J829 11331920 47487
JULIAN THE APOSTATE: BEING A Short Account OF HIS LIFE; The Sense of the Primitive Christians about his Succes∣sion; And their Behaviour towards him. Together with A Comparison of POPERY and PAGANISM. LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, on Lud∣gate-hill. M D C LXXXII.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. IN reading many of the late Addresses, I could not forbear thinking of those Angels which Mahomet saw, whose Horns were half Fire, and half Snow: those contrarieties which they wore on the out-side of their Heads, methought, ma∣ny of our Addressers had got on the in-side of theirs. For with a brave and warm Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and a Protestant Prince, they generously offered their Lives and Fortunes, and the last drop of Blood, in defence of his Majesty, and the Religion now established by Law; and by and by, the same Lives and Fortunes, and last drop of Blood, are promised over a∣gain to a Popish Successor. What is this but clapping cold Snow upon the Head of all their Protestant Zeal? For he that offers his Service to both of these together, lists himself under two the most adverse Parties in the World, and is Guelph and Gibeline at once. What benefit a Popish Successor can  from Lives and Fortunes, spent in defence
of the Protestant Religion, he may put in his Eye: And what the Protestant Religion gets by Lives and Fortunes spent in the Service of a Popish Successor, will be over the left Shoulder. But this contradictious Zeal was nothing near so surprising, as that of our Friends of Rippon, who beseech his Majesty, and are very sollicitous, lest he should agree to a Bill of Exclusion; (for plain English is as well understood on this side the Trent, as on the other) and seem to be very much afraid of losing the great Blessing of a Popish Successor. All the sober Men that I have met with, who remain unsatisfied as to a Bill of Exclusion, do nevertheless acknowledge, That a Popish Suc∣cessor will be a heavy Judgment of God to this Nation, to which we must pa∣tiently submit, as we do to all other Ca∣lamities. But did ever Men pray for a Judg∣ment, and make it their humble Request, that they might be sure of it? Do they not, on the other hand, when it begins to threaten them, heartily deprecate the Evil, and are they not earnest with God to avert it? Nay, do they not moreover use all lawful humane means to prevent it? There is no Judgment represented in Scripture, to be so immediately the stroke of God, as the Plague: David, in his great strait, made choice of it under that Notion; when he desired rather to fall into the Hands of God than into the hands of Men; and yet Men do constantly make use of all lawful means to prevent it. For, be∣sides their using Hippocrates's Receipt of Ci∣tò, longè, tardè, and running away from it; they make no scruple of antidoting and fortifying themselves against it. They strive with an infected Air, and with Fires, and Fumes of Pitch and Tar, &c. they endea∣vour
to correct it. Nay, they imprison Men that are infected, and put them under a very close confinement, when they have committed no Fault, nor done any thing to foreit their Li∣berty, only that they may thereby preserve o∣thers. This, and many other things are done by Law, till such time, as it pleases God to countermand that heavy Judgment. I was therefore perfectly posed with that Address, and could not tell what to make of it. The least I could think of them was this, That if they were Protestants, they were Men weary of their Religion, who were so undone for a Prince, a great part of whose Religion it is, to persecute and extirpate theirs. And con∣sidering with my self, what Precedents or Ex∣amples they might have of this strange Conduct, and being able to find none; instead thereof, I had an imperfect remembrance of the quite contrary carriage of the Primitive Christi∣ans towards Julian. In which, having throughly satisfied my self, I was willing to give the world this short Scheme of it. I can term it no otherwise, for whoever pleases to look into those places which I have cited, will find, that I have not impove ished the Sub∣ject; but have left, untouched, sufficient mate∣rials for whole Volumes, to any one that shall be disposed to write them. Having told you the occasion of writing this Discourse, I shall say somewhat of every part of it. I have been very brief in Julian's Life, because I wrote it, only to render the following Discourse concerning his Succession intelligible; and yet, I am sure, I have not omitted any of the main strokes of it. The Christians behaviour towards him was neces∣sarily added, as a collateral proof, and illustra∣tion of their sense about his Succession. Indeed,
if they had been worthy to have known Juli. an's Religion, before he came to be Emperor, we had not had that part to write; but they that report, and do not invent, must take things as they are. This behaviour of theirs being so contrary to what is commonly reported of them, and to the carriage of former Christians, I found it necessary to make some few Remarks upon it; and to shew that there was as wide a difference betwixt their Case, and that of the first Christians, as Laws for men, and against men, could possibly make. And if other men are for taking Laws and no Laws, and shake∣ing them together in a Bag, and for making the Result of either of them to be Passive Obedience, I cannot help that; no more than I can my own belief of this as a first Principle, that the Laws of a Man's Country are the measures of all Civil Obedience; or my belief, that any kind of O∣bedience, either Active or Passive, without a Law to require it, is like one of the marvellous Accidents in Transubstantiation, which makes a shift to subsist, when it has lost its Subject. But there it was, that I met with the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; which when it is taught without any regard to Laws, and is prescri∣bed both without Law and against Law, is not Evangelical but Mahumetane, and the very Turkish Doctrine of the Bow-string. In such a short Discourse, it was impossible for me to say the tenth part of what is to be said, to shew how intollerable that Doctrine is, and how contrary, both to the Gospel, and to the Law of the Land. Christianity is so far from enslaving us, or devesting us of those Rights and Priviledges which we have already, that it encourages us to procure more Liberties and Franchises, if we can come honestly by them. Read 1 Cor. 7. 21, 22, 23. with Dr. Ham∣mond's
Paraphraseupon them. And St. Paul him∣self was not for  Obedience by any means, even when the lawful Magistrate persecuted him, if it were in an unlawful way, but he stood upon his Birth-right. For did not he in one place, awe the Centurion and chief Captain, Acts 22. 25, 26, &c. and make all the Souldiers vanish who were commanded to beat him, by telling them he was a Roman? And did not he, in another place, bring the Magistrates of Philippi, one of the chief Cities of Macedonia, upon their Knees, when they had illegally beaten him, Acts 16. 39. without a fair Trial, by telling them he was a Roman? Although it is very plain, that Vers. 21. he, and Silas, who suffered with him, had really offended as they were accused, and were guilty of breaking the Roman Laws, yet St. Paul Vers. 47. insists upon this, that they were uncondem∣ned. It were easie to produce many more pas∣sages to the same purpose. And then as for the Laws of the Land, That Doctrine overthrows Magna Charta, Chap. 29. together with mul∣titudes of Statutes and ruled Cases; which, as I cannot stand here to name, so I need not, they are so well known. Only I will set down one Case, for the  of it, which comprises in it more than all that I have said. In the Circuit of Northampton, when the Lord Anderson and Glanvile were Justices of Assize, a Pursivant was sent by the Commis∣sioners to arrest the Body of a man to appear be∣fore them; and in resistance of the Arrest, and striving amongst them, the Pursivant was kil∣led: And if this was Murder or not, was Coke's Re∣ports 12th par. p. 49. Brownlow's Rep.  part. p. 15. doubted, and this depended upon the validity of Power, and authority of the Pursivant: for if his authority was lawful, then in killing of an Officer of Justice in execution of his Office, is Murder: And advisement was taken till the
next Assizes; and upon Conference, at the next The Resolu∣tion of all the Judges. Assizes, it was resolved, that the Arrest was Tortius, and by consequence that this was not Murder. The Pursivant was a proper Officer of the High Commission Court, he was sent by the Court to make this Arrest, it was one of the Powers of their Commission to send for any by Pursivant, &c. And yet because this Power had no foundation upon the Act, 1. Eliz. upon which their Commission was grounded, it could not justifie the Arrest, and consequently the Pursivant's Blood was upon his own Head. For as every Subject ought to be, and therefore is supposed to be connusant of the Law, much more ought they to be, who have any part in the execution of it. Now any man may see, that my Discourse does not descend to any such petty Matters as false Arrests, (though a Man's Li∣berty is not to be despised neither) but I have honest'y and legally parsued the end of our Savi∣our's coming into the World, which, as him∣self witnesses, was, not to destroy Men's Luke 9. 56. Lives, but to save them. Of which the Laws of the Land are likewise very tender, and have taken a particular care of all those, who are put upon an inevitable necessity of de∣fending themselves against the assaults of vio∣lent or evil-disposed Persons. And to conclude, That Doctrine quite alters our Oath of Allegi∣ance, and gives us new Measures of Obedience, whereas the old ones are these. I shall be o∣bedient to all the King's Majesty's Laws, Wilkinson . &c. Court-Leet. &c. p. 140. Precepts, and Process proceeding from the same. And then after all, that the case of a Pagan Successor might not seem remote and foreign, and nothing of kin to Popery, I found it neces∣sary to make a short comparison of both those Religions; which though an unfinish'd Piece,
I will be bold to say, is very like; wherein Popery may see her self neither flattered nor dis∣figured. The Church of England reserves her Faith entire for the Canonical Books of Scripture, her Reverence she divides betwixt the Ancient Fathers, and the first Reformers of this Church who partly were Martyrs that died for  Protestant Religion, and partly were  that afterwards setled it, as it is now . How much the Fathers would have been for a Bill of Exclusion, we have seen al∣ready: I shall in a word or two, shew you the sense of the other. Every Body knows that King Edward the Sixth, to prevent his  Sister from succeeding, and not having time to call a Parliament, bequeathed his Kingdom, by Will, to the Lady Jane Gray, which was confirmed by the Privy Council: It signified nothing indeed, because it could not make void an Act of Succession in Henry the Eighth's Time; but by doing that nothing, they shewed what they would have done if they could. I need not  what Bishops were concern'd nor how far they were con∣cerned in that Business. But to pass by that, the Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's Time, to whom, under God and that Queen, we owe the settlement of our Church, concurred to the making of that Statute 13. Eliz. Ch. 1. which makes it High Treason in her Reign, and for∣feiture of Goods and Chattels ever aster, in any wise to hold or , That an Act of Parli∣ament is not of sufficient Force and Validity to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, Sir Simon , , p. 140. and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and Government thereof: And when you see their Names, you will find that very many of them were Confessors.
Canterbury, Matt. Parker. London, Edwyn Sands. Durham, James Pilkinton. Winchester, Robert Horne. , John Scory. Worcester, Nicholas Bullingham. Lincoln, Tho. Cooper. Salisbury, John Jewel. St. Dabids, Richard Davies. Rochester, Edmund Guest. Norwich, John Parkhurst. Carlisle, John Best. Chester, John Downham. Alaph, Glocester, That brave Man, who in Queen Mary's Time was one of those poor six, that in the whole Convocation House opposed Popery; truly a very small representative Body of our whole Church. Richard Cheyney. Bangor, Nicolas Robinson. Landaff, Hugh Jones. And that these Bishops were active and zea∣lous for such Acts as these, and were not con∣cluded by a majority of the other Lords, appears by what they did, accor ing to some, this Parliament; but as Sir Simon D'Ewes will have it, the next Year, in relation to the Queen of Scots. I am not satisfied with Sir Simon's Reason, which is, That there was nothing moved about the Queen of Scots in the 13th of Eliz. For Cambden says, There was a Bill for making her lyable to be tryed as the Wife of a Peer of England, if hereafter she offended against the Laws; which the Queen hindred from passing into an Act. I should not have mentioned this, but by Sir Simon's Account we lose John Jewel, who died in the Interval betwixt this and the next Par∣liament.
But still there are Worthies enough left, who were excluders with a witness, for they were for excluding Mary Queen of Scots, the next Heir to the Crown, not only from the Succession, but out of the World. As you may see by their Writing, intituled, Reasons to Sir Simon D'Ewes Journal. Pag. 207. prove the Queen's Majesty bound in Con∣science to proceed with severity in this Case of the late Queen of Scots. Some of which I will here set down, only to invite the Reader to peruse the whole Paper. Every good Prince ought, by God's Pag. 208. Commandment, to punish even with Death, all such as do seek to seduce the people of God from his true Worship unto Super∣stition and Idolatry. For that Offence God hath always most grievously punished, as committed against the First Table, Deut. 13. His words are these; If thy Brother, the Son of thy Mother, or thine own Son, or thy Daughter, &c. Here you may perceive that God willeth his Magistrate not to spare either Brother or Sister, Son or Daughter, Wife or Friend, be he never so nigh, if he seek to seduce the People of God from his true Worship, &c. But the late Queen of Scots hath not on∣ly sought and wrought, by all means she can, to seduce the people of God in this Realm from true Religion; but is the only hope of all the Adversaries of God through∣out all Europe, and the instrument where∣by they trust to overthrow the Gospel of Christ in all Countries. And therefore if she have not that punishment which God in this place aforementioned appointeth; it is of all Christian Hearts to be fear'd, that God's just Plague will light both upon the Magistrates and Subjects:
but that by our slackness and remiss Justice we give occasion of the overthrow of God's Glory and Truth in his Church, mer∣cifully restored unto us in these latter days. Constantinus Magnus caused Licinius to be Eusebius Life of Const. lib. 2. put to Death, being not his Subject but his Fellow-Emperor, for that the said Licinius laboured to subvert Christian Religion. And the same Constantinus is for the same in all Histories highly commended. Much more shall it be lawful for the Queen's Majesty to execute this Woman, who besides the subversion of Religion, &c. A Prince ought in Conscience, before God, by all the means he can, to see to the Quietness, Safety, and good Estate of that people over which God hath appoint∣ed him Governour. —Therefore as the Queen's Majesty indeed is mereiful, so we most humbly de∣sire her, that she will open her Mercy to∣wards God's people and her good Subjects, in dispatching those Enemies that seek the Confusion of God's Cause amongst us, and of this noble Realm. Object. But haply it may be, that some do discredit these Reasons by the Persons, when they cannot by the Matter; and will put in her Majesty's mind, that we in per∣suading her, respect our own danger & fear of Peril coming to us, and not right and true Judgment: Yea, and that it may ap∣pear very unseemly and worthy sharp re∣proof in a Bishop to excite a Prince to Cruelty and Blood, contrary to her merci∣ful Inclination. Resp. As touching the first Branch; sure∣ly we see not any great continuance of dan∣ger likely to come unto us, more than to
all good Subjects while this State standeth; and the State cannot lightly alter, without the certain Peril both of our Prince and Country. Now if our Danger be joyned with the Danger of our Gracious Sovereign, and Natural Country, we see not how we can be accounted Godly Bishops, or Faith∣ful Subjects, if in common Peril we should not cry and give warning: Or on the o∣ther side, how they can be thought to have true Hearts towards God, and to∣wards their Prince and Country, that will mislike us for so doing, and seek thereby to discredit us. As touching the second Branch; God forbid that we should be Instruments to incense a merciful Prince to Cruelty and Bloodiness; neither can we think well of them, or judge that they have true mean∣ing Hearts, that in the Minister of God and Officer, do term Justice and right Punishment by the name of Bloodiness and Cruelty. God I trust in time, shall open her Majesty's Eyes to see and espy their cruel Puposes under the Cloak of extolling Mercy, &c. Here you see how urgent they are with the Queen, contrary to her inclination, to put Queen Mary to death, who did not suffer till thirteen years after; and how they mak thedan∣gerousness of her Religion, and the hopes which the Papists had conceived of ruining the Pro∣testant Religion, by her means, not only suffici∣ent, but necessary Reasons for so doing. A Bill of Exclusion is perfect Courtship to these Rea∣sons. Let those therefore that run down three successive Houses of Commons for that Bill, turn their Fury and Reproaches, with more justice up∣on these old , and we have done. And
let them likewise give us but one Reason to provs a Bill of Exclusion to be unlawful, which they will own to be a Reason a week af∣ter, and not be ashamed of it, and I do solemn∣ly promise to joyn with them in renouncing these Old Reformers, and will hereafter readi∣ly follow their new Guides and new Light. In the mean time, because I see hearty Prote∣stants abused to their Ruin, with shameful So∣phistry, I think it the part of every honest man to detect it. And the most popular Argument is this; You are preingaged, and cannot con∣sent to a Bill of Exclusion; for if you do, you are forsworn, because you have long since sworn Allegiance to the King, and to his lawful Heirs and Successors. Now though the Lawyers tell them, an hundred times over, No man can have an Heir while he is alive; yet this will not overcome that deceitful Prejudice which is occasioned by our common Speech; where a man and his Heirs are contempory, and familiarly live at once in the same House, and eat and drink together every day. Where likewise Heir Apparent sounds as a greater addition to Heir, and Heir Presumptive sounds as somewhat a less addition, and few are capable of considering them as terms of Diminution. No more than on the other hand, a Papist can be persuaded that Images are Idols, because there common speech has made a distinction, where really there is none, as the Homily well observes: Whereas . p. 13. here it has confounded an actual Heir with one that is only in possibility. What is to be done then? Shall we shew them, that the Duty of Excise, for instance, is granted to the King, his Heirs and Successors; in which it is plain, that Heirsand Successors have not any title to a Pen∣ny while his Majesty lives, which God grant may be long, to keep them a great while from
it. Why, still it may be replied, that Heirs and Successors may have this Law sense in an Act of Parliament, but an Oath of Allegiance ought to be conceived in plain words, and to be taken in the common sense of those words, without any Jesuitical Equivocation. Well, if it be so, then let them be sure to keep it in that sense in which they have taken it, or should have taken it by sixteen Years of Age, in the Court-Leet, in these words; This hear you, the Steward and the Court, that I shall swear, That I will be true Liege-man, and true Faith and Troth bear to our Soveraign Lord the King that now is, and to his High∣ness Heirs and lawful Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm of England, and o∣ther his Dominions depending on the same, &c. Whereby it is plain to every body, that no one certain or known Person in the World, has any interest at present in the Oath of Allegiance, besides his Majesty that now is: for who shall be King or Queen of this Realm of England hereafter, none but God himself knows. Another Argument I have heard, which is fetch'd from the Common-Prayer, That no Church of England-man can, with a good Conscience, be for a Bill of Exclusion, which they say is to the prejudice of his R. H. because we there pray, That God would prosper him with all happiness, both here and hereafter. There is no man in the Communion of the Church of England that prayes that Prayer more hear∣tily than I do. But it would be a Curse, either in the Mouth, or in the Heart of any Protestant, under the name of Happiness, to wish him the op∣portunity, and which is more, the invincible Temptation, and a kind of Necessity, to extir∣pate
the best Religion in the World. That, I am sure, would be far from promoting his hap∣piness in the next World, and I am apt to think, will contribute nothing at all to it in this. He that prays that Prayer with understanding, prays for his R. H's return to the Protestant Re∣ligion: which would both prove an unspeaka∣ble blessing to himself, and restore these three Kingdoms to be the happiest upon Earth. It would be some comfort if we could but hope for such a thing. But if the D. is perswaded that he has made a better choice, it were very de∣sirable, but not unless it stand with his H's good likeing, that he would injoy that Reli∣gion to the greatest advantage, and take his fill of it at the Fountain-head, which a Crown∣ed Head at this instant does, who could not enjoy it so happily at home. And the rather, because all Protestants are sworn not to suffer Rome to come hither. For I am throughly satis∣fied, and so may any Man else, by once looking upon them, that the Oath of Allegiance and Supre∣macy, are Protestant Oaths, (as a great asserter of Religion and Laws, now with God, thought fit to term them) and we shamefully and wick∣edly break them, unless to our power we keep out Popery. And the Oath of Supremacy, being often called in Statutes, the Oath of Obedience, we are bound, by virtue of our Religion, of our Oath, and of our Obedience, which are strong Obli∣gations, to oppose the entrance of Popery into this Kingdom. And I am afraid it is a vain undertaking to go about, by Law, to twist a Popish Interest with these Oaths, when both our Religion, and our sworn Obdience, engage us to oppose it. For in any case that can be put, whether it be fit to obey Man, or God and Man too, judge ye. Julian endeavoured to entangle the Christians, and to destroy Christianity that
very way. There was a Law, and an Ancient Law of the Empire, (and so great stress was laid upon it, that the breach of it was look'd upon as an Offence against the Govern∣ment and the Empire) that every one should ho∣nour and worship the Emperor's Statues and Pi∣ctures; which were set up for that end in pub∣lick Places. Now he took advantage of that Law to ensnare them unawares in Heathenish Worship, for he added the Figures of the Hea∣then Invect. 1. p. 83, 84. Gods to his own Picture, and as Grego∣ry's words are, mingled Poyson with their Meat, abusing their Loyalty to the Purposes of Idolatry. For this was his project, as So∣zomen Sozom. l. 5. c.  tells us, He concluded, that if he could bring over the Christians to this, he might the more easily attempt any thing else that he had a mind to; but if he found them disobedient, then to punish them without Mercy, as innovating in the Roman Customs, and offending against the Government and the Empire. A few therefore, who were also punished, understood the Cheat, & would not worship according to custom. Who they were, S. Gregory tells us, some of the wiser Ibid. and more conscientious found out the fraud, but they paid for their sagacity; the pretence was, that they offended against the Honour of the Emperor; but the truth was, they came into danger for the sake of the true King, and for the sake of Religion. But the multitude, as they use to do, from ignorance, or an unthink∣ing mind, simply thought they obeyed an Old Law, and more simply approached these Ima∣ges. But what says Gregory of this sort that Sozom. ibid. . obeyed the old Law? Who perhaps, says he, may obtain pardon for their Ignorance, as be∣ing hurried into Wickedness by a Wile. He makes a doubt of it, but he would have readi∣ly pronounced concerning their Pardon, who
wink hard & are wilful. Now if a Prince puts a Border of Popery (which some say is ten times worse than a Border of Paganism) about his Picture, which we fain would honour and re∣verence, and once did, before we saw that unhappy addition, what shall we say, or what can we do? In these afflicting Thoughts, I had almost for∣got a Matter of great Consequence, and that is Aug. in Ps. 124. Julianus ex∣titit infidelis Imperator, &c. a passage of St. Austin, which rises up against all that we have said concerning the behavi∣our of the Christians towards Julian, and is. to this effect. That the Christian Souldiers ser∣ved under this Infidel Emperor, and where their Religion was not concern'd, made Con∣science of obeying him; but where indeed it came to the Cause of Christ, there they made as much Conscience of disobeying him. Now the Reader may please to take notice, that the whole Contest which I have described betwixt these Christians and Julian was purely upon the score of Religion, and not from any lawless or ungovernable humour. And as for these Souldiers fighting under Julian a∣gainst the Persians, or other common Enemies of the Empire, (far as sure as they were Christians, they would never have drawn a Sword to destroy their fellow Christians, or the Interest of Christianity) and obeying the Word of Command, when they received his pay, it is such a low part of Honesty, that any man may pretend to it. If I had been there, a Souldier of Fortune, I should have done the same: and which is more, would have lost my own Life, rather than have served him that slippery trick in Persia. But the Christians obeying Julian in indif∣ferent Matters, which did not concern their
Religion, puts me in mind of a more famous Compliance amongst themselves. Every Body knows how the Church was rent in sunder by Arrianism, and there might be too much stif∣ness and rigidness on the other hand about Words, for ought I know, but miserably rent it was; which gave Julian great advantage against the Christian Religion. Now what did the Christians do? Did the Orthodox go and side with Julian, to revenge the Injuries which they had received from the Arrians in Constantius's Time; or make use of Julian's Favour which he shewed in resto∣ring them, to crush their Brethren which dif∣fered from them? No, there was no seeking to him by either side; only the Donatists of Africk complemented him, and received some small fa∣vours from him, but they were made infamous by it. Honorius the Emperor posted them for it all over the Empire very many Years after, and St. Austin is often teazing them for it in the next Generation. Sozom. l. 5. c. 11. For instead of that, a Synod held by Atha∣nasius, and other Bishops at Alexandria de∣termined, That because the Question of  and  troubled the Church, and because there were frequent Contentions and Disputes about them, these words should not be used in any Dispute but against the Sabellians. Lib. 6. c. 4. The same Historian has a notable passage to the same purpose in Jovian's Life, who succeed∣ed Julian; and who, by the way, when he was chosen Emperor by the unanimous consent of the whole Army, refused it, saying he was a Christian and would not be the Emperor of Pa∣gans: The Army on the other hand, begg'd of him not to decline the Government of them as a wicked Government, for they were all Christians too; upon which he accepted the
Empire. As soon as he came to be Empe∣ror, says the Historian, Questions and Dis∣putes about Doctrines of Faith, were again moved by the Presidents of the Churches. For while Julian reigned, the whole of Christianity lying at stake, they were quiet, and supplica∣ted God with . one accord, that he would be merciful to them, upon which he makes this Re∣mark; Thus Men use to do, when they are in∣jured by strangers, (or a Common Enemy) to be united amongst themselves; but when they are freed from Foreign Evils, then to fall in∣to Disorder, and disturb one another. O that we had but this piece of common sense, which it seems all the rest of Mankind have! for nothing else, but being united amongst our selves, can prevent the Foreign Evils which are coming like a Torrent upon us. All that I shall say further, in reference to this Book, is this, That I have been as care∣ful in the Citations, as ever I was in telling Money; and therefore can only say, as they usually do in that case, I hope it is all right; and if it should chance, in any one particular, to prove otherwise, am ready to make it good.
THE CONTENTS. CHap. 1. A short Account of Julian's Life, p. 1 Chap. 2. The sense of the Primitive Christi∣ans about his Succession, p. 11 Chap. 3. Their behaviour towards him in words, p. 20 Chap. 4. Their Actions, p. 25 Chap. 5. Their Devotions, and first of their Psalms, p. 29 Chap. 6. Their Prayers and Tears, p. 33 Chap. 7. Julian's Death, p. 35 Chap. 8. How they used his Memory, p. 39 Chap. 9. Reflections on the Behaviour of these Christians, and therein of Passive Obedience, p. 40 Chap. 10. A Comparison of Popery and Paga∣nism, as to their Polytheism, p. 67 Chap. 11. Their Idolatry, p. 92 Chap. 12. Their Cruelty, p. 111
The Editions of those Authors which are cited by page. BOnaventure, Moguntiae, 1609. Chrysostom, Fronto. Ducaei. Catechism. Rom. ex decret. Con. Trid. &c. Antwerpiae, 1574. Fox. Acts & Mon, 1632. Gregor. Nazian. Paris, 1630. Homilies, London, 1623. Juliani Opera, Paris, 1630 Missale ad usum & consuetudi∣nem Sarum, In Academia Paris. 1527. Pontifical. Roman. Antwerp. 1627.
ERRATA. PAge 14. Marg. r. vi. Con. lib. 1. p. 18. l. 18. for according, r. ac∣cordingly: p. 23. l. 10. for derided, r. deride: p. 25. l. ult. for that those, r. those that: p. 36. l. 16. for makings, r. making: p. 57. l. 29. dele so: p. 107. l. 5. for heir, r hair.
Julian the Apostate. CHAP. 1. A short Account of Julian's Life. COnstantine the Great, famous for being the Euseb. in vitâ Const. l. 4. c. 51. first Christian Empe∣ror, divided the whole Empire, at his Death, amongst his three Sons, as a Father does his E∣state amongst his Chil∣dren. That Part which came by his Ance∣stors, the West, he gave to the Eldest, the East . Greg. Naz. In∣vect. 1. p. 58. to the Second, and that which lay betwixt these; to the Yongest. All which devolved at last upon the second Son Constantius, by the death of his two Brothers. In the mean time, the Army used an extremity of Cauti∣on to secure them in the quiet  of their respective Thrones, for being jealous lest their Uncles, and other Kindred, might u∣surp, they put them to the Sword. In these outrages of the Souldiery, Constantius and Anibalianus, and Dalmatius Caesar, were slain; but Gallus, and Julian, the Sons of this last-named Constantius, were won∣derfully delivered, and saved, beyond all expectation. The cause of their Delive∣rance is variously represented.  every where attributes it to Constantius
the Emperor; and so does Julian himself Socrat l. 3. c. 1. So∣zom. l. 5. c. 2. acknowledge it in his Panegyrick of him. Others say, That Gallus the elder Bro∣ther was very sick, and the Souldiers con∣cluded, that his Disease would kill him, and save them the labour; and they did not think Julian dangerous, being but a∣bout five Years of age. However that be, the Emperor Constantius afterward took great care of them, and they were main∣tained Greg. Naz. In∣vect. 1. p. 58. . and served like Princes, in one of the Royal Palaces, as being the remaining Branches of his Family, reserved for the Empire. They both made so good progress in Learning, that they entred into Orders, so as to read the Scriptures to the People, thinking this no diminution to them, but that Piety was the greatest Ornament. The one of them was sincerely pious, though Ibid. p. 58. 59. hot and fierce in his Nature; but the other redeeming the time, hid his wicked Tem∣per under a Masque of Gentleness. Gallus after this was made Caesar, and a great part of the World put into his Hands; Ibid. p. 60. who being accused of Cruelty, and aspi∣ring to the Empire, was rashly cut off by the Emperor. Julian at the same time fell under the Emperor's suspicion, but by Socrat. l. 3. c. 1. the intercession of the Empress, he had leave to go to Athens to study Philosophy. How he spent his time there, Theodoret informs Theodoret. Hist. l. 3. c. 3. us. Julian, after the death of Gallus, grew presumptuous, and had a great mind to the Royal Scepter. For which cause he went up and down Greece, to find out Fortune∣tellers and Conjurers, having a mind to know whether he should obtain his desire. And he met with a Man that promised to fortel him these things; who led him into an Idol Temple, and there initiated him;
so that the desire of a Kingdom strip'd this thrice wretched Person of his Piety. But, according to Gregory, he had none to lose Greg. Ib. p. 61. at that time. For before this, in his Bro∣ther's Time, Asia was Julian's School of Impiety, for Astronomy, and Nativities, and the vanity of Prognosticating, and that which follows these, Magick; and he want∣ed nothing but Power to add to his Wicked∣ness. And before that, Gregory concludes, that he was a concealed Pagan, when he dis∣puted Ibid. hard with his Brother in favour of the Heathens, and pretended, that he only tried how he could hold the weaker side of a Question. Which agrees with what him∣self Julian Ep. 51. writes to the Alexandrians, when he was Emperor. He advises them not to worship Jesus, as God the Word, whom neither they nor their Fathers ever saw; but the great Sun, which from Eternity all Man∣kind do see, and behold, and worship, which is the living, and animated, and un∣derstanding, and bountiful Image of the Intelligible Father; if they would be ru∣led by him, who had tried both Religions; who had lived twenty Years in their Religi∣on, and was now onwards of twelve in this. However the Fathers all agree, that the oc∣casion of his revolt from Christianity, was from a thirst of Empire; and from consul∣ting his Heathen Gadbury's about it; for Sozomon tells us, That no Christian was to Sozom. l. 5. c. 2. meddle with the Arts of foretelling things to come. St. Austin has fully exprest the Matter in few Words; The same God, says he, that gave the Empire to a good Empe∣ror, August de Civit. l. 5. c. 21. gave it likewise to Julian the Apostate, Cujus egregiam indolem decepit amore domi∣nandi sacrilega & detestanda curiositas. The World knew nothing at all of this,
nor the Emperor himself, who was now perfectly reconciled to him, and sent for him from Athens, and made him Caesar; and as the greatest Pledge of his sincere Affection, Socrat. l. 3. c. 1. gave him his Sister Helena to wife, and gave him the command of an Army, against some of the Northern barbarous People who had invaded France. Julian indeed was jealous of this sudden advancement, and look'd upon it as grinning Honour; and in Homer's words, at that very time called it, , a purple Death; and long after, in his large Letter to the Senate and People of Athens he represents it as an Artifice to expose him to danger, and to de∣stroy him. But as Socrates has well obser∣ved, Socrat. Ib. it is plain that the Emperor had no such bad Intent, when he had given him his Sister, for that would be to have Defigns a∣gainst himself. In France he was very suc∣cessful, and routed the Enemy; and having got the Hearts of the Common Souldiers, by giving them Mony, they declared him Emperor. Thus Julian began to Reign; and after he had changed the Magistrates in every Province, and traduced Constantius in every City where he came, and having en∣creased his Numbers, with those that revol∣ted from Constantius, he openly laid afide his Hypocrisy of Christianizing, and mar∣ches with his Army for Constantinople. His Greg. In∣vect. 1. p. 67, 68. pretence was, that he came to excuse his be∣ing made Emperor; but in truth it was to wrest the whole Empire out of Constantius's hands. Who, on the other side, was going against the Persians; but hearing of Juli∣an's march, advanced with his Army to Ruffinus l. 1. c. 26. meet him; but fell sick and died in Cilicia. If this fatal Blow had not happened to the Christians, Gregory concludes, That Julian
had now paid for his Folly, and not gone so Invect. 1 pag. 68. . far as Persia for his Punishment, as he did afterwards, but had met it now within the Bounds of the Roman Empire. And he gives a very good reason for his Opinion; for when Julian was now lawful Emperor, and the state of Affairs was quite altered; Yet he found much difficulty in conquer∣ing that Army. The first thing he did when he came to Constantinople, was to change his Court; By putting to death some, and banishing Greg. In∣vect. 1. p. 75. others, not only for being loyal to the great King Constantius, but for being more loyal to a greater King, and therefore un∣serviceable to him upon both accounts. The next thing was, to gain the Souldiery; Which he presumed would be an easy busi∣ness, because some of them would be pre∣vailed upon by Honours, and some would be drawn away by Simplicity, as knowing no other Law than the Will of their Prince; and as for the  and time∣serving part, he could not fail of them. And in conclusion, he did draw over the greatest part of them. Nevertheless, God had still a Remnant, more than 7000 that did not bow he Knee to Baal, but repulsed Julian, as a brave strong Wall does asor∣ry  that is played against it. He likewise called home the Orthodox Bishops whom Constantius banish'd, for one or both of these Reasons, as Sozomen will have it; Sozom. l. 5. c. 5. either that the Church might be embroiled by a Civil War of Contention among them∣selves, or to lay an odium upon Constanti∣us; which last is in effect what Theodoret Theod. l. 3. c. 4. says, He did it as a popular Act. Having thus setled himself in his Throne, and made the Army sure to him, he began
to discover his Malice against the Christi∣ans. For before this he stood in fear of the Ib. cap. 3. Souldiers, who were Men principled in the true Religion. First of all, the fa∣mous Constantine having freed them from their former Errors, instructed them throughly in the Doctrine of Truth; and after this his Sons confirmed them in it. For though Constantius, at the Instigation of others, rejected the word , yet he sincerely confess'd the meaning of it: For he called the Genuine Son, who was begotten of the Father before all Worlds, God the VVord. Julian know∣ing these things very well, did not disco∣ver the wickedness of his Heart, nor as yet make any Laws against the Christians. Nay, he charged the People, That they Sozom. l. 5. c. 5. should injure none of the Christians, nor reproach them, nor draw them to Sacrifice against their VVills. They suffered, notwithstanding, very much in this Interval, as well as , from the insolency of the Heathens, and Julian's con ivance at it. Of which Theo∣doret gives us abundance of Instances. The Theod. l. 3. c. 6. Heathens, says he, ran about the Streets, and abused the Saints with  and Mockery, and omitted no sort of reproach∣ful and abusive Language. The Christians, not being able to bear the hard Speeches of these Men, reproached them again, and ran down that false Religion which they had in great Veneration. The Heathens, on the other side, answered them with Blows, and all manner of ill Usage, which he there sets down. In some places they proceeded to the most barbarous Out-rages. At Ascalon, and at Gaza, where they rip'd up Chri∣stians, and then stuffing them with Barley,
threw them to be devoured by the Swine; As Gregory observes, the first Hogs-meat of Invect. 1. p. 88. that kind that ever was in the World, and fit only for Julian's Devils. At Heliopolis there was one Cyril a Deacon, who in the Reign of Constantine, burning with a Di∣vine Zeal, broke many of the Images which were there worshipped: the execrable Hea∣thens remembring this Act, not only kil∣led him, but cutting open his Belly, they tasted his Liver. The Historian Records it as a Judgment upon those that did it, that in a short time after, their Teeth, and Tongues, and Eyes, drop'd out of their Heads. But, of all the rest, I must not omit their usage of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa; He, in the Time of Constantius, throwing down an Idol Temple, built a Church in∣stead of it. The People of Arethusa having understood Julian's Aim and Intention, soon discovered their hatred against Mar∣cus, who fled for it; but hearing that some of his Friends were like to suffer upon his account, he returned and delivered up him∣self to that barbarous People; who (because he would neither rebuild their Idol Temple, nor pay the Money which they demanded for it) strip'd him, and beat him, and dragged him about the Streets by the Hair of his Head. They threw him into Sinks, and stinking Channels; after that, they set on the Boys to stab and pinck his Body all over with their writing Bodkins; they cut off his Ears with Thread, and otherwise tortured him; they anointed him over with Oil and Hony, and put him into a Net, and hoisted him up in the open Air, in the very heat of Summer, to expose him to  and Wasps, and such mischievous Insects. And, at last, when they were weary
of abusing and tormenting him, they would have compounded with him for one piece of Gold. He said, No; it was the same Im∣piety to  one half-penny, as to give the whole sum. It is observable, that this Marcus was one of those that saved Julian, and privately conveyed him away at that time of danger, which we spoke of before. Greg. In∣vect. 1. p. 90. Whereupon Gregory has this sharp saying; For that one thing perhaps it was, that he justly suffered all this, and deserved to suffer a great deal more, because he saved, unawares, so great an evil to the whole World. Now all this was done and much more, not only without, but against Law: whereby it appears, how much an established Religion is valued, when the Prince himself happens to be of another. For that alone authorizes the greatest Violence, and Op∣pression, and Outrages against them that differ from him. The Heathens, you see, did not stay for Laws and Edicts to warrant such Proceedings, which indeed they never had at all; but as soon as they knew how Julian stood affected, they took that for their Cue, to act these Tragedies upon the Christians. They knew it would please the Emperor, and that was an unwritten Invect. 1. p. 92. Law. As Gregory wisely observes upon this occasion; The VVill and Pleasure of the Emperor, is an unwritten Law, back'd with Power, and much stronger than writ∣ten ones, which are not supported by Au∣thority. Upon which account he  all this Persecution to Julian himself, who being a Philospher, avoided the Name of a Persecutor; and compares those that in∣jured the Christians, to several Implements of Mischief, but him to the first Mover who set them on work.
This under-hand Persecution, was follow∣ed with one more open and publick; and though it were not so very severe in it self, yet it still encouraged the former. As The∣odoret's Theod. l. 3. c. 7. words are in the next Chapter; A thousand other Insolencies every where, both by Sea and Land, were then com∣mitted, by the Wicked against the Godly. For, from this time, the hated of God publickly made Laws against Christianity. Invect.  p. 81. To begin with that which Gregory says was a Law, though a childish and ridiculous one; whereby it was ordered, That Chri∣stians should be called Galileans; as if Men were to be put out of conceit with their Re∣ligion, by a Nick-Name, especially when our Blessed Saviour himself suffered so much in that kind, as the same Father ho∣nestly Theod. l.  c. 7. observes. In the next place, he pro∣hibited the Children of Christians to have any Poetry, Rhetorick, or Philosophical Learning; for, says he, according to the Proverb, We are shot with our own Fea∣thers: Or, as Socrates expresses it, He com∣manded, Socrat. l.  c. 12. by a Law, That they should have no Schooling or Education, lest by this Advantage they might be better able to op∣pose the Disputants of the Gentiles. Some of the Fathers say, That he would suffer no. Christian Masters to teach, and make no∣mention at all of his forbidding the Youth  Ep. . to learn. Nay, Julian himself says, That it would be an unjust thing to  Children, which knew not which way to turn them∣selves, from the right way; and says ex∣presly, That their Children were not prohi∣bited. Upon this Baronius wonders at the Ecclesiastical Writers, for saying, They were prohibited. Bishop Montague won∣ders more at him, for contradicting all
Antiquity. These great Men could not see a Consequence, which every poor Hugenot that comes over, perfectly understands. For by removing the Christian Masters, he did effectually deny the Children of Christians any benefit of Learning. For who would send their Children to Heathen Masters, where they should be in apparent danger of being principled aud trained up in Heathe∣nism? So that this Liberty which he indul∣ged them, was a thousand times better let alone; it was one of his Traps, and deceit∣ful Favours, wherein confisted the true Spi∣rit and Genius of Julian's Persecution. And this has been one of the Modern ways of extirpating the pestilent Northern Heresy in France; where the Protestants have had the liberty, and almost a necessity, of sending their Children to Popish Schools, by being allowed but one Protestant School-master, where five would have been little enough. He made another Law, That those that would not forsake Christianity, should have Theod. l. 3. c. 7. Socrat. l. 3. c. 13. no place in the Guards, nor be Governours in the Provinces. Immediately, as Socrates adds, who were true Christians, and who had only past for such, were made as mani∣sest to all Men, as if they had been set upon a Stage. They that were hearty sincere Christians, readily threw off their Military Girdles, chusing rather to endure any thing, than to deny Christ. Amongst whom were Jovian, and Valentinian, and Valens, who were afterwards Emperors. Of the other sort, who preferred the Mony and Honour which is to be had here, before true Happiness, was Ecebolius, who was always of the Emperor's Religion. Under Con∣stantius he was an hot Christian, and under Julian a  Heathen, and after Julian's
Time, would fain have been admitted for a Christian again. Gregory likewise makes mention of his Invect. 1. p. 86. Edicts against the Churches, to spoil them of their Endowments, Plate, and publick Stock; which was performed with Military Execution, and in some places with much cruelty. And the last was, to levy Money Socrat. l. . c. 13. upon those that would not Sacrifice, to de∣fray the Charges of his Persian Expedition. These are all the Laws which I can find he made against Christians; though he de∣signed far greater Severities against them, when he came home again from Persia. He Invect. 1. p. 93, 94. . intended, among lesser Matters, as Gregory tells us, to lay them all under a kind of Ci∣vil Excommunication, for they should have no benefit of the Law, unless they would Sacrifice in the presence of the Courts of Justice; so that whatever Injuries had been done to them, hey were to have no Remedy. But to the great happiness of the Christians, that day never came, for he was killed in Persia: but by whom, and in what manner, we refer that to a more proper place. CHAP. II. The Sense of the Primitive Christians about his Succession. JVlian's coming to the Crown, a Pagan, was a perfect surprize to the World; so that we cannot expect to read of any Endeavours used to prevent his Succession, and to fore-close him upon the score of his Religion. There can be no Petition to  to exclude him, nor Addresses
in favour of him; No Lives and Fortunes rashly staked down to maintain Impossibili∣ties, to defend Him and Christianity toge∣ther. These things are not to be had, and therefore we must be content to be without them: And the rather, because the Fathers have told us as much of their mind in this Point, as if they had actually, either Peti∣tioned or Address'd. To proceed the more faithfully and clear∣ly in this Matter, it will be necessary to consider how the Succession stood, and what Right and Title Julian had to succeed to the Empire. And then, whether the Chri∣stians would have been willing to set aside this Title, and to have excluded him, pure∣ly for his Religion. 1. And in the first place, there is nothing more plain, than that the Empire was He∣reditary: There are not words in the World to express it more plainly, then it is done, in these following Testimonies. Eusebius, speaking of Constan∣tine Euseb. vita Const. l. 1. c. 5. . the Great, hath these words; Thus the Throne of the Empire descended to him from his Fa∣ther, and by the Law of Nature was reserved for his Sons, and for their , and was to descend for ever, as ano∣ther Paternal Inheritance does. To which we shall subjoyn as plain a Testimony from an . Eumenius, in his Pan∣egyrick to the same Constantine, besides a Non for∣tuita , non repentinus  favoris even∣tus te :  nascendo meruisti. Quod  Decrum  & , &c.
great deal more to the same purpose, tells him, It was not the casual consent of Men, it was not any sudden effect of their Fa∣vour which made you a Prince. You gain∣ed the Empire by being born into the World; which seems to me the first and greatest Gift of the Gods for one to come into the World Great, and to have that at home ready for him which others can hardly attain with all the toyl and labour of their whole Lives. Now if Constantine the Great was born to the Empire, so was Julian, having the same Royal Blood flow∣ing in his Veins; being the Grand-son, as the other was the Son of Constantius Chlo∣rus. After such full and pregnant Proofs, it would be time ill spent to heap up more; such as that of Julian in his Pan∣egyrick to the Empress Euse∣bia, Julian Orat. 3. p. 202. . where he says; That Con∣stantius married her, to have Heirs for his Great Lordship of almost all the VVorld. He ha∣ving none, Julian himself was the sole and undoubted Heir; for in him the Family was after∣wards extinct. Only there are some who would be glad (whether they understand what it is or not) to see some Divine Right mixed with a Ti∣tle, for that would make it sacred and strong indeed. To please these Men if we can, let us again consider that Clause of Eusebius in the place last mentioned, where he , That the Empire was entailed, , by the Edict of Nature; which I think is the most sure and divine Settle∣ment that can be. But lest we should think this Expression fell from him by chance, in another place he varies the Phrase,
and calls it, , the Euseb. iv. Con. lib. c. 15. . Law of Nature. Speaking of Constantius Chlorus; He past over the Inheritance of the Em∣pire, by the Law of Nature, to his Eldest Son, and then died. And in anotherplace he has these words; His Son Constantine immediately receiving the Go∣vernment was declared absolute Emperor Euseb. Hist. l. 8. cap. 25. . and Augustus by the Army, and long be∣fore that, by the great King of all, God himself. If this will not do, I know not what measure of Divine Right will serve their turn, unless they would have a Crown to drop from the Clouds. And Julian pretends to no less than that, in his Epistle to the Jews; where he makes them large Promises of Quiet and Safety under his Go∣vernment; That, savs he, enjoying this Julian. Ep. 25. . Security, you may enlarge your Prayers for my Reign, to God the Creator of the World, who has vouchsased to crown me with his own unspotted Right-hand. 2. And yet the Fathers had the Consci∣science to set aside such a Title as this, and would have done an hundred more such, to secure their Religion. They were not so happy indeed, as to be before-hand with Julian, and to get him excluded; because, as I said before, there was not the least suspi∣cion that he had changed his Religion; but they shew their good-will sufficiently by what they said and did afterward. If they had no occasion to make their Application to Constantius about this Business while he was here, will it not do full as well, if they call after him to Heaven, and expostulate the matter with him there? And this Gre∣gory does in several places; In the very
beginning of his Invective, which he made presently upon Julian's death. After he has summoned all Nations to hear his Speech, all that dwell in the World, all People, Tribes, and Languages, all Men that are or shall be: And that his preaching might go the farther, all the Powers of Heaven, all the Angels, whose work it was to destroy the Tyrant, who had not kill'd a Sihon King of the Amorites, nor an Og the Invect. 1. p. 49, 50. King of Bashan, but had kill'd the Dragon, the Apostate, the great Designer, the com∣mon Enemy and Adversary of all, &c He applies himself particularly to Constantius: Hear, O thou Soul of Constantius the Great, (if you can hear at all what we say) and the Souls of all Christian Kings before him; but his especially, for as much as having grown up with the Inheritance of Christ, and enlarged it to his Power, and establish'd it by a long continuace, so as to be upon this account the most re∣nowned of all the Kings that ever were, (O the mischief of it!) he committed a gross mistake very unworthy of his own Plety: Not being aware of it, he bred up for the Christians an Enemy of Christ. And he did amiss to be good-natured in this Instance only, in saving and making him a King, who was both ill-saved, and made an ill King. And for this reason he is likely to be most delighted, as with the Destruction of Impiery, and the Restora∣tion of Christianity, so likewise with this Speech. Which in the next words he de∣dicates to God, as a Thanksgiving Oration, and a Sacrifice of Praise; so solemn it is. Now here is enough to shew that Constan∣tius would never have made Julian, Caesar, nor have set up an Enemy of Christ over
the Christians, if he had known him to have been such. But the same Father will give us better Measure in another place, in these words; Julian was presently Heir of his Brother's Invect. 1. p. 62, 63, 64. Kingdom, but not of his Piety; and not long after of him likewise who made him King; who partly gave way to it, partly was forced by Death, and suffered such a defeat, as was mischievous and pernicious to the whole World. What have you done, O divinest Emperor, and greatest lover of Christ! (for I am fallen to reprehending you, as if you were present and in hear∣ing; although I know you to be much a∣bove my reproof, being placed with God, and inheriting the Glory which is there, and are only gone from hence to exchange your Kingdom): VVhat strange kind of Counsel is this which you have taken, who did far excel all other Kings in VVisdom and Understanding! And after he has magnified him upon several accounts, he thus proceeds: You, who were led by the Hand of God into every Counsel and Enterprize, whose VVisdom was admired above your Power, and again your Power more than your VVisdom, but your Piety was valued above them both: How comes it to pass there∣fore, that in this Matter you should appear the only ignorant and inconsiderable Perfom VVhat haste was there of that cruel . kindness? VVhich of the Devils  in along with you at that Consult? How have you thus, in a small and short point of Time, brought and delivered up to a com∣mon Cut-throa, your great Inheritance, and your Father's Glory, I mean the Christians, that shining Nation which is
in all parts of the VVorld; that  Priesthood, which has been encreased with much Toil and much Sweat? To this Accusation of this good Empe∣ror, he presently subjoins an Apology, and shews at last, that what he did was through Ignorance; For who could be ignorant, even of those that knew him but indiffe∣rently, how that for the sake of Religion, and for the Love and good VVill he bare to us, he not only would have neglected him, or the Honour of his whole Family, or the Addition of an Empire; but also that he would have made no difficulty of part∣ing with his very Empire, and all things he had in the VVorld, and his Life it self (than which no Man has any thing more precious) for our Security and Safety. And after a great deal more to the same purpose, he says thus; But simplicity and plain-heartedness are not watchful, and weakness is joyned with good Nature; and who are freest from VVickedness, least suspect it. For this reason, what would come afterwards, was not known, and the Masque was not discovered. Sozom. l. 1. c. 5. . Somewhat like our Prince of VVales, or King of the Ro∣mans. In this remakable Passage, we have all this for our present purpose. 1. That the making of Julian a Caesar, (by which means he had an easy Passage to the Crown, for it was the next step to it) was a rash, foolish, and inconsiderate Acti∣on; that it was cruel and inhumane, and fit only for some Devil to advise. 2 That the Fault and Mischief of this Action, was not because he usurp'd after∣wards upon Constantius, or upon any other Consideration whatsoever, bnt purely be∣cause the Christian Religion suffered by it.
And. 3. That Constantius can be no o∣therwise excused than by his ignorance of Julian's defection from Christianity. And all this not nakedly set down, and coldly delivered, but with an Emphasis, and the greatest vehemency imaginable. He does not say, Constantius was to blame for this; but he calls him to account for it, he follows him with Interrogatories, and bids him answer from Heaven what he has done. He does not barely say, That if Constantius had known Julian's Religion, he would not have made him Caesar; but he fays, that he would have disinherited his whole Family first, he would have parted with his Empire, he would have strip'd himself of all, and lost his Life rather than have done it. And according we find, that as soon as Constantius understood his Er∣ror, he bitterly bewailed it, which was just at his Death. He could not know it much sooner; For after Julian was decla∣red Emperor, and had set up for himself, as Ammianus tells us, Am. Marcel. l. 21. ad init. Vt{que} omnes nullo impediente ad suum favorem alli∣ceret, inhaerere cul∣tui Christiano finge∣bat, a quo jampri∣dem occuliè descire∣rat, &c. progressus in eorum Ecclesiam solemniter Numine or ato discessit. In. 1. p. 69. Or by his vigorous Expediti∣on. . He still seigned himself a Chri∣stian. And though in private he performed his Heathenish Rites trusting some few with the secert, yet he publickly went to Church on Twelfth∣day, and after he had been de∣vout at the Service, he came away again. This was at Vi∣enna, not quite ten Months be∣fore the Emperor's Death. To return to what we were speaking of before, Gregory says, That Constantius made his excuse in many words, both to God and Man, for his kind∣ness to Julian; and shewed the Christians,
with much earnestness, the Concernment he had for the true Religion. This he did at his last gasp, when otherwise it was all one to him who had the Empire, for he had done with it. And in another place, and upon a different occasion, he has these words. They report Constantius repented him at his last breath, when every Man is a just Judg of himself, because of the Tri∣bunal, which is in the other World; for Orat. in laud. A∣thanasii, p. 389. these three things he acknowledged were evil and unworthy of his Reign; the slaughter of his Kindred, and his decla∣ring of the Apostate, and his innovating in Matters of Faith. And with these words in his Mouth he is said to have gone out of the World. This is ten times more than if Constantius had actually excluded Juli∣an, for he might have done that, and been sorry for it at his Death; as Men generally are for all the Actions of their Life, in which they are not satisfied. But now he repents him upon his Death-bed, where Men's Eyes are open, and they usually have their sobe∣rest Thoughts about them, that he had not done it, and reckons it in the number of those things which have blackned his Reign. This was the old fashion'd Doctrine of Gregory Nazienzen, who alone, except St. John, has had the Honour to be called the Divine; this was the sense of Basil the Invect. 2. p. 132. Great, for Gregory entitles him likewise to these Invectives; and this was the Consci∣ence of a Dying Emperor. If this Doctrine shall displease any of those Men. who de∣ceiving, and being deceived, say, That the Succession cannot be altered, which is pu∣nishable by the Laws of the Land; or that it ought not to be altered for the safety and security of true Religion, which is contrary
to what these Fathers assert with so much vehemency: In that case I have these two reasonable Requests to make to them. 1. That they would please to consute this Doctrine which they dislike, and prove it false. And then, 2. that they would never hereafter fetch their Mountebank Receipts of Prayers and Tears, and such like En∣couragements For even Scripture, not half so much abu∣sed, these men them∣selves call Cant. to Arbitrary Government, of which I shall say more anon, out of the Writings of these very Fathers; but let them pass from hence-forth for dan∣gerous and Anti-monarchial Authors. Whom we can the better spare at this time, because the whole Christian World was of the same mind. Which, by the way, Julian This Am. Mar∣cell. ex∣presly ac∣knowled∣ges in the passage just now cited. understood very well; for what else made him go to Church? Nay, the Christians had such an aversion to a Pagan Successor, that they could not endure him, when he was become their lawful Emperor. How fond they were of him, and what welcome they gave him to the Crown, and in how great heaviness they were at his Death, shall appear at large in the following Chapters. CHAP. III. Their Behaviour towards him in Words. ANd here a Man may almost lose him∣self in the great variety of Instances, which may be given of their Hatred and Contempt of Julian, when he was Empe∣ror. How they reproached him and his Re∣ligion to his very Beard; beat his Priests before his Face, and had done him too, if
he had not got out of the way; prayed for his Confusion, and triumphed at his Death, and loaded his Memory with the greatest Disgrace and Infamy. These things will better be seen in the History and Relation of the Matter of Fact: which I shall put into the best order I can, by giving an ac∣count of what was done in his Life-time, and then all that concerns his Death, and after that, how they used his Memory. Their Behaviour in his Life-time, will fall under these three Heads, of their Words, and Actions, and Devotions. I shall begin with the first of these, where Julian began with them. And they sufficiently requited him for calling them Galileans, for they named him Idolianus instead of Julianus, Invect. 1. p. 82. and Pisaeus, and Adonaeus, from his wor∣shipping of Jupiter and Adonis, and Bull∣burner, from the great number of them which he sacrificed. The Antiochians ex∣ceeded in this kind of despiteful usage, and chafed him into the revengeful humour of writing a Book against them, which has preserved the memory of those Indignities which they put upon him. They derided the shape of his Body, his Gate, his Goat's Beard, every thing that belonged to him, as you may see in the very beginning of that Julian Misopogon. p. 88. Book. And afterwards he tells them they were very happy Men, who had renounced all service, either of the Gods, or Laws, or him who was keeper of the Laws; and that the Gods, as well as he, had suffered dishonour from that City. It was a say∣ing among them, that Chi and Cappa had never done any injury to their City; by which Letters they meant Christ and Con∣stantius. Ibid. p. 89. Yes, says he, let me tell you freely, Constantius did you one single
Injury, that when he had made me Caesar, he did not kill me. Two or three times, in that little Book, he mentions their Anapests, and Lampooning his poor sorry Beard. P. 94, 95. He complains, that whereas the French lo∣ved him for the likeness of his Humour, and P. 95, & 112. took up Arms for him, and gave him Mony, and applauded him; the Antiochians did the quite contrary: they said, That he turned the World up-side down, and that his Beard was fit to make Ropes of; and that he made War against Chi, and they wish'd for Cappa again. And after Juli∣an Amm. Marcel. l. 22. Post quae multa in se facetè dicta comperi∣ens coactus dissimu∣lare pro tempore Irâ sufflabatur internâ. had written this Book, they were smart upon him again; and tho he was inwardly enrag'd, he was forc'd to dissemble it at the present. These things indeed were not said to his Face; but they were the common talk of the Christians just under his Nose, while he lay with his Army about seven Months in that City, to be in a readiness for the following, Campaign. And he was so en∣raged Lib. 23. Nondum irâ quam ex compel∣lationibus & probris conceper at emollit â loquebatur asperiùs se eos asserens posteà non visurum. at them, that at his de∣parture, when some wish'd him a happy Expedition, and a glo∣rious Return, he very roughly said, That he would never see them more, their Nick-names and  stuck so in his Stomach. But who commends them for this? Even that does no less a Man than Theodoret, who lived under two of the four Vid. 8. Act. Con∣cil. Chal∣cedonen∣sis. Theod. l. 3. c. 22. first General Councils, and was himself present, and a great part of the last of them. He puts it all upon the score of their Zeal and Love for their Religion. His words are these; That the Antiochians, who had received their Christianity from the
greatest pair of Apostles, Peter and Paul, and had a warm Affection for the Lord and Saviour of all, did always abomi∣nate Julian, who ought never to be re∣membred, you have his own word for it. For, for this Reason, he writ a Book a∣gainst them, and called them the Beard∣haters. 2. They did not only thus scoff at him, and derided him behind his back; but they took the freedom to reproach him and his Religion to his Face; of which I shall give these two Instances. The first of a Noble Man of Beraea; the story is very remarka∣ble upon several accounts, which Theodo∣ret Theod. l. 3. c. 18. gives us in this manner.Julian, be∣fore his Expedition against the Persians, sent to consult the Oracles, who promised him certain Victory. And after his Vi∣ctory, he designed the ruin of the Christi∣ans, and threatned to set up the Idol of Venus in the Christian Churches. March∣ing on with these Threatnings, he was over∣come by one single Man in Beraea: This Man was indeed in other respects an emi∣nent Person, for he was Governour there; but his Zeal made him more eminent. For seeing his Son warping towards the false Religion, which then prevailed, he turned him out of Doors, and publickly disinheri∣ted him. But he coming to the Emperor, who was but one Stage from the City, de∣clared to him, both his own Perswasion, and how his Father had disinherited him. Julian bid the young Man set his Heart at rest, promising that he would reconcile his Father to him. So when he came to Beraea, he invited the Magistrates, and chief Men, to a feast, and amongst these was this young Man's Father; and him, with his
Son, he ordered to sit next himself. And about the middle of Dinner, Julian says to the Father; In my mind it is not just to force a Man's Judgment, which is other∣wise inclined, and to reduce it, against his Will, to the other side. Therefore do not you force your Son, against his mind, to follow your Opinion. For neither do I force you to follow mine, although I can very easily compel you. But the Father, sharpnening his Discourse with a Divine Faith, answered, O King, do you speak of this Villain, who is hated by God, and has preferr'd a Lie before the true Religi∣on? But, says Julian, putting on again a Vizard of Meekness; Friend, leave Rail∣ing; and, turning his Face to the young Man, he said, I will take care of you my self, since I have not prevailed with your Father to do it. I have not told this Story in vain, (says Theodoret) but was willing to shew, not only the admirable freedom of this Divine Person, but also that there were very many who despised Julian's Power and Authori∣ty. And that did Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, Socrat. l. 3. c. 10. Sozom. l. 5. c. 4. with a witness, long before. Being led by the hand, for he was blind, and in Years, he came to Court to the Emperor, when he was publickly sacrificing to Fortune, and reproached him much, calling him Impious, Apostate, and Atheist. And he reproached him again with his Blindness, and saying, Your Galilaean God will not cure you. But Maris replied to the Em∣peror, with more Boldness, than before, says he, I thank God for striking me with Blindness, that I may not see thy Face, who art thus fallen into Impiety. The Emperor said nothing to this, but he per∣secuted
him grievously afterwards. And the aged Bishop, I suppose, had more wit than to expect any other It would be endless to reckon up the Say∣ings Theod. l 3. c. 14. Chrysost. Hom. 40. Theod. l. 3. c. 16. of Juventinus and Maximus, whose Anniversary Sermon St. Chrysostom in his Time preach'd at Antioch; of those Soul∣diers that were trapan'd into Sacrificing, by one of Julian's Stratagems; and of many others, who did not spare him in the least: And therefore, in these Matters, the Rea∣der must be satisfied with a tast only. CHAP. IV. Their Actions. HAving shewed you, the manner at least, how they treated him in Words, I proceed now to some of their Actions, which make manifest their hatred to him, and how they held him in the very lowest degree of Contempt. I shall give but two Instances, and the first is the Story of Valen∣tinian, which Theodoret ushers in with this Preface: And others that were in places Theod l. 3. c. 15. of Dignity and Authority, using the like boldness (as Juventinus and Maximus did) enjoyed equal Crowns. For Valen∣tinian himself, who was afterwards Em∣peror, but was then a Colonel of the Houshold Guards, did not hide the Zeal which he had for the true Religion. For when that Thunder-struck Mad-man went in Procession to the Temple of Fortune, the Chaplains stood on both sides of the Doors, cleansing, as they counted it, with Sprink∣lings, or Holy Water, that those entred
in. But when Valentinian, who gained both Kingdoms, of Earth and Heaven, for what he now did, walking before the Em∣peror, saw this Holy Water coming near his Cloaths; he struck the Chaplain with his Fist, saying, that it would not cleanse, but defile him. Julian seeing what passed, sent him away to a Garison lying by a De∣sart, and gave order that there he should spend his days. But in a Year, and a few-Months time, he was made Emperor, in reward of his Confession. For the Righte∣ous Judg, not only rewards those that are concerned for Religion in the Life to come, but sometimes he presently gives them the recompence of their pious Labours, by these previous Gifts now, confirming the belief of those which Christians hope for hereafter. You see how Theodoret magnifies this Action; and though it was so high a breach of the Peace, as might have cost him his right Hand, if not his Head, in many Courts; yet he makes him no less than a Confessor for it. And so St. Austin calls him; Valenti∣nian August. de Civit. l. 18. c. 52. was a Confessor of the Christian Faith under Julian, and lost his place in the Guards for it. Our next Instance, is a Passage of as great a Man in his way, and that is, Old Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum, Father to Gregory Nazianzen. We have it in the Funeral Speech or Sermon of the Divine upon his Father's Death; and after he has said a great deal in his praise, he has these Greg. Naz. O∣rat. 19. p. 307. words: But I suppose that some of them, who knew his Life very well, have won∣dred a good while, that I should be so taken up in these things aforesaid, as if I
had nothing else in commendation of him; and that I should make no mention of the difficulty of the Times, against which he seemed to have been set in battel aray. Come on then, and let me add these things to what has been said. Our Age bore such an Evil, as no Age did before, aud I sup∣pose none will hereafter, an Emperor that was an Apostate, both from God and Rea∣son, who thought it a small Bursiness to conquer the Persians, but a great Work to reduce the Christians. And the Devils that drove him, perswading him to it, he omitted no manner of Impiety, by Per∣suasions, by Threatnings, Sophistry, draw∣ing over to him, not only those that he gained by Artifices, but those also which he forced by Violence. Now who is there to be found that more despised this Empe∣ror, or had a greater hand in destroying him, than my Father? Of his contempt of him, amongst many other, both those Archers, and their Commander, are a proof, whom he brought against our Church; as either to take possession of it, or to destroy it: For having assaulted ma∣ny others, he came hither likewise with the same intent, and imperiously demand∣ed the Temple. He so far failed of accom∣plishing any thing of what he desired; that if he had not presently got out of my Fa∣ther's way, (being aware of it, either of himself, or by some Bodies advice) he might have gone away kick'd; The Bi∣shop boyling with Anger against him, and with Zeal for the Temple. I have had more trouble with this Pas∣sage, than with all the rest in the Book. For I have often tried to make this seating intended for the Captain of the Archers, and
have been ready to make Solaecisms in the Greek, to avoid the greater Solaecism of an Emperor of the World, awed and terrified with the fear of a kicking. But it will not do: it is too late for me to consult Julian's Honour, or to alter Gregory's words. And that you may be satisfied this is the sense of them, I have here set down the Comment of a Metropolitan of Crete, who was a better Grecian than I ever expect to be. Ac contemptionis, praeter multa alia, do∣cumento Eliae Cre∣tensis Com∣ment. in locum. quo{que} sunt sagittarii illi & Dux eo∣rum, quos impius ille adversùs Ecclesias con∣citabat, tanquam scilicet eas aut assumptu∣rus & subacturus, aut eversurus ac deletu∣rus. Cum quibus scilicet omnibus nihil eorum, quae cupiebat, perfecit, in tale Eccle∣siae propugnaculum incidens, quin potiùs, nisi quàm primum ipsi cessisset (nimirum vel ipse per se intelligens vel alium quen∣dam consultorem audiens) etiam pedibus contusus abiisset, eo nimirum vehementiore quodam adversis eum Divino Zelo commo∣to. Ergo contemptionis quidem luculentum hoc Argumentum est. Here you have the description of one of the Lachrymists of old, who at fourscore and ten, and after he had been thirty five Years a Bishop, was an Over-match for a Pagan Emperor; and having vanquish'd him, and won the Field, kept it as long as he lived, which was about nine Years after Julian's Death. And which is more than that, The Garlands and Trophies of this Victory are hung up in the Church by the hands of another Bishop, to satisfy the Ex∣spectation of a number of good Christian People, Basil the Great assisting at the Ceremony.
And now know I no more than the Pope of Rome, what to make of all this, what they meant by it, or upon what Principles these Men proceeded. Whether the Laws of their Country allowed them (which I am sure the Laws of our Country do not al∣low a Man to imagine) to offer Violence to their lawful Emperor; or whether old Gre∣gory distinguish'd, and did not resist Julian, but only the Devil, which his Son so often tells us was in him; Or how it was, I will never stand guessing. Only this we may be assured of, that none of these Bishops had ever been in Scotland, nor had learn'd to fawn upon an Apostate, and a mortal Enemy to their Religion. CHAP. V. Their Devotions. And first of their Psalms' THese Passages which we have hitherto related, were in common conversa∣tion, in the Streets and Market-place, in the Court and abroad in the World; where the Christians might chance not to have their Religion about them, and so shew themselves Men of like Passions with other Men; but when they go to Church, and enter upon Holy Ground; or when∣ever they make their Addresses to God in Prayers and Praises, there one may expect to see the flights of their self-denying and suffering Religion There one may justly expect they should lay aside all their Animo∣sity against Julian, though he were their Enemy, and for that reason pray the harder for him. Yes, so they do, the wrong way; they cannot sing a Psalm, but they make
his Confusion the Burden of it. And as they order the Matter, their Prayers and Tears are the Arms of the Church indeed, for they are Darts, and Arrows, and Fire∣brands, and Death. If moving all the Power, and solliciting all the Vegeance of Heaven against a Man; if calling for the Sword, and the Plagues of Egypt, be praying for their Pagan Emperor, they give him enough of that; as you shall see anon in their own words. I shall begin with their Psalms, which I shall set down so, as not to omit the Cir∣cumstances I find with them. Julian ordered the Christians to remove Theod. lib 3. cap. 9 and 10. the Bones of Babylas, and of the young Men who were martyr'd with him, from Daphne, where Apollo's Temple stood, Who gladly went and fetch'd the Coffin; and all the People went dancing before it, and singing David's Psalms; repeating after every Verse, Confounded be all they that worship graven Images! Julian not  the Disgrace which was hereby put upon him, the next day commanded the Leaders of this Dance to be appre∣hended. Salustius the Governor, who was himself an Heathen, dissuaded the Emperor from it; but when he saw that Julian could not contain his Passion, he went and seized the first which came to hand; which was Theodorus, a young Man, adorned with Divine Zeal, walking in the Market-place: Him he tortured from Morning to Night, with so much Cruelty, and so many fresh Executioners, as no Age has mentioned the like. And when he was upon the Wrack, and a Toiturer plying him on either side, he did nothing hut sing o∣ver again that Psalm, which the Congre∣gation
sung the day before, with an un∣concerned and chearful Countenance. This made Ruffinus, who likewise tells this Story, Ruffinus, lib. 1. c. 36. afterwards ask him whether he felt any pain? Who said, that he felt a little, but there stood by him a certain Youth, who all the while wiped off his Sweat with a very white Linnen Cloth, and often poured cold Water upon him, which so delighted him, that he was sorry when he was taken off the Wrack. For when Salustius saw that he had spent all that Cruelty upon him to no purpose, he put Fetters upon him, and kept him in Prison. But he was soon released, and no Body else punish'd upon that account. Julian it seems did not care to have that Psalm any oftner re∣peated; which he might very reasonably expect, when so much Cruelty could not make a Youth to alter his Note. To this I shall only add, what Theodo∣ret calls it, a memorable Story of an in∣comparable Woman: For even the Wo∣men Theod. l. 3. c. 17. (says he) despised this Man's mad∣ness, being armed with Divine . Her Name was Publia, and she was Mother to John; who was often chosen to be Bi∣shop of Antioch, but as often refused it. This Woman being a Widow, had a Quire of Virgins, which promised Virginity for LIfe, and was always singing Praises to God her Creator and Redeemer. And when the Emperor passed by, they sung their Psalms the louder, accounting him fit to be despised and derided. Now they sung, for the most part, those Psalms, which expose the weakness of Idols; and they said with David, The Idols of the Heathen are Silver and Gold, the Work of Men's Hands. And after they had shewed the
senslesness of them, they added; Let them that make them, be like unto them, and all those that put their trust in them! He hearing these things, was grievously vexed, and commanded them to be silent at such time as he passed by. But she, little re∣garding his Laws, put more courage into her Quire; and when he past by again, she bid them sing this Psalm, Let God a∣rise, and let his Enemies be scattered! Julian, in great indignation, commanded the Mistress of the Quire to be brought to him; and when he saw her venerable Age, he neither had any compassion for her Years, nor honoured her Vertue, but commanded one of the Souldiers to strike her on the Face, till he made it all bloody with his hands. She receiving this Dis∣grace, as the highest Honour, went back to her House; but she still shot him with her Spiritual Songs as she was wont. Now here indeed is a Suffering Religion, because the old Woman does not beat the Souldier; but I cannot possibly find out a∣ny profound Primitive Obedience in this passage. Where is the Reverence due to Ma∣jesty, or Eternity, as Emperors were then stiled, in courting him fit to be made a Laughing-stock? What dutifulness was there shewn, in refusing to comply with so reasonable a Command, as to forbear  Psalms only when he went by? But it was Julian, and they did not owe him so much Service. They say, Rage turns every thing into Weapons, and there seems to be some quantity of that Passion here, when their very Devotions are so plainly aimed and level'd at Julian's Head.
CHAP. VI. Their Prayers and Tears. I Come now to their Prayers and Tears, of which Gregory gives us a large ac∣count. He says, They followed Hezekiah's Example, who applied himself to God a∣gainst Senacherib with good success. And he insinuates, that they had more reason to do it, because they had no other way to help themselves. Thus did Hezekiah, who had great Forces about him, who was King of Invect. .  p. 123. the great City Jerusalem, who perhaps might have beat off that numerous Enemy by himself. But we who had no other Wea∣pon, nor Wall, nor any other Defence left us but our hope in God, as being altoge∣ther deprived and cut short of all humane Aid: Whom else could we have, either to hear our Prayers, or to prevent what was threatned, but God, who swears against the Pride of Jacob? And presently after he givs us an Account of those Cries which they sent up to God, in some of them in∣vocating him as a Lord and Master, in o∣thers complaining as to a kind Father, in others again, as if they upbraided and ex∣postulated with him, as Men in trouble use to do; O God, why hast thou rejected us for ever; why is thy Wrath so  the Sheep of thy Pasture? Lift up thy Hands against their Pride, &c. We chal∣lenged the Sword, and the Plagues of E∣gypt; and we besought him to judg his own Cause; and we urged him, that he would at length rise up against the Wicked. How long shall the Vngodly, how long shall the Vngodly boast? And withall, we used
those sorrowful and more proper Expressi∣ons, Thou hast made us a By-word and Reproach unto our Neighbours. We men∣tioned the Vine out of Egypt, destroyed by the wild Boar, that wicked One, who made wickedness his own, and was all over pollu∣ted with the Mire of it. Hitherto Gregory speaks in the plural Number, as if others had joyned in these Prayers with him: Never∣theless, because he says afterwards, These were my former Thoughts and Cries to God, it is possible they were his own private Devotions. However it is very evident, that their publick Devotions ran in the same strain. In the forementioned Oration, at his Father's Funeral, you may remember that Gregory praises him for his contempt of Ju∣lian, of which we gave you an account be∣fore; and for contributing to his destructi∣on. Concerning which he has these follow∣ing words. And as for his Destruction, How can Orat. 19. p. 307, 308 any one appear to have done more towards it than my Father? Either in publick, striking the Villain with the joint Prayers . and Supplications of all the People toge∣ther, and not at all fearing the Times; or in private, drawing forth his nightly Squadron against him; I mean, his lying upon the Ground, where he wore out his old Flesh, and watered the Floor with his Tears, for almost a whole Year together. In this place he does not specify what those publick Prayers were which they had for Julian, but he sufficiently describes them. First, They were such as tended to his Destruction, and were a means of it. 2dly, They darted these Prayers at him. It is exprest by a word, which might more properly be employed to describe the throw∣ing
of that Javelin, which afterwards stuck in his Liver. 3dly, The nightly Squadron mentioned aster, confirms us, that with these they fought him by day. And, 4thly, They were such Prayers as ex∣posed old Gregory to a great deal of danger; but he did not fear the Times a crumb. If ever the Christians were in cold Blood, sure they were at old Gregory's Funeral, for it was several Years after Julian's Death: And yet you see, that even then his opposi∣tion to Julian serves to embalm his Memo∣ry. It was thought to be so much for his honour, to help to pray Julian to Death, that a great part of the Congregation had been disappointed, if no mention had been made of it; as appears plainly from the Preface to this Passage before cited. So that in that Age the best Prayers and Tears were those, which did best execution upon an Apostate Emperor, and contributed most to his destruction. Which now follows to be spoken of in the next Chapter. CHAP. VII. Julian's Death. AFter Julian had reigned about nine∣teen Months, which the Christians thought very much too long, he met with an untimely Death, and they with the answer of their Prayers. For when he had been some time in Persia, his Army being suddenly attaqued by the Persians, he made  Marc. . 25. . so much haste from place to place to re ieve  which were most hotly enga∣ged, that he forgot his Armour; and while
he thus exposed himself, he was struck with an Horse-man's Spear, which pierced his Side, and stuck in the bottom of his Liver; of which Wound, about midnight, he died. And that the Christians might have this good News the sooner, as Historians tell us, it was conveyed to some of them by Miracle. A Christian School-master at Antioch, who Theod. l. 3. c. 19. was ask'd in derision, by Libanius, Juli∣an's great Master, What the Carpenter's Son was doing? being filled with Divine Grace, foretold what would shortly come to pass. For, says he, the Creator of the World, whom you in derision have called Carpenter's Son, is makings a Coffin. And in a few days after came the news of that wicked Wretch's Death. Which was likewise revealed in as extra∣ordinary a manner to St. Julian Sabba. Who having understood the Threatnings of that wicked One against the Christians, did more diligently offer up his Prayers to the God of the whole World. And on that day the Emperor was killed, this Person be∣ing at Prayers knew, of it; although he was more than twenty days Journeys off. For, they say, as he was supplicating the mer∣ciful and compassionate Lord, on a sudden he stop'd the current of his Tears, and was filled with Joy, which discovered it self in the chearfulness of his Countenance. They that conversed with him, seeing this change in him, desired to know the occasion of it. And he told them, that the wild Bore, the E∣nemy of the Lord's Vineyard, had suffered the panishment of his Faults, and lay dead, having done designing. When they heard these things, they all fell a dancing, and offered up to God an Hymn of Thanks∣giving. And they understood, by those that
brought advice of his Death, that it was the same day, and the same hour, in which this Divine old Man, both knew the Wretch to be slain, and spoke of it before-hand. And thus the News, as fast as it arrived, was every-where entertained with all the demonstrations of joy and gladness. His old Friends, The Antiochians, as soon as they heard of his Death, kept Feasts, and Theod. lb. c. 22. publick joyful Meetings; and they not on∣ly had Dances in their Churches and Chappels of the Martyrs, but likewise in their Theatre they proclaimed the Victory of the Cross, crying aloud, with one Voice, God and his Christ have gotten the Victory. In a word, the whole Church sung Songs of Triumph, as St. Jerome tells us, in his Comment upon the third of Habakkak. Because it was not known who threw that Spear which killed him, it gave occasion to variety of Reports. Some say he was kil∣led by a Persian; but the more general and prevailing Report, is, That he was kill'd by one of his own Souldiers; as Socrates's words are. But Callistus, who was then in Julian's Service, and has given us the History of that War in Hero∣ick Verse, says, it was a Daemon that did Socrat l. 3. c. 21. it. Which it may be he feigned as a Poet, and it may be was the truth of the Matter, for the Furies have punished very many. And so Theodoret after him. Who it was Theod. l. 3. c. 20. that struck that just stroak, no Body knows to this day. But whether it was Man or Angel that thrust the Weapon, it is plain that he who did it, was the Minister of the Divine Appointment and Direction. But Libanius the Sophist, whom Julian in his Letters to him, calls his Dearest Bro∣ther, is resolved to find out the Man that
kill'd his good Friend; and thus he traces him. Does any one desire to know the Sozom. l. 6. c. 1. Man that kill'd him? I know not his Name; but that he was none of the Ene∣my, this is a clear proof, that no Body a∣mong the Persians was rewarded for that Blow. Although the King of Persia made proclamation of rewarding him that kill'd him, yet no Body was tempted by the Re∣ward to brag that he did it. And we are beholden to our Enemies, that they would not assume the Glory of those things which they did not do, but have allowed us to seek for the Murderer amongst our selves. Now his Life was not for their profit, who did not live according to his Laws, and had long plotted against him, and having then an oppotunity, put it it in execution. And Libanius writing after this fashion, insinuates, that he who kill'd Julian was a Christian; which it may be (says the Ib. cap. 2. Historian) was true. This is a strange Concession, but you will more wonder that he should justify such a Traiterous Assassi∣nation, and yet he does in the follow∣ing words. For it is not improbable, that some one of the Souldiers might take into consideration, how the Heathens, and all Men to this day, do still praise those who long since have killed Tyrants, as Men that were willing to die for the Common Liberty, and defended in that manner their Country-men, Kinsmen, and Friends. And you can hardly blame him, . who shews himself so couragious for God, and for that Religion which he approves. And it is another wonder to me, that this strange Doctrine should be dedicated to Sozom. dedicat. Eccl. Hist. Theodosuss the younger, an Emperor, who in less than fifty Years after, sat upon the
very same Throne that Julian did. And now we have brought Julian to his Grave, it may reasonably be expected, that there the Christians should let him rest in quiet, and let fall their Quarrel when their Enemy was gone. Which whether they did or no, shall be shewn in the next Chapter. CHAP. VIII. How they used his Memory. TO make amends for their dry Eyes at Julian's Funeral, the Christians spa∣red neither pains nor cost to erect Pillars and Monuments to his Memory. Gregory gives us the Description of that stately one, which he reared for him; speak∣ing to Julian; This Pillar we erect for Invect. 2. p. 134. you, which is higher and more conspicu∣ous than Hercules's Pillars. For they are fixed in one place, and are only to be seen by those that come thither; but this being a moveable one, cannot chuse but be known every where, and by all Men; which I am fure will last to future Ages, branding thee and thy Actions, and warn∣ing all others not to attempt any such Re∣bellion against God, lest doing the like things, they fare alike. And I think he has made an Example of him. For let any one read the Inscription of this Monument, and he will bless himself to see what Titles of Honour are bestowed up∣on him. Thou Persecutor next to Herod, Invect. 1. p. 76. thou Traitor next to Judas, (only thou hast not testified thy Repentance, by hang∣ing thy self, as he did) and Killer of Christ Pag. 16. after Pilate, and next to the Jews, thou
Hater of God. He calls him Murderer, Enemy, and Avenger, &c. And all the Ecclesiastical Historians do the like. But I am weary of ripping up the re∣proachful and ignominious Titles, which the Christians Tongues being unfettered, as Gregory's Expression is, and the great fa∣cility Invect. 2. p. 132. of compounding Greek words have lavishly bestowed upon him. And after all, they lodg him in Hell, and there they leave him. Says St. Chrysostom, Where is the Emperor that threatned these Chrysost. Hom. de S. Hiero∣martyre . p. 723. things? He is lost and destroyed, and now he is in Hell, undergoing endless Pu∣nishment. What Protestants ever treated their worst Persecutors at this rate? Who ever called Queen Mary, mad Bitch, as St. Jerome does Julian, mad Dog? No, the Cour∣tesy In the Preface to his Cata∣logue of Eccles. Writers. of England has been shewn, even to that treacherous and bloody Woman, who deserved as ill of the Christian Religion, as ever Julian did, which I hope to make ve∣ry plain by and by. In the mean time it will be necessary to make some Reflections upon this strange and unexpected Behaviour of the Primitive Christians. CHAP. IX. Reflections on the Behaviour of these Christians. JVlian's Persecution was but a flea-biting Invect. 1. p. 53. to what the Christians had formerly felt; it was but a short and weak assault of the Devil, as Gregory calls it; and for that,
reason, he very much bewails the Sin of all those that withered away, when there was no greater heat of Temptation. If Men sell away from Christianity, they were ri∣diculously overcome, (as St. Chrysostom Chrysost. Hom. 40. de SS. Juv. & Max. mox ab i∣nit. expresses it); and if they persevered, it was no such great matter to quit a Trade or Profession for their Religion. Which was the Case of the discarded School-masters, and Physicians, and Souldiers, and was the greatest severity of all Julian's Edicts. He was, if we will speak properly, rather a Tempter than a Persecutor; for some he Greg. O∣rat. 10 in Caesar. p. 167. seduced with Mony, others with Places of Trust, others with Promises, others with Honours of all sorts, which he exposed in all Mens sight, not like a King, but in a very servile manner; and others again he won by the witchcraft of his words, and by his own Example. He wrought upon Men's Covetousness and Ambition, more than up∣on their Fear; and that with so good suc∣cess, that St. Asterius says, It verifies the Homil. 3. cont. Ava∣ritiam. Bi∣blioth. Pa∣trum Co∣lon. p. 704. saying of Paul, a Preacher of Truth, that Covetousness is Idolatry. And as for what he designed against the Christians, it was far short of what other Emperors had exe∣cuted. And yet how do the Christians treat this Emperor! One would take Them to be the Apostates; one while reproaching him, ruffling with him, and vexing every Vein in his Royal Heart; another while saying all their Prayers backwards, and calling down Vengeance upon his Head; after that, dancing and leaping for joy at his Death, and insulting over his Memory. But for the name of Christians, he had better have fallen amongst Barbarians. And yet he of∣ten put them in mind of their Christianity too: He told them, when they complained
of any Oppression; It is your part, when Socrat. l. 3. c. 14. you are ill used, to bear it, for this is the Commandment of your God. But they flurt at him for this, and say, He makes a very wise Speech, and this he remembers Greg. In∣vect. 1. p. 94, 95. since he was Reader; and he should have read on, and not skip'd over that Passage, The wicked Man shal be miserably destroy∣ed, such a one as denies God, and which is more, vexes those that persevere in the Confession of him. They ask, How or where that Right is that they should suffer and bear it, and that the Heathens should not spare those, who when time was spared them? They call him by the bloodiest Names of the Devil, for taking advantage of the Christian Doctrine in this Particular, which says, We must not avenge our selves, nor go to Law, &c. nor render Evil for Evil, but pray for, and wish well to those who injure and persecute us. And in con∣clusion, they come with their Distinctions, and tell him, That he must not think to drive all Men up to the top and pinacle of Vertue. For there are several commands in the Gospel, (which are no more than Counsels of Perfection) which bring ho∣nour and reward to them that keep them, but to those that do not keep them, no manner of danger at all. Is not this the right course to interpret and gloss away all their Duty? In a word, they seem to have broke all the Measures by which all the An∣cient and Suffering Christians have gone in all former Persecutions. The plain truth of the Matter is this; Their Cafe differed very much, and they were in quite other Circumstances than the first Christians were. When Julian came to the Crown, he found them in full
and quiet possession of their Religion, which they had enjoy'd without interruption for almost fifty Years, and which was so in∣estimable a Blessing, that they had plainly undervalued it, if they had not done their utmost to keep it. And then to have this Treasure wrested out of their hands, by one that had been bred up in the Bosom of the Church, who profess'd himself a Christian, and never pull'd off his Masque, till it was too late for them to help themselves; this was enough to raise, not only all their Zeal, but all their Indignation too. Whereas the poor Primitive Christians of all, were born to Persecution, they neither knew better, nor expected it. They professed their new Religion, as in some places the propounded new Laws, with an Haltar about their Necks. The Laws of the Empire were al∣ways in force against them, though not al∣ways put in execution; and the edge of the Ax stood always towards them, though it were not at all times stained with their Blood. In a word, they perpetually lay at the Mercy of their Enemies: their Religion at the best was in the VVorld but upon suffe∣rance, as Abraham was in the Land of Ca∣naan; Acts 7. 5. where he had none Inheritance, no not so much as to set his foot on. But as his afflicted Posterity were afterwards Lords of that Country, so after another Egyptian Bondage, Christianity was advanced to be the established Religion of the Empire. It is worth the while to read Eusebius, only to see in what a transport of joy the Chri∣stians were, upon that happy Revolution. The Christian World at that time, was the very Picture of Heaven. Such joy there will be again amongst good Men, when they
have cross'd the tempestuous Sea of this VVorld, and are safely landed in the Regi∣ons of Light and Immortality. For what Gregory says of Constantius, was true of Invect. 1. p. 64. many others; Never any Man in this VVorld set his Heart so much upon any other thing, as he did to see the Christi∣ans flourish, and to have all the advanta∣ges of Glory and Power. And neither conquered Nations, nor a well-govern'd Empire, nor great Treasures, nor excess of Glory, nor being King of Kings, nor be∣ing stiled so, nor all other things, which make up other Men's Notion of happiness, did delight him so much, as to have the honour of bringing Honour to the Chri∣stians, and of leaving them establish'd for ever in the possession of Power and Au∣thority.  And Men that valued the esta∣blishment of their Religion at this Rate, would not easily part with it. Now for Ju∣lian, who by his Baptism first, and by  into Orders after, and by his going to Church after that, sufficiently engaged him∣self to maintain Christianity, to endea∣vour on the other hand to dispossess them of their Free-hold, was an insupportable in∣jury. Is there no difference, I appeal to all the VVorld, between being turn'd out as Sheep among VVolves, which was the deplorable, but unavoidable case of the first Christians, and being worried by one of their own Flock? Has a Man no more Right nor Pri∣viledg after he is naturalized, than when he was a Stranger, or Alien, or accounted an Enemy? Do not the same Laws, which forbid Men to invade other Men's Rights, enable them notwithstanding to maintain and defend their own? These are the plain
and palpable differences between the State of the first Christians, and of those under Julian. To sum up all in one word; The first Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Country, whereas these under Julian were persecuted contrary to Law. For it is manifest that Julian oppressed them in a very illegal way. He did not fairly enact Sanguinary Laws against them for their Religion, but he put them to Death upon Shams, and pretended Crimes of Treason and Sacriledg. He dressed up Theod. l. 3. c. 14. an Accusation of Treason against Juventi∣nus and Maximus; and though they died for their generous Zeal, and hearty Con∣cernment for Christianity, he gave out, and commanded it to be noised abroad, That they were punish'd for Treasonable words. The other sham of Sacriledg St. Chryso∣stom Hom. de SS. Juvent & Max. mox ab init. acquaints us with in these words: If any one, in former Times, when Godly Kings had the Government, had either broken their Altars, thrown down their Temples, taken away their Oblations, or done any such thing, he was presently hur∣ried away to the Tribunal; and some∣times the Innocent were executed, when they were only accused. The truth of which Julian himself confirms in his own Writings; where he says, Let no Man Frag∣ment. Ju∣lian. p. 540. distrust the Gods, when he hears how some have done despite to Images and Temples. For have not many slain good Men, such as Socrates, and Dion, and the great Em∣pedotimus, which I am well assured were much more the Care of the Gods than their Images are? But they have afterward punish'd their Murderers; and this like∣wise has manifestly happened in our Time,
to those that were Robbers of Temples. And besides all this, by his connivance and encouragement, he let loose the rage and fury of the Heathens upon them, as I shew∣ed before. And therefore Gregory, all over his Invectives, charges him with Tyranny, and often calls him Tyrant. So that the same Men, who would quietly have submit∣ted to the Laws, under a Nero or a Dioclesi∣an, do nevertheless pursue Julian, as if he were a Mid-night Thief, or a High-way Robber. As for us, who, blessed be God, Bracton. l. 1. c. 2. Leges cùm fuerint approbatae consensu utentium & Sacra∣mento Regum con∣firmatae mutari non possunt nec destrui si∣ne communi consen∣su & consilio eorum omnium quorum con∣silio & consensu fue∣runt promulgatae. have our Religion settled by such Laws as cannot be altered without our own consent, we cannot better express our thank∣fulness for so great a Blessing, than by living up to this Holy Religion, and resolving to keep it. For surely it is not of the Es∣sence of the Gospel, to be a Suf∣fering Religion, that is an evil Circumstance, which attends it only in bad Times; it is a Reign∣ing Religion amongst us, and I hope will never be otherwise while the World stands. And therefore I much won∣der at those Men, who trouble the Nation at this time of the day, with the unseasonable prescriptions of Prayers and Tears, and the Passive Obedience of the Thobaean Legion, and such-like last Remedies, which are pro∣per, only at such a Time as the Laws of our Country are armed against our Religi∣on. What have we to do with the Thebaean Legion? Blessed be God, who has made the difference! but I ask again, VVhat have we to do with their Example? Are we to Sacrifice, or go to Mass to Morrow, or else
to have our Throats cut? Are we under the Sentence of Death, according to the Laws of our Country, if we do not present∣ly renounce our Religion? Poor Men, they were! and though they died as glori∣ous Martyrs, in respect of their Religion, yet they died as Criminals, and Malefactors, in the Eye of the Law. I hope many good Protestants would make a shift to die for their Religion, though it may be not with the gallantry that these Souldiers did, if they were in the like sad Circumstances, and had the Laws against them; but till then, they throw away their Lives, and are cer∣tainly weary of them, if they practise any such Passive Obedience. And the truth is, we justly deserve to be so used, as the The∣baean Legion was, and moreover to be loa∣ded with the Curses of all Posterity, if we suffer our selves to be brought into that condition. For that can never happen, but by our own Treachery to our Religi∣on, in parting with those good Laws which protect it, and in agreeing to such as shall destroy it. VVhen a Man is condemned by God and his Country, in a due course of Law, it is time for him to die, and he ought willingly to submit to the Laws of the Land, (for every Man enjoys the benefit and protecti∣on of them upon those terms; and Job lays down a great Rule of Equity, when he asks, Shall we receive Good things at the Hand of God, and not likewise Evil?) But if a Man be illegally assaulted, in the way of Violence and Assassination, he may use all lawful Remedies to defend himself.
It is a currant Notion among the Fa∣thers, that we ought to spare our Persecu∣tors, and not suffer them to be guilty of Murder. Gregory gives that as a very good Invect. 1. Chrysost. Hom. . Vol. 2. p. 1015. reason of Marcus's flight from Arethusa. And St. Chrysostom introduces David, speaking after thisis manner, when he fled from Saul, and as the Scripture tells us, had Goliah's great Sword with him, and put himself into a posture of Defence: It is better for me to be miserable, and to suffer more hardships, than that Saul should be condemned by God for the Murder of an Innocent Person. And that he meant no more, than only to prevent the effusion of Innocent Blood, appears by the several Opportunities, he had to have cut off Saul, but the sense of his Duty made him abhor the least thought of it. He only sought his own safety and preservation, which he could not abandon, without being accessa∣ry to Saul's murdering of him. There is no question, but it is every Man's Duty to pre∣vent the murder of any Innocent Person, and especially of himself, by all the ways and means, which the Laws of God, and of his Country, do allows; and if he do not, he is a kind of Felo de se, and guilty of his own Murder. VVe are to suffer Persecu∣tion 1 Epist. 1 chap. vers. 6. () if need be, as St. Pe∣ter's words are, and not else. Now I humbly conceive, being the VVrit, de Hae∣retico Comburendo is taken away in time, and the Laws protect us in our Religion, that it will be a very needless thing to go to Smithfield, and there be burnt for an Heretick.
And so far it is fit to inform the Popish Crew (for we have no apprehensions of Persecution from any other Quarter) lest they should be mistaken in the good Protestant Religion of our good Church, as Coleman calls it in his Declaration. No doubt they would bestow more good words upon us, if we would be all Passive Protestants; for then the fewer a∣ctive Papists would serve to dispatch us. But most men are satisfied, that Arch∣bishop Abbot's Doctrine was much more the good Protestant Religion of our good Church, than Dr. Sibthorp's; and that Dr. Manwaring was Orthodox when he Recan∣ted, but by no means when he preached his Pulpit Law. For that name the Great and Loyal Lord Faulkland, long before the War broke out, was pleased to bestow up∣on such mischievous flattery; which he then complained had almost ruined the Nation, and it can never be good for any thing else in any Age. And yet the Arbi∣trary Doctrine of those Times did not bring any great terror along with it, it was then but a Rake, and served only to scrape up a little paltry Passive Money from the Subject, but now it is become a Murdering piece, loaden with no body knows how many Bullets. And that the Patrons of it may not complain that it is an exploded Doctrine, as if Men only hooted at it, but could not an∣swer it, I shall stay to speak a little more to it. 'Tis true, this Doctrine cannot discover its malignity under his Majesty's Gracious Reign, which God prolong and prosper, who has been pleased to give the Nation the security of his Coronation Oath, which we know all Protestant Princes value and
look upon as Sacred, and likewise of ma∣ny Gracious, Promises, that He will go∣vern according to Law. But in case we should be so sharply punished for our Sins, as to fall under a Popish Successor, then this Bloody Doctrine will have the oppor∣tunity to shew it self in its own Colours, and we may then see, and it may be, feel the sting of it. For, first, I suppose these Men will allow a Popish Successor, when he is in possessi∣on, to be a Lawful Magistrate; because, ac∣cording to them, it is not lawful, no not for the King and Parliament, to exclude him. 2. I suppose that this Lawful Magistrate will persecute Protestants; for by so doing, he does God and the Church good Service, he merits Heaven; he cannot better testi∣fie the truth and reality of his Conversion: Nay, if he does not persecute Hereticks with Fire and Sword, he lies at the Pope's Mercy to have his Kingdom taken from him; and further, he is in danger to be so ser∣ved, as the two Henries of France were. However, because some Persons are so happy as to believe that he will not persecute! no; he will protect the Church of England as it is now established by Law, and be a Mighty Defender of the Faith; I shall be con∣tented with what every Body must grant, that he may persecute, that the thing is pos∣sible. 3. In this case all Protestants cannot fly, they will not be all in travelling case; and if they were, the Ports may be , the Writ ne exeas Regnum may be serv'd upon them; and besides, many may be persua∣ded that they ought not to fly, and leave their Native Country naked and defence∣less,
and expose it to a Conquest; they may likewise believe it a thing of very ill Consequence, perdere Patriam, which no Man in England is bound to do. 4. Now we are taught in this Case, That if Men do not over-run their Country, there is nothing but Death or Damnation at home; or, as it is in their own words. Nei∣ther p. 8. doth the Gospel prescribe any Re∣medy but flight, against the Persecutions of the lawful Magistrate, allowing of no other mean, when we cannot escape be∣twixt denying, and dying for the Faith. What the Gospel prescribes is one thing, what it allows is another; there are ten thousand things allowed by the Gospel, not one of which is prescribed by it, indite∣ments, Appeals, suing for Tythes; in a word, all humane Constitutions, which are not morally Evil. But it seems the Gos∣pel does not so much as allow any mean, when we cannot escape by flight, betwixt denying and dying for the Faith. As for de∣nying the Faith, that is down-right Destru∣ction, both of Body and Soul, and there∣fore is not to be thought of, as being the far greater extremity of the two. And so welcome Death! But by what Law must we die? Not by any Law of God surely, for being of that Religion which he approves, and would have all the World to embrace, and to hold fast to the end. Nor by the Laws of our Country, where Protestancy is so far from being Criminal that it is Death to desert it and to turn Papist. By what Law then? By none that I know of, but Parasites, Sycophants, & Murderers may. For it is plain, that every Protestant, who is persecuted to death in these Circumstances,
is barbarously murdered. If they can tell us therefore, who it is, in that Case, that shall have authority to commit open, bare∣faced, and down right murders, they will then direct us where to pay our Passive O∣bedience. It would be the horridest slander in the World, to say, that any such Power is lodged in the Prerogative as to destroy men contrary to Law. The Prerogative is no such boundles bottomless Pit of Arbitra∣ry power and self will, but it is limited, stated, and certain, and as well known as other parts of the Law; and it is fit it should be so, that the Subject may not offend a∣gainst it. It is the Glory of the Crown, and is intended to be for the Benefit, Quiet, and Safety of the people, to save innocent Lives, and not to destroy them. There is no authority upon Earth above the Law, much less against it; and that this Doctor might have seen, if he had pleased to have read on in that very Chapter of Bracton, P. 29. Bracton. l. 1. c. 8. which he makes use of without citing the place. What he says concerning the King is very true, and readily acknowledged by every English man; Omnis sub eo est, & ipse sub nullo, nisitantùm sub Deo. Bracton does not barely assert it, but he shews the rea∣son of it in these words; Parem autem non habet in Regno suo, quia sic amitteret praecep∣tum, cum par in parem non habet imperium. Item nec multo fortiùs superiorem, nec potenti∣orem, habere debet. So in another place, Rex Lib. 2. cap. 22. parem non habet, nec vicinum, nec superiorem. He likewise often uses these expressions, Rex est Vicarius Dei. Dei Minister & Vicarius. But Lib. 2. cap. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 24. Bracton is so far from setting God's Vicege∣rent above the Law, that among other rea∣sons, he inforces his being under the Law
from that very Title, which is the greatest upon Earth in the forementioned Chap. 8. he has these words; Ipse autem Rex non Lib. 2. cap. 8. debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, & sub Lege, quia Lex facit Regem. Attribuat ergo Rex legi quod Lex attribuit ei, videlicet dominati∣onem & potestatem. Non est enim Rex ubi domi∣natur voluntas & non Lex. Et quod sub Lege esse debeat, cùm sit Dei Visarius, evidenter ap∣paret ad exemplum Jisu Christi, cujus vices gerit in terrâ, &c. qui  uti viribus sed ratione & judicio. Nay, he will not al∣low Lib. 3. cap. 9. him to be God's Vicegerent any longer, than he acts according to Law; speaking of the King, he says, Potestas sua juris est,  injuriae. Exercere igitur debet Rex potestatem juris, sicut Dei Vicarius & Minister in , quia illa potestas solius Dei est, potestas autem injuriae Diaboli & non Dei, & cujus horum o∣pera fecerit Rex, ejus Minister erit, cujus opera secerit. Igitur dum facit justitiam Vicarius est Regis aeterni, Minister autum Diaboli, dum de∣clinet ad injuriam. So that this Popish Suc∣cessor we are speaking of, can have no Au∣thority to exercise any illegal Cruelty upon Protestants, and how far an inauthoritative Act, which carries no Obligation at all, can oblige men to obedience, I desire the Do∣ctor to resolve. For it is an undeniable Max∣im, Where there is no Law, there is no Trans∣gression. I freely and readily acknowledge, that according to the known Laws of Eng∣land, this Popish Prince, when he is lawfully possest of the Crown, will be inviolable and unaccountable, as to his own person, and ought by no means to have any violence of∣fered to him; for who can do that as David says of an anointed King, and be guiltless? so that if a Man be reduced to those Straits, as either
to lose his Life, or contract Guilt by keep∣ing it, he ought to die, and his time is come. But this must needs be a rare case, which can seldom happen; for bad Princes are hard∣ly ever known to stoop so low, as to be the Executioners of their own Cruelty, they generally reserve themselves for a better Office. And how far men may endeavour notwithstanding to save themselves, with∣out breach of their Allegiance, and of that true Faith and Loyalty which they ought to bear of Life, and Limb, and terrene Honour, if they have a mind to know, they may ask advice. But though we are out of our pain, as to this first difficulty, yet still there is nothing but despair left behind; for him that esca∣peth the Sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay, and him that escapeth from the Sword of Jehu, shall P. 8. Elisha slay. For we are told, that the Gospel, by its own Confession, is a Suf∣fering Doctrine, and so far from being prejudicial to Caesar's Authority, that it makes him the Minister of God, and com∣mands all its Professors to give him, and all that are put in Authority under him, their Dues, and rather die than resist them by force. At this rate, under a Popish Successor, the Lives of all Protestants shall lie at the mercy of every Justice of Peace, Constable, or Tything-man, who shall have Catholick Zeal enough to destroy them. E∣very Commission-officer, and Janizary, shall kill and slay without resistance. I never knew this before, that our Throats were the dues and perquisites of their places, and that an∣other Man is bound to stand still and suffer himself to be murdered, while they only give him a cast of their Office. We readily ac∣knowledge,
that no Inferiour Magistrate is to be resisted in the exercise of his Of∣fice, so far as he is warranted by Law; but illegal force may be repelled by Force, if you will believe Bracton, who has these words; Ei qui vult viribus uti, erit virili∣ter Bracton l. 4. c. 4. resistendum. Who likewise tells us, Ar∣morum quaedam sunt ; which he after calls, Arma pacis & justitiae, in the hands of private Men for their own Defence; and adds, Quod quis ob tutelam sui corporis fecerit, vel sui juris, justè fecisse videtur. This is in the Case of violent Disseisin; and I hope a Man's Life is his most valuable Free-hold, of which if he be disseised, he shall hardly be restored by any legal Reme∣dy afterward. All the world knows, that it is a misfor∣tune for a man, in his own lawful Defence, to kill another, but it is neither Murder nor Felony; whereas it is Murder even in a Magistrate to kill any man, if it be not done in due course of Law. And through the help of God, though we cannot hinder the Papists from being Idolaters, we will en∣deavour to keep them from being Murde∣rers, they shall not have that to answer for too. Is the Doctor serious, and in earnest, when he teaches and preaches up Passive Obedience for Evangelical in this Case? Would he really have men prostitute their Lives to Malice and Violence, when all the Laws of God, and of the Kingdom, pro∣tect them? Surely this is too light for the Pulpit, and is just such another piece of Drollery, as that which was dedicated to Oliver Cromwell, in the Book called, Kil∣ling no Murder. Where the Ingenuous Au∣thor
offers Oliver many convincing and sa∣tisfying Reasons, why he should kill him∣self, and very fairly gives him his choice, of Hanging, Drowning, or Pistolling him∣self, shews him the absolute Necessity of it, the Honour he would gain by it; and in a word, uses such Arguments, as might have prevailed upon any body but an hardened Rebel. Bating that Dedication, I never met with any thing like this Passive Do∣ctrine, for wheedling a man out of his life. orat. 10. p. 166. Gregory says, That Julian stole a Persecu∣tion upon the Christians, under a shew of gentleness, for he always disclaimed his being a Persecutor. And we, for ought I know, may be exposed to the bloodiest Persecution that ever was, under the meek pretences of Passive Obedience. For as a worthy person has lately observed, One sin∣gle Arm, unresisted, may go a great way in Mas∣sacring a Nation. But how many irresista∣ble Arms will there be lifted up against us under a Popish Successor, when every petty Popish Officer, according to this Doctrine, shall be an Absolute Emperour, and have the Power of Life and Death? It is a Do∣ctrine fit to turn a Nation into a Shambles, and enough to tempt and invite Tyranny and Cruelty into the World. For let a Prince be either a Papist, or an Atheist, and his Subjects well fetter'd and mannacled with this slavish Principle; and then what hinders, but the one of them may destroy Millions for their Estates and Heresie toge∣ther, and the other as many, to see what ugly faces and grimaces they will make. The lives of the best men in the World shall be exposed to the fiery and ambitious Zeal of a Papist, or the extravagant and
unaccountable humours of a Wretch; and hang at their Girdle, as Souls do at the Pope's. If the Doctor looks upon these as ex∣cepted Cases, why did he not except them; why did he not particularly except the Case of a Popish Successor, the mischi of which, it has been the care of several Par∣liaments to prevent, and of which we have such a dismal prospect, that it makes every honest mans heart to ake. But I am afraid this Doctrine is calculated and fitted on purpose for the use of a Popish Successor, and to make us an easier prey to the Bloody Papists. For why else is there all that Wrath against every little Pamphlet which op∣poses that Interest? How comes the History of the Succession to P. 29. be an Impious and Treasonable Book, and the Dialogue between Tutor and Pupil ano∣ther? Why, the first is an Impious and Trea∣sonable Book, because it shews how the Suc∣cession has been alterable in all ages. And this is so far from being an Impious or Trea∣sonable Assertion, that it was impious High Treason, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, to say the contrary; and is still Impiety, and forfeiture of Goods and Chattels at this day. Which is so far from making the Monarchy Elective, as the Doctor might easily have understood, if he had read the Ancient Historians of England, instead of Dissenters Sayings. He would likewise have found it possible to write an History of the Succession, without borrowing from Dole∣man, and impossible to write it, without having a great many passages, which Dole∣man has got into his Book.
And the other is an Impious and Trea∣sonable For that is the true meaning of sitting, till all Grievan∣ces are redres∣sed, and Pe∣titions an∣swered. Book, for saying, That Parliaments should sit till they have done that for which they are called, and sit, and were originally intended. But these men are not for a Po∣pish Successor, and so they and their Books, and whatever they have said, is to be blast∣ed with the names of Impious and Treaso∣nable. He talks as if he were already ar∣rived at that Age, in which these Books will be sure to be called Treason, and the Authors used accordingly, unless they make haste and die out of the way, as my Lord Hollis has done, who is another of his Im∣pious and Treasonable Authors. However, let the Design of preaching up Passive Obedience, and the Example of the Thebaean Legion, at this time especial∣ly, be what it will; if the Papists taking us to be all Passive, and a fine glib and easie morsel, shall try to swallow up innocent men quick, it is my hearty desire that they may find themselves choak'd. For where is it said, in the Word of the Lord, which these men cannot go beyond, that the World was made only for Banditi, or that we are to yield up our selves to Cut-throats and Assassinates, which the Papists have ever been to poor Protestants; and how many hundred thousands they have massa∣cred I know not; but this I know, that they never did, nor ever will massacre more or less than just as many as they can. To leave a matter of this importance as clear as may be, in such an occasional and accidental Discourse, I shall reduce the strength and force of what has been said, into these following Propositions.
1. Christianity destroys no mans Na∣tural or Civil Rights, but confirms them. 2. All men have both a Natural and Ci∣vil Right and Property in their Lives, till they have forfeited them by the Laws of their Country. 3. When the Laws of God, and of our Country interfere, and it is made Death by the Law of the Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our Lives for Christ's sake. This is the only Case wherein the Go∣spel requires Passive Obedience, name∣ly, when the Laws are against a man. And this was the Case of the first Christians. 4. That the killing of a man, contrary to Law, is Murder. 5. That every man is bound to prevent Murder, as far as the Law allows, and ought not to submit to be murdered if he can help it. And now I shall desire those men, who of late have thundered in all publick places with the Thebaean Legion, to keep that com∣pleat and admirable Example, (for which, thanks be to God, we have no occasion) till they have gotten another Maximian, and till that Maximian has gotten authority to cut such an unconscionable number of Throats, as 6666 at one time.
I have many more Exceptions against their Artillery of Prayers and Tears, than I can now stay to insist upon. First, There are only Tears mentioned, Greg. Invect. . p. 57. Eton. where they quote Prayers too. 2dly, The passage has nothing at all of that sense which they put upon it, speaking of the grievous things Julian designed against the Christians; but says Gregory, he was hin∣dred by the Goodness of God, and the Tears of Christians, which were shed in great plenty by many, who had this only Reme∣dy against the Persecutor. They had no other way to help themselves; What then? Does not Gregory complain in another place, Invect. 2. p. 100. Eton. that they were stripp'd of all humane aid; they had no other Wall, nor Weapon, nor Defence left them, but their hope in God? For besides, that Julian had gotten all the strength of the Empire into his Hands, there seems to have been a general Revolt from Christianity, almost like that in Queen Mary's time; which makes St. Asterius say, Quantus ab Ecclesiâ ad al∣taria Homil. con∣tra Avariti∣am. factus est concursus? Quam multi per honorum escam & illecebras und cum ipso transgressionis hamum devorarunt? What then would they have a few defenceless Christi∣ans do, when they had lost all their Strength, and so many of their Numbers? Have they never heard a West-Countrey∣man say, Chud eat Cheese an chad it? 3dly, It is very odd they should quote this scrap out of Gregory's Invectives. Believe me, they must look out very sharp, who could find out such a Daisy as this in a whole Field of Nettles. For never were two such Thunderbolts in this World sent
after a Persecutor, as those two Speeches are. 4. Whether they did not make use of some few other ingredients, besides Tears and Prayers too, in their Composition a∣gainst a Persecutor; I refer my self to the matter of Fact related in the former part of this Book. And, Lastly, I do earnestly desire them to take heed, how they recommend Gre∣gory's Prayers and Tears to the World; for, I declare, they are no better than Treason by our Law: They were such as did imagine and compass Julian's Death. If they would have these prayers and Tears be∣lieved to be in favour of Julian, they de∣ceive the World; and if they recommend them, such as they are, to people's use, I do again, as a Friend, give them fair warn∣ing. The Protestants in Queen Mary's Days, found their short disjunctive prayer made High Treason, ex post Facto, though they prayed, in the first place, That God would turn her Heart from Idolatry: and in case that were not done, then to take her out of the way. Whereas I do notfind that there is one single wish among the Ancients for Julian's Con∣version, but all for his down right destru∣ction. The preamble of that Act in Queen Mary's Time has some remarkable passages in it, which for the Reader's ease I shall here set down, and so conclude this whole matter.
Philip and Mary. FDrasmuch as now of late, Ann. 1, & 2 Phil. & Mar. cap. 9. divers naughty, seditious, malicious, and heretical per∣sons, not having the fear of God be∣fore their eyes, but in a devilish sort, contrary to the duty of their Allegi∣ance, have congregated themselves together in Conbenticles, in divers and sundry profane places within this City of London, esteeming themselves to be in the true Faith, where indeed they are in Errors and Herelies, and out of the true Trade of Christ's Catholick Religion; and in the same places, at several times, using their phantastical and Schismatical Servi∣ces, lately taken away and abolish∣ed by Authority of Parliament, have, of their most malicious and canter∣ed Stomacks, prayed against the Dueen's Majesty, That God would turn her Heart from Idolatry to the true Faith, or else to shorten her days, or take her quickly out of the way. Which Prayer was never heard or read to have been used by any good Christian man a∣gainst any Prince, though he were a Pagan and an Infidel; and much less against any Christian Prince,
and especially so vertuous a Princess as our Soveraign Lady that now is, is known to be, whose Faith is, and always hath been, most true and Ca∣tholick, and Consonant, and agreeing with Christ's Catholick Church throughout the World dispersed. Be it enacted, That every such Person and Persons, which since the beginning of this Parliament, have prayed, required, or desired, as afore∣said, shall be adjudged high Tray∣tors, &c. as also their Procurers and Abbetors therein. I shall only observe from hence, that these blind Papists were as much out, in thinking these prayers unprecedented, and of the first Impression, as they afterwards found they were in Queen Mary's Reckon∣ing. And from the rest, the Reader may please to make his own Observations.
A COMPARISON OF Popery and Paganism. The Introduction. WEll, what is all this to us? may some men say. Here is a great deal of adoe about a Pagan Successor: but Papists are Christians, and a true Church of Christ, only corrupt. O that Bishop Ridly were alive to hear them! if it be lawful to wish a good man out of Heaven, to come and do good upon a degenerate age: He would tell them what Christians the Papists are. Wolves, Thieves, Church-robbers, Ene∣mies In Fox. Vel. 3. p. 515.  all over the Bishop's Writings. of Christ, the brood of Antichrist; such Christians with him they are. And it is a Church; The Babylonical Beast and Whore, a devlish Drab, a stinking Strum∣pet, spiritually Egypt and Sodom, the Seat of Satan; such a Church it is. And these he tells the Lords of Parliament, are not an∣gry and railing Expressions, of a man de∣sperate and in anguish, but the words of a dying man, and the very truth of the matter. And therefore who can doubt, but Dedicat. Serm. Jan 30. revolting from the Protestant, which, as
Dr. Hicks tells us, is but another Name for the Primitive Christian Religion; and herd∣ing with these enemies of Christianity, does entitle a man to the name of an Apostate, as well as it did Julian? That brave Bishop and Martyr, we spoke of, was clearly of that mind, as you may see by this passage in his Letter to Mr. West, sometimes his Chaplain: which I wish every body would lay to heart. I like very well your plain speaking, wherein you say that I must agree or die. I say unto you, in the Word of the Lord, That if you do not confess and maintain, to your power and knowledge, that which is grounded upon God's Word; but will, either for fear or gain of the World, shrink and play the Apostata, indeed you shall die the Death; you know what I mean. And his Apo∣stasy agreed so ill with him, that this Mar∣tyr, who lay under the Sentence of Death, out lived him. But we may very well let him, and all the other Glorious Martyrs, rest in peace; for we have store of living authorities. The whole Clergy of England, who have subscri∣bed, with Hand and Heart, to the Homilies, as containing a godly, wholesome, and necessa∣ry 35 Article of the Church of England. Doctrine for these times; and by name, to those against the peril of Idolatry, have con∣sequently declared it as their Judgment, which I hope they are still ready to main∣tain; That the Church of Rome, as it is 2d part Hom. for Whitsun. p. 213. presently, and hath bin for the space of nine hundred Dears and odd, is so far wide from the nature of the true Church, that nothing can be more. That it is an Idolatrous Church, not Peril of Ido∣latry, p. 69.
only an Darlot, (as the Scripture calls her) but also a foul, Filthy, old withered Darlot, and the  her of p. 71. & p. 54. , guilty of the same  and wozle, then was among Ethnicks and Gentiles: & abundantly more to the same purpose, which I shall hereafter have occasion to quote. And to name no more, we have the honourable Testimony of my Lord Chief Justice Pem∣berton, Plunket's Tryal, p. 100. that Popery is a Religion ten times worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions. Which is so great a Truth, and so seasona∣ble, and coming from so great a Man, that it deserves to be written in Letters of Gold. And if Popery be ten times worse than all the Heathenish Superstitions; then I am sure we do no worse than the Pri∣mitive Christians, if we have ten times a greater aversion for a Popish Successor, than they had for their Julian. And yet if it be but equal, I think it will serve the turn: and therefore it will be sufficient to prove Popery as bad as Paganism; though if in so doing I prove it much worse, I cannot help that. It would be endless to run through all the particulars of both these Religions, and to compare them together. I shall chuse therefore to insist upon those things where∣in they mainly agree, and wherein they are removed at the greatest distance from Christianity: and they are Polytheism, Ido∣latry, and Cruelty, which I shall treat of in order.
CHAP. X. Their Polytheism. WHenever Paganism is named, the most obvious thing in it, and that which comes first to our Thoughts, is the multitude of Gods which they worshipped. And that the Papists have herein equalled and out-done the old Pagans, I shall first shew, is the publick and pro∣fessed Doctrine of the Church of England. And, secondly, I shall demonstrate the truth of it. First, That the Papists are gross Poly∣theists, and worship a vast number of false Gods, is the publick and professed Do∣ctrine of the Church of England: And he that doubts of this, never read the Homilies; which I shall take this occasion to recom∣mend to every Bodies reading, as one of the best Books that I know in the World next the Bible, and in the mean time shall set down several passages at large, which plainly shew what is the Do∣ctrine of the Church in this point. In the third part of the Sermon against Peril of Idolatry, you have these words: And for that Idolatry standeth Hom. Tom. 2. p. 46. chiefly in the mind, it shall in this part first be proved, that our Image∣maintainers have had, and have the
same Opinions and Judgements of Saints, whose Images they have made and worshipped, as the Gen∣tiles Idolaters had of their Gods. And afterwards shall be declared, That our Image-maintainers and worshippers, have used, and use the same outward Kites of honouring and worshipping their Images, as the Gentiles did use before their I∣dols, and that therefore they commit Idolatry, as well inwardly and out∣wardly, as did the wicked Gentiles Idolaters. And concerning the first part of the Idolatrous Opinions of our I∣mage-maintainers. What I pray you he such Saints with us, to whom we attribute the defence of certain Countries, spoiling God of his due Donour herein, but Dii tutelares of the Gentiles Idolaters? Such as were Belus to the Babylonians and Assyrians, Osiris and Isis to the Egy∣ptians, Vulcane to the Lemnians, and to such other. What be such Saints to whom the safeguard of certain Cities are appointed, but Dii Praesides with the Gentiles Idolaters? Such as were at Delphos, Apollo; at Athens, Mi∣nerva; at Carthage, Juno; at Rome, Quirinus, &c. What be such Saints, to whom, contrary to the use of the Primitive Church, Temples and
Churches be builded, and Altars erected, but Dii Patroni, of the Gen∣tiles Idolaters? Such as were in the Capitol Jupiter, in Paphus Tem∣ple Venus, in Ephesus Temple Diana, and such like. Alas, we seem in thus thinking and doing, to have learned our Religion, not out of God's Word, but out of the Pagan Po∣ets, who say, Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis, Dii quibus imperium hoc steterat, &c. That is to say, All the Gods, by whose defence this Em∣pire stood, are gone out of the Tem∣ples, and have forsaken their Altars. And where one Saint hath Images in divers places, the same Saint hath divers names thereof, most like to the Gentiles. When you hear of our Lady of Walsingham, our La∣dy of Ipswich, our Lady of Wilsdon, and such other: What is it but an imitation of the Gentiles Idolaters? Diana Agrotera, Diana Coriphea, Dia∣na Ephesia, &c. Venus Cypria, Venus Paphia, Venus Gnidia. Whereby is evidently meant, that the Saint for the Image sake, should in those places, yea, in the Images them∣selves, have a dwelling, which is the ground of their Idolatry. For where no Images be, they have no such means. Terentius Varro sheweth, that there were three hundred Jupi∣ters in his Time, there were no
fewer Veneres and Dianae, we had no fewer Christophers, Ladies, Mary Magdalenes, and other Saints. Oeno∣maus and Hesiodus shew, that in their time there were thirty thousand Gods. I think we had no fewer Saints, to whom we gave the ho∣nour due to God. And they have not only spoiled the true living God of his due Honour, in Temples, Ci∣ties, Countries, and Lands, by such Devices and Inventions as the Gen∣tiles Idolaters have done before them: But the Sea and Waters have as well special Saints with them, as they had Gods with the Gentiles, Neptune, Triton, Nereus, Castor and Pollux, Venus, and such other. In whole places be come Saint Christo∣pher, Saint Clement, and divers other, and specially our Lady, to whom Shipmen sing Ave Maris stella. Nei∣ther hath the Fire scaped the idola∣trous inventions. For instead of Vul∣can and Vesta, the Gentiles Gods of the Fire, our men have placed Saint Agatha, and make Letters on her day for to quench Fire with. Every Ar∣tificer and Profession hath his special Saint, as a peculiar God. As for Ex∣ample, Scholars have Saint Nicholas and Saint Gregory; Printers, Saint Luke; neither lack Souldiers their Mars, nor Lovers their Venus, a∣mongst Christians.
All Diseases have their special Saints, as Gods, the curers of them. The Por, Saint Roche; the Fal∣ling Evil, Saint Cornelis; the , Saint Appolin, &c. Neither do Eeasts and  lack their Gods with us, for Saint Loy is the Dorse∣leech, and Saint Anthony the Swine∣herd, &c. Where is God's Provi∣dence and due Honour in the mean season? who saith, The Heavens be mine, and the Earth is mine, &c. But we have left him neither Heaven, nor Earth, nor Water, nor Countrey, nor City, Peace nor War, to rule and govern, neither Men, nor Beasts, nor their Diseases to Cure, that a Godly man might justly for zealous indignation cry out, O Heaven, O Earth, and Seas, what madness and wickedness against God are men fal∣len into? What dishonour do the Creatures to their Creator and Ma∣ker? And if we remember God some∣time, yet because we doubt of his Abi∣lity or Will to help, we joyn to him another Helper, as if he were a Noun Adjective, using these sayings; Such as Learn, God and Saint Nicholas be my speed; such as Neese, God help and Saint John: To the Horse, God and Saint Loy save thee. Thus are we become like Horses and Bules, which have no understanding. For, is there not one God only, who by his Power
and Wisdom made all things, and by his Providence governeth the same? and by his goodness maintain∣eth and faveth them? Be not all Things of him, by him, and through him? Why dost thou turn from the Creatur to the Creatures? This is the manner of the Gentiles Idola∣ters; but thou art a Christian, and therefore by Christ alone hast access to God the Father, and help of him only. These things are not wzit∣ten to any reproach of the Saints themselves, who were the true Ser∣vants of God, and did give all ho∣nour to him, taking none unto them∣selves, and are blessed Souls with God: but against our foolishness and wickedness, making of the true Ser∣vants of God, false Gods, by attri∣buting to them the Power and Donour which is God's, and due to him only. And after more to the same purpose, there are these words. If answer be made, That they Pag. 48. make Saints but obtain to God, and means for such things as they would obtain of God: that is, even after the Gentiles idolatrous usage, to make them of Saints, Gods, called Dii Medioximi, to be mean Intercessozs and Helpers to God, &c.
There cannot be a fuller charge of Po∣lytheism than this is, which is here drawn up against the Papists, for making Gods of the Saints, nay, for making as very Devils of them, as ever any of the Heathen Gods were. From which they cannot clear themselves, with their lewd distinction, as the Homily calls it, of Latria & Dulia, for it is evident that the Saints of Ibid. p. 50. God cannot , that as much as any outward worshipping be done or exhibited to them. And to attribute such desire of di∣vine Alittle after p. 50. Honour to Saints, is to blot them with a most odious and  ignominy and villany, and indeed of Saints, to make them Satans and very Devils, whose property is to challenge to themselves the honour which is due to God only. So far the Papists are even with the Gentiles Idolaters, and as deep in Po∣lytheism Pag. . as they: But in many points also they have far exceeded them in all wickedness, foolishness, and madness. Pag. 53. Particularly in this they pass the folly and wickedness of the Gentiles, that they honour and worship the Ke∣liques and Bones of our Saints, which prove that they be mortal men and dead, and therefore no Gods to be worshipped, which the Gentiles would never confess of their Gods for very shame. And after a great many ridiculous practices of theirs, in
reference to these Reliques, are reck∣oned up, the Homily concludes that they are, not only more wicked than the Gentiles Idolaters, but Pag. 54. also no wiser than Asses, Dozles, and Dules, which have no under∣standing. I have been the more copious in these Citations, to shew that this is the standing Doctrine of the Church of England, to which all Orders of the Clergy have all a∣long subscribed; and is not one Doctor's opinion, or the conceit of any private man. But because the Judgment of our Heretical Church signifies nothing to Papists; who will likewise be sure to treat us as such when time serves, though now they have the treacherous impudence to pretend a mighty Zeal for us, when at the same time we are satisfied they are making their ap∣proaches to our Lives: I have another sort of proof for them, made up out of their own Oracles and Infallibili∣ty, with the help of a little common sense. Socrates taxes Libanius for making Por∣phyry . l 3. . 23. . a God, only because he once used these words; Let the Tyrian be merciful to me for preferring the Emperor Juli∣an's Works before his. What would he have said, if he had known any thing of the Popish Devotions, where they invo∣cate their Saints every day, and beg a thousand times more at their hands than this comes to? And it is from that pra∣ctice I mean to demonstrate their gross Polytheism.
First; Their bare Invocation of the Saints makes them Gods; because thereby they bestow Divine Attributes upon them. Secondly, The Matter of their prayers bestows several others. First, The bare Invocation of their Saints, and praying to them, is making them Gods, and bestowing Divine Attri∣butes upon them. And I am willing, in the first place, to take their Invocation at the very lowest: because though in their pub∣lick prayers and Liturgies, they often pray to their Saints to demand and command, and make them partners with God, and give them a divided Empire with him; yet in their Apologies, not being able to justify such abominable Sacriledge, they are con∣tent to lower theirSaints, and to place them C. Perrone Replique au Roy . in the rank of suppliants, and then their Invocation is no more than prier pour prier. Well, be it so for the present, for this gives them the Attributes of Omnipre∣sence and Omniscience, which belong to  alone. First, Of Omnipresence. It is nororious that the Papists, in all parts of the World, familiarly make their addresses to the Vir∣gin Mary; whereby they suppose her pre∣sent, both here, and in the Indies, and in all Countries between; that she gives au∣dience in this and the lower Hemisphear at once, and in millions of distant places in both, besides her presence Chambers, such as . Hall, &c. and innumera∣ble Altars, where she does especially
reside; and is notwithstanding in Heaven all the while. Now what can an Infinite Being do more? What other Ubiquity do we ascribe to God? That the very Act of directing their prayers to Saints, implies this Ubiquity, is very plain; for they im∣mediately apply themselves to the Saints, that they may obtain their mediation to God. So that their prayers are not in∣tended to be conveyed by God to the Saints, but to come directly to them, and by them to be recommended to God. And for that reason, in the Trent Catechism they are called Internuntii & Patroni, Interpre∣tes Rom. Cue∣chism. p. 297. p. 394. & Deprecatores ad . For to make God their Messenger to the Saints, (as he must be, if these prayers do not come directly to them) and to have him convey Orapro nobis's, is no good Court fashion, from whence we are told they take their pattern; and would very ill comply with that profound reverence towards God, and keeping of due distance, and avoiding ab∣rupt approaches to him, which is the great pretence for flying to the mediation of Saints and Angels. 2. The bare Invocation of their Saints supposes their Omniscience. For (to say Synod. Tri∣dent . Eosqui asse∣runt  esse in coelo regnantibus voce vel mente suppli∣care, impie sentire.  Chron. 6. 30. nothing of the Council of Trent's decree∣ing mental prayer to be used to them) it is not to be thought that the Saints will prefer Hypocritical prayers to God, and such as are an abomination to him; and therefore it is necessary for them to know mens hearts. Now not only the Scripture attributes this as proper and peculiar to God; so Solomon says, Thou only know st the Hearts of the Children of men: And God appropriates it to himself, The Heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wick∣ed, Jer. 17. 9, 10. who can know it? I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins. But likewise the Heathens themselves attributed it to their Gods, as that which was the ground of worshipping them, and of attesting them in all their Oaths and solemn Compacts Not only to know what is in man, but to know what is in all men, and at all times, is the perfection of infinite knowledge: which it is there∣fore impossible for Saints or Angels to have, because it is a contradiction, for a Crea∣ture to have so much as one single infinite perfection. It would be a great presumption in us, to go about to fix the Bounds and Limits of their enlarged understandings, and to tell just how wise an Angel of God is. They may for ought I know have an intui∣tive knowledge, without the trouble and hazzard of reasoning, and see the remo∣test Conclusions by as clear a light, as we do first principles: They may, in many other respects, have their under∣standings elevated and enlightned, beyond what we can imagine. Yet it is no pre. sumption to say, that they have not any such knowledge in any kind, as may equal them with God: But on the other hand, it is Blasphemy to ascribe that to them, than which we cannot ascribe any thing greater to him. And this knowledge of under∣standing and searching men's Hearts, the Papists not only imply in their praying to Saints and Angels, and decree in their Councils, but they openly avow it like∣wise in their writings, and will prove it by Scripture it self. Cardinal Perrone for one a∣mongst many others, proves that the Saints
know men's Hearts, because they are equal to the Angels: and the Angels assuredly know them, because they rejoyce at the Conversion of a Sinner; which is the inward change of man's mind, and lies very deep, even at the bottom of the Heart. But far less charity than the Angels burn withal, and a much smaller degree of knowledge than they really are endued with, will solve this Phaenomenon. For cannot such silly Wretches as we, be glad of the conversion of a sinner, who was given for lost, though we never saw him in our lives; if we be assured of it by a very good Friend, who likewise was himself the happy Author of this Conversi∣on, and invites us to congratulate the good success of his care and pains in it? And that this is the very case of the Angels Joy, I will venture to refer it to any man that will but once read over the first ten verses of the 15th Chapter of St. Luke. They like∣wise argue from Elisha's Heart going with Gehazi, and from his discovering the King of Syria's Counsels. But, 1. these were Actions and Words, which are nothing near so private as thoughts. And then, 2. there is no consequence from the extraor∣dinary performances of Saints and Prophets enabled and inspired by God, to infer an ordinary and constant power and fa∣culty of doing such things, at all times. Have the Saints and Angels Praescience, be∣cause Prophets have been some times ena∣bled to foretel Things to come? Have they the power of raising the Dead, and of do∣ing such Miracles, as are plainly the Fin∣ger of God, because God has been pleased, at some times, to make men his Instru∣ments in the performance of these mighty
Works? One would be ashamed of such Reasonings, and yet they have still worse. Tripple , p. 345. dedicated to the Nebility of England. For some of them take it ill, that in deny∣ing Invocation of Saints and Angels, we will not allow them so much knowledge as the Devil has. Well, for ought I know, they may hereafter have a new set of Gods, and from worshipping those, which as the Homily says, they transform into Devils, by setting them up as the Rivals of God, they may fall to courting those which have made themselves so; who it seems have one qualification towards Invocation. For who knows where Apostasy from God will end? Secondly, The Matter of their Prayers to Saints and Angels makes them Gods, by giving them still more Divine Attributes. 1. They attribute to Saints and Angels the disposal of Grace, pardon of Sins, de∣liverance from Hell, and eternal Life; which are as peculiarly the Gifts of God, as the Creation of the World was his Work: As you may see by these following prayers. Angelorum concio Sacra, Et Arch-ange∣lorum  in Festo om∣nium Sancto∣rum. turma inclyta, Nostra diluant jam pec∣cata, Praestando supera Coeli gaudia. Here they pray the Angels to blot out their Sins, and bestow upon them the Joys of Heaven. O Virgo sola Mater casta nostra cri∣mina. In Nativitat. B. M. Solvens, da Regna, qui beata regnant agmina.
Here they pray the Virgin to pardon their Sins, and to give them the Kingdom of Heaven. Ab Inferni horribili cruciamine, Litania San∣cti Bonavent. Tom. 6. p. 492. Libera nos Domina. From the horrible Torment of Hell Good Lady deliver us. Ut cunctis fidelibus defunctis requiem Ibid. aeternam donare digneris, Te rogamus audi nos. That it may please thee to give ever∣lasting Rest to all the faithful de∣parted this Life, we beseech thee to hear us. And in the Versicles, and Responses, towards the end of that Litany, you have these words. V. Ego dixi Domina miserere mei, R. Sana animam quia peccavi tibi, &c. I have said, Lady, have mercy upon me, Heal my Soul, for I have sinned a∣gainst thee. Shew they mercy upon us, And be gracious unto thy Servants. And presently after, you have this de∣vout Ejaculation. Miserere servorum tuorum super quos invo∣catum est nomen tuum. Be merciful to thy Servants, who are called by thy Name.
And so let them be, and never hereafter pretend to be Christians! for that she is their great Goddess, appears, 2. By that blasphemous Honour which they have done her, in decking and mag∣nifying her with the very same glorious praises and acknowledgements, where∣with David was inspired to honour God; which our Blessed Saviour himself, when he was upon Earth, and all the Church of God have sung to him ever since. Such as these which follow, and the rest is alike, for it is all quintessence. Psal. 10.In thee Lady do I put my trust. 18.The Heavens declare thy Glo∣ry. 30.Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, my whole Life, and my last day. 53.I will freely offer unto thee the Sacrifice of Praise, and give thanks unto thy Name, for it is good. 67.Let Mary arise, and let her Enemies be scattered. 111.Blessed is the man that feareth our Lady, and blessed is the Heart that loveth her. 118. 7th Part.Lady, how have I loved thy Law! it is ever before mine Eyes. 148.Praise our Lady from Hea∣ven, glorifie her in the Heights. Praise her Sun and Moon, &c.
And then this Psalter concludes just as David's does. Psalm 150.Let every thing that hath breath, praise our Lady. Who can endure to see Scripture thus transpros'd and abused, and a Creature cloathed with all the Majesty of Heaven, and adorned at this rate with the spils of her Maker? And besides David's Psalms, there is hardly an Hymn in the whole Bi∣ble, that is not in the same manner appli∣ed to her. The Chariots of Pharaoh and his Host, Canticum instar illius, Exed. 15. p. 479. she hath cast into the Sea. How came she to cast them into the Sea, ye blasphemous Wretches, a thousand years before she was born? They have likewise a Te Deum for her, which concludes thus; Praise becometh thee, Dominion becometh thee; To thee be Power and Glory for ever and ever. Amen. And an Athanasian Creed, which con∣cludes thus, speaking of our Saviour; He sent the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, and upon his Mother; whom he afterwards took up into Heaven, and she sits at the right Hand of her Son, not ceasing to prevail with her Son for us. Exorate. This is the Faith concerning the Virgin Mary, which unless every man do believe faithfully and firmly, he cannot be sa∣ved. Now, whence had we this blasphemous Liturgy? Did not Pope Sixtus the Fifth himself take care to print it in the Vaticar,
amongst Bonaventure's Works? And did he not make this Bonaventure a Doctor of the Church, and a Father, for these Works? And did not  the Fourth See Bona∣venture's Life before his Works. long before canonize him, and make him one of their Gods, for his Sanctity and Doctrine, which was testified by Miracles: such as raising the dead, &c. at the instance and intreaty of Frederick the Emperour, the Kings of France, Sicily, Hungary; . the Dukes of Venice, Savoy, Milain, &c? Did not the same Pope Sixtus hire and en∣courage people with Indulgences, to wor∣ship this new God at his first setting up, that so he might be sure to have the more di∣vine Honour done unto him? And did not  Bona∣vent. Pref. to this . . gratiâ & ad∣jutorio illius conditum & compactum. this Divine Bonaventure make this Book, when he was upon Earth, with the Virgin Mary's help? And did not he make it for this end, That those that often praised her by this Book, she might merciful∣ly look upon, with her amiable Coun∣tenance, and receive into her Love, and recreate and refresh their Souls at present, and in the Glory that shall be hereafter, set a Crown of precious Stones upon their Heads? And if all these Saints, and Popes, and Miracles, cannot make this to be good Catholick Doctrine, it is very hard. However, to wave this Liturgy, there is as much attributed to the Virgin Mary, in the publick Offices of their pretended Church: which no Papist can have any manner of colour of pretence to disown, because he himself joins in them. For in∣stance, they attribute Omnipotency to Canticum instarilliu, Exod. 15. her. Bonaventure indeed says roundly, Domina nostra Omnipotens, post Deum nomen
ejus. And is not cuncta potens as good as Omnipotens? and this the Missal freely be∣stows upon her, and gives it as a reason why she should forgive sins, and bestow the Kingdom of Heaven. Potens enim cuncta, ut Mundi Regina, & In Nativitate B. M.  Cum nato omnia decernis in secla & ultra, Subnixa es in gloriâ Cherubim electa, Seraphinque clara agmina. Nam juxta Filium posita, sedes in dex∣tera Virtus, lampas, & Sophia. For thou art Almighty, as Queen of the World, and with thy Son judg∣est all things for ever and ever; thou upheldest in glory the Cherubim and Seraphim, &c. Nay if she can do all things, they have reason, she is to be worshipped; O Dea certé. But how comes she to be thus all-pow∣erful, Corona B. V. p. 466. jure matris impe∣ra tuo dile∣ctissimo Fi∣lio. and Queen of the World? It is not by the Right of a Mother, which else∣where she is desired to use in commanding her Son, for then the Lady Ann, our La∣dies Mother, would come in for a share: Who, alas, must be content with her Daughters honour, for she her self is made but a poor Messenger, as you may see by these words to her: Tua proles est Regina, in Coelesti pa∣tria. In Festo An∣nae Matris B. M. Ipsa cunctis jam praelata, per te sumens haec precata.
Nostra fiat Advocata, in Dei praesen∣tiâ. Thy Daughter is Queen in the Hea∣venly Country. Let her who takes place of all, receiv∣ing these prayers from thee, be∣come our Advocate in the presence of God. What handing of prayers is here just as they help Bricks out of a Cart. From whence, by the way, we may observe that Cardinal Perronne stopt short, when he said, Invocation was only prier pour prier; it is prier pour prier pour prier at the least: For an ordinary Saint, no nor Angel neither, will not serve to present their prayers, but must go to the Virgin Mary and pray her over again. For thus likewise they speak to the An∣gel Gabriel. Nunc igitur  avcelera, Piae Matris In Festo San∣cti Gabrielis. precare viscera, Nato monstret pectus & ubera; Tu ab hoste nos tecum libera. Now therefore Herald make haste, intreat the Bowels of the Graclous Mother; Let her shew her Son her Bosom and Breasts; deliver thy self and us from the Enemy. It is well Poste haste is written upon this last Packet of prayers, for otherwise that mischance might happen to them, which did to the Master of Requests Petitions,
in Queen Elizabeth's Time: who told the Queen, when she complained that his new Boots stunk; that it was not his new Boots, but the old stale Bills which he had kept too long in his Pocket. To return from this Digression, The Vir∣gin Mary takes her place as Queen of the World, and Empress of Heaven, by an∣other right; for they have blasphemously made her the Bride, or the Wife of God the Father. So Bonaventure in his Te Deum. Te Matrem Dei laudamus, Te Mariam Hymnus in∣star illius qui . Ambros. & August. Virginem profitemur, Te aeterni Patris sponsam omnis terra vi∣neratur. All the Earth doth worship thee, the Wife of the Father Everlasting. But because I said I would wave Bona∣venture, though at the same time I proved his authority to be sacred, the very same is said, or sung, in their own Mass-Book. Tu es pulchra Dei sponsa, Tu Regem Christ∣um In die as∣sump. B. M. enixa, Domina es in Coelo & Terra. Thou art God's fair Bride, Thou broughtest forth the King Christ, And art Lady in Heaven and Earth. And again you have an account how he came by her. Imperatrix, cujus Imperio tota gaudet  In Festo Sancti Ga∣brielis. concio,
Te creavit Deus mirabilem, te respexit an∣cillam humilem, Te quaesivit sponsam amabilem, tibi nun∣quam fecit consimilem. Thou Empress, under whose Govern∣ment the whole Assembly of Heaven rejoyces to be. God created thee wonderful, he regarded thee his lowly Hand maid, he sought thee out his amiable Spouse, the like of thee he never made. And this Title is so familiarly given to the Virgin Mary, that it seems to be annex∣ed to her Imperial Stile; for I will be bound, at very short warning, to produce an hun∣dred places out of their publick and pri∣vate Devotions, where she is called by that Name. We are extreamly beholden to the Papists, and ought to take this occa∣sion to thank them, for answering an Ob∣jection of Mahomet against our Saviour's Divinity. For he being a crafty Impostor, found a necessity of lessening our Saviour, and making him barely a Prophet: by which means he himself would clearly have the advantage, in being the last Pro∣phet. And therefore he not only tells a ridiculous Story, how Jesus the Son of Ma∣ry, being questioned for it by God, utter∣ly denyed that ever he called himself the Son of God, and laid all the fault upon his Followers, because they had done it of their own Heads; but likewise he repeats and inculcates it all over his Alcoran, that there is but one God only, and no more. And in one place, I remember he gives this reason for it: There is but one God and no more, and he has no Son, for he
never had a Wife. But now there's an end of that Turkish Argument. And now likewise the Secret is out. For I con∣fess it has often amazed me, to see the ex∣travagant Blasphemies, which are used in their prayers to the Virgin Mary: as when they call her the Fountain of Mercy, (which Sung in the Council of Constance. Apud Chemnitium. Exam. Con. Trid. p. 610. Gen. 1634 & in sequentia Missal. in Visitat. B.M. is the brightest and loveliest apprehension of God, that can possess the minds of Crea∣tures); when they call her, Empress of Heaven, who upheld the Cherubim and Sera∣phim from falling, (there I thought them mad) whom all the Angels worship, (that methought was but reasonable, supposing the former) whom the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the whole Creation, are called upon to praise and magnify, (as if she had been the Maker of them all) and who threw Pharaoh and his Host into the Red Sea, (there, thought I, they make old Time go back a thousand years for this piece of Flattery). Where∣as this unthought of Relation entitles her to every thing that is, was or can be in the Universal World. Methinks such rank Blasphemy as this should poyson the Air, into which it is breathed forth, and blast the whole Creation round about! I am sure it will make the Ears of all Christians to tingle, and raise their Blood against such an horrid Religion. And thus I have proved the Papists, out of their own blasphemous mouths, to be Polytheists, in setting up Saints and Angels for Gods, and in giving Divine Honour to them. I have employed no other Argu∣ment, at present, to prove this, than only their prayers to them; whereas I might have used very many others, as he that will read the Homily against Peril of Idolatry,
may easily see. Against certain truth, I know there cannot possibly be any materi∣al Objection: but I would answer all tri∣fling ones, if I could foresee them. It may be the Papists will say, They do not make the Angels and Saints Gods, because they make them, in many respects, inferior to God. Were the Heathen Gods no Gods, because Jupiter was King of them? Was Vulcan no God, because he was only armed with an Hammer, and not with the Sove∣raign Thunderbolt? What difference the heathens made betwixt Jupiter and the other Gods, you may in part see, by this following passage, taken out of Maxi∣min's Eusebii Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 6. . Edict upon a Pillar in Tyrus. The highest and greatest Jupiter, who presides over your famous City, and delivers the Gods of your Country, your Wives, and Children, and Houses, from all destructive Calamity, &c. These poor helpless Gods, were so far from being Omnipotent, that they needed the protection of Jupiter, as much as the meanest of their Votaries. Or it may be they will say, They reserve peculiar Worship and Services to God, which they do not communicate to Saints: For they tell us, They celebrate the Mass Rem. Cate∣chis. p. 204. indeed, in memory and honour of the Saints; but the Priest never uses to say, I offer Sacrifice to thee Peter, or Paul; namely this Sacrifice of the Mass. For that they offer all other Sacrifices, if it please God to give me Life and Health, I shall hereafter fully prove: and then they shall hear more of this deceitful Juggle too, and of the Tricks they have played with St. Austin's words.
We grant they do not offer the Sacri∣fice of the Mass to the Saints, but to the Trinity: So that they offer the Son of God to himself; and according to the usual decorum, which they constantly observe in that awkerd Religion, which is made to spite the Reason of Mankind; As our Savi∣our once heretofore sat at the Table dis∣coursing and lay sowering in twelve seve∣ral mens Stomachs at the same time, so now he is every day, in person, both the Sacrifice it self upon Earth, and the God in Heaven to whom it is offered. None, but such a Fool as I am, would stand argu∣ing and disputing with these men; whom all the Reason upon Earth can never di∣stress, by reducing them to Impossibilities or Absurdities, when they own and profess these Absurdities and Contradictions of their own accord: it would certainly be more wisdom, to go and preach, as Vene∣rable Beds once did, to a heap of stones. But to proceed nevertheless, are not we to take it for a great favour, that they do not offer the Great God of Heaven in Sacrifice to Thomas of ? The Gentiles Idolaters were so far from offering Jupiter in Sacri∣fice to any petty God, that I never yet read, that they offered him in Sacrifice to himself. There is no consequence at all in this reasoning; The Papists do not offer the Sacrifice of the Mass to Saints and An∣gels, but only to the Trinity, therefore they do not make Saints and Angels Gods. For had not the Heathens proper Sacrifices for Jupiter, which were sacred only to him? and yet this did not destroy the Divinity of the other Deiries. It makes no more difference amongst the Gods, nor affects
their God-head any more, to have this or that particular Sacrifice, offered or not of∣fered to them, than it did for  to have a great Beard, and his Father Apollo to have none at all. Lastly, The Papists may possibly say, That there is great difference betwixt the Gods of the Pagans, and the Saints which they honour and worship: the former ha∣ving been lewd men, and sometimes feigned persons; the latter being such as we Hereticks pay some respect to, though not enough. I shall not now enter into the merits of that Cause, but refer them to a great Prelate of our Church, who has told them, That they Worship Saints in Heaven, and Saints in Hell, and Saints that are in neither place, nor ever were in being. Though, by the way, I cannot find any such great difference betwixt Romulus and Igna∣tius Loyola; the one having been, in his time, the Governour of a Den of Thieves, and the other the Captain General of the Modern Banditi: and it is all one to me, whether they worship the Nine Muses, or Vid. Festum 7. dormien∣tium. the Seven sleepers, for still the Polytheism remains the same; they have indeed chang'd their Gods, but not their Religion.
CHAP. XI. Their Idolatry. ACcording to my former Method, I shall, 1. shew, that the Church of England has all along charged the Papists with Idolatry. And, 2. I shall make good that Charge upon them, out of their own Mouths. 1. The Church of England has all along charged the Papists with Idolatry. The Homilies, I am sure, charge them with it above an hundred times over, out of which I shall make choice of some few Instances. Speaking of the Ages of Popery; It is evident, that Images, Su∣perstition, 3d part Ser∣mon per. Idol. p. 56. and worshipping of Ima∣ges and Idolatry, have continued many hundred Years. And in the same Paragraph, we have a fuller de∣scription of the State of all Christen∣dom before the Reformation. So that Laity and Cleray Learned and Unlearned, all Ages, Seas, and degrees of Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, of whole Christendom, (an  and most  thing to think) have been at once  in abominable Idolatry, of all other  most detested of God, and most damnable to , and that by
the space of eight hundred Years and more. And in another place, after a de∣scription of their Men Saints, which look'd like Princes of Persia Land; and the Idols of their Women Saints, which might have been taken for nice and well-trimmed , you have these words; And because Ibid. p. 72. the whole Pageant must be through∣ly plaid, it is not enough thus to deck Idols, but at the last come in the Priests themselves, likewise decked with Gold and Pearl, that they may be meet Servants for such Lords and Ladies, and fit worship∣pers of such Gods and Goddesses. And with a solemn pace they pass 2d part. p. 37. Our mighty Gods of Gold and Silver,  and . forth before these Golden Puppets, and fall down to the Ground on their Marrow Bones before these ho∣nourable Idols, &c. And elsewhere you have a large Discourse, shewing, Pag. 49. That their  and Ceremonies, in honouring and worshipping of the Images, or Saints, be all one with the  which the  Ido∣laters used in honouring their Idols. In Pilgrimages to  Images, which had more Holiness and Vertue in them than others: In their Candle-Religion, Pag. 51. turning Incense, offer∣ing up Gold to Images, hang∣ing up Crouches, Chains, and Ships, Legs, Arms, and whole Men
and Women of War, before Ima∣ges, as though by them, or Saints, (as they say) they were delivered from Lameness, Sickenss, Capt∣vity, or Shipwrack. In spreading abroad, after the Example of the Gen∣tiles Idolaters, lying and feigned Mi∣racles Pag. 52. of Images. Such an Image was sent from Heaven, like the Pal∣ladium or Diana of the Ephesians: Such an Image was brought by An∣gels. Pag. 53. Such an one came it self far from the East to the West, as Dame Fortune fled to Rome. Some Images, though they were hard and stony, yet for tender-heart and pity, . Some spake more  than ever did Balaam's Als, who had Life and Breath in him. Such a Criple came and sa∣luted this Saint of Dke, and by and by he was made whole, and lie, here hangeth his Crouch. Such an one in a Tempest vowed to Saint Christopher, and scaped, and behold  is his Ship of War. Such an one, by Saint Leo∣nard's help, brake out of Prison, and see where his  hang. And  thousands more Mira∣cles, by like or more shameless Lies were reported. And to con∣clude, Ibil. p. 50. The Papists serve themselves of those very ercuses which the Devil heretofore put into the Mouths of the
Gentiles to palsiate their Idolatry. So that by making use of the same Pretences and Answers, it is plain, that they be all one with the Gentiles Idolaters. These things hitherto are spoken in re∣ference to the worshipping of Images; and then as to their worshipping the Host, the Rubrick, after the Communion, declares, Declaration after the Communion. that it is Idolatry to be  of all faithful Christians. Which has been always the Doctrine of our Church, not∣withstanding the ignorant Cavils of some men, as appears by the Homilies, where this Doctrine was never discontinued. The Papists ignorance of the Sacrament is affirmed to have been the cause of the 1st . Serm.  he . p. 199. ruine of God's Religion, the cause of gross Idolatry, and of mummish . Their worshipping and falling down be∣fore every cross piece of Timber, which 2d part Peril of Idolatry, p. 25. is but an Image of our Saviour's Cross, must needs be rank Idolatry; when in St. Ambrose judgement to have wor∣shipped In his  of the Death of Theodosius the Emperor. the Cross to self, which was  with our Saviour Christ s own precious Blood, had been an hearthentsh Error and  of the Worked. In a word,  is so interwoven 3d part. Peril. of Idol. p. 69 with their Religion, that the Homily very justly brands them with the Name of the Idolatrous Church. So much for the Doct of the Church of England, which I hope will not seem strange or new to the meanest Reader; for I
am sure all the people of England ought to Article Ch. of England, 35. have been instructed and perfect in it, any time this hundred Years and better. 2. And now I shall undertake to prove the Papists to be as blockish Idolaters as ever were in the World, by irrefragable and uncontroulable authorities, such as they must either own, or renounce their Popery; and they are, their own Mass∣book, the Roman Catechism set out by the Decree of the Council of Trent, and the Roman Pontifical. And, 1. I shall set down all the sorts of Idolatry, which are enumerated by the Roman Catechism. And then, 2. prove them to be guilty of  very things, which they themselves acknowledge to be both Idolatry, and old Heathen Idolatry. In their Explication of the Second Com∣mandment, they have these words. It is manifest, that two ways especially, as Rom. Catech. p. 299. to this Precept, the Majesty of God is very much injured. The first is, If Idols and Images are worshipped as God; or if any Divinity or Vertue be believed to be in them, for the sake of which they are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be desired of them, or that any trust is to be put in them, as was done heretofore by the Gentiles, who placed their hope in Idols, which the Scripture every where reproves. The other is, If any one endea∣vour to represent the form of the Divinity in any kind of Work, as if it could be seen with bodily Eyes, or expressed by Colours or Figures. To begin with the first instance of Idola∣try,
to worship Idols or Images as God: by which if they mean worshipping an Image, with a persuasion that it is God; truly that is a very low dispensation, which very few, if any, of the Heathens were under. And such an imputation as this, they always look'd upon as an horrid slan∣der upon their Religion. If any Papist had charged the Heathens with it in Julian's time, he would have returned him this an∣swer. O thou Block-head, How can we . Julian. Fragment. p. 539. chuse but account them Stocks and Stones, which the hands of men have fashioned? Dost thou think that the accursed Devils lead all other men by the Nose, as they do thee, so as to esteem them to be Gods, which are their own Workmanship? Or if they mean by those words, the worshipping of Images, with the same honour and devoti∣on as God himself, even this the Heathens renounced. Julian gives this account of the respect which they paid to Images, where∣by you may perceive a wide difference be∣twixt that, and the honour which they gave to their Gods. Says he, Whosoever is Juliar. Ibid. a lover of his King, or Child, or Father, is delighted with their several Pictures, and pleased in looking upon them: by the same reason, he that is a lover of God, is pleased and delighted in looking upon the Images of the Gods, at the same time worshipping and dreading the Gods, who see him, but are not seen. Now who but a Sot, has the same reverence and pangs of Love for these dead Pictures, as he has for the person of his Prince, or for his Relati∣ons themselves? Let that be as it will, I am sure the
modern Pagans will never be able to Concil. Trid. Sess. 13. Rom. . p. 185. Totus Chri∣stus conti∣netur in Sa∣cramento, Christus au∣temest no∣men Dei & Hominis. Epist. 49. ad Deo Gratias Pres. Quaest. 3. acquit themselves of ten times more stupid Idolatry, when they worship a contemptible Wafer, which is hardly fit to seal a Letter, with a full persuasion, that it is not only a perfect and compleat man, but likewise the great God of Hea∣ven. An Heathen Idol look'd like some Body; and being placed, as St. Austin says, in an honourable sublimity, having the very likeness of Limbs and Organs of Sense, though it really were without Life and Sense, yet it might affect weak minds, and seem to them to live and breathe: But ne∣ver was there such a blunder before in the World, as to mistake a despicable patch of Bread, yea, though it have a Crucifix printed upon it to help the Imagination, for the Living God who made Heaven and Earth. No man can forbear scorning, and speaking contemptuously of this despica∣ble and detestable Idol. For though a small piece of Bread has an honourable place in the Creation, and a much more honourable place in the Sacrament, where we remember our Saviour by it; yet, when it comes to be made a God, it is vilely de∣graded, and becomes an Object of nothing but Scorn and Derision, of Hatred and De∣testation. Greg. N z. Inv. 2. p. 127. . Chap. 14. 7. As St. Gregory's words are, speaking of the Reign of Jovian, when Paganism ex∣pired; The Creature, says he, is no longer vilified with pretended honour, in being worshipped instead of God. And so the Wisdom of Solomon counts the Gibbet a more honourable piece of Wood, and pronounces it a happy Tree, in  of that cursed one, which is debased and fra∣med into an Idol.
2dly, That this sorry Wafer, this con∣temptible Idol, is likewise to be worship∣ped with the same adoration, which is due to the true God, is the express determina∣tion of the Council of Trent, with a Curse Concil. Trid. Sess. 13. to all them that shall say the . And accordingly they make those Addresses to the Host, which are enough to astonish a man, and fill him with the greatest hor∣ror and amazement. In the middle of the Prayer, Deus Pater  & origo totius Canon of the Mass in Miss.  p. 162. b. bonitatis, &c. is this Rubrick; Here let the Priest bow himself to the Host, saying, I adore thee, I glorifie thee, I praise thee with all the power of my Mind and Heart, and pray thee not to forsake thy Servants, but forgive us our Sins. If this were not directed to the Host, the Rubrick should have come in be∣fore  words, Quam ego indignus hic in manibus meis teneo. And Bishop Coverdale, who translated Fox. Mon. Vol. 3. p. 5. the Canon of the Mass, affirms, That the Priest here speaks in this manner to the Host, and asks why not? if it be his Maker: according to the usual saying of Papists, who have been at Mass, I thank God, I have seen my Maker to day. And for certain, that Noble Confessor understood the sense of the Papists, and their Worship, but See more of this, in the excellent and learned Dis∣course of Dr. Whitby, The Absurdity and Idelatry of Host-Wor∣ship. too well, to his cost. To conclude this whole matter with that, which would have startled and amazed the old Pagans themselves; after they have thus hailed their God, and bowed the Knee be∣fore him, and worshipped him with all
their Heart, and Soul, and Strength, they very fairly eat him up. 2. The next instance of Idolatry is this; If any Divinity or Vertue be believed to be in Idols or Images, for the sake of which they are to be worshipped. By Divinity, here must be meant, a divine Power and Efficacy to supernatural Effects; for other∣wise it will be the very same with the for∣mer Instance. And that the Papists are likewise guilty of Idolatry in this particu∣lar, I shall make as clear as any Demonstra∣tion in Euclide, with the help only of this one reasonable postulatum, That there is all that Divinity and Virtue in a thing, which Pontificale Rom. p. 360. is put into it. Now let any one read the Consecration of a New Cross, or a Picture of the Crucifix, and he will be satisfied, that there is Divinity and Virtue enough put in them to justifie the worshipping of them. We beseech thee, O Lord, Ho∣ly Rogamur te Domine, &c. Father, Almighty Everlasting God, that it may please thee to bless this Sign of the Cross, that it may be a Saving Re∣medy to mankind. Let it be solidity of Faith, proficiency of good Works, Re∣demption of Souls. Let it be a Comfort, and Protection, and safeguard against the cruel Darts of the Enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, &c. And after the Bi∣shop has said this, and another such Prayer, and used several powerful Ceremonies, and endued the Wood with so many Di∣vine Vertues, he may well do, as the Rubrick directs at the end of the Office. Then the Bishop kneeling before the Tum Ponti∣fex, &c. Cross does devoutly adore it, and kiss
it; the same do all others that have a mind. There is no man living can make an estimate of that infinite Divine Virtue, which is in the Paschal Taper, that very tall Idol, being thirty six foot long. For in the Consecration of the New Fire (very well worth the reading) which is to light this Paschal Taper; They pray, that who∣soever Missal. Sar. p. 90. a. b. shall carry away Light from it, may be illuminated with the Light of Spiritual Grace. Now this Light, well husbanded, may convey Grace to all the World. But I shall never be reconciled to that scurvy Rubrick, which directs to sprinkle this New Fire with Holy Water; with which, if it were never so little too lavishly blest, the World is in danger of being left grace∣less, and in the dark. And yet for ought I know, there is a lit∣tle Idol in a String, which may have as much Divinity and Virtue in it as any of them; and that is a Pectoral Cross, over which they say this Prayer. Almighty God, we humbly beseech . . p. 364, & 384. thee, that it may please thee to bless this Cross with thy fa herly Goodness, and impart Heavenly Vertue and Grace to it; That whosoever shall wear it as a sign of the Passion and Cross of thy only begot∣ten Son, for the safeguard of his Body and Soul, may receive the Fulness of thy Heavenly Grace in it, and the defence of thy Blessing. As for the other lit∣tle Wax-work Idol, called an Agnus Dei, he is so well known to be account∣ed by them, the Saviour of the World, and the Prince of the Air, and every thing
that is great, that I need say nothing of him. If any Unbeliever, after all, does secret∣ly imagine that these Charms which we have repeated, do not work; and that these Crosses and Trade are not really endu∣ed with all this Divine Virtue, which is here be spoken for them: To cure him of his Infidelity, let him only read the form of delivering a Banner, after it is consecra∣ted;  Rom. p. 388.  Vexillum Coelesti Benedictione Sanctificatum:  this Banner which is sanctified with Heavenly Benediction. You see the Bishop has blest it, and it is blessed. 3dly, I come now to the next instance of Idolatry, which is, desiring any thing of Idols or Images: Where I would fain know, whether the Papists do not ask as much of the Cross, as ever was begg'd of piece of Timber in all former Ages? In these follow∣ing words; Medicina Christiana salva , aegros Missal. Exal∣tatio Sanctae Crucis 14. Sep. sana; Quod non valet vis Humana, sit in tuo Nomine. Thou Christians all-heal, save those that are in Health, and cure the Sick; What humane Power cannot do, is done in thy Name. Nay, they desire as much of an Aerial Idol, as they can of God himself.
Hoc reatum peccatorum Tollat, praestet ju∣bilorum Missal. in Fe∣sto nominis . Odas, sede Beatorum  nobis persrui. Here they beg, neither more nor less, than that the Name of Jesus, (not the Per∣son) may release them of their , and give them the Joys of Heaven. 4thly, And as for the last instance, which is,  their , and placing their Hope in Images or Idols; If the Papists have no hope in these Idols which I have named, it is a sign they have no Faith in them, and are as very Infidels as we. So much for the first branch of Idolatry. Secondly, The other is, If any one endea∣vour . . p. 299. to represent the form of the Divinity in any kind of Workmanship, as if it could be seen with bodily Eyes, or expressed by  or Figures. This, as the Roman Catechism adds, was the Idolatry of the Heathens: who, as St. Paul excellently says, changed the Glory Rom. 1. 23. of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of Birds and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things. These men want nothing but to have all the Bibles in the world in one heap, which I am certain they would burn with as good a will, as our people do once a year their past-board Pope: For then they might go to work, and make a new Bi∣ble; and then St. Paul might say excellently what they had a  have him. In the mean time they have found out this useful expedient, to  and suppress any par∣of
Scripture, which makes against them: and that they have shamefully done in this place. They afterwards allow the Is∣raelites to be Idolaters, for changing their Glory into the similitude of a Caif that eateth Hay; and the Heathens in this place, for changing the Glory of God into the Psal. 106. 20. similitude of Birds and Beasts, and creeping Things. Now it is true, they do not trade in this sort of Imagery, and therefore they are willing that it should pass for Idolatry. But St. Paul's first instance of Idolatry, in this very passage, which they have shamefully mangled, is changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into the likeness of an Image of Corruptible Man: The absurdity whereof St. Paul expresses by an elegant Antithesis. But this falls heavy upon their own bald-pate Images, and their Monster Head with three Faces, and the other with an Imperial Crown on his Head, giving his Benisons with his two fore-fingers and Thumb, and that which sits with a Cru∣cifix resting on his Knees, and a Dove up∣on it; and to name no more, that same, which the honest Iconoclast found busie in creating the World, in a blue Coat, bare-foot and bare-legged, and marking out the Sun and Moon with a pair of Com∣passes; and therefore they make no words at all of that part of the Text, which con∣demns these horrid Disguises of the Deity. What, dare they not quote an entire Text of Scripture to their own Priests, for this  is written for their Instruction: No, nor in trusty Latine neither, which  so many of their cheats from the Eyes of the common people?
Nay, then I do not wonder at it any longer, that there was once a Vulgar Lan∣guage, spoken above four hundred Years in a Catholick Country, which never was worthy to have the Second Commandment in it. That great Antiquary, Mr. Lamhert in his Notes upon the Preface to King Alu∣red's Laws, has long since told the World, that he never met with that Command∣ment in any Copy that is written in the Saxon Language. By these practices we may see, that the Papists know themselves to be Idolaters, as well as we can tell them. But because they wipe their Mouths, and deny it, and endeavour to shuffle it off by nice Distinctions, I shall not think much to examine them. First, They say, They do not break Rom. . p. 300 this Commandment in expressing the se∣veral Persons of the Trinity by Signs, which have appeared either under the Old or New Testament. Of which  give the ancient of days in Daniel as an In∣stance. Secondly, They say, That these are not Pictures of the Divinity; but only that some Properties or Actions, attributed to God, are declared by them. In answer to the first of these Ex∣cuses. First, Let them then fairly confess them∣selves Idolaters, for making those Pictures of God, of which they have neither sign, nor shadow of a sign in Scripture. For under
which Testament did their Monster-head with three Faces appear? than which, ne∣ver did any Egyptian or Indian God make a worse Figure. Or out of which Testa∣ment did they copy their other pictures of the Trinity, that with a Crucifix on his Knees, or that where they sit all three a∣breast; where our Saviour has holes in his Hands and Feet, that you may know him from the Holy Ghost, for otherwise they are like as the two Sosia's in Plautus! Had they these out of Daniel? And one or other of these abominable Images of the Tri∣nity, we had formerly in every Church, 3d part Peril Idol. p. 40. as the Compilers of the Homilies tell us; who, though they be not allowed as Doctors, may nevertheless serve for Testifiers. 2dly, If a Scripture Sign be the only au∣thentick Original of a Christian Image or Picture, then are theirs all Idols: for I never saw any of those, which they pre∣tend to copy from Daniel's Dream, but va∣ried extreamly from the Original. They add very much in some things, and in others they take away. They picture the Ancient of Days like an Old Man; there is Dan. 7. 9. no such word as Man in Daniel: Then they give him all the Lineaments of a Face, and a Beard, purely out of their own Inventi∣on: And then, as for the Drapery, the Painter himself is the fashioner, for there is nothing more of it mentioned in Daniel, than the Colonr of the Garment. In a word, the Lines and proportion of the Body, the Face and Features, are altogether as the Painter pleases. If men had not been
stark mad of Idolatry, they would never have catch'd thus at the shadow of a Dream, and gone to work furnish'd with no better Instructions, than with the description of Eternity, of the colour of a Head of Heir, the colour of a Garment, and the posture of sitting. The Jews might as well have taken hints from Moses's Metaphorical Expressions of the Hand, and Arm, and Finger of God, and much more from his own speaking to them, to have pictured God in a humane Shape; from which they are so often and so strictly forewarned. And then, as for all those awful expres Deut. 4. 12, 15, 25.  of Majesty, wherewith the Antient of Days is attended in Daniel, which are fit to make all the World fear and trem∣ble before him, they are all left out in their Pictures. His Throne was a fiery Flame, Dan. 7, 9, 10. and his Wheels burning Fire. A fiery Stream issued and  forth from before him:  thousands ministred to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: The Judgment was sit, and the Books were opened. All this glorious representation of the Ancient of Days, is dwindled into a solita∣ry decrepid Old Man, who is no more like Daniel's Description, than a Mouse is to a mighty Monarch. 3dly, These Sign-Painters shew the worst Judgment that can be, in chusing their Pattern out of Daniel. For every Body knows, that Prophetick Dreams and Visi∣ons, and the Schemes of their Language, and their Descriptions, are more wide from the thing it self, and more unlike, than the
harshest Metaphors that ever were in the World. Flourishing Kingdoms are re∣presented in that Book by Rams Horns, and Goats Horns: which would make very unintelligible Pictures of Kingdoms, and would certainly require a Label to tell what they are. And therefore for men to fetch the Picture of God out of such a Book, where besides, above two thirds of their Picture is a perfect blank, is to do just like Children, but not with their Innocency, who, rather than fail of a Ba∣by to play withal, will make it of a Clout. Secondly, Their other Excuse is, That Rom. Catech. p. 300. these are not pictures of the Divinity; but only that some properties, or acti∣ons, attributed to God, are declared by them. To this I Answer; 1st, That not only their common peo∣ple, but all Papists call these the Images of God the Father; of which we have an instance in the Margin of this Catechism, (which is as great an Authority as I cite it for) where it is called Dei Patris Imago. And if no body is so rude and ignorant, as to think the Divinity is expressed by Ibid. those Images, (as the Catechism says) Why then is every Body so rude and ignorant, as to call them by that Name? For an Image of God the Father, must be an Image of the Divinity, or an Image of no∣thing: for I hope he never assumed Hu∣manity.
2dly, Further, it is undeniably plain, that the person of God the Father is declared by these Images, and not any properties or Actions. For would not he blazon a Picture of the Trinity very improperly, and like an Heretick, who should say, There is the Holy Ghost, and that is God the Son, and the other is Eternity, or infinite Wisdom? So that if a Picture of our Saviour stands for his per∣son, and the Dove, &c. for the Holy Ghost, so does this Old Man for the person of God the Father. 3dly, To let the  have their own way, I afform, That the very declaring of the properties and Actions of the Deity by Images, was the Idolatry of the Heathens. For when they made an Image of Jupiter, they did not pretend that it was the very Figure of his Di∣vinity, but declared some of his proper∣ties and Actions. And to prove that these Images were instructive, as the Po∣pish are pretended to be, I shall only give this Instance. The same Jupiter Plutarch de Iside & Osi∣ride, p. 381. Et Lilius Gy∣raldus, p. 76. was pictured in Crete  no Ears, and by the Lacedaemonians with four Ears, whereas the ordinary Pictures of him had but two. Now it is a Contradicti∣on, and therefore held to be an impos∣sibility, that one and the same person should have four Ears and yet but two Ears, and no Ears at all. When they therefore made him with two Ears, they would have him look like a man, and had no further meaning; but when they made him with four Ears, and no Ears, then they declared proper∣ties.
And the Moral, and Signification, Id signifi∣cantes domi∣natorem omnium au∣dire debere neminem, sed aequè omni∣bus patulas offere aures. Eum undi{que} & omnia au∣dire innuen∣tes. of both these, seems to be much alike. For when the Cretians crop'd him, they declared, That being King of the World, it was not fit that any one should have his Ear, but that they should lie open to all alike. And they that gave him that large set of Ears, declared, That he heard all things, and from all parts and quarters of the World. So that when the Papists have done all, when they have excused, and apologi∣zed, and blanched their Images of God, and made the  of them, still they are no better than old Pagan Idols.
CHAP. XII. Their Cruelty. WHat the Prophet says of Ephra∣im, has often come into my mind, with relation to the Pa∣pists, They are joyned to Idols: let Hosea 4. 17. them alone. They are infallible and in∣curable; and if they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, poor private men may do wisely to save their Breath. So we would with all our Hearts; but they will not let us alone. Nothing will satisfie them, unless they force their Idolatry upon us, (as the French King sells his Salt) whether we have any occasion for it, or any mind to it or no. These Mighty Nebuchadnezzus set up Images, and all People, Nations, and Languages, must either fall down and worship them, or else be cast into a fi∣ery Furnace. This is the hard Chapter to which we are now come, which is the very Sting of Popery: in which I shall first shew, That the Church of England has been all along sensible of the Popish Cruelty. And secondly, shew, That the Papists herein have far exceeded the old Pagans.
First, As for the sense of our Church. The Homilies give us a large account of the Cruelty and Tyranny of ma∣ny 2. Part. Serm. for Whit∣sund. p. 215, 216. of the Popes of Rome, who had not the Spirit of God, but of the Dehil; who not only were Cruel to the Living, but persecuted dead Bo∣dies: to whom they apply our Savi∣our's Prediction of cruel and raben∣ing Second. part. Peril of , p. 31. Wolhes in Sheeps cloathing. Their Image worship was maintained, at the very first by the Ireason and Rebellion of Pope Gregory the Third, Which Example, other Bishops of Rome have continually followed, and gone through withal most stout∣ly. And afterwards we have an account of the Tragical Cruelties, which were com∣mitted by the Empress Irene, in main∣tenance of Image Worship: who was the great Patrone and  Ca∣ptain Ibid. p. 34. of the Bishops of Rome, whose wicked and unnatu cruelty passed Medea and Progne, whose detestable  ministred matter to Poets, to write their horrtble Tra∣gedies. Amongst other things, she digged Ibid. p. 32. up the Body of her Father-in-Law Constantine the Fifth, and com∣manded it to be openly burned, and the Ashes to be thrown into the Sea; because when he was alive, he had
destroyed Images, and taken away the sumptuous drnaments of Chur∣thes. Which Example of hers (as the constant Report goeth) had like to have been put in pradice with Princes corses in our days, had the Authority of the holy father continued but a little longer. This is true modern Popish Cruelty and Barbarity, which according to the daily improvement of it under that Re∣ligion, would have far exceeded Irene's. She burnt her Father-in-Law, a man that was no kin to her, otherwise than by an artificial Relation, and a fiction of Law: But here it would have been an own natural Father, and Brother; in which case a sweet Protestant Prince, and a per∣secutor of Protestants, only not a Slave to the Pope, had both fared alike. So that where Popery comes to be well set∣led, the Sacred Reliques of all those Prin∣ces are in danger of suffering the most barbarous Indignities, who have been in their time either hearty Protestants, or not hearty and thorow-paced Papists. And neither the reverence of a Father, nor the dear Relation of a Brother, shall save them from being treated like the most notorious Malefactors, whom the Justice of a Nation thinks it self bound to follow and pursue into the other World, and to make examples to all fu∣ture ages. For blind Catholick Zeal knows no Body; but be it Peasant or Prince,
Strangers, or their own Flesh and Blood, alive or dead, if they have been Hereticks, or insufficient Catholicks, into the Fire  all they go. What English man, who had but one drop of true English Blood lest in his Veins, could have endured to behold this horrid sight? To see a parcel of cowardly Papists breaking up a Royal Monument with Sacrilegious Hands, and dragging thence a mighty Monarch, whom when he was alive, they durst not have look'd in the Face: to see those sacred Temples, which had been incir∣cled with a Crown, and that puissant Arm which had swayed the English Scepter for almost forty Years, now reduced to infamous Ashes; and these thrown into the Water, as not fit to have a place upon God's Earth: and all this perform'd by the pure Zeal of his own Daugher, on∣ly because he was not quite so good a Catholick as her self? I could not forbear shaking this Note a little, to try what Musick it will make in their Ears, who make way for a Po∣pish Successor, out of pure Loyalty to a Protestant Prince. As they like this, they may proceed. For here they may plain∣ly behold what blessed Fruits the Au∣thority of the Holy Father is like to pro∣duce, and what true and laudable Ser∣vice will be done to Protestant Princes, by introducing Popery. So well the first Reformers, in the be∣ginning of Queen Elizabeth's Time, un∣derstood
the Spirit of Popery. And yet they know nothing of those Hellish Plots, which almost filled up  succeeding part of that Queen's Reign. They knew no∣thing of the Paris Wedding, the Gun∣powder Plot, or the  Massacre; which will remain in Books, as Monu∣ments of the inhumane and accursed Cruelty of Papists, when time has peri∣shed the London Monument. And they may as well go and try their Foreheads up∣on this Monument of stone, as endea∣vour to out-face the other. These Cruelties never entred into the Hearts of Pagans, and therefore we have no foundation of a Comparison betwixt Popery and Paganism in this point; no more than we can compare Prince Ru∣pert's Iron Guns with Julius Caesar's. For this Murdering and Massacring hundreds of thousands upon the score of Religion, in cold Blood, and under the Sacred Rites of Friendship, are things found out in these latter Ages: And the com∣pendious destruction of a Nation at one blow, is as perfectly a new invention, as the Gun powder it self, which was to have done that Catholick Job. All that can be done therefore in this Matter, is; 1. To shew what Cruelty the Pagans exercised upon the account of Reli∣gion. And, 2. to shew that the Papists have far exceeded them.
The Pagan Cruelty, upon the account of Religion, falls under these two Heads. 1. The Sanguinary Laws which were enacted, or put in execution against the Christians. 2. The Outrages which were commit∣ted upon them. In both these the Papists have much out-done the Pagans, as might easily be made appear from their own Gene∣ral Councils, their own Historians, their Popes Speeches, particularly that of Sixtus Quintus, upon the Murder of Henry the Third of France; their Popes Bulls, par∣ticularly to the Irish in their late Holy War; their Holy Inquisition, which has, I will not say, Ten Persecutions, but ten thou∣sand Persecutions in the Belly of it. Alas, the Roman Laws were but Cob∣webs, to those of Holy Church against Heresy. You may see some of them in the 28. Vol. Conc. Paris, cap. 3. p. 161. Decrees of the Lateran Council, under Innocent the Third; Laws like our late Act for burying in Wollen, which will execute themselves, and extirpate pe∣stilent Northern Heresie, by a modest computation, in a Year and halfs Time. For it is Deprivation to the Bishop that is remiss and negligent, who must make room for another, that can and will con∣found Heretical Pravity: It is Death in that private man, who will not be an In∣former: it is the loss of his Kingdom to
that Prince, who will not extirpate as fast as he can; which in that case is to be given to Catholick Free-booters, who, when they have extirpated the Here∣ticks, are to possess it without any con∣tradiction, and to keep it in the purity of the Faith. But because I would willingly do all Right to the Papists in this Matter, which cannot be done, but by a large and just Discourse upon the Subject; I shall here break off, making that the Conclusion, which is the only end and intention of this Book, and that my hearty prayer to God, which shall always be my poor endeavour among men. The Lord of Heaven and Earth 2 l part Hom. for Whitsun. p. 216. defend us from their eyranny and Pride, that they never enter into his  again, to the di∣sturbance of his seely poor Flock: but that they may be utterly con∣founded and put to flight in all parts of the World: And he of his great Mercy so work in all mens Hearts, by the mighty Power of the Holy Ghost, that the comfor∣table Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly preached, truly received, and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of Sin, Death, the Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist, that like scattered and dispersed Sheep, being
at length gathered into one Folo, we may in the end rest all together in the Eolom of Abraham, sahac, and Jacob, there to be partakers of e∣ternal and  Life, through the  and Death of Iesus Christ our Sabour. A∣MEN.
FINIS
