L1338 12738580 93055
THE PRESENT STATE OF GENEVA. With a brief DESCRIPTION Of that CITY, And several changes and alterations it hath been subject to from the first foundation thereof untill this present year, 1681. LONDON. Printed for William Cademan, at the Popes-head, in the New-Exchange in the Strand. 1681.
TO THE REDER. Courteous Reader, THis Book was at first a Manuscript composed in Italian for the use of the present Great Duke of Flor∣ence by Signior Gregorio Leti the ingenious Au∣thor of the Cardinalismo and Nepotismo, from whom the Translator had
it at Geneva. Some ne∣cessary occasions having called the Author lately into this Country, the Translator communicat∣ed to him his design of turning that Treatise in∣to English, which he not only approved of, as knowing the value of the thing, but hath since ad∣ded with his own hand some remarkable passages which conduce not a little to the accomplishment of the work, and are of so
fresh a date, as cannot as yet have been published by any other. So that, Reader, you have here within the narrow com∣pass of so little a Treatise all that indeed can be said, or is necessary to be known concerning that so famed City and Republick. Farewel.
THE PESENT STATE OF GENEVA, &c. GENEVA,Antiquity. as appears by some Chronicles of the Country of Vaux, is one of the ancientest Cities of Europe, being commonly sup∣posed to have been built by Lemanus, Son of Hercules, the great King of the Gaules, who gave the name like∣wise to the Lake Lemane, by many cal∣led the Lake of Geneva. The first foundation of it was laid in the year of the World 3994. upon a little rising Hill covered with Juniper Trees, called by the French Geneuriers, from whence it afterwards took the name of Geneura; Lemanus having gran∣ted many Priviledges to the place, and erected the same into a City incorpo∣rated with great immunities and free∣domes,
prescrib'd them a Form of Go∣vernment suitable to the Customes of those times. In the time of Julius Caesar this Ci∣ty was of great renown, and by him called the Bulwork of Helvetia,Julius Cae∣sar. and frontiere Town of the Allobrogi, which name at present it deserves more than ever. When the eruption was made upon the Swissers in the year of God 230. by the Emperor Heliogabalus,Heliogabi∣lus. Geneva was al∣most utterly destroyed by Fire; but in the time of Aurelian the Emperour,Destroyed. about the year of Grace 270. it was by the command of the same Emperor rebuilt,Rebuilt. who having bestowed many priviledges on those that came to repair it, com∣manded it for the future to be called Aurelia, but the Inhabitants could not easily banish from their minds the an∣cient name of Geneva, which to this day it holds, tho during the Life of Aure∣lian, they called it Aurelia. The Situation of this City is one of the pleasantest in Europe, being on the North side, washed by the Lake, and on the South adorned with a spatious
Neighbouring Plain, reaching to the very Walls, and encompassed by two large Rivers, the Rone and the Arue. This plain serves the Citizens for a place of diversion and Recreation: There they walk to take the Air, and refresh themselves in the delightful Gardens, which inviron it, of which there is a great number. There like∣wise they train and exercise their Soul∣diers, and divert themselves at Play in a long Mall. Plain Pa∣lace.This Plain is commonly called the Plain Palace, and in a Corner thereof, where the Arue falls into the Rone, there is a spatious burying place for the dead.Burying-Place. The Confines of Geneva are on the East, and South the Dutchy of Savoy, on the West the Country of Gex belong∣ing to the King of France, and on the North side the Lake. Lemane, and be∣yond that Switzerland: From the Stee∣ple of St. Peters Church, which is a strong high Tower might have been seen formerly six (tho at present but five Principalities, the Spanish Burgun∣dy being united to France) to wit, Sa∣voy, France, the Spanish Burgundy, Swit∣zerland,
Sion, and Geneva, a thing so singular, as cannot be parallel'd in the World. This City hath of a long time been walled,Fortifica∣tions. and indifferently well fortified; but since the year 1659. the Fortifica∣tions both within and without have been augmented with Bastions, half-Moons, and Bulwarks, at which they are still busily imployed, the Engineer of the Republick, an expert and skil∣ful Artist, daily assisting and over-seeing their work. In the year 1662. The States and o∣ther private Persons of the United Ne∣therlands made a Present to the Repub∣lick of above thirty thousand Crowns,Hollanders which Sum was applyed to the raising of a strong and regular Bulwork on the side of the Rone, whereon by Order of the Senate this Inscription was put, Oppugna oppugnantes me ex munificentiâ Celsiss. Ordinum Faederatorum Belgii, 1663. The City seems divided,Bridges. because the Rone running through it maketh two Islands, that sustain four Bridges, two whereof which joyn to St. Gervase have
houses and shops upon them, but the other two that are united with the bo∣dy of the City, since the fire in the year 1670. have been left open with∣out any houses to cover them. Before the Reformation there were many casual fires, sometimes in one,Fires. and sometimes in another part of the City; but since the year 1534 that the Reformation began, until 1670. by the grace of God and provident care of the Magistrates, the City remained free from any such accident, when on Mon∣day the 17th. of January about twelve of the Clock at night a dreadful fire broke out upon one of the largest and most inhabited of the four Bridges, and burnt with so much force and rage, that in the space of three hours, tho the night was calm, without a breath of Wind stirring, the whole buildings, to the number of threescore and ten houses, were utterly consumed in the Conflagration, above an hundred and thirty Families deprived of habitation and a hundred Persons, Men, Women, and Children destroyed in the merciless flames; a dreadfull argument, that if the People could not escape with
their Lives, they cou'd not save their Goods. The loss was reputed to a∣mount to a French Million of Mony, and was the greater, because many sub∣stantial Merchants lived upon that Bridge. Many Collections were pre∣sently made throughout the City, for the relief of those poor People that were burnt out of all, and the Prote∣stants of Switzerland, Germany, and o∣ther places gave seasonable instances of their Charity to the distressed upon that occasion. The Bridge is now rebuilt with most excellent Workmanship,New-Bidge. but by Decree of the Senate no houses nor Shops are for the future to be built upon it, tho it be much stronger now than it was before, so that the City seems at present di∣vided. The Fabrick of their houses is not very considerable,Their Buil∣ding. the People having been alwayes more addicted to conveni∣ence than magnificence, so that we need say nothing but of their publick Structu∣res, which are, the Town House, repaired and beautified since the Reformation, the Arsenal, five publick Granaries, the Mint and the Towers, two of which
stand, one on each side of the New-Bridge. Ecclesia∣stick Buil∣dings.The Ecclesiastick Fabricks are the four Churches, to wit, St. Peters the Cathedral, St. Gervase, St. Magdalens, and St. Germans, besides two little Chap∣pels, where the Lectures of Theology, Greek Hebrew and Philosophy are held; and in the biggest of the two, preach∣ing in high Dutch. There is besides a Colledge built since the Reformation, containing Schools for the Youth that learn humanity, and houses for the Ministers and Profes∣sors. There were heretofore most magni∣ficent Buildings, both for the Regular and Secular Clergy, and especially the rich Abbey of St. Victor, the Abbot whereof was a Temporal Prince inve∣sted with many Jurisdictions. In the great Hall of the Colledge is the Library, furnished with excellent Old Books. The Library Keeper is a Minister, who is to take care of it, and shew it to such Strangers as desire to see it. Every day in the week there is prea∣ching in two places (to wit) in thePreaching
Churches of St. Peter, and St. Gervase, and thrice a week in St. Magdalens, but on Sunday, there are three Sermons at St. Peters, and as many at St. Gervase's, that is, two in the forenoon, and one in the afternoon; besides Catechizing at Noon in each of the said Churches. There is preaching twice every Sunday likewise at St. Magdalens in the Morning and Evening, with Catechizing at Noon. Every Sunday Morning, and Wednesday in the afternoon, there is a Sermon in High Dutch, and every Thursday in Ita∣lian. St. Peters Church was in ancient times dedicated to Apollo, as is to be seen in some very old Inscriptions, se∣veral Cardinals and many Prelates of great Renown were buried in this Church when the Romish Religion flourished here; and since the Refor∣mation in one of its Chappels, Ano 1628. was interred Emilia of Nassau, and sometime after the Princess her Si∣ster, both Sisters to the Prince of O∣range, Emilia being Wife to Don Anto∣nio King of Portugal, who was banished by the Spaniards. In another Chappel lies the Body of the Duke of Rohan bu∣ried
in the year 1638 in a most magni∣ficent Monument built by his Dutchess, who was laid there also near her Hus∣band, in the year 1660. as their Son Tan∣cred was in the Year 1661. There are two Hospitals,Hospita. the one within the City for releif of the Poor, not only of the Place, but likewise of all sorts of Strangers; and the other without the City in the Burying-place of the Plain-Palace, being a Pest-house for receiving of the infected in time of the Plague; when the Catholick Religi∣on reigned here, there were seven Ho∣spitals. Master of the Hospi∣tals.The Master of the Hospital continues in place three years, but he is usually confirmed by the Counsel of two hun∣dred, who have the power of Election for the next three years, and this place, as being very profitable, is much sought after. He hath for his Assistants (who are the Governors of the Hospital) nine Laymen with a Minister and a Syndick, who is President in all Courts kept for the management of the Revenue of the Hospital. Visiting of the dead.When any one dies, the body is in∣stantly veiwed by a Chirurgion appoin∣ted
by the Senate for that purpose; and without this search it cannot be buried. The Dead are buried without any ceremonious Pomp,Burying. being accompani∣ed to the Grave by few or many, accor∣ding to the quality of the person, but there is no obligation upon any to be present unless invited. Burying of Strangers of Quality.Persons of Quality, who are stran∣gers, are interred in the Cloyster of St. Peters, where Theodore Beza, who depar∣ted this life in the Year 1604. lies bu∣ried. Church∣yard of St. Gervase.In the Church yard of St. Gervase lie seventeen Citizens, who dyd fighting nobly in the defence of their Country, the night of the Scalado: to whose me∣mory the Senate caused this following Inscription to be cut in a Wall. D. O. M. S. Quorum infra nomina Scripta, Corpora sita, (Posteri nostri) dum ingressis ipsâ in pa∣ce urbem hostibus; & fortiter arma sua, & sedulo munia alia pernecessario tempore op∣pnunt; glorioso laudabilique exitu pro Re∣pub. ceciderunt. ad d. XII. Decemb. 1602.
Many of the Inhabitants, who die in that quarter of the City are usually buried in this Churchyard. Marriages are here celebrated with the usual Ceremonies,Marria∣ges. that is with the consent of the Parties, who being agreed, and having mutually past a Promise of Marriage and interchang'd a Ring (if they think it fit) they make a note of the Banes, with the names of the Per∣sons to be married, which being sign∣ed by the cheif Syndick, is given to the Minister, who publishes the same from the Pulpit three Sundayes successively, and afterwards, no lawful impediment being objected, they may marry when they please in the Parish Church of the Husband, or in any other Church if they judge it more convenient. The Burgesses and Citizens are not tied to give any security; but the In∣habitants or Inmates (as they are cal∣led) if they intend to marry, are obli∣ged to pay to the Hospitals, or French Box, about three Pistols, or to give in security for a greater Sum, that is, for thirty Crowns. Publick dancing and musick are not allowed,Dancing. however for the most part
they connive at it, and suffer the Bride∣groom and Bride to pass away their time with some Dance, or Ball with∣in doores. When any impediment of Marriage is objected; the matter is brought be∣fore the Consistory or Presbytery, who receive the necessary informations in the case: And in matters of Importance the parties must be cited, and appear before the Magistrates, and their cause legally tried. Inhabi∣tants Bur∣gesses and Citizens. Geneva is inhabited by three sorts of persons, Inhabitants or Inmates, Bur∣gesses and Citizens. The Inhabitants pay greater contributions than the o∣ther, and yet they enjoy not the same priviledges: Besides the Senate may send them going when they please, and it is likewise permitted to them upon leave asked to be gone, if they think it convenient. The Burgesses are those who buy their Freedom, and enjoy all sorts of priviledges; but cannot be admitted to the highest Dignities, and at present the price of ones Freedome is determin∣ed according to the pleasure of the Council. The Sons of Burgesses born
within the City are Citizens, and may attain to the highest place and Dignity in the Republick. A Colony of divers Nations.In former times Geneva was a Colony of the Allobrogi, but since the reforma∣tion it is become a mixed Colony of all the Nations of Europe, especially of French, Germans, Italians and Spani∣ards, who being persecuted for the truth of the Gospel repair daily thither in whole Families: Hence it is that when before the reformation, there were not above five thousand Souls in the City, it is at present so populous by the great concourse of people who flock thither, that it contains no fewer than thirty five thousand Souls of di∣vers Nations, and this is the reason why the humor of that people is so mixt and various, that it is not easie to find out the temper of any person there without long experience and conversation; every one retaining still some Tincture of the Antient instinct of their Original Country. A Prince of the Family of Hesse being in Incognito in Geneva in the Month of July 1602, composed the following verses.
Mauritius Hassiae, Landgravius. Quisquis amat vitam sobriam castamque tueri, Perpetua esto illi casta Geneva domus. Quisquis amat vitam hanc bene vivere, vi∣veret illam, Illi iterum fuerit pulchra Geneva locus. Hic vitae invenies quicquid conducit utrique, Relligio hic sana est, aura, ager atque lacus. Englished. A strict and sober life if you'd embrace, Let chast Geneva be your dwelling place. Or wou'd you lead a lawless life and fice, The same Geneva your abode must be, Convenience here for either life is found, The Air, Land, Water and Religion sound. The people of Geneva are very industri∣ous,Industy. and since they have not land e∣nough to take up their time in agricul∣ture and Husbandy, as other states of larger Territories have, they apply themselves sedulously to the improve∣ment
of handycraft Trades. Clocks and Watches.Clock and Watch making is a Trade of great esteem, and of Masters and ser∣vants there are above three hundred that follow that occupation; of whom there are some that drive a good Trade by it, not only in all the Countries of Europe but also in Turky, Persia, and other re∣mote Kingdoms: It is necessary tho that such as come hither to buy, have their eyes in their heads; if they would not be cheated; because there are bad as well as good Artists among them. Gold-Smiths Gun-SmithsThere are many excellent and skill∣ful Gold-smiths here also, but above all things tire-Arms are here made in per∣fection, such as Harquebuses, Pistols, Musquets and the like, and many Gen∣tlemen provide themselves from hence. The Genevians want neither Cour∣age nor resolution, having given proofs of the same on many occasions against the Savoyards,Liberty in great e∣steem. but especially when their beloved liberty lies at stake, for which they are ready (as they have alwaies been) to Sacrafice a thousand lives.an instance of it. Pecolat a Citizen of Geneva being ta∣ken in Savoy, and made Prisoner by Charles the Third a declared enemy
of the liberty of Geneva, and put to the Rack because he wou'd confess nothing to the prejudice of his Country; the Savoyards provoked by his constancy, and thinking him enchanted, called for a Barber to shave him, and to wash off all suspition of a Charme. Pecolat snatching the Razor out of the Bar∣bers hand, instantly cut out his ton∣gue, that thereby he might deprive himself of the means of discovering any thing to the hurt of his Country. Antient Inscripti∣ons.In the time of Paganism Apollo was worshipped by the Genevians, as ap∣pears by many ancient Inscriptions, that are to be seen in the City. In an old house, in the great Street you'l find, Apolloni Munfustius, and in a Wall of the Colledge there is still to be seen, Apolloni Muestius Mercator, without the Chain of the Harbour, their is a Rock called Neptunes Stone, but formerly Ne∣ptunes Prayer,Neptunes rock. because in time of Pa∣ganism the Boat men offered there Sa∣crifices there, when they were upon undertaking of any voyage. The Chri∣stian Reli∣gion plan¦ted.By some Manuscripts, and especially in a very ancient Bible kept in the Li∣brary, it appears that the Church of
Geneva was planted by the Disciples of the Apostles,Consecra∣tion of St. Peters Church. and that the Church of St. Peter was consecrated by St. Denis and Paradocus his Scholar, who remain∣ed Bishop of Geneva, when St. Denis was gone to preach the Gospel at Pa∣ris. The Successors of Paradocus became afterwards not only Cheif in Spirituals, but also Supream in Temporal Affairs, so that until the Year 1535. Geneva was Governed by a Succession of 74 Bishops, of which Peter de la Baume was the last, who being a Prelate odi∣ous for his lascivious life, and there∣fore very timorous, upon information that the Citizens intended to embrace the reformed Religion already receiv∣ed by their Neighbours, was so sur∣priz'd with fear of some unhappy ac∣cident in such a revolution, that he with his Chanons on a sudden retired into Burgundy, giving way (as he said) to this first popular commotion to spend it self, but he was greatly mi∣staken, for the people more encourag∣ed by the absence of their Bishop and Clergy gave a beginning to the refor∣mation,
and the chief Minister that preached there was one William Farrell a very Learned man. The Senate or∣dered that on the right hand of the Gate of the publick Palace this inscription shou'd be put, as it is to be seen by passengers at this day. Profligatâ Romani Antichristi tyrannide, abrogatisque ejus superstitionibus, Sacro sancta Christi Religio,Inscription of the Re∣formation. hic in suam purita∣tem, Ecclesia in meliorem ordinem singulari Dei benesicio reposita, & simul pulsis fuga∣tisque hoslibus, Ʋrbs ipsa in suam liberta∣tem non sine insign miraculo restituto sucrit. S. P. Q. G. Monumentum hoc perpetuae memoriae causa fieri, atque hoc lo∣co erigi curavit, quo suam erga Deum gratitudinem ad Posteros testatam fa∣ceret. Mony coyn∣ed.In the same year, 1535. And on the 24th. of October, the Senate began to coyn mony. The first Inscription or Motto about the Arms, was Post Tenebras spero Lucem, but it was order∣ed to be altered and instead thereof, only post tenebras lux to be stamped on the one side, and on the other Deus noster pugna pro nobis.
Geneva was under the Jurisdiction of a Bishop,Bishop. as their Spiritual and Tem∣poral Head and Governour. He had under him thirty two Chanons, one half of them being alwayes to be Citi∣zens, but all of them together exercised their Jurisdiction: there were besides Eleven Chaplains,Maccabees of whom six were called Maccabees, and this Congre∣gation was institued by John Alermet, Bishop of Geneva in the year, 1378. To serve in the Cathedrral of Saint Peter, which he subjected to the Can∣onical Jurisdiction, and endowed with considerable revenues, ordering them to be called Maccabees; besides them were six Clerks of the Quire, and seven Curates. The regular Clergy had five Mon∣asteries; three Frieries, to wit,Monaster∣ies. of St. Dominick, St. Francis, and St. Au∣gustine: And two Nunneries, the  of St. Clare, and the other of Domini∣cans, with their Chaplains. Eection of the Bishop.In the Primitive times the Bishop was elected by the general Council of the people, which was the custome likewise in other Bishopricks of Suitzer∣land; but he was alwaies confirmed
by the Pope, who afterward deprived them of that Priviledge, conferring the power of Election on the Chanons, who by plurality of voices chose two, of whom the Pope according to his pleasure confirmed the one. There were moreover four Annual Syndicks (as there are at present) who governed as Temporal Princes,Election of the Syn∣dicks be∣fore the Reformati∣on. being Judges in Criminal causes, Lords of the City, Masters of the Gates, and of all that belonged to the Militia, which the Bishop never challenged or medled with. The General Council consisted of Citizens and Burgesses, and to it belonged the Election of the four Syndicks, which was on Saint Martins day. Every Syndick after∣wards chose five Councellors, and all together Elected a Treasurer: From sun setting until break of day, the fo Syndicks alone had absolute Ju∣risdiction within the City, and acted what they judged convenient for the Publick by their own Supreame Au∣thority. When the Bishops Lieutenant or Vidone, as they called him in that time, aphrehended a Malefactor, he remit∣ted
him to the Syndicks;Admini¦stration of Justice be∣fore the Reforma∣tion. who were obliged within the space of twenty four houres to do Justice upon him, from which Sentence there was no appeal; it is true the Bishop had the power of pardoning and shewing mercy if he pleased; the Sentence be∣ing given by the Syndicks, it was intimated to the Prisoner, who was then again turned over into the hands of the Bishops Lieutenant with orders from them to cause the Sentence to be put in Execution, and if the Bishop gave no pardon, the Lieutenant de∣livered up the same Prisoner to ano∣ther Lieutenant belonging to the Counts of Geneva, who were feudatories of the Bishop, and he it was that put the Sentence in Execution: this was all the power and Authority that the Counts of Geneva had;Counts of Geneva. and it is also to be observed that Executions were alwayes performed without the City in a place called Champel, where one of the Gibbets is to be seen to this day. The Duke of Savoy as Successour to these Counts,Pretenti∣ons of the Duke of Savoy. pretends the Sover∣anity over Geneva, though there be no∣thing more certain than that the said
Counts never had any Jurisdiction of Command, nor right of Dominion in that City. His Highness indeed makes great pretentions, and is very well satisfied with the reasonableness of the same, though they be backt with very weak and frivolous evidences, seeing the proofs that are alleadged to make good those pretentions, come far short of what they are intended to assert: one argument is, that though the Bishop of Geneva was chief in Spirituals and Temporals, and was honoured with the Title of Prince of the Empire; nevertheless (His Royal Highness would have it) it behoved him to do homage to the Duke regent as to his Superiour, and to Swear fealty to him the day of his Inauguration; but there is not one Authentick act to be found of this, and the only Oath the Bishop took was to the Syndicks, to whom he swore, to maintain and preserve the priviledges and liberties of the City. It is further alledged that Duke Charles of Savoy went frequently to Geneva with his Dutchess Beatrix, where
all Imaginable honor and respect was shewed him: — This I am apt to beleive, but the consequence is not good; for the Genevians are civil and obliging to all strangers, but especially to per∣sons of high merit and quality. It is certain that Geneva was alwaies a free City, and that long before the House of Savoy was spoken of, or came in play, they were Governed by their own Laws and Statutes Imperial and municipal edicts; the Bishops, indeed of Geneva, who in the fall of the Ro∣man Empire raised themselves to Su∣premacy in temporals in that City, as well as other Bishops had done in o∣ther places, were commonly in contest with the Counts of Geneva, for the do∣minion and Governmenr of the City, a short account of which, I shall hear give you. After that one Humbert Bishop of Geneva had exchanged this for ano∣ther life, Andutius his Successor ap∣plied himself to the Emperor Frederick the first, and obtained of him to be declared absolute Prince of the City of Geneva, that in Temporals he should be subject to none but the Emperour alone, and that he should be free, and
Exempt from all taxes and tribute, but the Bishop being returned with design to enjoy the prerogative granted him by the Emperour; the Counts raised greater trouble against him than before, not suffering him to exercise any such priviledges; though this storme was afterwards calmed by the Golden-bull of the same Emperour in favour of the Bishop, and published in the year, 1162. For some time after, matters went on quietly to the satis∣faction of the Bishop, until that one William Count of the Geneveses, who took upon himself the Title of Count of Geneva, being for Rebellion and o∣ther heinous Crimes outlawed by the Emperour, and deprived of the fief which he held of the Bishop, betook him∣self to his friends for help and Assistance. This having occasioned a long warr whereby the forces of this Bishop and the City were much impaired the Gene∣vians call'd to their Assistance a Count of Maurianna who was afterwards Count of Savoy, but this put no end to the War; on the contrary it encreased day∣ly, in so much that the Count of Mau∣rianna being powerful, he seized several
places and Castles which belonged to those of Geneva, encroching dayly more and more upon the City, and not con∣tented with what he he had Usurped under the Title of Homage, he de∣manded to be reinbursed of the expen∣ces he had been at in the Wars. Hence many new quarrels arose, which lasted until the Counts of the Genevese were extinct, of whom the last was the Antipope Clement the seventh: To them the Dukes of Savoy, with con∣sent of the Bishop, succeeded as Heires, but Amadeus Prince of Savoy disdaining to be under the Jurisdiction of a Bishop, procured of the Emporour the Vicar∣ship of the Empire within all his own Territories, thereby pretending that as Vicar of the Empire, the Bishop in all his Jurisdictions ought to be subject to him, but the Bishop protected by the Pope made vigorus resistance, and threatned to Excommunicate the Duke, as often, as he should pretend to revive any such pretentions, wherefore the Duke that he might not Embroil him self with the Court of Rome, let fall his great pretentions, expecting a more favourable time to raise them again,
and so the Bishop remained in peace∣able possession of his Authority, and the people of their antient liberty. Afterwards in the year, 1418. Pope Martin the fifth passing through Savoy was in all places entertained by the Duke regnant at great expences, and with the highest Demonstrations of honour, the Pope to gratifie him, of his own free motion, conferred on him the Temporal Jurisdiction over the City of Geneva, but neither the Bishop, or people for all that, even suffered the Duke to enjoy that Pontifical priviledge and concession. In the year, 1536 about the begin∣ing of September, John Calvin of Noion in Picardy,The com∣ing of Cal∣vin to Ge∣neva. a learned man came to Geneva and joyning with Farrel, who already preached up the reformed Re∣ligion in that City, they together insti∣tuted many Ecclesiastick ordinances, and setled a lecture in Theology. Cardinal Sadoleto a person eminent for learning and integrity of life,Cardinal Sadoleto. hear∣ing of the separation of Geneva from the Roman Church, wrote a most courte∣ous and hortatory Letter to the Senate, promising them in the Popes name a
pardon for what was past, offering himself to be their mediator, for re∣conciling them againe to the Church, but the minds of the people being dis∣posed to the contrary, that Letter had no effect. The Ban∣ishment of Calvin and Farrel.In the year, 1528. Calvin and Far∣rel were banished Geneva, by order of the Council of the two hundered, be∣cause they had said openly that they could not Administer the Sacrament of the Lords supper, to loose and dissolute people, and indeed they actually refused upon an Easter day to give the Sacra∣ment to some Scandalous and lewd per∣sons, whereupon the Council of the two hundred being next day assembled, those two men were sentenced to be Banished, and presently departed. The Syndicks who were the con∣trivers of that Banishment were utterly ruined two years after; one of them that told Calvin the gates were made wide enough to march out at, burst in a narrow window, through which he attempted to escape out of prison; another was beheaded, but the rest fled, and so saved their lives. The year, 1540.Charles V. The Emperour
Charles the fifth by express Letters com∣manded those of Geneva not to Swear Allegiance to any whosoever, declaring that for the future, they should contin∣ue under the obedience of the Emper∣our, and enjoy the priviledges which other Imperial Cities and they them∣selves had allready in times past enjoy∣ed. Calvin re∣turnes to Geneva.The Edict of 1538, for Banishing of the Ministers was in the years, 1541 in a general Council revoked, and by express Letters they were recalled, so that on the third of September, 1541 Calvin returned to Geneva, about which time by his advice the first Ecclesiastick Laws were established in that Church, the Supremacy in Spirituals as well as Temporals, being by a General de∣claration asserted to belong solely to the Senate. Calvin dies.Calvin lived the remaining part of his life in great esteem and tranquillity in Geneva, and to the extraordinary grief of the people died the 24 of May 1564, aged fifty four years, ten Months and six days, his body was interred in the burying place of the plaine Pallace, but since upon suspicion that the Sa∣voyards
intended to dig up and insult over his bones, they were removed and buried within the Cloyster of St. Pe∣ters Church. The Government of Geneva was at first wholy democratical,Govern∣ment of Geneva. the people assembled in a general Council having the Supream power to dispose of Pub∣lick places by Election as of the Syn∣dicks Lieutenant, Auditors, Treas∣urer, Procurator general: And besides of making peace and War, neverthe∣less in the year 1607, The Council of two hundred alone concluded a peace, and at present all the power the people hath is of chusing by most voices in their Councils, one of two that are presented to them by the Council of two hundred, and none being ever presented by them but persons of chief note in the City; the Government seems now to have a great affinity with Ari∣stocracy, none but the more Noble being admitted to the publick adminstration of affairs. The publick Officers are alwaies first elected in the Council of twenty five, and then confirmed by that of the two hundered, who have the Authority
to approve, or reject the Election: when the Council of two hundred re∣jects a party proposed, then the Coun∣cil of twenty five returnes and makes a new Election, which is to be reiter∣ated, as long as the choice is not con∣firmed by the Council of two hun∣dred, who at the same time that they reject any person proposed, have the power to nominate another; but this is seldome put in practice; the manner of their Election is as followeth. When a Lieutenant (for instance) is to be made,Balloting. two candidates are chos∣en by the Council of twenty five, and presented to the Counsel of two hun∣dred; in which all the kindred and relations, first of the one, and then of the other Candidate successively to the utmost degree, are ordered to with∣draw, this being done, they carefully sift and examine the actions of the per∣sons proposed, and such as have any thing to object against them, speak their minds freely, then every member of the Council puts into a Box a B, or an O, B, signifying bon or good, and the O, omitted or rejected. If their be more Bs found than Os, the party is ap∣proved
but if more Os, the Council of twenty five proposes an other, and ma∣ny times the Council of two hundred rejects ten in one Election: Both being afterwards confirmed, they are pre∣sented to the people, and he who in their general Council has most voices, is legally elected. In the opening of any Council or assembly for Election, there are alwaies two Oaths Adminstred to the Mem∣bers, one that they chuse a fit person, and the other that they discover no∣thing of what shall be spoken concern∣ing the parties proposed. All Burgesses and Citizens past eighteen years of age are admitted into the General Council;The Ge∣neral Council. which is some∣times more, sometimes less Numerous, according as the Members are at home, or willing to come. The City Companies of the Militia.The City is divided into seventeen companies, each of which has for Cap∣tain a Lord of the Council of twenty five, with a Lieutenant, Ensigne and other officers who are commonly chose from among the Burgesses and Citizens, yet a Burgesse tho he may be a Lieuete∣nent, can never be an Ensigne.
The Com∣panies of Trades.Every Trade has a Company con∣sisting of Members of the same professi∣on, which is Governed by a Lord of the Council of twenty five, and four as∣sistants of the same Trade. The Electi∣on of Ma∣gistrates.The Magistrates are alwaies chosen by secret suffrages, some of whom con∣tinue in place for life, and others for a certain time. The Mem∣bers of the Council of 25.The Members of the Council of twenty five, who constitute the chief Court of the City, and carry properly the names of Counselors, are chosen out of the Council of two hundred, that is the Council of twenty five pro∣poses two, and that of the two hunder∣ed approves or rejects them, and if it happen that both are approved by the greater numbers of Bs, than Os, then they come to an Election by the Plura∣lity of voices, in which Election the Kindred have a voice; though when Scrutiny is made with Bs, and Os, all remove even to the remotest degree of relation. The members of the Council of two hundred are Elected solely by the Coun∣cil of twenty five,The Mem∣bers of the Council of 200. and must be twenty five years of Age compleate, as it is
ordered sometime agoe, they continue in place for life, unless by the Council of twenty five, who in the beginning of every year try and censure their actions, they be turned out or suspended for misdemeanor. In the beginning of every year the Council of two hundred, censure also the actions of the Council of twenty five; except of the four Syndicks, who with the Treasurer are exempted from that censure. The four Syndicks who are annual,Syndicks. are chosen by the general Council of the people, by the general Council of the people, and are commonly taken out of the Council of twenty five, one of them carries the title of first Syn∣dick, and he that hath once been a Syndick, in four years time returnes most commonly to the same place a∣gain. Lieutenant and Audi∣tors.The Lieutenant who administers justice has six Auditors for assistance, all chosen by the general Council of the people, the Lieutenant for one year, and the Auditors for three, of whom two are yearly chosen, and two go out, these Auditors are not elected out of the number of twenty five, but of
that of the two hundred. Procurator general.The Procurator general is likewise taken out of the Council of the two hundred, and chosen by the people for three years; but is commonly con∣firmed again for three years more, his Office is to take care of the observati∣on of the Lawes, and preservation of privilidges. The Treasurer is alwaies one of the Council of twenty five,Treasurer. who is to give an account of the revenues and dis∣bursments of the Republick; he is e∣lected by the general Council of the people, continues three years in place, and most commonly goes not out be∣fore he be chosen Syndick. Secretaries of State.There are two Secretaries of State chosen by the Council of the two hun∣dred out of that of twenty five, they continue in place during pleasure, but commonly until they be chosen Syn∣dicks, they sit uncovered, and write all the acts of the Council. City Mar∣shal.The Office of City Marshal is very considerable, tho he be as in other places but Captain of the Town Of∣ficers. This place is conferred upon one of the body of the two hundred,
but he is admitted into the Council of twenty five, and hears all that pas∣ses there; he has no voice, but only expects their orders; he sits uncovered on a bench by the door. Two are nam∣ed to the place by the Council of twen∣ty five, but the election belongs to that of the two hundred; he continues commonly in place for six years, and is not allowed to appear in publick without a staff in his hand with a Syl∣ver ball which belongs to the State. When the Senate makes a present of Wine or any thing else to Strangers of Quality, it is his part to make the Compliment, The House of the Secre∣taries and City Mar∣shals pub∣lick feasts.In the Town House of the City none live but the two Secretaries of State and the City Marshal, to whom it belongs to order the publick feasts in the times of Election, and to treate such, as the Senate thinks fit to ap∣point. At the Election of the Magistrates, that is of the Syndicks, Lieutenant, Auditors, members of the Council of twenty five and other greater Officers, the Council of twenty five Dine in the Town Hall at the charge of him who
is new elected, but because the electi∣on of the Lieutenant and Auditors is all waies on the same day, the two Auditors are at the charge of the din∣er, and the Lieutenant eates Scot-free. There are in the State of Geneva four Castellains who Administer Just∣ice to the people in the Country,Castellains. and are Members of the Council of the two hundred and by them elected, af∣ter that they are nominated by the Council of twenty five, as all other of∣ficers are; every one of these Castell∣ains continues in place three years, hav∣ing under him onely a Clerk, and Of∣ficers, and once a week, or oftener if need be, goes to Adminster Justice in the place of his Jurisdiction. Publick Gramnarie.To the publick Granarie, which is one of the first things that is to be seen in Geneva, and of great advantage both to the State and people, belong eight Governours with a Receiver, and Syn∣dick, who are intrusted with the man∣agement thereof. These Governors, (except the Syndick) are indifferently chosen from among the Cittizens, Burgesses and Inhabitants, or inmatess,
and meet on occasion upon notice given them by the Syndick, who is their President, they are all elected by the Council of twenty five, and confirmed by that of the two hundred; in se∣veral store houses of this Granary are commonly kept one hundred thousand Sacks of Corne, each sack weighing an hundred and fifty pounds weight at twelve ounces to the pound, and above twenty thousand sacks are yearly bought and sold here. The Bakers are ob∣liged to buy their Corn out of this Granary at the rate of 24 Solz dear∣er then it is sold in the Market, and the Inkeepers, Vintners, and other pub∣lick House keepers are bound to buy their bread from those Bakers, so that by this meanes the City raiseth a con∣siderable profit without burdenning their Subjects; such as put money in∣to that Chamber have formerly had seaven, or eight per cent, but at pre∣sent that the Chamber is not necessi∣tated to borrow money, they allow no more then three, or at most four per cent. The forces of the City.There are nine Companies of foot appointed for the constant Guard of
the City, the Captains who are chosen by the Council of twenty five, and con∣firmed by that of the two hundred, enjoy their places for life, some of them are of the body of the two hundred, and some not, according as they have friends and Interest. A Burgess may be a Captain, when other Offices re∣quire a Citizen. The Companies con∣sist of thirty Soldiers a peace not reck∣oning inferiour Officers, to wit, Ser∣jants and Corporals, and are all punct∣ually paid once a month. Every Cap. has an hundred French Crowns and somewhat more a year, a Serjeant a∣bout forty five, a Corporal somewhat less, and every private Soldier some∣what more then two Crowns a month: There are three Gates in the City, and at each gate a Captain with his Com∣pany keeps constant guard; more∣over every evening four are chosen out of those Companies that are not upon duty at the gates to go the round without and within the City; one of which Companies mounts the guard every night in the Town Hall. The Must∣er of the Companies.The penult and last day of every month the nine Companies three at a
time are mustered in presence of the Syndick of the Guards (who is for most part the fourth Syndick) and of the two Majors, and at the same time receive their pay. The Majors are members of the Council of twenty five,Majors. and common∣ly the two youngest are chosen. It is really a place of great fatigue; for they are obliged by turns once a week, to releive the Guards every evening, and to go the rounds twice a night about the City to visit the Sentinels; they are allowed indeed to discharge their Office on horse back, being attended by some Soldiers and a Lantern: And certainly since the Scalado and sur∣prize that the Duke of Savoy attempt∣ed to have made on this place, there is no City in the world more vigilant, and that uses greater diligence to pre∣vent the like for the future; for four of the Council of the two hundred every week go the rounds nightly, both before and after the Majors rounds, and every hour of the night the Senti∣nels are visited, the Guards being al∣waies doubled when there is any sus∣pition of danger.
Pomps and vain shows.There is a Court established here a gainst Pomps and vain Shows consist∣ing of a Syndick as President, the Procurator General, and four Depu∣ties, who meet commonly on Monday after dinner. The time when the Councils meet.Twice a year the General Council of the People meets after morning Sermon in St. Peters Church, to wit, on the first Sunday of November, for the Election of the Lieutenant, and two Auditors, and the first Sunday of January, for the Election of the four Syndicks, Procurator General and Treasurer. The Coun∣cil of 25.The Council of twenty five sits every morning, and on occasion in the af∣ternoon, excepting Sunday and Thurs∣day, when they never meet, unless matters of State, or other things of great importance require their atten∣dance. The Coun∣cil of 200.The Council of the two hundred meet the first Friday morning of every month after that the Council of 25 is up, for treating of matters of State and affaires of publick benefit; but if other necessary matters do require, ac∣ding to exigency they meet oftner,
and because many Civil matters are transferred from the Council of twenty five to that of the two hundred, they assemble sometimes three days a weak for the decision of such actions. There is no appeal to be made to the Council of the two hundred in any action under fifty Crowns, the par∣ties being obliged to deposit twenty, and besides alledge that the sentence given by the twenty five is against the Edict which is the Municipal Law of Geneva. The Coun∣cil of threescore.There is moreover a Council of sixty, the Members whereof are chosen out of the body of the two hundred, and are men of mature judgment, and such as have born the charge of an Au∣ditor, but this Council seldome meets and only upon matters of State: You must observe that the Members of the Council of twenty five, sit in all other Councils, whether of the General, that of the 200, or of the sixty. The Lieutenant assisted by his six Auditors holds a Court daily,Lieuten∣ant. and tho all be not present, yet it is still a Court, the first Auditor in absence of the Lieu∣tenant being President thereof.
In the Court which is called the Court of Appeals a Syndick is Presi∣dent,Appeals. and it is composed of five Judges or Counsellors, who are Members of the two hundred and continue in place for three years. They are to meet once a week according as causes happen; for from the sentence of the Lieuten∣ant they remove to this Court of Ap∣peals, and from  the Council of twenty five. When an action whether Civil or Criminal is to be decided in the Coun∣ twenty five; all the Kindred and Relations of the Parties withdraw, so that to fill up the Quorum of that Court, as of the other of Appeals, they take Assessors out of the number of the two hundred, who sit not on the bench, but on certain seats provided for them in the middle of the Hall: but if the number of the Judges not excepted against, exceed the half, the Court is compleat and no Assessors are called. The Con∣gregation of the Mi∣nisters.The Congregation of Ecclesiasticks, that is, of the Ministers who Preach the Gospel, consists of twenty four Church-men, that is of twelve Mini∣sters of the City, and as many of the
Country about, which belongs to the Soverainity of Geneva. Every Friday Morning this Assemb∣ly meets to treat of the affaires of their Ministery, and the Purity of Religion, thô upon urgent occasions they meet at other times: not only all the Ministers but likewise the Professors are admit∣ted into this Congregation, the truth is, the professors of Theology, Greek, and Hebrew are commonly Ministers, and tho those of Philosophy be not, yet they have place in the Congre∣gation. The Consi∣story.The Consistory which is held every Thursday, is composed of all the Mi∣nisters, and nine other persons of ex∣emplary life and Mature age, whom they call Elders; two of which are commonly members of the Council of twenty five. A Minister with the title of Moderator is President of the Consistory, who is changed weekly, but the twelve Country Ministers are never admitted to be Moderators. The Italians and Germans have like∣wise their Consistories, composed of their Ministers, and some Elders, who meet commonly after Sermon, and
treat of the affairs of their several Churches, but they depend on the greater Consistory. There is a kind of Hospital common∣ly called the French-Box,The French Box. which takes care to releive all the poor Families of strangers, for none are received into the great Hospital, but onely Burgesses, Citizens, and poor Travellers with∣out any respect to their Religion or Country. The Itali∣an and German Boxes.The Poor Families of the Italian Na∣tion are releived out of the Box of the Italian Consistory, and the Germans out of the German-Box. Admini∣stration of the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per.The Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per is Administred to the People four times a year, to wit, at Easter, Whit∣suntide, in the beginning of September, and at Christmass, but alwaies on a Sunday, and that twice in every Church with great concourse of Communicants. The Italians likewise and Germans receive four times a year in their sever∣veral Churches; so that the Sacrament is administred twelve times a year in Geneva, that is once a Month, a thing most convenient for Travellers and the sick.
The Italian Church is much antien∣er than that of the Germans. Hereto∣fore the Spaniards had a Church, but for want of people of that Nation it is now lost. The Col∣ledge.The Colledge for Letters is consti∣tuted of a Rector who is a Minister, seaven Professours, to wit, three of Theology, one of Hebrew, another of Greek, and two of Philosophy: There is moreover a Principal, who is a Mini∣ster also set over the Regents of the Schools, where the youths study hu∣manity; a libruy keeper, who has the charge of the publick library, and three Senators of the Council of twenty five, whom they call commonly the Go∣vernours of the Schools. The elect∣ion of Mi∣nisters.When a Minister is to be chosen for the City or Country, the Congrega∣tion by secret voices makes the Electi∣on, and then proposes the person e∣lected to the Council of twenty five, who have the absolute power of admit∣ting or rejecting him: If the party be rejected, the Ministers proceed to a new Election until they please the hu∣mor of the Council: The same method is observed in choosing of Professors;
but for the Regents of the Schools, it is sufficient that they be examined by the body of the Colledge, and then with their recommendation presented to the body of the twenty five. There are in Geneva many Students called Proposants, as well Natives, as of other Countries, as French, Ger∣mans, Switzers, Hollanders and others. These Students are employed week∣ly to say Prayers every Evening in three Churches, to wit, St. Peters, St. Gervase's, and St. Magdalens, and be∣sides to read in the Pulpit some Chap∣ter of the bible every Morning and E∣vening, between the first and last ring∣ing into Church. When any of these Ministers are to be ordained,Ordination of Mini∣sters. that is when they are to receive Authority to Preach and Admi∣nister the Sacraments, they are exa∣mined by the Ministers in the Congre∣gation, and afterwards without any Ce∣remony they receive their Authority, the Council of twenty five not med∣ling in that, but leaveing the whole care thereof to the Ministers. The Pres.There are many Presses in Geneva, which ought weekly to be visited by the
Rector; but to speak truth both that and Licensing of Bookes by the Rect∣ors and Governors of Schools with∣out which they should not be Printed, for most part are neglected. The Salary of the Mini∣sters and Professors. Adulterie.The Salary of the Ministers of the City exceedeth not the sum of two hundred Crowns a year. About fifty or threescore years agoe the Crime of Adultery was without any respect of persons punished with death, but that rigour is at present re∣mitted; the punishment being now some months Imprisonment, and a pecuniary fine, but the poor that have not mony are punished Corporally. Simple Fornication is also punished according to the quality of the offence, the delinquent being confined to prison for nine dayes to eate nothing but Bread and Water, none are exempted but must present themselves before the Consistory. The course that is ta∣ken in time of fire.There can no where better courses be taken in time of fire than in Gene∣va, for all the men upon the first al∣larme are obliged in their armes to be∣take themselves to the several quarters appointed them, and the serving Maids
with their Buckets to carry water, e∣very house keeper being bound to send his Maid; Masons Carpenters and the like are obliged to goe and carry their Instruments and tooles with them to the place where the fire is, and the Members of the Council of twenty five repair to the Town Hall, there to give the necessary orders. The Lieutenant with his Staff of Justice, two Auditors, and the Syn∣dick of the Guards with his Staff, and another Syndick all accompani∣ed with a considerable number of Of∣ficers go to the place where the fire is, and there give all orders necessary, e∣very one being obliged exactly to o∣bey them and to pull down what Con∣tiguous Houses they shall think most convenient for quenching the fire; the two Auditors take into their Custo∣dy all the goods they can, which they transport to prevent theft and robbery; and in a late fire a Burgess was hang∣ed for stealing some small trifle whilst the people were in confusion. The Guards of the Gates are doub∣led with a Company of Souldiers more than ordinary, and in the day time
when the Gates are open, so soon as they crie fire fire, they are shut and not opened again until the fire be quite out, the two Majors on Horse back continually surrounding the City and visiting the posts, and in a word no care and diligence is omitted. Tryals of prisoners dispatched.The Tryals of Prisoners are no where dispatched with greater expe∣dition then in Geneva, where they are not suffred, as in other places, to lan∣guish in a prison. The Gaoler is one of the Council of the two hundred,Gaoler. who discharges that office only for a year, but seeing it is a place of no great profit, there are not many that seek after it. Prisoners are commonly brought to Tryal at the suit of the Lieutenant and Procurator General before one of the Council of twenty five,Trials. who meet alwaies in a Room of the Prison appointed for that purpose, where they examin the Prisoner, who every time that the Council go to examin him, is obliged to pay them eighty Florins, which is about three Crowns, but such as are condemned to death, and have not wherewithal, are exempted from
payment, no man being bound to do a thing impossible. Malefactors are not tortured here so much, as in other places, and they never give the rack of∣tener then twice. The Tryal ended,Sentence. the Members of the Council of twenty five having first prayed to God on their knees, give Sentence, from which the Citizens and Burgesses, as soon as it is intimated to them, appeale to the Council of the two hundred. Execution of the Sen∣tence.After that Sentence of death has past, it is next day an hour before Sun∣rising intimated to the prisoner by two Ministers, and from that time till ten of the Clock before noon, he is constantly attended by two of them, who are relieved every hour, and who make it their business to prepare him for Death, the Prisoner, all that while being in the same Roome where the Council of twenty five sits, when they examine any Malefactor, and where he receives the intimation of his Sen∣tence, and continues till he be carried to the place of Execution. Time of Execution.At ten of the Clock then in the fore¦noon the Council of twenty five as¦sembles
before the Gate of the Town Hall where stands a seat of Justice, on which sit the four Syndicks with their staves of Justice in hand, the Counsellors sitting on each side of the bench, but lower than the Syndicks, the Prisoner assisted still by two Mi∣nisters, is brought before them by an Auditor (representing the Lieuten∣ant) and the City Marshal with his Officers, where kneeling alone before the bench, a Clerk with an Audible Voice reads to him all the Crimes he is guilty of, which being confessed by himself, the Sentence then read, the City Marshal holding all this while an open Bible in his hand before the Court, because before the Clarke be∣gins to read the Sentence he pro∣nounces these words aloud, haveing before our eyes, God and his holy Scripture. The Sentence being read, the Prisoner is instantly delivered over into the hands of the Officers of the Lieutenant, to whom the execution of Justice belongs, but the Sentence must be immediatly executed, and therefore the Executioner appears, who taking the Prisoner by the hand,
leads him into a low room, where hav∣ing put the Halter about his neck and bound him, an Auditor and the City Marshal on Horseback, with the Of∣ficers and Executioner on foot, bring him to the place of Execution, and stirr not from thence till the Malefactor be dead. Place of Execution.Ordinarily persons are put to death in the plain Palace without the City, and in the place of Molard. Geneva has at several times contract∣ed alliances,Alliances. both in the times of the Bishops and since, and that with se∣veral Princes, and Republicks, parti∣culary with the Common-wealth of Venice, with which until this day they entertain a very good corespondence, in so much that they willingly suffer their Captaines to levy men amongst them. In the year 1518.1518.1526. The Genevians made a League with the Canton of Fribourg, which in the year, 1526. Was confirmed with closer obligations of Friendship and enlarged with new Articles; The Canton of Berne with that of Fribourg, being therein com∣prehended, and all three together ob∣liged
in a perpetual, and individual League with one another. The reformed Religion being af∣terwards in the year, 1535.1535. Establish∣ed in Geneva, the States of Fribourg moved by their Church men, sent Ambassadors to Geneva, declaring that if they would not returne into the bo∣some of the Catholick Church they would be obliged to break the League, to these propositions the Genevians would not condescend, but protested they would faithfully observe the al∣liance. The year following which was 1536.1536. The States of Berne understand∣ing that the Fribourgers had made a League with the Genevians, sent Ambas∣sadors to Geneva, where a League for twenty five years was concluded be∣twixt Geneva and Berne, this Legue ex∣piring in the year, 1558. On the first of January of the same year a perpe∣tual League was concluded betwixt these two States. May the 8th. 1559 Henry the third,1559. King of France and Poland made Al∣liance with Berne, Solerne, and Geneva, in which treaty Geneva was by that
King called the key of Switzerland, and he alwaies esteemed it so, having re∣commended to the Switzers the pre∣servation of that City. Lastly, on the eighteenth of October, 1584.1584. Zurich made a mutual League with Geneva, in memory whereof the Senate crected a Marble Monument with this inscription, which is to be seen in the Hall of the Town house, on the side as you go to the Arsenal. Anno à vera religione divinitus cum vetere libertate Geneva restituta,Inscription quasi novo Jubileo inennte, plurimis vitatis domi & foris insidijs & supratis tem∣pestatibus, quod Helvetiorum primari Tigurini Bernarum exemplo aequo jure & in societatem perpetuam nobiscum venerint, & prius novo vinculo adstrinxerint, S. P. Q. G. quod faelix esse velit. D. O. M. tanti benesicii Monumentum consecra∣runt. Besides the above mentioned al∣liances, Geneva holds friendship and cor∣respondence upon account of the Pro∣restant Religion, with the English. Hollanders, and Protestant Princes of Germany all which in time of need would do them sene good Offices,
but the truth is the Jealousie that reignes amongst neighbouring Princes, has a greater influence upon the preser∣vation of the Liberty of Geneva than any other consideration whatsoever. Protest∣ants of France.This City is looked upon as the only City of refuge, for the Protestants of France, seeing upon occasion of any persecution, they can retreat into this place, and that makes them on their part so solicitous for its safety and preservation, that on all occasions they would be ready to shew the ef∣fects of their good inclinations towards it, as they have already done during the War with the Duke of Savoy, and it is certain that no sooner would any new War begin in Geneva, but that the Protestants of the best quality in France would come to its assistance, knowing very well, that if they be de∣prived of that Sanctuary, they must remaine exposed to the will of their enemies. As to the forces of Geneva, with∣out doubt they are but inconsiderable,Forces Arsenal. they have in the first place an Arsenal provided of all sorts of Armes for arm∣ing of six thousand men at least; be∣sides
a great many old Armes and Colors taken from their enemies in the time of the War. There is no great store of Cannon in the Arsenal, because this City being a Frontier place, has the Walls both day and night well furnished with great Gunns, and certainly there is no fron∣tiere place better provided with Can∣non. Private Arms.The private Houses are sufficiently, furnished with Armes, and there is no Citizen but hath Armes for two or three men, there are several that can Arme twenty five or thirty, and some are so well provided that they can conveni∣ently Arme three hundred Soldiers, so that every private House may be called an Arsenal, hence according to computation it is commonly reckoned that in Geneva there are Armes for for∣ty thousand men. The City is alwaies well furnished with Provisions and Ammunition of all sorts conveniently distributed into Magazines and Store houses in the se∣veral quarters of the Town,Provisi∣. so that if an accident should happen in the place, the City could sustaine no great
prejudice thereby, the other stores be∣ing sufficiently provided to supply the loss; they keep constantly Ammunition, as Powder, Bullets, Match and the like enough for a two years Siege, and a sufficient quantity of Corne for three years, having Mills within the Town alwaies in readiness to grind it. Military exercises.The Genevians are generally well trained in the exercises and discipline of Warr; and though they can brag of no famous Commanders (their wars having been more defensive than offensive) yet they have Soldiers of long experience in the wars, and take care to exercise their youth to Warlik exercises by conferring honor and reward on those especially who at some set times in the year obtaine the advantage of shooting. Kings of the several kinds of Arms.They preforme those exercises chief∣ly in the Spring, the fittest time for recreation, and to raise in their youth a generous emulation for Honor, they make him who hath shot best in the Cannon, Musket, Bow, Cross-bow, or Pistol, King of that kind of Armes wherein he hath excelled, giving him a mark of Honor and some priviledges
in reward of his dexterity: But the King of the Harquebuses is in greatest esteem amongst them, and besides the Priviledges which are allowed him, he is after his Election attended home by the Chief of the City with show and triumph. The publick reaps no small benefit from those delightful exercis∣es, for the Citizens are thereby train∣ed in the discipline of War, and by the Honor and priviledges conferred upon the Kings, encouraged to noble undertakings. But though brave men, and good Arms be the ordinary means of the de∣fence and preservation of the City,On what Geneva. builds its considence. yet the Geneveans trust not altogether to their own strength; they are sen∣sible enough of their weakness and inability to withstand the designes of their powerful enemies, who are very industrious in contriving their ruine. Their chief trust therefore is in God, under whose protection they are to sa∣crifice their lives and fortunes in main∣taining of their dearly beloved darling Liberty, as by experience they have already made appear. They can must∣er of their own some thousands of well
trained Soldiers, but in case of War, or Siege, the four Protestant, Cantons of Switzerland are obliged by mutual Articles to send them a supply of four thousand men, and it being the com∣mon maxim of States-men and skil∣ful Souldiers that the preservation of Geneva depends on the Friendship of Switzerland, and the Liberty of Swit∣zerland on the safety of Geneva, the Ca∣tholick Cantons themselves for rea∣sons of State, and that they may not by losing that barrier expose their Li∣berty to the descretion of a Conquer∣our, will in case of need, contribute both men and mony for the assistance of that place. In the year, 1602. Experience confirmed this; for in the space of few hours great supplies of men hastened in time of danger to Geneva: And the Scalado hapned about midnight in the bitterest time of Winter, yet next Evening about two thousand men un∣der several Commanders, came from the Neighbouring parts of Switzerland to the relief of the City, and about four thousand more were upon the march thither, but the danger being over,
they were with thanks dismissed. The History of this enterprize deserves some mention. On Saturday night the twelfth of December,An ac∣count of the Scala∣do. 1602. About midnight, the Forces of Charles Emannel Duke of Savoy attacqued Geneva by Scalado in this manner. The Signior D' Albigni the Dakes Licutenant (the Duke in person being come post to Champey a Village near to Geneva) with twelve hundred men, ad∣vanced towards the wall of the City without any noise of Drum or Trum∣pet, and an hour before midnight be∣gan the Scalado, making use of three Ladders most artificially made, as may be seen at present in the Arsenal, one Father Alexander a Jesuite standing at the foot of the midle-most and encour∣aging all the Soldiers with assurance of indulgence and pardon in name of the Pope, though the enterprize was at∣tempted without the Popes knowledge. Two hundred and fifty were already got into the City before any perceiv∣ed it; But God Almighty infatuated their Council, seeing they might as easi∣ly have brought in above a thousand;
and cut all the Citizens to peices; but by their own oversight, or unskilful∣ness they were discovered three hours before day by a Sentinel from the Tow∣er of the Mint House, the City taking thereupon the Allarm, the bravest and most active Citizens two hours be∣fore day put themselves in Armes, and after some hot skirmishes and brisk fighting, about break of day obtained the Victory and beate out the enemy who had the ill luck that their Petarde, (notwithstanding all their diligence) did no execution, seventeen of the Valientest Citizens were killed, and ten wounded in the action, the ene∣mies had fifty four killed, and thirteen taken Prisoners, some of which were wounded by leaping over the walls, the City Canon having broken their Ladders; early next Morning the Coun∣cil sate to consult what must be done with the thirteen Prisoners, and be∣cause the people cried for Justice, they were all condemned to be hanged, though they were not persons of the least quality in Savoy, amongst whom were the Barons of Sonaz, Attignac and Chaffardon. The Baron of Attig∣nac
having a broken Legg was carried to the Gallows in a chair, all of them pretended to be used as Prisoners of War, but the City told them they were traitors, peace breakers, and assassins, and used them accordingly, haveing on Sunday the thirteenth of December about noon caused them all to be hanged; The bodies of those that were hanged, as well as of those that were killed in the action, were pub∣lickly exposed until Tuesday the fif∣teenth of the same month, and then their Heads to the number of sixty seven cut off, and placed upon Poles, and their bodies cast into the Rone, according to the Sentence pronounced by the Council of sixty, who because they themselves had confessed that their orders were to kill men women and Children without distinction, and to cast their bodies into the same Ri∣ver, thought it just to do unto them, what they intended to have done to o∣thers. After this, the Peace being broken the Geneveans made several incursions into Savoy, but in the Month of July following, by the Mediation of the
seaven neutral Cantons of Switzerland, and the Authority of the most Christi∣an King, which (next to Providence) had the chief influence on the negoti∣ation, peace was concluded betwixt the Duke of Savoy and the States of Geneva, notwithstanding which peace, the Duke afterwards left no means unassayed to surprize the City, but all his industry and attempts have been successless. Combour∣cier be∣headed. Wednesday April the 19th. 1609. Signior della Cambourcier Lord of Ter∣rail was beheaded in the place of Mo∣lard opposite to the Harbour, because he had promised the Duke of Savoy (as he himself confessed) to assault Geneva on the side of the Harbour, for which purpose he came to the City to view and mark out the place. Peter De la Batide.Peter della Batide an ingeneer and complice with Combourcier was on the 21st. of April hanged in the same place. As to wealth,Riches Geneva is none of the Richest, though it be Richer at present than it was before the Reformation. It is true some private persons use their utmost endeavours to raise themselves
by trading in Germany, Italy, Hol∣land, Switzerland, and other Neighbour∣ing places, but the number of Mer∣chants is inconsiderable in respect of the artificers and tradesmen. The Trade of Bookselling is in great esteem here,Booksellers. and there are some Book∣sellers, who have great stores and va∣riety of books, especially of such as are prohibited of all sorts, and in all Lan∣guages, by reason of the convenience of the Situation of the place, Geneva being as it were the centre to Germa∣ny, France and Italy. There are about seven or eight in Geneva who trade for above a hundred thousand Crowns a year, some of which are worth so much, but trade not so openly as others do, and above a hundred Families who live handsom∣ly and commondiously by commerce, but most part of the Towns people are employed in handicraft Trades. Geneva hath its Laws and instituti∣ons, by the Geneveans called Edicts,Laws. taken for most part from the Civil law, and the particular customes of the Country, that have been in practice for two, or three hundred years, but
in such cases as are not determined by edicts, they have alwaies recourse to the Civil Law; these edicts since they were first collected into a body and published, have been reduced into a better forme and contain two parts, the one concerning the Elections of Magistrates, and their duty, and the other relating to the decision of Ci∣vil causes. Publick Revenue.The publick Revenue of the State amounts to about one hundred thou∣sand Crowns, but the Subjects are not at all burthened, paying only for maintaining of the Guards, and some small duty for Grinding of their Corn, Importation of Wine, and at present a little voluntary Contribution for the fortifications, so that a man for himself and Family of six persons may pay in all ten Crowns a year; such as have real estates pay the accustomed tithes, and Merchants the usual du∣ties. The publick and ordinary expence is considerable,Expences. forty thousand Crowns a year not being sufficient to pay the Sallaries of the Counsellers, Ministers, Professors, Regents, Soldiers, and de∣fray
the charges of the publick Fab∣ricks, Arsenal, Warlike provisions and the like; besides many other casu∣al and extraordinary charges that happen daily. The Territory of Geneva is as health∣full,Territory. and as fruitful, as it is little and narrow: And therefore most part of the Geneveans settle their estates in Sa∣voy and France, and pay the same pub∣lick duties as the native subjects of those two Princes do: none of the Neighbour∣ing Princes come near the Territory of Geneva for plenty, the Geneveans useing all dilligence to supply what it wants in extent, by pains and culti∣vation; so that it produces Corn, Wine, Turnips, Barly, Hay, and all sorts of Graine, the Fruits it com∣monly yields, are Nuts, Apples, Pears Cherries, Almonds, Chesnuts, Apri∣coks, but very few Figs. The Air.The air is good and healthful, be∣ing purified by the North-wind that frequently blows there, the winter is not so sharp as in Germany, and o∣ther Northen Countries, nor the Sum∣mer so hot, as in Italy and some pla∣ces of Dauphiny, the weather indeed is
sometimes excessively hot in the Sum∣mer and as cold in the Winter, but that continues but for a few dayes. In times past the Inhabitants of Geneva have been reckoned dul,The na∣ture and temper of the people. not to say, of a silly and blockish Spirit, but at present by their commerce, with For∣rainers, they are pollished and refined, and not only skilful in their workes, but are become speculative and subtile, managing their affiairs so cunning∣ly that it is not easie to over-reach them. Their jea∣lousie over strangers.They are very observant and jeal∣ous of strangers, especially the inferi∣or people; nevertheless they are respect∣ed and made wellcome, especially such as come to traffick or Sojourne and live in pension among them; in a word they who have mony and afford them occasion of profit, are there as in other places, well esteemed of. Geneveans good Poli∣ticians.They are very expert in affairs of State, and know well what measures to take with their Neighbours, as they have on many occasions made appear, and certainly if they were not so, they had very often been embroyled with the Duke of Savoy, which they have
hitherto prudently avoided▪ Rigour against delin∣quents.They were accustomed for a long time to receive and protect all that came and embraced the Reformed Re∣ligion, but at present the City being well peopled, they are not so ready to admit of such. Those who have committed any crime, in any other place had not best flie to Geneva, for that City is a cage for such as retreat thither, to avoid punishment, and many who have ex∣pected safety, have been so far disap∣pointed, that though they had commit∣ted crimes in remote places, yet at the suite of the plantiffs they have been made prisoners, where they promised themselves all kind of liberty, and af∣terwards brought to Trial and hang∣ed. Geneva hath no Soveraign upon earth,Soverain∣ry. and depends upon none but God Al∣mighty, the Senate having the same authority in their state, that the great∣est Monarch in the world has in his own dominions and are as careful to preserve it. Strangers who pass through or So∣journe at pensions in Geneva, are kind∣ly
received by the Inhabitants, and to gratifie them the Senate does affecti∣onately protect them, causing them to be treated with all imaginable civility, insomuch that offences that in other places would be severely punished, are passed over, and connived at in Geneva, for the honour and respects sake, which is shewed there to Gentlemen Travel∣ers. It is a common but false report in Italy, that Monks, Friers,Religions. Priests of the Church of Rome, are badly used when they pass through Geneva, for they themselves find the contrary in their Travels, and if any man should offer insolence to a Priest, or Frier in that City, he would certainly be pun∣ished, nor do the people refuse Charity and lodging to the poor Religious when they demand it. The rate of pensions for diet,Pensions. is com∣monly twelve Crowns a month for the Master, and six for the Servant, but there are inferiour pensions also, to wit, from seaven to eight Crowns a man, and the entertainment according to the price, nevertheless for Gentlemen who expect to be well treated, the
lowest is ten and the highest twelve Crowns a month all the City over: Fishing in the Lake of this City is very considerable both for profit and pleasure,Fishing. they commonly take trouts of four score pound weight at twelve oun∣ces the pound, and in the midle of the River opposite to the Town pre∣serve their fish alive for use, in two lit∣tle deal board houses made for that purpose. In the Summer time it is a very plea∣sant recreation to go a Fishing here, and both strangers, and Citizens mighti∣ly delight in it. All sorts of exercises are taught in this City,Exercises. as well as in any other place; there is a good Master for riding the great Horse, and for the first month four Pistols, and three for every month after, he has a Stable very well furnish∣ed with Horses; For Fencing, Dance∣ing, Mathematicks, Geography and the Languages, there is choice of Ma∣sters also, so that Travellers may So∣journe in this City with as much ease to the purse, and advantage for E∣ducation as in most parts of Europe. Inns.There are many Inns and publick
Houses here, in all of which as a Tra∣veller is of quality, and intends to or∣der his expences, he will find enter∣tainment answerable to the rate he payes. The Arms of Geneva.The Armes of Geneva are a half Eagle and Key, the Eagle signifying that the City is Imperial, and the Key, that it hath been an Episcopal See; but the Antient Arms of that City was a Sun, which they still use on a Seal, and has been retained since the time that Geneva (as has been al∣ready observed) worshipped Apollo. The Posts.The French Post comes hither twice a weak, to wit on Monday at ten of the Clock in the morning, and parts on Tuesday at noon, and on Friday in the Morning which parts again in the Evening, the price of a single Let∣ter from Lions to Geneva paying three Solzs. Twice a week the Messenger or Car∣rier arrives also, his business is to con∣vey to and fro between Lions and Ge∣neva all sorts of goods, and to con∣duct Strangers that are pleased to Tra∣vel with him, a single person pays him for passage, and entertainment upon
the rode about a Pistol, and for every pound of goods at sixteen ounces the pound tow Solzs. The German Post comes in on Mon∣day towards Evening, and goes out on Tuesday at the same time. The Let∣ters pay more, or less according to the distance of the place from whence they come. The Post of Turin which brings all the Letters of Italy, comes in on Wednesday and sets out on Thursday, but all Letters that are sent by that Post, must be paid for to Cambray. Hackney Horses and Coaches.There is no want of Hackney Hors∣es nor of Messengers, or Vittorins (as they are called) in Geneva, the usual hire of a Horse is twenty Solz a day, such as Travel with the Vittorin pay for all charges, at most half a Pistol a day a peace, and if the Company be greater the rates will be less; you may likewise have Hackney Litters at the rate of a Pistol a day less or more, ac∣cording to the season of the year, or circumstances of the Master. Here are to be had no Hackny Coaches, and there are not above seven or eight per∣sons who keep Coaches in this Town.
Three Faires a year are kept here,Faires. to wit on the twenty ninth of June, the first of August, and the twenty se∣cond of February; but they are but ordinary Faires, the Trade running chiefly in beasts, especially Horses and Cattel; there is a Magistrate appoint∣ed over the first to decide the contro∣versies that may happen; each Fair lasts three dayes, and on the second all the Inhabitants are obliged to wear Swords, the Guards of the City and Gates being for Greater security rein∣forced that day. They have two weekly Markets al∣so, on Wednesday and Saturday Morn∣ings, which are frequented by vast numbers of Savoyards and French from the County of Gez, who supply the City with all manner of provisions, and buy from thence what they need in the Countrey. This is all that can be said concern∣ing the State and Government of Ge∣neva, but before we bring this little Treatise to a conclusion, It will not be amiss to take some notice of the French Kings late resolution of setling a Re∣sident in that City: Whereby, as he
had a probable opportunity of intro∣ducing the Mass into that place, so had he a particular design, by making ap∣pear that the protection of that Repub∣lick belonged to him, to put a stop to the pretention of the Switzers, who, (especially those of the Canton of Bearn) endeavoured in effect under pretence of Friendship and alliance to skrew themselves into a kind of Au∣thority there; insomuch that upon the least occasion they wrote Letters to the Magistrates of Geneva in so imper∣ious a style, that they seemed rather to command than entreat. But the French (who of late are seldome asleep when their interest lies at stake, and who pretend to sway or give laws to all Europe) having the matter in the wind, thought it convenient to send a Resident to Geneva, to the end that by exercising there some litte Jurisdicti∣on by which the Law of Nations is al∣lowed to publick Ministers, they might baulk the Switzers in their pretensi∣ons, and confirm their King sole Protector of that City and Repub∣lick. About the end therefore of the year
1679, Mounsieur Chanvigny was sent Resident to Geneva, a man of a low Stature, but hotter temper than well suited with his Age of threescore years. This man having a Son in orders, and in expectation of Preferment, that he might curry favour with the Church∣men, and especially the Court of Rome, began to exercise his charge with ex∣treme violence, insomuch that not satisfied with the allowance of a Chap∣pel in his own House for his private devotion, he wrote Letters all about, inviting the Catholicks in the Neigh∣bourhood at Geneva to come publickly to Mass at his House. Nor did he stop here, but sollicited all the Curats and Monks in those parts to come and say Mass in Geneva, and often employed several of the Jesuits of Horne to Preach, inviting all the Neighbouring Catholicks to the exer∣cise. This was so ill relished by the People, that some of the rabble cast of all respect due to a Person of his Character, so that two of them were committed to Prison, being ac∣cused for having fired some Pistol-shot within the Court of the said Resident.
The noise of this reaching as far as Paris, moved the most Christian King to take information of the matter of Fact, who, thereupon ordered the releasing of the Poisoners, and recalled Chanvigny to Paris, sending in his place Monsieur du Pré, a person of very great experi∣ence, as the offices which he hath dis∣charged hath sufficiently made appear: And the truth is, this Gentleman lives in very good correspondence, both with the Senate and people; and tho he have Mass said in his House, yet it is with such moderation, as in appear∣ance removes all nsie from the minds of the People, who now begin to be acquainted with the freakishness and in constancy of Fortune. FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for William Cademan Bookseller at the Popes-head in the New-Ex∣change in the Strand. Folio. AN Institution of General History, or the History of the World, by William Howel, L. L. D. in two Vol: Historical Collections, or an exact ac∣count of the proceeding of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory. Pharamond Compleat. English. Clelia a Romance. English. Parthenissa Compleat. English. An Historical Heroick Poem on the Right Honourable Thomas Earl of Ossory, Written by Elkanah Settle. Quarto. An Historical relation of the first dis∣covery of the Isle of Madera. The Protestant Religion is a sure foun∣dation, &c. by the Right Honour∣able Charles Earl of Derby.
The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monar∣chy, by a Person of Honour. A warning Peace for the unready in two Visitation Sermons at Preston, by Seth Bushel, D. D. The great Efficacy and necessity of good Examples, especially in the Clergy; in a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D. A Sermon Preached before the King, by Miles Barne, Chaplain in Ordi∣nary to his Majesty. A Sermon Preached at the Assises at Lancaster, by Henery Pigot, B. D. Gods Revenge against Murther, de∣monstrated in the Persecution of Henry Symbal and William Jones, Executed for the Murthering Sir Richard Sandford. Plays in Quarto. The Rivalls, a Comedy. Catalines Conspiracy. Island Princess. Flora's Vagaries. Town Shifts. Citizen turned Gentleman. Morning Ramble. Macbeth.
Cambyses Empress of Morocco. Conquest of China. Herod and Mariamne Notes on Morocco. Ibrahim. Love and Revenge. Pastor Fido. Pope Joan. Fatal Love or forc't inconstancy. Careless Lovers. English Princess. Reformation. Spanish Rogue. Marcelia. The Mall. Rehearsal. Mock Tempest, Dumb Lady. Gentleman Dancing Master. Alcibiades. Dutch Lovers. Pysoes Conspiracy. Siege of Memphis. Rival Kings. Constant Nimph. Wrangling Lover. Tom Essence. French Conjurer.
Wits Led by the Nose. Counterfeit Bridgroom Tunbridge Wells. Conspiracy or Change of Government. Revenge or a Match in Newgate. Octavo and Twelves. The Spanish History, or the differences that hapned in the Court of Spain between Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard, with all the Let∣ters and the Politick Discourses re∣lating to those Affairs. Reflections upon Ancient and modern Philosophy. The English Princess or the Duchess Queen. A pleasant Novel. Court-songs and Poems, being an exact Collection. The Temple of Death, with other Poems, by a person of honour. Hogan Moganides, or the Dutch Hudi∣bras. Liquor Alcahest, or the Immotal Dissol∣vert of Paracelsus and Helmont. Philosophical Essay, or the history of Putrifaction by Dr. Sherly. FINIS.
