L1364 13111174 97646
A LETTER FOUND IN UTOPIA. And from thence recommended by a very good hand to the perusal of the Publisher. Wherein (among other things) a candid Testimony to Mr. Sterryes learned and accurate Discourse of the Freedom of the Will, late∣ly Printed: As also some reflections upon Contending or Disputing (as of late) about matters of RELIGION. With a POSTSCRIPT to the READER. Published to undeceive and quiet the minds of the People. By one that pities th' Inscription upon th' Athenian Altar. 1. Cor. 1. 20. Where is the Disputer of this World? Job 15. 31. Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall be his recompence. Isa. 44 20. —He feedeth on ashes: A deceived heart hath turned him aside that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a Lye in my right hand. All things Superable below him that is Insuperable: and All things Finite below him that is Infinite. Bonitas invicti non vincitur, & infinita misericordia non finitur. Fulgent. ad Mon. Diffudisti per omnem mundum religiosi nominis membra religionis vim non haben∣tia. Salvian. ad Eccles. Cathol. Ecchoing to 2 Tim. 3. 5. Qui Coelum dependenter habet in Revolutionibus suis, vari  sibi influentis impartialite exhibere tanquam Principi in terris, aut Potentatui amplissim: Is Terram similite queat expectare in Laboribus suis, fructum ipsius praematurum sibi producere; idqu tempore tempestivo; absque omni solicitudine, vel timore, sive Hominis, aut Bestiae . G. Americanus Protomartyr. Printed in the Year▪ 1675.
The Publishers PREFACE OR APOLOGY. THe following Letter might have waited sooner upon the World, had the liveliness of the Exod. 1. 19. Hebrew women been upon it, and no∣thing to hinder the celerity of its Pro∣duction; but it frequently so falls out among men, that useful things have but slow beginnings, and a Progress proportionable in their going on to ma∣turity: Jonah's Jon. 4. 6. gourd (under which he was willing to shade himself as long
as he could) came up in a night, and perished in a night; and it may well serve as an Embleme for things of a lower value, or such as the darkness of the night produces, and that cannot endure the light of the day: much Lucifugae. might be said about matters of that na∣ture, that come forth suddenly, and vanish accordingly, the ordinary fate of such Col. 2. 8, 20, 22. wordly Rudiments, as perish in the using, and that are seldom long li∣ved. But when the Prophet comes to speak of Sions peculiar and supernatu∣ral Birth-right, he says, Isa. 66. 7, 8. That before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child: well may this be attend∣ed with the succeeding Queries: Who hath heard such a thing? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? Shall a Nation be born at once? Sure∣ly
this can never or no where else be, but where Time and Eternity are coupled together in marriage: Rev. 22. 13. the beginning and the end, the first and the last, the highest and the lowest, the Esa. 46. 9, 10. most antient and honourable, with things not yet done, or of 1 Cor. 1. 28. no account in the worlds estimation; when Isa. 60. 22. a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, and Mic. 5. 7. comp. with Job. 38. 28. the remnant of Jacob in the midst of many people: as a Dew from the Lord, that waiteth not for man, nor tarrieth for the sons of men; and all this most amply, aswel as most compendiously, in Him, who makes the Heavens and the Earth to be but one Globe, or God and Man, to be but one intire Being, or most com∣plete Subsistence, in CHRIST OƲR  LORD for ever. If such a thing as this be creeping or stealing upon the World like Rev. 16. 15. a thief
in the night, to Luk. 1. 35. umbrage all the dark shades of the Creature, and to Eph. 1. 10. gather up, all that is but seemingly such, in∣to the full Heb. 1. 3. Brightness of the Fathers Glory, in Him, that Really is so. And if a savoury Specimen or Tryal hereof be candidly imparted to us, in and by the ensuing Epistle, let no man run a∣mong the Plot-mongers of the World for some execrable Stratagem or Hell∣bred Device, whereby to elude the Discovery: For the Thing (in it self) is Spiritual and Heavenly, and of a Di∣vine Nature. (falling sweetly upon us, like the Deut. 32. 2. Dew upon the grass, or small rain upon the tender herbs) and such must they be, that can give it any more than a civil Entertainment: and yet surely such there are, that can open their doors to such Jb 31. 32. Strangers as these, and be mighty glad of their Compa∣ny; Heb. 13. 2. neither can there be in it matter
of Disparagement, or Discouragement, or Prejudice, or Disadvantage in the least to any, but such as either 1 Cor. 2. 14. do not, or cannot, or Exod. 5. 2. Jer. 44. 16. 1 Joh 5. 20. will not understand it; since of this kind of Isa. 50. 4. John 6. 45. 1 Thes. 4 9. . Learning (above all the rest) it is most truly and proper∣ly said, that—non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem, i. e. it hath no e∣nemy besides the ignorant man, and one whose ignorance is the mother of his Devotion.
The Letter. Worthy Sir: I Received your Love in the Lines and A Dis∣course of the Freedom of the Will, by Mr. P. S Book you sent me (for so I do with much thankful∣ness acknowledge and interpret your accosting me with so free and large and noble a Present) the posthumous Work of a Person that was indeed of an Prov. 17. 27. excellent Spirit, whereby Heb. 11. He being dead yet speaketh; as a Man of rich and rare Endow∣ment; a Star of the first Magnitude, among those that were able to see him, and understand his worth: I have not yet had time to read the Book through∣out, but from what I have sedulously, and with great delight perused, I should not stick to assert (if that might signifie any thing) that the same Divine Glory appears in the Work, that was for∣merly wont to Eccles. 8. shine upon the face of the Work∣man in all the true Lineaments of the most perfect
and well-accomplished Beauty: It needs not to be denied but that the same Vail that was upon his Speakings may still abide upon his Writings, like that upon the (d) face of Moses, which the Apostle 2 Cor. 3. 3, 14. tells us, is to this day remaining untaken away, and that it cannot be removed till Christ himself removes it; which vail, he says is done away in Christ. The Prophet Isaiah likewise speaks of (e) a vail that is Isa. 25. 6, 7. en. 22. 14. spread over all Nations, and a covering cast over all people, which is not to be destroyed or swallow∣ed K. 19. 8. a 63. 15. sal. 26. 8. up, but in the Mount of God, the Mountain of his Holiness, or place where his Honour dwells; where he makes us a Feast of fat things, of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, &c. And the truth is, let men dream and divine, or conjecture what they please to the contrary, yet this is very certain, That all manner of vails and coverings whatsoever, can never be destroyed swallowed up, or quite taken a∣way, till (f) the Sun of Righteousness arise with heal∣ing Mal. 4. 2. in his wings, and freedom of good will upon us. But (dear & loving Sir) there is a passage in yours that I do not so well apprehend the meaning of, and you will not, I hope, be offended at my paraphra∣sing upon it (as briefly as I may) in order to a right understanding: Whereas you say in your Letter,
That the present time is very dark: I suppose you meant it to be so, only to those that are in the dark, 2 Cor. 4. 9. whose minds the god of this world hath blinded; otherwise to those that Eph. 5. 8. were sometimes darkness, but are now made light in the Lord, the present time is as lightsom to them, as any that ever was, or shall be; for if we rightly profess and confess him, Revel. 1. 4. that is, and was, & is to come, and yet Heb. 13. 8. yesterday, and to day, and the same for evermore; then we cannot but un∣derstand and see plainly, that neither Mini∣strations past, nor any that are to come, can make any the least change or alteration upon that complete subsistence, or being that we have in Him, Eph. 1. 22, 23. who is Head over all things unto the Church, which is his Body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all; if we can witness, and bear forth this testimony to the world, That 2 Cor. 4. 6 the same God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness (in that great early day, or morning of the world) hath shined into our hearts the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and if by ver∣tue of this Light we can clearly discern, and do know, that our GREAT Job 19. 25. REDEEMER li∣veth, who by Heb. 10. 14. one Offering hath perfected for ever, as many as come by faith unto him. So
that now we can sing triumphantly with Exod. 15. 1, 20. Job. 38 7. Mo∣ses and Miriam, and all those bright morning Stars, and blessed ones of God, unto the praise and glory of that one great and good work of his (wherein we are Eph. 2. 10. created in Christ Jesus) as having neither superfluity nor defect in it; and Tim 3. 17. that the man of God is thus made perfect, and so throughly furnished unto all good works (in that one) that he must needs stand Col. 4. 12. complete for ever in all the whole mind, and counsel, and will of our Heavenly Father: If these things be known to us, and believed on by us, how then comes it to pass, that we are so mightily trou∣bled, molested, or disquieted about all that darkness, and weakness, and want, and imper∣fection that we find to be in our selves, and that the thoughts hereof do frequently make us so exceeding wretched and miserable? since all these things (or Privations rather) are famili∣arly known among Believers, to be so disposed and ordered by the wisdom of the Almighty, as to become the sole Inlets, or Entrance into all that Light, and Strength, and Beauty, and Glo∣ry, and fulness of Sufficiencie, that is only to be found in God alone (in that way of Col. 1. 19. Christ eter∣nally) and no where else besides.
And in that Day (that great day of the Lord) wherein these things are thus made manifest, fi∣nished, or done for us, and in us, Zach. 12. 8. He that is feeblest in Jerusalem shall be as David [Psal. 2. 6. a King, 78. 72. a Leader, 1 Sam. 18. 7. a valiant man, 2 Sam. 23. 1. a sweet sin∣ger in Israel] and the house of David as God, or as the Mighties (for so the word is plural) and as the Angel of the Lord before [Them] and since every one of these, is now as the Angel, or Mes∣senger of the Lord before the rest of the Congre∣gation, or as the Angel of the Lord before [Him] so it may also be read, that is, a Messen∣ger, or Embassador, like his Servant Luke 3. 2, 4 5. Mal. 3. 1. Mat. 11. 10. John, to prepare, or made ready his way before him: it being the Angel, or Messenger of the Lord (and he only) that rightly knows & understands how to bring down every high Mountain, and how to lift up every low valley, and to make this an high-way for the Royalty of our King to pass upon in the wilderness: And this is that real Glory now, that the world can neither give, re∣ceive, or take away. And yet Psal. 149. 9. this Honour have all his Saints. Praise we the Lord. Having thus settled the main, and that which (in the love and distinct knowledge of it) is of infinite consequence and concernment to the Souls of men: In the next place, Sir, yours
mentions the name of one, that I have not heard of a long time before, that is Mr. W. L. Who con∣gratulates, you say, my return from Diogenes his Tub, &c. There are so many years elapsed since I had any report, either from, or concerning him till now, that I began to think, and was ready to conclude, that either some disease, or some sad casualty or other incident to mankind, might have carri∣ed him quite away from us, and lodged him in the Grave; but now I perceive by yours, he is alive still, and lately come forth upon me with A Tale of a Tub; and because (it seems) he was not willing to give himself any more trouble, he took (I suppose) what came next Diogenes his Tub re∣hearsed and transposed. hand, or what first fell upon his mind in order to the business, and so puts me into Diogenes his Tub, as the fittest Receptacle, or hiding place for me, in his own private judgment. Now, Sir, as to this, knowing him to be an Levit. 19. 32. old man 1 Sam 2. 32(that I speak of) and Job. 42. 17 full of days, and that the infirmities of Age cannot chuse but be either more or less upon him, possibly at some times, or in some cases, he may not have his Heb. 5. 14. senses so well exercised as they should be; however having been an intimate familiar friend, and one of an∣tient acquaintance with us, and a very honest well-disposed Gentleman, let us try (if you please) whether we may not help him a little at this dead, or dying lift.
To this purpose, I remember very well, that he who writes the life of that Diogenes, that he speaks of, among other things, hath this me∣morable passage concerning him: He says, that on a certain time he came into the Market-place Aelian. Po∣ly-hist. vit. Diog. Laert. at Noon-day, with a candle and lantern in his hand, and when they asked him what he made there in that posture? He said, he did it, as seeking for a MAN; and when they an∣swered, that the number of such was great a∣bout him, being in the midst of a croud of peo∣ple: His Reply was, Homines video, sed virum desidero: there were men enough indeed, he said, but among them all, he saw not the man that he looked for. Now, Sir, if you be free (for I must not impose) the next time you write to Mr. L. desire him to send us word what the man's name was that Diogenes sought for; and if he finds himself to be at a loss about it (as I doubt he will) let him but enter into the despicable Tub, I mean, the secret silence of Hermes, and there he may peradventure see either him, or that which he never saw before, and be so far satisfied with the Vision, as never to look any farther. But though this may perhaps surprise, or come unexpectedly upon Mr. L. yet there is
another Friend that looks, and longs for some∣thing, and to him I am hastening as fast as I can. His name Mr. R. B. (who sent me a Letter, and a small Book, together with yours) heavily complaining, not so much to my self, as to some other of our Friends in London, how negligent and careless I have been in not wri∣ting to him according to his expectation. But pray, Sir, the next time you see him, and have an opportunity, be pleased to let him know, that his speaking and writing may possibly be as of∣fensive, and liable to exception, as my silence, and not writing: And i that I deal plainly, and freely with him, I do not yet see what Ground or Reason he can have to shew for in∣teresting himself in those carnal Controversies, or Combats, or conflicts, or fightings after the manner of men, that are now so hotly pursued, High Dis∣sentions a∣mong Pro∣fessors scan∣dulous to Religion. to the shame and scandal of Religion, and all the Professors of it, as if they could live no where in the world without driving a mighty fierce violent trade of inconsistencie among themselves: What needs he to concern him∣self, or meddle in these matters? Having lit∣tle or nothing else to do that I know of. Can't he See Is. 30. 7. Am. 5. 13. Heb. 2. 20. sit still, and be quiet, waiting in See Is. 30. 7. Am. 5. 13. Heb. 2. 20. silence upon God, as would best of all become him?
Does he not know? Assuredly yes; he does, and cannot but know, That 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. the weapons of the Christian warfare are not carnal, but migh∣ty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, Reasonings, Disputations, () and every high thing that exalteth it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: And as for all o∣ther weapons managed by Job 21. 12. vain man, that would be wise, though born like the wild Asses colt, they are altogether useless and unprofita∣ble about the matters we mention, or things that we now speak of, and such as avail not in the least to 1 Cor. 1 32. the Resurrection of the dead; ra∣ther darken and cloud, and eclipse, and keep under that light and life of God, that might o∣therwise shine, and come forth abundantly, to the Mat. 5 16. glorifying of our Heavenly Father, and the mutual Eph. 4 16. edifying of one another in love. Thou O man of God, flee these things, says the Apostle: What things? 1 Tim. 6. 5. 11. comp. Perverse Dispu∣tings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth (as it is in Jesus) supposing that the gain (of a little empty breath, in popular ap∣plause or the like) is Godliness; from such with∣draw thy self, he says in his sacred and serious
advice to Timothy his dearly beloved Son, 1. Tim. 6. To the same effect others, though perhaps not so higlhy or divinely inspired: Sir H▪ Wotton was a very worthy Person, a man of Written or engraven on the plain Marble of Sir H. W. by his own appointment, Hic jacet hujus sen∣tentiae pri∣mus Auctor, Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesiarum Scabies. Nomen ali∣lias quaere. Lluyd. Mem. of the States∣men of En∣gland since the Refor∣mation, p. 806. excellent parts for Learning, and other useful abilities among men in his day and time, who never spake more like himself, or to better pur∣pose, than when he said, and took it for his Motto, That, Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesia∣rum Scabies: The Itch of Disputing is made, or becomes the Scab of the Churches. And when was it ever more lamentably upon them than now in this Conjuncture? What itching and scratching there hath been among the seve∣ral Parties both at home and abroad, I need not tell you, the Infamy of it is too notorious; yea, what resisting one another, even▪ unto Blood (quatenus Parties at least) not in their Heb. 12. 4. striving against sin which would have been very com∣mendable) but rather in their striving, and con∣tending to maintain and uphold sin, in all those fleshly 2 Tim. 3. 5. formalities that are sufficiently known to have nothing of the Life, and Power, or Spirit of God in them. And yet on they go for all this, and are upon their march Jehu-like, and furiously enough, and many sore Battles, and sad Rencounters
they have had of late, here and there, wherein man against man, and Book against Book, and —tantene animis coe∣lestibus irae? Party against Party have been bitterly and spitefully engaged, all fighting in the shadow (as old Hermes said) beating and buffeting one another (And abatarum more) blindfold and in the dark so long, until they have made themselves extremely ridiculous and contemp∣tible in the sight and view of all that are 1 Thes. 5. 8. sober, and Psal. 112 5. discreet, and Jam. 2. 1. impartial, and Prov. 3. 35. Dan. 12. 3. wise-hear∣ted among us, who cannot but see the formal Spirit thus divided against it self, to be in its root and fruit, the very same with that which is most profane or common among men. —pudet haec opprobria nobis, &c. A shame it is for us to hear and see, How sadly the Parties disagree. And all this for want of yielding that Sove∣reign Mat. 26. 18. Power and Authority in Heaven and Earth, to that Psa. 62. 11 PRINCE OF PEACE, and blessed Son of God, to whom of right it u be∣longs, and peculiarly appertains: Hence it is that there have been so many Aceldemaes, so many fields of Blood, in all Times and Ages,
in this and other Nations, Provinces, and Coun∣tries, That the Joh. 6. 69 Christ of God, the Psal. 45. 7. Anointed of the Father, that Just and Holy One, hath not only been Act. 3. 14. denied, but cruelly Act. 2. 23. slain, and murthered, by wicked lawless: hands, in the street of that Revel. 11. 8. great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; where also OƲR LORD IS CRƲCIFIED. And the 2 Thes. 2. 3, 4. Man of Sin advanced in the interim, and put into his Throne, or Seat, who can never manage, or car∣ry on his work, without abundance of blood and cruelty; and yet not prevail in the issue nei∣ther, but prevailed against for ever, by Revel. 12. 7, 8. Mi∣chael and his Angels, when they come forth conquering and to conquer, in the name and strength of that Great and Mighty God, who is not only Potent, but Revel. 19. 6. Omnipotent; not only Mighty, but —15. 3. Almighty. Upon which undoubted certainty, How good is that of the Psalmist! Yea, how ex∣ceeding worthy, even of all mens 1 Tim. 1. 15. acceptati∣on! Let not the Rulers, or Potentates, or Great Ones of the Earth (to whom he there in a spe∣cial manner directs his speech) think it any disparagement to them, or any whit below them, to stoop and bow hefore it, lest inevitable ruine attend them, for their neglecting or refu∣sing
so to do: Be wise now therefore, Psal. 2. 10. 11. 12. O ye Kings, he says, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Joh. 14. 6. Way (the Truth, and the Life,) When his wrath is kindled but a little; what then? A short elliptick phrase, implying, Contraria juxta se po∣sita magis elutescunt. That as contraries do best illustrate, and set forth one another, so none so accursed, or unspea∣kably miserable, as they who fall into a way of contradiction, or course of absolute contrariety, to, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him. If no Creatures under Heaven be in so low, and mean, and base, and deformed, and dangerous, and ruinous a condition, as they who draw back unto perdition, according to the Heb. 10. 39. rate of the 2 Thes. 2. 3. Son of Perdition, by an evil heart of unbelief: then it must needs follow by the Rule we are upon, That none so exceedingly blessed and happy as they, who are Is. 54. 13. Joh. 6. 45. taught of God, and inabled thereby to Heb. 10. 39. believe unto the saving of the Soul. And upon that account, be it serious∣ly considered of, by your self, Sir, and accor∣dingly by us all, that being the Apostle, after he had freely and fully debated all matters of out∣ward Order, concludes, That Gal. 5. 6. neither cir∣cumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumci∣sion,
but faith which worketh by love; since there is not any thing under a Form, or else∣where to be met with (among the circumcised, or the uncircumcised) that can profit in the least, avail, or signifie, without Heb. 11. 6. Mark 9. 23. Eph. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 5. faith to∣wards God, and Rom. 13. 10. 1 Cor. 13. 13. Col. 3. 14. love to one another. Were I but worthy, or any way fit to be an Ad∣viser to the several Partyships among us: I would hereupon in a fair and friendly way suggest thus much unto them, that as their crossing and con∣tradicting, and disturbing (especially their hating and being angry with one another) can never do any good (for the Jam. 1. 20. wrath of man works not the righteousness of God) so let them duly and timely consider, how much in opposing and gainsaying one another, on this manner they must needs oppose and gainsay the mind and will of God, whose Rom. 14. 17. Kingdom is Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and that hath nothing at all of that strife and contenti∣on in it, that now we speak of; more especial∣ly let them take heed, that by their So called, Jam. 3. 14. bitter zeal and animosities they ingage not too far, or stand not out too long, upon a stubborn disobe∣dience to that great counsel and command of Rom. 13. 8. Love (upon which so much of a Christian course depends) lest they all perish, and fall
thereby into the same condemnation: See to this purpose Jam. 3. 1. where the words are, Jam. 0. 1. Expl. My Brethren, be not many Masters, that is, do not that which love forbids, who 1 Cor. 13. 4. vaunteth not her self: Be not too Magisterial in obtru∣ding, or imposing your own sentiments in point of Opinion (and that some call Religion) lest ye receive thereby the greater condemnation, as there it follows. Before I remove or go quite off from hence, let me put you in mind, Sir, or be your Remem∣brancer once for all, of that most excellent and seasonable Advertisement which our Apostle (yea, our Great Heb 3 1. Apostle) gives us by the mouth or hand-writing of Paul in one of his E∣pistles, which I take to be so pertinent and pre∣tious, in opposition to all the monstrous de∣bacheries and follies, and vanities of this Age, that the Dawnings of it among us would be more than Aurora-like when ready to bring forth the Sun, or the Sun to bring forth the Spring, or the Spring the varieties of all the whole Creation. The Place that I mean is, Rom. 13. from v 12. and so on, where it is thus re∣corded, Rom. 13. 12, 13, 14. and written for our Admonition, The night is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let
us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armour of light, let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drun∣kenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof. May the Great Job 33 23 Interpreter, one of a thousand, the chief Gen. 49. 24. Psal 23. 1. Heb. 13. 20 Shepherd and Is 40. 11. Ezek 34. 23. Joh. 10. 11. Feeder of Israel be intreated, and prevailed with, to lead us into the life and power, into the truth and substance of all this, or of this all, which will otherwise be but vain∣ly read, or talked of among the people. But, Sir, one thing more I must add, and it shall be the Coronis or Conclusion of the whole, for I may not pass, so much as a seemeng ne∣glect, upon that truly Act. 17. 11. noble and Right 1 Sam. 2. 30. Hono∣rable 3 Epist. Joh. 1. 2. Lady with The most excellent Lady Sophia with whom the most noble and learned A∣ristobulus dwells. whom you reside, who hath made us both happy your self especially) in Is. 60. 15. the injoyment of her Acquaintance, as an emi∣nent Patern of that eternal excellencie that God communicated with his people in, when he makes them his 1 Cor. 6. 18. Sons and Daughters: Let me therefore intreat you to favour me so far, as to pay my due respects in full to her Honour; and so much the rather, because you know, that I am not in a capacity of doing it Man of himself at the greatest distance from the knowledge of God in Christ, and greatest e∣nemy there∣unto. my self, at
such a distance; withal, pray let the service be attended with an humble intimation, that I do with much veneration, and submission to the Divine Will congratulate that access of Dignity, lately put upon her even by the Apostle himself, where he lays his Commands upon us, to 1 Tim. 5. 8. Ho∣nour Widows that are Widows inded, that is, such as have been lawfully loosed, or rightfully disobliged from all manner of Compacts, Agree∣ments, or Combinations in the flesh, to be totally affianced or espoused, to Vidua non Viduata. Take this in the largest sense, put∣ting no con∣finement upon Lusts of the flesh. that 2 Cor. 11. 2. one Husband, who always Jer. 31. 3. Mal. 1. 2. loves, and never hates, and ever Heb 7. 25. Rom 6. 10. lives to God in the Spirit, and never dies to any thing but the flesh: And this is that Heb. 13. 4. Mar∣riage that I look upon as honourable indeed, and the bed that is undefiled; and as for those Whoremongers and Adulterens, or Fornicators of this world (Rev. 22. 11. Isa. 32. 6. filthy vile persons) that can ea∣sily, and without remorse prostitute their Souls, their Bodies, their Estates, their Reputations, any thing, every thing (be it either Sacred or Civil▪ to their own prodigious and unbridled lusts, let God alone to judge them, and to make it appear what they are, as he daily does, and will do it, more and more, to the praise of his holy Name, and the great and singular incourage∣ment of all those that have a secret Antipathy,
well and truly fixed and established in them a∣gainst all such lewd, and lowd-crying Abomina∣tions: In the mean time, or while this is doing, according to the counsel and care that God takes of his own Affairs, what shall we write upon the Premises, but Hinc Lachrymae? or that doleful saying of the Prophet, Ezek. 19. 14. This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, so long as it does continue. And now, Sir, that you have occasionally drawn me forth to this length, that is not ordi∣nary with me in things of this nature. If what I have written, may in the least refresh, delight, or do you good, as a furtherance of your Neh. 8. 10 Joy, your Mic. 5. 15. Peace, your Psal. 11. 6, 7. Rest in God, it stands as a dish ready dressed upon the Table before you, and having told you that you are kindly and heartily welcome to it; I do accordingly bid you 2 Cor. 13. 11. Farewell. Yours, and every one's that loves and walks in the truth, as it is in our blessed Lord Jesus: Erimastix Philalethes, R. C. P. Dated from Bethel, near the Pool of Bethesda, in the Land of our Immanuel; where the Angel gives it in upon Oath That time shall be no more, Apoc. 10. Or where all things are measured according to the account of God, and not according to the shallow Register of Mans Day and Time.
A Postscript TO THE READER. Courteous Reader: IF the Act. 9. 18. scales of ignorance be fallen from thine eyes, and the care of thy Native Country so dear to thee, as it should and ought to be, 17. 16. thy Spirit must needs be stirred (as Pauls was at Athens) to see the poor distressed Nation so mightily over-run with Formality on the one hand, and Pro∣faneness on the other, both combining in their Rise and Progress to ruine and undo the people, whilst they open∣ly proclaim to all the world, and testi∣fie at length to our very faces, the va∣nity
of our contending about our Reli∣gious Interests, and that we have fought in the shadow, so long till we have lost the Substance. And yet although it be true, that of all Pilots, he had need to be the most skilful that shall undertake to guide and carry the Ship securely, and let her fall down into a safe and even course between Scylla and Charybdis, or these two dangerous Rocks of Formality and Profaneness; considering like∣wise that of all Passengers or Tra∣vellers under Heaven, either by Sea or Land, none have more need of an able Convoy, or Isa. 4. 5. mighty Defence upon them, than such as are obnoxious, or in danger to be set upon by these two potent Armies of Formality and Pro∣faneness (always in a readiness on the Frontiers of Christianity) under whose Conduct, and in whose Maga∣zines
lie enveloped all the Counsels, and Contrivances, and Instruments and Executions of Cruelty and Confusion, of Mischief and Sorrow that ever the World heard of. Notwithstanding all this, and what else might be farther mentioned, look what the Prophet mentions in that formidable instance of Isa. 7. 2. 4. Syria's being confederate with Ephraim (when the hearts of the people were moved as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind) that's still in use, and chiefly to be regarded; Take heed, and be quiet, he says, and then fear not, neither be saint-hearted, for the two tails of thse smoaking firebrands, or portentous blazing Comets Formality and Profaneness. For albeit like Jannes and Jambres, and the rest of that Society, they (both) muster up all their might, and bring forth all their stock of Policy and Power to withstand the true Mo∣ses, or hinder the Mal. 4. 2. rising Sun, yet shall they 2 Tim. 3. 8. 9. proceed no farther, when once their folly shall be made manifest to all men, as theirs also was. Whereunto if this small Epistle, or slender Intimation thereby suggested, may but in the least be subservient, or any way advantageous,
let God have the Praise, and his People the be∣nefit of it, which will fully and exactly answer the End, or Designe of this Publication: where∣by nothing is more desired than to see the Life of the LORD JESƲS EXALTED, in the voiding of these things, and his own way of WORSHIP and ADMINISTRATIONS exer∣cised and put inpractise Joh. 4. 24. IN SPIRIT AND TRƲTH among us. Even so, Revel. 22. 20. Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. Making the Isa. 66. 22. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Revel. 21, 1.-5. Heavens and the Earth, and all things new; Jer. 33. 6. Revealing to us the abundance of Truth and Peace; Act. 3. 21. Restoring, Psal. 104. 30. renewing, and filling the Is. 27. 6. face of the World with the knowledge, and love, and fear of the Lord, as 11. 9. the waters cover the Sea; when our flesh, or tired-out condition shall Ps. 16 9. rest in hope, and Act. 3. 19. Times of refreshing come from that Job 42. 5. Beati∣fical Vision, or most calm and serene Ps. 16. 11. Presence, that hath fulness of Joy in it, and everlasting Pleasure. Even so, Amen. Jer. 51. 7. Babylon hath been a golden Cup in the Lords Babylon de∣tected. hand, that made all the Earth drunken: the Nations have drunken of her wine, there∣fore the Nations are mad.
Psal. 87. 5, 6. And of Sion it shall be said, This and that Sion exal∣ted. man was born in her; and the Highest himself shall establish her. The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people: that this man was born there Selah. In thy light we see light, Psal. 35. 9. FINIS: OR, THE END of all things is at hand: Be ye therefore sober 1 Pet. 4.—7. 8. and watch unto Prayer: But above all things, have fervent love among your selves; for love will cover the multitude of sins, and both timely correct, and totally expunge, or wipe out all the ERRATA that may be found in the Author or his Book, the Workman or the Work.
2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constraineth us thus to judge: that if One died for all, then were all dead: 15. And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto them∣selves, but unto Him which died for them and rose again. AMEN. HALELƲIAH. Which being Interpreted, is, PRAISE YE GOD.
