L2331 12232587 56633
Itur Mediteranium. A TRUE ACCOMPT Given of the PROCEEDINGS Of the Right Honourable, Lord Glin, The Lord chief Justice of England, and the honourable Barron Hill, one of the Barrons for the Exchequer, in their Summer circuit in the Counties of Berks, Oxford Gloucester, Mon∣mouth, Hereford Worcester, Salope and Stafford. 2. Chron. 19. ver. 5.6. And he set Judges in the Land, thorowout all the fenced Cittyes of Judah, City by City. And said to the Judges, take heed what you do, for ye Judge not for man, but for the Lord who is with you in the Judgement. Printed for the Author John Lineall and are to be sold by John Felton. in Stafford. 1658.
BERKS. FIrst Barron hill at Reding sate, Upon the Gaole, I do relate, The prisoners all they were set free, Not one there dy'd upon the tree, But three were burned in the hand, For so the Barron did command, OXFORD. At Oxford Gaole delivery, The Lord chief Justice sate truly, He carryed things so just being wise, That not one dy'd at that Assize. Yet two were burned in the hand, That Law they could not then withstand, Let them take heed the second time, Lest up the Gallows they do climb. GLOUCESTER, The Gloucester Scuffle between the Ordinary and the Jay¦ler: where the Ordinary for speaking some extraordi∣nary word before the right honourable Baron Hill, who should have been ommitted to the Jaylers custody, the 29. of July. 1658. That Judge at Gloucester he did sit, By vertue of Commission fit, That Countyes wrongs there for to cure, On Malefactors, lewd, impure, Amongst the prisoners that were there, One Ellis he did then appear, Who had a peece of Bacon stolne,
Carrying it even as his own. But though a thief in secret steal, There is a God will it reveal. For Ellis apprehended was, And to the prison he must passe. And being come unto the Jayl, His courage then began to faile. And after that convicted was, For to be hang'd wo and alas. That he should be so void of grace, At Gallows for to end his Race. No means there was his life to save, Or to secure him from the grave. But Psalm of mercy I am sure, Out of Gods sacred word most pure. That Psalm the Judge he would not graunt, Which did the prisoner then much daunt. He thought that he should hanged be, And end his dayes at'th fatall tree, The sixtieth Psalm the Judge him gave, Though Psalm of mercy he did crave, That Psalm he could not read nor scan▪ Alas a young ignorant man. That Oxford nor yet Cambridge saw, He standing thers worse then a Daw. A Daw he can caw and chatter, But he said nothing to the matter, He stood before the Bench as dumb, This is the truth, the all and some. The Ordinary there in place,
He thought it was no great disgrace. To save a Fellon from the tree, Although convict for the every, His conscience there he then did strain, To teach the prisoner in that vain, Lest he should dye a cursed death, An halter for to stop his breath. He thought a man of comely Feature, Not fit to dye for that base creature, By Moses Law was then unclean, Though people now to swines flesh lean, Th'ordinary speak he did not pause, My Lord I am Judge in this cause, To certifie that you may know Whether that Ellis read or no. For those same words he there was check't, What Justice could him then protect, Who did as't were the Judge withstand, That had the power in his hand, Under his Highnesse truth to scan, The Judge he being an upright man, The Ord'nary full seventy years old, Committed was to'th Gaolers fold, For those rash words he then did speak, The Judge said Jayler do him take, O no my Lord do you not so, It's more then you ought now to do For to commit me to the Jayl, To make my courage so to quaile. The truth I here must certifie,
The truth my Lord you'l not deny. He with the Jayler scuffled then, He could not force him in his Pen, Amongst that theevish crew to stand, Although the Judge did so command, After this brunt, the Judge, in love, Although he did, the prisoner prove, Whether he could read or no, The truth he there desir'd to know, Then Ellis Psalme, of mercy had, Which made him jocund and full glad, He then did straine his very throat, To read though he read all by rote, For it appeared, unto me, He could not read his A. B. C. Yet Ord'nary must yeeld to it, To save him from deaths second writ, To heaven, or hell, then for to go, For to partake of bliss or wo. He then was burned in the hand, That law he could not there withstand, Ordained against theevery, To force them from their knavery, The Judge askt him what that mark ment, For Bacon (my Lord) I am shent, Which shall be warning unto me, To leave off all, my theeverie, The Judge and all to laughter fell, The thiefe was sav'd though's hand did smell, Let him take heed of such about, Lest gallows, do him wholy rout,
From living mens society, To be in dead mens company, And there to lie and rot it'h ground, Till the Arch Angels trumpet sound Th'Ord'nary, was releast that day, Who for the Baron still doth pray, And to his tongue he will take heed, Lest further strife, it should him breed. THE POSTSCRIPT. A tragicall comedy, it did prove, Began in strife, yet ended in great love, The theefe was saved, from the Gallows tree. The Ord'nary freed from Gaolers crueltie Who would have rent his cloak there from his back, And put the Ordinary to the wrack, For he did bear to him, a former grudge, Oh how he joyd that he with him should trudge, The Baron did, his feircenesse there asswage, Although he was then, in a pettish rage, Because he could not get him into'es bar, For lucres sake, and for the former jar, He thought to have more then ord'nary fee, From th'Ord'nary, as many there might see, But he from him released was that day, And not on farthing, to him he did pay, For which he doth extoll the name of God, Who freed him from the Jailors smarting rod, The Gaole is worse then any cut throat Inn▪ A place provided, for to punnish sin, I may compare it, very ill to Hell,
For gingling Irons, and for stinking smell, Betwixt a Gaole and hell the difference this, The one is finite, th'others eternall is, From Gales and hell (O Lord) deliver me, And from my sinfull courses set me free, So shall I praise, and laud thy holy Name, And teach still others for to do the same. Two women executed were, At Gloucester then it did appear, By one, her husband lost his life, For she him stobd, with a pen knife, For which she (traitor like) was burn'd, VVho in his lifetime, at him spurn'd, As one that could not, him endure, Their downfalls both she did procure, Be warn'd by her ye wicked wives, Lest like her ye, do end your lives. Th'other woman from London came, A pick-pocket, to her great shame, She at that time her life did end, It to reprieve she found no friend Let wanderrers by her take heed, Lest they for hast make too much speed. There six were burned in the hand, That law they could not then withstand, Let them when they look on that mark, Take heed how they do steal, or sharke. MOUNMOUTHSHIRE. If you will hear: I shall ye tell, VVhat at Mounmouth assise befell, In ever knew the like before,
Who am full ten above threescore, I think the Welch men now grow wise No thief I saw at that Assize, The Lord chief Justice ready was, An upright Sentence then to passe, Upon the prisoners at that Bar, A Judges look will them all scar. But no thief I saw did appear. Before the Judge that coast was clear, Therefore the Welch men I commend, VVho do their manners now amend, Except the Jayler of the town, Of Monmouth who with raging frown Did bring a prisoner to his end, No doubt he murder did intend. The Prisoners name one Jones it was, A Gentleman once well to passe, VVho kept good hospitality, Releeving poor in charity, Yet for al that was sent to'th Jayl For suretiship, without all bayl, & there he lost the Gaolers favor through his rude & bad behavior He cast him in the Dungeon then, And lockt him up from other men. Then with a staffe even through the door, The Gaoler did, at him then pore, It peirct his eye in to the braine, And by that thrust, he there was slain, Then Miles the Jaoler he was brought, At that assise for doing naught,
Before the Judge, my heart did bleed, To think then of that murdrous deed, The Judge most wisely then did try That Monmouth Jayler narrowly, How Mr. Jones he lost his breath, And who was causer of his death. Some witnesses, did then appeare, And after that they all sworne were, The Iudg said then speake what you know Of Iones his Death the truth mee show By them hee gathered at that time, That Miles was guilty of the crime, Of shedding Master Iones his blood, That truth it could not be withstood The Iury found it Manslaughter, Though Judge he thought they did all err And wilfull murder it to find, Before Manslaughter in that kind. Yet Juries verdict he then took, That Jayler after had his Book, To save his life for that vile deed. Who as a Scholler there did read. The Judge he gave a strict command. To burn him soundly in the hand, And bade him call to God for grace Through Christ he would his sins deface. HEREFORDSHIRE. At Hereford Prisoners were many Yet for murder I saw not any Northen also for Manslaughter▪ In that reddy they did not er.
Some were for sheep others for Kine Some were for pigs or greater Swine. One he did steal an Iron Bar, Two Brothers gave to sheep a scar. For they did shear of them their wooll Or els as bad they did it pull. VVhich put the sheep unto great pain, A thief will loose his life for game. The Baron upright in his place. Did punish those were void of grace. Two Horse stealers they were to dye VVhether Repriev'd that know not I. Some then were whipped in that street Corrections house some there did greet And eight were burned in the hand For so did Justice then command. VVhen Hereford 'ssize ended was. Then to Worcester they did passe. WORCESTER. The Lord chief Justice he did sit, For that County assign'd to it. One Holder to the Bar was brought. A Fellow very lewd and nought. For he had stoln some sheep before, At severall times above threescore▪ In Lent Size he was burnt i'th hand. And being not banisht then the Land He fell again to his old trade. In sin he deepere then did wade. For he and's partner stole two Kine. To wickedness they did incline,
They drove them to Kiddermuster, Some about them, there did cluster, In there selling they were not nice, For they sold under Market price. For which they apprehended were, At Worcester Size for to appear: And by the Law they both were cast. For to be hanged at the last Yet Judge he did their liver both spare Hand burning fell unto their share, And after they were burnt i'th hand, The Judge banisht them from the land, Another was for a fals brief. I did not hear he was a thief. That time it did the Judge so please. To banish him beyond the Seas. All three were waft beyond the Main. Ile never call them back again, No doubt more theeves they leave behind▪ The next assize I shall them find. Two more were burned in the hand. His lordship gave such a command. Not one was executed there. A Maiden Size it did appear. From Worcester July the tenth day. To Salope they went through that day. SHROPSHIRE. At Salope many Prisoners were. Who at the Bar did then appear. For theeves do keep their hands in ure▪ Although it do their bain procure,
One Bot for coyning lost his life, His brasse mony was too too rife. The Country still it was abus'd. By those base tricks he dayly us'd. Some fourteen years he plaid his pranks His coyn was base as lottry blanks. That coyner now is dead and gone. Was he a coyner all alone. No doubt his Mates are left behind. Till Gallows tree they shall it find. Three horse stealers they were to dye, One was repriv'de I tell no lye, Some sixe were burned in the hand, The Baron gave, a strict command, VVhich did amaze them all▪ with fear, No more before me, do appear, For if ye do, ye hang'd shall be, No mercy ye shall have from me, He to them exhortation gave, That they of God would mercy crave, That they their lewd lives might amend, And never after him offend; Nor any mans goods, once to steal, Se'ing all secrets God doth reveale; In Shrewsbury began a fray. Not in the night but in the day The Lord chief justice in Court sate. This for a truth I do relate. one Lloyd and Phugh did by him stand▪ VVho had a tryall for some land.
Then Mr Lloyd being vext in mind, There Mastet Phugh his love did find, For he gave him a box o'th ear, And for that box he paid full dear, The Judge fin'd him an hundred mark, For his brave valour, gallant spark, Let him take heed he strikes no more, Lest striking makes him very poor, I wish him for to be more civill, For fighting comes still from the Divel, Who is the Author of alsin, And still from God seeks souls to win, The drunkards they begin to quarrel, when they have drunk to much of'th barell, All Gentlemen they should be wise, Especially at the Assize. And not to jest there with edg'd tooles Lest in the end they prove stark fools. The Judge that great fine did Remit, Only five pounds he paid for it. that Size did end the fourteenth day, Of August then they went away. To Stafford to begin that Size, VVhere a false Rumour did arise, VVhich was the cause then of great wo, The'nsuing lines the truth shall show. STAFFORD. Fear where no fear waa, Being a true Relation of a strange passage that happened in the Shire Hall of Stafford in the County of Stafford, the seventeenth day
of August 1658. the Lord Glin, Lord cheife Justice of England sitting there for Gaole deli∣virie and the right Honorable Baron Hill for Nisi Prisses. Listen a while, I will relate, VVhat at Staffod, befell of late, At that Counties Summer Assize, By a false rumour did arise, Out of ones mouth on him I frown, Who said a Beam was tumbling down, Even that same time, from roofe oft'hall, VVhich did amaze both great and small, The Barron from the bench did go, The Lawyers followed him also, Through all the croud, that Judge did pass Till down the staires he gotten was, The people pressed on the raile, By force it broke which made them quaile Then they fell one upon another, And some they did there almost smother. One Lawyer lost part of his Gown, Another had a broken crown Some there were bruised in the back and others legs they went to wrack, Some lost their hats, some lost their bands, others were crusht in arms and hands, Yea some through fear durst not arise, Being more opprest then by Excise: Some stood by them quaking through fear,
More then Quakers it did appear. there many panted for more breath. Expecting then untimely death. Many were there pluckt from that place. God knows whether they cal'd for grace or thought of heaven or else of Hell. Upon the stairs they did them quell. they trod upon them pressing down. Gentlemen Yeoman and the Clown. Even as a storm it came in hast. But God be prais'd that storm is past, And though Reports most fals are spread. there is but one of them yet dead. His Name was William Pickard That fatall fall did him discard. From living mens society, To be in dead mens company. Yet many there were bruised sore. our Neighbors harms we must deplore the Sheriff heard one cry treason. And he without a just Reason. the Judge that time he did forsake. And to his flight did him betake: For hast he left his Cloak behind, His Page him following did it find. And to his Master gave again. Reward he had then for his pain. one womans smock it did appear. Her petticotes Rent from her clear VVhether she lost them yea or no. That for a truth I cannot show,
Another she her head cloaths lost. Amongst the crowd as she was tost Her hair it fell about her eares: She like a Fury then appears: The Lord Chief Justice I commend, Who there was constant to the end. For from that Hall he would not start. Like Nehemiah he plaid his part. No base Sanballat could him fear, Or make him flye it did appear, He kept his place being grave and wise, Though fals Reports did then arise, He bad the Gaoler look to's Jayl. Lest in his trust he then should fail. Yet for all that one ran away, For all his hast one did him stay, And brought him to the bar again, Who then a Pris'ner did Remain, Till he was sentenced to dye, For stealing horse flesh certainly, And yet that Williams is alive, The Judge in love did him Reprieve. But gave the Sheriff a command, To banish him out of the Land, I wish all theeves were served so, Then Juries should have lesse to do, And true men then enjoy their own. Which by fals theeves is dayly stoln. One woman she condemned was, That kil'd her child alas alas. that she should be so void of grace, In whose lewd heart God had no place,
Her fact she did deny till death. Yea till the Rope did stop her breath. Four theeves were burned in the hand, I wish no theeves were in England, Then God should more be glorifi'd. Whose truth by theeves is still deny'd. I have you told the sum of all▪ What then was done in Stafford Hall. If you will walk now in that street. A second News it shall you greet. Some said that▪ hall Roof was faln down, Others cry'd fire was in the Town, Some said this and others speak that, And some they cry'd they knew not what. Some ran like to Orlando mad, To quench the fire which made some sad. But God be prais'd no fire there was, Though it for currant then did passe, That shire Hall it is firm and sure, In good Repair long to indure. If any ask me the truth Ile tell, How that disaster first befell▪ Which was the cause then of great wo, As by experience some did know. Some idle boyes were on the Hall. There walking made the dust to fall. Amongst the Lawyers at the bar, And that was it first bred the scar. then unadvised words one spake, VVhich made many the Hall forsake. If some had not then fled away their harms they had escap'd that day,
The Application. MAns daies as swift doe passe as doth the tide, Or as a Swallow which throug'th Aire doth glide. Or as an Arrow from a strong mans Bowe, And as a thought which God alone doth know. As they are swift their number is unknown, To us frail men one day we cannot own. The number of our dayes God doth conceal. To Adams Race he will not them Reveal▪ Because that they should still prepare to die, that we with him might live Eternally, O that all men would learn for to be wise, For in one hour great dangers may arise, To the impairing of life goods and all, To Gods choyce ones afflictions dayly fall. Those men in Stafford Hall did not once dream, That a fals Rumour of a falling Beam. Should to their lives and limbs bring such decay, The like was never heard off till that day, Let those that scap'd then praise the Lord of might, Who saw his judgements on their neighbors light, Yet in great mercy did their lives then spare, Who by desert should have had with them share. At Stafford Town the Circuit there did end, Then both the Judges homeward did intend, The Lord Chief Justice Augusts eighteenth day Towards Harding in Flintshjre he rode away. And Baron Hill from Stafford that day went, To Taunton Deane he was then fully bent. God blesse them both with uprightnesse of heart, To clear the guiltless, guilty make to smart, Then where they sit that coast shall still be clear, Not many theeves before them dare appear. Penned by John Lineall. FINIS.
