L2378 R15720 12393028 61046
A LIST OF ALL THE CONSPIRATORS That have been Seiz'd, (and where Committed) since the Discovery of the Horrid and Bloody PLOT, Contriv'd by the Phanaticks against the Lives of His MAJESTY and His ROYAL HIGHNESS. To which is Annexed, The Names of the Three late Famous Ignoramus Juries, &c. ARthur Earl of Essex, Cut his Throat in the Tower. William Lord Russel, Beheaded in Linc. Inne-fields. Capt. Tho. Walcot, Executed at Tyburn. ohn Rowse, Executed at Tyburn. William Hone Joyner Executed at Tyburn. Captain William Blagg, Tryed, and Acquitted. . Howard of Escrick In Custody at Whitehall, ol. John Rumsey, In Custody at Whitehall, In Custody of Messengers. Josiah Keeling, the first Discoverer, Zachariah Bourn, Sir Hugh Cambel, Sir George Cambel, Mr. Leigh, Mr. Lee a Dyer, Andrew Barber, Mr. Hoskin. ‡ Francis Lascoe, Mr. Pascal, Mr. Hugh Westlack Mr. Hugh Speke, Mr. Grange Brewer, In the Tower. Brandon L Gerrard Algern. Sidney Esq; Mr. Hambden, Major Wildman. Fran. Charlton Esq; Mr. Trenchard, Mr. Booth, Major Bremon, Aaron Smith, Hen. Dearam who let the L. Gray escape. In the Gate-house. Abraham Holmes, Pincol a Scotch Mi∣nister, and 6 Scotch Pedlers, John Gibbons, D. of Monm. Foot-man, Robert Bayley, Sam. Johnson, Au∣thor of Julian the Apostate: Bailed. William Casteers a Scotch Preacher, In the Marshalsea, Mr. Monroe, Major Hume, Mr. Robert West, Mr. Butler, alias Spence, Francis Frank, Edw. Cole, Brewer, James Wood, John Nisbet, ‡ John Armiger, M. Bateman, Shafts∣bury's Chyrurgeon. Robert Lock Master of the Ship which cary'd the L. Gray. Noice, a Draper. The Names of those mention'd in His Majesty's Proclamations; together with those which are Fled from Justice. The Names of those that are fled from Justice. Duke of Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Edward Norton Esq;, Richard Nelthorp Esq; James Stiles Esq; Robert Ferguson, Rich. Rumbold Malster, William Rumbold Richard Goodenough, Francis Goodenough, James Burton, Cheesem. Nathaniel Wade, William Thompson, James Holloway Merch Joseph Elby, Samuel Gibbs, Joseph Tyley, John Ayloff, John Atherton Glasier, Stephen Lobb Preacher, John Row, late Sword-Bearer of Bristol. For Apprehending The D. of Monmouth 500 l. Sir Tho. Armstrong, 500 l. Ford Lord Gray, 500 l. Robert Ferguson. 500 l. For Apprehending Rich. Nelthorp Esq; 100 l. William Thompson, 100 l. Rich. Goodenough, 100 l. Nathaniel Wade, 100 l. Rich. Rumbold 100 l. James Burton, 100 l. The Names of those that are under Bail. Lord Lovelace Sir Hen. Ingoldsby, Matth Mead, alias Richardson, Mr. Lands Barber, W. West Shoemaker. Sir J. Borlace, acquit. Mr. Shepherd Merc. Mr. Freake, Tho. Green In-keep. Mr. Hunt Apothecary Mr. Shepherd E. of Shafts. servant, Isaack Butler. The Names of those who are the Discoverers. Josiah Keeling, Colonel John Rumsey, Mr. Thomas Shepherd Lord Howard of Escrick, Mr. Robert West, Mr.  Lee a Dyer. The Names of the Conspirators who were Indicted July 12. with the number of Witnesses against each particular person, (viz.) Duke of Monmouth, 2 Ford Lord Gray, 2 Sir Thom. Armstrong, 2 Richard Nelthrop Esq; 3 Richard Rumbold, 4 Richard Goodenough, 4 Francis Goodenough, 4 Edward Norton Esq; 3 James Stiles Esq; 3 Robert Ferguson, 3 James Holloway, 3 James Burton Cheesem. 2 William Thompson, 2 Nathaniel Wade 3
The Names of the Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex, who without going from the Bar, found the Bill of Indictment against the Earl of Danby, upon the single Testimony of Ed. Fitz Harri in open Court, then a Prisoner at the Bar, and Arraign'd, afterwards Executed for high Treaso Sir Will. Roberts of Wilsdon Bar. Sir William Cowper Baronet. Henry Herbert Esq; Edward Boscowen Esq; Thomas Barnardiston Esq; Thomas Henslow Esq; Walter Moyle Esq; Josias Clarke Esq; Thomas Austen Esq;, Thomas Marsh Esq; William Bourne Esq; Edward Hutchins gen: Joseph Ratcliffe gent. Crisp Grange gent. Henry Gerrard gent. Robert Breedon gent. George Page Gent. John Harwood Gent. John Raymond Gent. Christo. Dodsworth ge Henry Dealing Gent. Edward Watts Gent. Augustine Beare Gent. The Names of the Grand-Jury for Edward Fitz-harris. Michael Godfrey of Edmonton, John Hill of Enfield, William Hundow of Enfield Gent. Thomas Curtis of the same, Gent. Elizeus Wyberd of the same, Gent. John Reade of Totenham Gent. Jeremiah Benton of the same, Gent John Young of Enfield, Gent. Edw. Johnson of South-Mims, Gen. John Page of Pinner, Gent. John Blott of Hendon, Gent. Francis Peters of Great Stanmore, John Greenhil of Harrow o'th' Hill. John Newman of the same, Gent. Thomas Rance of the same, Gent. John Bird of the same, Gent. John Taylor of the same, Gent. James Marsh of Hendon, Gent. John Todd of Pinner, Gent. The Names of the Pery-Jury for Edward Fitz-harris. Thomas Johnson of Mile-end, Esq; Lucy Knightly of Hackney, Gent. Ed. Wiford jun. of Enfield, Gent. Alexander Hosea of Hackney, gen. Martin James of Wappng, Gent. John Vyner of Whitechappel, en. William Withers of Cripplegate, * William Cleive of the same, honest Thomas Goffe of Stepney, Ralph Far of the same. Samuel Freebody of St. John-street, John Lockyer of Westminster. The Names of the Grand-Jury for Stephen Colledge the Joyner. John Wilmore, Leather-seller. Will. Mackley, Strong-water-man. Sampson Puller, Taylor. Thomas Cope, Ʋpholster, Peter Mortimer, Confectioner, John Wood, Brasier, Thomas Haynes, Carpenter. Thomas Fox, Apothecary. John Read, Milliner. Mark Stretton, Apothecary. Edward Powel, Book-binder. Paul Dorrel, Servant to the Coun∣tess of Exeter, No Free-man. * Francis Lascoe, Druggist, * John Armiger, Shooe-maker. Samuel Totton, Mercer. John Pettit, Woolen-Draper. Samuel Maine, Linnen-Draper. Caleb Hooke, Merchant. Robert Davies, Apothecary. The Names of the Grand-Jury for John Rouse. James Denew John Elwick, Thomas Shaw. Richard Tilden. William Carbonel. Josias Smith. Joseph Jackson. Samuel Crisp. Humphrey Rogers. John Showel. John Loggins. Edmond Shermon. John Hamond. Joseph Web. Peter Essington. John Newton. Isaack Delillers. Samuel Round. Henry Weade. The Names of the Grand-Jury for the Earl of Shaftsbury. Sir Samuel Barnardiston. John Morden. * Thomas Papillion. * John Dubois. Charles Hearle. Edward Rudge. Humphrey Edwin. John Morrice. Edmond Harrison. Joseph Wright. John Cox. Thomas Parker. Leonard Robinson. * Thomas Shepherd, Merch. now a Discoverer. John Flavel. * Michael Godfrey: Joseph Richardson. William Empson. Andrew Kendrick. John Lane. John Hall. The Presentment of the Grand-Jury at the Assizes held at Northampton, July 17. 1683. WE the Grand-Jury sworn to enquire for the Body of the Country of Northampton at the Assizes held at Northampton for the said County, &c. Have with great Horrour and Detestation receiv'd an ac∣count of the most Impious and Bloody Conspiracy against the persons of His most Sacred Majesty, and hi Royal Brother, which (thanks be to God,) He, by his providential Care has prevented, and brought to ligh their Helish purposes; And not knowing how far their wicked Designs may proceed, We held it our Dut in this juncture of Affairs, to present, that we have strong apprehensions of great Danger from a dissaffecte party in this County, who dd openly shew their Principles, by presenting a Seditious Address to Miles Fleet¦wood and John Parkhurst Esq; at the last Election of Knights of the Shire, tending to the alteration of th Succession of the Crown, and an Intended Association in it to that purpose; with an assurance that they woul stand by them with their Lives and Fortunes, without any regard or notice taken of the Kings Authority or their Allegiance or Duty towards their Sovereign And having observ'd, that since that time, they hav had and held several Meetings, Clubs and Cabals, which We cannot but think was to carry on the said purpo¦ses, and othr dangerous Designs against the Government; and their Discourses being notoriously bold, an their Party generally furnisht with a proportion of Arms rather for some Dangerous Designs, than for the u of Private Persons, which, upon Search could not be found, but were hid and conceal'd. We therefore Pr¦snt it very Expedient and Necessary for securing the Peace of this County, that all Ill-affected Persons ma give Security for the Peace, and particularly, Ralph Mountague Esq; Sir William Langham. William Harbord. John Thornton Nicholas Butler. Henry Rushton Miles Fleetwood. Charles Fleetwood. John Parkhurst. Edward Stratford. Edward Hopkins. Robert Haslerig. Francis Arunel. Francis Grans Sir William raven Saathiel Lovel. John Coombs. Thomas Colthurst Edw. Knighton. Barth. Manning. William Welden Gerrard Gore. Will. Stratford. John Bridges. Thomas Freeman John Allen. Arthur Brooks. Henry Hinde. Luke Aburne. Francis St John of Longthrop Matth. Orliber. Fane Denny. Robert Mansel. Jo. Craddock. John Lee. Samuel Ekins. Francis Morgan Thomas Catesby. Sir Tho. Samwel Sir Sam. Clarke Tho. Whitthorne William Tate. Tho. Andrews. Tobias Chancy Will. Wilmore. Capt. Ashby of Bugbrook. Edward Pier. Rector of Cot∣tesbrook. John Selby. John Lucas. Robert Ivory. William Lisle. To which Presentment as abovesaid, We the said Grand Jury have subscribed our Names as follows, (viz.) John Egerton Bar. Lewis Palmer Bar. Goddard Pemberton Thomas Elmes. John Needham. Henry Benson. Moses Barhurst Esq; Nich. Steward Esq; Harvy Eakins Esq; Will. Randolph gen. Rich. Plowman gen. Rich. Wicks gent. Edw. Ladkin gent. W. Bateman gent. Anthon. Gibs gen. Tho Woodward ent. William Cutbert nt.
