L2854H R39346 18368509 107419
AN ACT OF Common Council: Together with certain Orders, Rules and Directions Touching the Paving and Cleansing THE Streets, Lanes and Common Passages WITHIN THE City of LONDON, and LIBERTIES thereof: And other things relating thereunto. Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honourable City of London, at his House in Aldersgatestreet, 1671.
coat of arms of London
Veneris primo die Martii, 1671/2. By the Commissioners for Sewers, Pavements, &c. in LONDON. THE Commissioners willing that all persons concerned may take notice of a late Act of Common Council, and of several ancient Customs, and other Statutes, Rules and Orders relating to the Paving and Cleansing of the Streets and Sewers, and preventing other incon∣veniencies to the Common Passages in and about the City of London and Liberties thereof; and that due conformity may be yielded thereunto, and the Pnalties for breach thereof may be avoided, have agreed and ordered, That the same be forthwith Printed in a small Book, and delivered to, or left for, every Housholder within this City and Liberties; and which are as follow, that is to say,
FORD Maior, Octob. 27, 1671. An Act for setling of Lay-Stalls, pre∣venting several Inconveniences to Pas∣sengers, and relating also to the Clean∣sing of the Streets and Passages within this City and Liberties thereof. WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, enti∣tuled, An Act for the better Paving and Clean∣sing the Streets and Sew∣ers in and about the City of LONDON, the appointing, setting out, and pur∣chasing of places convenient for Lay-Stalls, and for publick Stores for Ma∣terials and Commodities, is vested in the Maior, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled; and other Authorities therein mentioned are thereby vested in the Maior, Com∣monalty, and Citizens of the said City, to be managed, executed, and done by such Persons as by the said Maior, Al∣dermen, and Commons in Common Council assembled, shall be thereunto
authorized and appointed, or by any Seven or more of them (being all Mem∣bers of the said Court) and no other Persons whatsoever. Be it therefore Enacted, Ordained, and Established by the Right Honourable the Lord Maior, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen, and the Commons in this present Com∣mon Council assembled, and by the Authority of the same, and the said Lord Maior, Aldermen, and Commons in this present Common Council as∣sembled do hereby appoint, That the several Pieces or Parcels of Ground hereafter named, that is to say, a Piece or Parcel of waste Ground on the South side of the hither end of Mile-end Green, adjoining to the High-Way there, extending from the Place called the Fort, to the hither end of the Wall of the House and Ground called the Red Lion; a Piece of Ground on the West side of and contiguous to Dow∣gate-Dock, now or late in the Possession of Job Clark; a Piece or Parcel of Ground on the East side of and conti∣guous
to Puddle-Dock, now or late in the Possession of John Cock; and a Piece or Parcel of Ground on the West side of and contiguous to Whitefriers Dock, now or late in the Tenure or Possession of Robert Gosling, shall be from hence∣forth places for common Lay-Stalls, to be employed for the publick Use and Benefit of this City and Liberties there∣of, in such manner as the Commissio∣ners authorized or to be authorized by this Court according to the said Act of Parliament, or any Seven or more of them shall order and direct; and the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them shall by Warrant un∣der their Hands and Seals directed to the Chamberlain of this City for the time being, order the Payment of all such Sums of Money, as are or shall be agreed upon concerning the same be∣tween the respective Proprietors of the said Grounds and the said Commissio∣ners; which Agreements the said Com∣missioners are hereby impowered to perform and make, and the said Cham∣berlain
for the time being shall make payment thereof accordingly out of the Moneys arising by the Imposition upon Coals, according to the aforesaid Act of Parliament. And the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them are hereby far∣ther authorized, as need shall require, to appoint and set out such and so many other Parcels of Ground for com∣mon Lay-stalls, and for publick Stores for all sorts of Fuel, and for all sorts of Materials for Pitching, Paving, and Cleansing the Streets, and for other Commodities for publick Use, as from time to time shall be by them found requisite and necessary; and to make Agreement with the Proprietors of the said Grounds, and to order pay∣ment for the same in manner as afore∣said, and the Ordering and Managing of the said Places when set out and appointed shall be in the said Com∣missioners or any Seven or more of them; And that all the Profits there∣of shall be paid unto the Chamberlain
of this City for the time being, for the use of the Maior, Commonalty, and Citizens of the same, and distinct Books of Accompts shall be kept con∣cerning the same, and the said Profits shall be disposed of from time to time, as the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them shall appoint to be approved of by this Court. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them shall from henceforth have Authority, and are hereby impowered from time to time to summon, enquire after, ex∣amine, and in default of Appearance upon such Summons or Submission to the Censure or Judgment of the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them, to cause to be indicted or informed against at the Sessions of the Peace to be held for this City, all such Persons as have made and shall continue within this City and Liberties thereof any Bulks or Stalls contrary to the an∣tient Usage and Custom of this City,
and several late Acts of Parliament, or have made and shall continue any Stall-Boards above the bredth allow∣able by the said antient Usage and Cu∣stom and Acts of Parliament, or shall set Goods and Commodities or Mate∣rials for Building into the Common Streets and Common Passages within this City or Liberties thereof, or shall hang out Goods to the hindrance or da∣mage of Passengers or their Neighbours Trade, or streightning the common Passage, or shall throw out or cast into the Streets, any Dust, Soil, or Rubbish, or shall dig any Pits or Drains, or other∣wise intermeddle with the Pavements (without Licence from the said Com∣missioners or any Seven or more of them) which shall tend to the ob∣structing or annoyance of the Ways, Passages, or Water-courses of this City. And further be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That from henceforth no Beggars or Vagrants, Tankardbear∣ers, Porters, or other persons whatso∣ever
bearing any kind of Burthens on their Heads, Backs, or Arms, Horses, or any kind of Cattel, shall be permit∣ted at any time of the day from Six of the clock in the Morning, until Nine of the clock at Night, to go on, pass, or be lead upon the flat Pavements in any Street between the Houses and the Posts adjoining to the said flat Pavements, ex∣cept only for going into the said Houses directly cross the said Pavements, under the penalty of five shillings for every Horse or other kind of Cattel whatso∣ever, and three shillings four pence for every Tankard-bearer, Porter, and o∣ther person carrying Burthen as afore∣said, for every Offence, and the said Beggars and Vagrants to be punished according to the Laws already in force: And that all Constables within this City and Liberties thereof and other Officers employed, or to be employed, by the said Commissioners or any Se∣ven or more of them (who shall have power and are hereby authorized and directed to employ such persons accor∣dingly)
and all Marshals and their Men and Warders are to take special care to prevent the said Offences and to appre∣hend all such Offenders; And in case the said Marshals or their Men or Warders shall be negligent in doing their Duty herein, it shall be lawful for the Lord Maior for the time being and his Successors, upon due proof of such Neglect, to amove such Marshals and their Men, and other inferiour Warders, and others to put in their places. And further be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That no Street-Car or Brewers Dray shall from and after the Tenth day of December next ensuing, be drawn with more than one Horse within this City or Liberties thereof, unless in such case only where the Load cannot be divided, and that the Weight thereof shall require more than one Horse for the Draught thereof, and in case also of drawing up any the Hills from Thames-street, and up Holborn-Hill, upon the penalty of Ten shillings
by the Owner of such Car or Dray which shall break this Law, for the first Offence, Twenty shillings for the second Offence, and Thirty shillings for the third and every other Offences, and that the supernumerary Horse and Horses shall and may be seized and impounded by the Officers appointed to take care of the before-mentioned Offences, or any of them, or by such Officer or Officers, as are or shall be appointed by the President, Treasurer, and Go∣vernours of Christs-Hospital for the time being, for taking care of Cars and Car-men, until the said penalty be paid. And be it further Enacted, That all Cars, Wagons, Drays, and other Car∣riages during all the time of their Load∣ing and Unloading within the Streets of this City and Liberties thereof, unless before Six of the clock in the Morning, and after Eight of the clock in the Evening, from Lady Day to Michaelmas, and before Eight in the Morning, and after Six in the Evening from Michael∣mas to Lady Day, shall stand side-ways,
the long way of the Street, and not cross the same, that so Passengers may safely go between the Houses and Carriages (Except for such Goods and Commo∣dities as are not portable;) And that no Dray upon any occasion whatsoever, shall from henceforth stand in any Street or Passage within this City or Liberties thereof, but where a Coach or other Dray may pass by such Cart or Dray so standing: Nor shall stand any longer time than for Loading or Unloading, or other case of absolute Necessity: And that if any person or persons shall cause his or their Car or Carriages to be set otherwise in Loading or Unloading, he and they shall forfeit Three shillings four pence for every such Offence; and upon the penalty that every Owner and Owners of every Dray standing contrary to this Act shall forfeit three shillings four pence for every Offence, and the Horse and Dray shall be impounded by any the Officers aforesaid, till Payment thereof. And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That from and af∣ter the said Tenth day of December nex∣ensuing, all the Dung, Soil, Filth, Seat coal-Ashes, and other Dirt, as well from all the Streets, Lanes, and Pas∣sages, as from all the Houses of the In∣habitants within this City and Liberties thereof, shall be carried away by such persons or their Servants, who are at present or that shall or may from time to time hereafter be permitted or al∣lowed to work any Car or Cars within this City or Liberties thereof, by the said President, Treasurer, and Gover∣nours of Christs Hospital, in such Man∣ner and Method, and for such conside∣ration as by the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them, and the Fel∣lowship of Car-men, shall from time to time be agreed upon; and in case the said Commissioners and Fellowship cannot or shall not agree for or touch∣ing the carrying away the Soil as afore∣said: That then and in such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President, Treasurer, and Governours
of Christs Hospital, and they are hereby required, and impowered, upon Certi∣ficate from the said Commissioners, to License such number of Cars as the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them shall think fit, not exceeding Eighty over and above the Four hun∣dred and twenty Licensed by former Acts of Common Council, which said Cars are to be disposed of by the said Commissioners for the better carrying on their work, and are hereby inabled to do such other work as other Street-Cars do or may do, and the Owner and Owners thereof shall in all points (ex∣cepting for carrying of Soil and other works to be done by Order of the said Commissioners) be under the Regula∣tion of the said President, Treasurer, and Governours, as other Street-Cars, and shall pay such Rent as by the said President, Treasurer, and Governours with the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them shall be adjudg'd fit and reasonable, not exceeding seven∣teen shillings four pence per annum apiece.
And it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That one Act of Common Council bearing date the One and Twentieth day of June 1665. touching the ordering and disposing of Cars, and all and every the Clauses therein con∣tained, be put in due and effectual Exe∣cution by the said President, Treasurer, and Governours, and that the said Com∣missioners be assisting to them therein. And it is Enacted, That all Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures in and by this Act before limited and appointed, in case the same shall not be paid to the said Commissioners or Seven or more of them, upon Summons to the respe∣ctive Offendors before-hand made for their appearance before the said Com∣missioners concerning Payment thereof, shall and may be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, or Information, in the name of the Chamberlain of this City for the time being, in his Majesties Court holden before the Maior and Aldermen of the said City in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of
London, wherein no Essoin or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant, and after recovery thereof, one third part shall be to the Prosecutor, and the other two parts and residue thereof (after all charges out of the said two parts deducted) to the Poor of Christs Hospital in London, to be employed for and towards their Relief; In all which Suits to be brought by this Act, the Chamberlain shall re∣cover his ordinary Costs and Charges, to be expended in and for recovery of all such Forfeitures against the Offender or Offenders; and in case the same Pains Penalties, and Forfeitures shall be paid to the said Commissioners or any Seven or more of them upon Sum∣mons, as aforesaid, without any fur∣ther process, one third part shall be dis∣posed by the said Commissioners for Encouragement of their Officers who shall take pains in the matter aforesaid, in such manner as they shall think fit, and the other two parts shall be disposed to the Poor of the Hospital as is afore∣said.
And lastly, be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That the Wardens and Assistants of the Fellowship of Car∣men, now consisting of Twenty three in number, shall be forthwith increased and made up to the number of Forty one, and shall so continue for ever here∣after: And that the Eighteen to be so added, and so upon any Choice or Election of others for the future upon any Avoidance, shall be such Persons as have or shall actually serve an Appren∣ticeship to the said Calling of a Car-man, and no other. Avery. Rules, Orders and Directions. I. Item, That hereafter all Streets within this City, called, known, or set down to be High Streets, shall be paved round or Causway fashion, and upon notice given to the Commissioners of any defective Pavements in any of the Streets, Lanes, and Passages within this City and Liberties, the same shall be
forthwith made good and amended, unless by general Consent some better Expedient be found and published. II. That inasmuch as it hath been found by common experience that the Paviers, to hide and cover their bad Workmanship, have oftentimes spread and laid great quantities of Gravel over their Pavements, to greater charge to the persons setting them on work, than was needful, and which upon a sudden Rain, did either choak the Common Sewers, or turn to dirt and mire in the Streets, there∣fore the said Paviers are required, that hereafter they do forbear to lay or spred any more Gravel on the Pavements, than will only fill up the Joints of their Work, and cause the same to be swept and well ram'd, and leave the Pave∣ments bare of Gravel, and keep a regular Method of Paving, not paving one door higher than another, upon pain of pay∣ing five shillings for every Complaint. III. That the Bredth of six foot at the least from the Foundation of the Houses in such of the said High Streets
which shall be allowed to be posted, shall be paved by the Inhabitants or Owners with flat or broad Stone for a Foot-Passage, unless such parts there∣of as shall lie before any Gate-way, which may be done with square Rag by the said Bredth of six foot, upon pain of paying Five shillings for every Week the same shall be omitted to be done after notice given. IV. That every Person having occa∣sion to rebuild or repair any House or Houses fronting any Street, Lane, or Common Passage, do first procure Li∣cence of Mr. Chamberlain for the time being, to hourd in a piece of ground before his building, within which to lay his Ma∣terials for Building, or in default shall pay Forty shillings, and Twenty shil∣lings for every weeks omission so to do. V. That a Fall or Cest-pool of con∣venient bigness shall be made and con∣tinued to every Grate of the Common Sewer within this City and Liberties, to receive the Sand or Gravel coming to the same, so to prevent the choaking
thereof: And upon Complaint at any time made of the want, decay or defect thereof, the Commissioners will forth∣with cause the same to be made or a∣mended. VI. That the Fellowship of Car-men of this City having undertaken for one year to commence from the first of January, 1671. to Sweep and Cleanse the Streets, Lanes, and common Passa∣ges within the said City and Liberties from Dung, Soil, Filth, and Dirt, and to carry the same together with what shall be brought out of the Houses of the Inhabitants unto certain Lay-stalls appointed, or that shall be appointed by the said Commissioners for the time being, the several Persons by them im∣ployed in and about this Affair (whose Names, Places of Abode, Number of Tun∣brils or Carts, and the Wards to which they are respectively designed, are here∣after set down) or such others as (by death or removal of any of them) shall be imployed therein, shall keep, observe and follow the Rules and Orders hereafter following viz.
VII. That they, their Agents or Ser∣vants, shall come out with their Tun∣brils, or Carts and Horses on Mundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays in every Week of the year from the eleventh of October to the eleventh of February by five of the clock every Morning of the same days, and not to continue and remain in the Streets, Lanes or Passages after the hour of Nine of the clock the same Morning; and from the eleventh of February to the eleventh of October, to come out as aforesaid, by Four of the Clock every Morning of the same days, and not to continue or remain in the Streets, Lanes or Passages after the Hour of Seven of the Clock the same Morning, and upon every Sa∣turday in the year to come out as afore∣said, by Two of the Clock in the Af∣ternoon of the same day, to remain and continue till Night, if need be: And within the Hours and Times aforesaid, shall cleanse all the Streets, Lanes, and Passages, every man within his or their respective Divisions, from its Soil, Filth,
and Dirt by sweeping of the same, and carrying it away, together with what shall be brought out of the Houses of the Inhabitants to the Lay-stalls appointed or that shall be appointed, upon pain to forfeit for every Offence Ten shillings. VIII. That the several Inhabitants within this City and Liberties, or their Servants do take care that the Dirt, Ashes and Soil of their Houses be in a readi∣ness for the Car-men, their Agents or Servants, either by setting out the same over night in Tubs, Boxes, Baskets, or other Vessels near and contiguous to their Houses, or by bringing out the same within convenient time before the Hours for their Departure as aforesaid. IX. That the said Car-men, their Agents or Servants in their several Wards or Divisions (with the Assistance of the Servants of the Inhabitants who are hereby directed to give such Assistance) shall in times of Frost or Snow, daily employ themselves in the opening of the Chanels, and heaping up the Ice and Snow, that so the Passages may be cleared, and
upon a Thaw of the same, that all the Soil and Filth found in the Streets, Lanes and Passages be carried away, upon pain of Ten shillings for every days omission. X. That no Person whatsoever do pre∣sume to cast out any Soil, Horse-Dung or Filth, or carry the same into any Street, Lane or Common Passage after the hours aforesaid, either by night or by day, up∣on the Penalty that the Person offending, if known (and if a Servant, his or her Master or Mistriss) shall Forfeit and Pay Five shillings —and if not known the Party against whose House the same shall be found, (having been laid there in the day time after the hours before mentioned) shall Forfeit One shilling; which said several Forfeitures shall be Paid the one moyety to the Discoverer, and the other to the Car-man or Car-men appointed to Cleanse that Ward wherein the offence shall be committed. XI. That the several Tunbrils or Carts imployed or to be imployed in this Work shall be Marked or Numbred according to the Number of Carts ap∣pointed
for each Ward, upon the pe∣nalty of Two shillings for every Load carried without such Mark. XII. That the several Car-men un∣dertakers in this affair shall set upon the fore part of his Tunbril or Cart, open and plain to view a board where∣on to be painted The City Arms, the Ward to which he or they are appointed, the Mark or Number of his Tunbril or Cart, upon penalty of paying Three shillings four pence a day for want thereof, which said Marking is to beto∣ken the Allowance of the Commissio∣ners, and to caution the Inhabitants from imploying of Foreign Carts. XIII. That the said Car-men Under∣takers, their Agents or Servants shall give notice of their being in the Streets with their Tunbrils or Carts by loudly knocking a wooden Clapper especially in Courts, Allies and other back passages, upon pain to forfeit Three shillings four pence upon every complaint duly prov'd. XIV. That the said Car-men their Agents or Servants do take care that
the Falls or Cest-Pools belonging to any Grate within their Respective Wards, be once in every Week, or oftener if need require, Cleansed of its Dirt and Filth, and the same carried away upon pain to forfeit Five shillings for every complaint duly proved. XV. That the aforesaid Car-men, their Agents or Servants and no other, shall also carry away to the Lay-stals afore∣said, all such Soil, Dirt and Dung (Rubbish or Earth excepted) that shall be made or found in any of the Houses or Stables of any Inn-keeper, Livery Stable-keeper, Brewer, Dyer, Sugar-baker, Sope-maker, or other Trader or Inhabitant within any the Wards to which they are Respecti∣vely appointed and designed, for which such Quarterly Allowance (over and a∣bove the Customary Rates by the Sca∣vengers Book) shall be made by the As∣sessors of each Ward according to their best discretion, respect being had to the Trade or other occasions in the making of more or less Dung and Soil by such Traders or Inhabitants.
XVI. That the aforesaid Car-men their Agents or Servants and no other shall take up and carry away to such Persons or places as will receive the same, all such Rubbish or Earth that shall be made or found within their Respective Wards or Divisions for which there shall be paid them by the Own∣ers or Proprietors thereof Twelve pence per Load and no more, provi∣ded they carry it away within one day after notice given for the conveniency of the owners, and to avoid complaint of them, upon pain that the person of∣fending in either of these cases shall pay Two shillings per Load. XVII. That no other Tunbril or Cart then what is or shall be appointed and allowed by the said Commissi∣oners for doing the Works aforesaid, shall be imployed or shall intermeddle with the carrying of any Soil, Rubbish, Earth, Dung, Paving-Stones, Thames-Gravel or the like within this City or Liberties, Bricks or Tyles from the Wa∣er-side within the said City and Liber∣ties
upon pain to pay to the Car-man or Car-men imployd in cleansing the Streets as aforesaid, of the Ward where this of∣ence shall be committed, Two shillings for every Load so taken up or carried in a Tunbril or Cart, and for Non-payment that such Tunbril or Cart shall be carri∣ed to the Cities Pound call'd the Green∣yard and there remain till payment there∣of. Provided, that if any the said Car-men shall not immediately afer notice im∣ploy himself in carrying the said Mate∣rials, to forfeit and pay Two shillings for every Load thereof, and the Owners at liberty to employ Foreign Carts. XVIII. That no Coachman, Car-man, Carter, Drayman, or other Person shall feed his or their Horse or Horses with Hay or Grains in the Streets, Lanes, or Common Passages within this City and Liberties, upon pain to forfeit and pay for every Offence two shillings six pence (over and above the like Sum formerly imposed and to be paid to the Gover∣nors of Christs-Hospital) the one Moity to the Discoverer and Prosecutor, and the
other to the Car-man or Car-men of the Ward in which the said Offence shall be committed, and in case of Non-pay∣ment to carry the Horse or Horses to the Cities Pound called the Green-Yard, there to remain till Payment thereof. XIX. That none of the aforesaid Car-men, their Agents or Servants, or other Person or Persons do sweep the Filth or Soil of the Streets, Lanes or Passages into any the Chanels of this City in time of Rain or otherwise upon pain to pay Six shillings and eight pence for every com∣plaint duly proved. XX. That no man shall cast or lay in the Streets, Lanes, or common Passages or Chanels within this City or Liberties, any Dogs, Cats, Inwards of Beasts, Cleaves of Beasts Feet, Bones, Horns, Dregs or Dross of Ale or Beer, or any noisom thing upon pain of Ten shillings for every Offence. XXI. That no man set a Tunbril, Car or Cart in the Street by Night-time, upon pain to pay Two shillings, besides Satisfaction to any Person hurt thereby. XXII. That no man do ride or drive a
Tunbril, Car, Cart or Dray, a trot in the Street (or sit on any part of the Car, Cart, Tunbril or Dray, unless another skilful person lead the horse) upon pain to forfeit and pay two shillings: in case of non-pay∣ment to carry the Horse to the Pound, as aforesaid, to remain till Payment thereof. XXIII. That no Wagon, Car or Cart shod with Iron or Spignails, or having more Horses than is allowed by the a∣foresaid Act of Common Council, shall take up any Goods within this City or Liberties to carry for Hire about the Streets, upon pain to pay Five shillings for every Offence: and in case of Non-payment, to carry the Horse or Horses to the aoresaid Pound till Payment thereof. XXIV. That no Goung-Fermer shall carry any Ordure till after Ten a clock in the Winter, and Eleven a clock in the Summer at Night, nor shall spill any Or∣dure in the Streets, upon pain to forfeit and pay Thirteen shillings four pence. XXV. That no Pudding-cart of Shambles shall go out till after the hours last before mentioned upon pain to forfeit Six shil∣lings eight pence.
XXVI. That no Artificer, Labourer, or other Person shall make any Stop or Dam in any Channel, nor shall slake any Lime in the Streets, Lanes or Passages, upon pain to pay Two shillings for every Offence. XXVII. That no man shall feed any Kine, Goats, Hogs, or any kind of Poultry in the open Streets, upon pain to forfeit Three shillings four pence for every Offence. XXVIII. That no man shall cast into the Ditches or Sewers, Grates or Gullets of the City, any manner of Carion, stinking Flesh; rotten Oranges or Onions, Rubbish, Dung, Sand, Gravel, or any other thing that may stop the course of the same upon pain of forfeiting Forty shillings for every Offence. XXIX. That no man shall make or con∣tinue any Widraughts, Seat, or Seats for Hou∣ses of Easement over, or Dreins into any the Common Sewers without Licence of the Com∣missioners for the time being, upon pain to forfeit Forty shillings, and Forty shillings a month for so long time as the same shall be continued after Warning. XXX. That no Person or Persons do pre∣sume to keep any Lay-Stall for Dung, Rub∣bish,
Earth, or other Soil, either at the Water-side or other place within this City or Li∣berties other then the common or publick Lay-Stals appointed, or to be set out and appointed by the said Commissioners for the time being, upon pain to forfeit and pay Fifty three shillings four pence and Forty shillings a week for every week he or they shall so continue to do after Warning, or be indicted from time to time as a Common Nusance. XXXI. That no Tylers, Bricklayer or other Person do throw out of Gutters, or off Roofs or other parts of Houses, any Tyles, Loam or Rubbish into any Street, Lane, or Com∣mon Passage, but do bring down the same in Baskets or Trays, upon pain to forfeit Three shillings four pence for every Offence. XXXII. That no person or persons do set out in the Streets, Lanes or Passages any Hogs∣heads, Barrels, or other Cask or Vessels to hoop, wash or dry, or otherwise incum∣ber the Passage, upon pain to forfeit and pay Twenty shillings for every Offence. XXXIII. That the Dung, Mud, Filth, and Soil of the Wards of Billingsgate, Bridge, Lang∣born,
Cornhil, Candlewick, Walbrook, Vintry, and Dowgate, shall be carried down to the Lay-stall at Dowgate Dock; of the Ward of Portsoken, Tower, Algate, Dukes-Place and Lyme-street, to the Lay-stall set out at Mile-end; of the Ward of Bishopsgate within and without to the Lay-stall at Holloway-Lane end, being part of a Meadow there belonging to the City; of the Ward of Cripplegate within and without, Aldersgate without, Bassishaw, Coleman-street and Broad-street to the Lay-stall at Bun-hill; of the Wards of Cheap, Cordwai∣ner, Queenhith and Breadstreet, to the Lay-stall at or near Three Cranes, and in Dunghill-Lane neer Broken-Wharf, until such time as the Publick Wharf or Key at the River-side shall be laid open, and afterwards to the Lay-stall at Puddle-Dock; of the Wards of Farringdon within, Castle-baynard, Aldersgate within, and St. Martin le Grand to the Lay-stall at Puddle-Dock; of the Ward of Farringdon without to the Lay-stall at White-friars, and this course to be used, until the Commissioners shall see cause to alter the same; and whoso shall offend herein shall forfeit and pay Five shil∣lings for every Offence.
XXXIV. That the Car-men, Underta∣kers, their Agents or Servants shall have Liberty to carry Rubbish from any parts of the City or Liberties into the Vineyard near Algate, for levelling the same, till the first of May next, and to shoot the same there gratis, and after that time to pay such Sum for what they there shoot, as the Commissi∣oners shall require. XXXV. That inasmuch as the said Car-men have undertaken to do this Work in better manner and to greater satisfaction than heretofore hath been done, and the Com∣missioners believing from what they have already observed, that they will accor∣dingly perform the same, do therefore ex∣hort all Persons that shall be rated towards this Work, willingly and readily to pay the same, so to prevent Trouble to them∣selves, and Discouragement to the said Car-men, in a Work of this nature so requisite and necessary to the Health and Trade of the Inhabitants of this City. XXXVI. That the several Pains and Pe∣nalties before-mentioned, not particularly expressed to whom to be paid, shall be paid
into the Chamber of London, upon Sum∣mons or Warning by the Officers attending the Commissioners or either of them; or in default, the Offender or Offenders to be in∣dicted at the Sessions for his or their respe∣ctive Offences. XXXVII. That if any the aforesaid Car-men, their Agents or Servants do offend in any the particulars aforesaid, or otherwise relating to this Affair; that Complaint be made thereof to the Commissioners at the Guild-hall, who will deal with them accor∣ding to their Offences. XXXVIII. That the Scavengers for the time being in the several Wards or Precincts within this City and Liberties, do take care either by their own Observations or Com∣plaints to them by any of the Inhabitants, that the said Car-men, their Agents or Ser∣vants do accordingly perform the several Branches afore-mentioned to them relating, or to make complaint thereof to the Com∣missioners, upon pain that the said Scavengers shall from time to time for their Negligence or Remisness be indicted at the Sessions, unless they shall submit to the censure and judgment
of the said Commissioners for the time being. XXXIX. Lastly, That every Housholder do pay to the Person delivering this Book, Three pence at least for and towards the Charge of Printing and Delivery of the same. The Names of the Car-men Ʋndertakers in the Affair aforesaid, their Places of Abode, their Number of Tunbrils or Cars, and the Wards to which they are designed are as followeth. Robert Simonds Tower 3 Cars. Horsly-Down. Robert Clough and Charles Harbert Queenhithe 3 Broken-Wharf. Breadstreet Cordwainer William Pinchbanck Candlewick 1 Blackmanstreet. John Fox Cripplegate inf. & ext. 6 Aldersgate. Oldstreet. John Brown Edward Drage John Samford Portsoken 5 Wenkoorth-street. Whitechappel. Stephen Samford Roger Rogers Billingsgate 3 3 Horsly-Down. Joseph Heydon James Russel Castle-baynard 3 Puddle-Dock. Christopher Rose Cheap 2 Whitecross-street. Thomas Moore Langborn 3 Horsly-Down.
Thomas Marshal Cornhil 2 Whitecross-street. Bassishaw Henry Chapman Vintrey, Dow∣gate, Limestr. 4 Stoning-Lane, Southwark. Thomas Nevil Robert Bendall Algate 5 Rosemary-Lane. Edward Clark Ralph Mitchell Colemanstreet 3 Oldstreet Moor-lane. Robert Webb Edward Looker Bishopsgate ext. 4 St. Olaves street. Anne Gee Alex. Shepheard Bishopsg. inf. 4 Barnaby-street. Horsly-Down. John Caines Robert Campion Faringdon ext. 15 At and about Whitefriers. George Aires Robert Goodwin Anthony Langley Simon Carter St. Bartholomews great and less. St. Sepulchers and Smithfield. Christoph. Holms Henry Ingersole John Wilder Faringdon inf. 4 Baynards-Castle. William Evenot Broadstreet 4 Horsly Down. John Matthews John Rose Aldersgate inf. and S. Martins 2 Whitecross-street. William Best Aldersgate ext. 3 Three Cranes. Ja. Cole, Cler. to the said Commissioners.
