L2885R 31354828 110269
By the Maior. THE Right Honourable the Lord Maior (by and with the Advice of the Aldermen his Brethren) doth hereby think fit to publish and declare, That all manner of persons within this City and the Liberties thereof, do from time to time duly observe and conform themselves to the Laws and Ordinances established for the suppression of Abuses, Disorders and Misdemeanours, and settlement of Peace, Order and Quiet amongst his Majesties Subjects: And that his Lordship doth pur∣pose to use his best Care and Endeavour to inforce the Execution thereof, and inflict the utmost Penalties upon all such persons as shall be discovered to neglect or fail in their Duty therein; And doth require all Citizens and Inhabitants, and more especially all publick Officers to be aiding and assisting for the discovery of all persons that shall be found to practise and commit any manner of such Disorders and Enormities. And particularly his Lordship doth earnestly admonish and command all Citizens and In∣habitants of this City deeply to consider, examine and observe the points of their OATHS, as first the Oath of Supremacy, provided for Extirpation of the Romish Religion. Secondly, the Oath of Allegiance or∣dained for preservation of the Honour and Fidelity due to his Majesty. Thirdly, the Oath taken by all persons admitted to the Freedom of this City, which for want of due Consideration, is in many particulars and frequently infringed, and the good and necessary Franchises and Customs of this City thereby violated. That all persons do refrain unnecessary and profane SWEARING and CURSING in ordinary Converse, for which the Penalty of Twelve pence is by the Law appointed to be paid or levied by way of Distress for every Offence, or (in case no Distress can be had) the Offender to sit three hours in the Stocks. That no Vintner, Inn-keeper, Ale-house or Coffee-house-keeper do permit any SPORTING or TIPLING in their Houses on the Lord's Day; nor any persons meet there to sport, tipple or use unlawful or unseasonable exercises, on the Penalties in that case appointed by the Statutes of this Realm. And that none do presume to keep a Common BAWDY-House or GAMING-House for the Reception of lewd and dis∣solute persons, which have been observed to occasion the ruine and destruction of many Apprentices and Young Men within this City: And that none do repair to any such Houses; Or be a common Drunkard, or quarrelsom and a disturber of the eace, or a promoter of Strife and Variance between others: Which are all Offences against the Law, and to be punished in such manner as by the Law is directed. And that no person do keep any publick House, or sell Ale, Coffee or other like Liquors, unless they be duly Licenced for that purpose. And further that no Vintner, Brewer, Butcher, Baker or other do sell any Bread, Wine, Beer, Flesh or other Victual whatsoever, but such only as shall be good and wholsom for Mans Body. And all Bakers are to keep the Assize appointed: And that all Weights and Measures used in common Traffick shall be duly sized and sealed. And his Lordship doth hereby streightly command all Constables to apprehend and take all sorts of Beggers, idle and suspected persons, and if they see cause to make search in any Victualling-house or other place suspected to harbour such loose and suspected people, and to carry them to Bridewel, as the Statute directs, wherein is contained also a Penalty for the Con∣stables Neglect herein. And that the said Constables do duly hold their Watches every Night, and suffer no persons to pass the Streets at late and unseasonable hours, unless they can give a good accompt of themselves and their occasions. And whereas the Commissioners for Sewers and Pavements have agreed on certain Rules and Directions for the better cleansing the Streets and common Passages within this City and Liberties, pursuant to the Directions of a late Act of Par∣liament, and have printed and published the same; Therefore all Inhabitants and others concerned are hereby required to take notice thereof and punctually to observe the same. And his Lordship will take care of the Complaints that shall be made to the Commissioners against the persons neglecting their Duty therein, that the Nusances may be removed and the Penalties severely inflicted on Offenders. And his Lordship doth expect, That all manner of persons within this City and Liberties, do in all particulars demean themselves as becomes them within the bounds of Iustice, Sobriety and good Order, conceiving himself obliged in Duty, and for discharge of his Trust, to inflict such due Punishment upon all Criminals and Offenders, as the nature of their Of∣fences shall require; and he doth expresly charge all Constables and other his Majesties Officers within this City and Liber∣ties, and all Citizens of this City, (as they tender the good Government, Peace and Welfare thereof) to discover and give Information either to his Lordship, the Court of Aldermen, or any of his Majesties Iustices of the Peace within the said City, of all persons offending and misdemeaning themselves, wherein they shall from time to time receive all due encourage∣ment and countenance. Dated at Guildhall the 23. day of December, in the 24. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. God save the King. Printed by Andrew Clark, Printer to the Honourable City of LONDON, at his House in Aldersgate-street. MDCLXXII.
