L720 14916435 102900
TWO LETTERS FROM Vice-Admiral John Lavvson, AND The Commanders of the Fleet, to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-Councilmen of the City of London, Dated the 13th of De∣cember, 1659. from the Downes; The Other the 21 In∣stant from Gravesend. James in the Downes, the 13 th of December, 1659. Right Honourable, HAving heard of those great Distractions and Divisions amongst the good People of our Nation by the late Breach betwixt the Parliament, and English Army, and the Army under Gen. Monok and the great disturbance in the City and Countries, and the said Desolation that is likely to ensue, if not by God's Mercy speedily prevented by amicable Composure of these unhappy Dif∣ferences. We have been necessitated, according to our Judgment and Consciences, to declare to the World, That we apprehend the onely visible means of healing our Breaches, and setling Us again in Peace, is, That there might be all Christian waies and means used to reconcile the Differences betwixt the Parliament (interrupted the 13th of October last), and the Officers of the English Army; which we earnestly intreat your Lordship, with your Honourable Brethren, the Aldermen and Common Council, to use your utmost for the pro∣curing and accomplishing of; and that the Force, that's now put upon the Parliament, may be taken off, that they may return with Freedom to the Exercise of their Trusts: But if it cannot be done by Christian and friendly means, We are resolved, according to our Declaration in∣closed, (through the Lord's assistance) to use our utmost endeavour for the Removal of that Force; in which we earnestly desire your Assist∣ance and which We doubt not but will be to the Glory of God, and the reviving the decayed Trade of your City in particular, and the Na¦tion in generall, which is the Desire of Your Lordship's most humble Servant. James, of Gravesend 21, December, 1659. Right Honourable, THe above written is a Coppy of our former out of the Downes, and since our Arrivall Here, having not received any Answer; We fear it came not to your Hand so timely as We Inended: We have therefore sent the Bearers, Captain Richard Haddock, and Captain Mark Harrison, to give You the state of Affairs with Us, and to acquaint You, That We are Resolved through the Lord'ds assistance to stand to our Declaration, and with our utmost to Endeavour the Re-establishment of the Parliament, In∣terrupted the 13th of October, 1659. To the Exercise of their Trust; and We hope and doubt not, but We shall find the Concurrence and Assistance in our Resolution, and, That You will discourage all Designes of Charls Stuart, and His Adherents, or the Convening toge∣ther of any Assembly in the Name, or under the specious pretence, of a Free Parliament, according to the Desires of some, which unavoyda∣bly must advance Charls Stuart His Interest; and Endanger the Ruine of the Cause, and Interest of Christ and his People, That hath cost so much Blood and Treasure, and also the Destruction of the Renowned City, and the Liberties of all good People, Civil and Religious: In confidence of Your Compliance herein, We shall give all Assistance for the Advancement of the Trade, Freedom and Safety of the City in Particular, and the Nation in General: Your Answer unto This is Desired by My Lord, Your very Humble Servants. John Lawson, Vice-Admiral, Commander of the James. George Dakins, Captain of the Bristoll. Philip Holland, Capt. of the Assurance. Francis Allen, Capt. of the Advice. Nathaniel Brown, Capt. of the Taunton. Thomas Penrose, Capt. of the Maidstone. Richard Rooth, Capt. of the Dartmouth. Thomas Lardge, Capt. of the Larke. Richard Newbery, Capt. of the Portland. Willowby Hannam, Cap. of the Kent. Henry Fenn, Capt. of he Hampshire. Samuel Higginson, Cap. of the Selbe. Anthony Artchy, Cpt. of the Forciter. Michael Natton, Capt of the Norwich. Thomas Traford, Liet. of the Worcester. Captain Thomas Bowry, Captain of the — Francis Parke, Capt. of the Centurion. Richard Haddock, Capt. of the Dragon. Mark Harrison, Capt. of the Elias. John Coppin, Capt. of the Langport. Edward Nixon, Capt. of the Pearle. John Bowry, Capt. of the Drake. Godfrey Reade, Capt. of the — To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of the City of London, also to be Communicated to the Alder∣men and Common Council. LONDON, Printed by John Streater, MDCLIX.
