M1039A 10763345 45724
THE EXAMINATION, and CORRECTION of a Paper lately Printed Intituled A Relation of the Discourse, between Mr. Hugh Peters and Lieut. Collonel Iohn Lilborn in the Tower of London, May 25. Whereunto is added for the satisfaction of all that desire it; and the just Vindication of Mr Peters, from the Scandall the Relator would isinuate against him by his imperfect, false, and misapplyed Rlation; a per∣fect true and impartiall Relation of the whole dis∣course that passed between them. By ROBERT MASSEY, Doctor in Phy∣sick, who was present thereat, and an Ear Witnesse thereof. Nunquam sera venit veritas. LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, May the 5. 1649.
The examination and correction of a Paper lately printed, and intituled a Relation of the Discourse between Mr. Hugh Peters, and Lieut. Coll. John Lilborne in the Tower of London, May the 25. HAVing perused a Paper passing up and down intituling it self the relation of a Discourse that passed between Mr. Hugh Peters and Leiutenant Collonel John Lilborne Pri∣soner in the Tower. And perceiving the evill Spirit and intention of the Relator, though in his front seems to car∣ry the pretention of publike benefit; and being sensible how exceedingly he hath wrested and tentered the discourse, to make some thing at least seem to speak in it to the slander and scandal of that reverend, and the Gospels, and his Countries faithfull friend and servant, Mr. Hugh Peters: I thought my self obliged in honesty, being present at the dis∣course, and an ear-witnes of the same; to give the world a true, impartiall, perfect relation thereof; and then leave the impartiall wel-affected reader to judge of the Relator, and his relation accordingly. But before I come to give you the Relation, of the Conference between them; I shall take leave to premise to the Readers observation, some few particulars; whereby he shall easily observe the Malignant and evill genius of the relator, and relation published, as it appears to insinuate into the people, suspitions and jealousie of the Parliament, Generall, Leiut. Generall, and the whole Army; and on all the Faithfull and worthy Patriots of the Common wealth: thus as it were adding more fuell to incense, and in∣flame the malignant, discontented, hot-spur, hair-braind Spirits of the times, unto such actings, as may effectuate their mischivous, malignant de∣signes, for the ruine and destruction, of the Common-wealth, and Free-State, thus newly by Gods blessing, and their uncessant endeavours settled and established, as the harvest and reward of our long and tedious labours and sufferings or at least vent their personall and private malice and spleen, in that they cannot be esteemed and preferred, according to that value and worth that their pride and self-conceipt hath exalted them in their own thoughts to aspire unto: and all this they would colour over under the pretence of standing for the Laws and the Peoples Liberties, although these men will account or esteem nothing to be Law, Justice, or Freedome, lon∣ger than it stands with their private ends and pleasures; thus to bear them out and justifie them in their headie, rash, and inconsiderat enterprises, they will stand for, and cry up any rotten, oppressive, slavish, absolet law, though the very self-same laws have been by them exclaimed again, as un∣just and unrighteous: And all because it warrants their malignant, sinfull, reasonlesse proceedings and actions in the accomplished of one or both
their evill ends and designes forementioned; and this reader  finde to be the intent and purpose of the false Relator, in his relation of the conference between Mr. Peters and Lieut, Coll. John Lilborne, for thou shalt in the ensuing true relation observe, that he hath not onely omit∣ted some things and words that were spoken; but also added many other some that were not: and what he hath related of truth, he hath wholly perverted, misapplyed to his evill and malicious purpose; and so I leave him, and his friend and friends, to the conviction of their own conscience. And now gentle Reader, I proceed to give thee (according to my promise,) a full, true, and impartiall relation of the discourse, that passed between them, not adding or detracting any one word, or syl∣lable as neer as my memory shall enable me, which was thus: Mr. Peters, my selfe, and one Captaine Smith of the Army, comming to the Custome House about some businesse, and walking in the walke there, Mr. Peters was shamefully and basely abused and vilified in slander∣ous words and execrations by the Malignant Porters, and Frock-men there, so as if he had not withdrawne in probabillity, they would have fallen on his person,Re ha ∣tion tha n  Mr  ha sitt Lie Jo bu for their carriages and countenances did evidently speake forth their mallitious purposes; Mr. Peters thereupon resolved to goe to the Tower, where, said he to me, I shall finde some of Collonell Prides men, who through the Lievtenant of the Towers assistance, he being my very good friend, I shall procure some of them, to seize some one or other of those uncivill rude fellows. Thus we went to the Tower together, and as we were entering in at the gate, we had some discourse of Lievtenant Collonell Lilburnes being there, the place onely administring the occasion thereof, in that we had formerly knowne Lievetenant Collo∣nell Lilburne: So Mr. Peters comming to the Lievtenant of the Tower, after some salutes, and that he had informed him of his abuse at the Cu∣stome House, partly of his owne minde, and partly, at the instance of my selfe and one friend more; he desired the Lievtenant of the Tower that he might see Lievtenant Collonell John Lilburne: the Lievtenant of the Tower replyed, Sir, I am very strict and carefull who I permit to visit him but I shall suffer you, seeing it is your desire; Mr. Peters replyed, I have beene acquainted with him formerly and seeing I am come hither so acci∣dentally, I desire to give him some good counsell, if he be in a disposition to embrace it; as also to heare from his owne mouth what he hath to say for himselfe in refference to his rash counsels of late: So the Lievtenant of the Tower, Mr. Peters, my selfe and another freind being also desirous in freindship to see him, went to his lodging, where we found him at din∣ner, with wholsome fare, though meane, which (after salutes passed) occasi∣oned as I supposed the Lievtenant of the Tower to say to him, I perceive
Lievtenant Collonell your fare is sutable to your allowance. Yea Sir, replyed the Lievtenant Collonell, the fare is good will you please to sit downe Gentlemen and eate with us; so we sate downe and eate with him and his wife, she being then at dinner with him. Mr. Peters give me leave to be plain with you, said L. Coll. Lilborn, I doubt you are come on some designe, you are sent a fishing by your great Masters: Mr. Peters replyed, I have no other designe in the world, but to give you a friendly visit L. Coll. as these Gentl. can testifie; my comming hither being meerly accidentall. You have no designe now, no more then you had the last year when you came hither to lye in the Tower, whilest the Aldermen were here? I professe said Mr. Peters, in the presence of God, I have not now, nor had then any degn, but comming with some of the Parliament souldiers that were to quarter in the Tower, I liked Coll Whites house so well, for the pleasantnes, ayre, and conveniency thereof in my opinion, that I took up my aboad there for a while, for my health sake: but you speak of designs, as if all men were on designes? I protest, I know no design my self, the Parliament or any in the Army have, other then to advance the glory of God, and the good of his people. You know in a Play, every one acts his part, and so you only act yours, and another his, I will not trust any of your or their faire words, or protestati∣ons; I know not what designes they have, but I am sure they would take away my life if they could. Why, said Mr. Peters, who goes about to take away your life, I know no man that seeks your life? you may live long enough for me or for any other for ought I know. I care not for my life replyed L. Col. Lilborn not this, if they should take it away as they dare not: but they were as good take it away, as keep me here and take away my livelihood, by which my self, wife and family should subsist. Why, hath he on allowance from the State, said Mr. Peters to the Lieut. of the Tower, hath he not? Yes said the Lieut. of the Tower; the State allows him twenty shillings a week, if he would accept of it, as the rest doe. Why, will you not accept of it, said Mr. Peters? No replyed, Lieut. Coll. Lilborne; I scorn to undervalue my self so much as to accept of it, I had rather make a shift and be without it: I am sure the King that they have put to death for a Tyrant allowed more then it to the meanest Prisoner that ever came hither. Why? what hath been accustomed to be allowed said Mr. Peters?
The meanest prisoner that ever came hither said he had three pound a week: the very Smith that the Bishop of Canterbury sent hither, whose head is now on London bridge, had so much while he was here. Is it possible? said Mr. Peters: yea but you know L. Coll. Lilborne, that the State now hath many more uses and occasions for money then the King had. I deny that said L. Coll. Lilborne, how can that be? they have all the Kings Revenues; and many other wayes that bring in money, that he had not: and therefore may as well allow it as he could. No, but indeed the State is very bare of money notwithstanding, in that these troubles have occasioned the experce of much more then was need∣full in a time of peace: No, said Lieut. Coll. Lilborne that cannot be that such vast summes of money as they have had and have, should be thus expended: what with a mischief should become of it? do we not see that Ireton and Cromwell, and your great Masters the Parliament men as you call them, give away to one another thousand, of it at a clap: that is the way the Common-wealths money goes. Indeed replyed Mr. Peters, they have given money among them hereto∣fore; but I pray you, what hath been given of late? and because you speak of Ireton, what hath he got, that you mention him? I am sure I heard a neer friend of his averre, that to his knowledge, that service for the State had impaired and hindred him in his own estate at least 3000 l. No replyed L. Coll. Lilborne, what need hath he, his father hath e∣nough given him for himself and Ireton too; and they pisse both in one Glasse, and know well enough how to share it ile warrant you: Because you mention Cromwell so much; what hath he had given him, that he hath not deserved, by his many great and indefatigable services for the Common-wealth? and therefore what hath been given him he may in justice, honesty, and honour accept: but let us leave this discourse, L. Coll. Lilborne, wilt thou never leave thy self free from trouble? what is the occasion of your being here? Do you not know, replyed L. Coll. Lilborne, ask your great Masters, they can best inform you. But doe you hear of the blood that hath been shed of late; they say your bustle hath been the occasion of it. I was at Sandwish, and there I met with some of their Letters, signed with C. Y. S. C. You did not finde my hand there, did you, said L. Coll. Lilborne? No replyed Mr. Peters; but yet they say, our are much the occasion of the late stirr. Is it wisdome, because you cannot have all done present∣ly, according to your mindes; therefore to run out to such courses as will tear all to pieces, and undoe both your selves and the whole kingdome?
I the occasion thereof, replyed Lieut. Coll. Lilborne? it they deal with others as they deal with me, there will be occasion enough ere long ile warrant you; for I have been here this three moneths or upwards, and have not as yet seen accusation, Accuser, or Judge, and is this according to the Laws and Petition of Right, which they have professed and promi∣sed so often to maintain? I tell you, they are worse tyrants then the King, whose head they have taken off. You talke of Lawes and the Petition of right, replyed Mr. Peters, when as you will have nothing to be law but what pleases your selfe, and serves your own turne, and that no longer neither. Hath not you your selfe ex∣claimed more then any man against the Lawes, Lawyers, and their Courts in the Kings time, as wicked, cruell, absolute oppressive and slavish? yet now you seeme to cry up those lawes againe to serve your owne turne. I tell you, said Mr. Peters (taking up Cookes reports) these Law Books Lievtenant Collonell, doe undoe thee, thou wast of another minde to my knowledge not long sithence. Law Bookes undoe me? No, they doe or should keep us all from un∣doing. I tell you, said Mr. Peters, there is no Law in thee, for doe you not see by daily experience and as your selfe have formerly observed, that Cookes and Littletons opinions, and the opinions of the Judges passe for Law? notwithstanding you shall not finde three of them in one minde in many cases, now Law truly so called is not the opinion of this or that man. But what say you then to the Petition of right and Magna Charta, are not those Law? our Predecessors called them Lawes and if they be no Laws we are in a miserable condition. I have said there is no Law in England, I tell you this is my owne pri∣vate opinion and I know not three more in England of my minde in this particular, it is my opinion only I say, for the reasons fore-men∣tioned. No Law in England! If this be their Tenent and yours, that are a lea∣ding man amongst them, the Lord deliver us: you are all of you a company of the very arrant'st Traitors, Rogues, and Villains in the world: did not you fight for the Laws of the land? I am sure you told the people you did, if you did not? you have deceived the people: and you have no other way or shift in the world, that I know of to save your selves from being Trai∣tors, in taking of the Kings head, but that he endeavoured the destructi∣on of the Laws, and therefore for the peoples safety, you were bound to destroy him. Why, This is true, said Mr. Peters, this is it indeed that made his execution just and righteous before God and Man; but yet the Lawes were, and are
some of them, evill, wicked, and slavish, that had by him and his pre∣decessors from the Conquest, been forcibly and tyrannously imposed on us, and wee nor you did not fight for the continuation or preservation of them I hope, but to be freed from them. But I pray you, L. Col. give me your definition of Law; for it may be else you may mistake and wrest my words. I will not give it you in my own sense, the Parliament shall give it you in their own Declaration. So turning to their Declaration, Mr. Peters read it, and said, Why, is this a definition of Law? This is onely a de∣scription of the benefit, and good effects thereof; and all these good things here spoken, doe we not now enjoy in England? This is no de∣finition, it wants the Genus and the other ingredients that make a true de∣finition: the definition of Law is rather some such thing as this, viz, Rea∣son deduced and collected from particular events: For necessity, you know was, and is the mother of Law, evill manners are the occasion of Lawes, and I know no Common-wealth this day in the world, that can shew me a Body of law that will hold to all changes that may and wil hap∣pen in a State: and therefore the daily Placats and Proclamations, or E∣dicts of the States of Holland, pleased me very well when I lived there. So then it seems all must be according to the will of your Parliament and Army, it seemes the Sword must give us Lawes. Why what Law hath there been in this land heretofore, that was not imposed by the Sword? Did not the Norman thus impose his slavish Lawes on us? And what Law have we now that we have not gotten and preserved by the Sword. I tell you, the sword must be in some hand or o∣ther, to enforce the observation of Laws, or what were you the better for Law? It is honest an good Governours as much as laws, that bring all these benefits on a people you read of in the Parliaments declaration: for if wic∣ked debauched persons be in place of power, be the Lawes never so many or good, the people will be miserable; but now if good men be in place, if the Lawes be evill or defective, there is some presumption and ground of hope that they will make them better. I tell you (replyed L. Col. Lilburne) I had rather live under wicked De∣vils with good Lawes, then under the best men in the world with bad or none at all. But I am not of your mind, nor many reasonable men else, I think. Why then, said (L. Col, Lilburne,) if the sword must give Law, if sixe Theeves meet three honest men and because they are stronger, rob them, and take away their money, therefore the act is justifiable in them, because they had the stronger sword. No, replied I: but if three honest men should met six theeves that
had robbed them, and being stronger then they, should take away their own again from them, is not the act lawfull, because they used force to cause the theeves to deliver them what was their own again? But L. Col. Lilburne, said Mr. Peters, because you cry up Law, & are for Law so much, what doe you think of the Decalogue, or ten Commandements, are they no lawes for us in England, or what do you think of the Parliamens Acts and Orders, are these no lawes? I tell you, our wound at present lies main∣ly in the lawes of the land, and in the Administrators and administration thereof, there being no less by computation then 50000. Lawyers in the land, enough to set ten Kingdoms together by the ears the processe of law being as tedious and vexatious as ever, and the Courts as numerous, some few onely excepted, I hope the Parliament will take this into their consi∣deration in time, and rectiie this grievance to the Nation. Sir, said L. Col. Lilburne, I thought my selfe safe whilst I squared my actions by the Rules of those lawes which the Parliament hath so often sworn and declared to maintain, as the Petition of Right, &c. and so you may, and every man else, that walkes so by them, as he walkes not beside them. I shall let you see your mistake (L Col. Lilburn) in that particular, and that yous and the Common-wealths safety lies not in the Petition of Right, or Magna Charta, or any other thing commonly called Law in the land, For Necessity, you know, is the mother of all Lawes, and there∣fore lawes doe and must change and alter, in that no law by man can bee made so absolute and perfect, but that time and many other circumstances may alter the reason of it, which indeed is onely the law, and then it ceases to be a law any longer. And as for Magna Charta, and the Petition of ht, what are they but some poore dull fragments and peeces of reason and eedome that our forefathers scrabled for, and wrested by force out of the hands of their cruell tyrants? And because we have obtained a little of what was our right, must wee be bound up to it so, as never to en∣deavour more to make our selves absolute free men, when God gives in our power so to doe. Sir, I am very sory for you, and doe wish the Spirit of glory may rest upon you: for I assure you in many things of your Dis∣course, especially in the violence of it, your spirit seems to me very unhum∣bled and unchristian. And so L Col. I bid you fare well, if I can doe you any good, I shall be ready to serve you. Thus, Reader, have I given thee to the best of my remembrance, and of theirs also that were with e, and were ear-witnesses as well as my selfe, a true, full, and impartiall Rela∣ion of the Conference that passed between them: Now I leave thee impartially to judge, whether the Relator in his Relation intended it for the publick good, and not rather to vent and insinuare a slander on Mr. Peters, and to prejudice him, and the whole State in him, in the thoughts of the people. Vale. FINIS.
