m1371 12618196 64435
A VINDICATION OF THE Primitive Church, AND DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY: In ANSWER to Mr. Baxter's Church History OF BISHOPS, And their COUNCILS Abridged: As also to some part of his Treatise of EPISCOPACY. Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam & ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis effice∣rentur schismata, quot Sacerdotes. Hieron. adv. Lucif. Ab illo Deo Patre, ab hac Ecclesia Matre, nullius me Hominis Cri∣mina, nullius Calumnia separabunt. Augustin. Coll. Carth. 3. Ego illam Ecclesiam defendo, hanc assero qualicunque voce in qua quisquid fuero, illa Ecclesia est, Aug. ibid. LONDON, Printed for Moses Pitt, at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1682.
PREFACE. IT is a very just Censure that Poly∣bius pass'd upon Phylarchus, one that wrote the History of the A∣chaian War, That he did not understand the principal Business of an Historian, because he conceal'd all the vertuous and generous Actions of one Side,Polyb. l. 2. . and insisted on∣ly upon such as might ren∣der them odious to the Rea∣der: the Rigor and Seve∣verity of Execution which the Achaians were sometimes obliged to use, are set out with all the miserable Circumstances that can be conceived on such Occasions; but not a word of their Clemency and Humanity which they commonly us'd towards their Enemies, when they fell into their Power: As if, says that Noble Writer, It were the Office of an Historian to record only the Worst of Humane Actions,
to reckon up the Faults and Mis∣carriages of Men, and not their great and com∣mendable Actions;. and as if the Examples of Sin might be of greater Be∣nefit and Edification to the Reader than those of Goodness and Vertue. Mr. Baxter's History of Bishops and their Councils, being writ after the same Model, falls una∣voidably under the same Reproof, un∣less perhaps the Disingenuity that is condemn'd in a Heathen, may become a Christian Writer; and what the one must not do to his Enemy, the other may offer to his Brethren and Fathers, to the great Lights and Ornaments of the Christian Church. Now this History of Bishops is no∣thing else but an Account of all the Faults that Bishops have committed in the several Ages of the Church, without any mention of their good Actions, of the piety and severity of their lives, of their Zeal for the Faith, of their Charity towards the Poor, of their Contempt
of the World, of their Labor and Di∣ligence in their Office. These were things he thought, perhaps, not to be∣long to a Church-Historian to relate: These were improper, unedifying Ex∣amples, at least wise they were not ve∣ry agreeable to the Design of our Au∣thor, which was, to disgrace Dioce∣san Episcopacy. This Weeding of Church-History for the Faults of Bi∣shops, is not to write, or abridge Hi∣story, but to draw up an Indictment; and because many things are falsly charg'd, it is no better than a Li∣bell. But we need not look for a severer Censure of this Church-History, than that we have in Mr. Baxter's own Critical Preface to it: For as his Church History is design'd to disgrace Diocesan Bishops and their Councils, so the Preface looks as it were intended to disgrace this History: For the Qua∣lifications of a Credible Historian, which he reckons up there, appear so little in our Abridger, and the Chara∣cter of Incredible Relators so nearly resemble him, that one might suspect a
Trick in it; and that some of Tom Co∣ryat's Ensurers had given their Testi∣mony to the Work. 1. It is supposed (says Mr. B.) that a Man should believe his Sen∣ces: Surely our Author was asleep when he wrote this, and thought he saw every thing he relates. But how shall we believe our Sences, since we are told, in this History, that they were not Presbyterians, but Episcopal Men that began the late War against the King? 2. The History of the Gospel is certainly credible. This would migh∣tily ensure the Credit of this Abridge∣ment, if all were Gospel that Mr. Bax∣ter writes. 3. Prophets who had Divine In∣spiration, and Vision, had that Evi∣dence that gave them a Certainty, tho not to others. It may be Mr. B. has heard a Bene scripsisti de me; but because he confesses this to be no E∣vidence to others, we may suspend our Faith; and upon Examniation believe as much as we shall find reason to do.
4. When History delivers a mat∣ter of Fact and Sence by the com∣mon Consent of all those that knew it, tho' of contrary Minds, Disposi∣tion and Interest. The Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters is acknow∣ledg'd by Catholicks, and Schisma∣ticks and Hereticks, Men of very contrary Minds, Disposition and In∣terest; and yet this Church History would have us believe the contrary: Here we are in a Streight: For whe∣ther shall we belive in this Case the Pre∣face or the Book? 5. When the History of any Per∣son or Action is prov'd by continu∣ed and visible Effects, as that Willi∣am of Normandy Conquer'd Eng∣land, while there are so many Ef∣fects of that Conquest in our Laws and Customs: And what may be prov'd by more visible and continu'd Effects than the Superiority of Bishops over Presbyters? The Laws and Customs of all Churches are full of this; all the Christian World being govern'd by Dio∣cesan Episcopacy till the last Age; and yet notwithstanding these visible effects,
we must not believe this Government to be Apostolical, when the Ancient History that delivers it as such is prov'd by such Continu'd visible Effects. Here we are in a great Streight again, which to trust, the Critic or the Hi∣storian. 6. That History is credible which speaketh consentingly against the known Interest of the Author. Well, but many of Mr. B's Characters of Ancient Bishops, are taken from profess'd Enemies, or persons manifest∣ly prejudic'd, as his Accounts of Atha∣nasius, Theophilus, Cyril, and di∣vers others do manifestly shew: But here he does endeavour to clear him∣self, and says, What I say of the Mis∣carriages of Bishops and Councils is most in their own Words: Often∣times they are not the Words of the Bishops or Councils, but Mr. Baxter's Own, when he mistakes in Translating them. What I say against Popes, is but the Recital of what is said by the Greatest Defenders and Flatterers of Popes: And let those Flatterers
and Defenders answer him if they think it worth their while; but because upon this occasion he is pleas'd to give Account of his Authors, let us consi∣der his Authorities. He tells us in the first place, who he has not made use of: I give you not a word (says he) out of Luther, nor Illyricus, nor the Magdeburgenses, &c. It is no great Matter: For they were some∣thing disaffected to Popery, and there∣fore they may be liable to Exceptions: But it is something hard to reject those that follow. No nor out of the Collections of Goldastus, Mar∣quardus, Freherus, Rubrus, Pisto∣rius, &c. So familiar to him, that Marquardus Freherus makes two Au∣thors by the same Figure that Mar∣cus Tullius Cicero makes three: Ʋnless you will lay this Mistake up∣on the Printer; but then you cannot easily give a reason, why, in the midst of so many Surnames, Freherus should have his Christian Name more than any of the rest: But whoever this mi∣stake belongs to, it is plain, Mr. B. had but little Acquaintance with
those Collections. He tells us, He gives us not a Word out of them. It must be surely great Modesty to conceal his Authors, or his Ignorance not to know them: For he does really gives us se∣veral things from these Collections, and cites his Authors too. Egristhart and theCall'd by Aimon, l. 4. c. ult. Ade∣marus, and Adelmus by P. Mas∣sonus. Anonimous Author of the Life of Lewis the Emperor, are cited with several others that are published in some of those Collections which Mr. B. denies to have given his Reader one word out of: It would sound some∣thing harsh from a Compiler of Gene∣ral History, to say, That for that of England, he had not given one word out of the Collections of Cambden, Savil, or Selden, but only out of Al∣ford or Cressey; and yet to cite Bede, or Newburgensis, or Hunting∣ton, &c. It is a strange thing, that a Man who talks so much of leaving the World, should not yet have left the Vanity of pretending, and of muster∣ing up Books of which he had never seen any more than the Titles. Thus far Mr. Baxter gives Account of his Authors negatively; in the
next place he informs positively, whence this Worthy Rhapsody is ta∣ken. The Substance of the Common History (the Rarities are not to be enquired after whence they come) is taken out of the commonly recei∣ved Church Historians, and among them Mr. B. does reckon Nazianzen, the first time doubtless that ever he ap∣pear'd among the Commonly receiv∣ed Church Historians: Mr. B. names Eusebius, Socrates, and some others; but I am afraid Mr. B. mistakes Dr. Hanmar's Translation for Eusebi∣us, &c. Whereas this English Tran∣slation which Mr. B. makes use of, has seldom the Sence of the Authors, and oftentimes none at all. The main part of the Councils he owns to be taken out of Binius, of an Old incorrect E∣dition of the Year 1606. but it must be noted, that where Mr. B. did not understand Binius, he is pleas'd to give something of his own. 7. The next Degree of Credibi∣bility depends upon the Veracity, or Credible Fitness of the Reporter,
as, 1. One that liv'd upon the place, or near. 2. A Wise Man. 3. One that made it his long and hard Stu∣dy. 4. One that is Impartial, a lo∣ver of Peace, and not engaged in Faction. 5. A Sober, Calm, Con∣siderate Man. 6. Of manifest Ho∣nesty, Conscience, &c. And after this, he tells us of several sorts of Men that are not to be believ'd: among others, One that is deeply engag'd in a Par∣ty; One that shews a Malignant Spirit, that extenuateth or denieth (he might have added concealeth) all the Good that was in his Adver∣saries, and fastens on them all the Odium that he can, without just Proof, mutato nomine de te; One that is ignorant or proud; a silly, weak Man; nor one that is passio∣nately rash, with many more things to this purpose. And how well the Circumstances of Credibility agree with his History, or how little these discre∣diting Circumstances concern him, the Reader will best judge: How Impar∣tial, how Calm, how disingag'd from Faction, how well vers'd in this Stu∣dy?
As for his Temper, the Books he lately Publish'd sufficiently discover it; and let the Reader judge, whether e∣ver any Man rail'd with greater In∣temperance, or less Provocation? Now to give some Instances of his Christian Meekness, pag. 19. he calls the present Bishops of the Church of England, A few Turbulent Prelates, p. 46. Si∣lencing, destroying Prelates. p. 73. Proud, Contentious, Ambitious, Hereticating part of the Bishops. p. 50. Hereticating Prelates; and this is a Title he takes great delight in, and applies to all Councils that condemn any Hereticks. p. 77. He has much ado to forbear calling Theo∣philus of Alexandria a down-right Knave. p. 95. Speaking of Bishops, he calls them the Fire-brands of the World. p. 98. Self-conceited Bi∣shops. p. 196. Merciless, Furious Bishops. p. 183. The Confounders of Churches, &c. And this is the Temper of the Catholick, of the mere Christian, as Mr. B. is pleased to style himself. Bitterness, and Wrath, and Clamor, and Evil Speaking, are
these the Fruits of that mere Christi∣an Spirit? To say no worse, This Spi∣rit cometh not of him that calleth us. But because Mr. B's Character of a Credible Historian regards not only those that write an Original History, it will be expedient to add something concerning such Qualifications as are most necessarily required in an Abridg∣er, or Collector of General Church History at this time. 1. It is very requisite, that whoso∣ever undertakes to write a General History of Bishops and Councils, should be acquainted with the Languages in which those Historians, out of whom he collects, have written: For it is neither safe, nor very decent to depend altogether upon Translations. Who does not see, who has read Valesius his Edition of the Ancient Church Hi∣storians, how necessary it was to tran∣slate them a new? And how often for∣mer Translations had mistaken the Meaning of those Authors, in Passa∣ges very Material? And who would not smile, after all this, to see a man
pretending to Learning, transcribing out of Dr. Hanmar's Translation, and Copying out the grossest of his Mi∣stakes? As for Instance, p. 83. Mr. Baxter, out of that English Translati∣on, says, That Hypatia taught in the Schools which Plotinus continu∣ed.. Scholam à Plotino deductam, Vales. He should have said, That he taught in the Platonick School, de∣scended or continued down from Plotinus, i. e. where he had taught above a Hundred Years before Hypatia was born: For Plotinus died about the Year of Christ, 270. Hypatia flourish'd in the begin∣ning of the Fifth Century: And p. 127. we have this imperfect Sence, Also that he em∣braceth the Venerable Images which the Oeco∣nomy of our Lord Jesus Christ: &c. Where he observeth that the Verb is left out, whereas the Sence is perfect in the Greek, and there needs no Verb; The Venerable Images of the Oeconomy of Christ: But of this
sort of Mistakes it would be endless to give Instances, the Translations of the Greek Historians and Councils, which he has made use of being very bad. But it may be alleadg'd here, in Mr. Baxter's Defence, that several other Compilers of Councils, and Church History, had as little Greek as he: For Surius and Crabbe had none at all, and Baronius discovers his Igno∣rance in this part, by the miserable Versions he is forc'd to make use of. Bi∣nius, Mr. B's. Author does not seem to have any, for all his Greek and Latin Edition of the Councils. And Bayle, a French-Man, and a Late Abridger of the Councils, had just so much Greek, as to be able to derive the Anomaei, Hereticks that denied Christ to be of like Substance with the Father, from , & , exleges, or sine Lege, Men without Law. Well then, let Mr. B. be excus'd in this particular, for undertaking to write Church History upon the Credit of Wretched Translations. It will be surely indispensably necessary to under∣stand these Transactions: But because
Mr. B. is so puzzl'd with these Latin Versions, I wish'd for his sake, that Hanmar had translated Binius: I wonder in what Dictionary Mr. B. found that ire ad Comitatum, was to go the Palace of Great Prelates? p. 56. We have strange Confusion of Discourse. p. 88. About the Scrip∣tures, the Divine and Terrible Scrip∣tures, for want of understanding the Language of those times; for all that Scripture is nothing else than Sacra Im∣peratoris, the Emperor's Letter. p. 107. Mr. B. represents Theodoret as a Je∣suit, not, I believe, out of any Evil Will, but for want of a little Latin. Theodoret says (according to Mr. B's. Translation) I take not my self to say true,. but I know I please God. Vere non dico, nisi quomo∣do novi placere Deo, i. e. In good Truth I do not speak, but as I am persuaded is acceptable to God: But p. 112. Mr. B. translates the Translation of Nicephorus some∣thing pleasantly. Stephanus (says he) was kill'd by the Boys, with sharp
Quills. Surely these were Porcupin's Quills to do this Execution: Yet it is to be acknowledged, that he has the Authority of Qui mihi for the Quills; but because in the same place these Calami acuti are said to be sharpened like Spears,. it will make new Difficulties: The Critics would be at a loss about it, if some Dictio∣naries did not render Calamus a Reed, or a Cane, which possibly may better agree with the Description of these Fa∣tal Weapons. I must confess I was something surpriz'd with Mr. B's sin∣gular way of rendring the Names of Places; as p. 96. The Council at Regiense, at Arausican. p. 131. at To∣letane. p. 217. George Bishop, of Praenestine. p. 358. D. of Spoletane. p. 428. Council of Palentine; with many more of this kind. It would sound something strange with us, to say, the Ʋniversity of Oxonian, or of Can∣tabrigian: For my part, if he stand upon it, I do not love to contend about Words, let him have Liberty of Con∣science in Grammar as well as Religion.
But Mr. B's Translation of Canon the 21st. of the Council of Tours is something more considerable, because Mr. B. makes Remarks upon it, in be∣half of some Dissenters: The Passage is somthing long, but to make the Rea∣der amends, it shall be the last; not for want of Matter, but because I would not tire him with too many In∣stances of one sort: the foresaid Canon is thus rendred by Mr. B. p. 187. Those that the Law commandeth to be put to Death, if they desire to hear the Preacher, we will have to be convicted unto life (i.e. not to die;) for they are to be slain with the Sword of the Mouth, and de∣priv'd of Communion, if they will not observe the decrees of the Seni∣ors left them, and do despise to hear the Pastor, and will not be sepa∣rate. Some Sectaries among us (says Mr. B.) are of the same mind a∣gainst putting penitent Malefactors to Death. Whatever mind some Se∣ctaries may be of, it is plain Mr. B. did not apprehend the Mind of this Council. The matter in short is thus:
This Canon speaks of such as having vowed Virginity, do afterwards mar∣ry; and that tho' the Ecclesiastical Laws do punish such with perpetual Excommunication; yet this Council thought fit so far to mitigate the pu∣nishment, as to offer Pennance and Reconciliation to such who shall sepe∣rate from these Marriages; which the Council expresses thus: Nos vero si quos lex perimi jubet, si cupiunt audire praeconem volumus ut con∣vertantur ad vitam: Nam peri∣mendi sunt Oris Gladio, & Commu∣nione privandi, si relicta sibi Senio∣rum decreta observare noluerint, & pastorem suum audire despexerint, & esse separati noluerint, i. e. We or∣der, that those whom the Rigor of the ecclesiastical law commands to be cut off, if they desire to hear the voice of the Preacher, (calling them to Repen∣tance) should be converted and live: For those that refuse to obey the De∣crees of the Bishops that have been before us, and also neglect their Pa∣stor, and will not seperate themselves, (i. e. from those unlawful Marria∣ges)
are to be cut off by the Sword of the Mouth, and Excommunicati∣on. And this is explained by what follows presently after, Qui verò in hac pertinacia perdurare voluerint, & potius in volutabro malae Conver∣sationis permanere quam se de veti∣to Conjugio separare perenni Ex∣communicatione damnentur, i. e. Let those who will obstinately persist, and chuse rather to wallow in the Enjoy∣ments of a forbidden Marriage, than to seperate from it, be condemn'd to perpetual Excommunication. I have promis'd to spare the Reader's Stomach, or Spleen in this kind; and to add no more Instances of Mr. B's Success in Translating Binius, and therefore shall add no more of this kind. 3. It is very requisite for an Abridg∣er of Church-History, of Bishops and Councils, to consult the best Editions of those Historians and Councils; least instead of the Words of the Historians, or of the Councils, he obtrude upon his Reader the Oversight of Copyists: If Mr. B. had been at this pains, and consulted Sirmond's Edition of the
French Councils, he must have want∣ed several Allegations for the Congre∣gational way, which are nothing else but corrupt Readings of the Ancient Canons of the Gallicane Church, as is shewed more at large in this Book: Nor can we suspect Sirmond as too great a Favorer of Diocesan Bishops, since it is well known how he is charg'd by the Abbot of St. Cyran, under the Name of Petrus Aurelius, for having falsyfied a Canon of the Council of Orange to the prejudice of the Episco∣pal Order, to comply perhaps with a Design the Jesuits had then on Foot to Govern the Papists of England, inde∣pendent from any Diocesan Bishops: Jesuits care as little for Bishops, as our Protestant Dissenters can do. 4. It is very requisite that an A∣bridger of Church-History use some lit∣tle Diligence in Examining and Com∣paring of Authors; at least in consi∣dering that Author out of which he takes his History: for want of this lit∣tle Care it is, that Mr. B. tells us, out of his own Head, That Theodaha∣tus yielded up Rome and the Crown
to Belisarius, p. 130. Whereas Theo∣dahatus was kill'd before Belisarius came near Rome; and it was from Vitiges that Rome and the Crown were forced by that Great General, as Procopius and Evagrius do parti∣cularly relate. It is an odd Oversight of Mr. B. p. 201. where he tells us, that King Egica, before the Council of Toledo writeth a Sermon for them (the Bishops) wherein he tells them, that every Parish that have twelve Families must have their pro∣per Governor; i. e. a Presbyter: Whereas that is not part of the King's Sermon, as Mr. B. calls that Prince his Letter to the Council, but a Canon of the Council it self: For the King's Letter ends long before with a Formal Date. Dat. die 70 faeliciter 60 Reg∣ni: Toleto. In the same Page Mr. B. to shew his Skill, makes Willibrood and Wilfrid to be the same; I wonder the more at this, because Binius, in this very place, from whence Mr. B. takes his account of Willibrood and Wil∣frid does plainly make them to be two persons; but when Mr. B. goes to play
the Critick, this is constantly his Suc∣cess: But Binius leads him into a mi∣stake, p. 253. where he transcribes, out of his Author, That Ludovicus deprives him (Pepin) of his King∣dom of Italy, and divideth it be∣tween his two Sons by the Second Wife, Charles and Rodolphus: It is great news to Historians, to hear, that Lewis had two Sons by his Second Wife, since no mention is made of any other but Charles; the Writer of that Emperor's Life, speaks of no other; nor Ammonius who transcribes him; nor the following Chronicles. Girard, Vignier, Mezeraye, who reckon up Lewis his Children, have no such person; and say expresly, that Judith had but one Son: She had a Brother indeed nam'd Rodolphus, but he had no share of the Empire: But this Di∣vision of Pepin's Kingdom, was be∣tween Lotharius and Charles, as the Annal. Franc. before mentioned do deliver: Nor was Italy the Kingdom of Pepin, the Son of Lewis, as Bini∣us and Mr. B. tells us; but Aquitain. Lotharius had been a good while before
made King of Italy, and Crown'd by the Pope, in the place of Bernard. Mr. B. by way of Remark, p. 342. says, That it was no wonder that Pope Benedict, and his Company should condemn Berengarius; but Lanfrancus, in his Book against Beren∣garius, writes, that Leo the Ninth was the first that condemn'd him some Years after the Death of Benedict, Anno Dom. 1050. We have a Conje∣cture of Mr. B's. p. 356. that is not unpleasant, and that shews his profound Skill in History: He cites an Epistle of Gregory the Seventh to the King of Denmark, where, among other things, he invites him to send his Son with an Army to conquer a Maritine province not far from Rome, possess'd by vile and sluggish Hereticks: What Province he means (says Mr. B.) I am not certain, unless it be the Waldenses. It is pretty well guess'd: For Gregory the Seventh died in the Year 1085. and P. Waldo, from whom the Waldenses had their Deno∣mination, began to be taken notice of about the Year 1160. But Fourscore
Years break no Square; nor is our Au∣thor much more happy in his Geogra∣phy, than in his Chronology: For p. 421. He tells us, that there was a Council held at Vienna near France: As if a Man should say, the City of Sarum near England: But there would be no end of instancing all the Over∣sights of this Church-History: the Reader may dip at adventure, and if he do not light upon Mistakes as Re∣markable as any of these, he has but ill Fortune: He that takes any plea∣sure to trace Beveus and Mistakes, may find here an endless Comedy of Er∣rors. 5. But I had almost forgot one Qua∣lification very requisite for a Church-Historian, which must not be omitted, the Learned call it , the want of which, betrays a Writer sometimes, when Fortune is not propitious, into great Absurdities. I will not be so bold with Mr. B. as to say this was the Occasion of a strange Misadven∣ture of his, p. 122. For speaking of the Canon of Scripture concluded upon in a Council at Rome, under Pope
Gelasius, Mr. B. makes a wonderful Discovery, that in the Canon they put a Book called, ORDO HISTO∣RIARƲM: And now let the Church of Rome value it self if it dare, for having preserv'd the Canon of Scrip∣ture entire and undiminish'd; since Mr. B. plainly discovers a Book to have been once in their Canon, which is not now to be found in any of the Pope's Bibles. A strange thing this! that no body should ever discover this before: But I wonder that he did not find out another Book in that Canon, every whit as strange as this, and that is Ordo Prophetarum: For there it is as a General Title before the Pro∣phets, as this Ordo Historiarum is before some Historical Books. This mistake is as if a Man should find a Chapter in the Bible call'd Contents, or a Book call'd Apocrypha. I have given these few Instances, out of many of Mr. B's great Abilities in Church-History, that the Reader may perceive how much this Infamous Li∣bel against Bishops and Councils is to be depended upon; and let any Man
that has any acquaintance with these Mattters, judge impartially whether this History do really disgrace Bishops or Councils, or any body else so effe∣ctually as it does the Author? And if this be the Effect of having made Hi∣story ones long and hard Study, e∣ven let us burn Binius and Baronius, and go make Buttons: We may with honest Application employ our time so to much better purpose. I must detain the Reader a little longer with this Preface, while I en∣deavor to clear some Passages of this Book, which may seem to be answered already, the Effect of them being said in behalf of Episcopacy, and replied to on the part of the Dissenters: For some part of this Book being Printed 8 or 9 Months ago, and the Subject having been treated by several Hands, it could not be, but that several things should be said to the same effect in An∣swer to Mr. B's Allegations for the Congregational Way; and in Confir∣mation of Diocesan Episcopacy, with what is written here; and being repli∣ed to there, seem already to have re∣ceiv'd
their Answer: Wherefore I con∣ceiv'd it necessary to take off such Ex∣ceptions as prevented any Passages in this Book; and because it could not be done conveniently, in the Book it self, to reserve them for the Preface: But upon Examination, I found them to be fewer than I did at first imagine; For Mr. Baxter, since his Church-History, and Treatise of Episcopa∣cy has made no farther Impression in∣to this Controversie; I have examin'd some Chapters of that Book that pur∣su'd the Design of this History, by the Addition of several Historical Passa∣ges to disgrace the Episcopal Govern∣ment, as the occasion of all Mischiefs in the Church: As for the first part, about the Order of Bishops, it had too many particulars to be minutely consi∣dered; but the Substance of it having been said in short in the first Chapter of his Church, and more at large in his Disputation of Church Government, has been examin'd in the beginning of this Book Dr. O. hath follow'd Mr. B. in the Congregational way; and as for his Allegations out of Antiquity, they are
transcribed out of Mr. Baxter, with little of Improvement or Addition. One would think a diligent Man might find good Gleaning after Mr. B. but Dr. O's. Book, it seems, is answered already by an unknown Hand: But there is a later Book published under the Title of No Evidence for Dioce∣san Churches, &c. in the Primitive Times, in Answer to the Dean of St. Paul's Allegations out of Anti∣quity for such Churches, &c. But no Reply being yet made, that I know of to those Exceptions, I shall endea∣vor to take off such of them as may con∣cern me. 1. I have endeavored to prove, that the Church of Carthage in Cyprian's Time, was Diocesan; and among o∣ther things, urge for it the Multitude of Presbyters that belong'd to that Church, even in the time of Persecuti∣on, when the greatest part of the Cler∣gy was fallen off. The Author above∣mentioned excepts against this, where it is alleadg'd by the Dean of S. Paul's, and offers two things in Answer; 1. A Passage out of Bishop Downham, That
indeed, at the first Conversions of Cities, the whole Number of the People converted (being sometimes not much greater than the Number of Presbyters plac'd among them) were able to make but a small Con∣gregation: But this Allegation can be of little Ʋse, because, 1. This was not the Case of the Church of Carthage, it was not a new converted Church, but settled long before, and in a flouri∣shing Condition. 2. Many more Pres∣byters may be ordain'd in a City than is necessary for the first Beginnings of a Church, with respect to future En∣crease; and for the Service of such as afterwards should believe: So that tho' there might be in a new gather'd Church, almost as many Presbyters as there are People, yet the Design of that number of Officers may be for several Congre∣gations, when the Believers of that place should become so numerous as not to be contain'd in one. 3. The Multi∣tude of Presbyters belonging to one Congregational Church, might be occa∣sioned by the uncertain Abode of most of the Apostles and their Commission∣ers,
who are the Principal, if not the only Ordainers of Presbyters, mention∣ed in Scripture. Therefore they might ordain more than were just necessary for the present Occasions of a Church, because they could not be present to or∣dain, as often as the Increase of a Church, or Vacancies, or other Necessities of it should require. But that any Church fix'd and settled, having its Bishop always present, should multiply Presby∣ters beyond Necessity, in the Circum∣stances of the Primitive Christians before Constantine, is altogether in∣credible: For the necessary Expences of the Church were very great; the Poor numerous; the generality of Chri∣stians not of the Richest; and the E∣states they had being at the Discreti∣on of their Enemies, and ruin'd with perpetual Persecution: Is it credible, that persons in this Condition would multiply Officers without Necessity, who were to be maintain'd out of the Public Stock; as Cyprian affirms the Pres∣byters of Carthage were? And lastly, if this Opinion of Bishop Downham had any certain Ground in Antiquity,
We should probably hear of it with both Ears: and we should have it recom∣mended upon Ancienter Authority than His: But the first which this Author cites is Nazianzen, who complains of the Multitude of Presbyters in his Time: This has been already alleadg'd by Mr. Baxter, and has received An∣swer; and he that cannot answer it to himself from the great difference be∣tween the Condition of the Church in Cyprian, and in Nazianzen's Time, has a fondness for the Argument be∣yond my Skill to remove. The next Instance of the number of Presbyters belonging to the great Church of C. P. St. Sophia, the greatest per∣haps in the World, will do as little Service, as the complaint of Nazi∣anzen: Justinian (says that Gentle∣man) Observing that Officers in Churches were multiply'd beyond reason and measure, takes order that they should be reduc'd to the num∣bers of the first Establishment; but in the great Church at C. P. he would have the Presbyters brought down to Sixty: And what follows
from this? That the Number of Pres∣byters was become extravagant in Ju∣stinian's Time; but what is this to their Number in Cyprian's: For this very Edict of Justinian shews, that this multiplying of Church-Officers, was an Innovation, and therefore would have them reduc'd to the first Establish∣ment; but that first Establishment it seems admitted great Numbers; for one Church had Sixty: True; but it must also be noted first, that these sixty were to serve more than one Church: For there were three more, besides St. Sophia, to be supply'd by those Presby∣ters, as may be seen in the Constitution, Nov. 3. c. 1. viz. St. Mary's Church, and that of Theodorus the Martyr, and that of Helena, as some, but of Irene as others read: Yet after all, there is no Argument to be drawn from this Number; for these were Canons of a particular Foundation, design'd for the Service of a Collegiate Church, and no measure to be taken from hence con∣cerning the Numbers of Presbyters be∣longing to the Diocess. This is evi∣dent from the Preface of the said No∣vel,
whither I refer the Reader. But I must confess, that what this Gentleman adds concerning the Church of Constantinople is something surpri∣zing. No doubt (says he) they (the Presbyters) were more numerous in C. P. in Constantine's Time, who en∣deavor'd to make that City in all things equal to Rome, and built two Churches in it;Soz. l. 2. c. 2. yet in the latter end of his Reign, after the Death of Ar∣rius, the Christians there could all meet together for Worship: It is said expresly, that Alexander, Bishop of that Church, . That Constantine built two Churches in C. P. Sozomen does not say but that he built many and very great Churches there.Soz. l. 2. c. 3. Ed. Vales. Euseb. de vit. Const. l. 3. c. 48. : af∣ter the same manner Eusebius says, that he adorn'd the City that he cal∣led after his own Name, with many Churches, and great Temples, . Some within the City, and in the Suburbs of it: Nor can we i∣magine, that two Churches (much less one) could suffice all the Christians in
C.P. when the City of Heliopolis being converted to Christianity requir'd more, and Constantine built several for them, ,Soc. l. 1. c. 18. i. e. Having built several Church∣es, he ordered a Bishop; but one for all those Churches and Clergy to be ordain'd there. Socrates indeed says, that Constantine built two Churches in C. P. and names them; but does not say, either that there were no more there in his Time, or that he built no more; but these being remarkable for the Magnificence of the Structure, are perhaps, upon that account, only men∣tion'd by this Author: But we have shew'd already from other Writers, of as good, or better Credit, That this Emperor built there very many, and very Great Churches. Nor were these only for State and Ornament, but the Number of Believers in that City did require many Churches for their Assemblies: And the Passage of Theodoret above cited does not im∣port the contrary: Therefore to clear this point, I will endeavor to shew the State of the Church of C. P. about the
later end of Constantine's Reign; and how it was impossible for them to meet All in one place. 2. I will shew, that the words before cited do not con∣clude, that all the Believers of C. P. were assembled in one Congregation with Alexander their Bishop. 1. As to the State of this Church, it could not but be very numerous, when we con∣sider what care the Emperor took to bring Inhabitants to it from all Parts, some from Rome, some from other Provinces; and it is more than pro∣bable, that much the greatest part of those that came to inhabit the first Chri∣stian Emperor's Favorite City, were Christians. 2. His care for rendering this City great and suitable to the Magnificence of so mighty a Prince, had that Success, that it did not only equal Old Rome, but excell'd it as well in Greatness of its Wealth, as the Multitude of its Inhabitants, , says Sozom.L. 2. c. 3. And the same Author adds, that the Piety of the Emperor, and of the Citizens, and their Charity towards the Poor, was the reason of its mighty Increase, from
the whence may be judg'd, what Religion the Generality of the City did profess. 3. The Success of that Charity did not only add, to the Number of the Citi∣zens, but very considerably to the num∣ber of Christians: For the same Au∣thor writes, that it had so good effect there. , i.e. That many of the Jews, and almost all the Heathens were converted and became Christians. 4. The same Au∣thor, to make it altogether a Christian City, writes farther, that it was never polluted with any Heathen Temples or Sacrifices, unless it were in the Time of Julian the Apostate. 5. The Pro∣vision which Constantine made for the Burial of the Dead, shews the num∣ber of the Church of C. P. to be far too great for one Congregation: For he alloted to that charitable Ʋse no less than Nine Hundred and Fifty Shops, or Work-houses, whose Profits were to be employed in burying the Poor de∣cently; which Shops were to be free from all Tax and Duty to the Prince: As you may see by comparing these se∣veral places in the Body of the Civil
Law, N. 59. with N. 43. and with N. L. 12. And Honorius in the Year 409. considering the Number of the Decani, the small Officers that atten∣ded Funerals, to have grown inordi∣nate, reduces them to Nine Hundred and Fifty, probably the first Establish∣ment of Constantine the Great. See Justinian's Code, l. 1 T. 2, 4. And if after all this, all the Christians in C. P. could meet together in one Church towards the latter end of Constantine's Reign, we must conclude some wonder∣ful Mortality to have happen'd, and that these Decani had had extraordi∣nary Employment, and bury'd, in a manner, the whole City: But let them believe that can comprehend; For my part, I can as soon imagine, that Ho∣mer, with all his Scholiasts, can be put into a Nut shell, or that a Witch can turn her self in a Key-hole, as that all the Christians in C. P. made but one Congregation. But notwithstanding the Number of Christians in C. P. might be much too great for one Congregation, yet the major part might be Hereticks, or Schismaticks, such as came not to the Bishops Church,
and therefore all that adher'd to him, might be no more than could meet in one Assembly. To which I answer, towards the latter end of Constan∣tine's Reign, it was so far from being the Case of the Church, that the num∣ber of Hereticks and Schismaticks was inconsiderable; and most of those were forc'd to come to Church; and that there may be no Difficulty remaining in this point, I will give some farther account of the number of the Catho∣lick Christians in comparison with Hereticks and Schismaticks. Constantine the Great, having set his Heart upon Christian Religion, to settle and adorn it, he thought nothing more effectual than the Ʋnity and Con∣cord of Christians; to promote which, he resolv'd to proceed against all Here∣ticks and Dissenters by a severe Law, and to reduce them to the Ʋnity of the Church. The Doctrine of Arrius, tho it began to be favour'd in several pla∣ces, had not yet made a formal Sepe∣ration,L. 2. c. 32. says Sozomen,, i. e. All came to Church, and communicated together;
but the Novatians and some old Here∣ticks. Against these the Emperour made an Edict, whereby he took away their Churches, and ordered them to be joyn'd to the Churches of the Catholicks. — He told them, it was better for them to communi∣cate with the Catholick Church, and advis'd them to come over to it. The Success of this Law we find in the very same place; That by this means, . The memory of those Heresies was in a manner ex∣tinguish'd; for they came all to Church for fear of that Law against their Con∣venticles. :Ibid. And those that persisted in their Opinion, having no opportunity to Conventicle, nor to corrupt the minds of men, died at last, and left none to succeed them in their Opinions: Only the Novatians remain'd, who, says the Author, did not suffer much by this E∣dict, being befriended by the Emperor, who had an esteem for their Bishop of C. P. upon the account of his Holiness; and therefore his Church there was not much endammag'd, tho' the Historian
speaks this very mincingly, and says on∣ly, that it was probable, that so it was; and likely had no other reason for it, than the Opinion which the Novatians had of that Bishop; and that their Church was not altogether extirpated then, like those of other Hereticks: But he confesses, that every where else they suffer'd the same measure with o∣thers, unless it were in Phrygia, and some Bordering Provinces: And now to allow the Novatians a Conven∣ticle in Constantinople, towards the later end of Constantine's Reign, which is more than Sozomen durst af∣firm, yet I hope the Catholicks will be still too numerous, to meet all of them in one Congregation. But Theodoret affirms, they were no more than could meet in one Church, and that they did actually do so. I an∣swer, That Theodoret does not say so, and that the Passage cited does not conclude it; therefore to clear this dif∣ficulty, let us examine it: After the Death of Arrius, says Theodoret, those of Eusebius's Faction were much out of Countenance, and bury'd him; but on the other side,L. 1. c. 14.,
which Valesius renders thus: B. autem Alexander cum gaudio totius Ecclesiae collectas celebravit piè, & orthodoxe, simul cum Universis fratribus Deum orans, & impense glorificans: Now he takes the Phrase , in a gene∣ral Sence, which I suppose was spoken with respect to that particular Congre∣gation in which Arrius was to have been reconciled, if he had lived but one Night longer; and that the Author intends only to say, that that Service was performed , with the Joy of that Church, which the Bi∣shop apprehended would be the occasion of great Trouble to it; and that with all the Brethren there present, not all the Believers of Constantinople (for that he does not say) he pray'd to, and prais'd God for what had happen∣ed; unless you will say, that the , does not signifie their Personal Presence, but only their Ʋ∣nanimity;* . A∣quila. as that of David Ps. 33.3. .
To conclude this point then, Theodoret could not think that all the Believers of C. P. could come together to the Bi∣shop's Church; for he cites a Letter of Constantine a little after this, where he gives an Account of the great In∣crease of that Church.c. 16. In the City that is call'd by my Name (says he) by the Providence of God, an in∣finite Multitude of People have joyn'd themselves to the Church; and all things there wonderfully in∣creasing, it seems very requisite that more Churches should be built; un∣derstanding therefore hereby what I have resolv'd to do, I thought fit to order you to provide Fifty Bi∣bles fairly and legibly written, &c. which he signifies in the same place to be design'd for the Service of the Churches there. Now where Christi∣ans were so multiplied, that it was ne∣cessary to build more Churches, and to make such Provisions for the Multi∣tude of their Assemblies, it could not be, that they should all make but one Congregation, It would swell this Preface to too
great a Bulk; if I should answer the rest so particularly: Therefore I shall be more brief, but as plain as I can; p. 10, 11, 12. This Author gives se∣veral Instances of several Bishops be∣ing in one City at the same time, in Answer to the Dean of Pauls, who af∣firm'd, That it was an inviolable Rule of the Church, to have but one. I have endeavored to shew, that it was the Rule of the Church to have no more than one: So Cornelius affirms, that in a Catholick Church there ought to be no more; and the Council of Nice finds Expedients even against the shew and appearance of two Bishops being to∣gether in one place. Jerusalem is the first Instance, which is said to have had several Bishops together in the time of Narcissus. I wonder to find a man of Learning cite this Passage, than which nothing can be more disad∣vantageous to his Cause: For 1. Nar∣cissus having retired, and the People not knowing what had become of him, the Neighboring Bishops ordain'd Dius in his place; who dying in a short time, was succeeded by Germanicio. In his Time Narcissus returns, and was
desir'd by the Church to resume his Of∣fice. What became of Germanicion is not said, probably he resign'd, or di∣ed presently: For the next thing we find is, that Narcissus, being very old, an Hundred and Sixteen Years of age, took Alexander into a Participation of the Charge: He was indeed the Bi∣shop, and Narcissus retain'd but the Title and Name only, as we may gather out of Alexander's Letter, ,Euseb. l. 6. c. 11. i. e. Who was Bishop before me, and who now joyns with me in Prayers. The Administration was, it seems wholly in the Hands of Alexander: For the Historian says of Narcissus before, . He was not able to officiate by reason of his great Age: And Valesius confirms this in his Notes upon the place. Hoc e∣nim sibi-vult Alexander, Narcissum in Orationibus duntaxat, non in reliquo Episcopali munere sibi col∣legam fuisse, and then, Ex quibus ap∣paret, Alexandrum non tam adju∣torem quam Episcopum in locum
Narcissi, utpote jam decrepiti factum fuisse. Narcissum verò nudum nomen Episcopi, atque honorem retinuisse. The next instance is of Theotecnus and Anatolius, who were for some time Bishops of Caesarea together: Anatolius was a person of extraordi∣nary Learning and Abilities, and Theo∣tecnus, designing to make him his Successor, says the Historian, ordain∣ed him Bishop in his Life time,Euseb. l. 7. c. 32. and as it were his Coadjutor, or Episco∣pus designatus: Afterwards Macari∣us and Maximus were Bishops at once in that Church: He means that of Je∣rusalem, tho' that of Caesarea was the last he mention'd; and this Instance is of the same nature with the other: For Sozomen writes, that first of all he was secretly design'd by the Peo∣ple, to succeed Macarius after his Death: And to make sure of his Suc∣cession, with the Consent and Concur∣rence of their Bishop, they brought it about, that he should stay at Jerusalem, and assist Macarins in the Episcopal Office,Soz. l. 2. c. 20. and , i. e. After his Death to govern that Church, where∣as
before he did only , i. e. assist in the Divine Service and Offices of the Church. Epiphanius, continues this Gent. (alleadg'd by Grotius for this pur∣pose) signifies that other Cities had two Bishops, and excepts but one, Alexandaia had never two Bishops,; His meaning cannot be (as a great Antiquary would have it) that Alexandria was never so di∣vided, as that several parties in it should have their respective Bishops there; for so it was divided in the time of Epiphanius, when the Ca∣tholicks had Athanasius, the Arrians had Gregorius, and then Georgius, and afterwards the one had Peter, the o∣ther Lucius; and the Novatians had their Bishops successively in that Ci∣ty,Soc. l. 7. c. 7. till Cyril's time. To which I an∣swer as briefly as I can. 1. That Epi∣phanius cannot mean that all other Ci∣ties had had two Bishops at a time: For the contrary is too notorious, and the Cases above alleadg'd are extraor∣dinary, when the Bishop, or People of a City had a mind to secure the next Succession to some Extraordinary Per∣son.
He was made the Assistant and Coajutor of that Bishop he was to suc∣ceed: If Alexandria had never done this (and it might be the reason why Athanasius was not ordained then when he was design'd by Alexander) I do not see what advantage can be made of this Passage; the practice of those other Churches has been already considered: However I do not see why that Learned Antiquary's Opinion may not be maintain'd against this Gent's. Objections: He says, that A∣lexandria was divided before Epipha∣nius his Time, between several Bi∣shops: It cannot be denied; but that is not the thing Epiphanius speaks of, but that before the Election of Theonas against Athanasius, who was before appointed by Alexander with the Ap∣probation of the Church, there were ne∣ver two opposite Bishops, as in other Churches: the Instances are all later than this Fact; and therefore are insignifi∣cant: Ʋnless it be that of the Nova∣tians. That they had their Bishops successively to Cyril's Time:Soc. l. 7. c. 7. Socra∣tes does not say in the place alleadg'd;
but only that Cyril had taken from him all that he had; and Successive∣ly from what time had they their Bi∣shops there? That is not said: It may be they began there after this time: For there is little account in Church-History, that I know, of any Novati∣ans in Alexandria before Athanasius. The next Instance is pregnant, and comprising many at once, as the Gen∣tleman tells us, it is that of Valerius and St. Augustin, who were Bishops of Hippo together; and the Bishops of those Parts assured Austin, that this was usual, and prov'd it by Ex∣amples, both in the Africane and Transmarine Churches, as Possedo∣nius tells us: But suppose all this true, that this might be maintain'd by the Examples of several Churches: What is it? That two Bishops may be in one Church? No, that is not the Matter; but that a Bishop, when he grows Old, may appoint or ordain his Successor, to prevent the Mischiefs that are usually produc'd by popular Elections, and to secure the Succession to some Extraor∣dinary Man; and this was not thought
to violate that Rule that allow'd but one Bishop to a City: For this Provision for a Successor does not destroy that Rule. For Instance, I believe no man will deny, but that this Government is Monarchical in its Constitution; and that it, ought to be in the hands of a Single Person; or if Royallists, word be not Authority enough, the Worthy Gentlemen that would have convinc'd Cromwell's Conscience about is, I hope will satisfie: And yet, after that this Succession had been a little interrupted by the Ʋsurpation of King Stephen, Henry the Second thought it conveni∣ent to make his Eldest Son King in his Life Time, and to have him Crown∣ed to secure the Succession: Yet for all this, and tho some more Instances may be fetch'd of the same Nature, from neigh∣boring Kingdoms, yet I belive it will be true enough, that it is the Rule of these several Kingdoms to have but one King▪ And this, as far as I am able to perceive, is the utmost that can be made of all those Instances of two Bishops in one Church. As for the last Reason of the Rule about dividing the
Revenue, I suppose it is added only out of Gayety, and might have been left to Mr. Baxter, who is us'd to supply his Want of Learning with a double Portion of Spight. But I have too much respect for this Person (who shews more Learning than any of the Advo∣cates for Dissenters) to make any Re∣flection upon it. This Rule is likewise pag. 15. op∣pugn'd by Exceptions from the Confe∣rence at Carthage; but of this I have spoke so particlarly in the following Book, that I think it unnccessary to add any more. The next thing I find concerns any thing alleadg'd by me is p. 23. where the Bishoprick of Hippo is consider'd. I have shew'd the Names of a good number of Parishes in it, which were under the Care of their Presbyters, and among others alleadg'd the Town of Fussala; the Gentleman Translates it a Castle, I suppose to diminish it; but these Castles were Garrison-Towns, with a good dependance of Villages be∣longing to them; and this particularly is so represented. It was Forty miles
from Hippo, and was in St. Austin's Diocess, and never had a Bishop of its own. This the Gentleman answers, by saying, That the reason why it had a Bishop no sooner, is signify'd by St. Augustin, when he saith there were no Catholicks at all in it: St Augustin says indeed, the Town or Castle it self had none, but the County belonging to it had some: Paucos ha∣bebat illa Terra Catholicos: And there were several Presbyters belonging to those Catholicks, Presbyteri qui eis Congregandis à nobis primitùs sunt Constituti: But I believe the reason alleadg'd for their having a Bi∣shop no sooner will hardly hold: For first, St. Austin says, that this Town, when he set upon the Reduction of it, to the Ʋnity of the Church, had then no Catholicks; but that it never had any he does not say; nor is the thing probable: But as for a Bishop, he ex∣presly says, that it never had any; but that it formerly had Catholicks, we may conclude by Mr. Baxter's rea∣soning, because it belong'd heretofore to the Diocess of Hippo. Simul cum
contigua sibi regione ad paroeciam Hipponensis Ecclesiae pertinuit. Now Mr. B. would ask what did belong to the Bishop of Hippo, the Stones or the Timber of the Town, since none of the People did ever own him: Nor can it be imagin'd how a Town so distant should be judg'd to belong to that Dio∣cese, where yet there never was one Man that own'd the Jurisdiction: So that I conceive this reason will not hold for its having no Bishop of its own, since the same reason destroys its dependance upon the Diocese of Hippo, which is exprefly affirm'd. As to St. Austin's Excuse, that it was too far, and that he could not look af∣ter the inconsiderable Reliques of the Donatists there: It is to be ascrib'd to his Modesty, since he discharg'd the Office of a Bishop towards it in much more difficult Times, while the Pres∣byters he employ'd were barbarously u∣sed, and the generality of the People were against him. The Towns in St. Austin's Diocese, mention'd by the D. of St. Pauls, this Gentleman finds to have had B shops
of their own or some other Towns that had Names like them, which yet may not be the same; but here I am uncon∣cern'd, having, as I remember, men∣tion'd none of these places, but divers others: But I cannot pass by what he offers p. 26. That St. Austin had on∣ly Episcopalem Sarcinam Hipponen∣sem, the Episcopal Charge of Hippo, as if he had been Bishop of the Town only: Nay, but of part of that nei∣ther: For the Donatists had their Bishop there too. This will strangely diminish the Bishoprick of St. Austin, which at first appear'd so large. To which I answer, That for the Dona∣tists having a Bishop there it signi∣fies little to our present purpose, since he was but an Ʋsurper, and the whole Diocess did of right belong to the Ca∣tholick Bishop: As to the Insinuati∣on, that St. Austin was only Bishop of the Town let us believe himself: Hoc Ecclesiae Catholicae, aut ut modum dispensationis meae non supergre∣diar,Ep. 159. hoc Ecclesiae ad Hipponensium Regionem pertinenti prodesse con∣testor:
Which plainly signifies, that all the Church, belonging not only to the Town, but also to the Region of Hippo, belong'd to him. There is but one thing more which I shall observe concerning the Diccess of Hip∣po; and that is a Passage cited out of St. Austin,Ep. 68. to shew, that there were many Bishops in that Region. Ecce interim Episcopos nostros qui sunt in Regione Hipponensi, ubi a vestris tanta mala patimur convenire. To which I answer, that these Bishops, who are said to be in Regione Hipponensi, were not the Bishops of that Region, but some Bi∣shops of the Province met together there; as had been done before upon the like Occasion, as may be seen in the same Epistle, Facto Concilio placuit ut conveniremini. 2, It ap∣pears from the Inscription and Stile of this Epistle, Clerici Catholici Regionis Hipponensium; and yet speaking of the Bishop of Hippo, they call him their Bishop, not one of their Bishops, which they must have
said if they had had more; but Conventus ab Episcopo nostro Pro∣culeianus, —non est Conquestus Episcopus noster, &c. So that not∣withstanding these Bishops mention'd in the Region of Hippo, the Body of that Clergy own but one who was properly their Diocesan: And this is farther clear'd by comparing this pas∣sage with that of St. Austin, mention∣ed a little before, where he assumes to himself the Church belonging to the Regio Hipponensium. From the Diocess of Hippo, we pass to that of Alexandria, of which I have spoke particularly enough be∣fore; but here the same Author of∣fers a great many things, p. 32. which I cannot answer at this time ve∣ry particularly; yet something I shall say as briefly as I can. The Instance of Maraeotis, he says little to; he in∣sinuates as if Maraeotis might not have Number enough of Christians to have a Bishop. But this Athana∣sius does sufficiently shew to be a Groundless Conjecture; and even be∣fore
Athanasius, the Generality of the People there were Christians. He farther finds one Dracontius made a Bishop in the Territory of Alexan∣dria; possibly a Chorepiscopus, or at least-wise, it is manifest from the Epistle to him, that it was the ex∣traordinary Favor of the People to∣wards him, that compell'd him to accept a Bishoprick: And the Danger of their falling to Arrianism was the reason which Athanasius makes use of to press him to accept it. This was an extraordinary Case, and al∣lowing this man a Country Bishoprick, that of Alexandria would be a great deal to big for the Congregational Measure. After this we have Instan∣ces of several Cities that had Bishops, and lay very near one the other; and what does this conclude? Might not these Dioceses be yet much larger than one Congregation? Suppose the Chief Cities of Holland had each a Bishop, yet I conceive they would be Diocesans, though those Cities lie ve∣ry close together. And now after all
this, though we have several Instances out of Egypt, how near Cities were together in some parts; yet upon the whole ac∣count,. Ath. Ap. 2. the Dioceses do appear to be large enough from the Number of them: For in Atha∣nasius his Time, there were not a Hundred Bishops in all Egypt, Li∣bia, and Pentapolis. The next thing I shall take no∣tice of, is the Defence of Mr. Bax∣ter's Allegation out of Athanasius, to shew, that all the Christians of Alex∣andria could meet in one Church. It is to be confess'd, that the Expres∣sions of that Father do seem to favor him, , and that the Church did , hold all, &c. Now suppose that all the Christians in Alexandria, the Catho∣licks at least-wise, could meet toge∣ther in that Great Church, yet all the Diocess could not; there were some parts of it at a good Distance, and they could not conveniently come;
so that the Diocess of Alexandria, will exceed the measure of the Congregatio∣nal Way. 2. Suppose this Great Church could receive all the Multi∣tude, yet if that Multitude was too great for Personal Communion, it is insignificant: For if that be a Congre∣gational Church that can possibly meet between the same Walls, this Congrega∣tional Church will be as indefinite as a Diocess. 3. Before this the Church of Alexandria met in distinct Con∣gregations, : But we are told, that these places were very small, short, and streight places: So I suppose they were in respect of the Multitude of Christians which they did scarcely re∣ceive. But that they were such Chap∣pels or Churches as some of our Pa∣rishes in England have as great a num∣ber as Alexandria, is hardly credible; because, 1. The Church of Alexandria was very numerous from the beginning; and if they met all in one place, it must consequently be very large: Nor
is it likely they should divide till they were grown too numerous for the big∣gest Meeting-place they could conveni∣ently have. 2. Tho' before the Empire was conver∣ted they might be confin'd to little pla∣ces, and forc'd to meet severally, yet after Constantine became Christian, it is not likely that the Alexandrians would content themselves with small and streight Chappels, when every ordinary City built very Great and Magnificent Cathedrals; And, 3. Some of these Churches had been built with a Design of receiving as ma∣ny as well could have Personal Com∣munion in Worship together; as Theo∣nas is said by Athanasius, to have built a Church bigger than any of those they had before: And yet this and all the rest were but few, and streight, in com∣parison of the great Multitude of Ca∣tholicks that were in Alexandria. But I conceive after all this, that the Expressions of Athanasius do not conclude, that all the Christians in A∣lexandria were met in that Great
Church: All that came, it may be found Room; but that all did come is not easily imagin'd: For the Tumul∣tuous manner in which they come to their Bishop, to demand a General As∣sembly, makes it probable, that not on∣ly Women and Children would be glad to absent themselves, but many more, either apprehensive of the Effect of this Tumultuous Proceeding, or of the dan∣ger of such a Crowd, would willingly stay away. Mr. Baxter, tho' he thought the main Body of the Catholicks might meet here, yet he would not conclude that all did; and even these that did assemble here, were too many for one Congregation; and was an Assembly more for solemnity and ostentation, than for Personal Communion in Worship, and the proper Ends of a Religious As∣sembly. But that we may not wonder how the Catholicks should be so few in Atha∣nasius his Time, we are told farther, that the Arrians, and other Dissenters might make much the Major part: Nay, it may be the Arrians alone were
more numerous. How true this is, we may learn from Athanasius, who speak∣ing of the Catholick Party, makes them the Major part of the Alexandrians,: All these were Catholicks, and their business was to desire Siria∣nus and Maximus not to disturb their Churches, till they might send to the Emperor. And that they were the great∣est part, might be yet farther clear'd from several Circumstances of that time, which I cannot insist upon in this place, without being too tedious to the Reader. To conclude this, not only Alexandria, and the other Cities of Egypt had se∣veral Congregations compriz'd in the same Diocess, but the Meletians had some Bishops of several Titles who had more Cities than one in their Diocesses, as may be seen in the Catalogue of Bi∣shops, ordain'd by Meletius, and given in to the Bishop of Alexandria. The lastthing I shall take notice of, is the Diocese of Theodoret. This in∣deed I just mention'd and remitted, the Reader to the D. of Pauls, who
had spoke very particularly of it: I shall therefore say very little to it here, being unwilling to do any prejudice to so good a Cause, and so great a Person, by a weak and unnecessary Defence: But this I cannot omit, that if those 800, not 80 Churches, as this Gentleman reckons them, belong'd to him as Me∣tropolitan, and they were all Episcopal, this poor Region of Cyrus would have more Bishops than all Africk, notwith∣standing they were more numerous there, than in any part of the World besides. I have no more to add, but that there was design'd a Chapter concerning the Right of electing Bishops and Church-Officers, with an Historical Deduction of the Practice of the Church, through the several Ages of it; but because it could not answer the Design first form'd without swelling this Book to too great a Bulk: It may hereafter in due time be publish'd by it self: The Subject af∣fording Variety enough for a large Trea∣tise, and requiring some Time and Diligence to do it to any Effect.
CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS. CHAP. I. OF the Design of Mr. Baxter's Church-History, and his Notion of Primitive, Congregational Epis∣copacy, Page 1. CHAP. II. Of Heresies and the first Councils p. 76. CHAP. III. Of the Council of Nice, and some that followed it, p. 105. CHAP. IV. Of the Council of Constantinople, p. 130. CHAP. V. Of the first Council of Ephesus, p. 177. CHAP. VI. Councils about the Eutychian Here∣resie, p. 228.
CHAP. VIi. The Council of Calcedon, p. 239. CHAP. VIII. Of the Authors of Heresies, Schisms and Corruptions, and whether they were all Bishops, p. 276. CHAP. I. A short View of the other Governments, set up in Opposition to Episcopacy, p. 364. CHAP. II. Of the Rise and Progress of Diocesan Episcopacy, p. 433
ERRATA. THe Faults that have escaped are almost infinite; I have noted some of the most gross. Page 5. for the effect, read this. p. 10. for judicially, r. judi∣ciously p. 11. for concident, r. coincident. p. 5. for the right, r. their. p. 18. for and so many, r. over p. 21. for or Elders, r. over. p 23. there is a whole passage so mangl'd, that it requires some trouble to restore it. What refers to the Council of Calchedon, cited in the Margin, That is left out, viz. that at that time they reckon'd 27 Bishops of Ephesus from Timothy, that Polycrates reckon'd himself the 8. (not the 6.) Bishop of that Church; for so many understand the passage of his Epistle, tho' that does not necessarily follow from the words cited by Eusebius. p. 27. for positure law, r. positive. ibid. the residence, r. their. p. 29. as they, &c. d. as. p. 36. . ibid. for our Presbyters, r. your, ibid. for alledging, r. alluding. 16. for Capital, r. Capitol. p. 39. in the Margin, r. coimus in caetum. p. 41. for the generality of Christi∣ans, r. many Christians. p. 57. for made, r. many Congregational, &c. p. 61. for before our Saviour was born, correct before his Passion. p. 63. r. Pan∣tenus Heraclas. p. 68. for shine, r. thinne. p. 69. r. that he should be. p. 81. for is dangerous, r. as. p. 113. for Constantin's time, r. Constantius. p, 126. for a dozen times, r. lines. p. 136. for to Meletius, r. to Pautinus. p. 143. for possum, r. portum. p. 319. for Observations, r. Obsecrations. p. 332. for not an Heretick, r. Arch-Heretick. 16. Arch Heresie, d. Arch. There are very many false pointings, which the Reader may correct; as Isidor, Pelus, Evagrius, Pontious, &c. where the Comma's are to be blotted out; and several other wrong punctations, that ren∣der the sence sometimes difficult; but with a little observation, the understanding Reader may restore them.
CHAP. I. Of the Design of Mr. Baxter's Church Hi∣story, and his Notion of Primitive con∣gregational Episcopacy. THERE is nothing so fatal to Chri∣stian Religion, as our unhappy Dis∣sentions about it, especially such as divide the Church into Parties, abhorring each others Communion: for be∣sides that, the very Disagreement between men of the same Profession, brings the whole Do∣ctrine under suspition of Falshood or Uncer∣tainty; the Method that the Parties contend∣ing, commonly make use of to set up them∣selves, by the Disparagement and Reproach of the contrary side, serves to bring them and their Religion into the lowest Contempt: and the Result of all is, that the common Enemy is made Judge between them, who fairly sums up the Evidence, and passes Sentence upon all sides, according to their mutual Accusation. This sad Truth is but too much confirmed, by the experience of our times, wherein there are few so happily removed from the noise of profane Conversation, as not frequently to hear the scurrilous Blasphemies of the Atheist, under pretence of running down the several Factions in Religion; 'tis this gives them Shel∣ter
and Protection, and while they pretend to expose this or that Party, they have the Op∣portunity, with little change of Company, to mock all Religion by parcels, and that with the great good likeing and approbation of Chri∣stians themselves. This is no such News, but that most men seem to be sensible of it, and bewail the thri∣ving of Prophaneness, by the Countenance that it receives from our Differences; yet for all this, how few abate any thing of their Fierce∣ness? How few will be so moderate as to sa∣crifice even the most disingenious Arts of Con∣tention, Calumny, and Railing, to the Safety and Honour of our common Faith. I wish Mr. B. had had this Consideration be∣fore him when he set upon the writing of his Church History of Bishops, and their Councils abridged, he has indeed sufficiently abridg'd all the good Services that Bishops and Councils have done to the Church, but their Miscarria∣ges he has enlarg'd upon to purpose, and some∣times, by a foul Juggle, conveyed the best of their Actions into the Catalogue of their Crimes, and their greatest Services for Reli∣gion, prove a considerable part of their Endict∣ment. I must confess, I never saw any thing that in my Judgment reflected with more dis∣honour upon Religion, than this strange ac∣count that he has given of the progress of it, and the frightful Representation that he has made of the Church in all Ages; Heathens have been civil and modest in their Character of us,l. 27. compar'd with this. Ammianus Mar∣cellinus,
though he be something sharp upon Damasus, Bishop of Rome, yet speaks honoura∣bly of the generality of Christian Bishops; Zo∣simus does not mention Chrysostom with any disrespct,l. 5. c. 23. though he had a fair occasion; nay the scurril Wit of that Buffoon Lucian, nor the Malice of Julian the Apostate, have left no∣thing half so scandalous in all their Libels against Christians, as this Church Historian has raked up; for here is nothing to be seen in his Book, but the Avarice, Ambition, Ignorance, Mistakes, and furious Contentions of the Bi∣shops, and the Governours of the Church. And they being so bad, the People that were guided by their Order and Example, could not be much better, they were but the Instru∣ments of the Episcopal Ambition, to fight their Quarrels, to kill all that opposed, and to burn and destroy all that came before them; turbulent, seditious, Incendiaries and Murder∣ers; and what can be the effect of such an Hi∣story, but that men should believe there never was any sort of People so desperately wicked, and so great disturbers of the World: the Ene∣my of our Religion will have reason to rejoyce, that his work is in great measure done to his hands, for this will serve him as a common place book, for railing against Christianity, and the Christian Reader will be in danger, either of loosing all his Patience, or a great deal of that Reverence he had for his Religion, and those primitive Worthies that profest and defended it.
But this perhaps will be thought not to con∣cern the Church, but the Bishops only, who are charged with these Misdemeanours, and dishonour'd by this Representation. He must have a strange notion of the Church, that can think it unconcerned in the dishonour of those by whom it is governed: for if one should write a Book, and call it the History of the English Nation, which should only represent the Vices of our Kings, the Contentions and Disagreements of our Parliaments, the Weak∣ness and Corruption of our Ministers of State and Justice, and represent all persons that were eminent enough to hold any place in Story, under mean and infamous Characters; he must needs have a very metaphysical Moderation,, that could think the honour of the Nation un∣concerned, and that it was no Reflection upon the English name. God forbid I should charge the Design of the Author with any disservice to Religion; but well-meaning men do sometimes pursue their Resentments too far, and so they can be revenged of their Enemies, pursue them into the Church, and set upon them in the Sanctua∣ry, not considering how much it is violated and profaned by the Action. But Mr. B. is not insensible of the evil use that may be made of this book, and therefore endeavours to pre∣vent it by wholsome Caution, and frequently in his History starting like a man affrighted to see that which he though to have been a Rod turn'd into a Serpent, streight applies what Remedies he can against the Poyson: he
does in the first place warm the Reader, that he do not abuse this into Diabolisme. But alas it is a poor Relief, to forbid an Enemy to make use of those Weapons you have put into his hands, to leave the Honour of our Reli∣gion at his Mercy, and then to desire him to be generous, not to make use of his Advantage. However, if the Scorner should prove perverse and take no Warning, Mr. B. proceeds to con∣fute his reasoning, and his Inference, by say∣ing that this scandalous account of the Bishops and their Councils, concludes nothing to the discredit of Church or Religion; for there were many good men that were not Bishops but Presbyters, Monks, or Lay-men; nay,p. 16. 17. &c. many He∣reticks; obscure good men, whose Vertues do not shine in Story; nay, there were some good men among the Bishops themselves, with more to the effect. God forbid I should en∣deavour to invalidate the least shadow of rea∣soning, that is urg'd in defence of the Church of Christ; I joyn heartily with him in this part, and I must profess, it is the greatest end of this Treatise, to prevent the Contempt of Religion, which this Church History might occasion. Nor can I think the Author will be offended, that I take his part and Religions against his own Book, and that I look upon it as a dangerous piece,p. 16. 19. § 49.22. &c. when he himself has gi∣ven such frequent and solemn Warnings against it. But I must take leave to pursue this point up∣on another Supposition than he does, for he takes all his History to be a true and just representa∣tion
of things, and upon that supposal, makes his Vindication of the Church; which I hope is a mistake in him, and will endeavour to shew, is very far from being true; nay on the contrary, it is the most injurious Character and the most unsuitable to the persons it is fast∣ned upon, that can be imagined: this I take the great Confidence to do, because I am per∣suaded, Mr. B. would be very glad this disho∣nourable Character, even of Bishops, should be found a Mistake, rather than it should be true, to the Disparagement of the Christian Name. It is true, that in the Western Church, the generality of the Clergy, as well as Laity, were so grievously corrupted; as well in Doctrine as Discipline, in some of the Ages that were more removed from our Saviour, that we must make use of God's Vindication of the Church of Israel to Elijah, to excuse it from a total De∣fection; but for the first four or five hundred years (thanks be to God) there is no need of that refuge: for the generality of the Chri∣stians of those times, and the Bishops more eminently, were men of that Holiness and In∣tegrity, as reconciled the most obstinate Preju∣dices against their Religion: men of so exact and punctual a Justice, of so frank and unstint∣ed a Charity, of so severe a Temperance, of so grave and weigh'd Conversation, that their Memory does still command an universal Veneration, and their Examples remain a re∣proach to the degeneracy of after Ages. What sort of men did the World know, that were
greater Undervaluers of it? Upon whom did the Temptations of Wealth, or Honour, or Pleasure, prevail less? What Society of men was ever united by so powerful Bands of Friendship and Affection? No Religion had ever so constant and faithful Adherers, whom no Danger, no Loss, no Death could fright from the Acknowledgment of the Truth, which is after Godliness, in hope of eternal Life. And all this owing next to the Grace of God, and the Precepts of so holy a Religion, to the Gui∣dance and Example of the Bishops. It was by their Ministry, that Churches were multiplyed, and the Kingdom of Christ enlarged: by their Care, that they were preserved in Peace and Unanimity. These were the great Champions for Religion, that maintainld the Purity of the Faith against Paul of Samosata, Arrius, Euno∣mius, Photinus, Macedonius, Pelagius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and innumerable other pestilent Here∣ticks, and Overthrowers of the Foundation of our Religion. But with all this, they were men, subject to the same Passions and Mistakes with us, and if some among them were evil men, and the best of them had his Failings, it is not to be wondered at, much less to be ag∣gravated, to the Disparagement of the Order. They were generally, men of severe Lives, and that naturally sharpens the Temper, and ren∣ders it more rigid and uncomplying; they had an extraordinary Zeal for Religion, and that oftentimes made them take Alarme, when it was not in any extream danger; and if their Knowledge and Discretion were not always
proportionable to their Zeal, surely among Christians it might be allowed to the Frailty of Humane Nature, and the Sincerity of a good meaning; If they differ'd sometimes among themselves, and were warmer than is fit in their Disputes; consider that the Apostles themselves had their Misunderstandings, and their Contentions; sometimes Peter was to be blamed, and Barnabas was carried away. The Churches founded by the Apostles, were im∣mediately divided about Opinions, which were presently determined in Council; and yet we do not find that the Controversie was at an end. Should any one therefore so abridge the History of the Apostles, as to represent nothing of them, but their unhappy Contention, and leave them under the odious Characters of Disturbers of the World, and Dividers of the Church? would it not justly pass for a Libel against Christianity? It were disingenious and base, even in an Enemy, in a Christian I know not how to call it. Having paid this duty to the honour of Re∣ligion by a general Vindication of it from such Consequences as might be drawn from this Church History against the Intention of the Au∣thor, I come now to his design, which is laid down, page 27. To shew the Ignorant so much of the matter of Fact, as may tell them who have been the Cause of all Church-Corruption, Heresies, Schisms, Seditions, &c. And whether such Dioce∣san, Prelacies and Grandure, be the Cure, or ever was.] But surely, this is not the way of cure∣ing Church-divisions thus to exasperate. These Reproaches cannot serve to heal, but to fret
and inflame the Wound; I have some hopes that I shall be able to shew the Reader so much of the matter of Fact too, as may let him see how much he has been imposed on by this Hi∣story, and that all Corruptions and Schisms, are very injuriously, and against all Truth of History, charg'd upon the Bishops. Yet sup∣pose the Charge be true, is it such a Wonder, that men of great Talents and great Authority do sometimes abuse them, and by that means become the Cause of Church-Corruptions? Private men though neither better nor wiser than the Bishops, have not the Opportunity of doing so much either Good or Hurt, and their Mistakes or Vices do not draw after them so great Consequences. This Accusation though it may serve to render Bishops odious, is yet of use to prove their Authority, and their ancient possession of the right of governing the Church; like his who would prove, that they have troubled the World ever since the Apostles time. If the abuse of this Power be sufficient reason to take it away, or to render it odious, what will become of preaching, and writing Books? What will become of Scripture and Conscience? Let him still exclaim, the Bishops have been the Authors of all Corruption and Schism, were they not Christians and Men as well as Bishops? and if a Heathen or a Jew should not lay such a Stress upon the name of Bishop, but put that of a Christian in it's place, and then make a great Outery, wicked Chri∣stians! turbulent Christians! would not this reasoning hold as well as Mr. B's? or if some
of the graver Beasts should recover the Conver∣sation they had in Aesop's days, and talk judi∣cially, might not they bray aloud, Horrible men! Abominable men! that will never agree or un∣derstand one another, and then conclude with the Ass in the Satyr. Ma foy non plus que nous l'home n'est qu'une bête. Be the Bishops, whose History Mr. B. writes, as bad as he will have them, how will this concern the rest of that order, unless they will follow their Examples, and own their Cor∣ruptions: Machiavel was of Opinion, that the greatest part of men were Rogues and Knaves, but what is that to You and I? let every man bear his own Burden. But Mr. B. is resolved to cut off this Retreat, and to level his Charge, not so much against the Persons as the office of Bishops, and to this effect, he explains himself, p. 22. There is an Episcopacy whose very Constitution is a Crime; and there is another that seems to me, a thing con∣venient, lawful, and indifferent, and there is a sort which I cannot deny to be of divine Right.] Here we have three sorts of Bishops, and this is pretty reasonable and compendious, but in another Book which he refers to in this, he gives no less than twelve;Disput. of Ch. Go∣vernment p. 14. dividing was much in Fashion at that time, though commonly it was without a difference: and as they could make a sort of Seekers, that neither sought nor found, so he gives several sorts of Bishops that were no more so than he or I; nay, in this
Abridgment of the great Division, I believe the Members will be concident, and that it is but a little artificial Illusion of Mr. B. that makes them appear several; take away the little cor∣ner'd glass, and that great multitude of pieces we saw, are in a moment reduced to one poor Six-pence, well, let us see then, what this cri∣minal sort of Episcopacy is, and what Mr. B. has to lay to it's Charge. That Episcopacy which I take in it self to be a Crime, is such as is afore-mentioned,p. 22. which in it's very Constitution, overthrows the Office, Church and Discipline, which Christ, by himself and his Spirit in his Apostles, instituted:] this is criminal indeed and a thousand Pities it should stand one Mo∣ment. But where shall we find this Abomination? it is not far of, if his Judgment may be taken; for, Such says he, I take to be that Diocesan kind,ibid. which has only one Bishop over many Score or Hun∣dred fixt parochial Assemblies. Is this then their Crime, that they have many fixt parochial As∣semblies under their Government? Had not the Apostles? Had not the Evangelists so too? And was that Constitution criminal? Had not the Bishops of St. Jerom's Notion several fixt Assemblies? That Father did indeed maintain that the poor Bishop of Eugubium was as much a Bishop, as he of Rome; but he little thought that he was more so, or that the Extent of the Roman Diocess had chang'd the very Species of it's Church Government:Hieron. Ep. ad Evagr. he thought they were both of the same sort, and that the single and small Congregation of the one, and the
numerous Assembly under the Inspection of the other, had made no difference at all in the na∣ture or constitution of their Episcopacy; he communicated with, and submitted himself in Questions of the highest moment to the Bishop of Rome:Vid Hier. Ep. ad Da∣mas. which, considering the Temper of the man, and his Contempt of the World, he would hardly have done, if he had judged him an Usurper, but would rather have joyned himself to the poor Bishop of Eugubium, and done all possible Countenance to that Primitive and Apostolick Constitution of Episcopacy. But let St. Jerom think as he pleases, Mr. B. is of another Opinion, and now let us consi∣der his Reasons. By this means (says he) parochial Assemblies are made by them (the Bishops) no Churches,p. 22. § 55. as having no ruling Pastors, that have the Power of judging, who to baptize or admit to Communion or Refuse, but only of Chappels, having Preaching Curates.] But must every Parish be an indepen∣dent Church, and exercise all Authority and Jurisdiction within it's self? May not several Parishes associate under the Discipline of the same Bishop, but that they must be unchurch'd? If it be no Church that has no Bishop, what will become of all Presbyterian Churches, that are subject to Classes? do not they unchurch Parishes as well as Bishops? But they are made no Churches for want of governing Pastors; this is a great Mistake, every Parish with us has a go∣verning Pastor, but it is in Subordination to the Bishop, and with Exception to some Acts that concern the general Union of all the Pa∣rishes
associated. Is he no Governour, because he is not Independent? Is he no Officer that is subordinate? At this rate, every Constable should be a King, and every Captain a Ge∣neral. But our Pastors Mr. B. says, have not the Pow∣er of judging whom to Baptize,] this is a Calumny that has not the least Shadow of Truth, and the contrary is notorious: That they have no power to admit to Communion or Refuse, is not true; they have Power to admit any one that is not excommunicated, or naturally inca∣pable; and they may likewise refuse the Com∣munion to such as they judge notoriously un∣fit, but must afterwards approve their reasons to the Bishop. Several have used their Liberty and Discretion in this point, without Offence; however, it is but fit, that since the peace of the Church does greatly depend upon the right Application of Church-censures, there should be a Restraint laid upon ordinary Ministers in this particular; yet there is no Church-censure can have any effect, without the Consent of the Minister of that Parish where he lives, against whom it is directed: The Ministers Re∣fusal indeed may expose him to great Inconve∣niences, and it is but just, when his Refusal is only the effect of Opposition, yet he has time and opportunity to produce his Reasons; and why should he despair in a just Canse of convincing his Ordinary? However, though the Power of Church-censures be not allowed Parish Presbyters under Diocesan Episcopacy, it is no Diminution of the right; for neither
under the Apostles, nor the Primitive Bishops, did they ever exercise it as principals or inde∣pendent. 2. Mr. B's second Reason against Diocesan Episcopacy is,p. 22. That all the first Order of Bishops in single Churches is depos'd; as if the Bishop of Antioch should have put down a thousand Bishops, about him, and made himself the sole Bishop of the Churches.] This reason goes upon the same Supposition with the other, that every single Congregation had a Bishop, the proof of which we will examine in due place. The Bishops of great Cities had several Parishes or Congre∣gations under them in the first times, which never had any other Bishops but themselves; and it was not this but the contrary, that was the fault of great Bishops and Metropolitans of old: for instead of deposing little Bishops, they multiply'd them to strengthen their Party in Councils,Vid. Collat. Carthag. when they began to vye with one another in number of Suffrages, as if the Arch∣bishop of York should make every Town under his Jurisdiction, an Episcopal Seat, that he might have as many Suffrages as the Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury. This I hope to prove in due place, and to shew the Reader how far Mr. B. is mistaken in the Causes of Schism, and that nothing contributed more to some of them than the multiplying the number of the lesser Bishops by their Metropolitans. 3. His third Reason is, That the Office of Presbyters is changed to Semi-presbyters,] What then is the Office of a Presbyter? Is it not to preach, and to be the mouth of the Congrega∣tion
in publick Worship? to administer the Sacraments? to exhort? to admonish, to ab∣solve the penitent, to visit the sick? This all Presbyters in the Church of England have full liberty to do; and I wish all would take care to execute their Function, as fully as it is per∣mitted them. 4. Discipline is made impossible,p. 22. as it is for one General without inferiour Captains, to rule an Army.] But are there not subordinate Officers in the Church, as well as in the Camp? How then is Discipline impossible? If the General reserve to himself certain Acts of Jurisdiction, does he by that means supersede the Commissi∣ons of all inferiour Commanders? Mr. B. is much upon the point of Discipline's being im∣possible under Diocesan Episcopacy, because one man, he thinks, cannot govern so many Parishes. Admit in all things he may not, nor is it necessary he should, but in such Acts of Government that are reserved to him, it is possible enough, and has been practised from the days of the Apostles, to this present time. This Point you may find excellently discuss'd by Mr. Dodwel, in his second Letter to Mr. B. which Mr. B. confutes briefly, (Cb. Hist. 2. part) by telling the Reader, that if he will be∣lieve those reasons, he has no hopes of him; a short way of confuting, and one would won∣der, that he that makes use of it should write so many and great Books of Controversie. Yet this I must add, that if it be impossible now, 'tis fit to let the World know who has made it so; the Dissenters themselves have first
weakned the Authority, and obstructed the Execution of Discipline; and when the subor∣dinate Officers agitated, caballed against their Superiour Commanders, it is not wonder if Go∣vernment be made impracticable. However, the Accusation sounds ill from those men, by whose Mutiny and seditious Practises, things have been brought to that evil Pass. Mr. B. pursues his point further,§ 55. and adds, Much more does it become then unlawful, when first deposing all Presbyters from Government by the Keys of Discipline they put the same Keys, even the Power of decretive Excommunication and Ab∣solution into the hands of Laymen called Chancel∣lors, and set up Courts liker to the Civil than Ec∣clesiastical.] It is a Question I cannot easily re∣solve, whether it be the King or the Bishop that governs by the Chancellor, but whoever governs by them, they neither have no nought to have the Power of Decisive Excommunication, or the Power of the Keys, but act only as Assi∣stants, and judges of matter of Fact, and apply the Canons, which determine what Offences are to be punish'd with Excommunication; if they do any more, I neither undertake the Defence, nor will I suppose those that employ them, own their Actions any farther. How∣ever, the Presbyterians fall under the same Cen∣sure with our Diocesans, for their Elders do directly excommunicate, and yet are lay-men. It would be much to the Advantage as well as the Reputation of our Dissenters, if they would first agree, and correct those Abuses among themselves, which they so sharply ex∣claim against in our Church.
2. When they oblige the Magistrate to execute their Decrees by the Sword, be they just or unjust,§ 55. and to lay men in Goals, and ruine them, because they are excommunicated by Bishops, Chancel∣lors, &c. This is the Law of the State, and not of the Church, and therefore is not to be charged upon Diocesan Episcopacy; besides, now there are few that have reason to com∣plain of this, there are those Evasions found that render that Law insignificant; but the Threatning Princes and Magistrates with Excom∣munications, if not Depositions,p. 23. if they do commu∣nicate with those whom the Bishops have excommu∣nicated, belongs not at all to our Diocesan Episcopacy: let the Papists, who hold this Do∣strine, or the rigid Scotch Presbyterians, who seem to have outdone the Popes in their Claim of Authority over Sovereign Princes, answer it if they can. 3. Or when they arrogate the Power of the Sword to themselves, as Socrates says Cyril did.§ 55. How far Socrates is to be credited in his ac∣count of that Bishop, we shall consider in due place; in the mean time, this does not concern Diocesan Episcopacy, as it is with us, for our Bishops do not arrogate that Power: if the King confer upon them any Authority extrinse∣cal to their Office, Mr. B. has declared him∣self,p. 23. § 59. that shall make no difference, and that he will submit to them notwithstanding. The next Paragraph I am loth to meddle with, it is little else but Biitterness and Rail∣ing, and this I have neither Skill nor Inclina∣tion to answer; yet because it is set down as
the highest Aggravation of Diocesan Tyranny, I must say something to it, lest I should be thought to be ashamed of the Cause, and to desert it. It becomes much worse,§ 56. (continues Mr. B.) by tyrannical Abuse, when being unable and un∣willing to exercise true Discipline (and so many hundred Parishes) they have multitude of Atheists, Infidels, gross Ignorants, and wicked Livers in Church Communion; yea compel all in their Parish∣es to communicate, upon pain of Imprisonment and Ruine, and turn their Censures cruelly against godly persons, that dare not obey them in all their Formalities, Ceremonies, and Impositions, for fear of sinning against God. I am afraid, there are too many wicked men in all Communions, and the Communion, or as they call it, the Religion of the State, will have the most, for Reasons I need not mention: but it is often∣times a hard thing to know them, and until they are discovered it can be no Reproach to the Discipline of the Church that they are in outward Communion, but all sorts of People, and these with the rest, are forced into our Commu∣nion.] They are indeed obliged to come to Church, and to receive the Sacrament three times in the year; but all this is upon the Sup∣position of their being Christians: if they declare to the contrary, they are immediately exempt∣ed from all Church-Jurisdiction; and for the Civil, let them deal with it as well as they can. It is the duty of every Christian to come to Church and receive the Sacrament, and be∣cause all that have been baptised and have not
renounced the Faith, are presum'd to be Chri∣stians; it is doubtless, lawful to quicken them to that which is their Duty by Penalties upon the neglect of it. As for the Atheists and Infi∣dels declared, if they are admitted to Commu∣nion, it is an unexcusable fault of Discipline, yet such as is to be charged on the Minister of the Parish that receives them, rather than the Bishop; and for the being of any such men amongst us, that is not so much to be imputed to the defect of present Discipline, as to the licentiousness of the late unhappy times, and the Offence that was given to light and unstea∣dy minds, by such pretended Saints as made Religion their Warrant for all their barbarous Villanies they committed. But wicked Livers (he adds) are forced into Church-Communion by the Bishops.]§ 56. This is a great Mistake, for the Bishop forces no such in∣to the Church, but obliges the Minister and Church-wardens of every Parish, to present such, if any there be, that they might be se∣parated from Communion, till they shall have given some Satisfaction to the Church, by their Repentance, and good Hopes of their future Amendment; and lastly, that gross Ignorants are admitted to the Communion, can be charged upon no other than the Minister of that place, whose Duty it is, to instruct them in the Prin∣ciples of their Religion, and the Bishops are so far from obstructing the Exercise of this Duty, that there is hardly any thing which they press with greater Earnesiness.
As to those godly persons who dare not obey the Orders of Bishops, in point of Church-Communion, and cannot bring their Conscience to comply with Ceremonies and Formalities.] Whether it be their Fault or Misfortune, I pity them heartily; but I believe this ought not to be charg'd upon the Constitution of our Episcopacy: for if the King and the great Senate of the Nation, after Ex∣perience of former Troubles, should think fit to impose this as a Test upon such as they thought the Government not secure of: what is all this to Diocesan Episcopacy? The next Paragraph concludes the Arraign∣ment of Diocesan Bishops,§ 57. not with any Ar∣gument, but a great many hard Words, which suppose the Proofs that have gone before to have amounted to full Evidence. I am not wil∣ling to repeat them here, let them stand or fall with those Arguments they depend upon. Now least you should take Mr. B. for an Enemy to Bishops, for one sort he rejects he receives two, the first, such as St. Jerom says Was brought into the Church for a Remedy against Schism; the Bishop of this Constitution was it preside over Presbyters, and without him nothing of Moment was to be done in the Church.§ 58. These Presbyters that were under the Bishop, had they several Parishes or Congregations, or the same with their President? If several, then this is the Diocesan Prelacy, that is a Crime in it's Constitution, if the same, then what did they do there? For by old Canons it ap∣pears, (and Mr. B. makes use of them to serve his own Turn) that a Presbyter was not to
preach in the Presence of the Bishop, what then? Shall they only read the Offices of the Church? This is to fall into worse than Dio∣cesan Episcopacy, and to make Presbyters, not Preaching, but, what sounds much meaner, reading Curates only to the Bishops. There is another sort of Bishops that he dares not deny to be of divine Institution,§ 60. And they are such as succeed the Apostles in the ordinary part of Church-Government, while some senior Pastors have the supervising Care of many Church∣es, (as the Visitors had in Scotland,) and are so far Episcopi Episcoporum, and Arch-bishops, ha∣ving no constraining Power of the Sword, but a Power to admonish and instruct the Pastors, and to regulate Ordinations, Synods, and all great and common Circumstances that belong to Churches; for if one Form of Government in which some Pa∣stors had such extensive Work and Power (as Ti∣mothy, Titus, and Evangelists as well us Apo∣stles had) we must not change it without Proof, that Christ himself would have it changed. Let us compare this with Diocesan Episco∣pacy, and see whether for all this mincing of the matter, they will not amount to the same thing: this supervising of many Churches, does it not sound like having many Parishes under them? And if this be impossible for a Diocesan, how comes it to be otherwise in an Evangelist, or an Apostle? Nay, how comes it to be allowed in a Scotch Visitor or Super-in∣tendent? The regulating Ordinations is no other in Scripture-Phrase, than to appoint and ordain Elders in every Church, and in every
City; the Diocesan Bishops desire no more in that point, than to have such a Regulation, and that it should not be accounted an Ordi∣nation that is done without, or in Opposition to them. The Evangelists might sometimes ordain Elders by their own single hands, with∣out the Assistance of any Presbyter, sometimes together with the Presbytery; our Diocesan Bishops never ordain any to that Order, with∣out the Assistance of their Presbyters; the Evangelists and Apostles had the Direction of Church-censures,1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. 1 Tim. 5.19, 20, 21. Tit. 2.15. as appears from frequent In∣stances in the new Testament; as also an Au∣thority or Elders as well as the People, to ad∣monish and rebuke, and punish those that were negligent or disorderly; The Bishops claim no more, it is the same Authority, it is the same Office hitherto, and this is the same of what the Bishops in all Ages of the Church have pre∣tended to succeed to; they of the Presbyterian way, make all this Power of the Apostles, as extraordinary as their Gifts, and to expire to∣gether with them: but for this they never of∣fer any Reason; and if this Notion should ob∣tain, it would follow, that neither Presbyters nor Deacons could be succeeded in their Offices, because they also were inspired with extraor∣dinary Gifts as well as the Apostles. But Mr. B. allows all this, and that they ought to be succeeded even in this Eminence and Extent of Work and Power; Why then does he find Fault, and exclaim against that which he can∣not deny to be of divine Institution, and of perpetual Use under the name of Diocesan
Episcopacy? From these men the ancient Bi∣shops derived their Title, to this Authority they pretended to succeed,Act. Conc. Tholi. Eu∣seb. l. 5. c. 24. Polycrates reckons himself the sixth from Timothy, and Irenaeus gives us the succession of the Roman Bishops, from St. Peter, to his time; and if it had been necessary to his Purpose, did undertake to shew the same of the Governours of the most considerable Churches in the World, which af∣terwards Eusebius has collected out of their se∣veral Registers.Comment. 1 Ep. ad Timoth. Schol. Graec. Theodoret does admirably ex∣plain the Original of this Title, by shewing that the Apostolick Power was fully convey'd to their Successors. Those that are now call'd Bishops, says he, were, in the Beginning, called Apo∣stles, and the name of Bishop and Presbyter were then of the same Signification; but in Process of time, the Title of Apostle was appropriated to those who were Apostles indeed; that is, to the 12. And the name of Bishops was taken up by those that were before called Apostles.Walo Mess. p. 35. & sequent. Salmasius a man that never looks behind him, or regards any Consequence, runs away with this Passage as if he had found the greatest Treasure in the World, that Bishop and Presbyter signified the same thing in the Apostles time; and is so transported that he cannot take any notice that at the same time there is a Distinction made between the Office of Presbyter and Bishop: for the Name they anciently bore, shews the Nature and Eminency of their Office, that they were Apostles in Authority; but the Title be∣ing too great and invidious, they laid it down for an humbler name, and were content with
the Stile that was common to Presbyters in the Apostles time. Hitherto we have an exact Agreement between these three sorts of Episco∣pacy, and find the Members of Mr. B's most compendious Distinction, to be without Diffe∣rence. But it must not be dissembled, that there are some things in which they seem to disagree, especially-these two; first, That the Evange∣lists or Apostles were unfixt, but Bishops are determined to a certain Diocess. Secondly, That the Apostles and Evangelists had Bishops under their Jurisdiction, which Bishops do not pretend to. As to this Unsetledness of the Apostles, there are some that look upon travelling to be so es∣sential to their Office, that their Commission is in danger to expire, if they should reside any considerable time in any certain place.Walo Mess. de Epise. & Presb. And Salmasius makes so acute a Remark upon the Inscription of St. John's two latter Epistles, as comes within a small matter of deposing him. Before those Epistles, he stiles himself John the Presbyter, or the Elder, or it may be in English, no more than John the aged; and what would you imagine so great a Critick would observe from this? That St. John having fixt his Resi∣dence at Ephesus for some considerable time, had lost the Eminence of his Apostleship, and sunk into the common Level of Presbytery; and therefore stiles himself Presbyter only, as if he had been conscious his Apostleship had de∣parted from him. But how comes St. Paul to remain three years in the same place, and re∣main
his Title, and much longer yet at Rome, where he dyed in the Exercise of his Apostle∣ship? Clemens Alex. speaking of St. John, tells us he went about, . In some places he appointed Bishops where they were want∣ing, and none but Apostolick men could do it; and in some places he himself govern'd the Church entirely, i. e. as their Bishop, and pro∣bably, appointed another when he left them, to succeed in the Charge. Vales did not see the Import of this Phrase, but rendred it, Partim ut ecclesias integras disponeret & formaret. The last is a Comment that destroys the Sence of Clement, who by  could not under∣stand the setting of a Church, under it's Officers which his former seems to imply, but the order∣ing and governing of it by himself, in Oppositi∣on to his setting up of Bishops in other places; and though he had some Authority there by way of supervising the Bishops, yet he did not take the Care of the whole, which is, . Now in whatsoever City they lived, besides the general Care of all the Churches, they lookt upon that as their peculiar Charge, and govern'd not as ordinary Presbyters, but by Apostolick Authority: as a Metropolitan; who although he has the supervising of all the Dio∣cesses within his Province, yet may have his proper Diocess which he governs, as a particular Bishop. And the Office of an Apostle does not essentially consist in the governing of more Churches than one, else St. Paul would never
have vindicated his Apostleship from the parti∣cular Right he had over the Corinthians,1 Cor. 9.2. If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the Seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. So that though he had had no more Churches to govern, yet his Apostolick Authority might have been still exercised over that particular one of Corinth. The Provinces of the Evange∣lists were not yet so large as those of the Apo∣stles, for these were either sent to such Cities or Parts, whither the Apostles themselves could not go, or left where they could not stay: The Church of Ephesus was the Diocese of Timothy, from whence although the greater Occasions of other Churches might call him away, and re∣quire his Assistance, yet his Authority was not Temporal, nor would it have expired, if he had resided a longer while at Ephesus; so that these Apostolick men were not so because they were unfixt, but because they had that Emi∣nence of Authority, which they might exercise in one or more Churches, according as their Necessities did require, or as the Spirit signi∣fied: and that they did not settle in one place is to be ascribed to the Condition of their Times, and not to the nature of their Office: for the Harvest was now great, and such La∣bourers as these were but few, and therefore their Presence was required in several Places. And as this Unsetledness is not essential to Apo∣stolick Authority, no more is it essential to Episcopacy to be determined to a certain Church. Every Bishop is Bishop of the Catho∣lick Church, and that his Authority is confined
to a certain district, is only the positive Law of the Church, that forbids one Bishop any Exer∣cise of his Office within the Diocess of another; and St. Paul seems to have given them the oc∣casion, who would not build upon another mans Foundation. However, in any case of Necessity, this Positure Law is superseeded, and a Bishop may act in any place, by virtue of a general Power he has received in his Ordi∣nation: so that this first Exception of the Apo∣stles and the Evangelists being unfixt, and Bi∣shops determined to a particular Church, can make no essential Difference. As to the Visitors of the Church of Scotland, they make evidently against Mr. B's Notion of an essential Difference between Bishops and Evangelists; for first of all, the Residence was fixt to certain Cities, and their Jurisdiction confin'd within certain Provinces, as the Su∣perintendent of the Country of Orkney was to keep his Residence in the Town of Keirkwall,Spotswood Hist. Scot. l. 3. p. 158. he of Rosse in the Channory of Rosse, and so the rest in the Towns appointed for their Resi∣dence. Their Office was to try the Life, Diligence, and Behaviour of the Ministers, the Order of their Churches, and the Manners of the People, how the Poor were provided, and how the Youth were instructed, they must admonish where Admonition needed, and dress all things that by good Counsel they were able to compose; finally, they must take note of all hainous Crimes, that the same may be corrected by the Censures of the Church. So far of their Constitution as we find it in Mr. Knox's first Project of Church-polity,Spotswood p. 258. and their
practice was altogether the same with that of Diocesan Episcopacy, as Bishop Spotswood de∣scribes it, The Superintendents held their Office during Life, and their Power was Episcopal, for they did elect and ordain Ministers, they presided in Synods, and directed all Church Censures, nei∣ther was any Excommunication pronounced without their Warrant. And now let the Reader judge how the Constitution of Diocesan Episcopacy becomes a Crime, and yet these Visitors of the Church of Scotland, conformable to divine In∣stitution. As to the second Exception, that the Apo∣stles and Evangelists were Episcopi Episcoporum, and had Bishops under their Jurisdiction, which our Diocesans, who are the Bishops but of particular Churches, do not pretend to; This makes no Difference, at leastwise no essen∣tial one, for the same person may have the Charge of a particular Church or Diocess, and yet have the supervising Power over several others. But in this point Mr. B. does but equi∣vocate and impose upon his Reader; for by his Episcopus gregis he means only a Presbyter, and a particular Bishop may have Jurisdiction over such, without any Injury or Prejudice done to the Office, which from it's first Insti∣tution has been under the Direction of a supe∣riour Apostolical Power: if therefore these Presbyters do retain all that Power which es∣sentially belongs to them under a Diocesan Bi∣shop, how are they degraded? In short, either this Order of Congregational Episcopacy is different from Presbytery, or the same with it;
if the same, how is it abrogated by Diocesan Episcopacy, since Presbyters are still in the full Possession and Exercise of their Office. If they are distinct how then comes Mr. B. to con∣found them as he does, § 16. where he says, That the Apostles themselves set more than one of these Elders or Bishops in every Church. So then those Apostolick men, as Bishops of the particu∣lar Churches wherin as they resided, had Autho∣rity over Presbyters within the Extent of their Diocess, and a general Supervising Care of several other Churches, and so they were Epis∣copi Episcoporum: in the first, they are succeed∣ed by Diocesan Bishops, in the latter, by Me∣tropolitans, which yet were never lookt upon as two orders essentially distinct. But after all this we shall never come to a right Understanding of Mr. B's Episcopacy, un∣less we take along with it, his Notion of a particular Church, which he sets down, p. 6. § 19. There is great Evidence of History,p. 6. that a particular Church of the Apostles setling was essen∣tially only [a Company of Christians, Pastors, and People, associated for personal holy Communion, and mutual help in holy Doctrine, Worship, Con∣versation, and Order] therefore it never consisted of so few or so many, or so distant as to be uncapa∣ble of such personal Help and Communion, but was ever distinguished as from accidental Meetings, so from the Communion of many Churches or distant Christians, which was held but by Delegates, Sy∣nods, of Pastors or Letters, and not by personal Help in Presence. Not that all these must needs always meet in the same place, but that usually
they did so, or at due times at least, and were no more, nor more distant than could so meet, some∣times Persecution hindred them, sometimes the Room might be too small, even independent Church∣es among us sometimes meet in diverse Places, and one Parish has diverse Chappels for the aged and weak that are unfit for Travel. Every one of these Churches then had one Bishop, and was, in his Opinion, all the Dio∣cess of apostolical and ancient Bishops. If in any City or Town the number of Christians should exceed what might meet in one Con∣gregation, that then they were to imitate the Commonwealth of Bees, who when they grow too numerous for one hive, send out new Colonies, commanded by their own Officers; so when Christians grew too many for personal Com∣munion in Doctrine and Worship, they must resolve themselves into several Churches, and have as many independent Bishops, as they have Congregations. But this model of a Church I am afraid is like to please no Party: for the Dissenters are of Opinion we have too many Bishops already, but this Project would make more Bishops in this one City, than are now in the three Kingdoms. Mr. B. has elsewhere endeavoured to take away this Prejudice,Disp. 1. of Ch. Gov. Ch. Hist. part 2. by saying, that those ma∣ny Bishops he is for, are not of the same sort with ours: 'tis true indeed, Dioceses are not to be so large, yet their Power within their own Church, is to be equal to the others within their Diocess; and the Church would
fare no better in this Case, than the Empire did in the times of Galienus, when the People, generally discontented with his Government, because it was too remiss, found themselves immediately enslaved by no less than thirty Tyrants. The Presbyterians would never en∣dure that the Power of their Classes and Sy∣nods, should be settled in congregational Bi∣shops, and the Independent's Principles will as little admit this Project: the Erastian Party will allow this Bishop no Power of Censures or Church Discipline. Lewis Moulin,Paraenesis. who seems to speak in the name of all the English Inde∣pendents, explodes the use of Excommunication in a Christian State, and will have no Ruler but the Civll; and some of the greatest men of that party in their Recommendations before his Book, though they speak something cau∣tiously, yet do not disapprove his Notion. What some others of them have writ of the Nature of a Church, is so mysterious and sera∣phical, that one must be verè adeptus to un∣derstand it: the plainest thing I believe can be made of it is that they are above Ordinances, and that these Saints on Earth have as little need of Discipline and Censures, as those in Heaven. The Episcopal men are content with the present Form, and do not desire the Bishops should be multiplyed; at least, not according to this Project: for this, in their Judgment, would lie heavier than the Burden of Issachar, So that I cannot see what party or principles this would suit, besides the Authors own, nor
since he is so subject to Change, is it likely to please him long: However, if it be the Primi∣tive Platform, it is Reason, that all Churches notwithstanding their Prejudices, should con∣form to it, and therefore it is not equal it should be rejected, though all the World were against it, before that great Evidence of History, which he alledges in Favour of it, is con∣sider'd. For this Evidence he refers us to another Book of his,1 Disput. of Ch. Go∣vernment and Wor∣ship, p, 1659. and dedicated to R. Crom∣wel. p. 87. Gro∣tius his Opinion he rejects himself. p 6. Edict. Vossii. Disp. p. 88. . § 22. where the Proofs are set down at large; the first Authority he menti∣ons there after the Scriptures, is that of Clemens Romanus, who mentions only Presbyters and Deacons; but this is besides the present Questi∣on. As for the Pseudo Clement which Mr. Thorndike mentions, and is alledg'd by Mr. B. though it may be to the Purpose, yet 'tis of no Authority. The next and the plainest as he confesses, is Ignatius, out of whom he cites se∣veral Passages, the first out of his Epistle ad Smyrn. Ʋbi itaque apparet Episcopus, illic multi∣tudo sit; quemadmodum utique ubi est Christus Je∣sus illic Catholica Ecclesia, as in B. Ʋshers old Translation, with which Vossius's Greek Copy does agree, from whence Mr. B. urges, That this Plebs or Multitudo is the Church which he ru∣leth, and not only one Congregation among many that are under him: for this does without distin∣ction bind all the people one as well as another, to be where the Bishop is or appeareth, viz. in the pub∣lick Assembly for Communion in Worship: It is plain therefore there, that there were not then many such Assemblies under him; otherwise, all save one, must
have necessarily disobey'd this Command.] To which I answer, first, That Antiochus cites this Passage, quite differently and more at large, than it is in the Text, and to this Effect, § Wherever the Bishop appears,Antioch▪ Ser. 124. there let the Mul∣titude be, as wheresoever the name of Christ is call'd, there let a Church be assembled; it is not permitted the Flocks of young Lambs to go whi∣thersoever they please, but whither the Sheepherds lead them; those that remain out of the Flock, the wild Beasts destroy, and devour all that which goes astray: which Words do not at all imply, whether there were one or more Congregati∣ons under that Bishop, and their design is to prove that Christians ought not to assemble themselves where they please, without the Leave of, or in Opposition to their Bishop: this appears plainly from the Context to which Mr. B. does refer us, these are the Words that immediately precede the Passage alledg'd, Nul∣lus sine Egiscopo aliquid operetur eorum quae conve∣niunt in Ecclesiam,. illa firma gratiarum actio re∣putetur quae sub ipso est, vel quam utique ipse con∣cesserit. So that here is a plain distinction be∣tween a Congregation under the Bishop, that is, where he is personally present, and a Con∣gregation assembled by his Permission and Al∣lowance; and these Expressions of Ignatius can have no other Occasion, than the Usage of the Church even in his time, to have seve∣ral Congregations under one Bishop. The next Proof is out of Ignatius's Epist. to the Philadelphians, where he exhorts them to come all to the same Eucharist, and these are
his Motives, Ʋna enim Caro Domini nostri Jesu Christi, & unus Calix in Ʋnionem Sanguinis ip∣sius, unum altare & unus Episcopus cum Presby∣terio & Diaconis conservis meis.Disp. p. 89. And thus the old Translation, which is word for word ac∣cording to the Florentine Greek Copy. The Passage, as Mr. B. cites it, is in this Epistle interpolated, but making more for his purpose, he preferr'd it to the Genuine Read∣ing, where there is no mention of unus Panis, unus Calix, toti Ecclesiae, but that which he lays his greatest stress upon is, Ʋnum Altare, unus Episcopus, and this all Copies do agree in; from whence he concludes, Here it is ma∣nifest, that the particular Church, which in those dayes was govern'd by a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons, was but one Congregation, for every such Church had but one Altar. This Observation of one Altar in one Epi∣scopal Church, he confirms by Mr. Mede, who propounds it with great Modesty, and onely as a Conjecture, and M. B. has added nothing to his Reason, more than his own Confi∣dence. If he had but taken leisure to consider, and not have run away with that onely which seems to make for his purpose, he might have found enough in those very Passages cited by Mr. Mede, to have undeceived him. The Mat∣ter in short is thus; The Principal Church, or Meeting-place, in every City, belong'd to the Bishop, where his Chair was set up, with a Bench of Presbyters on every side, circling the Communion Table; this whole place was called Altare, Sacrarium, and with∣in
the Jurisdiction of a single Bishop; it is probable there was no more than one: the Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons repre∣sented the Unity of the Church, although it might be divided into several Congregations, and every Congregation might have a Com∣munion Table; so that one Bishop, one Altar, signifies indeed the Unity of the Church, as being the place of its common Councel and solemn Tribunal, and to set up an Altar is not to have two Communion Tables in a City, but to have di∣stinct Governments,Mr. B's Dispute of Church Government, p. 90. The Ancients ordinarily call the Lords Table and the place where it stood, . I say, the Ta∣ble and the Sacrarium or place of it's standing. And so says Bishop usher in his Notes upon the passage before cited, Altare apud patres mensam Domi∣nio eam passim denot at apud Ignatium & Polycarpum, Sacrarium quoque. and opposite Bishops and Presbyters; this is confirmed by a Pas∣sage of Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magne∣sians cited by Mr. B. Omnes adunati ad tem∣plum Dei concurrite si∣cut ad unum Altare. If this reading which he uses were right, it would distinguish be∣tween Christian Temples, and imply, that some of them had not Altars, which is not likely to be true, if Altar and Communion-ta∣ble were the same. But to speak ingeniously, neither Temple nor Altar here does signifie what Mr. B. would have it; for the Florentine Copy has, , which refers only to the Jewish Tem∣ple and Altar, wherein consisted the Unity of the Jewish Church, notwithstanding they were divided into many Synagogues and Con∣gregations.
But that one Altar for every Church so fre∣quently mention'd by Ignatius, does not signi∣fie every Communion-table, but that eminent one together with the Bishops Chair, and the bench of the Presbyters, appears from di∣verse Passages in his Epistles. In that to the Magnesians he alledges to this Ecclesiastical Con∣sistory about the Altar, . That well-platted Crown of our Presbyters, alledging to the Fi∣gure in which they sate; and then follows, , the Counsel of the Altar or Sacri∣fices. And in his Epistle to the Ephesians, he speaks to this Effect, Unless a man be  within the verge of the Altar, he is no partaker of the bread of God, and this Phrase, , he explains in his Epistle ad Trallenses, he that is within the Altar is clean, wherefore he obeys the Bishops and the Presby∣ters; he that is without, is such a one that does any thing without the Bishop and the Presbyters: so that Obedience to the Bishop or Presbyter, is an Explication of that Phrase of being within the Altar: and this might consist with the Division of the Church into several distinct Congregations. But St. Cyprian in his fifty fifth Epist. makes this yet clearer, where speaking of the Insolence of such as ha∣ving sacrificed to Idols, thrust themselves into Church-Communion, without doing any Pen∣nance, he breaks out at last into this passionate Aggravation: what then remains, but that the Church should yield to the Capital, and that
the Priests withdrawing themselves, and ta∣king away the Altar of our Lord, Images, and Idol-Gods, together with their Altars, should succeed and take Possession of the place, pro∣per to the sacred and venerable bench of our Clergy? the bench of the Clergy then belongs to the Altar, that is, the Communion-table of the Principal and Episcopal Church, to which all other Congregations did belong, in as much, as the Presbyters they joyn'd with, ap∣pertain'd to that Altar, and so there was  and , and yet several As∣semblies under his Direction and within the Communion of that Altar. This Usage of one Altar and several Com∣munion-tables depending upon it, continu'd a long while after in the Church: Innocent I. in his Letter to Decentius, mentions the sending of the consecrated Symbols from the Episco∣pal Church Altar, to the depending Parishes upon solemn times; and long after that, all the Parishes of a Diocese paid Homage to the Episcopal Church by sending some of their principal Members to communicate there, upon Solemn Festivals, as appears by several Canons that are cited and examined more particularly hereafter: and here in England there have been Footsteps of the same Custom till of late in Comparison, though from the first begin∣ning of the Gospel we have not the least hint of Congregational Episcopacy in this place. The next thing he alledges is a passage out of Justin Martyr,Just. Mar∣tyr Ap. 2. p. 97. Ed. Paris, 98.99. where he describes the man∣ner of the Christian Assemblies in his time,
where the Eucharist is said to be celebrated by the Bishop,1 Dispute p. 92. and that on Sunday all the Christi∣ans that liv'd either in Cities or in the Coun∣try, came together, prayed with, and received the Sacraments at the hand of the Bishop, and those that were absent, had it sent to them by the Hand of the Deacons: but what shall we conclude from hence? That all that came to∣gether could come to one place, or because the Congregation of the Bishop as being the most eminent, is here only described, must we con∣clude that there was no more than one in any City? This account is only General and serves only to shew what they did, when they came together, (and the Principal Assembly, was surely the most proper instance) and not in how many places they might be Assembled.Disp. p 33. The Story of Gregory Thaumaturgus makes the next Proof, who being made against his will Bishop of Ne-Caesarea found but seven∣teen Christians in the whole City: this was in∣deed a small Congregation and hardly nume∣rous enough to make a Church; but if Mr. B. had been so ingenious, as to have mentioned the Success of that Bishop's Ministry, he might have spared any one else the Labour of answer∣ing this Instance: for the same Bishop out of those contemptible Beginnings did so far en∣large the Church of that place, that when he dyed, he left but seventeen in the whole City that were not Christians; if the number of Chri∣stians at his first Entrance was hardly enough to make a Congregation, towards his latter end it was surely too great for one: for the
multitude of people in the City and the Coun∣try that belong'd to it,Ubi supra. it is said by Gregory Nysser to be infinite. The Testimony of Tertullian, Apolog. chap. 39. is as little to his purpose; his words are these,p. 93. Where a Body compacted, by the Knowledge of the same Religion, the Ʋnity of Discipline, and the League of Hope, do come together into one Congre∣gation,Conus ad deum Ed. Rigalty, and not in caeum & Congregati∣onem. to offer up Prayers to God, we meet for the hearing of the holy Scriptures, we feed our Faith with those holy words, we raise up our hope, we fix our Confidence  confirm Discipline by the inculcating of  ours Precepts; there are likewise there Exhortations, as being done in the presence of God, that is lookt upon as an Antici∣pation of future Judgment, if any one has so offend∣ed as to be banish'd from the Communion of Prayer and the Assembly, and of all holy Commerce; most approv'd Elders do preside. Now let the Reader judge, whether Mr. B. has Reason to be so confident of this Passage, as to say,pag. 94. If I be able to understand Tertullian, it is here plain, that each Church consisted of one Congregation; and yet out of the words, there can be nothing brought to favour it, unless it be this, that Christians used in those days to assemble for Prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, but whether one or more such Assemblies were under the Discipline of the Bishop and Presbytery, is not signified in the least. That Elders are said to preside, does not at all prejudice the Right of the Bi∣shop, for either those are Bishops that are said to preside, and so every particular Church will have many; which if it be not against Mr,
B's Notion of Episcopacy, is confessedly against the practice of the Church, in those times when one Church had no more than one Bishop: if they were Presbyters, then 'tis probable, there was more than one Congregation. But it ap∣pears by what follows, that these Presidents were all the Officers of the Church, where they are distinguish'd from the people, and said to live out of the common Stock, and the Deacons as well as Priests, did assist at the Sa∣crament, and the Bread and Wine was distri∣buted by their hands, a shall endeavour to prove in due place;  cites out of the same Author, De Corona Militis, to put his meaning out of all doubt, concludes nothing less than what he would have him to say; his words are to this effect,Presidenti∣um c. 3. That we must receive the Eucharist at all times, but from no other hand but those that preside. That those were not Bishops, appears from the next passage which he cites out of the same place,This Mr. B. mistakes Ch. Hist. p. 7. when he says, that they took not the Lord's Supper, but only Antistitis manu, I suppose his Memory deceiv'd him. . where Tertullian, speaking of Baptism, mentions the form of renouncing the World and the Devil, Sub ma∣nu Antistitis, where we may observe, that he uses another Word, as well as another Num∣ber; yet since it is said that Christians ought not to receive the Sacrament, but from the hands of those Presidents, we must not con∣ceive the Bishop to be excluded, but by that general Name to be comprehended together with his Bench of Presbyters: but will not this Circumstance of Baptism serve to evince, that a Bishop had then but one Congregation, and every one to be baptized, was to make his Re∣nunciation
under the Bishops Hand? nothing less: for many more might be baptized by a Bishop in the compass of few years, than there are in the greatest Diocese in the World. Pau∣linus could not well wish a greater number in his Diocess, than he baptized in seven and thirty days:Bed. l. 2. chap. 14. Pamelius did labour to prove that Antistes is the same with Seniores Presidentes, and that Presbyters might baptize as well as Bi∣shops; but that is not the thing in Question, nor does this Passage suppose every baptism performed by the Bishop; but the Renunciati∣on of the Devil, &c. which was preparatory to it, to have been made in his presence, he might have a very large Diocess, and be at Leisure for this, especially when we consider, that the generality of Christians in those times had such an awe of that Sacrament and the strict Obligation it lay upon them of more than or∣dinary Sanctity, that they deferr'd it till the last, and were baptized on their Death-bed, and that not by the Bishop, but by any other Presbyter or Deacon: nor can we find in all the History of the times we now speak of, that Children had any part in the solemn and pub∣lick Baptism, but they might be privately bap∣tized in case of Necessity, and eminent danger of Death, without the assistance of the Bishop. And long after these times, we find in the lar∣gest Dioceses where a great many Congregati∣ons are affirmed to be under the same Bishop,One Bap∣tistry to a Church, sufficient for several Congrega∣tions. there were but three days in the year appoint∣ed for solemn Baptism, and the Bishops were so far from being unequal to the Multitude,
that they complain of the general Neglect of the Sacrament, and of their not being fully employed at those times; so that supposing this Antistes to be the Bishop, and every one that was solemnly baptized past under his hand; it is far from making out Mr. B's Notion, that there was but one Congregation under him. The next thing he makes use of to confirm his Conception of Congregational Church, is the Consent of the people,Disp. 95. in the Margin. Ch. Hist. p. 7. as well in the Ele∣ction of their Bishops, as in several other Ec∣clesiastical Acts; but this e rather hints by the Bye, than insists upon, and I suppose, did not value much, since he takes no care to im∣prove it: whoever will take the pains to exa∣mine those passages, will find that the people never polled at the Election of their Bishops, which was principally the act of the Clergy,. but approved it commonly by a general and confused Voice of the Multitude, that was pre∣sent, and the Phrase Ʋniversa Plebs does not de∣note every particular Christian of the Church, but onely a general Assembly and Congregation of as many as could come together, or of the most considerable Persons of the Diocese, or rather, as it is usually express'd, all the People that were present at the Action: Cornelius ele∣cted, plebis quae tunc adfuit Suffragio. Cypr. l. 4. c. 2. I shall not forget to answer this Argu∣ment more particularly hereafter, when we shall meet with it confirmed by any Canon of Councils, or other passages in his History. Basil. Ep. 194. ad Pleb. Nicop.
As for Nynius's History of St. Patrick and the three hundred and sixty five Bishops, which he planted in Ireland, I suppose 'twas invented by some learned Monk, to fill up the Irish Ca∣lender, and to leave no day in the year so for∣lorn, but that the name of one of these Bishops could vindicate it from Prophaneness. That which follows of Scotlands having no Bishops before Palladius,Disp. 1.97. Yet Eng∣land had Bishops long be∣fore, as may be seen in the Subscrip∣tions of the Coun∣cils of Or∣leance and Nice. but that the people there were instructed by Priests and Monks, makes nothing at all to our present purpose, though the Authority of Henricus Major, and Johannes Fordorius were unquestionable, for there is no account of setled Churches or Dis∣cipline, but only that some good men out of their Zeal for Religion, did endeavour to pro∣pagate it among the Scots, and that these were not Bishops. But Buchanan stretches this point higher than it will bear, and will have it, that the Churches of Scotland were governed by Presbyters and Monks, the first time; I believe in Story we meet with Monks amongst the Orders of Church-Government: but I be∣lieve that the Story it self may be easily dispro∣ved, and we may expect shortly a fuller ac∣count of this and other things, relating to the ancient British Church, by the hand of one of the greatest Masters of Antiquity in this Na∣tion. The last part of Mr. B's Evidence has some of the Canons of ancient Councils, but I must needs say, he does not cite with that accuracy, that one would expect from a person that ad∣vances so singular a notion; The first is the
fourteenth of the Council of Adge,Can 1. the Sum of it is this, that if any man should desire a Chap∣pel of Ease for the benefit of his Family, he might be gratified in it, but with this Proviso, that upon the most solemn Feasts he should hear divine Service in Parochiis aut Civitatibus. Mr. B. makes Parochia signifie a Diocese, be∣cause the word is used frequently in that sense by Eusebius and other Ancients, but does not consider, that the Import of it is changed by this time, and is taken for a Parish in the fifty third Canon of the Council of Adge, whose Title is de Presbyteris parochianis rei Ecclesiae di∣strahentibus; & cap. 2. vass. 3. There is express Difference made where a Presbyter is allow'd to preach, Non solum in Civitatibus sed in omni∣bus Parochiis.47. The next is the thirtieth Ca∣non of the same Council, Benedictionem super plebem fundere, aut poenitentem in Ecclesia benedice∣re presbytero poenitus non licebit; to which he adds the thirty first,47. Missas die dominico saecula∣ribus totas audire speciali ordine praecipimus, ita ut ante benedictionem sacerdotis egredi populus non presumat, quod si fecerit, ab Episcopo publicè con∣fundatur. From whence he infers, that all the people were oblig'd to come to the Bishops Church, because they were to stay till the Benediction, which it was lawful for the Bi∣shop only to give; but if Mr. B. had consider∣ed these two Canons, he must have observed, that either they contradict one another, or the same thing is not meant by the Benediction of the Priest and the Bishop: by the first, which is reserv'd to the Bishop, Confirmation must in
all probability be understood: By the second, the Priests Benediction, that which is pro∣nounced at the dismissing the Congregation; or if he will understand a Bishop by Sacerdos, the Canon forbids it, in making a Distinction between them, ab Episcopo confundatur; where∣as if by Sacerdos they would have understood a Bishop, it is not likely they would have ei∣ther chang'd the Term, or repeated it, but have added, ab eo confundatur. But why should we insist upon this, since nothing can be more notorious, than that Presbyters had Churches now distinct from Bishops, and eve∣ry Diocess almost a great number of Parishes, and there are few Councils of that Age, but oblidge the Bishop to visit all these Churches once a year. To these he adds the thirty eighth Canon of the same Council,Disp. p. 99. Cives qui superiorum so∣lemnitatum, id est, Paschae & Natalis Domini, vel Pentecostes festivalibus cum Episcopis interesse neglexerint, quum in Civitatibus communionis, vel Benedictionis accipiendae causa positos se nosse debe∣ant, triennio communione priventur Ecclesiae. It is not to be denyed, but it was the ancient Cu∣stom for all the Parishes or places depending upon any Episcopal Church on certain times to repair to it, not so much for personal Com∣munion, as for Homage: but we are not there∣fore to conceive, that every Soul under a Bi∣shops Charge, was to appear before him on those solemn times, but only the most conside∣rable persons of every Division, and this Canon means no more. Sirmond could never find any
more than 47 Canons of this Council, the rest were taken out of Conc. Epaonense, from whence the true Reading of this Canon is to be sought for: there is Cives superiorum natalium (not solennitatum) and so it is cor∣rected in the best Edition of the Council of Agde, and Communionis is left out: which re∣storing of this Canon overthrows all the use that M. B. would make of it, since all are nei∣ther obliged to be present, nor to personal Communion, but what Cives superiorum Nata∣lium signifies, we must learn from other Coun∣cils of this Age: in the 14 chap. of the Coun∣cel of Arvern. we have it thus explained, that together with all the Presbyters and Deacons of a Diocese, Quicunque sunt etiam Cives natu majores pari modo in Ʋrbibus ad Pontifices suos in praedictis Civitatibus veniant. And the third Canon of the fourth Council of Orleans, obli∣ges onely the Principal Citizens to assist the Bi∣shops on these Solemn Times, Quisquis de pri∣oribus Civibus Pascha extra Civitatem tencre vo∣luerit, sciat sibi à cuncta Synodo esse prohibitum, which is no other than if the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, the Liveries, and most considerable Citizens were obliged on certain High Festivals to come to Church to St. Pauls. The next of the Canons he produces are either to the same effect with what he has al∣ready alledged, or not directly to his purpose, so that I believe upon a Review he will judge as well as I that there is no necessity of a Reply.
Mr. B. has heretofore excepted, the Church∣es of Rome and Alexandria,Ch. Hist. p. 7. § 23. and has despair'd of bringing them ever to comply with his Mo∣del; but now it seems he has found a means to reduce them to a Congregation: he revokes his former Concessions, and declares, that he finds no reason to believe (that ever the two chief Cities of the Empire had so long; that is, for two hundred years after Christ, more than some London Parishes, or near half so many) it is Pity these great London Parishes should ever be divided, they are so serviceable to Dis∣senters on all Occasions; for if a Conventicle is to be kept up, the Greatness of St. Martin's or St. Giles Parish will justifie it; those Church∣es will not hold a tenth man that ought to re∣pair to them, and surely, better set up a meet∣ing against the Law, than that the People go unedified. And again, when Rome or Alexan∣dria are to be reduced to a single Congregati∣on, then it is but comparing them to these great Parishes, and the work is done; It is not likely, that for two hundred years, Rome it self had near so great a number of Christians as one of these Parishes. Suppose they had not, the Question is not whether the Church of Rome was more numerous than that of St. Martins, but whether they could meet in one Congrega∣tion: for suppose they were but half, or a quarter so big, if they could not meet in one place to hear the Word and receive the Sacra∣ments, but must resolve into several Assemblies for to do it, it is no matter what proportion they held to our London Parishes.
But what Evidence is there out of History, that the Church of Rome made but one Con∣gregation for two hundred years after Christ, is it that the People are said to consent to the Election of the Bishops, or to concur in seve∣ral Ecclesiastical Acts? But how shall we be assured, that every Believer was obliged to be present, or that Matters were carried by Vote; and not by general and confused Approbati∣on? Besides, though all that had the right of Electing Church Officers might possibly meet in one place, yet they were not the fifth part of the number that had right to Congregation and Personal Communion; for Women and Children, and Servants must be supposed to be excluded, together with the Poor, and the more inconsiderable Persons: or if this pra∣ctice of approving the Election of Church-Of∣ficers be any Argument for a Churches being no more than a single Congregation, it will follow, that Rome had but one Congregation for many hundred years after, for the People were very long in possession of that right, after the whole City was become Christian, and surely then they were too numerous for one Congregation. Anton. de Dom. l. 4. c. 11. makes a long de∣duction of the Election of the Bishops of Rome, and proves that they were chosen by the Peo∣ple, until Innocent the Second, for 1100 years, and that he was the first that alter'd the an∣cient way of Election; Now if any one can believe, that for eleven Centuries there was but one Congregation in Rome, much good may it
do him. As for the Peoples Right to chuse, which Mr. B. does so much insist upon, and seems to give the People Encouragement to re∣volt from those Bishops, which they never chose. I shall give a more particular Account of it towards the latter end of this Trea∣tise. Mr. B. makes a Computation of the Church of Rome, in the time of Cornelius, and finds it to fall much short of one of our great Parish∣es; for when Novatian divided that Church, it had but forty six Priests, seven Deacons, and as many Sub-deacons, forty two Acoluti, Ex∣orcists, Readers, and Porters fifty two, Wi∣dows and Poor that were disabled, and lived upon the Charity of the Church, fifteen hun∣dred: upon which we compute thus, Suppose the Poor the tenth part of the whole Church, (as St. Chrysostom calculated the number of the Church of Antioch) the Product then would be fifteen thousand, and not ten thousand five hundred, as Mr. B. reckons, or the Printer mi∣stakes, and even thus, would they be too ma∣ny for one Congregation. We cannot ima∣gine any five Churches of such as the Christi∣ans might be supposed then to have,Ch. Hist. p. 7. capable of holding them all;Euseb. l. . c. 43. but if we consider this Passage more narrowly, we shall find Mr. B.'s Computation to be extreamly short: for these  were not only poor, but sick and dis∣abled, for so the word is explain'd in the Epi∣stle of the Roman Clergy to the Clergy of Car∣thage, upon the subject of Cyprians retiring,Ap. Cyr▪ Sive Viduae, sive Thlebomeni qui se exhibère non
possunt, sive qui in Carceribus sunt, sive exclusi à sedibus suis utique habere debent qui eis ministrent. So then these poor were such only, as were not able to help themselves, that were not able to come abroad; and such as these surely are not the fortieth part of any people, unless it be in the time of Plague or extraordinary Sick∣ness. In the next place let us consider the number of the Priests, what use can there be of forty six in one Congregation? For they were nei∣ther to preach nor administer the Sacraments in the Presence of the Bishop; for the first Mr. B. urged it elsewhere to prove no more than one Congregation belong'd to one Bishop, and I hope he will not be so disingenious as to cast it off as soon as he has serv'd his turn of it. For the Administration of the Sacraments, Ju∣stin Martyr is very clear in his Description, that the Bishop consecrated and gave it the Deacons to be distributed among the Congregation:ubi supra. so that unless there were distinct Congregations at that time, those 46 Presbyters could hardly find how to employ themselves. But Mr. B. does endeavour to remove this Objection,Ch. Hist. p. 8. by shewing the Church-Officers were very much multiplyed in those days, to the end, that as many as had any useful Gifts, might be employ'd in the Service of the Church: For this,Orat. 1. p. 45. he brings in Nazianzen, as a credi∣ble Witness shortly after, complaining of the Excess in this part, that the Church Rulers were almost more than the Subjects: but how shortly after? would you have judg'd this to
have been spoke? No longer than about a hun∣dred and fifty years, and after one of the great∣est Revolutions that happen'd in the Church in Cornelius's time: the Christians as Mr. B. re∣marks, were not of the greatest and richest, and therefore it is not likely that the publick Charge should be multiplyed without Necessi∣ty, and forty six Presbyters be appointed for one Congregation. But in Nazianzen's time the Church was in a prosperous and flourishing Condition, the Governours were now become Christians, and great Priviledges and Wealth were added to the Clergy, which made it then so desireable a thing. But in Cornelius's time the greatest Dignity was Martyrdom, and the Clergy was particularly aim'd at by the Heathen Per∣secutors, their Portion was Labour and Danger, they were to come and assist the Brethren in the Prison and at the Stake; and the Office was so unpleasant, that Novatian (the Author of that Sect which Mr. B. speaks so favourably of) desired to be eased of the Burden,Euseb. l. 6 c. 43. and re∣nounced his Priest-hood: besides, the same Epistle of Cornelius, as if it were to prevent such a Mistake as this,Ad Fahi∣n Anti. expresly tells us, that these Officers were not useless and unnecessary, but calls the Clergy, To , and the Necessity of them appears by what immediately follows, be∣cause they had the Direction  of a great and innumerable People: and now with what Reason Mr. B. has retra∣cted his Exception of the Roman Church, let the Reader judge.
But the Church of Rome had long before outgrown the Stature of a Congregation, for Euaristus, the sixth from St. Peter, is said to have divided Rome into Titles or Parishes, the multitude being grown too numerous for one Assembly;Ep. Pii ad Baron. or if the Authority of the Pseudo Damasus be not to be depended upon, we have the two Epistles of Pius to confirm it: in the first we have mention of Euprepia, that had gi∣ven to the Poor, Titulum Domus suae ubi nunc cum Pauperibus nostris commorantes missas agimus. Several learned men do except against the Word Missa as not being yet in use in the Church,Hospin de Temp. but it is a very hard matter to shew when it was first taken up; certain it is, that way of speaking was made use of not long af∣ter, Remissa for Remissio being found in Tertul∣lian and Cyprian: in the second Epist. we have these words, Presbyter pastor titulum condidit & dignè in Domino obiit. I must needs say, Blondel does not deal very ingeniously and equally with these Epistles, for in his Pseudo Isidocus he endeavours to prove them suppositious, tho they are not in Isidorus's Collection, yet in his Apology for St. Jerom's Opinion concerning Bishops, he vouchsafes to make use of one of them, to prove that Bishop and Presbyter sig∣nified the same thing in Pius's days; 'tis a sad case, that the Ancients shall have no farther Credit with us, than they serve our Turn: when they speak what men will not have them, then they are false and Impostours, let them give the same men but some little Coun∣tenance, and then they are true men again.
The great Liberality of the Church of Rome is no small Argument of its Greatness, for, besides the maintenance of their own Clergy and Poor, they were able to relieve most other Churches,Euseb. l. 14. c. 23. and it was their practice from the be∣ginning to oblige all the Brethren, by all manner of kindness, and to send to a great many Churches that were establisht in every City, the Necessaries of Life, relieving the Necessity of those that were in want, and sending necessary relief to those who were condemned to the Mines. This was the anci∣ent Liberality of the Roman Church, and Soter is said, not only to have continued, but im∣prov'd it. Now, if according to Mr. B's No∣tion of those Times, not many Rich, not ma∣ny Noble were call'd, the number of Believers must be by so much the Greater,Euseb. l. 7. c. 5. to be able to supply the Necessity almost of the Universal Church; and Dionysius of Alexandria speaks of the Roman Church's Charity in his time, in these words, All the Provinces of Syria, together with Arabia, , which you re∣lieve every one: The word  is there Emphatical, and implies an admiration of, as it were, the All-sufficiency of the Roman Church, how it should be able to supply the wants of so many Churches, and to furnish so Expensive a Charity. Under the Reign of Commodus, the Church is said to have enjoyed peaceable and happy Times, and to have thriv'd so well, that the whole World in a manner was reduc'd; the words of Eusebius express a wonderful increase; ;
that every Soul in a man∣ner, of every sort, came over to the Christian Religion; and at Rome particularly the in∣crease was so great, : that abundance of considerable Persons for their Nobility and Wealth, came over, with their whole Families and Relations, Euseb. l. 15. c. 21. Certain it is, that the number of Christians at Rome was proportionably greater than in any part of the Empire, for thither they fled for Refuge in times of Persecution, and shel∣ter'd themselves in a crowd; and if Tertulli∣an's account of the state of the Christians in his time, makes it very probable that they made the better half of the Roman Empire; if he boasts of multitudes, and say that they had possessed themselves of the City and Coun∣trey, and every place was full of them but the Temples, if they did in a manner besiege the Heathen in every part, and were more benefi∣cial to the Publick, by the consumption of all sorts of Commodities, and made Use of more Frankincense in One Street, than the Heathen did in any one Temple; it is evident that they were the major part every where, but in Rome more eminently so. See this urg'd far∣ther by Mr. Dodwel, in his Letter to Mr. B. Towards the middle of the Third Century, they received a considerable Increase from the Countenance of Alexander Severus, the greatest
part of whose Family (and that alone would make a good Congregation) were Christi∣ans,Euseb. l. 6. c. 21.28. and this Favourer of Christianity reigned thirteen years. Towards the latter end of that Age, their condition was most flourishing, and all the World, in a manner, had receiv'd the Faith; let us observe in what glorious Expressions Eusebius represents the Church be∣fore the Persecution of Dioclesian,Euseb. l. 8. c. 1.. who (sayes he) can describe, their full and innumerable Assemblies, and the multi∣tude of their Meetings in every City: So that by this time, not onely in Rome, but almost in every City, the Christians had several Congre∣gations. Valesius, tho he corrects the old Trans∣lator, yet it seems did not fully comprehend the meaning of this place, nor see the Elegan∣cy of Eusebius's Gradation; for first, he re∣presents the many thousands that came toge∣ther to make a Congregation, then the num∣ber of such Assemblies, that there were seve∣ral of them, and at last mentions the Places that receiv'd them, that there was no Church, no Chappel, no Oratory, but was full in those dayes. About this time, or not long after, Rome had above forty Churches, which we must not imagine to be built all at the same time, but by degrees, according as the num∣ber of Believers did require, and in all proba∣bility, there must be more than one or two, even in the first and second Century. And now I have mention'd this, it will not be amiss to clear that Passage of Optatus about these forty Churches,Optat. Mii. l. 2. contra. Parmen▪ from the Exceptions of
Blondel, whom Mr. B. follows in his mistake Optatus in that place traces the Donatists of Rome to their first Original: If Macrobius, says he, were demanded whom he succeeds, he must needs confess it is to Eucolpius; if Eucolpius be ask'd in whose Chair he sits? he must say, where Bonifacius Ballitanus sate before him; and he, where Victor Garbiensis, who was the first Donatist Bishop in Rome, and there the Succession ends, he having none to succeed to, Filius sine Patre, Tyro sine Principe, Hospes sine Hospitio, Pastor sine Grege, Episcopus sine Populo, non enim Populus aut Grex appellandi fuerant pauci qui intra quadraginta & quod excurrit basi∣licas locum ubi colligerent non haberent. It is plain then, that Optatus does not speak of the state of Rome as it was in his own time, but of Vi∣ctor Garbiensis, the first Donatist Bishop; when this was, is not easie to fix. There is no greater Argument for a great number of Congregations under the Bishop of Rome, than what Mr. B. observes of their Churches before Dioclesian's time, that they were but like our Tabernacles, as to the capa∣ciousness,Euseb. l. 8. I suppose, as well as the manner of their Structure, and therefore the lesser they were, the greater Number there must be of them, and the Church must grow too big for his Definition, since there must be more than could in those circumstances, have personal Communion in Doctrine and Worship. When the Diocess of Rome is reduced with∣in the narrow Bounds of a single Congregati∣on, what other Church can pretend to more?
And if the Imperial City need not be excepted, Alexandria cannot hope for Exemption, there∣fore he proceeds to shew that Alexandria the greatest and most populous City in the World, next to Rome, had no more Christians than could meet together in one Congregation; and of this he offers a bold Proof, that it was so in the time of Athanasius,Athan. T. 1. p. 531. Ch. Hist. 9. whose words he cites, where he excuses himself for having ce∣lebrated Easter in the great Church of Ale∣xandria, and drawn together such a multi∣tude as gave great occasion of Jealousie to the Emperour; but his Plea is, that the other Churches were so narrow, that they would have been in danger of suffering by the crowd: and as if this Church would have held all the People, he adds, that it was bet∣ter for the whole Multitude to meet in the Great Church, and to have the concurrence of the people with one Voice, &c. This Church was newly built by Constantius, and we may suppose it very large, though not yet so great as to be able to contain all the Believ∣ers in Alexandria; nor does Mr. B. desire it should, but only the Generality:Ch. Hist. p. 10. yet granting that it received all, it would follow indeed, that the Church of Alexandria then was but one Congregation: but what was it before this great Church was built, when they had no possibility of personal Communion, were not they then made congregational Churches un∣der one Bishop? And Athanasius in the same place confesses the multitude was so great, that all the other Churches in the City could
not hold it. Besides the Orthodox were probably much more numerous before the building of that Church, and the Banishment of Athanasius; and if this vast Fabrick could not receive the party of Athanasius, what Church shall we imagine could have been large enough for all the Christians in Alexandria be∣fore they were divided by Arrius, and before they were governed by Gregory and George the Arrian Bishops? He adds to this of Athanasius,p. 10. § 30. another Argu∣ment given him by a learned Friend, which I will take the liberty to examine: The City of Alexandria, says Strabo, is like a Souldiers Cloak &c. and by Computation, about ten Miles in Com∣pass; a third or forth part of this was taken up with publick Buildings, Temples, and Royal Pa∣laces; thus is two Miles and a half, or three and a quarter taken up.] I will not say, this learned Friend has impos'd on Mr. B. but there is a ve∣ry great Mistake betwixt them; suppose Tem∣ples and Royal Palaces should take up such a part of the City, must there therefore be no Inhabitants in those Palaces, or no Christians amongst those Inhabitants? But he believes this to be that Region call'd Bruchium, which Epipha∣nius speaks of in his time as destitute. What? all the publick Buildings of the Town in one Region, and that an outer Skirt too? as it is described by the Greek Martyrology in Hilarion,. And in the Life of Apollonius Discolus,.
This Epiphanius says, was destitute of Inhabitants in his time, and not unlikely, and perhaps, destitute of publick Buildings too; for it was destroyed after an obstinate Siege in the reign of Aurelian, as Am∣mianus Marcellinus, or of Claudius,l. 22. as Eusebius would have it. However, the City must be reckon'd by so much the less,In Chro∣nico. neither is there any Necessity of this; for they might enlarge upon another Quarter, being, it may be, for∣bid to build in Bruchium, because it was divi∣ded from the rest of the City, and too favou∣rable a Refuge of Rebellion, to which that People was too much addicted; they might dwell closer than before, and so their Multi∣tude be undiminisht. However, certain it is, that this City long after the Destruction of Bru∣chium retainrd it's ancient Greatness, and is re∣presented by no Writer, as diminisht either in Number or Wealth; but to let this pass, let us see what becomes of the rest, he adds, A great part of the City was assign'd to the Jews, so Strabo indefinitely, as Josephus quotes him; others tell us more punctually, that their Share was two of the five Divisions (Ush. Annals p. 859.) though many of them had their Habitations in the other Divisions, yet they had two fifth parts entire to themselves (which he might have found as punctually in Strabo, as in Bishop Ʋsher) and this (continues he) is I suppose the, which Josephus says, the Successors of Ale∣xander set apart for them; thus we see how six or seven Miles of the ten are disposed of.] And by
the same rule he might have disposed of all at once, and concluded out of Strabo's Division of the Town, that there was not one Christian it it: For Strabo liv'd in Augustus his time, when it was a hard matter to find a Christian in Alexandria, unless we will take in Justin Martyr's old Christians, such as Socrates, i.e. all virtuous good men; and then I am afraid, they would be too few to make a Congrega∣tion. The number of these Jews was much lessened within a little while after Strabo, by an Insurrection of the Alexandrians against them; the Civil Wars afterwards under Tra∣jan and his Successor had almost extirpated them; and yet even at this time, Alexandria was as populous as ever, and frequented by al∣most all the Nations of the Earth, as Dion Chry∣sostomus represents the flourishing State of it in his time: but no matter what number of Jews or Heathens it had in Strabo's days, the Que∣stion is, whether many of both were not con∣verted to the Christian Faith, and that very early. There remains now but three or four miles to be disposed of between the Heathens and the Chri∣stians,ibid. and much the lesser part will fall to the share of the latter: 'tis kindly done, to provide for the Christians before they were in Being: surely, Strabo who makes the Distribu∣tion, and Bishop Ʋsher who cites it out of him, never intended the Christians one Foot of ground in all that Division; and this learned Friend might have spared his little Town of eight or ten Furlongs, which he so liberally
bestows upon the Bishop of Alexandria before our Saviour was born. What he adds about Alexander and Meletius I wonder it could escape him,p. 11. there being no∣thing more notorious, than that Alexandria had now several fixt Parishes, or , and every one govern'd under the Bishop, and by it's proper Presbyter, and his remark upon two Bishops living quietly in Alexandria, is so disingenious a Suggestion, that he has reason to be ashamed of it:See Epiph. in Hares Miletian. for while Miletius lived quietly, and did not set up Altar against Altar, all was well; but a little before his Death, the schismatical Humour returned upon him again, and he ordain'd Priests and other Church-offi∣cers, every where, in Opposition to Alexander, he may find as many or more Bishops living peaceably in London, though there be but one Bishop of the place, as there was in Alexan∣dria. Now because Mr. B. has endeavour'd to re∣present the Church of Alexandria so inconside∣rable, even after Constantine's days, it will not be impertinent to give the Reader a View of that Churches Greatness, even from the first Foundation of it. In St. Mark's time, Alexan∣dria had several Churches,Euseb. l. 2. c. 16 Niceph. l. 2. c. 15. Euseb. l. 2. c. 24. though but one Bi∣shop, for that same Evangelist is said to have preacht the Gospel there first, and , that is, to have founded several Churches or Congre∣gations there;. yet for all this the whole was but one  in which Annianus succeeds
St. Mark; and Eusebius, in the Chapter be∣fore cited, tells us, that the number of Chri∣stians was so great in Alexandria, even at the beginning, that Philo vouchsafes to take notice of them; but as for the Essaei, which he there describes, whether they were Jews or Christi∣ans, it is not very material, though this is observable, not only of them, but of all the Jews of Alexandria, that their Principles had prepar'd them for Christianity above all other People: for by their moralizing of the Law, and making Virtue and Holiness to be the De∣sign and meaning of all those Observances; they were coming, as it were, to meet the Go∣spel, and, like the Centurion our Saviour commends, were not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. In Adrian's time,Vopiseg. in Saturn. they were, it seems, so considerable, as not only to be mention'd by that Emperour, but to be set at the Head of all the Sects of Religion in Alexandria, and they are named first: for that Emperour in his Letter to Servianus, reproaching the Egy∣ptians with inconstancy and lightness, sayes, those that worship Serapis are Christians; and there are that call themselves the Bishops of the Christians, that devote themselves to Serapis; all these, it seems, were Christians by inclina∣tion, though sometimes they were forc'd by the Egyptians to worship their Gods; for he that has the least tincture of Christianity, can have no great Devotion for Serapis:— and the Patriarch himself,ibid. when he comes into Egypt, is forc'd by some to worship Serapis, by others,
to worship Christ. It is not material to our purpose, whether this Patriarch were Bishop of Alexandria, as Casaubon and Salmasius will have him, or rather the chief Governour of the Jews, called  by Claudius,Josephus Antiqu. l. 19.4. and  by Philo; it is enough that the Chri∣stians then were so powerful as to be able to oblige him to worship Christ: there is no doubt but that Adrian does the Christians wrong in this point, for they never forc'd any to their Religion, not after they were upper∣most, unless we should judge those of Alexan∣dria to be more violent than the rest; how∣ever, this Account certainly represents them as very considerable, and equal to any Sect or Religion in Alexandria.— Ʋnus illis Deus est, Hunc Christiani, Hunc Judaei omnes venerantur & Gentes. Salmasius understands Serapis by this one God. Casaubon looks upon this Pas∣sage as spurious, and added afterwards by a Christian hand in the Margin; from thence, by an ignorant Scribe, transferr'd into the Text. But, 'tis most probable, that that one God, which the Christians and Jews are said in the first place to adore, is the true God, which both worship'd, although after different manner. And now, by the preaching of the Christians, the greatest part of the Alexandri∣ans might possibly be brought over, if not to a perfect Acknowledgment, yet to some Vene∣ration and Esteem of the true God. The great Catechists of Alexandria, as Pan∣teus, Clemens, Origen, and Heracles, did not a little advance the growth of Christian Reli∣gion
in that place, and Origen's School parti∣cularly was so frequented, one Company com∣ing still after another, from Morning till Night, that he had hardly time to take breath, and was forc'd to take Heraclas into his Assistance, to instruct the more ignorant sort. Dionysius, who gives an account of Valeri∣an's Persecution in Egypt, represents the Chri∣stians, as well of Alexandria as of other Cities, extraordinary numerous; the concourse of them to him when he was banish'd to Chebron, was so great, that he was forc'd , and afterwards, when he was removed from thence to Coluthio,Euseb. l. 7. c. 12. . Euseb. l. 8. which was nearer Alexandria, he comforts himself with this, that those of his Flock could come to him, and stay with him, and meet there in several Congregations, as it were in remoter Suburbs. Valesius observes from hence, that Suburbs, that is, in this sense, Villages of the dependance of any City, had their particular Congregation, and were not obliged to come to the City Church, which he believes was but one, even in Alexandria, in Dionysius's time, but how that is deducible from this passage, I cannot see. Under the Persecution of Dioclesian, what numbers of Christians might be at Alexandria, may be judged by the multitude of Martyrs that suffer'd at Thebes: Eusebius was an Eye∣witness of what he relates concerning them; he saw great multitudes suffer together, some dayes ten, some twenty, some sixty, and some∣times
an hundred, and this continued not for a few dayes onely, or a short space of time, but for several years. The division of Alexandria between several Presbyters, as it were into so many Parishes, although it be not mention'd before Arrius's time,Epiphan. Haeres. Me∣let. & Ar∣rian. who was the fixt Minister of one of them, call'd Buchalis, are to be supposed to have been instituted before; for Epiphanius, though he observe this as singular in the Alexandrian Church at that time, yet says nothing at all of its Novelty, which he would not probably have omitted: and Sozomen seems to imply,Soz. l. 1. c. 15. that it was an ancient Custom. Petavius mi∣stakes Epiphanius's his words, and imagines,in Epiph. that these Divisions of Alexandria are there∣fore said by him to be singular, and different from the Usage of other Churches; because, says he, those which Epiphanius had seen were but small, and might have but one Congrega∣tion, but it is plain from Epiphanius his words, that what he look'd upon as singular, was not their having several distinct Assemblies, but because they had certain and fix'd Presbyters; and therefore he adds, as an Effect of that Cu∣stom, that every one would be denominated from his Pastor, as the Corinthians did, when one cry'd, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos: and this indeed was so singular, that perhaps no other Church in the World had it besides,Vales. An∣not. in S∣zom. l. 11. c. 15. not that of Rome; and Valesius infers from the same Passage of Pope Innocent's Epistle to De∣centius, which Petavius brings to prove the contrary, that although there were several Ti∣tles
or Churches in Rome then, and had been long before, yet none of them was as yet ap∣propriated to any Presbyter, but they were served in common, as greater Cities in Holland and some other Reformed Countries, that have several Churches and Ministers, who preach in them all by their turns. Lastly, and to conclude this account of the Church of Alexandria, it is evident out of Athanasius, how the Bishop of that City had from the Beginning several fix'd Congregati∣ons under him;Athan. T. 1. p. 802. particularly those of Mareotes, who, though they must be suppos'd to receive the Faith almost as early as Alexandria, yet ne∣ver had a Bishop before Ischyrias, (if he were to be reckon'd one.) [Mareotes, says Atha∣nasius, is a Countrey belonging to Alexandria, wherein there never was a Bishop, not so much as a Chorepiscopus, but all the Churches of that place were subject to the Bishop of Alexandria. And now let the Reader judge, whether the Bishop of Alexandria had more Congregations than one under him, or no more than could conveniently meet in one place. I have hitherto examin'd Mr. B's Evidence of History for his Congregational Churches: let us now see whether there be not as good Evidence to the contrary. The growth of the Church of Jerusalem was so sudden, and so great, as to exceed the mea∣sure of one or two Congregations. St. Peter's first Sermon brought over three thousand, an∣other five thousand;Acts 2.41. then the Sacred Histo∣rian, as if the Multitude had grown too great
to be numbred, mentions the other Accessions in gross and indefinitely, but with such Ex∣pressions as imply, they much exceed the num∣bers aforementioned: Multitudes both of Men and Women were added to the Church, and the number of the Disciples multiplyed in Jerusa∣lem greatly; and a great number of the Priests were obedient to the Faith, Act. 6.7. Now let us seriously consider, whether all these Con∣verts could meet together in one place, for per∣sonal Communion, Doctrine and Worship, or whether they could find a room spacious enough to meet in all together; we find but two sorts of places they met in, the Temple, and from House to House; the Temple cannot be supposed the ordinary place of their Assembly, since the generality of the Priests and People did oppose them; and though the Apostles preacht there, it was no otherwise than they did in the Synagogues acd Market-places, and other places of concourse, to gain new Prose∣lytes, and not to instruct those they had con∣verted: when they preacht from House to House, the fifth or tenth part of them can hardly be supposed to have convenience for personal Communion: and it is certain, they did break Bread no otherwise than from House to House, from whence it is plain, that it was not possible for them all to hold personal Com∣munion in the principal part of Christian Wor∣ship, i. c. the holy Eucharist, which is made by Mr. B. as necessary to the Individuation of a Church as Communion in Doctrine. The Pres∣byterians prest this Instance very unmercifully
upon those of the congregational way, who made use of all Shifts, and most of them very poor ones. To elude the force of the Argu∣ment, sometimes they turn the Temple into a Church, another while they send the greatest part of them home to the country, and what∣soever other means they could find to diminish their number, they laid hold of them; and this way not succeeding in their own Opinion, they found a Secret in the Ayr,Grand Debate. Answer of the Assem∣bly, to the Reasons of the dis∣senting Br. p. 27. ibid. which they fancied to be much more pure, and shine in Jerusalem, than our Northern Climates, and so more proper to convey a Voice to a greater Distance; whereas, our dull unyielding Fog, arrests the Voice in every point, as it passes. However, the Assembly of Divines resolved they would not be paid with this piece of Phi∣losophy, and undertook to shew the Argu∣ment to be as thin as the Ayr they talkt of; and the Lord Bacon relieves them in this Di∣stress, who was of Opinion, that a Voice could be heard much farther in a gross than a pure Ayr, the Resistance perhaps preserving it lon∣ger, as Opposition serves, to lengthen a Dis∣course, and to make Disputes endless;p. 81.82. but in the second part of Ch. Hist. takes it up again. but Mr. B. in his first Disputation of Church-Go∣vernment summing up the Exceptions of the Independents against the Presbyterian Argu∣ment, drawn from the Church of Jerusalem, prudently leaves out this of the Ayr, but finds another Expedient as proper for his purpose; and that is, that men had much stronger Voi∣ces in those times and places, which they may believe that can fancy Nature to decay, and
that our Fore-fathers were Giants. For my part the next thing I expect is, that they should believe with Kirker that the Ancients knew the use of Sir Samuel Morland's speaking-trumpet, for Kirker had a Vision of some old Manuscript that no body else ever saw, which revealed to him, that Alexander the Great could speak to his whole Army together, by the help of a Trumpet; and who can tell, but in this vast Congregation of Jerusalem, such an Engine might be made use of? However, since Dioce∣ses are to be no larger than the Sphear of a man's Voice, it will be an useful Instrument to a Preacher, of weak Lungs, to stretch out the Bounds of his Diocess, and be as serviceable to the Church as it is to the Camp.Disp. of Ch. Gov. p. 81. But Mr. B. tells us one thing more which a Friend told him, which I wonder as much, he should believe, as that he be satisfied with another Friend's Computation of the Christi∣ans in Alexandria in Strabo's time: 'tis in short this, That, he, though his Voice was none of the lowdest, yet he preacht to a Congregation judg'd to be about ten thousand men,2 part of Ch. Hist. in one place he has but 6000. but in another he comes up again to 10000. and that they all hear'd him; I am afraid that this Friends Calculation exceeds as much as the other falls short; for we reckon now, that three thousand makes an extraordinary Con∣gregation, and it may be possible for a migh∣ty Voice to speak to a thousand more, but it may be, that the World is degenerated since, and that our Lungs are no more in Compa∣rison with those of the times he speaks of, than they were compared to those of the Eastern Preachers.
At last, to make sure work, he concludes that though Jerusalem might have many As∣semblies and yet but one Church,p. 81. & 82. and after the dispersing of the Apostles, but one Bishop, yet this is no Precedent; This I must needs say, is something more than the Independents would adventure to say, they minced the mat∣ter and told us, that Jerusalem being the first born Church, and nursed up by the joynt care of all the Apostles might arrive to an ex∣traordinary Stature, and look gigantick, in Comparison of the rest, yet they durst not say it had more than one Congregation, and was no Precedent: What shall we judge then? That the Apostles built the Church of Jerusa∣lem after one model, and those of other Cities after another, or if they did, surely they were both lawful; does that overthrow the Church and Discipline of Christ's Institution, that is, according to the practice of his own Apostles? Or can a Conformity to the Discipline of the Mother-church of Jerusalem, become in it's self a Sin? Wherein shall we be saved if the Imitation of the Apostles do not secure us? But Mr. B. says, the Office of a Bishop sup∣poses him to have no more than one Congre∣gation, since he must hold personal Commu∣nion with all, in Preaching, and Admini∣stration of the Sacraments, visiting the Sick, relieving the Poor, and the like: but must all these Acts be performed by himself in Person? Must he have no Assistance? Is nothing to be done within his Congregation, without his Presence? May not he do all this occasionally,
as the Apostles and Evangelists did,Every Bi∣shop had Presbyters in the first times, and if he were so indis∣pensably oblig'd to do all himself, what use were they of? and yet appoint Elders for the ordinary and constant Performance of the Ministry, whom he shall supervise and direct? It is very strange, that the Bishops should have been so many hundred years in an Office, which it was impossible for them to discharge, and yet this be never discover'd by themselves or others. However, the generality of Bishops (you say) for a long while after the Apostles, had but one Congregation to govern; what then? If all the Believers in and about a City, would hardly make a Congregation, that is, to be ascribed to the Condition of those times, and not to be reckon'd essential to the Office: all things have their Beginning, but are not con∣fin'd to the Measures of their Infancy; and if the Beginnings of the Church were but small, even the greatest Cities, it cannot be a preju∣dice to the Governour of it, if the number of Believers should increase, since they are ap∣pointed in Clemens Opinion, for the Govern∣ment not only of those that have already,Ep. ad Co∣rinth. but of such as shall afterwards believe. The Practice of the universal Church, is evidently on our side, for who has ever heard of two Bishops in one City, though it were never so great, unless in time of Schism: and it is strange, when the number of Believers did encrease beyond all Possibility of personal Com∣munion, that none should ever discern the ne∣cessity of dividing into several Churches, and learn this Wisdom from the Example of Bees; But the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria by their
Affectation of Empire, became evil Examples to others by their first Corruption of Church Dis∣cipline. It is strange then, that among all the Quarrels of the Bishops, and in all their Accu∣sations of one another, that this Crime of so high a Nature, should never be objected, that no good man could never complain of this Corruption, that there should never be laid to their Charge this usurping of Authority over whole Cities and multitudes of Congrega∣tions. But supposing this an Usurpation in the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, how is it cre∣dible, that all the great Cities in the World should be carryed away with their Example? that there should be not one honest Bishop left, that understood the nature of his Office, or the just bounds of his Diocess? Or suppose the Bishops so far prejudiced with self-Interest as to have neglected a Duty that redounded so much to the Diminution of their Power, yet were the People who in those times had some part in their Election, ignorant of this great Secret, would not they right themselves, and not have suffer'd their several Congreations to become Chappelries, &c. Dependencies upon the Bishops Church? Would not they have go∣vern'd themselves, rather than become, as it were, a Province to the Bishop; or if the Peo∣ple were ignorant of this, was there no Priest that was ambitious enough to be Bishop, that could inform them of their Right, in Expe∣ctation that they would be grateful to the Dis∣coverer of their Priviledges. And lastly, was there no Schismatick learned enough to justifie
his setting up of an Altar against an Altar, by this Argument, that there were more Believers than could hold personal Communion with the Bishops Altar; that there was work enough for more Bishops than one, and that in popu∣lous Cities there ought to be several Churches: yet they were all so dull, as never to think of this way, but on the contrary, every one pre∣tended, that there ought to be but one Bishop in a City, and that himself had the Right, and the other was the Usurper. In short, since the Nature of the Church re∣quires, that it should swarm, when Believers grew too numerous for one Assembly, and send out new Colonies under Independant-officers, Is it not very strange, that it should so far for∣get it's Nature, as never to have done this, and to leave not one poor instance, upon whose Authority, the Independency of Congregations might relye? It is upon this, that the present Question turns, and not whether Bishops at first had but single Congregations; for if there were no more Believers within, or belonging to the City, they could have no more; but af∣ter they were multiplyed into several Congre∣gations, still they had but one Bishop: and Mr. B. does not as much as pretend to any Evi∣dence of History to the contrary, unless it be, when the Church was divided by Schism. I thought my self obliged to consider Mr. B's Notion of a Church and Episcopacy, as it lyes scatter'd in his first Chapter, and explain'd more at large in his first Disputation of Church Government; partly because he insists so much
upon it, and bends the whole course of his Hi∣story to favour it as much as is possible; partly, because he makes it a plea to justifie his Rail∣ings against Bishops and Councils, as if those he dishonoured in this History, had departed from the ancient use of Church Government and Discipline; and their Usurpation had drawn after it all those evil Consequences and Calamities, which he relates throughout this Book. It is time now to enter upon his Histo∣ry, and to examine how truly and how fairly he has represented the Actions of Bishops and Councils, I shall go along with him as far as the end of the Council of Chalcedon, and en∣deavour to vindicate the Reputation of the four first general Councils, which our Church receives, from those injurious Representations which Mr. B. has made of them in his Hi∣story. In the next place, I shall endeavour to shew how little Truth there is in that general Accu∣sation which this History is intended to make out, that Bishops have been the Authors of all Heresies, Schisms, and Corruptions: Thirdly, that the way to remedy this, is not by multi∣plying Bishops, and that this Expedient is so far from being the Cure of Church Divisions, that nothing has contributed more to widen the Breach, and to render Peace and Concord impossible within any considerable Compass. Fourthly, That though Bishops and Councils have been guilty of great Miscarriages, they ought not to be imputed to the Order, but the Men; and if Bishops brought in several Cor∣ruptions
as well in Doctrine as Discipline after the four general Councils; Bishops have like∣wise reformed the Church from them, and have maintained, and do still maintain and justifie their Reformation. Lastly, that latter models of Church-Governments without Bi∣shops have been subject to all the Miscarriages that are charg'd upon the Bishops, and have not been able to prevent or remedy the Mis∣chiefs of Heresies and Schisms, and that the In∣dependent model is of all other, the most un∣likely to remedy these Mischiefs, and is justly charg'd by the Presbyterians to have given the occasion to all those Confusions in Religion, those monstrous Doctrines and endless Separa∣tions, under which we still labour, and almost despair to see a Remedy for them.
CHAP. II. Of Heresies and the first Councils. THE design of general Councils being chiefly to preserve the Unity of the Faith,Ch. Hist. c. 2. p. 28, 29, 30. and to reject and discredit all such dangerous doctrines as appear destructive of the fundamental Principles of Religion: Mr. B. thought fit before he enter'd upon the History of these Councils, to give us some ac∣count of Errors which they were designed to remedy: his Discourse is very favourable to the Mistakes of men, [and considering the com∣mon Frailty, it is but fit that we should for∣bear, (as far as is possible) with each others Infirmities] yet still there are such Errors as are not to be endured, and corrupt the very Vitals of Christianity: these when they were obstinately maintained, were stigmatized by the Church, with the name of Heresies, a word which Mr. B. has no Fancy to, and yet St. Paul and St. Peter made use of it to signi∣fie the worst and most dangerous sort of Er∣rors, and such as are not to be tolerated with∣in the Communion of the Church.Tit. 3.10. It is Saint Paul's charge to his Son Titus, an Heretick af∣ter the first and second Admonition, reject;Galat. 5.12. and reckoning up the works of the Flesh that excluded from Salvation, he puts in Heresie: and St. Peter,2 Pet. 1.1. to render it the more frightful, joyns with it the Epithete of damnable, say∣ing, that wicked men should come, who
should bring in damnable Heresies. Now, since we are warned before hand, that Heresies there must be, that wicked men will endea∣vour to introduce wicked Doctrines, the Church would be left in an evil condition, had it been provided with no Authority, no means to remedy those Mischiefs that would certainly overthrow the very Foundations of that Faith, upon which it was built: Now, what defence shall she make against these As∣saults? Arms she has none, but Prayers and Tears, and even those may return empty; if the Heretick will be perverse, and obstinately fortifie himself in his Errors: must she then suffer this Cancer to eat up her very wels? is there no way of stopping the Progress of this Plague, or to interpose between the sound and the infective? Surely, it cannot be left so de∣stitute, so forlorn, so helpless: there is nothing of Nature or Society but has some means as well as Inclination, to preserve it self; and the Church being a Society united upon the Terms of a common Faith and Charity, must be supposed to have so much Power within it self, as to refuse the Use and Benefit of it's Communion, to such as violate the Terms up∣on which they are associated, corrupt the Doctrine, destroy Holiness, and indanger the Attainments of the ends and Benefits of Reli∣gion, not only to themselves, but to those that converse with them. They had Power to reject a Heresie, to put away from them wicked Persons, and to refuse to receive into, or shut out of their Communion such as would
not submit to the Laws of their Society. The great condition of their Admission into the Church, was a Profession of the Christian Faith, and they had no right to remain in it any longer than they kept up to that Professi∣on; if they brought in Doctrines that were inconsistent with it, and did persevere in their mistakes, using all endeavours to propagate them, it is but just and equal, it is but natural that such should be turn'd out of the Fellow∣ship of the Church, and it is but reasonable, af∣ter a sad experience of the mischiefs that at∣tend these Doctrines, to endeavour to prevent the li for the future, by guarding diligently the Entrances of the Church, and by taking Security of such as enter into it; and if not of all such as enter into it, yet, at leastwise, of those that are admitted to teach or govern the People, that they will not revive those dan∣gerous Doctrines. 'Tis this that Mr. B. finds so much fault with, and ascribes all the mischiefs that have befallen the Church, to an ignorant zeal against Heresie: There is no doubt but this has been the occasion of great Calamities, the greatest Hereticks persecuting the Truth under the name of Heresie:p. 31. §. 15. p. 32. the Arrians were exceeding violent against the Orthodox Believers, and used all manner of Cruelties to reduce them from the right way, which they called Heresie; they, on the other side, returned the infamous name, though not the barbarous treatment, upon their Enemies; and what shall we infer from hence? that there is no Heresie, because Truth is some∣times
so miscall'd, that no Doctrines are dam∣nable, because men have condemned one ano∣ther for some that are not so? Is there no Truth, because Contradictions lay claim to it? and because that every man honours his mi∣stake, under speciousness of that Title; for all these confusions of terms, the things are the same, and a real Heresie is damnable and ought to be reproved, and cast out of the Church, nothwithstanding, that under this pretence the greatest Truths have been discredited. Mr. B. gives such an account of those Con∣troversies that exercised the four first General Councils, as seems in great measure to ex∣cuse those Heresies which were condemn'd by them, and to blame their condemnation, cal∣ling the Bishops, in derision, Hereticators and Damners, because they pronounced Arrius, Ma∣cedonius, Nestorius, &c. Hereticks, men of dan∣gerous Principles, and not to be tolerated in the Communion of the Church; yet, for all this, I belive Mr. B's own Rule will absolve them; for, in his Book called, The true and on∣ly way of Concord,pag. 291. & seq. he makes a Catalogue of such Errours, which men ought to be restrain'd from preaching and propagating: now all those Errours condemn'd by the four first Ge∣neral Councils, are laid down there, not only in the Sense, but in the very Terms they were condemn'd in; these Doctrines are by him own'd to be dangerous, and by no means to be suffered to be preach'd. But what if men grow incorrigible, and will preach them, not∣withstanding these Prohibitions and Restraints?
his Resolution is very moderate, that every one should not be ejected or silenced, that holdeth or preacheth any one such Errour what then? must he be suffer'd to propagate the Infections, and to teach these Opinions that are so confessedly dangerous? nor that nei∣ther; for there follows such an Exception in this Toleration, as wholly overthrows it; for those are to be cast out, who, consideratis consi∣derandis, are found to do more harm than good: Now, what if the Orthodox Bishops did find that, consideratis considerandis, those Hereticks they condemned, did more hurt than good, that they destroy'd with one hand much more than they edified with the other; and that the propagating of one of these dangerous Doctrines was not compensated by all the other Truths that they preach'd; there is no variety of wholsom food can countervail the Mischiefs of one envenom'd bit; and that Phy∣sician is not to be trusted that puts in any one dangerous Ingredient, though the rest of the Composition were very innocent, and this was the Rule they went by; the Hereticks in their Opinions were dangerous men, they were ob∣stinate in their Opinions, industrious in pro∣pagating them, and were mostly upon the vindication of these controverted Doctrines: it was therefore necessary, since they did more hurt than good, that they should be cast out of the Church. Nor is he less displeas'd with the Form than the Matter of this Condemnation, and there∣fore he gives the Bishops the Titles of Hereti∣cating,
Cursing, Damning Bishops; but what An∣tichristian words are these, that can move a moderate, healing-man to so great Indignation? Anathema esto, is the usual form of condemna∣tion in Councils, which he so frequently calls Cursing and Damning, the word is St. Paul's,1 Corint. 16.22. If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema-maran-atha; and he had borrow∣ed it from the Jews, which signifies no more than the separation of any thing from com∣mon Use; and is used sometimes in a good, sometimes in a bad sense. In the first, he de∣notes any thing consecrated or devoted to God; in the latter, any thing which we abhorr, and separate our selves from for fear of Pollution; so that the addition of it to those Errours which they condemn is dangerous: As for In∣stance; If any man shall say, that there was a time when Christ was not, let him be Anathe∣ma, imports no more, than that we declare our abhorrence of such Doctrines, and will have nothing common with those that profess them; but Mr. B. I know not out of what Dictionary, translates it, God damn you, and calls it the Religion of the Bishops and their Councils; Nay, though this did imply so much, they may plead the Example of St. Paul even in that case, since they do no more than apply his general Sentence, which he repeats more than once,Gal. 1 9. If any man preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed. And, that you may not think that this other Gospel does directly overthrow that which he had preach'd, and teach men
to deny and renounce our Saviour Jesus Christ; we must understand, that all this relates to the Legal Observances, which some would in∣troduce into the Churches of Galatia, and their compliance with those Teachers, is by the same Apostle called, a turning away unto another Gospel; and the preaching of those men, the Perverting of the Gospel: and so warm is the same Apostle against those Disturbers of the Church, that he wishes that they were even cut off which troubled them:chap. 5.12. Yet the Coun∣cils did not go so far in their Anathema's, they did but declare the Leprosie, as the Priest under the Law turn'd out the Diseas'd, and gave warning to all People of the danger of the Infection; and it was but fit that such should remain without the Camp till the Dis∣ease was heal'd, lest it should spread, and the whole Church become an Abomination and Anathema to him, whose Faith it had suffer'd to be corrupted. This was the Design of the Bishops and their Councils; to this end they directed their Ana∣thema's, and if they have not always met with the Success that were to be wish'd, we must not judge uncharitably, and undervalue or de∣ride their Endeavours. And now let us consider their Acts, and see what it is that they have done. The first Coun∣cils, about the time of the Observation of Easter, he passes over with only mentioning, for there is little of them remaining. Pope Vi∣ctor was doubtless to be blam'd for endangering the Peace of the whole Church,Euseb. l. 5. c. 24. upon so light
an occasion;Ch. Hist. p. 34. Whether Victor did actually ex∣communicate the Churches of Asia, or only threatned and endeavour'd to do it, is not ve∣ry clear, from the Relation of Eusebius. Vale∣sius is of opinion, and it seems the most pro∣bable, that this proceeded no farther than Let∣ters of Accusation,Vales. in locum. which he sent to most Churches, to represent the Asiaticks as unwor∣thy of Communion; but the generality of Bi∣shops not approving it, and advising to Peace, it is likely the business went no farther; so Schism was avoided by the peaceable counsel and disposition of the Bishops. The Councils of Carthage, Labese, under Agrippinus, and that of Arabia under Origen, he does but just men∣tion; that of Rome,c. 2. p. 35. after the death of Fabian, held by the Roman Clergy in the Vacancy, he makes some Remarks upon, that are grounded upon a mistake; for this is rather to be count∣ed a Consultation than a Council; and, as if they had wanted Authority to determine any thing in that ticklish point of receiving the lapsed into Communion, they only agreed this,ap. Cypr. Ep. 31. That nothing should be changed before the Ele∣ction of their next Bishop, as appears by their Letter to the Clergy of Carthage; the Bi∣shops that were here present, were such as came to assist and advise the Roman Clergy in a time of so great danger, and not to deter∣mine any thing authoritatively in Council, much less to be presided and govern'd by the Roman Presbyters. After this, says he,p. 35. § 26. there was another Coun∣cil in Carthage, two in Rome, and one in Car∣thage
about the same Controversie. These he passes over very lightly, and the Schism that was the occasion of some of them, because it was impossible to charge it upon any Bishop: Cyprian behaved himself like a prudent good man, and an indulgent Father, and yet all this could not prevent Schism and Conventicles; Faelicissimus, Priest of Carthage, makes the first breach, whom Mr. B. mistakes for Felicissimus the Deacon,§ 26. who joyn'd himself afterwards with Novatus, against the good Bishop Cypri∣an. Novatus, an African Presbyter, improved this difference; and not content to disturb his own Church, went to Rome, and kindled Discord and Dissention there. Baronius would have this Novatus to be a Bishop, because he is said by Cyprian to have ordained Felicissimus a Deacon; but it is plain, as well out of Cy∣prian, as the Chronicle of Eusebius, that he was but Priest. Novatus Presbyter Cypriani, Romam veniens,Ep. 49. &c. saith Eusebius; and Cy∣prian, after he had shewed what manner o man he was, adds, that being conscious of such horrid Crimes, he must expect, non  Presbyterio excitari tantum, sed & Communica∣tione prohiberi: and as for the Ordination o Felicissimus, Cyprian in the same Epistle shew it to have been done against all Rule and Or∣der, because, he says, that he did it, nec p∣mittente me nec sciente, but, sua factione & am∣bitione: which plainly shews, that Novat was Cyprian's Presbyter, and ought not to have ordained a Deacon, unless it were in Conjunction with him, or by his Permission
whereas, if he had been a Bishop, his right to the ordaining of Deacons would have been un∣questionable. This was the Author of that Schism Mr. B. favours so much throughout his whole History, and claims Kindred with them, as the Puritans and Nonconformists of those Times; yet having known what man∣ner of man he had been, he might have been ashamed of such a Progenitor, who, if Cyprian be to be believed, was always restless, arro∣gant, proud, perfidious, a Flatterer, and an In∣cendiary, that carried a tempest with him where∣soever he went, and was a sworn Enemy to Peace and Settlement; he robb'd the Orphans, cheated the Widows, purloin'd the Treasures of the Church, he suffer'd his Father to starve, and would not as much as bury him when dead; he kick'd his Wife, being great with Child, and caused sudden Abortion: and this was the great Saint and Puritan, that could find no Church, no Bishop holy enough for his Communion; this was the severe Judge, that would not admit Re∣pentance, and represented God cruel and im∣placable, as himself; for it was really his Opi∣nion, as I shall shew in due place, that there was no pardon for the lapsed, no, not with God; and that Mr. B. mistakes, when he af∣firms this Rigour to extend no farther than to refuse an outward Reconciliation with the Church. The next is another Council of Carthage,p. 36. under Cyprian, where one Victor is condemn∣ed for making a Priest Guardian of his Chil∣dren, and intangling a man devoted to the
Service of the Altar, in the Affairs of this World. All that he has to except against this, is, the Rigor of the Sentence, that forbids his name to be mentioned in Prayer for the dead; and that there should be no Oblation made for his Rest: but this shews, that the ancient praying for the dead was intended rather as an honourable Remembrance of them, than any act of Charity toward the Soul departed; else it is not likely, so good and indulgent a man as St. Cyprian was, would have been so cruel in his Intentions, as to deprive a poor Soul of any Relief he had judg'd necessary for it. p. 5. § 8.After this he gives a short account of several Councils called upon the subject of Rebaptiza∣tion of Hereticks, and here, to do him Right, he is just enough in his Remarks: The Gene∣rality of the World was for rebaptizing Here∣ticks, and considering what manner of men the first Hereticks were, it is probable they had Tradition as well as Reason on their side: However, Mr. B. endeavours fairly to excuse these Differences, and speaks of the Bishops with Honour and respect, allowing them to be men of eminent Piety and Worth: Had he used the same Candour towards others, who were no less eminent, it would have been no Disparagement to his Judgment or Sincerity; but his contrary unequal Dealing is not much for the Reputation of his Charity and Mo∣desty. There is a mistake § 29. where he make; Eus bius to speak that in his own Person,. which he cites not of Dionysius Alexandrinus,
That he does not condemn the rebaptizing of Here∣ticks,Euseb. l. 7 c. 6. which was a Tradition of so great Anti∣quity. The Councils of Antioch that condemn'd Paulus Samosatenus, are in effect acquitted by Mr. B. when he acknowledges him, that was rejected by those Councils, a gross Here∣tick. That infamous meeting of Traditors at Cyr∣ta,p. 36. § 37. A meeting of 12 evil men that were Bi∣shops. lib. 1. con∣tra Par∣men. was rather a Conspiracy than a Council; and I am sorry Mr. B. has not done that Right to the Catholick Church, as to shew who these men were. Opatus Milev. reproaches his Donatist Adversary with these Progenitors; amongst these was Donatus Masculitanus, Vi∣ctor. Rusicciadiensis, Marinus ab aquis Tibilita∣nis, Donatus Calumensis, and the Murtherer, Purpurius Limatensis, the great Promoters of the Schism of the Donatists, and, as it were, the Apostles of that Sect; yet these men, tho they were confessed Traditors, became of so tender Consciences soon after, as to abhor Communion with Cecilianus, because he was ordained by Felix, whom they suspected of the same Crime, that they had pardoned one another. The Church is so unconcerned with the crimes of these men, that they are in some measure her Vindication, they went out from us, because they were not of us, and they left the Communion of the Church, because their crimes made them despair of enjoying it. The next Council he mentions,c. 2. § 38. is that of Sinuessa, one of the most nonsensical pieces of Forgery that ever I saw; three hundred Bi∣shops
are said to meet together, to judge Pope Marcellinus, and could find no better place than a Cave, where they could meet but fifty at a time; like the Prophets that were fed by Oba∣diah in the time of Jezebel's Persecution: and these Judges when they came together, durst not be so presumptuous as to judge a Pope, but desired him to condemn himself; and when the poor man is perswaded to pass his own Sentence, Melchiades pronounces these Words, Justè ore suo condemnatus est, nemo enim unquam judicavit Pontificem, nec praesul sa∣cerdotem suum, quoniam prima sedes non judica∣tur à quoquam: and yet for all this, Mr. B. de∣clares, that whether this be true or forg'd is too hard a Controversie: Just as hard as that con∣cerning St. Ʋrsula and her eleven thousand Virgins, or the travelling Chappel of Loretto, or the History of the seven Champions. The Council of Illiberis follows next, that has many very good Canons, and some have need of a favourable Interpretation; it is ve∣ry severe in some cases, denying Communion even at the hour of Death; but this is not the thing which was condemn'd in the Novatians, as we shall shew hereafter. The Council of Carthage follow'd, that began the Schism of the Donatists,p. 39 § 40. upon the oc∣casion of Cecilianus his Election; Thus, says he, the doleful Tragedy of the Donatists began by Bi∣shops, divided about the Carthage Bishop. Tho it cannot be denyed, but that Bishops had a hand in carrying on this Schism,Opt. lib. 1. contra Par∣men. yet 'tis not true, that it was begun by them; for Optatus
makes Botrus and Caeleusius, the first Authors of this Schism; for these, desiring themselves to be Bishops of Carthage, and disappointed of their Hopes, by the unanimous Election of Cecilianus, left the Communion of the Church, and drew Lucilla, a rich and potent Lady, in∣to their Party, Et sic tribus convenientibus causis & personis factum est ut malignitas haberet effe∣ctum. Schisma igitur illo tempore confusâ mulieris iracundia peperit, ambitus nutrivit, avaritia robo∣ravit. These three invited those Traditors of the Council of Cyrta to Carthage, to judge the cause of Cecilianus, who they pretended, was ordained by a Traditor; and these inveigled a great many others, by a plausible pretence of Zeal against the Betrayers of Religion; so Ce∣cilianus was condemn'd, and Majorinus put in∣to his place. The Donatists, says Mr. B. were so call'd from Donatus,§ 40. a very good Bishop of Carthage hereto∣fore, and not from Donatus, à Casis nigris. 'Tis true, the former gave them the name, but I wonder where Mr. B. finds that he was so good a Bishop,De script. Ec∣cles. in Donat. St. Jerom makes him an Arrian;Optat. lib. 3. contra Par∣men. Optatus represents him as the most arrogant, proud man, that ever was, that he exacted such a Submission, even from Bishops, as to make them worship him with no less Regard than God him∣self, that he suffer'd men to swear by his name:Aust. in Joh. tract. 3. prop. Friem. St. Austin makes him an Impostor, that he made his party believe, that when he pray'd, God answer'd him from Heaven; and the civil Magistrate found him no less turbulent than the Church, his contumelious Language to
the Emperours and their Lieutenants, shewing sufficiently what Spirit he was of.Gregori Macula Se∣natus & dedecus Praefecto∣rum. Lastly, He mistakes the time of this Council, with Binnius and Baroneus, placing it in the year of Christ, 306. But Optatus making this Election of Cecilianus subsequent of the Tole∣ration granted the African Churches by Ma∣xentius, who had not reduced Africa,Valesius de Schis∣mate Dona∣tist. c. 1. § 41. till about five years after; it is clear, that this Council could not be before. An. 308. Another Council was held at Carthage, where no less than two hundred and seventy Donatist-Bishops,The Bi∣shops now begin to multiply, Schism the occasi∣on. for Moderation, agreed to communicate with penitent Traditors, without rebaptizing them, and so did for for∣ty years. This looks liker a piece of Policy than Moderation, for it had no tendence to Peace, but to strengthen the Schism. For the number of Bishops in this Council we have only the Authority of Tychonius,Aug. Epist. ad Vincen∣tiam. a Do∣natist, who probably, (as the humour of those Schismaticks was) might magnifie the strength of his Party, and stretch it a point beyond what it really was. The time of this Council is likewise very much mistaken, as appears by what we have said of the Council going before; and, it is probable, that it was held in the time of Donatus,Vales. de Schism. Donat. c. 3. Schismatick Bishop of Carthage, and immediate Successor of Majorinus. St. Je∣rom, in his Chronicle, sets his Promotion in the year 331. Donatus agnoscitur à quo per Africam Donatiani; And it cannot be well imagin'd, that Schism should spread so suddenly, as in the very beginning of it, to have two hundred
and seventy Bishops of their Party; especially, considering that Constantine the Great used all his Endeavours to suppress them. It is observable, that before this time we do not meet any very numerous Councils, ei∣ther in Africk or any where else; the greatest falling much short of a hundred; which shews, that Bishops were not yet so much multiplied, and that their Bishopricks were of a larger Extent; but these Schismaticks ha∣ving divided the Church, made Bishops in every Village to strengthen their Party, and to out∣number the Orthodox; besides that, they had set up an Altar,p. 4. § 44. and made them Bishops in eve∣ry City, where they could get the least Con∣gregation to joyn with them. Mr. B. complains, upon this Occasion, That some Popish Persons liken the Separatists among us to the Donatists; who those Popish Persons are, I will not pretend to ghess; However, this I am sure, that the word Heresie of old was never worse abus'd, than that of Popery is now; for whomsoever men have a mind to render odious to the People, it is sufficient to call him Popish, and then he is baited under that infamous name, as the Christians ancient∣ly were in the Skins of Beasts: But if a man had a mind to make odious Comparisons, Mr. B's Defence of our Separatists from the Impu∣tation of being like the Donatists, would ren∣der them but little Service. For his first Excep∣tion of our Separatists having no Bishops, which the Donatists had, makes them differ not only from that Sect, but from all the Sects and Church∣es in the World till the last Age: and his se∣cond
Exception of their being the lesser num∣ber, signifies as little; for so were the Dona∣tists at first, and so may they long continue; or rather may the name of Separation cease, and all return into one Flock; under one Shep∣herd. But the Donatists divided the Unity of the Church, appointed Bishops against Bishops, and Altar against Altar, pretended to a greater Purity than the Orthodox, and boasted, that their Church had all Wheat and no Tares; were great Calumniators of Bishops, and the honest Clergy that took their part, they gave great Jealousie to the Civil Government, and spoke Disrespect∣fully of Princes: I will not say, that any of our Separatists do resemble them in any of this. The succeeding Councils of Ancyra, Neocae∣sarea, and two of Alexandria, escaped with pretty good Quarter; the Acts of some not displeasing him, and of others being lost. The next is that of Laodicea,p. 42. § 49. They were so few, that without Contenti∣on, they made di∣vers good Canons. of 32 Bishops; not so few, but they could have fallen out, if they had been so disposed; three Canons of this Council, he cites in favour of his con∣gregational Church: The forty sixth requires, That those that are to be baptized, and not al∣ready baptized, (as Mr. B. translates) should learn the Creed, and repeat it to the Bishop or Presbyters, on the Friday of the last Week, i. e. of the Lent, or any other, next preceeding the day of solemn Baptism. By this, saith Mr. B. You may conjecture how large a Bishoprick then was. They might be as large as ours for all this: For though the Bishop may not hear them all himself, upon the same day yet the Presby∣ters
of his Diocess may, and the Canon is sa∣tisfied with that: And Canon 56 forbids the Presbyters to go into the Church before the Bishop, but with him: and Mr. B's Inference from hence, is, That every Church had a Bishop, though some Chappels afar off, had but Presbyters only. But I cannot see what Service this Remark does him; for 'tis confessed, that no Bishop had but one Cathedral, and that is the Church meant here in the Canon; for it is added, Nec sedere in Tribunalibus, which were put up on∣ly in the Episcopal Church; but that there were other Parish Churches supplied by Pres∣byters, and those far from the Cathedral, is acknowledged by Mr. B. I will not contend with him about their Title, whether they were Churches or Chappels; it is sufficient to dis∣prove his Notion, that they were several Con∣gregations. Canon 57. It is order'd that Bi∣shops should not be ordain'd in Villages and Ham∣lets: The Canon does not distinguish between the small and great, putting Villages indefi∣nitely, but instead of Bishops they were to have Visitors, i. e. qui circum eant, that should go about, and visit them:§ 49. which Expression im∣ports, that there was no small number of them under the same Association, and yet, all these were under the Bishop of the City, upon which they depended, and their Visitor was to do nothing without his Knowledge or Privity; which Mr. B. translates Conscience:Sine Con∣scientia Ep. nibil faciant. But least he should have forgot the thirteenth Canon, or taken no notice of it, I would re∣commend it to his consideration; it is but
short, Quod non sit permittendum turbis, Electi∣onem eorum facere, qui sunt ad sacerdotium pro∣vehendi; which shews, that the Peoples Right of electing Bishops or Ministers, is not so general, as to have no Exception in Anti∣quity. That great Roman Council, of two hundred seventy five Bishops,p. 43. p. 53. this is confess'd to be part∣ly false if not all. which Mr. B. mentions out of Crabb, is of so little Credit, as either not to be taken notice of by the following Compilers, or else, as is most probable, is set down elsewhere; for Crabb sets them down twice. It is uncertain, says Mr. B. whether it was before or after the Nicene Council: for my part, I believe it was neither before nor after, but just the same time with the other great Roman Council, that follows next to it, of 284 Bishops, which is said to be held after that,ibid. Constantine was baptized by Sylvester: A hundred and twenty nine Bishops came to this latter from the City of Rome, and not far from it: How big were Bishopricks then says Mr. B.? But had there been no more Bishops in Italy than were in this Council, they would not have exceeded the number of Christians in Alexandria, when Strabo described it. After this he finds fault with several things in this imaginary Synod; first, Because men are curs'd for being ignorant of the time of the Moon; and then he congratulates the Makers and Improvers of the English Liturgy, (he should have said the Almanack-makers) that they did not live in those severe times: For alas! one year they mistook the time of Easter, and this is one of the things for
which two thousand Ministers are silenc'd, for not declaring Assent, Consent, and Approbation of, yea, and the use of it, and so to keep Easter at a wrong time. The silenc'd Ministers have little Reason to thank him; or any body else, that gives this reason of their Separation; nor do I believe they would be thought such strict Observers of Times and Festivals; and it is strange, this should trouble their Consciences, who care no more for Easter than they do for Christmas, but only that it falls upon a Sunday; and if the old observance of Easter in this Country, upon the fourteenth day of the Moon, had continued, we must have expected to have had as many Arguments against the Feast of the Resurrection, as we have had against that of the Nativity. After this, he quarrels with several other Canons of this Council, and at last ends in these Exclamations, O brave Pope and Clergy! O patient Council! that subscribed to one man, and pretended to no Judgment. O humble Con∣stantine! that subscribed to all this, and said no∣thing, and a Womans Subscription perfecteth all; and O credulous Reader that believeth this! Why then does he speak so modestly, that the Fiction is but uncertain? Why does he make Advantage of the number of these imaginary Bishops? Why does he find Fault, and aggra∣vate, and exclame; if after all, this is but a dream, and his Reader a Fool to believe it? Before I close this Chapter, I must give an account of Mr. B's Favourite Sect, the Novati∣ans, whom he speaks so favourably of, as of∣ten
as he has occasion to mention them. The Original of their Schism he slubbers over, p. 35. after this manner; And Novatus, and Novatian, as 'tis said, being against their taking (i. e. the laps'd) into Communion at all, the Councils excommunicated them all as Schisma∣ticks. One would imagine by this account, that Novatus and Novatian had been thrust out of the Church, and that their Schism was an Effect of their Excommunication; but the con∣trary is notorious,Ep. 39. for Cyprian charges Novatus with having first departed from the Ʋnity of the Church, and drawn away several Brethren from the Communion of their Bishop; and the Reason of all this was, his Consciousness of those horrid Crimes he had committed, which he foresaw would unavoidably bring the Censures of the Church up∣on him, as soon as ever the Persecution was over. This was the tender Conscience of the Author of the ancient Sect of the Puritans;Euseb. l. 6. c. 43. Novatian in like manner withdrew from the Communi∣on of the Church, before he was excommuni∣cated; and the reason of his being renounced by the Church, was, because he had first re∣nounced their Communion: this Pharisaical Saint could not vouchsafe to enter into the same Church with Sinners; and if it were not pur∣ged of all Dross and Corruption, it must be unworthy of his Communion: yet this severe Refiner, of all others, had least reason to exact this Purity, whose Entrance into the Church, as well as the Ministry, was by extraordinary Dispensation and Indulgence; he was baptized
in his bed, in great danger of Death; he neg∣lected to be confirmed by the Bishop; he was made Priest against Ecclesiastical Laws [that forbid Clinicks to have any share in the Go∣vernment of the Church] by the intercession of the Bishop, who promis'd the People, who were generally against his Admission, that this Act should never be drawn into Precedent. Being made Priest, he became no great credit to his Friends that promoted him, for in time of Persecution, being desired to assist some of the Brethren that were in distress, he re∣nounc'd his Office, and Religion, saying, that he would be Priest no longer, and had an inclination to betake himself to another sort of Philosophy than the Christian: this is the man that was so rigid and cruel, as not to receive the Repentance of such as had fallen in time of Persecution, but, insinu∣ating himself into the good opinion of the Confessors, such as had endured the fiery Tryal, he began to bring them into a dislike of the Church, since it did receive those that had abjured that Religion for which the Con∣fessors had so gloriously suffered, and equal∣led them to these holy Martyrs in all the Pri∣viledges of Communion. Some of these good men were carried away with his dissimula∣tion, to do countenance to the Schism, and their Authority brought off several others from the Communion of the Bishop; but these at last discovering the Wolf in Sheeps clothing, forsook the Impostor, and return'd
to the Unity of the Church; he, in the mean time, uses all diligence to widen the breach, and to make it perpetual, by setting up him∣self for a Bishop, which then was thought necessary to the Being of a Church, although he had sworn solemnly before never to take the Office upon him. To compass his Design, he sends some of the subtilest of his Agents to three plain ignorant Bishops, to invite them to Rome, under pretence that this wretched Schism might be ended by their good Offices: These good men, suspecting no trick, came; and, overcome with his good Entertainment, with too much Wine and Perswasion, were forc'd at last to lay their hands on him, and conse∣crate him a Bishop; and not thinking him∣self secure enough yet under this Title, he makes every one of his Congregation engage himself by Oath never to forsake him, or to return to Cornelius, and this in a manner so Solemn, that the relation of it is sufficient to strike a horrour on the mind of the Reader: for when he administred the Sacrament, after Consecration, he made every one that re∣ceived, when the Bread was in his hand, to swear to him by the Body and Blood of our Saviour, that they would never forsake him, or return to their former Bishop. These were the men, these were the means by which the Schism of the Nova∣tians was begun and carried on; a Schism no less execrable in the Conduct of it, than in∣famous in its Authors, and, which is yet worse than all this, most blasphemous in its Do∣ctrines.
Mr. B. is too favourable in his representa∣tion of the Novatian Doctrine; for, in the place above-cited, he makes these two Observations in favour of them. First, that Novatus did not deny the laps'd pardon of Sin with God,p. 39. but only Church-Communion. Secondly, That he did not deny this to other great Sinners repenting, but only to those that laps'd to Idolatry, or denying Christ; but the Novatians long after extended it to other heinous Crimes, as upon suppos'd parity of Reason. As to the first,lib. 4. c. 28. Socrates does endeavour to excuse them, by saying, that those who had sacrificed to Idols in times of Persecution, were to be exhorted to Repentance, though not to be admitted to Communion, and as to the Pardon of their Sin, they were to leave that to God, who alone has power to forgive Sins. It must be confess'd, that Socrates is an Hi∣storian of good credit, and, it seems, well ac∣quainted with the History and Doctrine of the Novatians, who probably in his time might have grown more moderate in their Opinion concerning Remission of Sin; but nothing can be more evident, than that the Authours of that Schism denied not only the Communion of the Church, but God's Pardon, to those who had sinned after Baptism; for this, all the Writers of that time, who must be sup∣pos'd to understand their Tenets, do unani∣mously affirm. Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived the same time with Novatian, and writ
to him to advise him to return, and be recon∣cil'd to the Church, and lay down that Ho∣nour of a Bishop, which he pretended was forc'd upon him; this ancient Writer gives us this account of their Doctrine:Euseb. l. 7. c. 8. Novatian, sayes he, I justly abhor, because he has divided the Church, and drawn aside several Brethren in∣to Impiety and Blasphemy, and brought in a most wicked Doctrine concerning God, representing our most merciful Saviour as cruel and void of pity: Besides this, be evacuates holy Baptism, and overthrows the Faith that was before him: And lastly, He banishes the Holy Ghost irrevocably from those in whom there is great reason to hope that either it Remains still, or may return to them again. So far Dionysius. Cypr. ad Nov. Haer.S. Cyprian argues, in several places, upon the same Supposition, and looks upon their Severity, in not admitting Penitents to Com∣munion, as the Effect of a more cruel Do∣ctrine, that God would never receive them into favour:idem ad Anton. l. 4. ep. 2. This was the main Argument against the lapsed, He that denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven: and consequently, they denied them Communion, because they believed Christ would finally reject them. This the same Father uses great diligence to explain, and confutes their Inference from it by the Exam∣ple of St. Peter, who deny'd his Master, and yet was received into Grace. He does ac∣knowledge indeed frequently, that Novatus did exhort those to Repentance he refused to
receive; but then he urges, that nothing can be more impertinent, than to press men to re∣pent, and yet to take away from them all hopes of Pardon; and therefore, he notes this as a pernicious Effect of their Doctrine, That it frighted men out of their Religion, and made them turn Heathen, upon despair of Mercy, and cast away all thoughts of Repentance, since it would not avail them to Salva∣tion. Eusebius,Euseb. l. 6. c. 43. who had seen all this and a great deal more relating to the Novatians, and in all Probability, had read several of their Books, understood this to be their Doctrine; for No∣vatus, saith he, (so he calls Novatian) a Pres∣byter of the Roman Church, puff'd up with Inso∣lence and Pride against the laps'd, as if there re∣main'd to them no hopes of Salvation, although they should perform all things that are requisite to a sincere Conversion, became Author of that Sect, who arrogantly assume the name of Puritans. These Witnesses are so express and full, that Socrates takes off nothing of the force of their Testimony; for he says only this, That they remitted Sinners to God, who was only able to forgive them, but they never give the least hope that he will do so, or that any Salvation is to be attain'd out of the Communion of the Church; so that this is to be lookt upon ra∣ther a Shift, or a put off, to divert Envy and Clamour, than to give any Comfort or Encou∣ragement to the penitent.
As to M. B's 2d Observation, That the Authors of this Heresie did not deny Pardon to other great Sinners, but only to those that laps'd to Idolatry, or denying Christ; and that it was their Follow∣ers long after, that extended it to other hai∣nous Crimes: Socrates expressly confutes it, in the place above cited; where, speaking of Novatian's Letters to several Churches upon the occasion of his Schism, adds, That several were offended at the Severity of that Rule, that admitted none to Communion who had sinn'd mor∣tally after Baptism. The word there indeed, is Sinn'd unto Death, but that he did not under∣stand that particular one of Apostacy by it, ap∣pears by what follows in the same Chapter; That some took part with Novatian, others with Cornelius, according to their several Inclinations and Course of Life; the looser and more licentious sort, favouring the most indulgent Discipline, the other of more austere Lives, inclining most to the Novatian Severity; which implies, that all Sins in the Opinion of these Schismaticks were equally irremissable: And a little before, in the same Chapter, Novatian confesses as much, where he remits the forgiving not only of this Sin of Apostacy, but all Sins in general to God alone; which is fuller confirm'd by St. Am∣brose,l. . de Poe∣it. c.1. who charges them with the Stoical Opi∣nion that all Sins are equal. Now let us see whether the Council of Eli∣beris des favour this Doctrine, and whether Mr. B. had any reason to admire how that Council should be received as Orthodox, and yet
the Novatians be accounted Hereticks.p. 39. He notes in his Margin, that Abbaspinaeus has learnedly made the best of it; so has Mendoza, in his large Defence of this Council, who vindicates this Canon by great numbers of Instances of the same nature in other Councils. He must be a great Stranger to the ancient Discipline of the Church, that has not heard of Penitents not being received into full Communion at the hour of Death: but this is far enough from being Novatianism: for such, although they were not receiv'd into the Lord's Supper, or within the Congregation, were yet, upon their Repentance, received into the Order of Peni∣tents; who, though they were not admitted into all the Priviledges and Familiarity of the Communion, yet they were received into the Charity and Unity of the Church; they had the Benefit of the Churches Prayers, and at last were reconciled by Imposition of hands, though not by the receiving of the Sacra∣ment, which was the more usual way. We do not find that this Sect was much more mortified than it's Neighbours, unless it were in Phrygia, where Socrates saith,In the place last cited. l. 1. de pae∣nit. The People were naturally averse to Pleasures. But at Constantinople, their Bishop Sisinnius was so gay and luxurious, as to give Offence to the Orthodox Party: and Saint Ambrose objects the same thing to the whole Sect. Lastly, they were no less Enemies to Peace, than they were to Truth, though Mr. B. com∣mends their Moderation in one Instance; for
the Catholicks in time of common Persecuti∣on, frequented their Churches, and would have made up the old Breach,Socr. l. 2. c. 38. but the Nova∣tians would not comply, but kept to their ancient rule of Seperation, and refused to unite. .Doctor Forbes intended a particular History of the Novatians, to shew the Nature and Method of Schism: it is Pity that great man did not live to perform what he design'd. Steph. Keuchelius writ a Book of the Novatian Heresie (so he makes it) Strasburg 1651. Quarto.
CHAP. III. Of the Council of Nice, and some that followed it. THE great Council of Nice gives Ti∣tle to Mr. B's third Chapter;Ch. Hist. p. 45. § 1. He can∣not deny, but the Controversie about which it was called, was of great Moment, and that it was brought to a happy end, but lessens, as much as he can, the Credit of the Bishops, and ascribes very little to their Pru∣dence and Judgment. I do not envy Con∣stantine the Reputation of having heal'd the Differences of the Church, and there is no doubt, but he contributed much to the stil∣ling that Controversie for a while; yet it seems he did not judge the Bishops and Coun∣cils to be of so little use as Mr. B. would re∣present, but was at great Pains and Expence to bring an extraordinary number of them to∣gether, and he knew no other way of compo∣sing Differences about Religion, than by get∣ting a Consultation of the most learned and eminent of those that had the Direction of the Church. Some of these indeed had their Grievances to represent, and complaints against each other; but the Modesty of Constantine put an end to their Quarrels and Disputes, burning all their Accusations without reading them. It is no wonder, if in so great a num∣ber
assembled from all the Provinces of the Ro∣man World, (considering their great Dissen∣tions about Religion) that there should be some that might retain the Sense of Injuries received, and complain of such as had done them wrong; but these were but few, and the matter soon accommodated. Mr. B. adds, That Eusebius Nicomed. and Arrius were brought but to counterfeit Repentance,§ 1. which satisfied Constantine, though not Athana∣sius; who, refusing to receive Arrius into Commu∣nion upon Constantine's Request, caused much Ca∣lamity afterwards. This is an oblique Accusation of that great Champion of the Christian Faith, and seems to charge him with all the Calamities which that unhappy Controversie brought upon the Church: but how justly, we will refer to Mr. B's own Words, who calls Arrius's Re∣cantation, A counterfeit Repentance, and Consent to the Nicene Faith. If Athanasius saw through this Dissimulation, why is he yet blamed for not admitting him into the Church, be∣fore he had sincerely corrected that Fault for which he was justly cast out?Socr. l. 1. c. 27. And it was no hard matter to discern the Insincerity of Arrius's Confession, since he dissembles the very point in Question, and rejects the Terms in which the Council had expressed it self: If therefore the good Emperour were imposed upon by a counterfeit Repentance, and would restore that Incendiary to Op∣portunities of doing Mischief, Athanasius is
not to be blamed, who wisely foresaw what Mischiefs were like to follow, upon the Re∣ception of that Heretick. Compliance with Hy∣pocrites, is no likely means to reclaim them; and there is a sort of Mercy that is more cruel, than Severity: if those few that dissented from the Determination of that Council, had not been received again without giving great∣er security of their Faith and Moderation, it might perhaps have ended that fatal Contro∣versie. In the next place,§ 2. Mr. B. passes to the case of the Meletians, and thinks it useful (for our warning in these times) to recite the sum of the Story out of Epiphanius. The short of it is this,Epiph. Haer. Me∣let. Peter Bishop of Ale∣xandria, and Meletus Bishop of Lycopolis, being Fellow-prisoners for the same Faith, disagreed unhappily about the old Question, Whether those that denyed the Faith in time of Persecution, were to be receiv'd upon their Repentance?Epiph. Peter was for In∣dulgence, Meletius for Severity. In Con∣clusion, they divided Congregations in the Prison, Peter suffer'd Martyrdom, but the Schism survived him, and the Churches of Aegypt were upon this occasion, divided into Parties; Meletius is reconciled to the Suc∣cessor of Peter, and lives peaceably with him in Alexandria, content with the Title of a Bishop, but without any exercise of his Function. At last, the Spirit of Divsion re∣turn'd upon him again, and he made new
Ordinations, and set Church against Church, and Bishop against Bishop; His Followers after his Death, joyn'd with the Arrians, against Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and became a great Support to that Heresie,p. 46. Just as if the Nonconformists at this time, saith Mr. B. should seek, by the favour of the Papists, to be deliver'd from the silencing and destroying Prelates, upon Condition of common Liberty; the cases are not much unlike. I do not desire to improve this Compa∣rison to the Reproach of the Non-conformists, as he endeavours to render Bishops odious, under the Name of Tyrants; yet I wish they would seriously consider, what Support their Separation has been to that Faction, they above all men exclame against. They have made the Breach, and the Enemy has lodg'd, and fortified himself in it, and yet notwithstanding the common danger that threatens all, still choose to pursue their lit∣tle Scruples and great Animosities, to the evident hazard of the Reformed Religion, rather than to close with the Church, and to make up the Breaches of our City, which will be impregnable, when it is at Unity in it self. But to return to our Story of the Me∣letians. Mr. B. confesses, page 48. That Baronius and Petavius say that Epiphanius is deceived in all this History, and makes the case of the Meletians, better than it was, and that some Meletian Knave be∣guil'd him. He answers, 1. They give us
no Proof of any such Knaves beguiling him at all. 2. That he who was so apt to overdoe, in suspecting and aggravating Heresies (as in Origen and Chrysostom's Case) was not likely to make the case here so much better than it was. 3. And how much nearer was Epiphanius in Time and Place, than Baronius and Petavius? And how easie was it then for him to have true Notice of such publick things? 4. And if they make Epiphanius so fallacious in such a Story as this, so near him, what a shake does it give to the Credit of his copious History of the many other Heresies, which he had less opportunity to know, and con∣sequently, to the Credit of much of Church-History? Mr. B. has an easie way of confuting mens Opinions, without confuting their Reasons: If he had but mention'd any of their Argu∣ments, he might have spar'd the Labour of his own. As to his first Reason against them, they do not stand much upon it, whether a Meletian Knave beguil'd Epiphanius or no, they prove him to be deceiv'd, and it is likelier he should be deceived by a Meletian Knave, than any Body else. As to the se∣cond; No body can think he design'd to excuse the Meletians, by that Story which he laid down as he found it. As to the third, it would have some weight, if Baronius and Petavius contradicted this out of their own Heads, without any Authority anci∣enter
than Epiphanius. Is not Athanasius as credible a Witness, who lived in those times, and was concern'd in some of those Acti∣ons that are related by Epiphanius; his Re∣lation contradicts this. Who then is to be be∣liev'd, Epiphanius, who writ a long time after,Athanas. Apol. 2. or Athanasius, who was witness of most of these things, and must needs have heard of that Quarrel in the Prison, if any such thing had been? But he gives us this ac∣count; which, how it can consist with Epipha∣nius's, let Mr. B. judge: Peter, says he, was made Bishop with us before, and suffer'd Martyrdom under the Persecution of Dio∣clesian; he depos'd, in a Synod of Bishops, Meletius an Aegyptian Bishop, convict of many Crimes, and in particular, that he had sacrificed to Idols; he neither appeal'd to any other Synod, nor took care to purge himself before Peter's Successors in Alexan∣dria, but made a Schism; so that his Fol∣lowers now instead of Christians, are called Meletians; then he began to asperse and ca∣lumniate the Bishops, and Peter in the first place, then his Successor Achillas, and after him Alexander, and that with great cun∣ning, borrowing the Instance of Absalon, to render the Fact of his Deposition more invidious, and to revenge himself by calumniating the innocent. What shall we now believe? That Meletius who was convict of sacrificing to Idols himself, should be so severe against others that had fallen into the
same Sin? or how should he be imprison'd for his Religion that had sacrificed to Idols? This, and the Story of that dividing Mantle, can no more agree, than Peter and Meletius could in the Prison, according to Epiphanius his Relation. Socrates and Sozomen have the same Story with Athanasius, and not one word of this Partition Mantle. In short, is Peter himself to be believed against Epipha∣nius? He is represented there as one too in∣dulgent to Sinners, but his Canons are the severest of any that I have seen, and are down-right Novatianism in Mr. B's Opinion: He appoints very long Penance, for Sins not very hainous; and for those that fall away under Persecution,Vid. Petr. Alex. Can. ap. Bib. Patr. apud. Synodic. Bever. though their Temptations be never so great, and the Terrors of Death never so forcible, yet he allows them but just Encouragement enough to hope for a Pardon upon their sincere Repentance; but for such as prevent the danger, and offer themselves to Sacrifice before the Officers hale them to the Temple,Petr. Alex. Can. 4. & Argu∣ment. Ca∣non. such were never to be admitted to full Communion, no not at the hour of Death. Is any man like to find fault with this Bishop for being too indulgent? Is this any great Encouragement to Apostates? It would be strange after all this, that men should depart from his Communion, for be∣ing too much prostituted to the Betrayers of Religion: If all this does not satisfie Mr. B. but that he will still believe those holy Mar∣tyrs, as unmortified in Prison, as the Priests
and Jesuits heretofore were at Wisbich, let him enjoy his Fancy, and contempt of ancient Bishops, and be bound to believe all the Sto∣ries in Epiphanius. Mr. B. confesses, that Epiphanius seems not to be very accurate in his Disputes nor his Narratives; why then does he maintain him here against the Authority of Athanasius, and all Sense and Reason? He does acknow∣ledge some Passages in this History to be mistaken; as that the Meletians joyned with the Arrians before the Death of Alexander; and in his Instance of the time of Arrius's death, placing it before the Councel of Nice. Besides these, there are other Mistakes no less gross, which Mr. B. swallows down as true History; as first, that Constantine the Great banish'd Athanasius into Italy, where he remain'd twelve or fourteen years, till after the Death of Constantine. If Athanasius himself be to be believ'd, or Socrates out of him, Constantine banish'd him into Gallia, and Treves was the place where he abode; nor is there any Likelihood that he saw Italy during his first Banishment. But the account of the time of it,Euseb. de Vit. Con∣stant. for twelve or fourteen years, is intolerable; for the Councel of Tyre was not assembled till the thirtieth year of Constantine,Epist. Praef. Marot. Constantius and Albinus being Con∣suls; which agrees with the three hundred thirty fifth year of our Saviour, according to Baronius's Computation; Athanasius his Banishment is plac'd the year after, Constantine
dyes the year ensuing, and presently after his death, Athanasius is recall'd. Baronius places his return in the year 338, but Vale∣sius proves, from the style of Constantine ju∣nior's Letter, in the behalf of Athanasius, who was then but Caesar, that Athanasius return'd the very same year that Constantine dyed: So that the twelve or fourteen years do hardly amount to so many Months; which, I believe, was the true writing of Epipha∣nius, and that Years are put in, instead of Months, by the mistake of the Copies. Theo∣doret computes his Banishment to be two whole Years, and Baronius follows him. There are several other things in the same Author no less absurd, as that Athanasius is charged with the murther of Arsenius, in Constantine's time; that Eusebius baptized Va∣lens the Emperour, though Eusebius was dead many years before Valens came to the Empire; that Constantine was the Son of Valerian; that George was put into Athana∣sius's place in the time of his first Banishment; that Achillas succeeded Alexanaer in the See of Alexandria,Dallè, l. 4. de Imagin. p. 394. Epiphanius planè aliter Schisma Meletianum nar∣rat, quam rei ve∣ritas poscebat. and many other such Oversights in History; and one would wonder so great a man as Epiphanius could be guilty of, or that any one that pretends to Church-History, should fol∣low him in those gross mistakes, which they may correct out of any Historian that does but make mention of the same things and Times.
Mr. B. strangely confounds Gregory and George, the Arrian Bishops of Alexandria; for page 47 he tells us, That when Con∣stans had compell'd his Brother Constan∣tius to restore him (Athanasius) he was again banish'd; For George, that had been made Bishop by the Arrians (and by Con∣stantius) was kill'd by the Heathen Peo∣ple in Julian's time, and his Corps burnt, and the ashes scatter'd into the Wind, which increased the suspition of Tyranny against Athanasius. I hope George's murther in Julian's time, did not bring Athanasius into suspition of Tyranny under Constantius. But pag. 62. Sect. 45. this George is call'd Gregory; Gre∣gory the Bishop, being, as is aforesaid, murther'd by the Heathen, and burnt to ashes.] We no where read, that this Gregory was either mur∣der'd or burn't, but that he was turn'd out of the See of Alexandria, because he was odi∣ous to all, and to the Arrians themselves, and that George,Socr. l. 2. c. 14. who was afterwards mur∣ther'd, was put in his place. Where he says, Constans compell'd his Brother Constantius to restore Athanasius, he mistakes Constans for his Brother Constantine, who was the Author of Athanasius his first restauration: for it was long after his first banishment, and after the Coun∣cil of Sardica, that Constans threatned his Brother with War, if he did not restore Atha∣nasius and Paul into their Churches.
Page 48. §. 4. He gives an account of the Heresie of Arrius, and, I think, heartily con∣demns him, if these words be his own, He that denies the Deity of Christ, denies his Es∣sence, and he that denies his Essence, denies Christ, and is no Christian. Yet he excuses this Doctrine in comparison of Socinianism, and that very justly. At last, after a short sum of the Arrian Doctrine, he concludes, this was the dangerous Heresie of Arrius. I must confess, he is so much given to Figures, that I can't tell whether he be in earnest here, or speaks only Ironically; but, sure I am, that what he sayes in the next Para∣graph, is very much to the disadvantage of the Doctrine of the Trinity: And, to say truth, Petavius has done it no great kind∣ness by his Defence of it. 'Tis true, that some of the Fathers, before the Nicene Coun∣cil, seem'd to speak sometimes in favour of that Doctrine, which was afterwards taken up by the Arrians; but that they did cadem sentire, is more than ought to be granted. Before some Controversies have been started, men have spoke less warily, whom, after∣wards, Disputation has brought to be more Cautious in their Expressions.Dallè de usu Patr; Dallè makes the Ancient Fathers to be of little Use in the Controversies between us and the Pa∣pists, because (though they may seem to favour sometimes one side, sometimes ano∣ther, yet) they speak loosly, and without any regard to our Controversies, which were
not then in being; Several Passages extol∣ling Communion with the Bishop of Rome, were little intended to set him up for an infallible Judge; and others, speaking with great Veneration of the Eucharist, may seem to favour Transubstantiation, &c. If any such Opinion had then been in the Church, their words, in probability, had been more decisive. It is a commendable Charity of Mr. B. to say, that it is enough to believe those Fathers to be saved,p. 49. though we may not believe them to be without Errour. Though that Errour, by his confession, is very dangerous, as implying a denial of Christ; yet, he adds, that God is merciful, and requires not knowledge of all alike.ibid. But, for my part, I believe they do not stand in need of that Charity: Some of them spoke loosely, in compliance with a Platonick No∣tion of the Trinity, not fore-seeing what Consequences might be drawn from their Expressions, or how narrowly they should come afterwards to be examin'd. Certain it is, that the Fathers that followed the Ni∣cene Council,Athan. ad Afros. Hist. Tri∣part. l. 2. c. 7. Socr. l. 5. c. 10. & Sozom. l. 7. c. 12. took all the Ecclesiastical Wri∣ters before their time to be of their Opinion; and Sisinnius, the Novatian Reader, after∣wards Bishop, is said to have confounded all the Arrian Disputants, by putting the matter to this issue, Whether they would stand to the Judgment of the Ancient Fa∣thers, in the Interpretation of such places of Scripture as were controverted between
them. Eusebius, no Enemy to the Arrians,Ep. ad Cae∣sar. Hist. Tripart. l. 2. acknowledges  to be used by some Ecclesiastical Writers, long before the Coun∣cil of Nice: the Creed of the Council of Antioch against Paulus Samosatenus, has it,Vid. Con. Antioch. and several other things, that shew how much the Doctrine of the Church at that time differ'd from that of the Arrians. It would be a great Service to the Truth, that seems now to labour under some Prejudice, if some learned hand would take the Pains to shew (which I believe is not impossible) how Petavius has betray'd the constant Tra∣dition of this Doctrine, to establish it by the Authority of the Church, and relieve the Memories of those holy Martyrs that he leaves charg'd with the Suspition of blas∣phemous Opinions concerning our Sa∣viour. Having done with the Nicene Council,p. 50. §. 7. and all that related to it, Mr. B. thinks it worth his labour to add the Sum of the History of the Audians out of Epiphanius.Epiph. Haeres. Au∣dian. That the World may percieve what Spirit the hereticating Prelates were then of, and how some, called Hereticks, were made such, or defamed as such, and who they were that did divide the Churches, and break their Peace; The Author of this Sect was Audius, a man severe in his Life, and sound in his Principles, but one that took great Liberty of Speech, and reproved sharply, whatsoever he found amiss, though
it were in the Bishops; they, in Revenge, persecuted him, and turn'd him out of the Church. He is made Bishop of his own Sect, and so exasperated, as to abhor all Communion with the Bishops of the Catholick Church. If all things were as Epiphanius represents them, Audius had very hard Measure: but it seems, from Epiphanius his own account, that there was not want∣ing just occasion against him; for he held, that God had Humane Shape; a Doctrine, if obstinately maintain'd (and such bold men are not easily reclaim'd) altogether intole∣rable: But I am afraid Epiphanius had this Story from as bad hands as that of the Meletians; for, this Schism happening in a remote part of the World, and being scat∣ter'd afterwards into several Parts, it is likely, that some Audian might impose up∣on him;l 4. Haeret. ah. For it looks like the Story of one party: and the more likely, because Theo∣doret, a man that lived in that Country, where they first sprung, gives an infamous Character of them, That they held some of the Doctrines of the Manichees, That God was not the Author of Fire and Dark∣ness, that they exercised Usury, that they cohabited with Women, without Mar∣riage, that they were great Hypocrites, of a proud, Pharisaical Spirit, that cried, Touch me not, for I am holier than thou. If Au∣dius were like his Followers, I know no∣thing so like him and them, as Labady and
his Disciples:See Laba∣dy's Epist. against Reforma∣tion. This was a man very free in his Reproofs too, he spoke sharply against the Vices of the Clergy where he lived, though there were no Bishops amongst them; and it may be, one of his Followers may be able to perswade a learned man in Con∣stantinople, that he was banish'd only for his Liberty of Reprehension, and out of Envy to his Virtue. Page 52. Section 14. we have several shrewd Remarks upon some Canons of the Council of Nice; As first, That no Patri∣archs are named there; Secondly, That they nullifie the Ordination of scandalous and un∣capable men. Can. 9.10. Which will justifie Pope Ni∣cholas, forbidding any to take the Mass of a fornicating Priest. This fornicating Priest of Pope Nicholas, is no other than a mar∣ried one; and whatsoever will justifie that Prohibition, cannot but condemn Mr. B. who is himself married. As for deposing scanda∣lous Ministers, there is none but wishes it, but not in the manner he seems to insinuate by the Sentence of the people, but by their law∣ful Superiors, which these two Canons do suppose. 3. That Rural Bishops were then in Ʋse, and allowed by the Council. Can. 8. And what can he infer from hence? Not surely, That every Country Parish had a Bishop, but that, such Cities as had larger Territories belonging to them, had Ecclesia∣stical Visitors under the City-Bishop, which
were called Chorepiscopi;Can. 57. Conc. Laodic. Whether they were Bishops indeed, or Priests, with a de∣legated Episcopal Power, is not agreed amongst Learned men: Sure it is, that they had this Obligation common to them with other Presbyters, not to do any thing of Moment without the Advice and Approba∣tion of the Bishop.Conc. Car∣thag. 4. 4. That no Bishop was to remove from one Church to another: yet some other Councils allow this Translation, and Gelasius understands it only of such, as out of Covetousness or Ambition, and by in∣direct means, shall endeavour to translate themselves; and the Practice of the Church was never very conformable to this Canon, the most eminent Bishops in the World,Socr. l. 7. c. 36. ha∣ving transgres'd it. 5. The Arabick Canons; the fourth, Si ppulo placebit, is a Condition of every Bishops Election: Newer Translations render this Concurrence of the People, Cum consensu Pepuli, Populo consersum praevente; which implies little more, than that the Bi∣shop ought to be such, as the People should have nothing material to object against; and not, that they were to please themselves, and to indulge their Fancies in the Election of their Bishops, for that did belong to the Clergy,Vid. lo. ap. Synod. Br. 0. and particularly, to the Metropoli∣tan; as the th Arabick Canon does ex∣pressly inform us. 6. The fifth Arabick Ca∣non, in case of Discord among the People, who shall be their Bishop or Priest, re∣fers
it to the People, to consider which is most blameless; and no Bishop or Priest must be taken into anothers place, if the former was blameless; so that if Pastors be wrongfully cast out, the People must not forsake them, nor receive the ob∣truded. Nothing can be more disingenuous than this Dealing: The design of that Ca∣non is, that there should be but one Bishop in every City; but if the People disagree, and one party stand up for one, and another for another,Vid. loc. they ought to consider the Ju∣stice of the Cause, and he that is already Bi∣shop, ought to continue so, if they have no∣thing material to lay to his Charge, and that be not evidently proved: so we see plainly, that this Disagreement is only be∣tween the People, who have no Power to depart from the rightful Bishop, and facti∣ously to set up another against him; but that the People should stand by their Pastor when he is canonically ejected by his Superiours assembled in Synod, is very far from being any meaning of this Canon, though Mr. B. would force it to that purpose: Besides all this, though any of these Arabick Canons should directly favour, either his Notion of a Church, or the cause of Dissenters, or disallow the Practice of our Church in any thing they scruple: it would give them but very small Relief, since there is no Church, and much less ours that ever receiv'd them,
nor were they ever heard of, till the last Age. 7. Those ordained by Meletius, were to be received into the Ministry where others dyed, if by the Suffrage of the People, they were judged fit; and the Bishop of Alexandria de∣sign'd them. Whither this tends, is not hard to conjecture, but it would spoil the Drift, if one should observe maliciously, First, That these Meletians were Episcopally ordain'd. Secondly, That they were receiv'd into the Ministry, upon the Supposal of their Sub∣mission to the Canons and Orders of the Church. Thirdly, That in that same place, Sozomen declares in the Name of the Coun∣cil, that it is not lawful for the People to elect whom they please. Page 53.l. 1. c. 24.  Cir. Ath. Ep. ad Strap. The Council of Gangrae, he has nothing to object against; that of Tyre is ma∣nifestly Arrian, and abhorr'd by the Ca∣tholick Church; that of Jerusalem is of the the same Stamp; but here Mr. B. goes along with the common Mistake, that Arrius was here receiv'd into Communion, where∣as Athanasius affirms him to have died out of the Communion of the Church: And it is plain, that comparing Socrates, Sozo∣men, and Athanasius, Arrius, the Author of that Heresie was dead before the Council of Jerusalem; and it is observable, that Atha∣nasius, in his account of that Council, every where expresses himself thus,Ep. Synod. Con. Hie∣ro ap. Athan. l. de Synod. That , and , were there receiv'd into Communion. See Vales, his Annot. Ec∣clesiast. in Socrat. & Sozom.
The next, of any Note,p. 54. § 21. is the Council of Antioch, of near a hundred Bishops, (of which, thirty six were Arrians) the most Orthodox, and the holy James of Nisybis, one, yet they de∣pos'd Athanasius, and the Arrians (it's like by the Emperour's Favour) carry'd it: Thus far Mr. B. Many have wonder'd, how the major part of this Council, being Ortho∣dox, Athanasius should be condemn'd by it; Mr. B. who does not seem much to favour him, because he was not kind to the Non∣conformist Meletians, insinuates a base com∣plyance of these Orthodox Bishops, with the Emperours Inclination; a moderate man, and always for the most charitable Construction. However, Pope Julius's Let∣ter is express, that he was condemn'd but by thirty six Bishops, whether they were Arrians or no, he does not say: Athana∣sius reckons ninety, Hilary ninety seven, Sozomon ninety nine; and be they never so many, it seems, the lesser number carry'd it; and if the Emperour made that a Law, the Orthodox Dissenters ought to be ab∣solved. Certain it is, that this Council lay under the Imputation of Arrianisin, for when it was objected to Chrysostom, that he resum'd his Place, after that he had been ejected, without the Authority of a Synod to restore him, which the Canons of this Council did require; his Defence was, that this was not a Canon of the Church, but of the Arrians. Sozomen makes them all
Arrians. The Faction of Eusebius, (saith he) with several others that favour'd that Opinion, in all, ninety seven Bishops, assembled at Anti∣och, from several places, under Colour of con∣secrating a Church; but indeed, as the Event prov'd, to abrogate the Decrees of the Nicene Council: Athanasius rejects them, as sworn Enemies to him and the Faith, so that there is no likely-hood that the majority was Orthodox, since Constantius and Eu∣sebius had the contriving of this Synod, and by it's means, the Ruine of Athana∣sius. But how came this Opinion of thirty six only, being Arrians, and yet carrying the Cause? Some say, that they acted se∣cretly, and did not admit the Orthodox to vote with them; for so the Condemnation of Athanasius past at Tyre; or that they might be impos'd upon by their specious Pretence of disowning Arrius; but because there is no account of any Difference be∣tween the Arrians and Orthodox in this case, no Protestation enter'd, (nay, if any such thing had been, it cannot be imagin'd, but that Sozomen must have mention'd it, where he speaks of the Bishop of Jerusalem, absenting himself on purpose, lest he should be drawn in a second time, to subscribe to the Condemnation of Athanasius,) we must conclude. That these were all of a Party, and pack'd together upon that design. And perhaps, the reading of thirty six in Julius's Epistle, may be a mistake of Tran∣scribers,
it being easie to mistake the Greek figure of 90 for 30, unless we shall judge the contrary to be the true Reading; for the two ancient Latin Translations of Diony∣sius Exiguus, and Isidorus Mercator, conclude, consenserunt & subscripserunt 30 Episcopi, and the Greek Synodical Epistle wants but one of just thirty Subscriptions. Sozomen mentions another Synod at Antioch, of just thirty Bi∣shops, and confounds the Acts of it with those of this first; but whether it be his mi∣stake, or the old Translators, that might confound the second with the first, I am not able to determine, and the matter is too con∣fus'd to be extricated here. Though the Authority of this Council was not great, yet it seems the Canons of it were so wisely suited to the condition of a distracted Church, and to the depressing of Schism, that they were adopted afterwards by General Councils. Mr. B. mentions se∣veral, that are most of them levell'd against Dissenters, and yet they are such, as the Dissenters themselves, that own any Disci∣pline, cannot find fault with, and when they are in any Power, find necessary to ob∣serve. The fifth forbids any Priest or Deacons to gather Churches or Assemblies against the Bishop's will; and if any did, and did not desist upon admonition, he was to be deposed; and if he went on, to be opprest by the exteriour Power, as seditious. The word opprest, it seems, is Emphatical; and has indeed an old Version
to favour it; but what may be Oppres∣sion, in his sense, with the Council was Le∣gal Punishment; and the Greek word it uses signifies not so much the Penalty, as the End for which it was to be inflicted, the reduction of Schismaticks.. And here Mr. B. ends very angrily, and leaves his sting be∣hind him, in this sharp Expression, [this is their strength.] There are many as intelli∣gent men as Mr. B. that are of Opinion, that these [they] have strength of Reason and Argument on their side, as well as of Power; but there are those that have a strength that is invincible by any Reason, and that is Perverseness: and that is the on∣ly strength of some that I will not name. After this, he spares his Gall, for about a dozen times, though not without one small sally, till he meets with the Council of Sar∣dica, which clear'd Athanasius,p. 55. § 28. Marcellus, and others. Austin and many others, says he,August. Ep. 163. ad Eleus. Where he rejects it, be∣cause Athanasius and Julius were condemned by it. reject this Council. Surely, not because it clear'd these men; for all the Orthodox World look upon their Cause and that of Religion, as so nearly joyn'd, that they could not desert the one, without betraying the other: Besides, St. Austin does not reject this Council, for he had never seen the Acts of it, but that of Philippo-polis, as appears by his Exceptions against it, that it was carried on by the Arrians.
I marvel that Mr. B. speaking of the Ar∣rian Synod at Philippo-polis,p. 56. § 29. would seem to give so much credit to the Calumnies those Hereticks fastened upon Athanasius, and other good Bishops, as to be stagger'd with their Accusation. Athanasius had already detect∣ed so many Subornations against himself, that it ought not to astonish any to hear the same men, or their disciples, lay'd new and incredible Crimes to his charge, no more than the Centuries of Scandalous Mini∣sters, or the lying wonders of the anni mirabi∣les, ought to stagger any man in his Opi∣nion of the Conformists of the Church of England. In the next Paragraph,§. 30. we have a soft, kind character of the Circumcelliones, who pass only for Violent Reformers, taking from the Rich, what, they thought, they had wrong'd any of, and righting the injured, and unjustly doing Justice. We need not despair, after this excusing of the most barbarous and de∣sperate Villains that ever defamed Christia∣nity, by assuming the Title; but that Mr. B. in a great fit of Charity and Moderation, may another time give us an Apology for John of Leyden, or of Venner, and his despera∣do Saints. The rest of the Councils, to the end of this Chapter, must be confess'd not to be much to the Honour of the Church; yet the evil Effects and Consequences of them, are ra∣ther to be charged upon the Arrian Empe∣rour
than the Bishops. This was the time of the Arrian Inquisition, and this was the miserable choice, to subscribe, or to suffer Im∣prisonment, and scourging, and Banishment, and Sequestration; and many good men pre∣served Faith and a good Conscience, against all this Violence and Compulsion, many fell in the day of Tryal, and subscribed against their own Judgment; yet such are rather to be pitied than insulted on, considering we have all the same common Infirmities, and without extraordinary Assistance, are not sufficient to encounter all the Terrours that a resolved Enemy can make use of to affright us; and in this case, it is evident, that it was neither the Bishop, nor the Christian, but the Man, and the infirmity of Humane Nature, was to be charged with these Com∣pliances. The account which Hillary gives of those times is very sad, but yet, such as shews, rather the Calamity than the fault of the Bi∣shops, every one, as in time of an irresistable Conflagration, using his best, though ineffe∣ctual Endeavour, to quench the Flames. This made every one a Projector, and devise new Forms of Creeds, in hopes at last, that some one or other, might be receiv'd by all the differing Parties. It is an easie thing to mock at the Dissentions or Differences of the Church, but it is not an easie matter to heal them; and Reconcilers themselves are at last engaged in the Dispute they would
put an end to. If Mr. B. despises their Un∣skilfulness, that they did not understand, ei∣ther the Cure of Church-Divisions, or the true and only Terms of Christian Concord, it was their Unhappiness, not to have so discerning a Spirit as his; and yet, for all his Projects and Methods, we do not find any great Suc∣cess of his Undertakings; for neither is he himself free from Contentions, and those very bitter, in which he is, and has been engaged, against almost all sorts and Sects of me; and some have judg'd him so much a Stranger to Peace, as to need a Moderator to stand be∣tween the Contradictions of his own Books.
CHAP. IV. Of the Council of Constantinople. IT was a malicious Suggestion of the Devil against Job, when he had no∣thing to lay to his Charge, to call his Integrity in Question, Does Job serve God for nought? And Mr. B. though he else∣where abhors Diabolisme, yet here, conde∣scends to the odious Arts of the Accuser of the Brethren, and endeavours to disparage the Faith and Orthodoxness of the Bishops of the West, by insinuating, that it was but their Compliance with good Empe∣rours: The Bishops (says he) much follow'd the Emperours Will:p. 65. § 1. and if the Faith of Con∣stantine Senior and Junior, Constans, Valen∣tinian, had not fail'd, the General Councils at Milan and Ariminum, tell us how failing the Bishops Faith was like to be. What can there be more unchristian, than this Suggestion? Why could not the Bishops Faith be as sincere and constant as the Emperours? Nay, that these Emperours did continue Orthodox, must be in great Mea∣sure ascrib'd to the Diligence of the Bi∣shops, that had any Influence upon them. But it seems, the Emperours drew Councils on their part, what side soever they took; And what wonder, since they could call whom they pleas'd, and pack
their Councils, disable those that were not for their Turn, turn honest men out of their Bishopricks, with a high hand, and put into their places, such as were fittest for their purpose. By the same means, England became Presbyterian, as the World became Arrian, and yet I hope Mr. B. will not charge the Bishops with too much Compliance in that Particular: Nay,§ 2. in the very next Paragraph, Mr. B. does the Bishops Right again, and shews, without thinking of doing them any Justice, how they were not so complying as he represented them before; for he tells us, That eighty were burn'd by Valens in one Ship, and in all the East, he Depos'd, Abus'd, Murder'd many that would not forsake the Nicene Creed; and then descends to more Particulars of the Arrian Persecution. And now the Reader may cease to wonder, if he find numerous Councils in so short a time, contradicting one the other; since good Bishops are ba∣nish'd, depos'd, or murder'd, and Hereticks forc'd upon their Churches. Of this, tho we have not the Particulars of the num∣bers turn'd out in the East, yet we may imagine it,Notitia Affr. una cum Fa∣cundo Edi∣tae à Sir∣mondo. Though Mr. B. makes them 660. by comparing the Arrian Visi∣tation of Africk, where there were but four hundred sixty six Bishops in all, and I believe the Schismaticks come into the number, who might abhor Arrianism, no less than the Catholicks; and then Church∣es must be of greater Extent even in Africk
than Mr. B. fancies them: all these were call'd before King Hunnericus, to give an ac∣count of their Faith, of whom but eighty eight fell away, and three hundred seventy eight persever'd: It seems, the majority of Bishops was not then so complying, as they are injuriously represented in this Hi∣story. St. Basil, in the Descriptions he makes of the lamentable Estate of the Eastern Church∣es, does not complain of the Temporizing, and Compliance of the Bishops, but of the hard measure they receiv'd, and how they were generally turn'd out by the Arrians. Thus that excellent Bishop complains to his Brethren of the West,Basil. Ep. 70. The Shepherds are driven away, that the Flocks might be dissipated. And a little farther, There is no Criminal condemn'd without some Evidence, but Orthodox Bishops are pu∣nish'd without any proof at all; some of them never saw their Accusers, and were never brought to any Bar, nor were ever indicted of any Misdemeanour; but secretly, in the Stilness of the Night, were hurried away into Banishment, and dy'd with the Hardships of the Wilderness; and though we should be silent, yet the World cannot be ignorant of the Banishment of the Priests and Deacons, and of the Havock that is made of the whole Clergy. And in another Place.Ep. 220. Among all the Dioceses of the Bishops those that are the most
eminent Assertors of the Faith, are driven out of their Country, by Calumnies and false Accusations, and others brought in who lead Captive the Souls of the igno∣rant. And if you would know what persons they were that made up the Arrian Councils, the same Author tells you, they were such as they put into the places of those good men that were turn'd out; Men that would not fail to serve them,Basil. Ep. 69. (the Arrians that put them in) to the Destruction of the true Faith, and were the Slaves and Instruments of those that promoted them in their Revenge up∣on the Orthodox Doctrine. And now judge, whether it was the Compliance of the Bishops, or the Violence of the He∣reticks, that made so great and sudden Change in the Church, and in the Doctrines of Councils. In reckoning up the principal things done in the Council of Constantinople,§ 4. p. 66. he makes the Deposition of Gregory Naz. to be one against all History, and a∣gainst himself in the next page, where he says, That Gregory, seeing the Reso∣lutions, and offended with the furi∣ous Carriage of the Bishops in the Council, resigneth to the Emperour, and departeth: Let them be resolv'd upon casting him out as much as they will, yet it was not done, only they put another
into his place, which was made vacant by his voluntary Resignation. Upon this account he represents this Council in a most odious manner,p. 66. § 7. and for this end, makes use of the words of Nazianz. speaking of the general Corrup∣tions of the Times, and the Divisions of the Church, (and what Age has been so happy, as not to labour under these Evils?) But he has mangled and dis∣joynted the Words of that eloquent Fa∣ther, more barbarously than ever the Bi∣shops or their Councils did the Church: The Courtiers,Gregor. Orat. in Sy∣nod. whether true to the Empe∣rour, I know not, but for the most part, perfidious to God. This is in the Close of his Speech in the Council, among those passionate Valedictions; but Mr. B. joyns with it, his sharp Reproof of the Bishops, page 524. where we may observe his wonted Candour; for Nazianz. speaking of the Factions of the Bishops, under these Metaphors, . Mr. B. thought fit to render it, Raging like furious Hor∣ses in Battel, and leaves out the , Almost; to make the Satyr more full, writes, and like Madmen, casting Dust into the Air. And, as he thought fit to leave out in one place, so he adds in another, to the Words and Sense of Nazi∣anzen;
therefore he professes, That it is unseemly for him to joyn with them in their Councils, as it were, to leave his Studies and Quietness, to go play with the Lads in the Streets. To joyn with them in their Councils, is an addi∣tion of Mr. B. the words of Gregory are these, . In like manner, it would not become me, (who know better things than the multitude) whilst others bustle in a Crowd, to choose ra∣ther to be one of them, than to enjoy my Liberty with Obscurity. There is nothing reflects upon this Council, be∣fore which this Oration was spoken, but only representing the great Trouble that would attend the Office of a Bishop, and especially, the Bishop of the Imperial City, that he might obtain the Request he had made before, and which all this lamentable Description of the Church is design'd to recommend; he desires to be dismiss'd, Give me (says he) The Reward of my Labour; What?p. 23. Not such as some envious men may think, but such as I may safely ask; give me Rest and Ease from my long Labours, have Compas∣sion on my gray Hairs, have some Re∣spect
to a Stranger, and put another in∣to my place, who may be vex'd and disturb'd in my Stead; such as hath clean hands, and an eloquent Tongue; such as is able to gratifie you in all things, and may be sufficient to joyn with you in an effectual Care for the Church: But as for me, you see how I am wasted with Time, and Labour, and Sickness — The Verses cited out of Gregory,Ch. Hist. p. 67. do not concern this Council at all, but repre∣sent the miserable Distractions of the Church, at that time he accepted the Bishoprick of C. P. and his chief design in it,1 Carm. de vita sua. was, to reconcile, if it were possi∣ble, these Differences, which were occasi∣on'd by Hereticks, who envy'd the Or∣thodox Bishops, and had a violent Passi∣on for their Chairs. However, Mr. B. will have it, That he spake all this and a great deal more of this Council of C. P. one of the four which is equall'd to the four Evan∣gelists. He does indeed in several places find fault with this Council, but is far from making such a Riot as this; and, it seems, he had a great many Friends in it, as appears by their Dissention con∣cerning him, which he put an end to, by a voluntary Resignation of his Place: and it is evident from his own Account, that the Council had not agreed upon his Deposition till after his Resignation;Carm. de vita sua.
for, after his Speech, he says, That a con∣fus'd Murmur follow'd, and the younger men brought the old over, I suppose, to accept of this Offer, that since his Case did give some occasion of Dissention, the prudentest way was to take him at his Word, and so end the Quarrel. But it seems, Gregory did resent the In∣jury, and did not bear the Deprivation of his Bishoprick, with the same Generosity he propos'd, which made him a little more sharp than was decent, in his Re∣presentation of the Bishops; but from hence to conclude against the Bishops, as the Disturbers of all the World, would argue as little Judgment as it would Cha∣rity; for Orators draw something bigger than the Life, and Satyrists love to aggra∣vate. The Age, though wicked enough, may not be as wicked as a zealous Preacher might represent it; all men are Lyars, says David in his Haste; and St. Paul, when he was neglected by his own Friends, concluded generally, All seek their own, and not the things that are Christ's; and what wonder, if this holy man, shar∣pen'd with Discontent, should exclame, with somewhat too great a Passion, against the Administration of the Church, which he had been forc'd to quit. His Censure of Councils, that he knew none of them have any happy End, was not the fault of the Expedient for ending of
Differences, but of the men, and particu∣larly, of the Hereticks, that were upper∣most most part of his time, for he does frequently profess a great Veneration for the Council of Nice, and was one of the greatest Champions for it in his time. The Case of Meletius and Paulinus,p. 69. § 9. both Orthodox Bishops of Antioch, was some∣thing nice, and determined very tenderly, that both should be allow'd equally the Administration of that Church,Socr. l. 5. c. 5. Sozom. l. 7. c. 3. but with a Provision, that this Indulgence should ne∣ver be drawn into a Precedent, and that the Surviver should govern alone. Fla∣vianus, and ambitious,Socr. l. 5. c. 10.15. popular Presbyter, after Meletius his Death, is elected Bishop, in opposition to Meletius, which was the occasion of much Trouble in the Church. The Expedient so extraordinary, shew'd the Moderation that was us'd to end the first Schism: but Flavianus can have no excuse, who, against the Canons, and the Interest and Peace of the Church, and against his own Oath, set up himself against his lawful Bishop. Mr. B's Observation is, That even good Bishops cannot agree, nor escape the Imputation of Heresie; which refers to Lucifer Calaritanus. It is much to be lamented, that good men cannot rightly understand one another, but so it has ever been, and the Apostles them∣selves had misunderstandings; but this is
no more incident to Bishops, than to any other good men: it is the effect of Humane Frailty, from which, no Dignity, no Title, can ever free us. The History of the Priscillianists is rela∣ted by Mr. B. with his usual Ingenuity;p. 70. § 13. for, all along, he observes this Rule, to be very favourable to all Hereticks and Schis∣maticks, be they never so much in the wrong, and to fall upon the Orthodox Party, and to improve every miscarriage of theirs into a mighty Crime.Aug. de Haer. c. 70. These Priscillianists joyn'd the monstrous Opi∣nions and Practices of the Gnosticks and Manichees into one Heresie; and, besides their blasphemous Conceits concerning this World's being created by the Devil, and our Saviour's descending gradually through the several Spheres of Heaven, they were monstrous in their lewdness, and promis∣cuous Fornications, men of no Faith, whose Principle was this, Jura, perjura, Secretum prodere noli: These men, after they had been condemn'd by some Coun∣cils, (and very justly, I hope) got, by the means of some Mercenary Courtiers,Sulp. Sev. l. 2. prope fin. the Emperour's Protection, and his Order to be restor'd after they had been banish'd. Ithacius, and some other Bishops, the most zealous Opposers of this Sect, applied them∣selves to Maximus the Tyrant, desiring him to suppress these Hereticks by the Sword. In short, Priscillian, and several
others, after they had been condemn'd by the Council of Bourdeaux, were put to death at Treves, by Maximus his Order; and, how justly, let the Reader judge, by this Relation of Sulpitius Severus;l. 2. Priscil∣lianum gemino judicio auditum, convictumque maleficii nec diffitentem obscoenis se studuisse doctriuis, Nocturnos etiam turpium foemina∣rum egisse Conventus, nudumque orare soli∣tum, nocentem pronunciavit. But, notwith∣standing the Sentence were most just, and Severus confesses, that these Hereticks were Luce indignissimi, yet all good men were offended that Bishops should procure their death, and concern themselves in Bloud: Whereupon, Theognostus excommunicates Ithacius in a Council at Treves, as Baronius tells us,Bar. An. 385.29. & an. 386.25. ubi supra. though Severus brings in Maxi∣mus, perswading St. Martin to joyn with Idacius, who had been condemn'd by none but Theognostus, and that upon a private Quarrel. St. Martin,Ch. Hist. p. 71. sayes Mr. B. renounced the Communion of the Bishops and their Synods.] One would imagine, that now Martin the Saint were become Martin Marr-Prelate, and turn'd Presbyterian; but no such mat∣ter, he renounc'd only the Communion of Ithacius his Party, and that others did as well as he.Amb. Ep. 58.76. Conc. Taur. c. 5. Theognostus, Ambrose, Stu∣dius, and several others, scrupled Commu∣nion with these men polluted with Blood: how justly, I will not pretend to deter∣mine,
but Mr. B. cannot complain, if he calls to mind how often he reproaches and derides the Tenderness of the Bishops, that are content to enjoyn Penance upon great Malefactors, that had taken Sanctuary in the Church: There he pleads with Ida∣cius, that it is pity they should live, and that the Gallows should be deprived of its due: However, forgetting himself, he makes this a Plea for Separation [and which shews a Divine justification for Separa∣tion from the Bishops and Synods of such a way; yea,p. 72. § 19. though of the same Religion with us, and not so corrupt as the Reformation found the Roman Papacy and Clergy:] This Divine Justification is the Angel's Reproof of Martin for having communi∣cated with the Ithacians once,Sulp. Sev. Vit. Mart. to save the Lives of some Eminent Persons. How far the Historian is to be credited in these marvellous Relations of St. Martin, I am as loth to determine as Mr. B. but sure it is, that, all things confider'd, though St. Martin may pass for a great Saint, yet several of his actions shew more Sim∣plicity and Zeal, than Knowledge or Dis∣cretion; for, though it were much to his credit to be sollicited to an Emperour's Table,Sever. yet it was a great want of Duty to prefer his own Priest to the Emperour and Nobles, in outward expressions of respect: and, though it was great Devotion in the Empress to condescend to be his Cook
and Serving-maid, yet it was no great sign of Humility in him to accept the service. For my part, I must confess, I should be very loth to separate from the Communion of a Church, whose Doctrines I could not except against, merely upon this Divine Ju∣stification, and the Example and Miracles of St. Martin. But this Instance could become no man worse than Mr. B. who, in a Letter to Dr. Hill, confesses himself to have been a man of Blood, and therefore despairs of the honour of ever being instrumental in the Peace of the Church. If St. Martin was so far in the right, why does not M. B. imitate him? why does he not renounce Communion with those bloody men that instigated the Long Parliament and Peo∣ple to rebell, that pressed the King's death, and defended it when it was done? why does he not renounce these, especially, since they never gave the least sign of Repent∣ance? These were the men that applied themselves to the Maximi of this Nation, to persecute, not Priscillianists, but a great many Worthy, Honest Men: And I need not call to Mr. B's remembrance, who were the sordid Compliers with these Usurpers, who compar'd Cromwel to David,Disput. 1. Ep. Ded. to R. Crom∣wel. and his wise Son to Solomon: but this has trans∣ported me a little too far; and, to say truth, who can forbear, where men have the confidence to suggest those things against
others, that they stand most notoriously guilty of themselves? The next thing, worth Reflection, is, his Remark upon the Council of Capua:§. 20. This Council (sayes he) had more wit than many others, and order'd, that both Congre∣gations, Flavian's and Evagriu's, being all good Christians, should live in loving Commu∣nion: O that others had been as wise, in not believing the Prelates that perswaded the World, that it is so pernicious a thing for two Churches and Bishops to be in one City, as Peter and Paul are said to be at Rome.] Whatever Wit this Council had, it seems Mr. B. shews little, in mistaking it so gross∣ly: for the Council of Capua never order'd that the two opposite Bishops and Con∣gregations at Antioch, should joyn in lo∣ving Communion; but only that the Eastern Bishops, that had divided them∣selves upon that occasion, some taking part with Flavianus, others with Evagrius,Conc. Cap. that these should be received into the Commu∣nion of the Catholick Church, if they were Or∣thodox in the Faith: so that if the Schism at Antioch could not be compos'd, the Mischief should not go any further, or di∣vide the Catholick Church;Ambros. Theoph. Ep. 78. as St. Ambrose writes to Theophilus Alex. Cui bonae pacis naufragio Synodus Capuensis tandem obtulerat possum tranquillitatis, ut omnibus per totum Orientem daretur Communio Catholicam confi∣tentibus fidem, & duobus estis tuae sanctitatis
Examen impertiretur: And now Mr. B's vi∣olent Exclamation against those who would perswade the World, that it is so pernicious a thing to have two Bishops in the same City, might have been spar'd: but this is to be pardon'd, when we consider, that a Gun makes the same noise, whether it hit, or miss the mark. But this Council condemn'd a new Heresie (Hereticating was in fashion) viz. of one Bishop Bonosus,Ch. Hist. § 21. p. 72. denying Mary to have conti∣nu'd a Virgin to her death. Here Mr. B. makes himself pleasant with his own Dream; for, surely, no man, with his Eyes open, ever saw this Condemnation of Bonosus by the Council of Capua; which determines only, that the neighbouring Bishops should judge between him (Bono∣sus) and his Accusers:Ambr. Ep. 79. sed cum hujusmodi fuerit Concilii Capuensis judicium, ut finitimi Bonoso atque ejus accusatoribus Judices tribu∣erentur, & praecipuè Macedones, qui cum Episcopo Thessaloniensi de ejus factis cognosce∣rent, advertimus quod nobis judicandi forma competere non posset. Next (sayes our Author) we have a strange thing,§ 23. a Heresie raised by one that was no Bishop: but the best is, it was but a lit-Heresie; that of Jovinian.] But how! is it so strange a thing that a Heresie should be raised by one that is no Bishop? or did he not turn Heretick because he was
not made one? Cerinthus, Ebion, Marcion, Valentinus, Artemon, Arrius, &c. were they Bishops? I suppose it will be a hard mat∣ter to find any Bishops to have been the Authors of any Heresie, for a long while after Christ; and even those that gave names to Heresies, were not the first that gave them being, as we shall shew more particularly hereafter. It is strange (sayes Mr. B.) that Binnius vouchsafes next,§ 24. to add out of Socrates (when he hereticates him also) a Council of the Novatians.] And why should it be so strange, since Binnius sets down a great many more Councils that were Heretical in his opinion? But, let Mr. B. enjoy his wonder, when he is in the fit, he must give others leave to wonder a little too, at the Transports of a man that pretends so much to moderation [that would say, as loud as I can speak, if all the proud, am∣bitious, hereticating part of the Bishops had been of this mind; O, what Sin,Ch. Hist. p. 73. § 24. what Scandal, and what Shame, what Cruelties, Confusions, and Miseries had the Christian World escap'd!] And what is all this about? The leaving Easter indifferent; i. e. Whether it be to be observ'd with the Jews, or the Christian Church? And yet Mr. B. in this very Paragraph, finds fault with silencing of Ministers that would not keep it at the wrong time. If all times be indifferent to observe it in, what time
is wrong? and who changes the nature of things indifferent, the Bishops, or those that make a Conscience of Observing it upon a mistaken time? He is very much here in the Commendation of the Nova∣tians, as if none had ever observ'd this Moderation but these Schismaticks. Did not Irenaeus, and many other good Bishops, shew the same moderation before Nova∣tian was born? But these Hereticks, than whom there never was a more proud, Pharisaical sort of men, must have the Ho∣nour of it, when it was their necessity that put them upon this Indulgence one towards another: and, that you may understand how peaceably they behav'd themselves in this present case, take this short account of it out of Socrates and Sozomen, who, if they were not Novatians (as most Learn∣ed men, both Protestants and Papists, are of Opinion) were too great Favourers of that Sect, as all complain of them. The Novatians,Socr. l. 5. c. 20. Sozom. l. 7. c. 18. in the time of Valens the Emperour, did think fit, for Reasons unknown, to change the Rule for the Observation of Easter, which, by the Decree of the Council of Nice, was become, in a manner, Universal. It may be they would have no Observance com∣mon
with the Catholick Church, and especially at that time, when they were all under the same Persecution, and the Catholicks desir'd a Reconci∣liation with them; and therefore they flew off, as much as they could, to avoid such a Conjunction: Howe∣ver, this Innovation did not so ge∣nerally obtain among the Eastern Novatians, but that the contrary U∣sage prevail'd almost every where in a short time. Sabbatius, a Con∣vert Jew, ordain'd Priest by Marci∣anus, the Novatian Bishop of C. P. began to favour the Jewish time of observing Easter, established in the Council of Pazus; and for this, and the pretence of greater Purity, began to separate from the Church; He is call'd upon to shew the Rea∣sons of his Separation, and declares his greatest Grievance is about Ea∣ster. The Novatian Bishops, per∣ceiving this was but a Pretence, and that his real Disease was the de∣sire of being a Bishop, were resolv'd to take away this Excuse, and leave it indifferent for every one to ob∣serve
Easter when he thought fit. And what was the Issue? He seem'd to be satisfied for some time, till he found he had some Follow∣ers, and an Opportunity to set up a Congregation for himself; and then, notwithstanding his Compli∣ance, turn'd Schismatick: so little good does Concession do with men that are set upon Separation. So that though you should take away all Rule and all Order, yet there is a sort of men, that a Wantonness of Spirit has made restless, that would never be satisfied; the Dis∣ease is fed by Concession, and then it is most violent, when they know not what they would have. A great Council (says our Histori∣an) was call'd at Hippo,p. 73. § 25. and Augustin yet a Presbyter, was there: Good men will do well, and most of the African Councils were the best in all the World? And why would you judge? Because their Bishopricks were but like our Parishes, and they strove not who should be the Greatest, or domineer. I am content he should like any Coun∣cils or Bishops, but I am afraid, this
good Opinion will not continue long; for the Reason of his good Liking is a great Mistake, that they were Bishops ac∣cording to his own Model, Whose Dioceses were no bigger than our Parishes. But sure∣ly this cannot be; for all Africa, from Tangier to Aegypt, had but four hundred sixty six Bishopricks,Notitia Affr. which were thus di∣vided according to the Provinces. 1. Proconsularis. 54. 2. Numidia. 125. 3. Provincia Bizac. 107. Sees without Bishops. 006. 4. Maurit. Caesar. 120. without Bishops. 006. 5. Maurit Sitifens. 044. 6. Tripolis. 005. 7. Sardinia. 008. There is some Difference between the Sum in gross, and the Particulars, which will not agree, though you should de∣duct the twelve vacant Sees, for then the Particulars will not come up to the Sum of four hundred sixty six: And now judge, whether the African Bishopricks were not bigger than our Parishes, by comparing the vast Extent of Africk, with our England, which is not near so big as some of those Provinces: and
yet the Bishopricks of Africk were multi∣ply'd thus occasionally, as we shall shew hereafter, and cannot prescribe to other Countreys: Nor could the Churches of Africk, notwithstanding the Multitude of their Bishops, and Narrowness of their Dioceses, keep themselves in Peace any more than their Neighbours, but were divided as soon as any, and their Divi∣sions were as long and irremediable as their Neighbours; And indeed, Schism came over from hence into the other parts of the World with Novatus, and who taught the Roman Presbyters first, to set up against their Bishops. In short, there was no where a greater Breach, nor more extravagant Schismaticks, who oppos'd themselves, not only against the Discipline of the Church, but the Civil Government too. Now, lest this may put our Author out of Conceit with the Bishops and Councils of Africk, as well as the rest; I must put him in mind of his own Re∣mark, That good men will do well, whether they be Bishops or not, whether they have large or small Dioceses, and a very good man in a very great Diocess, will do an extraordinary deal of good. A Donatist Council at Bagai,S 29. p. 73. had three hundred and ten Bishops, who condemn'd Maximianus; and upon this Council, Mr. B. makes two observations. 1. How great a number the Donatists were, and upon what
Pretence, as over-voting them) they call'd others Hereticks and Schismaticks. Very unjustly no doubt, for they were Hereticks and Schis∣maticks themselves still, notwithstanding their Increase; Multitude may render a Sect formidable, but it is but a poor Ar∣gument of Right. 2. How small Bishop∣ricks then were, the number tells us; not so small as our Parishes, though the Dona∣tists did use all means in the World to multiply them, and to strengthen their Party. The Council of Turin order'd,p. 74. § 30. That Communion should not be deny'd Felix, one of Ithacius his Party, and not the con∣trary, according as the false Reading of Binnius;Vid. Conc. Sirm. So Sirmond. in loc. Male enim in vulgatis qui Felici non communicant, abest enim in Manuscriptis Negatio. Another Carthage Council,§ 31. call'd the se∣cond, which Binnius saith, was the last, is plac'd next; and so our Author takes it. This Mistake Binnius takes from Baronius,Conc. T. 2. p. 1158. as Labbe shews, Erravit post Baronium Bin∣nius verè enim hoc Concilium celebratum fuit. Anno 390. Sub Genethlio decessore Aurelii cujus nomen necnon Alypii exulat à MS. opti∣mae notae. The Canons that Mr. B. instan∣ces from hence, in favour of his Congre∣gational Church, will not comply with his Design;ibid. That the Bishops only, had the Power of making Crisme, and all the Priests were to receive it from him, that the Bishop
alone, was to reconcile Penitents publickly; this may consist with a great many Congrega∣tions, and the Canon,Can. 3. "Reconciliare quem∣quam "in publicâ Missâ Presbytero non lice∣re; may probably, extend only to the Ca∣thedral Service, and that the Priest should not do this in the Presence of the Bishops, as he is forbid several other Acts, which he is supposed to do apart, and in the Bi∣shops Absence, but with the Supposition of his Consent.Can. 4. The fourth Canon ex∣presses the Absolution of Penitents, by Re∣conciliare sacris Altaribus, the plural; tho, it must be confess'd, it is improper, for there was but one principal Altar, that was properly so call'd, though several Com∣munion-Tables depending upon the great Altar, there might be in the same Diocess, unless the reconciling to one Church, be reckon'd a Reconciling to all other parts of the Catholick Church. The fifth Canon is disingeniously cited by Mr. B. thus,Can. 5. When Christians were multiply'd, they that desir'd a Bishop in a place that had none before, might have one; but he leaves out the Consent of the Bishop, out of whose Diocess that other is taken, which is made absolute∣ly necessary. Dioeceses quae nunquam Epis∣copos habucrunt, non habeant, & illa Dioece∣sis quae aliquando habuit habeat proprium, & si accedente tempore, crescente fide, Dei popu∣lus multiplicatus desideraverit proprium habere
rectorem, ejus videlicet voluntate in cujus po∣testate est Dioecesis constituta habeat Episco∣pum. Which is confirm'd by the third Council of Carthage, where it is added,Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 42. Codex. Int. Eccles. Affr. c. 53. Conc. Affr. c. 20. That since, upon this occasion, many ambi∣tious Priests did seduce some Congrega∣tions to desire them for their Bishops, for this very Reason, Propter malos eorum cogitatus & pravè concinnata Concilia hoc dico, non debere rectorem accipere eam plebem quae in Dioecesi sem∣per subjacuit,Integ. Cod. Can. 98. Conc. Affr. 65. nec unquam proprium Episcopum habuit. This is made yet more difficult by other Canons, that re∣quire, that no People that have before had Bishops, should have any, but by the Approbation of a full Provincial Council, with the Consent of the Primate, and the Bishop of the Diocese. He mentions several other Council of Carthage, some whereof,Ch. Hist. p. 74. are Collections of Canons, which Binnius mistook for particular Councils; but there is little that he cites out of them, that favours either his Model of Episcopacy, or his design to disgrace Bishops; some however, I am oblig'd to take notice of, as first, That the Bishop's Cottage should not be far from the Church; the Word is, Hospitiolum, not quite so poor as a Cottage; for it was to be the Refuge of the Poor, and the Inn of Strangers, and a place fit for Hospi∣tality; but it is not hard to guess, why
this is particularly noted in the Margin for, it may be, that he may have a great Passion to have this Canon executed. En∣vy is a Passion, may slay the silly one, but it is much more comfortable, to be the Object of his Envy than Contempt. There are others that order the Bishops, to regard the Presbyters as his Brethren, and they are much to blame, that do not; but there are others innumerable, that command the Presbyters to observe their Bishops as their Governours, as their Fathers, as the Vicegerents of Christ. 52. is something odd, and shews the Poverty of the African Church, that a Clerk, or Clergy-man, how learned soe∣ver in God's Word, must get his Living by a Trade; this is contrary to the usage of all other Churches, even in their lowest times, and to the third Council of Carthage,Can. 15. which forbids it. Item pla∣cuit ut Episcopi & Presbyteri, & Dia∣coni, vel Clerici non sint conductores neque procuratores, neque ullo turpi vel in honesto negotio victum quaerant, quia respicere debeant scriptum esse, ne∣mo militans. Deo implicat se negotiis saecularibus. This same Canon in some ancient Books, runs thus, Ut Episcopi, Presbyteri, & Diacones, non sint con∣ductores, aut Procuratores privatorum neque ullo negotio tali victum quaerant quo eos peregrinari vel ab Ecclesiasticis
officiis avocari necesse sit. And, that we may not judge that this Canon only forbids them dishonest ways of Living, which might be understood by Turpe & inhonestum, the Greek Translation does explain it thus, , from any way that is mean or dishonourable: but of this, more than enough. The Story of Theophilus,§ 73. p. 75. the great Pa∣triarch of Alexandria, comes next, whom the succeeding Ages of the Church ho∣nour'd as a Saint; but Mr. B. is in a strait, whether he shall believe him to be a down∣right Knave, or credible, nay, most credible Socrates and others, gross Lyars:p. 77. Yet there is no necessity of either, for these Histori∣ans might be impos'd upon by false Re∣ports, and the Monks that were the Au∣thors of them, were, it may be, downright Knaves. I must crave the Reader's patience, whilst I endeavour to relieve the Memory of this Great man, from the Imputation of Knavery, which Socrates, and Sozomen, Pal∣ladius, and some others fasten upon it; and with them Mr. B. who sets up their Evi∣dence and Authority. Sozomen having written this Story most particularly, I will Translate those two Chapters out of him that contain the Ac∣cusation of Theophilus; and add out of So∣crates what the other has omitted. The Story is thus.
At that time there was a Que∣stion disputed in Egypt,Soz. l. 8.11. which had been started not long before, Whether God ought to be conceived under a Humane shape? Most of the Monks, understanding those Places of Scripture, which ascribe to God Eyes, and Face, and Hands, grosly and literally, fancy'd him as a man; others, who could pe∣netrate farther into the meaning of those figurative Expressions, were of the contrary Opinion, and judg'd the other Party to speak blasphemously, and unwor∣thy of God. Theophilus taught publickly in the Church, that this Opinion of the Anthropomorphites, ought by no means to be em∣brac'd; and, in his Paschal Epi∣stle, which he writ, as his Custom was, every year, he declar'd, That God ought to be conceiv'd Incor∣poreal, and void of Humane shape. The Egyptian Monks understand∣ing this, came to Alexandria, and, having got together, made an up∣roar, and would have murder'd
the Bishop: He comes out to them, and endeavours to appease the Tumult, by saying, I see you as the Face of God: This saying did a little asswage the Tumult, and the Monks, having abated something of their rage, reply'd, If thou think'st as thou speakest, condemn Origen's Books, that teach men to think otherwise of God. This, reply'd Theophilus, I intended to do long ago, and most willingly comply with you in; for I dislike Origen's Opinions no less than you. And, having thus cajol'd those Monks, he appeas'd the Tumult. There is no downright Knavery in all this; for those words,Gen. 33.10. I see you as the Face of God, are the words of Jacob to his Bro∣ther Esau; and his condemning of Origen, though not for that which these giddy-headed Monks fancy'd, was nevertheless very just; here was no Lye, though there was a Deceit; and the Danger he was in, the Examples of Holy men in Scripture, and Ecclesiastical History, will Justifie or Excuse him. And now let us pursue the rest of the Story.
This Controversie would like∣ly have been at an end,Soz. l. 8. c. 12. if Theo∣philus had not reviv'd it, upon a Design of ruining Ammonius, dio∣scorus, Eusebius and Eutychius, who were sirnam'd , long, or tall. These were Brothers, and very eminent among the Monks of Sce∣tis, as we have shew'd before. These, of all the Monks of Egypt, were the greatest Favourites of Theophilus, who entertain'd them frequently at his House, with great kindness and Familiarity. Diosco∣rus he made Bishop of Hermenopo∣lis; but the ground of his Quar∣rel with them, was his hatred of Isidorus, whom, heretofore, he had endeavoured to have made Bi∣shop of Constantinople, after the death of Nectarius.Socr. l. 6. c. 7. Some say, that when a certain Woman had come over to the Church, from the Heresie of the Manichees, and had been receiv'd to Communion before she had made an abjura∣tion of her former Heresie; Theo∣philus charg'd the Arch-Presbyter
with this Neglect, but he had a grudge against him before upon another account: Peter (for that was his name) affirm'd, that the Woman was receiv'd Regularly, according to the Law of the Church, and with the consent of Theophilus himself; and that Isi∣dore could testifie all this; which he did at his return from Rome, whither he then was sent. Theo∣philus excommunicated both, as having done him wrong, and be∣ly'd him: This some say. But, I have heard, from a very credible Person, who convers'd familiarly with those Monks at that very time, who said, that there were two Reasons of Theophilus his fal∣ling out with Isidore; the one common to him and Peter, be∣cause they refus'd to witness for Theophilus his Sister, that a certain Person had made her his Heir; the other particular to Isidore; be∣cause he, being Overseer of the Poor, and having a considerable Sum of Money in his disposal, re∣fus'd
to re-imburse the Bishop what he laid out upon the Build∣ing of Churches, saying, That it it was far better to refresh the Bodies of the Poor, for whom that Treasure was intended, and which were properly the Temples of God, than to lay it out upon the building of Churches: But, whether it were for these, or for other reasons, so it was, that Isidore was excommunicated, and came to Scetis, to his old Friends the Monks. Ammonius, taking some of them along with him, goes to The∣ophilus, and desires him to be re∣concil'd to Isidore, which, he is said then readily to have pro∣mis'd; but, after some time, when nothing was done, and they saw plainly that Theophilus did intend to put them off, they come again, and renew the Request, with great∣er earnestness, requiring a perfor∣mance of his Promise: He takes one of the Monks, and puts him in the common Prison, for a ter∣rour to the rest; but this would
not do; for Ammonius, with the rest of the Monks that came with him, under pretence of bringing Relief to the Prisoners, got into the Prison, and resolv'd to stay there with their Companion; Theophilus hearing this, sends for them, but they at first desir'd him to come himself and fetch them out; for, it was not fit, they said; that since the Affront they had receiv'd was publick, they should privately be dismissed; yet, af∣terwards, they were prevail'd up∣on to come to him: and he sent them away, after he had begg'd their pardon, and promised ne∣ver to molest them more. Howe∣ver, he fretted, and was vexed in himself, and cast about how he he should do them a mischief; and, since they despis'd every thing in the World but their Phi∣losophical Life, he resolves to at∣tack them in that part, and to di∣sturb their Peace and Quietness: for, understanding by the Dis∣course he had had with them, and the Complaints they were us'd
to make to him of the Anthropo∣morphites, that they were Favou∣rers of Origen, he kindled a dead∣ly feud between them and the Monks of the contrary Opinion, which was blown up by their un∣decent wranglings and Disputes; in which they left the Question, and, instead of arguing, reproach'd one another: So they that be∣liev'd God Incorporeal, were call'd Origenists, those of the contrary Perswasion, Anthropomorphites.] So far Sozomen. Socrates differs something in the relati∣on of this matter from Sozomen, though, as to the greatest part, one has copy'd out of the other, yet so as to leave it a very hard Question, to determine which is the Original, and which the Copy. Socrates sayes nothing of Isidor's being the occasion of this Quarrel,Socr. l. 6. c. 7. but only, that those Monks, disliking the Covetousness of Theophilus, would live with him no longer, but return'd to their solitude; and when Dioscorus was had in great Veneration of the Monks. Theophilus envying him, and being angry with his Brethren, re∣solv'd to ruin them, by stirring up the Anthropomorphites against them; that he
wrote to the Monks against Dioscorus, ac∣cusing him with holding God to be Incor∣poreal; and that he had no Members like men, as the Scriptures describe him, and by this means he set them all together by the Ears. Isidor Pelusiota confirms Sozomen,Isid. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 152. so far as to make Isidor to be the ground of this Quarrel, without any particulars, but treats Theophilus very outragiously, calling him . Now, if we examine these Relations im∣partially, we may observe several things that are very improbable, almost impossible, to conceive. All these men that are said to be persecuted unjustly by Theophilus, were such as he had an Extraordinary kindness for; and therefore it is not very likely, without special Provocation, he should ever endeavour to ruine those he took so much pains to set up: And, 1. As to the Story of Isidore, it is alto∣gether improbable; for this was the man he opposed to Chrysostom, as Competitor for the Bishoprick of C. P. This was he that was intrusted with the great Secret, upon which his Life and Dignity did de∣pend; he that had receiv'd double Or∣ders and Letters to present him that should overcome, whether Theodosius or Maximus; And, is it likely, he should fall out with this man so desperately about a punctilio of re∣conciling a Heretick Woman? or witnessing that himself must know not to be truth?
Is it likely a Person so Eminent in Place and Reputation, of an extraordinary For∣tune too, should suborn two the most con∣siderable men in the Church of Alexan∣dria, to forswear themselves in favour of his Sister? Surely, he must know them too well, after so long an acquaintance and experience, to hazard his Reputation upon so unlikely a Project, He must know them to be very Evil men, before he would at∣tempt them in that nature; nor is it very likely, that Isidore, considering his Obliga∣tions to Theophilus, should have refus'd him any Money to carry on and support his Magnificence in Publick Buildings. However, suppose all this true, they must be only private Reasons, such as Theophilus kept secret to himself; but he must find some other plausible Pretence to justifie his Excommunication of these persons that were so considerable in their Place, and Reputation in the World: He could not be so brutish, as to excom∣municate a man, because he would not forswear himself, or rob the Poor to serve him. There must be something for a Colour, and that these Impartial, Credible Historians, did both forget; for I suppose, the Monks from whom they had this Relation, did not care much to insist upon that point, which would make a man suspect, that Theophilus his Cause might be something justifiable; and
surely, it was very plausible, when all the World in a manner, did approve it. Thus every Malefactor will give out, that he is persecuted out of Envy and Malice, and such a one they had disobliged in this manner, and another became their Enemy upon another Ac∣count, but not a word of the Crimes laid to their Charge, or of the Evi∣dence against them. No poor men, though they talk'd Sedition or Treason, blasphem'd God or the King, and the Fact be notorious, yet they fall innocent Victims to the Malice or Covetousness of their Judges. Sozomen unawares discovers the Secret,. and blabs out his Author, I have heard, says he, from a credible Person, who was acquainted with these Monks. The Rela∣tion shews sufficiently, he was of the Party, and that he had it from them; and if a Monk cannot tell his Story suffici∣ently to his own Advantage, and to the Prejudice of his Enemy, let him be irregular; and to say Truth, without this Intimation one might taste something of a Monkish Invention and Spirit, the whole Story is so marvelously gross. Besides that, Socrates and Sozomen are not so credible in this Particular, because they every where espouse the Cause of the Novatians, to whom Theophilus was no great Friend: reason enough to in∣cur
a very odious Character in their History, as many other good men have done upon the same account. But other Historians, and more credi∣ble than Socrates or Sozomen, discover sufficiently the Vanity of this Fiction: Posthumianus was in Alexandria immedi∣ately after these things happen'd; and let us hear what account he gives of this Affair. After seven days,Sulp. Se∣ver. Dial. l. 1. we came to Alexandria, where there was a foul Contention between the Bishops and the Monks, about the Books of Origen, those con∣demning and forbidding the reading of them, because of ma∣ny dangerous Errors contain'd in them; the other Party char∣ging this upon the Hereticks that had corrupted the Works of Origen. The Contention in short, grew very high, and the Bishops according to the Autho∣rity they had, forbid all, good and bad, because there were Ec∣clesiastical Writers enough, that might be read with as much Be∣nefit, and much less Danger;
and then instanc'd in several pla∣ces of Origen, that were very extravagant; but this could not satisfie the Favourers of Origen, who began to be in an Uproar, which when the Authority of the Bishops could not appease, the Civil Magistrate is forc'd to take the Church-Discipline into his own hands, Saevo Exem∣plo, says the Author. Upon this, the Monks were terrified, and made their Escape whither they could, and the Edicts of the Ma∣gistrates pursued them. This person it seems, was no Favourer of Theophilus, and yet there is nothing he finds fault with, but the too great Rigour, and the taking of the Gover∣nour to supply the defect of Church-Discipline: yet it seems, there was abso∣lute Necessity for it, for these Monks had mutiny'd, and rais'd a Sedition, and then surely, it is time for the Magistrate to look about him. 2. The same Historian represents this not as any sudden surpri∣zing Oppression of the Origenists; for he mentions several Synods that had been assembled for this purpose. 3. He
does not make this the Effect of any particular Quarrel between the Monks and Theophilus, but makes the Contro∣versie to be between the Monks and the Bishops; and which of them had most right to govern the Church, and appoint what Books were, or were not fit to be read? But to return to our Author, he tells us farther,Sever. The Bishop of that place en∣tertain'd him very courteously, and beyond what he could have expected; he made him a kind Invitation, that he would stay, and live with him, but that he refus'd, thinking it not fit to stay in a place, ubi fraterna Cladis tam recens fervebat invidia. Then he adds, That though the Monks ought likely to have obey'd the Bishops, yet, on the other side, they ought not to have us'd so great a Rigor. Here is not a word of Theophilus his Crimes, which he would not have dis∣sembled, having so fair an Occasion to mention to mention them, and they would have been very proper Reasons for his Re∣fusal to stay at Alexandria, and would
have very much aggravated the Envy of persecuting those Monks:Theophi∣lus. But here is not a word of Him, which the other Bi∣shops are not as nearly concern'd in as himself: and lastly, here is a plain Con∣futation of that pretty Story of Socrates, That the Origenists were persecuted for believing God to be incorporeal; where∣as, they were the Errors of Origen, as that Christ had dyed to save the Devils and such like; that the Bishops object∣ed. And, to say Truth, that was a pretty Suggestion, that they should be call'd Origenists for holding God incor∣poreal. Was Origen singular in that point? Did not every one that ever had any Reason with his Sense teach the same thing? And therefore the other Story of the Anthropomorphites, urging Theophi∣lus to condemn Origen upon the same Account, comes under the same Suspiti∣on; for, by the same Reason, they must have forc'd him to condemn all the Ec∣clesiastical Writers in the World. Yet such was the Impudence of these muti∣nous Monks, that they were not asham'd to tell it all the World, that all those that were against them, were Anthropo∣morphites;Hieron. Johan. And Chrysostom was so cre∣dulous as to believe them, and to charge Epiphanius with that Error, to which no man was a more bitter Enemy: Where∣as the Controversie was indeed, whether
Origen's Works were to be read, and this was started sometime before Theophilus was concern'd in it,Ep. ad Tranquil. 76. Edic. Mar. Vi∣ctorii. as appears by St. Hierom, who in a Letter to Tranquillinus, condemns the passionate Haters and ad∣mires of Origen, he allows him to be read sometimes for his great Learning, as Ter∣tullian, Novatus, Arnobius, Apollinaris, but with Caution, that we choose the Good, and avoid the Evil: But if these Passionate Friends and Enemies of Origen will be in the Extream, and will either reject the whole as Faustinus, or receive and approve the whole, and admit no mean; his Deter∣mination is, Libentius piam rusticitatem, quam doctam blasphemiam Eligam; which shews the Controversie between the Or∣thodox and the Origenists, and serves like∣wise to vindicate St. Hierom from the Im∣putation of having prevaricated in this case,Sulp. Sev. D. 1. Ruffin. Inv. as he is charg'd by Posthumianus and Ruffinus, as if once he had been an Ori∣genist himself, and that this Letter was writ before the Troubles about that Que∣stion in Alexandria, is clear, from the fa∣thering of that Opinion upon Faustinus, which he would never have done, if it had so great Patrons as Theophilus, and the Authority of several Synods to con∣firm it. And whereas Theophilus is represented so odiously by credible Socrates, and the Character is believ'd by credulous Mr. B.
it will not be amiss, to see what other as credible men as any of his Enemies say of him, whether in general, or with Re∣lation to the Condemnation of the Ori∣genists: St. Hierom blames him for his too great Moderation in this Particular,Ep. 68. Super Nefaria haeresi quod multam pati∣entiam geris, & putas Ecclesiae visceribus incubantes tuâ posse corrigi lenitate multis sanctis displicet, ne dum pauco∣rum paenitentiam praestolaris nutrias au∣daciam perditorum, & factio robustior fiat. This does by no means agree with Mr. B's Authors, who intimate, as if he had circumvented and surpriz'd them: And in another place,Ep. 70. Dolebamus te nimi∣um esse patientem; and in another Letter, he charges the Origenists with calumnia∣ting Theophilus and others,Ep. 78. instead of an∣swering to their charge. Now, for my part, I have as much Respect for St. Je∣rom, as our Author has for Socrates; and am as loth to believe him a Flatterer that had renounc'd all the Enjoyments of the World, as to think Socrates a gross Lyar; but there is no Necessity the Historian should be so, though the Story should prove false; for he might be impos'd upon, but Hierom has hardly any Excuse unless things were as he represents them. It was the Observation of a very wise man, that he thought himself to have hit the Point of Virtue exactly,Aristotle. which he plac'd
in Mediocrity, when he was charg'd with having declin'd into the two Ex∣tremes, by persons of different Interests. How Theophilus did, I will not judge, but he has this Mans Judgment in his Fa∣vour, for one condemns him with too much Rigour, and others with too much Lenity in one and the same Action;E. ad Cy∣ril. ap. Cy∣ril. 7.5. p. 20. and such Atticus a moderate good man, in the Account of Socrates, describes him to be, . I knew your Predecessor Theophilus, a man equal to the Apostles in time of Confu∣sion, prefer Peace to a punctilious Exact∣ness. But that which render'd the Cause of the Origenists most invidious, was the in∣volving of Chrysostom in the same Quarrel; for he receiv'd these banish'd Monks, when they came to Constantinople, perhaps, not so much out of Compassion to them, as out of Purpose to thwart Theophilus, whose opposition to his Election he could not have forgot. Theophilus resents it too much, and stirs up Epiphanius to go and dislodge those Fugitives, which occasion'd great Disorder: At last, Chrysostom being in dis∣grace at Court for having reflected upon the Empress in some of his Sermons, she is
resolv'd to take the opportunity of his Quar∣rel with Theophilus, and other Bishops, to re∣venge her self; a Synod is call'd, and Chry∣sostom is depos'd, and afterwards banish'd: Thus those troublesom Monks, like many other Sycophants, shifted the Quarrel, and engaged good men in it: and so they were sure to be reveng'd of their Enemies one way or other; if they were worsted, then they triumphed, if they overcame, the Vi∣ctory must make them odious. I do not in∣tend to excuse Theophilus in this Particular, he did certainly prosecute his Resentment too far, but he was not the only man, Epi∣phanius a person of great Holiness, Hierom, and several other persons, renoun'd for their Piety, were concern'd in the persecution of this great man, as well as he: and so it is that the best men have their Resentments and Piques, as well as others; and to say the Truth, this is their Weakness, for that Severity which gives men generally a Repu∣tation of Holiness, tho it mortifie some irre∣gular heats, yet is apt to dispose men to Pee∣vishness; and what kills some Weeds, be∣comes a Nourishment to others. I have dwelt so long upon this, not one∣ly to vindicate Theophilus, but to shew (once for all) the manner of our Author's dealing with his Reader in his Church-History. Any scandalous Story, though it be as false and improbable as any in the Anni mirabiles, or White's Centuries of Scan∣dalous
Ministers, any Fiction, that reflects with disgrace upon Bishops and Councils, is set down for Authentick, no matter who delivers it, whether Friend or Foe; and there it stands, without adding the least hint that as Credible Historians do contradict, or confute the Calumny. He mentions a scrap of an African Coun∣cil,p. 80. § 45. to petition the Emperour, that the Pri∣viledges of Sanctuaries should be preserved inviolable, and no man forc'd away to pu∣nishment, that had taken Refuge there; Justice was taken for wickedness, (sayes our Author.) No such thing; they might them∣selves deliver the Offender, if they judg'd him unworthy of Mercy; all they desir'd was, that they should not be forc'd away, or else their Sanctuary was no more so. It is a hard thing to please a man that has such contrary Humours. He is offended with the Bishops, for procuring Justice up∣on Priscillian and his Complices, and calls them Bloudy Bishops, and not to be commu∣nicated with; now he is angry with them for being too merciful, and reckoning Ju∣stice a Crime, which they never did, but desir'd only, their Sanctuaries might not be forc'd, upon any pretence, for that would utterly destroy the merciful Design of those Priviledges that were granted some Places devoted to Religion; which was, to give Criminals time and opportuni∣ty to repent of their wickedness.
In the Fragments of the Councils of Toledo, there is a Canon,§ 47. that makes a dif∣ference between the Offerings made at the Parish Churches, and those made at the Altars. Our Author mistook the meaning of this Canon, which is thus; Quae ad Parochianas Elclesias offeruntur, in terris, vineis, mancipiis, peculiis, &c. that is, Whatsoever is given to Parish Churches, whether in Land, Vineyards, &c. that the Bishop is to have the disposal of it all; but what is given to the Altars, that is, to the Episcopal Church, he has but his Thirds: Yet all this notwithstanding, Parish Church∣es had Communion Tables, and, where∣ever there were Congregations, there was the Administration of the Lord's Supper: Nay, before this time, Altars were become much more frequent than our Author would have believ'd;Conc. Carthag. 5. Sub Ana∣stasio. for a Council of Car∣thage forbids the erecting of Altars in the High-ways, and in the Fields to the memory of Martyrs, yet the Exception shews how numerous they might lawfully be; nisi aut ibi corpus, aut aliquae certae reliquiae sunt, aut origo alicujus habitationis, vel possessionis vel passionis fidelissima origine traditur. We have a strange occasional Remark of our Author, That Pope Innocent,§ 55. one of the best and wisest Popes, excommunicated Theophilus, Arcadius, and the Empress] yet did this pass without contradiction. I perceive any thing passes with him for Hi∣story;
for this Epistle of Innocent, that men∣tions the Excommunication of the Persecu∣tors of St. Chrisostom, after Chrysostom's death, is all forg'd, which Labbee does as good as confess; for, over against the place where the Pope threatens Eudoxia with Pu∣nishment in this life as well as that to come, he notes in the Margin, that Eudoxia died before Chrysostom: Which is a sufficient proof of the Forgery; for Eudoxia died in the year 404. Oct. 6. and Chrysostom in 407. Nov. 14. Therefore Mr. B. might well have spar'd this Note, and his Author, Binnius, might have spar'd that wise Remark, That the Pope was a true Prophet, because the Em∣press dy'd soon after. Among the Decrees of Boniface,Ch. Hist. p. 82. § 50. one is, that no Bishop shall be brought or set before any Judge, Civil or Military, either for any Civil or Criminal Cause, so that, as Mr. B. sayes, a Bishop had the priviledge of a had Physician, he might murder and not be hang'd, &c. This Decree is, I believe, hardly so ancient as the fore-mention'd Epistle; for we have only the Authority of Gratian for it, a man little to be depended upon, unless he find Vouchers that are ancienter than himself: but any thing will serve Mr. B's turn, that will give him occasion to ease his Spleen against Bishops.
CHAP. V. Of the First Council of Ephesus, &c. OUr Author in the beginning of this Chapter,p. 84. §. 3. to prejudice his Reader be∣forehand against the Acts of the Council of Ephesus, gives the worst account of Cyril who was the President of it, that he could patch up out of all the libels and accusati∣ons of his Enemies. The first thing he is charged with is the oppression of the No∣vatians. This was enough with Socrates or Sozomen to paint him as ugly as men do the Devil,Socr. l. 7 or Antichrist: and therefore there is no great credit to be given them in these relations, as manifestly espousing the cause and quarrels of the Novatians: But suppose he had us'd severity towards these Schisma∣ticks, it may be they deserved it; and be∣ing Schismaticks and Alexandrians, it is not unlikely that they were very trouble∣some and seditious. Socrates makes it part of his charge that he took upon him the government of tem∣poral affairs,Socr. l. 7. c. 7.  and a little before, . This
was not the usurpation of the Bishop but the indulgence of the Emperour; and the Truth is, that the Church and State being now united, and the Schisms of the one causing inevitable seditions in the other, the Civil Magistrates for the greater securi∣ty of their Government did think it expedi∣ent to invest the Bishop with a coercive power, since their Spiritual authority was contemn'd to the dishonour of Religion, and no less to the disturbance of the State. And it was it seems a crime in Cyril to ac∣cept this Commission, or to act in pursu∣ance of it: though our Author elsewhere professes that he shall not dishonour such,p. 23. sect. 59. nor disobey them. But besides the suppressing of the Novatian Conventicles, he is charged with executing some Jews, and banishing others, which Orestes took ill, as an in∣croachment upon his office, who was Governour of the Province.Socr. l. 7. c. 13. But as to this he cannot be very much blamed, for the Jews conspired against the Christi∣ans, and resolved to destroy them all in one night; they gave the alarm that one of their Churches was on fire, and as the Christians ran out to quench the fire, they were murdred by those Villains. Perhaps Cyril did not think this a time to complement the Governour to the as∣sistance of the Christians, when the dan∣ger they were in was sufficient to call him away, but animated the people to make their defence, and to go in quest of these
Murderers; and it was a sign of his Mo∣deration that there were but some execu∣ted, and that all were not put to the Sword, after so barbarous an attempt. This or something else offended the go∣vernour,Socr. l. 7. c. 14. so that he became irreconcile∣able to Cyril. The Bishop like a good man, endeavoured by all means to pro∣cure a reconciliation, but without effect; and why is a Bishop to be worse thought of, if a man of quality become his implacable enemy without cause? Five hundred Monks came from Mount Nitria in a fit of wild zeal to take the Bishops part; and Socrates cannot say that he sent for them, they light on the governour and assault him; he is wounded, and hardly escapes with life: But how could Cyril help this? or how can he be charg'd with the extravagance of those Monks that he had no knowledge of till they had committed it? But one of those Mutineers (says Socrates) that wound∣ed the governour being executed for his crime, was honour'd by Cyrill as a Martyr; I do very much suspect this story, from the circumstance of changing the crimi∣nals name to Thaumasius, and the most pro∣bable conjecture that I can make of it, if there be any ground at all for the story, is, that the memory of a Martyr of that name might be honoured by him, which his ene∣mies interpreted to be the Criminal. But this changing of name is a thing without precedent, and without reason; for either
this disguise was put on that it might not be observ'd, and he was ashamed of doing it openly; and then it will not be easie to be certain that this Thaumasius was that Ammonius who was executed: or if he was the same, and Cyril confest it, then it is impossible to imagine a reason why he should use that disguise. But there are men in the world that honour such as Martyrs that were executed, not for Wounding a Governour, but Murdering a King after a most unexampled manner; witness the worthy Martyrologies of Har∣rison,Speeches and Pray∣ers, Print∣ed A. D. 1660. Carew, Cook, Peters, &c. and of Barkstead, Okey, Corbett: with this Motto in the Frontispiece, these dyed all in Faith: and innumerable other things that justifie their horrid crimes; and make them Mar∣tyrs by the cause of their suffering:Printed 1662. I hope they were neither Bishops nor Episcopal men that were so fond of Canonizing these Murderers for Martyrs. Another thing which our Author cites from the professed enemies of Cyril to ren∣der him odious, was the Murder of Hypa∣tia, the famous She-Philosopher; She it seems was barbarously murder'd, but by whom, or upon what occasion is not cer∣tain. Socrates makes the occasion to have been this,Socr. l. 7. c. 15. That she being frequently with the Governour was suspected to do Cyril evil offices, and to disswade the Governour from being reconciled to him, therefore some Zealots watched her, and barbarously
Murder'd her, among whom was one Pe∣ter, a Reader of the Church, and an ad∣mirer of Cyril. And this (continues the same Historian) brought a great reproach upon Cyril and the Church of Alexandria.] But he cannot charge the Bishop of being by any means conscious to it: and though it were done upon his account by violent heady Zealots; yet he could be no further guilty than he contributed to it, by his countenance or consent.Suidas in Damascius. Damascius in the life of Isidore the Husband of this Hypatia charges Cyril directly with this Murder; but his credit signifies very little, as being in the first place a Heathen, and a violent enemy of the Christians; and secondly, being more remote from these times, for he liv'd in the reign of Justinian;Vales. An∣not. in Socr. l. 7. c. 15. Valesius cites the passage at large out of him, and promises to publish much more of him than we have had hitherto: This is taken out of Suidas, who I believe cites the whole out of this Author: In the beginning he makes it dubious who were the Authors of the death of Hypatia, Some (says he) fasten it upon Cyril, others upon the Alexandrians, the most seditious of all mankind: as may be seen by their murdering some of their own Bi∣shops; all which I suppose are the words of this Damascius: Then he goes on to give a more particular account of this Woman; and makes Cyril to conceive this en∣vy against her, because on a certain time passing by her house, and seeing what great re∣sort
there was to her, and what a number of Coaches were at her door, he resolved to make her away. This whole story is altogether improbable, for Hypatia was an Alexandri∣an born and bred, and so publickly known, that Cyril who was bred in the same place could not be so great a stranger to her as that story makes him to be after he was a Bishop. He could not be ignorant of her or her School, without being the greatest stran∣ger in Alexandria: In short, this is no other than a calumny invented by this Damascius to render the Christians odious, which he en∣deavoured to do upon all occasions, as Pho∣tius tells us.Bibliothe∣ca, l. 180. For this is the character he gives of this Author, ; one that frequently snarls at our religion, though he be afraid to dis∣cover his malice too plainly. After this, to render Cyril more odious yet, our Author reproaches him with that un∣happy quarrel with Chrysostome, At∣. and his op∣position, to the restoring his name to the diptychs of the Church; and his harsh expression that compares that holy man with Judas.] This quarrel was it seems hereditary to him, and he did prosecute it beyond all equity or de∣cency against the memory of a dead man. This was a fault, and he that is without any, or without any particular animosity, especi∣ally if he be in any eminent place, let him
cast the first stone. But our Author does charge him with some things injuriously, as his calling Alexander Bishop of Antioch, that perswaded Atticus to restore Chryso∣stoms name, a bold-fac'd man; the word (though us'd by Cyril in his Letter to Atti∣cus,) is indeed the expression of Atticus in his Letter to Cyril, and therefore if there be any indecency in it, it's to be imputed to the first Author: But however Cyril had behaved himself in this affair, it is a lit∣tle unchristian to blast his memory with those faults he had corrected in his life time; for though our Author affirms, that no credible Historian tells us that either Theophilus or Cyril ever repented of this: yet I believe there is sufficient evidence to the contrary to perswade any reasonable man. For besides that Socrates affirms Theophilus before his death to have been reconcil'd to those Monks, upon whose ac∣count he had quarrel'd with Chrysostome, Cy∣rils Letter to Gennadius shews him to have been satisfy'd in the business of Chrysostome's Honourable Restauration to the Diptychs. Gennadius was a Presbyter of the Church of C. P. and refus'd to communicate with Proclus his Bishop for receiving the Bi∣shop of Elia into his communion contra∣ry to the Canons,Ep. Cyril. ad Gennad. which do not own that Bishop as Palaestinae praepositum. Here Cy∣ril urges very peaceably, that the ri∣gour of the Canons must oftentimes give way to peace and expedience; whence it
appears, 1. That he had chang'd his mind as to the necessary maintenance of the Canons, rather than remit any point that would conduce to peace, which was his arguing with Atticus; 2. It appears from hence that he held communion with Proclus, else he had never been so urgent with this Presbyter to communicate with his Bishop; 3. That this communion with Proclus supposes him satisfy'd in the restitution of Chrysostom. For this Proclus had not only kept his name in the Dip∣tychs, but fetch'd home his bones, and so ended that Schism of the Joann; so that Cyril must by this have chang'  judge∣ment concerning Chrysostom: N is Let∣ter to Atticus, which our Auth cites, lays the greatest stress upon this argument, that it will be dangerous to restore his name, because it may divide the world again, since the greatest part had expung'd it out of their Diptychs, and could not ea∣sily be brought either to re-admit it, or to communicate with those that did: But find∣ing the contrary, it seems he follow'd the examples of other Churches. The fiction of Nicephorus about Cyril's Vision was (I suppose) invented to salve the reputation of Cyril. For since after so great oppositi∣on he chang'd his mind; to remove from him the imputation of levity, and to shew that he was carry'd away sincerely, and by an invincible mistake, he must be reconci∣led by a miracle.
However it were, whether Cyril repent∣ed of this fault or no, our Author cannot forbear exclaiming, upon the occasion of Cyril's restoring the name of Chrysostom by the authority of a Synod. O ductile Sy∣nods! O unhappy Churches whose Pastors must grow wise and cease destroying after so long sunning, and by an experience which costeth the Church so dear!] It had been doubtless much better there never had happened any diffe∣rence between the Pastors of the Church, but what Church has been so happy? what government can secure this uninterrupted Peace? Surely our Author cannot pretend to exempt himself from the lash of his own exclamations; for I know no man deeper engag'd in the contentions of the Church, or that has writ with greater bit∣terness on all such occasions: The writing of a great part of his 80 books being but like so many pitch'd battels he has fought, and most commonly in the dark, when he was hardly able to discover friend from foe: if he scorns to be so ductile as these Synods, and to recant his mistakes when they are discover'd to him, I pray God give him a better mind, and make him to have a more honou∣rable opinion of repentance. The last part of Cyril's accusation is ta∣ken out of Isidore's Epistles,§. 6. some of which are very sharp: yet I believe when the Rea∣der shall have weigh'd the circumstances duly, this will be no great offence to him; Isidore was certainly a good man, but very
easie to take any impressions; and hot in his reproofs: this may be evidently seen in his dealing with Cyril. For he reproves him in one place for prosecuting his pri∣vate quarrels against Nestorius,l. 1. Ep. 310. under pre∣tence of Zeal for the faith; yet the same Author in another place advises him not to betray,l. 1. Ep. 324. and give up the cause, : and rather to suffer any evil that might befal him, than to endure so much as to hear false and pernicious do∣ctrines. So that the same Isidore who re∣proaches this man upon a false information, retracts afterwards; and gives him com∣mendations no less extravagant than the reproofs he us'd towards him before; for he is very large and passionate in his com∣mendation when he recommends to him the miserable estate of the Church of Pe∣lusuim,l. 2. Ep. 126. into which it was brought by the covetousness and ambition of one Martini∣anus a Presbyter,If. Pel. l. 2. Ep. 126. O thou best of men, it belongs to thy Wis∣dom and Authori∣ty, to res∣cue the poor Church of Pelusium from the Hands of evil Go∣vernours. : nor is this only a general comple∣ment, but he goes on to mention particu∣lar instances of his integrity against this Martinianus, who after he had robb'd the Church of Pelusium sent some part of the money to Alexandria to endeavour to pro∣cure himself the Bishoprick: Cyril having intimation of this practice, rebukes him sharply, and threatens if he go on any fur∣ther
in this base course so dishonourable to Religion, that he will not only excommu∣nicate, but have him banish'd. Where∣upon Isidore applys himself to him in ex∣pressions of the greatest admiration of his integrity, and does not know how to call him by a title good enough;What Compe'la∣tion shall I use that may be suitable to so great worth? ; Whoever is the least acquainted with the Spirit and temper of Isidore will hardly suspect him of flattery, but that he was the real Convert of this great Bishop, and by these commendations of him endeavoured to make honourable amends, and to wash off the dirt he had before rashly cast upon his name. If I should take the pains to gather the hands of the Fathers, and to set down the glori∣ous testimonials they give of Cyril; I be∣lieve few Saints could shew greater evi∣dence of their merit towards the Church, Gloriosissimus fidei Catholicae Defensor,Prosper. contra col∣lat. c. 41. Celest. Ep. ad Nest. §. 5. and Cyrillus Alexandriae Episcopus vir omni sapi∣entia & Sanctitatis exemplo clarissimus, pro∣batissimus Sacerdos, &c. But Theodoret it seems was never truly reconcil'd to him: for in his Epistle to Johannes Antioch. he looks upon the death of Cyril as a deliverance of the Church from a turbulent enemy of Peace. But God only knows, says our Author: Yes sure there are men that know it too, though not Mr. Baxter: They that are a little more vers'd in the writings of the Fathers know very well,Baron. An. 44016. that this Epistle is spurious, and that John
to whom it was directed was dead four years before, which Theodoret could not but know. And it is very well known that the Nestorians forg'd several Letters in the name of Theodoret.Leont. de Sect. Sect. 5. In short, nothing can be a plainer confutation of this Fiction than Theodorets own Letter to Dioscorus, the successor of Cyril; where besides that he does shew John to be dead seven years before the time of the writing of that Let∣ter,Theod. Ep. ad Diosc. he does also make it appear that there was a full and sincere reconciliation be∣tween him and Cyril before his death: That Cyril when he had written his Books against Julian the Apostate, and another about the Scape-Goat, before he publish'd them, sent them to John Bishop of Anti∣och, to communicate them with the great∣est Scholars of the East, He sent them to me, says Theodoret, and I read them, and sent him an account of them, and I received Let∣ters from him after that,Ad Fla∣vian. which I have still by me: And the same man in another Let∣ter gives an account of this to Dioscorus, that he had sent to him to acquaint him that he persevered still in that league that had been made between Cyril, of happy memory, and the Eastern Churches. And now let any man judge whether this forg'd Letter that goes under the name of Theo∣doret, be not as great an injury to him as it is to Cyril. But with our Author that weeds Church-History, any fiction or impo∣sture is authentick that does but contain
some scandalous reflections upon great Bi∣shops, and this seems to be the mark that directs his choice all along. I have been more particular in the Vin∣dication of this great Bishop from those calumnies our Author raked out of all the Libels of his Enemies, because all this seems to be brought in on purpose to lessen the reputation of the Council of Ephesus, that was chiefly directed by the authority of Cyril; and that you may not take this for an uncertain conjecture of his design he explains himself [But (pardon truth or be deceived still) ignorance and pride,p. 94. sect. 20. and en∣vy, and faction, and desire to please the Court, made Cyril and his party by quarrelsome He∣retication to kindle that lamentable flame in the world.] Can any man that has any inge∣nuity or knowledge of those times affirm this? How could this gratifie the Court, since the Emperour was so highly offended with the contention, that he ordered Cy∣ril to be imprison'd, and was extreamly dissatisfy'd with both parties? Or how can that be the effect of Cyril's Envy or Ambition, which he himself did endeavour to prevent by all the amicable methods ima∣ginable; as may be seen by his Letters to Nestorius? But if the Reader will not blindly engage in all the groundless jealou∣sies and malicious suggestions of our Au∣thor, then he has much ado to forbear cal∣ling him Fool; but however he dismisses him with that which is equivalent, Let him
be deceived still, as if every one that had any more charitable opinion of Bishops and Councils than he, that seems to have read little more than what Binnius has of them, lov'd to be deceiv'd; and shut his Eyes against the greatest evidence in the World. Before we enter upon the Council of Ephesus, it is fit some notice should be ta∣ken of our Authors account of Nestorius. The worst thing he can say of him is, That he was hot against Hereticks, and de∣sired the assistance of the Civil Magistrate to suppress them; that he went about to pull down the Church of the Arians, and they set it on fire themselves, and then call'd him Fire∣brand, when themselves were the Incendia∣ries; he vex'd the Novatians, &c. After all we have this Remark; Thus Turbulent Hereticators must have the Sword do the work of the Word. When our Author lays about him, he never minds where the blow falls, and deals alike to friends and foes: What Hereticators were hotter than the Presbyte∣rians in the year 1646? the Inquisition is not more severe than their Ordinance a∣gainst Heresies,Ordi∣nance a∣gainst He∣resie and Blasphe∣my: pre∣sented to the House of Com∣mons. which they desir'd should be made Felony, and punish'd by death. And of other opinions that were to be punish'd by imprisonment, were there not many that are yet in dispute between the Reformed themselves? Nay, he that vindicates that Bloody Ordinance as the In∣dependents call'd it, does complain against
the Bishops for not being severe enough in the eradication of Heresies:Vindicati¦on of the Ordin. against He∣resie, p. 23. Impr. James Cranford. I will set down the words because they are something re∣markable: In the Bishops times there were some Arians and Blasphemers put to death, according to the Laws which then were, and for ought I know are still in force. But had the Bishops had as much zeal for God and his truth, as they had for their own greatness, they had obtain'd such a law as this is, if not in all the particulars,Presbyte∣rian Tole∣ration. yet in most of them long ago, and thereby prevented many of those monstrous opinions, which have of late been vented among us, to the great dishonour of God and our Kingdom, and the mischief to Souls; but they were cast out for their luke∣warmness, and let others take heed of the like: How shall the Bishops do to please these men? Sometimes when they are in autho∣rity, they are Hereticators, and Persecutors, and Instigators of the Civil Magistrate against men for Conscience sake: Some∣times they are lukewarm and negligent for not providing Laws severe enough, and for not putting men to death for errours in Religion: If I were worthy to advise our Author I would desire him for the honour of Presbytery, to level his spiteful reflections a little more justly, lest whilest he lets fly with a good will against Bishops, the Brethren of the Holy Discipline be not hurt; and lest what he designs against Councils, fall unhappily upon the Reverend Assembly,Answer to Dr. Stil∣lingst. for which he expresses no small esteem else∣where,
although Bishops and their Coun∣cils are so abominable in his sight. But enough of this, for our purpose: I will leave our Author to the judgement of his Brethren, and only crave the Readers Par∣don for this digression. We are now come to the Council of Ephe∣sus,§. 9. which was occasion'd by Nestorius his denying the Blessed Virgin to be the Mother of that person that was God: this doctrine was broach'd by his favourite, Priest Ana∣stasius; though Nestorius being the more eminent person carry'd away the name and reputation of it: Our Author says, This set all the City in a division, disputing of they well knew not what: Nestorius was suspected by some to deny the Godhead of Christ, but he was of no such opinion,] It is true, he did not directly deny the Godhead of Christ but consequentially he did, as we shall shew hereafter. The Emperour weary of this stir,p. 89. sect. 9. calls a Council; and yet our Author forgets himself not many pages after, where he will have his Reader believe that Cyril made all this stir to please the Court. The truth of it is, the obstinacy of Ne∣storius oblig'd the Emperour to assemble this Council; for Cyril had try'd all the moderate ways in the world to reclaim him before this was thought of. Nothing can be more modest than Cyril's Letter to Ne∣storius,Ep. ad Nest. though he had receiv'd several per∣sonal provocations from him; and after
this another written with the same Spirit;Secunda Ep. ad Nest. but Nestorius took all this brotherly admo∣nition for reproach, and endeavour'd to maintain his opinion, and to secure himself in equivocal and doubtful expressions, sometimes seeming to speak the same thing with Cyril, that Christ had two natures in one person, sometimes considering Christ as a double person, and always denying Mary to be the Mother of God by any means: This was the unhappy Controversie that divided the world. Several being deceiv'd by the Equivocations of Nestorius took his part at first, but finding him obstinate in denying the Virgin to be the Mother of that person that was God, they at last de∣serted him, and joyn'd with Cyril in his con∣demnation. It had been happy for the Church if the mysteries of our Religion had never been curiously disputed. But when busie, trou∣blesome men have started a new dangerous doctrine, and endeavour to propagate it with all industry imaginable, it is not fit that the Governours should sit as uncon∣cern'd Spectators, but that they should op∣pose vigorously all such remedies as God has put into their hands: i. e. advise, admo∣nish, rebuke; and if these means prove in∣effectual to stop the course of evil doctrine, they must proceed according to the Apo∣stles advice, a Heretick after admonition re∣ject. This method therefore of proceeding against Heresies and the Authors of them
cannot be disallowed by any reasonable man. But this case of Nestorius it seems yields a further debate; and the merit of the cause is yet disputed. Derodon makes Nestorius Orthodox, and Cyril the Heretick: our Author believes both Orthodox, but that they did not understand one another; and so by words that themselves did not under∣stand, they set all the world on fire. As for Derodon, he manifestly condemns Nestorius in a little Treatise De Supposito, printed with several other Philosophical Tracts of his; and approves Cyril: the truth is, he has a singular notion of a person there which seems to approach Nestorianism, which he endeavours to confirm by the au∣thority of Cyril and other Fathers: but this which our Author cites, I have not yet seen, nor can I find that it has been yet publish'd; however since the minutes of his arguments are set down by our Author, I will endeavour to shew the mistake of that learned man, by giving the true state of the question between Cyril and Nesto∣rius. Nestorius did first recede from the allow'd expressions of the Fathers, who did all occa∣sionally call the Blessed Virgin the Mother of God; and therefore was justly suspected to recede from their doctrine: Cyril ad∣monishes him of this dangerous innovation, and explains himself concerning the Incar∣nation of the son of God; Nestorius endea∣vours to confute it; and now let us see
what it was that they both maintain'd. I will begin with the Doctrine of Cyril,  the word united the flesh to himself hypo∣statically or personally:Ep. 2. ad. Nestor. and a little after, :Ibid. i. e. distinct natures concur∣ring to make a real Unity; of both which consists one Christ and one Son: not that the difference of the natures are taken away by that Unity, but that the divinity and humanity combin'd by an unspeakable man∣ner of Union, make one Christ, and one Son.Ibid. And then , uniting the manhood hypo∣statically to himself: and as to the order of this Union he explains himself farther, : i. e. He was not first a meer man that was born of the Holy Virgin; which the Divinity afterwards did assume; but the Word being united to the Man from the very Womb, is said to have undergone a carnal generation. And that this Union does not destroy the difference of natures in Christ, he shews expresly in that same place, :
He became man, but did not therefore cease to be God, but after the assumption of Flesh, remain'd still the same that he was before. And to the same purpose in another place, after the assumption of Flesh he remain'd very God,Ep. ad Eulog. and suffer'd death upon the Cross, i. e. the Flesh only, and not the divine nature; but nothing can be plainer than this [That there is a vast difference or distance between the divinity and humanity of Christ,l. 2. contra Nestor. I must needs confess, for they are different things that are signify'd by these two names, as to what re∣gards their essence, and have nothing the one like the other, and , the Ʋni∣on does admit a difference, but excludes all di∣vision;Ep. ad Nest.] and lastly he shews the absurdity of rejecting this Hypostatical Ʋnion as incom∣prehensible; because it will unavoidably force us to allow two Sons; the Son of Man: , by himself: and the Son of God again by himself, , which he plainly confutes. If this does not suffi∣ciently declare two natures subsisting in one person, it is not in the power of words to do it. Thus was he understood by all the world, excepting only the Eastern Bishops, who had a quarrel against him, and therefore were resolv'd to cavil; and even these at last were reconcil'd to his expressions. Thus the Fathers in the Council of Chalcedon un∣derstood him, and the Catholick Church
ever since, yet all this it seems could not prevail with Derodon, who in opposition to almost all the world, maintains his Pa∣radox, that Cyril taught the same doctrine with Eutyches; and that Nestorius was in the right. For this purpose he cites out of Cyril se∣veral passages that affirm Christ to have but one nature; and this is that which was condemn'd in Eutyches. It is true indeed that Cyril does frequently own but one na∣ture, but it is to be observ'd that  in his sense is the same with ; and by both he means nothing but a real Union, in opposition to an imaginary, notional one, which Nestorius did maintain. This may be easily observ'd by comparing all those places where he affirms but one nature, with those already alledg'd, that expresly affirm the contrary. But besides this, if he shall be allow'd to explain himself, the matter will be soon decided, : Natural, that is,Confir. A∣nath. 3. a real Union. When Acacius presses him with the Confessions of the Orthodox,Ep. ad Acacium. that own two natures in Christ, and that those Divines do express this difference, because there really is one between the Natures: Cyril an∣swers, that he does by no means take away these terms of distinction, but condemns the wrong application of them, so as that one should be apply'd to the word , and the other to the Son of the Vir∣gin , that is, so as to divide the
person, and to make the Son of the Vir∣gin different from the Son of God; there∣fore, says he, there is , one nature of the word; but of the word incarnate, i. e. one hypostasis. For so he explains himself in the conclusion of that answer, that those Orthodox that mention two natures, and he, are all of the same opinion; for since there is but one Son, one God, and Lord; so it is that we and they do confess one person only; for that was his design by the expression of one nature: and that those things that be∣long to the Divinity, and those which be∣long to the Humanity must be all ascrib'd to one Christ: and justifying himself against such as suspected him of confounding the two natures in Christ,Ibid. he denies that ever he took away . And John Bishop of Antioch wil∣ling to express the same thing; ; which though he disowns to be his own words, but that John express'd himself after that manner, yet he receives the sense of them; that se∣veral things are to be understood of Christ as Man, and others of him as God; yet that the Godhead and the Manhood make but one Christ. In what sense Cyril affirm'd one nature, appears further from what he condemn'd
in Nestorius and others:Cyr. Ep. cum 12. Anath. , not dividing and separating God from man, as part from part; nor yet joyning them together by an Ʋnity only of honour and authority; this was it that he charg'd Nestorius with, and from which he never did so much as en∣deavour to vindicate himself: Whereupon Cyril urges, that unity of dignity or honour does not imply personal union; and parity of authority does not unite nature; for Pe∣ter and John may be of the same authority and dignity, and yet they are not one but two persons: besides this, he rejects ano∣ther way of Union, , by a participation of divine graces, as holy men are said to be united to God; upon which account he does reject frequently this expression that Christ is ; and he no less rejects the way of ar∣tificial conjunction, , as being very improper to express this hypostatical union of Christ: But that which he thinks comes nearest to illustrate this Union, is that conjunction of body and soul in man, which is a concourse of two very different natures, which yet make but one man; this is one of the greatest argu∣ments to prove him a Heretick: but if this will serve to do it, most of the Fathers that wrote upon this subject, must be Hereticks
as well as he; since they all make use of this illustration. Yet though he were singu∣lar in this instance, it would by no means conclude him in the Heresie of Eutyches; for those things that are brought to illu∣strate, are not necessarily required to be like the things they are to illustrate in every point. What Cyril concludes is on∣ly this, that as the Body and Soul make one Man, so God and Man makes one Christ; and this is the composition that he means: which will be easily understood by comparing this with other passages of Cy∣ril. If he judg'd that Christ had but one only nature resulting out of that Composi∣tion, like that of Man; then it must be either the divine nature which had taken the humane into it self, or that the divi∣nity should be chang'd into his humanity, or some third nature that must result from both, all which he equally abhorrs; for notwithstanding the incarnation,Ep. ad Nest. ad Acac. ad Joh. 12. A∣nathim. ad Success. he affirms expresly, ; of the humanity he affirms it still remains, because there is no , no ; no mixture, no chang∣ing of it into another nature. 3. In the Composition of man there is one form joyn'd to matter, which makes the unity of nature, but in the hypostatical union the man retains his proper form according to Cyril; who denys that the word informs the body of the man, but that it is Corpus animatum, a body endu'd with reason and understanding. So that it appears plainly
by the doctrine of Cyril, that he did ac∣knowledge two natures in one person, and that when he oftentimes affirm'd one nature in Christ, he meant only one person; which he would not have divided and separated from it self, : and the rea∣son of using the phrase of one nature, as well as of one hypostasis or person, will appear further by considering the errour of Nestorius, against which he oppos'd those expressions. This Heretick began to dis∣cover himself, by not only scrupling,The Opi∣nion of Nestorius. but condemning the Title which the Blessed Virgin bore commonly in that age, of be∣ing , the Mother of God; by con∣demning this expression, Nestorius in ef∣fect condemn'd all the Fathers who had us'd it; and this gave a general alarm, as if the faith of the Fathers, Athan. Gre∣gory, &c. was going to be condemn'd in this Word: and there was very great rea∣son for this jealousie. John Bishop of An∣tioch, a particular friend of Nestorius,Joh. Ep. ad Nest. was scandaliz'd at this innovation, and sends a Letter to him to expostulate about this matter; and presses him very hard with this argument: If you understand and believe the same thing with the Holy Fathers that have gone before us (for this I understand by several common friends that you do) why are you afraid to express an orthodox meaning by a convenient phrase? Especially since so great mischief and confusion is like to ensue upon your refusal: But how he explain'd himself we shall see presently.
In his Epistle to Cyril he expresses himself one would think very Orthodoxly,Ep. ad Cyr.  but if we examine what he means by  and , we shall find that he really maintain'd two persons as well as two natures.  is us'd not only for a person, or an intelligent subsi∣stence, but likewise as Persona in Latine, with relation to office, dignity, authority, and other circumstances of a man: so 'tis used in those phrases, ; and ; this was the most common signification of the word; and therefore Cyril does not use it so frequently as  or , which he thought more proper to express the perso∣nal union of Christ: and Nestorius does in∣dustriously avoid . Now let us see wherein he made the unity of person to consist:Cyr. Cont. Nest. p. 43. Ed. Par. : i. e. It was God that took upon him the form of a ser∣vant, it was this which was assumed: after that there is the dignity of the conjunction; (though  does not signifie such a near conjunction as that personal one, but only an artificial joyning, so as that the things do still remain under different subsi∣stences) the authority is common to both na∣tures; for the same dignity belongs to both, confess the unity () of personal dignity
not subsistence,Ibid. the natures or subsistences re∣maining still different; and then, there is no di∣viding of the conjunction of dignity and filiati∣on; and then, the son is twofold, not in respect of dignity, but of nature. And the errour which he charges Cyril with, is, as if all those things that are said of Christ as God and as Man,p. 33. were understood by him , not according to the Honour of the conjunction, but according to nature, or naturally: than which nothing can be plainer. Cyril's an∣swer does plainly shew what he meant by , and what Nestorius, by his : Why therefore (says he) dost thou pretend to maintain the true faith, when thou dost manifestly divide Christ into two persons, , and dost destroy the manner of that true and real union, , which is with him the same thing as , whereby Christ is , really one. But thou on the other side makest that equa∣lity of honour to be Ʋnity, which is not a real, substantial, but an imaginary Ʋnity: So that Nestorius does evidently hold two natural persons (for so I must speak) still distinct in Christ,Vid. Zanch. de Incar∣nat. Verbi. joyn'd together not hypostatically, but into one title, or dignity, which Cyril explains sometimes very properly by the word . This being premis'd concerning Ne∣storius his holding two natures in one per∣son, we shall see more clearly how all his expressions do point at this notion,
we have now observ'd,Cyr. cont. Nest. , Where there are two generations,p. 21. there are two Sons, but the Church knows but one son, there∣fore the word cannot be said to be born with the flesh as one person; and so conse∣quently God and Man is not the person that was born of the Virgin; and Christ was a person distinct from the word: nor does he hold this consequentially only but in ex∣press terms, therefore, says he, Christ is said to be the Word,p. 47. because he i. e. Christ is joyn'd for ever to the Word. What, is not Christ the name of the person? and if there be not two, what can this conjunction of Christ with the word signifie? and therefore Cyril makes this advantage of it,p. 52. . The same thing is observable from Nestorius dividing his Worship in respect of God and Man; the first he worships up∣on his own account, the latter : which Cyril takes to im∣ply another person. There are many more instances to the same effect,p. 74, 84, 90, 100, 108, 126. Ed. Par. cited and con∣futed by Cyril in the same Book. When Cyril and the Eastern Bishops were agreed, the Nestorians cavil'd as if Cyril had receiv'd those that maintain'd the same doctrine with Nestorius, and as if John and the rest had condemn'd those that held the same faith with them;Ep. ad A∣cac. but Cyril makes it sufficiently appear what difference there was between them and Nestorius: For he destroys the mystery of the incarnation, deny∣ing
that the Son of God was born of the Virgin, for these are Nestorius his own words, I have read, says he, in Scripture that God pro∣ceeded or pass'd through the Virgin: : but he read no where that he was born of her; and in the same place, Therefore Christ is call'd the Word of God, because he is joyn'd for ever to the word. Christ then in his sense is not the word, but belongs to it; which manifestly makes two persons: and a while after, I separate the natures, but I joyn the adorati∣on; and that upon the account of that equali∣ty of honour and authority which the man had by his conjunction with God, not into one na∣tural person and properly so call'd, but into an union of title and dignity. With respect to which opinion Cyril presses the unity of na∣ture, and makes use of  and hypostasis in∣discriminately: And lastly, Nestorius denys Christ to be truly and properly God, in his first Anathema in answer to those of Cyril, say∣ing, Si quis Christum verum deum & non Imma∣nuel dixerit, i. e. Whosoever shall call him True God, let him be Anathema, which shews that the Union he meant was not per∣sonal, but that Christ was no more than what Cyril often charges Nestorius with holding, : If those twelve Articles of Nestorius were extant in Greek, they would likely discover more of his mind, but as they are, they have hardly any sense at all. How far Nestorius dissembles his opini∣on by those plausible expressions of one per∣son
and two natures, may be judg'd from what is already observ'd concerning him: but our Author falls into a great passion against those that say Nestorius dissembled when he affirm'd two natures and one person; I take them, says he, to be the Fire-brands of the World, and unworthy the regard of sober men, who pretend to know mens judgements bet∣ter than themselves, &c. It cannot be un∣known to any man that has read any thing in Ecclesiastical writings, that Hereticks were us'd to take refuge in Equivocation; and to shew a fair plausible doctrine to the first view, but when this was narrowly exa∣min'd and compar'd with other things that dropp'd from them, either unawares or in greater confidence, it was found to be no∣thing but deceit and illusion. Thus the Arians frequently impos'd upon the Ortho∣dox; thus the Nestorians seem'd to own the word , changing only the ac∣cent, which chang'd the signification of the Word from the Mother to the Child and off-spring of God; and S. Paul, who was not unacquainted with the arts of Here∣ticks, gives this caution against them, that they are not presently to be taken for what they appear,Rom. 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learn'd, and avoid them; for such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple: But let them be accounted Fire∣brands
of the World that will not put the most charitable interpretation upon the ex∣pressions of men of suspected doctrines: I am content, and I believe the Bishops will not be so much concern'd in this accu∣sation; I could wish our Author would look home, and observe those Fire-brands that will make men of what Religion they please, in despite of all Protestations and Oaths to the contrary: Is it not strange that men who subscribe the Articles of the Church of England, so destructive of all the errours of Popery, which were the oc∣casion of the Reformation; that renounce Transubstantiation, Popes Supremacy, Idola∣try, Rebellion for the cause of Religion, Ado∣ration of Images and Saints and Angels; that notwithstanding all this, these men must be Papists and Popishly affected, and let them say or believe what they will, they must be ac∣counted so: What shall a man do to these men? who instead of pulling down Popery strengthen it, by reckoning so many learned and godly persons of that side? and whilest they endeavour to dishonour these persons by so odious a name, do no small honour to the Papists by making the most eminent party of men both for learning and integrity that perhaps is now in the World, to be favou∣rers of their way: hoc Ithacus velit: The Je∣suites indeed are apt to feign several death∣bed Reconciliations to their Church, to gain it credit by the accession of some eminent opposers of it, but this they do sparingly,
as the easie people can swallow the cheat; But these Papist-makers of ours will present them with thousands together, and send them the Protestant Churches of three Kingdoms in one present. If any be Fire brands of the World, if any set up Popery under the dis∣guise of Protestants, they are surely these men that cry down all for Papists that they have any prejudice against; and out of spight to their brethren assist that common enemy, and become the most liberal Benefactors to the Church of Rome that ever it had since the Reformation; nay, not inferiour to the forgers of Constantine's Donation. These men would deserve better of Rome than Fran∣cis or Dominick, could they but make their words good. Surely the Papists are not now to learn how to make the best use of a fictitious title, they will not fail to boast of that strength which dissenters give them; and have no reason to discover the fals∣hood of a calumny that is so much to their credit and advantage! I must beseech the Readers Pardon for this digression, and Gods Pardon to these false accusers of their brethren, that they may know in this their day the things that belong to their peace. To return now to the business we left. It will not suit the proportion of my design to dwell upon every particular ex∣pression of Cyril's that may be suspected, and to detect the Heresie of Nestorius lurk∣ing under the disguise of Orthodox Ex∣pressions, I hope that what has been alrea∣dy
observ'd, may be sufficient at least to suspend the Readers judgement from pro∣nouncing Cyril a Heretick with Derodon, or Nestorius (who was condemn'd by almost all the world) an Orthodox and sound be∣liever? until some abler hand undertake that matter, and treat it more particu∣larly. Our Author though he make use of Dero∣don's citations to disparage the authority of these Councils, yet he differs from him in con∣clusion, and is loth to give in to that bold Paradox, that Cyril so much celebrated in the Catholick Church for his defence of the faith, should at last, after twelve hun∣dred years good credit prove down-right Heretick. Therefore he endeavours to moderate the business, and to make both parties Friends and Orthodox, though they themselves were not sensible of it! All this stir, saith our Author, proceeded only from misunderstanding, and Cyril and Nestorius and the rest of the Bishops did not understand one anothers meaning: It is not unpleasant to observe a man unacquainted with the language in which these disputes were, pretend gravely to be Moderator, and to perswade the World they did not under∣stand the terms they quarrelled about, though the language were vulgar to them all; and by the strength of Hanmer's, and other miserable translations, to play the Critick: but whether is most likely that these great and learned men should under∣stand
one anothers terms; or persons re∣mov'd from their times many hundreds of years, and ignorant of the language in which they writ, I leave the Reader to de∣termine. It is true, that in this case there was great misunderstanding between Cyril and the Eastern Bishops; yet we find that as soon as ever they came to debate the matter calmly, they found they differ'd but in expression, and yet both found they differ'd widely from the doctrine of Nestorius. But though some few men might be transported, and mistake one another in the heat of their contention, it is strange that all the world should be so blind and undiscerning, that no man before our Au∣thor should find out this undiscover'd agreement between the contending Bi∣shops, and not one have the fortune to stumble upon this observation. Mr. B. does endeavour to satisfie this doubt, by shewing that besides the factiousness of the generality of the Bishops, there were but few among them that had any learning;p. 92. and this he offers to make out by several arguments: 1. That the Fourth Council of Carthage did forbid Bishops to read any Heathen Authors.Mr. B. mi∣stakes it for the 6th. But how should this Prohibition make ignorant Bishops in the East, where it had no force? Nor do we find any such prohibition there, unless that of Julian the Apostate to bring Christian Religion into contempt, by making the professors of it ignorant of all humane learning. 2. When no Bishop was to be re∣mov'd
from place to place, but they were made in every Church out of an inferiour degree; why should this keep them in ignorance, since they had the freedom of liberal edu∣cation; and the lower degrees of the Church did no more incapacitate men for learning than they did for Episcopacy? 3. Ʋniversities were rare, therefore no wonder if learned Bishops were so rare: If University education be so necessary for learning; our Author I believe must keep these ignorant Bishops company, and he will help them to more, if others heed what he writes of the Universities. But yet Philosophy Schools were not so rare as he fansies in the Eastern Church, for there was hardly a considerable City that had not one; and besides all this, the great learning of the world being easily intelligible to the Eastern part of the World, as being writ∣ten in their common language; they had the less need of Professors; and a man might go a great way with his own private Reading. 4. When Nectarius must be the great Patriarch that was no Christian, and when Synesius, because he had Philosophical knowledge, is chosen Bishop even before he believ'd the Resurrection! Learned men were very scarce, he would inferr; but it is hard to do so from these instances: for 1. I do not find any where that Nectarius was made Patriarch for his learning:Socr. l. 5. c. 8. Socrates indeed says he was noble by descent, and a Prator by office, that he was of a sweet obliging
temper, and an extraordinary, and admirable person,. which rendred him very popular; and the Multitude in a fit of kindness would force him to be their Bishop. There is not a word of his learning, or of the scarcity of learned men, that might justifie this extra∣ordinary and irregular election of a Cate∣chumen into the second Bishoprick of the World: and if any one should yet fansy that to be the reason, let him consult Sozo∣men;l. 7. c. 8. who gives a more particular account of this action, and different from Socrates: He is so far from thinking that there was no Christian of learning and abilities equal to that dignity, that he tells us there was great variety: and that several Bishops of the Council that then sate, propos'd many as fit for that Charge: Diodorus Tarsensis happen'd to be strangely taken with Necta∣rius his Countrey man; and the circum∣stances, if true, make it look something like a miracle: He propos'd him to the Bi∣shop of Antioch as a sit person for that high charge; the Bishop wonder'd at the fan∣cy; and to comply with Theodorus puts his name among several others that he offer'd to the Emperour, but in the last place, lit∣tle expecting he should be return'd Bi∣shop. The Emperour by an unaccountable im∣pulse pass'd all by till he came to his name, and fix'd there, and nominated him Bishop: He was no Christian, says our Author. He was not yet baptiz'd indeed, but he was a
Catechumen and a very good man, and wanted nothing but that consummation; which was Constantine's condition till within a month before his death: and now let the shrewdest guesser in the world consider whether the small number of learned Bi∣shops was the reason why Nictarius was chosen to be the great Patriarch. Synesius his promotion concludes the ig∣norance of Bishops no more than that of Nectarius. For Synesius, besides his learn∣ing, had a peculiar eloquence, and besides that, was a person of an extraordinary life and reputation; so that it was not his Phi∣losophical learning was the only reason of his preferment: but he did not believe the Resurrection; and surely there must be a great want of able men, when a person un∣der that, and several other unqualifying circumstances should be forc'd into a Bi∣shoprick. But Theophilus understood the meaning of it, that this was but a fiction to avoid being Bishop: for his Letter to his Brother was not design'd as a secret,Syn. Ep. 105. but as he suggests there, that it might be shew'd, and become a remedy against that fondness the people had of him; and in another to the Presbyters of Ptolemais after he was made Bishop,Ep. 11. he does acknowledge that he had us'd all the arts and stratagems that he could devise to escape it: Evagrius and Nicephorus did take him at his word,Vid. Bar. An. 410. Luc. Holst. dissert. de fug. Ep. and represented him to posterity as he had cha∣racterized himself: and excuse those that
ordain'd him by saying, that they had hopes that afterward he would believe more Orthodoxly, and correct those er∣rours he confess'd: It was not then for want of able men that he was made Bi∣shop, but it was the extraordinary affe∣ction of Theophilus, and the people of Ptolemais, and the great reputation he had in the world, having been sent long before by the City of Cyrene to Arcadius, and de∣liver'd that noble Oration de Regno, that alone were enough to make all ingenious men in love with him for his eloquence and his gravity, and to render him emi∣nent in the most learned age of the World, though Mr. B. in the second Part of his Church-History, part 1. p. 169. af∣firms, That there are divers poor men, Wea∣vers, Plowmen and others of the Church of Kederminster, that can Pray, and Teach, and Write as methodical, pious, weighty tractates as Synesius, notwithstanding he was a Philoso∣pher, and as well as any Eusebius extoll'd as famous Bishops of the second and third age, &c. not to say, of Clemens, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Cyprian; yea even as Holy Macarius, Ephrem Syrus, Synesius, Isidore, Pelus: By this you may judge how well our Author is acquain∣ted with those Ecclesiastical Writers. The last thing by which he proves the scarcity of learned Bishops, is the igno∣rance of Nestorius, which Socrates that knew him does affirm: But here our Au∣thor does Socrates wrong, for he does not
say that Nestorius was ignorant, but that he was unacquainted with the Fathers and Ec∣clesiastical writers, which made him condemn the word ,l. 7. c. 32. which was us'd by Atha∣nasius and several others: and that he did not vouchfafe to read the Ancients. As for Philosophy, perhaps he had too much, and his writings do shew that he had no confus'd illogical Pen: So that this proves the ignorance of the Bishops of those times no more than the rest. The truth is, our Author has the worst luck in the world in his observations, where he ventures to dictate out of his own head, and to speak something new: He could not have likely pitch'd upon such another age in all the History of the Church as this, for multitude of eminent and learned Bi∣shops, and I believe I may say there is none that has recommended it self to Posterity by so numerous and substantial Monuments of learning. What shall we think of Hie∣rom, Ruffinus, Augustin, the two Cyrils, Theodoret? what shall we say of Synesius, Isi∣dore, Pelus, and infinite others? were these ignorant times that yielded such eminent lights, such renown'd Champions and Or∣naments to the Church of Christ? One may say with great truth that it was not till now that learning was become general among Christians, and especially in the East. Yet alas (say our Author) how few Bishops could distinguish then, as Derodon, and cur conimon Metaphysicks do now, be∣tween
Individuum, prima substantia, natura, suppositum, persona, and distinguish be∣tween a right essence, and hypostasis or subsi∣stence, &c. and have defin'd all these? Na∣ture, says Derodon, is taken in nine senses, but the sense was not here agreed on before they disputed of the matter. Alas indeed! this was a wonderful ignorance. They sim∣ple men did not understand the art of split∣ting a good six-pence into two bad groats; or of evaporating all good substantial sense by multiplying impertinent distinctions: but for my part I value them not a farthing the less, for not knowing nine sorts of na∣tures, any more than for not knowing the four sorts of Seekers, or our Authors twelve species of Episcopacy. What our Author speaks of the turbu∣lence and factiousness of the Bishops,bid. that blinded them so, as not to distinguish be∣tween the Abstract and the Concrete, and be∣tween the qui & quà Deus: It is after his wonted candour. It is no wonder if good men are vehement, when they think their faith is going to be overthrown; and if heat and passion is in any thing to be ex∣cus'd, it is surely here, where the concern is so very great, and easiness and moderati∣on look like the betraying of the cause of God. But there needs no other answer to our Author, than the words of our Savi∣our,Mat. 7.5. First cast out the beam out of thine eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. If the Bishops
were turbulent here, it was for the faith; but there are those that have been and still are more turbulent for the circumstances of Religion. I wish our Author would think of it. There remains yet one considerable Ob∣jection against Cyril, which I have reserv'd on purpose to the last place that I might answer it more at large, and I hope it will give great light unto the subject we have in hand. The objection is this, That Cyril father'd the doctrine of Nestorius about the Incarnation upon his Master, Theodorus Tar∣sensis, and Theodorus Mopsuestenius. But Theodore Tars. dy'd in the Communion of the Church, and was own'd by it, not only as a sound Member, but as an eminent Champion for the truth. I will take notice at this time of this Theodore only, whose discrple Nestorius was. Fa∣cundus takes great pains to vindicate him, and does it very effectually; but as for this charge of Cyril, he does not well know what to say; sometimes he is in doubt of the matter of fact, whether Cyril did condemn his doctrines, and write against him; be∣cause in doing so, he must depart not only from the rest of the Fathers, but from himself too: For in some of his writings he is very high in his commendation: Scripti sunt à Magno Theodore (says Cyril. ap. Fac.l. 8. t. 6. p. 349.) adversus Arrianorum & Eunomiano∣rum Haereses viginti forte & ampliùs libri, & elia prater hac Evangelica & Apostolica Scri∣pta
interpretatus est, & hos quidem labores nul∣lus est ausus increpare, sed dextrò decreto ho∣norare studium rectorum dogmatum quod in cis est. And therefore he makes it a doubt concerning Cyril, sive scripserit aliquid ad∣versus Theodorum sive non: But there is no question to be made about the matter of fact; For Cyril's Epistle to Successus, where he accuses Theodore as the Father of Nesto∣rianisme, was never question'd that I know; and another of his to Acacius Melitenus, men∣tions not only his dislike of Theodore, but that he had writ against him; because he conceived he had writ against our Saviours incarna∣tion: and yet Theodore did expresly main∣tain two natures in one person: So that Cyril in opposing this must either be a He∣retick, or he must mistake the meaning of those he wrote against. Now for the clearing of this matter we must observe, that though Theodore was no Heretick, yet there was Heresie among his writings, foisted in by the followers of Apollinaris, and this is the very Heresie for which Cyril condemns him. I will set down Theodore's own words as they are cited by Facundus:Fac. l. 10. c. 1. Ante triginta enins hos annos de Incarnatione Domini Codicem con∣scripsinus usque ad 15. versum pertingentem, in quae Arris & Eunomii de hâc re delicta, nee non etiam Apolinarii vanam prasumptionem per totum illud opus examinavi, ut nihil, sicut mea fert opinio, praterirem ex his qu ad fir∣mitatem Ecclesiastica Orthodoxia pertinerent,
& ad convincendam corum impietatem. Sed hi qui omnia facillime praesumunt, & praeterea rursum ab Apolinario, qui princeps hujus haeresis fuerat, instituti, omnibus quidem similiter sen∣tientibus, opus nostrum manifestum fecerunt, siquo modo aliqua invenirent valentia ad con∣vincendum ea quae in eo sunt scripta; quo∣niam verò nullus contra certamen Scriptis suscipere praesumebat, imitati sunt infirmos Athle∣tas & callidos, qui duni non possunt contra for∣tiores certare, insidiis eos & machinamentis quibus possunt conantur evertere. Scripserunt enim ipsi, inter se proculdubio, quaedam inepta quae à nobis unqnam minimè dicerentur; deni{que} haec ipsa in medio Scriptorum nostrorum in qua∣dam parte interposuerunt, & suis familiaribus demonstraverunt, aliquando etiam & nostris qui per facilitatem suam omnia pronis animis audiebant; Et hoc quasi documentum, ut putabant, nostrae impietatis videntibus praebebant. Ʋnum autem ex his Scriptis erat, duos filios dicere; sic enim nos feerunt in hoc opere dicentes, quod oporteat putare & dicere duos filios, & vehe∣menter nos illum Sermonem defendere, dum nos in illâ Scripturâ manifestè ubique diceremus quod non oporteat duos filios dicere: The summ is, that those Hereticks, that could not confute his books, resolv'd to cor∣rupt them, and foisted strange doctrines that he abhorr'd, as that we must own two sons in Christ; and this cheat was carry'd on with that Impudence that they shew'd these interlopations to some of the Bishops own Congregation, who
were carry'd away with it at first, but were recover'd by the Bishops reproof, that they should be so foolishly credulous as to give greater credit to these wri∣tings than to what they heard him daily preach in the Church. If then those that were so near Theodore were impos'd upon by this cheat of the Arians, what wonder if Cyril should light upon corrupted Copies at that distance of time and place, and take that for the doctrine of Theodore that was but the Interpolation of those Here∣ticks? But this is not all; Theodore had several ex∣pressions of his own that might be justly suspected of implying Two sons: so that Sir∣mond in his note upon that passage where he disowns two sons, remarks, duos tamen imprudenter statuit:l. 10. and he himself confes∣ses that he was too negligent in his first writings. Non quantum oportuit habuimus cir∣ca istam rem diligentiam, passi enim sumus quaecunque incipientes ut evenit in imperitiâ scri∣bendi constituti, siquidem & multas immutati∣ones illo tempore quae nostra sunt susceperunt,Sup. Ex. quas non est praesentis temporis enarrare, ex quâ causa magis negligenter à nobis composi∣ta sunt plurima. And to let you see that Theodore,l. 10. c. 2. how Orthodox soever his meaning was, us'd sometime suspected and dangerous expres∣sions, the same Author cites the Epistle of John Bishop of Antioch to Nestorius, where he proposes to him the example of his own
Master Theodore, who in a publick expo∣sition, having dropp'd some words that gave offence to several persons, and among others to Nestorius himself, he made no difficulty to retract it. Where we may observe by the way, that John's Epistle is to be corrected from this passage of Fa∣cundus, and Theodorus put instead of Pau∣lus, that was in all the Copies of that Epi∣stle, that had been compar'd before the  Edition of that Council;L'abbé T. 3. p. 391. part 1. c. 25. but L'abbé re∣s Theodorus, out of Segniers Copy. Let us return now to Facundus: he urges from this passage, that Nestorius never made use of the authority of his Master for his defence, which he would probably have done, had he not been conscious to him∣self of having departed from his do∣ctrines. However Theodorus be Orthodox,Cyr. Ep. ad Success. yet Cyril did not find fault with him without reason; his expressions were harsh, and that was all he objected to him, and added, that if he were alive and did not explain him∣self more Orthodoxly and more commodiously, he deserv'd to be condemn'd: In short, he wrote against the Apollinarists that confounded the natures in Christ, and as it often falls out, while he avoided one extreme he seem'd to fall into another: This was Cy∣ril's own case, who to assert a real Union call'd it Natural; and asserted one nature, meaning by it but one person; but that term he thought not sufficient, since Nesto∣rius
endeavour'd to shelter himself under the ambiguity of the term; thus St. Austin writing against the Manichees seems to be of one mind, and writing against the Pelagi∣ans of another; and although he endeavour here to reconcile his own writings, yet if the same things seeming so contradictory, had been maintain'd in those terms by two several persons, it is great odds but they would have fallen out: So hard it is to keep steady between two extremes when the subject is nice and difficult, and it is not easie to find terms that are proper and distinctive. Having given this account of the do∣ctrine of Cyril and Nestorius, I will give the Reader a short view of the Proceedings of this Council, which our Author repre∣sents with his wonted candour and inge∣nuity.Sacra Im∣per. ad E∣pisc. Me∣trop. The Emperour in his Writs for the calling of this Council commanded the Bishops to be at Ephesus before Pentecost: They hore date 15 cal. Decembr. and doubt∣less came time enough to the most remote parts of the Empire: and they do parti∣cularly direct that after Easter they imme∣diately put themselves upon their journey, implying that the time between Easter and Whitsontide was sufficient for the remotest Bishops to perform their journey. Cyril and Nestorius, and near two hundred Bishops were there at the time appointed:Ep. Joh. ad Cyril. John Bishop of Antioch stuck by the way, some of his company falling sick, and several
of their Horses dying, and sent notice of it to Cyril and the Synod. The Bi∣shops that were met, were inclin'd to open the Council immediately, in obe∣dience to the Emperours command: many of them had come from far,Ep. Synod. ad Imp. some of them did not enjoy their health in that place, and many were poor, and could not en∣dure the expence of a long stay; besides that they were number enough, and it was not fit that about two hundred Bi∣shops should stay for thirty, and stop all proceedings to wait their arrival. These therefore make their applications to Cy∣ril, and press him to proceed; he gave them good words, and desir'd them to have patience for some time, for it would not be long e're John and the Eastern Bi∣shops would come, who were already upon their way, and not far from the place; he deferr'd their sitting there∣fore for sixteen days longer,. and the Ea∣stern Bishops still delaying, he was obli∣ged to comply with the Importunities of the Synod; and John had sent two Bi∣shops before to desire Cyril to go on,Alexander Apam. Ale∣xander Hierap. and not to stay for him; upon this, Cyril thinking all were satisfy'd, open'd the Synod on the 22 of June:The 22 of June falls exactly at the end of the six∣teen days allow'd by the Synod. Nestorius was summon'd to give an account of his faith, he sent a surly answer, that he would consider, and do as he thought fit; the next day they sent others to him, but now he had fortify'd himself in his house,
and got a guard of Souldiers, and treat∣ed those that were sent to him rudely and unworthily: So that now there was no other means than to examine his doctrine out of his writings,Ep. Synod. ad Imp. which be∣ing judg'd by the Council to be dan∣gerous and destructive of the incarna∣tion and unity of Christ, he was con∣demned. I cannot see any thing in all this proceeding that is very blameable; and John had no reason to find fault, having given them leave to proceed. But he co∣ming to Ephesus shortly after, and finding fault with the proceedings of Cyril, became the occasion of great confusions: which yet cannot be with any justice charg'd up∣on the Council; John with his protesting Bishops countenanc'd the cause of Nestori∣us, and condemn'd Cyril, being drawn in by Candidianus, who was a favourer of Nesto∣rius:Act. 1. prope finem. and it is not unlikely that he had secret Orders from the Emperour to do Cyril all the ill offices that he could, for the Em∣perour in his Letter to Cyril before this Council, shews that he was not a little angry with him. He pretends his wri∣ting to him,Theodos. Cy∣ril. p. 1. c. 31. and the Empresses, about this question, to have been the cause, as if he had had a design to divide the Court as well as the Church, and to sow discord in the Royal Family. But whatever were the reason, it is evident by his proceed∣ing, that he had a pique against Cyril; who was oppos'd in every thing by the
Emperours Officers: A little Commit∣tee of about thirty Bishops, with John and Candidianus at the head of them, set up against the Council, condemn'd Cyril and Memnon, and gave the Emperour an account of what they had done, he sent Johannes Comes with Order to depose Cy∣ril, Memnon and Nestorius. This John gives a sad account of the confusion all things were in, and of the heats of Bishops; but is very much to be suspected. For the tenour of his relation makes it evi∣dent that he was a partizan of the Eastern Bishops, and therefore endeavours to lay all the blame upon Cyril and his party: but sure I am that the confusion which he represents cannot be much greater than our Author makes in the sense of this John; and the Bishops could not understand one another much worse than our Author did that Epistle. They would have the Scriptures read (says our learned Translator) but they that favour'd Cyril said, that the divine and terrible Scriptures were not to be read without Cyril; the Bishops that were with John said, that Cyril ought not to be present at the reading of the Scriptures. One would imagine that this Officer would have read a Chapter of Job to recommend patience to these violent Bishops; but it is quite another matter, for these terrible Scriptures were nothing else but the Emperours Letter, which in the language of those times was call'd Sacra; and Sacra Scriptura in this place, as every
body knows that has any acquaintance with these times, or has but read this Letter; for the secret is discover'd within a few lines, Augustarum literarum lectionem fecit, in quibus depositi sunt Cyrillus & Nestorius, &c. And now it is no wonder if all things were in confusion, and all parties, unless that small one of John of Antioch, dissatisfy'd; the Orthodox look'd upon the faith as in∣volv'd in the condemnation of Cyril, and to suffer in the same proscription with him; and the greatest part of the Christian Church look'd upon it self as engag'd in the same cause: therefore the Emperour considering better of it, whether out of fear that all the world in a manner would oppose this sentence, or being better inform'd concern∣ing Cyril, revok'd this decree, but con∣firm'd the deposition and banishment of Nestorius; and considering the party of John was but inconsiderable in respect of those that own'd the Council, the Empe∣rour, who probably might have made use of them against Cyril, commands them now to be reconcil'd to him, to condemn Ne∣storius, to receive the Council; and Cyril was only desir'd to sacrifice his resentments of the injuries received at Ephesus, to the peace and settlement of the Church; and so at last Cyril and the Council of Ephesus prevail'd against all the little arts that were us'd to blast their reputation, and by the means of Paulus Emissenus a perfect reconciliati∣on was effected, so sincere, that the old
contentions are chang'd into friendship and confidence, and Cyril sends some of his books to John and Theodoret to revise and correct. So far were they from think∣ing him a Fire brand and incendiary as long as they liv'd: as our Author represents the matter. But this reconciliation does as little please Mr. B. as their dissentions: There is no thanks to the Bishops for this; the Em∣perours threatning Letter cur'd them all of Heresie; and good men! they were all this while of one mind and did not know it: It is some sign of good nature that they would submit to the powerful interposition of the Emperour; but there is a temper, which Mr. B. is acquainted with, that is not to be prevail'd upon either by threats or pro∣mises from the Magistrate, and seems to hate nothing so much as compliance with Superiours: there are some that scorn to preach by the licence of the Government, and place the Kingdom of Christ purely in opposition to Laws and Magistrates.
CHAP. VI. Councils about the Eutychian Heresie. IT is the general weakness of our minds not to think we have sufficiently avoid∣ed one extreme, unless we run into the other; and to be still running away from what we dislike, we care not whither, without considering what inconveniences the contrary extreme may expose us to! This is frequent among us, not only in what relates to our passions and manners, but to our faith. Nestorius, for fear of blasphemy, dissolv'd the incomprehensible unity of the son, and fell into blasphemy on the opposite side, denying Christ to be Deus verus:Anath. 1, 2. Eutyches, abhorring this do∣ctrine, thought he was not safe till he had deny'd Christ to be verum hominem:Brevic. de Hist. Eutyc. and this became the occasion of a great deal of stir and tumults in the Christian World. This Eutyches (who to our comfort was no Bishop, but an Abbot,) having pleas'd himself some time with his notion concern∣ing the person of Christ, was not content to enjoy it himself, but was ambitious to propagate it: He therefore drew up a new
Creed different from those which had been set forth by all the Councils before him, and sent a Copy of this Confession into se∣veral Monasteries, to desire Subscriptions.Act. con. C. P. This got wind, and Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, having notice of this practice, advises Eutyches as a friend to desist from such dangerous enterprizes, and to acqui∣esce in the decrees of the Councils of Nice and Ephesus. Eutyches pursues his course, and Eusebius reports the whole matter to Flavian: who having called a small Con∣vention of Bishops at C. P. sends for Euty∣ches thither. He at first refuses to come; but afterwards, being encourag'd by a fa∣vourite Eunuch, he comes to the Council as if he had been going to a war, guarded not only with his Monks but with Souldi∣ers, and the Emperours guards, where af∣ter some tergiversation he discover'd his Heresie, and the Council having admo∣nish'd him to retract, but without effect, condemn'd him as a Heretick. Our Author makes Eutyches as Orthodox as Cyril; and would shew that he was con∣demn'd for the doctrine of the Council of Ephesus.Brevic. de Hist. Eu∣tych. The Truth of this we shall un∣derstand by considering the following par∣ticulars of his doctrine. He held Christum verum hominem non fuisse, nec in co esse duas naturas, sed unam Dei Verbi, incarnatam; though the last words be the very same with those of Cyril;Ep. 2. ad Nest. & alib. yet the rest are ex∣presly condemn'd by him, for he maintains
upon every occasion, that Christ is truly Man as well as God, and perfect too, as consisting of Body and Soul, nor did he deny two natures in Christ, but only said that they were not separated or divided; that there was no , but that both were united in one subsistence. He does indeed frequently assert one nature,ad Eulog. l. . which in his sense is no more than personal unity; and sometimes too says there is ,ad Acac. Melit. unless we shall read it , which is much more agreeable to Cyril's ordinary way of expressing himself; ;Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. and yet Eustath. Beryt. cites Cyril in the Council of Chalcedon according to the first reading. But not to make any difficulty about this,Flav. Ex∣empl. fidei Theodos. Dat. Conc. Chalc. part 1. Ep. 5. It. Maxentii Cathol. Pro∣fessio. Flavian it seems did not stand much upon that expression. For he owns it with this interpretation ; so far he own'd one nature as was consistent with one Christ that must be God and Man, but he con∣demns all those that shall teach that there are two sons, or two hypostases, or two persons, and so dissolves that unity. And yet for all this, he was condemn'd as a Ne∣storian; and although he seems to speak the same words with Eutyches, yet he condemns him;Brevic. & Ep. Flav. but you have already seen some dif∣ference, and shall sind yet more. He goes on concerning Eutyches, saying, Christum no∣bis esse Consubstantialem negavit: which is an express contradiction to the doctrine of
Cyril, who all along affirms Christ to be of the same substance with us as to his huma∣nity, as well as of the same substance with the Father in respect of the divine nature: [Deinde dixit Virginem quidem quae cum ge∣nuit secundum carnem consubstantialem nobis esse,Rescript. Flav. ad Leon. ipsum antem dominum non suscepisse ex eâ carnem nobis consubstantialem; & Corpus domini non esse quidem corpus hominis, humanum verò cor∣pus esse quod est ex Virgine: adjecit autem & aliam impietatem;Ep. ad Leon. Corpus domini quod ex Ma∣ria factum est non esse nostrae substantiae, neque humanae conspersionis. This is something hard to be understood at first sight; but the Breviculus Hist. Eutych. does explain it, speaking of Eutyches his opinion concern∣ing Christs flesh, quam quidem non esse homi∣nis perhibuit sed humanum, ut similitudo magis humani corporis quàm veritas suaderetur. But to return to that which was more insisted upon for Heresie, his affirming of one na∣ture, which these passages will serve to ex∣plain. The great Complaint of Eusebius Doryl. to Flavian, and of Flavian to Leo, against Eutyches was, that he affirm'd one nature af∣ter the incarnation. Did not Cyril say the same thing? does not Flavian himself say that he does not reject it? what then is the Contro∣versie? Surely these men cannot be so mad as to fall out so violently, when they all say not only the same thing but the same words. Shall we imagine that Flavian would pre∣varicate, and accuse Eutyches to Leo of
that Heresie, which he owns for sound do∣ctrine to Theodosius?Flav. Ep. ad Theod. It is not to be con∣ceiv'd that any one, much less so great a man as Flavian, should be either so foolish or so wicked; and if we consider the accu∣sation, we shall be able to unriddle this dif∣ficulty.Flav. Ep. ad Leon. For after he had charg'd Eutyches with holding but one nature after the Uni∣on, he adds for a confutation of that er∣rour: neque vero unitas convenientium in Chri∣sto duarum naturarum sicut unâ re, proprietates suas in unitate confudit, sed manent in unitate perfectae naturarum proprietates; the one na∣ture of Christ according to Eutyches did (it seems) take away, and confound the pro∣perties of humanity; but according to Fla∣vian they still remain'd; for how else could Christ suffer, and the divine nature not have suffer'd too? The Monothelites spoke out what Eutyches disguis'd, whose principle extended to much absurder consequences than that, if it had been pursued; and the denying of the body of Christ (for I do not find that he mentions any thing of his Soul) to be like ours, tends manifestly to this confusion of the nature, the form, and properties of the humanity of Christ with that of his divinity. There is one thing more in Eutyches his way of expressing himself which is liable to exception; and that is, that before the union, there were two natures, afterwards they were but one; if he speaks of the par∣ticular natures of Christ, this must be very
impious or absurd; either it must imply that the divinity was united to Christ after he was come in the Flesh, or that he was at first but a meer man, and the divinity was united to him afterwards, for the merit of his obedience; or else that the man was before his birth: the first I think Eu∣tyches did not hold, the latter was suspect∣ed by Leo,Ep. ad Flav. & Julian. who wishes he had been ask'd what he meant by this expression, For where were the two natures before the in∣carnation? his humanity could not ante∣cede it self, and be before he was man: and he was never purely and simply man, but ever from the first moment in conjunction with the Godhead; therefore Leo fancies that Eutyches was of opinion that the soul of Christ pre-existed, and so indeed there would be two natures; but it is still absurd to say they were both in Christ, for Christ denotes the person that is constituted of both, and so they could be never in him until they were united.Ch. 6. Ject. 1. Mr. B. makes Cy∣ril say the same thing, which, if it were true, would either justifie Eutyches, or in∣volve Cyril in the same condemnation with him. But our Author has mistaken Cyril, or Derodon who furnish'd him with this no∣tion, and the citations upon which it de∣pends. For Cyril never said there were two natures in Christ before the Union, but on∣ly considers the divinity and humanity ab∣stractedly; not that the humanity ever had a separate existence from the Godhead
in Christ; and the result of all Cyril's dis∣courses upon this point is only this, that two different natures very unlike and dis∣proportionable were joyn'd together in the person of Christ, but never thought that one of the particulars united, before that union had any separate existence, nay, his words are express to the contrary, ,Ep. 2. ad Nestor. he was not first born an ordinary meer man of the Ho∣ly Virgin, and the word came afterwards into him; but being united from the womb he is said so to have undergone a carnal gene∣ration. It was the luck or the cunning of Eutyches not to engage far in disputes about his doctrines, or to explain himself much in publick; there he seem'd Orthodox enough; but when he instructed his Monks in pri∣vate, then he discover'd himself more ful∣ly. But the circumspection of the Church, and the zeal of good men, did not suffer it to go on long undiscover'd or uncensur'd. This is no unusual thing with Hereticks, to be reserv'd in publick and promiscuous au∣diences; and to use greater freedom in se∣lect meetings. This was much practis'd amongst us in the late unhappy times: though there was licence enough to say any thing in publick, yet the teachers Spirit (it seems) was under some restraint in the Church, as some men think evil spirits are in consecrated places, and were not free to reveal the mysteries of their sect: of this
we have several instances in Edwards his Gangrna, which I would recommend to the reading of such as are so fond of Tolera∣tion; and if the effects of it in those times, as they were represented there, do not cure them of that mistaken charity, no∣thing will, but a too late experience of those evils when they are past remedy. Having given this short account of the do∣ctrine of Eutyches, which they that condemn∣ed it understood much better than we can; and could doubtless distinguish from such expressions of their own that sounded like it: We will proceed to the history of its condemnation. The Synod of Constantinople having condemn'd Eutyches, he made his appli∣cation, first to Leo Bishop of Rome; and being rejected there, apply'd himself to the Emperour by the means of his old friend Chrysaphius,Niceph. l. 14. c. 47. an Eunuch in great favour and credit at Court. He obtain'd a review of the acts of the former Sy∣nod, before Florentius and most of the same Bishops that had condemn'd him. Florentius was a person of great integri∣ty, and the Bishops after a second hear∣ing, and after the cause of Eutyches had been pleaded by three Monks his Advo∣cates, and all things diligently fifted, persever'd in the same opinion; and the issue of this appeal was not a little to the disadvantage of Eutyches, and increas'd the suspicion of his crime.
This way failing him,Niceph. l. 14. c. 47. Lib. Synod. in Syn. Eph. Diosc. he makes use of the Eunuchs authority to call a General Council, that should be so contriv'd, that Eutyches might be acquitted, and Flavian depos'd. This Flavian had incurr'd the Eunuchs displeasure before by sending him his , his Benedictions, in Bread and not in Gold; therefore he was glad of any opportunity to do him ill offices: and he had such an influence upon the Emperour, who was too much addicted to this kind of Vermin,Suidas. as to set him upon the ruine of this Good Bishop. In order to which, he dispatches several Letters to summon Bi∣shops and others to a Council at Ephesus,Conc. Chalc. Par. 1. Sacrae, ad Dioscor. ad Elpid. Co∣mit. &c. Pars 1. which sufficiently shew his bitterness against Flavian: intimating that the Nestorian Here∣sie was springing again, and that there were several favourers of it; he forbids Flavi∣an and the Bishops that condemn'd Euty∣ches to sit in the Council; he complains against Flavian that he had call'd a Synod against his will, and prosecuted Eutyches, and disturb'd the Church, notwithstanding all his advice and orders to the contrary; and in short, the Letters that call'd this Council suggested sufficiently what it was to do, and that their only business was to con∣demn a Bishop the Emperour did not care for; though without any just ground, nay for his honesty, if Nicephorus relate the business truly. There is no doubt but the Emperour, or rather this Eunuch who con∣triv'd all this mischief, knew how to choose
Bishops for the purpose; and the Presi∣dent did admirably suit with such a de∣sign, who besides his emulation against the Bishops of Constantinople, was, if half be true that is said of him, one of the most wicked profligate wretches in the World. This Synod in short did the business it was call'd for, and that not without force, for they us'd all the violence imaginable to fright poor conscientious men to a con∣currence with them: and if any one should offer to speak for Flavian or Eusebius, the next word was da comites, you shall go the same way if you be troublesome.Act. 1. Conc. Chalc. T. 4. p. 135. Eutyches brought in his confession of faith, which was no other than the Nicene Creed; and added only that he condemn'd all Here∣ticks: but when Sozon would have put him to explain himself concerning the incarna∣tion, Dioscorus and his party would not suffer it, for fear he should betray himself. And upon that he was absolv'd.Act. 1. Chalc. T. 4. p. 134. As if a So∣cinian were call'd to a Synod to answer for his doctrines, and would make a confession of his faith in the Apostles Creed, and when any one should desire him to explain himself farther, moderate comprehending men should cry, this contains all that is ne∣cessary, there is no need of a farther Test: And thus some Synods in Poland were so moderate as to be impos'd upon, which occasion'd great mischief to those Reform∣ed Churches there, now almost extinguish'd under the notion of Socinians. How bad
soever Dioscorus and this Council were, yet they are in my judgement to be look'd up∣on rather as favourers of Heresie than as Hereticks, for although they did threaten to cleave him in sunder that durst say there are two natures in Christ, yet they were not of Eutyches his opinion for all that; but follow'd the meaning I believe as well as the words of Cyril. And it is observa∣ble that Anatolius in the Council of Chalce∣don after Dioscorus's condemnation,Act. 5. T. 4. p. 558. says ex∣presly that he was not condemn'd for He∣resie, but Misdemeanors. The Judges said, for this reason Dioscorus condemn'd Flavian, because he said there were two natures in Christ. Anatolius said, Dioscorus was not condemned for Heresie, but because he excommunicated Leo, and being cited to appear before the Coun∣cil, refus'd to obey: The Instrument of his Deposition gives the same reason, and all the subscriptions that mention any reasons at all; only that of Paschasinus charges him with not only receiving Eutyches, but of being of his opinion. But because this Council chose two natures,Act. 3. p. 458. as the most safe way of expressing the Oeconomy of Christs incarnation, Dioscorus cry'd, cum Patribus ejicior; and his followers were af∣terwards call'd Eutychians, though they did not own his doctrines; as some of the Eastern Christians are call'd Nestorians, though they do not really hold the do∣ctrine of Nestorius; but the very same with the Eastern Bishops that mistook Cyril,
and with Theodorus Tarsens. and Mopsuest. who were misunderstood on the other side by Cyril. But of this we have said enough already. CHAP. VII. The Council of Chalcedon. NOw comes the great Council of Chalcedon under the new Emperour Martian,p. 99. §. 14. where all is chang'd for a time; yet Pulche∣ria, who married him and made him Emperour, and whose power then was great, was the same that before had been against Nestorius, in her Brothers reign. Thus far our Church Historian. It is a marvellous observation, that all should be chang'd for a time, and yet Pulcheria be the same that condemn'd Nestorius, in her Brothers reign. She was the same person I suppose, though I dare not maintain any identity against the split∣ting instruments which he borrows of De∣rodon; (those Metaphysical terms I mean, which we have mentioned before,) and our Authors charms and imaginary reme∣dies against Heresie; those Notions that he bewails the ancient Bishops were so dull as not to be able to find out. But if out of special grace he will allow Pulcheria to be the same Pulcheria in and after her brothers reign, we must acknowledge his good
nature in the concession. But where is the wonder all this while? that matters should change, and yet she be still the same? It may be that she might not have always the same credit and authority with her brother, and if Nicephorus may be believ'd in a sto∣ry that hangs very well together and is ve∣ry probable,l. 14. c. 47, &c. her interest was very low when the Second Council of Ephesus was call'd; for the end of it was to ruine her favourite Flavian, who had given her no∣tice of a Court-plot that was form'd against her, to shave her, and thrust her into a Monastery: So that it is not much to be wondred at if Pulcheria when she had the power in her own hands, should change some things that had been done against her will, and perhaps design'd by the Court on purpose to affront her. This then can∣not be the wonder; and it would vex a man to see one stare, and stand agast, and yet not be able to find out the subject of the admiration. It may be (for I will ven∣ture to guess once more) that the won∣der is, that the same Pulcheria should con∣demn Eutyches, that had condemn'd Nesto∣rius before. But why should we wonder at this in Pulcheria, more than in Flavian, in Eusebius Doryl. and a great many others that did the same thing at that time? Nay, did not all the world in a manner, all the Catholick Church, condemn both these? Will he say, that these are contradictory Doctrines, and therefore one must be true
and the other false? But Mr. B. has de∣termined already, that Cyril, Nestorius, Flavian, Eutyches, all of them meant the same thing; and what wonder then is it, if a devout Lady could not find this secret consent of doctrine under appearing contradictions, when the learned Bishops could not do it, nor after ages, nor the subtile distinguishing School-men, no nor Derodon himself? However since we cannot discern the drift and shrewdness of the ob∣servation, we ought thankfully to accept what we can understand, though that be no great news, That Pulcheria that was Empress after her Brothers death, was the very same that condemn'd Nestorius, in her Brothers reign. This profound Remark is immediately follow'd by another of great acuteness;p. 100. sect. 14. That it was never truer than in the case of ge∣neral Councils, that the multitude of Physicians exasperateth the disease, and kills the patient.] And yet our Author will have these Physi∣cians multiply'd without end. If every Congregation have its own Bishop, what general agreement can we then expect? what unity in a Nation, when Bishops are grown so inordinately numerous? Since it can be no otherwise than by a consultati∣on of these Physicians, that the publick Peace and Unity can be preserv'd. Or if this Expedient should fail, what other way is there left? Our Author comes in here, and relieves us in a great strait,
and offers a remedy more Soveraign than all the Hereticating Councils in the World. In short it is this: The word () the [one nature after Ʋnion] the words [One Will and one Operation] had never done half so much mischief in the Church if the errone∣ous had been confuted by neglect,p 100. sect. 14. and Councils had not exasperated, enraged and engag'd them, and set all the world on taking one side or another.] It is an admirable way to cure Heresie to neglect it; and to preserve the Church by despising such small diffe∣rences as may be reduced into a Word. It was but a word that divided the Arians and the Orthodox; It was but the Trinity, Servetus said, that divided all the World. Despise the disputes about this, and then Christians, Jews and Mahumetans may be comprehended under the same Rule. It is but the Import of the word Episcopus that our Dissenters stand so much upon; why does not Mr. B. perswade them to despise this Verbal Controversie, and study rather to be quiet than to write about it? But we find he cannot perswade himself to this, otherwise the Shops would have wanted divers books that he hath publisht this year. Nay, we find that he himself will not be answer'd with Neglect. So that we are like to find little benefit of this rare project for confuting the disturbers of the Church. For though six of his Books that came out in little more than six months were let pass without any Answer that I know of:
yet this Patience has been so far from mend∣ing his humour, that he writes and writes on still, runs us down with Repetitions, proclaims his own victories, and insults over our silence; and in short he cannot be more violent and outragious, more bit∣ter and malicious under all the provocati∣ons imaginable, than he is under that Neg∣lect which himself is pleased to prescribe for the cure of them. I wish our Author had taken his own advice before this Book was written, practic'd this Mortification upon himself. And not gone on as he does still to disturb the world with perpe∣tual contentions to no purpose, but to shew how much he wants of a Scholar and a Christian. But however men may be confuted, yet they are seldom convinc'd by neglect, and therefore, lest that expedient might fail, our Projector slurs in another,p. 100. ubi supra. One skilful, healing man, that could have explicated ambi∣guous terms, and perswaded men to love and peace, until they understood themselves and one another, had more befriended Truth, Piety, and the Church, than all the Hereticating Councils did. And why may not this skil∣ful man shew his skill in Councils as well as elsewhere? why may not many such skilful healing men be found in such great Assemblies as those of General Councils? Or if such as these are strangers to Gene∣ral Councils, why do they not appear since the use of such Councils has been laid aside?
We have had several new disputes raised of late, and many of them in the opinion of judicious men, meerly about words and for want of understanding one another, as the Controversie of Justification, Good Works, &c. yet we have not found that any of these healing men were able to re∣concile parties, any more than the Coun∣cils of old, which our Author according to his manner of respect and charity, ho∣nours with the Title of Hereticating Coun∣cils. Our Author is is so full of his observati∣ons in this place that I am almost weary of observing them,p. 100. sect. but that in the next Para∣graph is so choice, it must not be passed by. If what Socrates writeth of Theodosius Ju∣nior be true, (as we have no reason to doubt) God own'd his moderation by miracles, notwith∣standing his favouring the Entychians more than he did any ways of violence.] I am afraid that the miracles whereby God own'd Theodosius, especially those recorded by So∣crates, could do but little countenance to the Eutychian cause. For Socrates little thought of Eutychians when he related those miracles. That Heresie was not then known, at leastwise not by that name, when that Hi∣storian wrote.Soer. l. 7. c. 48. Prosp. in Chron. For he ends in the 17th Con∣sulship of Theodosius, ten years before the be∣ginning of the Eutychian Heresie; and that we may be sure this Controversie was not yet sprung, the same Author tells us in the same place, that the Church was then in
peace, and That as long as there is peace, there is little matter for Church-History; and that if men had been peaceable and quiet, he should have been at a loss for materials; and that therefore he does make an end there; for peace preserving things in the same Or∣der, does not afford variety enough for an Historian. From whence it is manifest that Socrates wrote in that peaceful interval between the first and second Council of Ephesus, and could not think of Theodosius his mo∣deration in respect of the Eutychians; and so Mr. B.'s notwithstanding might have been spar'd; for Socrates says not one word of any miracles in approbation of his favour∣ing of Eutychians; or that any were done in favour of Theodosius after that, for the History does not reach so far. But if it were allow'd to comment upon the ways of Providence, one might say, that he who was heretofore own'd by God as be∣ing wonderfully protected by him, seem'd to lose the divine favour as soon as he fa∣vour'd Hereticks; for he dy'd soon after; but far be it from me to make such con∣structions, for who can find out the ways of the Lord, or who has been his Councel∣lour? Besides, what can be the meaning of Theo∣dosius his favouring Eutychians more than he did any ways of violence? Was there ever a more violent outragious sort of men than those Eutychians he favour'd? Were there
ever greater violences committed than in that infamous Conventicle at Ephesus? where Eustathius was kick'd to death,Act. Con. Eph. 2. Read Act. 1. Con. Chalc. and all those that durst defend him were threat∣ned to be serv'd in like manner; where the cry was, let him be cleft in sunder that says there are two natures: What now can our Author mean by favouring such men more than any ways of violence? unless it be that he thinks the Emperour took a particu∣lar delight in that kind of cruelty; and that he had rather one should be kick'd to death, or cleft down-right, than that he should be hang'd or beheaded, which would not be much to be credit of his Moderation. And to say the Truth, his Letter to Va∣lentinian discovers a strange kind of Spirit;Among the re∣ambles of the Counc. of Chalc. for there he justifies the proceedings of the Eutychians at Ephesus; he says that all things were carry'd on with much freedom, and per∣fect truth; that Flavian was found guilty of inno∣vating in Religion, and that he had been treated according as he deserv'd. I wonder Mr. B. can cite this against Flavian, and not discover the notorious falsity of it. For who does not know the Liberty, that was given there, to have been no other than either of subscribing or of suffering banishment or death? as we shall shew presently more particularly. This is but an ill sign that Mr. B. is a Hater of false History, when he lets this pass unre∣prov'd, and puts upon his Reader for Truth that which he must needs know to be other∣wise. And as to Theodosius, whose Letter
this is, it is not unlikely that he was im∣pos'd upon by his Eunuch, or whoever else penn'd it for him; for he must needs know the Eutychian Proceedings to be the most violent and disorderly that ever were in any solemn Assembly. At last Mr. B.p. 100. sect. 17. comes to the Council of Chalcedon, and the Acts of it. Dioscorus in the first place is accus'd for his Ephesine General Council: Dioscorus alledges the Em∣perours Order, and that all the rest of that Council consented and subscrib'd as well as he: The Bishops answer'd that they did it against their wills, being under fear: condemnation and banishment were threatned, and Souldiers were there with Clubs and Swords. The truth is, Mr. B. does most disingenuously mince the Acts of the Council, and uses all the foul play that is possible, to render Diosco∣rus his case the more plausible, and on the other side to discredit the rest of the Bishops that said they were forc'd. The first An∣swer of the Eastern Bishops was, that no man did voluntarily consent to the condemnation of Flavian,Act. 1. Conc. Chalc. violenta est facta vis cum pla∣gis, they were beaten to it; this Mr. B. leaves out, because it would go near to excuse their complyance with a merciful man. And in Stephen Bishop of Ephesus his vindi∣cation of himself, Mr. B. uses the very same method; for all that he said is slub∣ber'd up in this, that Eulogius and Elpidius and some Eutychian Monks and Souldiers threatned: Alas! one would think this
was a poor spirited man that would do any thing against his judgement for the threat∣ning of these men. But let us understand from the Acts themselves what manner of threatning this was. Stephen says in the first place, that he communicated with Flavi∣an,Ibid. and Eusebius Doryl. and their Clergy, and received them kindly. Eulogius and El∣pidius with Monks and Souldiers to the number of about three hundred came to him, and would have kill'd him, and then forc'd him to subscribe before he should go out of the Vestry. The Answer of Theodore Bishop of Claudiopolis is maim'd by our Abridger of Church-Hi∣story after the same manner,Ibid. by leaving out that which made most for his defence, and taking that part which was most liable to Exception: The Leading men, says, he, lead us on; as simple ignorant men that knew not the cause; and frighted us by defaming us as Nestorian Hereticks: Thus Mr. B. But the most considerable circumstances are omit∣ted: for Theodore says, they were impos'd upon at first by such Acts as seem'd to speak fa∣vourably of Flavian, that afterwards they were threatned by Dioscorus his party, not only making them of near kin with Nestorius, but adding, Cut them in sunder that say two natures, dividite, interficite, ejicite, cleave them, kill them, cast them out. They were for∣ty two, of one hundred and thirty which made up that Council, who dissented from Dioscorus and his party at first, but could have no free debate, and these with this violent usage were
soon reduc'd to fifteen, and they at last were forc'd to subscribe a blank paper, to save not only their Churches but their lives: And Thus, says Mr. B. they cry'd they were fright∣ed.]p. 101. And surely they had great reason to be so: Such as though it could not justifie them for acting against their Conscience, yet might move pity in men that have any com∣passion of humane infirmity, considering that they also are subject to the like; let him that standeth have a care lest he fall. The Egyptian Bishops answered, that a Chri∣stian fears no man, a Catholick (Orthodox) fears no man; if men were fear'd, there would be no Martyrs.] It is much easier to say than hold: There have several gone to discover themselves to the Heathen Judges, with the intention and confidence of Mar∣tyrs,p. 101. that were yet so frighted as to re∣nounce their Religion before they came away. Upon the reading of the Acts of the Se∣cond Council of Ephesus, it appear'd how things were carried; Mr. B. makes the best use he can of them to disgrace the Bishops; the first thing he takes notice of is Dioscorus his words, Anathematizing any that should contradict or retract any thing held in the Nicence Synod.] There is a foul mistake for want of a little Latin, and a little ingenuity; for Dioscorus says not one word of contradicting or retracting the Council of Nice. All the debate was whe∣ther the Council of Nice had explain'd the
faith fully, so as to need no farther authen∣tick explication. The Synod is for this, and will have no Additions; and let him be Anathema. , that goes beyond the bounds given by the Fathers; and then, , let no man add or diminish. Dioscorus adds, what a fearful thing it will be to offend against God in this particular; and that he is Anathema that shall presume to examine, or discuss, or revise the faith agreed on in the Council of Nice, or here. The Latin Translator has indeed retractat, which Mr. B. translates retract, as if it were the recanta∣tion of what was done in this Council that they provided against. But the Greek word is ,Con. Labb. T. 4. p. 32. Examining of a thing anew; and therefore  is joyn'd with it: So that as to this point they were all agreed, and so in the succeeding Councils likewise, that nothing was to be added to the Nicene faith; but since new opinions were daily started, they might examine whether they agreed with that faith, and did not directly or consequentially destroy it; and all this does not add any thing, but only apply emergent cases to the old unal∣terable Rule. Here Eutyches his confession at Ephesus was read,p. 101. sect. 18. saith our Author. But as we have mention'd before in the Council of C. P. under Flavian, it was only the Ni∣cene Creed without those additions that it afterwards generally receiv'd in opposition
to Apollinaris and Macedonius, &c. How far this may secure the Church from Here∣sie; the multitude of Heresies that sprung after, whereof the greater part would wil∣lingly be try'd by the Nicence Creed, do suf∣ficiently shew. Eutyches adds,Ch. Hist. p. 101. that he cleav'd to the Ephe∣sine Council, and to Cyril who presided, dis∣claiming all additions and alterations, profes∣sing that he had himself Copies in a book, which Cyril himself had sent him, and which is yet in his hands; and that he stands to the defini∣tion of that Council together with that of Nice: One may very well ask here, what all this means? What is this that Eutyches dis∣claims all additions to, and alterations of? What Copies are these that Eutyches had by him? and what definition of that Council does he join with that of Nice? Here is nothing but nonsense and confusion. The case is thus, Eutyches gave the Nicene Creed for his faith, and acknowledg'd the Council of Ephesus, and Cyril; and farther adds, that Cyril and the Council of Ephesus pass'd a de∣cree, that nothing should be added to the Nicene Creed; and that he had a Copy of that decree by him. Eusebius Doryl. gives him the lye, and says, there was no such decree past. The Truth is, such a thing there was, and is still extant in the Acts of that Coun∣cil: but not altogether to that purpose,Conc. Lab. T. 3. p. 689. for which Eutyches does mention it. The design of that decree is only this, that the Nicene Creed shall be the only publick form,
and that no other be taught, to such as are Converted from Jews, or Hereticks, or Infi∣dels; but that this form should stand unal∣ter'd: which is no more than if we should determine that no Article should be added to that which is call'd the Apostles Creed, which is the common form of our solemn confession of faith; and that no Bishop or Minister should devise new forms to be us'd in its stead. This is the design of that De∣cree; and Cyril could mean no otherwise: for if any one should teach new doctrines that might not be absolutely contradictory to the express words of that Creed, yet he should be condemn'd though he still own'd that Confession of Faith: Nestorius his case was of that sort, and therefore the Synod says,Con. Eph. Act. 6. T. 3. p. 671. that since several do shelter themselves under the generals of this Creed, and put their own construction upon the Articles, they were to be confuted out of the Fathers; and so Nestorius was condemn'd notwithstand∣ing he profess'd to receive the Nicene Creed. Our Author goes on,p. 102. sect. and tells his Rea∣der, When Basil Bishop of Seleucia is re∣proach'd by Dioscorus for having prevaricated and despis'd the saith, for the fear of men; He makes this Answer, If I have been call'd to Martyrdome before the Judges I had endu∣red it,Act. 1. but he that is judged of a Father useth just means, (it is the contrary which that Bishop says justis non utitur; does not make use even of all lawful means to vindicate
himself.) After this the Eastern Bishops cry'd, We have all sinned, we all crave par∣don, and this in the next page our Au∣thor observes to the discredit of the Bi∣shops of those times,p. 103, 111. that they were so far from the Martyrs constancy, that they turn'd as the Emperours Countenance and the Times, and worldly interest turn'd, Voting down things and persons in one Council, and crying Omnes peccavimus in the next. How easie they were to follow the Emperours Inclination in this case we have seen already, in the Account these Bishops gave of the violence us'd towards them. When Souldiers and a giddy Rabble of Monks with Swords and Staves, like Bedlam broke loose, run upon men with open mouth, denouncing death and destruction; We ought rather to pity the infirmity of those poor men that were overborn with the Temptation, than to insult over them. It may be they had no mind to be Martyrs in this Controversie, that must be confess'd, as it was manag'd, to be something perplex'd; though neither these nor any other terrours could have pre∣vail'd with them to betray their religion: And it is not unlikely, that had they had the cause of the Martyrs which was plain and indisputable, they might likewise have had their Resolution and Constancy; and Basil Seleuc. does mention, when this levity is objected to him, that he had behav'd him∣self with greater courage upon the account of Religion at C. P. probably against Macedo∣nius,
or the Arians. Mr. B. who is here so severe upon the Bishops for sacrificing their Consciences to their fears, might have re∣member'd, that when the Jews came with Swords and with Staves to take our Saviour, the Disciples forsook him and fled, and Peter de∣ny'd his Master out of fear; and yet they were all receiv'd again upon their return, and entrusted with the planting and propagation of the Gospel. From these warm debates of the Bishops, Mr. B. observes two lamentable,§. 19. undeniable things. The Reader may observe, that when our Author ventures upon Observa∣tions, it is more than an even lay that he is out; I believe his memory betrays his judgement, for his eye is no sooner off of the book to consider, but he loses his story. Now let us see what he infers from what he has recited, as he says, out of Binius and others. 1. That this doleful Contention,p. 103. sect. 19. Anathe∣matizing, and ruining of each other, was a∣bout the sense of ambiguous words, and that they were of one mind in the matter and knew it not. Who were they that were of one mind and knew it not? Eutyches and those that oppos'd him? They were far from being of a mind, for Eutyches deny'd Christ to be truly and pro∣perly man, i. e. to have the proprieties, and the Constituents of Humane Nature; and the Monothelites, Theopaschites, &c. were the Genuine Disciples of Eutyches, and own'd those Consequences of his Doctrines which
he did not think fit to publish. Or who else were those that were of one mind, and knew it not? Dioscorus and Flavian? I am apt to be∣lieve they were much of the same Opinion as to the point in Controversie; and knew it well enough; which was the only reason why Dioscorus, with his party of Bishops and Monks, would not endure to come to any Debate of that matter, for fear it would ap∣pear that they all agreed, and then there would have been no pretence to condemn Flavian, which was the design, if not of the Emperor, yet at leastwise of those that govern'd him; and several Bishops in that infamous Assembly at Ephesus were about to make this Mutual consent in Doctrine appear, if the Monks, the Myrmidons of Dioscorus, would have given them leave to speak? Or lastly, did not the Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon understand one ano∣ther? The contrary is notorious, from their Debates, and their Subscriptions. The Egyptians indeed scrupled subscribing, not upon the account of the matter, but the form; because they had no Metropolitane, (Dioscorus being now depos'd) and it was against their usage to sign any thing in Coun∣cil without their Metropolitane; and as soon as they had one, they subscrib'd willingly. But if they were all of a mind and knew it, How did they condemn Dioscorus? Anatolius confesses in the Council, and no man contradicted him, that Dioscorus was not condemn'd for Heresie but Misdemeanours: Well; But why did
Dioscorus absolve Eutyches, if he had not thought him to be of his opinion? There is good reason for that: for Flavian could not be condemn'd, unless Eytyches were absolv'd; and that those very men that re∣ceiv'd him did not think he was of their opi∣nion, though their expressions were the same, appears manifestly from the manner of their transacting that affair; for when some well-meaning Bishops were so curious as to desire he should explain himself in that point of doctrine for which alone he had been call'd in question, Dioscorus for∣bids any farther search, for fear Heresie would appear, and then Flavian must be acquitted. The Case was just as if a Papist were to purge himself of that Imputa∣tion in an Assembly of Divines, and should offer the Nicene Creed for his Faith: But some honest plain men, not satisfy'd with this Impertinent vindication in those things he was not question'd for, putting cross questions about Transubstantiation or Supremacy, should immediately be check'd, and all should cry, we will have nothing ad∣ded to the Nicene Faith; would not any one conclude that this Reverend Assembly was afraid Popery would appear, and that the man that for private Reasons they would acquit for that time, would discover him∣self to hold such opinions, as he could not be able to approve to that Assembly? This is the naked case; from whence the Rea∣der may judge, how far these were of one
mind: and that men of very different opi∣nions joyn'd to serve a present turn; and united in design, when they knew some of them, that their doctrines could never be reconcil'd. Mr. B. to make out that they were all of one mind,p. 102. sect. 19.1. shews how they came to be mi∣staken. The Egyptians (Eutychians) took two natures and two sons to be of the same sense, which the others did not.] The Egyptians indeed took two natures to imply two sons; for they took nature in the sense Cyril us'd it, for hypostasis, and so it really did im∣ply two persons: but they acknowledg'd distinct properties of the divinity and hu∣manity, which Eutyches did not; and so Eutychians and Egyptians are not altogether the same thing. 2. Though at first the Egyptians seem'd not to understand what Flavian meant by two natures; yet it is evident that there was something of wilful∣ness in that mistake; and at the Council of Chalcedon it was quite taken away, and all subscrib'd to two natures, that yet own'd Cyril's expressions of but one Nature Incar∣nate. It is plain (saith Mr. B.) that while all sides held,p. 103. 11. that Nestorius held, that there were two sons (which he expresly deny'd) that they accus'd Nestorius in ignorance.] It is true indeed that Nestorius own'd but one son: but how? one in dignity and title only, as we have shew'd before; but that unity was of persons, i. e. really distinct accor∣ding
to his notion; taking person properly for an intelligent subsistence, and not for a notional unity of two things, really distinct, in the participation of the same common name or title, which was really the  of Nestorius. And Mr. B. is so confi∣dent of this notion of his, as to conclude with his defiance to all gain-sayers, This is true, whatsoever faction shall say against it.] If it were a Faction that spoke against this truth, it was a mighty strong and ge∣neral Faction, and was never oppos'd by any person before Mr. B. For then all sides granted they disagreed one from the other, and succeeding ages were of the same opi∣nion; and all the factions in the world agreed in this, that Nestorius and those that oppos'd him, spoke absolute contradictions to each other. The next remarkable thing that our Au∣thor cites out of the debate of this Coun∣cil,p. 104. is that about the words of Cyril, which in the next Paragraph he calls Eutychian words, they are these: We must not conceive two natures in Christ but one Incarnate. These words may sound harsh to one that is not acquainted with Cyril's manner of expres∣sing himself: But they are not yet Eutychi∣ans. For Eutyches his opinion is condemn'd by Eustathius, (who cites these words of Cyril,) immediately after. He that says there is but one nature, so as to deny Christs flesh, which is consubstantial with us. So Mr. B. translates indeed, out of the Latin Tran∣slator,
who mistook the sense of this place. The words of Eustathius were these, , he that affirms one nature to the taking away of the consubstantiality of Christs flesh to ours, or to the denying that his flesh is of the same substance with ours, let him be accurs'd.] Which was the doctrine of Eutyches, where∣of he was convicted by several Witnesses in the Council of C. P. and Basil Seleuc.Act. 2. one of the clearest men in all this Council makes a wide difference between saying one nature incarnate, or of the word incarnate, and one na∣ture absolutely, which was the errour of Euty∣ches, as he affirm'd. Though in the Council of C. P. Eutyches makes use of the same expressi∣on (unless we may think those Acts corrupted by the Council of Ephesus in favour of Euty∣ches, as Flavian complains they were, to ren∣der his opinion more plausible) I have shew'd before how ill the notion of Cyril about the Incarnation did agree with that of Eu∣tyches. Mr. B. had great reason to note the Im∣pudence of Binius, in calling this allegati∣on of Eustathius out of Cyril, to be Wicked and Heretical; since he does no more than cite Cyril's words: but this remark is left out of latter Editions. After this, Mr. B. brings in Dioscorus de∣fending himself by the authority of Cyril,p. 104. sect. 22. who maintains one nature incarnate, and then concludes, I am condemn'd with the Fathers; they say the same that I do. I must repeat
therefore once more, what I had said be∣fore, that Dioscorus was not condemn'd for Heresie, but for condemning and murdering Flavian, &c.p. 104. And although our Author seems to be dissatisfy'd that when Dioscorus offers satisfaction to God and you, i. e. Euse∣bius Doryl. his repentance was not accept∣ed; yet I suppose he is not in earnest; for upon other occasions he is inexorable in much lesser matters: and surely if any Mis∣demeanours may depose a Bishop that has nothing to plead but the Orthodoxness of his belief, Dioscorus was justly condemn'd, and yet our Author observes that a verbal quarrel was turn'd to personal revenge, because Eusebius Doryl. reply'd upon Dioscorus, that he must satisfie the law. Mr. B. concludes his citations out of the first Action of this Council, with the sub∣scriptions of the Bishops in the Council of Ephesus whereby they absolv'd Eutyches; which being read in the Council of Chal∣cedon, the Bishops concern'd had no excuse, but to cry, Omnes peccavimus. Our Author it seems takes great delight in repeating as often as he can this recantation of those Bishops, looking upon it, I suppose, as a great undervaluing and reproach to confess an errour. The Spirit of Schism is very nice in point of honour, and reckons no∣thing so great a disgrace as the acknow∣ledgement of a mistake; where it is once engag'd, no conviction shall be able to re∣claim it, though it be in the most indefen∣sible
thing in the World. And though in∣terest and conscience should oblige to re∣turn; yet in honour he must not recede, nor recant what no Rhetorick is able to pal∣liate. Recantation, whether they be in the right or the wrong, appears equally infa∣mous. A late brisk defender of Non-con∣formity out of fondness for a smart saying in Religio Medici has dropp'd an unlucky truth, that he is not so much afraid as asham'd of Conformity. I have charity enough to believe him that he is indeed asham'd of owning that which he has so fiercely oppos'd, not so much by his reasoning, as by his ill manners and scurrility. For my part I do not envy these men this inflexible stiffness of Spirit, but do sincerely pity them, although the witty Author just now mention'd has derided Compassion, no less than Mr. B. has Re∣pentance, and Recantation. However I had rather be found among those Bishops that cry'd Peccavimus after a fault, which yet had all the excuses that can be made from violence and compulsion; than to maintain a Schism upon a point of honour, and for shame of confessing to have been in the wrong. In the third Action, among many things,p. 104. our Abridger of Church-History fastens upon the law of Theodosius for the confirming of the second Ephesine Council, and the Con∣demnation of Nestorius, and of Flavianus, Domnus, &c. One would expect here that our Historian being tir'd with throwing dirt
at the Bishops and their Councils, should divert the outragious Spirit, by giving him one loose at Emperours and Courts. But no such matter, he scorns to change his game, and therefore charges the Bishops with the faults of the Magistrate, and lays all the blame upon them; So far (says he) could fierce and factious Prelates prevail with a pious and peaceable Prince, by the pretences of opposing Heresie and Schism.] And what authority has our Author to ground this observation upon? What if the Eunuchs and Courtiers prevail'd upon the Empe∣rour?Niceph. l. 14. Synod. Eph. Dios. Elib. Synodico. and the Emperour prevail'd upon some Bishops by fair means, upon others by force, to condemn those persons as He∣reticks, and to make way for his Edict against them? what then? (will you say) no extraordinary matter: Only Mr. B. when he comes to make observations mistakes the Fact, and the more bitter and malici∣ous he endeavours to be, the greatest over∣sights he usually commits. It was once the hard fortune of the Christians to father eve∣ry calamity that befel the publick; if the Army had evil success, or the Harvest prov'd scanty; if pestilence, or famine af∣flicted the Heathens, the Christians were the cause of all this Mischief: To the Ly∣ons, to the Stake with them. It fares no better with the Bishops in Mr. B.'s History; whatever is done amiss, it is by their procure∣ment. Whose act soever that be, a Princes or an Eunuchs, or a Monks, or a Womans, yet
still the blame is the Bishops. And this is the cry which some men teach their Dis∣ciples to use. If Trade fail, O these Lord∣ly Bishops spoyl all; if a Brother shut up Shop, and conveys himself away without evening his accounts, the Bishops have un∣done him. The truth is, these men or their neighbours have great reason to pray the Bishops may always continue; for this peevishness and gall which is so predomi∣nant in this party of men, if it have not its ordinary vent, will taint the blood, and turn into Jaundice and other evil distem∣pers; or if it fly out, it will disturb the peace of the family, or of the neighbour∣hood, or it may be of the Kingdome: So necessary it is for this sort of men to have something to rail at, and to exercise that freedom of speech upon, which is part of their Liberty of Conscience. In the next place our Author relates at large out of the fifth Action of the Coun∣cil, (which he mistook for the fourth, be∣ing deceiv'd by the running Title in Binius that is false Printed) what pass'd be∣tween the Council and the Egyptian Bi∣shops; and this he did not think fit to Abridge, because he did not conceive it much for the honour of the persons con∣cern'd. The debate it must be confess'd was something too warm; but that heat was not altogether without reason. The case in short was thus: The Council had con∣demn'd Eutyches for a Heretick, and Diosco∣rus
for receiving him into Communion, and for other Misdemeanours. The Egypti∣an Bishops, considering how far they were engag'd in the same crime, and standing in a near Relation to Dioscorus, began to be afraid that they might possibly be involv'd in the same punishment: and therefore petition'd the Emperour, declaring the up∣rightness of their faith; and condemning all Heresies, but not naming Eutyches. This Petition was read before the Council, which immediately made this exception, Why did they not condemn Eutyches? They answer'd, that they condemn'd him, or any body else, that taught any thing against the faith. This was look'd upon as a de∣lusory answer: and the Council began to press them closer: At last they condemn'd Eutyches. Having been brought thus far, they were call'd upon to subscribe his con∣demnation. This they scrupl'd, which made the Council jealous of them, upon the account of their dependance upon Di∣oscorus, and of their behaviour in the se∣cond Ephesine Council: and therefore they resolv'd to press the point home. The Egyptians pretended they could not subscribe according to the custome of their Church without their Patriarch. Their Tergiver∣sation all along made the Bishops look up∣on this as a Trick; yet at last, when they understood the case, they admitted of this expedient; that they should give se∣curity that they should not leave Chalcedon
before they had a New Metropolitan, and so the debate ended. If this business seem to have been manag'd with too much heat, it is not much to be wondred at, all circum∣stances consider'd, and especially the inju∣ries and provocations that several of the Council had receiv'd before from Diosco∣rus and his party. Men will be men, where∣ever they are plac'd, whether in a Coun∣cil, or in the Church, or even at the Al∣tar. The next business (says Mr. B.) was with the Abbots of the Monks (it would have been great news to have found Abbots of Seculars,p. 106. sect. 25.) who had petition'd the Emperour for a Council to end their broyls, and that without perturbations. These petition'd that Dioscorus might be call'd: He was call'd indeed several times before, but he did not think fit to come; but they would have him restor'd; and the Council opposing them, they began to talk imper∣tinently about Religion. Among these was Barsumas, who had headed a great number of the same sort of Cattel at the Second Ephesine Council, and had assisted in the murdering of Flavian, encouraging his Monks to make sure work, kill, slay, knock him on the head, &c. It is not unlikely but some of these, if not all, (for some in this Council charge him with having headed 1000 Monks) had been with him at Ephe∣sus; and it is not very material whether such giddy sanguinary fellows were satisfy'd with the Council or no. If the countenance
of this sort of men signify'd any thing, there was number enough that own'd the Council, and give the Emperour thanks, that his Christian Authority had cast out Euty∣ches,Act. 5. who had spoke blasphemously against our Saviour, and sow'd Tares in the Church. At last (says Mr. B.) there was a dissention whether Leo's phrase should be put into their Definition of Faith,p. 107. sect. 26. (now drawn up anew.) There is no mention there of Leo's phrases, but only , the Contents of his Letter should be inserted into the Definition or Rule of Faith. This inserting of it into their Definition was, I believe, no other than what we find in the larger De∣claration of Faith drawn up in this Council; where the Epistle of Leo is receiv'd, toge∣ther with those of Cyril to Nestorius, as Ex∣positions of the Faith deliver'd them by the Council of Nice. Mr. B. says that Leo's Epistle was a while run down. There was no such thing, but only some said that their Rule of Faith was full enough without it. It was not because they had any exception against the doctrine of it, but because they would preserve their Rule as simple, and with as lit∣tle addition as they could. But at last it was yielded to, saith Mr. B. when the Illyrican Bi∣shops had first slighted Rome, and cryed, Qui con∣tradicunt (Definitioni) Nestoriani sunt, qui contradicunt, Romam ambulent: He must be very captious that can interpret this for a slight; And it does not appear, that the Le∣gates, who were usually very apprehensive
of slights put upon their See, did take any notice of it. I am not very much con∣cerned whether it were or no, I must con∣fess I do not find in my self any great devo∣tion for that See to vindicate it from any slights, yet I believe this we now speak of was never intended as one. Only our Au∣thor, according to the usual success of his observations, misunderstands the matter. The Judges assisting in this Council propound∣ed it as the Emperours direction,Act. 5. that they should appoint select Bishops out of every Province to draw up their Confession of Faith, or else that every Metropolitan in the name of his Province should make a Declaration of his Faith; otherwise that the Emperour would call a General Council in the West, since they would not deter∣mine this present Controversie: Upon which Cecropius Bishop of Sebaestopolis said, We desire the Definition may be read, and then those that will not subscribe and conform to right∣ful Determinations, let them walk to Rome, i. e. to that General Council which the Emperour threatened to call in the West. And the Illyrican Bishops seconded this Motion: Those that contradict are Nesto∣rians, let them walk to Rome. What man∣ner of slight this was, is not easily guess'd; at the worst, these Bishops did no more slight Rome, than Cecropius did the West, whither he bid Dissenters walk, to be satisfy'd. In the next Paragraph our Author makes Theodoret speak what was never in his§. 26.
thoughts, nor indeed in any honest mans: Theodoret said, I take not my self to say true, but I know I please God.] These are not Theodoret's, but Mr. B.'s words, and very applicable to himself and his Church Histo∣ry: For as mean an opinion as I have of his knowledge in Church History, I doubt not he can read Latin when he had the book before him; and yet when he does that, I am afraid that many times, He takes not him∣self to say true. But perhaps he may be of opinion, that a pious fraud may be accept∣ed; and that by calumniating the Bishops whom he takes for Enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and gratifyers of the Devil, he may please God,Disp. 1. of Ch. Gov. I cannot clear him of that in other places so well as in this: Here our Authors fault was only ignorance of theo∣dorets language, or a mistake of his Latin Translation, which I shall rectifie, for it is pity the good Father should suffer by it. His words are these, : that is in English, In good truth, I do not speak, but as I know is pleasing to God: The Latin Translation puz∣led our Author: Vere (i. e. reverà) non dico, nisi quomodo novi placere Deo. The next words of our Author do as much wrong the sense, though not so much the Reputation of Theodoret: I would first satisfie you of my belief: whereas Theodoret said only , i. e. I would perswade you in the first place that I regard not preferment. The La∣tin thus, Priùs satisfactio vobis quia neque de
civitate cogito, &c. And at last, after a great deal of that debate about Theodoret, our Author concludes, do not these words here Translated out of Binius agree too well with Gregory Nazianzen's character of Bi∣shops and their Councils? How well they may agree with Nazianzen is not so mate∣rial: but they should have agreed better either with the Original, or at least with the Translation out of which our Author Translated them: and yet for all this our Author will understand all these Greek Bi∣shops better than they did one another, or even themselves. In the next place we have an account of Ibas Bishop of Edessa;p. 108. sect. 28. His Epistle to Maris against Cyril was acquitted; at least the Bi∣shop upon the reading of it. It is a sad Narra∣tive of the Calamitous Divisions which these Prelates and their Councils made.] In the first place there is no truth in what our Au∣thor says, that this Epistle was acquitted; for the Council says no such thing. In the next place Ibas was not acquitted upon the reading of this,Act. 10. Con. Chalc. any more than a priso∣ner is acquitted upon the reading of his Impeachment; but he was upon the de∣fence he made, that he communicated with Cyril, and receiv'd his Orthodox in∣terpretation of those twelve Articles which before he thought to be full of Impiety. Baronius An. 432. (deceiv'd by Grego∣ry the Great,Gregor. l. 7. Ep. 53. Act. 6. and the Acts of the Se∣cond Council of Nice) concludes this Epi∣stle
to be forg'd, and falsely father'd upon Ibas; but Anno 448. he recants, and owns it to be genuine. The truth is, Ibas him∣self never pretended to disown it, neither at Tyre nor Berytus, nor Chalcedon, where this was objected against him; but confes∣sed, that before Cyril explain'd himself, he thought him a Heretick, and follow'd the Judgement of the Eastern Bishops. Some say this Epistle was written whilest Ibas was a Nestorian before the Reconciliation; but the words of that letter are express to the contrary: for it mentions the Union and Peace of the Churches by the means of Paulus Emissenus. How then comes he to give such an odious account of Cyril, and the pro∣ceedings of the Council of Ephesus? The Truth is, the Eastern Bishops were not so ingenuous and fair after their Reconciliati∣on with Cyril, as he was towards them; however he goes in Mr. B.'s History under so odious a character. Who ever reads his Letters to Nestorius, and to John of Antioch; and considers with what candour he acts; must needs see that he had very hard measure from those whom he treated with great ingenuity and confidence. The Eastern men are still upon the disparage∣ment of Cyril's proceedings, and the vin∣dication of themselves; with what Truth or Reason, has been shew'd already; and Ibas here pursues the same prejudices, and would insinuate that his party had the Right, and Cyril was their Convert: But if
here was any change of opinion on either side, it was on theirs: for first they joyn'd with Nestorius, and afterwards condemn'd him: Yet this Epistle of Ibas shews that there was a core left still. In the eleventh Action,p. 109. sect. 29. two Bishops (Bassia nus and Stephen) strive for the Bishoprick of Ephesus; And, saith our Author, while the Bishops were for one of them, the Judges pass'd sentence to cast out both. One would imagine here that the Judges pass'd sentence against the consent, or inclination of the Bi∣shops; But there is no such matter; it was not the Judges but the Bishops past this sentence.Act. 11. When the cause of these two Bishops was exa∣min'd, the Judges propounded it to the Bi∣shops to determine of the right that was in Dispute; the Bishops answer'd, that the right was on Bassianus his side, let the Ganons take place, for Bassianus was the first Possessour. The Judges represented to them, that in their opinion neither of them were fit to be con∣tinu'd Bishops, yet referr'd the whole matter to the Council to determine as it should think fit. And this Mr. B. calls passing a sentence, while the Bishops were against it. The Bishops find∣ing that Stephen was not like to carry the cause, for they had no great favour for him, because he had been a very active In∣strument of Dioscorus in the second Coun∣cil of Ephesus, willingly consented the other should be turn'd out too; and were so ex∣tremely satisfy'd with this expedient, that they cry'd it up presently, and own'd it to
be a Divine suggestion: and so the Bishops who (Mr. B. says) were for one, did indeed pass sentence against both Competitors. At last our Author enquires after the suc∣cess of all this:p. 109, 110, 111. sect. 32, &c. What Concard did these late Councils procure to the Churches? From that time most of the Christian World was distracted into Factions, Hereticating and killing one ano∣ther. The Alexandrians murder'd Proterius their Bishop chosen by the Council of Chalce∣don. And to aggravate the cruelty, Mr. B. says they spar'd not to tast his Entrails with their Teeth like Dogs.(Gustare more Ca∣num) The miracle of tasting with Teeth would be much greater than the cru∣elty, and go a great way to justifie the bar∣barity of the Action, if it were true. But what shall we say to these lamentable con∣sequences of these Councils? Was it the misfortune, or the fault of these only, not to be able to heal the differences of the Church? Or else was the defect in the Councils, or the blame to be imputed to those obstinate men that oppos'd the Rule establish'd by them? These were not the first Councils that have miscarried as to their design of Universal Reconciliation. The Council of Jerusalem under the Apo∣stles, that determined the Controversie about Circumcision; did not presently silence all Disputes about that Question: For the Church of Galatia was presently after divi∣ded about it. The Council of Nice, though it quieted the Arian Controversie for a while, yet it was not able to prevent those
lamentable Contentions which the same que∣stion afterwards occasioned. Or if Bishops and their Councils could provide no effectu∣al Remedies for the violent distempers of the Church; let us see what Presbyterian Synods have done. The Synod of Dort con∣demn'd the Arminians, and Subscrib'd cer∣tain Articles, declaring their Doctrine in the points in Controversie; yet the disease was so far from abting, that it grew more violent, and the Civil Magistrate was ob∣lig'd to second the determinations of the Synod by inflicting Imprisonment and Exile upon such as would not subscribe; and yet all this would not do, for the same breach remains unclos'd unto this day. Our Au∣thor in his meek Answer to the Dean of Pauls Sermon says very kind things of the Assembly of Divines: and yet these, with their Catechisms, Directory, and An∣notations, and Overthrowing of the Episco∣pal Church Government, (upon which they charg'd all the Miscarriages, and Divisions of the Church,) were so far from Reconciling the people, that after this they were distra∣cted into innumerable Schisms. Never was there so lamentable a face of things; never such variety of Heresie, and such wan∣tonness and Extravagance in Blaspheming God, under pretence of Religion and Con∣science; and this is the state whither the same manner of Men are driving again. Experience (they say) is the Mistriss of Fools, but they are Fools to be begg'd
whom even experience so dearly purchas'd is not able to make wiser. But to re∣turn to the success of these Councils. Now since Councils, whether of Bishops, or Presbyters, have oftentimes so bad suc∣cess, what is to be done? What other reme∣dies shall we find more effectual? The Pa∣pists have left the use of General Councils of late, He who had among them the chief authority of summoning such Councils, being grown jealous of that way; and the Condition of the Ecclesiastical Roman Em∣pire has been for some ages not unlike that in which Livy represents the Hea∣then Roman Empire in his time, nec vitia nostra ferre possumus nec remedia. At last a great part of the Western Church weary of expecting relief by a Gene∣ral Council from that Tyranny and Cor∣ruption under which it labour'd, was forc'd to use extraordinary means to reform them∣selves; and what they could not do all toge∣ther, they did severally, as they had Opportu∣nity. It was the good fortune of our Church to Reform it self with the countenance and assi∣stance of the Civil Magistrate, and therefore they could do it by degrees, and with greater Moderation, than other Churches, who must contend with the Civil power about it, and who had no other strength than the zealand Resolution of the People. As soon as this Reformation began to take root deep enough here, the Clergy, Assembled in a National Synod, establish'd a rule for Unity
and peace, and to prevent disputes as much as was possible: This rule comprehended the Doctrine, Worship and Discipline of this Church which was at first receiv'd with uni∣versal joy and approbation, None but Pa∣pists opposing it; But some time after some few discontented men under pretence of Zeal against Popery, took the part of the Papists against this rule; and it is observable, that as one faction grew up and gather'd strength, so did the other; that one's right and left hand can hardly grow in evener proportion; so that one would fancy, that either they advanc'd by some secret consent, or were nourish'd from the same Common Stomach; It may be from him that Palavi∣cini calls the Stomach as well as the Head of the Church, the Pope: And what shall be at last done for these Protestants, as they call themselves? Shall every one be left to himself without any rule? The effect of this will be, that in a little time we shall have no Religion at all. Shall this rule be alter'd? We can have no assuance that when it is alter'd, we shall find any Conformity to it then more than now; and this, as it is, has the advantage of any innovation, if for nothing else, yet for its standing, and that it is an Antient Establishment. In short, these that Cry out against this rule, seem to have a great respect for the Prote∣stants of Queen Elizabeths time, and that Reign is counted the Golden age of this Kingdom. Let us consider then what was
their Rule, whether 36 or 39 Articles, and that Rule that made them so happy, may, if preserv'd entire, keep us so still. CHAP. VII. Of the Authors of Heresies, Schisms, and Corruptions, and whether they were all Bishops. I Have hitherto gone along with Mr. B. step by step, conceiving it necessary to make a more particular Vindication of the Church in these times, as well because they were the best that the Christian World has had for true piety and zeal; as also because our Church Professes to receive the four first General Councils; and lastly because all sober moderate Christians have always had, and still retain a great esteem and venerati∣on for many of those persons that are re∣presented so odiously in Mr. B. 's Church-History. I do not pretend to justifie eve∣ry thing that was done by all the Bishops and Councils of those times. There have been wicked men, and wicked Bishops in all times, and the Church under the Apostles, nay their own Order, was not so happy as to have none but good men of it. But I hope I have shewed sufficiently that things were not as Mr. B. represents them; and that most of his particular Accusations are
void of all truth and ingenuity. I must deal with him hereafter more Summarily, and Answer the drift and design of his Book, which is to render Episcopacy Odious under the more invidious name of Diocesan Prelacy; a distinction without ground or foun∣dation, as I have already shew'd, and will be yet more fully made out. The main design or Mr. B.'s History is 1. To charge the Bishops with all Schisms; Heresies, Corruptions, &c. 2. To shew,p. 27. §. 7.4 that Diocesan Prelacy and grandeur is not the Cure, nor ever was; And to this purpose are le∣vel'd all the particulars of his Church-Hi∣story. In this Chapter I will endeavour to take off the first general Charge. That some Bishops have abus'd their Office and Authority, and have been the cause of Heresie, or Schism, cannot be deny'd; but Priests, Deacons and Laymen have been so too; and therefore if the mis∣carriage of any particular man becomes a prejudice to his Office, and the Order must suffer for the personal faults of those that are of it, we must have neither Priests nor Deacons in the Church, since some of them have been Authours of Heresies, &c. But this is not all, our Author tho' he speaks indefinitely, that he will shew the ignorant (and he must be very igno∣rant that knows no better) who have been the cause of Church Corruptions, Heresies, Schisms, Sedition; yet he means they were the Authors of all these evils; as he is pleas'd
to explain himself p. 72. Next we have a strange thing, a Heresie rais'd by one that was no Bishop: and then, as if that were impos∣sible, he shews that was no Heresie; and so the Bishops remain under the whole charge of raising all Heresies. I wish he had left Schism and Sedition out of this charge; for if he can perswade the Ignorant Readers that the Bishops were the cause of all these too; they will never be perswaded that any Presbyterians are to be found in Church-History. For if they had been in the world, they must have had their share with the Bi∣shops in Schism and Sedition. It is a heavy charge, to accuse the Bishops of all the Heresies and Schisms that have af∣flicted the Church, and if it were true, would go near to stagger the Reverence that one might have for the Order. For though Bishops as well as other men may be sub∣ject to Miscarriages, they might be allowd the frailty of Humane nature, from which no dignity can exempt us; But to be found the cause of All the Evils that have befallen the Church, would argue such a malignity in the Constitution, as would shew plainly that God never design'd them for good. But I believe this can be no more prov'd against them by matter of fact, than that Bishops invented Gun-powder, or Hand-Granadoes, or were the Authors of the Scotch Covenant, or the late Rebellion of the Field Conventiclers in Scotland.
Let us then trace the Heresies and Schisms that have torn the Church in pieces in seve∣ral ages of it, to their first original; and examine who were the Authors of them; and if it appear out of Church-History that Bishops rais'd them All, or the greatest part, I will give up the Cause, and believe every thing in Mr. B.'s History; and for penance read over all the fourscore Books that he tells us he has written. Where then shall we begin? If the Bi∣shops should be convicted by the first In∣stance, it would be ominous: However, because it shall appear that I deal imparti∣ally, I will begin with the first. All Eccle∣siastical Writers do agree that Simon Magus was the Author of the first Heresie in Chri∣stian Religion.Simon Ma∣gus. Epiphanius indeed reckons up about a score of Heresies before this,Epiph. Haer. 21. but they are Heathen or Jewish Heresies; and I hope Mr. B. will be so kind as to al∣low that the Bishops had nothing to do with these. That Simon was a Heretick, all are agreed in, though the Scripture say no such thing; and though Epiphanius confess that his Sect cannot truly be reckon'd among Christians.Haer. 21. p. 55. Ed; Pet. This man did teach very strange, and, if there be any such, damnable doctrines. But that he was a Bishop no man ever yet af∣firm'd. Justin Martyr thought he had seen an Inscription at Rome to this Simon, which own'd him a God, though it is possible this might be a mistake: But that ever any Wri∣ting
or Tradition called him a Bishop, I have not heard. It is true indeed, he had a great mind to be a Bishop; that is, to have power of Confirmation; and that every one on whom he should lay his hands should receive the Holy Ghost. And he bid fair for it. For he offer'd Peter Money (says the Text:) And the Repulse perhaps disgusted him so, that he resolv'd to leave the Communion of the Church, since he could not be a Bishop in it; and it has been the disease of several other Here∣ticks, to scorn to be any other Member of the body but the Head. The next that Epiphanius mentions, is Menander;Menander. Epiph. Har. 22. who, as Irenaeus (and out of him the rest) says, was Simon Magus his Disci∣ple, but neither Irenaeus, nor Eusebius, nor Epiphanius, nor Philastrius, nor Theodoret; and in short, no man that has given any account of Hereticks, or any Historian whatsoever that has been yet heard of, has given the least Intimation that he was a Bishop.Saturnius, Basilides. Iren. l. 1. c. 22, 23. Epiph. Her. 23, 24. Euseb. l. 4. c. 7. August. Ep. ad Quodlib. Philast. Haer. 3, 4. Theod: Haer. Fab. l. 1.  Saturninus and Basilides follow next; and neither of them were either Bishops, or of any other Order in the Church, that we can find. The next is the Heresie of the Nicolaitans, which is generally fathered up∣on Nicolas the Deacon: Irenaeus l. 1. c. 27. seems to he positive in this, Nico∣lait autem Magistrum quidem habent Nico∣laum unum ex septem qui primi ad Diaco∣nium ab Apostolis Ordinati sunt, Nicolas one of the seven Deacons was the Master of the
Nicolaitans; or at leastwise they look'd upon him as their Master.Epiph. Haer. 2. Epiphanius follows Ire∣nans, and enlarges the story, shewing how he was a good man at first, and did contri∣bute much to the futherance of the Gospel; but that afterward the Devil enter'd into him:Philastr. Haer. 5. Bibl. Patr. M. de la Rigne. T. 4. p. 10. Philastrius follows the Authority of Epiphanius. But for all this, I believe Nico∣las the Deacon may be acquitted of this im∣putation; for there are Witnesses of very good Antiquity that endeavour to Absolve him. 1. Ignatius Interpolated in two several places, warning those he writes to,Ign. Ep. ad Trall. & Philadelph. Interpol. to have a care of the Nicolaitans, calls  ∣uns, and  i. e. those that falsy call themselves by the name of Nicolas, Syco∣phants and Impostors. The old Latin Inter∣preter explains this farther, and adds, Non  talis fuit Apostolorum Minister Nicolaus. Clemens of Alexandria is more particu∣lar in the Vindication of Nicolas,Clem. Alex. l. 2. Strom. c. 3. whose name these Gnosticks abus'd to countenance their lewdness; For speaking of that Abo∣minable Sect, he has these words, . i. e. They that pretend to be the Followers of Nicolas the Deacon, do per∣vert a saying of his, that the Flesh must be thus'd, that is kept under: But these Men like
Goats abandoning themselves to all uncleanness, understand and him to permit men to dishonour their bodies by indulging themselves in all their lusts. And the same Author in another place gives a more particular vindication of Nico∣las the Deacon,Clem. Alex. l. 3. saying: That Carpocrates gave out this story of him, That he had a comely Wife, and was Jealous of her, for which he was reprehended by the Apostles: But Nico∣las, to acquit himself of this Imputation brought her before them, and offer'd to release her to any other that would marry her: and that this action was suitable to his Maxim which we have mention'd before: Whereupon Cle∣mens adds, that the Nicolaitans, as they call'd themselves, following this Doctrine and Action of the Deacon , Rashly and without Examination, give themselves over to all manner of uncleanness: and then goes on to vindicate Nicolas, ad∣ding, That he had understood by Tradition that he always preserv'd his faith to his Wife inviotable; that his children that he had by this Wife, were remarkable for their Chastity, and all dy'd unmarry'd: And concludes at last, That this was to be look'd upon as an Instance of Mortification: and the Words that those Hereticks insisted upon so much, meant no∣thing else.Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 29. Eusebius, who cites this passage at large, seems to be of the same opinion; and therefore says only that these Hereticks gave out Nicolas for the Author of their Doctrine () they only cracked and boa∣sted that it was so.l. de Hae∣res. S. Austin speaks with the
same caution with Eusebius, and says only, ut perhibetur, permisisse fertur; though he says, eâ qui vellet uteretur, it cannot be under∣stood of common prostitution, for Carpo∣crates himself says , that she might be Married to any body that would have her. Theodoret follows Clemens, allows this rela∣tion about Nicolas to be true,Theodor. l. 3. Haeret. Fabl. and excuses him, by saying that He did not intend seri∣ously to be as good as his word, but only to haffle those that accus'd him of Jealousie; and at last concludes, From hence they (the Nicolai∣tans) are manifestly convicted to be Impostors, and falsly to call themselves by that name. Pe∣tavius does not know what to determine in this case,Is Epiple. since the Fathers are divided about is; But I believe one needs not be so scru∣pulous: The whole matter depends between the Authorities of Irenaus and Clemens: Clemens is very particular, and had examin'd the business it seems as far as he could; the other speaks generally, and perhaps look'd no further than the name, nor could he so easily have an account of them, as Clemens could, who liv'd where the sect was most numerous: Carpocrates who was the Father of it was an Alexandrian. Besides, the Words of Irenaus, if they are examin'd, do not positively affirm Nicolas to have been the Father of the Nicolaitans: Magistrum habent Nicolaum are the words, which may signifie no more than that they hold him to be so: If the Greek Copy were extant, it might have given more light; perhaps he
said no more than Eusebius does, and the Word might be , they boast that he is their Master. I am to beg pardon for this Digression; If it can relieve the Memo∣ry of a person whom the Scripture inti∣mates to be a Man of Honest Report,Act. 6.3. full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom; I am content to bear the blame of the Impertinence. But however it were, it is some comfort, and enough to my purpose, that he was no Bishop. The Gnosticks had no Bishop either for their founder or promoter that is yet known:Clem. Alex. l. 3. Carpocrates was no Diocefan Pre∣late, but his Sect pretended high, indeed to something more than a Bishop, to an Apostle. They quoted Matthias for such another sentence as the Nicolaitans did Ni∣colas the Deacon, and would have perswa∣ded the World that they were his Disci∣ples. Cerinthus,Clem. Alex. l. 6. Ebion, Valentinus, Secundus, Epiphanes, Isidorus, Ptolemaus, Marcus, were they Bishops? What Churches did Colarba∣sus, or Heracleon, or Cerdo govern? Mar∣cion indeed was a Bishops son, but it does not appear that he was of the Clergy; he was Excommunicated by his own Father for a Rape, and when he could not obtain Absolution turn'd Heretick. It were end∣less to reckon up all the Hereticks that gave names to Sects; they were most of them bred up the Scholars of other Hereticks, and differing in some things from their Ma∣sters,
set up for themselves, and call'd their followers by their own names. The 39th Christian Sect in Epiphanius is that of the Cathari or Puritans, and these are the first that we find started by any of the Clergy. Novatus an African Priest began this Sect; I have given his History before; and shewn how he seduced Novatianus a Roman Priest,Epiph. Aug. Philastr. &c. or at leastwise joyn'd with him against his Bishop. Theodotus, whom St. Austin calls Theodotion, was a learned man indeed, and Orthodox at first: and so was Bardesanes Syrus; but neither of them was a Bishop. Montanus became the Author of a Heresie because he could not obtain the highest place in the Church: and turn'd down-right Fanatick, saying he was the Holy Ghost. In short, the first Heretick Bishop that we find is Paulus Samosatenus who succeeded Demetri∣anus in the Bishoptick of Antioch in the year 262;Euseb. in Chron. & who fell into Heresie in the year 267. His is the 65th Sect in Epiphanius, or the 45th Christian Heresie. This Paulus was a very ill man, and taught dangerous opini∣ons, that Christ was not God:Euseb. l. 7. c. 30. But though he was really a Heretick, yet he was not the Author of this Heresie. He is said by Eusebius (and the rest out of him) to have learn'd this from Artemas, (as he calls him) or Artemon;Epiph. &c. as also from Theodotus who began to teach this doctrine, and to gather him a Sect under Victor Bishop of Rome, by whom he was excommunicated.
But Paulus Samosatenus is said to have reviv'd this Heresie: It is true indeed; but Eusebius in the place before cited makes it appear,l. 7. c. 30. that the Sect of Artemas, and Theodotus was then in being; For the Coun∣cil of Antioch in their Synodical Epistle sent to several Bishops where they desire them to receive Domnus, whom they had made Bi∣shop in the place of Paulus Samosatenus, when he should send his Circular Epistles, and then speaking of Paulus deridingly, say, Let him (if he thinks fit) write to Artemas, and let those that follow Artemas communicate with him if they please. But the best of it is, that if God permitted a Bishop of so eminent a Church as that of Antioch to fall into He∣resie, he on the other hand rais'd up Godly and Orthodox Bishops to oppose him, and to vindicate, not only the Christian Religi∣on, but the Order of Episcopacy also which he had dishonour'd. For the Neighbour Bishops assembled in the Second Council of Antioch Condemn'd and Depos'd him: Dio∣nysius of Alexandria, being now very old and unfit for Travel, could not be there, but writ to him, says Theodoret:Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 1. Eus. l. 7. c. 30. Eusebius cites the Epistle of this Synod that expresly denys that; saying, that Dionysius of Ale∣xandria had writ to the Council, but had not vouchsafed so much as to salute Paulus. From which passage Valesius concludes that the Letter of Dionysius to that Heretick Bishop in the Bibliotheca Patrum is forg'd,Vales. An∣not. in Eus. l. 7. c. 30. notwith∣standing Baronius receives it for genuine.
Now because Mr. B. promises to shew, not only Who have been the cause of Heresies, &c. but also How; It will not be impertinent to shew briefly how this Bishop also fell into Heresie. It was in short by the way of Com∣prehension, for Zenobia Queen of Palmyrene after her Husbands death, being very con∣siderable in the East, and being Proselyted to the Jewish Religion, (for which reason likely Lnginus her Favourite speaks so fa∣vourably of Moses) this Paul Bishop of Antioch thought that by reducing Christ to be a meer man he might reconcile both Re∣ligious, and take away the Partition-wall that divided the Jews and Christians, no∣thing being so great an offence to the Jews as that Christ was own'd by his Disciples to be God: And thus compliance and vain projects of Comprehension, made this man a Heretick. But Philastrius is not to be re∣garded,Phil. Haer. 17. Ap.Bib∣lieth. Patr. who charges this Bishop with being turn'd Jew, and teaching Circumcision, and bringing over Zenobia to Judaism. Before this time, there is another Bi∣shop reckon'd by some Collectors of Here∣sies, as the Author of one;Nepos. Nepos an Egypti∣an Bishop, who taught out of the Revelation of St. John, as he pretended,Euseb. Hist. l. 7. Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 3. that the Saints should live a Thousand years of pleasure here on Earth. If this be a Heresie, it was much older than this Nepos:Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 307. Ed. Par. For it was so ancient and so general an opinion, that Justin Martyr did not believe they were perfectly Christians
that did not believe it. For all that were Orthodox did look for the Restauration of Jerusalem, and that Christ should reign there gloriously with his Saints a thousand years; which he endeavours to prove out of the Revelations, and the Book of the Prophet Isaiah.Iren. l. 5. c. 33, 34, 35. Ireneus endeavours to prove the same thing at large, and derives the Do∣ctrine from Papias, and by him from St. John, the Beloved Apostle. So that if Nepos prove Heretick for this, he is like to find very good company, but Author of it he cannot be: It is some favour to him that Epiphanius and Philastrius pass him by, for I do not remember that either of them men∣tion him: However you will say, that though he was not the first that taught this Doctrine, yet he was the first that divided the Church about it: And that is a heavy fault that Mr. B. charges upon the Bishops, that they divide the Church about unneces∣sary, nice Speculations: But this Nepos is as far, if not farther from the Imputation of Schism, than that of Heresie; For Dio∣nyfius charges him not with Schism, but only with writing a book for the Millenary opinion, which others afterwards laid a great stress upon, and by that means seve∣ral Churches were divided and some entire∣ly carried away, and all this after Nepos his death: They might have done the like with Justin Martyr, or Irenaeus if they had pleas'd, and made the same stir, and yet those Fathers not at all concern'd in the
Schism; this is manifestly the present case; there is no account of any Schism made about this point till after this Nepos his death; And Dionysius who writes against him, thinks himself oblig'd to make his Apology before hand; saying, that he ho∣nour'd the man for many great good quali∣ties, and was sorry that he was forc'd to write against his Brother in the defence of Truth: And as to the matter of fact, it was thus, He found in the Region of Arsi∣noe several Churches distracted about this matter; so that they began to make Schisms in several places: The Bishops surely must be concern'd, where there is any Schism or Heresie, they must have a hand in it: But here by good fortune no such thing ap∣pears;Euseb. l. 7 here is mention only of Presbyters and Teachers, whom this Bishop assembled; Presbyters of the Villages: and these after some Dispute he at last perswaded to Peace. But what became of the Bishop of that Re∣gion will you say? It may be he was dead, and that this Nepos was the man; unless one may imagine the Diocess of Alexandria to extend so far; for the Country adjoyning to the Lake Mareotes, and call'd by that name, was part of the Alexandrian Dio∣cess, as we have shew'd before out of Atha∣nasius, and the Arsinoeites was the next Re∣gion to that: But however this be, our point is sufficiently clear'd, that this Nepos was neither Heretick, nor Schismatick: Nor does it appear that any Bishop was con∣cern'd
in that difference, save only Dionysius of Alexandria, who by his Prudence and Authority did compose it. To conclude, For the first three hundred years after Christ there is but one Bishop found, who was the Author, or rather the Reviver of a Here∣sie; and yet Mr. B. looks upon it as a strange thing, that there should be a Heresie rais'd by one that was No Bishop. The following Ages were not so happy; but as Christians generally degenerated, so did the Clergy too; but yet not so much as our Author would make it appear. The beginning of the fourth Century was very unhappy to the Church; not only by rea∣son of a most violent Persecution rais'd against it from without, but also of Here∣sies and Schisms from within. Meletius an Egyptian Bishop,Meletius. and the first of that Order that began a Schism, forsook the Commu∣nion of the Church, because they that fell from the Faith under Persecution were re∣ceiv'd into it,Epiph. as Epiphanius tells his story; though others of better Authority give other Reasons, that this Bishop had himself deny'd the Faith; and being condemn'd by a Synod of Bishops, he set up a Schism: But of this we have said enough else∣where.Athan. Ap. 2. About the same time started up the Schism of the Donatists;Donatus. named so from one of their Bishops,Aug. de Haees. that lived a good while after the rise of that Faction: this was carried on by evil men that were Bi∣shops
and others: but Optatus derives it from two Presbyters, Botrus and Geleusius, and one Lucilla, a woman of great interest, and very whimsical. But the Sect that most afflicted this Age, and divided, almost subdu'd, all the World, was that of Arius.Arius. But Arius by good providence was no Bishop, but a Priest of A∣lexandria: who taught that Christ was not of the same substance with the Father, and that he was not Eternal. This Doctrine first divided the Church of Alexandria, and then all the World, some few Bishops taking his part, but the generality being against him. The Original and Occasion of this Heresie is variously related, though all agree in the Author:Haer. 68, 69. Epiphanius makes Meletius the Schismatick to be the first discoverer: though afterwards his Sect, if not he him∣self, joyn'd with these Hereticks; just as our Dissenters joyn Interests with the Pa∣pists to ruine the Church of England. I would not be so bold to say it, if Mr. Bax∣ter, who knows it much better than I, had not observ'd this before: if it be otherwise, they must be satisfy'd by him, who I sup∣pose may be able to give a good account of that matter. When the Bishop of Alexan∣dria had been inform'd that one of his Presbyters, and the Divinity Reader of that City (for so Arius was) taught dangerous doctrines, denying, in effect, the Lord that bought us, he calls him to answer this charge in the presence of his Fellow-Presbyters;
and Arius owning his Doctrine was con∣demn'd. This I should not give so great credit to, upon the word of Epiphanius (who is unaccountably mistaken in several things relating to this Heresie) unless the Letter of Constantine did confirm it;Euseb. de vit. Con∣stant. l. 2. who blames Alexander for proposing this questi∣on, which it seems by this story he could not avoid, since this Schismatick (not per∣haps out of any good will to the faith, but as is usual with the separating Spirit, to reproach the Church with countenancing Heresie,) had given him notice of this Into∣lerable Doctrine, and the Industry and Application us'd by Arius to promote it: The occasion was the Ambition of the He∣retick,Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 4. c. 1. who could not endure to see Ale∣xander in the Bishops Chair, for which he had been his Competitor, after the death of Achillas.Sand. Hist. Eriml. l. 2. p. 159, 160. Sandius impudently affirms (with∣out any proof) that it was after Achillas had been put out by Alexander: I cannot but warn the Reader against the intolerable dealing of that Arian Historian, For he has so little shame as to cite Sozomen, and the Tripartite History, to prove that Achil∣las was turn'd out by his successour, where∣as there is not one word of it there, but on the contrary, the whole story is much to the disadvantage of the Arian cause: For there Arius is said to envy the promo∣tion of Alexander,Sozom. l. 1. c. 15. Hist. Tri∣part. l. 1. c. 12. and to be so impatient as not to live under the tedious expectation of the Bishops death, in probable hopes
of succeeding him, but to seek out any oc∣casion of quarrel, and then to set himself up. The passage is so very plain that it is hardly possible to mistake it, and to apply that to Alexander, which is manifestly said of Arius. The same Historian tells us,Sandius. Ibid. that Achillas was of the same opinion with Ari∣us, and refers to the same place, but with∣out the least shadow of Truth. I suppose he took Achillas the Priest, that revolted with Arius, to be the same with the Bishop, who he says was depos'd, but who was in∣deed dead before that time. And Epipha∣nius his placing Achillas after Alexander,Epiph. Haer. 68. is a strange unaccountable mistake, as divers other things are in his relations of this mat∣ter: But let it be as Epiphanius says, it can give no countenance to Sandius his opini∣on; For this Achillas that Sandius speaks of had revolted with Arius, but he whom Epiphanius mentions was Orthodox, and set up by that party against the Arians. In the next place, it is not likely that the Achil∣las that joyn'd with Arius was in Alexan∣dria when Alexander dy'd,Socr. l. 1. c. 6, 8. Soz. l. 1. c. 21. Theod. l. 1. for the Council of Nice condemn'd Arius and his adherents, and the Emperour having banish'd him (as some say) or only forbid him to return to Alexandria (as others) the Presbyters of Alexandria that joyn'd with him were pro∣bably remov'd for quietness sake, at least∣wise, if they did not conform. Lastly, Though Achillas might recant, and remain in Alexandria, yet considering
the Arian party was now condemn'd by all the world, it is not likely that one of the first promoters of it should be chosen Bishop of so eminent a Church; and much less probable, that being chosen he should re∣sign to Athanasius, a young man, and but a Deacon; and what is more than all, that one devoted to the cause of Alexander, and one of the Champions of it in the Council of Nice: What Sandius says after this, out of Philostor∣gius: of Arius his modesty in preferring Ale∣xander to the Bishoprick of Alexandria,Philost. l. 1. t. 3. is altogether improbable; not one of all those Historians that give an account of this mat∣ter saying any such thing,Theod. l. 1. Hist. Ed. id. Haeret. Fab. l. 7. Vid. Gotofr. Dissert. but several of them the quite contrary. But that Arian Historian mistook his Index, and put l. 3. for the first, and the third paragraph, which would not have been an easie mistake if he had look'd into the book that he cited. But to return where we left. Arius who was the cause of all the mis∣chiefs that follow'd that Controversie, was no Bishop; and his first followers were not Bishops neither:Socr. l. 1. c. 6. Sozom. l. 1. c. 21. Some Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria first took his part, and two Bishops that call'd themselves so, being of Meletius his setting up, and who were indeed no Bishops, as being ordain'd Schismatically. Arius when he left Alexan∣dria made his Application to several Bi∣shops, and was rejected by most: Eusebius of Nicomedia at last undertook his Prote∣ction, and prevail'd with some few more
to joyn with him; and the greatest part (as appears by the Letters sent to Alexan∣der) only out of Moderation, and to endea∣vour to compose the difference between the Heretical Presbyters and their Bishop. But this way encreasing the difference in∣stead of healing it, a General Council was agreed upon; where there were but seven∣teen Bishops that so much as favour'd the cause of Arius, and but five that refus'd to subscribe, who were afterwards banish'd. Had Constantine preserv'd the Rule which that Council had establish'd, and not tam∣per'd with it in compliance with the Ari∣ans, and by an Indulgence, and compre∣hension, endeavour'd to bring those under a Rule that were enemies to it, and to joyn such doctrines as were Incompetible, there might have been an end of the Arian Here∣sie; but the Church is never distracted more by any thing than projects of Modera∣tion. And because the calamities that enfu'd upon the Arian Controversie are to be da∣ted from Constantine's recalling of Arius: It is some Justification of the Bishops that their authority and credit with the Empe∣rour did not effect it.Socr. l. 1. c. 25. But it was an Arian Priest, that insinuated himself into the fa∣vour of Constantia, and by her Intercession prevail'd with the Emperour to admit of Arius his delusory Recantation. Constantius succeeding his Father in the East, and taking part with the Arians, it
is no wonder if in a little while they grew uppermost, not so much by the compli∣ance of the Bishops with the Inclinations of the Prince, which Mr. B.'s charity does so often suggest; as by the violence that was us'd, by deposing and banishing, and kil∣ling all those that durst be active in the de∣fence of the Faith: And what was worse than all this, by condemning men for other things than their Faith, and so taking away from them the reputation of Martyrdom,Socr. l. 1. c. 28, 29. Sozom. l. 2. c. 25. by accusing good Bishops of the most hei∣nous crimes, and suborning Villains and Strumpets to swear the charge; by impo∣sing upon the simpler sort by plausible pre∣tences. And so at last, (as Vincentius Liri∣nensis expresses it) by force and fraud the whole World in a manner was turn'd Arian; partim vi partim fraude factus est A∣rianus: But of this I have said enough already, to shew with what little reason or humanity the Bishops are charg'd with com∣pliance in the case of the Arians. The Sects that sprung out of Arianism were most of them begun by those that were no Bishops.Sozom. l. 3.18. id. l. 5.12. Socr. l. 2.29. Philost. l. 3. Aetius who thought not Arius to blaspheme enough, and added to his Heresie further disparagements and di∣minutions of the son of God, was first a Physician, and then began to teach Heresie; afterwards was made Deacon by Leontius Bishop of Antioch, an Arian, which is the highest Degree we find him arrive to in the Church; he was at last excommunicated
by the Arians themselves as being too mad for their company. Eunomius was his Scholar,Socr. l. 4. c. 7. and his Clerk; bred a Heretick, and by that merit, Here∣ticks prevailing, he came to be Bishop. It were well indeed if all Bishops had the priviledge the Pope pretends to, to be In∣fallible as soon as he is set in his Chair. It were well if that Order were a preservative against Heresie: But since it is in vain to hope that, it is no wonder to see a Bishop a He∣retick, that was so when he was a Lay-man, and brought the same disease along with him into the Office. Macedonius his case is the very same; He was a Heretick long before he was Bishop; and was for that reason chose by the Ari∣ans after the death of Eusebius,Vid. Athan. Apol. 2. id. Ep. ad Sol. Socr. l. 2.6. Sozom. l. 3. c. 3. and not af∣ter the death of Alexander, as Socrates and Sozomen seem to say. For at the Synod of Tyre, this Macedonius, who at the death of Alexander was but a Deacon, is said by Athanasius to have been a Presbyter belong∣ing to Paulus Bishop of C. P. and to have accused his Bishop; which Sozomen like∣wise confirms.Vid. Vales. Observ. Ec∣cles. ad Socr. & Soz. He is said to have been re∣commended together with Paulus, by Ale∣xander on his death-bed, to the people of Constantinople for their Bishop; but the cha∣racter is not great: Socrates says only for a , an outward shew of gravi∣ty, which Sandius takes for true piety, and so amends the character: But Sozomen says that Alexander recommended him only for
a man of business, and acquainted with the ways of the world. This man it is likely turn'd Arian when he was Priest under Eusebius, who remov'd from Nicomedia to Constantinople, and by that means so ingratiated himself to the par∣ty,Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 3. that after the death of that Arian Bi∣shop, that party set him up against Paul who was turn'd out by Eusebius.Epiph. Haer. 77. Another improver of Arianism, and lea∣der of a new Sect was Aerius; but he was No Bishop, and for that reason turn'd He∣retick. For Eustathius and he having been fellow Students, and Eustathius having the better fortune to be preferr'd to a Bishop∣rick: This good man, although oblig'd by all the promotion his friend could give him, yet could not be contented; and be∣gan to disparage that Order and Authori∣ty of Bishops, since he had not the for∣tune to arrive at it. This was the Cartwright of those times; and the Father of the Presby∣terian parity: a Notion brought into the world by the ambitious discontents of one, who when he could not be Bishop himself, yet scorn'd to seem inferiour to any Bishop. There is another Division of the Arians, mention'd by Theodoret, which were call'd Psatyriani, or Tapsuriani; who had no Bishop for their Leader, but one that pre∣par'd a certain food well relish'd in those times; the Criticks are not agreed whether it were Custard or Pudding-Pyes. What this leading man was for a Scholar I cannot
learn; though I believe not inferiour to the Weavers and Plowmen of Kedderminster, whom Mr. B. preferrs before the Ancient Fathers: all that can be said for this man is, that he had too much learning to follow his calling, and nothing would serve his turn but mending of Religion. But if I should joyn with him Theodotus the Tanner, (who liv'd indeed a good while before) Mr. B.'s Weavers and Plow-men might be hard put to it, and reconcil'd to their Trades again. The Audians were a Sect sprung up much about the same time with the Arians,Epiph. Haer. 70. head∣ed by one Audius an Anthropomorphite, but no Bishop, till after he had made this divi∣sion; and then (as the design of all Here∣ticks generally is,) he was made Bishop of his Party. Epiphanius gives him and his followers a very fair Character: which St. Austin seems to suspect,Ep. ad Quodvult. de Haeres. and observes partiality and favour in the Relation. But Theodoret, who had most reason to know them, represents this man as a heady fellow, of extravagant conceits,Theod. Haer. Fab. l. 4. and his followers as great Hypocrites: These it is probable were the Anthropomorphites of Egypt, that were so violent against the followers of Ori∣gen, in Epiphanius his time, who he says, communicated with the Catholick Church; and for that reason it may be, he speaks so favourably of them. The Errours of Origen, as they were per∣tinaciously maintain'd by the Monks of Ni∣tria, became a Heresie; but the Bishops had
no hand but in condemuing those gross mi∣stakes; and when the Monks began to mu∣tiny, and raise tumults about them, threa∣ten to kill the Bishop, and when they grew insupportably troublesome; then they were banish'd for quietness and peace sake: Of these we have spoken more particularly elsewhere. It was not long before this, that the Priscillianists sprang up in the West, a Sect made up of a mixture of Manichees and Gnosticks. It was a lewd infamous Heresie: But the Author of it was no Bishop. For whether we trace the original of it to Egypt, and to that Marcus who first brought it to the West;Sever. l. 2. in sin. It does not appear that he was so much as a Clergy-man. Priscillianus, his Scholar, who gave name to the Sect, was a Lay-man when he was condemn'd in the Council of Saragossa. There are two Bi∣shops indeed that are condemn'd by the same Council: but such as were drawn in by the fair pretences of Priscillianus, and accesso∣ries only to his crime, but he that gave them the name is call'd by the same Author Princeps Malorum: whom after he was con∣demn'd, those of his party, to give greater credit to their cause, made Bishop of Abila: But Mr. B. on this occasion does not find fault with the Bishops as Authors or promo∣ters of this Heresie, but for calling the civil Sword to their assistance, and procuring great severities to be us'd towards the Au∣thors of it.
The Pelagian Heresie had no Bishop either for its Author or Promoter;Aug. Haer. 88. Pelagius who gave it its name and being, was a Monk; and Julianus and Coelestius his Disciples were never Bishops: or if this Heresie be deriv'd from Ruffinus, Jovinian, Evagrius, Ponti∣cus,Hieron. in Jerem. l. 4. praef. or lastly from Origen, as St. Jerome de∣rives its Pedigree; It is evident that Bi∣shops had no hand in it; none of these be∣ing Bishops, but most, if not all of them Presbyters. Nestorius who gave the name to a Here∣sie, was not the first Author of it, as I have shew'd before, but fell into it by engaging himself in the defence of Anastasius his Presbyter, who first preach'd down ; but as to Heresie Mr. B. does acquit him. Eutyches was a Monk, and impos'd upon the Council of Ephesus, as we have shew'd before; or they conniv'd at his errours, and were not willing to examine his doctrine to the bottom, for reasons before mention'd. This Heresie was preserv'd chiefly among the Eastern Monks, who made such fearful disturbances about it after the Council of Chalcedon. Petrus Fullo, who invaded the Bishoprick of Antioch, was indeed a great promoter of Eutychianism, and a very wicked trouble∣some man; but the comfort is, he was a Heretick long before: For being a Priest of the Church of Chalcedon,Theod. Lect. Coll. l. 1. he was put out for his crimes, or as others say more expresly,
for Heresie; which Liberatus sufficiently dis∣covers,Liberat. in Breviar. c. 18. when he tells us, that this person seiz'd upon the Bishoprick of Antioch, per vilissimn papulum & Haereticum.Alex. Ser. de S. Barn. His Here∣sie was the thing that recommended him to the Rabble that made him a Bishop. The Eatychians in the East were reviv'd or new modell'd by one Jacobus Zanzalus, no Bishop, but an obscure mean man, ,Niceph. l. 18. c. 52. In Haer. 3. Maxim. cum Disput. Pirrho & Theod. An. 633. says Nicephorus, upon which account he was call'd Zanzalus, that is, a pitiful, mean fellow. Matthew Paris gives a more particular account of him, which is lyable to several exceptions, which it is not necessary to urge in this place. The Heresie of the Monothelites, though an unavoidable consequence of Entyches his Doctrine, yet it is generally father'd upon Cyrus Bishop of Alexandria: Sergius of C. P. Cyrius Bishop of Phasis, and Theodorus Pha∣ranatarius. Baronius lays it mostly upon the first, and shews how he came to fall into this mistake; he had a charitable design of uni∣ting the Divisions of the Church, by devi∣sing some project that should comprehend all parties: he thought one Will, and one Operation would not be so harsh, as one Na∣ture, which had been for so long time the subject of Contention. But with the same success that usually all such designs have: when the Rule is changed, the Church is im∣mediately all to pieces, and those that were united under that Rule divide into parties and factions; which will hardly ever unite again.
Now because in the following ages of the Church the Devil had another game to play, and started up but few Heresies until these last ages; let us see what sort of men the Authors of them have been. The Swenkfeldians, Anabaptists, Menonists, The Family of Love, Quakers, Ranters, and the rest of the Modern Sects; did these derive themselves from any Bishops? Servetus (whom the Ministers of Swisserland prosecu∣ted as far or further than Idacius ever did the Priscillianists) was he a Bishop? Socinus was he a Prelate? or the Racovian Divines, were they a Council of Bishops? how then comes it to be so great a wonder as our Author professès it to be, that a Heresie should be rais'd by one that was No Bishop? It is much a greater wonder that any one that makes Conscience of what he says, should against all truth of History, and against his own knowledge, charge the Bishops with all the Heresies in the World; that a per∣son that seems to be so sensible of approach∣ing judgement, as frequently to put himself in mind of it in his Writings, and even force the belief of good charitable men by such professions of Sincerity; should yet advance so malicious and so groundless an Accusati∣on. There is no dallying with the all-seeing God; and if every idle word will be ac∣counted for, what plea shall be made for whole books full of Calumny and Detracti∣on? What for blasting the memory of so ma∣ny Holy men for ought he knows that are
dead? What for aspersing so many faithful Servants of God, for ought he knows, that are living? What for defaming the whole Order from which he receiv'd his Ministry? and to which he owes Honour and Subjecti∣on, as he will surely find in that day when he comes to give account of all the hard things that he has written against it. But if you would have the True Causes of Schism, Heresie, &c. You must not look upon this or that Order of Men, but go up to the first Original of such things. These Mischiefs, as all other disturbances of the World, proceed from our Lusts which war in our Members: and do not flow from any particular Institution or Order, but from the General Corruption of Humane Nature; by which means all conditions, and degrees of men, have had the misfor∣tune to have some that have been wicked and infamous. The Apostles had a Judas, the Bishops a Paulus Samosatenus, the Pres∣byters a Novatus and an Arius, the Deacons an Actius: and in short there is no Office in the World, Sacred or Civil, but has been in the possession of infamous persons, who have been a reproach and scandal to it. Now although the passions of men move them to be troublesome in any State or Cir∣cumstances, yet there are some that qualifie them more for Mischief, and others that dispose them for it: There may be many wicked men that might be willing enough to make a disturbance, but they may want
parts and Abilities for the work. Any man may pretend to a wicked opinion, but every one cannot recommend it to others; and there are few that care for being He∣reticks by themselves; But where Malice and an evil temper has the advantage of Natural and acquir'd endowments, like Sulphur and Salt peter, it does not only presently take fire, but has likewise an ex∣traordinary force and capacity to destroy. It is observ'd by some of the Fathers that most of the Haeresiarchae, the Authours of Heresies or Sects,Aug. Com. in Psalm. were men of great wit and accutness in Reasoning, Non Enim putetis Fratres, potuisse fieri Haereses per parvas quas∣dam animas, non fecerunt Haereses nisi Magni Homines: Do not think that Heresies were first rais'd by ordinary, mean persons; they were great men that set them up: and within the same page he mentions se∣veral of them considerable men. The same Observation St. Hierom makes.Hieron. Com. in Os c. 9. Nullus enim potest Haeresim struere nisi qui Ar∣dentis Ingenii est, & habet dona natura qua à Deo Artifice sunt Creata. Talis Valenti∣nus, talis Marcion, quos Doctissimos legimus: Talis Bardesanes, cujus etiam Philosophi admi∣rantur Ingenium: None but men of Great Parts are able to set up a Heresie: Valen∣tinus and Marcion we find were very lear∣ned men, and Bardesanes was admired even by Philosophers. Vincentius Lirinensis am∣plifies upon this subject with great art and passion; he tells the great endowments of
such as rais'd Heresie, and reckons up par∣ticularly all the advantages they had to re∣commend themselves and their Doctrine; and at last concludes they were a mighty Temptation, enough almost to stagger the most confirm'd Orthodox Believe:Vincent. Lir. adv. Haeres. allu∣ding I suppose to that of the Apostle that there must be Heresies, that (by that tryal or Temptation) they who are approved might be made manifest. It was a Question that puzzl'd the most understanding Heathen I think that ever was,Cicer. how God should ever be∣stow Reason and wit upon such men as he foresaw would make use of the gifts against the Donor: This Christian Religion ren∣ders more easie, when it shews us the end of this permission, the manifestation of those that are approv'd. Now though these Qualifications of Ma∣lice and Wit where they are met in the same person, do dispose and fit him for Distur∣bances, yet he seldom breaks out into any extremity before some outward occasion of Discontent does inflame him. There is in∣deed a Temper that no Fortune, no Ho∣nours, can content, and render easy to it self, or restrain from disturbing the world; but this extravagancy is not Common; and the Generality of men, though not very quiet or peaceable in their Dispositions, yet when they have gain'd their point; and are possess'd of wealth, and honour, they are commonly willing to secure the enjoyment of those Possessions, by letting things run in the ordi∣nary
course: But if one of these men hap∣pens to labour under repulse and disap∣pointments, his patience is soon at an end. Upon this account many of the Inferiour Clergy that have stood in Competition for a Bishoprick and lost it, have broken off all Communion with their Bishops whose Com∣petitors they were; so Novatianus, and seve∣ral others became Hereticks: sometimes growing impatient with waiting for the Death of their Bishop, they have revolted against him, and drawn the People after them, Thus Arius and Macedonius became the heads of Sects; sometimes despair of Promotion after long waiting, and envy against those they saw preferr'd before them hath carri'd away unsteaddy men, to set up for singularity, and to make new Sects. Thus Aetius Separated from the Arians, and taught new Blasphemies of his own. Sometimes vain men have been carri'd away with the applause and favour of the people (that flock'd after them and through'd their Churches) to set up them∣selves against their Bishop upon presumpti∣on of greater interest in the people. This St. Austin makes a principal cause of Heresies. Sic enim fiunt Haereses & schismata,Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. prop. sin. cum dicit plebs carnlis, quae in charitate dei fundate non est, Ibo post Amatores meos, cum quibus utique sive per fidei Corruptionem, sive per ela∣tionem superbiae turpiter fornicantur: Heresies and Schisms are caused by giddy People that have itching Ears, and run after such
Teachers as they fansie. There is no doubt but these pretended greater Edification, for an excuse of their Curiosity: Yet this good Bishop did not like the reason, and makes it the cause of all the mischiefs that befel the Church. Nay the Apostle expresses no small dislike of those that heap themselves Teach∣ers, having Itching Ears. Were that great Apo∣stle and that Great Bishop alive now, what would they say, when they should hear men renounce all order and rule, and profess to follow their fancy, under the notion of grea∣ter Edification? Yet this I must observe far∣ther, that how good soever the argument may be for separation; It sounds not well from the Teachers whose Commendation is involv'd in the reason, They might sure∣ly give the People leave to say it, and that might have sav'd their Modesty without losing the argument. To Conclude this Point: Almost all the Heresies and Schisms that have distracted the Church, have been no other than so many defections of the Discontented part of the Clergy, and the more pragmatical part of the Laity from their Rightful Bi∣shop.Cyp Ep. 55 Non aliundè Haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt Schismata quam inde quod Sacer∣doti non Obtemperatur;Ep. 69. Schisms and Here∣sies spring from no other cause than disobe∣dience to the Bishop: Inde Haereses obortae sunt, dum Episcopus qui unus est, Contemnitur: All the disturbance of the Church is pure∣ly for want of observing that Precept of
the Apostle;Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they Watch for your souls, as they that must give account: i. e. Obey those that are Rightfully over you, and submit to them, not choosing your selves new Teachers, and running after your own fancy:Epad. Syr. Which Ignatius seems to pa∣raphrase as he is cited by Antiochus. Let the people assemble where the Bishop is present. The sheep ought not to go wan∣dering whither they please, but as the Shepherd leads them. The people ought to follow the directions of their Bishop, and conclude what he orders to be most pleasing to God. And surely any one would think this the securest course; Those that seduce the people into Faction, they may have interests of their own to serve by making a breach and a disturbance: but all that love peace should surely cleave to their Bishop: For his interest as well as duty oblige him to maintain peace and Uni∣ty; for he is unavoidably a loser by the Quarrel, and cannot rationally be suppos'd to have any design but to preserve things as they are: But the Pretences of others though never so plausible are to be suspe∣cted of design, where the separation is manifestly to the prejudice of the people as well as of the Bishop; and to the advan∣tage of him only that perswades it. Now as the Bishops are under the least Temptation to make a disturbance (and what Governour will raise a Sedition against him∣self?)
so in fact likewise they are sound to be very few, that being Bishops have rais'd any Heresie or Schism. Let any man con∣sult the Catalogues of Ancient Heresies: and Compute how many of the 60 reck∣on'd by Epiphanius, or of the 88. of St. Austin, or of the greater number of Philastius, and the more confus'd account of Theodoret; How many of them I say were Bishops when they turn'd Hereticks, and he shall find very few if any one in all those numbers. But if any after they had Debauch'd the peo∣ple from their Rightful Pastors, were by subreption made Bishops of their Party, They were never look'd upon as Bishops but only as heads of a Faction. So that I believe the reader may by this time easily perceive what truth there is in Mr. B.'s General Charge, that the Bishops were the causes of the Heresie, and Schism, and that it was so wonderful a thing that a Heresie should be begun by one that was no Bishop. Besides this charge of Heresie and Schism, Mr. B. accuses the Bishops of ha∣ving been the cause of Church corruptions, and Sedition: As to the first, if he means that the Bishops first introduc'd these cor∣ruptions into the Church, I believe he will be never able to prove it: as to the latter we shall examine it in due place. The Corruptions of Christian Religion whether in Doctrine or Worship, have crept unperceivably into the Church; and by such degrees, that it is a hard matter to
ace their Original, and we are so far from nowing the first Authors of them, that we are ignorant even of the age wherein some of them were introduc'd. Mr. B. charges consident∣ly, but proves nothing: But the most proba∣ble conjecture I think can be made of the rise and Progress of these, is, 1. That most of the corruptions in Doctrine crept in together with the Heathen Philosophy: For great Phi∣losophers especially the followers of Plato turning Christians, still retain'd something of their former Notions, which not appearing to be any way prejudicial to Christianityl; but on the Contrary rendering it more ac∣ceptable to the wiser part of Heathens, were by degrees own'd among the more learned sort, in their Disputations with Heathens, and pass'd without contradiction: But af∣terwards busie men building farther conse∣quences upon this foundation, Improv'd the corruption, till at last it grew Gross and intolerable. Hence came the Invoca∣tion of Saints, and Angels,Plat. Pot. l. 5. Orig. adv. cll. l. 8. Hieron. des∣cript Eccl. in Orig. Euseb. Praep. Ev. l. 12. Virg. Georg. 6. Somn. Scip. &c. and the opinion of their knowledge of Humane affairs. Hence Prayer for the Dead, and the opinion of Purgatory; Hence proceeded many other curious Questions about the nature of God and his Attributes, of the Fatal determina∣tion of events, of free will and the like. And as to the more sordid, superstitious cor∣ruptions in Worship. If any one sort of men are to be charg'd with them, I believe the Monks will bid fairest; The Cross, and Reliques, that came first from Judea, are
owing as far a I can observe to Melania and her Monks;Paulin Ep∣ad. Sulp. Sever. and I do believe the story of the finding of the Cross is of no ancienter standing. Who has fill'd all the world with fictitious Reliques, and fabulous Revelati∣ons concerning them? Who Debauch'd the reason and common sense of men by their fulsome Legends and fictions of Miracles? By whose means in short, had Superstition overspread the face of the Christian world? Were not the Monks the manifest Authors and Promoters of all this? Superstition was born and brought up first in Monasteries, and as Monks came into the Church, they brought it along with them, and the opi∣nion the people had of the piety of these Retir'd men, made every thing current that they advanc'd? What so devoted Instruments had the Papal usurpation, as the Monks, that pretended exemption from the juris∣diction of their Bishops, and subjected the Episcopal Authority to it. And for Transub∣stantiation, though the Grossness of the con∣ceit were enough to prove it Monkish; yet besides, it is found by matter of fact to be theirs, Paschasius Radbertus being the first that broach'd this Doctrine. All this that I have but just mentioned in the General may be made out by a deduction of the rise and Progress of Superstition; but a particular account would exceed too much the Pro∣portion of this book. This I must add, that the Bishops who are charg'd with these Corruptions by Mr. B. were the only op∣posers
of them that we find in Antiquity: as we may see in the Canons of the Afri∣can Church, and that of Spain, and other Countreys. The first Picture we read of in a Christian Church was torn in pieces by Epiphanius a Bishop: the first Councils about Images condemn'd the Idolatrous use of them with great zeal, but at last supersti∣tion being still advanc'd by the Popularity of the Monks, and the ignorance of the Age, and some of the Emperors joyning with them, prevail'd against the Bishops: and so Idolatry was brought for a help to Chri∣stian Devotion; And if at last the Bishops joyn'd in the superstitions, it is no more a wonder, than that they were engag'd in He∣resie. For when any number of people are corrupted, whether with superstition or false Doctrine, they will find Teachers to their own mind, not that their Bishops will comply with every popular wind of doctrine, but because men will make themselves Pastors after their own hearts: and as long as there is a Heretick or an Ambitious man who will be any thing for applause, or preferment, they will never want Bishops and heads of their faction; or if the Clergy have no Judas, they will find Teachers amongst themselves, and give them what Titles they please. The last branch of the Charge is Sedition, and this is as grievous as any of the other. Suppose the matter of fact in the first place true, that several Bishops had been Sediti∣ous: does this proceed from their Consti∣tution,
or any Principle the Bishops maintain, that is inconsistent with the people where they live? This I suppose cannot be pretend∣ed. Or is Diocesan Episcopacy such an enemy to the peace of the Government? We have had the experience of it for many ages, and find but few that were so troublesome. But because as the case stands now, we are to reckon only since the Reformation (for if a man be not blind he may see that this worshipful Church History is only design'd against Protestant Bishops under a general name) They I suppose will receive ample Testimony from the Government, of their faithfulness and Loyalty: How many acts of Oblivion have been made for Bishops and their Party? Where were they seen encou∣raging Rebels against their Prince with the hopes of Salvation? What Reign have they disturb'd here with their Seditions? or whose Government were they enemies to, unless it were that of a Rebellious piece of a Parlia∣ment, and Oliver Cromwel, and his Son, the David and Solomon of Mr. Baxter? But Loyalty has hitherto been the greatest crime of our Bishops; and long may they conti∣nue to fear God and the King, more than the Insolence of any faction; and I pray God they may always preserve Inviolable that great Treasure committed to them, and the greatest next that of the Faith: the hon∣our of the most Loyal Church in the World.
Now although the Bishops of the Church of England since the Reformation need no defence in this particular, the merit of their Loyalty being so well known; and what other Bishops may do, does not concern us; yet because in this Treatise I have un∣dertaken the defence of the Primitive Church, and by consequence of our own, it will be necessary to add something upon this subject, by way of answer to such particu∣lars as Mr. B. has brought together to shew the seditious Practices of the Bishops. The first thing he takes to task,Treatise of Episcop. part. c. 22. is an old Maxim of King James, no Bishop no King: which is represented here as if the Bishops were the Authors of it: and if the Presby∣terian, had say'd no Prebyters no King: you would have taken it for Treasonable, as if they had threatned that the King shall not be King unless they may have their way, and shall not the King be King unless you may be Bishops? It is well for the Bishops that none of them was Author of that Dangerous saying; else I perceive it might bear an impeachment, and prove by little management at least Constructive Treason, but the Authority of a King may excuse him of Treason against himself, though the Scotch Presbyterians have declared him a Traytor to Jesus Christ and the Holy Kirk: And surely that King had some reason to say it, for it is not likely he should pass such a complement upon the Bishops, and make them so necessary to Mo∣narchy, if he had not found some great
suitableness in this Church government to that of the State. The truth is that saying of King James was the Result of a long experi∣ence, of a Turbulent, Seditious, ungovern∣able Presbytery in Scotland: and how little he was a King while he was among them the Historians of those times as Spotswood, John∣ston, and others do sufficiently shew: Or if you would have a more particular descripti∣on of the Insolencies, and enchroachments of that Presbyterian Clergy, look into the Burden of Isscahar, and you will soon find rea∣son enough for this Maxim. But Mr. B. goes about gravely to Confute this, as an affect∣ed fiction without proof.Ch. H. p. 2..2. c. 22. For 1. Heathen Em∣perors were without Bishops: 2. follows the insinuation of Treason. 3. What is in the nature of the Thing to Warrant this assertion? They owne every Text and Article for Monar∣chy as well as Prelacy, &c. and the same reason Holland and Venice must have no Bi∣shops. Would not a man wonder, that any one should make so great a stir about such a lit∣tle saying? Suppose it is not absolutely im∣possible but Kings may be without Bishops or Presbyters either, what then? Why then King James was mistaken in his Politicks: when he said No Bishop no King. There is no necessity of that neither: for all Maxims in Morality and Policy are not to be used so un∣mercifully as to be judged according to the rigour of the letter. He spoke this with re∣gard to his own experience, and his own case; and the Anti-Episcopal men made his words
good, by destroying Bishops first, and the King after: when this or that sort of men is made either necessary or destructive to government; the meaning is, that either their Principles or Practices, or interest, do either support, and assure, or else overthrow and endanger the State: and that their practices upon all occasions are generally suitable to their principles. This will be clearer by these instances: Popery is generally look'd upon as a Religion destructive of Civil pow∣er, and not without reason. Must there therefore be no government where there is Popery? The Kingdoms of France, Spain, and Poland, and several other Countreys do manifest the contrary. The Jesuits are look'd upon as the great Incendiarys of the world, and that no place can be at peace where they have any influence: and yet they are entertain'd in all Popish Countries: Is the general charge therefore of Sedition against these false and groundless? No such matter. Suppose then among Christians one should say with regard to us, no Protestants no King. I suppose there would be no such mighty absurdity in it. Therefore if the Principles of those that were Anti-Episco∣pal, were look'd upon by that wise King as Anti-Monarchical too: and the Doctrine of the Bishops was much more safe to the Government; it was ground enough for the saying. And now to vindicate those Pri∣mitive Bishops from the imputation of Sedition, that he has charg'd in this chap∣ter
with desturbing the Church and the world. The first thing Mr. B. lays to the charge of Bishops is the Usurpation of Popish Pre∣lacy: Do you not know, saith he, that where Pre∣lacy is at the highest, there Kings and Em∣perors have been at the lowest? Do you not know, how the Papal Prelacy at present usurpeth one part of their Government, and is ready to take away the other when ever Kings displease them? &c. Is it the Bishop or the Papist that is here to blame? Is this the effect of their Order, or of those pernicious principles they have inbib'd? If it was the fault of the Bishops, then we must find the same practice in other Ages; or if the Popish Bishops are dange∣rous to Government, are their Presbyters less to be fear'd? The Jesuits before our Civil Wars us'd all the interest they had to prevent sending of Popish Bishops into Eng∣land. It was not I suppose out of any great affection to us, or regard to the Peace of the Kingdom, but because they thought Bi∣shops unnecessary, since Priests and Jesuits could do more mischief without them. But the same reason that renders. Popish Priests and Bishops so dangerous to Govern∣ment, renders the Presbyterians so too: But first let us examine Mr. B.'s instances of more ancient Episcopal Sedition. The first is at Alexandria in the time of Theophilus and Cyril, which I have consider'd already. I need say no more here than, 1. That the Alexandrians of all the people in the world were the most infamous for
Sedition, even before they ever had any Bi∣shops. 2. That their Bishops did never give any countenance or encouragement to their Sedition. The next is the combu∣stion in Constantinople about Chrysostom, where Theophilus and Epiphanius were concern'd: To this I Answer, 1. That these Bishops were indeed the occasion, but never intended this tumult, or gave their party any incourage∣ment to make this disturbance. 2. That what they did, although it was very unjust, yet it was not done against the civil Go∣vernment, but in complyance with the Em∣perour. 3. That those who began this mu∣tiny were such as favoured Chrysostom, but did it against his will, and against all his intreaties and observations to the contrary: for he conveyed himself away first of all pri∣vately to prevent a mutiny: and in the whole business he behaved himself so as to indeavour by all means to prevent any mischief. He saw the civil power was wrongfully against him, and he would not contend, but indeavoured to steal away to prevent contention. The story of Theophilus his charging Isi∣dore with double Letters, that whoever was Conqueror, he might apply himself to him in his name, is of the same piece with the rest of Socrates his story concerning that Bishop; and in all probability an invention of one of the Monks of Nitria. He would never have disobliged that man afterwards after such a manner, that he had intrusted
with such a secret. Upon this Mr. B. makes a great outcry: What would have been said of one of us now, if we had not only complyed with a vi∣ctorious Tyrant, but also juggled with presents and double Letters before hand: I did my self disown Oliver Cromwel openly to his death: So did John Lilburn, So did the Levellers. So did the Presbyterians, as far as they durst, and none of these out of any great affection to their Prince: but because they saw things run against their inclination: and these had the same quarrel against Cromwel they had be∣fore against the King: i. e. they could not indure to see the power in any other hands than their own. But whatever Mr. B. had with Cromwel to his death: It seems he generously forgets it after his death. And compares the most barbarous villain in the World to King David in his Epistle to his Son. But as for his owning his Son Richard Cromwel, because it was given out that he was a Cavalier in his heart, will surely find excuse as far as it finds belief. The next thing is the Bishops too sudden owning the Barbarian Conquerors. Do I need to recite (sayes Mr. B.) how great Leo himself and other Roman and Italian Bishops, owned the Barbarian Conquerors? No wonder then if they too early took Theodoricus for their King, set over them by God, who was a better man than the rest, and had at last a better Title. The truth is, it is not necessary for you to recite this at all: because I think their lyes no necessity upon any man to re∣cite
that which is not true. For how I pray did great Leo himself own the Barba∣rian Conqueror?Vid. Ba∣ron. ad An. 461. Or who were those that he owned? Theodoricus? But Leo. was dead a long while before, in the year 461. as Baronius; or the year before, as the Chronicle of Marcellinus fixes it: whereas Theodoricus did not invade Itadly till the year 490: Was it Attila that he owned? He was indeed a Barbarian Conqueror in Leo's time: But how did he own him? Attilas, when he had laid all Italy wast, and was come with his Army before Rome, this Bi∣shop is said to have gone out to him:Suid Ca∣ssiod. Chron. Missu Valentiniani Imperatoris, sent by the Em∣peror, and prevailed with him to raise the Seige and leave Italy. If this be owning Barbarian Conquerors, they were very un∣reasonable that would find fault. So Lupus Trecassensis, Eusebius of Milan, Severinus, and several other Bishops of that time, prevailed with several of those Barbarous Conquerors, to use their victory with mo∣deration; and by their intercession saved the lives and fortunes of many thousands, But that they flattered these Kings, or ap∣prov'd of their Titles, we do not find. But however Leo may escape, the Italian Bishops too early took. Theodoricus for their King. How does Mr. B. conclude that it was too early. Had they then any rightful Empe∣rour whose cause they might maintain against this Usurper? the Western Empire was now extinct, and not so much as the Title
remain'd after Augustulus: Odoacer had no Title but his Sword, and the possession of 13 or 14 years. The Eastern Emperor, if he had any right, he had given it to Theo∣doricus, whom he adopted,Jornand. de Reb. Get c. 57. adamplian∣dum hono∣rem ejus, in arma sibi e∣umifilium adoptavit &c. Annu∣it quae po∣scebat, di∣misit ei po∣pulum & se∣natum com∣mendans Rowanum. and sent into Italy to drive Odoacer out thence? So that if Conquest; or resignation can give a Title, this King had a sufficient one. And besides all this, the Western Empire was at that time in such a confusion, what by facti∣ons within themselves, what by invasion of Strangers, that it was a very hard matter to know who had the right; there being no Law of Succession established, and Theodosuis his line being extinct. So that this is no paral∣lel with our late Rebellion, when there was a lawful King, of ancient desent, whose right did not depend upon any election of the people: to raise War against such a one, and to put him to death, and own the fact, and extol the barbarous Usurper, is such an instance not to be parallel'd by any Nation, and such as no Christian Sect or Profession, out of Popery could have own'd or justified, but that of our tender conscience Loyal Protestant Dissenters. In the next place we have the story of Theophilus and the Monks of Nitrià which no reasonable man can believe as it is rela∣ted by Socrates and Sozomen, without loving a malicious lye. The reasons I have given in another place, and do not think it very convenient to repeat them as often as Mr. B. does the story: But this is added by way
of observation. Did ever Presbyterians com∣mit such an Ʋnchristian, Inhuman villany as this, by such false dissimulation and Malice? Yes much more, by the Covenant. Who preached up Rebellion under pretence of Religion? And destroyed the King under pretence of fighting for him? Who sold their Master when they had promised to protect him? Were not these Presbyterians? But because Mr. B. seems now to have gone over to the Independents, he knows much worse can be said of them. I am en∣tred upon this much against my inclination, being forc'd upon it by the confidence of our Author, than which nothing can be more pro∣voking; quis tulerit Gracchos de Seditione querentes. The next instance is that of Eusebius Sa∣mosatenus, who when Valens his Officer had brought him an Order for his Banishment,Theod. l. 4. c. 13. tells him, If the people should know it, they would drown him in the-river Euphrates: What would they say if our Churches were such, as this Orthodox Episcopal Church was? What ever they would say of the people, they must needs commend your Ministers. But the case is very much alter'd. Here a Bishop leaves his people, rather than occasion any disorder: With you the Pastors perswade the people that notwithstanding all the laws to the contrary, they must not desert their Pastors. Here the People were incensed with the apprehension of Arianism, which o∣verthrew the Foundation of the Faith; with
you there is no such reason, since you all con∣fess we are agreed in the Substantials of Re∣ligion, and yet the Teachers press their Congregatios to stand by them against the Government. Here a good Bishop would not be prevailed upon by any intreaties to re∣turn against the Emperors command, to the manifest endangering of the publick peace; and desire them to have patience, and submit to Authority: The Presbyterians. Teachers when they had opportunity, did inflame the people against the Government, and by their seditious preaching kindled the late Rebel∣lion. What would we say then, if you were like this Church of Samosata, that lov∣ded their Bishop, and would be govern'd by him, and take his advice when he disswa∣ed them from tumult and sedition? We would say then that, tho' the first heats were not warantable, yet that you would be much better than you are, and the Government could be much more secure of you than it is. Mr. B. pursues this instance farther, and adds,Theod. l. 4. c. 14. When the Emperors Arian Bishop was set over them, not one of all the people would come to the Church as they were used to do: Would not wash in the same water, &c. do our hearers deal as harshly as this? How shall a man deal with those that have no Con∣science, but against Ceremonies, and Epi∣scopacy? Is there any resemblance between our case and this? The Arians (as Mr. B. confesses) deny'd by direct consequence the
Being of Christ; and is it any wonder that Orthodox Believers should have such abhor∣rence of these men? If any of our Bishops, Nay, if an Angel from Heaven should preach such Doctrine as this, let him be Anathema, and be abhorr'd as much as you please. In the mean time they are but in evil case, that depend upon the Authority of your instances for Separation, and will believe they are moderate Men, because they do not use Orthodox rightful Bishops as harshly, as the Orthodox did the Arian U∣surpers; Although they have no great rea∣son to boast of their civility upon this ac∣count, it being easy to shew out of their writings, and Sermons, (to say nothing of their common conversation) such Lan∣guage as a Christian ought to be ashamed of: But these good men are too much mor∣tified to blush, and keep their blood so much in subjection, that they never suffer it upon any provocation to flush into their faces. After this we have another story of the Virgins that sung in reproach of Julian the A∣postate: Who can help Libels,Theod. l. 3. c. 13. and Lam∣poons from stealing out against one that is generally hated? Did any of the Christians enter into any combination against him, or declare it lawful to Rebel? Presently we have another story of the Church of Edessa that would assemble, not∣withstanding the Emperors commands to the contrary. And what is all this to the
purpose? Did not the Primitive Christians do so too, and suffer'd Martyrdom for it? But did they ever enter into Covenants, and Practices against the State? No, here is mention of a poor Woman that made hast to the Assembly when she knew it would be disturb'd by Souldiers, and in probability be massacred: but what to do? to see how manfully a field Conventicle would be have it self, or to plunder the Baggage of the assailants, when they should be put to the rout? No such thing: but with a design to suffer Martyrdom, and to dye tamely with the rest, for the profession of the Faith. In the next place, We have Basil's answer to the Prefect,Theod. Hist. l. 4. c. 19. when he offered him the Emper∣ours favour (upon condition he would turn Arian, which our Author with great inge∣nuity forgets,) This (sayes he) may take with Children, &c. And as for the Em∣perors friendship, I much value it joyned with Godliness, but if it want that, I say it is per∣nicious: Upon this our Author remarks, In one of us this Answer would have been enough to make us seem as bad, as it made Basil esteem∣ed good. I must ask your pardon if in this point I am not of your Opinion. For when your circumstances are the same with Basils, I believe you may follow his example; and they are unreasonable men that will find fault, that when any King or Emperors fa∣your upon Earth is offered you upon condi∣tion
to betray the Faith, you should reject it with indignation. But the difference be∣tween the substance, and indifferent circum∣stances of Religion, strangely alters the case. There is a great deal more to this effect; of the Orthodox refusing to con∣form to and keeping separate assemblies from the Arians; which as they do not prove Sedition against those that were then Non conformists, so they do not excuse ours. And this must be added, that in all these lamen∣table distractions of the Church we find no Orthodox Bishop animate the people against the government, what persecution soever they suffer'd; but on the contrary, restraining all Tendencies to Rebellion, and withdraw∣ing themselves when the Popular favour towards them grew inordinate and uncon∣troulable; whereas too many of our Schis∣matical Presbyters have kindled and fo∣mented Sedition. Mr. B. saith, Audas a Bishop in Persia demolish'd their Temple or Pyreum by violence, for which the Emperor of Persia kill'd him,Theodor. l. 5. c. 39. and destroy'd all the Christian Churches. And Audas was very much to blame: and the fact was disowned generally: and Theodoret condemns it, and antiquity never approv'd it. But who follows the example of this Zealot Bishop? I am sure our Episcopal men are far enough from any such imputation. But there are men in the world that Mr. B. knows, who have not destroy'd Pagan Temples, but Christian Churches; and some were
so zealous as to move for the pulling of them all down as polluted with supersti∣tion. What Theodoret says of Julian, calling him Tyrant, which Mr. B. takes notice of, was after Julian's Death, and therefore could not tend to Sedition. But whoever animated the people to resist him? His Apostacy in∣deed being inexcuseable, people took the Liberty to give him such a Character as he deserv'd when he was dead; and his succes∣sours were not at all concern'd in it, as hav∣ing no relation to him. Isaak, as Mr. B. observes,l. 4. c. 34. spake to Valens with great bold∣ness: but it was with the assurance of a Pro∣phet, and such a one as spake immediately from God. The Christian people of Thessalonica (says Mr. B.) rose and kill'd some of Theodosius his officers,Theod. l. 5. c. 17. which provok'd him by his Souldiers, to kill seven thousand of them, for which Am∣brose brought him to do open Penance. The Christian people are much oblig'd to Mr. B. for giving them the honour of this Sedition: But Theodoret whom he cites for this story, says not one word of the mutineers being Christians.Ruff. l. 1. c. 30. Ruffinus who is particular enough in relating it, says nothing of their being Christians, but has some circumstances that make for the contrary.Niceph. Hist. l. 32. c. 40. The occasion of this Sedition was about a Charioteer, who had lewdly attempted one of the Govern∣ours Pages, and was put in Prison for it; but being expert at his calling, the people
interceded for his release, to entertain them at the Publick races: It is not likely the Christians would have concern'd them∣selves for such a villain: or for his Perfor∣mance at those publick spectacles. It being forbidden by the Canons of the Church to be present at them, and extremely declaim'd a∣gainst by the Bishops of those times: 2. It is not likely they were Christians if we con∣sider the method Theodosius took to revenge this outrage: for as these Chariot Races were the occasion of the Sedition, so he made them the opportunity of his revenge, for having got a great number together to that sight the Souldiers put his orders in execu∣tion, and slew 7000. in Ludis Circensibus,Ruffin. l. 11. c. 30. says Ruffinus. 3. That the Generality of those that came to these spectacles, and conse∣quently of those that were there slain, were not Christians, may be gather'd from the ar∣guments us'd by St. Ambrose to aggravate the Cruelty; where there is not a word of their being Christians, and his brethren, but only of their bearing the Image of God and being men. 4. Zosimus,Theod. ubi sup. Niceph. l. 12. c. 41. who omits nothing that is to the reproach of the Christians, does not mention this Sedition, which if it had been theirs he would have hardly pass'd. But the Christians, it seems are more beholden to that Heathen, and profess'd enemy, than to Mr. B. Lastly since there are so many Au∣thors Christian and Heathen that mention this Sedition, and not one of them say the Christians were concern'd in it, Mr. B. is in∣excusable
for charging such a Barbarous Se∣dition upon those of our Religion, as if he affected without any authority to render Christianity odious. And though all this had been the fault of the Christians, it is but an accidental Tumult, and the Bishops are no way concern'd in it. Our Author adds, that to mention all the Bloodshed in Rome (as at Damasus Election and else) and at Constantinople, and Alexan∣dria, would be tedious, even that which was shed on the account of Bishops. It cannot be deny'd but there were great and bloody Tumults upon the account of Bishops, but there were not many Bishops that encourag'd them; but on the contrary they us'd all means possible to prevent and remedy them, by withdraw∣ing, by quitting their right, and going into voluntary Banishment. But almost all these Tumults were occasion'd by the Popular elections of Bishops, which Mr. B. out of his love to peace doubtless, and to save effusion of Christian blood, would restore by his Re∣formation of Episcopacy. Lucius (he would say Lucifer) Calarita∣nus, was a pious Bishop (says Mr. B.) but so hot for separation from those that had been Arians, that he is numbr'd for it with the He∣reticks, though an Orthodox Bishop: And what is all this to Sedition? The Novatians were Episcopal, and so were the Donatists (says Mr. B.) and yet how have they been judged of for their Schism I need not tell: They are very much to blame
that say the Presbyterians or Independents troubl'd the Primitive Church: It was im∣possible for them to be troublesome before they were at all, it seems all the Sects, and Schisms of that time thought they had no right to pretend to be a Church, unless they had Bishops: But these Anti-Episcopal Sepa∣ratists were reserved, it seems for the last times, as the severest curse, and judgment that could befal the Church. Those Epi∣scopal Schismaticks indeed divided the Church, but these quite dissolve it. Besides these Episcopal Schismaticks, Mr. B. gives a small list of Bishops that were Anti-Hereticks. Apollinaris, father and son, Paulus Samosatenus, Nestorius, Diosco∣rus, Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theodorus of Mopsuestia, have been Arch-Hereticks, and the cause of Tumults and Dissension. There is much of this that is not true, and some of it that Mr. B. does not believe to be so: For 1. Apollinaris the Father was no Bishop;Hieron de Script. Apoll. Laodic. Syria. Ep. Patre Presbytero. l. 6. c. 25. Gregor. Nyss. Ephr. Syrus. Philost. l. 8.15. Gottoffred. Dissert. in Philost. and this was he that was the Arch-Heretick as Zozomen informs us: and as much may be gathered from Gregory Nyssen, who makes Apollinaris a very old man when he should have disputed with Ephraim Syrus. Apollina∣ris the younger is said to have been a Bishop by Philostorgius, though Photius adds that he knows not whence he had it: But Jerom is express, and that is the Common opinion. Yet whether he were the Author of this Here∣sie or his father, he was a Heretick before he was a Bishop, while he was yet reader of the
Church of Laodicea:Socrat. l. 2. c. 46. and from Socrates, and Athanasius writing against his Heresie, it is plain that it was long before the younger Apollinaris was made Bishop (if ever he were so.) Nicephorus makes the repulse of Apol∣linaris at Antioch, (which seems to be after he may be presum'd to have been Bishop from some expressions of that Historian,Niceph. l. 12. c. 4.) to have been the occasion of his Heresie; but this manifestly contradicts, all ancienter Histo∣rians; and indeed the very story contra∣dicts it self; for Flavian upon the place con∣victs him of having been a Heretick before: Sandius thinks he was not Bishop of Lao∣dicea, till after the Council of C. P. because Pelagius is found Bishop of Laodicea in the subscriptions of that Council; though I be∣lieve this reason of small moment, and the Acts of that Council shew him to have been Bishop of that place before: However, manifest it is, that whether the father nor the son were Author of that Heresie, he was not a Bishop at that time. Nestorius Mr. B. himself has taken great pains to prove Orthodox, yet now it seems his mind is changed. The same he does with Diosco∣rus. He was on their side against the Coun∣cils that condemn'd them; but now from Ad∣vocate he is turn'd Accuser: Eusebius of Ni∣comedia was no Heretick in the judgment of Valesius: but if he were, he was not an Here∣tick: because he did not begin the arch-Here∣sie, but followed Arius. Theodorus of Mo∣puestia was an Orthodox Bishop as Mr. B.
owns out of Derodon, and as Facundus proves at large; though he had the ill fortune o be condemn'd by Later Councils, upon  misunderstanding: this case I have discuss'd more Particularly in another place, where Theodore Tarsensis, his Doctrine was examin'd. At last Bishops failing, Mr. B. mentions Aerius, who spake against Bishops, because him∣self could not be Bishop: so Pestilent a thing the desire of such Bishopricks have been: And who can help it: if men will be Ambiti∣ous, and aspiring: must there be no Go∣vernment, because it is the aim of ambition, or may be the Possession of an evil man? So there must be no Kings, because many times a Crown became the occasion of Civil Wars: There must be no reputation, because Am∣bitious men affect it, and grow Seditious to become Popular. After this we have little hints of quarrels which were far enough from Sedition, as that of Theodotus and Basil, and of Eusebius and Basil, the former was a particular hu∣mour, and had no consequence. Of the lat∣ter, because Mr. B. says it was sad and scan∣dalous, I will give a more particular-relati∣on, that the Reader may discern the diffe∣rence between the Temper of those good men that are here scandalously repre∣sented, and that of our Separatists that Mr. B. compares with, and prefers before them. A difference happen'd between Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea and St. Basil then Presbyter of that Church;Nazianz. Orat. de Basilio. how or upon what occasion
Gregory Nazian. Was not willing to discover; nking it not much for the honour of Re∣gon to rip up the faults of Bishops. But he says indeed that Eusebius, though he was a very good man, yet was in fault; and seems to say that he envi'd Basil. But when the fall∣ing out was known, the Monks took Basils Part, and drew many of the people with them, and would have done him right up∣on his Bishop: but this good man, though he knew the Merit of his cause, and of his person, yet for peace's sake retir'd into the Widerness. He might have said to his Monks, that the people must stand by them; and considering his Learning and Eloquence, he might have presum'd to have edified more in a Coventicle than the Bishop could in the Church; yet this good man had in humbler opinion of his gifts, than to endanger the peace of the Church, rather than forbear the exercise of them: And after a long Banish∣ment and silence, he was not grown so resty and Irreconcileable, but that when his Church, was threatned by the Arian Pest, he return'd voluntarily to assist his Bishop without desiring the Church Walls (i. e. the Order and Discipline of it) to be bro∣ken down that he might enter Triumph∣antly like a Conquerour. He came of his own accord, submitted to his Bishop and liv'd with him 'till he dy'd not only in peace and Charity: but in the most entire friendship and confidence. The Applica∣tion of the Parable of the merciful Samaritan
is not improper here. Go thou and do like∣wise. The contention between Basil and Euthomius (Anthimus I suppose he means about the ex∣tent of their Diocese was no less (Scandalous) Any unreasonable Usuper may bring the meekest man upon earth into odious De∣bates; so Saint Paul himself was put upon an Invidious vindication of his Authority and Jurisdiction. The People of Casarea would have torn in pieces Eusebius, the Emperor's (the Empress he would have said) own unkle, for Basils sake if he had not hindred them; And does not this shew the Loyalty,Greg. Na∣zianz. Orat 19. de Basil. as well as the Autho∣rity of this Bishop: But the People were Episcopal; all people, especially those of the meaner sort, as these were, are apt to be mov'd into disorder, but it is much for the Honour of the Bishops authority, and their Duty, that they obey'd him so readi∣ly: surely they are much more Tolerable than those that Assassin Bishops. The difference between those of Neo Cae∣sarea and Basil is not worth the mentioning because it contains nothing like Sedition; and is only a quarrel about Psalmody, and some new orders introduc'd among them. The Antiochians for a Tax under Theo∣dosius the Great did Tumultuate and kill the Magistrates, and destroy'd the Statues of Fla∣cilla the good Empress: And what then? What is this to the Bishops? It does not ap∣pear
that these mutineers were Christians. The Heathens indeed were very Turbulent in this Emperors Reign because he had Or∣der'd their Idols should be destroy'd,Zozim. l. 4. c. 38. and that they were the men principally concern'd in this uproar we may understand by the choice of their Delegates whom they sent to carry their submission to the Empe∣ror:Zozim. l. 4. c. 42. Lybanius and Hilarius both Heathens. The Church of Antioch I suppose was not in such want as to be forc'd to charge the ene∣mies of their Religion with so great a trust, nor could they have been so absurd as to commit their cause to such hands as they could not be assur'd of, and they could not think they would be so acceptable to a zea∣lous Christian Emperor, who had so lately put out such severe Edicts against the Hea∣then superstition. It shews a strange temper when a man to render Bishops odious will not stick to raise false accusations against Christians, and charge them with the Sediti∣on of Heathens. In the worst, says Mr. B. Good Ambrose at Milan (was not silenc'd as we are) but by an Orthodox Emperor desir'd and Commanded to deliver the Arians possession but of one Church and he refus'd to do it and to for∣sake that Church. &c. Whereas we left all our Churches at a word: It is strange Mr. B. should take such delight to compare us with the Arians; surely he would have his Reader believe we are as unsound in the Faith as those Hereticks, or else all this discourse is but to amuse and impose upon him; But
there is great reason to value the peacable Resignation of the Nonconformists, when we consider by what Usurpation and vio∣lence they were brought in; and what a number of worthy Learned Ministers of the Church of England were turned out to make vacancies for these Men who were to instruct the people in new Mysteries of Re∣ligion, which their old Pastours had not the Conscience, or ability to Teach them, that is of the Lawfulness of Rebellion. We have several other instances of St. Ambrose his zeal against the Arians, and some of his Charity in rescuing some of them from the fury of the multitude, of his popularity, &c. But not a word of his sedition, or his forcible resistance of the Emperour: The harshest thing he did, was the shutting of the Church against the Offi∣cers of the Emperour, who would have de∣livered it to the Arians for a place to Blas∣pheme Christ, under pretence of Worship∣ping him. But at length, after long straining Mr. B. has found out some Bishops in the same fault, of owning and flattering Tyrants, and Usurpers, with himself, and this be∣cause it is home to the purpose, and seems to parallel his Dedications to R. Cromwel. We have the story at length, and set out with all the advantage of Remarks and com∣parisons, and thus it begins. And because the late Revolutions in Eng∣land are made by some Prelates. The pretence
for the Silencing of 1800 Ministers, of whom one in ten never meddled with Wars: being fal∣len again on this case of Maximus, Let it be Noted how like he was to Cromwel, saving that it was not the Sectaries, but the Bishops that he studied to please, and rise by: How just the pretence was, Mr. B. can tell better than I, if he would speak-out: And whether he will or no, others perhaps will have the Courage and the Honesty to do it. How like Cromwel was to Maximus I do not find by Mr. B. though he desires it should be Noted: They were both Usurpers, but as unlike in their circumstances, as they could well be imagined. For First, Crom∣wel. Usurped a Kingdom setled in one Family by a long and unquestionable Descent, upon a King of undoubted right. Maximus U∣surped an Elective Empire at the disposal of Armies, being chosen by his own Army, and that of Gratian,Sulp. Sev. de vit. Mart. c. 23. Aur. vict. Socr. Sozom (as he said) against his will. Gratian against whom Maximus Rebelled, was kill'd indeed by Andragathi∣us, an Officer of this Tyrant: by his or∣der as most suppose; but as he himself pro∣tested, without his knowledg: However it was in pursuit, in open Field, in a posture of Resistance, and at the head of some of his Troops.Zozim l. 4. c. 37. But Cromwel murdered the late King in cold blood, after the formality of a Tryal, with all the pomp and ostenta∣tion of insolence and cruelty: Maximus when he had done this, though he entred
by Treason,Ambr. ep. 27. Sozom. l. 7. c. 13. Zozim ubi supra. yet afterwards had his Title confirmed by Treaties concluded with Va∣lentinian, and Theodosius the great, who or∣dered their names should be joyned together in all publick forms, and that his Statues should be every where set up: So that those who lived in the Provinces under Maximus could not now reject him without Rebellion; He being their Prince, and no other having any right, or making any claim. And had he been contented with his first conquest, it is not likely Theodosius had ever arm∣ed against him: But Cromwel, as he en∣tred without any colour of right according to the constitution of this Kingdom, so while he enjoyed it, the right Heir was still in being, to whom he and all the people in Conscience still owed Allegiance, and whose interest the invincible Loyalty of some of his subjects did still promote, and therefore they were not so excusable that complyed with this Tyrant, as those that closed with Maximus. Lastly, Maximus did pretend something of Title by Descent, as being related to Constantine the Great.Baron. An. 383.1. But Cromwel never pretended to be of the Royal Family: So that here was a vast difference between these two persons before us. But Mr. B. can find no difference but this, That Maximus studied to please the Bi∣shops, and rise by them, and not by the Secta∣ries: If there had been any Sectaries in those dayes of the same Principles, with some of ours; He understood his interest too well
to have neglected them. But how is it the Bishops fault, that he studied to please them? That he studied to rise by them, is more than any body has said before Mr. B. And if Maximus had such a design upon the Bishops, he was surely disappointed; for we do not find any where, that any Bishop did ever con∣tribute in the least to the raising of him. But besides to what would he rise? He was Emperour already, before we find him take the least notice of the Bishops: And if after this success of his Army, to establish him∣self in his new conquest, he indeavoured to oblige all sorts of people, and amongst the rest, the Bishops, who were popular men in those dayes; I cannot understand, how it can be any great reproach to them. Some∣times wicked Men may reverence that Vertue and goodness in others, that they will not practise themselves Sometimes their guil∣ty Consciences, and their just fear of re∣proof, makes them stand in awe of men of severe conversation, and to indeavour to please them. Sometimes their interest leads them to oblige those that have any influence or Authority over the people: And one would think this would hardly be objected by way of reproach to them that innocently received the obligation. Well, But what did this Usurper do to please the Bishops? And how far were they instru∣mental to his advancement? Mr. B. tells us, When Gratian the Emperour befriended the Priscillianists; Maximus to please the Bi∣shops,
persecuted them to death: But by this, if he pleased some Bishops, he displeased several others, who were extreamly dis∣satisfied with these proceedings; although they all were of opinion those Hereticks were not fit to live:Sulp. Sev. l. 2. in sin. And in the account which Severus gives of this proceeding, he intimates that the Bishops were generally dissatisfied; that Ithacius to avoid their prosecution, did lay down his Bishoprick; that Theognostus and a Synod condemned him for it. Yet another Synod, to prevent a Schism in all likelihood, received him into their Communion: But to proceed, saith Mr. B When Valentinian,Sulp. Sev. de vit. mar. Baron. Ar. 385.29. by Justina the Em∣presses's means, did persecute or trouble Ambrose, for refusing to deliver a Church to the Arians, and also other Orthodox Bishops as well as Am∣brose; Maximus gave to Ambrose and the Bishops the honour of keeping him out of Italy; and wrote his Letters to Valentinian for the Orthodox Bishops, telling him how grievous a thing it is to persecute the Ministers of God, and when under his Father they went for faith∣ful Ministers. Ʋpon this message of Maximus: he saith, that Valentinian being afraid of him, the persecution ceased, and Ambrose must be sent upon an Embassage to Maximus, to stop him. As to the when, Mr. B. mistakes the time in the first place,Sor. l. 5. c. 1. l. So  with Socra¦tes, and Sozomen; Socrates makes this perse∣cution of Ambrose to be before the Death of Gratian, which that Historian sayes, so frighted Justina, that she left off tro
that good Bishop any longer. But Ambrose himself contradicts it,Ep. 33. Baron. An. 383.19. and shews plainly that this happened after his first Embassy, and after his obtaining a peace of Maximus. In the next place: Maximus is said to have given Ambrose and the Bishops, the honour of keeping him out of Italy. It was certainly a great Honour to Ambrose (for other Bi∣shops there were none concerned in it) But I much question whether ever Maximus de∣signed it as such;Gloriosum est mihi hoc pro salute pupilli Im∣peratoris. Amb. Ep. 27. who (as we shall shew presently) not out of reverence to Ambrose, but for fear of Valentinian's preparation ac∣cepted a Peace. But this Ʋsurper, faith Mr. B. wrote Letters to Valentinian in favour of the Orthodox Bishops and St. Ambrose. Who can help it, if a busy Usurper will be for∣ward to concern himself in matters that do not belong to him? But lest the Reader may suspect any treacherous correspon∣dence between those Bishops and this Usur∣per,Amb. Ep. 27. I will give a brief account of Am∣brose his negotiation with him. When Maximus had seised that part of the We∣stern Empire that Gratian was possessed of, Valentinian, fearing lest the Tyrant should invade his Countries, sends St. Ambrose to mediate a peace: Maximus having under∣stood that Valentinian was making some pre∣parations against him, and had entertained the Huns and other Auxiliaries, began to incline to an accommodation, looking upon the Invasion of Italy as too hazardous an at∣tempt: Therefore he sent some of his Offi∣cers
to meet Ambrose, and to offer him a peace; which afterwards was concluded upon these Terms: That Maximus should be owned Emperour, and retain all the Countries he was possessed of: This was the first Embassy of Ambrose, in which negotia∣tion, it was not so much to do Honour to Ambrose, as out of fear of Gratians prepara∣tions, that Maximus did forbear invading Italy. But when this Usurper perceived that Valentinians affairs were not in so good a posture as he imagined at first, he was vexed that he had let so fair an opportunity slip, of adding the Dominions of Valentini∣an to his other Conquests. Upon this, he begins to pick quarrels with Valentinian, to take the part of the Orthodox Bishops, nay of the Heathens, and every one that had reason of discontent, calling himself Procu∣ratorem Reipublicae. Valentinian jealous of his designs, sends Ambrose a second time, to desire Gratians body, and likely to sound Maximus. This good Bishop was enter∣tained this time but very coldly: The U∣surper reproached him with having im∣posed upon him before, and keeping him out of Italy. The Bishop replyed, that it was not he, but his own fears that prevail∣ed with him: and in short, when Ambrose would not communicate with him nor his Bishops, because he looked upon him as a man of blood; He was sent back without having been able to effect any thing, and with no better answer than that Maximus
would consider of it. This is the summ of this negotiation, as Ambrose himself, and Paulinus in his life, gives an account of it. And now if any disloyalty can be suspected in Ambrose, and the Orthodox Bishops, it must be such a secret as was never yet reveal∣ed: Whereas nothing is more evident from these Relations, than the integrity of that Bishop, and his extraordinary affection towards his Prince and Country. For from what has been already said we may observe, 1. That Ambrose was not only a dutiful Subject, but as himself sayes, though with∣out vanity, the Father or Guardian of his Prince. 2. The confidence his Prince had in his integrity, when after so great and fresh Provocations he would trust him with his life and Empire, and that although he had been provoked in the most tender part, by his Princess indeavours for the introdu∣cing of Arianism. Others perhaps if they had been in his condition, would have look∣ed upon this Tyrants declaring for the Truth, as such an opportunity that Provi∣dence had offered for the preservation of the Faith: and since the Empress was of a false Religion, and the Emperour was Go∣verned by her, why should no they set up this Maximus as the Protector of the true Faith? But Ambrose and the Bishops were of another mind. They knew what it was to Dye for their Religion, but did not under∣stand what it was to brigue, or to resist.
I have thus far observ'd with Mr. B. what this Usurper Maximus did in favour of the Bishops, how he studied to please and rise by them. The next thing we ought to enquire after is, what success his Design upon the Bishops produced, and whether they answer'd his kindnesses, by for∣ming any interest to support his Pretensions, or by declaring in his favour. Mr. B. gives a full account of it in these words, and the said Maximus, and the Bi∣shops did so close, that only one Hyginus a Bishop is mention'd, and Theognostus, besides Ambrose and Martin, that rejected Maximus. I shall grant Mr. B. here more than he de∣sires. The truth is, that even those Bishops that he says rejected Maximus, did Really own him for Emperor, as having all the Confirmation the Laws of that time did require: and it is a mistake of Mr. B. be∣fore, where he tells us that Ambrose would not Communicate with the Bishops because they own'd Maximus, whereas all the quarrel of St. Martin and Theognostus was against his proceedings with the Priscillianists, and his Murdering of Gratian, if he Murder'd him. But for all that they own'd him to be Em∣peror, as much as those did that Commu∣nicated with him. Ambrose would not Com∣municate with Theodosius upon the like ac∣count: but never disown'd his Authority, as Emperor all that while; what Hyginus did, Mr. B. cannot tell without Revelati∣on; he was bannish'd by Maximus (as
St. Ambrose tells us,) but the Reason is not express'd. Well then: if all this be true, Mr. B's. Observation will be so too; That Bishops can comply with Ʋsurpers that will be for them, as well as Presbyters. What they can do is not our Question, but this in∣stance of Maximus I am sure does not dis∣cover in them any great inclination to it, for how I pray did these Bishops comply with that Usurper? Were any of them in∣strumental to his Advancement? did they Preach up his cause, and the lawfulness of his Revolt? Did they ever press the people to bring in their Plate, and Contributi∣ons? Or after his successes and the Murder of Gratian, did any of these Bishops justifie the Usurpers Proceedings, and preach and print in defence of that Barbarous Regicide? did they flatter him as the Preserver of Religion, the David, the Champion of Israel? I believe one much better vers'd in Antiquity than Mr. B. will find it a hard task to find out any Books, or Dedications of Bishops to this effect: But Mr. B. can tell who Printed, and Preach'd, and ga∣thered subscriptions, for the Approbation of the most execrable Regicide committed under the Sun: and others can say some∣thing, though at present it is not necessary to be particular. Well: But as to the Bi∣shops that own'd Maximus, what sort of compliance was theirs? What did they do so much in favour of the Usurper? When he had Conquer'd the Countrys where they
liv'd, and been own'd by both the Empe∣rors Reigning, then they submitted to him; that is, they did not think themselves ob∣lig'd to Rebel, or to stir up the People against him; that was none of their busi∣ness: and therefore they meddled not with it. And in short, we do not find they stu∣died any other complyance than only to be quiet and to do their own business. Some of them indeed desir'd his assistance against the Priscillianists; so might Bishops have desired Cromwel to supress Ranters, Seekers, Adamites, and such like, that were not only a Reproach to Christian Religion, but to Hu∣mane Society: and yet I do believe such an Address would hardly have been interpreted by the strictest Royalist for a Criminal com∣plyance with the Usurper. Most of the Bi∣shops in Maximus his Dominon communica∣ted with him, you will say; and that goes a little farther. I do not see what great hurt there was in all this: what if he pretended to be Penitent? what if he excus'd it as well as he could, by pretending he was forc'd by the Souldiers? I believe Ambrose did not scruple his Communion at first, and he seems to hint as much; but upon his second Em∣bassy he found him to be a bloody Aspiring man, and then would have nothing to do with him or any that adhered to him; which he might yet do with greater freedom and decence than those that were his Subjects, because Ambrose belong'd to another Prince, and own'd him only in Titular Conjuncti∣on
with his own Master. And now let the Reader judge by this, instance how the Bi∣shops comply'd with Usurpers, and how like the case of Maximus and his Bishops, is to that of Cromwel and his Adherents and flatterers. The last instance Mr. B. gives out of Antiquity is Ambrose his letter to Eugenius the Tyrant, which is inscrib'd, Clementissi∣me. Imperatori Eugenio: and in the close of the Letter we have these expressions, in his vero in quibus vos rogari decet, etiam exhi∣beri sedulitatem Potestati debitam; sicut & Scri∣ptum est, cui Honorem, Honorem; cui Tribu∣tum, Tributum; nam cum Privato detulerim corde Intimo, quomodo non differrem Impe∣ratori? i. e. But in this matter where it be∣cometh us to petition you, we must also give the diligence due to Power, as it is written, Honour to whom Honour; Tri∣bute to whom Tribute; for when I ho∣nour'd you, when you were a private man from the inwards of my heart, how should not I honour you an Emperor? Thus Mr. B. Here it is necessary in the first place to observe the occasion, and necessity of Ambrose his writing. Many of the Roman Senate, being still Gentiles, had prevail'd with Eugenius to furnish the expence of the publick Sacrifices, as it was used to be in former times: Ambrose, who had prevented this indignity to Christian Religion under Valentinian and Theodosius, was earnestly so∣licited by his friends, to try his Authority
with Eugenius, who was newly set up by the Army; with much unwillingness he at last undertook it. He gives him the Title of Emperor, and such Title as the condition of those times afforded, this Engenius had; being set up by the Army which had been in possession of the right of making Emperors for several ages. But though he were an Usurper, yet there is no flattery in using the common Stile to him; so Justin Martyr calls Marcus Antoninus  Pious, when he knew him to be an Idolater. St. Paul owns a respect due to the High Priest, although the office was Abrogated by our Saviours Priesthood, and the Jewish Priests were now Usurpers. So Protestant Princes, when they have occasion to write to the Pope, are fain to use the Stile of his Holiness; and yet by that Title are not to be understood to ac∣knowledge his Usurpations. So Ambrose in∣scribed his Epistle, Clementissimo Imperatori Eugenio. But does not he flatter him with these Expressions, sedulitas Potestati debita? This is but a poor Complement; and own'd no farther than in general Terms; Honour, where Honour. But does not he profess he Honours him? He says indeed, when he was a private man he had respect for him, and should not he now pay it when he was Emperor? This question I believe is a lit∣tle Artificial; and us'd on purpose because he would not speak out: as we may say by the words following, sed qui vobis deferri vultis, pimini ut deferatur ei, quem imperii vestri
vultis Autorem probari. But Sir, permit that Honour you would have pai'd you, to be given to him, whom you would have to be thought the Author of your Empire: whom you would have to be thought, is an inti∣mation that he begg'd his pardon that he could not think so. But for a farther vindication of St. Am∣brose, we may see more particularly from the same letter how he behav'd himself to∣wards this Usurper Eugenius. 1. Under∣standing he was to come to Milan, the Bi∣shop left the Town, because he would not be forc'd to communicate with, or to own him: and in the beginning of this Epistle he gives Eugenius himself this short account of it;Paulin. in. vit. Ambr. Secessionis mea causa timor Domini fuit. Nec pluris facere cujusvis Hominis, qua Christi gratiam consuevi. i. e. The fear of God was the occasion of my departure: and I am not used to make greater account of any mans favour, than of Christs. Then after a large account of what he had urg'd to Valentinian and Theodosius, the Reader may see how far Ambrose was from any mean complyance with this Eugenius; whom he would have no Communication with, not so much as by writing, though urg'd and provok'd to it: Ideo etiam in primordiis Imperii tui Seribenti non rescripsi, quia istud pravidebam futurum. In the beginning of thy Reign I did not answer thy Letter, because I foresaw what would be. Denique reposcenti litteras cum non Rescriberem, dixi,
haec causa est quod extorquendum ei Arbitror: At last when I refus'd to writ upon se∣cond summons, I gave this reason, that I thought it must be extorted from him. And now since Mr. B. upon this Letter of St. Ambrose does Appeal to the Reader: Saying, Reader do not only judge of my two Epistles to R. Cromwel by these Passages, but even of theirs that submitted to Oliver himself; and yet judge of the Inferences that are rais'd by our Accusers. Since I say he does Appeal, he cannot be offended, if I set down some passages of those Epistles, and then let the Reader compare: I will be none of his Ac∣cusers, nor make the least Inference good or bad from them. Before his five Dispu∣tations of Church Government, he has an Epistle to his Highness Richard Lord Prote∣ctor of the Commonwealth of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland. And it begins with these words.
Sir, THese Papers are Ambitious of Accompany∣ing those against Popery into your High∣ness's presence, for the Tender of their service, and that upon the same account. The Con∣troversies here decided, are those that have had a hand in most of the Great Transactions, that of late years have here past, and that still have a hand in the Differences that hinder our de∣sir'd peace. I observe that the Nation General∣ly rejoyceth in your Peaceable entrance upon the Government: and are affected with indignation, if they hear but any Rumours that Trouble∣some Persons would disturb their hopes. And many are perswaded that you have been strange∣ly kept from participating in any of our late bloody Contentions, that God might make you a Healer of our Breaches, and employ you in that Temple work which David himself might not be honour'd with, though it was in his mind, beause he had shed blood abundantly, and made great wars, 1 Chron. 22.7.8. I perceive also that some Settlement of Church Affairs will be expected from you by the most: And then after some bitterness against the Bishops and their party; and some sharpness against the Sectaries, and some discourse against a Ge∣neral Toleration in Religion, he comes at
last to Advise the Protector to keep tender∣ly the Golden mean in this point, and for his own sake not to Indulge all; where we have this Remarkable passage, If you give liber∣ty to all that is call'd Religion, you will soon be judged of no Religion, and lov'd accord∣ingly: Then after some more particular Ad∣vice how to behave himself, Mr. B. adds, If you could be the happy instrument of taking away the Divisions of the Godly—this would be the way to lift you highest in the esteem and love of all your people; and make them see that you were Appointed of God to be a Heal∣er and Restorer; and to Glory in you, and bless God for you, as the instrument of our chiefest peace.—I should have been as ready as another to censure such an Address as this, as guilty of Presumptuous boldness, but that I consider what is the work of my calling, and what it is to be faithful to the eternal God, and am Conscious of fidelity to your Highness in my boldness. My carnest Prayers for your Highness shall be, that your own soul being first subjected and devoted wholly to God, you may Rule as one that is Rul'd by him, &c. And that God would endue your Highness with that Heavenly wisdom.—That so the eter∣nal God may be engag'd in the Protection of your Dominions and you. —Parliaments will love and Honour you, and Abhor the Motions that tend to a division, or your just displeasure: Ministers will heartily pray for you and praise the Lord for his mercies by you. And Teach all the people to love, and Honour, and obey
you.—I crave your Hhigness Pardon for this Boldness, and your favourable acceptance of the tender'd service of R. BAXTER. An Extract out of Mr. B's. Epistle Dedicatory to R. Cromwel before his Key for Catholicks. Sir, THese Papers presume to tender you their ser∣vice, because the subject of them is such as it most nearly concerns both us and you, that you be well acquainted with the Roman Canons that Batter the Ʋnity, &c.—It is only the ne∣cessary defence of your life, and dignity, and lives of all the Protestants that are under your Protection or Government, and the souls of men, that I desire. The serious endeavours of your Renowned Father, for the Protestants of Sa∣voy, discover'd to the world by Mr. M. in his Letters, &c. Hath won him more esteem in the hearts of many that fear the Lord, than all his Victories in themselves consider'd, we pray that you may inherit a Tender care of the cause of Christ.—We humbly Request, that you would faithfully adhere to those that fear the Lord in your Dominions. Then speaking of several sorts of persons that he calls Mask'd Pa∣pists, (as I believe some were, and I am
afraid there are more of the sort:) He mentions in the Tenth place, Those that under the pretence of defending Prelacy, and of uniting us to Rome, do adhere to the course of Grotius and St. Clara (one without the spi∣rit of Divination may guess who are meant) and Ʋnchurch all Reform'd Churches, degrade all the Minsters that are not of their way, while they maintain the verity of the Church of Rome and the Validity of her Ordination.— These Ten sorts of men we are jealous of, and if ever you Advance them into places of com∣mand or power, It will encrease our jealousies. —Lastly we beseech you that Toleration may be limited by execution as well as by Law— and who would have thought that had not known it, that they (the Jesuits and Friers) had so Insinuated into the several Sects among us, and that they were so industrious in their work, as the New-castle Scottish Jew was, &c. At last after all his Advices and Petitions he adds,—If you ask who it is that Pre∣sumeth thus to be your Monitor: It is one that serveth so great a Master, that he thinks it no unwarrantable Presumption in such a case to be faithfully plain with the greatest Prince; it is one that stands so near eternity, where Laza∣rus shall wear the Crown, that unfaithful man-pleasing would be to him a double crime; it is one that rejoyceth in the present happiness of England, and wishes earnestly that it were but as well with the rest of the world, and that honoureth all the Providences of God by which we have been brought to what we are. And
he is one, that concurring in the common hopes yet to these Nations under your Government. And observing your acceptance of the frequent Addresses, that from all Parts of the Land come to you, was encourag'd to do what you daily al∣low your Preachers to do, and to Concur in the Tenders, and some performance of his service. —That the Lord will make you a Healer and preserver of his Churches here at Home, and a successful helper to his Churches abroad, is the earnest Prayer of your Highness's Faith∣ful Subject, R. BAXTER. I hope Mr. B. will find no Reason to tax me of any disingenuity in this Extract, for I have not torn pieces of sentences, and conceal'd any thing that might give words a more favourable Construction; but I must confess it is with great Reluctance that I have been able to do it at all: And since Mr. B. himself refers to them, and compares them with Ambrose his Epistle, and endeavours to justifie them by hinting at other instances, I could not avoid giv∣ing some account of them. I have promis'd to make no Inferences, Malicious, or not Malicious from them, but as to the occasion that has brought in all this, I must crave leave to shew him, besides the expressions, a great difference between these Epistles and that
he compar'd them with. For that was ex∣torted by importunity, these are volunteer services to an Usurper. Eugenius had writ∣ten twice to Ambrose before he would make any answer; and then he owns such a fro∣wardness, that unless the Honour of Reli∣gion, threatned by the Restauration of I∣dolatry, had requir'd it of him, he would not then have been prevail'd with to have made any Applications to him: although there had pass'd an aquaintance and friend∣ship between them, when Eugenius was a Private man: But Mr. B. was a stranger to R. Cromwel, and had no great temptation to dedicate books to him, nor any reason∣able hopes that the Protector would ever read this Epistle. In short, if I were as worthy to advise Mr. B. as he was to ad∣vise Cromwel, I would say it were much more adviseable for a Christian (especially for one that thinks he is so near his Eternal State,) to repent and cry peccavimus with the Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon, whom he some∣thing Unchristianly derides, than to stand upon justification of the fact, and think to face it out by comparing himself with them that were so unlike him in all their circum∣stances. This odious, unpleasant work is no sooner done, but Mr. B. leads me into a subject much more Invidious, by his charg∣ing the late Rebellion upon the Bishops and their Party.
But this I must add (says Mr. B.) ad ho∣mines, That it has been the Bishops themselves, that have been the grand cause of our Church Divisions and Separations. What advantage they have given the Separatists I have shewed before: I am sure in the Congregation where I once was Teacher, and the Country about, no∣thing that ever came to pass, has so inclin'd the people to avoid the Prelates, as their own do∣ing, especially the silencing, and Reproaching their Ancient Teachers, whom they knew longer and better than the Prelates did: and to say truth, the people generally are very Competent judges of their Pastors. But if the Bishops have been the Cause, the Grand cause of our divisions, how came it to pass that when the Bishops were gone, that these divisions increas'd? in other evils, when you remove the Grand cause, there follows abatement of the distemper: This strange disease of separation grows more incurable by removing the cause. But Mr. B. saith, the reproaching and Silencing of the ancient Mi∣nisters gave offence, and made the Bishops odious. If Mr. B. means that which was done after his Majesties Restauration: it will be an easie matter to answer, There were many of those Ministers that were Usurpers, and had intruded into the Church∣es of other men, who had been silenc'd, and cast out by those powers that had rea∣son to be jealous of honest men. There were many others that were intruders into the Ministry, and such not a few of them
as Mr. B. himself would not have thought fit to have continued. All the rest were such as would not submit to the Rule that was then Establisht in the Church, but chose rather to leave their Livings, and the Bi∣shops could not help it any other wise than as they were Members of Parliament; for it was the Law that tied them to that choice, and not the Bishops. If Mr. B. means what happen'd before the last Civil Wars; as 'tis likely he may because that follows next, then these Ancient Teachers that he speaks of, howsoever they might be qualified otherwise, were the instruments of an Anti-Monarchical, Anti Episcopal Fa∣ction. They would preach but they would not conform to the Establisht Religion. Nay many of them would Preach against it, and against their Governours too; and Ali∣enate the pople from them by their Sermons. These were such Incendiaries as no Govern∣ment would have endured. And what man∣ner of men several of them were may be observ'd from the Register of Norwich: where,Heyl. Life of Land, p. 291. of four persons who were inhibi∣ted preaching, one was by Trade a Draper, another a Weaver, and a third a Taylor: and perhaps not altogether so learned as the Weavers and Plowmen of Kidderminster, whom Mr. B. vouches of Abilities not in∣ferior to most of the Ancient Fathers. Yet by Silencing of these, saith Mr. B. the Bishops caus'd separation. It is pity the people should know no better than to follow such
men as these out of the Church: but if there be such an absolute necessity that these men must preach I should think they would be∣come a Conventicle much better than a Church. In the next place Mr. B. gives us a new account of the original of the late Wars: and affirms that it was a Parliament of Episco∣pals and Erastians, and not of Presbyterians, who first took up Arms in England against the King. It is well the Bishops had no share in it. But pray where were the Presbyterians, when this Parliament took up Arms, were they not yet in being? Or were there none of them in the House? Or did they Protest against the proceedings of those Episcopals and Erastians? As many of them as were of the Parliament I hope consented to the taking up of Arms; and it may be, may give Mr. B. little thanks for depriving them of the glory of the acti∣on. For the Erastians I have not much to say; but that at last they outwitted the Presbyterians, although in the beginning they were reckon'd all one. But can Mr. B. believe (or think any body else so weak as to be impos'd upon in a matter so notori∣ous) that it was a Parliament of Episcopals and Erastians, and not Presbyterians; that began the like War? were they Episcopals that voted down Episcopacy, Root and Branch before the war was begun? Were they Episcopals that Peti∣tion'd the King at York for Reformation in Di∣scipline and Worship? i. e. for Abolishing of Episcopacy and Common Prayer? Were they
Episcopals who in their humble desires ten∣dred to the King at Oxford,Feb. 1. 1643. pray him to give his Royal Assent for the utter Abolishing Arch-Bishops, Bishops, &c. out of the Church of Eng∣land; and to promise to Pass other such Good Bills, for setling of Church Government, as upon con∣sultation the Assembly of Divines shall be re∣solv'd on by both houses of Parliament? Were they Episcopas that enter into a Solemn League and Covenant against Episcopacy, and for Reforming of our Church after the Presbyterian Platform? In short were they Episcopals that set up Presbytery by so many and repeated Ordinances?Aug. 19. Oct. 20. Feb. 20. And this was the Parliament that began and continued the War: The Erastians and Independents were at first inconsiderable, and acted joyntly with the Presbyterians, taking the Covenant as well as they; and some of them were pre∣sent at the forming of it in Scotland. But afterwards, opposing the Establishment of Presbytery, they found a device to elude all the force of the Presbyterian Covenant, by the means of that clause in it, that Re∣formation intended was to be according to the word of God; which they conceived Presbyterian Government not to be. Some of them added, that the Covenant was so attemkper'd on purpose to take them in; for their Principles they said were very well known when they took it.Grand. De∣bate. p. 89.90, 91, &c. But the Presbyterians ut∣terly deny'd any such thing, that they knew any principles of theirs that were contrary to Presbytery; and the Assembly of Divines
in their First Conference with the dissent∣ing Brethren,p. 108. &c. urge the Honour of this Presbyterian Parliament as an argument against the Toleration of the Independents,p. 20. because that in so doing, the Parliament should grant Liberty to destroy, and pull down, what themselves are endeavouring to set up. Now How these should be no Presbyterians who set up Presbytery, how they were Episcopals that destroy'd Episcopacy, is (I must con∣fess) too hard a Riddle for a man of a plain understanding; unless one may think that Mr. B. gives this Bishop-destroying Parli∣ament the Title of Episcopal, as the Ro∣mans honour'd several of their Generals with the Titles of those Nations they had overcome: or else that Mr. B. speaks by a figure, too frequent, though not very decent in History call'd Fiction. As to the particulars, with which Mr. B. con∣cludes this Chapter I have so long dwelt upon, of the Parliaments Army, Generals, Lord Lieutenants, Assembly of Divines be∣ing Episcopals and Conformists, I had ra∣ther and body else should disprove than I: not that it is so difficult a matter, for who that can remember so long, or can read English does not know the contrary? But because I am unwilling to renew the me∣mory of so unpleasant and odious things; and heartily wish, that as our Gracious King pass'd an Act of Oblivion for those matters, so they who enjoy the benefit of that act of Grace would suffer us to for∣get
the occasion of it, or cease to presume that we have so far lost all memory and sense that we do not know the same things when we see them acted over again: But however Mr. B. informs us of the Original of the late Rebellion, I am sure there was a time when we had a very different account of things; there was a time when the Pres∣byterians and Independents contended who should have the greatest share of the Glory of having carry'd on that cause; and there is one who is very particular in this matter on the behalf of the Presbyterians,Bastwick of Independ. p. 624. & seq. to whom I re∣fer the Reader for his satisfaction.
CHAP. I. A short View of the other Governments set up in opposition to Episcopacy. IF eminent places or offices, as they give authority and jurisdiction, could like∣wise secure those that are possess'd of them from errors in Administration; if any cha∣racter or order could so Consecrate the per∣son that bears it, as to exempt him from the Common condition of Humane frailty, and from a possibility of being wicked; the world must needs be happy, by submitting to such a constitution, and then Schism and Sedition would have no Pretext. But if after all the Accessions of authority and honour, men retain their nature and their manners, and are subject to passions as they were before, it is no wonder if all de∣grees and Denominations can furnish Nu∣merous instances, of vice and infamy, and the more eminent any order is, the more frequent examples of evil men, it common∣ly affords: For the blemishes of such per∣sons are more Conspicuous, and expos'd to publick view and observation, and the eyes
of all men are fix'd upon them, so as they will quickly discern what is amiss, nor are they less forward to censure their mis∣carriages. Besides it is possible that the Governing part may not always consist of the best men, for ambition makes men In∣dustrious in the pursuit of power, and goes a shorter and generally a more effectual, though less direct way to obtain it. And when they are in possession, they begin to discover that temper they before Artifici∣ally concealed, and become more open, since they have less restraint. Lastly even Power it self is a great temptation, and an eminent private virtue has often times lost it self in the Exercise of Authority, as weak heads grow giddy when they are plac'd upon a height. But however it comes to pass, so it is, that there is no sort of Government whether of Church or State, which any one that has a mind to disgrace it, may not shew to have been in the hands of very infamous Persons; and that the best that have possess'd it were not without their faults. If one have a mind to Reproach Monarchy there are Ne∣ro's and Caligula's enough; nay Augustus and Trajan, who are reckoned the best of that rank, had great and some inexcusable faults: If one he inclin'd to raile against Common∣wealths: the Ingratitude of Athene or Rome or Carthage towards their best friends and preservers will furnish him with Infinite matter. If one would Disgrace Episcopa∣acy, Church History is full of evil contenti∣ous
Bishops, Paulus Samosatenus, Eusebius, Nicomed, Nestorius, Dioscorus, and innumera∣ble others: and the most Orthodox and holy were not without their blemishes. Theophi∣lus, Cyril, Epiphanius had very undecent heats. Nay the Apostles themselves had a Judas, and the rest of them were not free from misunderstandings, which must needs give great offence to the Church: What shall we do then in this case? Shall we submit to no Government that has been prophan'd by evil administration? shall we be of no Church that has any mixture of the world? Shall we renounce Monarchy because we have read of Tyrants? or throw down Episcopacy, because some of that order have been un∣worthy of it? By this reason we must have no Government or order at all, or as the A∣postle infers, we must go out of the world. But since our necessities require some kind of order, and there can no number of men live by any Common Rule, whether of Re∣ligion or Law, without authority plac'd in some hands or other to enforce it; and since God himself was pleased to appoint the kind of Government under which his Church was to be; notwithstanding that evil men might creep into the office, we remain still under an Obligation to submit our selves to it, and it is not in our power to alter that constitution. This Mr. B. and all the Dissenters will easily grant, and therefore they say that they contend only for the Primitive Institution of Church Govern∣ment.
Be it so: yet this long deduction of reproach and accusation does not prove any thing to the prejudice of the office; and this notwithstanding, Episcopacy may be the Church Government of the Apostles setling; for those things that fill Mr. B.'s Indictment against Bishops are the faults of the men not of the Office, and the same miscarria∣ges may be discover'd in other kinds of Church Government that are not Episcopal. And since every project is more plausible, and seems to have fewer inconveniencies in the Idea than in the use; lest any one for want of experience, or History, may think Presbytery, or any Church Government that is not Episcopal to be subject to no abuse or Disorders, I will give a short account of the Rise and Progress of that form of Govern∣ment, that has obtain'd in such of the Re∣form'd Churches as have cast off their Bi∣shops; and shew that they have suffer'd under the same Calamities, that had be∣fallen Episcopal Churches, and are guilty of most of the same things, as requiring sub∣scriptions, Conformity, &c. as our Bishops against whom all this History, and bitter∣ness is directed. It is not yet a Hundred and fifty years that the Church has known any other Govern∣ment but Episcopal; and the newer Models of Church Polity have obtain'd but in a small part even of the Reform'd Churches; and that in some places under Persecuting Prin∣ces, who more effectually keep under the
Tares in the field of the Church, prevent excesses, and Unite the suffering Church, than any sort of Church Government or Disci∣pline whatsoever: yet the Histories even of these Churches can furnish too many instan∣ces of Tumult and disorder, of Heresies Schisms, and contentions, of Wars, and Desolations: and if this cannot be drawn into any argument against the Presbyteri∣an way, there is less reason it should be urg'd against Episcopacy, that for so long time obtain'd over the Universal Church: which under this constitution, had pass'd through fire and water, and then was brought into a wealthy place, through distresses, and Persecutions, through all the encourage∣ments of wealth and power. And in short, through all the Tryals that can be made by all the differences of outward condition, and Circumstances. They who fancy a time when the Church had no Bishops, do represent it as then full of discord, and Distraction, (I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas.) So that as, they say, it was necessary for the preser∣vation of peace and Unity to appoint one person over the rest: and if the Presbyte∣rian parity had any place in the Primitive times as some do imagine, it must needs have been an intolerable kind of Govern∣ment, since all on the sudden it was Uni∣versally abolish'd; it must have given strange occasion of offence when all the Christian Churches in the world should conspire to
Abrogate this Polity, and to destroy all the memory and footsteps of it, so that in the lamentable distractions which the Church fell into afterwards under Bishops, none should so much as propose this way of relief, by returning to their Ancient Government; and the people that were so harrass'd with perpetual contentions about their Bishops must either think that there could be no Church where there was no Bishop, or else that Presbyterian parity, or a Popular Church Government would occasion yet greater mischiefs than those they suffer'd. That the inconveniences are not less, will appear from the experience of such Churches as have cast off Episcopacy, some of which, (at leastwise a good number of very un∣derstanding men in them,) do at time this wish that they might be govern'd by Bishops, and conceive it to be the only remedy for their divisions. Beza in vitâ Calvini. J. Lassitius de Discip. Frat. Bohem. Calvin. Ep. ad fratr Bohem. Eccles. Bo∣hem. ad Ang. Parae∣nes.In the beginning of the Reformation those Eminent Instruments whom God was pleas'd to employ in that work, were so wholly taken up with preaching, and writing against those gross errors and superstitions which had cover'd the face of Christianity, that they had little or no leisure to look after Disci∣pline or Government; and did do the work of Evangelists, rather than Governours of the Church. But when they saw to what mis∣chiefs the want of Government and discipline expos'd the Reform'd Churches, and were thereby convinced that there must be build∣ing
up as well as pulling down; then they began seriously to consider of some Ecclesi∣astical Polity: For many had joyn'd with them in pulling down Superstition and Papal Tyranny, who, when they began to discover their opinions more particularly, became intolerable, and advanc'd such do∣ctrines, as did not only destroy Christianity, but all Government and society.Muntzer. Swenckfeld &c. These by good providence were neither Bishops, nor Episcopal men, but against all sort of Church Government and order, and while there is any of this leaven remaining, let what sort of Government you please obtain, there will never be an end of Schism and Sedi∣tion. For if Episcopacy be Abolish'd, what ever is establish'd in its Room, will be ac∣counted by such men every whit as Anti∣christian; and Presbyterian Glasses and Sy∣nods, or Congregational Episcopacy will have no fairer quarter; for these will admit no Government, no Law, but that which will permit every one to do what he pleases; and that will set up a State of Grace just like Hobbs his state of nature. It is very much to be fear'd, that this is the most pre∣vailing principle among our Anti-Episco∣pal Dissenters. And if out of such inconsidera∣ble beginnings they increas'd so fast when the fences of our Church had been once taken away, as not only to ruin all projects of unity and Establishment, but to possess themselves of the Government; what may we expect now when they are
form'd into considerable parties, and out∣number those of the Classical and Parochial Presbyterians; that is, all that are for any sort of settlement that may be suited to the Circumstances of this Nation? What may we not have Reason to fear, if the Laws which give check to their Insolences were once taken away? And if they should be taken in under the Notion of Protestants? A dishonour from which it has pleas'd God hitherto to preserve that name, according to the prayers of the first Reformers, who dreaded the growth of Sects, no less than the return of Popery it self. But besides that Heresie may spring where there are no Bishops, as there were none in the Reformation, when those Monsters first appear'd; There can be also bitter conten∣tions about Religion, where Bishops have nothing to do. Luther, and Carolostadius were no Bishops,M. Adams in vit. Ca∣rolost. and yet they could quar∣rel, and disturb the Reformation they had in hand with their Jarres. Carolostadius in Luthers. Absence Reform'd the Church of Wittenborg, took away Images. Auri∣cular Confession, &c. Which Luther took offence at, as being done without his Autho∣rity, or advice, which was the beginning of the Sacramentarian War: and M. Adams blames them both in these words, visus est uterque cupidior Gloria. Luther was angry that any body should set up himself a new master in a place where he was so much concerned, and could not indure, Ordinationes suas in
Populo pressâ mea authoritate erigi: And this contention was so Exasperated that after a Conference, Carolostadius was Banished from Turingia by the Elector of Saxonie's order, and the instigation of Luther; and some other Ministers were turn'd out of their places upon the same Account: and the sufferer did not spare to render all this Treat∣ment as Invidious as he could, and therefore writes a Letter to the people of Orlamund, Subscribed A. Bodenstein, non Auditus, non Convictus, à Martino Luthero Ejectus: If Bi∣shops or their Councils had been concern'd in this, what Bitter Reflections should we have upon the Prelatical persecuting Spirit? But it seems other men as well as Bishops have pas∣sions, and may disturb the Church: Yet we are not to aggravate, but to cover as much as we can the frailties of great per∣sons, and to retain still a Reverence for the Authority of their Offices, and their Personal Excellences. But whereever the Lutheran Reformation was received, Diocesan Episcopacy soon be∣came the Church Government; and I be∣lieve it will be found to have preserv'd those Churches in as great peace and Unity, if not more, than those had that were Gover∣ned without Bishops. The Churches of Sweden and Denmark never knew what Schism or Heresie was, but by reading or hear-say: and those of Germany, though something more disquieted, yet it was seldom from within, but by Projects of Union with
other Churches under a different kind of Po∣lity, as well as of different opinions in some points of Religion: It is to be wish'd that the Churches of the Ausburg Confession, as they took care to preserve the Antient form of Church Governmet, had been also a lit∣tle more careful in the point of Ordinati∣on: For their Bishops, though they have the same authority with Diocesans, yet were at first ordain'd but by Presbyters; and the Principles of those Churches touching the right of ordination are so loose, that I be∣lieve those of the Presbyterian Discipline will hardly allow them. Hunnius defend∣ing their Ordinations, says, the power is in the Church diffusive; and that it may be conveyed, not only by Bishops or Presby∣ters, but by Deacons, or any body else if the Church think fit: and I am afraid the Practice of some of those Churches is not o∣therwise to be justifi'd. But before this Lutheran Reformation, was that of the Bohemians; not that of the Calixtins only, but the Ʋnitas fratrum Bohe∣morum; whose Churches were govern'd by Diocesan Bishops; and where Discipline was so far from being Impossible,Commenii. Hist. Ec∣cles. Slav. p. 32. notwithstand∣ing the Dioceses were very large, that they were perhaps the best Govern'd Churches in the world: Bucer speaking of this Govern∣ment, says, haec verò est Coelestis potius, quam Ecclesiastica in Terris Hierarchia, and Calvin was so taken with this Government, as well as Discipline, that he looks upon their Go∣verning
and ordaining Pastors as no incon∣siderable blessing,Ep. ad Pa∣stor. Bohem. Neque Vero parvo est esti∣mandum quod tales habent Pastores a quibus Re∣gantur & Ordinentur: and those were their Bishops, as may be seen in that Account they gave of themselves in Ratio Disciplinae Or∣dinisque Ecclesiastici in Ʋnitate fratrum Bohe∣morum, printed at Lesna, 1632. and after∣wards at the Hague by Commenius, 1660. Whoever would know more of these Epis∣copal Diocesan Churches may consult La∣sitius, or the short Accout of Commenius, the then only Remaining Bishop of those Churches. And these had such Bishops as were not only invested with the full Au∣thority of Diocesans over several Churches, but such as had been ordain'd according to the Canons of the Ancient Church,Stephanus. accito Epis∣copo altero, &c. Com∣men. Hist. p. 24. by the Bishops of the Waldenses, who derived them∣selves by an uninterrupted succession from the Apostles. It is time now to Return to the Princi∣pal Design, which was to shew, how no other form of Government can secure the Church from Heresie, Schism, and Conten∣tion, any more than Episcopacy; and that those Churches which put themselvs under new Models of Government and discipline, have been excercis'd with Schism, Heresie, and Sedition, no less than those under Epis∣copacy. The Churches which follow'd the Refor∣mation of Zuinglius had at first no Govern∣ment nor discipline that was properly, Ec∣clesiastical.
All authority rested in the Civil Magistrate, and the Ministers did only preach and administer the Sacraments with∣out excluding any. It was from this pra∣ctice (I suppose) that the Divines of that way came to speak generally so loosely of the power of the Keys, making it all to consist in preaching, without any regard to Ecclesiastical discipline. But the Licen∣tiousness that followed this defect of Disci∣pline and Government, soon open'd the eyes of the Ministers, who Complain'd pas∣sionately of the Increase of Libertinism un∣der pretence of Reformation; and endea∣vour'd to make the people sensible, that there is more required to make a true Protestant, than to Renounce the Pope, and Transubstantiation; and that the Notion of a Church did imply something more than a Company of sound believers met together to hear a Sermon. Calvin, a person of ex∣traordinary Abilities, was one of the first that observ'd and Complain'd of this defect in the Reformation; and endeavour'd to Remedy it in the Church where he was Pa∣stour, by Establishing an Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment:Baza vit Calv. and that perhaps not such as he thought most perfect and absolute, but such as the Circumstances of the place would bear. The people of Geneva were sufficiently prejudic'd against Episcopacy, having turn'd out their Bishop, who had likewise a title to be their Prince; and to have talk'd of Introducing a Bishop there,
would have sounded as harsh as the menti∣on of a King would have done to the Ro∣mans after the expulsion of Tarquin. But suppose they could have been Reconcil'd to the name and the office, upon assurance it should not exceed its proper bounds; it is possible Calvin might look upon it as too Invidious a proposal to his Church, for fear of being understood to recommend himself; and to affect dominion over his Brethren; Episcopacy then seeming Impra∣cticable in that place, he devised a form of Go∣vernment that should be more popular and consequently more acceptable the Ministers were to be all of equal Authority, and were in the first place to govern the Church, and with them a certain number out of the Lai∣ty under the Title of ruling Elders were to have a share in the Church Government; and this mix'd Council without any Bishop was to exercise all Ecclesiastical Censures and Jurisdiction. One would think this would be unexceptionable, but it proved o∣therwise; for this frame was no sooner begun, but it was presently broken in pieces, and the Author banish'd: But his Reputation a∣broad made them reflect upon this Treat∣ment with shame, and desire him to return: With him this Government was restor'd, which was so far from remedying all disor∣ders that it became the occasion of some very great ones; and the State of that Church as it is discrib'd by Calvin in his let∣ters to his friends, and by Beza in his life,
was most lamentably distracted; and this Government was made odious in the begin∣ning of it by very harsh, and rigorous pro∣ceedings. The Expulsion of Castellio a man of Great and Polite Learning, was too In∣vidious. The opposing of the Senate in the Election of a Minister to such a point of heat and Contention,Beza vit. Calv. as to endanger the peace of the City, wanted little of Sediti∣on. Calvins quarrels with Perinus came to that height, that the Council of the City had almost cut one anothers throats about it. Siquidem eousque semel in ipsâ curiâ deven∣tum est, coactis Diacosiis, & pene exertis jam Ensibus parum abfuerit quin mutuis caedibus ipsam Curiam cruentarent. And what was the reason of so dangerous a Contenti∣on? No Article of the Creed was in dan∣ger; It was not for any part of the faith that they contended so fiercely: the great∣est occasion of all this stir was some Recre∣ations, as Dancing, which the People of Geneva were addicted to, and Calvin forbad upon pain of Excomunication, this bred the first discontents. Perinus being Captain of the people, and perhaps a lover of Liberty, began to oppose this Tyranny, and to charge Calvin with false Doctrine; two of the Mi∣nisters joyn'd with him, and were turn'd out, as Scandalous and Seditious: and so by degrees the Contention was improv'd to that desperate point that the Common Coun∣cil of the City had almost destroyed one another. I might add a great many more in∣stances
of the Tumults occasion'd by this Di∣scipline; and shew how distracted the con∣dition of Geneva was during the time of Cal∣vin, meerly upon the account of this form of Ecclesiastical Government; But whoever desires to see more may have Recourse to Calvin's life written by Beza. But as to the Rigours of that Discipline, I suppose the Highest Tyranny of Epilcopa∣cay can hardly match them. One was put to death at Geneva for Libelling Calvin: I wish the Majesty of Kings were so Sa∣cred to the men of this way. Another was banished the City for preaching against Pre∣destination, a hard punishment for weakness of understanding. Servetus was burn'd for Heresie; by the Instigation of Calvin and the Minsters of Geneva, and such others of the Neighbour hood as they could engage in that cause; which occasioned no small dis∣putes between them, and some other more Moderate Divines: the Case of Ithacius and the bloody Bishops, as Mr. B. calls them, was not half so odious: for this Heretick Servetus was burn'd for opinions only, the Priscillianists for lewd abominable Practices besides. Nor did Geneva only feel the evil effects of this unepiscopal Government, but it had in a little while an unhappy Influence upon the Neighbouring Churches of Suitzerland. Erastus having published his Theses of Excom∣munication, was confuted by Beza; yet there remain'd still several Ministers dissatisfi'd;
as Bullinger, Gualter and diverse others. This occasion'd very great jealousies between the several Parties, and it had almost come to a Rupture. The Churches of the Pala∣tinate were no less shaken with this new Controversie,Vid. Bul∣lingeri Ep∣cum Erasti. Thes. Edi∣tas. and the zealots for this Go∣vernment and discipline took all occasions publickly to maintain them; but the Pru∣dence of that Prince prevented the mischiefs which threatned his Churches from this que∣stion. Bullinger in a Letter dated March. 10. 1574. and Gualter in some Letters of his to the Bishops of London and Ely, and several other eye-witnesses do sufficiently testifie the Lamentable condition of those Reformed Churches, and the Confusion which Presbyterian Government brought upon them. From Geneva this Government was brought into the Churches of France. But what success it had there, the Miserable distractions and wars that presently follow'd do sufficiently declare: I do not charge all that Tragedy upon this Government; but it seems it cannot prevent Tumults, and Sedition, and War, any more than Epis∣copacy: For with what violence the Re∣formation was carried on in many parts of that Kingdom, is not unknown to any that has but look'd into the Histories of those times. There were some very wise men who understood the condition of that King∣dom, of opinion, that had the Reformati∣on there proceeded with more Moderation,
and been content to have left the Ancient Government, and some observances of un∣questionable Antiquity, that Kingdom was in a great disposition to receive it: and in probability all the following Wars, and bloodshed about Religion would have been prevented. That the Reformed Churches of France had no considerable differences between them, is owing not so much to the Constitu∣tion of their Government, as to their Com∣mon danger: which United them closer than all the bands of Discipline and Govern∣ment. Besides, when they obtained some Edicts in favour of their Religion, they Extended them only to such as their Churches would own; and so every dissenter from them, was left to the Rigour of the Laws against Hereticks, and enjoy'd no benefit of that Protection which the Reformed Churches were to have. Upon this account the Lutherans (of whom there were many in that Kingdom in the beginning of the Re∣formation) were oblig'd either to Conform to the Rule of those Churches, or to leave the Country: and these necessities kept them along while Undivided. Besides this, the affairs of that Reformation were ma∣nag'd, not so much by their Ministers, as by the great Persons who were the Heads of that party: and their Synods were imploy'd not so much in making Ecclesiastical Canons; as in taking effectual measures for their mu∣tual defence and preservation; in receiving
assurances of Protection from foreign Prin∣ces;La vie de Mr. Dis Plesses. Mornay. p. 119, 120, 123, 124, 231, 280, & 345. in making Alliances; in providing for Peace and War, so that they might be more properly call'd Parliaments than Synods, al∣though they had their Politick Assemblies besides. And yet they were not without their dif∣ferences about Religion among themselves. Some Ministers starting new and unprofita∣ble questions in Divinity, their remedy was no other than that of the Ancients, to con∣demn such opinions as they judged to be dangerous by the Authority of their Synods: and they descended to take notice of very trifling subtilties some times, such be∣ing unregarded, would perhaps have died of themselves. The Synod of Saumur condem∣ned a Minister of Poictou for questioning the Humanity of Christ when he lay in the Grave, and the same Assembly condemned the Doctrine of a Suiss, not under their juris∣diction, about justification by works after Re∣generation, a Controversie meerly about words; another Synod at Gap. declared a∣gainst the Doctrine of Piscator about Justi∣fication, which Alarm'd some of the Re∣formed Churches; but the Prudence of Du Plessis prevented any mischief that might have ensu'd, by stopping the proceedings of that Synod. P. D. Moulin and Tilenus happen'd to have some difference of a dangerous na∣ture, about the Mystery of the Incarnation: and notwithstanding these great Professours had learning and distinctions enough, (which
Mr. B. says the Ancients that first mov'd this Controversie wanted,) yet they could by no means agree about it; and disputes about Person, Nature, Properties had like to have endanger'd the peace of those Churches. But how was it prevented? The Litigants were too considerable to be pass'd by with Contempt, and the subject of the difference was of so high a nature, that it ought not to be left to the hazard of so slight a reme∣dy: How then was this Controversie deci∣ded? Not by Niceness of Distinction; no by distingushing nature into 9 sorts, or split∣ing of Notions; But the wise Du Plessis having got their Papers into his hands burn'd them altogether: and the fire (with∣out making distinction between the Ortho∣dox, and Heretical sence) put an end to that Controversie.Vid Du Pless. p. 388. But yet it was not quite ended, for it began to revive afterwards o of its own Ashes, and so made some little flat∣tering, but was compos'd again by the same Person; to whose prudence the Unity of that Church is in great measure to be ascri∣bed, as the Instrument of the Divine good∣ness towards them: for after his death the peace of those Churches was very much en∣dangered by a new Controversie about Uni∣versal Redemption, and the Nature of Ori∣ginal sin; and the Dissention was not far from a Schism. Cameron though he had clear'd himself of all suspition of Heterodoxy at his promotion to the Professourship of Saumur, had the bad fortune after his death to fall
into suspition of Heresie: and his Scholars and followers were brought into no small troubles: What had been allow'd by the Synod of Dort as sound Doctrine in the Eng∣lish Divines, was now call'd in question in France, and what was approv'd in Camero while he was alive,Acts Au∣thentiques per Blon∣del. became dangerous and Heretical after his death. It is hardly to be imagin'd, what great contention this little, and to some, Imperceptible difference did create; or how many Synods it employ'd, Amyraldus, Dallee, Blondel, and several others were look'd upon as little better than He∣reticks; and their Doctrine about Original sin condemn'd in a National Synod at Cha∣renton, and an Abjuration of it requir'd by all those that were to enter into holy or∣ders; and a stricct Injunction was layd on all Ministers upon pain of all the Censures of the Church, not to preach any other wise of this point than according to the Common opinion. And all this stir, as Blondel deduces it,p. 50. was rais'd from little pri∣vate quarrels between some of the Profes∣ours; and from the discontents of the University of Montauban that they of Sau∣mur should be favour'd too much in the di∣stribution of such Pensions as the Churches furnish'd for the maintenance of their Uni∣versities; and they thought themselves wrong'd and undervalued because their Sa∣laries were less: We see that lesser matters than a Bishoprick can sometimes disturb the Church; and that others as well as Bi∣shops
shops can prosecute their private piques to the hazard of the Publick peace; and that there will be contentions where there is no Episcopacy. If we Consult the History of the Reform'd Churches in the Ʋnited Netherlands, We shall be farther confirm'd that Heresie, Schifm, and contention, may arise under other forms of Church Government as well as Episcopal; and the parity of Ministers cannot remove all occasions of Strise, and Disturbance; and many eminent men of that Church are said to be very sensible of this truth, and to look upon Episcopacy as the most effectual remedy in the world for their Divisions. The Church Government of that Country was not establish'd without great trouble and difficulty; and occasi∣on'd no small disturbance; the Ministers taking an authority to themselves of setling the Church as they thought fit without the consent and Concurrence of the Magistrates. The first Synod they held, was at Dort, as∣sembl'd without the permission of the Civil Authority;Brandt. Hist. vande Reform. l. xi. where the Heidelberg Catechism was impos'd upon all Ministers; and they were farther obliged to subscribe the Netherland Confession, and to submit themselves to the Presbyterian Government. (It seems the Bi∣shops are not the only Church. Governours in the world that require subscriptions and Canonical obedience,) Nor were the Mini∣sters only bound to subscribe, but all the Lay Elders, and Deacons, were to declare
Assent and Consent to the Articles of Disci∣pline. The Civil Magistrate was very much offended with these Proceedings and would by no means confirm, no not so much as take into Consideration the acts of this Synod: but said they would take care of Religion themselves, and appoint Commissioners to put in, and put out Preachers as they should think Expedient; and as for their Consistories and Classes, they declared they knew of no Power they had. The Ministers on the other side Preach'd up their own authority; and vilifi'd the States, calling them in derision Stakes. But the effect of this Contention about Presbyterian Govern∣ment was very sad; for while they were quarreling about Jurisdiction the Spaniards made great Advances, and took several Towns in Holland. The Synod of Middlebrough An. 1581.Band 13. was held likewife without the Magistrates leave, and the Historian observes that the Eccleslasticks were thought by several to have extended their Jurisdiction here a little too far, and to the prejudice of the Civil pow∣er. Here they distributed their Churches, throughout the Country, digesting them in∣to Classes, and Classes into Synods. Here like∣wise they excluded the Magistrates from any share in the Election of Church Officers, and oblig'd all Ministers, Elders, Deacons, Pro∣fessors of Divinity, and School-masters, to subscribe the Netherland Confession; which was little so known there, that several mem∣bers
of this Synod had never seen it, and began to enquire what Confession of 37 Articles it was that they talk'd of. They order'd likewise that the form of Excommunication should be, I deliver thee up to Satan; some∣thing more harsh than the Anathema's of Bishops and their Councils. Here also they condemn'd Kaspers Colhaes Minister of Ley∣den for unsound Doctrine. But he would not stand to the judgment of this Synod, that was Judge and Party both, and this oc∣casion'd strange disorders in the Church of Leyden, which continu'd still a kindness for their Pastor notwithstanding this condemna∣tion, and the Excommunication of the Synod at Harlem. However prevail'd they so far, that he was turn'd out of his Ministry, and forc'd to betake himself to a mean employment. This caus'd great discontents among the Common people, many of them fell off to o∣ther opinions, and there was no Communion administred in that City for a year and a half; and when there was a Communion in the year 82 there were not a hundred persons present at it: If these Synods had been Episco∣pal what Clamour might we have expected? What Animadversions? But others can di∣sturb the Church as well as Bishops. The Synod held at Harlem did but en∣crease their confusion. For by the Excommu∣nication of Colhaes and other proceedings, they brought all things to that confusion, that the Prince of Orange told the States roundly, that unless they took some care to
settle the Church, which was daily more and more distracted by the Presbyterial Synods, they must expect that the Reform'd Religi∣on, and their Country, would be unavoid∣ably lost. They according to his advice empower'd Commissioners to settle the af∣fairs of Religion; which establishment the North Holland Ministers in a Synod at Am∣sterdam publickly protested against. At Dort, Herman Herberts Minister of the place was accused of having caus'd a Book of D. George to be be printed, which he absolute∣ly deny'd: and the proceedings were so extraordinary, that one of the Commissi∣ners that sate with the Classes upon that oc∣casion, said that he had read much of the Spanish Inquisition,H. van. Nespen. but that he never was in any place where he saw so lively and effe∣ctual a representation of it as here. An. 1586. A National Synod was call'd to sit at the Hague by the order of the Earl of Lei∣cester, without the States; and here they insisted upon their Ecclesiastical authority, and excluded the Magistrate from any voyce in the chusing of Church Officers; That a National Synod should meet every third year, without the Magistrates leave; and subscription was more strictly press'd upon the Ministers under pain of being turn'd out of their Churches. But these were but slight differences in respect of that which follow'd, that fatal Schism I mean occasion'd by the Arminian Controversie. The seeds of it had lain in that
Church from the beginning; and Colhaes, uyrhuis, Herberts, I'o hert, and divers o∣hers had declared themselves against the received confession and Catechism of those Churches long before Arminius. But his autho∣rity and learning bore up against the Current of the contrary Doctrine, that had overborn such as before that had oppos'd it:See the pre∣face to the Acts of the Synod of Dore. and now, the condition of those Churches was most deplorable, for several years together there was nothing but perpetual Dispute, and Clarour; Conference after Conference; and Synod after Synod; Appeal, upon Ap∣peal. At last it came to Tumult and Sedi∣tion; to Confusion and blood-shed. Mini∣sters were turn'd out of their charges, some Banish'd,Vid. vit. Episcopii. others set upon by the Rabble, and in danger to be torn in pieces. Nothing can be imagined more distracted than the state of those Churches was for a long whle together. At last, after all the inter∣posing and good offices of other Reform'd Churches, but without effect, a general Synod was resolved upon, where the Re¦monstrants were condemn'd, and the Ci∣vil Magistrate seconded this sentence by a∣nother more severe, whereby they Banish'd the Ministers that would not subscribe, ma∣ny of them were imprison'd, and in short Bshops could not have procur'd greater rigour and severity; which here seem'd to be more grievous, where every body else had liberty of Conscience, and Jews were allow'd a publick exercise of their Religion.
And yet these very points in difference, that not only rent these Churches in pieces, but shook those of France, who confirm'd the De∣crees of the Synod of Dort, and turn'd out such Ministers as favoured the con∣demn'd Doctrine, and requir'd subscrip∣tions to the contrary opinions, of such as were to be admitted into the Clergy; these points (I say,) have not had the same unhappy influence upon some other Churches that were Episcopal. Men in our Church have taught very differently of these mat∣ters, and yet the Unity of the Church hath been still preserv'd notwithstanding this difference of opinions: which shews that E∣piscopal government is not so subject to Schism, as Mr. B. would make the world ima∣gine, and to say the truth ours has been troub∣led with no other such difference but what hath been made in opposition to the very form of Government it self; and there is no wonder if it seems so difficult to heal it, since the Church can no otherwise satisfie these men than by destroying the whole frame of its Government and order, and it is strange any should expect it, that did not believe all those under the rule of the Church to be Hypocrites. These men talk much of Cere∣monies and Liturgy; but this is the least of the difference, though it be most pretended, because most useful to render the Gover∣nours of the Church odious, for shutting men out of it for such Circumstances as these. This makes most noise, as a false,
Alarm commonly does; but the real design is upon the Government. Therefore those that fancy any Accomodation practicable upon any allowances in this part, seem to my apprehension to mistake the disease; for Alas! It is not accomodation but Victory that these men aim at. But to return to the Churches of Holland, whose Schism gave occasion to this digression. After the Synod of Dort, though all means were us'd to suppress the Remonstrants, yet they remain still in separate Assemblies, and the unhappy breach continues to this day, without any probability of being made up.Vid. Span∣bmite. Ep. ad Amie. When they had tir'd themselves and the world with this Controversie, they were di∣verted with new matter of dispute; the names of Voetius and Cocceius, rather than any difference between their Doctrine, disturb'd again the peace of those Churches. And though the ground of the quarrel is scarce perceivable, yet it is hardly to be ima∣gin'd how great the Animosities are. This indeed never came to a formal Schism, yet it has divided those Churches into formal parties; and in some occasions the quarrel seems of more than ordinary consequence; and has great influence upon the Promotions of the Ministry; and the Affections of several Cites are determin'd to this or that party. And as these Presbyterian Churches have been afflicted with Schism and contentions, so they have been sensible of the mischiefs of Heresie, and labour more than any part of
the Christian world under the Infamy of them. Here the Ministers have no great Re∣venues, nor dignities, nor Power; and here are no Patriarchs, nor Bishops; and yet Here∣sies makes a shift to thrive; Arians, Socini∣ans, Menonists, Labadyists, and diverse others; they are neglected, no general Councils disturb the enjoyment of their errors, and yet they abound, and are pertinacious. Nor is it a wonder they take such deep root in Presbyterian Churches; for of late, like Storks, they have affected a republican Church above all others; and it is observable that in these last ages, there have been no He∣reticks that have not been likewise Anti-Epis∣copal; and at the same time that they become enemies of the truth, they declare war against the Bishops who are the Guardians of it. If it be objected that our Country swarms with this Vermin too, it ought to be consi∣dered from whence they came to be so rife among us. It was the taking away of Epis∣copacy that opened such a door to errors; and there were more Heresies started here in the space of four years after Bishops had been laid aside, if Edwards reckons right, than have been known in the Universal Church from the foundation of it to that time. And those that fall into Herefie here, do it commonly by degrees; They begin with Schism, and end in Enthusiasm and mad∣ness; first they are Presbyterians, and then, if that dispensation be not spiritual enough, they are improv'd in to Independents, and
from thence to the fifth Monarchy or Qua∣kerism. All the extravagant Heresies among us are but the spawns of the first Schism, and the consequences of those Principles of Sepa∣ration that draw them from the Communion of the Bishop. The Church of Scotland has felt the Di∣stractions occasion'd by this Parity of Mini∣sters more than any of her Neighbours; and though it has not been divided by a formal Schisin 'till of late, yet from the first setting up of this Government, it has been exer∣cis'd with perpetual contentions, and Tu∣mults, and Sedition, about Church Disci∣pline. Mr. B. tells us that,Treatise of Episc. p. 1. p. 164. The Church of Scotland is an Eminent instance, that Churches which have no Bishops have incomparably less Heresie, Schism, wickedness, and more concord than we have here. For the concord of that Church, it was much greater while it conti∣nu'd under Superintendents and Bishops, than it has been since Andrew Melvil di∣iturli'd it with the Perfection of the Geneva Discipline and Government. For a long time after, all the Disputes about Religion were reduc'd into one point of Ecclesiastical so∣vereign jurisdiction; which they disputed against the King and the Government, with such perpetual Seditions, and Treasons, as at last engag'd three Kingdoms in most unnatural and bloody Wars; which ended in the slavery of them all, and par∣ticularly of those that were the first Incen∣diaries, through the wise and just judgment
of God. What Schism there arose in the late times, between the disciplinarians, and the rest; and what disturbances the same sort of men have given of late; is too well known to need a relation, and the field Conventieles still witness. But because Mr. B. would perswade us that there is such great concord to be found in Anti-Episcopal Churches, and particularly in this; I will give one Instance, that shall let the reader see how far this way is from establishing a lasting Concord; and withal how this pari∣ty that is pretended, is really no more than a pretence, the leading men against Bishops commonly assuming greater authority, and exercising it with greater Absoluteness, and more Impatient of being oppos'd and con∣tradicted, than any Bishops who are legally Invested with power. There happen'd a great division in the Presbytery of St.Spotswood. H. of Scot. 1.6. Andrews about prefer∣ring a Minister to the Church of Luchars. There were two pretenders, and Melvil with a few more was for one, and the rest who were three times as many in number, were for the other; Melvil look∣ing upon himself as an Apostle, and dis∣daining to be overrul'd by the Majority of the Presbytery, left the place, and with his six Presbyters that follow'd him, made another Synod by himself: and both these Presbyters, like Anti. Popes, Issu'd out their several pleasures. The Gen∣tlemen of the Parish upon this were divi∣ded
into factions; some holding with one, and some with the other, which occasioned great scandal: and the heats grew to that height, that the Presbytery was forc'd to be divided; one part of it to sit at St. Andrews, the other at Couper; the one un∣der the Influence of Melvil, and the other under that of Th. Buchanan; so hard it was for one Presbyterial Diocese to hold two Topping Presbyters. The observation that follows the relation of this difference in Spotswood is very remarkable: Thus was that great strife pacifi'd; which ma∣ny held to be Ominous,p. 386. and that the Govern∣ment which in the beginning did break forth into such Schisms, could not long continue; for this every man noted, That of all men none could worse endure Parity, and lov'd more to Command than they who had introduc'd it into the Church. This sort of men did afterwards make not only a formal Schism, and insur∣rection against those Bishops plac'd over them by authority, but after that Episcopacy was abolish'd in Scotland, could be as little at peace among themselves. They were in the first place divided about the receiv∣ing the King, and the Conditions to be Impos'd upon him; and in this they pro∣ceeded even to the Excommunication of one another. After his Majesties Restaura∣tion, when Episcopacy was again establish'd in the Church: the Presbyterians who sepa∣rated from the Communion of the Bishops, were divided yet among themselves some
accepting the Kings Indulgence and Licence to Preach, others renouncing it as deroga∣tory to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: and up∣on this they parted Communion; Nor could these resolute Renouncers of Indulgence agree yet among themselves, about the measure of their Contempt of authority; some were content to Conventicle, and Preach against the Kings order, and carry their Contempt no farther; the others un∣der Cameron were more fiercely Zealous, and thought themselves oblig'd by the Co∣venant to attempt the deposing of the King, as they manifested (besides their several Writings to that effect,) by two formal Rebellions: These are the fruits, this the Peace and Unity that Presbytery, and the Scotch Covenant produc'd, the Covenant so much Idolz'd once by our Presbyterians of England, and which notwithstanding all the Mischiefs that attended it here, and do still issue from it in Scotland, they are yet loth to renounce, though required so to do by all the Authority in the Nation. But what is all this to Congregational E∣piscopacy? It is not Presbytery, but this that Mr. B. Contends for: He is for Bishops, and would only pare off the superfluities of their Dioceses, and reduce them to their first bounds. To which I answer: First, That Mr. B.'s. Congregational Bishop and Parish Presbyter is all one; and he has taken so much pains to prove it in his Treatise of Episcopacy, that it were an injury to his
sincerity to question his opinion of it. But Secondly, That there was some necessity to say all this of Presbyterian Governments being subject to Heresies and Schisms as well as Episcopal; because Mr. B. himself had made the comparison between them; and charg'd all Schisms and Heresies upon Dio∣cesan Episcopacy, as the fault of the consti∣tution; it was therefore necessary to see how all sorts of Governments of the Church, as well as of the State, may be disturb'd by evil and factious men, and are subject to great inconveniences when they fall into evil hands. But then what Schisms can be im∣puted to this Congregational way? This can∣not well be answered without asking a que∣stion: was this Congregational Episcopacy ever establish'd in any Churches? If not, it will be as hard a matter to shew what mis∣chief, it has occasion'd as it is to discover what Civil Wars happen'd in Plato's Com∣mon-wealth, or to reckon the Differences of Sects of Philosophers in the College of Atlantis. If this Government has been set up any where, it is but naming the time and place, and it may be that some account may be given of the Schisms and Heresies that molested it. Mr. B. contends it was the first, Apostolical, and Scripture constitution: and shews at large that a Church was but one Congregation, and a Bishop could have but one Church. Well: but there were Schisms and Heresies then: and St. Paul makes fre∣quent complaints of them. Or if this sort
of Government continu'd for some Centuries after, as Mr. B. would make it appear; it must be likewise granted that there never were greater and more Blasphemous Heresies than in those times, and for Schisms, they could not be avoided, it seems, and though a Dio∣cese were but one Congregation; the Pres∣byters could not agree who should go∣vern that, but divided it into separate As∣semblies. But to this Mr. B. Answers,2 Dispute about Or∣dination. p. 329. That the Multitude of Sects and Heresies that sprung up in the first and second and third ages of the Church was no dishonour to the form of Government then us'd in the Church, as should encourage any man to dislike or change it. Why then does he endeavour to dishonour Diocesan Episcopacy upon this very reason? and why does he reproach it with the Schisms and Heresies that happen'd under that go∣vernment? But no man can reason against Mr. B. better than himself does in the very same Paragraph; it is but taking away the word Prelacy, and putting in the stead of it Congregational Episcopacy, and then no∣thing can be more full to our purpose. If it was Congregational Episcopacy that was us'd, then Swarms of Sects and Heresies may come in notwithstanding Congregational Episcopacy (even in better hands than yours). But if it was not Congregational Episcopacy that was then the Government (but Diocesan Episcopacy) Heresies are no more a shame to that Govern∣ment now: I wish Mr. B. had consider'd this place when he conceiv'd the first design of
his Church History: perhaps he might have seen the Inconsequence of his design to dis∣honour Bishops and their Councils, from a long deduction of Schisms and Heresies which he lays at their door, and have forborn giving this just offence to all that have any real concern for the Honour of Christian Re∣ligion, which is no less concern'd in all these disgraces than Episcopacy. Yet I shall willingly discharge Congrega∣tional Episcopacy from any Imputation of those evils that disturb'd the Church in the first times, and be content Mr. B. should lay it all to the account of Diocesan Go∣vernment, which I shall shew at large in the next Chapter to have been the Constitu∣tion of the Primitive Churches; in the mean time, I must enquire a little farther after the Glorious fruit of this Congregational Episcopacy. If the Ancient Church was quite a stranger to this kind of Episcopacy, it will be a hard∣er matter to find it in latter ages, since Mr. B. tells us that Bishopricks were en∣larged so enormously in process of time, that several Cathedrals were turn'd into Chapels, and instead of, one Congregation e∣very Bishop had several Scores and Hundreds: And the Reformation where it retain'd Bishops, made them all Diocesans, and set them over several Congregational Churches; thus the Bohemians, Denmark, Sweden, and some parts of Germany: besides these three Kingdoms. Where they Abolish'd Episcopal,
Government, they threw away the Titles too, so that if Mr. B.'s kind of Episcopacy ob∣tain'd any where, it must be under another name, therefore that we may discover it, it will be necessary to give a short desoription of it, and then we may possibly find it to have acted under the disguise of another name. This Congregational Bishop then,Treatise of Ep. which Mr. B. makes so much a do about, is the same thing with an Elder, as he tells us, and takes great pains to prove it. 2. This Elder has no necessity of any ordination by any Bishop, or Elders; but having abili∣ties, and inclination to exercise them in the service of the Church,2. Disp. p. 164.165. he may Inter∣pret it to be sufficient authority to preach, Administer the Sacraments, &c. Nay is ob∣lig'd to do the Office of a Bishop or Elder.1. Disp.  throughout. Treatise of Ep. p. 33. 3. That this Elder can Govern but one Con∣gregation: and there may be more than one of such Bishops belonging to that one Con∣gregation. 4. That this Congregation is not to be so great as that of Israel, that had 600000 men; but is to be restrain'd to the compass of personal Communion, in hearing, praying, and receiving the Sacraments. 5. That this Church and Bishop, is independent and is invested with all Ecclesiastical power with∣in it self:3. Disp. p. 347. So that no other Bishop or Synod has any power or Superiority over it but by its own consent: and then consequent∣ly no particular Congregation is obli'd to enter into any association at all: but may▪
refuse to submit to any Synod: nay if it be left in this liberty and Independence by Christ, it ought not to engage with any associations as should be prejudicial to that original liberty: and consequently set and determin'd Synods are to be avoided, and since they are only prudential means of pre∣serving good correspondence between neigh∣bour Churches, it is enough, they should be occasional. And what is all this but the Picture of Independency; and the Congre∣gational Episcopacy upon Examinations proves nothing else but Congregational Eldership. What a Healing constitution this is, I shall shew first by matter of fact. Secondly I shall shew the natural tendence of such a Govern∣ment to endless discord and division, that the Schisms and Heresies that it has hatch'd were not accidental, but proceeded from the nature of the Government it self. 1. Some derive this Congregational way from Socinus,Case of the Church of Engl. p. 249. who perhaps thought it the most suitable to his design of spreading the poyson of his Heresie, and to prevent all dangers that might threaten it from the con∣demnation of Synods; Especially consider∣ing the late Union that had been made be∣tween all the Reform'd Churches of the Greater and lesser Poland in the Synod of Sendomiria. Others deduce it from Ramus and Morellus, who plac'd all Ecclesiastical authority in the people; and by making the Government of the Church to be a Demo∣cracy, made way for Congregational Inde∣pendence.
This put the French Churches to the trouble of several Synods,Thorndykes right of the Ch. p. 67. which con∣demned this Doctrine, as pernicious to the Unity of Christian Churches, and de∣rogating from the honour of Religion. Mr. Thorndyke conjectures, that it came over hi∣ther with Ramus his Philosophy: And that his credit in our Ʋniversities was the first means to bring this conceit in Religion among us: For about the time that he was most cryed up in them, Brown and Barrow published it. And R. Ba∣ly, who indeavours to relieve the English Presbyterians from the imputation of hav∣ing begot this ill-faced Child,Disswasive. p. 12.13. (as he calls it) would fain also Father it upon Morellius, who (as he thinks) learned from the Disciples of Munster, this Ecclesiastical Anarchy: But whoever were the Authors of it, (and none of those yet named can give it any great reputation,) it is certain that the Fruits of it are to be found only amongst our selves, where it happened to take root, and grow up into something consider∣able. The Brownists or those of the separation, laid the first Foundations of Independency a∣mong us: and though they had so few followers at first, not exceeding one Congregation, so as not to have any occa∣sion of entering into any measures of a gene∣ral Unity: yet they declared for the inde∣pendence of Congregations, and that no Di∣ocesan Prelacy, or Presbytery had any Authority over Congregational Churches.
Rob. Brown, who gave the name to the Brownists (though Bolton had led that way to separation twenty years before) seems to have made the first step towards this Con∣gregational way,Brown in the column intituled the state of Christi∣ans. 50. Art 51. but he speaks of it some∣thing more obscurely: Who have the grace and office of watching and guiding? The Answer is, Some have this Charge together, which can∣not be sundred: Some have their several charge over many Churches, some have charge but in one Church only:52. — How have some their charge and office together? Ans. There be Synods or the meetings of sundry Churches, where the weaker Churches seek for help to the stronger, for deciding or redressing of matter, or else the stronger look to them for redress: Who have their several charge over many Churches? Ans. Apostles, Prophets, Helpers or Evan∣gelists: Nor does he determine whether any may succeed to this general inspection or no. Those that followed, delivered them∣selves with greater clearness upon this point:Confer. with Eger∣ton p. 43. Collection of certain Art. 1590. Art. 11. Barrow and Greenwood make all Ecclesiastical power to belong to every Con∣gregation, and call the Bishops Antichristian, because they take upon them to oversee so many Pastors and Churches: And in another trea∣tise, where they answer this Question, whe∣ther the Queen may be excommunicated by the Presbyterie, they say, That they de∣test the power of any Person or Presbytery, usur∣ping Authority over the Church: No Presby∣tery can do any thing of this kind without the
consent of the whole Congregation, —but That the Congregation whereof the Prince is, may Excommunicate him: Ainsworth went the same way, and declared himself in these words.Ains. Com∣munion of Saints. c. 24. We find no Authori∣ty committed to our Congregation over another, for Excommunicating the same, as every Church has over her own members: Christ reserveth this power in his own hands. Barrow affirms,Bar. Refut∣tat of Gif∣ford. 137. that ordinary set Synods are as prejudicial to the Rights of the Church as the other, i.e. Diocesan Episcopacy. But Johnson was the first that cleared this point, and treated of it particularly:Johns. Chri∣stian Plea, Treat. 3. He layes down two things as the foundation of Church Government and Unity: 1. That all particular Churches, with their Pastors do stand immediately under Jesus Christ their Arch Pastor, without any other strange Ecclesiasti∣cal Power and Authority interposed between: Whether of Prelates, or their unlawful usurping Synods. 2. That notwithstanding the estate and distinction aforesaid,Treat. 3. c. 6. p. 261.262. &c. yet all the Churches and Ministers of them should be alwayes ready to advise and assist one another—and in this manner might be had a lawful and profi∣table use of Synods, classes, &c. Provided they do not usurp any unlawful jurisdiction or power over particular Churches: This man goes yet farther and maintains Congrega∣tional Episcopacy: and shews out of several places of Scripture and antiquity, That there may be in a particular Church, one Pastor, or Angel of the Church (properly and specially so
called) and divers teachers and ruling Elders joyned to this Pastor in the Ministry and Go∣vernment of the same Church, who may all of them generally be called Pastors, yet so as one be specially distinguished from the rest, in re∣spect of place and function to be the Pastor, (so more particularly called) under Jesus Christ the Arch Pastor: Never did copy agree more exactly with the Original, than Mr. Baxters doctrine about Church Government, with this of Johnson the Brownist. Ʋt sit tam fimilis sibi nec ipse: It is easier to find a dif∣ference between Mr. B. and himself upon other occasions, than to discern the least disagreement between him and Johnson in this. Robinson (whom Baylie makes the Father of the Independents) though he left some tenets of the Brownists,Diss p. 17. Robins. A∣pol. p. 17. continued still a separation in the Sacraments and Discipline, and was as much for this Congregational way as any of the Brownists. In his Apolo∣gy he declares, That every particular Con∣gregation is intire without any relation to other Churches, as Peter or Paul are perfect men without respect to others; that these Congrega∣tions are Independent and under Christ only. Therefore the Ancient bounds which the Apostles have laid are not to be removed under pretence of any human Prudence, Antiquity, or Ʋnity: Upon this foundation the Independent Churches were built, and continue to this day, which though they may differ in points of Doctrine as their Pastors, or leading men may be inclined, yet this constitution
of Government gives them a common De∣nomination: And now having given this account of the Original of this way, at least∣wise in these last times, (the higher Anti∣quity of it we shall consider elsewhere) I shall in the next place, give some account of the success of this form of Government, and shew what fruits of Peace, and Truth, it has yielded since its first planting by the Brownists. Robert Brown Schoolmaster in Southwark,Baylie diss. Ch. 1. having seduced out of the Communion of the Church of England such a number of Disciples as made up a congregation, for fear lest the severity of our Laws might dissipate this new Church, resolved to re∣move it to a place of greater liberty, and accordingly perswaded his followers to transport themselves and families into Mid∣dleborough: Here they had not been long but they began to be shaken with intestine dis∣cords;G. Johns. Letter to Fran. Johns. George Johnson sayes, It was in great measure occasioned by Browns Wife, and other Women of that banished Church; which caused a mortal feud between Brown and Harison: and some said it was the occasion of Harison's death. It was also the cause of Excommuni∣cating Perriman: And this new fashion'd Church in short broke all to pleces, most turning Anabaptists, and Brown at last see∣ing himself deserted, returned with tears in his eyes into the Unity of the Church; Conformed, and was preferred to a living.
The next Congregation that was formed under this rule was by F. Johnson,Diss. p. 14. (for Bar∣row was hanged before he could fill his Church) and this finding the air of the English Government not to agree with it, followed its Pastor to Holland, and setled at Amsterdam, a kind Soil for a young and tender sect: But this Colony had no better success than that of Brown, for in a little while it was diminished by the falling away of several to the Anabaptists, who were Ex∣communicated by the Congregation they deserted: But the dissensions that were raised among themselves afflicted them yet more; for G. Johnson having disobliged his Brothers Wife, by reproving her for the vanity of her Apparel, and cited a Text of Scripture for it, when he was candidate for the place of a Pastor in conjunction with his Brother,G. John∣son dis∣course of some trou∣bles, &c. 1603. was required to recant his Doctrine against fine Cloaths; he on the other side drew Articles of Impeachment against the Busk, Stomacher, and Sleeves, &c. of his Sister in Law, and the contention grew so sharp that the Pastor Excommunicated his Brother, notwithstanding all the mediation of the Presbytery, and afterwards his father too, upon the same quarrel: I must confess I never saw any thing more extravagant than this contention, as it is related by the sufferer with great particularity; the Im∣pertinence, the Childishness of the whole Transaction is so extraordinary, that a man cannot reflect upon it without compassion;
as men would the strange and extravagant humours of Bedlam: After this breach fol∣low'd another between F. Johnson the Pa∣stor and Ainsworth the Doctor of the Church who divided it yet once more, and excom∣municated one the other, Johnson and his par∣ty quit the place, and go to Embden; where this Church dissolv'd, and the other part at Amsterdam after the death of Ainsworth remain'd a long while destitute of any Of∣ficers: Smith who had transported a new Church to Leyden left it, and turn'd Ana∣baptist, and these Congregational Churches were every where just expiring, when Ro∣binson revived them with new and more Commodious principles; though the Go∣vernment were still the same. And now part of Robinson's Church with his new amendments being carried over to New England in a short time over-spread the whole Country, for the old Planters having almost lost all sence as well as neg∣lected all exercise of Religion, did easily give into this new Model, and so the whole Country, i. e. as many as were of any Com∣munion submitted to this form, though the greater part were of no Church at all by rea∣son of the difficulty of admittance into this: yet what were the fruits of this Congregati∣onal Episcopacy in this flourishing conditi∣on? 1. The neglect of Converting the Pa∣gans, which their Minsters own without any shame or remorse; which seems to have proceeded not so much out of their prin∣ciple
to make all Saints which should be ad∣mitted to their Communion, (though that was pretended by them, for a reason against general Conversion) as out of the nature of their constitution; for the Pastor of a Congregation, thought it not worth his while to go and gather Congregations o∣ver whom he was to have no authority, and such as must be committed to he knows not whom. Nor were these Soveraign Congregations,Short story of the rise. p. 32.13, 2. much more useful for the preservation of truth and Unity, than they were for the Propagation of the Gospel: For they soon fell into horrid kinds of errours and blas∣phemies, that the Holy Ghost personally dwelt in them; That their own Revelati∣ons of particular events were as Infallible as the Scriptures. That sin in a child of God should never trouble him: That souls, were mortal; that the Resurrection of the dead was not to be understood literally, with seve∣ral such hideous doctrines. Some extrava∣gant women, as Hutchinson and Dyer did af∣front these Churches, and drew several of these Congregational Bishops, and the leading men among them, unto their party, and to countenance their errors that were no less Monstrous than the births they are said to have had: These began to affect purer ordinances, and despis'd their setled Churches as legal Synagogues: Williams and several others declar'd they could not con∣form, and would have the benefit of Separate.
Congregations: But after all these men had no better remedies against Schism and He∣resie than those they rail'd at so much here, the Sword and power of the Civil Magi∣strate: Williams was banish'd, and makes woful complaints of his hard usage; Hutchin∣son and her company, being also forc'd farther into the Country, was with her followers slain by the Indians: nay some have been so Barbarous as to destroy Quakers upon the account of their Religion; and in short, there is no place nor Trade nor dealing for those that oppose their Churches, and their Excommunication is rendred terrible even to those who are not of their Churches, upon the account of the Civil deprivation that at∣tends it. From New-England this Congregational way return'd back again to Holland, where notwithstanding all the advantages it might have had by some farther experience in New-England and the late amendments, yet had no better success than when it was planted there under the name of Brownism: The first Independent Church there was at Rotterdam setled by H: Peters an Apostle suitable to the constitution:Bailies Diss. Chap, 4. to him succeeded Bridges and Ward: but Simpson coming thither and renouncing his Ordination, and reducing him∣self to the state of a private member, was not long satisfi'd, the Pastors not allowing the private members sufficient liberty of Prophe∣sying. Whereupon Simpson erects a new Congregation of his own, and the conten∣tions
between these Congregations were ex∣tream fierce and Scandalous, Ward is turn'd out for favouring Simpson, in his pretensi∣ons to Liberty of Prophesying, and at last with much ado the business is made up by the interposing of 4 Brethren of other Con∣gregations which they call'd a Synod: but that peace lasted not long for some time after they were all dissipated, and at this time I do not know of any one Congre∣gation of this way in all that Country. At Arnheim where they setled a small Congregation they had no better success, for they fell into strange Heresies, and Extra∣vagances, setting up Chiliasm, and Blasphemy, That God is the author of sin, and the like, and now their remains not the least foot∣step of their Church or Doctrine in that place. But no place can furnish a more Tragi∣cal History of this Congregational Episcopacy than England, for this opinion taking new root here about the beginning of the late Wars, produc'd such confusion, as nothing but the miraculous hand of God could have ever reduc'd to any settlement or order: He that would see the Influence it had on the Civil Government, the growth and pre∣vailing of it in the Army; the Slavery of the Nation which immediately follow'd the Murder of the late King, and the Aboliti∣on of Kingly Government: the Shedding of so much Innocent blood, under the forma∣lity of Justice, though against all the Laws
of this Land and those of God and man; he that would see how they set up an Usurper, and when he was remov'd by a happy provi∣dence how they oppos'd all the means of Union and settlement, may find enough to entertain his wonder in Walkers Hi∣story of Independency: and the Histories of those times: But for the Influence it had upon Religion, there would be no end of relating the strange confusions, the Heresies and Schisms that this way brought amongst s.Vid Ed. Gangraena. Tho. Edwards gives some account of them for about 4 years, and reckons near two hundred several strange opinions with which they infected this Kingdom: nor did they only beget Heresies but learn'd to Cherish them us,Baylies Diss. p. 93. for though this kind of Church Go∣vernment did open the way to Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Familism and many more Heresies, yet the Independents commonly disown'd and Excomunicated such as fell to them: But here Independency became an Ʋniting Principle, and bound up all sorts of Errors and Blasphemies in one, and would ot disown any that would enter into their Constitution or interest, let them believe as they please, or believe nothing all: but as to the Sects that Sprung out of them let us ar Bastwick:2. part of Indep. Post∣script. p. 37. Before the Independents Ap∣ition in our Horison, there were but three  four Sects known among us, and they were  in number and well conditioned: But out of the dependents lungs are Sprung above 40 several ts of straglers, which before their coming were
never known among us. J. Lilburn related it unto me, and that in the presence of others, that returning from the Wars to London, he not forty new Sects, and some so pernicious that he had much a do to keep his hands off them, though he was in his judgment for a Tolerati∣on of all Religions. There are innumerable and Diabolical Sects; and so prodigiously Impious, that it is not for a Christian to name their opinions. And Lastly these Congregational Bishops, men of humble pretences, that would not aspire at first beyond a single Congregati∣on, nor desire to govern that any otherwise than in Conjunction with, and by the advice of all the members, These men when they had an opportunity, exercis'd so great, and extensive a Tyranny, as this Church had never felt under the most Insolent of Dio∣cesan Bishops: for P. Nye and H. Petr the Arch-Bishops of those times, wh Govern'd the Committee of Tryers,  no Law, no Canons, but their ow pleasures, they rejected whom they pleas'd without giving themselves the Trouble  the sufferers the satisfaction of the least rea∣son; and there was no relief, no Quare I∣pedit against these Church Governours and their proceedings were so arbritrary that some stil'd that Committee,The Case of A. S. The Eng∣lish Inquisition. And this is the fair fruit o Congregational Episcopacy among us. Con∣fusion, Regicide and Slavery in the Common wealth; Heresie, and endless Sects; and more than Papal Tyranny in the Church.
But surely Mr. B. is not for this Congre∣gational Independent way, but for a Tempe∣rament or Mixture of Church Government, made up of this and Presbytery, and Episco∣pacy: Mr. B. tells us that he has not chang'd is opinion these forty years:Treatise of Episc. praef. and if we may judge of it by what he has written since, it must be either Independency, or something so like it, that an ordinary Capacity can∣not distinguish from it. For if to declare  Church of Christs constituting to be but e Congregation, joyn'd in personal Com∣ion of Prayer and Sacraments and that ery such Congregation is Independent; d hath all sort of Ecclesiastical power en it immediatly by Christ. If to say, that  usurp▪ Authority over several of these ches, and to assume the power of cen∣ over their Members, is contrary to the tolick Institution, and unchurches all e Congregations, and that no Synods,  more than Bishops, have any Superiori∣ over any one, or more of these Churches,  that a Church for Discipline cannot prehend a greater number than a Church  Worship; if this be Independency Mr. B. ds it, or else he either does not mean as  speaks, for all these things he plainly ms) or speaks so as no body can make  other meaning of his words. Yet how can this be? for he is not against es and Synods: no more are the Indepen∣, they have not condemn'd the use of ods, as I have shew'd out of F. Johnson:
and the Independents  Assembled in a Synod, declare in the Preface to their Confession, that this neglect of Synods, and Consociation was the cause of those endless divisions their Churches ran into; but still this is no more than a Neighbourly consultation, and has no proper authority to impose any rule upon National Churches: But Mr. B. is for Episco∣pacy: so is Johnson, and Mr. B. is for no other. For he does expresly disown any Bishop that is appointed over many Chur∣ches: But he is for Bishop Ʋshers Episco∣pacy: It is true Mr. B. says so in several places: and that Bishop Ʋsher and he had agreed the point in a quarter of an hour: What might have been the result of Mr. B.'s con∣versation with that Learned Primate I can∣not tell: But that which Mr. B. so often referrs us to for Bishop Ʋshers opinion, shews there is as great a distance between him and Mr. B. in this point as there is between Mr. B. and the Church of England: There is a small Paper that bears the name of that Bishop, Entituled The Reduction of Epis∣copacy, which Mr. B. often mentions; I will Transcribe the second Article, that the rea∣der may see how well his notion of Epis∣copacy does agree with Mr. B.'s. Where∣as by a Statute in the 26 year of K. Henry the Eight (reviv'd in the first of Queen Elizabeth) Suffragans are appointed to be erected in Twenty six several places of this Kingdom,p. 6. the number of them might very well be conform'd unto the number of
the several Rural Deanries into which every Diocese is subdivided: which being done, the Suffragans supplying the place of those who in the Ancient Church were call'd (Chorepiscopi) might every month Assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or Incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the major part of their voices conclude all matters that should be brought into Debate before them. To this Synod the Rector and Church-wardens might Present such Impenitent persons, as by admonition and suspension from the Sa∣crament would not be Reform'd, who if they remain Contumacious and incorri∣gible, the sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and accordingly be executed in the Parish where they liv'd,— Hitherto also all things that concern'd Parochial Ministers may be referr'd, whether they did touch their doctrine or their Conversation: The Diocesans were to remain as now, only to Govern by a Sy∣nod of Suffragans, and incumbents: and their Decrees if occasion were to be revi∣sed, by Provincial, and Metropolitical Sy∣nods, presided by the Metropolitans: Now let us compare this with Mr. B.'s Doctrine of Church Government. First then: the Sffragans here mention'd, as the Bishops of the first and lowest order, are Diocesan for every one is to rule a Rural Deanry, which consists of about 40 or 50, or sometimes
more Parishes: is not this the same species of Government with Diocesan? if a Dio∣cese of 50 Parishes be specifically distinct, from one of 80 or a Hundred, we must have several species amongst us too, accord∣ing to the different proportions of our Bi∣shopricks: the Diocese of Lincoln will be specifically different from that of Bristol, and by this way it is possible at last to make out Mr. B.'s Twelve sorts of Episcopacy which he reckons in his Disputation of Church Government: in short: what kind of Epis∣copacy does Mr. B. reject? Diocesan he says:Treatise of Episc. part. 1. c. vii. and what is that? By a Diocese we Non∣conformists mean only a large Circuit of Ground with its Inhabitants containing many particular Parishes; and by a Diocesan Church we mean all the Christians within this Circuit, who have but one Bishop over them: though they be of mary Parishes. And what Episcopacy does Mr. B. approve? Bishop Ʋshers Episcopacy Re∣duc'd: and what is this? It is a Bishop over many Parishes, a Bishop of a Rural Deanry that contains a great many Parish Churches. It is manifest therefore that Mr. B. says and unsays, and Condemns himself in that which he approves. 2. Bishop Ʋsher's Reduction overthrows the Foundations of Mr. B.'s Church, the Essence and Individuation of it: for he defines a Church by a Congregation, for personal Communion in Worship and Discipline. and denies that one Church can be any far∣ther extended in respect of its Government and Discipline, than it may in respect of
Worship: which he expresses thus: I think many of them (i e. the Presbyterians) do with Rutterford, distinguish between a Wor∣shipping Church and a Govern'd Church. (And sadling the Horse for Prelacy to mount on) do affirm that many, about Twelve of these Wor∣shipping Churches (like our Parishes) may make but one Govern'd, or Presbyterial Church: But Bishop Ʋshers Project makes 40 or 50 Worshipping Churches, but one Govern'd Church. 3. Bishop Ʋshers Reduction deposes Pa∣rish Bishops, and turns their Churches into Chapels, because they are allow'd no exer∣cise of the Keys, but only admonition, and suspension from the Sacrament 'till the Bishop and Synod is made acquainted with it;Art. 1. and this any incumbent in the Church of England is allow'd to do: But Mr. B. re∣jects Diocesan Episcopacy for this fault of turning Churches into Chapels, and Pastors into Preaching Curats, and yet approves all that he Condemns by yielding to Bishop Ʋshers Reduction: It is something strange he should be a Non Conformist, to himself, as well as to Diocesan Episcopacy, and upon the very same reasons too. Lastly, This Project of Church Govern∣ment (in which there is one thing not so agreeable to the practice of Antiquity, which is the Major part of the Presbyters concluding the Bishop, who alwayes had a Negative voice, and nothing ever becom∣ing an Act, without his consent and Appro∣bation)
this I say may perhaps be of some use to make an accommodation, between Pres∣byterian Government, by Classes and Synods, &c. and Diocesan Episcopacy: but it wholly overthrows Mr. B.'s Congregational way, however qualifi'd by the Independent Prin∣ciples of Consociation, beyond which Mr. B.'s Notion of Church Government, and constitution does not extend. Therefore, to leave this Episcopacy of Bishop Ʋshers as destructive of Independence, why may not they of the Congregational way prevent such inconveniences as they have fallen into, by some quallifying Prin∣ciples in favour of Consociation, and some abatement in their Punctiliousness of ad∣mitting into full Communion, and Church-membership? And thus far no doubt Mr. B. does comply: to which I answer, That the Fundamental Principle of this Congrega∣tional way does dispose it to all manner of confusion, which I undertook to shew in the last place. I shall say nothing to such Principles of our Independents as have no necessary Connex∣ion with the nature of their Church Govern∣ment, as those of separation from every defect in ordinances and the like, they are besides my purpose, and the mischief, and unreasonableness of them have been shew'd already with so much light, and advantage by the Incomparable Dean of Pauls, as to be able to convince any men who did mis∣take in good earnest; as to that part there∣fore
I will suppose them satisfi'd in point of Conscience though not perhaps in point of Honour, and consider only the mischiefs of their Government, abstracted from their other opinions. The Independent or Congregational con∣stitution is founded upon these two Prin∣ciples. 1. That Christ and his Apostles insti∣tuted Congregational Churches, and en∣dued them with all the Power that is given the Church: as of censures, Excommunica∣tion and the like, without any dependence one on another, or of several upon one Ge∣neral Pastor, and that the single Congre∣gations planted at first in several Cities when they came to encrease beyond the pos∣sibility of Personal Communion, were to Imitate Bee-hives, and to send out Colonies under their proper Officers, without any dependence on the mother Hive. 2. That what was thus instituted by Christ and his Apostles must so continue, it not be∣ing in the power of man, or the Church to alter it. This is the foundation of Independent Government, and if you abate any thing of these Principles, the whole Fabrick must fall to pieces. If you deny the first that Christ or his A∣postles did not institute such Churches, the Congregational way has no pretence, or if you will say that the first that were planted were indeed of this kind, but accidental∣ly,
there being no more believers in any City than might meet in one Congregation it equally destroys it: for when Christians were multipli'd into several Congregations they might put themselves under another form more commodious for preserving Unity among them. If you deny the second, that though the Apostolical Churches were of this Model, yet that it was not necessary, and unaltera∣ble; it will remove all just reason of conten∣tion about it; for the Church having made use of its liberty in the change of that Govern∣ment which it is suppos'd to have power to do as it saw occasion, nothing can be more unreasonable, than to tear it in pieces upon this occasion, unless it has done something that it had no authority to do, and so al∣ter'd the Government Establish'd by Christ with out his leave: in short if the Apostles did not found Congregational Churches, there is no reason why we should set them up; if they did found them at first, but did design they should continue no longer, than till the numbers of Christians should exceed one Congregation, the success of the Gospel has chang'd that form: If they were founded at first, and then the matter left to the discretion of the Church to frame it self according to its best convenience, the Church has already determin'd it, there can be no Controversie: So that if any of these Princi∣ples be deni'd, the Congregational Govern∣ment must fall of course.
Independency, therefore being founded up∣on a firm belief of those Fundamental Prin∣ciples, which cannot be left, but the whole frame must sink, I shall proceed to shew the unavoidable mischiefs that belief exposes these Congregational Churches to. 1. Of the mischiefs that this way occasi∣sions, by rendring any Union between par∣ticular Churches Impossible. 2. The mischiefs it produces in particu∣lar Churches or Congregations. 1. Of the Impossiblity of preserving any Unity between Independent Churches. These Churches like so many little So∣veraignties crowded together within the same Territory, and a great number of them within the Walls of the same City, their Vicinity and Cohabitation gives them op∣portunities, and begets a necessity of a Cor∣respondence and Communication between them; and this begetting a mutual know∣ledge of each others opinions and practice, differences will arise, and endanger their peace; and what remedy is there, since there is no common Court to put an end to it? It must be a lamentable case when every quarrel, becomes a War; and there is no end but either Ruin, or at last, when they are tyr'd with contention, their Volunta∣ry Acquiescence. But you will say there is the same Inconvenience in Episcopacy; for if Bishops fall out about Religion who shall judge between them? if you say Me∣tropolitans and Synods; suppose two Metro∣politans
then should differ, or two Coun∣cils: It were much better they would a∣gree, but if they will quarrel, it is not quite so bad as if those that live in the same City, and under the same Government should fall out; suppose our Church could not adjust all Articles of Faith and Disci∣pline with the Churches of France or Suit∣zerland, good men would wish that it might be made up, and that there were a per∣fect Harmony in our Confessions: But in case this could not be effected, yet the Controversie would remain pretty quiet within the books that should be written about it: But if within the City of London those Controversies should be unhappily started, and one Parish take one side of the Question, and another the contrary, it would be something more dangerous; and an Intolerable defect in the constitution of our Church to have no effectual reme∣dy to apply to the beginnings of this Divisi∣on: But what hurt is it, you may say, let both enjoy their own opinion, if they would do so with Peace it were something; but these little republick Churches, like Des∣cartes his Vortexes grate and make Impres∣sion one upon the other; Some members of one Congregation may be seduc'd by the other, and the whole perhaps in dan∣ger of being carried away with evil Do∣ctrine or example, what shall be done in this case? They can submit to no Judge; for they are immediately under Christ; they
must have no Diocesan, no Classes, no pow∣er to Controul them; what then? They must wrangle to the worlds end; or Dis∣solve and come to nothing as many of their Congregations have done. The Independents have been made very sen∣sible of this by a sad experience of great and Irremediable dissensions, and some of them have been so ingenuous as to confess it, and enter'd into some measures for an effectu∣al Prevention of these disorders: by way of Consociation or Synods: but neither can relieve them as long as they maintain the principles before mentioned, i. e. as long as they are Independents. For 1. What Consociation can there be between those bodies of men, that cannot be United under any Common Government, to which the particulars are to be subordi∣nate? Without any Laws to correct them, without authority to execute them, without any subordination of the Members: what Permanent Consociation can be expected, that must depend upon the pleasure of eve∣ry Congregation of that Association? that remains still Independent, and under no obli∣gation to submit any farther than it self thinks good? This is the case of the Inde∣pendents, either there must be General Of∣ficers to take care of this Consociation, as Bishops or Supervisors, or some Committees any Synods, and these must have some pow∣over the particular Congregations under their Inspection, or there must be no such
Officers: If that be allow'd, it is no more Independence, but Diocesan Episcopacy or Presbytery: And overthrows the Funda∣mental principle, that the Congregations immediately under Christ, and that the con∣stitution cannot be alter'd for any conve∣nience. If they have no Persons appointed over the Generality, then wherein does this Consociation consist, or how are they Uni∣ted? But suppose they have Synods, as they had one in the Savoy 1658. What can they be able to do? They may advise, and dis∣course the matter, but if any particular Con∣gregation be obstinate, they cannot censure, that Importing a Superiority, which de∣stroys the notion of Congregational Indepen∣dence; to make this clearer, if possible, suppose something like Hobbs his State of nature, That Twenty men, who can have no pre∣tence of authority one over the other, were cast upon an Island; and their Common necessities would oblige them to live to∣gether and maintain some Commerce and agreement, and that every one should be∣lieve firmly that God had not only made him free, but that he had laid an obliga∣tion on him so to continue, and never to subject himself to any Creature, upon the pretence of any conveniences of life. How should these men do? They might consult, and agree upon a rule, they might make a distribution of proprieties, and promise ne∣ver to hurt or injure one the other: But these men being subject to the same Appe∣tites
and disorders with others, it is not to be expected they should live long with∣out some bodies transgressing his du∣ty: And then what shall be done to pre∣serve this Consociation of Kings? Every one is sacred and cannot be called before any Tribunal, but his own Conscience; and that perhaps he may dispense with: he must not submit to any one, nor to all his as∣sociates together, nor can they, continu∣ing in that opinion of Original Freedom, usurp any Authorities over him; What can such a Constitution produce? Either their indignation, or necessity must prevail over their principles, and so they must submit to Government, or else if they retain these fancies of Independant Soveraignity and freedom, they must dissolve and break all to pieces, and renounce all communicati∣on one with the other. You will say that good men will agree, and preserve such an union as their com∣mon necessities require, without any su∣perior power to inforce it: But the Inde∣pendents know by woful experience, that all have not proved Saints that they have received for such, though they were as punctilious in the admitting of them as the Pope in a Canonization; besides this, reason will destroy the discipline of Congregational as well as of associated Churches: for every good man will do his duty, and what need therefore of any power in the congregation to censure.
It is plain therefore that Congregati∣onal Churches, unless they renounce the Principles of their Independence, cannot enter into any solid and lasting union, having no means to preserve it, and all the union that their Principles will ad∣mit can be no other than that of a heap of sand, where the parts are loose and unconnected, and therefore una∣voidably scattered and dissipated by the first Wind that shall arise. Nor is this Congregational Constitu∣tion less pernicious to the Peace of Par∣ticular Churches, than it is to a Gene∣ral union of many Congregations, which I shall make appear by the following rea∣sons. First in General; and then by exa∣mining the different forms there may be of Admininistring this Congregational power. 1. He that lyeth under an unjust sen∣tence of a Congregation has no relief; for this being Independent, there is  Appeal left, and this is the more grir∣ous, by how much the deprivation of Communion, is a sorer punishment to those who have known the value of the Ordinances of Christ, and have tasted the grace of God in them, than any other that can be inflicted on mens bo∣dies or estates. And here can be no o∣ther relief but by Separation and Schism.
2. When a Pastor is turned Heretick, and has seduc'd his Congregation into a good opinion of his Doctrine, they have no relief, because they have no judge to examine the Doctrine, and to remove the evil from among them. 3. If a Congregation shall conspire to be wicked, turn Libertines and Antinomians, who shall censure them for it? the Ma∣gistrate may not be a Christian, or may not take notice of it. But the inconveniences of this way may be farther observ'd, by looking into the several forms, whereby this Congrega∣tional Supremacy either is or may be Administred. 1. Suppose the Pastor invested with this whole power, without any appeal to be made from his sentence; what tempta∣tion would this independence be to abuse that unaccountable power, since no superior Court could revise his Acts? And if this man suld prove impru∣dent, and wilful in the Administra∣tion of so great a power, what peace could be expected? And yet we must ex∣pect this power should fall often into the evil hands, and it must be a wretched constitution that should not make some provision against it. But in the Congre∣gational way, the first thing is extremity: But I will not urge this, because the Independents will not allow the Pastor any such power, and therefore let us consider
this way as managed by the Pastor, and a select Presbytery: the inconveniences are rather greater. For, 1. In many Congregations the Church power must come into the hands of such as have little capacity, or experience, and by that means would become con∣temptible. 2. Suppose they should not all agree upon a Sentence of Excommunication, must the majority conclude it? and against the opinion of the Minister? This would be something hard for him to pronounced sentence against his own judgment, and con∣demn a person he believes to be innocent; if he does refuse, then he resists the Au∣thority of the Church, and that must needs produce a Rupture. 3. They of the select Presbytery must be supposed, to have a mixture with the rest by way of dealing, and commerce, and this begetting differences and feuds between them, it cannot be voided but that Church censures will be abused to revenge private Animosities: and those upon whom they are to be executed, will be more loth to submit when they recollect that they proceed from persons they had disoblig'd: and in∣stead of reflecting upon their guilt, they will be apt to ascribe all to private grudge: upon which reason in common Law, he that is supposed to be judged by his neigh∣bours, has the liberty to reject any with whom he has had any falling out.
4. This would probably degenerate into a civil Tyranny, when a poor man should refuse to comply with some of his Ecclesi∣astical Judges, to his own disadvantage, they would find some advantage against him: and by disgracing him in the Congregation, ruine him consequently in his lively∣hood. 5. The exercising of such censures with∣in so little compass as that of a Congrega∣tion, by the members of it one on the o∣ther, must in a little while ingage the whole body in parties and factions, without any hopes of uniting, the sufferers will be discon∣tented, and when they grow numerous will not conceal their resentments, but bend them to the disturbance of that Congregati∣onal unity. But lastly if we suppose the whole Con∣gregation concerned to declare it self in eve∣ry act of Excommunication; few of the in∣conveniences before mentioned will be re∣moved, and there will be others yet greater. For, 1. It cannot well be avoided but upon ma∣ny causes the Congregation will be divided, and when it happens to be upon the subject of removing from, or restoring to Church communion, such differences do lead them in∣to Schism; for since there is no judge between them, every party will likely stand by its own opinion, and will hardly submit their judgments to the majority of the other side, that out-votes them but by a few voices:
Those that were fierce for turning a Mem∣ber out of Church fellowship, because they are offended with him, will likelier quit the Congregation and set up for themselves, than endure the Communion of that which they cryed out upon as so great a scandal. 2. The wisest and best men who are ge∣nerally the fewest will be of no use, for they will be overborn with number. 3. It will make a constant trade of Facti∣on, and making of parties. To conclude therefore, If the Church hath been afflicted with Schisms and Heresies un∣der Diocesan Bishops, we have seen that it has suffered the same things under other sorts of Government, but that which Mr. B. offers as a remedy of disorders, has been the least able to preserve the Church from divisions, nor were those infinite breaches accidental only, as the best Government in the world cannot prevent all inconveniences, but were the natural fruit of that constitution, which would not be able to preserve peace be∣tween the Churches of one City, how much less between the numerous Congregations of a Kingdom: and is such a form as destroyes it self, and pulls even particular Congrega∣tion in pieces, by unavoidable feuds and facti∣ons first, and then by formal Schism and Se∣paration.
CHAP. II. Of the Rise and Progress of Diocesan Episcopacy. Mr. Baxter in a Book published since his Church History,Treatise of Episc. Part 1. c. 3. gives us such an ac∣count of the Original of Bishops and Dio∣cesans, as would make one suspect he had had some late Revelation; for he speaks so particularly of such things, which no body else ever heard of, and shews all the first causes of the rise of Episcopacy after so new a manner, that it must be either new Reve∣lation, or some new Authors found out: But because nothing of these appears in the Margin, I am apt to believe it was rather a Dream: For he tells us, That in the begin∣ning there were but few Scholars and Phi∣losophers converted, who were able to Preach, and these men of parts Overtop'd the rest, and where such as these were found, they were highlier esteemed than the rest, and these in some time became Bi∣shops, being made first Arbitratours, and then as more learned Judges of true and false Doctrine, nay, being wiser than all the rest, it was fit he should have a negative voice; and Fourthly, they understood their own value well enough, and that made them proud and desire preheminence.
And, Lastly, one Bishop was set over some Churches for want of more able men, and he having got the start of the others that came after, made them truckle to him. Mr. Blondel had a quite contrary dream, and for my part I do not know a better way of Answering one Dream but with another, he Dream'd I say, (for he had surely never seen it with his eyes open) That these gifts were not had in any so great esteem then,Apologia pro sentent. Hieron. Praefat. but all went by seniority, and of the Colledge of Presbyters, the Senior was as it were the Bishop, and when he dy'd, the next by seniority took the chair with∣out any more ado, no Election, or Or∣dination being necessary: If this answer does not satisfie, I must profess I cannot help it for want of Authors that speak par∣ticularly of these matters. All that I can affirm is, that the Ancients talk of Bishops in every age, up to the Apostles times, and make these Bishops their successours; but of the occasions of their promotion there is not a word, only St. Jerom a great while after their institution ascrib'd it to the in∣conveniences which parity produc'd: But as to the time Mr. B. tells us,Treat. of Ep. Part 1. c 3. p. 15. Hieron. Ca∣talog. Scr. in Marco. Euseb. Chr. Hieron. Ep. ad Evagr. But as to the time Mr. B. tells us, That if Hie∣rom mistake not, it began at Alexandria some years before the death of St. John the Apostle. If Mr. B. do's not mistake St. Jerom, which is almost impossible, he must know that Mark dy'd in the eighth year of Nero, which answers the 63. of our Lord. Seve∣ral
years not only before St. John's death, but before St. Pauls; and before almost any of the Apostles: So ancient is Episcopacy at Alexan∣dria according to St. Jerom. His words are these: Nam & Alexandria a Marco E∣vangelista usque ad Heraclam & Dionysium, Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum no∣minabant: i. e. from the Death of St. Mark, (which Jerom following Eusebius, places in the eighth year of Nero,) to Dionysius and Heraclas the Presbyters elected their Bishops out of their own body: And this some years, i. e. almost forty before the death of St. John: But does Jerom make this the first Original of Episcopacy, surely Mr. B. mi∣stakes him? For he makes the divisions of the Church, some saying, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas, to be the first occasion of this institution: and these divisions happened in the Church of Corinth many years before St. Marks death;An. Chr. 52. and that we may not think Hierom speaks this by a figure to express such divisions as followed afterwards in imitation of those of Corinth; he instances some particulars that require them to be understood of that particular dissension among the Corinthians, for he adds: After that every one thought those whom he Baptized to be his own, and to belong pe∣culiarly to himself: Which St. Paul men∣tions, and confutes, and thanks God that he had Baptized but few, lest they should say, He Baptized in his own name: Now this
determination of the Apostle that Baptizing of Converts did not give the Baptizer any right to Govern them, and that they ought not to bear any name of relation to him, but his name only in which they were Bap∣tized, it is unlikely that this controversy should revive after so clear a determination, and therefore the Original of Episcopacy in St. Jerom's opinion, must be referred to those dissensions in the Church of Corinth. For which he fancies this remedy to have been provided: And I cannot but won∣der at Blondel,Apol. p. 3. who makes St. Jerom to speak in this place of things done almost a hundred years after [An. 140.] when but a few lines before this passage, he shews Episcopacy to have been set up in Alexandria immediately after the death of St. Mark, i.e▪ about eleven years after this division in the Church of Corinth. Having considered the summ of Mr. B.'s account of the Original of Episcopacy, which is partly Fiction, partly a mistaking, or mincing of St. Hierom: I shall proceed to give an Historical account of the rise of Diocesan Episcopacy, out of the Scriptures and Antiquity, as far as I am able to trace it, hoping that some others better acquaint∣ed with the Ancients may some time or other give a more full and perfect Deduction. Our Blessed Saviour1 Pet. 2.25. The Bishop of our Souls, laid the first foundation of his Church by his own PreachingLuke 4.15. Matth. 4.12. Mark 1.14. in the Synagogues of Galilee, where he was approved, and glo∣rified
by all that heard him: and now hav∣ing entred upon that great undertaking of reducing the World to the obedience of faith;Matt. 4.18. Luke 6.13. John 6.70. he made choice out of his followers and Disciples of such Persons as he thought fit to instruct more particularly in the know∣ledge, and to commit to them the great work of the conversion of the World. Whom he call'd ApostlesMatt. 13.11. Mark 4.11. Luk. 8.10.Luke 5.11.28. Matt. 19.27.28. Mark 10.28. Luke 22.28. These as more specially devoted to him, did constantly attend his Person, and follow him whither ever he went.John. 2.11.4.53.11.45. And after that he had converted several out of the great multitudes that followed him, by the excellence of his Doctrine, and the conviction of his Miracles, he gave these ApostlesJoh. 21 15, 16. Commission to take care of that Flock which was already gathered, to in∣crease it, not only by finishing the Conver∣sion of such; as the found of his Gospel, and the Fame of his miracles had already disposed to receive the Gospel, but to pro∣pagate it to the ends of the Earth,Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15. and to Preach to all Nations. When he had justi∣fied his Doctrine; as well as us, by his death and resurrection: TheLuke 1.32. flock of the Church was yet but very small, and Peter though he were now allow'd to be universal stor, might easily discharge his duty:1 Cor. 15.6. The greatest number we read of between he Resurrection and Ascension is but oo,Act 1.15. and at Jerusalem when they met to∣ether they were but about a hundred and enty: But it was not long before these all beginnings, this grain of Mustard feed
grew up with a prodigious and surprizing increase,Acts 2.41. for on the following Pntecost there were added unto them about three hundred Souls: The first fruits of the Spirit, who must be supposed to have been converted, not all by the Sermon of St. Peter, but by theActs 2.4, 6, 7, 8. Ministry of the other Apostles, and the number of the Converts makes it more probable, that the multitude was divided into several Audiences, since theActs. 1.13.2.2. upper Room where they were assembled, could not hold so great an assembly: This accession made the Church too big for the house, where it first assembled, and the Disciples having yet no publick places of meeting but obliged toActs 2.46. break bread from house to house, they were by this means divided into seve∣ral Congregations: But those of the Con∣gregational way, indeavour to diminish the numbers, by making a great part of these new Converts to be strangers, and to re∣turn home▪ when the Feast was over: To which I Answer, 1. That the Scrip∣ture gives no countenance to this conjecture, but sayes all those strange Nations wereActs 2.5, 14. Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Original word inclines most on this side. But 2. Suppose they were some of them Strangers▪ yet how shall we be assured that they return∣ed home? The Scripture seems to say th contrary:47. For as soon as it sets down th number; it adds, That they continued st fastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship and in breaking of bread and in Prayers: They
i. e. the three thousand in the Verse going before: besides there is no probability of their leaving the Apostles, it is not suit∣able to the zeal and devotion of the first Converts, who despised all Earthly concerns, and left Houses and Land, and Families, for Christs sake. And these Proselytes sold all, and had all things in common, which takes away the necessity of their returning home: Nor did the Church cease to grow and mul∣tiply, but proselytes came over every day; For the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved: But among these daily accessions, some are very great and remark∣able; for not long after we find no less than five thousand more added to the Church at one time:v. 47. Many of them that heard the word believed, and the number of the men, (that is plainly, of those that heard the word and believed) was about five thousand:Acts 4.4. and be∣sides these that were Converted the ge∣nerality of the people favoured the preach∣ing of the Gospel, so that the Magistrates durst not deal over rigorously because of the people:v. 21. This general good disposition was improved by the Apostles into a per∣fect conversion of great numbers: For be∣lievers were the more added to the Lord,Acts 5.14. mul∣titudes both of men and women. And the Christian Congregations were now so thronged, that they brought out their sick and laid them in the Sreets that the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them. And now the Church of Jerusalem grew too
numerous for the Apostles to take the whole charge of it upon them, for when the Number of the Disciples was multiplyed,c. 6.1. their arose a murmuring of the Grecians that their Widows were neglected, and the Apostles desired the multitude to chuse seven men, whom they might appoint over this matter: And in the mean time they would give themselves up continually to prayer and the ministry of the Word: and the twelve it seems had enough to do in this particular, for they declare that they cannot look after Tables, but they must neglect their more peculiar duty,. 2. leave the word of God: And we do imme∣diately find the success of this Counsel,. 7, The word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplyed in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedi∣ent to the Faith: And now after all these accessions,Acts 8.1. we find but one Church in Je∣rusalem, a great persecution is said to have been raised against that Church: Now what manner of Church shall we imagine this to be, a Congregational one, shall all those thou∣sands make but one Assembly, for Com∣munion in Prayer, and the Sacraments? It is incredible. There was no place large enough no hold them: and considering the opposition that was made against them, they cannot be supposed to have the use of any publick meeting place; the Synagogues were taken up by the Jews, and if we may guess at their bigness by their number, we must conclude they could not be very capa∣cious,
since in Jerusalem there were as Sigonius delivers from the Records of the Jews, no less than five hundred and eighty:Car. Sigo∣nius de Rep. Heb. l. 2. c. 8. Lightfoot Hor. Hebr. cap. 36. prooem. Evang. Mat. the number more generally argeed is four hundred and eighty: In short the multi∣tude of Believers as it is represented by St. Luke, must be granted to exceed the mea∣sure of one or two Congregations, and con∣sidering their circumstances might probably make up more than twenty Congregations: This Church then in the singular containing more than one Assembly, was no other than a Diocess, governed by the common Council of the Apostles, in which Peter may be sup∣posed to preside, without doing the Pope a∣ny Service. To this the Assertors of the Congrega∣tional way make several exceptions,Grand De∣bate con∣cerning Presb. and Independ. in the Answer to the rea∣sons of the Diss. Breth. and Mr. B. among the rest, but so frivolous, that I wonder after the Answers made to them by the Divines of the Assembly, any can be so obstinate as to insist upon them. They Except, 1. That the first three thousand Converts were not all of Jerusalem, but returned home after the Feast was over, but of this no other proof than that there were dwelling in Jerusalem devour men of several Nations, or as they render it so∣journing: and it is not very significant how we understand it, since the Scripture sayes expresly, that they continued in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship. But of this already. 2. That the five thousand is not to be ad∣ded to the other three, but includes them:
There needs no other Answer to this, than to refer them to the place, which is clear enough of it self: The miracle wrought on the Cripple that sate in the Gate of the Temple, and the Sermon that seconded it was altogether occasional, and there can be no reason to imagine the whole Church then to be met together in that place. 3. That in those Countries there were much greater Congregations than can be with us, as some of those that followed our Saviour, who Preached to Myriads, and the reason is offered, because the air is more pure and thin. That at Charenton, the Con∣gregation consists of many thousands: This is manifestly to trifle, and to Libel their own cause, by reasons that are impertinent, or ridiculous. 4. Mr. B. Adds, they had better Lungs; in those times and places, he might have said as well, that they had better Ears, and a quicker hearing, or that they could understand a mans meaning by his gaping. 5. They say that this being the first Church, and under the joyn'd care of all the Apostles, might soon arrive to the greatest measure of a Church: What is this in effect but to yield the question? How they came to that number we see well enough, but the thing contended is, that their number did exceed a Congregation; besides they can∣not be supposed so well to have multiply∣ed so very soon, if the Ministry of
these Apostles had not been divided, and some Preached in one Assembly, and others in another. 6. They say there was liberty till Sauls per∣secution. And what then? Under that liberty the Church might exceed the measure of a single Congregation in less time. 7. Mr. B. sayes, this is no precedent: And why? The Mother Church gathered, and governed by all the Apostles together, (which is a circumstance that perhaps no other Church can boast of) Why shou'd not this be a precedent? The truth is it spoils a notion of Congregational Indepen∣dent Churches, and because it cannot be made to comply, it must be protested against that it be not brought into a Precedent. Besides these exception,Acts 2.26.5.1.6.5, 6. they offer testi∣monies to prove rhe Church of Jerusalem no more than could meet in one place; be∣cause all the multitude is sometimes said to meet together  and : against these proofs there lies one great ex∣ception: The number of Converts on one side are specified, and it plainly thence ap∣pears, that there was no possibility they should all meet together, for all acts of wor∣ship: but on the other side, all the proof is in general expressions, the whole multi∣tude, and the all may denote only those that were present, and not all that believ∣ed, as it is said Luke 1.10. The whole
multitude of the people were without Praying, i.e. not all the people of Jerusalem, but the whole multitude that was present; so the meeting  may be said of several Congregations meeting for the same purpose as well as of one. But the Independents in the Assembly of Divines did seem to give up this point, and to grant that before the dispersion there might be more than one Congregation of Christians; but that after they were scat∣tered, there remained no more than could meet in one place: Suppose all this: what advantage can it be to their cause: if there were more once than might meet in one Assembly, and so were forc'd to divide in∣to several; and this notwithstanding to retain the name but of one Church, because under one common Government, it follows that wheresoever the Christians should after∣wards increase in the same manner, they might likewise be governed after the same manner, and in several Congregations, still preserve the Unity of the Church: If there were no more afterwards than one Congre∣gation, it is plain, that it was only casual; if I may so speak of the circumstances of the Church. Nor is that true in fact which they affirm of the Church of Jerusalem after the disper∣sion, for though they are all said to be scat∣tered besides the Apostles,Acts .1. yet it cannot be understood of all the Believers, because af∣terwards, we find Saul entring into houses,
and haling out Men and Women: We find good men, believers doubtless, taking care of Stephens Funeral:Hist. Ecc. l. 2. c. 1. . Nid. Lorin. Cajet. Cal∣vin. Bez. in. Loc. and thus Eusebius understood it, where he sayes all the Dis∣ciples, i. e. the Disciples of Christ, men∣tioned Acts 1. that conversed with Christ, and so the generality of Expositors; nor is it to be imagin'd, that the Apostles should remain alone at Jerusalem, when the whole Church had been forc'd thence, and the fury of the Persecution was so great that there was no opportunity to Preach pub∣lickly: Nor is it unlikely that the Preach∣ers were more particularly mark'd out for destruction, for in Stephen's case, we find it was his publick Disputing and Preaching, that brought him under the lash of that Per∣secution, and his Indictment was made up of what was delivered by him in his publick Discourses; though besides it cannot be deny'd but that other Converts, Men and Women were also hal'd to Prison: But whatsoever numbers were forc'd away by that Persecution, it is likely they return'd most of them after it was over, and it did not continue long, for immediately after the the Conversion of St. Paul,Acts 9.31. The Churches had rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified and multiplyed: And it is a strange conceit of Baronius, That these are the Jews of the Dispersion that St. Peter and James directed their Epistles to,An. 35. and that they were scattered into all the Parts of the World: After this Perse∣cution
the Church of Jerusalem,Acts 8.14. Acts 11.22. as the me∣tropolitan of the rest, takes care of them, sends some Apostles to Samaria, and Barna∣bas to Antioch: and these as soon as they had fulfilled their ministry, return home to their Mother Church, which could not but thrive much more in proportion than the rest, whether we reflect upon the num∣ber and abilities of her Pastors, or the advan∣tage of its scituation. For the place it self was a most convincing witness, as of some very remarkable actions of our Saviour, so particularly of his Death and Resurrection, here the vail of the Temple was rent, here Rocks cleft in sunder, here the empty Se∣pulcher preach'd with no less efficacy than the Apostles, and though they should hold their peace, the Stones would become Apostles, and be Witnesses of the Resur∣rection. This Church being thus considerable in all its circumstances,Apud Eu∣sib. Ecc. Hist. l. 2. c. 1.  ap. Eusch. l. 2. c. 23. when the Apostles were call'd away, was committed to James the just, the Brother of our Lord: If not before, for as Clemens reports the matter, he was ordained Bishop of Jerusalem, pre∣sently after our Savious Ascension, and mentions it as an instance of the humility of the Apostles, that would not contend about it, but chose one that was no Apostle, and Hegesippus one of the Ancientest Ecclesi∣astical Writers, co-temporary with Justin Martyr and Athenagoras, gives much the same account with Clemens as to the time of
his promotion, unless we shall take Jerom's Translation, which if the words would bear it, is much more commodious: Hegesippus writes, That James took upon him the Episcopacy of the Church of Jerusalem , after the Apostles;Post Apo∣stolos. Hie∣ron Catal. in Jacobo. Jerom ren∣ders it, but against all Grammar, and there∣fore Sophronius who translates him into Greek, is forc'd to change the case, and write , it is very probable Jerom read so in his copy; though Rufinus who translated the same passage confirm the Greek reading: However certain it is that James was Bishop of Jerusalem (whether with or after the Apostles is not so materi∣al) not only from Hegesippus and Clemens Alex. but also from St. Paul, who men∣tions him as one of the Apostles, that he had conversed with in Jerusalem, and it is likely there were no more there at that time but he and Peter. But when they were at last dispersed, Ecclesiastical History makes James the Ordinary, Bishop and Diocesan of the place. As for his Episcopacy it will not be disputed by any man that has left him∣self any freedom of understanding and belief: and it is strange to see Salmasius run his head so violently against such solid Testimonies, as those of Hegesippus and Cle∣mens. But for his Diocess, that I see will be stiffly deny'd, though the Scripture Te∣stimonies already alledg'd, are sufficient to perswade any reasonable man, that the Church of Jerusalem was more than a Con∣gregation,
and consequently the Bishop of it a Diocesan, according to Mr. B.'s defini∣tion: But besides; we have as ancient Te∣stimonies from Church History too, of the greatness of that Church, as of any other whatsoever. For Hegesippus among several commendations of him, sayes, that several of the Jewish Sectaries who believed nei∣ther a Resurrection nor Judgment to come, were converted by James. And that when a great number of the Rulers and and prin∣cipal men of the City,Apud Euseb. l. 2. c. 23. . were by his Ministry brought to believe the Gospel, the Jews made an uproar, the Scribes and Pharisees saying, that it was to be fear∣ed, that all the people would turn Christians: would they fansie them∣selves in so great danger, if the Christians in so vast and populous a City should have but one single Congregation? Suppose they had one Synagogue of four or five hun∣dred, is that such a dreadful proportion as to fright people out of their wits as if they were, immediately to be overrun with Chri∣stianity; and what should give them so great disturbance? The Christians had al∣wayes had one Congregation there, and surely a pretty full one, from the time of Christs Death, and if their meeting places were not increased, and Synagogues with
their Rulers and Officers had not deserted the Jewish Church, and professed Christia∣nity, there had been no protence for such an apprehension, as if all Jerusalem were about to change the Law for the Gospel; it was more than a poor Congregational Church, and Bishop that must give cause to these apprehensions. It was not long ere this Church of Jeru∣salem, that was grown so formidable to the Jews, that they were afraid lest in a little while it might swallow up all their Syna∣gogues, was removed thence, and by a special warning snatch'd from the destru∣ction that was shortly to fall upon that wicked City. There is an ancient Tradi∣tion that the Christians of Jerusalem forsook it before the last Siege, and went to Pella,Euseb. Hist. l. 3.5. a City of beyond Jordan: and because the obscurity of the place may make one su∣spect that the numbers of the Church of Jerusalem were not so great, if this Town could receive them all: We must under∣stand that Town to be their Metropolis, or seat of their Bishop, but the believers were all scattered through that whole Country,Epip. Haer. 30. . Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 11. as Epiphanius writes: and his way of expressing himself, makes Pella only the principal residence of the Church, and here it is probable their Bishop liv'd, for after the death of James and the Destruction of Je∣rusalem,
the Apostles and Disciples, and such of our Savious kindred as remained, met together to appoint a Successour to James when this Church was departed from Jerusalem, and it must needs be more than an ordinary charge to occasion so so∣lemn a meeting, to consult about the Per∣son that should succeed in it. It was more surely than the oversight of one single Con∣gregation:Id. l. 3. c. 35.. And his Government added yet greater numbers to that Church, many thousands of the Circumcision receiving the Christian Faith at that time, and among the rest Justus who succeeded in the Bishop∣rick of Jerusalem. Now from this account of the Church of Jerusalem it appears manifestly, 1. That it was Episcopal from the beginning, and some of the Authors that attest it, liv'd in that time, when the Apostolical Church Go∣vernment is pretended to be chang'd into Episcopacy, by Blondel, and it shews no less the vanity of Mr. B.'s conceit about the Original of Bishops. 2. That the Bishops of Jerusalem were Diocesan's having the oversight of several Congregations, which is necessarily inferr'd from the express numbers of Converts, from general expressions of wonderful ac∣cessions; from the jealousy of the Scribes and Pharisees, who apprehended from the progress Christianity made, that all Jeru∣salem would soon become Christians; from the farther accounts of its increase, and of
the innumerable multitudes that were added to it, and this is sufficient to shew the weak∣ness of Mr. B.'s conjecture, who makes Rome and Alexandria to be the first patterns of Diocesan Episcopacy, and that not till after the beginning of the third Centu∣ry. Nor was the Church of Jerusalem singular in its constitution, but all other Churches of the Apostles planting were of the same kind, and design'd for the like, and yet farther increase: The beginnings of them as of all other things were but small, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of Mu∣stard Seed, which is yet capable of prodi∣gious improvement, and the slip when first planted is but single, yet afterwards it shoots out several branches, which though never so mnumerous, and at some distance one from the other, yet communicate all in the same same body and root: The design of the Gospel is not like those of the Authors of Sects, or Religious orders to have only a select company of followers, that are much at leisure, but great and compre∣hensive, and suited to the whole World: There is no Sex, no Capacity, no condi∣tion but is design'd to be brought into the Church, and to be digested the most com∣modiously that may be, so that there may be one fold under one Shepherd, Christ the Universal Pastor: The Schools of the Philo∣sophers and the Synagogues of the Jews were to narrow foundations for such a
building as that of the Christian Church; which are to be larger in proportion to the greatness of the Fabrick: and it is no less the strength than beauty of the whole to have its Stones and Timber, the parts of which it consists, of something a greater magnitude than those of private and ordi∣nary building: nor can it yet stand without there be some kind of coherence and con∣nection, at least wise where the people that are members of the Church, are likewise united in a political communion, this con∣nection ought particularly to be regarded, which the Apostles in their first planting of the Gospel had an eye to, as shall be ob∣served farther in the course of Diocesan E∣piscopacy, which after this digression I am going to pursue. The first Persecution that was raised against the Church of Jerusalem was by the good Providence of God turned into the happy occasion of planting several other Churches, and that storm which was designed to quench that fire that came down from Heaven, scattered the sparks of it into all the Regions round about: Samaria was the first place we read of that entertained the Gospel when it had been forced out of Jerusalem,Acts 8.1. v. 4. v. 5, 6. v. 12. Philip the Deacon Preached Christ unto them, and the people with one accord gave heed to those things that were spoken by him: and when they believed they were Baptized both Men and Women. Now the Apostles who
remained in Jerusalem when they heard of this success, send Peter and John thi∣ther, who confirm the believers by impo∣sition of hands, and why could not Philip do this?. Schol. , Epi∣phan. he could dispossess unclean Spirits, and heal all man∣ner of diseases, he could Preach powerfully, so as to Convert in a manner a whole City, and why could not he do all other Acts that were useful to the Church, but that these Apostles must be taking Authority upon them in his Church? it is something like Diocesan Prelacy to reserve any Acts of Order or Discipline to themselves: yet so it was that the holy Ghost was not given  by their hands and what kind of Govern∣ment they established there,Chrysost. Oecumenius. Theophylact. does not ap∣pear; and some pretend to give reasons why they did not appoint a Clergy there as afterwards they did in other places, be∣cause they say that Samaria was near e∣nough to Jerusalem where the whole Coun∣cil of the Apostles did reside, and thither their Bishop or Presbyters might repair for more solemn Ordination. And that we may not think meaner of the success of the Apostles Ministry than we ought, and measure it by the progress of Sectaries, as Anabaptists and Quakers, as Mr. B. does, with too much disparagement
to the first Planters of Christian Religion, St. Luke gives us a short account of loe visitation of St. Peter, that lets us see ho wonderfully the Gospel prevail'd at first for when that Apostle passed through  quarters, and came to the Saints that dwel∣led at Lydda,Acts 9.32, 33. &c. Saron Tra∣ctus qui∣dam Regio∣nis non pro∣cul à Cae∣saria.  Joseph. An∣tiq. l. 20. c. 5. . Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 37. Lydda Civitas Palestinae quae diospolis appellatur. Hieron de  Heb. and healed miraculously a Person that had been long bed-ridden:  that dwelled at Lydda and Saron saw him and turned unto the Lord: and this Town an Territory mentioned with it was large e∣nough for a considerable Diocesan Church nor is there any likelyhood, it was divided under several Church Governments, Mr. B. confessing that no City with the villages a∣joyning had any more than one Bishop  a long time after this: and in the time  the Council of Nice. It was an Episcopa seat, for we find Aetius Bishop of the place among the subscriptions of th Council, The next considerable Church that wa founded, was that of Antioch, the greated City of all the East, and the Church d soon bear a good proportion to the greatne of the City:Acts 11.1. For the hand of God was w them (the scattered Disciples) and a gre number believed and turned unto the Lord: an when Barnabar had come from Jerusalem
assist in this work.v. 24. Much people was added unto the Lord, and when Barnabas had brought Paul to Antioch, they assembled themselves with the Church,v. 26. and taught much people: It is not unlikely that all these Proselytes mentioned hitherto were Jews, or such as were Proselytes of the Gate, and had re∣ounced Idolatry, and such must the Greeks be to whom those of Cyprus Preach'd the word at Antioch, v. 20. for Paul and Bar∣nabas sometime after tell the Church of Antioch as an extraordinary thing,Acts 14.27. that God had opened the door of Faith to the Gen∣tiles: and there is no doubt but they were ncouraged by that success to Preach to the Gentiles at Antioch too, while they abode here a long time with the Disciples: and the ultitude of these Gentile Converts made equestion about Circumcision of so great portance, as to require a determination of all the Apostles and the whole Church of Jerusalem assembled in Council: for before that, there were not only several Congre∣gations probably, but separate Churches: and the people were not only distributed but divi∣ed,Gal. 2.12. compared with Acts 15.1. . and rent into separate ssemblies: unless we shall terpret this separation o be rather a scruple re∣ting to Conversation and iet, than to publick and Church Communi∣ as it is most likely; though even this must ave likewise an evil influence upon their
Communion too: for it is not likely the Jews, if they stood so much upon the Law about choice of meats, should care much for the Communion of the Gentiles, when they fansied to be prophane and polluted by the transgression of that Law: Barnius makes two Bishops of Antioch together a this time upon the account of these disser∣sions,Martyro∣log. Rom. Feb. 1. Evodius and Ignatius, the one choses by Paul, the other by Peter, but the misery is, that the Author that gives this light is confessed to mistake,Clemens Const. l. 7. c. 46. Orat. in S. Ignat. by making Paul  chuse Ignatius, and Peter Evodius, whereas Chrysostom sayes the contrary, that Igna was ordained by Peter: and to speak freely, I believe this no better than what Bar would forbid his reader to imagine, a fi which he was forced to make shift with i reconcile the contradictions of Eusebius a Chrysostom,Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 22. Ed. Valsi. Euseb. Chro∣nicon. the former making Peter to be dead before Evodius, to whom he makes Ignatius to succeed; the latter expressly a∣firming that Apostle to have ordained him: For my part, I believe that the tradition Chronology of Eusebius, and the preci time of the Succession and Government  the first Bishops was no otherwise known to him) is not a Foundation firm enou to build any Opinion upon;Vid. Dis∣sert. Span∣hemii Blond. Prae∣sat. Apol. pro sent. H. especia when we consider, that the place as we as time, of St. Peters Martyrdom is que∣stioned, not without some appearance  Reason, and the whole business is involve in so many difficulties: Blondel takes grea
pains to confute the conjecture of Baronius but advances another of his own more strange and improbable, and what is yet worse draws important consequences from it, and pretends by these seeming contra∣dictions to discover the nature of Primitive Episcopacy, and the ancient Law of Suc∣cession: But all that is trifling. It is plain of Chrysostom, that he thought Ignatius the immediate successor of Peter, and therefore makes no mention of Evodius at all: unless one shall say that Peter might ordain Igna∣tius as he did Timothy or Titus as an Evan∣gelist, and that afterwards he became the fixed Bishop of Antioch: though Chry∣sostoms words will hardly bear that sense, and refer to the Episcopal Office at large: But however it fare either with Baronius his divided Episcopacy, or Blondel's Succession by seniority, it is highly probable, that the Bishop of Antioch even at this time was a Diocesan, having the oversight of a Church that was distributed into several Congre∣gations, for if we reflect upon the multi∣tudes said to be converted, the number of Apostles, and extraordinary Labourers commonly residing in this City: the con∣junction of Jews and Gentiles under the common title and profession of Christianity, we must conclude that the Church of Anti∣och was too great for one Congregation, especially before the place of assembly can be imagin'd very capacious: and I believe Mr. B. does not imagine such vast
Cathedrals as Pauls to be very Pri∣mitive. Orat de S. Ign.But what ever number of Christians there might be at that time, Ignatius his Bishop-rick was never the less Diocesan in its constitution and design, or else Chrysostom mistakes one Topick of his commendation: He reckons five things that were much to his honour: whereof two bring him under suspition of Diocesan Prelacy, , the greatness of his Authority, or Government: , the great∣ness of the City whereof he was Bishop: The first I suppose refers to his metropo∣litan Power, the second to his peculiar Di∣ocess, but if this Bishop were to have but one Congregation, what would the great∣ness of the City signifie? how many more would have the same honour with him? Or what so great difference is there between a full Congregation in the heart of the City, and another as full in Chelsey? at leastwise what honour does the greatness of the City do the Minister of that single Con∣gregation? And now to pass by the Church of Co∣rinth, where St. Paul Preach'd for a Year and six Months, upon a Divine assurance of ex∣traordinary success, and that God had much people in that place,Acts 18.8, 9, 10, 11. and where many ef∣fectually believed and were Baptized, where Peter and Apollos Preached with that ef∣fect as to leave many Disciples,1 Cor. 3. who cal∣led themselves by their names: And to
say nothing of Ephesus where a numerous Church is said to have been gathered by St. Paul who preached there for two years, and not only they that dwelled at Ephesus, but all that dwelt in Asia,Acts 19.10. heard the word of the Lord, and the progress of the Gospel was so considerable, that the shrine-makers apprehended the ruine of their Trade, when they saw and heard that Paul not only at Ephesus, but throughout all Asia, had perswaded and turned away much people.v. 26. To pass by these, and several other eminent Churches, Let us consider the Diocess of Rome, as it was yet in the Apostles time. It is very uncertain who laid the first Foundations of this Church, though cer∣tain it is, that before Pauls coming there the Gospel was not only received,Rom. 1.13, 15, 17. & seq. but their Church was very considerable; for St. Paul in his Epistle written long before his com∣ing there, as he himself witnesses, sayes, that their Faith was spoken of through the whole World: and by the multitude of salu∣tations in the end of that Epistle, he makes appear the numbers of Christians in that City: Salute Priscilla and Aquila,Rom. 16. Ostendit Congregati∣onem Fide∣lium Ec∣clesiam no∣minari. Hi∣eron in loe. , Coetum Fidelium: nec mirum est in tam am plâ Civitate distinctos fuisse Fidelium coetus. Beza. with the Church that is in their house: This was one of the Congregations of that Church, which is occasionly mentioned, and it is not impro∣bable that several that are mentioned with all the Saints that are with them, may
be the Officers of several Congregations; For it appears that most of these were of the Ministry, and such by whose means the Romans believed, and that they were strangers come thither from other parts where Paul had known them,Congregationem vert. Eras. Istos amats quos satutat intelligi∣mus ex nominius suiffe pere∣grinos per quorum exemylum at{que} Doctrinam non absurde existi∣mamus credidisse Romanes. Hi∣eron. for as yet he had not seen Rome: And this number was afterwards in∣creased considerably by the coming of Paul, who converted some of the Jews, and afterwards received all that came, whether Jews or Gentiles, and Preach'd to them the Kingdom of God, for the space of two whole years, no man forbidding him: And the progress of the Gospel in this City may be farther observed from the Persecution of Nero, who is said to have put an infinite multitude of them to Death,Ingens multitude, hand perinde in Crimint ineendii quam odio bumani generis convicti sunt. Tac. H. l. 15. upon pre∣tence that they had fired Rome; and the Heathen Historian sayes, that they who confess'd were first laid hold on, then a vast company were convicted by their indication, where by the by, besides the multitude of the sufferers, we may take notice, that the words seem to be mistaken generally, as if the Christians some of them had confess'd the Fact, and accused the rest, Lipsius thus understanding the passage, gives Tacitus the lye; but he does not say they confessed the fact, but they confessed without expressing
the particulars; but what did they confess then? If it were this Crime that the own'd themselves, and charg'd others with, how comes he to add that they were not con∣victed so much of this Crime, by this In∣dication as by the hatred of all mankind? therefore this confession was no more than owning themselves to be Christians, and the hatred they were in, made this sufficient conviction. To these instances of the great numbers of Christians in some more considerable Cities,Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 3. . I shall add only the general ac∣count which Eusebius gives of the success of the Chri∣stian faith immediately af∣ter the first discovery of it. That presently in all Cities and Villages, Churches abounding with innumerable multitudes, were assem∣bled; and the Granary of Christ was fill'd up to the top with the Wheat that was ga∣ther'd in. Hitherto I have observ'd chiefly the growth of Christianity under the Apostles, and that there was in some Cities such a num∣ber of Christians, as could not meet toge∣ther in one Assembly, for personal Commu∣nion in Doctrine and Worship: The next thing we must shew in order to Diocesan Episcopacy must be, that such numbers of believers made but one Church Govern'd by one Bishop.
As to the Church of Jerusalem we have shew'd already from the most ancient Ec∣clesiastical writings, that James the Just was Bishop of that Church, i. e. of all the Be∣lievers in Jerusalem: Nor is that Tradition without ground in the Scripture it self, for St. Paul reckons James the Lords Brother a∣mong the Apostles of that Church,Sal. 1.19. though he were none of the Twelve; and in ano∣ther place he mentions him as a person in Eminent place and authority there, one that had sent several Brethren to Antioch [before that certain Brethren came from James.].12. Here we find the style of the Scrip∣ture to alter in favour of Episcopacy, for hitherto the Messengers who were sent from one Church to another, were said to be sent in the name of the Church in Ge∣neral: as the Church of Jerusalem sent John and Peter to Samaria:Act. 8. In like matter the Church sent Barnabas to Antioch:v. 11. But now it seems they come from James, and the Acts of the Church, pass in the name of the Bishop only, although after this we find this Style to vary again; and sometimes the Church of such a place sends to another without the mention of the Bishop, though the letter be pen'd by the Bishop himself, as the inscription of Clemens his Epistle to the Corinthians does inform us: and Iastly, as the authority of James appears by sending to the Church of Antioch, so it does likewise from his speech in the Council of Jerusa∣lem, where he seems to preside, and deter∣mines
the question in dispute,Act. 5. in the name of the whole Assembly. All this consi∣der'd together with the Testimonies of Hegesippus and Clemens, there can be as little doubt that Docesan Episcopacy was setled by the Apostles in the Church of Jerusalem, as there is of any thing that is not ex∣presly set down in Scripture; and it cannot be deni'd without resecting the most Authentick records of Church Hi∣story. It is to be confess'd that the Scriptures have not left so full and perfect account of the constitution and Government of the first Churches as might be wish'd, for the Acts of the Apostles the only Scripture History of those time, relate mostly the victories of Christian Religion, how seve∣ral Cities were converted: By what mira∣cles, by what Argument or exhortation: but before the Holy Pen-man comes to give an account of the settlement of those new Conquests, he carries away the Reader from thence, to follow the Apostles to some other place, where they begin to lay the Foundations of another Church: Thus we have no more notice of the Churches of Samarid and of Judea (Jerusalem excepted) than that such were founded by the Apo∣stles; but of their Government, and con∣stitution we are not the least information; and the prospect left of Antioch in Scrip∣ture, is very confus'd as of a Church in fieri, where a great number of Eminent
persons, labour'd together to the building of it up, but after what form does not ap∣pear but only from Ecclesiastical Writers,Eusel. l. 3. c. 22. Chronnon. Chrysost. Orat. de Ignatio. who report that this Church when it was setled and digested, was committed to the Government of Evodius, and after him to Ignetius, and the succeeding Bishops. Nevertheless we are not left destitute of all light in this particular even from the Scriptures, the History of St. Paul, as it is deliver'd by St. ke in the Acts of the A∣postles, and by himself scatteringly in his own Epistles, informing us in some mea∣sure of the from of the Primitive Church Government in the Apostles times. This Apostle of the Gentiles did common∣ly use this method informing those Chur∣ches he had converted, as may be seen by consulting the Citations in the Margin. When he came to any place where the Gospel had not been preached (and he did not affect much to build upon another was foundation) He preached first in the Syn∣gogues of the Jews,Rom. 15.20. 1 Cor. 3.10. Acts 9.20, 13, & 14. Acts 13.46. and if they rejected the grace of God, he turn'd to the Gentiles. As∣soon as he had converted a competent number, he took care to improve them in the knowledge of the truth,1 Cor. 3.2. and for that purpose taught them constantly either at his own house,Acts 28.30.19.9.20.20. or at some publick School as that of Tyrannus or any other convenient place where a good number might assem∣ble together: These converts as they were made Partakers of the same common Do∣ctrine
and Faith; so they were to be per∣petually united by a Communion in wor∣ship, in Prayer, and the Sacrament: for it was not with the School of the Apostles as with those of this World,Acts. 11.26. Heb. 10.25. which the Disciples leave when they conceive them∣selves to have learn'd what they came for: But there was an obligation upon all these Scholars to Assemble themselves together,Rom. 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.13.12.22. Phil. 2.12. till they came to a perfect man, which was not consummated till after this life: Nor was the Relation between Christians dissol∣ved when the Congregati∣on was dissmiss'd, Origc. s. 1.8. in fine. but they were united farther into one Society or Corporati∣on, into a holy City, un∣der the Government of Christ their King, and un∣der Apostles and such o∣ther Officers of his, and their appointment: and so far to act and determine all things within themselves that they were not to appear before any Heathen Magistrate upon any difference, but to referr it to the Brethren, or to the Apostle under whose direction they were. Thus far we may consider a Church with∣out any other Officer than the Apostle who converted them; but their numbers increa∣sing in that place and much of his time being taken up in disputing with, and preach∣ing to unbelievers, and gainsayers, or this
Apostle being call'd away to preach the Gospel in other places,Acts 9.29.17.17.19.8, 9. it was necessary to ordain such Church Officers as might take care of this Church, in the Doctrine and Discipline of it,6.4. Acts 14.23. Phil. 2.12.20.17. and others to take care of the poor, lest that Office taking up much time; might be a hinderance to those who were to guide the Assembly in Doctrine and Worship: Now this consti∣tution does not take away the relation that was between this Church and the Apo∣stle that founded it, and these Officer act in subordination to him whether pre∣sent or absent: and St. Paul therefore looks upon himself as the Apostle, or Bi∣shop of the Corinihians though he could not hold personal Communion with them:1 Cor. 5.3. Acts 15.36. for sometimes he goes a Circular visitation to examine the State of those Churches which he had planted: or if the distance, and oceasions of that Church where he resided, or his imprisonment, and other outward Circumstances, would not admit this personal visitation, he sends his letters and orders what is to be done: If any open Scandal be permitted he sends his Excommunication to be publish'd in that Church whereof the offender was a member,1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. Cum meo spiritu qui∣pro me erat praesens, sive in mearum literarum authoritate. Hiero. he judges as though he were present; he orders that when they are met together in his spirit, they would deliver the Criminal to Satan: And because some of the Teach∣ers in the Church of Corinth began to set up themselves in opposition to the Apostle,
taking advantage of his absence,1 Cor. 4.18, 19.9.1, 2.5.19. and using all means to lessen him in the esteem of that people, he is forced to assert his Authority, and to justifie his Title, to let them know that he was their Father, their Apostle, and that they owed him still the duty of Chil∣dren notwithstanding his absence; and last∣ly, that he would come to them shortly by way of Apostolical visitation and examine the power of those that entred into compe∣tition with him: For as far as his Line or Diocess, or Province did extend, so far he pretended a peculiar Authority to govern,Rom 15.19. 2 Cor. 10.13. to 16. . Dioecesis sive certus Pasto∣rum & Eclesiarum numerus: Unit. Frat. Bohem. Sect. de Antist. Regulam vocat Ditionem, & praescriptum Praedicationis Terminum. Salmeron. and exercised Diocesan jurisdiction upon all within his Rule. But when this Line was so far extended, that he neither was able to visit every part himself, and his communication by Letters would not answer all the occasions of those Churches he had planted,1. Tim. 1.3, 18. c. 2.14, 15. c. 4.12, 14. c. 5.21.22. Tit. 1.5. c. 2.15. he provides for them not by leaving every Congregation Independent, and resigning all Authority into the hands of every particular Presbyte∣ry; but by sending Persons endued not on∣ly with extraordinary gifts, but with Apo∣stolical power to ordain Elders, to end disputes, to censure the unruly and irregular, whether of the Clergy or People, to con∣fute
Hereticks, to preach the Gospel, and in short by all means to provide for thee welfare of those Churches committed to them: And now as the Apostle had before ordained assistant Elders in the several Churches which he had planted, for the ordinary attendance of the Congregation; so now he takes to himself Assistants of a∣nother sort, Suffragans for the Service of his Province, which he distributed as he found most expedient,. Eu∣seb. l. 1. c. 12. . Theod in 1 Tim. 3. Phil. 3.25.  acceperat in illis Apostolatus officium. Hi∣eron in locum. . Anonym.  Phot. . . Chry∣sost. . Chrysost. in Timoth. and these in the Apostles time were sometimes called Apostles, or Evangelists, Bishops, Presbyters, Fellow. Labourers, Helpers, Deacons, &c. but their successors leaving greater and more invidious titles contented themselves with the name of Bishops, which was common to them with ordinary Presbyters at first, though the Offices were alwayes distinct. Of this kind we have several mentioned in Scripture of St. Pauls Province, as Barna∣bas,
Timothy, Titus, Crescens, Epaphradi∣tus, Sosthenes, and some others that had no relation to him, as James the Just, Mark, Linus, Clemens, &c. These exercised E∣piscopal jurisdiction in that district where they were appointed, Ordained Presbyters, received accusations against them, Re∣prov'd and censur'd them as there was cause, and in short govern'd those Churches over which they were appointed by full Apo∣stolical power, which was transmitted to their successors. But the extraordinary abilities of some of these men, and the occasions of several other Churches, made their residence less constant in the Diocess where they were plac'd,2 Tim. 4.9. than otherwise might have been expected,Phil. 2. and therefore Timothy the Bi∣shop and Apostle of Ephesus is called to Rome by St. Paul to be imployed as the necessi∣ties of the Church should require; Titus is sent to Dalmatia, though Crete were his first Province, but this concludes no more a∣gainst their being Diocesans, than the Voy∣age of Germanus and Lupus into Brittain, to oppose the Pelagian Heresy, would conclude against their being Bishops. Now what care was taken for those Churches which these Apostolick Diocesans left, whether they returned again to their Provinces is not mentioned in Scripture: But Ecclesiasti∣cal Records shew an uninterrupted Suc∣cession from the Bishops in several Churches.
Nor do we find that they were all so un∣fixed as they are represented by the adver∣saries of Episcopacy, for Mark who was the first Bishop of Alexandria, remained in that Province,Euseb. Hist. l. 2. c. 16. Niceph. l. 2. c. 43. Gelas. in Conc. Rom. in decr. de lib. Auth. planting Churches in the Country round about, and governing them by Apostolical Authority, which after his Martyrdom there, was derived to his succes∣suors in the same charge. Now this order being of perpetual use, and necessity in the Church, to ordain Pres∣byters, and Deacons, to exercise discipline, to preserve unity, they were multiplyed according as the Apostles found most expe∣dient for the Church, and the most emi∣nent Cities became the Residence of these first Bishops, not because God takes great∣er care of Cities than he does of lesser Towns and Villages, but because the A∣postles thought it the most natural way to follow the distribution that was then in the more civilz'd part of the world: St. John a little while before his death mentions se∣ven in the Lydian Asia, under the name of Angels of the Churches, nor is it probable there were any more in that Province: The Seven Churches being the same with all the Churches mentioned in the next Chap∣ter,Rev. 1.20.2.23. . Andr. Caesar. Ego puto simul inveniri posse Angelum & hominem bonos Ecclesia Episcopos. Origen in Lucam, Hom. 13. , ut Collegas moneat Beza. Ad Episcopum loci dirigitur. Paraus. and Carolus à Sancto Paulo concludes
the same thing out of St. John, Cum in Asia septem tantum hisce temporibus essent E∣piscopi ut in Apocalypsi legere est, nec majorem corum numerum in Ponto tunc fuisse proba∣lile est:Geogr. Sa∣cra, p. 289. Dissert. 4. c. 5. Quod si de Angelis superiorum Coelorum, & non de praepositis Ecclesie intelligi vellet, non conse∣quenter diceret.—Laudatur sub Angeli nomine praepositas Ecclesiae, Aug. Ep. 162. But Dr. Hammond makes all these Angels to be Metropolitans, having several Bishops under them, for the reasons I must refer the reader to his Dissertations. Thus far the Scripture discovers the rise and progress of Diocesan Episcopacy, which was the form of Church Government under the Apostles, who had large Provin∣ces to supervise, and their suffragans, such as are commonly called Evangelists, had several Congregations to govern, and this was undeniably the constitution of the Church in the first age; the next thing we are to inquire is, whether the Office ex∣pired with those Persons, or was de∣signed to be of perpetual use in the Church. The Adversaries of Episcopacy are not all agreed as to this point, the Presbyteri∣ans generally looking upon the offices of Apostles and Evangelists, extraordinary as the persons were: Mr. B. is something more scrupulous, because he does not find any where, that Christ design'd to have this al∣ter'd, and yet he condemns Diocesan E∣piscopacy as being altogether different from it. I have said something to this al∣ready,
and therefore I shall answer here more briefly: 1. That we have no reason to believe from Scripture that the Office of Apostles or Evangelists which concerned the Govern∣ment of the Church was extraordinary, and for a time only; and the extraordinariness of their gifts can be no argument against their continuance, for notwithstanding they did many miraculous things, yet they never could contrive to be in two places a the same time, and as to their governing of several Congregations, they were under the same inconveniences with their succes∣sors: They visited from place to place, they called the Presbyters of some Churches to them to give them directions, they pro∣ceeded by information, and legal evidence, and what was possible to them to do in these cases, is not become impossible to those that succeed them. 2. All other offices had extraordinary men in those dayes, and the same argu∣ment will hold against Presbyters and Deacons as against Bishops, for the first Deacons that were elected were men full of the Holy Ghost. 3. The unfixedness of these is no argu∣ment against the reason of their continu∣ance, and all that will follow from that is no more than this, that if it was essential to their office to be unfixed they ought to be so still, and not to cease to be at all.
4. All of them were not unfixed, and if they had been so, it does not follow that the nature of their office requires it, it might be no more than accidental. 5. That they governed several Churches, and were Arch-Bishops; As to the notion of Church or Churches, it is not very ma∣terial whether we say, Bishop of one or of many Churches; for many worshipping Churches may make but one Governing Church, and worshipping Churches may have their officers too, as our Parishes, but still in subordination to the Bishop, as the several Churches under these Evangelists and Apostles were subordinated to them, in matter of Discipline, and Ordination. But because many depend upon the title, which these secondary Apostles have in Scripture, as Timothy is commanded to do the werk of an Evangelist, it is necessary to observe that it was not all their work, to Preach and Propagate the Gospel, but to settle Churches, to govern them, to or∣dain Officers, to censure offenders, these are the things particularly given in Charge, that of Evangelists was common to them with divers others. But ordination is made their peculiar right: For why did Paul leave Timothy and Titus, one in Ephesus, the other in Crete to ordain Elders? Were there not Presbyters in Ephesus already? Might not they ordain? Might not they re∣ceive Accusations, and Excommunicate? Why then was there one single Person left
to do all this? and in Crete, it is not to be conceived, but that since St. Paul had converted several to the faith in that Island, he also had ordained some Church Officers in those places of the Island where he most resided: Or what need had he to leave a Bishop behind him to ordain, when he might by the ordination of a few Presbyters in one City provided sufficiently for ordination in the rest? or lastly since this ordination is made so insignificant by Mr. B. why might not these Believers have appointed their own Teachers without any further circumstance; and by an instance of their power have freed Posterity from the su∣perstition of thinking Apostolical Ordina∣tion, and succession so requisite to Au∣thorize Pastors? But since the Apostles or∣dained all Ecclesiastical Officers by them∣selves, or their  their Assistants, their suffragan Bishops, and left some of them on purpose to do this work, it is plain that they conceived some kind of necessity for it, and did not look upon the power so common or insignificant, as later projectors of Church settlements would make us believe. Now as the Scripture discovers no other sort of Episcopacy, than such as we have discribed; so the ancient Bishops knew of no other Original of their Office, for they conceived themselves to be derived from the Apostles, not as ordinary Presbyters or Deacon, but to succeed them in such a
preheminence of dignity and power as their first Assistants were endued with: And Eusebius whose diligence nothing could escape, and whose judgment was not easily imposed on, ater all his search could find no other Original of Episcopacy, and derives the Bishops of the most eminent Cities of the Empire from the Apostles, and their Assistants whom they appointed as the first Bishops of the Church:Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.. How many (sayes he) and who they were that followed the ex∣ample of the Apostles, and were thought worthy to govern those Churches which they founded is not easy to say; besides these which St. Paul mentions in his Epistles, he indeed had a great number of Assistants, and as he calls them fellow Souldiers whose names are preserved in his Epistle: And Luke in the Acts of the Apostles makes mention of some of them: Among these Timothy is said to have been first Bishop of Ephesus, Titus the Bishop of the Churches of Crete. Crescens was sent to Gallatia, as the present reading of St. Pauls Epistle is, but as Eusebius read it, to Gallia; Linus whom he mentions in his second to Timothy, was made Bishop of the Church of Rome next to Peter and Clemens, who succeeded Linus, is owned by Paul as his fellow labourer. And Lastly, Dionysius the Areopagite whom St. Paul mentions as the first Convert of Athens is reported to have been the first Bishop of that Church, by another Dionysius a very Ancient writer and Bishop of Corinth: This was the rise of Episcopacy according to Eusebius
and the progress of it he takes care to shew by setting down the successours of these and other Bishops to his own time:Ep. ad Smyrn. ad Ephes. ad Magn. Ignatius derives the Original of Episcopacy a little higher yet, from Christ himself the Univer∣sal Bishop, and compares the Bishop with his Bench of Presbyters, to Christ sitting in the midst of his Apostles, and is the most express and vehement of all the An∣cients in setting out the dignity and prehe∣minence of the Bishop: Irenaus deduces the Episcopal Authority from the same Ori∣ginal; and makes the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, to be his principal ar∣gument against the Hereticks and Schisma∣ticks of his time; and because it was end∣less to make a perfect enumeration of those who succeeded the Apostles in all the Churches of the World,Valde longum esset in tali vo∣lumine enumerare Successiones. l. 3. c. 3 he instances in that of Rome where Linus was first ordained Bishop,Lino Episcopatum administran∣dae Ecelesiae tradiderunt Apo∣floli. ibid. Polycarpus ab Apostolis in eâ qua est Smyrnis constitutus E∣piscopus— qui us{que} ad∣bue successerunt Polycarpe. ibid. then Cle∣mens, and so on to his own time; and in another place proposes it as the only remedy against Here∣sy, to obey those that have a due succession from the Apostles, who though they are there called Presbyteri, yet it is plain who he means by them when he adds, that they are the same which he shewed be∣fore to have succeeded the Apostles, which were those Bishops he had given a Cata∣logue
of before. And Lastly, speaking of the Bishops to whom the Apostles commit∣ted the government of those Churches they had planted, he makes them much anci∣enter than those Hereticks that disturbed the Church, and draws an argument from their Apostolick institution, and their con∣stant succession in that office, against those that brought in new Doctrines: Ter∣tullian makes use of the same Argument,Quapropter eis qui in Ecclesia sant Presbyteris obandire o∣portet his qui successionem ha∣bent ab Apostolis sicut oftendi∣mus, qui cum Episcopatus suc∣cessione Charisma veritatis cer∣tum acceperunt. l. 7. c. 42. and re∣quires of the Hereticks a succession from the Apo∣stles; and Origen speaking of Bishops makes them like∣wise to succeed the Apostles in their office:Omnes enim ii valde posterieres quam Episcopi quibus Episcope Ecclesias tradiderunt. In short it was the opinion of all the Ancients. And Aerius is looked upon by Epiphanius if not as a Heretick, Origen.  c. 1. yet at least as an innovator for maintaining an e∣quality between Bishops and Presbyters: For if the Bishop were only the first Presbyter, and the opinion of the Church was at that time that there was no Original difference between the Orders,Haeres. 75. Epiphanius could not have obser∣ved this as a singularity in Aerius, there∣fore the common opinion then being con∣trary to this notion, they must apprehend Episcopacy, to be the Apostolical Order, de∣rived from the Apostles by a succession:
First to those Assistants we have been speak∣ing of, and from them to the Succeeding Bi∣shops; I shall conclude with the testimony of Theodoret, whose judgment and knowledg of Ecclesiastical Antiquity was greater than ordinary:. So also Clemens is said to be an Apostle, by Clemens Alexand. Strom. l. 4. He makes Bi∣shops at first to be called Apostles, and Presbyters to be called Bishops; and from such Apostles as E∣paphroditus who was Bishop of Philippi, Bishops are descended according to his opinion, but that out of modesty the Suc∣ceeding Bishops changed the title of Apostles for that of Bishops, and this for some time after was common to them with Presbyters, though the offices then were manifestly distinct. All this considered, I cannot but wonder that the conjecture of St. Jerom concerning the Original of Episcopacy, against all the sense of Antiquity and the traditions of particular Churches concerning the Succes∣sion of their Bishops, gathered by Eusebius, should obtain not only among the professed Adversaries of that Order, but even among many that retain it: therefore for a further Confirmation of what we have said con∣cerning the Original of Bishops: I shall in∣deavour to remove that prejudice which the Authority of Jerom has done it, who has
advanced a singular notion in this particu∣lar, which I shall first set down as briefly as I can, and afterwards examine the grounds of it. St Jerom observing the name of Bishop and Presbyter used in Scripture promiscu∣ously, and without distin∣ction, concludes,Idem est ergo Presbyter qui Epi∣scopus & antequam Diaboli in∣stinctu studia in Religione fie∣rent, communi Presbyterorum Concilio Ecclesiae gubernahantur: Postquam vero unisquisque eos quos Baptizaverat suos put a bat esse, non Christi, in toto Orbe decretum est, ut unus de Pres∣byteris electus caeteris superpone∣retur, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret & Schismatum Semina tollerentur. Hieron. in Titum c. 1. that the Office was not not then distinct, but that Bishop and Presbyter were but two names to signifie the same order, but when di∣visions were occasioned in the Church by this parity between the Presbyters, the Churches who were governed before by a Col∣ledg of Presbyters, for to remedy that evil, consented that one should be chosen out of the rest, who should be set over them, and be called more peculi∣arly their Bishop, to whom the care of the whole Church should appertain, that all the seeds and occasions of Schism might be taken away: But that St. Paul and the Ancients make Bishops and Presbyters to signifie the same thing: This is in short the opinion of St. Jerom I will in the next place examine the ground of it. Apud ve∣teres idem Episcopi & Presbyteri erant. idem Ep. ad Ocean. Cum Apostolus perspicue doctat cosdem esse Presbyteros quos & Episcopos. id. Ep. ad Evagr.It is manifest by the allegations of Jerom in defence of his opinion that it was grounded
chiefly upon those places of Scripture where Bishops are called Presbyters, or Presbyters Bishops, and then from the synonomy of the names concludes to an Identity of the Office; and then he adds, One may perhaps think this to be my sence and not that of the Scripture,Phil. 1.1. let him read the Apostles words to the Philippians, his salutation of that Church with the Bishops and Deacons, which he confirms by Acts 20.27, 28. Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 5.1. And now suppose all this is granted, that Presbyters are called Bishops, and they again Presbyters, yet I am afraid it will hardly follow that they are the same, and some of those texts cited by St. Jerom are sufficient proofs to the contrary; for that of Peter, The Elders or Presbyters among you who am my self an Elder,1 Pet. 1.5. if the reasoning of St. Jerom hold, will prove likewise that A∣postles were no more than ordinary Pres∣byters; and if Peter were but a Presbyter we shall be at a great loss to find any Bishops in Scripture that were superior to Presby∣ters; and to the same purpose Jerom cites those texts of St. John, The Elder to the elect Lady,2 John 1. 3 John 1. The Elder to his beloved Gaius, which plainly overthrows his Argument; for if an Apostle were of an office superior to a Pres∣byter properly so called, and yet is called Presbyter in Scripture, then Bishops might be of a superior degree to Presbyters though they might some time be so called: or if it be replyed that these Presbyters again are called Bishops, it does not alter the case at
all, for so some Messengers of Churches are called Apostles, as Andronicus and Junia who were of note among the Apostles:Rom. 16. Besides there were several of the Fathers that observed this Synonomy of Bishop and Presbyter as well as Jerom, but could not observe the necessity of his inference, that therefore there were then no Bishops but Presbyters;Chrysost. in Ep. ad Phil. c. 1. Chrysostom con∣fesses the titles were confounded, but he takes notice likewise that all other Ecclesiastical titles were so as well as these, that Bishops were sometimes called Deacons, and that Timo∣thy being a Bishop was com∣manded to fulfil his mini∣stry or his Deaconship;. nor did he wonder at this at all, since in his own time the Bishops when they wrote to Presbyters or Deacons owned them as Brethren, and cal∣led them their fellow Presbyters, or fellow Deacons, : which he did not take at all to derogate from the dignity of their Order, no more than the modesty of the Apostles calling them∣selves Presbyters or Deacons could be a prejudice to the Preheminence of their A∣postleship, which they took care to vindi∣cate when they were forced to it by the ambition of some teachers that entred into competition with them:Theodor. u∣bi supra in Ep. ad Phil. ad Tim. Tit. Theodoret observ'd the same promiscuous use of Bishop and Presbyter, but could yet see that there were Bishops then superior to Presbyters, and in that time properly called Apostles: The
Greek Scholiast, Theophylact, and Oecume∣nus saw the same, but were still of opinion that the Episcopal office was alwayes di∣stinct from the Presbyters; so that the ground upon which Jerom built his conje∣cture, was rejected by the current of Ec∣clesiastical writers, who could discern the preheminence of Bishops above Presbyters, notwithstanding the names were confound∣ed: And yet this is the foundation upon which that conceit doth wholly stand: all Jeroms allegations are to this effect, all the additional confirmations of Salmasius and Blondel, are no other than from the phrase of some of the Ancients, who do not al∣wayes distinguish between Bishops and Pres∣byters, but speak in the phrase of the Scriptures, and yet there is nothing more evident than that at that time, when these Authors writ, Bishops and Presbyters were distinguished, and excepting only Clemens Romanus, Blondel and Salmasius do both ac∣knowledg it. But to return to Jerom, Let us considet the account he gives of the Original of E∣piscopacy something more particularly: Before there were factions in Religion, the Church was governed by Presbyters of e∣qual Authority: But what factions were these that gave birth to Episcopacy? What time was that when the Church was under Pres∣byterian government? He informs us in the following words: Before it was said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Ce∣phas:
If we understand this according to the letter, we must conclude this to be very early: For this Epistle to the Corinthians, where that division is mentioned, was writ∣ten in the year of Christ 52: And then this notion will do little service against E∣piscopacy: for this will make it of Apostolick institution. Besides I do not see how it can be true: for the Church was now Governed by Apostles, and not by Presbyters: and if in most Cities there were no particular Bishop ordained yet, it was because the Apostles were their Bishops, and visited them to establish good order, to ordain officers, to punish the disorderly, as they had opportunity; and when they were not able to be present, they sent their orders in writing, and exercised Episcopal Authority at a distance: But Blondel con∣tends earnestly against the literal under∣standing of that passage, and shews that Jerom could not mean this of the Church of Corinth, but of some following Schism that sprung up after the example of this of Co∣rinth. His reason is, that the passages where∣by Jerom confirms his opinion of Bishops and Presbyters being the same, were written after that Epistle to the Corinthians. I have shewed before how probable it is that Jerom spoke without a figure; and I need not repeat it here. But these things you will say cannot can∣not consist. It may be so: and it is not cer∣tain that Jerom when he wrote this passage, did consider in what order of time St. Paul's
Epistles were written: what if it was an oversight for want of stating the Chrone∣logy of the New Testament? If it be re∣plyed that Jerom a man of that great learn∣ing and diligence, and particular know∣ledg also in Chronology, as we may con∣clude from his translating of Eusebius his Chronicon, could hardly commit such a mi∣stake; It is to be considered that accord∣ing to Blondels computation, who makes him to speak of the second Century, he will be as inconsistent with himself: for sup∣pose w should say that Jerom pointed to the year 135, as the precise time when the Presbyterian Government was changed, how shall we reconcile Jerom to himself: For in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical wri∣ters, he reckons several Bishops long before that time, he makes James to be Bishop of Jerusalem, statim post Ascensionem, presently after the Ascension of Christ. He calls Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, he makes Anianus to succeed Mark in Alexandria in the eighth year of Nero. How shall we make all these things to consist? did he think James to be no more than a simple Presbyter, or Timothy could he fansie him to have no su∣periority over the Elders he was to ordain or to govern? it is not possible: or shall we say that in these relations he only tran∣scribes out of others, and that he does not speak his own opinion: Well suppose this: Either he must have some Authority for his opinion greater than that of such Authors
he follows in that Book; or not: if he had none, why should we believe him against all Antiquity? Nay why should we believe so uncharitably of him, as that he would de∣liver those things he did not believe without the least warning to the reader, or that he would believe any matter of fact against all the tradition and History of the Church, and yet have no Authority for it? Or if he had any Authority from Ecclesiastical writers to ground his opinion upon, why are they not produc'd? Nay we may be assured in this point that he had none from that Catalogue of writers we are speaking of, since he had seen none but what Eusebius had seen before him, and cites as we have shewed before for the contrary opinion, to confirm Epi∣scopacy to be Apostolical, and to have be∣gun long before this time, which Blon∣del would have Jerom thought to assign for its Original. So that what way soever Je∣rom be understood of the Original of Episco∣pacy, he is either manifestly inconsistent with himself, or with Scripture and An∣tiquity. But his Scripture Authorities, you will say, do sufficiently prove that Episcopacy was not yet introduced into the Church. Nothing less: unless they can prove that those Presbyteries were not governed by the Apostle that e∣stablished them, or by some Assistant, or Suf∣fragan; or unless they can make out that Ti∣mothy, Titus and divers others of that rank, were no more than simple Presbyters.
After this time (whensoever it was) St. Jerom adds, It was decreed over all the world, that one of the Presbyters (who governed before in common) should be set over the rest. In what Church in the whole world was this Decree Registred? Who ever heard of it before St. Jerom? What general Council passed it? What Authority made it Au∣thentick? Or by what means did all the Churches in the World agree to this change? What, was there no opposition made against this alteration of the Apostolical Govern∣ment? What, did all the little Ecclesiastick Aristocracies submit without dispute to this innovation? We may as well believe that there was a time when all the Repub∣licks in the world, upon the considerati∣on of their being obnoxious to Factions, became Monarchies by mutual consent: Nay this might with greater reason be believed, for it is not impossible but that men who are satisfied of their power to set up what form of Government they please, might a∣gree to shake off together, a form that they find very incommodious: but that so many Societies as there were Churches in the World, appointed by divine direction, should so universally change what the A∣postles had instituted without any noise or resistance, and that by one common decree, is altogether incredible, and one may say with the same reason, that they conspired at the same time to change their Creed.
Having examined St. Jeroms singular opi∣nion concerning the rise of Episcopal Go∣vernment, I should now conclude that point, if Clemens Romanus in his excellent E∣pistle to the Corinthians did not seem to favour this opinion; therefore I think it necessary to consider such passages in it as are alledged against Episcopacy, and from the whole to make a conjecture of the state of that Church when that Epistle was written. The Inscription of it affords Blondel an argument against Episcopacy, for it is not in the name of the Bishop or Clergy, but of the whole Church that it is written: The Church of God at Rome to the Church of God at Co∣rinth.. From whence Blondel infers, that since there is no mention of the Clergy, it follows, that the Church was governed then not by the pleasure of one man, but by the common Counsel of those that were set over it: This way of reasoning I must confess to be very extra∣ordinary: Because there is no mention of the prerogative of the Roman Clergy,Ubi cum nulla pecu∣liaris vel scribentis mentio, vel cleri Romani Praerogativa vel Corinthiaci Presbyterii a plebe discretio appareat, sed omnes ad omnes confertim scripsisse comper∣tum sit: luce meridiana clarius clucescit tune temporis Ecclesias communi Praepositorum Consilio gubernatas, non unius regi mini à cujus utu penderent omnes subjacuisse. or of that of Corinth as distinguished from the Laity, it's clear, nay clearer than the day, that
there was no Bishop. It would be a very strange thing to see two men with their eyes open, dispute fiercely whether it were noon-day or midnight: and yet this is our case; that consequence which to him is as clear as the Sun, does not at all appear to others. If he had said, because there is no mention of the Clergy in the Inscription as the Governing part, therefore there was no Clergy, or the Clergy did not govern, the inference would have appeared, but what truth there would be in it I need not say. Others inscribe Epistles in the same style, to the Church of such a Place, where notwithstanding there is a Bishop and a Cler∣gy:Dionys. Corinth.  And yet in the body of these Letters he mentions the Bishops of those Churches. Irenaeus ubi supra. Euseb. l. 4. c. 23. And this Argument of Blondel may be justly sus∣pected, when we consider that the Ancients though they were well acquainted with this Epistle of Clemens and its Inscription, yet they could by no means see this consequence that is now drawn from it. Irenaeus had doubtless seen that Epistle, for it was in his time commonly read in Chur∣ches: and yet he thought Clemens who wrote it to be Bishop of Rome, notwithstanding his name be not mentioned in it. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth sayes it was read in his Church, and yet he could not find any thing in it to perswade him that at that time there were no Bishops, but on the contrary
he was of opinion that Bishops were insti∣tuted by the Apostles, and that Dionysius Areopagita was ordained by St. Paul the first Bishop of Athens: so that these ancient writers it seems were as blind as we, and could not observe either in the Inscription, or body of this Epistle what Blondel at such a distance of time could perceive as clear as the noon day, and yet those writers if they had suspected any such thing might have been easily satisfied by their Fathers, who might have seen the state of the Church, about which the difficulty was, and so told them upon their own knowledge whether the Go∣vernment was Episcopal or Presbyterian: And therefore this is our comfort that if we cannot discern this light which Blondel talks of, that those who lived nearer the East, the rising of it, could see no more than we: But some men surely have glas∣ses for distance of time, as well as place, and can see farther in the Apo∣stolick times than the next Generati∣on that followed them. But to pro∣ceed. Clemens owned but two orders in the Church of Apostolick Institution,. Bi∣shops and Deacons, which he sayes the Apostles or∣dained out of the first-fruits of the Gospel, over those that should afterwards be∣lieve. And these were appointed in Cities,
and the Country, or Regions round about: from whence Blondel draws many observa∣tions, and out of him Mr. B. as 1. That in those days no body thought of what the Council of Sardica did afterwards decree; that no Bishop should be made in any Vil∣lage, or small City, lest the dignity of that office should be undervalued, and grow cheap: This is grounded as most of the rest of Blondels and Mr. B.'s Arguments from this Epistle, upon a mistake, and I fear a wilful one concerning the name of Bi∣shop: For if the Bishops of Clemens who he sayes were apponited , were only Presbyters, then the Council of Sardica did not do any extraordinary thing by that prohibition of Bishops in little Dioceses, for Presbyters were still allowed in the Coun∣try Villages by that Council: and there∣fore if Episcopacy was an institution later than Clemens, this Council has done nothing so contrary to this, by forbidding Bishops properly so called, and allowing Presbyters to reside in Country Villages. Some there are that interpret , by Provin∣ces, but there is no necessity at all for this, though the phrase will very well bear it, for these Bishops I believe with Blondel and Mr. B. were no other than Presbyters, such as were first appointed to govern the Church, but in subordination to the A∣postles, who were the proper Bishops of those Churches they founded, and as they found occasion, appointed others to suc∣ceed
them in that eminence of Authority, over such districts of the Apostolical Pro∣vinces, as they judged most convenient for the edification and unity of the Church. And this distribution of Church Officers, by Clemens into Bishops and Deacons is the less to be depended upon as exact,. Esay 60.17. because it seems to be made only with allusion to a place in the Old Testa∣ment where those titles are mentioned: Besides, the mentioning but these two sorts of Church Officers, may be done only according to the distin∣ction of the several imployments in the Church, some being Ministerial, others Go∣verning, though the latter may have a difference in the measure of their power, in the administration of the same Govern∣ment: An evident instance of this we have in Clemens of Alexandria, who notwithstanding he distribute the Clergy some∣times into Presbyters and Deacons,. Clem. Alex. strom. l. 6. p. 283. Ed. Silburgii, in 1 Tim. 1. as the Govern∣ing or Teaching, and the Ministring Parts; yet he does elsewhere acknowledg three Orders where he comes to speak more di∣stinctly. To the same ef∣fect are the words of the Greek Scholia,
collected out of the ancient Fathers, that Bishops sometime in Scripture comprehend Presbyters too, Because their offices are much a∣like,. Sch. Gr. . Chrysost. in 1 ad Tim. c. 3. Secundum Presbyterorum, immo paene unum corum esse gradum & Episcope∣rum. they both admi∣nister the Sacraments, they both teach and guide the Church, and exercise discipline, and the difference between them is not very great▪ and what is that, since they are both qualified for the same Acts? Be∣sides Ordination there i hardly any thing, but that they act in subordination to the Bishops, in whom the principal Authority of Teaching and governing is placed, and the Presbyters are the Assistants, and supre Council of the Bishop, and both making as it were one Bench; the directive govern∣ing part of the Church. Salmasius would understand Chrysostom, when he sayes the distance between Bishops and Presbyters was not great, to speak of his own time only; which is so impudent a construction that one would wonder how any man could be guilty of it, since every one that has the curiosity to consult the place, will discern the imposture, and there is none of the Ancients that does more expresly distinguish between Bishops and Presbyters from the
beginning than this eloquent Father, and nothing can be more plain than that he speaks there of the constitution of Epi∣scopacy and Presbytery without any regard to time; for it is evident from him that he thought there was no difference in this par∣ticular between these orders of the Church in his time and that of the Apostles, as any man may see that will but look into his com∣ments upon Phil. 1.1. 1 Tim. c. 1,Tom. 4. Ed. Savil. and c. 3. There are several other passages in that Epistle of Clemens that make mention of Presbyters appointed by the Apostles to guide the Church, of the Presbyters of the Church of Corinth who were turned out by a faction; but nothing that affords any argument against Episcopacy but such as the same answer may be extended to, which I have given already to the allegations made from thence. But to clear this business of the Church of Corinth as far as possible, I will shew the state of it as it may be gathered from this Epistle, and then take liberty to offer a conjecture concerning the form of its Government at that time and the occasion of the Schism. The Church of Corinth in the first place is said here to be an Ancient,. and sound Church, that for a long while had enjoyed all the benefits of peace, and order, and was had in great esteem and veneration of all those that knew it, until at last having eat, and drank, and being enlarged and growing fat, it lifted
up the heel. From this prosperity sprung all the evils of emulation and discord,, &c. . the meaner sort set∣ting themselves up against the better, and silly men growing conceited and prag∣matical, set themselves against men of wisdom and experi∣ence: But because in all the insolencies of the people against their Rulers there are commonly some persons of note that first animate the sedition,. it was no otherwise here; a few ambitious discontented men and they too not very extraordinary Per∣sons for knowledg or endowments; instigated the common people against their Governours,. & having popular parts, they knew how to insinuate themselves into the multitude, and to manage the credulity and passions of the people to their own advantage,. and prejudice of the publick. Therefore Clemens aggra∣vates this sedition by com∣paring it with that menti∣oned by St. Paul,. when they cryed some for him, some for Cephas, some for Apollos, for they were two of them great Apostles, and the other one highly esteemed by the Church, But now (sayes he) consider by what manner of men you are perverted: And
now what could give occasion to all this disorder? What would these troublesome men have? this is not expresly set down, but such hints are scattered as are sufficient to ground a probable conjecture. 1. They are said to be great Zealots about things not material or requisite to salvation:. and hot disputants about such mat∣ters. 2. They were such as magnified the power of the people, and perswaded them that they had a right to turn out their Pastors, therefore Clemens shews what course Moses took to establish the Priesthood, and how the Apostles fore∣seeing there would be con∣tentions about the name and office of a Bishop,. ap∣pointed chosen men which the people cannot with any justice turn out.. 3. These men were ambiti∣ous, disobedient, despi∣sers of their superiors, and yet such as would bear rule themselves,. and lift themselves up above their brethren; and their discon∣tents arising from the ill success or opposition their ambitious pre∣tensions met with, were probably the oc∣casion of this Schism: and therefore Clemens advises them to be content with their stati∣tion, and chuse rather to be inconsiderable
in the Church, than to be never so great out of it, than to be the heads and Bishops of a Faction. From which Circumstances one may con∣jecture, 1. That the Church of Corinth at this time had no Bishop, the See being va∣cant by the death of the last or otherwise. 2. That this sedition was , a contention about this Bishoprick. 3. That the Clergy and people were divi∣ded about it, the people setting up some they had a favour for, whom the Clergy did not approve: and when they could not be prevail'd with,. the people persist∣ing in their kindness tow∣ards these persons, broke out into extremities, and turned out part of the Cler∣gy that would not comply with their choice: Which is yet further confirmed from the directions which Cle∣mens gives upon this account; that these men would go regularly to compass their design by just means, that they would enter in at the right gate; and happy are those that enter that way, behaving themselves peaceably. For let a man be faithful, let him be never so powerful a Preacher, let him be never so wise and discerning, holy in his life, yet by how much he seems to excel others, by so much ought he to behave himself more humbly, and seek the common good of all, and not his own particular.
Besides this the passionate expostulation of Clemens with the Ringleaders of this se∣dition makes this conjecture yet more pro∣bable; Who is there among you generous, and charitable? Let him say, if this Schism and Sedition has been raised upon my account, I will withdraw, I will be gone withersoever ye please, only let the Fold of Christ live in unity and peace with the Presbyters that are over it: and to incourage them to this generous resigna∣tion, he tells them of many Kings that have offe∣red themselves a Sacrifice for the safety of their Countrys? How many to put an end to sedition have left their own Cities?Apud Euseb. Hist. l. 6. c. 45. with more to that effect, which Dionysius of Alexandria bor∣rows out of this Epistle, and sends it as an exhortation to Novatus to put an end to that Schism he had caused: and what is there so proper against a Schismatick Bi∣shop, we may judge not without reason to have been applyed by the first Author upon the same occasion. And thus much of the state of the Church of Corinth at the writing of this Epistle. The last thing I shall observe out of Clemens is a passage that seems to favour the distri∣bution of the Clergy into three Orders,. Bi∣shop, Priests, and Deacons: The High-Priest
(sayes he) hath his proper office, the Priests have a proper place appointed for them, and the Levites have their peculiar Ministry, and the Lay-man is obliged to keep himself within the bounds of his own station. Brethren let every one of you glorifie God in his own place, and keep him∣self within his own line, not breaking over the bounds of his own Office and Ministry. Having now given an account of the Ori∣ginal of Diocesan Episcopacy out of Scripture and Antiquity, and examined the singular opi∣nion of St. Jerom concerning it, I come now to give a short view of the progress and advancement of it. The first Bishops after the Apostles ac∣cording to the opinion of Rabanus Maurus,In 1 Tim. 4. had very large Dioceses, Primis temporib Episcopi Provincias integras regebant, Apost∣lorum nomine nuncupati: i. e. In those first times Bishops governed whole Provinces being called then Apostles: and this conform∣able to Theodoret who af∣firms not only the same thing of the first Bishops being called Apostles,Is Argumento Ep. ad Tit. . Theod. in 1 Tim. 3. but also that they had large Dioceses too; for speak∣ing of Titus, he calls him Bishop of Crete, though it were a very great Island; and in another place he sayes, that Epa∣phroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians,
Titus of the Cretians, and Timothy of the Asians. i. e. In his language their Bishops, and the Canons of the Apostles signifie as much, where they order every Bishop to medale only with his own Diocess and the Regi∣ons that belong to it.Can. Ap. 33. . But as Christians were multiplyed in the World, so the number of Bishops increased, every considerable City with the Country about becoming Dioceses;. Phil: 1. Chrysost in loc. . Oecum. Theoph. nor. i una in urbe plures. Episcopi esse potuissent. Hieron. It could not be: It was a∣gainst the design of the instituti∣on. Loci ipsius Episco scribendum esset, non duobus aut tribus. Ambr. in Loc. so Asia towards the latter end of St. John had seven Bishops, and by propor∣tion we may conjecture of other Countries: and the first advances of Christia∣nity being very wonderful, and the success of our Re∣ligion giving occasion to envy and persecution, the condition of those times seems to have proporti∣oned the distribution of the Church, and to multiply Dioceses. For in those trouble∣some times, it being very difficult to main∣tain▪ such a communication as ought to be, between a Bishop and all the parts of his Diocese, it was found necessary to multi∣ply Churches, and that every City with
some Portion of Countrey belonging to it should have its own Bishop: who though his flock might at first be but small, and not exceed a Congregation; yet was he proper∣ly the Bishop of the place, i. e. , of those that afterwards should believe. Whatever accessions were made to this Church, though the whole City and Country should be converted,. Cornel. ap. Eseb. l. 6. c. 43. Episcope cedunt; they accrue to the Bishop of the place into how many Congregations soever they might after be distributed; and therefore the Church of a Bishop retained still the singular number, though distributed into several Congregations: and in such a Church they contended there ought to be but one Bishop, though it had never so ma∣ny Presbyters, as that of Rome had, when Cornelius pretended there ought to be but one Bishop, and Novatus did not con∣tradict him; but the dispute was about this, which of them were the rightful Bi∣shop. Episcopacy being setled upon these foun∣dations with a regard to the future increase, as well as the first condition and small be∣ginnings of the Church, we do not find that for the first three Centeries the number of Bishops was near so great as it became afterwards; although in a little while the multitude of believers was so great, that there was no Country, no City, no village in several Provinces of the Roman Empire, where there was not a good number of
Christians. Before the persecution of Tra∣jan they were so increased that in the Pro∣vince of Bithynia, as Pliny complains, the Heathen Temples were become desolate,Prope jam desolata Templa coe∣pisse celebrari, & Sacra So∣lemnia diu intermissa repetl; paffim{que} venire victimas qua∣rum ad hu rarissimus emptor in∣veniebatur, ex quo facile est opinari quae turba hominum e∣mendati possit. Yet after the Apostasy of so many, the numbers are still great: Vi∣sa est mihi res consultations digna, maxime proper peri∣clitantiam numerum, multi e∣nim omnis aetatis, omnis or di∣is, utriusque sexus, — ne{que} enim Civitates tantum, sed & vicos & agros superstitionis i∣stius contagio pervagata est. Plin. Ep. l. 10. Ep. 100. the Sa∣crifices neglected and laid aside; and notwithstanding the severity of that per∣secution made great num∣bers fall off, yet those that remained unshaken and re∣solved to dye Martyrs for their Religion, were ex∣ceeding numerous. Not long after Arrius Antoninus found so many of them in Asia that it was an end∣less thing to put them to death, though they made no resistance; and when they thronged so much about his Tribunal, offering themselves to death, he sends them back again, desiring them if they had such a passion to dye, that they would hang themselves, because he had not Executioners enough: And at Carthage the number of Christians was so great that they could not have been destroyed without mak∣ing the City desolate, as Tertullian tells Stapula the Governour of the Province: If thou shouldest go about to destroy the Christians here, what wouldst thou do with so many thou∣sands of people? when men and women of all de∣grees, of all ages, should offer themselves to
the Executioners, how ma∣ny Swords,Tertull. l. ad Scap. c. 5. Hoc si placuerit & hic furi, quid fa∣cies de tantis millibus homi∣num, tot viris ac foeminis om∣nis Sexus, omnis tatis, om∣nis dignitatis, offerentibus se tibi, quantis ignibus, quantis gladiis opus erit? paree tibi si non nobis, parce Carthagini si non tibi. what fires would be necessary for the Execution of so great a multitude? Spare the City by sparing us. Nor are we to imagin Carthage to abound more with Chri∣stians than the rest of the Empire, for the same Author tells us, that the whole world was oversprend with Believers, and that the Heathen cryed that they had ever run the Ci∣ty and the Country,Obsessm vociserantur Civitatem, in agris, in Castellis, in Insu∣lis, Christianos: omnem sexum,  am, dignitatem transgre∣di ad hoc nomen, quasi de∣trmento moerent. Apol. c. 1. and eve∣ry place was full of Christi∣ans: that persons of all con∣ditions, sexes, and age was over to this name. Nay, so great were their numbers, that it was not want of strength but want of will that hindred them from becoming masters of the Empire: Loyalty was part of their Re∣ligion, and that was the reason why they did not force the Government to a To∣leration of, or a submission to it. The bar∣barous Nations that over∣ran the Empire were not near so numerous:Plares nimirum Mauri, & Mar∣comanni, ipsi{que} Parthi omnia vestra implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, contillabula, castra ipsa, Tribus, Decarias, Pa∣laium, Senatum, forum. The Christians had filled all Places, their Cities, their Towns, their Councils, their Tribes, the Court, the Senate, and what not: and
though they had been yet inferiour in num∣ber and force, yet their contempt of death would render them a very formidable Ene∣my: Nay without Rebellion we might easily ruine our Persecutors, should we but withdraw,Potuimus inermes, nec Rebelles, sed tantummo∣do discor∣des, solius divortii in∣vidia ad∣versus vos dimicasse; si enim tan∣ta vis ho∣minum in aliquem or∣bis remoti sinum abru∣pissemus à nobis, suffudisset vestram dominationem tot qualiumcunque Civium amissio, imo etiam ipsa destitutione punisset, proculdubio expavis∣setis, ad solitudinem vestram, ad silentium rerum & stuporem quen∣dam quasi mortuae urbis, quaesisstis quibus in ea imperassetis, plures bosles quam Civis remansissent, nunc autem pauciores hostes habetis prae multitudine Christianorum, pene Omnium Civium, pee Omnes Cives Christianos habedo. Apol. c. 37. and retire to any corner of the World, the loss of so many subjects of any kind would unavoid∣ably ruin the Government; How you would be astonished at the strange solitude our departure should cause, at the silence, and stilness of your City, as if it had expired by our departure? you would be to seek for Subjects to govern, and wore enemies than Citizens would remain with you; but now your enemies are more inconside∣rable by reason of the great multitude of Chri∣stians, who are your Citizens, and almost all your Citizns are Christians. And because the Heathens complained that Christian Religion was an enemy to trade, and that it would destroy the com∣merce of the East, which depended upon the consumption of Frankincense and Spices in the Temples, the Apologist answers: that the Arabians sell more for the Christian funerals than they do to the Heathen Temples: and the Christian Charity spent more in a street, than the
Heathen superstition did in a Temple.Sciant Sa∣baei pluris & charioris suas merces Christianis sepeliendis profligari, quam diis fu∣migardis — Interim plus misericordia nostra insumit vicatim quam vestra Religio Timplatim. c. 42. Now the largeness of the Dioceses of those times will appear by comparing the vast multitude of Christians and the small num∣ber of Bishops; and first no City how great soever had more than one Bishop: this is so well known that it would be great imperti∣nence to go about to prove it by instances, and I have shewed already how the Fathers were of opinion that there ought to be no more. Besides, the Bishops of most Cities if not all, had a considerable Territory be∣longing to their jurisdiction, which was commonly the Country lying round a∣bout their City: So Alexandria besides the Ager Alexandrinus, which was of very large extent, had likewise all the Region called Mareotes, containing above an hundred and fifty Villages, as Athanasius rightly un∣derstood, computes them. For every Presbyter had ten or more Villages under him,Athan. Apol. 2. . Singuli autem Presbyteri p∣prios habent pages, os{que} maxe∣mos, denos interdum aut plres: ex bis apparet singuls Mareoti∣ce pages non habuisse snum Pres∣byterum, sed unicum Presbyterum denos pages rexisse, at{que} inter∣dum plures. Valesius. and probably some Assistants or Curates to take care of some of them: This Region alwayes be∣longed to the Diocess of Alexandria, and never had as much as a Chorepiscopus. But I have before given a particular account of Rome
and Alexandria, and therefore I shall say no more here, than that there being but one Bishop in each of those Cities, his Diocess must be very large, and contain several di∣stinct Congregations. The African Dioceses, which Mr. B. fansies to be no bigger than our Parishes, were at first very large, till the Schism of the Donatists had divided that Church into small pieces: the manner and the reason of this change I shall shew in due place, and even then it will appear that there were some very large Bishopricks in Africk. Carthage in Tertullians time had an infinite multitude of Christians, as we have shewed already; and Cyprian who was made Bishop there not long after, gives us hints enough of the greatness of his Diocess.Tempestas maxima ex parts plebem nostram prostravit — ita ut cleri portionem sua stra∣ge perstringeret. Ep. 6. Multi adbuc de Clero absentes. 28. Presbyteri qui illic apud con∣fessores offerunt, singuli cum singulis Diaconis per vices al∣ternent, quia mutatioersonarum, & vicissitudo convenientium minuit invidian. Ep. 5. The number of the Clergy there even in time of per∣secution, when he confesses several of them to have fal∣len away; yet even then there were so many Pres∣byters left in the City that he advises them to go to the Confessours in Prison by turns to Admini∣ster the Communion to them, that the chang∣ing of the Persons, and the seeing of new fa∣ces daily may render it less envied or observ∣ed. Besides when four of his Presbyters, and those probably living at some distance from Carthage, had writ to him about something
relating to the Church, he tells his Clergy that he was resolved from the time he was made Bi∣shop,Ad id vero quod scripserunt mi∣hi Compresbyteri nostri, Dona∣tus, & Fortunatus, & Gordias & Novatus; solus rescribere ni∣hil potui, quando à primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim, ni∣hil sine consilio vestro, & sine consensu plebis meae privatae sententia gerere, sed cum ad vos— venere — in commune tractabimus. Ep. 6. Decipientes quosdam fratres ex plebe nostra. Ep. 28. to determine nothing without advising with his Clergy; which intimates, that they were not of the Clergy residing at Carthage: for it is not likely that four persons would pretend to write to their Bishop about any publick concern of the Church without consulting their Brethren, if they lived together with them, and met daily at the same Altar; and Cyprian's speaking of them with this strangeness, makes it improbable that they were among this Clergy, to whom he wrote concerning them. Besides we have express mention of one Country Presbyter and Deacon belonging to the Diocess of Carthage, Gaius, Diddensis Presbyter, who from several passages of that Epistle appears to have been near the City and under its jurisdiction; and it is not improbable that this is one of those Presbyters Cyprian complains of in another place for their pre∣sumption in receiving the lapsed into com∣munionQuorun∣dam immo∣derata prae∣sumptio plebis universae tranquillitatem turbare conetur—ali∣qui de Presbyteris. nec sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub Antecessoribus nostris factum est, cum contumelia & contemptu Prapositi totum sibi vendicent. Interim prohibeantur offerre acturi apud nos, & apud confessores ipsos, & apud universam plebem, causam suam. Ep. 10.
without consulting their Bishop, or the Clergy; and the nature of their fault makes it evident that there were several Congregations now in Carthage, for this could never have been done by a few in the Episcopal Church in the presence of all the Presbytery, it is not probable they would have indured it; or if they had, then they had been all in equal fault, which Cyprian does by no means lay to their charge, but layes it upon a few, and orders they should be suspended from their office by the rest of the Presbyters, and their cause reserved to be tryed before him and the whole Church at his return: Beside this the Charity of the Diocess of Carthage towards the redemp∣tion of the Numidian Captives, was so con∣siderable, that it cannot be supposed to be gathered in one o a few Congregations,Misimus autem Ses∣tertia cen∣tum millia nummum, quae istic in Ecclesia cui de Do∣mini indulgentia praesuus, cleri & plebis apud nos consistentis colla∣tione collecta sunt: — And if the like should happen again, he makes no doubt but his Diocess will relieve them: liben∣ter & largiter Subsidia praestare ad hoc opus tam necessarium Fratres & Sorores prompte & libenter operati sunt. Ep. 60. LL. S. centum millia: LL. centum, as Pamelius corrects it, though without the Authority of any MS S. Potest inter caeteros, qui alimentis Ecclesia sustinentur, hujus (Histrionis) necessitas adjuvari—Si illic Ecclesia non sufficit ut laborantibus prstet alimenta, poterit se ad nos transferre, & hic quod sibi ad victum & vestitum necessarium fuerit, accipere. especially when we consider, that Cyprian when he sends it to the Bishops of Numidia with a Letter, and particulars, does not take notice of it as any extraordinary mat∣ter; and all the observation he makes of
the Contributions of his flock is, that they were done prompte & libenter, readily and willingly, and he promises that they will be as ready upon any such occasion. 2. The Ordinary charge of that Church was so great for the support of the Bishop, Pres∣byters, and a very numerous Clergy, be∣sides poor, who were plentifully relieved, and especially in dangerous times, besides the maintenance of such, as when they be∣came Christians were obliged to quit their former callings as inconsistent with that holy profession, and the extraordinary charge of Messengers that passed perpetu∣ally between them and other Churches; This ordinary charge was so great, that the summ collected in this Diocess for the redemption of those Cptives, at the lowest computation, must suppose a considerable Diocess to furnish it, especially so soon after a terrible persecution, as that which this is supposed to follow. Lastly, the Diocess of Carthage is not extraordinary in all these cir∣cumstances, but the rest of Africk were some of them distributed into several Pa∣rishes: For Caldonius an African Bishop makes mention of one Felix,Faelix qui Presbyteri∣um submi∣nistrabat sub Decimo, proximus mihi vicinus — plenius cgnevi ndem. —Cum ergo universi pacem preterent— quamvis mihi videatur debere pacem accipere, tamen ad consultum vestrum s dimisi, e videar aliquid temere praesumere. Caldon. Ep. ad Cypr. 19. who did the office of a Presbyter, under one Decimus,
another Presbyter of Caldoniu's Diocess, as will appear from some passages of that Epistle, though Goulartius be of opinion this Decimus was a Bishop, and Felix his Presbyter: But Pamelius his conjecture is much better grounded, who makes him the Vicar or Curate of Decimus. For 1. If he and his wife Victoria had belonged to ano∣ther Bishop, why do they make their Ap∣plication to Caldonius to reconcile them to the Church? Why do not they go to their own Bishop Decimus; or if he were dead and no other yet ordained in his place, Why not to the Presbytery there who ought to have reconciled them? and in a vacance took care of Ecclesiastical. Disci∣pline, as the Clergy of Rome declare, that at such a time they are to take care of the Church, Cum nobis incumbat,Ap. Cypr. ep. 3. qui praepositi esse videmur, & vice Pastoris custodire gre∣gem. But their making their application to Caldonius makes it clear that he was their Diocesan, that the Cure in which Felix officiated was in his Diocess. 2. Caldonius his remitting them to Cyprian as the first Bishop, makes it probable that he was their Ordina∣ry; for what else had he to do to meddle with, or remit the cognizance of any per∣sons belonging to another Church, to any other than their own Clergy, and let them remit them to the Primate if they judged the case difficult? Therefore it is much more probable that Caldonius was the Bishop of the Suppliants, and that the
Priest mentioned, exercised his charge in some Village or Town in his Dio∣cess. But since there is no Record left as An∣cient as the times we speak of that gives the just extent of any Diocess, and what we men∣tioned already are only accidental hints; we must take some other way to make more just observations of the magnitude of those Stars, and of the Orbs in which they moved. And since most of the Remains of An∣cient writings do either concern Religion in general, and are taken up in the defence of it against Idolatry, and Blasphemous He∣resies; or else in giving some account of the general administration of the Church, by Bishops met in Councils: we must try whe∣ther we may not ground a probable compu∣tation of the Bishopricks of those times in some Provinces, upon the number of Bi∣shops that usually met there, to determine such things as concerned the general Uni∣on and the peace not only of the Churches within such a district, but also the Church U∣niversal. Now the Church of Africk at this di∣stance of time stands in the best light of any, which is owing to the excellent writings of Cyprian, who gives several particulars con∣cerning the state of the Churches of that part of the world in and before his time. The first Council mentioned there, was un∣der Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage, about
rebaptizing of Hereticks; but the number is not mentioned, which if it had been any thing extraordinary, Cyprian would not have forborn to alledge, to add weight and Authority to the precedent he cites in favour of his own opinion.Cypr. Ep. 71. Agrip∣pinus bonae memoriae vir cum caeteris Coepiscopis suis qui illo tempore in Provin∣cia Africa & Numidia Ecclesiam Dei gubernabant. The next we find is at Lambese against one Privatus of that place, where there were present ninety Bishops, the most nu∣merous Council we read of in Africk before the Schism of the Donatists:Ep. 55. com∣pared with 30. nor is it to be wondred there should be so many Bishops met together in a Provincial Synod, since the Province of Cyprian contained Africa properly so called, Numi∣dia and the two Maurita∣nia's;Latius fusa est nostra Provin∣cia, habet enim Numidiam & Mauritanias duas sibi cohae∣rentes. Ep. 45. and we find several Councils composed of the Bishops of all these Provin∣ces less numerous than this against Privatus:Nanc cum in unum convenisse∣mus tam Provinciae Africae∣quam Numidiae Episcopi, nume∣ro 71. Ep. 73. However this passage of Cyprian of Provincia nostra, whether it be understood here of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Province, yet it was usu∣al for the Bishops of those Provinces in Cyprians time to meet at Carthage to con∣sult as the occasions of the Church did re∣quire.Cum in u∣num Car∣theini Convenissent Kal. Sept. Episcopi plurimi ex Provincia Africa, Numidia, Mauri∣tnia. Sententiae Episc. ap. Cypr. T. 2. ed Goulart.
And it is further observable that there is a great difference in the number of the Councils of Africa properly so called, and the other more general ones of the several Provinces united: all the Bishops of that Country or the greatest part coming toge∣ther upon extraordinary occasions, as we shall shew presently from the simplicity of their constitution, which continued longer in that Church than in any other of the Chri∣stian World; and the strict obligations eve∣ry particular Bishop had of coming to the Synods, which here were more indispensable, because there were no Metropolitans to represent the Suffragans of their Province, but of this hereafter. After the persecution that forced Cypri∣an from Carthage, was ceased, a Council was assembled to settle the Discipline of the Church relating to the laps'd,Cum quies & tran∣quillitas data esset, & Episco∣pis in unum convenire indulgen∣tia divina permitteret, tune communicate & librato de omnium collatione, con∣silio, statuerem{que} quid fieri oporteret: Si quis vero ante concilium nostrum, & ante sententiam de omnium Consilio statutam lapsis temere communicare, yse communion arceatur. Persecutione spita, copisus Episcoporum numerus, quos integros & incolumes, fides sua & Domini tutela protexit. Ac si minus sufficis i Africa Episcporum numerus, etiam R∣mam, &c. Ep. 52. & Epigraph. Ep. 54. Cypriau liberalis, &c. Numero 42. or such as had fallen away in time of Temptation: and since Cyprian in his recess would never de∣termine any thing concerning it, before the storm were over, and all the Bishops
permitted to come together to establish a general rule concerning it, it is to be imagined that all that could possibly come together would meet upon this occasion, where they were all concerned: and so no doubt they did, and Cyprian intimates as much, where he says that all that had stood and persevered under that persecution came together, and their number did hardly exceed forty; it is likely that only the Bishops of the Province of Africk appeared here, the business requiring some speedy remedy, and all of that Province that had not lapsed doubtless came together; and Cyprian with regard to the number of Bishops in the Province, calls this a great number of Bishops. Another Syned is said to be called shortly after by the Author of the Libellus Synodi∣cus in the cause of Novatian which appears to be after that which we have mentioned last,. Lib. Synod. Sed cum statuissemus Collegae complures qui in unum convene∣ramus (perhaps in Hadrumettina Colonia) & legatis ad vos coepiscopis nostris, omnia interim int egrasuspenderentur, ut t universi nostri Collega & communicationem tuam, i. e. Catholicae Ecclesie unitatem — probarent, firmiter ac tenerent: and these universi Collegae it seems were the 84. above mentioned: who came from Africk, Numidia, and the two Mauritani's, for the Union and consent of all these was designed by Cyprian, in or∣der to which some Bishops were sent to Rome to inform them of the whole matter. Cypr. Ep. 45. as well from the number which was eighty four, and supposed the Church in a peace∣able condition, as from Cyprians Letter to
Cornelius about the Clergy in Hadrumettina Colonia, which though it be placed in the order of Pamelius before the Synod of Car∣thage about the lapsed; yet from seve∣ral circumstances I conceive was writ∣ten some time after: For 1. From the E∣pistle of the Synod last mentioned it appears that it was the first after the Persecution: 2. It makes no mention at all of Novatian: 3. The Letter of Cyprian about Polycarp and his Clergy gives the reason why they deferred to determine the difference between Cornelius and Novatian: because they staid for an account of the whole mat∣ter from those Bishops they had sent to Rome, that the cause of Cornelius might want no advantage of evidence to justifie and clear it, though he, Cyprian, was well enough satisfied of the justice of it, and had com∣municated with Cornelius before; All this he sayes in the same place was done in order to establish a general consent about commu∣nicating with Cornelius, which was to be done in a full Council of all the Provinces, the same that we have set down here from the Libellus Synodicus. Another African Council whose Epistle to Fidus about the Baptism of Infants is still extant,Ap. Cypr. Ep. 59. Aug. tr. du Ep. th. l. 4. c. . had sixty six Bishops, as St. Augustine reports, and names the num∣ber as extraordinary, to add greater Authori∣ty to their Testimony. That concerning Basilides and Martialis had but a very small number; and the first about the validity
of Baptism by a Heretick, had no great number, as we may conclude from the In∣scription of it, which shews that the Bishops of Numidia were not there, and that it con∣sisted only of the Province of Africa pro∣perly so called.Cyp. Ep. 68.70. Ep. ad Januarium & caeteros Episcopos Numidas. And Cyprian though he mentions this Council in several places, yet he sayes nothing of the number; nay though he mentions it in the very same peri∣od with that which followed upon the same account, yet he does not say any thing of the multitude of Bishops there, but ex∣presses that of the other, because he thought it remarkable, considering the number of Bishops at that time, when we had met together the Bi∣shops of Africa and Numi∣dia seventy one in number:Quid in Concilio cum complu∣res adessemus, decreverimus — Et nunc quoque cum in unum convenissemus tam Provinciae Africae quam Numidiae Episcopi septuaginta unus. Ep. 73. And this Council as if it had not been full enough is confirmed by another of greater extent and number,Cum in unum convenissent Episcopi plurimi, ex Provin∣cia Africa, Numidia, Mauri∣tania, Sententiae 87. Episc ap. Cypr. T. 2. c. 15 consisting of eighty seven Bishops assembled out of the Provinces of Africa, Numidia, Mauritania; and of these eighty seven, two left their suffrages with Proxies: and this is the most nume∣rous of all the Councils in Cyprians time, and the last of that Country we have any ac∣count of in that age. This was the state of the Church of Africk and the number of their Bishops, which if we compare with the vast increase of Chri∣stians
there described by Tertullian, and the Accession, we may probably conceive to have been made after by the care and mini∣stry of those good Bishops that governed that Church: we must conclude the African Dioceses to be very large, and to contain each of them not only a very great num∣ber of Believers, but those also disper∣sed throughout a great extent of Coun∣try. But it may be objected that all the Bi∣shops of Africk might not meet in these Councils, and therefore there is no compu∣tation to be made of their number from this observation: To which I answer first, that it is possible every individual Bishop might not be present, yet the greatest part was, and none was to absent him∣self without absolute necessity, as of sick∣ness or the like: and the number of such would be inconsiderable. And the Canons of that Church are very strict in this point in after times,Codex Canon. Afric. c. 53. vid. Conc. Carth. 3. c. 43. and give strange incourage∣ments to such as have otherwise but ill titles to their Bishopricks, to hold them to the prejudice of him who has the juster title, if the one frequent their Councils, and the other neglect them: On the otherside neg∣lect of duty in this parti∣cular is made liable to de∣privation.Carth. 4. c. 21. Episcopus ad Synodum ir non sine satis gravi necessitate inhibatur, fic tamen ut in sua persona egatum mittat. 2. In Cyprians time when the African Bishops had no dependance one upon another, and no sub∣ordination
to Metropolitans, and the Decrees of their Synods did, and could ob∣lige only such as were present and consented to them; it was necessary that all should come together or send their Proxy, in order to establish that Unity among them which was the design of these Councils, and yet all the number even of their most solemn Councils is not great. 3. The practice of the African Church within half an àge after this time confirms this inference from the number of the Bishops at Councils, to the number of Dioceses in that Country: for we find presently, as Bishopricks were multiplyed by the Schism of the Donatists, so Councils became much more numerous: and whereas ninety was the greatest number that ever met there before this Schism, af∣terwards we find several hundreds. But however this inference will hold, it is some comfort to find some others of great know∣ledge and judgement in antiquity to hold the conclusion: that the number of Bisho∣pricks was not great in Cyprians time; which is assigned as a reason why his Pro∣vince was so large.Aucto numero sedium Episcopalium, adeo ut omnibus invigilare haud facile esset Carthag∣nensi Episcpo. Carol. à S. Paulo. Geogr. sacr. p. 84. But to make this point clear beyond all exception, I will indeavour to shew from unquestionable testimonies, how Bisho∣pricks came to be multiplyed in Africk more than in any other part: and then notwith∣standing
this, I will make it evident that those Bishops were Diocesans, and some of them after the crumbling of that Church into small pieces, had yet very large Di∣oceses, not inferiour to most of ours for ex∣tent of Territory. The Schism of the Donatists, though it broke not forth with any violence till after Caecilianus was made Bishop of Carthage, yet it was hatching long before in the time of Mensurius,Aug. Ep. 163. when the faction was kept up under hand, and had its Agents in several places: But being grown ripe, it took occasion from the promotion of Caecilianus to declare it self. Secundus Tisnigensis being called to Carthage with his Numidian Bishops to set up another, He came accordingly with about seventy Bishops, all the strength he could make, and perhaps more than his own Province could afford him: These declare they would not communicate with Caecilianus, and therefore set up Majorinus against him; and in like manner, where ever they could make the least party imagin∣able, they appointed a Schismatical Bishop; and not content to equal the number of the Catholicks, they divided the ancient Dioceses, and erected several new Episcopal seats, that by the number of their Bishops at least they might appear to be Catholicks, as they afterwards laid claim to the title upon that account: It was not long after this breach,Aug. Ep. 48. but we hear of unusual numbers of Bishops met in Council; and one of the
Donatists of Carthage according to Tychonius his relation,vid. Valesii Dissert de Schism. Do∣nat. had no less than two hundred and seventy Bishops, which if it be true shews this change to have been very sudden; though it cannot be so soon as Balduinus, and out of him Baronius would understand it to be: but of this I have said enough before. Some time after when they quarrelled among themselves, they called a Council of three hundred and ten, Bagatense against Maximianus. The Catholicks observing what advantage this reputation of having a great number of Bishops gave their adver∣saries,Conc. Carth. 2. c. 5. Codex in∣teg. can. Eccles. Afr. c. 53.98. thought it necessary to make use of the same course themselves, and to make as many Bishops as they could; therefore they order, that where part of a large Dio∣cess should be willing to have a Bishop of its own, if the Bishop under whom they were should consent, a new Bishoprick might be erected. But it was commonly at the cost of the Schismaticks that they multiplyed Dioceses; for where there were two Bishops in a Diocess, the one a Catholick and the other a Donatist, and the Donatists would return to the unity of the Church,Codex Can. 118. the Diocess was to be equally divided be∣tween them, and that with so much exact∣ness, that if the number of the Towns hap∣pened to be odd, the odd Town was ad∣judged who it should belong to: nor was this all, but where the Donatists had dri∣ven out or perverted all the Catholicks,
there they set up a Bishop as soon as ever they had any party, and sometimes in the same Donatist Diocess there were three or four Catholick Bishops. This is made out so clearly in the conference at Carthage, that I need only cite some passages out of it, and leave them to the Reader without farther inference or application. Petilianus Episcopus dixit sapientissimè ac prae∣scie ommá pravidisti vir nobilis,Collatlo Carthag. Cogn. Pri∣mae gesta. 65. nam in Plebe mea, i.e. in Civitate Constantmensi adversarium habeo Fortunatum, in medio autem Dioecesis meae, nunc institutum habeo, imo ipsi habent, Delphinum: pervidet jam hinc prastantiatua duos in unius plebe fuisse imaginarie consti∣tutos, ut & numerum augeant, & tamen plebium numerus non sit, qui sit illarum, sci∣licet, Personarum: & hoc Argumenti est maxi∣mi, ut videantur nos hoc genere superare, si du contra unum constituti sunt vel tres: Nam etíam in plebe praesentis sanctissimi Collegae, ac fra∣tris mei Adeodati, i. e. in Civitate Milevi∣tana, ita commissa res est, ut unum ibidem ha∣beat Adversarium, alterum in Tuncensi Civita∣te, qui ad hujus scilicet plebem antiquitus perti∣net, & ante biennium esse videtur constitutus: Tertius vero sit in loco qui dicitur Ceramussa: Ergo cum unus sit Civitatis Milevitanae Episco∣pus à partibus nostris, tres videntur ab his con∣stituti fuisse, ut illorum numerus augeretur, aut fortasse excederet numerum veritatis: Requirendum est igitur quando auctus est illorum numerus, quam Originem ha∣eit, utrumhoc novitas fecerit,
an dederit Antiquitas, utrum ut ita dixe∣rim, contra vetustatem canam vitium hc fuerit novitatis. Petilianus (Donatist Bishop of Constan∣tina said: Noble Sir, you have wisely foreseen all things: for in my Diocess, i. e. in the City of Constantina, I have Fortunatus an opposite Bishop; and in the middle of my Diocess, I have, nay they have, Delphinus another Bishop: Your excellence may perceive by this, how they have set up two imaginary Bishops in the Diocess of one to increase their number, and yet the number of Dio∣ceses will not be so great as that of their Bishops: and this is a great argument that they would seem to out do us in this kind, if they do but set up two or three against ones for in the Diocess of my worthy cllegue Adeodats who is here pesent, i. e. in the City of Milevis, the matter is so ordered, that he has one Anti Bishop there in the Ci∣ty, another in the City of Tunca which has belonged of old to his Diocess, and it is not above two years since he is set up there▪ a third is in a place called Ceramussa. There∣fore whereas there is but one? Bishop of Milis of our party, they have three, that they may increase their number, and perhaps exceed the number of the truth, or of the True Church: we ought therefore to ask them when their number increased thus, what was the Original of it? Whether this be an innovation, or Reverend Antiquity, or rather whether this novelty has not
been irregularly introduced against reve∣rend Antiquity. And what Answer is there to all this? No other than that it was impertinent, it was nothing to the business of the confer∣ence, which was to dispute the cause of the Church, whether it were to be found among the Catholicks, or only amongst the Donatists. Fortunatianus Episcopus Ecclesia Catholica dixit, Multiloquio Ecclesia causam agi non debere perspicit mecum tua dignationis sensus, Cognitorum optime. Fortunatianus Bishop of the Catholick Church said, Best of Jndges, you perceive as well as I that the cause of the Church ought not to be maintained by much imper∣tinent talk. Therefore the Catholicks could not deny the matter of fact, but despised the argu∣ment, and perhaps looked upon it as a credit to their cause to be so watchful and industrious in it; and since Schism would needs divide the Church, they thought it allowable to return them the same measure and devide Schism too, by parcelling their Dioceses between several Catholick Bishops. And that we may not think this instance▪ singula,Col. Carth. Cogn. 1.117. I will proceed to cite some more pas∣sages to the same effect. Petilianus Episcops dixit, in una Pleb Janri Collegae nostu praeferis, in una dic∣cosi quicor sunt constuenti contra ipsn,  nume∣r stilicet augeretur.
Petilianus said, In the single Diocess of my Brother Januarius, there are no less than four Bishops set up against him, that their number may be increased. To this and some other little reffections the Answer of Marcellinus the President was, Hac ad praesentem non pertinent actionem: These things are not to the purpose. And these, checks were the cause why we have not many more particulars of the divisions of Dioceses in Africk; yet for all this, some could not forbear making their complaints when it came to their turn to speak. Verissimus Episcopus dixit, Agnosco illum,Coll. Carth. Cog. 1.121. quatuor sunt in plebe mea, Datianus, Aspidius, Fortunatus & Octavians. Verissimus said▪ I know him, (for be∣fore the Conference the subscriptions were to be examined, and the Donatist Bishops were to confront the Catholicks, i. e. the Bishop of each City his opposite Bishop there) there are four Bishops in my Diocess, and names them. Now that we may not think this way was taken up by the Catholicks only to increase their party,In ipsa an∣tem Ecclesia Mustitana apparuit & ipsos Episcop alium antiqua Cachedrae addidisse, & bot in allis locis se fuisse po doclaratm, 25. Bre. Col. they when it comes to their turn charge the Donatists with the very same Arts. For,
Sumnius Episcopus Tiguallensis idem dixit, praesto sum: in Dioecesi mea duo sunt Gaianus & Privatus. Alypius Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae dixit, animadvertat nobilitas tua etiam in nostrorum Dioecesi eos ordinasse Episcopos. Sumnius Bishop of Tigualla said: I am here: there are two set up against me in my Dio∣cess, and names them. Alypius Bishop of the Catholick Church said, Your Honour may please to observe, that they have set up several Bishops in single Dioceses of ours. Marcellinus V. C. Tribunus & Notarius dixit:ibid. Talia ab utrisque partibus constat objecta; si haec vultis diligenter inquiri, ad hanc causam superflue venisse nosce∣mur. Marcellinus, Tribune and Notary, (the moderator of this Conference) said: It is evident that these things are objected on both sides; if this be the business you would examine, I am come hither to little pur∣pose, for this is not the thing I came about. This check had so much effect that we do not find any make this impertinent com∣plaint for a long while together, but the opposite Bishops own the knowledg one of another, and so the subscriptions are read and passed with little interruption. At last Alypius not being able to hold out longer, would make his general remark upon a great number of Donatist Bishops.
Alypius Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae dixit: Scriptum sit illos omnes in villis vel in fundis esse Episcopos ordinatos, non in aliquibus Civi∣tatibus. Alypius said, Let it be recorded that all these were made Bishops in Villages and Hamlets, and not in any Ci∣ties. Petilianus Ep. dixit: Sic & tu multos habes per omnes Agros dispersos, immo crebros ubi habes, sane & sme populis habes. Petilianus Answered: And you have many dispersed in the Country, and of those several without any people to go∣vern. And now the reader may perceive by wha methods the Dioceses of Africk came to be so numerous:Subscribed 266, 14 present that did not sub∣scribe: ab∣sent of the Catholicks 120. Bre∣vic. Col. It was not the example of the Bees that made Bishops swarm so much there, but an unhappy Schism, and the affectation of number to support the credit of it, then a necessity that lay on the Catholicks to add number to their weight, and to turn the ballance on their side, no less in point of reputation, than it in∣clined of it self as to the justice of their cause: and yet after all this the Dioceses were not so little as our Parishes;Cll. Carth. Cog. 1.212.215. for reckoning after the utmost computation there will be a great difference: for the number of sub∣scribers on the part of the Catholicks in this Conference was two hundred sixty six, va∣cant Sees sixty four, absent two hundred
and twenty: in all five hundred and fifity Dioceses: The Donatists had two hundred seventy nine subscribers, said they had more ab∣sent than the Catholicks,Augustine writes but 120, which probably is the truth, Brev. Coll. c. 12. besides vacant Sees, but mention no number:Augustine shews from the con∣fession of the Donatists, that they had not not so great a number absent as the Catho∣licks, because they had con∣fessed that all their Bishops young and old were there, excepting only those that were hindred by sickness. ibid. and since by this Conference it appears every Diocess had two Bishops at least one with another, the Dio∣ceses will not be found to be very small; and perhaps if the absents and vacancies of the Catholicks were to be examined, they would not all have proved effective, or not far to exceed the number of the Dioceses of Africk as they were after reduction by the Emperours edict at the time of Hunnericus his conquest of that Country, which I have mentioned before out of the Notitia Africa published by Syrmond. And yet in all this division several Bisho∣pricks in Africk had the fortune to remain intire,Conc. Car∣thag. 3. c. 39. and so large that they were not in∣feriour to our Dioceses in England for large∣ness of Territory: For in the whole Pro∣vince of Tripolis there were but five Dioceses,Codex Can. 49. A. 397. Tripolita∣a Pro∣vincia abortu habet aram Philenorum, & lineam ab ea ductam ad Lybicas gentes, ab occasu Tritonem flavium qu dividitur a Bizacend, à Septentrione terminatur mari Africo, à meridie desertis Libycis. Carol. à S. Paul. p. 91. at the time of the third Council of Carthage, and the Notitia Africae which was taken some
years after, sets down but one more, for which reason the African Councils made several exceptions in their favour, as that there should be required the presence but of one Bishop of that Province in any Council: and that few Bishops might be allowed to ordain there, in consideration of their number. Besides there were several large Bishop∣ricks in the other Provinces:Codex Can. 56. for we find in the Canons of the African Councils, that one Bishop had such extent of Territory as might be divided into several Dioceses, and where it is permitted any part of a Diocess, as a considerable Town, and the Territory belonging to it, to chuse a Bishop for them∣selves, with the consent of him, part of whose Diocess they were; It is added, ut adem Dioecesis permissa proprium tantum ha∣beat Episcopum, caeteras sibi non vindicet Dioeceses, quia exempta de fasce multarum sola meruit honorem Episcopatus suscipere: It is enough, when a Bishop gives way that another Bishop should be set up in part of his Diocess, that that part which he grants this to, may have their own Bishop; but this new Bishop is not to assume any right over the other parts of his Diocess: Because his part being taken out of the bundle of several Dioceses, (i. e. such as would make several like his, but belonging all to the same Cathedral,) was alone designed for this new Bishoprick: And to the same ef∣fect he calls that ancient intire Diocess out of which another is to be taken Massa Dioe∣cesium,
an aggregation of Dioceses, or as we would now speak, of Rural Deanries: The same thing is supposed by the Canon that forbids a Bishop to leave his Cathedral, and live in any other Church in his Diocess.Con. Carth. 5. c. 5. Con. Carth. 4.36. And by another to this effect, That the Presbyters who are Rectors of Churches in a diocess, ought before Easter to repair to their proper Bishop for Chrism, and not to take it of any other, who perhaps may be nearer: It would be end∣less to cite all the circumstances that imply the greatness of the African Dioceses even at this time; I will select some Dioceses there whose extent is mentioned occasionally, but without any remark of their being extra∣ordinary in comparison of others. The Diocess of Hippo Diaretorum,Codex Ca. 78. not Re∣gia, where St. Augustin was Bishop is said to contain many Churches, by that Canon whereby it is provided that Equitius the Bi∣shop of it is to be deposed, and another put in his place; and for the easier effecting of it, it is said, Ecclesiae ibi ab his retinen∣tur qui Equitii facinorosam communionem decli∣naverunt. The Diocess whereof Xantippus was Bishop must be supposed of good ex∣tent,August. Ep. 236. for Augustine complains to him of one Abundantius a Presbyter in fundo Strabo∣nensi, at a great distance from his Bishop, and near it seems to Augustine, as may be gathered from the nature and manner of the complaint: in the same place there is  Presbyter Gippi∣tanus
who was neighbour to this Abundantius, or rather they lived both together, tho' they had several Cures. Alypius Bishop of Tagastis,id. Ep. 289. had likewise the Church Thyana under him, which pro∣bably was a considerable City, as may be gathered from the Epistle of St. Augustin to Melania, whose Son was forced by a tu∣mult of the people of Hippo to take Or∣ders. Hippo Regia the Diocess of St. Augustin was very large,Ep. 74.212 236. Ep. He mentions many Paro¦chial Presbyters and Parishes in it, as Pres¦byter Germaniciensis, Armemansis, Subsana, where Timothy was ordained Reader, which occasioned no small trouble: Malliana, Tur∣res, Ciran, Vitalis, &c. And such was the number of Churches in his Diocess, that he excuses himself to a friend, whom he had promised to assist in some kind of Study, that he could not be as good as his word, because he was gone upon his Visita∣tion, which would hold a considerable time: and therefore he remits him to one of his Presbyters: Quoniam visitandarum Ecclesiarum ad meam curam pertinentium necessitate profe∣ctus sum: But we have a clearer account of the extent of this Diocess than of any other in Africk,id Ep. 261. Volens pro∣desse quibusdam in nostra vicinitate. This Neighbourhood which Mr. B. sometimes argues from, to shew the smallness of Dioceses then, was not the next door or the next Town. in his Letter to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, where he mentions a place in his
neighbourhood, as he expresses it, that belonged to his Diocess, and had never had a Bishop of its own; yet forty miles di∣stant from Hippo: the passage because it is something remarkable I will set down in St. Austins words. Fussala dicitur, Territorio Hipponensi confine Castellum, antea ibi nunquam Episcopus fuit, sed simul cum con∣tigua sibi Regione ad Paroeciam Hipponensis Ec∣clesiae pertinebat.—i. e. Te place is called Fussala, a Town adjoyning to the Territory of Hippo, which never had a Bi∣shop of it own, but belonged to the Dio∣cess of Hippo with the Country about it: Sed quod ab Hippone memoratum castellum mil∣libus quadraginta sejungitur: because it is forty miles distant from Hippo, and the miserable condition of that Church requi∣ring the presence of a Bishop, he ordained one for them, which not proving as useful as he expected, he sends this Letter to excuse himself: Nor are we to imagine that the Diocess of Hippo was singularly great above all the rest of Africk,Collat. Carth. 1.65. but that Carthage, Cirta, Milevis, and many others of the more emi∣nent Bishopricks, had more Churches under the inspection of their Bishops: and the Diocess of Milevis particularly had besides Towns and Villages, Cities likewise belong∣ing to it; for besides Milevis, Civitas Tuncensis belonged to that Bishop.
And now if Mr. B. and the Nonconfor∣mists in whose name he makes Diocesan E∣piscopacy a reason of Separation, had lived in Africa in the time of Cyprian or Augustin, they must have renounced their communion, or must have renounced these principles, they must have been Nonconformists there, and abhorred the largeness of the Bishops Dioceses, no less than the Donatists did the largeness of their Charity: Augustin would have been reckoned for all his learn∣ing and holiness, no better than an Anti∣christian Bishop, and our Reformers must have had toleration to Separate from him; and what is the sweetest liberty of all, to discharge their gall and bitterness upon him. So that this is our comfort, that these men that are such irreconcileable enemies to our Church, would have been no otherwise to the Prophets, the holy Primitive Bishops that have gone before us. And for the same reason they reproach us, they must reproach the ancient renowned Churches of Christ: Nay the Church Universal, as will further appear by what follows. Although it may seem sufficient for my design to have shewed the progress of Dio∣cesan Episcopacy in Africk, the Country that Mr. B. singles out, as retaining the clear∣est footsteps of the Congregational form; yet for farther satisfaction in this point I will briefly shew the progress of Diocesan Episcopacy in other Nations, and shew how at first they were but few in comparison, not
only for want of Christians in all Cities and Villages, but by choice; and when they came afterwards to be multiplyed, it was not so much from the increase of believers, as from Schisms and divisions in the Church, and from the increase of Metropoles by the Christian Emperors: in order to which I shall proceed upon the same grounds I have done hitherto. From the great number of Christians that were dispersed into all parts and Cities, and the small number of Bishops that met in Councils, especially Provincial, where all were obliged to be present; as al∣so from some general expressions of the con∣dition of some Bishops in the earliest times, as it is to be presumed that in the earliest times of the Church, the Provincial Synods were the majority at least of the Bishops in the several Provinces; so the first Synod had so few Bishops that we must needs conclude their number then to be very small. For in∣stance therefore, The Gallick Synod assembled at Lyons under Irenaeus,Ex Libello Synod. against Marcion and other Hereticks, had but twelve Bishops in it. The Synod of Hierapolis under Apoli∣narius against Montanus and Maximilla had twenty six.Ibid. The Synod of Anchialus under Sotas had twelve or thirteen Bishops.Ibid. And Eu∣sebius having cited two or three subscripti∣ons out of Serapions Epistle,Hist. ocl. l. 5. c. 9. adds, that there were the subscriptions of many more, not
naming the number, perhaps because in his time it would have looked but inconside∣rable, all being but twelve. The Synod of Ephesus under Polycrates about the time of Easter, was probably more numerous than most of the Provincial Coun∣cils of this age, as consisting not only of the Bishops of Asia, but of those of the neighbouring Countries; as we may con∣clude from Victors attempt to excommunicate them:, Euseb. l. 5. c. 25. . Libàl Synod. Polycrates in his Letter to Victor sayes they were a considerable number, and if he should write down all their names, it would seem a great multitude: But no number is any where expressed. But a Synod held at Rome about the same subject had but fourteen Bishops, and seve∣ral other Synods about this Controversy had not many more. That of Jerusalem un∣der Narcissus had but four∣teen:Papa Victor direxit Authorita∣tem: not the language of that time. Praecepta it a{que} authorita∣te praedictus Episcopus nonsolum de sua Provincia, sed de diversis Regionibus omnes Episcopos evo∣cavit. And the famous Council under Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea had but twelve besides him; Eu∣sebius makes but one of both these: Bede repre∣sents it as an extraordinary great Assembly, for the Preface to it I conceive to be his, he makes him to assemble not only the Bi∣shops of his own Province, but from several other parts.
The Council of Lyons under Irenaeus made up but fourteen: That of Corinth under Ba∣chillus eighteen: That under Pasna or Palma the same number: That of Osroena eighteen, but the President of it is not known: That of Mesapotamia which fol∣lows had the same number, and it may be was the same Synod; as that of Rome which follows is it may be the same with that which is mentioned before to have had the like number; and the occasion of such mistakes as these, is, that when men find a Synod cited upon several accounts, although it might be the same meeting that determined several things, they are apt to conclude they were several Synods. However it is plain from hence, that there were but few Bishops in comparison of what they grew to within an hundred years after, and that I take to be an argument of the largeness of their Dioceses. But you will say, there were but few Chri∣stians in these Parts: The countrary is noto∣rious to all the Word, for these parts where most of these Councils were held, were the best planted and furnished with Christians of any in the World: But it may be there were but few in the world at this time. It is not long after this that Tertullian wrote his Apo∣logy, and what number of Christians there were then, we have shewed already. How then can this be imagined, for every City, if it have a Church must have a Bishop; there is no absolute necessity of that, that it should
have its peculiar Bishop: for we have seen already one Bishop, as that of Milevis, had more Cities than one in his Diocess, and it had been so from ancient time, or rather from the beginning, antiquitus pertinuit: And in this time we are now speaking of, it is likely the Apostolick constitution of Bishop∣ricks, which in the beginning, as Rabanus Maurus observed, were very large, did hold; and it was the best suited to the infancy of the Church, when one general visit our should take care of several Churches scattered as yet, and incoherent: and because a persecu∣tion might overthrow these little beginnings, it was necessary there should be one, whose office it should be, to cultivate these new Plantations, and where they were rooted up, to set anew, and to confirm those that were shaken with a competent district. But when Christians multiplyed every where, and most Cities had such numbers belong∣ing to them, as must be distributed into se∣veral Congregations, the Diocess of the first constitution became too great, and every City with some of the Territory belonging to it, became a Diocess, and had its pro∣per Bishop. And this seems to be most a∣greeable both to the Scripture History of the Church which we have made a deducti∣on of before, and to the progress of the Church in succeeding ages; and particularly to the numbers of Bishops which are found in the first Synods: But to proceed,
The Synod at Rome under Victor where∣in Novatus was condemned was much more numerous than any menti∣oned before,. Euseb. Hist. l. 6. c. 43. and consisted of sixty Bishops besides Priests and Deacons; and Eusebius speaking of this, observes the number to be very extraordinary, consi∣sidering the circumstances of those times, and the numbers assembled in foregoing Sy∣nods:. But the Libellus Synodicus reckons but eighteen, which it may be was a small Synod previous to this greater one mention∣ed by Eusebius. The Eastern Synods about Rebaptizing Hereticks were reckoned as for those times very numerous;Euseb. l. 7. c 5. Plurimi tractavi∣mus, Firmil Ep. ad Cypr. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 3. and yet that of Iconium the greatest of those of the East consisted of but fifty Bishops, and these met together out of several Countries, as Galatia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, and other neighbouring Provinces. St. Augustin despises the smalness of their numbers, though Dionysius confesses these were mighty Synods in his time, or rather before his time; for they seem to be earlier than Baronius places them: But what were these against so many thousand Bishops as were in the world then? sayes Augustin. I believe it would have been a very hard matter to have found so many thousand Bishops at that time; I am sure the Acts of the Church discover no such multitudes of them, and they must be very negligent, if they should
be so many, and yet suffer things to be carried any way in Councils by a very few persons: that Father judged of former a∣ges by his own, when Dioceses were exceed∣ingly multipyed, even to be the grievance and complaint of the African Church. But Baronius goes to mend the matter by telling us, that this opinion could find but fifty to countenance it among all the Bishops of the East: One would imagine by this that the Councils of Iconium and Synadae,An. Ch. 258 were but a small number of Bishops, protesting against the general suffrage of their neigh∣bour Bishops. But if this were true, Stephen Bishop of Rome had acted very extravagant∣ly and upon ill information, when upon the account of those publick resolutions taken by fifty Bishops, he goes to excommuni∣cate all the Bishops of Cilicia, Galatia,Euseb. l. 7. c. 5. Cappadocia, and the bordering Nati∣ons. What number of Bishops France had at this time appears from the Council,Vita 5. Pauli ap. Bosquet Hist. Eccl. Gal. par. 2. where Paul Bishop of Narbonne was accused of in continence, Evocatis paucis Episcopis Galliae, quia nondum erant plures, having called a few Bishops together, for at that time Gallia had not many. Nor do we find that Dioceses were much multiplyed in Spain as yet, the famous Coun∣cil of Illiberis, which decreed so many things relating to Communion, and such as all the Churches there must be supposed to consent to, had but nineteen Bishops; a number
so small that Baronius takes occasion from hence to despise the Authority of the As∣sembly. But what ever may be inferred from the smalness of their number, surely one must infer that their Dioceses were Di∣vided into Parishes from Canon seventy se∣ven,Siquis Dia conus regens plebem sine Episcopo vel Pres∣bytero ali∣quns bap∣tizaverit, &c. Conc. Illib c. 77. Hic regere posse plebem Diaconum, hoc est curam Parochiae habere, Hispani Episcopi docent, & Baptizare posse, Mendoza. where it is ordered, That if a Deacon who has the government of a Congregation or Parish without a Bishop or Presbyter, shall Bap∣tize any, the Bishop shall perfect it by Confirma∣tion; or if in the mean time the party dyes, we are to hope well of him The Council of Neocaesarea in like manner does signifie the same distribution of Dioce∣ses into several Parishes,, &c. Conc. Neocaes. c. 13. where the Country Presbyters are distinguished from those of the City, and the former are forbid to officiate in the Citie's Cathedral in the presence of the Bishops or Presbyters belonging to them. Now when Constantines conversion had made so great and happy a change in the affairs of the Church, when the Civil power that hitherto used all means possible to de∣stroy it, took it not only into its protecti∣on, but to special favour and kindness; and studyed all means possible to render it great and honourable, the number of Bishops and Dioceses were so far from being dimi∣nished, that they soon after were exceed∣ingly encreased, partly by the Emperors mul∣tiplying
Metropoles, partly by the unhappy Divisions that soon after afflicted the Church, as will appear by the progress of this dedu∣ction. When Constantine Indicted the Council of Nice, it appears from Eusebius that he us'd all means to have as great an Assem∣bly of Bishops as could well come toge∣ther;Euseb. e vita Con∣stant. l 3. c. 6. for which purpose he furnish'd many of them, especially such as were at a great distance with convenience for Travail: and there is no doubt but as many as could have any means of going, would be carri'd thither by their curiosity to see and enjoy the Presence of a Christian Emperor, that new Miracle that God had wrought in fa∣vour of his Church: and accordingly they came from all parts of the Roman Empire, and some from the Nations beyond it. The Countries that lay next to Nice did doubtless send the greatest part of their Bishops: as may be inferr'd by comparing the subscriptions of the Bishops of Palestine Phoenice, Coelosyria, Egypt, and some other Countries, either with the Ancient Noti∣ of the Dioceses of those Countries, or the subscriptions of following Councils; and it is observable that the Province of Bithynia where this Council was held, had but 13 Bishops Present, though the prin∣cipal Bishop of the Province were extream∣ly concern'd, and at last condemned by this Synod therefore we cannot but conclude that that Province had very few more. Yet after all
this care to make a full assembly, the number of Bishops scarce exceeded 250. as Eusebius who was present does affirm;232. according to the MS. ci∣ted by Mr. Selden in Eutich  Which Sandius takes to be Sabinus often mention'd by Socrates: and one that exposed this Coun∣cil, as consisting of poor Illi∣terate men. and Eustatius Bishop of Anti∣och reckons but 20 more, though the Common opini∣on reckons 318. and yet how small a number is this in comparison of some suc∣ceeding Councils, where we find without half the Apparatus, that belong'd to the Nicene Council, double the number meet together: The Council of Sar∣dica on the part of the Catholicks, had near 300. the Hereticks had great numbers at the same time in Philippopolis: the Arrian Council of Sirmium had 300 Western Bi∣shops besides those of the East; that of Ari∣minum had 400. Bishops from the Western parts of the Empire; for in the East there was another Council called at Seleucca: and lastly, that of Chalcedon had no less than 600. There can be no reasonable account given of this difference,. Euseb. vit. Const. l. 3.17. but that the multitude of Dioceses was strangely in∣creas'd; for Constantine de∣sign'd the Council of Nice to be as great and Magni∣ficent as was possible, and yet it was nothing in comparison with those that followed, nay was outdone by some Pro∣vincial Councils of Africk.
And as the number of the Council of Nice shews that Dioceses in those times were not so many, nor small as they be∣came afterwards; so the Canons of the same Council, do suppose Bishopricks to be very large, and forbid the dividing of them: for one Canon orders that every Bishop should be ordained by all the Bishops of his Province.Can. 4. . And considering how large Ecclesiastical Provinces were then, they cannot suppose all the Pastours of every Congregation to meet, nor indeed the Ministers of every good Town or substan∣tial Village, which in several Provinces would amount to several thousands, without ma∣king such an Assembly more numerous than any general Council that ever was in the world:Can. . another Canon provides a∣gainst the dividing of Dioceses in case a Novatian Bishop shall happily be willing to be reconcil'd to the Church; but that he should be content with the place of Presby∣ter, unless the Catholick Bishop should think fit to leave him the title of a Bishop; if not,Inveniat e locum ut sit in Paro∣chia Chore∣piscopus. then to make him a Chorepiscopus, i. e. the Rector of a Country Parish in his Diocese, or a City Presbyter, lest there should be two Bishops in the same City: The Afri∣can Councils took another course as we have seen, and divided the Diocese in such a Case; but when they consider'd the Au∣thority of this Council, we find them chang∣ing
their Practice: for Augustin when he had design'd his Successour, yet would not suffer him to be ordain'd in his life time, because he would not violate this Canon, although his Predecessor had permitted his Ordination while he was alive;August. Ep. but Au∣gustin makes his excuse, that he did not know of this Canon then, and yet his Diocese was large enough to hold two; but he un∣derstood this one City with all its depen∣dencies; and thought that by vertue of this Canon there ought not to be two Bishops together in the Diocese of Hippo that was above forty miles in length. The Diocese of Constantinople to which Constantine was so great a Patron,. Euseb. vit. Const. l. 3. c. 46. was very conside∣rable in his time; for it had so far outgrown the measure of one Congregation, that the Em∣peror thought it necessary to build a great many Churches, and very large Temples, or Martyria, because they were dedicated to the memory of Martyrs; and this not on∣ly within the City, but in the Suburbs, that is, in the language of that time, the Ter∣ritory belonging to it: And it is great pity there was no Bishop or Presbyter that could inform the welmeaning Emperor, that this was mistaken devotion, to submit all these Churches to one Bishop. The Council of Antioch supposes Bishops to have large Dioceses,An. Ch. 341. Can. 8. and therefore pro∣vides that Country Presbyters shall not give
Canonical Epistles, not so much as to the next neighbouring Bishop, but the Chorepis∣copi may send such as were called , for friendly correspondence and concord. And the next Canon about the power of Metropoli∣tans, Can. 9. where it is forbid any Bishop to do any thing of great moment that may concern the whole Province without the concurrence of the Metropolitan, does notwithstanding allow, that he may govern his own Church, and all the Regions under his jurisdiction. Another Canon supposes more than one City in a Diocess, and therefore Orders, That a Bishop shall not Ordain a Presbyter or a Deacon in another City than his own,, &c. Can. 22. or that is not subject to him. Concil A∣grippin An. 346. Non opinio∣ne, sed veri∣tate cogno∣vi, pro fini∣timi loci conjuncta CivitateThe Council of Colen discovers the Dioceses thereabout to be very large, for the Bishops assembled had most of them their Seats at a great distance from Colen: Sêrvatius Bishop of Tongres in his Subscription adds some∣thing concerning his own knowledg of Eu∣phratas Bishop of Colen; and he gives for his reason that he was his next neighbour, and yet their Cities are fifty or sixty English miles distant one from the other: and the
extent of the Diocess of Colen appears from the same Council, where not only the peo∣ple of the City exhibite their complaint against him; but of all the Towns of the second Germany,Subscriptio Servatii. Cum{que} reci∣tata fuisset Epifiola plebis Agrippinensis, sed & omnium Castrorum Germaniae se∣cundae. Ap. Conc. acta. Provincia Germaniae secundae Metropolis. Civitas Agrippinens, Colo∣zia. Libel. Provinciar. whereof Colen was Metro∣polis, and most of them belonged to that Diocess. The Council of Sardica considering what course the Arians took to strengthen their party, by increasing the number of Bishops, as the instance of Ischyras Presbyter of Ma∣reotes shews, who was Ordained Bishop of a Village by the Arian Council of Tyre, thought fit to declare against such proceed∣ings, as derogating from the dignity of a Bishop: and therefore Decree; That no Village or inconsiderable City shall have a Bishop,: Con. Sard. c. 6. or any place where a Presbyter may suffice:—and lest you may imagine this an innovation to favour the growing greatness of the Bishops, they add imme∣diately, That the Bishops of a Province shall Ordain Bishops in those Cities where there were any before; which supposes, that there were several Cities after the Empire became Chri∣stian, that had never yet had Bishops: Nay they add farther, That when a City
grows very populous, so as to be fit to receive a Bishop, it may have one: To the same purpose is the Decree of the Council of Laodicea, held after that of Sardica, and much later than is generally pretended: That Bishops ought not to be made in Villages,. Visitatores qui circum∣tant, Isid. Merca. or in the Coun∣try but Visitors: who by the name they bear appear to be Diocesans, because they have several Congregations under them which they are to visit: and as for such Coun∣try Bishops as are already, they must take care to act nothing of moment without the advice and privity of the City Bi∣shops. Yet all this while Dioceses do multi∣ply against all means used to prevent it: as we may perceive by the extraordinary numbers that met in Councils,Acciti at{que} tracti 400, & àmplius Episcopi. Sul. Sev. l. 2.  Epiph. Synod. ap. Athan. de Synod. exceeding very much the greatest of those that had gone before: Ex∣traordinary numbers met at Sirmium and Ariminum; at the latter all the Bishops of the West are said to have met; for the Emper∣perors Officers were sent all over Illyricum, Italy, Africk, Spain, France, to summon the Bishops to meet at Ariminum: and all the Bishops are said to come thither from all the Cities of the West. And now as we may observe the number of Bishops and Dioceses to increase; so we may make some judgment concerning the
occasion, from that little light that is left in this particular: We have but a very ob∣scure account of the erecting of Bishopricks, how and when most of them were founded; but those instances that are preserved are sufficient to make us comprehend how the numbers came to increase so sensibly after the breaking out of the Arian controversy: and in Egypt some time before upon the occasion of the Meletian Schism,Epiph. Her. 68. Meletius having left the Communion of the Catholick Church, formed a separate faction, and Ordained Bishops and Presbyters in every Country, and in every place through which he pas∣sed; nor was he content to set up only one Altar against another, but to erect several in the same Diocess. Nor is there yet any end of dividing Dio∣ceses, but these increase in proportion to the divisions of the Church;Meletius: , &c. Epiph. Haer. 68. and as the Meletian Schism multiplyed Bishops in Egypt, the Au∣thor of that Sect Ordaining Bishops in every Region, and in every place that he passed through, several in the same Diocess, and as the Arian Controversy made Bishops where there never were any before: so it is not to be doubted but the Controversies which followed,Athan. Ap. 2. multiplyed Dioceses no less than these. But besides this the multiplying of Metro∣politans by the Christian Emperors con∣tributed
no less to multiply Bishops. We have an eminent instance of this in the Pro∣vince of Cappadocia in the time of Basil the Great: The province being divided be∣tween two Civil Metropoles; the Bishop of Tyana the new Metropolis thought that ac∣cordingly all that part of the Country that belonge o the Civil jurisdiction of his City, became no less subject to him as his Ecclesi∣astical Province, which occasioned great disputes and animosities between the two Metropolitans. Basil complains of the Bi∣shops of the second Cappadocia that they presently renounced him in a manner:Ep. 259. and when he made any difficulty of Ordaining any Bishop belonging to his Province, An∣thimus was ready to admit him, as it hap∣pened in the case of Faustus. Therefore to oppose the power of this new Usurping Metropolitan, he betakes himself to the ordinary relief of making more Suffragans▪ that by this means he might have some remedy from a Provincial Synod:Epist. 58. & 195.: Naz. de Vit. suâ: & Ep. 22, 23. To this purpose Sasima a small Town belonging to Caesa∣rea is made an Episcopal Seat, and Gregory Nazian∣zen is preferred to it much against his will, as a Per∣son that might be of use to him against his Antagonist, which he complains of in his Epistles to Basil, and in his account of
his own life, and so sensible was he of Basil's ingaging him in this quar∣rel,. Naz. Or. de Basil. that he cannot forbear expressing his resentments even in the Funeral Orati∣tion of his friend: where besides this new Bishoprick he shews that seal others were erected upon that contention, and that the Church had this advan∣tage that, By the increase of Bishops there would be a more exact and particular care ta∣ken of Souls, and every City should be govern∣ed in all Ecclesiastical affairs within it self: which before in that Country it seems they were not used to: And Lastly That by this means the strife endeds, After what manner he does not say, perhaps this increase of Bishops carried the cause for Basil against Anthimus, and so the controversy ended: However Nazianzen commends Basil here for multiplying Dioceses, yet in the Verses before cited, he makes it a very unnecessa∣ry innovation for him to set up a Bishop at Sasima having no less than fifty Suffragan Bishops in his Province already;. yet if we consider how far Sasima was probably from Caesarea we must conclude the Diocess of Basil out of which this is expresly said to be taken, to have been very large: for that this place was at some good distance from Basil, we may perceive from Nazianzen's
complaint as if he had been banished by this promotion into some remote place. 2. If any guess may be made by comparing the itinerary from Constantinople to Jerusalem, Printed th that of Anto∣nius with the Tabulae Peu∣terigeranae,Apud Itinerarium Antonini Sasus in finibus Ciliciae: But this cannot be the same with Sasime in the other Itinerary. the distance must be as great at least as between Hippo and Fussala; for in that Itinerary there is reckoned sixteen miles from Sasima to Andavalis, which in Peutingers tables is a great way from Caesarea. 3. Sasima in the Ancient Greek Notitiae Printed with others by Carolus â S. Paulo,Ordo Metro∣politarum prout de∣scriptus est in Charto∣phylacio. is set down in the second Cappadocia, which was under the Metropolis of Thyana: and therefore it is not likely to be very near Cae∣sarea the Metropolis of the other Cappadocia: And one may observe that the Dioceses of Cappadocia notwithstanding this division were yet very considerable, and far from being reduced into Congregational Chur∣ches. It is plain from Nazianzen that Cap∣padocia had but fifty Bishops, for so many he sayes Basil had under him, (and no doubt he owned him as Metropolitan of the whole Province) and considering the extent of that Country, the Dioceses must needs be large: for the Country as Strabo computes,Strab. l. 12. is near four hundred miles in length, and little less in breadth, as Causabon restores the reading of one thousand eight hundred furlongs in the twelfth book, by a passage in the second, where the breadth is made
two thousand eight hundred. And in this compass Bishops may contrive fifty Dioceses of very competent extent, and not inferior to many of ours. Basil writing to the Presbyte of Nico∣polis, Salutes the Clergy of the City, and the Clergy of the Diocess. And in a Letter to the Ci∣tizens of the same place,Bas. Ep. 592.. de∣sires them to shew a good example of affection to∣wards their new Bishop, to the rest of the Diocess:Ep. 94. And in another to the Brethren of Colonia whence Euphronius was chosen to Nicopolis, he tells them that he who was their Chorepiscopus before may take care of them still, and continue to be their Bishop: The same Father in another Epistle,Ep. 72. Evasenis. shews that Ancyra was a Diocess of good extent, for Eustathius passing through the Territory of that City, is said to have overthrown the Altars of Basilides the Bi∣shop of it, and to set up his own Tables; which supposes several Country Churches under the jurisdiction of that Diocesan.Bas. Ep. 406. Amphi∣lochio sub nomine Hracleidae. , &c. And Lastly when Basil directs Amphilochius Bi∣shop of Iconium to constitute Bishops in the
Province of Isauria which at that time was it seems distitute, upon what occasion I know not; he enters upon a comparison between the convenience of large and small Dioceses, and debates for sometime, whe∣ther it were best to Ordain one Bishop of the Metropolis, Seleucia I suppose, who shall take care of the whole Province, and Ordain more Bishops as he shall find expe∣dient, or else appoint a number of lesser Bi∣shops first: And here he confesses that if he could find one that would answer the character of St. Paul, that were a work∣man, who needed not to be ashamed, such a one would go a great way, and be worth many little Bishops; would be of great∣er use to the Church, and by that means we might with less hazard undertake the care of the Souls of the Province: But if this cannot be done, then let there be made Bishops in the lesser Cities and Vil∣lages where there were Bishops before, and the matter be so ordered that the Bi∣shop of the Principal City may not di∣sturb us hereafter in point of Ordinations. By which it appears that Isauria was then part of Basils Province; and we may per∣ceive the reason why he chose rather to Or∣dain the Country Bishops first, to form an interest in the first place, and to diminish the strength and power, and to prevent the usurpations of the Bishop of the chief City.
Nor were these Chorepiscopi Country Bi∣shops other than Diocesan, as to the extent of their Church, which consisted of many Congregations, and those at a good distance one from the other; for these were not as Rectors of a single Parish, but Visitors of several Churches, to the proportion it may be of our Rural Deaneries, though like them they were more immediately related to a certain Parish or Town: But their Episco∣pacy was in relation to the association of several Churches. So Basil sayes he sent to the Chorepiscopus of those places, not of one Country Town;. Bas. Ep. 355. and therefore the Coun∣cil of Laodicia calls them , Visi∣tors; and where Cities were not very thick, some of them had the inspection of a large Territory: But yet these were but the De∣puties or Surrogates of the City Bishops in point of jurisdiction, for they were to do nothing of moment without their Bishop, and several Councils provide against their Usurpations. Basil whose Diocess and Pro∣vince we come from giving an account of, is so resolute upon his prerogative, that he will not endure they should ordain as much as the inferior Clergy, as Deacons, Subdea∣cons, Readers, and several others which the Church of that time reckon'd among the Clergy without his consent,Bas. 181. and if they do let them know (sayes he) that whosoever is admitted without our consent, shall be reputed but a Layman: What would he have said if they had pretended to ordain Presbyters or
Bishops in opposition to them? The Bishops of the Church of England desire no more than S. Basil assumed, That none should be reputed Priests or Deacons that were ordained in their Dioceses without their consent, and that by simple Presbyters who were never Chorepiscopi, or had any chara∣cter to distinguish them from other Presby∣ters. Therefore the case ought not to be reckoned so hard as it is commonly repre∣sented by the more moderate Nonconfor∣mists, who pretend this point of Reordina∣tion the only bar that keeps them out of the Church, since there was never any o∣ther Church, not any in Ancient times would have received them upon any other terms: and they must have remained Non∣conformists under Basil, Athanasius, and all the ancient Bishops, whose names are, and alwayes have been had in veneration with all Christians; not one of these would have ever been perswaded to own a Pastor that his Presbyters had ordained in opposi∣tion to him, nay hardly could they have been prevailed with to admit such as any other Bishop should Ordain within their Diocess; so extream punctilious they were in this matter; and there is hardly any one thing that caused so frequent and danger∣ous contentions between them as the point of Ordination. Nor was this Province singular in the ex∣tent of its Bishopricks, or the manner of their Administration, but all the parts of
the Christian World went by the same Rule as to Diocesan Episcopacy, and most of them had much larger Dioceses than these we have been speaking of: The Frontier Provinces of the Empire towards the East, being more remote from the contentions that afflicted the Church, were not cantoned into so small Dioceses as other Countries, and being likewise less divided in their Civil Condition, because it might render them less defensible against Invasion, the Ecclesi∣astical Dioceses likewise remained intire in the the measure of their first Consti∣tution. The Diocess of Edessa seems to be of ex∣traordinary extent,Conc. Chal. Act. 10. even at the time of the Council of Chalcedon, when the ambition of some Metropolitans, and the contenti∣ons of Hereticks and Schismaticks had re∣duced Bishopricks to be very small. For 1. some of the misdemeanors charged upon Ibas Bishop of this place, shew that Diocess to be extreamly rich:. The Collection for re∣demption of Captives amounted to fifteen , and tho' it is not easy to reduce that summ to our money, yet we must con∣clude it to be a considerable sum, when we reflect upon another accusation of Daniel Brother to Ibas, as if he had bestowed on Cal∣loa, the money of the Church, for she had let out to use two or three ; which must be a considerable summ, since it's taken notice of as an argument of her wealth: Besides the Church of Edessa had
six thousand more of these Numismata be∣sides its ordinary Revenues, (and one of its Mannors called Lafargaritha is mention∣ed there) and two hundred pound weight of Church Plate. 2.. The City of Battina was in the Diocess of Edessa; for Ibas is accused of having endeavoured to make one John Bishop of it; who was suspected of Magick: But Ibas his Arch-Deacon of that place opposed it. 3. Maras who was one of Ibas his accusers was Excommunicated by another Arch-Deacon of his. 4. The Cler∣gy of the City of Edessa was above two hun∣dred persons, not reckoning that of the Country within his Diocess; and this was a Diocesan Bishop to purpose, who besides a large Diocess had Excommunicating Arch-Deacons, and a great Revenue: And if Mr. B. or his Brethren had been of that Diocess we might have found them among his accusers. The Diocess of Cyrus whereof Theodoret was Bishop was yet larger,Theodor. Ep. 113. containing eight hundred Churches, as he writes to Leo Bi∣shop of Rome: The exceptions which Mr. B. makes against this Epistle are so fully an∣swered by the incomparable Dean of Pauls, that nothing can be added. But if Mr. B. should quarrel with any writings of this time for mentioning great Dioceses, we must have a new Critick; and disgrace a great deal of the Fathers that have hitherto been received by a general consent: It is a very hard matter to convince men that i∣magine
all that time for them whereof we have little or no account, and reckon si∣lence of Antiquity for consent; and then if any thing shall appear against what they have once fanfi'd, though it be never of so good credit it is spurious; it is all Im∣posture, because it makes against them: who would ever be convicted, if it shall be Defence enough to say the Evidence is a Lye? Petavius mistaking a passage in Epiphanius,Not. in E∣piph. Hae∣res. Arr. Epiph. Ep. ad Joh. Hieros. ap. Hieron. thought the Dioceses of Cyprus to be very small, but from Epiphanius his Letter to John Bishop of Jerusalem it appears that his Diocess was of good extent: John had a quarrel with him for having Ordained a Pres∣byter in his Diocess, though it was only for the use of a Monastery: and he excuses him∣self by shewing how common a thing this was, and how frequently it was done in his own Diocess; and he was so far from taking offence at it, that he thought him∣self obliged to some of his neighbouring Bishops for using that liberty: and there∣fore commends the good nature and meek∣ness of the Cyprian Bishops who never quar∣relled with one another upon this account; and then adds: That many Bishops of our Communion have Ordained Presbyters in our Province, that we could not take (because they fled from us on purpose to avoid that honour, which was the modesty of those times—Nay, I my self desired Philo of blessed memory, and Theophorbus
that they would Ordain Presbyters in those Churches of Cyprus which were near them,O vere benedicta Episcoporum Cypri mansuetudo & bonitas: — multi Episcopi com∣munionis nostrae & Presbyteros in nostra ordinaverunt Provin∣cia quos nos comprehendere non poteramus— & ipse co∣hortatus slim b. m. Philonem, & sanctum Theophorbum, ut in Ecclesiis Cypri quae juxta se g∣rant, ad meae autem Parochiae videbantur Ecclesiam pertine∣re, to quod grandis esset & late patens Provincia, ordina∣rent Presbyteros, and belonged to my Diocess; because my Province, (i.e. my Docess) was very large: Now that this Province which is here said to be of so large extent was no other than his Dio∣cess, appears from the na∣ture of the thing. For if we shall imagine that it was his Province, as Metropo∣litan, the words will have no sense: for then are not there Bishops enough dispersed through this great Province, who may Ordain within their respecture Dioceses, and to them be∣longed the Ordination of Presbyters, and not to the Metropolitan? If we shall take this Province for a Civil division, there will be yet greater absurdity; for there may be other Metropolitans as well as he, and by what Authority could he dispose of their Dioceses or Provinces? In short there he gives leave to Ordain Pres∣byters where the right of Ordaining them belonged to him; and that being in his par∣ticular Diocess only, it follows that this great Province was no other than his own Diocess or Parochia as he calls it also in the same passage. Nor were the Dioceses of the West gene∣rally any thing inferior to those we have
been speaking of: Italy indeed had the smal∣lest, not only by reason of the great multi∣tude of Cities there; but by the policy of the Bishops of Rome who having alwayes had some Authority over the greatest part of the Country, strengthened themselves by making as many Bishops as they could within the dependance of their City; and by that means secured themselves from all such dangers as might threaten them from gene∣ral Councils; having a strong party of Bi∣shops at hand to send whither the Popes occasions should require their service: What effect this policy of multiplying Bishops in Italy had we see in the History of the Coun∣cil of Trent, whither several Bishops came from France, Spain, and Germany, with de∣sign of reforming most of the grossest abuses in the Church, and to moderate, if not wholly to remove that insupportable Yoke of the Papacy: But the Italian Pensioners being too many for the well-meaning Bi∣shops, that Yoke was setled more grievous than before, and weight added to the op∣pression; No remedy being left but vain complaints, (and Dudithius makes a very lamentable one to the Emperor) and then submission. Yet after all this the Italian Di∣oceses were never reduced to a single Con∣gregation, and some of them remain still of a very considerable extent. The Bishopricks of Spain were at first ve∣ry large as may be observed from the small numbers of Bishops that met in the Coun∣cils
of that Country: The Council of Eli∣beris had but nineteen Bishops, and the first of Toledo had the same number;Hinc colligo Nationale fuisse Concilium cum to tempore sede Toletana tot Suffraganeos non haberet Episcopos: Similiter de Eliberitano statuo, cum eo∣dem Episcoporum numero fuisset celebratum: — adde etiam quod in subscriptionibus Marcellus subscribit qui suit E∣piscopus Hispalensis. Gar. Loy∣asa. from whence Gar∣sias Loyasa infers that these were general Councils of all Spain, because the Pro∣vince of Toledo (sayes he) had not so many Suffragans at that time; and that Mar∣cellus Bishop of Sevil who was a Metropolitan of a∣nother Province was there. But the extent of the Spanish Dioceses does appear not on∣ly from the number of Bishops in their Coun∣cils, but also from the Canons made in them: As that of the Council of Toledo is very express about the making of Chrism, that it belonged only to the Bishop,Quamvis paene ubi{que} custodiatur ut abs{que} E∣piscopo Chrisma ne∣mo confici∣cat; ta∣men quia in aliquibus locis vel Provinciis Presbyteri dicuntur Chrisma conficere, placuit ex hac die nullum alium nisi Episcopum Chrisma facere, & per Dioecesin destinare, ita ut de singulis Ecclesiis ad Episcopum ante Diem Paschae Diaconi destinentur, ut confectum Chrisma ab Episcopo destinatum ad diem Paschae possit occurrere, Conc. Tolet. 1. Can. 20. Fratri autem Ortygie Ecclesias de quibus pulsus fuerat, pronunciavimus esse reddendas. Exemplar. Defin. sent. and that all the Churches of his Diocess should send before Easter every year for it to the Bishop, who was to be put in mind of it by the Arch Deacon. And in the same Coun∣cil there is a definitive sentence, where∣by Ortygius is restored to his Bishoprick, out of which he had been unjustly ejected, that shews that his Diocess consisted of se∣veral Churches; for so the Sentence runs, That he be restored to his Churches.
Nor can any one think it strange that these should be general Councils of all Spain, when he considers the numbers that usually met in Provincial Synods of that Country. For the Council of Saragossa had but twelve, and that number is extraordinary compa∣red with some following Councils: Concilium Gerundense had but seven Bishops; that of Ilerda eight, whereof one was present but by Proxy; that of Valentia seven: And lest we may imagine the Bishops of Spain neg∣lected their Synods, the sixth Canon of the Council of Arragon (which consisted of ten Bishops) Orders, That if any Bishop having received Summons from his Metropolitan,Si quis Episcoporum commonitus à Metropolitano ad Synodum nulla gravi intercedente necessi∣tate Corporali, venire contemp∣serit, sicut statuta Patrum san∣xierunt, us{que} ad futurum Conci∣lium cunctorum Episcoporum Charitatis Communione privetur. Conc. Tarracon. c. 6. shall neglect to come to Council, being not hindred by sick∣ness, shall according to the Decrees of the Ancient Fa∣thers be excluded the com∣munion of the other Bishops untill the next Council fol∣lowing. And the same Council by another Canon signifies the extent of the Dioceses in Spain,Multorum casuum experientia magistrante reperimus non nul∣las Dioecesanas Ecclesias esse de∣stitutas, ob quam rem hac con∣stitutione decrevimus ut Anti∣quae consuetudinis Ordo serve∣tur, & annis vicibus ab E∣piscopo Dioeceses visitentur, & siqua Basilica reperta fuerit de∣stituta, Ordiatione ipsius re∣parari praecipiatur, &c. Can. 8. where it Orders every Bishop once in a year to visit his Dioce∣ses according to the ancient usage of that Church, and see what Churches there were out of repair, and ordered them to be repaired out of the Re∣venues
of those Churches, there being a third part reserved for that purpose by anci∣ent custom and tradition; and the thir∣teenth Canon of the same Council makes a distinction between the Presbyters of the Cathedral, and those of the Diocess;Non solum è Cathedralis Ec∣clesiae Presbyteris, verum etiam de Dioecesanis ad Concilium tra∣bant. Can. 13. and that the Metropolitan take care to summon some of both sorts to the Council of the Province. And this was the state of the Dioceses in Spain from the time of the first Council of Nice, to the latter end of the fifth, and the beginning of the sixth Century. The Churches of France as they had a near correspondence with those of Spain in several other things,Bona de Reb. Litur. l. 1. c. 12. and as Bona conje∣ctures had anciently the same Liturgy be∣fore Pipin's time; so they were not unlike in the extent of their Dioceses: For Gallia be∣fore the time of the Council of Nice, seems to have had but very few Bishopricks; al∣though it is to be supposed the number of Christians there was much greater than in any other part of the Empire Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great having favoured the Christians in the Provinces un∣der his Government,Euseb. de vit Const. l. 1. c. 13. while his Collegues used all manner of Violence and Arts to root them out every where else:vid. Conc. Arelat. 1. apud Sir∣mond. Conc. Gall. Yet when Constan∣tine the Great called a Council at Arles to re∣sume the cause of the Donatists, the Gallican Bishops it seems were so few that we find
but eight of them subscribe in that Coun∣cil. The Council of Valence had twenty one Bishops, and this is very extraordinary for the Province of one Metropolitan, in these times; and therefore it is more probable that it was a general one of several Provin∣ces, or of all Gallia: For there is an Epistle of this Synod directed to all the Bishops and Churches of Gallia, by way of Preface to the Canons of it, a thing never assumed by the particular Synods of a Province; and this will appear yet more probable by comparing this with other Councils that followed. (The Council of Regium or Riez▪) consisted but of thirteen Bishops personally present, and one Presbyter who was Proxy for a Bishop. The first Council of Orange had but six∣teen personally present, and one Proxy. And that we may not imagine the Gallican Bishops to be so negligent as not to attend these Provincial Synods; let us but consider the eighteenth and nineteenth Canons of the second Council of Arles, which pro∣vide against this neglect: There its ordered, That if any Bishop be hindred by sickness, he shall not fail to send his Proxy: But if any Bishop shall neglect to come, or depart before the conclusion of the Assembly, let him know that he is shut out of his brethrens communion, and so to continue until the next Synod shall restore him. Yet for all this in∣junction the Synod of Angers assembled the
year following had but eight Bishops, and the third Council of Arles, within three years after had but thirteen Bishops; The Synod of Tours ten, whereof one subscri∣bed by Proxy, and another subscribed being absent, the Canons being sent to him: The Council of Vennes (Venetum) had but six Bishops, and there were but two more in the whole Province, as appears by the Epistle of that Synod to those two that were absent, desiring their confirmation of such Canons as they had made: And Lastly another Council at Arles about Pre∣destination, had but twelve subscriptions. From whence it appears how large the Dio∣ceses of Gallia were at that time. The Ancient Notitia Galliae published by Sirmond, and written as is conjectured in the time of Honorius and Arcadius, rec∣kons in all the seventeen Provinces of Gal∣lia one hundred and fifteen Cities, taking in all the Country between the Rhine, and the Brittish Sea: Carolus à Sancto Paulo will by no means allow this to be an Ecclesi∣astical Notitia,Geogr. sacra Galliae, p. 124. because there are several Cities mentioned in it that never were Episcopal seats, and several Episcopal Sees are omit∣ted; indeed the Ancient Notitia of the Gal∣lican Bishopricks published by that Au∣thor, reckons about one hundred twenty and six in all that vast tract of Country; nor are they so few at this day, taking in Savoy, Suitzerland, Alsace, and all the Countries bordering upon the Rhi,
to Cologn and the Country of Cleaves, be∣sides all the Spanish Netherlands, all rec∣koned within the Ancient Gallia, which will afford very fair Dioceses. But the Acts of the ancient Gallick Coun∣cils do make yet clearer proof of the large∣ness of the Dioceses there: Proculus Bishop of Marseilles layes claim to several Churches as having been anciently Parishes of his Dioceses;Con. Taurin. c. 1. Easdem Ecclesias vel Parochias suas fuisse, vel Episcopos à se in ilsdem Ecclesiis ordinatos, and left that the ambiguity of the word Pa∣rochia may make the sense doubtful, he layes claim in the same place to others as depending upon his Metropolis, and where he had Ordained Bishops. The Council of Regium Orders, That if one be Ordained against his will Bishop of any City by fewer than three Bishops,Liceat ei unam Parochiarum Ecclesiam cedere,— nec uquam duarum Ecclesiarum gu∣bernationem obtineat. or without the consent of the Metro∣politan, that he may be made Rector of one Parish in the Diocess, if the Bishop thinks fit; but is to have the government of no more than one Parish, and the City Bishop to Or∣dain all his Assistants. The First Council of Orange appoints, That if a Bishop shall build a Church in another Bishops Territory;Gon. Arans. 1. Can. 10. the Ordination of Minister to serve it shall belong to the Bishop in whose Territory it is; but the right of Presentation and Patronage shall be in the Founder of that Church: which
supposes a Diocess of more Congregations than one. The Council of Vaison (Vasense) en∣joyns all the Ministers of Parishes within every Diocess to repair to their Proper Bishop for Chrism every year before Easter,Per singula Territoria Presbyeri vel Mini∣stri ab Episcopis, non prout libitum fuerit vicinioribus, sed à suis propriis per annos singulos chrisma petant, appropinquante solemnitate Paschali. Con. vas. c. 3. and not to go to other Bishops that may be nearer to them. There would be no end of instances of this kind, within the space of five hundred years after Christ: but this is sufficient for our present design, which is only to give a view of Diocesan Episcopacy; of the Rise and Propress of it in several parts of the Christian World. As to our own Country of Brittain, for whose use Mr. B.'s Church History is more especially calculated, and against whose Bi∣shops all the Venom is directed, it is cer∣tain indeed that we had Bishops betimes; for we find some of their Subscriptions to the great Council of Arles.A. D. 314. Sulp. Sever. l. 2. And there were some of them present about forty years af∣ter in the Council of Ariminum: But how large their Bishops were then will be a very hard matter to demonstrate.Hist. Brit∣tan. l. 2. c. 1. ed Ascens. Jeffrey of Monmouth reckons twenty eight Bishops, and three Arch-Bishops in Lucius his time, set up in the place of so many Flamins and Arch-Flamins, who were the directours of
the Heathen Religion here;Vid. usser de Primord. Eccl. Brit. p. 57. Gild. bis denis bis{que} qua∣ternis Civ∣t tibus mu∣nita. Bede Hist. l. 1. c. 1. Bede, l, 2. c. 2 and this it seems he had from Gildas de Victoria Aurelii Ambrosii: But all this I suppose has no other foundation than a passage out of Gildas de exidio Britanniae, where he mentions twenty eight Cities in Brittian; and another out of Bede who follows Gildas: The Flamins I suppose were added for ornament after∣wards, by some imposture under the name of Gildas. But all the account that I know of the number of Bishops here, is in Bede, who sayes, That in a Synod assembled in Worcester∣shire about the receiving Augustine the Monk, there were seven Brittish Bishops present, and probably all the Bishops in the Country were there, this being the second Synod as∣sembled upon that subject, and that wherein the matter in controversy was to be finally decided, the Bishops that were present in the first Conference pretending they had not sufficient Authority to make an Accomo∣dation. But whether it were upon the Authori∣ty of this Testimony, or of something else more express, so it is that the succeeding Historians deliver it for certain, that Wales had but seven Bishops: Jeffrey of Monmouth tells us that when Austin came over,Hist. Brit. li 1. c. 12. Ed. Heid. Gyrald de Eccles. Men. dist. 2. & Itiner. Camb. l. 2. c. 1. he found in the Province of the Ancient Brittains seven Bishopricks, and one Arch-Bshoprick. And Gy∣raldus Cambrensis gives the reasons why there were but four in Wales in his time, since anci∣ently there were seven: Either (sayes he) there were more Cathedrals within the compass of
Wales in former times, or rather because Wales was of a larger extent heretofore than it was in his dayes, and reached as far aa Severn: And so indeed it was of much greater extent than it is now, having all the Country of Hereford, a good part of Glocestershire, Worcester, Sa∣lop, and Cheshire belonging to it. And Ba∣leus gives this account of the Bishops as∣sembled in that Synod mentioned before out of Bede: That seven Brittish Bishops met there, for in those dayes the Brittains had just so ma∣ny under the Arch-Bishop of Menevia, accord∣ing to the number of the Bishops of Asia mentioned in the Revelation of St. John:Baleus Script. Brit Cent. 1. c. 70. and then gives their names: Hereford, Landaff, Llanba∣derne, Vowr, Bangor, Asaph, Worcester, and Morganensis or Glamorgan, though this was the same with Landaff: And therefore Bi∣shop Ʋsher thinks, that either Chester must make up the seventh, or Caer Ilyby, i. e. Holy∣head in the Isle of Anglesey; and so perhaps it is Episcopus Monensis, and not Morganensis. But as to the number of the Welch Bishops at Austins coming over, if any one desire to know any thing more particularly, he may consult the learned Primate of Armach,Usher de Primord. Eccles. Brit.  87, & se{que}. who has exhausted that point: But as to the form of the Brittish Church Government, that it was Diocesan, and not Presbyterian or Independent, we have a modern Testi∣mony, which though it be of no great Au∣thority for the Credit or Learning of the persons that give it; yet it is something re∣markable, because they were professed ene∣mies
of the Church of England, and of all Diocesan Churches: It is the testimony of an Independent Synod assembled in the Sa∣voy,Preface to their De∣claration of Faith, near the end. A. D. 1658. For Novelty (say they) for which we are both charged, (i. e. the Pres∣byterians and Independents) by the enemies of both: It is true in respect of the publick and open profession, either of Presbytery of Inde∣pendency, this Nation has been a stranger to each way, it is possible ever since it has been Christian. And now having given an account of the Rise and Progress of Diocesan Episcopacy, and the extent of Ancient Dioceses in seve∣ral parts of the Christian World, I shall con∣clude this Chapter with a general Testi∣mony of St. Jerom concerning the custom of the Church in and before his time: Jerom speaking of Confirmation, makes the Ortho∣dox person in the Dialogue say these words: I do not deny (sayes he) this to be the custom of the Church,Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, ut eos qui longe in minoribus Urbibus per Presbyteros & Di∣aconos baptizati sunt, Episco∣pus ad invocationem S. Sprri∣tus manum impositurus excur∣rat. Hieron adv Lucifer. for the Bishop to go about his Di∣ocess to confirm by imposition of hands, such as are Bap∣tized in lesser Cities remote from the Episcopal Seat by Presbyters and Deacons And the same Father speaking to the same purpose, that this was done rather to honor Episcopacy than by any absolute necessity, adds: Otherwise (sayes he) those are to be mightily bewailed,In viculis & Castel∣lis, & re. motioribus locis per Presbyteros aut Diaconos Baptizati. who being Baptized in Villa∣ges,
Towns and places remote from the Bi∣shop, have dyed before they were confirmed. Therefore it was the custom of the Church then; nor does he speak only of his own time, but of the constant practice of the Church, that Bishops should have Presby∣ters and Deacons under their jurisdiction in places very remote from their Cathedrals; and that little Cities, Towns or Castles, i. e. fortified Towns and Villages, might be remote from their Bishops Seat: and so Dioceses be then and before that time of a very considerable extent. FINIS.
Books sold by Moses Pitt at the Angel in St. Paul's Church yard, Are All that are Printed at the Theatre in Ox∣ford (a Cataloge of which he gives gra∣tis to all that please to send to him for it) As Bibles in Folio for Churches, Bibles in Quarto, Octavo, and Twelves. Testa∣ments in Octavo and Twelves. Com∣mon Prayers in Folio for Churches. Com∣mon Prayers in Quarto, Octavo, Twelves and Twentyfours. The English Atlas, or a description of the whole Word: the which will be twelve Volums in Folio: The two first Volums whereof are published, the third is now in the Press. The price to subscri∣bers is Forty shill. a Volum in quires, they paying Forty shill. alwayes before hand on the delivery of every Volum. Catalogue of the Books in the publick Li∣brary at Oxford, Folio. Historia Ʋniversitatis Oxoniensis, Fol. Marmora Oxoniensia, Folio. Pocock on Micha and Malichi, Folio. Jamblichus de mysteriis Aegyptiorum, Gr. Lat. Folio. Charltoni Onomasticon Zoicon. Fol. Sir William Dugdale's History of our Civil-Wars, Fol. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. Fol. Dr. Cole's four Controversial Dialogues, Quarto. Lord Clarendon against Hebs, Quarto. Prideaux maimonidis Heb. Lat. Qua.
