m3033 31354728 110244
A Bemoaning LETTER OF AN Ingenious Quaker, To a Friend of his. Wherein the GOVERNMENT OF THE QUAKERS Among Themselves, (As hath been Exercised by George Fox, and others of their Ring-Leaders) brought to Light. Wherein their Tyrannical and Persecuting Practices are Detected and Redargued. Also a Preface to the Reader, giving an account how the said Letter came to the hand of the Publisher. By G. I. LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1700. (Price Stitcht 6 d.)
ERRATA. PAge 11. line 27. for Foxoman read Foxonian. Pag. 14. lin. 27. after Self add and Posterity. Pag. 15. lin. 12. after Lord add but also opposed in the Name of the Lord. Pag. 33. lin. 20. for Boreman read Bowman. Pag. 33. lin. 24. for Nelson read Elson. Pag. 34. lin. 19. for Nelson read Elson. Pag. 45. lin. 2. for Rember read Remember. Advertisement. THE Author's Name is not inserted, ye he's well known to the chiefest Quakers in the City: He is a Person of great Credit and Reputation, and has a very plentiful and large Estate.
THE PREFACE TO THE Reader. READER, THou art here presented with the Copy of a Letter, wherein thou wilt find (upon reading) a Discovery made of the Transactions of the Governing Quakers, both in some of their Persons singly, and  their Body, or Convention, joyntly: For  houldest know, that the Quakers have for e years formed themselves into a kind of
Politic-Ecclesiastical Body, and have held their Meetings for matters of Government, e∣very Monday, or Second day of the Week,  Devonshire House: There they take Cogni∣zance of those things that concern them as Qua∣kers, that is, A party of Folk that desire to ¦pear different from all others in Religion, Go∣vernment, Speech, Apparel, Civil Converse, and what not. Of some of their Transactions in these Meetings, thou mayst perhaps have read in a Book entituled, The Quakers Spiritual Cou writ by one Smith, who had been a Quaker, but was gone from them. This piece which is now put into thy hands, appears also to be w by a Quaker, and one that is so still (at t writing of this) in Principle and Practice, but offended at the governing Body, by reason of their Defection, as he conceives, from th former Principles in their present Practice, as in the Letter it self will more fully appear▪ wherein he doth not only declare Matter of Fact, but compares it with the Quakers Principles, and the Practices of the Aposta∣tized Romanists, and others, whom they con∣demn. The Quakers are wont to glory in their
Profession, as standing not in Word, but in Power: Whereby they seem to mean the ex∣cellent Conversation of their People above all others: But if particular Persons among them transgress so manifestly, that it cannot be ex∣cused; then they defend themselves, as others o, by saying, That it is no fault of their Principles, but the Person, that did not walk according to his Principles; But if it do ap∣pear, as here it doth, that not only as particu∣lar Persons, but as a Body, they are guilty of the like Tyranny, Oppression, Persecution, &c. as other faulty Bodies or Corporations, I hope we shall not suffer our selves to be imposed upon by their nauseous Self-commendations, to be∣lieve that they transcend all others, or that their Principles are better than those of other Christians whom they condemn, at least it will not appear from their Practices that they are so. I must needs say, I see no reason at all, why the Writings of particular Persons, that are of the greatest Eminency among them, who write in their Names, and are generally, if not universally, approved by them, as written by their true Spirit, should not be imputed to the Quakers, as Quakers; But that what they
do as a Body and Society should reflect upon them as such, I cannot see with what face they can deny. I do indeed easily foresee, they will endeavour to invalidate the Evidence that is here given against them, from the want of the Author's Name: To which Exception I have this to say to the Judicious Reader; 1. That in truth, I do not know his Name, for that Copy it pleased God to bring to my hand, had no Name subscribed, nor was it addressed to any; and the Person from whom I had it, either cannot, or will not (being per∣haps engaged to the contrary) tell me the Au∣thor's Name. But (2) I suppose the Considerate Reader may find sufficient reason, from the intrinsic nature of this Relation, and from the Circum∣stances wherewith it is accompanied, to exact of him Credence of the Matters of Fact contained in it; if not, he is at his liberty to judge as he shall see cause. (3.) I desire the Reader to consider what weight is to be put upon, or what credit to be given to the Name of an obscure Au∣thor, when even Mr. Pen, the Son of Sir William Pen Deceased, hath (for In∣stance)
failed so Egregiously in his Book enti∣tuled, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, &c. in answer of The Spirit of the Quakers tried, that in relation thereto, and after a diligent comparing of these two pieces, Mr. John Faldo in his Book entituled, Quakerism no Christianity, hath given this Judgment; But for Pen's sake I shall believe it more than possible, that a Man of the highest Pretences, having some more than ordinary means to deal rightly and ingeniously, may yet so far deceive my Expectations, as to give the highest Contradictions to them all. Part. 3. Sect. 1. And how ordinary a thing is it, in these times, for one Controvertist to charge the other with notorious Falsities in Matters of Fact; what credit then to be given to Mens Names, except other things concur to give testimony to their Narratives? 4. I am not conscious to my self of any the least injury I have done to the Copy, or undue practice in presenting it, God knows, I believe the publishing it may be useful to the Publick. There was one line in the Copy which could not be so read as to be made Sense of, and there∣fore 'twas left out. I shall say no more, but
assure the Reader, the Author seems to me to be faithful and ingenious, however let him judge of him and his work as he sees cause. Farewell. G. J.
THE The Spirit of the Hat: OR, The Government of the QUAKERS among themselves, &c. Dear Friend, WHat is made known and manifested in me, concerning the great Apostacy in this day, and what I have seen and heard, I am made willing to communi∣cate the same, to testifie unto the truth thereof. It pleased the Lord, about twenty Years ago, to visit this Nation with his Loving-kindness, in send∣ing forth a Spiritual-Ministry, in the mid'st of Wars and Fightings, to turn us from Darkness to Light, and to bring us out of the Strife into the Patience of Jesus, into his Love and Meekness, to do good for evil. This Seed being sown, prospered in the Hearts of many, and brought forth Victory through Judg∣ment, and the Spirit of Burning: And the Lord was wonderfully with them in this Dispensation,
that very many came off from the barren Moun∣tains, and out of the sandy Deserts, and were here refreshed, without Money, without Price, and the Bread was broken freely to the Hungry, and Water given freely to the Thirsty: And not only so, but likewise our Vessels were filled with the same, whereby our Hearts were made glad, and caused the Springs of Life to break forth out of our Bellies, and the Bread of Life to dwell within us that we needed not to go forth out of our own Houses, having an Holy Anointing within us to supply the wants of our Souls, and lead us into a Truth. And the Lord did daily add unto the Church, and raised up many to go forth in the Power to Preach the Everlasting Gospel, whereby the Church multiply'd and encreased to the astonishment of the Nations. How low and humble were they in their Spirit▪ how few were they in Words! Their yea was yea, and their nay, nay! Ah! let me take up a Lamentation! How are the Mighty fallen! How have the Stars ceased to give their Light! How are the Poor distressed, and the Young Ones bruised, by the High Mountains and Lofty Cedars, whose Habitations were once in Hea∣ven, but now upon the High Places of the Earth, to impose upon the Conscience, and to Establish an Arbitrary Power by a Law; these are the armed Beasts, and the many Antichrists, which break the Unity in Spirit, and the Bond of Peace. This brings in Divisions, causeth Differences, contenti∣ons and Emulations: It roots up the good, and eats as doth a Canker, whereby the Unity is di∣vided,
and the Peace broken. But the Unity that the Lord approves of, is for every one to act ac∣ording to his measure and growth in the Truth. All are not strong, therefore all cannot be in the me Exercise, no more than a Child can be found  the Exercise of a Man: So that the disuniting-Spi∣it doth not barely lie in being of another Mind nd Judgment, but in the imposing of its Judg∣ent and Practice; which appears plainly by Paul, o clearly judged that the ground of the Diffe∣nces in the Church, lay very much in the judging e another in Meats and Drinks, &c. It's the great Promise of the Father in these latter ays, That he will write his Laws in our Hearts, d put his Spirit into our inward Parts, to lead us to all Truth, and out of all appearances, which s Spirit manifests in us to be in the Imitation, nd after the Traditions of Men. Is it then reasonable for the Spiritual Man to be ound in the practice of doing, before a Law writ∣en, but rather wait at the Feet of Jesus till God eveals. And he that walks according to this Rule,  all know his Doctrine, and be led to behold his lory, and Witness an Unity in Spirit with his rother, though in a different Exercise. How doth this differ from the World's and the xoman-Unity, which is to yield subjection to  Order of the Body, (so called) though no anifestation within. And this Unity they glory  by this is their Kingdom upheld; from this they e able to boast, Who is able to make War with ? Who can stand before us? Do not all fall that ve risen up against us? Are not these the high elling Words of proud Babel, whose towring
thoughts must be abased? Whose practice hath been to Crush the Tender Ones, in their Bodies, Souls, and Spirits. This Language hath min Ears heard, this practice hath mine Eyes seen, to the grief and wounding of my Soul. This combined Unity I have no pleasure in; its Nature is known by its Image, its Birth by the ex∣ercise of its Power. My Friend Observe; What difference is there in these things between George Fox and the Papists. The one saith, No Liberty out of the Church: The other, No Liberty out of the Power. Saith the Papist, What Liberty to the Sectary? No: What Liberty to the Heretick? No. And George Fox saith, What Liberty to the Presbyter? No: What Liberty to the Independant? No: What Liberty to the Baptist? No. Liberty (saith he) is in the Truth. The difference lies only here, The one hath greater Power to compel than the other. The Papists say, Believe as the Church Believes: So likewise saith G. Fox: But I say Nay, I am not to believe a thing barely because the Church be∣lieves it, but because it's manifested in me, else  am to wait till God Reveals it. I was told the a∣bovesaid by two there present. The Church of Rome claims a Power of Excom∣munication (of them) that will not submit to their decent and comely Order, though in it self the thing be meerly Circumstantial, Ceremonial, or (as they term it) indifferent; and their reason is, It Judgeth the Power, and smites at the Authority, and (say they) it's an Inlet to Division and there∣by is Unity violated. Behold a resemblance thereof, it hath been often
said unto me, The Hat is nothing, but it is out of the comely Order, it judgeth Friends, who are in the Power, who testifie against it, and it breaks the Unity; and therefore we cannot suffer such to Marry or Bury, nor to partake of any Priviledge as a Member of the Body; and this is in the sub∣stance Excommunication: For Excommunication chiefly lies in a Man's being deprived of the Bene∣fits, and put out of the Protection of the Law, as also from being a Member of the Church. The Severity is the same with us, for where ould I Marry or Bury, if we were an intire Nati∣on? Or how can I take a Wife without a Witness? Or how can I have a Witness, if to be one is lyable to the same Misery. Selected Bodies ought to be found in the Exercise of Moderation, Tenderness, and Mercy, as if they were a Nation. I always find, when once such put forth their Hands to afflict for Conscience sake, as their Power groweth strong, so doth their Oppression. But perhaps they would say, We do not eject for Conscience sake, but because of an obstinate Will, which opposeth Friends. The Papists justifie themselves by saying of the same. I remember a Judge likewise made the same reply when a Friend mentioned Conscience. Cer∣tainly it cannot be an Evil in one, and Right in the other, no more than it is Cruelty in the Papists Persecutions, and Just in the Protestants. It will be a noble Example in those that stand upon the Advantage-ground to Act in Moderati∣on, Tenderness and Mercy. And although it is the Policy of the World's Churches, &c. under a
pretence for Unity, not to hear the tender Con∣science, yet the Church of Truth will; and where they are found, will account them as Brethren, and not to think it a sufficient ground to refuse them after Admonition, if they persist, but to wait till God perswades them. And this is the Royal Law of Liberty, the other is the Yoke of Bondage, from which we are not to be entangled after the Tradi∣tions of Men. This great Charter of Liberty is violated, and greatly broken in many particulars: If I have a Cause before the Elders, but especially if I am a Dissenter, it's frequently urg'd, give it to Friends; if I do not, a farther Snare is offered, namely; Dost thou believe Ʋs to be in the Power of God? If I say, Yea; then, What wilt thou not leave it to the Power of God in Friends? Thou art in confusion to believe Ʋs to be in the Power, and yet durst not trust to the Judgment of the Power. To my knowledge, this is a capital Crime accounted. What greater Usurpation can there be than this, to claim my Right from me into their Breasts? For though the Elders may be preserved in the Power this Year or Season, they may apostatize from the Truth, and yet claim the same Prerogative over my Propriety; hereby a Tyranny may be entail'd upon my self, by laying of such a Foundation. A most incomparable Instance is the Church of Rome, who was in the Power and Glory of God; howbeit through Pride she lost it, yet gain'd, through Subtilty, the Prerogative before mentioned, to give up unto her Judgment, and to believe as she be∣lieves, to the Destruction of many thousands: So that it clearly appears, the Spirit that claims such a
Power, under pretence of being in the Power, is the Spirit of Exaltation: and I know, that those Persons that have been most confident in the claim, under the same pretence, have committed great mistakes; and thereby Truth hath been depressed, and Error cherished. I suppose I may affirm that in all Ages, Truth hath not been persecuted as Truth, but as Error; I could instance, that many in the great Assemblies in London, have not only been dissatisfied with the rest of their Brethrens Actings, though they made use of the Name of the Lord. Both these cannot be right, yet both claim the same Power in Judg∣ment: Otherwhiles submit (through fear) unto the Judgment of the more eminent, though it doth not at all correspond with their understandings. If one part of the Body be liable to mistakes, why not the other? And if the Spirit, as they are a Body, is to be Judge and Determiner of Things; by what Spirit shall I know which is in the right? How needful is it therefore to be joyned to our own, in the particular, considering how lyable man is to err; a, in petty Matters. And I know, an Oppressive ct done by a Select Body, having Power, is by cry few clearly discerned; but when done by a rivate Person, every weak-sighted Man can then iscover it to be an Oppressive Act: And so the evil ctions of Great Ones are judged less Criminal, and the Persons less Faulty than in Justice they ght to be. The Churches of Men are still setting up them∣lves one above another; but the Assemblies of the e Church are all equal, having Christ the Light ally present with and in them; and therefore
Friends of one place, cannot say they have Power over Friends in another place, seeing all may be ¦able to have Christ the Light alike, in and among them; else Christ his Spirit, in several place should be above, and under themselves: But Chri in each Assembly of the Faithful is their Hea and this Head they do not leave, to set up a flesh Head to themselves, whether it consists of one many of them; seeing Antichrist doth as stron invade Christ's Headship in many, as in one Ma in a Councel, as in a Pope; in George Fox and  Body, as either. This Spirit of Antichrist in G. Fox, &c. would wrest from me what I am not willing to part with¦al, to wit, my Conscience, under no less Pena than Excommunication; which is as far as them lies, the loss both of Heaven and Eart of Heaven by Excommunication, of Earth  Deprivation; and this without Redemptio unless complying with his or their Will a Pleasure; and for no other cause, than for  omittance of a very small Ceremony, which  hold necessary to Salvation; like the Circumcis of old, who Preached, Ʋnless they were Circume they could not be Saved. But perhaps they will ▪ We do not Excommunicate thee, yet we can own thee in thy Error. I answer, It's one th not to own a Man in a particular, and anot thing so to disown him, as wholly to exclude  from Protection: For if I am once accepted of a Member, and after cast off as not being a Membe I shall leave it to the Sober what to call it. Perhap they will say, This casting off was not for the thing (as indeed it hath been said unto me) but for t
Contempt. I may rather say, Sure the greater the ruelty, to lay an Injunction upon so small a matter, at draweth after it so deep a Censure, as to cast  man out of the Church. Suppose a Magistrate d command a trivial matter, some Ceremony or her, under pain of Treason, and should proceed gainst the Infringers of this Command as Trai∣ors; it were much to be doubted, whether the ommand did not partake more of Cruelty, than e Disobedience of Contempt: For where Au∣ority shall so far lose it self, as to lay so great a eight upon so small a matter, it rendreth it self ontemptible; and then it's no marvel if it be con∣mned, having made it self contemptible. What ill our Lord do unto these that shall be found beat∣g their Fellow-servants, and driving them from eir Dwellings? Again, whosoever squares his Actions in things gious by the Spirit's requirings; he is a bad rit, &c. Whosoever would be governed by the at Law, To do as he would be done unto, he is  of the Truth; He that will not do what others ould have him to do, he is wilful, stubborn, and stinate. If the Body saith, It is to be so or not so, tho' two thirds of them are otherwise minded,  are silent) and if it shall happen for one to ose the thing with much moderation, and the  two thirds shall in their spirits unite with him,  notwithstanding a few of the combined Elders  bring him to the Bar, and unless he will own ondemnation, Judgment shall pass against him, th such an imperious Authority, that the others re not open their mouths, so that their arbitrary
Commands they can impose upon their Fellow-Members. They proceed further, saying, He that will not submit to the Body, opposeth God and  Truth; And they make the Body the Touch-ston saying, This is according, or not according  Truth, as the Body hath Unity or not Unity with it; and so by this practice the Spirit of the Lord is to be tryed, and judged by the Body. This  two parts, to deprive us of the Law of the Spir and to bring in a tyrannical Government; it wo lead us from the Rule within, to subject us  Rule without. It is asserted in Print, that if I believe the Light within me directs me to a thing, and the Body shall not have unity with it, it is safer for me to re upon the judgment of the Body. I remember abo a dozen of the great ones subscribed a Paper to the effect, and sent it to Hartford, but it was the much disliked: There was this also in it, That  any person had (as he thought) a command from God, to do a thing, or to put forth a thing in Print,  must first come and lay it before the Body, and they judge, he must submit. Is not this an Arb¦trary Government, bounded by no Law, but what G. F. and a few more please? Herein the ground of our Liberties is taken from us, (to wit) T live, act, and judge according to the Law withi In this is the distribution of Justice, and he that is overawed by a power without, stifles and strangles true Judgment, which ariseth in himself by this is Justice and true Judgment obstructed and violated. It's the highest usurpation of our just Liberties; For when such Principles are established, they are not easily laid down, they have encroached
Jurisdiction where none was, taking upon them a Power to judge and domineer over the Innocent, over the Consciencious, over the tender in Spirit, by ew Laws which the Spirit never gave forth, nor hath unity withal, nor many of the Body, which rough fear oppose not these things. They go igher; they say, Their Judgment is God's, and their Acts are as binding as God's, it procceding from the Spirit of the Lord in the Body: Their udgments are so positive from God and for God; nd their Censure so severe, which causeth a aint-heartedness in the weaker, to speak ac∣cording to their measure, lest they should dis∣please the Body, and be brought to Judgment. t is a dangerous evil for any Man, Men, or Coun∣cel, to make him or them Lords, or Lawgivers in the Church: Christ himself being the immediate Lawgiver, and Judge in this the Day of his Power. Men have commonly thought, that to preserve the Church in Peace, is to suppress Error; whereas to preserve them in Faith and Love, with the Father, Word and Spirit, this is rather to preserve the Church. How many persons, under pretence of healing the Body, wound it still deeper; and under pre∣tence of preserving its Peace, hurry it into endless Dissentions; or reduce People to a Formal Faith! Doth not the abovesaid Body practise the same? ea. Ah! How do they build up that which they once pulled down; and do that themselves which they have condemned in others! Ah! That they would suffer the Word only to be the Rule in the Kingdom, and the Light thereof alone to shine
there, and not to walk in the light of their own Fire, and in the Sparks which they themselves have kindled, whereby they may lie down in sorrow whilst they neglect the true Light, which lightet every man that comes into the World. In the true Church, Unity stands in diversities. But in the false, Unity will not stand without Unity formity. And it is greatly to be lamented, how that very many will do nothing without the Autho∣rity of the Body, tho' it be never so clear in the and this sets up the Body above Christ. And because a further dispensation is not relished by the Elders, the which they hide from the In∣feriours, lest their glory should be Eclipsed, and draw the rest from a dependence upon them: They content themselves with this limited Mini∣stration, and set up Tabernacles here for their Re∣sidence; which is above, and beside the Spirit of the Lord's teaching, which leads us on to know and follow the Lord. These are they that stop Israel travel out of all appearances, which his Spirit leads not to; These are they that lay stumbling-blocks in the way in their Journey: These are they that will not have the Lord's People, Prophets; that their Persons may be still had in Admiration for advantage sake: else, what meaneth it, that certain Persons are appointed to spend the whole time in speaking in every Meeting, and all the rest to come as Hearers, neglecting the Gift in themselves, only waiting upon their Lips. When as often times fresh Springs arise in particulars, to make glad and comfort the Hearts of others: But through the long Declarations and Discouragement, withal,
the Springs are stopt, and the tender nipt. Ah! God will visit you for these things. And certainly if this Babylonish practice had not been exercised, is precious Truths had been publish'd in the mouths of thousands more, and 10000 more to the know∣ledge thereof would have been brought; a greater growth in the Truth witnessed, and the Mind and Will of the Lord more revealed; a greater discove∣ry of the Man of Sin within and without us, by the ranscendent brightness of the Everlasting Day, which will again break forth, and recover the round which hath been lost; open the Mysteries which are yet hidden, break the Serpent's head, and ound the Leviathan. Amen, Halelujah. Moreover, as others before them set up the Scrip∣tures above the Spirit, in having that to be the Tryal, Touch-stone, Standard of Doctrine Wor∣ship, and of all Spirits; so do they greatly err in set∣ting up the Body above the Spirit, in having the Spirit tried by the Body; the one saith, The Scrip∣ture is the Rule; but in truth, the Meanings they make the Rule: The other saith, The Spirit (and not the Scripture) is the Rule; but the Dictates of the Body they make the Rule. For if I walk ac∣cording to my Measure, and my Measure is my Rule, and it differs from the judgment of the Body; by their Rule I am to deny my Motion, because it answers not the Mind of the Body; for they lay down this as an infallible Rule, That the Body will have a true sense, feeling, and understanding of Mo∣tions, Visions, Revelations, Doctrines, &c. and there∣fore safest to make Her my Touch-stone in all things relating to God. Ah! that she would return from whence she is
fallen, and repent, that the Crown may again be set upon Her head. The same Arguments which the Pope, &c. makes use of to support himself, the Body useth, and se∣vere judgment is denounced against him that shall speak a word against the Authority of the Body,  it is against him that shall speak against the Power and Authority of Rome. And as it was and is a common practice for the Pope to esteem Drunkards Whoremongers, &c. far better than Non-confor∣mists, even so it is with the Body at Devonshi House. If a Non-conformist endeavours to bring to lig the vicionsness of the Priests, they will have way to prevent him, either to raise some Accusations, or some other cunning Evasion. The Body practise the same, as I could instance, and may, when oc∣casion offers. I have heard, from a credible hand, what a so∣lemn Meeting there was appointed by G. F. and others of the Elders, to Judge and Condemn seve∣ral Men and Women of good report; and shelter cover, and hide the wanton practices of others▪ and the more effectually to discourage persons from discovering these wanton and unclean Ministers, to some they would say, Let it fall, had Spirits will get it, and reflect upon good Friends; to others, Th art an unclean Spirit, raking in Mire and Dirt,  lay open the Miscarriages of others; By which means the Adulterer goes free; only perhaps private re∣proof passeth upon him. Consider, O Friends! Is it right to cover the Whoredoms of the wanton Ministry, &c. and un∣clean Strumpets? and judge so openly the mistake
of a person, when the Actions were true, and in the same House. Is not this apparently to discou∣rage persons from discovering these things, and en∣couraging of the other in their filthy and defiled onversations? whom God will judge. He that stifieth the wicked, and condemneth the Innocent, is in abomination to the Lord. Again, those that forbore the custom of their Hats in Prayer, could not partake of their Rights is a Member, until a Renunciation thereof, and for  other cause; when Zealots for that form (tho' guilty of uncleanness, and other vile abominations, and the persons accused for the same, yet) allow'd to minister as a Teacher, and employed in the Ser∣vice for the Body. Such was the rigidness, That persons only su∣spected to favour the forbearers of the Hat, must ar a publick Testimony against them and their irit, or else be liable to be disown'd. If they were not drunk with an Arbitrary Power, they might sure find out a medium (for the omittance of o small a Ceremony) between an Ejection and an pprobation, between owning a person, and not gi∣ving him a liberty to exercise his Conscience. If this kind of Judicature had been set up in the postles days, what Confusions, what Disorders, that Divisions, what Rents, and Breaches had here been in the Church? there being some that eld a necessity of keeping the Ceremonial Law, others not; some for keeping of Days, others eve∣ry Day alike, some for eating of Meats, others of erbs; some for Circumcision, others not. And ul, to preserve the Unity, notwithstanding these fferences, writ, not to judge one another in
Meats, &c. but to wait till God reveals it to him. And if G. F. and the Body had but this moderation what a Harmony, what a Unity would there have been amongst us! The Papists had a way to try all suspected Persons by, namely, that they call the Sacrament of the Al∣tar; the Protestants the Oath of Allegiance and ∣premacy, as also the Renunciation of the Covenant the Presbyter the Covenant it self: And this Body tries suspected Persons by this, namely, Haft t given Testimony against the Spirit of the Hat  could never get any of them to define what  Hat-Spirit is. And as the Papists (to render  Protestants odious) styled them Hereticks; the Pro∣testants, Phanaticks, Puritans; and all Sects call as in scorn Quakers; and the same Spirit of reproach hath entered this Body, in stiling the forbearance of the Hat, Hatters, Hat-men. If any may ha that Appellation, it's rather due unto you, w keep it off upon a Religious Account, than upon those who keep it neither off nor on upon a Religi∣ous Account. They of the Circumcision were  called, not because they forbore the practice of th Act, but because they still continued in it; and it preposterous to give Nick-names unto persons for not doing of a Thing by the name of the Thing. We were called Quakers, because we trembled  his Word, not because we did it not. We displeased Man, because we do not uncover our Heads before him; we say, and say true, true Respect doth not lie in the uncovering of our Heads a pitiful low thing to lay honour and respect in  Hat; we say, it's the honour below which perish∣eth: We say, it's an honour that may be trampl
upon, and laid in the Dust, (as William Baley and others well said, and many of these men that have orn this faithful Testimony, are so far backslidden, that they say there is a Respect and Reverence due nto God in it); Let the Judicious judge, whether e Honour and Reverence which they give God in is thing, according to their own words, be not  honour below, which perisheth. They do not deny the giving of this Cap-honour to Men, because there is honour in it, but because there is no solidity in it, for just and true honour ey acknowledge is due unto Superiours; and al∣o' G. F. and others have trampled upon this Hat-honour as the most vile Excrement, yet he and they  say unto us, You give no more reverence unto God, an unto a Horse. Is it not strange that these men shall lay so much ess upon a Hat, as a Duty due unto God, when hey have look't upon it as a poor low thing when an hath required it; and to make us more odious,  are called Ranting-Spirits, when we do abhor d abominate that monstrous Principle. It's pro∣ble many do forbear that practice, what then? iust I therefore be a Ranter? Nay surely, no more han they are Papists that are in the same Exercise ith them in this outward Observation. The Ran∣ gives no honour at all unto God, neither inward or outward, but makes a derision at the Name of the Lord. We do not forbear the Hat in this disdain, or for ant of reverence to the Holy, Pure God, (for if e required it, I believe we could not only offer at, but our lives also) in the Service of the Lord, d for his Truth: but because he doth not require
this of us, but rather a more Spiritual Reveren It is therefore an abuse to be stiled Ranting-Spir It is a true Saying, and worthy our Observation That they conspire together to destroy the Ch Jesus in us. These ill Ministers conjoyn together to suby our Laws and Liberties, given by the Great, ∣vah, by obstructing or denying of Justice, (if apprehend it sutes not to their Interest) which  the Life and Blood to the Body, and doth g warmth and motion to every Member, whi nourished and enlivened by it, but being once ∣ped and seared up, as the particular must of neces∣sity faint and languish, so must the whole fram dissolved; and assuredly, tho' they are lifted as it were, unto Heaven, in their proud imagina∣ons, the Righteons God will blast all their exal expectations, and they shall die and perish in  general dissolution; because they have not rega the Fatherless, nor pitied the poor in Spirit,  compassionated the tender Conscience, which fe∣ed to sin against the Lord, but crushed, spo and oppressed (without bowels of mercy) the that had little strengh to help themselves: invade their Rights, violated their Liberties, endeavonre to take the Meat from the Children and give it  Dogs. Heretofore, before they were high and mighty they were the Balm of Gilead, which healed on Wounds, restored our Spirits, and shewed us the way of Salvation; but of late years, like the Fig tree mentioned in Luke, without efficacy, without Fruit, only destructive to the particular Members who discharge their Duties and Consciences
whereas they should be like the good Old-man, who ieth in a full age, after he hath fought a good ight, and overcome the Evil one; they should be ke the Shock of Wheat which cometh in, in due ason, to uphold our lives with the staff of Bread; nd not unjust Judges to overthrow our Liberties) or proud Elders, to overthrow the Gospel. One ing more to add, and perhaps thou hast not alto∣ther forgotten it; it is this. G. F. being very sick and weak for a long time, tender Love rose in the heart of W. Gosnal, to give m a friendly Visit, and when he came into his amber, G. was transported into such an high assion, and uttered such vehement and violent words against him, that many there present in the oom, were almost astonished thereat; It was for is cause W. G. long before signified unto Samuel ewton his apprehensions, that G. F. would have ukcen him, (of this more hereafter) and he being ted up in his Spirit, like Lucifer, he uttered words this effect; Friends, Although I have not yet  it you, I do now declare it, I have power to bind and to loose whom I please. How hath Solomon celes fed this exalted spirit, who puts forth these ords, Stand up Muggleton the Sorcerer, whose outh is full of Cursing, Lies, and Blasphemy, who llest thy last Book a Looking-Glass for G. Fox, whose name thou art not worthy to take into thy outh, who is a Prophet indeed, and hath been faith∣ful in the Lord's Business in the beginning. It as said of Christ, that he was in the world, nd the World was made by him, and the orld knew him not: So it may be said of this true rophet, whom John said, He was not; but thou wilt
feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a milstone upon thee; and although the World knows him not, yet  is known. Certainly such Expressions are not fit to be given unto man; and to lift up one in this nature above his Brethren, is of dangerous Consequence. Sure  this mortal hath been greatly puft up by such fa∣ing, flattering Parasites; Or else he would ne suffer persons to kneel before him: It is done up two occasions, tho' in a very private manner, a but by a few. The one is when he sends you fo to Administer; the other is upon some misdemea∣nour committed by a Minister, and upon the ac∣knowledging of his fault upon his bended Knee then G. absolves him. Such is the absolute power which he takes to himself, That he will break one Letters, and alter the Contents. One of the m∣eminent Ministers amongst them, being of a mod∣rate spirit, writ as in the name of the Lord, judg∣ing both those that kept the Hat off or on, in a wi∣ful, opposite, contentious spirit; But as for tho that kept it off, or on, as to the Lord, those he  the Spirit of the Lord did not judge, or words to this purpose: he blotted out a line or more, and writ over it clearly another sense, to wit, That be did judge those that kept it on, and not those that kep it off, and John Whitehead, who writ the Letter knew not of it. My heart is often-times grieved within me, and my spirit oppressed with Sorrow, when I call to mind their Lowliness, and their Plainness in Ap∣parel! Ah, how did their Countenances and Gar∣ments suit with their Preaching of the Cross of Jesus, and very many were brought by their Mi∣nistry,
out of Rich-clothings: But behold a Won∣der! These Ministers, in a short space, got into the Rich-Habits, to wit, Beaver Hats, Camlet Cloaks, the finest of the Cloath, not inferiour to the Merchants of the City, setting aside their Lace and Ribbands. It hath been their lot to be haled with violence) out of the Assemblies of Professors, bearing of faithful Testimonies and thrust into ison. Did I think to see the same violence offered our Assemblies! Nay, but with Sorrow, mine s have seen pulling down, haling out, and usting forth of our Meetings, and they went to e utmost, as far as their power; And doubtless they wanted not Will, but Power to Punish. These waning Wolves, which worry and prey upon e Flock, boast themselves to be Peers in this Se∣ted Body? and affirm, That if any of them ommit a fault their Peers, or their equals, are only to be their Judges, and not the Laity, or Commo∣ty; so that in their Selected Assemblies, these p the Inferiours at so great a distance, and their its are so over-awed, that they dare not (but dom) contradict the sayings of the most emi∣t Elders. It fell out that poor James Claypoole contradicted, d that with much moderation, the imperious lder, John Bolton, for saying unto a maid, That  was first to see the evil in her self, before she judged, and not (saith he) because we say it. This poor an, for this presumption, was first to acknowledge is Error: Yet he in private confest it to be no Error; But being a man of peace, would rather ar his burthen, then to stand against, or contend
with so great an Elder. How is it possible the Young ones can speak their minds freely, when they are thus curbed and overawed? By this means a few will sway a Meeting which way they please, un∣less the Peers are in Competition, then they meet, as two great waters, ready to overwhelm one ano∣ther with their asserting both in the Name of the Lord. To prove this, I shall give thee a few preg∣nant instances. The First is concerning the Marriage of John Osgood, who is well known to be a man of Mode∣ration, Sobriety, and of a deep Judgment, own∣ing and holding forth, as occasion offered, the Principles delivered; and he was held in such re∣putation, that I know no mans Counsel had a greater influence upon, and acceptance with the Meeting than his; But after he came to forbear the Exercise of the Hat in Prayer: The Zealots for that practice, did use their utmost endeavour to screw him out of that power and authority which he had in the Meeting, as the Paper signed by Eleven Ministers doth clearly demonstrate. It came to pass, that it was his purpose to take Re∣becca Travers, the Younger, to be his Wife: first lie went to the Womans-Meeting, according to Cu∣stom, to acquaint them with his Intentions, and there they past it with so great an Acceptation, that a very considerable part of them went along with him to the Mens-Meeting, to justifie and stand to their procedure towards him, if occasion offered, whereas others have seldom above two. He liked wise acquainted the Men with it, and after a short space, one there charged him for opposing a Serval
of the Lord, that had declared a thing in the Name of the Lord. He presently cleared himself from this aspersion, by proving the person to be in a notorious falsity, which he asserted in the Name of the Lord; this Blasphemer, that is thus stiled the Servant of the Lord, under the pretence of a Physician or Chyrur∣geon, made it his common practice to commit Un∣cleanness, and wantonness towards Women; and yet he was employed and sent by G. F. to judge Persons and Meetings; he made him also as his Companion in his Travels, and covered him in his wickedness, insomuch that it was a crime sufficient to take notice thereof. And although John Osgood cleared himself as is above expressed, John Bolton with two or three more had another snare for him; namely, Wilt thou give a testimony against the Hat-spirit? His Reply was to this purpose, When he saw it to be an evil, he should; but at the present he did not, and therefore could not give a Testimony against a thing, before it was manifested in him to be an Evil. This would not satisfie them, altho' he again came into their practice, in the keeping of it off. This Marriage was declared by Rebecca Travers the Elder, and J. O. to be of the Lord: and John Bolton, with not a∣ve two or three more, did so oppose the passing thereof, in the name of the Lord, that it could not be obtained, unless he would give a testimony as ove, and yet almost the whole Meeting was for assing of it. This will seem prodigious to persons norant in these affairs.
He therefore, without their Consents, appoin a Day to take his Wife, and a very considera number of the Meeting were Witnesses the  Such was the Severity and Lordliness of J. B.  he in publick disowned Tho. Salthouse, for his bei there a Witness, and for his Moderation. Th Transactions did so seize upon the Spirits of othe  that it was exceeding difficult for any to ob Witnesses in such an affair, if the Meeting ref to pass  never so unjustly. By what hath been said, it may be clearly dis∣ed, That the greatest part of the Meeting signi more than Cyphers, that a few Rule by Will  Pleasure, a certain ready way it is to make Hy crites; for what greater temptation can a Man  withal to reduce him to a conformity against  Conscience, than to deprive him of a Person wh he most dearly loves? And what greater rigid can there be to deny the accomplishment of  weighty a Concern, for the omittance of so  a Ceremony as the Hat? Let this be had in perpetual memory, That so of you were Judged, Condemned, and Execu for no other Cause than the Hat, and now th Judge, Condemn, and Excommunicate for▪  same, (Oh greatly to be admired!) Not tha am against this practice when required of the Lo but against the customary use thereof; for th have known, and frequently seen, that when a ∣nister hath ended his Declaration, and a gene apprehension that he will make a close with Pra off goes their Hats, according to the custo other Societies; and immediately up stands a
er and begins a new Declaration, then, as Men amed, on goes their Hats again. Moreover, it  happen sometimes for a Man to be overtaken ith sleep when the Prayer is begun, by some acci∣nt or other he is disturbed; but before he is well akned, he snatches off his Hat as a Man afright∣ Can I judge that those things are any other  a formal Custom? Nay, assuredly, others do  pretend that spirituality of Worship, and there∣ it is no marvel in them. never could yet understand why the Head may  covered by an Assembly, when a Minister shall rn high Praises unto the Lord, in an elevated, esh, and lively Spirit, and to be so erroneous as  be Excommunicated for the same in time of yer. have been the larger upon this Instance, be∣se it proves the greatest part that is here writ∣ The next is this M. Boreman and Elizabeth aily came before the Men's Meeting, to express  intentions touching their Marriage; the one  declared positively, as from the Lord, that it s to pass; John Nelson, Gerrard Roberts, and as Briggs were three of them, besides many oe. Tho. Briggs was transported into such an  Zeal, that he told them, That it was of the , and that they opposed the mind of the Lord:  when the other Party came close to the busi∣ he did not know whom the Persons were that ended their Marriage, to his great shame. John ton, and Sam. Newton, were the great Oppo∣, under the same pretence, but indeed with
more moderation. Several went home with gri∣ved and sorrowful hearts, whereof John Osgood w one, and William Phillips another; I could name more, but let this suffice. The next is concerning John Swinton, who did write a large Paper by way of Lamentation, as ∣ing commanded and required of the Lord to pu∣lish the same, wherein was exprest, That the L∣ers (the Leaders) were greatly guilty of the f∣ness of Dyet, fineness in Apparel, and of speak words out of the Life, which was a burthen to  Life: He justified this for several years, tho strongly urged to deny it; but at last they pur∣sued him so closely, that the Meeting at Devon∣shire-House sent for him out of Scotland, in th Winter-time, for Him and his Paper to be try, But before he came, there was a meeting at the said place concerning him, and there John Bolton▪ Gilbert Layty, John Nelson, and Charles Har with many others, past Judgment against Him ad his Paper: A Reply was made by Gawen Lawe That it was not regular to deal so by a Person an his Writings, that was not there to answer for hi∣self; to Condemn Him, and then to Try him. Thi I bring as a further proof of their unreasonable Ty∣ranny; For what Justice and true Judgment could be expected, when these Grandees, who were  Judges, did give Judgment against him before-hand? In a short space after John came to London, and a Meeting was again appointed; He saw  Breach would be great, and likewise his Exercise telling divers before-hand, The Child must not b
divided, nor the Seamless garment rent: and so when the day came, he denied the Paper, and the Spirit that gave it forth, yea, fit for the fire; and moreover, That it was writ in an hour of tempta∣tion and weakness. Let the impartial judge, whether this Recanta∣tion was not done rather in such an hour? and whe∣ther the things are not true that he declared? It's time to conclude, having dwelt long enough upon this Subject, with this Counsel and Admo∣tion to the High and Mighty, and to the lofty Mountains, and aspiring Cedars of this Assembly, before spoken of: Despise not to take counsel of a Fool, nor disdain the advice of the young and weak Ones, for 'tis possible, deep knowledge and et little esteem may be found together: This I have to inform you, that though you have reduced many to a sober life, the way to keep them, and to bring in more into the same Fold, is by mildness, not setting up a Lordly Judicature over the Conscience, for by this all Professions have been split before us; and it is observed, that when the Spirit of Lord∣ship enters a People over their Fellows, the Lord doth disappoint the Undertakers thereof, by the withdrawing of his pure Spirit. My Soul's desire is, That the Spirit of Lordship and Exaltedness, which hath entred the Body, may be crusht for ever, that the little Ones may serve the Lord without fear, and be found in the Exer∣cise of nothing in the Worship of God, but what his pure Spirit leads unto, and out of that, Truth may spring up in the hearts of thousands, by en∣joying
of this holy Liberty, and that God may  exalted in the Farth, that the Horn of all O∣pressions may be broken, and dasht to pieces,  the praise of the Name of the Lord, that the Lig of his Glory may shine in our Temples in  strength and lustre, not wanting a proud Lord  Body to rule over us, nor a proud, wanton,  Ministry to monopolize his' precious Truth fro us, but that every one may sit under his own Vi without fear, and eat his Bread at his own Tab And God bears me this Testimony, That his T as it hath been declared, is dear unto me, and  Principles delivered, my Soul doth own; and the∣fore, according to my Measure, ought to have  place in the Body; but from the Body of Chris and the Unity of his Spirit they cannot exclu me, and therefore my Soul is abundantly satis and refreshed, in my solitary Retirements, and  not to join hands to oppress any, nor yet to give up my neck unto the Yoke of Bondage, nor  Back to the Oppression, nor my Judgment and Ey to the Body: Though I can give my Back to th Smiter, and my Cheeks to the pulling off of th Hair, yet it is through a patient suffering, and no a sordid slavish subjection. And altho' they daily exercise the Oppressions before-mentioned, yet by their deceitful flatteries they make people believe, That they are a harm∣less, innocent, and peaceable People, suffering an bearing wrong, but not doing any; or if any per∣sons Write, or Speak their Grief, that the Public take notice of, they will represent them under such terms as may render them odious; and the more
ffectually to weaken their Testimonies, they will  upon them scurrilous and contemptible Appella∣on, as Scotch-men, Welch-men, Tinker, Taylor, &c. me of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an in∣isition into the truth of the matter, they would ake people believe that they are envious, malici∣, and discomposed Spirits, bad, dirty, factious,  ranting Spirits, who are gone from Truth, and  out of Truth. Such is the portion of those that appear in the least inst their imperious, tyrannical, and lascivious tions; and what-ever Man detected the fallacies  destructive Cheats of imperious disdainful men,  was thus reproached? Must it be justice in m to complain of their Oppressions, and Envy; d Malice, &c. in us to complain of ours? their rs are but few, yet verily they have been exceed∣ expert in learning of the Papists subtilties. If I have any interest in a Burial-place, and dis∣ase the Body by discharging of a good Consci∣e, I shall be deprived thereof, and be necessita∣ to seek a place for my dead else-where: albeit,  Truth, as it hath been declared, is dear unto,  precious with me; for say they, Thou opposest iends who are in the Truth. Let the Spiritual an judge whether this is not a setting up them∣lves? yea, let the reasonable Man judge, whether  is not to dispose of my Right and Propriety Will and Pleasure? they are like the Pharisees old, who were more zealous to keep up their y are more zealous to keep up their power as body, than the Truth it self.
It appears plainly unto the Just and Righte  Man, that G. F. and the rest of his Councel ha endeavoured to subvert the Royal Law of Liberty and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical ¦vernment over the Conscience, over the Flock  God. These are the ravening Wolves which prey  the little Ones in a Lordly Spirit; This is that  venomed spirit which hath tainted their Judgm poysoned their Hearts, and blinded their  how hainous it is in the Nature, how mischie in the Effects of it? which will best appear,  be examined by that infallible Law, To do  would be done unto; This is the Foundation of  Laws, out of which they are derived; this  Supream Law, and the Health of the People  end of all Laws to which they are designed  how far this Spirit in them stands in opposition this Law, I shall further manifest. They pretend and claim an Infallibility in ¦ment, &c. (not that I am against Infallibility  that it is in a special manner peculiar to the they are a Body, this I am against) yet who  fallible in Judgment than they? who more pa in Justice? And what can be more dangerous  destructive to the well-being of a People, than  a claim without it? If they were in it, assu they would boast less, be more humble and  more self-denying and mortified in their Con¦tions. I shall be liable to transgress, by breaking a hidden in their Breasts; that must be a Crime  they are pleased to say is so; all must be error
ey, please to call so. What (say they) dost thou  dost thou feel that which the Body doth not?  art in an exalted Spirit, the Body hath not unity th it; if it had been a true motion, the Body would  a sence thereof, (behold the Touch-stone); and tainly in their degenerated Natures, as many at enormities have been, so greater will be pro∣d: Lust will become a Law, Envy will be∣ne a Law; Ambition and Covetousness will be∣ne Laws: What Dictates, what Divisions such ws will produce, may easily be discerned by the  Vicissitudes, to dispose of all to the mainte∣ce of it self? The bounds of the Royal Law they  removed and broken, (and this mischief must ds ensue in the stead thereof, Tyranny establish∣ and yet they will tell us, It's for the honour of uth, and its service from the Spirit of Truth. What greater dishonour can there be to the  God of Heaven and Earth, than to pretend  Holy, Pure Spirit in the practice of Injustice  Oppression, and to make use of his great me and Power to patronize their pride and ex∣ted Spirits? Such arbitrary courses have an ill Operation upon  Spirits of Men, it weakens their Hearts, and ls their Courage, and begets in them a slavish mper and Disposition; and where this arbitra∣ nd unlimited Power is set up, a way is open not ly for the security, but for the Advancement and  couragement of Evil, and a means to Increase terers. Such Men are aptest to cry up the body in all respects, and are the only good Friends: t others (though exemplary in their Conversa∣tions)
who cannot yield and comply against  light in their Consciences, to some of their pro¦ings, are subject to their Jealousie, Censure,  an Ejection. In days past the Lord raised up a Moses to  Ruler and Leader to his People Israel, who  then under Types, Figures and Shadows; and  Lord spake to his People by his Servant Moses But another Administration more glorious is e∣blished; to wit, The Dispensation of the So God, whom Moses prophesied of, who speak from Heaven, who is the end of all Figure Types and Shadows, he who is the substance of  Types, &c. is now the Great Captain, and Lea of his People, makes use of, and lays by what ¦struments he pleaseth, reveals his Mind sometime to one, sometimes to another, without respect  Persons or Bodies, as he pleaseth, That there may  no glorying but in the Lord: He abaseth the pro and exalteth the humble; hides his mind from  High and Mighty, from the Wise and Prudent,  reveals himself unto Babes; and therefore he ne¦eth not a Fox, nor a Body to conveigh his  unto his People, he being himself their Teach  and hath planted his Laws in their Hearts, and ¦ven them an holy Anointing, to know the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error. And albeit the Kings of the Earth exercise Lord¦ship and Authority over their People, yet it ough not to be so among the Disciples of Christ, being  Brethren: But for the greatest to be well contented to serve in the meanest employment, if the Lo requires it, as to be served, to hearken, and su¦
to the Voice of his Spirit, in the least Babe  in the greatest, or, as in the Body. And I affirm, the Lord did not raise them up to ring us off from the barren Mountains, to feed pon them who are now become a Deart; nor om under our Oppressors, to turn Oppressors themselves: Let them remember the Army, it is eir Figure; and if the Lord's anger waxed hot against them for their Unfaithfulness, what will be e Portion of these, who have so deeply Aposta∣zed fram clearer Manifestations? Many of the most Eminent have had potent Im∣ses, to give forth solid, and sound Arguments or Liberty of Conscience, and have pleaded ongly for the same, yet George Fox was heard to  in a selected great Assembly thus, Though many friends have writ for Liberty of Conscience, I never d the Word, it is not a good Word, no Liberty to the Presbyterians, no Liberty to the Papists, no Li∣berty to the Independants, no Liberty to the Baptists, . Liberty is te only in the Truth, and saith  no Liberty out of the Power. In Answer un∣ this, Truth gives Liberty unto the weak, yet  weakness in the Truth. Since the Spirit is withdrawn, they do greatly oast the Power is as much, and as fresh as ever, it so, they would be more refreshed with it, and  with Sleep in their Assemblies) and their Unity, as entire as ever. Yet verily, sharper Contentions  seldom found amongst any People. To prove his, I will set down two notable Examples, it is between four famous and eminent Elders. First, Tho. Salthouse and John Balton: T. S. b∣g a man of some Moderation and Tenderness, used
his endeavours to beget a Reconcilement between the Practicers and Forbearers of the Hat in Prayer, and to receive each other as Brethren, though they differ in that particular thing; but that high and hot-spirited Elder J. B. called him false Prophet, reputed him worse than the Forbearers, and op∣posed his Ministry, untill with much ado a Re∣concilement was made by a condescention on both parts. The other is between G. Fox and Sam. Newton, who being a man of some Honesty and Cleanness in his Spirit, was against having of a Person to Act in their behalf, as in relation to Sufferings, whose Conversation Preached not Righteousness, but G. F. opposed him with so much wrath and vio∣lence, that some there present thought he would have strucken him, he being a person so right qualified and accomplished for George's Interest. Such is the swelling Pride of this Luciferian. that he gave forth a Paper, That his Marrirge with Margaret Fell, was a Figure of the Marriage between Christ and the Church. I may more justly believe it to be a Figure of the great Apostacy from the Truth, and barrenness in the Truth. He likewise declared, That his Marriage was a∣bove the state of. Adam in his Innocency, in the state of the second Adam, who never fell. This Paper was so ill Resented, and so much dislik'd, that it was called in again; and a rare thing it was to get a sight there of, albeit through an accident, I had a View of it. The abovesaid Samuel Newton and John Bolton, to give them their due, have not taken a little Pains, Labour and Travel, to bring to Light and
to Judgement such unheard of Practises of beastly wantonness, and filthy uncleanness, that it is hard to believe the excess thereof: But John Bolton hath, or had a Confession in Writing from one or two of the Female Persons concern'd, of the Debauched Actions, to declare the truth thereof; yet notwithstanding they met with such great Obstructions and Opposition, that they cannot accomplish a thorow Examination of it, because it toucheth many Eminent Ones in the Ministry; who from day to day resorted unto them, and giving them these Appellations, Innocent Lasses, and Daughters of Sion. Sometimes it comes to pass, that two approved of in the Ministry, will oppose and Judge each other in publick Assemblies, in the Name of the Lord: but to prevent the evil effects therof, the next day Persons shall be appointed to declare the Greatness of their Unity, and the Oneness in their Spirits. But least there should be a misapplication of what I have Written; when I express the Body, I do declare, my meaning is, The Second Days Meeting at Devonshire-house, with some other Principals in other Countries, who are their Abet∣tors, and not the whole Body of the People called Quakers; for I am assured, and well know, that very many have not bowed to this Golden Image, with whom my Soul hath Unity, and with whom I am Refreshed. And moreover, I meet with many who will free∣ly open their Hearts to me, with grieved and sor∣rowful Spirits, to behold what Domineering, and what partial Judgment is practised, what Severi∣ty
and Tyrany is Exercised at this Meeting, but especially against Dissenters. But, say they, it is out of our Power to Redress it, until God doth Change their Hearts, or give  more Power; reckoning themselves at present to weak to grapple with these Goliah's, unless th little Stone be given them to smite them on their Foreheads, or Words to this purpose. Let us trust in the Lord, and wait upon him with patience in Faith which overcomes the World; that he will thresh the Mountains, and rebuke the High and Mighty, who are Exalted above their Measures; and exalt his Truth over all, that Justice and Righteousness may flow as a River, to the re∣joycing of his Oppressed People, and to the Praise and Glory of his Name for ever. From a deep Mourner in Israel, to behold how the Earth is fil∣led with Violence, and the Righteous Seed Op∣pressed. Dear Friend, It hath pleased the Lord to raise thee up to bear a Testimony against an Adulterous, Tyrannical, and an Hypocritical Generation; let the Word of the Lord therefore have a free passage in and through thee, and Consult not with Flesh and Blood; Watch against the Enemy, lest he dar∣ken thy Understanding, that thou canst not distin∣guish between the Precious and the Vile. Mix not thy own Thoughts with the Motions of the Spirit; keep in the Fear, and in the Humility, that an ex∣alted Spirit may be kept out: Build thy House up∣on the Rock of Ages, and stand in the unchangea∣ble without wavering, that thy Conversation may be without Blemish, thy Judgment withot Error, and thy Love unto the Truth without Dissimulation.
Be Faithful unto the Lord's Requirings, that Diso∣bedience may not enter. Rember the Root bears the Tree, and the Tree the Branches; if the na∣tural Branches were cut off through unbelief, and thou with thousands grafted in, be not high min∣ded, but fear. From a Little hidden One of the Flock of Jesus.
