N381 99830401 34852
CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS Tendered in all humility, to an Honorable Member of the Councell of State, Aug. 1. 1649. Concerning I. The Discontents of the People. II. Opprobrious Speeches against Government. III. Pasquils and Pamphlets. IV. Invectives out of the Pulpit. V. Eaves-droppers, Whisperers, or Informers. Wherein is represented the Opinion and Practice of many the most eminent Statesmen, in relation to these Particulars. By Marchamont Nedham, Gent. HORAT. Vim temperatam Dii quo{que} provehunt In majus.— LONDON. Printed in the Yeare, 1649.
The PREFACE. Honoured Sir, BEing very sensible of my sad suffering (after six Weekes imprisonment) upon suspicion of being the Author of Mercuri∣us Pragmaticus; and finding that many o∣thers have been, and may be, imprisoned upon the same Accompt, or the like, for scandalous Pamphlets, I thought meet (having little else to do in Prison) to descend somewhat in∣to the nature of my supposed Crime; which I judged might be best understood out of the monuments of History and Policy. And my thoughts being thus farre ingaged, other Particulars (not differing in Specie from the former) came unawares into my view, viz. the present discontents of the People, with those bitter Arrowes shot out of mens Mouthes, and Pulpits: whereto I
have added a briefe Lant-skip touching VVhisperers, Informers, &c, as being my selfe brought under the Lash, and persecuted by that unworthy Generation. Concerning all these I have taken the bold∣nesse to Treat, in an indifferent manner, in re∣lation to your selfe, and others, who sit at the Helm: And though it were extream arro∣gance in me, to instruct your wisdome (who am my selfe of but few yeares, and small experi∣ence;) yet since what I shall deliver, is deri∣ved from the best Opinions and Examples, I am the more confident in my Designe: not as if you knew not these things already; but only out of a desire to be your Remembrancer, in what may be partly convenient to procure the Weale and Peace of the Nation.
I. Concerning the Discontents, and turbu∣lent Humours of the PEOPLE. MOst alterations of Government have been attended with strong oppositions, discontents, and bitterness of the people; especially when they enjoy not those Benefits promised, or expected, by a Change of their Governors. It is not in their Power to consider the Circumstances of Reason; nor to weigh the grounds of a necessity, which may constraine Governors to lay burthens on them for the present, to purchase ease in the future; but for the most part being led by sense, they cry out when the shoe wrings, and will not have patience to attend the tedious remedy and Cure of grand Inconveniences. To allay these, and gaine Them, it hath been the way of new Princes and States, not to be too rigid in their exactions of obedi∣ence, &c. but (as Vlpianus Lib. 4. de manu∣miss. Ʋlpian saith) conniventibus occulis agere, to wink at small faults, and let them have their humours for a time. So did that King of the Macedonians spoken of by Livie. Non quià probaret,Liv. lib. 42. sed quià in novâ possessione regni patienda omnia essent, passum. Not because he approved what he tolerated, but bcause there ought to be a generall Toleration in a new government. Thus Tiberius, though he were a most strict exactor of the disciplin of the Lawes, yet durst not be severe in his first essaies of government, knowing that too sharp remedies would have multiplied Distempers. And this is noted by Tacitus concerning Faelix, eum nimiis remediis Delicta ac∣cendisse, that the minds of Delinquents were rather inflamed than restrained by his harsh dealings: And by the same means Livy saithLiv. lib. 6. of Manlius, Remedio seditionem irritâsse, that he exasperated the People to Sedition. But on the contrary, most memorable is that Place of Livy, concerning the Carriage of the People of Rome, uponLiv. lib. 2. alteration of the Kingly Government; That though they groaned un∣der many Pressures and Calamities, yet being cherish't by the Indulgence, prudence, and easie government of the Senat, They grew sensible of Li∣berty, and so Zealous and unanimous in the defence of it, ut regium no∣men non summi magis quam infimi horrerent, that the very name of of King was odious among Them, from the highest to the lowest. It was excellent Counsell which Livia gave to Augustus, Novum
principem imperandi auspicium facere debere á clementiâ, That a new Prince ought to commence his Raign with Clemency; and the rea∣son why Mithridates so soon lost himselfe is noted by Tacitus, Eum atrociorem fuisse quàm novo regno conduceret, because he behaved him∣selfe with more violence, than was meet for one that had but newly become master of a Kingdome. Nor doe I find any one of the con∣trary opinion, but onely that Machiavel. Florentin devill, who broached so many wilde Maxims to countenance the Gruelties, and Inhumani∣ties of his Borgia. The furious beginning of Rehoboams Govern∣ment occasioned that revolt of the ten Tribes, which made the great Rent betwixt Israel and Judah; and this through the Counsell of some hot Heads about him, contrary to the judgement of his Father Solomons old Counsellours, who advised, saying, If thou wilt be a ser∣vant1 Kings cap. 12. unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever. There are (saith Cicero)) certaine extravagances to be tolerated in a new Government, which he calls popularia munera, to oblige the People. For (as Aristole saith in his Politiques) Hinc fit, ut PlebsLib. 6. pol. c. 4. presentem Reipublicae statum amet, siquidem plerisque lubet dissolutè vi∣vere quàm modestè. The common people are naturally of a loose disposition, so that if they may enjoy a kind of dissolute liberty, they like the present state of Government whatsoever it be. And for this we have the practice of the wise Augustus, as soon as he attained the Empire; who to indear himselfe to the People, gratified them with large Immunities, Ease, Plenty, Pleasure, Sports, Pageants, and open Theatres; at which (Tacitus tells us) he wasTacit. Annal. 1. wont to shew himselfe among them in publique. And when upon the advice of his more rigid Civilians, he was minded to alter this li∣centious Custom, the noble Mecaenas was of another minde, and stopt his Resolution, saying, Expedit tibi, Caesar, plebem sic occupatam esse, It much advantages thee, O Cesar, so to busie the mindes of the People. Let them be charmed with such Arts of indulgence, and have wherewith to satisfie their appetites, then they no more remem∣ber their former state, but every one sits down content with his pre∣sent condition, and according to that of the Satyrist,Juvenal. —Duas tantùm res anxius optat, Panem, & Circenses.— Fair words, gentle carriage, and a reputation of Clemency are of more force (saith one) for the taming of turbulent spirits in a new Common-wealth, Plus valent, &c. quàmcareer, bonorū confisca∣tio, proscriptio, virgae, denique & Secures. than Prisons, Forfeiture of Goods, Banish∣ment,
Bodily punishment, or Death it selfe. When the Mother of Alexander Severus stirred up his Wife to tax him of too much lenity, and tell him, ita molliorem tibi potestatem, & contemptibiliorem fecisti, that by it he rendred his Authority the lesse manly, and the more contemptible, he answered, Sed securiorem at{que} diuturniorem, that it became thereby the more secure and lasting. Camerarius in the life of Phil. Melanchton, tels a story of Everhard Duke of Witten∣berg, how he boasted in a solemn Assembly of all the Princes of the Empire; That he durst, even in a Wildernesse, trust himself asleep in the bosome of any one of his Subjects. Certainly love is the surest Guard of States and Princes; which is no way to be obtained but by gentleness & mercy, whereas severity sowes the first seeds of Sedition & Enmity. Multis terribilis caveto multos, was the Advice of Ausonius; andNcc invisa Im∣peria retinentur diu. Seneca. it was upon this Ground Caesar broached that in Suetonius, Praestat semel mori quàm cavere semper, It is better to die once than beware ever. It was a saying of the Emperor Rudolphus, 1. recorded by Boccalini: Severum & immitem me aliquando fuisse paenituit; lenem & placabilem nunquam. It hath often repented me of my Severity, but never of my lenity: And that the latter is most convenient in turbulent Times, the same Author gives the Reason; Civiles enimOdi Deus ni∣mis vehementes impetus; odere Cives. dissensiones mansuetudine & moderatione multo facilùs, quàm severi∣tate & armis sedari possunt; For, civill dissentions are far more easily quieted with meeknesse and moderation, than by Severity and force of Arms. Anthony Perez fol. 155. compares a new State full of Malecontents to a Tower founded upon Quick-Silver: From whence he inferrs the necessity of a fair and gentle Carriage to win such persons (if possible) or else (as Guicciardin Hypomnem. polit. nu. 56. observes) they soon grow desperate. Most excellent to this purpose is the Advice of Ta∣citus in Agricolà; omnia scire, non omnia persequi, nec paenâ semper, sed saepiùs paenitentiâ contentum esse. It behoves States-men to know all things, but not to prosecute all things, and to sit downe satisfied more often with the Repentance, than the punishment of an offen∣der. And in another place of the same Author, Non quicquid nocens reus pati meretur, novo sub principe statuendum est: Adeò nonnunquàm delicta nimis asperis remediis at{que} suppliciis, magis magis{que} augentur. It is not for new Princes to inflict punishments upon Offenders to the utmost of what they merit: For, so sometimes by such harsh dealings, they rather increase their number than suppresse or amend Them. Wherefore Iovius saith, the same way must be taken to order an inraged People, as an unruly Horse: Quoniam sicut peritus eques
non semper & uno tenore fraenum stringit, aut calcaria subdit; sed saepe∣numeròBesoldus. in dissert. de are. Rerumpub. laxat, & veluti adulando, palpando{que} quoquoversùm ducit etiam ferocissimum equum at{que} inhabilem. Sic viri prudentes in novâ Repub∣licâ plebem succussantem & ferocientem moderatè regunt, fraeno injecto, sed laxo; ne, si violento tractu reducant, Seipsos imperio excutiant. For, as an expert Horse-man doth not alwayes rein, or spur, a metled Horse; but now and then gives him head, and at length, as it were by soothing, and stroking gently, can guide him which way he please, though wild, and skittish. So ought prudent States-men to order a mutinous & seditious People in a new Republique, with meek∣ness and moderation; bridling them with Laws, but somewhat loosly; lest by reining them too hard, they hoist themselves out of the Saddle. From whence it's to be inferr'd that in new Common-wealths, new Lawes ought to be as the Bridle and the whip, to restrain dis∣affected persons, and hold them under the Lash: But they are not to be put in execution, save where absolute necessity requires; and then not in the extremity neither; especially in this Common-wealth of England, so full of men of generous spirits and education, in whom severe and rigid exactions and executions would now raise the grea∣ter spirit of opposition, since they look upon their present Lords and governers, as those who of late were but their Fellow-Subjects. But above all things they ought to beware of declaring high Treason in too large a Latitude, which should be strech't to none but Crimes of the highest nature, since (as Tacitus speaks) Majestatis Crimen omni∣umAnnal. 3. accusationum Complementum esse debet, the Crime of Treason ought to be the utmost of all Accusations. And Curtius saith, TurpeLib. 21 esse, imò non videri è re principis, vel publici patris, Crimen majestatis ad minima & ridicula quae{que} reduci, It is very impolitique, and beneath the Majesty of a Prince, or publique Father, to reduce the meanest and most triviall matters within the compasse of Treason. But some may say, what course is then to be taken? I answer to this, there can be no better Counsel, than that of Alexander in Cur∣tius,Lib. 6. In novo et precarie Imperio, adhuc jugum rigidâ cervice subeunte populo tempore opus est; dum mitioribus ingeniis imbuuntur, & efferatos mollor consuetudo permulcet. In new and precarious Governments, which alway depend much upon the Love and Courtesie of the Peo∣ple, the cure of mutinous and dis-affected Spirits must be a businesse of Time; and is not to be effected by Laws like Thunderbolts, but by the still small voice, the smooth oyle of gentle language, persua∣sive Admonitions and Declarations, hopes of mild government,
pardon to offenders, Acts of Mercy, with all arts of case and Indul∣gence;Nemo est nomen da∣turus, ne∣mo arma capturus, nemo di∣miturus in Repub∣licà, pro superis Dominis. Livius lib. 4. which are so much the more excellent in the policie of a Christian Common-wealth, in that they savour of the Spirit of meek∣nesse, and may be derived out of the Doctrines of Christianity. I shall conclude this first particular with the saying of an excellent Cunra∣dus Ritter∣shusius in thes. de jure pub∣lico. Oderunt dum metu∣ant. Civilian, out of Dion. Halicar. lib. 6. num. 34. Quicquid est formida∣bile, id necessitate naturali maximè est omnibus exosum. At firmissi∣mum est imperium, quod beneficiis, non suppliciis, subditos in Imperio continere solet: Illorum enim benevolentiam, horum timorem esse comi∣tem. Whatsoever is terrible must of necessity be hatefull to all. But that Government is most sure and lasting, which retaines the Subject in obedience with good turns, rather than panishments; the former being accompanied ever with love and good will; the lat∣ter with fear and hatred. And (as one saith) Nemo potest esse fidus ei quem timet. Feare is the very bane of Allegiance. II. Of opprobrious Speeches against Government. GOverners (especially Founders of a new Government) have never been free from these bitter arrowes: And though it be a hard matter for persons in power to digest such things; yet we shall find the wisest have ever entertained them with neglect and scorne, as unworthy their revenge or notice. Therefore the Tragedian setsSeneca in Herc. down this for a Rule, Ars prima regni posse te invidiam pati, the chiefest Art of Government is to be able to indure malice and envy. And most of the Roman Emperors were so far from controlling the licentious railings and revilings of the people, that they seemed rather to approve them. It was the Custome of Caesar (saith Sue∣tonius)Suet. de Caesare. when such persons were brought before him, Satis habuit pro concione denunciare, ne perseverarent, to dismisse them onely with an admonition, that they should do so no more. And it is observa∣ble what Livie saith of them Olim non appellab antur seditiosi, sed tan∣tùmLiv. lib. 5. novi Sermonis autores; That of old time among the Romans, such persons were not characterised with so black a coal as the title of seditious, but were called Authors of new Rumors, idle Newes∣mongers, &c, When it was told the Emperor Frederick 3. that divers had raised vile reports, and cast out opprobrious words against him about the Court, he, nothing at all moved, made answer, Principes & alios prae∣stantesJovius de vit. Imp. viros, quasi Signum ad quos omnes virulentae linguae tela conjice∣rent,
expositos esse; at turres praealtas fulmina feriunt, humilia praetere∣unt tecta. It is the common lot of Princes and eminent persons to be ill spoken of, being set as a marke for every virulent tongue to shoot at. But above all others, the Governers in a free City or State, must bear with these things, and take heed of crossing the people in this licentious humor: And of this opinion was the Emperor Tibe∣rius himself (as Suetonius reports of him) In republicâ, vel civitate liberâ, linguam mentes{que} liberas esse oportere, That in a Common-wealth or free City, both the opinions and tongues of men ought to be free. For (saith one) Quid plbireliquum erit, adempto per inquisitiones lo∣quendiSuet. de Tib. audiendi{que} commercio. If you set Spies upon the people, and deprive them of the liberty of hearing, speaking, easing and uttering their minds to each other, then they reckon they have lost all and so grow desperate. Wherefore Suetonius saith of the same Ti∣berius; opprobria inse & suos jacta, nolle ad cognitionem vocari; That though he were otherwise a most severe and rigid Prince, yet he would never suffer any to be questioned for reproaches against him and his. This Rule holds especially in every alteration of Government; which though somtimes it may be for the better, yet the people be∣ing subjected to the inconveniences of a Change, which of necessity brings on many grievances and pressures for the present, look upon themselves as miserable, quasi libertate Tacit. Annal. 1. amissâ, & cruda Servitute, and reckon that they have lost their liberty. In this case they must be tenderly handled: The Governers must in most things seem to say as they say; And such language as is not fit for them to heare, they must seem not to heare. For, as Justin saith, Plebs ut est naturâ le∣quax,Justin. lib. 9. it à praeclarè secum agi autumat, si possit linguâ ad criminandum pro libidine uti. Quoniam rebus nequit ulcisci, verbis usurpare liberta∣tem cupit, The people are naturally full of tongue, and think they are at a fine passe, if they may use it as they list against whom they please. And when they are not able to revenge themselves by deeds, they desire to take a liberty in words. Whereupon Tacitus con∣cludes, Lubricum linguae non facilè ad poenam trahendum esse, that theTac. lib. 7. slips of the tongue are not ordinarily to be punished: And most excel∣lent to this purpose, out of the same Author, was that counsel of Au∣gustus to Tiberius, when he urged him to revenge certain vile reproa∣ches, Aetatituae, mi Tiberi, noli hac in re indulgere, & nimlùm indig∣nari, quenquam esse qui de me malè loquatur: Satis est hoc si habemus nè quis nobis malè facere possit. O my Tiberius (saith he) be not angry that any should speak ill of us: It's sufficient we have power to hin∣der
them from doing us any ill. A Governer need not value words that hath the power of the sword; but ought rather to despise them, and acquiesce in his own merits, contentus ipsâ vi Imperii. SuitableCurtius. lib. 1. to this was that wise saying of Laurence de Medicis upon the like oc∣casion, loquantur illi, nos verò faciemus. Let them talk, but let us be doing. III. Concerning Pasquils and Pamphlets. THe same neglective carriage ought to be likewise in respect of idle Pasquils and scandalous Pamphlets. There is, and hath been, in every Age scripturiendi pruritus, a certain Itch of scribling; and when Governers shall (as Ʋitellius did) enact Lawes against such scurrilous Productions, they give them a kind of Reputation, and make them the more sought after: and the judgment of Tacitus upon this Act of Ʋitellius is, that such Prohibitions have no other effect, ni∣si alimentum famae, but the magnifying the fame of the Authors. Very well (saith Tacitus) to this sence spake Crematius, in an oration to the praise of Julius and Augustus Caesars. Ipse D. Julius, ipse D. Augu∣stusTacitus. tulere illa, & reliquere; haud facile dixerim moderatione magis, an verò sapientiâ: name spreta exolescunt; si irascare, agnita videntur. The Emperors Julius and Augustus bore those things, and contemned them, with a world of moderation and wisdom: For, being slighted, few beleeve or regard them; whereas if you be angry at them, you seem to acknowledge what they write. Thus those wise Emperors be∣haved themselves; whereas Nero, by raging against the scriblers of his time, punishing them, and causing their Papers to be burnt, did but make himself the more odious, and multiply their number, and cause them to be held in greater admiration. To this agrees that o∣ther passage likewise in Tacitus upon this Act of Nero. Punitis inge∣niisTacit. Annal. 11. gliscit Autoritas; ne{que} aliud externi principes, aut qui eâdem saevitiâ usi sunt, nisi dedecus sibi, at{que} illis gloriam peperere; the punishing of wits augments their reputation, and never did any Princes use them with the like cruelty, but they brought dishonor to themselves, and glory to them. If Emperors then allowed so great a liberty of writing and speak∣ing, much more may it be expected in a free State and Common-wealth. Hence (saith Suetonius) Romae & Athenis Comoediae, Satyrae &c. fre∣quentes, & etiam in Triumphis summa dicendi licentia erat. At Rome and Athens quipping Comedies and Satyrs were acted frequently
and openly, and even in the midst of their Triumphs, the People had liberty to say what they would of them. So Florestae likewise saith,Floresta Espagnola paer. 1. cap. 1. num. ult. Romae species libertatis est licentia Pasquillorum, At Rome the licenti∣ous custom of Pasquils is esteemed a kind of liberty: And this li∣cence is to be reckoned inter simulacra libertatis; as appears by the policie of Augustus and Tiberius, noted by Matthieu in Sejano, quiPierre Matthieu. fol. 103. talem libertatem permiserunt, ut respublicae adhuc libera esse videretur. Most pat to this purpose is that story out of Jovius concerning A∣drian the 6. who being much troubled at the abuses of of a certain rythming Pasquil, grew exceeding melancholy, till he was recovered by the wisdom of Ludovicus Suessarius, à quo edoctus erat (saith my Author) eam malèdicendi & scribendi licentiam obscurorum bomi∣num, libertati at{que} nequitiae dari, ut cùm insignes viros impunè carpse∣rint, fortunam suam câ vindictae cupiditate consolentur. I could have added a hundred Instances more, were it not that my design is now to write but a small Pamphlet, and not a volume to give in evidence against the vanity of Pamphlets; which I reckon far beneath my self, much more below the care and consideration of men in Autho∣rity. IV. Of Invectives out of the Pulpit. BUt as for Invectives &c. by way of Sermon, and such kinds of Prizes as are plaid in the Pulpit, under pretence of Religion, the case is far otherwise; nor were they ever tolerated by any prudent States-men: Because (saith one) Quicquid offertur sub specie religi∣onis &c. whatsoever is delivered under a religious pretence, strikes an impression upon the soul, and through the ears sinks deep into the minds of the vulgar. Hac, veluti thyrso, percutiuntur mentes humanae (saith Tacitus) ut facile in ejus imagine, etiam falsa & simulata acqui∣escant.Tacit. Annal 6. By this mens minds are so charm'd, that things though never so false and fained, find easie entertainment. Bodin writes, that the Southern Tyrans keep their vassalls in subjection by the mere force and pretext of Religion: And in this respect, as it is called the Binder of States and Kingdoms, or (as Gaius the Civilian calls it) maximum remedium expediendarum actionum; So if this pretext of Religion shallBsoldus. in dissert. de Arcan. Rerumpul. cap. 2. run in a Current contrary to the received Government, it becomes the Bane of any State or Kingdom: But especially in a free State, care must be taken to curb the licentioufnesse of Sermoning: For, as it is observed by Besoldus the Civilian, this very thing was the ruin of
those many flourishng Commonwealths in Greece. Now then, if it hathbeen of such power to cause disturbances and ruin, in States of an ancient standing; much more speedy and fatall must the consequence needs be, in a State whose Foundation is lay∣ing, or but newly laid. And therefore in this case, very excellent wasCicero. pro Flacco. that custom of the Romans mentioned by Cicero, qui nullam vim con∣cionis esse voluerunt apud plebem &c. who had a speciall care what Sermons were made among the people, and permitted none but what had the countenance and approbation of Authority. For, as Papini∣anus observed, so prevalent was any reason enforced under pretence of Religion, among the Romans, it à ut omnia post religionem ponenda civitas Romana duxerit, etiam in quibus summae majestatis decus voluit apparere; that the City of Rome valued concernments of that nature, even before such as might advance the honor of the Empire. And this is observed likewise by Valerius Maximus. If I list, I could dis-embogue a cloud of witnesses and sad exam∣ples, to manifest the strange power of those Pulpit-Politicians; who, like the ancient Demagogues of Athens, or popular Orators in Rome, can chain the hearts of the people to their own tongues, and lead them by the nose which way they please, to the accomplishing of a∣ny design whatsoever. Look into Germany, France, great Britain, and generally all over Christendom, and we cannot want Instances both old and new, But the most famous one of all is to be fetcht out of I∣taly, from Florence, concerning one Hierom Savanarola, a Frier Pre∣dicant; who so bewitched the People with his Sermons &c. and at length gained such a Reputation of Sanctity, and so many Follow∣ers, that taking Arms he drove out the Medicean Family, usurped the Soveraignty and Majesty of Florence to himself, and (if I well re∣member the story out of Lipsius) made a shift to maintain himself inLips. in monit. & exemp. po∣lit. possession, for the space of 12. months (or more) till his fraudulent Arts and pretences being discovered, he became odious and contemp∣tible; and in the end being forsaken of all, the people returned to their Allegiance, and delivered him up as a Traitor. This is enough to shew, what prejudicé a State may receive by pragmaticall and pe∣tulant Preachers: Therefore (for a conclusion) let me recommend the advice of a notable Politician; Patricii adeò corum loquacitatem ambitionem{que} comprimant, ut iis nullâ ferè aliâ de re, praeterquàm de morum corruptione, animarum{que} salute, publicè verba facere liceat; that Governers ought so to bridle the tongues and ambition of such Prea∣chers, that they presume not to utter any thing in publique, save what concerns the corruption of mens manners, and the salvation of souls.
V. Concerning Eaves-droppers, Whisperers, &c. I Shall (in brief) discourse only of one particular more, and then I have don, viz. concerning that Odium Governers may bring upon themselves, by imploying such persons, which the antient Grecians called ; the Romans Auricularii vel Delatores; we in English, Eaves-droppers, Whisperers, Informers, &c. of whom Tacitus gives this Character, Delatores (inquit) genus hominum publico exitio reper∣tum,Tacit. Annal. 4. that they are the very Pest of mankind. Quâ in re detesterne pc∣tius depertissimorum nebulonum fumos at{que} fraudes; an vcrò principumBesold. dissert. de Arcanis Rerum∣pub. insolentiam, qui hujuscemodi amant, fovent, amplectuntur? Concerning which sort of despicable and forlorn wretches (saith one) I know not whether be most hatefull; either their Fumes and Frauds, or the Insolence of those Princes and great persons, which love, cherish, and entertain them. By such as these (saith Arrianus) even goodArrian. in Epictet. lib. 4. men were undon at Rome. Hoc modo viri boni Romae subvertuntur. Arridet tibi homo quidam &c. Thus one comes, and sooths thee up, and entring into discourse as thy familiar friend, de principe inclemen∣ter loquitur, speaks amisse of the present Government, on purpose to under-feel thee: Then thou, supposing this to be a true Test of his temper, dost second him in the same kind of language, and deliverest all thy mind with confidence; paulò post abductus linguae temeritatem morte luis; and so in the end thou art brought to ruine. Hence (saith Polybius) when such persons are sent abroad, plena omnium suspicionum, & vix secreta domuum sine formidine, every man suspects another, the very secrets of our Families are unsafe, nor dares any one trust his neighbor. At this wretched passe the City ofTacit. Annal. 4. Rome once was; and it is recorded by Tacitus in his fourth book, upon ocasion of Titius Sabinus being accused by three Senators. The manner thus; Those three hid themselves before-hand in some secret corners of a certain room, whither they had appointed one Latiaris to bring Titius Sabinus and under-feele him in discourse; which being acted accordingly by Latiaris, Sabinus utters his mind to the full; and so the three Senators hearing all, went and accused him to the Emperor. Hereupon (saith Tacitus) Non aliàs magis anxia & pavens civitas, etiam adversum proximos, Congressus, Colloquia, no∣tae ignotae{que} aures vicari; etiam muta at{que} inanima, tectum, & parietes circumspèctabantur. So generall a fear seized the whole City, that the people durst not converse or discourse with their nearest friends and acquaintance, nor scarce trust the very stocks and stones, and
searched the roofs and walls for fear of Treachery. Quae quid aliud sunt (saith one) quàm extrema dominationis Flagitia? What greater tyranny can there be than this, so destructive of civill Conversation, which is the end of Governments, Societies, and Cities? What In∣gredient more harsh, to inflame the rage of a people, than the coun∣tenancing and cherishing such pestiferous Creatures? There are another sort of men which the Latines call Lictores; in English Serjeants and Pursuivants; but those more immediately at∣tending the State are ordinarily called Messengers. These, if a great number, must all be maintained with what they can squeeze; and therefore upon the least pretence (guilty or not guilty) all are fish that come to net. Therefore it is the advice of a wise man, ne in po∣pulariUlpianus. Statu Patricii multos Lictores habeant, that in a free State there should not many of these Officers be permitted. This is secon∣ded likewise by Livy, lib. 3. where he tells us, Non pudet Lictorum majorem propè numerum in foro conspici, quàm togatorum, aliorum{que}, the Romans were not ashamed to have a greater number of these Of∣ficers, than of their Lawyers and Gown-men, attending their Courts of Justice. A third sort of men there are, far more tolerable than either of the former, yea, and very necessary in a Common-wealth abounding with persons disaffected and seditiously inclined. The Romans called them Speculatores; quippe erant veluti è speculâ principis, saith Sueto∣nius.Suet. de Claudio. They may in English, not improperly, be termed Scouts or In∣formers: And such Suetonius tells us the Emperor Claudius had al∣waies attending him, who pried abroad into the conditions of men, and the state of the Common-wealth; not to intrap or insnare any, and then accuse them face to face upon particulars, but only for the Princes private information in generall. These are farre different from those impudent Auricularii, or Eaves-droppers, who first be∣tray, next accuse, and then aggravate under-hand with pretences and perpetuall whisperings, by these tricks abusing the ears of Authority, grieving the people, and making them quite out of love with their Governors. And as it is most certaine, that they heap a world of hatrod upon Governers; so it is very rare, that they bring them any benefit at all by their service: For, lest they should seem to be idle, or uselesse, they usually feed their Patrons with more frivolous matters and fop∣peries, than realities. Most excellent to this purpose are those wordsAmmia∣nus. lib. 14. of Ammianus concerning these whispering ear-wigs; qui paulatim e∣ruditiores
facti, processu temporis, ad nocendum, per clandestinos versu∣tos{que} Rumigerulos, compertis leviter quaedam addere malesuetos, falsa & placentiasaepe dicentes, artium nefandarum calumnias insontibus adfi∣gunt. Indeed, it is the Custome of this kind of mercenary varlets, if they have but the least hint of matters, immediately to frame an ac∣cusation, bring a man in question, cast him into prison, and then rake every way for materialls to make good the Charge; and still to load the poor Delinquent (guilty or not guilty) with fresh calumnies, and the ears of Statesmen with high suggestions: And this, out of de∣signe onely to magnifie their owne Service, that they may gaine the greater reward, with the more meritorious reputation. Of this hu∣mor in such instruments, Petronius hath taken notice, Nec satis est vulgâsse fidem; simulatius exit Proditionis opus, famam{que} oner are laborat. And this I find is my own case at this instant, in relation to such secret whisperers, who serve their own ends, by making me the unfor∣tunate Subject of many idle Insinuations. All which, with my selfe, and this briefe discourse, I most humbly submit to Con∣sideration. Qui nil sper are potest, desperet nihil.Sen. Tra∣goed. FINIS.
