P1649 11467389 47803
A REGULATION FOR SEAMEN WHEREIN A METHOD is humbly proposed, WHEREBY Their MAJESTIES Fleet may at all times be speedily and effectually Mann'd, and the Merchants be more readily and cheaper serv'd, without having their Men at any time press'd or taken away; Setting forth The great Advantages that will accrue thereby to the KING Merchant, and Subject in general, whereby these Islands will be more secure and happy, the Kings Revenue considerably be eas'd, Trade in general be quicken'd and encourag'd, and every indivi∣dual Subject receive benefit thereby, in lessening the Price of all Naval Commodities; Wherein is also propos'd, A Method or Nursery for training up of Seamen to supply the Loss and Decay of them in Time of War: AS ALSO, The giving hereby equal Liberty and Advantage to all Seamen, removing many Hardships that they now suffer under, and giving them many Encouragements that they do not now enjoy. By JOHN PERRY, late Captain of the Signet-Fireship, now a Prisoner in the Marshalses, according to the Sentence of a late Court-Marshal. To which is added, A short NARRATIVE of his Case relating to his Loss of the said Ship in Company of the Diamond-Friggat, in September 1693. LONDON: Printed in the Year 169.
THE miserable and unhappy Circumstances that I now lie under, upon occasion of my late heavy Sentence, and the Sense of my now suffering Reputation in the World, would be suf∣ficient to damp all Thoughts of a Dedication, were I not also conscious of my own slender and weak Abilities; but under all these Pressures and Disad∣vantages I cannot look up, nor dare to have that Presumption, as to affix the Names of any Persons of Honour to the Offspring of so lost and forsaken a Wretch, but shall think it a Favour, if any such Persons shall vouchsafe to look upon any thing that carries my unhappy Name in the Front; and if they shall have Patience to peruse these fol∣lowing PROPOSALS, and shall afterwards have so much Charity as to read my CASE also, and shall then please to have this kind Thought for me, that howsoever unfortunate the Action mentioned therein was, That I would have done bet∣ter in it if I could: This would be some Relief to me under my present Sufferings, until such
time as God and my King shall please to enable me, by giving me some other Opportunity, which I cannot wholly despair of, whereby I may give the World such further Satisfaction, as to believe that it is really true, and that what I did then do, was to the utmost of my Power. John Perry. Marshalsea-Prison, Decemb. 18. 1694.
THE PREFACE. HOW great Advantages for Riches and Strength all States and Kingdoms have that abound in Shipping, needs no Rhetorick to express; Examples there are enough in History to convince us of the Truth of it, and of how many States and Nations in all Ages have raised themselves thereby to great Power, and whilst by their Care and good Conduct, they have incouraged their shipping, Glory and Renown has still attended them: but whenever by their great Opulency, or trusting to their own Security, they grew Careless or Supine; some more Industrious Sate and Nation have always got the Advantage of them. That this ever was, and ever will be, the fate of the World is no question, and that it is of great moment for our Nation at this time to consider of it, is as undoubtedly true. The Glory and Safty of these Nations consists in two Parts, one depending on the other, the one is in a good and regu∣lar application of our Power at home for the Defence and Se∣curity of these Islands from the insults of our Enemies, and the other is in the openness, freedom and extent of our Trade
abroad: As to the nature and extent of our Foreign Trade, it is not my business, nor in my power to speak of it, it hath been sufficiently treated of by a Person of great Judgment and perspicuity in those Affairs. I shall only add my hearty Wishes for the publick Good, that if any of our Trade has been at any time lost, we may use our best endeavours, not only to regain, but enlarge it, which will not only prove an Ho∣nor, but a Security to these Nations. My present purpose is only to offer my weak Endeavours, in humbly proposing some Regulation for the better exerting of our Naval Power, and to remove some present heavy Op∣pressions. Necessity puts us often upon Industry, and 'tis the want of something that still whets our Invention; and whether there is not cause for it in our present Exigency of Affairs, let any Man consider. We have been in a Long War with a Powerful and Subtil Enemy, who has been undermining the Peace of Chri∣stendom for several years; and who by his Art and Cunning has been contriving how to erect his own Trophies upon the Ruine of his Neighbours. Could it ever have been thought that the French, who in the memory of this Age were so inconsiderable in their Shipping, could steal so soon and secretly into such great Power, as to bid Defiance to so many Princes by Land, and at the same time to maintain a Powerful and Numerous Fleet by Sea, little inferiour to two of the greatest in the whole World, to dare us both when united in our own Channel? when it was before thought that the single Force of either would have been sufficient to have shut them up in their Ports, and have ruined them by Sea at any time. Thus we have thought, and thus have we been deceived; and tho (God be thanked) the Scale is now turned, yet however the Remem∣brance
of it cannot but be useful to us; to keep us waking for the future, that we may not sleep too long in our own security, without providing or looking for future Emergencies, and that we may not suffer by any greater Power or sudden Surprize of our Enemies, when we may not have an Ally to help us. And one true way to direct us how to provide for our Security, is, to look about us and see if any of our Nighbours are not better provided, and have better Methods than our selves; and if so, it will be absolutely necessary that we should amend ours, and think it no trouble to change our old Methods for better: for this is most certain, that if we are not as careful and industri∣ous, and take as good Methods as our Neighbours, however we may flatter our selves with Futurities, and put off our thoughts for providing against them; yet a time maycome when we shall feel the misery of our Inadvertancies, as many Nations have done before us. I shall only trouble the Reader with one Pas∣sage, which I hope will not be thought impertinent. When I was an unfortunate Prisoner at St. Maloes, talking with a French Officer there, upon what might be the Issues and Events of this War; he was telling me, that however powerful we pretended to be at Sea, yet his Master would match us, and that had his Mastor but the single Trade of England or Holland, he would soon Ruine us both, by the method and order he observes in all his Maritime Affairs (all Seamen there being obliged at the King's immediate command to go on board his Fleet); as for Ships of War, says he, where there is Money to be had, they may be soon built and Stores provided; but the chief thing is the ready Manning and fitting them out, wherein, continues he, France has the Advantage: for, says he, your Ships are mann'd when the Seamen please, but ours when the King pleases. I could not but think his Argument had too much truth in it, and that if France had but the Numbers and Nurseries of Seamen as we have, we should soon find the smart of it.
This I must confess, out of Natural Love to my Country, put me upon thoughts if some way could not be found out whereby we might ballance his Absolute Power in Manning his Fleet: and whilst I continued at St. Maloes I did apply my self to it, and imogined that there could be no Expedient for it, except it could be so ordered, that they should all pass through the Fleet into Merchant-men; for which purpose I drew up the Scheme of a Project for it, much to the purpose as hereafter, and soon after my coming over, I gave a Draught of it to a Person of Honor, and of great Judgment, then an Admiral in the Fleet; only in that Copy I proposed the Seamen to pass thro' the Fleet, and in this through a Register, which I have since thought to be more convenient. But since I have delivered some Copies of it out, some Reflections have been made as if I had taken my measures from Capt. St. Loe; and as it now cometh in my way I cannot but take notice of it, and solemnly protest my Ignorance of it, and that I never saw nor heard of any of his Proposals till af∣ter I had delivered mine in to the Admiralty Board; and I hope it may the more easily be believed, seeing the great difference there is between his and mine, excepting the Register, which, as I have lately been informed, not only Capt. St. Loe, but several other Persons have formerly been upon. I beg pardon for this Di∣gression, and return to shew what is the Design of these follow∣ing Papers. The Charge, Trouble, and Confusion that we have been at all this War, to fit out and man our Fleet, is known to have been very great, and there has been many Grievances and Complaints that have on all sides attended it; the Royal Navy always want∣ing Men on the one hand, and the Merchants being always ob∣liged to submit to the extravagant Demands of Seamen on the other; one third part of our Seamen being generally supposed to lie hid on shear, in hope to make their Advantage in a Mer∣chant
Man, which, were there any Method to prevent, there would be no scarcity of Seamen, but enough to serve both: where∣by the King's Fleet might always be mann'd, and the Merchants have them upon reasonable Terms. For this reason have I been encouraged to offer my humble Endeavours, howsoever accepted, for the publick Good, not being so vain as to think, but that there may be many Errors and Imperfections in them, which were I not ignorant of. I would endeavour to correct or amend, but as it is, I must submit them to the Judgments and Censures of more knowing Persons, only hoping for this Favour, that if I shall be thought not fit for any Encouragement, they will at least have this kind Thought for me, That I am willing to do all the good I can. The following Poposals have two Intentions, the first is in re∣spect to the Safety, Honor and Defence of these Nations, whereby the King's Fleet may at any time, without Pressing, be speedily and effectually Mann'd without the great charge that the King is at in impressing Seamen, as late publickly represented by a very In∣genuous and Judicious Person, to amount to upwards of 36000 l. per Ann. and these following Papers do not only propose how we may readily unite our Naval Strength, but give us also a true Inspection and Knowledge of it, whereby our Numbers of Seamen may at all times be known, which is as necessary as to know the Number of our Ships; and if at any time their Numbers de∣cline, or are not sufficient to answer our present Necessities or Future Emergencies; that then, without groping in the dark, we may be able to provide for such Recruits as will supply such Defects: to which end I have also proposed a Method as a Nursery for Seamen, and that some such Method ought to be taken, is most undoubtedly true.
The second Intention of these Proposals, is the fixing of Mer∣chants Wages to a reasonable Rate, and to relieve them from that great Oppression that they and the whole Nation now suffer under, by the exorbitant Demands of Seamen, which enhances Freight, and which by Communication spreads and diffuses it self like a general Tax upon the whole Kingdom, by the Rise of all Naval Commodities. I shall only give the Reader one particular In∣stance, that is in our Newcastle-Trade: According to the Cu∣stom-House Books, there is yearly imported into this City about 320000 Chaldron of Coals one Tear with another, and there is required for the bringing home of these Coals after the rate of 12 Men for every 200 Chaldron, and to each of these Men is commonly given, in Times of Peace, about 35 s. per Voyage, which is usually made (Wind and Weather considered) in a Month or Six Weeks time; but now during the War, the Demands of Sea∣men are so high, that they now give them 4 or 5 l. and sometimes they are obliged to give them 6 and 7 l. per Voyage; but sup∣posing the Wages at no higher Rate than 4 l. 10 s. it will amount by calculation to above 3 s. 3 d. ½. upon every Chaldron; so that computing the increase of Seamens Wages upon every Chal∣dron of Coals brought into this Port, there is paid by this sin∣gle City of London, and Places adjacent, by the Rise of that one Commodity only, above 52500 l. per ann. to satisfie the extravagant Demands of Seamen, and which incourages them to hide, and keep out of the King's Service. This is but the Tax of one Commodity, only paid by this single City and Places adjacent; but if it were possible to compute the Charge of the whole Kingdom, not only in this but in all other Naval Commo∣dities, it would swell the Acount to a Prodigy, and be motive sufficient for every worthy and publick spirited Patriot, to take care of his Country, and to free them from the Burthen and Op∣pression of such a Tax, that, for want of a due Regulation, is
paid to maintain the Idleness and Luxury of Seamen. And of how great moment such a general Relief and Ease of the Sub∣ject would be, in a time when we are engaged for our common Safety, to contribute our utmost for carrying on the War, may easily be considered, and whether such a general Relief for Merchants, would not be a sufficient compensation for the Duty lately laid upon Tonnage.
A REGULATION FOR SEAMEN, WHEREIN A Method is humbly propos'd, whereby their Majesties Fleet may at all times be effectually mann'd, the Merchants more readily and cheaper serv'd, without having their Men at any time press'd or taken away, and all the Grievances and extraordinary Charges now attending both King and Mer∣chant removed. WHEREAS the Manning of their Majesties Fleet with a sufficient Number of Seamen in time of War, has been always, and is still found very difficult, besides the great Charge his Majesty is at in Pressing of Men; and not only so, but when the Fleet is so Mann'd, the greatest part of prest Men are always seeking opportunities to desert the Service, their Affections being more enclin'd to serve in Mer∣chant-men, chiefly by reason of the great Wages which Mer∣chants do give them in time of War: So that Seamen matter
not if they loose 5 or 6, sometimes 12 Months Pay, from those Ships they desert, together with the further loss of their Time whilst they are hid on shoar (which it's believed one third part of our Seamen commonly are) in expectation of getting into some protected Merchant-man: And notwith∣standing it has been lately published in the Fleet, that whoso∣ever deserts shall suffer death, yet they still desert when they have an opportunity, for which several have suffered. Now what is humbly proposed hereafter, is a Method whereby, in time of War, their Majesties Fleet may, with∣out Confusion or Grievance, and that with much less Charge than they are now at in pressing of Men, be all sufficiently mann'd, and never want Seamen, the Merchants much ea∣sier, cheaper, and better served, and the Seamen have no Temptation to desert or hide, and by consequence have no occasion to suffer the loss of their Pay or their Lives; neither need their Majesties Ships that are laid up in Winter be kept in pay, but might discharge the greatest part of their Men as soon as they are in Harbour, which would ease the King of another great Charge, with many other Conveniences. The proposed METHOD. Proposition 1. That there be a Register Office erected in every considerable Port in England, for registring all Seamen, their Names, Age, Place of abode, Quality, and Ships they last served in; and that there be particular Books kept in each Office for the respective Qualities of Men, one for Officers in general, and another for able Seamen, another for ordinary, &c. And it is humbly propos'd, that the general Register-Office at London be allowed 500 l. per ann. one Clerk at 100 l. and two or three other Clerks at 50 l. per ann. and two Messengers at 30 l. per ann. and
that at all other Ports where it shall be thought convenient to erect other Offices; the Register-Officer may be allowed from 100 l. to 300 l. per ann, and the Clerks proportion∣ably, according to the Business of the Port, and accor∣ding to which the Number of Clerks must be more or less. And that there be a Proclamation published throughout the Kingdom, to require and cause all Seamen within one Months time after such Publication made, to repair to the said Offices they nearest reside unto, and enter them∣selves therein. And if any Seaman shall refuse to obey the said Orders, and shall not within one Month come and enter himself in the said Register, nor give in a true account of his non-ability by reason of Sickness, or the like, that then all such offending Seamen shall be obliged to serve the King Six Months on board some of his Ships without Pay, and his Wages to go to the Chest of Chat∣ham. And for the Encouragement of all such Seamen that are unimployed, and shall come in speedily and obey the said Proclamation, every such Seaman may be allowed such free Gift or Bounty-Money as is hereafter mentioned, (viz.) For every able Seaman that enters himself with∣in one Week after Proclamation 20 s. within two Weeks 15 s. within three Weeks 10 s. within a Month 5 s. That such Bounty-Money shall be paid to each Seaman or his Assigns within one Month after he is entered on board any Ship, either Kings or Merchants, as shall be appointed them; and if they are appointed for the King's Service, then such Sums to be paid by the Treasurer of their Majesties Navy; and if appointed for Merchant men, such Sums to be allowed and paid them by the Comman∣ders or Owners of such Merchants Ship.
Argument 1. London being the Metropolis and chief place for Seamen, the Register Officer will not only have abundantly more Business than the rest, not only by rea∣son of the Scituation of the Place, but also by receiving the weekly Accompts of all the other Offices, therefore his Sallary is humbly proposed at 500 l. per ann. And as to Bristol and Newcastle, the Business will be very considerable there, which may be presum'd to deserve 300 l. per ann. And all others according to the Business of the Place, and the Clerks also accordingly 40 or 50 l. per ann. It would be very convenient and good that Seamen should at first have some Encouragement for their ready Obe∣dience to this Method, which would be of such general Ease and Relief to all Persons; and the Merchants cannot think much of giving (once) this Bounty-Money, when now they give a Sum far exceeding it. When once 'tis understood, as by Proclamation may be made mention, That no Seaman can have any Employment, except he register himself in the Office, as hereafter appears; and what Encouragement there is to prompt their speedy coming in, it may be presumed that few or none at all will refuse to enter themselves, but that they will voluntarily and speedily do it, by reason also of their Preference of Service, he being first to be employed that stands next on the Books; and when they find that there is no possibility for them to be employed otherwise, nor no place to turn themselves in, but by coming to the Register, they will soon think it bet∣ter to come and enter themselves, than to run the hazard of the Penalty, by being taken, or otherwise to starve on shoar, especially knowing, that by this Method they shall all have a fair and equal Chance, and the Advantages be the same into whatsoever Service they go; neither can a
Seaman think of employing himself out of his Element; for there is no Service easily to be found, wherein he can have 15 or 18 l. per ann. Sallary, and his Victualing, like as in the Sea-service. Prop. 2. That all the Commanders of the Kings and Merchants Ships and Vessels, do within ten Days after the erection of the said Offices, give in a true List to each respective Office they are nearest unto, of all the Men that particularly belong to each of their Ships, de∣noting their Ages and Quality, that they may be regi∣stred in the said Offices, and thereupon receive Register-Tickets, to be sign'd and seal'd by the said Register-Of∣ficer, that shall denote the Age and Quality of each Man, the Ship and Place, if Merchant-man, they are bound to; and that without such Ticket, no Seaman do presume to enter, serve, or continue himself on board of any Ship or Vessel, either King's or Merchant-men, without the Pe∣nalty of serving the King Six Months on board some of his Ships, with Forfeiture of his Wages for that time to the Chest at Chatham. Arg. 2. By giving Tickets to Seamen, it not only strengthens the Power and Security of the Register, with a great deal of ease, but it is a Convenience to the Sea∣men, and a great Security to Masters of Ships, Houshol∣ders or Inmates, who might otherwise, notwithstanding all their Advertencies, fall under Penalties. The Penalty is proposed at the forfeiture of 6 Months Wages, supposing nothing less would keep them to a sense of their Duty, and that if they had any part of their Wages allowed them, they would scarcely find any Severity in their Punishment.
It is highly necessary that Penalties should at first be in∣flicted to awe the Seamen, and to bring the Regulation in practice; but it's supposed that after a little time the Me∣thod will be so agreeable, that there will be few or none found guilty of any breach of the same. The Penalties are proposed to go to the Chest at Chatham, that their Forfeitures may not fall to the Benefit of any others, but to the Use of themselves in general, which is presumed will prove to their better Content and Satisfaction. Prop. 3. That no Commander of any Merchant's Ship or Vessel do give to, or agree with any able or ordinary Seamen, &c. for any other Wages than as hereafter followeth, viz. S. S. An Able Seaman not above 30 nor less than 28 per Month. An Ordinary Seaman not above 26 nor less than 24 per Month. A Groomett not above 22 nor less than 20 per Month. A Landman not above 22 nor less than 18 per Month. A Boy not above 18 nor less than 15 per Month. and proportionable to his other Officers, according to the Burthen of the Ship, and number of Men she carries. Arg. 3: It's conceived that about 30 s. per Month for an able Seaman, &c. in Merchants pay may be equivalent to the King's, considering the Disadvantages in Merchant-men, as 12 Months to the Year, no provision for Accidents if maimed, &c. no short Allowance upon victualling, nor Allowance for Cloaths if taken by the Enemy, Discount upon Damages, harder Labour, &c. And the reason why Merchants wages is proposed to be fix'd and brought lower, is, because it will be impossible for any true Regulation to be made without it.
For the exorbitant Wages that have been, all this War, given by Merchant-men, may truly be said to have been the great cause of all the Grievances that King, Merchant and Subject in general, have long lain under, always complain∣ing but cannot help themselves: for whilst there is double or near treble the Pay in a Merchant-man, how can a Seaman be easie or contented to serve the King? will he not study and seek all ways and means to hide from and evade the Ser∣vice? or if taken and forced to serve the King, will he not study and take all opportunities to desert? tho the Ruine of his Family, his Wages and his Life lie at stake for it. And though the Merchants do pay and continue their high Wages, yet they cannot be said to be in the fault neither, having no power to help themselves; for whilst the King must make use of the Power of Pressing, for the getting his Ships man∣ned, (as it is requisite, for the Safety of the Nation, he should;) so on the other side, a Merchant would never be mann'd, could he not find out a way that would ballance the King's Power: the force of which, for want of other, he places in his Money, thus through the opposition of each other, the publick Calamity, and a long Train of Grievan∣ces follow. To remedy which, no expedient can be found, until the Merchants can be supply'd as effectually as the King, and the Wages of both be brought and kept to an intrinsick Ballance. The first of which (as is presumed) cannot be done without a Register; and the last cannot be fix'd or kept except the Seamen be obliged to pass through, and the Mer∣chants be obliged to take them at the Register, or the like. And why there should not be such a Regulation made, as is proposed, to prevent it, may be enquired into. First, The King and Subject, in general, will have no reason but to like it; for the King would not only be well manned at all times, but be considerably eased in his Revenue, by ta∣king
away the great Charge of Impressing. And as to the Subject in general, they would greatly be eased in the price of all Naval Comodities, which by the exorbitant Wages of Seamen, have been raised, and which, by consequence, upon this Regulation would fall lower. Then for the Merchant in particular, he has no reason to be discontented at it, because he will have as good Men as the King, ready found for him, free from being prest, and eased in his extravagant Wages, now given. And as for the Seamen, the Generality of them will have no occasion to complain, for they will all have an equal Ad∣vantage, without murmuring or repining, in the Kings Ser∣vice; and as to those that skulk and hide to avoid the King's Service, considering their Loss of Pay, Expences in Victuals &c. whilst they are hid on Shoar, and their being prest into the King's Service upon their return home, after which they are kept like Prisoners on board, without being permitted to go home to their Wifes or Families, nor receive any com∣fort of their Voyages, all these Hardships that the Seamen now run through, besides their great Loss many times of their Wages, and sometimes of their Lives, occasioned by their deserting the King's Service; all these things considered, it would be really better, and perhaps more advantagious for them, that no such Temptation of high Wages were: and tho this Regulation proposed, may seem a little harsh to them upon first hearing, yet a very little Consideration will make them like it. And to prove that Merchants Wages can never be fix'd lower, nor kept to a ballance, and that no true Regulation can be made, but by such like Method as is proposed in these Papers, may thus be demonstrated, First, Except the Seamen be obliged to pass through some Register, or the like, and the Merchant also be obliged to take them there, no Restriction, nor Penalty can secure or
hinder the rise of Merchants Wages; and if there was an Order made ever so strict to bind the Merchants from giving, and the Seamen from demanding higher Wages, without be∣ing obliged at the Register, it would be ineffectual. For if Merchants and Seamen were at their liberty to chuse one another, without being thus obliged, the Seamen (having their high Wages fresh in their memories) would be unwilling to go into the Merchants service for such small Wages, and lie longer idling on shore; and the Merchants, to have their Ships mann'd, would, either for the advantage of better Seamen, or for being earlier fitted to Sea, be prom∣pted still to raise their Wages (by Connivance.) And the same reasons for the Seamens exorbitant Demands, would be then, as now; and, by consequence, the Prejudice and Grievance to their Majesties and the Subject in general would follow. The Allurements and Temptations of deserting their Majesties Service being still the same. And to think upon a Penalty upon the Merchants or Seamen to prevent it; it would be altogether impracticable, for there can be no Discoverers of such Connivance but them∣selves, and they being both agreed will never do it; neither would it be reasonable that a Merchant should lie at the mer∣cy of any Seaman, that may falsly swear, for the sake of a Reward, that such Merchant did connive with him. Prop. 4, That no Commander of any Merchant ship or Vessel do presume to entertain any one Seaman otherwise than shall be ordered him, and tickeited for him from some Register-Office, and that all Merchant-men be obliged to take in one 5th or 6th part Land-men, or such a Number as shall from time to time be thought meet, and that if any Commander of any Merchant-ship or Vessel, shall presume to take in, con∣ceal or entertain any one Seaman, that is unticketed or not appointed for him by the said Office, that then the said
Commander shall forfeit and be obliged to pay after the rate of 6 l. per month, for every such Seaman during the time he was on board him: one Moiety of the said For∣feiture to be paid to the Discoverer, and the other to the Chest of Chatham. And that if any Seaman shall presume to enter himself on board any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, for the space of six days, without being ticketted for it by the said Office, that then every such Seaman shall forfeit and be obliged to pay to the Discoverer, after the rate of 20 s. per Month, for all the time of his unticketed Service; and moreover be obliged to serve the King six months without Pay, and his Wages to go to the Chest. Arg. 4. The Lords of the Admiralty, who are plac'd on an Eminence, from whence they descry all the Necessities of of the State, in respect to Naval Affairs, may, by this Re∣gulation, easily foresee and prevent all the Confusion and Dangers, which, for want of a due and regular Division of Seamen, might otherwise accrue; and from time to time be able to proportion such numbers of Land-men to them as shall best consist with the safety of the Kingdom, Benefit of Commerce, and Nursery of Seamen. By imposing a Penalty both upon Merchants and Seamen too, all thought and probability of asking by the one, and consenting by the other is taken away. Prop. 5th. That all the King's Ships when they discharge any Men, do give into the Office that is nearest unto them, a qualified List of such Men they discharge, mentioning their Names, Ages, Quality, when and where they last served, and places of abode, and that the Lieutenant of the said Man of War, do go with them when discharged, and see them answer to their Names, and that then ab∣sent
Tickets shall be delivered to the Men, limiting a certain time for them to go about their own Occasions, at the expiration of which time, if not call'd sooner, they are to attend again for new Tickets, and if Occa∣sion requires their Attendance sooner than their time limited, they shall have Summons sent and left for them at their places of aboad; besides which Summons, a pub∣lick List shall be hung up at the Office of all those Seamen whose turn it is next to be employed, mentioning their Names, Ages, Qualities, and from whence, and when they were last discharged, and such a competent number of Men shall be put therein from time to time as shall be thought fit, and the Occasion of the Service require. That six Months after the erection of the said Offices, Orders, may be issued out from the Lords of the Admi∣ralty, directed to all such Commanders of any of Their Majesties Ships who shall come into any Port to re-fit or clean, (excepting those Ships that are to be dischargedin the Winter) that the one half of all such Seamen, belonging to them, beginning with those that stand first on the Books, and which have served above a Twelve Month on Board such Ships, may have their Liberty to be discharged, if they desire it, provided that they immediately enter themselves into the next Register Office, and that these Orders be continued alternatively every six Months, or as near it as possible. Arg. 5. By this means the great Plague of being turn∣ed over from Ship to Ship ceases, and by having their whole Ship's Crew enter'd together at the Office when it falls to their Turns again, to be employ'd either in the King's or Merchants Service, for which they will have a fair and equal Chance, their old Ship Mates will come together again, which will not be a little Pleasure and Satisfaction to Sea∣men,
and if any one of them is Tardy and Runs into a Penalty, they generally knowing one another's Haunts, they are the most likely to find out the Offender, and get the Reward; besides, if any Person's Summons for Service should by any Accident miscarry, he will soon have notice of it by the others. Seamen by being thus reliev'd, will not be always con∣fin'd to one particular Ship, wherein for some Reasons they may be uneasy, but will have their Liberty of going into any other of the King's Ships that can entertain them, or take their Chance at the Office, and by giving Liberty to one half only to be discharg'd at a time, it will be to the greater Ease and Satisfaction of the Commanders. &c. But the high Wages of Merchants being fix'd and brought lower, the old Allurements and Temptations will be taken away, and by consequence but very few will desire to leave the King's Service, and thereby be the less trouble to the Register. Prop. 6. That all the Commanders of Merchant-men, upon their return from their respective Voyages, and upon the discharge of their men, do go with them, to the next Of∣fice, and give in a true List of them; rating all such as were not Officers according as he shall think they deserve, either Able, Ordinary, or otherwise; and see them answer to their Names: upon which they are to receive Absent Tickets, as above; those that have been Officers, to have Certificates of their good Behaviour from their Comman∣ders, if not, to be entred as Able Seamen only. That if any Seam an be discharged into any Register-Office, and shall desire to be removed into any other Re∣gister-Office (to attend for Service) that is nearer to his usual place of abode, that then such Seamen shall have a Transfer Ticket given him for that purpose to be made, limiting a time for his Passage.
That all the Commanders of Merchant-men, before the Discharge of their Men, do give into the next Office, a true Account, upon the Oath of himself and Mate, of all the Men he at any time hath had in his service, from his first going out to his return home, and of what Wages is particularly due to each of them, and that he be obliged not to pay any of them, until they have entred themselves in the Register, and can produce Entry-Tickets of it, and that then he reserve one Tenth part of such Seamens Wages, to be paid into the Register-Office, there to be kept for them until such time as they are again ordered for Ser∣vice by the Register. And if it appears, upon the Master's account given, that any of his men are absent that have at any time run away from him, that then the full of such absent Seamens Wages be paid into the Office, for the use of the Chest of Chatham, his Wages to be computed not as the Master pleases, but according to the rate of his other like Seament wages, and to be reckoned from the time of his Entry to his absenting himself. And that the Tenth part likewise of all such Seamens Wages that are paid and discharg'd out of the King's Service, be paid by the Treasurer of their Majesties Navy into the Register-Office, for the purposes aforesaid. And that if it so happen that any of the said Seamen shall not fall to be employed in three months, or shall have leave to quit the Service, that then such Money shall be paid them upon demand. That the Tenth part of such Wages, shall continue to be paid into the Register, only during time of War. It is also humbly proposed, for the Encouragement of all Seamen in the Merchants Service, that 2 d. per month upon all Seamens Wages, as well in Peace as War may be deducted to go to the Chest at Chatham; and all Sea∣men to have the same Benefit as those in the King's Service upon the account of Wounds, Bruises, or any other accidents.
Arg. 6. It is necessary that the Commanders of Mer∣chant-men should give all the Officers Certificates of their good behaviour, for the Satisfaction of such Merchant-men, whose turn afterwards may be to take them, and it may be presum'd, that there will be no Commander but what will be careful in giving their Certificates without Favour or Af∣fection, because he knows not, but he may suffer himself by the same breach of publick Faith, besides his being obnoxi∣ous to the reproaches of all such of his Fraternity, that may hear of it. Seamen being often taken in at one Port, and discharged at another, may thus be set on shoar some di∣stance from their usual places of aboad, and 'tis but reason∣able they should have the Comforts of their Friends and Fa∣milies whilst ashoar. The reserving some part of the Seamens Wages will be a check upon them, and draw them to a Love of the Re∣gister, as usually they do all those places from whence their Money comes, especially if they want it; and besides, it will do them a greater Kindness than perhaps they would do themselves, by saving some part of their Money towards their fitting out again, if they should want it, and the Sea∣men cannot complain for want of its present Payment, ha∣ving all the rest of their Money in their Pockets. It may be supposed, that the loss of a Seaman, with pay∣ing notwithstanding all his Wages that is due to him, will be Cause sufficient to oblige a Commander to look after his Men, who may run away from him, and not be in his Power to prevent it; but 'its presumed, that the loss of their Wages, and the love of their Native Country, will keep them from such thoughts. The Chief thing that hath hitherto discouraged Seamen from Fighting in Merchant-men is, that they know if they do Fight, and are wounded or utterly disabled, no Con∣sideration
will be given, nor Allowance made to support them, which if such Deductions for that purpose were made, it may be hoped that the Merchants Ships would be better Defended. There may perhaps be some Objection against the fore∣going Proposal, that by paying the tenth part of Seamens Wages into the Register Office, it would create another great Charge of a Treasurer, &c. To which I answer, That it will need no additional Charge, nor no Treasurer but the Register, and were the Sums much larger, secure and conve∣venient Methods may be taken for it with little or no Charge to the Office. Prop. 7. That always the Men that are discharged from any Office, be from time to time, those that stand first upon the Register. And to the end that all Seamen may have e∣qual Fortune and Advantage, they are to take their course for Employment according as it falls out, either into their Majesties or Merchants Service, as they are entred into the Register-Book, except such as shall voluntarily pass through any Register-Office into their Majesties Service, which all Seamen out of Employ, and not appointed for Service, shall at all times, tho it be not their Turn to be employed, have liberty so to go on board which of their Majesties Ships that can entertain them, or they have a desire to serve in. And if any Seaman shall be unwilling to go any foreign Voyage that shall be appointed him, he may change with any other Seaman that is willing, that stands after him, setting him∣self in the said willing Seamans Place. That all such Seamen, who are outward bound in the King's Service, upon any foreign Voyages, and shall stay out longer than one Year; that all such Seamen, during the time that they are out, may be allowed 12 d. per mon. more, as an Addition to their usual Wages; and that
one Moiety of such Seamens Wages accruing due upon their foreign Voyages, may be paid every 6 months, to such Seamens Wives, or such other Persons, as they shall, be∣fore their departure, nominate and assign to the Commis∣sioners of their Majesties Navy, or some Register-Officer, And that the first 6 months Payment may begin at the Expiration of 12 months from their departure. Arg. 7. By giving Liberty for Seamen to go into the King's Service at any time, it may in a little time whol∣ly man the Fleet with Volunteers, which undoubtedly would prove to the better Safety and Honour of our Nation; for such willing Men will heartily and chearfully look their Enemies in the Face, whereas Press'd Men having no mind to Fight, are rather for running down into the Hold; and when Seamen once flinch or run from their Posts, it is a dangerous President, and the many late evil effects of this kind may sufficiently convince us of the Truth and ill Con∣sequences of it. The uncertainties of Seamens healths, and the hardship they may endure in foreign Voyages, together with the long absence from their Familes or Friends, may well deserve an Addition to their Wages, and if their Wives and Families had but the benefit of their half pay, to preserve them from the want and Necessities, that they might otherwise be re∣duced to, 'twould make them go with the greater Ala∣crity. Prop. 8. That as often as there shall be ocasion for Seamen, either for their Majesties or Merchant Ships, besides the Publick List aforementioned, Summons shall be sent to the respective places of the said Seamens abode, mentioning their day and time for attendance to be appointed for Service; and that if any Seaman do not observe the said
Summons except due proof made of Nonability upon ac∣count of Sickness or the like (and then they are to give no∣tice of it to the next Register) that then the said Persons not appearing, Warrants may be issued out to apprehend and take them, and the said Offender be obliged to serve the King 6 months without Wages, and his Pay to go to the Chest; but if any Seaman shall incur the Penalty, either by disobeying the said Summons, or for not entring him∣self according to Proclamation, and shall, within 20 days after his forfeiture, surrender himself voluntarily to the next Register-Office, it may be left to the Power of the Register to mitigate his Penalty, but not to set it lower than one month's Service. And if any Housholder or Inmate shall presume to conceal or entertain any Seaman, that is not ticketted by the Register-Office for serving in some Ship, or ticketted for his Attendance on shore till his turn comes to be employed, or he whose time in the said Ticket for Attendance is expired; and does not immediately give notice of it to the next Register, that then the said Hous∣holder or Inmate, in whose House or Lodgings, the said Seaman is found to have been entertain'd, shall be obli∣ged to pay the sum of 5 l. or to suffer three months Impri∣sonment without Bail or Main-prise, provided the said Sea∣man has been there for the space of three days and proof can be made that he was known to the said Housholder or In∣mate to be a Seaman, and after such Proof made, if the said Housholder or Inmate shall refuse to pay the said Penal∣ty, or shall refuse to surrender himself, that then a Warrant may be issued out, to make Distress and Sale of the said Offenders Goods, for the said Penalty, the Overplus, if any, to be returned: one Moiety whereof shall be paid to the Discoverer of such concealed Seaman, and the other to the Chest; but if no Distress can be made, the Disco∣verer shall then receive the sum of 50 s. out of the said
Seaman's Six Months Wages, which shall immediately be assign'd to the Discoverer by Ticket by the next Re∣gister Office, and shall be allowed to the said Discoverer or his Assigns, when the said Wages shall become payable. Arg. 8. By imposing a Penalty upon the Entertainers of Seamen, a Seaman will have no Harbour, for his Friends will not harbour him for their own sakes; and to conceal himself and quality amongst Strangers, will be uncomfort∣able, and to think of any other Employment out of his own Element will be difficult and discouraging. A Seaman may be concealed in the Lodging of an In∣mate, where all the Goods may not be worth five Shil∣lings, and therefore unable to pay five Pounds, but there is no reason that such an Offender should pass unpunished, or the Discoverer go without his Reward. Prop. 8. That the Commanders of all Their Majesties Ships do give the Men they give leave to be absent from their Ships, Register Tickets for that purpose to be made, and without they have such Tickets, no Housholder or Inmate is to entertain any Seaman for the space of two days, Sickness to be excepted, and then to give notice of it to the next Register, under the Penalty as in the Case of a conceal'd Seamen, that if any Seaman shall presume to absent himself without such Ticket of Leave from his Commander, or shall stay longer than the said Register Ticket of Leave shall mention, that such Seamen shall be obliged to serve the King for a certain time, during which, his Pay shall be forfeited to the Chest, not ex∣ceeding Six Months, according to the nature and degree of his Offence, and at the Descretion of his Captain, to whom he belongs.
Arg. 9. It is fit that Seamen should be Ticketted, not only to prevent the Seamen being absent from their Duty longer than their Leave given them, but also to prevent any shisting Seaman from passing under a pretence that he belongs to a Man of War, and therefore not Ticketted, by which means some Men will evade coming to the Re∣gister Office, if Men of Wars Men were not also Ticket∣ted, that have leave to go on shoar. Prop. 10. That the Commander of all Merchant men shall have an Order from the Admiralty of what num∣bers of Seamen, and what Landmen, &c. they shall take in. That the Commanders of all Merchant-men may have the Liberty to choose their Mate where they please, and if the said Mate be entered into any Office, he shall be discharged though it be not his turn to be employed, or out of any of the King's Ships, if he desires his Mate from thence, but as to all his other Officers, he shall choose them only as the Order to the Register for his Men shall signify, out of double the number of the Complement as shall be ap∣pointed for him, out of those which stand next in course upon the Register, unless such as he can by Applica∣tion made, get out of Men of War, to be discharged to him for their Preferment, and if so, such to pass to him through the Office where he has the rest of his Men. That for the Encouragement of such Seamen as have been Officers in Merchant-man, and would voluntarily serve their Majesties, but that they are unwilling to be at all Calls under the commands of a Boatswain, and for the encouragement of those who shall improve them∣selves, and are capable of subaltern Offices. And
that the Commanders of their Majesties Ships do take notice of such Men that doth accordingly behave themselves, and rate them extraordinary to be paid something per Month more, than is now paid able Seamen, and such to be quartered in some little Post in time of Fight, as Chief at a great Gun, and that the Complement of such Men do never exceed the third part of the number of the Guns that each Ship car∣ries, and that those Men upon application made by Merchant men, may be discharged to them for Offi∣cers, if they like not those that stand next on course at the Office as aforesaid. Arg. 10. It is reasonable that a Master should not be confin'd to his Mate, by reason of the great Trust that is repos'd in the Master, and which in case of Mortality, de∣scends to his Mate. As to his other Officers, he has a dou∣ble Choice, besides a Liberty by application made, and leave granted to have them out of a Man of War, or other∣wise, if he shall find any of his Men deserving or capa∣ble, he may preser them. It is necessary that some further encouragement snould be given to such good and able Seamen, as have been Officers in Merchant-men, and are willing to serve the King; for those Seamen who for their Deserts have had a distinction and been preferred in a Merchant man, will think it hard to be put back before the Mast upon the same level with others in a Man of War, for this reason a distinction is proposed both in Pay and Post, and such would be very useful in such Posts in time of Fight, which together with the o∣ther Officers as is usually quartered at the Guns, might make one to the Command of each Gun. Prop. 11. That all Merchant-men may have their liberty
to take their Land men where they please, but if they cannot find any themselves, they are to be supply'd at the Office, to which end there may be certain Com∣panies always kept, maintained, and recruited by the King for the breeding of Seamen to supply such Occasi∣ons, and that such Companies may be raised by beat of Drum, as the Marines, to be bred up and instru∣cted at the King's Tards, and to be commanded by some superannuated Boatswain and an Assistant; who shall daily receive Orders for their Employment from the Master of Attendance, as he shall see occasion, and be ordered by the Commissioners of the Tard (if any) and such men to be employed 6 or 7 hours in the day, and to receive 18 d. per day. That besides those Land men kept at the King's yards, there be also certain Numbers kept at every other Port where there is a Register Office, and to be paid and quartered, according to the same rate as the King's Foot-Soldiers are; and to be permitted by leave of the Register, to work on board any Ships or Vessels that may have occasion for their Help, and what they so earn to be moreover to their own Advantage. That for the Encouragement of Marines, as well as Land men, on board the King's Ships, and for the breed∣ing of Seamen, it may be so ordered, that all the Cap∣tains of Men of War do conslitute and appoint two Masters each Watch, one skill'd in the Theorick and the other in the Practick part of Sailing, to take upon them the Command of, and to teach and instruct the Marines, as well as the other Land-men; and that the Marines be discharged from their Companies, and en∣tred as Seamen on the Ships Books, as soon as they shall be recommended by the subaltern Officers, to the Cap∣tain, as deserving it.
Arg. 11. Of how great use and absolute necessity such a Provision and Nursery of Seamen would be, is obvious to every Man; and that they might be easily raised is no que∣stion; for by listing themselves here, they are sure to be put into the way of a good Livelyhood, and, if industrious, of good Preserment, and are as free from any further Obligation, after they are entred on Ship-board, as any Seaman in Eng∣land; for the sake of which great numbers would come in, and in a little time choice and exception might be made of liking them; that by their employ at the King's yards and their Duty on ship-board, they would, in a little time, be made fit for service; and discharging always those that have been longest upon the Books, the King's Fleet and Merchants would always be mann'd by willing and ready Men; 'tis humbly proposed that there may be maintained at the King's yards and other places at least 1000 men in pay, out of which there may be drawn 100 every Week, more or less, as the Service re∣quires, so that there may be drawn 5000 men per Annum, if required, and these men being generally employed in Sea∣mens business, will make them ready and fit for Service, a∣gainst they are drawn on board. By this means the King may have 5000 men every year raised as a Recruit for Seamen, which will be maintained and ready upon all occasions, with no great charge to the King, those in the King's yards earning good part of their Pay. That the Marines, as well as Land-men, on board the King's Ships, be carefully instructed in all parts of Sailing, is undoubtedly necessary; but the discharging the Marines may be left discretionally. Prop. 12. That no Merchant-man presume to take in any Land-men, except they be first entered in the Re∣gister-Office, where a Book for Landmen may be kept
on purpose, under the same Penalty as for an unticketed Seaman; that if any able Seaman shall, under pre∣tence of being a Landman, enter himself as such in the Register, and by Connivance receive larger Wages from the Commander, that then, upon due proof made of his being such an able Seaman, he shall up∣on the return of his Voyage forfeit two third parts of his Pay due to him, one part to the Discoverer or Discoverers of such able Seaman, and the other part to the Chest, and farther be obliged to serve the King 6 Months for half Pay, and the other half to go to the Chest. And to the end that such Offenders may be disco∣vered, a List of all the Ships Company, as qualified, may be signed and sealed by the Register, and publick∣ly be affixed to some part of the said Merchant-ship, which if blotted, torn, or otherwise made illegible, the Master shall be obliged, under the Penalty of 20l. to set up another Copy within four Days after No∣tice given. Arg. 12. This List will be a sufficient Check both up∣on the Master and the Seaman; that no Fraud can be, but may easily be discovered. Prop. 13. That all the Register-Offices do every Week or as often as it shall be thought meet, give into the general Register Office at London, a List of what Numbers of Men, and what Quality they are of, that are weekly employed by them; and also what Num∣bers and Quality they are of that stand unemployed on their Books.
Arg. 13. Of how great use this will be to answer all Emergeneies, and to regulate all Naval Affairs, need not here be mentioned, it being very obvious to all judicious Per∣sons. Prop. 14. That the Entry, Absent, and Transfer-Tic∣kets for the said Register Office, and Absent-Tickets for the Fleet be printed by a Printer appointed on purpose, that the General Register under his Hand do appoint what Numbers at any time shall be printed, and no more. Arg. 14. These Tickers will, in a little time, be uni∣versally known, to the great Ease and Security of Seamen and Subject in general; and that they may be the better kept from counterseiting, they may be printed by Copper-Plates, to be kept at the Office. Prop. 15. That no Seaman be obliged to enter him∣self in the said Register, and be forced to go to Sea, or suffer any Penalty for not doing so; but such as have served as Seaman within a Year last past; that no Seaman quit the said Service, but such as can shew good reason, and have leave so to do from the Lords of the Admiralty, or from some other Persons appoin∣ted by them. Arg. 15. It would be unreasonable for one that was a Seaman three or four Years ago, more or less, and is now fall'n into some other Employ on Land, for him to be ob∣liged to go to Sea; and it would be needless to give him and the Office an unnecessary trouble to be discharged; neither is it reasonable that any Seaman should quit the Ser∣vice without leave from the Lords of the Admiralty, or
some others appointed by them, which may be a Regi∣ster-Officer, the next Justice of Peace, and a Captain of a Man or War, which being joyned together, may determine such Matters, and for that purpose may be conven'd as often as there shall be an occasion. ☞ That the same Method as is used for Seamen, may be for Shipwrights, Caulkers, Rope makers, Sayl-makers, &c. I Shall not enumerate the many Advantages that might accrue by such a Regulation, but only answer these three following Objections, viz. First, That by thus obliging Seamen, it looks like an In∣fringement upon the Liberty of the Subject. Secondly, That by lowering of Seamens Wages, we shall drive them all into foreign Services. Thirdly, That the War is now almost at an end, and we had better bear the Grievance a little longer, rather than charge our selves with any new Project now, that can be of little or no use to us in times of Peace. Objection 1. That by thus obliging Seamen, it looks like an Infringement upon the Liberty of the Subject. Answer. Liberty is a popular Argument indeed, and there ought to be a due Respect to it; but whether the Re∣gulation propos'd doth not rather enlarge than entrench upon
the Liberty of the Subject, is worth our present Enquiry. By the King's Royal Prerogative, and the Consent of all Ages, a Power is invested in him to press Seamen upon all Emergencies, where the Safety of the Kingdom is con∣cern'd, and by this Power all Seamen are obliged to serve him, and the great Assembly of the Nation have thought fit to give it this additional Power to strengthen it; That whatsoever Seaman deserts their Majesties Service, shall suf∣fer Death. Thus every Seaman is now obliged to serve the King, and the Desertion of such Service is put under a more sad and mournful Penalty than is here propos'd, which there ne∣ver would be any more cause for, were the Method propos'd establish'd: How far then ought the tragick and untimely End of such Men to move us, especially when Methods are found out for their Safety and Preservation? Thus the Liberty of the Subject would be no more in∣fringed than it is already, and a grievous Penalty would be removed. But there is further a real Argument for this Method pro∣posed, in respect to the Liberty of the Subject; for by the power of the Press, there is oft made no distinction, (for Sea∣men cannot be known by their Faces) but Land men as well as Seamen are hurried away to the great detriment of ma∣ny, and against the true Liberty of the Subject; and not∣withstanding strict Orders are frequently issued out from the Lords of the Admiralty, that no such violation should be made, yet it is daily practised, and the Subject daily suffers. And indeed had there been no such Violence us'd, a great part of our Fleet must have been unmann'd, and were it not still continued, for want of a better method to breed Sailers, our Ships would soon feel the Want of Men; for the Boys, in the King's and the Merchants Ships, would
never grow fast enough to supply the yearly Decay and Loss of them. Therefore it may easily appear how highly necessary it is that some Expedient should be found out for manning the King's Fleet, without Pressing, and that some other method should be taken, for the more effectual breeding of Sea∣men, to secure both the Safety of the Kingdom, and Liber∣ty of the Subject. Object. 2. We should drive all our Seamen into Foreign Services, by reason of our low Wages. Answ. First, They would be terrified from deserting the service, by the Act of Parliament, for that purpose made, and still in force against them. For, if I am not mistaken, there is an Act of Parliament that whatsoever Seaman absents himself, without leave, from the service of this Kingdom, in time of War, and shall en∣gage himself, or take pay under any Foreign Prince or Po∣tentate whatsoever, that such Seaman shall suffer Death. If there be such a Law (as it is requisite there should) then such Publication ought to be made of it, by setting it up in every Ship, or elsewhere, that no Seaman might be ig∣norant. But if there were no such Act to over aw them, would not the natural Love that Seamen have for their Native Country restrain them from any such thoughts? Would they be contented to lose what pay is actually due to them, in hopes to get more by deserting their ship, in a Foreign Coun∣try, where they must not think to return to Old England any more, the place that they so affectionately talk of when they are abroad? Would they be contented not only to for∣sake their own Country, but their Families, Friends and Acquaintance, to live amongst Strangers, in an uncouth and
untelligible Language, and all for the sake of a little more Wages, which he knows not neither how long 'twill last? The experience of these things hath sufficiently convinced us to the contrary, and that it must be great and insufferable Hardships indeed, that will make a Seaman desert his Native Country; for during all this War, of so many thousand Seamen, that have been carried into St. Maloes, notwith∣standing they have endured very great Hardships there, and have been continually offered and tempted with 4 or 5 l. per month pay, yet none will engage in their service, and many of them have afterwards, upon their return home, entred themselves in the King's service. But yet, after all, if there should be some few, contrary to the common Inclination of Seamen, desert, would it be of sufficient force to continue the great Tax and Oppressi∣on, that they put upon Merchants, &c. by their exorbitant Wages; and would there not be many more Seamen bred by this method, than would desert by it? and shall it be said that the Desertion of a few men is reason sufficient to stand in competition, and to keep the many Grievances on foot, that might otherwise be removed? And is it not now as reasonable and necessary, that Sea∣mens Wages, in respect to Merchants, should be ascertain'd and fix'd, as well as Carmens, Coachmens, Watermens, and the like, who at certain Rates are obliged to work? And is not the Advancement of their wages to 30 s. per month, in time of War, sufficient, when in times of Peace, they are contented with much less? If these things be granted in the Affirmative, what reason have we then that these Grieveances should not be redress'd? It is true, that the long continued course of an evil Custom, whereby some particular Men may have made profit, will at first to them, seem grievous, and look like an Oppression, but
that is no reason at all why it should not be removed, or why the Publick should suffer by its continuance. Object. 3. The War is now almost at an end, and we had better bear the Grievances a little longer, rather than charge our selves with any new Project now, that can be of little or no use to us in times of Peace. Answ. That the War is near at an end no Man knows, for we have so said every year since it began, and, as we have thought, had reason so to say; but we see no end of it yet, nor know not when we shall; and whilst it does continue, there are Grievances still to bear, which may cause many an aking heart, and many a man to lose his Life, which might be otherwise prevented, and did we but consider the extraordinary Charge that the Nation, in ge∣neral, is put to for want of a due Regulation, it would be motive sufficient for every worthy Patriot and Lover of his Country, to seek out and help forward a Remedy to avoid it: for, abstracting all the Complaints, Trouble, and Con∣fusion that attends it, which is not a little, the very Charge alone that the King is at in Impressing, and the increase up∣on Merchants Wages, by the exorbitant Demands of Sea∣men, would in much less than one years time, make a Fund suf∣ficient for the discharge of the Offices in this Regulation proposed, for ever. The Charge of these Offices, by some general Tax, will not be felt, and without them, during any War, the Pub∣lick Calamities will cry aloud and be heard. But the great∣est Consideration of all is the publick Safety of the King∣dom, which may well be presumed to be in no secure and good Condition, without some more effectual Method for the breeding of Seamen and Manning the Fleet; and if the French had but been in a little stronger Condition 3 or 4 years ago.
and but push'd on their War by Sea a little vigorously, it might have driven us to have thought of some more ef∣fectual method (tho perhaps then too late) or our Ruine. And to think that a Method or Regulation for Seamen, in time of Peace will be of no use, will be a mistake; for per∣haps it may be then most necessary; I mean upon the prospect of a War breaking out, for by this means, the Strength of the Nation, in respect to Seamen, may at any time be easily known and soon united, our Ships may be quick and earlier out, to the surprise and terror of our Enemies, and our Nation be happy and secure, our Merchants will not be tax'd by the Seamens extravagant demands, nor suffer for want of men in their Voyages, nor no such things as Injuries, Complaints or Tears be heard of, occasioned by the Rapines and Vio∣lence of a Press.
THE Practice and Use OF THIS METHOD In time of PEACE. Prop. 16. THAT in times of Peace, within Ten Days after Proclamation for that pur∣pose to be made, all Penalties and For∣feitures to cease in the Regulation a∣forementioned, until such time as Proclamation shall be made again to the contrary, excepting all Penal∣ties in the fourth and sixth Proposals aforesaid, the whole matter in them contained, being always to be observed both in times of Peace as well as War, and that the Masters of all Merchant-Ships and Vessels, be obliged to keep up in publick View, the Register's List, as in the twelfth Proposal mentioned, and Forfeit the same Penalty upon Default.
Arg. 16. The Seamen being thus at all times obliged, as well in Peace as War, to enter themselves in the Office, it will not only secure our Seamen, but their Numbers may at any time be known, and their Entry will be so fa∣miliar and easy to them, that in time of any ensuing War, there will be no starting, but presently fall into their old Methods, to the general Satisfaction of them all, finding that all shall have equal Fortune and Advantage, and that none can be oppress'd or endure more hardship than ano∣ther: thus shall we have at all times our Seamen ready for the speedy and effectual Manning of our Ships, to the Safety and Honour of our Nation. But I still perceive there is one Objection more to an∣swer, which is somewhat material, that is, Where shall we find Money, when the Nation is already put to it to raise necessary Supplies for the War, to Pay and Maintain ano∣ther Charge that will be created by these Offices, and for the extraordinary Charge also of maintaining the Land∣men at the King's Yards, &c. To this I answer, I shall not presume to direct the Great Wisdom of the Nation, but if there were no other way to raise this small Tax, I would only propose one General Que∣stion to the Merchants? Would they not be willing by ha∣ving all their Grievances now remov'd, their Men to be kept free from Pressing, whereby they might prosecute and finish their Voyages in Freedom, and to save such consi∣derable Sums in their Wages? Would they not be contented for these Considerations, to pay 1 s. per Month more than the Rate fix'd for each Man in time of War, and 6 d. per Month in time of Peace to redeem them for the present, and to secure them for the future from such Oppressions; and will they not otherwise, were no such Regulation made, and the War continue, pay as much in one Year by the
over-demands of Seamen, as will in all probability defray that Charge for twenty Years together, and it may be presum'd that such a Duty would sufficiently defray the Charges propos'd; for in times of Peace there needs no continuance of raising and maintaining of Land∣men, for Seamen will then breed fast enough for our Oc∣casions. I Have thus humbly offered my Endeavours for the Publick Good, as well as my strait Confinements, and want of Liberty, for further Inquiries would permit me. I should not have presumed to have Printed them, and by it have expos'd my Inabilities to the World, had I not been strip'd by my late Loss of that little all that I had, whereby I am made unable to pay for the Transcript of some few Copies, that I would willingly have presented to some Persons of Honor; with this humble Presumption, only that if my honest, though defective Endeavours, may not in general be approv'd of; yet however, hoping that some little Light at least may be given by it, whereby their Majesties Fleet may be better served, the Merchants relieved, and the Subjects in general be eased, which I cannot but think will be a very acceptable piece of Ser∣vice in our present Circumstances of Affairs, and be well worthy of the Sollicitude and Endeavours of any Ingenu∣ous Lover of his Country. I cannot but be sensible of the difficulty that all new Projects have in their Birth, and that they are generally starv'd in their Infancy with∣out the Patronage and Protection of some Power. That mine deserves but little regard I am satisfied in, nei∣ther can my now unhappy and despicable Circumstances recommend me.
I have lost the use of my Right Arm in the King's Service,I lost the use of my right Arm by a Shot I received in an Engage∣ment with a French Privateer in Jan. 1690. I was then Lieutenant under Captain John Layton in the Montague, who was kill'd in the beginning of that Action, his Head being taken off by a great Shot; and by my not giving due time for my Wound to be dress'd, and by Acting in my Post for above an Hour after, it had like to have cost me my Life, the Surgeons often giving it for their Opinions, that I should Die of my Wound. and since that, have lost all that I had in the World, when taken by the French, and I was carried into St. Maloes, and kept there a Prisoner near Five Months, and had not Almighty God in his particular Care and good Pro∣vidence, in a wonderful man∣ner preserved me there, I had been no longer the Object of any Person's fear or prejudice: but thanks be to God, who hath preserved me thus far, and though he hath permit∣ted me to fall, and now to suffer under my heavy Sentence, I with Patience submit to it, with this Comfort and Satis∣faction, that I never was reputed a Coward, and if I may trust to my own Judgment of the late Action for which now I suffer, I think that I did my Duty to the utmost of my Power; and whereas it is a common saying after Mis∣fortunes, to cry out, If we had known before what would have come after, we could have prevented it, or have done better; it happens not so in my Case, for as God is my Witness, I know not how I could have done better, worse for me it must have been, if I had acted otherwise than I did, for I was driven on the Edge of two Precipices, and if I had fallen either way, it would have been my inevi∣table Ruin, as may appear by my following Case, which I would not in any wise have Printed, had I not appeared in Publick in another Matter, and therefore I thought it very requisite to take some notice of it, least my Silence, as to this Matter, should be imputed to my Guilt, which would have made me very uneasy, for though I patiently submit to my Sufferings, yet I cannot to my Guilt; I
hope this will not be thought any Reflection at all upon that Honourable Court, that Try'd and Condemn'd me, for I cannot think that they acted contrary to their Judg∣ments in Condemning me, but do believe that they were led to it through the defect and weakness of my Defence, and the Testimony of some prejudic'd Witnesses that were against me, which I cannot now particularly remember, but do believe that by my eagerness and endeavours to prove the ill Will, Prejudice and Combination of those Persons, I did neglect the more proper part of my Defence, that might otherwise have acquitted me, for the Truth of which, I appeal to the Honor and Judgment of all those Honourable Gentle∣men who were my Judges, who no doubt will read or hear of this Writing. My Intention was to have said as little as possible to my Case, that I might not tire the Reader, but going upon it, I found I could not do it in less room than as fellows, which I have taken Care to the very best of my Judgment and Memory, not to err one tittle from the Truth.
The CASE of Capt. JOHN PERRY, Lately sentenced at a COURT-MARTIAL, For the LOSS of Their Majesties FIRE-SHIP the Cygnett, to a Thousand Pound Fine, and Ten Years Imprisonment. ON September the 20th. being about Twenty Leagues distance South-West from Cape Clear, I then com∣manding the Cygnett Fire-Ship, under the command of Captain Wickham of the Diamond, who was my Com∣modore, at Eight in the Morning the Wind at North-West and by West, we saw two sail right to Windward, bear∣ing down upon us, I then made sayl, and spoke with Captain Wickham, and told him, I believed they were French, and that I was getting my Ship in readiness; he said he believed the same, and directed me to lie under his Lee Quarter within call of him, and that if he would have me go upon Service, he would loose his Spritsayl-Topsayl, and hoist it with the Sheets flying, according to
the written Order, which I produced at my Tryal, and which he gave me some days before under his hand. About four Hours from our first seeing the Enemy, they came up with us, the Diamond being then under her Top-sayl, and I (being a heavy Sayler) under my Top-fayls, with Foretack at Cathead, both steering away North-East and by North, one of the Privateers, called the Gra∣nado, first came up, and fired some Guns at the Diamond on her Weather side, whilst the other, called the Philippo, came bearing down after her, with his Spritsayl Yard top'd, as I then believed, to board her, according to all Practice, on the Weather side; upon which I called to my Master, and told him, that I rerceived the Enemy was for board∣ing, and that I would be so too as soon as I had an op∣portunity, although I had no Signal; whereupon he re∣plied, If you please, we will get our Tacks on board, and be on board this Ship, which was then right to Windward of me;  Musquet shot, standing towards the Diamond, as aforesaid; and therefore I refused his inconsiderate Mo∣tion. Upon the coming up of the Privateer, the Diamond set her Fore fayl, with the Tack at Cathead, and let fall her Main sayl, and stood away without altering her Course, when at the same time, he having the Wind of me, he might have bore down to me at any time, and easily have brought me to Windward, if he would have had me to have pre∣vented the Privateer from boarding him, as he hath since pretended, or have given me an opportunity to have burnt him. Seeing the Diamend thus to make fayl, and contrary to my first expectation, seeing the Privateer running up un∣der her Stern, to board her on the Lee-quarter, on which side the lower tier of Guns was not out, I immediately ordered my Main and Foretacks, to be got on board, my Top sayls to be hoisted, and Mizzon to be hal'd abroad,
and sprung my Loof as near as I could lye, so to gain the Wind of the Privateer, that I might be ready to clap her on board, then believing, that by that time I could gain the Wind, the Diamond would have put off the Privateer, and that then I might have a fair opportunity of burning him, whilst he lay becalm'd, or before he could have gathered way from under the Diamond's Lee; but finding the Dia∣mond did not put off the Privateer, as I and all Persons pre∣sent, every minute, expected she would have done, I was then resolved to burn him, notwithstanding I had no Orders, as he lay with his Bough on board the Diamond's Quarter; then believing, in that little time I had to consider of it, that as soon as I had set fire to the Privateer, the Men, to save themselves, must have run into the Diamond, and with such haste, that most of them must have gone without Arms, and consequently have been forced to beg for quarter: This, as God is my Witness, was then my Thoughts and Resolutions; but having gain'd the Wind, and brought the Privateer right a head of me, not half a Cables length distance, we saw the Diamond's Colours struck, and coming up very near, we perceiv'd none but French men upon the Deck, and no re∣sistance made, and that the Diamond was lost, I then found my Design ruin'd and prevented, and nor in my power to recover the Diamond, neither could I do any Injury to the Enemy, unless, at the same time, I had sacrificed not only my self, but all my Men, to the Revenge and Fury of the Enemy, we having no Ship nor Refuge left for us to hope to fly to, that could have saved us from the Pursuit and Destru∣ction of the other Privateer, who all the time, from the Phi∣lippoes boarding the Diamond, was very near us, and siring upon us with both their great and small Shot; and finding thus that we could do no service, and that we had no power to escape or defend our selves, we surrender'd.
But had I then burnt the Privateer, it is very probable as Cir∣cumstances since appear, it would have been my utter Ruine, though the Enemy had given me quarter; for my Com∣modore might have then said, that I was the occasion of the Loss of his Ship, by telling that there was but a few Men boarded him, that they were at close Quarters, the Enemy just ready to cry for Quarter, and that then I came without Orders or Notice, and fired the Privateer, put all his Men into a Consternation and Dread of being burnt themselves, fore'd all the Privateer's Men into the Diamond, who, by their greater Numbers, over power'd them, and so they lost their Ship; and that if I had staid till he had thought fit to give me the Signal, I might have done Service, and saved the Ship. All which, though Supposition only, I humbly offer to the Consideration of the impartial Reader, and whether the World would not have easily believed such an Allegation true, and that such a Man of War could not have been otherwise lost so soon, especially to one Privateer. The Question has been put, Why I did not burn my Ship, when I found I could not do Execution upon the Enemy? Whether it is thought a Fault in me, or no, I know not? But I humbly hope, that since there has been no President of it, that ever I heard of, except it was when the Men could make their escape to shoar, or to a Fleet that could protect them, I shall not be thought a Crimi∣nal for it, it being very reasonable to think, that had we destroyed our Ship when we were under their power, they would have prevented us from saving our selves on board any Merchant-ship, and have left us to the Mercy of the Sea, or destroyed us, which all my Men then said, and I believed they would have done.
This being the true and just account of my Case (as near as I can remember) what could have been more ex∣pected from me? I know not; it was my Unhappiness to come home and be in this unfortunate Action, for which now I suffer: But if I had only lain in my Post for so short a time as that wherein the Diamond was taken without making any Attempt at all (with Submission to better Judg∣ments) I believe (If Orders are always to be observ'd) I might have justified my self, though not so honourably, I being under Command, and to expect a Signal, which was never given me. But notwithstanding that I did attempt to burn the Enemy, and had done it (thinking thereby to have merited the good Opinion of my Country) had I not to my great Surprize and Amazement found the Diamond so soon surrendred, which was immediately after she was boarded. But the main and only Question which I fail'd in answer∣ing to at my Tryal, and for which the World generally condemns me, is, Why I did not burn the Privateer, or the Diamond and Privateer too, after I saw the Diamond was surrendred: All the Answer I made to it, when the Question was put to me by the Court, was, That I believed, that if we had so done, we should have had no Quarter, to which no Replication being made, threw me under that unhappy Mistake, that they took my Answer for granted, believing, that if they had not so done, they would have signified it to me, and therefore I did offer no Reasons, though pre∣par'd to prove it, but did believe it needless, and indeed my Sentence, when given, was so unexpected and surpri∣zing to me, that I thereupon replyed, That if the thing were to do again, I knew not how I could do any thing more or better than I did, and humbly prayed the Court to let me know wherein I had failed to do my Duty; but it was then too late, and I had no Answer to it.
The Reasons that I had then to offer were as followeth, Had it been possible for me to have burnt the Privateer and Diamond too, after she was surrendred, those on board the Diamond must have been burnt or drowned by their own Countrymen; but had we so done, it was impossible for us to escape, and as unreasonable to expect any thing but utter Destruction from the other Privateer: This I did, and do still believe would have been my Fate; and I must consess it was the only thing that hindred me from attem∣pting to do Execution after the surrender of the Diamond; and as I always did, and ever shall abhor deserving the Name of a Coward, and my former Behaviour can never deserve that Imputation, so on the other side, I would not throw my Life away, when there is not the least prospect of preserving it. The Reasons why I did, and do still believe, that had we done Execution, and been taken, we should have been de∣nyed Quarter, is, in the first place, because I knew it to be affirmed to be the Law of Arms and Nations, that Quar∣ter was denyed to Fire-ships Men, if taken after Execution, in the Book De Jure Maritime & Navali, lib. I. cap. 13By the Laws of Nations, and by the Laws of Arms, and at this day practised, in all Fights, the small Frigats, Ketches, and Smacks are to observe and take notice of the Enemies Fire-Ships, and to watch their motion, and to do their best to cut off their Boats, and gene∣rally the Persons found in them are to be put to death, if taken, and the Vessel, if not taken, destroyed; and the reason why the extremity of War is used to such, is that by how much the Mischief is the grea∣ter by the act of such Men, if exe∣cuted, by so much the Punishment is aggravated, if taken, and quar∣ter denied them by the Law of War.. the only Book that ever I heard of that treats of Sea-Affairs of that kind, and which has ben never writ against, or contradicted, that ever I heard of; but had there been no such Law ever heard of, in my opinion (with Deference to better Judgments) the very Reason and Nature of the thing, in my Case especial∣ly might induce any Man to believe, that had I done Exe∣cution
upon the Enemy, after the surrender of the Diamond, the utter Destruction both of my self and Men might have been most justly expected; for what could have been more provoking and deserving of Death, than for me, when the Diamond was lost, and I under the Power of the Enemy (and they calling upon me to strike) to do them the utmost Mischief I could? Could I, in such a case, expect or hope for quarter? A Garrison that suffers a Storm, at the last extremity, has much more reason to expect it; for they may possibly save themselves, but to us it was impossible; for when the Diamond was gone, there was nothing left to save us from the Power of the Enemy. Had not the other Priva∣teer lain as he did firing upon us, and who had mann'd his Boats, and were coming to intercept and cut off our Escape to the Merchantmen (who were all upon the run as soon as they saw the Diamond's Colours struck, and) who sail'd fa∣ster than my Boat could row; even in that case no Merchant∣man could save us or herself from the pursuit of the other Pri∣vateer, who sail'd very well. If ever there was any President that was found contrary to the said general Rule and Practice set down in the afore∣said Book, of destroying Fireships men, if taken after Exe∣cution; and if there were any Men that ever had Quarter from the Enemy (which is more than ever I heard of) I presume it must have been, not as in my Case, but when there was a probability for them to escape, when the At∣tempt was made. In general Fights Fire-ships are command∣ed upon Execution, and must go, let their Fate be what it will, and then there is all probability for their Escape, a Frigat or Boats being always ready to take them up, and a Fleet able to protect them when taken up; but if they should miscarry, and are taken, the Enemy would have much more reason to forgive them, than for me, who could not plead either Command for Execution, or Hope of Escape after I had done it.
All which I humbly offer to the charitable Considera∣tions and Judgments of all judicious Persons, and whether, if we had done execution upon the Enemy, after the sur∣render of the Diamond, we could have expected Quarter. I have been the more tedious upon this single Point, because I am generally condemn'd for it; and, I believe, had I spoke to it at my Tryal, it would have been now better for me. Upon the whole, I humbly hope it will be consider'd, First, That I was commanded to the Leeward of the Diamond, and as to my Distance, though it has been alledg'd against me by my Commodore, that I was not near enough to the Diamond to have prevented the Privateer from board∣ing him, yet it can never enter into my Thoughts, that he did really think that I was not near enough to him, or that I could have prevented the Privateer from boarding him; for first, if he had not thought me near enough, he having the Wind of me, and Sailing much better than me, he might have boar down to me at any time, and brought me as near to him as he pleas'd: but if I had been ever so near to him, I know not how it could have been possible, or in my Power to have prevented the Pri∣vateer from boarding, he having the Wind both of me and the Diamond too, and either of the Privateers could have run round me at any time, and have disabled or ruined me at their pleasure, I being unable to make any Defence, having sent all my Men away as usual on such Occasions, except my Boat's Crew, which row'd but with six Oars, my Ship was not only small, but a very heavy Sailer, and being not fit for the Sea, was broak up at St. Ma∣loes whilst I was there. Secondly. That I was not at my own Liberty to act when I thought fit, for I was under a Commodore, who gave me Orders when I should go upon Service, and whose Orders I was to obey.
Thirdly. That he never did give me any signal for go∣ing upon Service during the Action. Fourthly. That though I had no Orders, (and did run the hazard thereby of ruining my self, if I had been un∣successful in my Attempt) yet notwithstanding, I did en∣deavour to do Service, and as it was sworn at my Tryal, I did set all my Sails to gain the Wind, and that within a very little time from the Enemies boarding, I had gain'd the Wind, and had laid the Privateer on board, had the Diamond but held out, which she might easily have done, had they but given the Enemy any reasonable Op∣position at boarding, or at least defended their Close Quar∣ters, or behaved themselves any thing likely, which indeed, I did not in the least suspect when I was making my Attempt. Fifthly. That if I could have done Execution after the Diamond was taken, yet it was impossible for me to escape. Sixthly. If it was not unreasonable for me to expect Quarter from the other Privateer, after I had burnt his Con∣fort or his Prize, knowing at the very same moment that I must fall under his Power. Lastly. If it can still be thought, that I am in Fault, because I did not do Service, though with the certainty of being denied Quarter, yet I on the other side with all sub∣mission hope, that it may be consider'd, that if I had hap∣pily been under the Command of a Man of War that had Fought any thing like what was reasonably expected, I had not deserv'd any Censure.
I have given here as short and brief Account of the Acti∣on as I can, which relates to my particular Case, and have forbore personal Reflections as much as possible, without doing injustice to my self, and have not omitted to the best of my Memory, any one material thing. There are indeed some other things which I hear have been reported to my Prejudice, and which I also think sit here to take notice of and answer, by reason that I would not willingly remain any longer under any Persons ill Opinion: one thing is, That the Master of my Ship would have had me attempted to have burnt the Privateer, before she boarded the Diamond, and that I refused to do it, replying, that I was Captain of the Ship. This was indeed sworn at my Tryal, and it was true that he did make such a Motion, and I did refuse it: and I submit it to the Judgment of all those Persons who know the nature of Commands, whether any Captain is obli∣ged to act at any rash or inconsiderate Motion of his Master, and whether the Masters urging of it can be any excuse for the Captain for any miscarriage that may ensue by it. But without any other Arguments, supposing that I had had ever so fair and feasible an opportunity to have burnt the Priva∣teer; and in attempting it, without a Signal, had either been disabled in my Mast or sunk, or after laying the Enemy on board, and setting fire to my Ship, she had been put off a∣gain (which indeed very commonly happens, tho men of War be disabled,) would not then the whole Miscarriage and Loss of the Action have been fix'd on me, and could my Master's advice have then excused me for acting without Or∣ders, when I was under Command and to expect a Signal, and might not then my Commodore have alledged, that by my Misbehaviour in acting without Orders, I had both en∣couraged the Enemy, and discouraged the Diamond's Men, crying out, that their Fire-ship was gone, &c. and that if I
had staid till he had seen time, I might not only have saved his Ship, but have done execution on the Enemy. Another thing has been objected, that I wanted Powder, and that my Sally-Ports were not open to shew that I was a Fire∣ship; as to my want of Powder, I did send to the Diamond for some, (tho not on purpose) but 'twas some considerable time before the Enemy came up with us, my Fire-works being a little dammaged by some bad Weather we had received some few days before; but it not being sent, I started some Cartridges, which I was unwilling should o∣therwise have been done, and my Ship was very well sit∣ted for Service, long before the Enemy came up, as my Gun∣ner swore at my Tryal; and as to the not opening my Sally-Ports, I kept them shut to preserve my Priming dry, till such time as I should have occasion to open them, upon quitting my Ship, in doing execution. But had I not had that reason, I should have thought it best to have kept them shut, to have conceal'd the Quality of my Ship, for the greater security of service; and not, by discovering my self, to have bid the Ene∣my, (who were both to the windward of me, and sa led two foot for my one) to have avoided, disabled or sunk me: for I did not expect, nor I dare say did any other Person then pre∣sent, upon the coming up of those Privateers, that they would have took the Diamond, or that there was any occasion for our Frighting them, for then certainly my Commodore would have opened all his own Ports, and have had all his Guns out, and have tack'd and stood to the Enemy, and have also or∣dered me to have kept my Ports open. I shall be no farther tedious to the Reader, only in all Humility to beg and hope that the publication of my Case will not give any Offence, or be thought a Crime, but ra∣ther that my unhappy Circumstances may be commiserated that hath given any occasion for it. The heavy and black Clouds of Insamy, that like Death have hung over me, have made
my Life very uncomfortable, and I had rather not live, than live contemptible, and my Reputation being as dear and tender to me as my Life, I could not see it bleeding and at it's utmost extremity, without giving it this Relief, especially having so fair an Opportunity; and indeed, the late Wounds in it have struck so deep, that it has made me often wish, that my Life and that, had gone together, but God Almighty, who in his great Goodness, sees what is best and fittest for us, will I hope, in his good Time, deliver me out of all my Troubles: in the mean time, I humbly hope, that I shall have the kind Reader's charitable Thoughts, which to me will be like visiting the Distressed in Prison, for which every Person has undoubtedly a good Security of Reward. FINIS. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by John Whitlock near Stationers-Hall, 1695.
