p2308 99830334 34785
PROPOSALS FOR PRINTING A New Atlas. MOSES PITT of London, Bookseller, being Encouraged by His Most Sacred MAJESTY, His Royal Highness the Duke of YORK, his Highness Prince RUPERT, Both the Universities, the Royal Society, and divers others, the Nobility, Gentry, and Learned Men of this Nation, to undertake the Printing of an Accurate Description of the World; and resolving to proceed with all convenient diligence, for the more effectual carrying on thereof, maketh these following Offers. I. HE the said Moses Pitt having the advantage of making use of di∣vers Plates already Graven, but more especially of those of Janssons Atlas, doth design by renewing and regulating divers of them, and by adding many new Plates, together with new Descriptions throughout, to Print a compleat Collection or Maps, Tables, or Delineations of the Heavens, Earth, and Seas, with their several parts, in such manner, that all the Maps shall have the same situation of North and South; and all things shall be as exactly and particularly describ'd, as can be done by the help of all the Maps and Delineations already extant in Print, and of as many others as can be procured, of several things and places formerly but imperfectly describ'd; as also of divers late and new discoveries of parts heretofore unknown, or not taken notice of as yet in any Maps. II. To each of these Maps or Delineations he intends to add an Alphabet of all the places contain'd therein, with directions how to find them; as likewise an Explanation or History proper thereunto, in sheets by themselves, to be done by a Geographer approv'd by the persons hereafter mention'd to be the Directors of the whole Work.
III. He will Print the whole Work in as good Paper and Character as any of those already Printed by Blaeu, Jansson, Sanson, or any other. IV. Whereas the Atlases of Blaeu and Jansson are usually comprehended in Eleven Volumes in Folio, in all the Languages hitherto Printed; it is intended that this Atlas in the English Tongue, shall be printed in Eleven Volumes like∣wise, each Volume to be sold to the Subscriber at the rate of Forty shillings in Quires. But if those Gentlemen that are concern'd in the management of it, shall think fit to contrive it in fewer Volumes, it shall still be at the rate of Forty shillings a Volume; or if so many useful Maps can be pro∣cured, that they shall think fit to make it Twelve Volumes, it shall still be at no more then Forty shillings a Volume; and each Volume both in num∣ber of Maps and Descriptions, shall not consist of less than fifty-five sheet Maps and fifty-five printed sheets of Tables and Descriptions, one with the other, according to the judgment of the Directors. V. He doth also promise to deliver to the Subscribers the several Volumes as they shall be compleated and finished, they paying their Forty shillings at the time of their subscribing, which is to be before the four and twentieth day of July, 1678; Forty shillings more at the delivery of the first Volume, Forty shillings at the delivery of the second Volume, and the same sum to be paid upon delivery of all the other Volumes successively, only the two last to be deliver'd at twenty shillings a Volume; for which several sums aforesaid, the said Moses Pitt will give his Receipt under his own Hand and Seal, with two Witnesses thereunto, with an engagement to deliver to the Subscribers or their Assigns, at his Shop in St. Pauls Church-yard, they ma∣king good their Subscriptions, the several Volumes as they shall be printed, according to the plain meaning of these Proposals. VI. No Volume shall be sold singly to any Gentleman whatever, except the Subscribers, (by the Bookseller Moses Pitt) under Five and fifty shillings in Quires; neither shall any Volume be deliver'd to any person whatsoever, before all the Subscribers have theirs, provided they send for them within one Month after notice given in the Gazette of the finishing of every Volume. VII. The first Volume designed to begin withall, is that which contains the Maps of the Low Countries, and of the West part of Germany, which are the chief Seat of the present War, before which is to be added an Intro∣duction to Geography, such as shall be advised by the persons after-named, together with a Map of the Terrestrial Globe, and Maps of the greater Divisions or Parts of the Earth. This Volume is intended to be compleated before the four and twentieth of the next ensuing March. The next Volume design'd, is the rest of Germany, intended to be compleated within four months after the said four and twentieth day of March. The said time proportionably allow'd for the compleating of all the rest; Unless it be judged necessary by the Directors, that a longer time be allow'd for some of the Volumes. VIII. Whosoever shall subscribe for ten compleat Books, shall for the same price have eleven compleat Books in Quires deliver'd to him. IX. Because several Gentlemen do complain that they have been deceiv'd by several Proposers in this nature, therefore for the punctual performance of what is here undertaken, the Bookseller Moses Pitt, has already given sufficient Security to Sir Joseph Williamson, one of His Majesties Principal Secretaries of State, and President of the Royal Society, for performance of his Engage∣ment and Proposals. X. It is requested, that every Subscriber to this great Undertaking, would be pleased to set down the County and place of his Habitation, together with his name and directions how to send to him, to the end that notice may be given him according as the Work goes forward.
WHereas his most Sacred Majesty has been Graci∣ously pleased, for the promoting of this Design; to permit that his Collections of Maps and De∣scriptions of Countries may be perus'd, that such of them as have not yet been published, and are thought proper for this work, may be taken into it; and whereas his Royal High∣ness, and his Highness Prince Rupert, have been also pleased to promise the same favour; and the like has been done by the Right Honourable Sir Joseph Williamson, one of his Majesties prin∣cipal Secretaries of State, and President of the Royal Society, and also by the most learned Dr. Isaac Vossius, who is pleased to communicate his most copious and exquisite Collections, and it is hoped that the same will be done by several other persons of Honour and Quality: therefore it is humbly desir'd that all Gen∣tlemen, who have any particular Maps or Relations of new Dis∣coveries, or any more perfect descriptions of places already known, would be pleased to send the same to the said Moses Pitt, who will give sufficient security for the safe return of the same unprejudic'd, and if they shall be thought proper (by the Persons hereafter men∣tioned) to be inserted, he will take care that it shall be done, and that the obligation shall be thankfully acknowledged in such man∣ner as shall be to their own best satisfaction. May 3. 1678. WE whose names are here subscribed, not doubt∣ing but that this Work will be of great Use, and for the Honour of the Nation, and being de∣sired by Moses Pitt, to give him our Assistance, that he may be the better enabled to perform it, do promise that we will from time to time at spare hours, both give our Advice for the car∣rying on of the Work; and further, since he offers to refer himself to us in divers of his Proposals, we will observe how he makes them good, and give an Account thereof to Sir Joseph Williamson, President of the Royal Society, or to the President of the said Society for the time being, Chr. Wren. Isaac Vossius. John Pell. W. Lloyd. Tho. Gale. Rob. Hook.
UPon psing these preceding Proposals, we whose Names are underwritten, well approving and highly commending this Design of the said Moses Pitt, do for his en∣couragement not only subscribe our selves for one or more Copies of the said Book, but do also recommend so Noble and Useful a Design to the rest of the Nobility and Gentry throughout his Majesty's Dominions. His Majesty is pleased to Command, that one Copy of this Work be subscribed for, as for his Majesty, on His behalf, J. Williamson. His Royal Highness James Duke of York. His Highness Prince Rupert. AILESBƲRY. R. ARƲNDEL. ARRAN. John Arundell. Rich. Allestree. H. Aldridge. John Alport. E. Ashmole. Ph. Ayres. BRIDGWATER. BATHE. BƲRLINGTON. BERKELEY. BELASYSE. Rob. Boyle. Edward Backwell. Henry Baker. Ben. Baron. Tho. Barrow. Ra. Bathurst. Jo. Bemde. Franc. Bernard. Andrew Birch. Fra. Blake. William Blathwayt. Charles Blount. Tho. Boteler. Will. Boothby. Robert Brady. W. Bridgeman. Peter Brown. Gilb. Burnet. Edw. Byde. W. CANT. CARNARVEN. CLARENDON. CARDIGAN. JO. CHESTER. RAL. CHICHESTER. GEO. COVENTRY. CORNWALLIS. G. CARTERET. Hen. Capel. Hugh Cholmley. Thomas Clayton. Charles Cotterel. J. Chase. Hen. Clarke. John Collins. Edw. Conyers. John Corrance. Mar. Cottel. Edw. Cranfeild. DORSET. DEVONSHIRE. N. DƲRESME. DELAMER. Henry Dacres. Wroth Delamayne. Ra. Delaval. Th. Diodati. Henry Dodwell. Tho. Doughty. Jon. Dryden. RICH. EBOR. ESSEX. PETER ELY. THO. EXON. Rich. Everard. Laur. Eusden. FINCH. C. FAƲCONBERG. FRESCHEVILLE. Charles Feltham. John Fitz-Williams. Will. Franklin. CHA. GERARD. Will. Genew. Tho. Gill. Jo. Goad. W. Godolphin. HƲNTINGDON. HƲNSDON. HOLLES. C. Hatton. Theed. Haak. Tim. Harlon. Edward Haynes. John Herbert. A. Hill. Tho. Holbech. Will. Holder. Anth. Hornech. Harry Hyrne. Tho. Jeames. Will. Jane. KENT. H. LONDON. Edward Lake. James Langham. Rich. Lucas. K. Lucy. MANCHESTER. MƲLGRAVE. MAYNARD. R. Maiteland. Tho. Marshall. Jonas Moore. NORTHAMPTON. NEWPORT. And. Newport. Rich. Newman. Isaac Newton. OXFORD. JO. OXON. PETERBOROW. PERTH. JOS. PETERB. Tho. Page. S. Pepys. Walter Pope. Humphrey Prideaux. RIVERS. JOHN ROFFEN. SƲNDERLAND. SHAFTSBƲRY. SETH SARƲM. PAOLO SAROTTI. Charles Scarburgh. Geo. Seignior. Edw. Sherburn. Tho. Smith. Tho. Spratt. Henry Stafford. Edward Stillingfleet. Jon. Trelany. Will. Trumbull. Charles Trumbull. Francis Turner. Will. Turner. Tho. Turner. Stephen Ʋpman. Robert Vudal. WINCHESTER. WORCESTER. WINDESOR. WARD. CH. WOTTON. J. WILLIAMSON. Obad. Walker. John Wallis. Robert Wallis. Fr. Watson. Peter Wyche. WE whose Names are underwritten, do subscribe for  Book compleat, according to the true intent and meaning of these Proposals.
