P2317 13114285 97734
A SERMON Preach'd to the Artillery Company, AT St. MARY le BOW, Septemb. 11. 1677. And at their earnest desire PUBLISHED. By THOMAS PITTIS, D. D. One of his Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary. Mart. lib. 1. Epig. 3. I, fuge, sed pateras tutior esse domi. LONDON: Printed by J. D. for John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1677.
Imprimatur, G. Jane R. P. D. Episc. Lond. a Sacris Domest. Septemb. 18. 1678.
To the Honourable Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet; Lieutenant of his Majesties Tower of London; Alderman, and President of the Artillery Company. Sir Joseph Sheldon, Knight, and Alderman, Vice-President. Colonel John Mews Treasurer. As also to The Right Honourable Francis, Lord Viscount Newport, Baron of Erral, Treasurer of his Maje∣sties Houshold, and one of the Kings most Ho∣nourable Privy Council. Sir Joseph Williamson Kt. one of his Majesties Principal Secretaries of State. Stewards. Sir Francis Chaplain Kt. and Alderman, now Lord Major Elect. Knights, late She∣riffs of London. Sir John Peak, Sir Thomas Stamp, Samuel Pepys, Esq Richard Beckford, Esq Capt. Daniel Causton, AND To the whole Court of Assistants, Field-Officers, Captains, and Gentlemen, Professing and Exerci∣sing Arms in that Renowned and Honourable Society. Right Honourable, &c. YOU, that are advanced by your most Illu∣strious Leader, whom his Royal Highness vouchsafes to command, and condescends to be your Captain General, (whose early Prowess asto∣nish'd the World, and continued Victories have made
the Earth and the Sea shake; when his Friends were amazed at his Heroical Attempts, which at once awed and confounded his Enemies; to whom Courage and Conduct, both at Sea and Land, seem as natural as they have been familiar: His Name only is too au∣gust and awful to be mention'd in such a Dedication as this, to which common Custom has entitled many) may safely lay your Commands on me, who being always train'd to strict Obedience, cannot reject the Orders of my Superiors, without offering violence to my self. Though my Judgment therefore, in relation to my Dis∣course had before you, does not altogether correspond with yours, (especially as to the Publication) yet I am resolved to submit my Will, because it seems neither discreet nor safe for me to disoblige so Honourable a Society, in which every Commander has the skill of a General, and he that marches in the lowest place of Dignity among you,De Coronâ, cap. 11. De Idolola. cap. 19. understands Discipline sufficiently to Command. Though Tertullian, therefore, questi∣ons the Practice of Christians warring against others, not dreaming that they would Arm against themselves: And Arnobius vindicates our Saviours Innocence,Adver. Gent. lib. 2. whilst at the same time he evinces his Power, because he did not propagate his Doctrine by the Sword; did not beat out the Brains of Men, that he might put his Precepts into their Heads; Challeng'd not any Tem∣poral Authority, nor spread his Legions over the World
to dissolve the Peace of Humane Societies; as if, like Draco, he would write his Laws with Blood. And even to propagate our own Religion, we confess our Weapons must not be Carnal. Yet that Christians, not∣withstanding, upon other Accounts, did not conclude Wars unlawful, when, by assaulting others, they de∣fended themselves under the Command and Conduct of their Prince, appears by that Lightning Legion mentioned by Eusebius; who, being in Arms,Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 5. and be∣fore the Enemy, by their devout Prayers obtained Rain to refresh themselves, and Lightning from Heaven to discomfit their Adversaries, when the whole Host might otherwise have perish'd. And,Tertul. Apo. cap. 37. Eucher. E∣piscop. Lug∣dun. besides others interspers'd in the Army and Garisons, we know there was a The∣bean Legion, (as well as the former Melitin) all Christians, who became as Glorious and Renowned Martyrs, as they were Valiant and Victorious Soul∣diers; never before equall'd by any, nor probably will ever be again, considering their Cause, Number, and the Place to which they innocently retired; every one of which readily suffered a tame death from the hands of the Executioner, rather than either to Sacrifice to an Idol, or Rebel against their Lawful Sovereign. This following Discourse does therefore justifie De∣fensive Wars, when our own Prince calls us to our Arms; in which, as he is Judg of the Cause, so he becomes only responsible for it to him who is above the
Highest; and we that are Subjects escape Guilt, if we behave our selves with Faithfulness and Courage. Those that are mercenary under another, have their Case different; with which, my Discourse not medling, I shall have nothing to do in the Dedication. The Ser∣mon, perhaps, might make a rattle from the Pulpit, when assisted by the help of a good Sounding-Board, a swift Delivery, and your Commendations: But I fear, for all, t'will appear to be charg'd with white Powder only when coming from the Press, and not carry a good Report far: However, since your Com∣mands are that it must be printed, it becomes your own, and you are bound to defend it; for you having so dearly paid for it, I can no longer call it mine; Justice therefore presents it to you, from him who is Right Honourable, &c. Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant THO. PITTIS.
Luke 3.14. former part. And the Souldiers likewise de∣manded of him saying, And what shall we do? WHen the Watchman (like Ezekiel) is set upon the Tower,Ezek. 33. if he blow not Trumpet when he dis∣cerns the Sword coming, though the People die in their Iniquity, their Blood will be required at the Watchman's hand: But if he warn them to prepare for Battel, and they securely slight the Alarm, he delivers his own Soul from guilt, though they all perish by their careless inadvertency. Ha∣ving for this end therefore received our Orders, if we discharge our Duty with faithfulness and alacrity, we have a reward given us far above the merit of our Action, a Glorious Crown outweighing all intervening Difficulties; But
if we either desert our Station be∣fore we are reliev'd,Desertores, Seditisos, & Fu∣gitives, aut si loco, statime, vel praesidio cessent, tergave de s∣sent, aut è castris effugissent, tanquam p ssmo same ad∣strictos, capitali poena plectre selebant Alex. ab Ale. and Cenial. Di. lib. 2. cap. 13. our Superior Officer finds us sleeping, or the Enemy chance to make his Ap∣proaches, before we have given sufficient warning, we die then, without mercy, as those that have been unfaithful to their Trust, and betrayed our Fellow Souldiers to the Ad∣versary. Now because the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battel to the Strong, nor Favour always to Men of skill,Eccles. 9.11. (as the wise Man informs us). It was a pious use among some Philosophers to begin their Lectures, as well as end, with Prayer; and it was a custom among the Heathens,Mos ergo Ro∣manus erat, in∣structo a ato∣que exercitu, quum congre∣di acie parant, Deos primum consulere. Alex. ab Alex. Gen. Dier. l. 4. c. 7. be∣fore they went to encounter an Enemy, to make some Observations from the Heavens; as if the one could not instruct with success, unless they had the influence of a superior Being, nor the other Fight prosperously with their Ene∣mies, without the smiles and approbation of the Gods. And though this has been sometimes abused to more unworthy designs, when Men determined their own Resolutions, and then sought God to patronize their Villany; vow'd first, and then made enquiry, and a long Prayer
became the Prologue only to the devouring Widows Houses: Yet it well becomes the stoutest and most victorious Heroes to pray for success (when their Cause will bear it) before they attempt an Hazard and Encounter, that they may prepare themselves for another Life if the present should be lost; may deprecate Divine Wrath and Vengeance, that the Artil∣lery may not play upon them from Above, that the Stars may not fight against them, the Clouds of Heaven fall upon a Worm, and they may have no Enemy to encounter but the Men that are in Battalia before them. For Military Men, that are sweltered conti∣nually in Smoak and Darkness, dwell in the midst of Blood and Wounds, and bear their Lives continually in their Hands; that travel in the midst of Noise and Storm, and cannot have the advantage of very frequent Retire∣ments: that live always among the Dead, to whom the Graves are never shut, but, though glutted, gape for more; should especially be∣fore their Enterprize not forget their last En∣counter, that their Preparation may prevent a Surprize from Death, that it may not as∣sault them sleeping in their Trenches, and
possess them of eternal Misery before they are awake, to escape the Danger. When the Baptist therefore became the He∣rauld of the approaching Messiah, was com∣missioned to prepare for his Lords Reception, now laid his Ax to the Root of the Tree load∣ed with the Vices of Men, and preached the necessary Doctrine of Repentance: They that heard him, surprized vvith the unexpected ter∣ror of the Lord, that smote their Breasts like a Clap of Thunder, being vvilling to escape that Fire, vvhich vvithout altering their course of Life, should assuredly consume what it could not purifie; began to enquire how they might escape the Wrath to come: And whilst the Publicans and the People made their Ad∣dress to St. John for his Directions to order their Lives; the Souldiers also, (what-ever wick∣edness may be supposed to attend the Camp) though they might not fear the Fury of an Ene∣my, were loth to dwell with Everlasting Burnings, and therefore demanded of him, saying, What shall we do? This was then the Souldiers Question; and I doubt not but 'tis yours now: To answer therefore to your Demands, as well as the end
of your appearance here, that the Sword may not slash the Gown in pieces, nor the Priest refuse to instruct the Souldier when he seeks the Law at his Mouth, because he is the Mes∣senger of the Lord of Hosts; since we come not here to consecrate any Villanous De∣sign, to entitle God to the Works of the De∣vil, or to seal Conspiracy by a Sacrament; I shall in the handling these words, endeavour, 1. To view the Persons making the De∣mand. 2. Answer the Demand it self. First, For the Persons. These were Souldi∣ers, a Profession consequent to the Fall of Adam, and the distinction of Mens Properties in the World, almost as ancient as Humane Societies; without which, considering the depraved dis∣positions of Mankind, Prerogatives would be invaded by aspiring Men, Laws die for want of execution, the different Priviledges of Man∣kind would be confounded, and our Proper∣ties submit to every one that is either stronger or more subtil than our selves. Nor is this Pro∣fession more Ancient than Honourable, the De∣signs of it blazon the Glory of its Possessors, without any other Herauld but themselves, their
Employment being either to gain or secure Peace; They draw therefore their own Escutcheons with the Points of their Swords, their Hazards write their Names in Blood; they are entitled to Trophies by their Valour and Victories, and become a Root of Honour to Posterity. Nay the great Titles that now di∣stinguish the degrees of Men, were first drawn out of the Field, being there differenced by several Commands; and the honour of the Pike cannot be rendred less or new by that of the Gown, (and God forbid that any of us should fall out about it) since the Magistrate has his Sword too, and I hope he does not bear it in vain. But I must not here vindicate the Honour only, but the Lawfulness of this Profession too, when the Sword is not lifted up to Slay the Inno∣cent, nor used to Combate the Lord's Anointed. 'Tis true, indeed, the Christian Doctrine de∣signing an universal Peace on Earth, (though by accident sends a Sword) delivers nothing of the State of War; yet by its frequent allu∣sions to it, translating its Rules, Words of Command, and Names of Weapons into the use of Christians, and spiritualizing Warfare it
self, without rebuke or contradiction to the thing; It seems to be a reasonable Conclusion, that our Saviour left the determination of this to the common Custom and Justice of the World. And therefore the Answer of St. John Baptist, to the Demand made by the Souldi∣ers in my Text, neither rebukes, nor inveighs at their Profession, but gives them some short Rules how to behave themselves in that capaci∣ty; That they should not disturb their own Quarters, nor the Habitations of others, by either frightning or plundering the Innocent, but be contented with their fixed Allowance; to which must be added this too, That they must not Mutiny for want of Pay. Thus also when Cornelius (who was Commander of part of that which amongst the Romans was called the Italian-Band) was directed by an Angel to St. Peter, that this Apostle might inform him what he ought to do, (Acts 10.) He did not tell him, what he was once told himself,Mat. 26.22. They that use the Sword, shall perish by it; this being private and without Authority; nor advised him to lay down his Commission, but acquain∣ted him, That his Prayer was heard and his Alms had in remembrance before God; and immediately
preached the Gospel to him, with which it seems his Profession was consistent. Nay our most Blessed and Glorious Lord himself, when he had the opportunity of conversing with ano∣ther Captain, (Luke 7.) does not at all re∣prove his Calling, though he argued to Christs Authority from his own; but heal'd his Ser∣vant whose health he had petitioned, and dis∣miss'd him with this honourable Eulogy; I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel. Now though the Gospel is altogether silent as to the Case of Publick Wars, even whilst it prohibits private Revenge; because its Rules, if exactly followed, would certainly produce an Universal Peace: Yet Nature it self design∣ing Man's Defence, (though it sent him na∣ked into the World) by giving him reason to form Weapons by Art and Industry, when the Beasts are armed by their very shape and frame; And the Gospel no-where forbidding the lawful use of Arms; As in the case of pri∣vate Injuries we are directed to appeal to pub∣lick Wrath, (Rom. 12.19.) So in publick Mischiefs, when no satisfaction can be other∣wise obtained, it must be lawful for Sovereign Powers to endeavour to regain that by force,
which others have unjustly deprived them of, and to resist violence offered to them: Because all these being co-ordinate under God,Tertul. ad. Scap. cap. 2. and ac∣knowledging no Superior upon Earth, cannot make their Appeals for Justice against each other, and therefore would be left without means of Defence or Reparation, should they not repel one Force by another, where Laws are silent and cannot speak; or if they do, Obedience is refused: Without this then, they could neither protect others nor them∣selves; and for a Prince to be a Christian, would be, of all Men, to be most miserable. This the Primitive Converts to the Faith well knew, and therefore refused not to serve the Empe∣rors in their Wars, though they did to bow and sacrifice to their Idols, but flock'd to the Field in whole Legions, when their Sovereigns Ho∣nour or Safety was endanger'd: Nor are any now free from suspicion, who lay down their Arms in their Princes Cause, that they will not take them up in their own. But though Publick Wars appear lawful, when the Cause is just; yet Civil Wars, be∣twixt Prince and Subject, will alwayes be Cri∣minal on the Subjects part. For the Prince be∣ing
in lawful Possession, will be the Defender, and the People Aggressors, unless we are able to justifie Rebellion,Vid. Tertul. Apol. cap. 31, 32, &c. and lift up our hands against the Lord's Anointed, with a better shew of Ar∣gument and Reason, than because it has been done, or designing Men put it into our power: Such insinuations as Liberty of Conscience,Ambros. O∣rat. contra Auxentium. and Priviledg of the Subject, when there is no unjust invasion of either, are stale and fulsome; the Design is smelt, like Gunpowder, at a di∣stance; nor can we now so easily be cheated into our own ruine, to satisfie the Malice, Ava∣rice, or Ambition of a few: And certainly we must be infatuated or bewitch'd, if we are twice in the same Age vanquished by one little Stratagem. Our Wounds are yet fresh and reeking; and though the Blood be stopp'd, and the Gash skin'd over, the Scar remains: But Charity, which has covered a multitude of Sins, should blot this out of our Memories, would others do the same from their Attempts and Writings. But alas! we are forced sadly to remember, when Iniquity was established by a Law, and Men among us like those fran∣tick Ephesians, in the celebration of their , beat out the Brains of all they met
with in honour to their Gods, when Clouds and Darkness overspread our Habitations, as if Damnation had been brought upon this other World. We have seen a Church (like Noah's Ark) swimming in the midst of Waves and Tempest; viewed the Heavens covered with Smoak, and our selves amazed in the midst of Thunder; our whole Land turned into an Aetna, and the adjacent Islands into Vulcanellaes, belching Fire and Brimstone upon themselves, as if the great Conflagration were come, and the surrounding Sea had been to be absorped in Flame: nay, the Throne it self floating in the Monarch's Gore. May our Joys never more be sullied with such dismal Prospects as these. May the Stars ne'r forsake the Pilot, nor the Sun be rob'd of its Light or Influence.Exod. 7. &c. May the Plagues of Egypt never reach our Habitations, where Darkness was thick enough to be felt; where Rivers of Wa∣ter were turned into Blood, and Lice brought into all their Quarters. May the Power of Frogs never be seen, nor they croak in our Bed-chambers; the itch of Novelty never seize us, more venomous than the Boyls of Egypt; nor the place on which now I stand ever-more
undermine it self: Let Hail and Thunder ne∣ver be parallel'd with Powder and Bullet, and Mouth-Granadoes more killing than all: May the Locusts never appear in Armies to eat up all the Grass in the Land, nor any Home-bred or Forreign Enemies sweep away our Beasts fa∣ster than the Murrain: May the Parallel never more run to the Jewels and Ear-rings, nor our Houses be like to those of the Egyptians, in each Family to have one dead. May the King's Throne be established in Peace; our Religion safe under the Conduct of Divine Providence; our Laws never be mute or silenc'd, our Pro∣perties secured, and our Estates increase; this City become the Admiration, though not the Envy of the World; and you still remain our Guard, that we may never more be made like a gentle Beast ready sadled for the next that will ride us. And thus I pass from the Souldi∣ers Profession. Secondly, To their Religious Demand, What shall we do? In Answer to this, The Baptist's return must not only limit my Discourse, because I speak not only to Souldiers, under that Appellation, but to such as are Christians too. And certainly
Religion, though it softens Mens Manners, cannot be thought to make their Heads so, nor to degrade the true Valour of Men into the cowardise and effeminacy of a Woman: For though it molifies Beastial and Savage Natures, yet it does not abate the Courage of Mankind, but advances it under the Conduct of Pru∣dence, heightens Valour, by directing it to its proper Object; enlarges the Christian Souldi∣ers Fortitude, by propounding strong Argu∣ments to incourage it, and makes their Vertue look like it self. For (1.) it discovers to Men the vanity and transitoriness of this lower World, for the sake of which they are so loth to part with their lives. (2.) It enables them to run through Dif∣ficulties and Hazards, by injoyning Mortifica∣tions and Austerities to themselves; enduring Hardship, as good Souldiers of Jesus Christ, pre∣pares them for the troubles of a Temporal War∣fare; gives them Patience to bear, and Courage to overcome all their Misery. (3.) It gives them sufficient hopes of God's assistance in all their lawful, though difficult, Encounters: for he, gi∣ving his Spirit to them that ask him, entitles them to Omnipotence it self. (4.) It assures
them of the Pardon of their Sins, the want of which makes Men Cowards, and afraid to die. (5.) It promises a future Life after this is ended, of which Men have an invincible evidence in the Resurrection of our Saviour. This will make them (like the Ancient Martyrs) stand as if their Bodies were impenitrable, look the stoutest Enemies in the face, bear up against the Shock and Fury of an Adversary, whilst they view their Bodies only as the outward Gar∣ments of their Minds, which they may lay aside without losing: Every Wound makes but a new breathing-place for their Souls, which coveting Enlargement, through these holes, endeavour to make their passage to it. The veiw of Immor∣tality causes great Minds to scorn the Advanta∣ges of this Life, wish for their Translation, and despise all the Terrors of Death. And lastly, (to name no more) Religion makes Men more obedient to their Commanders, and orderly in their deportment; by teaching them to be sub∣ject for Conscience-sake, to mind that Rank in which they stand, and not to intrench on the Authority of others; to be sober and tempe∣rate, that they may be fit to Watch or Fight; and to be diligent and faithful in their Place and
Station, that they may with resolution either withstand or assault an Enemy. And now, to answer the Souldiers Demand, (What shall we do?) will not be difficult, since, in a word, it is to believe what the Captain of your Salvation has said or done upon the Au∣thority of his Divine Revelation; and to live sutable to your Profession; which is to intitle your selves to his Favour, and Reward, by per∣forming the general Condition of the Gospel. But since I speak to Persons that are engaged to Fight under the Banner of their Temporal Prince, as well as that of their Lord and Savi∣our; since the Directions left in Sacred Writ are there exhibited in Martial Terms, it may perhaps be more acceptable to you, if I deliver them in such too; that Divine Truths may pass securely when clad in Armour, distinguished by the same Colours with your selves, and having your own proper Shibboleth, may rest in the same Camp with you. First then; You must not at any time List your selves under a pretended Officer that has not a lawful Commission; for all these must derive their Authority from the Great Prince and Captain of your Salvation, to whom you
have vowed Duty and Allegiance: If there∣fore you submit to the Conduct of any that does not from hence fetch his Power, you are no longer under our Saviour's Banner, but Combate under another Ensign, what Colours soever they pretend to Display; And then you are sure, when taken, (as you cannot escape) to be punished as Desertors, being notorious Re∣negadoes from your Cause and Interest. He that is not with me, says Christ, is against me; and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth, (Luk. 11.23.). We read of Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites in the Gospel, who compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte; but when he is gained, they make him more the Child of Hell than them∣selves, Mat. 23.15. And 'tis predicted by our Saviour, (though this did not influence the Men, but they the Prediction) That there shall arise false Christs, and Prophets, working Wonders in confirmation of their Authority, insinuating their Doctrines with such specious Shews, and subtil Arguments, that (if it were possible) they will deceive the Elect: But when they say unto you, Behold! be is in the Desart go not forth: Behold! he is in the secret Chambers, believe it n t, Mat. 24.24, 26. Such are those false Teachers
mentioned by St. Peter,1 Pet. 2.1. who bring in damnable He∣resies, denying the Lord that bought them.1 Tim. 3.6. And these are they (says St. Paul also) who creep into Houses, and lead silly Women captive, laden with sins, led away by divers Lusts. Such are not to be complied with, but resisted; we must abominate them as St. John did Cerinthus, St. Paul the Gnosticks, Atha∣nasius the Arrians, or St. Cyprian did Novatian. For as the Promises of the Gospel are only made to the True Church; so that cannot well be a Church, in which there is no lawful Ministry; As an Army is but a Rout of Men, without Dis∣cipline, when they are not put in Order by such as have Authority to command them. Secondly; You must lay aside all your Incum∣brances, those Impedimenta Militiae,2 Tim. 2.4. that weary the Christian Souldier in his March, and hinder his Activity in all his Encounters:Heb. 12.1. Let us lay aside every Weight, (saith St. Paul) and the Sin which doth so easily beset us: All filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, says St. James:Jam. 1.21. We must leave our sinful Passions and Vices behind us, if we will press forward for the prize of our high Calling; and the pomps and vanities of a phantastick World must be first blown off like loose Corns, before we Discharge at Principalities and Powers, and
Attaque those Spiritual Wickednesses, who being posted in high Places, have already gain'd the ad∣vantage of the Ground: All softness and effe∣minacy must be abandoned, and we must first shake off Youthful Lusts,2 Tim. 2.22. if we intend to encounter more rugged Enemies: These do as much mis∣chief in a Christian's Warfare, as Women and Children in a Camp, devour the Provision, but make their Relations lose the Field. A tender Man, that can only sleep upon a soft Pillow, cannot rest when he exchanges it for a Stone; and he that lies always upon a Down-Bed, with warm Curtains drawn about him, will take cold when he rests only on a Turf of Earth, and has nothing over him but the Canopy of Heaven, and be utterly disabled to fight an Enemy: though he may appear in a Slash'd Doublet, he'l endeavour to sleep in a whole Skin; and will suffer no more Inconveniencies for Religion, than he will Wounds for his own Country. Thirdly; You must not forget to put on your Armour. The last thing a Souldier parts with is his Sword, nor is he dressed till he is girded to it. In times of Difficulty he sleeps in Armour, and in the intervals of Danger (though he may
put it off, yet) he keeps it in his view and power: Hence is that direction of St. Paul, Wherefore, take unto you the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil Day; and, having over∣come all to stand, (Ephes. 6.13.) Nothing then remains after the Victory, but to keep the Field, which is the Signal of the Conquest; to secure what you have now gain'd; behold with joy the Salvation of God, and to put on your Eter∣nal Crowns. Now what those particular pieces of Ar∣mour are, by which Christians encounter with success, the Apostle also directs to, as a most Faithful and Generous Commander. (1.) Truth girt about your Loins, that you be not betray'd by false Insinuations. Possess your selves of all the saving Doctrine of the Gospel, that no Heresie may be able to oppose the Di∣vine Sentiments of your Minds: And let this claspe close about you, that so, like the Ancient Military Girdle, it may fix and fasten your other Armour, that it may keep in your Bodies that they may not swell with Lust or Intemperance, but make them subservient to your Minds, and the uses of Religion; and that it may knit and fortifie your Loins, that you may be prepa∣red,
and strong, for Battel. 2. You must also take Righteousness for your Breast-plate; Obedience to the Orders of your Supream Commander, when conveighed to you by intermediate Officers. And here your Exercise must be sincere, and according to the utmost of your Power, Universal. This will guard you from any inordinate Fears and An∣guish in your Minds, and mortal Wounds from the assaults of Sin. (3.) You must put Shooes upon your Feet, as being ready for March or Battel; Peace with∣in your selves, and Charity to others; that Of∣fences from without may not scandalize you, and like sharp Stones grieving the bare Feet of a Traveller, wrench your Joynts, or cause you to desist from your Enterprize, that you may run on with fury upon your Enemies, when your Feet are thus securely shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace. (4.) You must take the Shield of Faith; a firm Belief possessing your Minds, both of the Promises and Threats of Heaven; and this will quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked. This lifts the Soul above Difficulties, makes it con∣quer in the midst of Thunder; and though
this may roul up and down the Clouds, our Faith arms us against its Power, and makes it break under our Feet: The belief of the Pro∣mises will excite our Endeavours fully to pos∣sess them, and an assurance that God's Threats are infallible, will make us diligent and vigi∣lant to avoid them: This will help us to Con∣quer this World, whilst it reaches to us the Glo∣ries of the next. (5.) You must assume the Helmet of Salvati∣on, which is the Confidence and Hope of it: This, like an Helmet, will bear off the Blows of our Enemies, that we may put to flight the Armies of the Aliens, those Forreign Lusts which War against our Souls; Keeps us free from Fearfulness or Despair, and makes us perse∣vere unto the end, in hope of that Immortal Crown which hangs in our view if we believe and expect; and shall certainly at last be in our Possession, if we are not weary and faint in our Minds.
(6.) You must take the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God; which teaches us to possess our selves of the Weapons of our Adversa∣ries, and both to handle and secure our own: It discovers the Force and Stratagems of our Enemies, and no Ambush can be so closely laid to offer us any Injury in our Marches, if we fix our Designs by these Rules: We can with ease withstand Assailants, when we re∣ceive them with a scriptum est, and draw Di∣rections and Arguments from Sacred Writ to obviate the Subtilty or Storm of Temptati∣on. Now lest, thus accoutred, we should go forth and fight in our own Strength, and, like the Wicked, rage and be confident; we must add to all Watchfulness and Prayer: Vigilance that we are not taken by surprize, and thus made Prisoners of War; and Prayer too, that the Lord of Hosts may joyn in the Encoun∣ter, deaden all the Bullets of our Enemies, and add a greater Power to our own. And now, that our Armour is thus fixed, we must prepare and make ready for the Bat∣tel: The Drums beat, and the Trumpets sound, and every Man must hasten to his Co∣lours, and put himself into his Rank and Or∣der; The World and the Flesh are Confede∣rates with the Devil, to Conquer and Lead you away in Triumph, and their Vanguard begins to appear. Remember therefore the Obliga∣tions
of your Baptism,De Sacra∣mento Mili∣tari apud. Rom. Mace∣don. Lacede∣mon, &c. Vid. Alex. ab A∣lex. Gen. dier. lib. 1. cap. 20. Tertul. de Coronâ Mil. cap. 3. & de Spectac. c. 4. that Sacramentum Mili∣tare, by which (as the Romans in their Oath) you are engaged to fight the Battels of your Leader; to withstand all the Temptations of the Devil, abandon all the Lusts of the Flesh, and defie the Pomps and Allurements of the World: Remember those that have gone be∣fore you, who through Faith and Patience in∣herit the Promises; especially our Supream Lord himself, who calls to you as Julius Caesar was wont to his Souldiers, not go yonder, but come hither and make your selves Partners in the Victory: He himself has set you an Ex∣ample, engaged you by immense Issues of his Love, and is gone to prepare Crowns for you, if you remain faithful to the Death. What he commands is highly reasonable, ten∣ding to the perfection of your Natures, and Godliness, gives you the Advantages of this Life, and the Glory also of that which is to come. Pluck up therefore your Courage and Resolution; Let Cowardise and Fear be a∣shamed, and sneak, and not appear in a day of Battel. For as a small Levite, of mean Parts and Spirit, is fit only to carry Wisps of Hay to feed Calves at Dan and Bethel; but has
not courage enough to slay a Sacrifice, nor knows he how to offer it to the God of Israel: So if you do not abandon your Fears, your Adversaries will easily win the Field, and make you turn back in the day of Battel, though you are harness'd and carry Bows, are furnish'd with Arms to assault your Adversa∣ries, and defend your Selves: Resolve then either to secure your Bucklers, or (as the man∣ner was) to be brought back upon them; to endure any Hardships and Difficulties, rather than to give ground or quit the Field: 'Tis not enough to boast and ruffle when you put on your Armour, unless your Courage maintains your Honour, till you come at last to put it off. For a Hectoring Coward is but like an Hare in an Helmet, or an Hog in Armour; the one may Snuff and Grunt at a Storm, but he lies down and sleeps in it: and the other may make a frightful Appearance, but runs present∣ly before the Face of his Enemy. A few Cowards are enough to disorder a whole Army; their fear makes them full of mistakes, they will create Light in the midst of Darkness, and take the Sparks in their own Eyes, for Fires in the Camp of the Enemy; and if they are
prevailed upon to fight, they strike winking, and like the old , ventilate only, and beat the Air, or fall upon their Friends, and disorder the Host. Carnal Fear therefore must have no place in the Christian Camp. But yet our Courage must not advance to Rashness. This creates Zeal in Religion with∣out Knowledg, and that will flame so furi∣ously, that it will not kindle only, but burn up Devotion, consume the Sacrifice, and the Altar too. Such a Man being cloathed in Fire, belches Flame, and speaks Thunder: But though (like the Horse in Job) he smells the Battel afar off,Job 39. and laughs among the Trum∣pets; yet both equally distinguish the Sound and the Enemy; only the Horse is capable of better management, being to be held in with Bit and Bridle; but the Zealot being blind, (though he does not know it) lays about him without discretion, whilst Chance only di∣rects him to that which he encounters. This makes him often assault Christianity with its own Weapons, fight against our Saviour under his own Banner; and whilst he thinks to win Heaven by Storm, he makes the Kingdom suffer violence, and endeavours to force it without a
Metaphor. Such a Man will kill the Apo∣stles, to do God Service; refuse his Worship, to avoid Superstition; and rob the Church, to escape Sacriledg. No Bowls are so pleasant to Carouse in as those of the Temple,Dan. 5.3. if Bel∣shazzar has once the possession of them; nor is any Estate so desirable as Glebe-Lands to the Furious or Prophane; the tenth Sheaf shall then make the fairest Bread, and the best Barn to lodg it in, shall be a Temple desecrated by such a bold prophanation. The Christian Soul∣dier must take his Directions therefore from his Officers, and duly observe his Rank and Order; not invade the Station of his Superi∣or, nor desert his own: For where there is not this distinction it is not Order, but Confusi∣on; the Pulpit will there be made a Drum, and this turn'd into a Pulpit. He therefore that does not observe his Place, is not capable of Military Conduct; for an Army must be under exact Discipline, and the first thing a Souldier must be taught, is how to obey: And when you have thoroughly learn'd this, you must be used to frequent Exercise, that you may know how to handle your Arms, be more expert in receiving and obeying all words
words of Command, and encounter your Enemies in any Figure you shall be cast into: For Habits are acquired by frequent Acts; which, once obtained, become easie and plea∣sant to you. But above all,John 15.17. John 17.11. Phil. 2.1, 2. Ephes. 4.2, 3, &c. you must be at unity among your selves; and there is nothing in all Christi∣an Religion, to which Men are more frequent∣ly and pathetically exhorted: This Cements the Church of God,1 Cor. 10.17. which the Lord's Supper both represents and increases. If an Army once break their Ranks, they make a Gap to receive the Enemy, who soon spies such an Advantage to break and rout the main Bo∣dy. And if Christians, by differences among themselves, refuse to stand by, and assist each other; leave their Station,1 Cor. 12. ch. and invade each others Rights and Office; Satan, being the Prince of the Air, presently plays upon them from on High; and having cantoniz'd those that were before united, crumbles them in∣to Faction and Divisions,Gal. 5.15. and makes the Church fight against it self, that joyning his Forces with one Party, he may increase the Schism, till he has destroyed another, and weakned all: And if those that remain yet un∣divided
do not make good their Front against him, by filling up the Places of the Dead; His Name is Legion,Mark 5.9. and he will pour down his Troops upon us, 'till we are put into an eternal Confusion, and routed beyond the pos∣sibility of a Rally. For what countenance can we expect from him that is Defender of the Faith, if we raise Disturbances by our Divisions? Nay what Protection from God himself, when instead of opposing the Common Adversary, we run upon each other, and destroy our selves, and fly the Methods of Divine Providence?Prov. 19.3. And our Religion is now so interwoven with the Concernments of the State, that we can hardly disjoynt the one without endan∣gering, if not ruining the other; and God and the King become either our joint Ene∣mies, or Friends. To make Christianity, then, tilt against it self, and by this to raise Intestine Divisions, is to run our selves on the Points of Swords, antedate all the Misery we fear, provoke and dare the Violence of others, and draw Blood from our Persecu∣tors Heads upon our own: Whilst we pre∣tend to light our Matches at the Stars, if we
thus make Thrones uneasie, we do it at the Flames of Hell, that we may discharge Fire and Brimstone into the World. Instead of this therefore, let us incourage one another to Love, and to good Works,Heb. 10.24. and fight the good Fight of Faith,1 Tim. 6.12. that prostrates our Enemies, and lays them at our Feet;1 John 5.4. mor∣tifie all our reigning Sins,Col. 3.5. and persevere in all the Duties of Religion,Col. 1.23. that we may lay hold of Eternal Life; and,Rom. 8.37. through Jesus Christ, be more than Conquerors. For inward Guilt will make our Musquets recoil upon our selves, our Swords turn their Points upon our Bosoms; and when we are called to Fight the Battels of our Sovereign, we shall sheath them with such trembling Hands in the Bow∣els of our Adversaries, that we shall give them time to make a Pass at our own. Let us therefore, whilst we engage our Enemies, first make Friends with our selves, and then contend with Faithfulness and Courage, that no Fear may cause us to give back, nor any Hypocrisie make us Treacherous; We other∣wise bussle and fight for Satan in the Name of God; and instead of Kindling our Sa∣crifice
with Coals from the Altar, we burn it in the Flames of Hell. Finally, that you may know how to use; as well as gain, a Victory, you must not swell and be puffed up with your Successes;Luke 18.11, 14. for this is so far from being an Argument that you grow in Grace, that you have drunk Poison, and are even blown up by the Devil: The Christian Souldier must be the more humble and modest, by how much the more he is Victorious: This is the way to possess your Conquests, and your selves too; and whilst ye thus demean your selves, you still go on to compleat your Tryumphs. You can ne∣ver be secure in this World, but your whole Lives are a continued Warfare; the Enemy will Assault where he cannot Conquer,Ephes. 6.12. and will trouble those whom he cannot overcome: He will rise again after he is slain, and endea∣vour to get Dominion over us, even when we have him under our Feet; and is always like a Roaring Lion,1 Pet. 5.8. Mark 13.37. seeking whom he may de∣vour. Be watchful therefore, and always upon your Guard;1 Cor. 10.12. and let him that standeth, take heed lest he fall, that when he has over∣power'd one Temptation, another may not
overcome him.Val. Max. lib. 9. cap. 1. Sen. Epist. 51. ad Lucil. Cyprian. passim de Lapsis, & in Epist. Hannibal was vanquished by the Delicacies of Capua, after he had conquer'd the Roman Army; and some were found a∣mongst the Lapsi, after they had confess'd Christ in a Prison. And if we too having begun in the Spirit end in the Flesh, our sensual Plea∣sures having bauk'd our Progress, and weakned our Resolutions,Ezek. 18.24. stain all the Christians former Victories; Though he has contended earnestly for the Faith, and kept it safe amongst Earth∣quakes and Storms; yet, if after all (like the Ancient Romans in times of Peace) he grow luxurious, and lies down playing in the Sun, he will not only discolour his Beauty, but stain the Glory of former Actions, whilst every lit∣tle Vermin will assault him.Judg. 15.15 Sampson who slew a thousand Men with that uncouth and Enthu∣siastick Weapon, the Jaw Bone of an Afs, was yet weakned by the Embraces of a Wo∣man; and though he brake all the Bands of the Philistins, was so hampered in the Locks of his Mistress, that he lost his own;Judg. 16.19 and with these his Strength departed from him, till he, became a Vassal and Scorn to his Enemies, be∣ing first a Slave to his own Prisoners, when his Reason yielded to his Affections: Take heed
therefore, least after God has brought you out of the Land of Egypt, you tempt him in the Wilderness;Heb. 3.12. and (as the Apostle applys it) that there be not in you an evil Heart of unbelief, in departing from the Living God; but exhort one ano∣ther daily, whilst the state of your Tryal lasts, lest any of you be hardned through the deceitfulness of Sin; that having subdued your Enemies in the World, you may at last triumph over Death too, through him who died and rose again, Jesus Christ the Righteous; To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, be all Glory, Power, and Adorati∣on, now and for ever. Amen. FINIS.
