P2779 12758182 93459
ENGLAND AND EAST-INDIA Inconsistent in Their Manufactures. BEING AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE, INTITULED, An Essay on the East-India Trade. By the Author of, The Essay of Wayes and Means. London, Printed in the Year, 1697.
Some Considerations upon Reading a Treatise, Intituled, An Essay on the East-India Trade. By the Author of the Essay on Wayes and Means. THE many Objections formerly made against the East-India Trade, be∣cause was carried on by the Expor∣tation of our Coyn or Bullion, and by the Importation of Manufactured Goods and Toyes, were usually answered by the Ad∣vocates for that Trade, that such Goods could not be injurious, because were not spent in England, but Transported to Fo∣reign Markets, and thereby occasioned the Importation of more Bullion than ever was Exported: But the Truth (which was for∣merly denyed) being now owned by this Treatise, that one half of the said Goods are consumed at Home, and that those Ma∣nufactured Goods do hinder the Consump∣tion of what are Fabrickt by our own Peo∣ple.
The Landed Men have now Reason to conclude, that they are more concern'd in this Contest, than the Weavers, as well for their particular Interest as the publick good: And therefore the Considerations here Offered are thought necessary, that these new Maxims and Arguments may be Examined; because the Rents of Land as well as Preservation of our Coyn, Con∣sumption of our Manufactures, and the Im∣ployment of our People, doth much depend upon what Resolutions may be taken for the settling of this Trade. The General Notions about Trade from Page the First to Page the Eleventh are post∣poned, to be considered at the end of this Treatise. Page the Twelfth asserts, 1. That the East-India Trade is beneficial to England. 2. That to Prohibit the Wearing of India Wrought Silks, Bengals, &c. will be destru∣ctive to the Trade of England. To justifie the first Proposition, it is said, That we Export but 400000 l. per Annum, of which ⅛ to ¼ is in our Home made Goods, and that the produce of 200000 l. brought home and spent in England, being the one half, yields us 800000 l. and
the produce of the other 200000 l. being in Goods sent Abroad to Foreign Markets, yields us another sum of 800000 l.: And therefore that England gains by this Trade 1200000 l. per Annum clear. Page 16, 53. Instead of offering Vouchers to prove this Accompt, it is said, That it must be clear Gains, because the half spent in Eng∣land prevents the Exportation of treble that sum in Money, which would otherwayes be carried out for the purchasing of Silks and Linnens in Foreign Parts, and that the other half must be clear Gains, because no one versed in Merchandize will deny it. Page 16. And for a further confirmation, the Au∣thor tells us Page 17, That he hath cogent Reasons to believe this Nation did increase in Riches from Anno 1656 to Anno 1688, 2 Millions per Annum; and that after much study and thought did find, that the said increase did arise 900000 l. by our Planta∣tion Trades, 500000 l. by our Products and Manufactures, and 600000 l. from the East-India Trade; which we must believe, be∣cause he saith the matter is not capable of any clear demonstration to the contrary. Page 18. It is thought convenient to answer this Accompt with an Accompt much different, and yet probably as true, viz. That there
hath been Exported for India Annually ever since Anno 1673. when the Trade in Manu∣factured Goods from thence begun first to increase till Anno 1690, about 600000 l. per Annum in Bullion by the Company, Private Traders or Interlopers, from England or Spain, and that the Goods brought from thence never brought back into England, nor saved the going out of 200000 l. per Annum in Bullion: And therefore that this Trade, instead of being profitable to us, hath exhausted about 400000 l. per Annum of our Treasure, and done us much Mis∣chief by the Importation of such Goods; and that our Riches have not Increased ever since Anno 1666, but have Annually De∣creased very much by Trade. But before any Argument should be en∣ter'd upon, which of these Accompts is most Justifiable, 'tis requisite to agree upon matter of Fact and Principles, particularly what may properly be called the Riches or Treasure of a Nation? Or what may be esteemed the most Useful, after what is ab∣solutely Necessary, to supply the Necessi∣ties of Nature? Some being of Opinion that nothing doth deserve that Name, or to be so esteemed, but Gold and Silver; be∣cause no other Metal is so lasting and dura∣ble, or so fit to receive the Royal Stamp,
nor to be ascertained in Value, and divided into several Denominations, nor so conve∣nient to pay Fleets and Armies; and be∣cause hath a general esteem in all parts of Europe, as fit for such uses, and to be the Standard for the carrying on of Commerce, and to be Barter'd off for all other Commo∣dities. That Jewels, Lead, Tin or Iron, though durable, yet having not those other quali∣fications, do not so well deserve to be esteemed Treasure. That Silks, Woollen Goods, Wines, &c. may be esteemed Riches between Man and Man, because may be converted into Gold and Silver, yet do not deserve to be esteem∣ed the Riches of the Nation, till by Expor∣tation to Foreign Countries are converted into Gold and Silver, and that brought hi∣ther, because are subject to corruption, and in a short course of Years will consume to nothing, and then of no value. This being stated, if agreed, whoever will undertake to make out, that we have either by the East-India Trade gained 1200000 l. per Annum, as asserted, Page 15, 16. Or that the Nation did increase in Riches from Anno 1656 to Anno 1688, two Millions per Annum, must make out that so much was Imported in Bullion, over and
above what was Exported: Which is so sar from being generally believed, that many are of opinion, we have had our Treasure Annually exhausted ever since 1666, not only by the East-India Trade, but also by the great Exportation of our Coyn to the Northern Kingdoms to purchase Naval Stores, and Deals, Timber and Iron, used in the Rebuilding of London, and a greater number of Houses since erected elsewhere, and to other places and Countries for sup∣plying the many losses of Goods that were burnt by the Fire, or spoiled in removing, for the purchasing of Foreign Commodities for the furnishing of the new built Houses, and to carry on the French Trade. From Anno 1656 to 1688 is 32 Years, which at 2 Millions per Annum is 64 Mil∣lions. All that remember how plenty Mo∣ney was in this Nation Anno 1656, may find reason to conclude that we have not now in the Nation as much Gold and Silver as we had then. So that either the 64 Mil∣lions hath been spent since 1688, (which no Man can believe) or else was never gotten; which is most likely to be true: Because, according to the best computation that can be made, it is concluded there hath not been Imported into Europe from Africa and Ame∣rica (from whence only any quantity of
Gold and Silver comes) since the Year 1656, much above 2 Millions per Annum, and it cannot well be imagined that we have got all to our shares: But if the Author had spent more thoughts, and study, to have found out where the 64 Millions he men∣tions to be gotten, are now to be found, would have done the Nation a great kind∣ness at this time. In justification of what hath been said, that we lose by the East-India Trade, as it hath of late Years been managed, these particulars are offered. 1. That it appears by the Custom-House Books, that there was Enter'd in the Com∣panies Name, Shipt out from Anno 1675 to Anno 1685, above 4 Millions, which is a∣bove 400000 l. per Annum: And though it be difficult to make out exactly what was carried out, those Years, by Interlopers or particular Persons from England and Spain, to carry on Private Trade, yet it may be computed at 200000 l. per Annum. 2. Of the Goods brought from India and Exported, it doth not appear by such Ob∣servations and Estimates that have been made, that 200000 l. worth per Annum were ever Exported to Spain, or any Coun∣try from whence we usually Import Bul∣lion.
3. That from France, Holland, Turky, Italy, no returns usually come in Bullion; what being brought in from Holland against any Sale, usually going out again by the Course of Trade, seldom stayes long, be∣cause it is not supposed the ballance of that Trade hath for many years stood long in our favour, nor till we apply our selves more to good Husbandry in the Consump∣tion of Foreign Commodities, can well be expected ever will. 4. That no rational account can be given of any Gold and Silver imported into this Kingdom to continue here, but what comes from Africa, Spain, and formerly Portugal, and some small Parcels sometimes from Jamaica, and that from all those places we seldom have imported according to the best Calculations above 600000 l. communibus annis for 30 years last past, and if ⅓ of that be allowed to be for East-India Goods, it is the most that can well be reckoned; and that whatever we have Exported more in Bullion annually hath been lost by that Trade; for what comes back in Goods to be consumed here, makes us no amends for the Treasure Exported, and Trades that cannot be ballanced with our own Products, ought to be rectified some other way, and not by sending our Money to India to buy Goods for that purpose.
Till these Objections be removed, we must be very credulous if we believe that the India Goods Exported bring us back as much Treasure, as that Trade carries from us in Bullion, and if not brought in by the Goods sold abroad, cannot possibly be brought in by the other half of those Goods spent at home. But to salve that, it is ar∣gued in this Treatise, that nothing can be a clearer Gain than 600000 l. per Annum by the Goods spent at home, because so much would otherwayes have been Exported to purchase Foreign Silks and Linnens. But this Argument will appear to have no ground if our Course of Trade in Silks and Linnens from the European Nations be look't into, and how and for what uses those Silks and Linnens, and these from India are consumed, that will make it plainly appear that these Goods from India do us no such Service, and are so far from being a clear gains, upon any such Account, that do not save us any thing material, but are pernicious in the highest degree. It is well known by all Traders, that the Silks imported from France were most Lustrings and Alamodes which have been computed to amount to 400000 l. per An∣num, what other Silks came thence, were esteemed for their being of some new fashi∣on,
and were usually high prized Rich Silks. The promoting of the Lustring Com∣pany to Manufacture Lustrings and Ala∣modes here, and incouragement to our Weavers to make such Rich Silks may pre∣vent their coming from France, but which sort of these Silks from India are spent in the room of Alamodes or Lustrings or of any other Silks, that did usually come from France, is unknown to those skilled in that Trade. The Silks that usually came from Holland were Velvets, Alamodes and Lustrings; and from Italy, Velvets, Da∣masks and Taffaties; though it be not doubted but the Silks from India do hinder the Consumption of some Damasks, Taffa∣ties and Sarsenets, yet being those were all, or most, purchased by the Products of our Ma∣nufactures, we had better have them, then send our Money to the Indies to purchase these. Diaper, Dowlas, Canvas and Lockrams, which were four sorts of Cloth that com∣posed the vast quantity of Linnens formerly imported from France, which as well as other Linnens taken from Hamburgh, Germany, &c. were most used for Sheeting, Shifting, Ta∣bling, and such other uses in Families as have not hitherto, nor is it likely will ever be sup∣plyed by these Linnens from India. The Muzlings and fine Linnens from India, it
may be observ'd, are consumed for long Cravats, Nightrails, Commodes and Win∣dow Curtains, (an Expence not known in England till within these 20 years) also for Aprons, and thus do hinder the Consump∣tion of Cambricks, and Lawnes, and the course Callicoes, of some course Cloaths. But if Cambricks and Lawnes, and most of such course Linnens were all purchased with our Woollen Manufactures; then we shall find reason to conclude we did ill to introduce the Expence of these Linnens from India, which are so far from being a clear gain to England, as asserted Page the 16, that they are costly and mischievous upon several Considerations. As it doth not appear upon these Exa∣minations that the East-India Trade is be∣neficial by bringing in more Bullion than carries out or by hindring the Exportation of any of our Coin for Silks or Linnens; so it may be affirmed, that the Silks do us a further Mischief by being spent directly in the room of our Stuffs made of Wooll, Hair, and mixt with Silk, and Worsted, and that no other silk made abroad, did ever serve for those uses, and therefore most dangerous. The Arguments derived from the great Gains made by that Trade, as by several
Accompts in that Tract, ought to be lookt on, as blinds or baites for unthinking men; for if the accompts be not true, then the Arguments grounded thereon cannot be good. It is well known the Company doth not export the Goods they bring, but sell them at a publick Sale, and that in the most flourishing times seldom got clear 50 per C. by such Sales, the Merchants or Shop-keep∣ers who buy of them, get 10 to 20 per C. more, either by sending abroad or retailing them here, adding to this what is paid for Cu∣stoms and Charges, yet all will fall much short of this Computation, and that part which is thus gotten by Sales at home, is gotten by their being a Monopoly, and can∣not be reckoned as gains to the Nation; and taking the Stock from Anno 1657. when first Incorporated to this day, there hath not been divided, (the Author owns Page 52,) not 20 per C. others think not 10 per C. per An∣num, amongst the Adventurers in that Com∣pany; and the Crown, Capt. Dorrel, who went an Interloper, was thought to make an extraordinary Voyage, because divided 50 per C. and few others ever made the like. So that without better Vouchers then are produced in that Tract, these Accompts ought not to pass, neither ought we to be∣lieve that what is pretended to be gotten
by the East-India Trade was so in Fact; no such Gains having been divided amongst the Adventurers, much less to the Nation, which may appear by their Books to be true, what∣ever Gains have been made by some parti∣cular Persons; but if 300 per C. then must be hid as part of 64 Millions gotten by Trade since An. 1656. And it cannot be denied, but that this Trade hath the Worst Foundation of all the Trades we drive, because carries from us Gold and Silver, which we cannot well spare, and brings us back Toyes, Handi∣craft and manufactured goods, which we least want, not only to the hindrance of the Consumption of our Wooll, but the imployment of our people (from whence only Riches can have their original) and being the foundation is so bad, it will hap∣pily be found impossible to make the super∣structure good. Measures taken of Trades, by the Gains made by the Traders, will alwayes prove Erroneous; from a due con∣sideration of what sorts of Commodities are Exported, and Imported, a true Judge∣ment can only being made, whether the Trade to any Country be good or bad. As it hath been made out, that it is not probable that the Bullion Exported to India hath brought us back by the Goods transport∣ed
to Foreign Markets, and that the Goods sold here do us any considerable service, by hindering the Importation of Foreign Silks and Linnens; so it is plain, that the pre∣tended Gains made by that Trade on the Goods sold here is not Gains to the Nation, but gotten out of our own Peoples Pockets, by the Sales of such Goods to the Gentle∣men and Landed men, or others, who are the Consumers, but not concerned in the Stock, by making them give great Rates for what they buy. The Nation by any such Sales to our own People cannot be imbursed of the Treasure sent out, in Gold or Silver, or get more than they would by taking away an Estate from A. to give to B. But if this be a good way to bring Gains to the Na∣tion, to carry on Trade by Joynt-Stocks, then certainly we have been very imprudent, not to set up more Monopolies for Trade; there being several Trades, as well as Com∣modities, that might be named, of which if any Persons could get a Monopoly, or the priviledge of the sole Buying and Sel∣ling, would as probably make four for one, or as much as can be made by these Goods from India. Those that argue against this, have forgotten the Arguments amongst o∣thers which have been alwayes given by the Advocates for this Trade, for its being car∣ried
on in a Company with a Joynt-Stock, that when the Trade was Free and Open, before Incorporated Anno 1657, that all the Traders lost by it; and it was the chief Reason given for obtaining that Charter, and what have since weighed very much for the supporting of this now in being. When Persons that have a Trade Incor∣porated sell their Goods at extravagant Rates to Foreign Countries, what may be gotten by selling them dear may in some cases be advantagious to a Nation; but ex∣traordinary Gains made by any such Persons on Goods sold to our own People to be spent at Home, will appear to be Gains made by working upon the Nation, not for the Nation; to the advantage of some by the prejudice of others. If it be said, that this Trade hath a good foundation, because Materials are plenty, and Labour cheap in India; it being agreed that these Manufactured Goods are spent both Abroad and at Home, in the room of our own. This instead of being an Argu∣ment for recommending this Trade, will appear the most dangerous part of it: For unless our Wooll fall to nothing, and the Wages of those that work it up to 2d. per Day, and Raw Silk and Silk Weavers La∣bour proportionable, the India Goods will
occasion a stop to the Consumption of them; because those from India must otherwise be Cheapest, and all People will go to the Cheapest Markets, which will affect the Rents of Land, and bring our Working People to Poverty, and force them either to fly to Foreign parts, or to be maintained by the Parishes: And therefore how the Land∣ed men are concerned in the Contest about this Trade, they may do well to consider. By what hath been said in answer to this Proposition, it may appear that as long as we manage the East-India Trade as we have of late Years, we shall lose by it: That Gold and Silver is the on∣ly or most useful Treasure of a Nation: That we have not increased in Riches since Anno 1666: That the Consump∣tion of East-India Silks and Linnens at Home do us no service, by hindering the expence of any Foreign Silks or Linnens: That the India Goods Trans∣ported do not bring us in near the quan∣tity of Gold and Silver Exported to carry on that Trade: That the East-India Trade hath a bad foundation: And that the great Gains made by Mer∣chants, or Traders that carry on that Trade, is because the Trade is confined
to some few Persons, who are but as one Buyer and one Seller: And that nothing but Bullion Imported, can make amends for Bullion Exported. Which if not observed we may Trade away our Riches, but not get Riches by Trade. The second Proposition is, That to Pro∣hibit the Wearing of Indian Silks, &c. will be destructive to the Trade of England. Con∣sider'd under three Heads. I. As relates to the Woollen Manufacture. II. As relates to the Silk and Linnen Manu∣factures. III. As to the effects such a Prohibition will have. I. As relates to the Woollen Manufacture. By what is said under this Head re∣lating to the Woollen Manufacture it plainly appears, that the Author of this Treatise is of Opinion, that our Nobility, Gentry, and Landed Men, make too much of their Estates by selling their Wooll too dear; and that after many thoughts about it, had found out an effectual way to reme∣dy this evil, by endeavouring to perswade them, that it is advantageous for us to send
our Money to the Indies to buy Manufa∣ctured Goods there, to be spent at Home, as well as Abroad, in the room of our Woollen Goods, which he endeavours to prove is their true Interest to do, as well as the Interest of England, and that therefore it is their best way to sell their Wooll very Cheap, and to get little by it, that it may be Exported: And for their Comfort tells them, that though they may thus make but little of their Wooll, yet that those that drive the India Trade at the same time may make 400 l. of 100 l. Pa. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. That our Woollen Goods consumed at Home do not inrich the Nation, and that a high Price on our Woollen Manufactures may hinder the Sale of them, is agreed; but that we must therefore send our Money to India to purchase the Manufactured Goods made in those parts to be spent at Home, and Abroad, in the room of our own, in order to bring down the Price of them, by making Wooll and Labour cheap, are false Conclusions drawn from true Principles. If after we have used our best endeavours to keep up the Price of Wooll, and the Ex∣pence of our Woollen Goods, it should be our misfortune to be disappointed by the increase of such Fabricks in other places, or disuse in the Expence of them, we should
and ought to submit with Patience; but it would be unanswerable to be so zealous to have it done, as to give the first blow our selves by discouraging the Expence of them at Home. The Author of this Treatise might have done well to have told us to what price he would have Wooll fall, and in what places we can Consume more Wollen Goods abroad, many Landed Men have for many Years past found Wooll already so Cheap, that cannot with∣out great difficulty make their usually Rents of Sheep ground now, and the generality of Merchants will own, that have not got by Trading in Woollen Goods for these 30 Years last past 6 per C. per Annum, the in∣surance of Adventures paid; and if it be considered how the Manufactures of Wooll are increased in Ireland, Holland, France, Germany, Spain and Portugal, and what a Drugg our Manufactured Goods are become beyond the Sea, and that have been Export ed of late Years, rather out of Necessity to provide effects, then out of choice in hopes of Gaines; no Reason will appear for bring∣ing Home, or incouraging the Expence of these Goods, if not in order totally to Ruin the Manufactury, unless we could be assured that the Falling of Wooll and Manufactures to a low Price, would first Ruin those o∣ther Manufactures, and then that ours
would certainly Advance in Price again; or that it could not be done by opening the East-India Trade, and making those Goods Cheap, as well as by running down our own. And we should also have been told how the Landed Men and Poor should sub∣sist whilst the Experiment was making, and how in case this Project should not take, we should retrieve what we may Lose by try∣ing it, and how we should regain the Ex∣pence of them at Home, after the East-India Goods have gotten Possession by an unterrupted usage: Unless these things be plainly made out, there will not appear any great Reason why we should permit the India Goods to jostle out the Expence of our own, and thereby occasion the Fall∣ing of Wooll, from 8 d. to 4 d. per Pound; For if the Landed Men should be disap∣pointed in their expectations, would then conclude that were Cullied out of their Mony by being perswaded to part wich a Bird in Hand, in hopes to get another out of the Bush from an unknown Country. What Woollens, Silks, Linnens, and other Goods of our own Make we spend at Home, are for the supply of our Necessities; and hitherto hath been thought very advantage∣ous, to save the Expence of such or the like Goods from abroad, as well as to imploy
our People; and that the expence of such have always proved not only most Secure for our advantange, but the Cheapest: If we should reject our own, and prefer the Consumption of those from India amongst us, we may reasonably expect that other Nations should by our Example do the same, and so by our own endeavours destroy what we ought to be industrious to pre∣serve. It might as well have been argued that the best way for a Country Gentleman, that hath all Conveniences about his House of his own, should instead of using them for himself and Family, send his Mony to Market to buy, and then send his Products a∣broad in hopes of making of Mony of them, though he do not know of any Market or Buyer for them; or that we should not im∣ploy our own Ships from Newcastle, or from Port to Port on our Coast; but the Dutch, who Sail Cheaper, to force our own to seek imployment abroad, in hopes might there∣by bring Mony to the Nation. But if it should be understood that not∣withstanding what hath been said it is our Interest to spend these Indian Goods at Home, that we may save our Woollen Goods to have the more for Exportation; if no stop must be put to spending them, either at Home
or abroad, seeing the 150000 l. worth, which were brought by the last three Ships will appear to be more, then it may be pre∣sumed were brought here from the Year 1600, to Anno. 1670. though then a Trade was constantly driven to India: If such great Gains be made on them, why may not the East-India Merchants be tempted to go on increasing this Trade, till bring suf∣ficient quantities to supply all Markets a∣broad as well as at Home. This is so far from being a groundless Supposition, if the Gains be so Great as represented, (or but 50 per C.) that according to the usual Course of Trade, we may presume that if this Trade be approved by authority may increase very fast. For what Merchants will imploy their Stock, or their care to carry on the Trade in our Manufactures, when can have no hopes of more Gains then 6 per C. If by get∣ting into the East-India Trade and Dealings in those Goods, may have such great Profit as the Author hath Suggested: Therefore we should have been told what we should do with our Wooll, and our People too, if that Trade should thus increase upon us, which is more probable then that the Expence of our Woollen Manufactures will increase, if the Consumption of those Goods from India be continued.
But least these and such like Arguments given in that Treatise to perswade us that it is our interest to Consume these Goods at Home, should not be sufficient: At last the old Bugbears the Dutch, are called upon to frighten us into it, who, as upon all occasions when any contest hath happened about this Trade, are usually Summoned for that purpose; and therefore it is said Page the 33 d. that if the English were forbid to bring India Goods into Europe, the Dutch would; and thereby hurt abroad the vent and Con∣sumption of our English Cloath: But this needs no answer here, it being not proposed that the English shall be Prohibited from bringing these Goods into Europe; but only the Consumption of them in England; and the Consumption of our English Cloath were never understood to be much preju∣diced by these Goods. This Head cannot be concluded better then with the Authors own Words, Page the 9th. As Bread is called the Staff of Life, so the Woollen Manufactures is truly the princi∣pal Nourishment of our Body Politick; which being an undoubted Truth, the Ar∣guments in favour of East-India Goods, that they should be Consumed, either at Home or abroad in the room of them, are the more to be admired, because looks as contradictory as to affirm that the best way
for a Man to preserve his Life, were to Cut his own Throat: And as much against pru∣dence in the Carrying on of Trade, as that we should Discourage the Expence of our own Corn at Home, on a Supposition that by sending our Mony abroad, we may get Cheaper, and so force the Exportation of it; or that by Selling our own Cheap here, we may introduce the Exportation of it; or by having Woollen Goods from Ireland, to be spent here instead of our own, we may make great advantages by Exporting ours. II. As to the Silk and Linnen Manu∣factures. Upon this Subject the Author labours to make out that Silk and Linnen are not the Genuine off-spring of this Kingdom, nor the Manufacturing of them Calculated for our Meridian: That though some of the Materials may be had from our own Soil, yet most from abroad: That our Wages are so high we can never expect any good from these Manufactures; and that therefore our People must be imployed upon our Wooll, that we may purchase Silks and Linnens from abroad, in Exchange of our Woollen Goods; and if we do not take that Course we shall Lose our Trade to Silezia, Saxony,
Bohemia and Poland; and that it is the prudence of a State to see that industry and Stock be not diverted from things profitable, and turned upon Objects unprofitable. How Silks or Linnens perfectly Manu∣factur'd in India, bought with our Mony should be esteemed more the Genuine off-spring of this Kingdom, or better Calcula∣ted for this Meridian, then our Silks and Linnens Manufactured at Home by our own People, is not apparent to all Mens understanding; especially being the Linnens are Fabrickt with Materials of our own growth, and the Raw Silk we generally have, is purchased by the Product of our own Manufactures, and but of a small value in proportion to the Labour bestowed in making it up, (which must be owned to be all our own) and that we cannot spend our Goods in Turky or Italy, without taking their Silk in return: Upon all which the proper Question is, whether we had best run the Adventure of Losing or discouraging such Manufactures at Home, and those Trades abroad, rather then put any stop to the Consumption of these beloved Goods from India. As the Author hath sufficiently by such Arguments discovered his Transports of zeal for the East-India Trade; so how
much prefers the Welfare of the Moguls Subjects, the advancing of his Lands, and the imploying of his People before those of his own Country. Though many young Gentlemen have been prevailed with by Tradesmen, or those that serve them, to despise their own Products, and to spend in the room, what imposed upon them by such Traders; which hath too often ended in the destruction of their Estates; yet it may be said to be a bold attempt to endeavour to perswade the whole Body of the Nation, that it is their Interest to do so also; and to imploy none of their People on Silk and Linnen, be∣cause all hands may be imployed on the Wollen Manufacture, that all such Goods may thereby be Sold Cheap: But if Selling Cheap be so advantageous, and the true In∣terest of our Landed Men, that the Lively∣hoods of so many People as live by the Silk and Linneen Manufactury, must be Sacri∣ficed to effect it: Why hath he not given al∣so some Arguments to have perswaded our East-India Merchants, or other Traders (who seldom think they get too much) to have given a good Example by Selling Cheap also? For without some such, though the Landed Men should sink their Price of Wooll, and the Poor Weavers should be taken off from the Silk and Linnen, that the
Wooll might be Wrought up and Sold Cheap here to the Merchants, yet they may keep up the Price abroad, and Sell as dear as ever; and then this Project would occasion a Loss to the Landed Men, and disappoint∣ment to these Weavers; only to give a good opportunity to those that send such Goods abroad, to Gain the more by them: And if the Author be of opinion that the Ex∣pence of Manufactured Goods from the India be so advantageous, and that Selling Cheap is the way to increase Consumption; Why hath he not proposed the opening of that Trade, that it may not be any longer a Monopoly, that those Goods may also Fall in Price? For if there be 300 per C. gotten by them as he affirms, though should Fall 200 per C. yet would afford more Gains to the East-India Merchants then the Wooll or Woollen Goods to the Landed Men, or Clothiers at the present Prizes; and be the occasion of so great an increase of that Trade, that in a short time we should see no great need of taking of the Weavers from the Silk and Linnen Manufacture to be im∣ployed on the Woollen: For the Goods from India would Supply the Markets in the room of them both abroad and at Home; that so there might not be any great need of many of them, especially if none must be Spent
at Home, as the Author would have it. But we are told Page 42. that some of the Materials for Linnens may be had from our own Soil, though too dear, and not enough: But the Author hath had the ill fortune to be misinformed in that also; for the Bishoprick of Durham alone, will afford as much Flax (if incouragement were given for the Manufacturing of Linnen) as to make sufficient to furnish all England; and the County of Somerset, as well as others, would be found capable to supply any de∣fect; and that there are many poor People in Durham that work for 3 d. per Day; and that they make a Thread so fine as to be worth 12 s. per Pound; and that there is Linnen of 7 s. per Ell made at Malton in Yorkshire; and that we could make sorts fit for Tabling, Sheeting and Shifting, upon which the great expence of Linnen depends, very good and sufficient for such uses, to furnish the Nation: If cannot well be af∣forded so Cheap as to contest with what comes from Foreign Parts, yet should not be discouraged upon a supposition, that it is not the genuine off-spring of this Kingdom; for many Manufactures in this and several Countries, from a small beginning, have come to great Perfection, and therefore ought to have all incouragement given to
it. That it is not come to more Perfection may happily, upon Examination, be found our own fault. If the original, or chief cause or means of Riches must be from the Labour of our People, how do such Arguments, as are used in this Tract, consist with that Maxim? Our Woollen Manufactures must be reduced to near one half by not spending them at Home, Silk and Linnen Manufactures not convenient, and if Paper and Shooes, &c. had stood in the way of East-India Goods, it is probable that by the same way of argu∣ing, those would have been cryed down also: And being about 40000 Fans came in the last Ships from India, with some Han∣dicrafts Wares, as usual in all Ships, if they should be permitted to increase, with the Silks and Linnens from those parts, being purchased with Bullion, how shall the State imploy the People upon Profitable Objects, or prevent Poverty from growing upon us, unless could find out Mines of Gold and Silver: And therefore we should have been told, how our Industry and Stock could have been better imployed then in such Manufactures, before such advice should be given for the discouragement of Woollen, Silks and Linnen.
But upon the conclusion of this matter, the Author seems to be of Opinion that Silk and Linnen may do well in process of time, when England shall come to be more Peo∣pled, and when a long Peace hath increased our Stock and Wealth; but the Author doth not tell us how the People we have shall live in the mean time, nor of any pro∣bability how our Stock or Wealth shall in∣crease, nor how we shall then set up again, promote or incourage such Manufactures, if we should now permit them to be de∣stroyed, being our being in War is an ad∣vantage to the Sale of some of those Com∣modities; neither doth he tell us by what we shall get Money to carry on this East-India Trade in the mean time: For some are of Opinion, that our Trade to India hath been carried on by Money arising from the Labour of our People imployed in other Trades, and not by the Gains or Returns we make by it; neither doth he tell us how we shall get Money to purchase the Linnen and Silk he would have us take from A∣broad, nor what incouragement will be left for the increasing of People if these Manu∣factures be destroyed. Page 28. and 34. having well argued how it is our Interest to imploy the People we now have, and that we want more; it
looks like a Contradiction to argue, that we should not imploy any in fabricking Silk or Linnen, nor on Woollen Goods to be spent at Home. All to the Plow and Cart may be too many; and such as have been bred in Inland Countries have not a Genious, Spirit, or Inclination to the Fishing Trades. If the Author of this Tract had gone as often to Spittle-Fields or Canterbury, as it may be presumed he hath to the India-House, and had informed himself what vast num∣bers of both Sexes, and of all Sizes, are imployed in that Manufactury, and had their sole dependance thereon, would pro∣bably have received such impressions as to have induced him to have forborn giving the Opinions he hath about that Manufa∣cture, and have been convinced, that our English Weavers, even in that Manufacture, have shewed themselves able to contest with the French, Dutch and Italian, both as to Price and Goodness, notwithstanding the great Misfortune we lye under, of having so many of our Gentry fond of no Silks but what come from Abroad. That this Ma∣nufacture hath increased very much in this last Age, notwithstanding these difficulties, is an undeniable Proof against what is as∣sented, that this Manufactury cannot thrive in England. Men being so apt to mind their
particular Interest in matters of Trade, that it is to believe a great Contradiction, that it should so much increase if it could have been out-done by the French, Dutch or Ita∣lian Silks, so as to have prevented the Ma∣kers or Master Weavers from making Profit by them; and how they have improved, to make them as good (if not better) than any made beyond Sea, may be evident to any person that will make an inquiry, exa∣mine or compare them, with what come from Abroad. III. As to the Effect such a Prohibition would have upon the East-India Trade in General. Upon this Head it is argued, that it will endanger the loss of half that Trade. If he mean that part of the Trade which is carried on by the Importation of Manufa∣ctured Goods, Handicraft Wares, China, Lacquer'd Ware and Toyes; and would have it understood, that a stop to the going out of our Money to purchase these Com∣modities, would occasion any Loss to Eng∣land, would have done well, First, to have made out that ever we gained by those Commodities; otherwayes there be many
that would not be much troubled to have that part of the Trade lost; it being sup∣posed that the Salt-Petre, Druggs, Spices, and Course Callicoes, are all the Commo∣dities we ever had from thence, that were necessary for us; and there can be no great danger the Mogul will deny us those, tho' we should leave him these for his own use; because till about the Year 1670, we did not usually take any others from him: And it may be difficult to find out any way to make that Trade Profitable, but by confi∣ning our selves to those Commodities, that we may send out little Money, and by Tra∣ding from Port to Port, and making Gains there in Trafficking with the Indians. His Arguments against any such Prohi∣bition, because no such Law would be ob∣served, may be made against any new Law, and supposeth a strange Weakness in our Legislative Power; and that being one half of the Goods from India are spent at Home, there will be no incouragement for the Mer∣chants to ingage in this Trade to India. If must singly depend on the Markets Abroad, is contrary to what hath been practiced; for there was an East-India Trade long be∣fore we ingaged in these Manufactured Goods, and against his own Opinion in re∣ference to our own Goods; having a little
before argued that our Woollen Manufa∣ctures should all be sent Abroad; which may be as great a discouragement to Mer∣chants, Clothiers or Weavers, to ingage in those, as for the India Merchants in these: And if it be agreed (as it is) that either our Woollen Goods, or those Silks, must travel, Why should we not rather put that difficul∣ty upon these Goods, than upon our own? But at last would not have the present time good for such an Alteration, nor have it done rashly, nor without contemplating the Universal Trade of the Nation, whereas this Matter hath been already under Consi∣deration Fifteen Years, and without much time in Contemplation, we might be satis∣fied that our Coyn growes scarce, and that this Trade hath for several Years carried out near as much Bullion as we have Imported from all parts of the World. But least all this should not prevail to have this Trade continued, the Dutch, as usual, are again mustered up; though upon a due Consideration of their Trade to India, and how it is carried on, no well grounded Argument can be brought for the continu∣ance of this branch of that Trade from any thing relating to that Nation. The Dutch having had the sole possession of the Island of Ceylon, the chief Islands in
India for Cloves, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, for about Forty Years, and got the Com∣mand of Bantam, where Pepper is Plenty, and of other places where Spices are to be had: By that Commodity, and by Trading with their Ships, Spices and Goods, in those parts, and bringing Home what thus got, for the European Markets, no doubt have made it an Advantageous Trade to them; but they never sent out any considerable parcel of Gold or Silver for India, till after we had ingaged in bringing Home these Silks and Fine Linnens; then the East-India Company in Holland, to make Gains for themselves, though with the danger of de∣stroying the Manufactures of their own Country, by our Example, ingaged also in these; but still carry on the Trade in them with a great advantage to us; for though have brought many of these Goods, yet never sent out one seventh part so much Bullion as we, and have alwayes used their utmost endeavours to discourage the Ex∣pence of these Goods in their own Territo∣ries, and yet they are complain'd off there, as much as here, and stops and restraints are often put upon the bringing of them from India: But if there must not be a to∣tal Stop or Prohibition till both these East-India Companies Consent to it, we may
expect it, but in vain, till Temptations ari∣sing from Private Interest (however oppo∣site to the Publick) be extirpated. The Dutch East-India Company will alwayes argue for the Continuance of this Trade, because the English bring them; and the English East-India Company for bringing of them, because the Dutch do: But the Dutch having them upon much better terms than we, may probably hold out longest. But the Trade being carried on there by a Mo∣nopoly, as well as here, and great Men concerned, no Judgment can be made by the Gains that Trade affords to the Com∣panies, whether the Trade be good or bad. As for Spices, Druggs and Saltpetre, the way to have more of them, is to confine the Trade to such Commodities; these o∣thers not being made, by the Indians, till the Factors bespeak them. Till some such Limitation be made, these affording most Profit will be preferred, and we were not debar'd the having those when we did not ingage in this Trade of Manufactured Goods, and little Reason to fear we shall be now. This Head is concluded with an Accompt of Pepper, which with the other Accompts in this Tract, do not agree with other Mens Opinions, about the Gains made by
this Trade; for if the General Adventurers in the East-India Stock in Holland, compu∣ting from the Original of that Stock to this Day, have not made 5 per Cent. by their Money put in, as all Persons do agree that have any Knowledge thereof, if this vast Gains be made by this Trade, who runs away with it? The like Question may be properly put, as to this Trade here; If 100 l. imployed in this Trade have produ∣ced usually 400 l., as so often asserted in this Treatise, it must be thought strange, that the Adventurers that underwrit this Stock Anno 1657, if had continued their Shares to this Day would not have receiv∣ed much above 10 per Cent. per Annum, notwithstanding the great Advantages made for several Years, by confining their Stock (for making large Dividends) to 375000 l. and Trading with other Peoples Money, taken up at 4 per Cent. Unless this My∣stery be explained, both as to Holland and here, there will remain a Doubt, That if there be any such Gains, that it is swallow'd up by some particular Persons, under pre∣tence of a Publick Good, to carry on a Pri∣vate Interest; and that both Nations will in time find, that they have but dreamt of making such Vast Gains by this Trade, in these Goods; and that the Gains made in
both Countries by Stock-Jobbing, and other indirect or private wayes, by such as have got into the Management, is the true Rea∣son why there hath been so much strugling about this Trade more than about others, that upon a true Calculation would be found more Beneficial. The Author of this Tract having owned Page 12. as to the Trade to the East-Indies in General that it is naught, and that if all Europe would agree to have no further Deal∣ings to those Parts, would certainly save a great Expence of Treasure, because Europe drawes nothing from thence of solid use, only perishable Commodities, and Mate∣rials to supply Luxury, in return of Gold and Silver, which is there buried and never returns; but would have the Burthen to fall upon the Collective Body of Europe. It is concluded, that nothing could be more fatal than this Assertion, to all the Argu∣ments in this Discourse, to render this Na∣tion, in a manner, undone, if the Impor∣tation of Indian and Persian Silk be Prohi∣bited; upon which (it is said) the preser∣vation of above half of that Trade depends, and half our Foreign Business. Page 22. It is well known that England and Hol∣land drive the greatest Trades of all European Nations, and that doth depend much upon
the Consumption of their own Manu∣factures: If these Indian Silks be Con∣sumed, as is owned Page the 31st. in the room of our Stuffs, Anthorines, &c. and the Linnens, as well as the Silks (as com∣plained of in Holland) in the room of the Silks and Linnens Manufactured there, and we spend half at home of what is brought from thence, and all purchased with our Gold and Silver; why may not England and Holland be taken in amongst the Collective Body of Europe, upon whom this Loss doth Fall, and be found to bear the greatest Share by the Loss that these Manufactured Goods occasions, whatever Gains do or might make by the other Branches of that Trade? For other Nations that Consume such Goods, because have none of their own Fabrick, cannot be at any Loss in so doing; do but Lay out their Mony in these Goods, instead of Laying it out in the Woollens made by us, or Linnens made by the Dutch: All Na∣tions not being so extravagant, as to spend so much the more because these Goods are brought them: Therefore as may truly con∣clude with the Author, that this Trade is Naught for Europe in general, so very par∣ticularly for this Nation, which indeed suf∣fers most by it, because we altered the Management of it since the Year 1670. Of
which some hints are given before, and might be made apparent; but omitted for this time, least it should be thought strange that the Author should not be in the Right, neither when Argues against this Trade, nor for it. But to conclude with some Observations upon what mentions of Cardinal Richlieu, Page the 6th. that had left behind him an Evidence how much had made Matters of Trade, his care and Study; and that thereby had laid the only Foundation of a Solid and lasting greatness: If he had also taken Notice of the Edicts, Tariffs and Orders made since, and of the Politicks practised in France re∣ferring to Trade, particularly of the Edict made the 26th. of October, 1686. for Burn∣ing and Destoying China Silks, Stuffs, &c. and other Goods from India, would have found that they have proceeded quite con∣trary, to what proposed in this Treatise, and that have found their end by it; For by in∣couraging the Consumption of their own Manufactures both at Home and abroad, and their Fishing Trades have increased their Riches, Seamen and Navigation, to such a degree in 40 Years time, as hath enabled them to maintain a long War with most of the Princes of Europe, without much help from the East-India Trade; and that
therefore we may conclude a Nation may Thrive by Trade, without that to the East; and that they have been as much in the Right in the managing of their Trade, as we have been in the Wrong in the Management of ours. By what hath been said, it may appear that the Manufactured Goods from India, Spent and Consumed in England, cannot by any way be Instrumental to prevent the going out of our Coin, nor to the bringing in of Gold and Silver to make amends for what Ex∣ported to Carry on that Trade: And that unless it can be made out by very good Proof or Demonstration that by the return of India Goods we Transport to Foreign Countries, we bring Home in Gold and Silver more then we Ex∣port, for the Carrying on of that Trade, that we ought to conclude that our Treasure hath been Exhaust∣ed by that Trade; and that it hath been mischievous to us in the highest degree, by hindring our Woollen Manufactures as well as the improve∣ment of those for Silk and Linnen: All which is submitted to better Judg∣ments.
Amongst the scattered Notions laid down in that Treatise referring to Trade, the Author Observes, Page 11. That in our great Assemblies it hath never been sufficiently thought a matter of State, but manag'd rather as a conveniency, or ac∣cidental Ornament, then the chief strength and support of the Kingdom. That as it hath never been greatly the care of our Ministers of State; so it hath not been enough the Study of Nobility and Gentry, who (give me leave to say) for want of a right Knowledge in the general Notions of it, have been frequently imposed upon by particular Merchants, and other interested Persons to Enact Lwsa, so much to the prejudice of Trade in General. And Page the 25th. That Trade is in its Nature free, finds its own Channel, and best directs its own Course; and all Laws to give it Rules and directions, and to Limit and Cir∣cumscribe it, may serve the particular ends of private Men, but are seldom advantageous to the Publick. That Governments in Relation to it, are to take a Providential care of the whole; but generally to let Second Causes work their own way; and Considering all the Links and Chains by which they hang together, peradventure it
may be affirmed that in the main all Trafficks whatsoever, are Beneficial to a Country. That few Laws in a State are an indication of Wisdom in a People; but it may be truly said that few Laws Relating to Trade are the Mark of a Nation that Thrives by Traffick. What is said, Page the 11th. cannot easily be reconciled with what is said, Page the 25th. For if Trade must be Free without being Limited or restrained by any Laws, what need is there, that our Nobility and Gentry, who make our great Assembly, should apply themselves to Study a right Knowledge of it? For according to this Opinion, no Laws Relating to Trade should be Enacted, because are seldom Advanta∣geous to the Publick; And that all Trade whatsoever is Beneficial; and yet the Au∣thor is of Opinion, Page the 11th. that no Wisdom can give the Publick effectual help till we can mend the Condition and Posture of Trade. But taking it for Granted that what is said, Page the 11th. is but a Complement to our Nobility and Gentry, and to save their time, that may not spend it about what is unnecessary: and that what is said, Page 25. That Trade ought to be Free, is the Authors Opinion, because best agrees with the whole design of the Book: It being so Ma∣terial
a Point, that all Laws already made and all Proposals for any Future Regulati∣ons depend upon the decision thereof; should not be resolved without a due Ex∣amination of such Arguments and Consi∣derations as may be proper to lay Open the State of the Case: To which it is hoped, being the ingenious Author tells us, hath applyed his Thoughts and Study to mat∣ters of Trade, he will afford his assistance. If Trade must be left to take its own Course, find out its own Channel, and not be under any Restrictions or Limitations by Laws, on a Supposition that all Trades Naturally afford Profit and Advantage to a Nation; then the Act of Navigation and all other Laws Relating to Trade should be repealed, and all Considerations for making any more for Future laid aside. Though the Author seems to incline to this Opinion, and it be known that many others agree with him in it, yet upon Exa∣mination it may appear a vulgar and dan∣gerous Error. For the first Foundation that should be laid for the preserving or increasing of Trade, is to have a Stock, which Stock should be in Mony; then to use all endeavours to preserve and in∣crease it by Frugality in the Consumption of Foreign Commodities and Labour and
industry, for the increasing and promoting the Consumption of our own. So long as the Nation keeps to Frugality and industry Laws may not be absolutely Necessary to Limit the Consumption of any Foreign Commodities, nor to increase or promote our own Manufactures: But if there be an appearance, that a Nation is running into a luxurious Prodigal Expence of Foreign Comodities, and to a neglect in Manufacturing and promoting their own, and to idleness, and spending of time in what is not profitable for the Nation, the usual Consequences of Luxury, (which we fear is our Case at present) then Laws will be necessary to put a stop to it, that the Trea∣sure of the Nation may not be Consumed thereby: For by the Course of Trade no stop can happen to any such Consumptions nor Idleness, till want of Money occasion it. To omit making such Laws upon any such occasion, would be to permit, that which is of the greatest importance to run the last extremity, rather then agree that it should be prevented by prudential Laws made by the State, or any endeavours used for that purpose. As it hath been Suggested that Gold and Silver is the only, or at least most useful and best deserving to be called the Treasure of a
Nation, and so necessary for the Carrying on of Commerce, that when ever plenty of that fails, we may expect that Trade will in a great measure fail also; so it may be affirmed that Bartering of Commodities can∣not supply the want thereof, because can∣not make any quick Progress; neither can it be supplied by Credit, because Credit must have its Original and existence from an expectation or assurance of Money. All Traders have Reason to make it their business to get Money by their Trades, by sending out and bringing Home such Commodities as are most vendible, and yield them most Profit: But whether send out Goods or Bullion, or whether what bring back be necessary for the supply of our Necessities, or useful for a further Manufacture, or be spent in Prodigality, Luxury, or Debauche∣ry, or to the hindrance of our Manu∣facture (so long as they get by it) they do not generally take it to be their Province to mind: But for the good of the whole, it may be presumed the State ought to mind it so far, as may be convenient to prevent the Exportation of our Treasure; if not, the Stock of Gold and Silver, which is abso∣lutely necessary to Carry on Trade, as well as for our Defence, will be Consumed; by which the Traders themselves as well as
the generality will in time be involved in Misery. Though Riches cannot be gotten, but from Foreigners, by having our Ships im∣ployed by them, or dealings with them, or by our Exporting and selling to them, to a greater value, than we purchase and take from them, that the overplus may be brought home in Bullion; yet no Trades carried on by the Exportation of own Products, and Manufactures, or those from our Plantati∣ons, though what brought back in return, be all perishable Commodities, can diminish our Riches, for all such Goods of ours (un∣less some Objection be made as to Tin and Lead) would have perisht by time, if had been kept here; but a great distinction ought to be made, between Trades carried on by the Exportation of our Products, and Trades carried on by the Exportation of our Bullion, to purchase perishable Commodities, because in such casewe Exchange what is durable, and most useful, for what cannot long do us any Service. Supposing Three Millions of Coyn be at present the Stock of the Nation Circulating for the carrying on of Trade, as long as it is laid out in our own Products, and Manu∣factures, and such are Exported, though whatever be brought in return of them pe∣rish
in a short time, yet our Stock will be good, and so long Trade will be carried on: But if instead of carrying on Trade by the Exportation of our Goods, we should send out, a Million in Coyn or Bullion to the India, to purchase Silks, another Million to France to purchase Wines and Brandies, and another Million to purchase Fruit, or Toyes, and all be spent at home, we may soon find the Treasure of the Nation consumed, our stock of Gold and Silver which we had for the carrying on of Trade, in the hands of Foreigners, and the Goods we had in return, in the Draynes, or on the Dunghil. If this be obvious represented thus in gross, then lesser parcels of Money sent out to purchase such Goods (by the Rule of Proportion) must have the same Effect in some Degree; by all which it may appear that what is asserted, Page the 25, That all Traffick is beneficial to a Country, cannot be true, as to some Trades; that some Traders for their private Gains may be tempted to carry on, who may get by Trade, and yet the Nation may lose at the same time by such Trades. And therefore if no Laws must be made to promote the Making or Consumption of our own Goods, nor to hinder the Importation
or Consumption of any from abroad, it must inevitably follow, that when ever a Nation falls into Luxury, and the People to Idle∣ness, or to spend their Time in Imployments unprofitable to a Nation, such a Nation must be reduced to beggery by Trade, without any hopes or prospect that it can be prevent∣ed, till their Treasure be Exhausted, and no Money left to carry on such Trades, unless the Government interfere to hinder the Consumption of such Commodities, as upon an exact inquiry may be found, do carry out our Coyn, either by Prohibitions, or rather by Example, or high Impositions laid upon the Vending and Consuming of them at home; which happily may be found most in offensive, as to Foreign States, and not difficult to be contrived, and made effectual, and not prove any great hindrance to Trade, or to many Trading Men, if will have re∣spect to their Posterities, and Common Good, as well as to their present Gain. For as the Consumption of some Commodities may be hinder'd thereby so will make room for their Trading in others; and prove but a taking them off from Vending Goods unprofitable to the Nation, to Trade in Goods that may be more convenient.
It is agreed that the best way to incourage Trade, and make it advantageous to a Na∣tion and useful to afford a livelihood to the vast Number of People that have their Sole dependance thereon, is in general to al∣low all the liberty imaginable; but as most general Rules may be liable to some excep∣tions, so this especially to these two: First, that no Trade ought to be incouraged that is carried on by the Exportation of our Bul∣lion, unless to purchase what we absolutely want for our Defence, or Support of Life, and we cannot possibly have on better Tearms, or where we may have an un∣doubted indisputable assurance that the Goods purchased with it will bring in more Bullion, in Bullion, by the Sales of such Goods abroad, than was carried out. Se∣condly, that no Wooll be carried out raw and unwrought. Other Laws may be found necessary to prevent abuses in the Manufactu∣ring of Goods, keeping the People to Work, and for the incouraging and increasing of Trade, which should be applied as Occasi∣ons and Exigencies may require, but none appear necessary (upon these sudden thoughts) contrary to the Freedom insisted on, but what may be Comprehended under these two Exceptions here mentioned.
Where it appears plain that a Trade is carried on by the Exportation of our Coin and Exhausting of our Treasure, no Argu∣ments can be given that it must not be pre∣vented, because may hinder the Gains or Imployments of some Persons, that can have much more weight in that particular, than what might have been offer'd against the wicked Trade of Clipping, for though the Livelihoods many got by that Trade, were justly more obnoxious to the Law, be∣cause was a secret Robbery, and upon many accounts indanger'd the Peace and Tranquil∣lity and welfare of the Nation; yet being what was so wickedly got, doth not appear to be sent out (unless to be exchanged from Silver to Gold,) the Nation did not lose so much Treasure by it, as hath and will, by Trades carried on by the Exportation of our Coyn, as long as permitted. Whether Trade left at full Liberty to be carried on, by the Exportation of our Pro∣ducts and Manufactures may produce Trea∣sure, will much depend upon good Sales to our Commodities abroad, and good Hus∣bandry in the Consumption of Foreign Commodities at home, but the having of many sorts of Manufactures of our own is not onely the best way to have Variety to
send abroad, but to prevent our being in want of such Commodities, that there may be no Temptation for their being Imported; but no Trade more likely to bring us in a good proportion of Bullion, then out Fish∣ing Trades; not only because in is procur∣ed by our Labour, without any great Cost by Foreign Materials, but being a Commo∣dity necessary abroad for the support of Life, seldom fails of Markets, and ready Money, which is often brought home in Speaie from many places, and is also a Commodity not likely ever to go out of Request; for which, and because those Trades are also a Nursery for Seamen, it may be found our true Inte∣rest to favour those Trades with the best Protection, and Incouragement. And thus the Authors Maxime, Page the 38. That it is the Prudence of a State to see that Industry and Stock be not diverted from things profita∣ble to the whole, and where a Nation is a certain known gainer, to be turn'd upon Objects unprofitable, or new Inventions, in which it cannot be determined in many years whether we get or lose, or how the Ballance stands; may be put in practice with all the certain∣ty imaginable, as well as by the Fishing Trades as by the Woollen Silk and Linnen Manufacture, and happily upon Examination
will be found more Politick, then as the Author would have it applied, in favour of the East-India Trade. But it being supposed that the Dutch will be here again brought upon the Stage, and the Liberty they give in matters of Trade, and for the Exportation of Money, object∣ed against what is here argued; to make one answer for all, which is supposed may be satisfactory, not only against all Argu∣ments that can be derived from the Practices of the Dutch, for an unlimited Freedom in Trade, but as to what hath been argued or may relate to the East-India Trade also; Let it be agreed that we shall live in Eng∣land as Parsimonious as they do in Holland, and be as Industrious in our Fishing, and some other Trades (that might be named) as they are, and that we shall not send out more Bullion to the India for the carrying on of that Trade, then they do, or that we shall have great Impositions upon such Fo∣reign Commodities as may be found to be the occasion of the Exhausting of our Trea∣sure or pernicious to our own Manufactures, to secure us from such inconveniences as are feared from such Liberty; then all disputes shall cease, as to all Prohibitions relating to Trade: But if we must not be lead, nor take
Example from them in Parsimony, and In∣dustry, we ought not to be lead by them in making of Laws relating to the Exportation of our Coin, or Prohibitions of Goods; be∣cause whether such Laws be good and ne∣cessary, or not, depends wholly upon the Genius and Inclination of the People. If Par∣simonious and Industrious, then no need of such Laws; but if Luxurious and Idle, must be Ruin'd without them; and this is well known to those States where such Liberty is granted which makes them very observant of their old Customs and Fashions, and very diligent and careful to keep their People to Work, as may be instanced in Holland. Though it may be as difficult to give a true account of the Turnings, Windings, Circulations, Steps, Degrees and Progress of Trade, and Drawing and Redrawing by Exchange, as to give a certain account of all the Veins, Arteries, Fibres, Circulation of the Bloud, Causes of Diseases and Mo∣tions in a Body Natural, yet there are some plain Cases relating to both, which may be agreed without penetrating into the pre∣tended Misteries of either. That we should send out to India about 600000 l. per Annum in Bullion, though it
hath been never yet made out that those Goods bring us back again in Bullion, the value of 200000 l. and much of it, to be there laid out, to purchase Manufactured Goods to be spent in the room of our own, or that we should send out Bullion to any place to buy Goods to be spent in Luxury, or in the room of such as we can make by our own people, or that we should Export our Wooll Raw, to be Manufactured abroad, when the Advantage by Manufacturing it at home would be near seven parts in Ten ad∣vantage, however may agree with some Mens Interest, cannot well be for the Inte∣rest of the Nation, nor the best way to gain or retain Riches; for no Gains made by par∣ticular Men, can make a recompence for the loss the Nation will receive by having their Stock of Money Consumed, and the Poor beaten out of their Imployment. Sufficient Care being taken by Prohibiting or Discouraging the Consumption of such Goods as occasion the carrying out of our Coyn, or Bullion, and for encouraging the working of our Wooll at home, no Liberty should be thought too much to be given, for the carrying on of Trades by a permu∣tation of Commodities, not only by a free Exportation and Importation, but without
being Subject to the Payment of great Du∣ties because will be found the best way to in∣crease Trade, and make it beneficial, for though it may be difficult to give a particu∣lar account how, or what gains, may arise to a Nation, or particular Men, by every distinct Trade, yet so long as carried on by the Exportation of our Products, or what other Goods we may have, there can be no danger of losing, for the particular Traders will take care not to carry on Trades by which they do not get, and such Gains made by the Collective body of Traders, may properly be said to be the Gains of the Nation, and Trade thus carried on may be left to take its own Course, and find its own Channel, and to work by Second Causes its own Way. But the Author having Asserted, Page 11, That it will be found at last, when all things come to be rightly understood, that no Plenty at Home, Victory Abroad, Affection of the Peo∣ple, Conduct or Wisdom in other things, can give the Publick effectual help, till we mend the Condition or Posture of Trade. It is hoped that as he hath obliged the Publick, with his Excellent Book of Wayes and Means, so if do not agree with such Notions as these, that he will communicate his Thoughts
how the Condition and Posture of Trade can be mended, by pursuing any others, and how or which way a Nation can get by Trade; as long as by a Prodigal Consump∣tion of Foreign Commodities and neglect∣ing and discouraging of our own, we take in more than we send out, and then Export our Gold and Silver to pay the Ballance, which will be found to be our Case, what∣ever specious pretences may be made by those that make Profit by sending out our Gold and Silver to hide the true reason from the Nobility and Gentry, whose Application of Thoughts upon these Subjects, would no doubt be of great Use, not only to the Publick, but, to their particular Interests. FINIS.
Advertisement. LAtely Published a Book Intituled, A Discourse of Trade and Coyn; in which most of the Notions mentioned in this Tract referring to Trade are inlarged. Sold by B. Alymer at the Three Pidgeons against the Exchange in Cornhil.
