P3152 R12910 13583651 100506
A Practical Discourse ON THE Late Earthquakes: WITH An Historical Account OF PRODIGIES And their Various Effects. By a Reverend Divine. Amos 3.8. The Lord hath spoken, who can but prophesie? LONDON, Printed for J. Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry. 1692.
THE PREFACE TO THE READERS. I Wish I could say with the Apostle, 1 Thes. 5.1. Of the Times and the Seasons ye have no need that I write unto you: But alas it is too evident that there is a great and unavoidable necessity of re∣minding you seriously of the fatal circumstances of the Times wherein you live. Is it not evident that God is angry with us? Is it not easie to read the Hand-writing on the Wall against us? Are not the Vials of Gods wrath discharging themselves upon us? Have we not had of late a Terrible Intimation of Gods Displeasure, as well as of his Power and Sove∣raignty, in shaking the Earth? I have expected that some Piou Monitor would put you in mind of this Important matter, and treat you with a sub∣ject of so Weighty and Universal a Concern. But now fearing that Warnings and Admonitions of this nature might come too late, I have here adventured publickly to admonish you both of your Danger and your Duty in this sad Scene of Providence wherein you are now placed. I remember that Reverend and Good Man Dr. Jackson) whom I shall have occasion to mention in the follow∣ing Discourse) hath presented the World with a small2 vol. of his Works. Treatise, somewhat of the like Nature with this which I here offer. Indeed he was a Workman that needed not to be ashamed, he was a diligent observer of Gods administrations in the World, both of Old and in Latter Times, as all his Writings testifie; he was a severe Reprover of publick Vices, a strict Enquirer into these National Exor∣bitances which so much provoke Heaven, he was a Faithful Fore-warner, and Bold Denouncer of such Judgments which he saw were like to overtake an incorrigible people. And therefore I hope it will not give offence if I follow the steps of this worthy Person, and with a resembling zeal and courage, pre∣sent to your view the Dreadful Signs and Tokens of Gods Anger against this Nation, and impartially shew you what are the Direful Harbingers and Pre∣sages of its final Ruine. I do not undertake with a peremptory Ballance to pronounce a Mene Tekel on the Land of our Nativity. I have no Commis∣sion
to intermeddle with the Fatal Periods of Kingdoms and Empires. The Date of them is not legible to us, but is known only to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Neither is it my design at present to represent the Times worse (I mean as to Morality) than they are, nor to render the present Face of Affairs Black and Melancholy, and thereby to fright and discourage Peo∣ple, and to take them off from their business, nor to administer any thing which may be pleasing to the Minds of Male-contents, whose number is too great alrea∣dy. This is none of my purpose, but I will tell you sincerely what is, viz. to set before you (as far as I am able) the Critical Times of Gods dispensing Judgments to a Nation, that being Fore-warned you may prepare your selves to receive them, or (if the Divine Decree be not Absolute and Irreversible) you may prevent them. This is the unfeigned intention and design of the present undertaking: and I heartily implore the Divine Assistance, that it may prove successful, that we of this Nation may see the Hand of God stretched out against us, and tremble at it, and before the Sentence be gone forth, turn from our sins, and hinder the actual pouring out of his Vials upon us. In short, whatever shall be tendered to you in the ensuing Papers is wholly in discharge of the Office of aEzek. 3.17. Watchman, who is obliged to give notice of aproaching danger. And therefore I hope none will take exceptions either at me or what I write, since I act within the compass of my Calling, and do nothing but what my Fun∣ction as well as my Conscience warrants me to do. Let it then be your Prayer, as it is mine, that God would vouchsafe to Crown with his Blessing this ho∣nest and well meant design.
THE SIGNS and FORE-RUNNERS OF A Nation's, &c. Jeremiah 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, then I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. WHEN the Apostles had put That Question to our Saviour, Act. 1.6. Wilt thou at this time again restore the Kingdom to Israel? We read that He returned This answer, v. 7. It is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons which the Father hath put in his own Power. From which Reply of our Lord we are instructed that an Unseasonable and an Unlawful Curiosity is to be checked, and that an In∣quisitive Searching and Diving into those future things which belong not to us, and which are wholly placed out of our reach, and on purpose put in God's own power, are altogether unbecoming a Christian. But, not∣withstanding this, it is Folly and Sottishness to take no notice of those Signs and Symptoms of Calamity, which, although they are in God's own power, he is pleas'd to set before our Eyes, and with this very design, that we may be Warned by them, and learn to escape the Divine Vengeance by
abandoning our sins. God upbraideth his People Israel for not observing his Providence in this kind, Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the Heaven knoweth her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow, observe the time of their coming: But my People know not the Judgment of the Lord. And the Pharisees were taxed by Christ on the like account, namely, for their gross Dulness in over-looking the visible and manifest Tokens of the Divine Displeasure against them. He corrects their fond Inquisitiveness about the Weather, (asDr. Lightfoot on the place. one observes out of the Jewish Writers, that these men were very Curious in minding the face of the Heavens when they took a Journey) whereas at the same time they took no notice of That which was more observable; they did not discern those plain and undoubted Signs of Ruine which were so visible amongst them; Matth. 16.2, 3. You (saith our Saviour to them) say, when it is Evening, it will be fair Wea∣ther, for the Sky is read: and in the Morning it will be foul Weather, for the Sky is red and lowring. O ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the Times? You are Weather∣wise, it seems, and can make Prognostications of the Seasons which shall happen, from your observing the Sky and the Clouds. But why do you not make Remarks likewise of another nature? Why do you not lift up your Eyes, and behold those Black and Thick Clouds which hang over your heads, and will in a short time disburden themselves upon you in Storms and Tempests, in amazing Thunder and Lightning, which will prove destructive to you? Are you not sensible of the Turbulent Weather which hovers over you? Do you not perceive the Tempestuous Season which is near? Is not your Disease come to a Crisis? Are not the Symp∣toms of Death upon you? Is not your Fatal Harvest drawing nigh? Is not your Corn ripe for the Sickle? May not he that runeth read the Terrible Sentence which is passing against you, and guess at the Time of its Execution? Do you not perceive the Destruction of your City and Temple approaching? If you do not, it is high time that you did: It is fit that you be Allarmed, and look about you, that you take notice of the Imminent Danger you lie under, and that you be apprehensive of the Remarkable Discoveries of God's Wrath and Indignation against you. For, be it known to you, that your General Corruption and Depravity, your Universal Defiance against God and his Laws, will find no other Recompence than Utter Ruine and Desolation: And let me tell you, it is your own fault if you do not espy at this time the manifest Tokens and Forerunners of it amongst you. It is no hard matter to Discover God's Purpose and Intention concerning the Overthrow of a Rebellious and Im∣penitent People. He speaks to the Inhabitants of a Nation, and they may, if they wil, understand his Voice: Yea, they may by hearty Re∣pentance and Turning to God avert his Judgments. These two things then we have here before us.
1. That God signally Speaketh and Pronounceth concerning the plucking up and pulling down of a Nation. 2. That when he doth so, if that Nation turn from their evil ways, God will turn away his Wrath, and repent of the evil that he thought to do unto them. First; God himself here informs us that there is an Instant wherein he will speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it. This Great and Important thing he Speaks divers ways. I will not undertake to enumerate all of them, but will only chuse out These four to insist upon. 1. God speaks concerning the Destruction of a Nation by his Pro∣phets and Messengers. 2. By his Severe Dealings with other Nations. 3. By Lesser Judgments as the forerunners of Greater and Heavier ones. 4. By Strange Signs and Prodigies. 1. God is wont to Speak concerning the Ruine and Downfall of a Nation by the mouths of his Prophets and Ministers, whom he stirreth up to denounce his Wrath, and to proclaim his Purposes of Vengeance against a Sinful Land. Thus God set Jeremiah over the Nations and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, Jer. 1.10. The Prophet is said to do this by reason of his Com∣mission given him by God to denounce destruction to impenitent Nations. Accordingly God saith, Hos. 6.5. I have hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my Mouth: which may be meant of Gods fore-telling and declaring his Judgments by the Prophets. And thus the two Witnesses that Prophesied had power to shut Heaven, and had power over Waters, to turn them to Blood, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues, as often as they would, Rev. 11.6. I conceive the meaning is this, that they were authorized to Denounce and Proclaim the dreadful Judgments which were due to obstinate sinners. And this hath been the constant usage and dispensation of Heaven in the former ages of the World. Noah was constituted Gods Harbinger to the first Generations of Men, before the final destruction of them by the Deluge. He was that. 2 Pet. 2.5. Righteous Crier (so I crave leave to render the Greek,) that Just and Godly Herauld, who was sent to proclaim the Divine Vengeance to the Unrighteous and Ungodly World. Mo∣ses and Aaron denounced Judgments (as well as shew'd Miracles) before the overthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyptian Armies. There was a Samuel to thunder out Saul's Fate, and to warn Eli of the Destruction of his House. There was an Elias to foretel Ahabs bloudy end, and a Daniel to let Belshazzar know that the Medes and Persians should deprive him of his Crown. And so was it with Nations as well as Persons: Isaiah, Jeremiah, and other inspired Prophets gave warning of the ensuing ruine
of the Jews: they freely and plainly acquainted Israel and Judah that they should be dispersed into a Foreign Nation, and be miserable captives in a strange Countrey. The Prophet Jonah, though backward and un∣willing, was dispatched by the Almighty to that great City Nineveh, to let them know the Date of their Ruine, if they prevented it not by speedy Repentance. But besides these more Sacred and Solemn warnings which we find Registred in the Infallible Volume of Truth, there have been Other Notable Denunciations of God's Displeasure to a Nation, from the Mouths of such Persons whom he hath been pleased to raise up for that purpose. A very Observable and Singular Instance of this kind is that which is related by aJosephus de bello Ju∣daic. l. 7. c. 12. Cre∣dible Person, who, in his History of the Jewish Wars, tells us, That one Jesus, or Josuah, a poor silly Country man, four years before the defection of the Jews from the Romans, and before the War was so much as Begun, in the time of Jerusalems greatest Peace and Plenty, at the Feast of Tabernacles, was first heard to Cry out against the City, with a most hideous and doleful voice, and after that he travelled day and night through all the Streets, Crying aloud, Woe, VVoe to Jerusalem. And so Eager and Concerned was this Prophetick Peasant in this his employment, that no Threats or Stripes which he suffered, could divert him from it, but for Seven years together, and upward, even until the Siege, he perpetually repeat∣ed, with a Dismal Note, his Denuntiations of VVoe to the City, Tem∣ple and People. This Relation is from the Pen of one who was a Jew by Birth and Nation, and therefore it is probable he would give the Truest Account he could of the Affairs of those People; besides that, he had more than ordinary opportunities of acquainting himself with all the passages both preceding and accompanying the War between the Jews and Romans. And this is he who makes this Solemn Protestation at the beginning and end of his Book, that the Writing of Truth was the onely scope he had in that and all other his Writings. I might leave this Remark by the by on the foregoing Narrative, That they who Scoffed at JESUS, the Son of God, and at last Crucified him, were warned by a Poor ordinary Man of that Name, concerning their Final Destruction, but it was in vain, and to no purpose. But, to come down to Our Selves, and our Late and Present State, We have not been destitute of Prophetick Warnings. England cannot say, She hath been without her Prophets. Latimer, that Man of God, and Other Martyrs in the Marian days (as you may Read in Mr. Fox's Mar∣tyrology) threatned the Ruin of this Island, considering its shameful In∣gratitude, after the Receiving so many Favours from Heaven, and fore∣seeing
or fearing its Apostacy to Superstition and Idolatry. Did not those Famous Lights of our Country, Bishop Andrews, Archbishop Abbot, Bi∣shop King, Mr. Mede, and Dr. Hacket fore-tell the downfall of the Church of England? which some of us saw verified, though it pleased God to restore it again. Did not the Judicious Mr. Hooker, in the Preface to his Ecclesiastical Polity, soretel our Late Troubles Forty years before they came to pass? Did not Dr. Jackson, Mr. Ferrar, Mr. Edwards, and others, speak Prophetically of the Events and Transactions which we have since seen, insomuch that we may rightly think, they Beheld those things at a distance? Did not that Excellent Servant of God Archbishop Usher Predict those Changes and Miseries which have since befallen Eng∣land and Ireland? It is acknowledged by all Men that have their eyes open, that there hath been, and still is, a Design to bring us under the Roman-Yoke and Tyranny, which heretofore prevailed in these King∣doms; the effct of which can be no other than the Slavery both of our Souls and Bodies. Now as to our Great and Unexpressible Danger, in relation to This, we have not wanted some Prophetick hints. To pass by that Antient Prophesie which hath been found amongst Mr. Selden's Manuscripts, in which it is foretold, That Popery should decay in England about the year of our Lord 1500. (which we know was accomplished,) and that it should be Restored about the year 1700 (which is not far di∣stant from us:) To pass by This, I say, as not knowing what Au∣thority it is built upon, I will produce the Prophetick Suggestions of two Eminent Worthies of our Church, and so put a period to this First Head of our Discourse. I have named one of these persons already, I mean, the Learned, Pious, and every ways Accomplished Primate of Armagh. Who hath not heard of the Extraordinary Motions and Im∣pulses of his Spirit, in reference to our Late Times? Have notDr. Bernard, and others. Those who have given the World a faithful Account of that Holy Man's Life; assured us, That he had frequent and constant Impressions on his Mind (and such as could not be removed all his days) that the time was near at hand which should involve the Protestant Churches in unspeakable Calamities, and that this Land, in a special manner, should feel the Cruelty of the Papists. And This, and much more to this effect, he was wont to repeat to his Friends, with a wonderfully concerned Pas∣sion, and his words were usually accompanied with abundant Tears. There is another Admirable Person, viz. Mr. George Herbert, that Di∣vine Poet, and I wish there be no reason to add, that Inspired Prophet, whose Lofty Raptures in the Last of his Poems, Entituled, The Church Militant; sadly intimate to us (what we justly have deserved) That Popery shall make its Return to us again, and that the Gospel shall leave England, and go visit the Americans.
Religion stands on Tip-toe in our Land, Ready to pass to the American Strand. VVhen heighth of Malice, and prodigious Lusts, Impudent Sinning, &c.— Who sees not, that many Passages in this Poem nearly concern us at present? Is it not evident, that we have been filling up the measure of our sins? Who can deny, that the most Prodigious and Impudent Lusts are tolerated amongst us? Who knows not, that Seine and Tiber have been mixed with our Thames? Is it not manifest, that we greedily take in and imbrace the Vices of For∣reigners, and therefore may justly expect (as a most Fitting Reward for us) to be brought under the Dominion of Strangers, to live in the con∣dition of Slaves, and to have the Kingdom of God wholly taken from us, and given to a Nation which will bring forth the fruits thereof? If any shall say, That the Suggestions of these Persons whom I have produced were not immediately from God, and cannot be stiled Prophe∣sies, for this way of Revelation is ceas'd long ago: I Answer, That they who suggest this, say more than they can prove; For, as it was A∣braham, the Friend of God, that was acquainted with God's purpose of destroying Sodom and Gomorrah; and it was the Beloved Disciple John that had the Revelation of the Greatest Mysteries concerning the Future State of Christ's Church in all Ages: So it may be believed that there are still some Beloved Servants of God who have Discoveries of Secrets from him, upon some Great Occasions especially. In this number I may reckon the Worthy Persons before mentioned, besides several others in Forreign Countreys, as John Hus of Bohemia, Abbas Joachim in the Isle of Sicily, Savanarolo in Italy, Luther and Melanchthon in Germany, John Knox, and George Wischard in Scotland. The respective Histories which speak of these Persons, assure us, that they had a Prophetick Spi∣rit, and that they were inform'd by God concerning several future events by Secret Inspiration. And there are others whom I could name, and whom I have known, who have had such a Divining Spirit as to foretel what afterwards came to pass. And although the People of England are said to be very much inclined to hearken to Prophesies; and particu∣larly it is observed by Comines, as a Fault in the English, that they de∣pend much upon Prophesies and Presages, and are wont to Interpret them according to their own conceits, (which folly, it seems, they inherit from their Ancestours, the Antient Britains, who, asCambd. Britan. One assures us, were People of great Credulity, and gave ear to every Idle Prophesie, and presently from a Superstitious Hope believed them) yet this ought to be no impe∣diment to our belief, that there are some ral Prophesies at this day, That the Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and that he sometimes Reveals to his Servants what he will do in the World. Or, if you are loth to call this a Prophetick Spirit, yet if you will grant that of Philo
to be true,. Phil. in Flac The Mind of Man is given to Presage, especially in a time of Trouble and Ca∣lamity; or if that be Authentick which Cle∣mens Alexandrinus averrs,. Strom. 6. A Disciple of wis∣dom hath a fore knowledge of Signs and Prodi∣gies, and of the Events of Seasons and Times, which he borrowed from VVisd. 8. 8. Then it is most certainly true, that the Masters of VVis∣dom, those who are set apart by God for the Instructing of the World, and for the Fore-warning of Men concerning their future danger, are sometimes indued with an extraordinary Fore∣sight: Those whom Providence hath placed on the VVatch-towers, are blessed with a Clearer Prospect than Private Christians, who are seated be∣low. These are the Persons whom he stirs up to denounce future Judg∣ments to an Impenitent People. And these are all to be esteemed as True Prophets, although we have not actually felt some of those things which they threatned the Inhabitants of this Nation with. What though Po∣pery be not returned into these Realms? Yet we may remember (with Trembling and Rejoicing together) how near it was to us; and it must be ascribed wholly to the Singular and Unexpected Providence of God that it approach'd no nearer: It is owing to the Allmighty and All∣wise Conduct of Heaven, that it was Prevented and Averted. But if we look upon Humane Causes, and the Natural Tendency of Things, we must acknowledge that they were in readiness for the readmission of the Roman Religion among us; and consequently our Ruin and Destruction were approacing. Those Persons therefore might, even as Considering and Understanding Men, foresee what they so often denounced. And the impartial view of those sins, and the nature of them, which the People of this Land were daily indulging themselves in, could not but yield them matter of Loud Complaint, and of severe Threatnings against such Offenders. Hence how many in This Age have Cried aloud, and spared nt, and have lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, and have shewed this People their Transgression, and the House of England their Sins; Though such a Sight hath been very Unacceptable to them? Have not all those Faithful Mi∣nisters in the Land, who have been intrusted with the Flock of Christ, freely and impartially, for a long time, set before Imboldned Sinners the Folly of their ways, and warned them of the Exceeding Danger they were in, not onely as to themselves, but as to the whole Community, on which they were bringing a Sudden and General Destruction? Thus God speaks concerning a Nation, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy, viz. By the Ministery of his Word, by his Prophets and Ambassadours; and particularly he speaks to you at this time, by one of the meanest and
unworthiest of his Messengers, who is authorized to utter such Words as these, our Sins are great and Crying, our Dissentions and Divisions are many, and every day increasing. Both of them make us obno∣xious to the Divine Displeasure: and if we Repent not of the for∣mer, and take care to heal the latter, we shall certainly bring down Ruine upon our Selves and our Posterity. II. God speaks concerning the final Desolation of a People, by his Judgments and severe Dealings with other Nations, or with the same Na∣tion informer times. It is an undeniable Truth, and may be made clear to Inquisitive and Judicious Minds, that many of the Divine Threat∣nings and Transactions of Providence of Old, look and reach even unto Us upon whom the ends of the World are come. We have our Destru∣ction plainly Intimated, and set forth before us, by the Increpations and Reproofs, the Menaces and Threatnings of the Prophets of the Old Te∣stament. If we look into those Sacred Scriptures, and view the several Denunciations of Judgments there, we must needs think our selves con∣cerned. For the Holy Writings are Large and Comprehensive, and like the Divine Commandments exceeding Broad. I might shew, that the Sa∣cred Prophesies recorded in the Infallible Canon of the Bible, have an aspect not only to things which were at that time transacted, but to those Affairs also, which are of the like Nature in other Ages. I could make it appear that many of those Prophesies which did primarily relate to things which are long since past, do likewise refer to matters now in being, and to other things which are not yet accomplished. It is the Nature of those Antient Prophesies to look directly at one thing, but ob∣liquely at some other. There is a Complication of Predictions in the same place of Scripture: one great Revelation is pregnant with others. The Scripture is so full, that it sometimes comprehends several Persons, if not Nations, under one Name. The Jews overthrow not only by Antio∣chus, but by Titus Vespasian (which was three hundred years after) was foretold at once by Daniel. The same Prophesie and the very same Words Predict the one and the other, as is plain from Christs Words in Mat. 24.15. When ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the Holy place. It signifies therefore first Antiochus his setting up the Image of Jupiter in the Temple at Jerusalem, or his Armies entring into that Temple, and defiling it (of which Jo∣sephus gives us an account:) and then likewise it signifies Titus Vespasians prophaning that Holy Place, and afterwards destroying it, for all agree, that our Saviour speaks in that place of the final Destruction of Jerusa∣lem: And He tells us, that the Prophet Daniel spoke of it in those words, and therefore he adjoyneth in that forementioned verse, Whoso readeth, let him understand, intimating thereby that there is a secret meaning in the Prophets Words, and that there is a more than Ordinary Understan∣ding
required to comprehend the sense of what he saith. These Prophe∣tick sayings are wonderfully Large and Extensive, and wrap up different meanings in few words. And if the Prophecies and Menaces, which primarily belong to the Jews or other Nations, do in a secondary way relate to the People of future Ages, and consequently do concern Us of this present Generation, then certainly the Actual Inflicting of Punishments and Judgment recorded in Sacred Writ appertain to the present Times. All these things, saith the Apostle, speaking of Gods Judgments on the Jewish Nation, Happened unto them for. Ensamples, 1 Cor. 10.11. The Evils and Punishments which were inflicted on that People, were Types (as the Greek word is properly to be rendred,) they were fit Representations of what we shall suffer, if we be guilty in the same manner that they were. It was intended, that we should be Copies of those Originals. What befell the Fathers, was to be a Sign to their Sons, as the Jews Proverbially speak. When we see our Sins parallel with theirs, we may know what is coming on us by the Judgments which overtook them. When we are Conscious to ourselves, that we are guilty of those very Sins, which the Scripture acquaints us brought down Evils and Plagues upon other Nations; we cannot but conclude that our Ruine is described in the Book of God, and that our Destruction is foretold by the ancient Prophets, Ezek. 23.31. Thou hast walked in the way of thy Sister, saith God to Jerusalem, therefore will I give her Cup into thy hand: If thou imitatest another People in thy Sins, thou maist expect to do so in their Plagues. Samaria had felt the Divine Wrath and Vengeance: And Jerusalem must take warning by her: The Calamities which the one had experienced, were too plain a Presage of the dismal fate of the other. The Word of the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, speaking of the fearful Fall and Destruction of Egypt, is very Remarkable, Chap. 32.9, 10. I will vex the Hearts of many People, when I shall bring thy Destruction among the Nations into the Countries, which thou hast not known. Yea, I will make many Peo∣ple amazed at thee, and their Kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them, and they shall tremble every mo∣ment, every man for his own Life, in the day of thy Fall. When we see Gods scourge on others, we have good reason to think that the Lsh∣es will even reach us at last. To this purpose, observe, how God speaks to Jerusalem by the Pro∣phet Zephaniah, I have Cut off the Nations: Their Towers are Deso∣late, I made their Streets waste. I said, Surely thou wilt fear, thou wilt receive Instruction, Chap. 3.6, 7. God speaks to one Nation by the Ca∣lamities he sends on another. Is not this Our Case? Are there not many Examples of Gods Severity before our Eyes? Have not King∣doms and Churches, Nations and Cities been brought to utter Deso∣lation
for their Contempt of Gods Laws, and the Prophaneness of their Lives and manners? Do not the Annals of all Ages serve to assist our belief of this Truth? Jerusalem grievously sinned, and there∣fore she was removed. The Greatest and most Celebrated Monar∣chies (as the Assyrian, and others,) and the most flourishing Church∣es (as those noted ones of Asia) lie buried in their own Ashs because of their crying Sins. Those Eastern Churches, which were planted by the Doctrine of the Holy Apostles, and water'd with their Blood are now the Habitation of the Disciples of that vile Impostor Mahomet. I might (if I would enlarge on this Head) direct your Eyes to the Calamities and Miseries, which other Countries nearer to us have laboured under: But both the Examples which are remote, and those that are near at hand ought to be made use of to this one design, namely to imprint it effectually on our Minds, that Punishments on others speak Ruine to our selves. I will close this part of my Discourse with a short Reflection on the An¦cient Brittains, who first inhabited this Nation. We may be warn∣ed of Gods Vengeance by the Example of those our Ancestors, who deservedly were harass'd and Plagued for their Heinous Miscarriages.De excid. & Con∣quest. Britan. He flourish'd about A. D. 530. Gildas, a British Monk, who purchased the Names of the Wise, for his Grave and Sober way of Writing, and Flourish'd a little after the Saxons first coming hither, hath left a brief, but full Ac∣count of the Sins and Calamities of his Countrey∣men. This British Jeremy (for so I may stile him) with Tears recounts and laments their Outragious Vices, as the cause of all their Distresses and Miseries, of all their Unhappy Changes and Revolutions. This Instance, as more nearly concerning us, ought to be considered and laid to Heart by us in a signal manner, yet so as we forget not to cast our Eyes on other Examples, which we meet with in History of those Kingdoms and Common-wealths, which have thrown off Justice and Probity, Faith and Honesty, and have indulged themselves in the greatest Enormities, and have soon after come to Ruine. So that from what hath befallen other Nations, we may rationally judge of the future Revolution and Fate of our own. III. God speaks, and that very plainly, concerning the overthrow of a Land by the several lesser Judgments, which he first sends a∣mong them. When God is angry with a People, he discovers it by his Threatnings (of which I said something under the first Head,) but after he hath threatned, he begins to strike: After he hath done chiding, and that proves not effectual, he proceeds to Blows. And these, though they be not of the greatest size, are cer∣tain
Signs and Evidences of Gods anger, and they let us understand that unless we Repent, we shall feel the utmost of his Fury, and Indignation. Though the Syrians be before, and the Philistins behind, and they both devour Israel with open Mouth, yet for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, Isa. 9.12. And after the rehearsal of Diverse Judgments this is again repeated in the same place, His anger is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched out still: As much as to say, lesser Evils do but make way for greater and more astonishing ones. This is Gods known Method in the World, of Punishing Sinners. This is evidenced in those Plagues which were inflicted on Pharaoh, and the People of Egypt: The Judgments which God sent upon them rose higher, and higher till the last was the severest of all. So the Author of the Book of Wisdom ob∣serves concerning the Canaanites, Wisd. 12.8, 10. That God did not destroy them all at once, but executed his Judgments on them by lit∣tle and little. Whereupon he adds, v. 26. They that would not be reformed by that Correction wherein he as it were dallied with them, shall feel a Judgment worthy of God. And this is clear in Gods pro∣ceedings against the Jewish Nation, who you will find were gradu∣ally punished. When they continued a stiff-necked and incorrigible People, and continually did that which provoked the Divine Maje∣sty, the Chaldeans came, and sack'd and burnt Jerusalem, and carri∣ed the inhabitants away Captive into a strange Countrey. And though the Slavery in Egypt was hard, yet this Captivity in Baby∣lon, was (asQuemadmodum lapis durior est late∣re, sic Babylonica servitus durior fuit Aegypt. Prov. Jud. the Jews observe) more hard and intolerable. And afterwards, when by Gods Infinite Goodness they were restored to their own Countrey, and the Hearts of Pagan Princes were inclined to shew favour to them, yet (notwithstanding this miraculous Mercy) they sinned against their Deliverer, and fell into their former Idolatries, and in sundry manners perverted and corrup∣ted their ways; and adding at last to all their wickednesses the crucify∣ing of the Lord of Life and Glory, their Sins being now come to the heighth, the extremity of Gods Wrath was declared against them, and the Roman Armies came and besieged them, and after they had broken in upon them, miserably treated those wicked Caitiffs, exposing all either to Fire or Sword, except those who were made Captives, to be the Li∣ving Remains and Lasting Trophies of their Cruelty, the race of whom are Fugitives and Vagabonds on the Earth to this day, and their Name as well as Nation is almost extinct in the World. Thus one Judgment, and that a greater, succeeded another: The Jews suffer'd under the Egyp∣tians, and among the Chaldeans, and I might have added that they were plagued by the Syrian Armies: but at last came Titus, who out-did Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, and Antiochus. And this was but what the
great Jehovah had told them they might expect at his hands; viz. That if they would not hearken to him, and be reformed, but would walk contrary to him, he would punish them yet seven times more for thir Sins, Lev. 26.18, &c. Which is repeated no less than four times, to intimate the certainty of it. This is the Process of the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, this is the usual course of the Dvine Justice. The Throne of Ju∣dicature is ascended by several Steps and Degrees: There is a certain Climax in Gods Judgments. God hath his Milder, and he hath also his Severer Punishments, his Gentler and Hasher Inflictions; but the for∣mer are wont to prepare the way for the latter. The Heavenly Judge is not rigorous with Malefactors for the first Crime: But if they go on in their evil Practices, the extremity of the Law is executed upon them, and they feel the utmost severity of the incensed Majesty. May not We of this Nation think our selves, even on this account, fitted to Destruction, and ready for the Extremity of Gods Wrath? We have experienced ma∣ny and various Calamities: And may not we fear that they are the Har∣bingers of utter Destruction? The Divine Revenge begins low, and strikes more sparingly and gently, till at last it fetches a greater compass, and takes its strokes with more force, and lays on heavier blows. We have in many Instances felt the anger of Heaven; but we are to remem∣ber that as we have sinned variously, so it is just that we be Punished af∣ter that sort. As the measure of our Iniquities fills, so doth that of Gods Wrath in a proportionable manner. Reflecting upon our former and present Calamities, we may say as our Saviour in the like Case, Matth. 24.6. All these things are come to pass, but the end is not yet. It may be, ver. 8. All these things are the Beginning of Sorrows. The Distresses and Evils which have already happened to us, have not produced any Amendment in us, and therefore we may justly fear that they will be back'd with more Direful Conse∣quences. God hath been to England as a Moth, as the ProphetHos. 5.12. Hosea expresseth it: He hath been wasting us with Lingring Afflictions. Doth it not remain that he be unto us as a Lion (as it follows in theV. 14. same place) that he tear us in pieces, and make a full end of us? The Moth makes way for the Lion, that is, some Lesser and Mea∣ner Judgments, which silently and gradually eat out the heart and strength of a People, prepare them for a more Fatal and Devouring Judgment. The Moth, which consumeth one Thread now. and anon another, fits the Garment to be rent in pieces the easier. God, before he Utterly Ruines a Land, wasts them by piece-meals, weakens and enfeebles them by degrees. By Precursory Judgments he makes them unable to withstand a Final Devastation, to fru∣strate some Devilish Conspiracy, to resist some Potent Enemy, or the like. It may be observed thatIsa. 3.1. the Lord takes away from a People whom he destines to Destru∣ction
(as he did from Jerusalem, and from Judah) the stay and the staff, the whole stay of Bread, and the whole stay of Water; i. e. the Necessary Provisions of Man's Life. Though, blessed be God, these Supports are not yet taken from us, yet we have reason to be afraid that they will be removed, and that God will blast the Fruits of the Earth, and bring a Famine upon us in the Rear of all those No∣table Judgments, that Terrible Army which hath quartered amongst us. Other Stays of a Land (as youV. 2, 3. read) are the Pru∣dent, and Antient, the Judges, and Experienced Coun∣cillors, men of sincerity and faithfulness, of skill and abi∣lity to manage Publick Affairs for the best; as also the Mighty Man, and the Man of War, Valiant Leaders and Souldiers: These are the Stay and Staff of a Kingdom, and when God designs the Ruine of a People, he suffers these to fail. The Mighty Man, and Man of War, and the Captain of Fifty become Deserters: The Prudent and Antient withdraw, and hide those Heads which would be useful in a Perillous Time: The Honourable Man is vilified, and discharg'd from his High Station, the Judge hath his Quietus, the Councellor is dismiss'd, the Eloquent Oratour is struck dumb, and all his Excellent Topicks of Discourse dwindle into a faint Aposiopesis. Lastly, The Cunning Artificers and Industrious Trades∣men, the great Stay and Staff of a City or Nation, are shatter'd and broken. This was the True Pourtraiture of Jerusalem, as the Prophet represented it. When These things were Visible, the Final Destruction of That People was so too, which makes the Prophet expresly and peremptorily add,Verse 8. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen. This is the Short, but Sad Epitaph which the Man of God prepares to write over those two formerly Glorious, but now Sinking and Expiring Kingdoms. They had lain a long time in a Sick and Weak con∣dition, and now the Fatal Four is come, and the Prophet loudly proclaims their Utter Ruine. The Moth had weaken'd and worn them a considerable time; and now at last the Lion seizeth upon them, and they are unavoidably torn asunder, and destroyed. If we had that spiritual fagacity which some of God's Servants are endued with, we might soon read our Future Miseries in those Evils which have been our Allotment already. For 'tis certain, (though not observed by vulgar Eyes) that there are some Acci∣dents that befall us, which point to Greater Mischiefs that are to ensue. This Truth which is so much hidden from common appre∣hensions, was plainly Preached by our Lord upon the occasion of the Unusual Massacre of the Galileans, and the Disaster of those Inhabitants of Jerusalem, on whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew them.Luke 13, 5. Except ye repent, saith he, ye shall All likewise perish: As if he had said, these Particular
and Single Accidents are Presages of a General Destruction. The Galileans Blood which Pilate shed, doth portend an Universal Sa∣crifice of the whole Nation of the Jews: The Fall of the Tower of Siloam, fore-signifies the Demolishing of the Temple, and of all the stately Structures in Jerusalem. These (saith aDr. Jackson. Pious and Pathetical Writer) were the first Drops of Gods Displeasure against that Nation, but these Drops without Repentance will grow into a Current, and that Current into a River, and the River will swell into a Floud, and that Floud into an Ocean of publick Woe and Tragick Miseries. We of this Nation have felt many Judgments, but these are nothing to what we may expect; for lesser evils are fore-warnings of Great∣er to follow: past calamities are signs of more dreadful ones to come. Gods Judgments on a Nation are least at first, but succes∣sively worse and worse: they are not unlike that Cloud which Elijah saw, no bigger than a Mans Hand at the first view, but they spread themselves by degrees, and cover the whole Heaven. Say that we are freed from some great Dangers which we lay under (and blessed be God that by the late Happy Revolution we are freed from them:) we are not thereupon to think our selves secure, and as it were priviledged from those Great Plagues which remain for the ungodly. God hath a whole Magazine, an Inexhaustible Store-house of Weapons of Vengeance: and when we think they are all spent, he is whetting them and making them ready, or perhaps he is pre∣paring more Destructive ones. The late harmless motion of the Earth may be succeeded by a furious and violent concussion, such as may prove fatal to the whole Nation. Divine Justice, it may be, is setting out in some New and Unheard of ways of severity, in some untrodden Paths of Vengeance. Or perhaps the Judgments which we experienced heretofore, the Intestine Wars, the Civil Distractions and Commotions, the Pestilence, the Fire, the Bloody Conspiracies and Attempts of our Implacable Enemies, and all their Cursed Outrages and Execrable Villanies may be repeated. And though the same Cup may be put into our Hands, yet we may be forced to Drink Deeper of it, and the very Dreggs of Gods Wrath may be poured into it. IV. God sometimes speaks, and that aloud, concerning a Nation, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it, by Strange Signs and Pro∣digies which he causeth to appear. These the Hebrews call Othoth and Mophethim; the Greeks ; the Latins Portenta, O∣stenta, Prodigia, These exceed the ordinary course of things, and are above the usual Laws and Power of Nature. And being such, that is, extraordinary as to their production, they are so likewise as to their Ends: they were designed to Terrifie and Admonish Mankind, to be
Prognosticks of approaching evil, to be Messengers and Fore-runners of heavy Plagues and Miseries; whereas things that are ordinary and natural, i. e. which are produced by the constant and settled Laws of Nature are not Ominous, because there is no evil lurking in Nature. I reckon in the number of Prodigies, the sudden and unaccountable changes which are sometimes observ'd in the Air and other Elements, the strange and amazing Tempests, Storms, and Thunders, with the affrighting circumstances that accompany them: Earthquakes, whether they be the lesser and gentler Tremblings of the Earth, or whether they be the more fierce and vehement Shocks of it, whereby Houses and Inhabitants and all things on the place are violently removed and destroyed: Great and Horrible Eruptions of Fire: Excessive Inun∣dations of Water (the outragious Sallies of either of those Masterless Elements being very Boading and Portentous:) Alterations in the Heavens, strange Appearances of the Sun and Moon: Comets, or, as they vulgarly are called, Blazing Stars. These happening besides the common and wonted order of Nature are not only Calamities themselves, but are the un∣doubted Emblems and Ensigns of other approaching Calamities to a Nation: and they are set in the fair and spacious Theatre of Heaven as the fittest place to represent those Divine shews to the view of all. The Apparitions likewise in the Inferior Regions of the Heavens are justly reckoned as Prodigious and Portentous: the Delineations and Effigies of Persons and Things in the Clouds were ever presumed to presage some strange events. Especially the Images of Armed Men joined in Battle, and Fighting in the Skies have been by the wisest ob∣servers of things that happen accounted to be Significative and Omi∣nous. And indeed the whole Doctrine of Prodigies hath been vouched and maintain'd by the long and uninterrupted Aprobation of the wisest Historians, and all other prudent enquirers into the Works of Providence. The Annals of all Times testifie that when God prpos∣eth to punish a Kingdom or City, he usually fore-signifieth it by Pro∣digies of one quality or other. I doubt not but this hath been Gods me∣thod from the Beginning of the World. I question not but the General Floud which wash'd away the first great and incorrigible sinners, was foretold to the people of that Age by some remarkable signs, though Moses, who omits many other things for brevity sake, hath not record∣ed them Some of these Portentous accidents shall presage the End of the World, as is implied in the four and twentieth chapter of St. Mat∣thew, for those things which are said there to be fore-runners of the Destruction of Jerusalem are to be understood likewise, as Indications of the approaching Consummation of all things. But there are express instances in Sacred Writ: we read that the Egyp∣tian Plagues, which were no other than Prodigies, were the fore-runners of the fatal end of Pharaoh and his mighty Host.
The same Sacred History assures us that the dispensation of the Jews was renowned for many Terrible Instances of Prodigious Appearances. That Grave Authour who Writ the Books of the Maccabees relates the wonderful Signs which were seen in Jerusalem, be∣fore the Sacking of it by Antiochus's Army: Then (saith he) it happened that through all the City for the space almost of forty days,2 Mac. 5.2, 3. there were seen Horsemen run∣ning in the Air in Cloth of Gold, and Armed with Lances like a Band of Soldi∣ers: and Troops of Horsemen in Array, Encountring and Running one against an other, with Shak∣ing of Shields, and Multitude of Pikes, and drawing of Swords, and casting of Darts, and glit∣tering of Golden Ornaments, and Harness of all sorts. These were the Visible Signs from Hea∣ven which presaged the coming of that Execrable and Bloody Tyrant to Jerusalem. This Dreadful and Astonishing Apparition was Remarkable for its continuance, for it lasted above a month together; besides it was a Spectacle to entertain all Beholders that would look up and see it. But it was most Notable and Significant in regard of the Effects and Events which followed it, viz. the horrible Persecutions which the Inhabitants of that place suffer'd, and the Bloudy Slaughters which they underwent under Antiochus: There was (as that Writer tells us) killing of Young and Old,13, 14 v. making away of Men, Women and Children, slaying of Virgins and Infants. And there were destroy∣ed within the space of three whole Days fourscore thousand, whereof fourty thousand were slain in the Conflict, and no fewer sold than slain. And to all this was added the spoil∣ing of the Temple,15. v. and the Prophaning of it no less than three years and a half. But the most remarkable Prodigies were those which Christ him∣self foretold should be the direful presages of Jerusalem's overthrow, its last and final overthrow by Titus, in the second year of his Father Vespasians Reign, and in the thirty eighth year after Christs Passion. Great Earth quakes, saith he, shall be in diverse places,Luk. 21.11. and Famines, and Pestilences, and fearful Sights and great Signs shall there be from Heaven. He that will give himself time to consult that Famous History of Josephus, which treats on purpose of the Jewish War, may be soon convinced of the Truth and Reality of what our Saviour here saith, and abundantly satisfie himself that it was fully accomplished. There never were such Famines and Pestilences as happened at that Time, viz. at the Siege of Jerusalem. Armies and Chariots, and Glistering Troops were observed in the Clouds, and other Strange and Ominous Apparitions were beheld in the Skie before the Taking and Burning of that Renowned City. A Fiery Sword, or a Blazing Star in the shape of a Sword, hung over that Place, and was Gaz'd on by all its Inhabitants. This Comet ap∣peared no less than a Year together, Hovering over the temple and other Parts of Je∣rusalem, as a Certain Hieroglyphick and Symbol of the Desolation which was near at hand. They who would not attend to the Star over Bethlehem, had now a more Affright∣ing one, which denounced the Fate of Jerusalem. That is a Wonderful Passage which we find related by that Historian, that the heavy Gates of the Temple were sen to fly open when there was no body near to forward their Motion. And this Opening of the Temple Gates of their own accord, is taken notice of in the Talmud as a Prodigious thing that happened to the Jews in those days, and as a Mark (among other things) of the Divine Anger. But the Terrible Noises and Voices, and the Fearful Sights which appear∣ed were the most notable of all. A little before the approach of Jerusalems Final Ruin, one day at the Feast of Pentecost, as the High Priest entred into the Temple to offer the usual Sacrifices, there was heard a Sudden Noise, and This Voice following it, Let us De∣part Hence. Whih was a Warning, and an Allarm from Heaven of the Misery which that City underwent as soon as God's Servants had quit the place. On the Feast of Un∣leavened Bread, at Nine a Clock at Night, the Temple was seen of a sudden to be all Incompassed with a Clear Light, as if it were Broadday. If you would Farther satisfie your selves, you may peruse the Twelfth Chapter of the Seventh Book of the fore∣mentioned History, which particularly and purposely treats of the Dismal Signs which then appeared; and there also you will see what that Learned Man's Judgment is con∣cerning Prodigies. He cannot but be lookt upon as a Credible Authour, not onely for the Reasons before suggested, but because this Person Accompanied Titus to the Siege of Jerusalem, and consequently was able to Behold the things which then happened, and to acquaint himself also with the Passages which had gone before.
But this withal is very considerable, that what this Jewish Historian relates concerning this matter, is seconded and confirmed by that Sober Roman Writer Cornelius Tacitus, who lived also in the time of Jerusalems Destru∣ction. He relates the same Prodegies which Josephus doth, but being igno∣rant of the true God, and an Enemy both to Jews and Christians, he re∣presents them in a rude manner. He expresly tells us, ThatReginibus adversae visae per caelum concunere acies, rutilantia aram; & subito nubium igne collu∣cere templum. Expessae repente delubri sores;  audita major humana vo, excedere Deos; simul motus ingens excedenti∣um. Hist. lib. 5. Troops of Men appeared in the Skie, all in bright Armour, and with the sudden light which flshed from the Clouds, the Temple shone: The great and massy Gates of this Holy place slew open of their own accord: And unto Sights were added unusual Noises; a Voice spoke to this purpose, That the Gods were departing: And this loud Voice, far greater than that of Man, was accompanied with a Noise as it were of a great ma∣ny persons rushing out, and leaving the place. Would you have a particular of the strange Events, and deplorable Calamities which were presaged by these Signs and Apparitions? Take it in short thus, (and if you have a desire to see the tragical account at large, consult Josephus, e∣specially his four last Books, which cannot be read without a mixture of Pity and Horrour) during the Siege that Year, and at the taking of Jerusa∣lem even Eleven hundred thousand perished by Fire, Sword, Famine, Pe∣stilence, and Civil Discord. Ninety seven thousand were reserved for Cap∣tives, for so many were taken prisoners at that time by the Roman Armys, on the occasion of extraordinary Multitudes of Jews meeting together to de∣lbrate the Passover, which was the very time at which they put our Saviour to Death. An innumerable Company of that misceant Nation, which sold Christ for Thirty pieces of Silver, were exposed to sale at a far Cheaper rate: For (as this Author affirms) the Market ran so low, that twenty Jews were sold for a Penny. The whole City and Temple were utterly demoli∣shed to the Ground. And this was done by him who was stiled the D∣ling and Delight of Mankind, as if the Jews were not of Humane race; Tho' (as the same Author saith) the sight of Jerusalems Ruines, were so Lamenta∣ble and Dismal, that it extorted Years from that Warlike Person who was the cause of them. But to proceed in the things which I undertook, viz. that all Sober and Intelligent Writers acknowledge there are certain Prodigies which are sore runners of the Evils and Calamities which are to insue. An Antie tS. gustin. de Civ. dei l. 3. c. 23. Father tells us, That before the Civil Wars of the Romans, their Beasts and Cattle generally ran Wild, even those that were exceeding Tame before: A Presage (aith he) of their ∣ness and Inhumanity. A known Ecclesiastical Historian, speaking of the Earthquake which happened in Bithynia, and the neighbouring Countrys, in the Days of Valentinian and Valens, makes this Remark, That
. So∣crat. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 20. this unusual Concussion of the Earth seemed to be a certain Sign of the Shakings and Convulsions, the Tumults and Disorders which afterwards were in the Christian Churches. The Author of the By∣zantine Annals giving an account of the Earthquakes and Comets, and other Terrible Accidents in the Reign of Constantinus Dux, utters these remarkable words,, &c. Mich. Glyc. An∣nal. Pars 4. These Occurrences which then happened were Punishments for sin, and marks of the Divine Anger, by which, Invasion and Slaughter were portended to the Na∣tion: For by Prodigies set up by God, not only things pre∣sent, but future are declared and foretold. But besides these Instances in the Sacred History, and in the Writings of the Jews, and in Ecclesiastical Authors, I will also mention what Prophane and Gentile Writers have said of this matter. It is the Observation of the Antient Father of History, Herodotus, That. Lib. 6. as often as Extraordinary Evils and Calamities befal a City or Nation, they are wont to be foreshewn, viz. by some unusual Sign. And again, he saith in another place,. Lib. 9. c. 99. The things which happen by Divine Appointment, are declared, and foresignified by many Signs. De bell. Pelop. lib. 1.Thucidides, a very Grave Author, takes no∣tice, that immediately before the Peloponesian War, which proved so fatal, there were Earthquakes, Eclipses of the Sun, Drought, Famine, Pestilence, that were the fore-runners of it. Lucan recounts the prodigies which hap∣pened before the Civil Eruptions between Caesar and Pompey, and acquaints us, That the whole Theater of the World was filled with them: —Superique minaces Prodigus terras implerunt, aethera, pontum. Pharsal. 1. The Earth, the Skies, the Seas did all abound with those Strange Appear∣ances. Dis Cassius speaking of the Fight between Caesar and Anthony, asserts, That there were Great and Wonderful Signs appeared before it; and he adds withal, That. Histor. Rom. lib. 47. God always foretels extraordinary Events by this sort of Occurrences: And afterwards he calls these. Lib. 54. such Signs as are wont to happen before very great Calamiiies. Virgil con∣cludes the first Book of his Georgicks, with the enu∣meration of several Prodigies, which presignified the Death of J. Caesar, and were fore-runners of the Civil-Wars which succeeded. He particularly mentions
Armorum sonitum toto Germaniacoelo Audut.— What Strange Armies were seen and heard in the Air. And others have taken notice in a more special manner of this kind of Prodigies. Arma ferunt inter nigras, crepitantia nubes, Terribilisque tubas, auditaque cornua coelo Praemonuisse nefas. Metamorph. l. 15. Ovid remarks that strange Sights and Noises in the Clouds, presaged the Death of that Great Man, who fell by the Se∣nate. And sometimes the loud Voices and Shoutings of Men, Clattering of Armour, and Prancing of Horses were heard, but nothing was seen, as a. Appian. Civil. lib. 4. Greek Historian observes, and reckons them as fore-runners of Civil Wars. Moreover, not only Antient but Modren Writers give their suffrage here, and furnish us with instances to prove what we have asserted.Scheretzius & Lava∣ter de Spectris. Two sufficient Authors assure us that Armies in the Air, and other strange Sights and Noises were seen and heard at Vienna before the first coming of the Turks thither,Metor. lib. 2. Melan∣chton. and laying Siege to it. * Melanchton, a person of known truth and integrity, ascertations us that Armies in the Clouds were frequently seen in Germany, from the year 1524. to the year 1548. There are some who imagin the Clouds may by chance fall into the shape of Horses and Men, and the Winds ruffling the Clouds and beating them backward and forward may make them seem to encounter one ano∣ther: And upon Thunder and Lightning there may be a resemblance of great Guns going off: Thus they impute all to the Natural position and structure of the Clouds. But to think that this is the true solving of this Phoenomenon is so fond and idle that I cannot believe it will be the sentiment of any Sober and Considerable person. Spectacles of so Composed a frame are not that works of mere Chance. Besides, the ex∣perience both of the wise and the vulgar attests these to be presages of ap∣proaching Evils and Calamities, which shews that they are not Casual and Fortuitous. (Cardan. De rev. vanitate.) That great Philosopher and noted Physitian of Milain acknowledgeth and testifieth that these Armies in the Skies have been seen and heard before great Wars and Commotions in Kingdoms. And even his Country man Machiavel, who had no great kind∣ness for Religion or Providence, (and therefore his words are the more remarkable) avets, and proves in several Examples and Instances that the strange and unusual disasters that happen to Kingdoms and Common-wealths
are foretold by Signs and Prodigies.Disput. de Repub. l. 1. c. 56. p. 229. I can∣not (saith he) but acknowledge my self ignorant of the cause, but the thing it self I cannot but own to be true both from antient and latter instances, that all the great Commotions and Changes which have at any time hap∣pend to Cities or whole Countries, have been constantly foretold either by some Diviner, or by discoveries made by Prodigies and Signs in the Heavens. And he pertinently takes notice of what appear'd in Italy of this nature, and shews the strange events thereby portended. JoachimDe Ostentis. Camerarius, a man of great Learning, and vast Experience, hath writ of the several Pro∣digies seen in his time, and he declares that they were fore-runners of dismal event. Caper Pruceus, another excellent person, and an emi∣nent Chronoliger, freely gives his judgment in this point, and tells usCaldes publicas quan∣do{que} praeviis in natur signis portendit ac paenuntiat, ut sint concions de ira Dei & aliquos revocent ad paenitentiam. Epist. Ded. ante Chronic. Carion. that publick Slaughters and Miseries are before hand declared by certain Pre∣vious signs in nature, that they may be Sermons and Warnings to us of the wrath of God, and call us to Repentance. Sir Walter Raleigh hath these memorable words,The Acts of the Em∣pire. Some wise men not superstiti∣ously but discreetly do think prodigious signs from Hea∣ven or on Earth are not to be neglected. Read what the Learned Grotius (a man of that Composed∣ness and Sobriety, that he would not be led by vul∣gar Opinions, a person indeed who had nothing common and vulgar in him) read, I say, what that Great Histiorian and Observer hath delivered in his Annotations in these few words,Multa constat ex prophanis sacrisque literis antequam extarent, ex∣traordinariis iis indiciis prodita fuisse, non natu∣rali causarum nexu & or∣dine, sed Dei nulu varbio trio. Theol. Doum. Tom. 3. l. 1. c. 10. Comets and Flaming Swords and other signs of a re∣sembling nature, are wont to preceed and betoken great alterations and revolutions of Affairs. I will and the words of Dionysius Petavius, a noted Scholer and Divine, who treating of universal and prodigious sights in the Heavens, speaks thus,Soldent magnas rerum conversiones praecedere Cometae, Gladu Ardentes aliaque Signa ejusmodi. In Joel. cap. 2. v. 30. It plainly appears both out of Sacred and Pro∣phane Writers, that many things were discovered and foresignified by these extraordinary Signs and Tokens long before they came to pass, though this hath hap∣pened, I cannot say by any Natural Connections and Or∣der of Causes, but wholly by the Will and Pleasure of God. I will conclude with that Notable Remark of a Modern Historian, who taking notice of the Prodegies which preceded the Wars of Germany, speaks thus,The Hist. of the Iron Age, 1st. part, 3d. Book 1. Chap. That fatal Torch which appeared toward the end of the Year 1618, with a long and formidable Tail, seemed to denounce to us the Wrath of God, thereby to prepare us to repentance, or
else patiently to suffer the Evils that we could not avoid. Those Sights which were seen in the Air in many places, those Tempests, those Exundations of Ri∣vers, those Disruptions or Shiverings of Bars by the merciless Ocean, those Earth∣quakes and Inundations, those Monstrous productions, those Waters turn'd into Blood, those Impetuous Winds which have overthrown so many Towers, and rooted up so many Trees: those Bloudy Rains, and so many other Supernatural Accidents are the Messngers of Divine Indignation to such as are obstnate in their wicked∣ness. Thus that Author, who is went to mingle Devout and Pious Eja∣culations with his History. Thus you see what is the Sense of all Ranks of Men, Fathers, Philosophers, Poets, Physitians, Statesmen, Lawyer, Divines, Historians; yea; Men of the most different Religions, Jews, Pagans, Christians, Protestants, Papists agree in this, that the things above named portend great Changes to the Publick. Therefore it is to be wondred at that the Observation of Prodigies is reckoned by aDr. Goodman. late Writer as one in∣stance of some Mens Judaizing. I do not see how these two are a Kin, for I have proved, that God hath given notice of his approaching Judgments by unusual Signs and Appearances, not only among the Jews, but likewise under the Christian and Gospel-Dispensation. This I have made good by an Induction of several Instances. And if God doth still speak to the inhabitant of the Earth by Prodigious Signs, certainly they ought to attend to them, and it can be no Superstition (whatever that Author suggests) to do so. The Gravest and Sobrest Heads have not disdained this Contemplation: The most Evangelick Minds have been exercised herein, and therefre it cannot justly be thought to be any tendency to Judaism. What the Apocryphal Writer delivered long ago holds true under the Oeconomy of the Gospel,2 Esdr. 9.6. The times of the Highest have plain beginnings in Wonders and powerful Works, and ending in Effects and Signs. These Times are still in being and these Signs are yet to be seen. Signs which foretel future Calamities to a Nation. Let us then reflect on those Divine Tokens, which we of this Nation are not strangers to. Many Wonderful Appearances have been in our days: The Earth, the Air, the Waters have afforded several Portentous Acci∣dents. The face of the Skies hath been disguised, and the Cloods have not been void of Terrible Images and Representations. As for the Heavenly Bodies, they have put on strange and ominous looks, and have appeared with affrighing and amazing countenounces. The Glorious Luminaries, have been changed and disfigured, as boding some remarkable shiftings and alterations here below. If any Man shall step forth, and say he hath seen none of these things, or if he had, he will not believe that they are Heralds of the Divine Displeasure, I can point him to that which he cannot deny to have been often seen with his own eyes, and to have been observed by all the Inhabitants of the Land, I mean those Prodigious Comets, which shaked their flaming Tails over our heads, and shot their fiery rays at us, with much anger and fierceness. I will not in this place, undertake to make it
appear, that the Apparitions of Comets, are Signs of insuing evil to a Nati∣on, and that there is a manifest connection between the things signified, and the Signs (which some are very unwilling to grant) I will not, I say, under∣take this now, because I find it done already in a * Particular Discourse, (* Cometomantia; or, a Discourse of Comets.) wherein the Author hath in∣deavoured even to gratifie the most Inquisitive, and to entertain the Philo∣sophical and Curious. I will only at present make my Appeal to those who are Sober and Impartial Judges, whether We of this Nation have not had some proof already of the power and influence of those Celestial Signs. Did not those flaming Torches, which appear'd in Sixty Four, and Sixty Five, usher in, and presage, a Raging Petilence, and a Devouring Fire, two of the most Tremendous Judgments that can happen to a place, or People? We then gazed on those Glaring Lights of Heaven, but how few of us were moved at their strange appearance? But if we neglect the remembrance of them now (especially seeing other Messengers of the like nature have appear∣ed in the Heavens) we are inexcusable. Can the Dire Effects of Comets be demonstrated by more pregnant Instances and Consequences, than so ge∣neral and spreading a Mortality, and the consuming of so great and samed a City to Ashes? And surely those last Comets which appear'd, especially that in Eighty, which was of so vast and unusual a Magnitude, were not placed in the Heavens for nothing. No, no: We have experienced the Stupendi∣ous Events which were signified by the arrival and appearance of those won∣derful Messengers. It is evident that those Heavenly Flames were set up to be an intimation of those mighty things which have since come to pass, and to forewarn us of those infinite Dangers we were liable to. They will for the future be believed to be Forerunners and Monitors, Heralds and Prog∣nosticks of impendent Judgments, maugre all the Objections and Cavils of some daring Pens to the contrary. And now of late we have been allarmed with a Prodigy of another na∣ture, the Trembling and Shaking of the Earth. We would not be affected with what appeared over our heads: And now behold! We are call'd to take notice of what is felt under our feet. This is a very remarkable and astonishing act of Providence, and it will concern us to enquire into the meaning of it. For it is certain, that there is some great thing portended by an Occurrence of this extraordinary nature, as all wife and considerate per∣sons have ever confess'd. That thereof is the thing which I will undertake: I will briefly and plainly suggest what I conceive is the signification of this Prodigious Accident. So far as I can apprehend this Shaking of the Earth, signifies and foretels, at least intimates to us and warns us of I. A Greater Judgment of the same kind, another Earthquake more ter∣rible. For if the Windy and Turbulent Matter within the Bowels of the Earth, which was the cause of this surprizing event, be not spent and exhau∣sted, which it is likely must be done by a violent and sudden Eruption of it, which will necessarily break and scatter those parts of the Earth where it both
vent, then we may expect an Earthquake of a more violent nature, and such as will prove very fatal and destructive. Let us not therefore think our selves secure, but let us be daily preparing our selves for it: But withal let us incessantly pray that God would be pleased to prevent and avert it. For I do not here pronounce any thing positively and peremptorily, but only suggest to you what we may justly fear; and look for, and that even in the nature of the thing it self. But God can over-rule all Natural Causes, and can by ways and means, which we know nothing of, prevent all future dan∣ger of this kind. And I question not but he will, if we turn from our for∣mer sins, and be heartily sorry for our past transgressions. Otherwise we may expect to be visited with a greater Calamity, and to be cut off in our sins, unless God for his own Names sake, and out of meer Grace and Pity shall think good to spare us. We have heard what hath been the lamenta∣ble fate of some others, where Earthquakes have happen'd: Great numbers have been swallowed up alive by the gaping Earth, and have been buried in its Bowels: And the Circumstances of those that survived, were unspeakably miserable and forlorn. On which occasion let us remember our Saviour's words, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. We shall all experience the like Severity of God, unless we resolve for the future to renounce our evil ways to amend our Lives, to devote our selves to God's Service, and live to his Glory. II. God's Shaking of the Earth, is a Token of God's Power and Soveraign∣ty, and of his Universal Dominion over the Inhabitants of the World. Therefore you will frequently find in the Scripture, that these Attributes of God are set forth and express'd by his moving of the Earth, and his shaking the Foundations of it. And his actual doing of it is recorded in the same Holy Writings, as an exertment of his Soveraign Power, and it is intended to strike terror into the hearts of Men, and to beget in them an awful sense of the Divine Majesty. Thus we read that when God designed to give proof to the Israelites, that he was their absolute Soveraign, Lord and Law-giver, he caused Mount Sinai (the place where he appeared to them) to quake greatly, 19. Ex. 18. The Son of God, when he hung upon the Cross, and 'twas ne∣cessary to give some undeniable evidence that he was God indeed, did it by exerting this signal act of his Power and Might, as the Evangelical History testifies, 27. Mat. 51. The Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent. And observe the event of it, Vers. 54. When the Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake, and those things that were done, they fear∣ed greatly, saying, truly this was the Son of God. The moving of the Earth is such a proof of the Divine Power, that it even forced an acknowledgment from the most hardened Pagans. So when Christ at his Resurrection de∣signed to express his Irresistible Power and Soveraignty there was a great Earthquake, 28. Mat. 2. and it is not to be questioned, but that this was as effectual to convince Men of Christ's Almighty Power, as that at his Passion. Such another Instance we have in 16. Acts 26. There was a great Earthquake, so that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken: and see the eect of it,
Vers. 29. The Jailor came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? We see then what is the Significancy of this late Trembling of the Earth, it is to put us into the same posture, it is to make us tremble, and stand in awe of the Divine Majesty, and to acknowledge his transcendent Excellency, his Greatness and Supremacy. It is to rouze the Atheists of our days, and to remind them of that Being which is endued with Infinite power, and can do what he pleaseth in Heaven and Earth. III. It is a Sign of God's great Displeasure and Anger. Accordingly we find it threaned as a token of his anger against Jerusalem, 29. Isa. 6. Thou shalt be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Earthquake, and great noise, &c. This and the like Prodigies are Divine Menaces, they are certain Marks of the Wrath of the Amghy, because of our sins. Wherefore on this account especially let us take notice of the late Hand of God towards us in that sud∣den Trepidation of the Earth, and let it put us in mind of our Sins, which are the only cause of God's Displeasure. The main Lesson we are taught by it is that in 4. Psal. 4. Stand in awe, and sin not. Whilst so many remain stu∣pid and sensless, let us be apprehensive of the Almighty's Hand stretched out against us: Let us be deeply affected with this extraordinary Dispensa∣tion: Let us with the Psalmist, be afraid of God's Judgments. Now God speaks with a loud Voice to this Nation to turn from their evil ways, now he commands all Men every where to repent, and to abandon their sins. This is that which this Remarkable Providence of God calls for. And the Lord enable us to do this speedily, lest our continuing in our Impenitence pro∣voke him to cut us off speedily. IV. Great Changes and Commotions are fore signified by this extraordi∣nary agitation of the Earth. That such unusual and amazing acts of Pro∣vidence are the forerunners of great Revolutions, hath been the universal knowledgement of the wisest Heads. Earthquakes particularly are signs of the perturbations and troubled state of the Church, said the Ecclesiastical Hi∣storian, as we observed before. It was foretold in 24. Mat. 7. that there should be great Earthquakes in divers places, before the final change and ex∣tirpation of Jerusalem. Those commotions in the natural world portend∣ed greater and more horrible ones in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity of the Jews. I oberve this likewise that in the holy Scriptures great alterati∣ons are express'd to us by Erthquakes, by moving and shaking the earth, and such like terms. This is the stile and idiom not only of the Old Test. but of the New, as is evident from several passages in the book of the Revela∣tion: and therefore there is some foundaton for what I here suggest, viz. that this particular sort of Prodigies is a signification of some notable Changes and Revolutions in the world, and particularly in this British Isle. V. It is probable that the day of Judgment and end of the World are foretold and represented by this late wonderful Occurrence. Those great Erthquakes in divers places, mentioned in 24. Mat. may be understood to be forerunners of the Last Day, as well as the destruction of Jerusalem:
For this was designed without doubt by the Holy Ghost to be a type and re∣presentation of that. Therefore 'tis worth our observing, that there have been of late, that is, within these nine or ten years, more Earthquakes than there had been two hundred years before. Which should remind us of our Saviours Prophecy, and induce us to believe that the great and Terrible Day of the Lord is approaching, when he will judge the world in righte∣ousness, and these numerous Earthquakes in divers places are the harbin∣gers and presagers of it. Let us then be effectually reminded by this late shaking of the Earth, of that last Terrible Revolution, when the Earth and the Heavens shall be dissolved, and when our Lord shall come in flaming fire to take Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of his Son Jesus. Let us watch and pray, and with faith and patience expect our Lords coming. Let us be in readiness to meet the Bridegroom who cometh at midnight, at the time when the jovial world thinks not of it. Thus I have freely given you my sentiments concerning this late Prodigy, and others which we have had before; and I leave the consider∣ate reader to judge of what I have said. To shut up this part of my Discourse, I might remind you that there are two persons who have writ of this subject, the one dispersedly, in his several writings (especially in his Sermons on 13. Luke 5. and 21. Luke 25.) the other professedly, in a particular Treatise: But they have done it in a very different way. The one hath a huge veneration for Prodigies and Divine Signs, and makes frequent discoveries of them in Gods administra∣tions in the whole world: the other is as warm against them, and will not be perswaded that such things ever happen. The one thinks he sees a Prodigy in most of the great and extraordinary accidents on the stage of the World; the other shuts his eyes, and refuses to see such things any where. That which I shall suggest concerning those Dissenters is this, that if the Doctrine of the former be thought by some to betray too much Fear and Indignation, the latter is guilty of too much Boldness and Insensible∣ness: If the former Approaches to Superstition, the latter may be suspected to lead us to Atheism. Both these Extreams are hugely dangerous, and are with great care to be avoided. As we must not be misled by Fancy and Credulity, so on the other side, we must not shut our Eyes at the plain Dis∣coveries which God is pleased to make in the World, I mean of his designs of Vengeance and Punishment to a Nation, among which I reckon, and not without cause, those Ʋnusual Accidents above named. I have the longer insisted, on this Subject because some are prejudiced against it, and will by no means believe that there are any such things as Prodigies and Portentous Indi∣cations. Therefore I was desirous to satisfie you from the serious considerati∣on of foregoing Instances, and from the Suffrage of the most Wise and Intel∣ligent, that Prodigies are nor the effect of Imagination and Fancy, but that they are really existing in the World, and that God is pleased sometimes to give notice of his Displeasure against a People by these Strange Signs and Wonders in the Heavens and on the Earth.
But if after all that hath been suggested, some will stand up, and con∣fidently maintain that this and the forementioned particulars have nothing of Presage in them, that God speaks not by these concerning the plucking up and pulling down of a Kingdom: They see no boding tokens and signs: The timorous and faint-harted are the only people that make discoveries of such things: This is the attainment of the melancholly and discontented. It is black and sooty Choler which makes things look so dark and dismal. Ap∣paritions and strange sights are the delusions of some poor Travellers, who are jogging on the Road before their Eyes are quite open, or who stay abroad so late that they are almost shut. Or, say that there are such affrighting things that are talk'd of, yet this is to be said, that they have been laugh'd at, and written against by very worthy and reverend men. As for Prophesies, and the Denunciations of Gods messengers, they are out of date now adays: there are no Seers to be expected in this blind Age of the World. If any have pretended to a greater foresight than others, we are not bound to credit what they say, for all things continue as they were from the beginning (as some of their perswasion and principles long since observed.) As for what other Nations have suffered, that concerns not us. We are hale and prospe∣rous, and surely there is no infection in Bodies Politick. What then have the judgments which have lighted on others to do with us? And whereas 'tis said that the lesser Judgments which we have felt are forerunners of Greater, we are rather willing to believe that the worst is past, and that what we have felt already is the greatest evil we shall undergo. If you hear any persons talk after this rate, you may conclude it to be the language of Atheists, and no o∣thers: and it deserves nothing but contempt and scorn. Such men are unwilling to acknowledge a supreme Ruler and Governour of the world, and therefore it is no wonder that they deny all proofs of his ruling and govern∣ing, and will not take notice of the tokens and demonstrations of his an∣ger towards sinners. But I thought it my duty to put you in mind of them, and accordingly I have briefly presented to your view the diverse intimati∣ons of a Kingdoms ruin, the sundry presages of Gods pulling down, and plucking up, and destroying a sinful Land. The practical result of all that you have heard is this: 1. That you be sensible of these symptoms of Destruction. 2. That you be exhorted to make a right use of them. 3. That you take care to prevent the impendent judgments, by speedy repentance. For as I have made an impartial Inquiry into the dreadful presages of a general Judgment on this Nation, so now I am desirous to direct you to the proper and only means of avoiding the Divine Vengeance, which is the next thing contained in the words. I. Be sensible of these things which I have suggested to you. Since God hath been pleased to speak to you in divers manners, it is your duty and in∣terest to attend to his voice. Let me use our Saviours words, Mat. 24.32. Learn a parable of the fig-tree: when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh, so likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things (or most of them which I have been treating of)
know that it is near even at the doors. I will not add what follows in the next Verse, This Generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled; For it is my Business at present to put you into a way whereby you may prevent all these Evils and Calamities that are threatned. But this cannot be done unless you first of all be Apprehensive of these sundry manifestations of Gods wrath, and be throughly sensible of the Tokens of his Indignation. That none of these things which I have spoken come upon you, you must be careful to take notice of these Marks of God's Displeasure, to Observe and Discern the Signs of the Times, to Hearken to the Voice of Gods displeasure. And to im∣print this the deeper on yur minds, you ought to remember that there can∣not be a more inable Sign of a Nations Ruin than their being senseless and stupid, and no ways Regardful of the Sins and Judgments they labour under. When Men will not be made Apprehensive of either of these, but bless them∣selves in their hearts, saying they shall have Peace, then there cannot be a more certain Prognostick of Peoples Destruction. When all the Plagues and Judg∣ments which were sent upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians did rather harden their Hearts, than melt then into Sorrow and Repentance, it was easie to guess that their Final Ruin was not far off. When God threatned to smite the Jews with Blindness, he added likewise what should be the effect of it, viz. They should not prosper in their ways, and they should be oppressed and spoiled ever∣more, and no man should save them, Deut. 28 28, 29. This may be the meaning of the 5th. of Isaiah 13. Therefore my People are gone into Captivity, because they have no knowledge, therefoe they are destroyed, because they are Senseless, and will not know and perceive their danger. They refuse to understand and consider what their Condition is, and 'tis no woder that they fall into mise∣ries, and that without remedy. Of such Persons as these the same Prophet speaks, Chap. 28. v. 14.15. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye scornful Men (you that think your selves secure, and therefore scorn and deride all the Threatnings and Judg∣ments of God:) Ye have said, we have made a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are we at Agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us. This is the Language of Stupidity and Sottishness, of Insen∣sibility and gross Security. And this is the usual practice of Sinners, viz. to perswade themselves that Punishments and Judgments and deadly Plagues shall not overtake them, notwithstanding their persisting in their Sins and Pro∣vocations. But certainly there cannot be a more evident Token that Judgments and Plagues are near at hand. When you read that God speaks after this manner to his Prophet, go tell this People, hear ye indeed, but understand not: See ye indeed, but perceive not: Make the Heart of these People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes, &c. Expect to hear in the next words, of their Cities being wasted without Inhabitant, and their Houses without Man and their Land utterly desolate. Isai. 6.9, 10. That Spiritual Judgment was a foerunner of this Temporal one: When they were made insensible, they were ripe for Destruction. This is implyed in the Prophet Jeremy's words in the 12th.
Chapter and 4th. Verse. How long shall the Land mourn, and the Herbs of eve∣ry Field wither; for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? The Beasts are consumed, and the Birds, (all things for the use and service of Man's Life are blasted and cursed) because they said, He shall not see our last end; which words refer to the 5th. Chapter and 12th. Verse. They have belyed the Lord. and said, It is not he, neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see Sword nor Famine; that is, they flattered and sooth'd themselves, and shut their Eyes against the plain Discoveries of God's Wrath against them: They would by no means believe the Prophesies and Denuntiations which were uttered concerning their Destruction. This insensibleness did certainly betoken the Vengeance which was to insue. This is briefly summ'd up in those few words in the eleventh Verse of that 12th Chapter, The whole Land is made dtsolate because no man layeth it to heart. The Condition the Land is very sad and deplorable, but there is none that takes notice of it: Men generally are grown hard and stupid, and the Judgments which are a∣broad in the Earth make no impression upon them; but be it known to them that as this shall be the Cause of their Desolation, so it is a sure Sign that it shall come to pass. The Prophet Hosea's words concerning Israel are observable, Hos. 7.9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not, yea Gray Hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth it not. Gray Hairs are signs of declin∣ing Age, and Weakness of Nature, and so set forth here the weak and languishing state of this People: Now, when they either See not, or de∣spise this Danger which they are in, it is a manifest Argument of their Ruine. To pass to the New Testament, you read there, that Christ came and wept over Jerusalem, wishing that Luke 9.42. they had known in that their day the things which belonged to their Peace, and then proceeds to foretell the Ruine and Devastation of their City, and to give the reason of it, viz. because, v. 44. They knew not the time of their Visitation. Their Senselesness and Ob∣duracy are assigned by our Saviour, as the cause of their Overthrow. Josephus observes, that before the Final Destruction of Jerusalem, they were not mo∣ved and wrought upon by those many Prodigies which hapned: Those ex∣traordinary Voices and Sights left them as they found them, Deaf and Blind. They neither attended to them, nor believed them to be what they were, that is, Tokens of God's Anger. , &c. De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12. They interpreted some of these Signs according to their own Fancy and Pleasure, and others of them they de∣spised, until their Folly was confuted by the utter ruine of their Country, and by their own overthrow. Nay, Tacitus tells us, that this besotted people, Sibi tantam fatorum magnitudinem interpretati, interpreted all those Ominous Oc∣currences in favour of themselves, and look'd on them as Signs of their good Fortune. Some of them thinking that That was the time foretold when some Eminent Person out of the East, and particularly out of Judea should be fa∣mous
for his Conquests, concluded those Prodigies to be no other than the Ensigns of so great a Victor. Thus, as God gives to Princes and People a true understanding and sense of their Condition, when he designs their wel∣fare; so on the contrary, he makes Blindness and Insensibleness to be previ∣ous to a Nations Ruine; according to the Observation of that worthy Servant of God, Martin Luther, when God intendeth to destroy a Kingdom, a Country, or a Principality, he takes from them Wisdom, that is, he blinds them, and then bereaves them of their Power and Ability. So he in his Colloq. Mensal. If you see a people deprived of their Senses, and infatu∣ated, you may conclude their condition desperate, and that they are de∣stined to Misery, without any Remedy. This was the temper of the Carthagi∣nian Christians, when the Barbarians came in upon them, as Salvian de Prov. l. 6. a pious observer of God's Dispensations hath recorded. When some of their Bre∣thren were cruelly tormented by those Invaders, they laugh'd at their suf∣ferings, and would not be persuaded, that themselves were nearly concern∣ed in the Calamities which their fellow Christians underwent. When their Savage Enemies laid Siege to them, they would not deny themselves the liberty of their Feasts and Merriment. It was hard to tell, whether the Noise of the Wars or of their Sportings and Revellings was loudest. Thus it hapned to other Cities and Countries long before: Security was the fore∣runner and cause of their Destruction. We read in the Sacred Story, Judg. 18.7, 27. the people of Laish dwelt careless and secure, which gave occasion to the Men of Dan to come upon them, and smite them with the Edge of the Sword, and to burn their City with Fire. Pagan Records acquaint us, That the Ancient and Famous City of Sparta, was never conquered, till it was walled about. This created Security, and Security wrought their Fall. That perhaps was a feigned Relation of the Poets concerning the Trojans (however, it may convey to us a real and useful Remark) that when the Fatal Horse was brought before their Gates, they were almost as earnest as their Enemies to have it taken in. So blind and besotted were those peo∣ple, that though Apollo's Priest cried out against it, and passionately dissuad∣ed them from receiving it within their Walls, and run his Spear into it, and made the Armour clatter which was within, yet they were not appre∣hensive of the mischievous Present. The crafty Sinon, a Fugitive Grecian, prevailed more with his Wily Tale and Counterfeat Tears than the wary and honest-hearted Laocoon with his repeated Warnings and Dissuaswes. And so they haled in their Ruine with their own hands, and took pains to draw the fatal Pile into their City, which proved their Overthrow. The Application is easy, and I wish this Age would lay it to heart. The ge∣nerality of men are grown so sottish and senseless, as to court their own De∣struction, and wilfully to make way for that which will ruine them: They greedily imbrace their mischief, and delight to pull down Destruction on
their own Heads. They are warned of their danger, they are freely told of the extreme Peril they are in, but they will not give ear to it. This is the infatuation which so great numbers lye under at this day; and if the God of Heaven be not pleas'd very speedily to convince them of their Folly, it will prove their inevitable Destruction: For where a people are thus senseless and incorrigible, and take the course to destroy themselves, there is no hope of Help and Recovery. Every where you may behold men (like the ancient insensate Wretches before spoken of,) — Sno vino{que} Sepultos; sunk into a dead Sleep, and overcome with Sottishness, and De∣baucheries. God's faithful Ministers have the Fate of Cassadra, who foretold the fatal event of things, but found no Belief. They have cause to complain and cry out with the Prophet, Who hath believed our Report? It fares with them as with Lot, who when he told his Sons, that God would destroy Sodom, seemed to them as one that mocked. So foolish are most men, and slow of heart to believe, what God's Messengers have spoken, what his good Providence hath discovered, what the Divine Mercy hath set before their Eyes, and called upon them to observe. The Voice of God, though very shrill and piercing, hath not awakned these Sleepers. They remain obdurate and unconcerned, notwithstanding the fearful Appearances of Wrath that are before their Eyes. Nothing will make Impression on this hardned, this Iron Age. Their Calamities are so far from humbling them, that they seem to make them more Loose and Frolick. The banished Hebrews hung their Harps on the Willows; and that mournful Sense of God's Hand upon them, was a happy Presage of their Return from their Captivity. But our light and wanton Behaviour, portends the continuance and increase of our Distresses. Our unseasonable and lavish Mirth, our intemperate Jollity and Luxury, signify some great and lasting Evil to us. It is very ominous when God's Judgments make us rejoyce. So it is, we are most cheerful and brisk, when we have the greatest reason for the contrary. When Domitian had brought the Roman Empire so low, that they were forced in a most shame∣ful manner to buy their Peace with the barbarous Nations with very large Sums of Mony; there were yet daily Triumphs at Rome, as if all were well. We have acted after the same manner; we have seem'd to be pleas'd with our Dangers; we have made Addresses to our Ruine; we have even triumph'd in our Misery. Such hath been our Carelesness and Stupidity! This is after the rate of the Old World, Luke 17.27. who eat and drank and married, and were given in marriage, and took no notice of the preparing of the Ark, which signifyed that a Fatal Deluge was at hand. And, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be, even his last coming to Judgment, 1 Thess. 5.3. when they shall say, Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction cometh upon them, as Travail upon a woman with Child, and they shall not escape. Of all the Signs of the approaching of the Day of Judgment, this seems to concern us most at this
time. The generality of men indulge themselves in their Pleasures, and for∣get God and their Duty, and take no notice of the Judgments which hang over their heads, or of their Crying Sins, which are calling down those Judg∣ments. I have met with Petrus Licetius, J. C. an Author who hath pub∣lished a Book, with this Title, De hujusce seculi Caecitate. I appeal to you, whether it may not justly admit of another Edition in our Age. The Title fits these Times exactly, for we are blind and senseless; we go on in our Sins, and perceive not the Wrath of the Almighty; we provoke God daily, and yet are not apprehensive that he will punish us. This, this is an unde∣niable mark of Ruine. But the design of this Discourse, is to persuade you to open your eyes, and to see your Danger. O that ye were so wise as to con∣sider your latter end, I mean the Close and Issue of a Nations great and ma∣nifold Provocations. The end of these things is deadly and destructive. Flatter not your selves then, and suffer not others to do it, but remember there was, Ezek 13.18. a VVoe pronounced to them, that sowed Pillows to all Arm holes; (so the false and fawning Prophetesses did, by these Types, assuring the People of the lasting Peace and Ease which the Land should enjoy) and made Kerchiefs (or any thing which binds and tyes fast, as the Original Word denotes) upon the head of every Stature, (for all Persons of what age or growth soever) to hunt Souls, to destroy the people by this means, to persuade them, that they were as it were tyed and fastned to the Land, and should not be removed, and that no evil should happen to them, though they had so grievously Incensed God's Anger. But let none of Ʋs be abused and deceived after this manner, and let us not be of the number of those who continue stupid and uncon∣cerned in the midst of Danger, 1 Thess. 5.6. Let us not Sleep, as do others, but let us watch, and be sober, lest the day of Vengeance overtake us as a Thief. Let us know in this our day, the things which belong to our Peace, and understand what are the true Remedies of our Calamities. Arise, and rouze your selves, shake off your Poppy, disgorge your Opium, look about you, and know what you do. You are already in some measure, I question not, made sensible of your condition, but not enough. My hearty desire is, that you may be fully Awakned, and that your eyes may be broad open. I hope, after all the means that have been used to rouze the people of this Land, after all the Loud Alarms which have been amongst them, they will fall asleep no more, and never be guilty of their former Drowziness and Dul∣ness, their inexcusable Blockishness and Stupidity. This is the first thing I commend to you, and without this, there is no good to be done. That is the reason why I have been so large in this particular. And because I have been so, I will be the more concise in the following ones. Only I beg of you, that you would seriously consider, and lay it to heart, what hath been now suggested to you.
2. Having then arrived to a Sense and Discerning of the state you are in, and being made Apprehensive of the Divine Admonitions and Warnings, in the next place be exhorted to make a right use of them. If you have attained to an understanding of the Times (as it is said in 1 Chron. 12.32.) let it be to the end there mentioned, viz. to know what you ought to do. To direct you particularly, in reference to the forenamed Heads; First, Be perswaded to attend unto the Voice of God's Prophets, whether they were those of Old, whose Threatnings and Denunciations reach even Us, and relate to our pre∣sent Condition, or whether they are such of God's Servants and Messengers as he hath raised up of late. You cannot say, [You see not your Signs, or there is no more any Prophet]. Blessed be God there have been some personss ex∣traordinarily moved and stirred up to give Warning to this stupid and Le∣thargick Age, of the Judgments which hang over their Heads. And shall a Trumpet be blown in the City (by the Spiritual Watchmen) and the People not be afraid? Shall enlightned and Prophetick Souls be sent amongst us, and we not lsten to their Summons and Warnings? Secondly, Let us mind Gods dealings with othe Nations, and see our own Extirpation in their Ruin. Let us be admonished by them, to learn Righteousness, and not to dispise the Voice of God, and to violate his Laws. Let us not be found guilty of their sins, lest we partake of their Plagues. Thirdly, View the lesser Judgments already iflicted on you, that they may not be a Prologue to greater and more Grievous Punishments: Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. Fourthly, Shut not your Eyes at those Re∣markable Signs and Prodigies which have appeared amongst you, especially, Those Blazing Lights which God set up in your view not many years since. Tremble at the Hand writing which you saw in the Heavens: Read the Mind of God in those Red and Fiery Characters. Esteem them to be certain To∣kens of Gods D spleasure: And whenever again such Wonderful Spectacles appear in our Horizon, be not so daring as to deride their Flaming Train, but look on them with Reverence and Dread, and conclude them to be God's Harbigers and Heralds. Let these Divine Monitors direct you to your Du∣ty: And as the Magi were guided to Christ by an unusual Star, so shew your selves truly Wise, by being led to him by these Extraordinary Signs from Heaven. And will you not remember, or rather can you forget the Hand of God, which hath been lately felt amongst us? Shall not the Earth as well as the Heavens, instruct us in our Duty? Shall we not be moved and affected with the Trembling of that Vast Element under us? Shall we not betake our selves to Prayer and Humiliation? Shall we not Abandon our sins, as the means to avert those Evils which were threatned by such Prodigious Occurrences? Which brings me to the Third and last Deduction from the Premises, which is This, let it be your main care and study to Prevent God's Terrible Sentence of Destruction against you; Let it be your concern to divert it by speedy
Repentance. For I need not here stand t prove that gnerally Gods Denunci∣aions of Judgment to a Nation (whether by Prophetick Intimations, or by Dreadful Prodigi, or by those other ways, before mentioned) are not Ab∣solute and Irrevocable. It is most clear from many places of the Old Testa∣ment, and particularly from my Text, that there is place left for Rpen∣tance. Let me prevail with you then to call your sins to remembrance, and so effectually represent them to your Consciences, as to work in your Amend∣ment of Life. Shew that this great Change is wrought in you by Discounte∣nancing and Reproving the Crying Vices and Enormities of the Age, by opposing the general Prophaneness which Reigns amongst Men; and if you be Reviled for so good a Cause, bear it with a Contented and Couragious Mind. Purge your own Hearts and Lives from Corruption and Defilement, that you may the more confidently call upon Others to mind a Religious Life, and that you may by your Holy Example and Practice wi upon them. Assure your selves that it is dangerous not to Repent at any time, but that new it is much more so, now when the Signs of Gods Anger have been so Visible amongst you. Resolve then now to relinquish the Evil Courses, and to betake your selves to your Duty with great seriousness and concern, That turn∣ing from your wicked ways, and bringing forth Fruit meet for Repentance, you may remove those dreadful Judgments which are impendent over you, and God may continue o shower down his Blessings and Mercies on this Na∣tion. Who can tell if God will turn and Repent, and turn away from his fierce an∣ger, that we perish not? Jonah 3.9. Yes, we can tell that he will turn away from his anger, if we do so from our sins. For we have it from the mouth of God himself, that if that Nation against whom he hath pronounced, turn from their Evil, then he will repent of the Evil that he thought to do unto them. You see what encouragement you have to discharge this Duty which I am now pressing upon ou. If you Repent, God will Repent likewise: So he is pleased here and in other places to speak, that he may condescend to our shal∣low Conceptions, and signifie his real Intentions of Mercy to us. God hath wrought Great and wonderful things for England: And we might expect far greater if we were truly Thankful for what we have experienced already. The secret Plots and Contrivances of Blood-thirsty Men against us, have been marvellously brought to light; and their open Endeavours and Attempts have been defeated almost by a Miracle. We might hence take Comfort, if our Crying Sins were not an impediment in the way, we might have ground of hope that God hath yet a kindness for this Land. Judg. 13.23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have shewed us all these things, nor would as at this time have done such things as these. These Blessings surely are the Earnest of others. He bestow, these favours on us to fit us for the reception of some thing which is yet to come. At least we may hope that the final and
Irreversible Sentence is not yet gone out against us. Well, this is a Truth we may be certain of, and which we may all trst to, that as nothing but our Impenitence and Incorrigibleness can hinder us from being Partakers of the Divine Mercy, so nothing but our Repentance and Amendment can make us sharers in it. Our great Physician is willing to heal our Maladies, and cure all our Publick Distempers, and to restore unto us those Blessings which are so necessary for the happiness of this Land. But then we must follow his Ad∣vice and Prescriptions, which are no other than this, that we Repent and Re∣form our Lives. This we must do, and that speedily, before the Decree come forth against us. Let every one of us lay to heart his Sins which have contri∣buted towards those Judgments that have been abroad in the Land: Let e∣very Soul resolve henceforth to quit those Practises which have procured such variety of Plagues to this Nation. Let all ranks and Degrees, all Conditions and Orders of Men in good earnest amend their ways. Let Ministers and People, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants do it effectually. Let there be this universal strife, and this only, throughout the whole Kingdom, who shall be most forward and zealous in the prosecution of this Duty. I could press this upon you by many Motives and Arguments, but I will make use of these three only, and so put a period to the whole. First, what I have exhorted you to, I beseech you think of performing, for your own sakes. If you love your own safety, if you regard your Personal and parti∣cular welfare, I intreat you to be faithful and diligent in the discharge of what I now tender to you. If you have a kindness for your selves, you must needs do it. Again for the good of your Families and of the whole Community (to joyn both these in one) be perswaded to set about this Task. You may read in History that the Commanders of Armies generally in their Speeches to their Souldiers put them in mind of their dear Wives and Children at home, and of their Beloved Countrey which they fight for: And this is thought ef∣fectual to raise their Spirits and Courage to the highest pitch. Let me use the same Argument with you: Act as you ought to do, behave your selves according to what I have suggested to you, and that for the sake of your near Relatives, your Families, and the Publick Interest. You are all embark∣ed in the same bottom. If you be Persons of generous Spirits you will have a respect to the Community, whereof you are Members: You will be desi∣rous to advance the Common good and prosperity of the Nation; which can never be effected but by your particular and personal Reformation; for the common Wellfare depends upon your single Amendment, the Publick being made up of Individuals. Let this Consideration prevail with you. Lastly, do it for the sake of Posterity. Let the Generations yet to come be beholding to you: Lay an Obligation on the future Age, by being mindful of the true Concern of the Present one. Why should you be unkind to them that shall
be hereafter, and some of them nearly Related to you? Why should you en∣tail a lasting Series of Calamities and Curses on the People that are not yet Born? Thus you are beset and environ'd with Arguments: You are concern'd on your own account, and on that of the whole Kingdom, and for succeeding Generations. As you regard your own Happiness both here and hereafter, as you love your Country, and value the Prosperity of the Land of your Na∣tivity, as you desire to transmit the Gospel, and to convey all other Blessings to those that come after you, and in concurrence with all these to advance the Honour and Glory of the Eternal God, hearken unto what I have said, and be perswaded to turn from your Evil ways, and to break off your Sins by unfeigned Repentance. FINIS.
