p3233 8723541 41672
The Present Alteration in Religion IN FRANCE. DISCOURS'D OF In TWO LETTERS, THE ONE From a Peson of Quality to an Abbot. THE OTHER The Abbot's Answer thereunto. Which may serve as an APPENDIX to the MISTERY of JESƲITISME. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Janeway. 1682.
The Present Alteration in Religion IN FRANCE. SIR, I Have not hitherto appear'd scrupulous to you, yet I fear I shall now become so; and if you wonder at that, you will much more at my chusing you my Casuist; for it is to you that I will declare a Doubt of Conscience, not knowing whom else to consult. If you conceive your selt unable to resolve it, I confide so much in your Prudence and Friendship, that you will give your self the trouble to procure me an Illu∣mination from some of your Learned Friends, who will instruct me what I am to think of all that we see, which I understand not. You know that I have always sought after Men of worth to con∣duct me; and by reason thereof I fix'd my self to the Direction of Messiers de St. Sulpice, whose
Piety all the World knows. They have taken great care to conduct me into the Simplicity of the Faith, without embroiling me in the Disputes of the Times; and above all, to continue firm by a perfect Submission to the Pope, without examining his Decrees, or making distinction or exception in what he commands (seeing the liber∣ty that some take in this matter) being the true Mark whereby to know Hereticks, and all such as have an ill Opinion in Matters of Faith. Such persons were then criminally proceeded against, not excepting Bishops themselves, that dared to expound the Popes Bulls; and I was told we are oblig'd to believe that the Pope was Infallible in Matters of Fact as well as Matters of Faith, though we daily saw Writings which prov'd the contrary. I read some of them out of curiosity, which had like to have done me harm; for, they were so well clear'd, that they fully perswaded my Reason. But I fought against this false Light, which would have captivated my Understanding, by answering my self with that which my Con∣fessor oft told me, That in Matters, of Faith we must not seek for Evidence, and that we ought to contain our selves within this Holy Igno∣rance, which instructs our Knowledg to submit, and not to dispute upon the Word of Jesus Christ; whoo tells St. Peter and his Successors, This Spi∣rit will teach you all things. There I acqui∣esced with much satisfaction until the last year: But I must tell you truly, I know not where I
now am since that time. There are daily Edicts of Parliament, publish'd against the Popes Briefs, and there is publickly maintain'd in these Edicts Maximes and Opinions altogether like unto those which were heretofore attributed to the Janse∣nists, and for which they were treated as Here∣ticks and Rebels to the Church. I have ask'd my Confessor, What the meaning was of this change? He gave me only for Answer, That it was Interest of State which oblig'd us to carry our selves dif∣ferently according to the Times, and that this did not concern me at all. This quieted my Conscience never a whit, but on the contrary I find it much: perplex'd; for I ought surely to know what I must hold, and Religion is not to change with the Times. I do indifferent well ap∣prehend that these Humane Interests do oft times change the, Conduct of Princes; but the Prelates of the Church in these Occurrences use to speak their Sentiments. Here quite contrary, the Bi∣shops of France support the Edicts; no body con∣tradicts them neither in the Chairs, nor Schools, nor even in the Tribunal, of Confession, where Men might under the Seal of Secresie speak their Sentiments with freedom; and where the Confes∣sor would be more oblig'd not to suffer that to be a Doubt in the Soul, which formerly they esta∣blish'd as the Foundation of Faith; which was the Obligation to believe, and in all things to obey the Vicar of Jesus Christ, who supplies his place upon Earth. What then shall we think of all
this? and you your self, Sir, what do you think of it? Those that said heretofore that which is now publickly said, were counted Hereticks; and it was so thorowly believed, that we believe it still. In the mean time the King, the Parliament, and all the Bishops, say the same things now. Are they changing of Religion? Are they going over to them? But there is no likelihood of that, for they are as much persecuted as ever. Who can then unfold so incomprehensible a matter? I con∣jure you therefore to seek out some Light herein, and to let me share in it; for in, good earnest in a matter concerning Salvation, I would not remain in any doubt whether I hold the Right or the Wrong. And notwithstanding all my Confessors prohibiti∣ons, I resolve to seek after the Light, and shall endeavour to discern where the Truth lies; seeing there is no sfety but in following it. You will lay the greatest obligation in the World on me Sir, if you will please to contribute thereunto, and I shall be a thousand times more all my life long Your most humble and Obedient Servant.
THE Answer to the Precedent Letter. I Have, Madam, observ'd so much good Sense, and excellent Ingenuity in the Letter which you confided to me, that the Person that wrote it, is her self able enough to decide the Case of Con∣science which she proposed, though it includes things so contradictory, and which can so hardly be reconciled. It's true, That the Pope's Infallibility was maintain'd some years since as an Article of Faith, both in Matters of Fact and in Matters of Right; and that all those were treated as Hereticks that were of another Mind, the Bishops not except∣ed, who were as much distinguish'd by their Piety, as by their Doctrine. But now all is chang'd. The Pope's Bulls, heretofore so sacred and so inviola∣ble, are highly condemned by Arrest of Parlia∣ment, and those Decrees are supported by Au∣thority of the Clergy of France. The Vicar of Je∣sus Christ is no longer Infallible, and many other Maximes are Establishing, which were formerly charg'd only upon the Jansenists. This is it, Ma∣dam, which troubles your Illustrious Friend, she would willingly have some body so well inlight∣ned as to prescribe her the manner how she ought to demean her self in so strange a confusion. She
hath consulted her Confessor, and is not yet sa∣tisfied. I assure you, Madam, that I pity her, and wish nothing more than to draw her out of those snares wherein she is held. But as I cannot do it by my own Light, I conclude I shall do it possibly by that of others, and it will be hard if I find not in Paris some able man to resolve this difficulty, which gives her so much disturbance. As I was considering whither to repair, it came into my thoughts to go to the Carmelites, and ask for Father Caesar. You know, Madam, the great reputation he has. The great Caesar, who vanquish'd the Gauls, brought not more under his Empire, than this man hath drawn persons of Quality under his Di∣rection. It is true, nevertheless, that I am not satis∣fied: He answers me nothing else but that we must keep to the Body of the Tree. I understand you Father, said I, the Body of the Tree is the Pope; why then doth the Parliament and Clergy seperate from him? Why then do they question his Infal∣libility? Can this be done without Heresy? I en∣ter not, said he, into these Disputes, it belongs not to me to judg of those who are set to judg others. But I will ever maintain with the peril or my life, that we must keep to the Body of the Tree. 'Tis well done, said I, it appears to me that you are well fixt to it, and that all the Powers on Earth cannot make you waver. When I saw he would not ex∣plain himself farther, I took my leave, and in re∣turning I bethought my self of going to the (Je∣uits) Colledg of Clermont, where I was certain
of finding men of easy access. It is the place where the ablest Casuists are bred, and where men are refined and purified daily more and more. I ask'd for him who taught Cases of Conscience, but he was gone forth; I was then advertiz'd of another Father, who came to me with a Gravity haugh∣ty enough, yet mix'd with some sweetness. I went towards him at the same time with a sub∣missive respect. (For at this day all Ecclesiasticks of what quality soever, Abbots, Bishops, and Arch-Bishops, do creep to these Gentlemen, else they expose themselves to their indignation, and pass for Jansenists) so after I had made my ho∣mage to the Reverend Father, I let him under∣stand, whereby to be the more favourably heard, that I came on behalf of a Lady of Principal Quality, whose Conscience is troubled about all these Affairs that pass at this time in the Church. And to the end he might be better inform'd, and answer more accurately to every particular▪ I shew'd him the Letter you had sent me, He read it with good attention, and after he had com∣mended the facile and natural manner wherewith it is written, he told me (with great ostentati∣on, as venting a Profound Doctrine; and with that great disdain which it inspires towards the ignorant) that he did not see in the least any shadow of difficulty in the thing, and that it was drowning ones self in a drop of water. I told him however that it is not this Lady alone that drowns her self, Father Caesar that great Guid
and Confessor (who doubtless is known to you) drowns himself too, though he thinks he hath sav'd himself very happily, by telling me a hun∣dred times, that we must keep to the Body of the Tree. This Father did not much wonder at the Name of Father Caesar, He is a good Man, said he, smiling to himself, and shaking his Head. Perceiving this Father speak with so much Zeal, and so good an Opinion of himself, I expected that he would speak nothing but Oracles. How happy am I (said I, Sir) to have met with you! for I even imagine you will let me see the Heavens open: Pray therefore do me the favour to tell me how you reconcile all that we see now adays, to that which pass'd formerly? O very easily, Sir, said he: You know, heretofore that it was, of import∣ance for the honour of our Society (which one may well say are the surest Pillars of the Church) to establish the Infallibility of the Pope as an Ar∣ticle of Faith, that so we might get him on our side, and oblige him to use all his Spiritual Pow∣er for us against the Jansenists, who then made a cruel War upon us, and you see, God be prai∣sed, how we have succeeded. They have done their utmost Efforts to ruin our Doctrine, and rendred our Morals ridiculous and extravagant; and though in appearance they would needs bear us down with the Authority of the Fathers, Coun∣cils, and the Scriptures, we have nevertheless managed things so well, that they themselves have been declared Hereticks. In fine, that dan∣gerous
Cabal hath been dissipated (said he) and are become Wanderers and Vagabonds, and can very hardly sind any place of safety for themselves upon Earth. Now, as at present there is nothing to be feared from that side, and that other Af∣fairs have occurred wherein we judg'd it our In∣terest not to have so great respect for the Pope, and to have much for the King, to whom we are infinitely oblig'd: We have believed that to maintain the Rights of his Crown, and to pre∣serve our selves continually in his Grace and Fa∣vour; we might follow the Opinion of many Doctors, who believe that the Pope may be de∣ceived: so that you must not wonder if in divers times we believe different things. But Father, said I, does Religion then change with the Times? You deceive your self, said he, it changeth not for all that, it remains ever the same, and is unchangeable; though according to divers occur∣rences we are sometimes of one Opinion, and sometimes of another. There lies the Miracle of the Doctrine of Probability, which far from shaking the Tenets of Religion, does confirm it; and no body knows better the value and price of it than our selves, by the most frequent use we make of it. For by this means it is that we have spread Christianity almost thorow the whole World, and establish'd it without any great con∣tradiction in the midst of the most savage and barbarous. People, by suddenly suppressing what ever might quash or give any aversion or distaste.
It is well known what we have done for the Glory of Jesus Christ in China: his Death and Sufferings Preach'd there, caus'd horrour and exposed us to all sorts of outrages and violence. We believ'd there∣fore that Probably we might not tell them a word of it, and that it would suffice us to preach up his Miracles, his triumphant Ascension into Hea∣ven, and all that, that might give them a pleasing and advantagious Idea. You cannot imagine, Sir, the progress that we have made, and do daily make, by means of this most Divine Doctrine of Probability, and that God hath doubtless inspir'd it into us, that we might labour more Profitably, and with less danger to our persons, in the Con∣version of so great a number of Infidels. Whilst the Father was thus talking, I admired to him the conduct of those new Apostles, and compar'd them to those of the first Christians, who preach'd not the Gospel with so much precaution, and who had not for their guidance in their Mission, this Pro∣bability, which would have sav'd them much Blood: But it pleased not God to Inspire them with it. This Grace was reserv'd for these last Vessels of Election, who were to carry his Name more remote in the World, and render their labours more illustrious. But as this Father spake with much zeal and sincerity, so I declar'd my self much satisfied. I am even ravish'd (said I) Sir, with all that you have told me, and if I under∣stand it aright, it seems to me that the Popes In∣fallibillity is but a Probable Opinion, upon which
one may chuse whether to be either for or against it, as it pleaseth one best. You are in the right, said he. Then give me leave, Reverend Father, said I, to ask you a little Question upon it, Can one impute a probable Opinion to any as a Here∣sie? Yea doubtless, said he, if the Opinion be probably Heretical. Then reply'd I, Father, It is an Opinion with those of your Society, That it is probably Heretical not to believe the Pope's Infallibility, for that is one of the greatest Here∣sies which you charge the Jansenists with; and by consequence you must now look upon, and shun all as Heretical, who have the same Sen∣timent: that is to say, the Gentlemen of the Parliament, and all the Bishops of France. You are too quick, said he, you have already for∣gotten that which we have newly establish'd as a thing indisputable; and which you learn in our ablest Casuists, That in respect of a Probable Opinion, one may chuse Pro or Con, which side you like best. Argue therefore a little more equal∣ly upon that Principle (said he) and draw your Consequences thence better. For if it be proba∣ble, That it is a Heresie not to believe the Infal∣libility, it is also Probable that it is no Heresie. Men have their choice to say either Yea, or Nay, as it is most advantageous to them. So then, Fa∣ther (said I) though the Bishops, the Parliament, and the Jansenists do not differ upon the Subject of Infallibility; and though they all believe the same thing, it being of the highest Importance to
you to lead and manage the Bishops and Parlia∣ment, you declare, them to be most Orthodox. But for the Jansenists, who are so contrary to you, you will ever declare them Hereticks. Yes, it is so, said he, which we can do with a good Conscience, by directing our Intentions as we ought; and therein mind nothing but the glory of God, and that of our Society. But Father (said I) what would you do, if the Clergy and Parliament should contend with, or differ from you; would you spare them any more than the Janse∣nists? We would beware (said he) of engaging two such powerful Bodies against us; we would take such measures as might not hurt us. Pru∣dence would suggest to us a Thousand Expedients to conjure down that Tempest. It were then con∣venient to dissemble for some time, and as occasi∣on should offer to fall soul upon some of them, and render them suspect, to deter others. Are you ignorant of what we have done (continu'd he) to other Prelates, that dared to clash with us? I could name you a sufficient number, whose Do∣ctrine and Conduct we have cry'd down. I re∣member it, Father (said I) we cannot taxe you with being wanting in that. Death it self extin∣guisheth not your Resentments, so just are they. And to speak only of the late Bishop de Pamiez, all the World knows you reserve those Resentments still against him; and that not being able to exer∣cize your Zeal against his person▪ you employ it to hinder (as one may say) his repose in his Grave;
by rendring his Memory hateful. You, the Fa∣thers of Pamiez, have particularly signaliz'd your selves herein. For the People running to the Sepulchre of this Prelate, and giving him the honours as to a Saint, you labour'd with might and main to perswade them that he was damn'd, because he had Excommunicated Three of your Society. 'Tis in effect a Crime never to be remitted, neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Mock not (said he) every Prelate that Excommunicates us, is himself Excommunica∣ted (ipso facto;) and if he repairs not this injury before he dies, and asks us not Pardon for his Ti∣merity, it is impossible that he an be saved. But not to stray too far from our Subject, be per∣swaded (continu'd he) that there is nothing so commodious as our Doctrine of Probability; and notwithstanding all the Endeavours the Pope hath used against it, it shall ever continue firm with us. 'Tis in vain to oppose it, it is of absolute necessity in the World. What means else is there to reconcile so many things which seem incom∣patible? And how can we ever resolve the Case of Conscience of your Marchioness or Dutchess? If after all this there remains any Scruple with her, let her but take the pains to come and see me, and I am confident she will be freed of all her Doubts. This Madam, is all the Solution I could draw from this Fa∣ther; if it be not satisfactory, I see no better
means than to accept his Offers; he is full out as willing as able; and I am, Madam, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, The Abbot of — FINIS.
