P353 13024868 96676
A COMMENTARY UPON THE DIVINE REVELATION OF THE APOSTLE AND EVANGELIST IOHN. BY DAVID PAREUS: Sometimes Professour of Divinity in the Universitie of HEIDELBERG. And specially some things upon the 20th Chapter are observed by the same Authour against the MILLENARIES. decorative device Translated out of the Latine into English, By ELIAS ARNOLD. AMSTERDAM. Printed by C. P. ANNO. MDCXLIV.
To the Christian Reader: IT is an usuall saying, A good thing cannot bee too common: the worth and profitablenesse of this Booke is well knowne of the learned every where: being (and indeed deservedly) esteemed one of the best and choisest Commentaries, that is now extant upon the Revelation. And if we consider the perillous times wherein wee are, I know no worke more seasonable for our instruction and comfort touching the present Commotions and uproares in the world. For here we shall find, that it is necessary, that such things come to passe, to the end the words of this Prophesie may be fulfilled: we have all need (as the Apostle saith) of patience: now what will more perswade us to be quiet, contented, comforted, then to looke into the Revelation of Iesus Christ, where we shall find all the conflicts and combats of the Godly, against the Dragon, Beast, and False-prophet most clearly set forth, and none of our sufferings in any way or kind to be otherwise, then what was fore-appointed in the unchangeable decree of God. Moreover here we have set downe with the finger of God, the cer∣taine event and issue of the whole warre: namely Antichrists destru∣ction, and the glorious and happy victory of the Saints. A man of a weake and cowardly Spirit, will cheerfully fight, if he know before hand that he shall surely overcome. This assurance all true Belee∣vers have, that they shalbe more then Conquerors through him that loveth them, and therefore they have cause enough to stand fast, hold their owne, fight the good fight of faith: seeing it is without question, that they shall overcome in the blood of the Lambe: But of this I need not here speake, considering how largely and sweetly this matter is treated of in this Commentary. It is not my purpose to speake any thing in the behalfe of the Translator, or in the praise of his worke: least that in the Proverbs Chap. 27.14. should be applied to me. Wherefore what is here done, I leave to the triall and judgement of all sober and godly minded Readers. Onely I must needs say that it would be a singular bene∣fit to our Nation, if there were more of Pareus his workes translated into our English tongue. And for ought I do perceive, the Tran∣slator of this hath some purpose so to do, if this (which is the first) doe finde a faire and friendly acceptance. And I have no reason to thinke otherwise: Considering how well Mr. Brightman on the Re∣velation is approved of: Now howsoever I will not speake any thing in the least to his disparagement: notwithstanding seeing Pareus was
a later Writer, an Interpreter one among a thousand, a man of an acute and deepe judgement, and one that had his thoughts and meditati∣ons on the worke 30. yeares: in these and other respects the Reader may well make account to meete here with many things, more for his satisfaction then hitherto he hath ever had: and that he may the sooner see with his owne eyes the trueth of what I speake, I shall advise him in the first place carefully to read Pareus his Preface: for it will much helpe him, to the better understanding of the following Commentary. And thus committing the worke to the favourable acceptance of religious and judicious mindes, beseeching the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to blesse and prosper it for his glory, and for the consolation and edification of all those that seek his favour, and de∣sire to feare his Holy Name, I rest Thine in IESVS CHRIST. J. C.
THE AUTHOURS ADVERTISEMENT TOUCHING THE Publishing of this COMMFNTARY. I Had thought indeed never to have set forth this Com∣mentary upon the Revelation, long since expounded in the Academie in CLXXXVIII-Lectures, but to have left the same unto my children for their proper use: and this for divers causes: especially finding that as yet I had not touched the height of the mysteries, neither should easily satisfie others, having in many things not satisfied my selfe. In the meane while I thought it requisite with all diligence to search out the judgements of more learned Interpreters in the harder matters: and not to neglect whatsoever might seem in the Commen∣taries of ancient and modern Interpreters to conduce for the poli∣shing of the work: as not being ignorant of the admonition of Horace, (Membranis intus positis, delere licebit, Quod non edideris: nescit vox missa reverti.) That a man may alter or blot out his private writings, which are not made publicke: but the word that is out cannot be recalled. Notwith∣standing it happened of late (I know not by what providence) that at length I assented to the publishing thereof, at the earnest request of friends: who judged it a thing unfit, that the Church, (no weighty reason hindering the same) should any longer be deprived of this trea∣sure: be it whatsoever it be: perswading themselves that by me some∣thing more would be published touching these mysteries, then as yet was extant. And that the things yet hid, are perhaps of that nature, which either God hath reserved unto his own power, or are better not to be known, then known by us: of which kind some things are, Enchir. cap. 17. accor∣ding to Austin. They added that now there was speciall use to vindicate this Pro∣phesie, it being publickly depraved by new feigned Oracles and false Glosses, as if it did establish Romish Idolatry, and Patronize Popish Tyranny, from which notwithstanding it portendeth nothing but sad evils unto the Godly, and most miserable calamities unto the Church, the which the Revelation setteth forth by lively colours, as it were the very Kingdome of Antichrist himselfe, under the type of a Beast and False-Prophet: All which they affirme is made appeare throughout this Commentary: by which reasons being over-swayed, I gave way to the publishing thereof, yet so as this Sacred and last  or gratefull Gift should be dedicated unto none, save unto my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. If therefore so it be, that in the opening of these mysteries I may
seem unto some in any place to come short: these I lovingly desire to supply my defect with their greater diligence: pardoning in the mean time what is not yet attain'd to, & being thākfull for what is found out. But & if there shalbe any, who wrest my expositions touching the beast, or his head, or horns, or the like mysteries, unto the offence and injury of any mans person: to these I testifie, that I have written nothing to the reproch or scandal of any man: but truly and candidly expounded what our Saviour Christ reveald unto Iohn, not to the injury, but rather instruction and Salvation of all such as desire to be saved, nor unto the offence, but admonition and amendment of such as wil not perish. Neither am I the first who have thus expounded the Beast. What speake I of my selfe? Neither was the Apostle John the first who shewed Antichrist at Rome: for before him Paul testified, that the Son of perdition should sit in the Temple of God as God, that is, claim the prin∣cipallity in the Church: for even then the mysterie of iniquitie was a working, except it had bin for that which did with-hold, that is, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Ierom interpret it, the Romane Empire: which first being translated from the mountains of Rome to some other place, and weakned, should as it were be abolished. After both Irenaeus a most ancient Writer said, that the numerall name of the Beast in all likelyhood should bee () Lateinos, Lib. 5. c. 25 and as if he had bin a divine Prophet foretelling the apostacy of the La∣tin Church, he expresly addeth these words: But in this we wil not boast. Gregory himselfe I. Romish Pope confidently affirmed that that Priest should be Antichrist, Lib. 4. E∣pist. 38. or Antichrists fore-runner, who stiled himselfe UNIVERSAL: pointing as with the finger at Boniface III. his Successour: for, saith he, the king of pride is at hand, and that which is not lawfull to be spoken, an Army of Preists is prepared. Neither will I now alledge any more (reserving it till afterward in Chap. 13.) Bellar. lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 21. who after the time of Gregory I. have demonstrated Rome to be the seat of Antichrist, and the Pope with his double-sword Anti∣christ. Wherfore it is said not of ignorance, but malice, that by us Pro∣testants the Pope first began to be Antichrist. De velan∣dis virgin. Good things scandalize no man, unlesse an evil mind, saith Tertulian, But trueth is the best thing. Therfore this truth, that Antichrist doth now reigne at Rome, can scan∣dalize none but evil-minded men. Wherefore thou, O Pope, hear this truth and repent, Rev. 19.10 before the hand of the Heavenly Conquerour lay hold on thee, and cast thee into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. Neither let Parasites deceive thee, who from the Revelation pro∣mise unto thee the whole Empire of the World: one while denying thou art a man: another while they feine thee an halfe-god, one while Gods Vice-gerent, yea a God: who paint out thy Church gloriously sitting on a throne, (I sit a Queene, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow) treading under her feet the Protestant Hereticks with their Bibles. Rev. 18.7. These cosen thee with vain words. Hearken to Clemanges a man of ancient credit, De corrupt. Eccles. Sta∣tu. cap. 26. he sheweth what the Revelation promiseth thee: What thinkest thou, saith he, of thy Prophesie, to wit, of Iohns Revelation? dost not thou at least thinke, that in some part it belongs unto thee? Thou
hast not so lost shame and sense to deny these things. Therefore looke into it, and read the condemnation of the great whore, sitting upon many waters, and there contemplate thy worthy acts, and what shall befall thee. Hath not the Apostle Paul sufficiently noted that thou art he that sittest in the temple of God as God? why then shouldest thou not suspect all that thou dost, and hast? Thy two horns like the Lambs: thy two keyes, and the two swords in thy hand: the Triple Crown on thy head: the mysterie in thy forehead: the Image which thou causest the inhabitants of the earth to worship, killing them that refuse to do it: the name and the number of thy name: the Masse and Latine Leturgie: the whorish woman sitting upon Se∣ven Mountaines: now oughtest thou not to suspect all these? And ye O unwise Kings: when will ye understand, whom to serve and what ye should do? when will God put it into your hearts to doe his will, that is, to make Rome the whorish woman desolate? Oh serve the Lord with feare and trembling, kisse the Son least he be angry, and yee perish in the way: let the Lambe conquer you, not unto destruction, like as the Beast overcommeth, but unto conversion: do it (o kings) speedily, least it be too late. For God will not be mocked. He hath begun to put into the hearts of diverse good Kings to do this willing∣ly: He will also put into the hearts of others, when it shall please him, according to the oracle of the Angell. Rev. 17.17. And already hath he perswa∣ded the hearts of some Emperours deceased, even in their ago∣nie, to approach before the Tribunall of God not by invocating of Mary, but by imploring the divine mercy, and so rendred their soules to God their Saviour, not in confidence of the Churches treasure, but the alone merits of Jesus Christ. He put also into the heart of ano∣ther great Zelot in his sicke bed, to turne his face from the Priest, chanting prayers to the Virgin Mary, and promising him Salvation by his owne and the Saints merits, thereby testifying, that he desired to be raysed up by the intercession and merits of Christ. They that cease to do thus shall not be partakers of Salvation. They which do it seriously, verily they are overcome by the Lambe unto their Sal∣vation, and they make the whore desolate late indeed, yet not too late. But let no man tempt God: for ye know not how soone yee may be taken away. While therfore it is time walke in the light, least the darknesse come upon you. Neither let flatterers deceive you, who say, that it seems harsh, dishonourable, and unbeseeming, that so many Princes warre against the Lambe, follow the Beast, are Antichrists Vassals, that the greatest part of the Empire consists of Antichrist, who is to be cast into the Lake of Fire. This is the deceitfull song of Sirenes. To begin with the last particular, How I pray shall the greatest part of the Empire consist of Antichrist, if our trueth doth stand that the Pope is Antichrist, un∣lesse either the Pope be said to be the greatest part of the Empire, then which nothing is more false, and opprobrious to the Empire, or that these men do meerly triflle? But will they deny them to be Kings touching whom the Revelation hath foretold such things? Or wil they accuse the Revelation to cast dishonourable aspersions upon Kings?
They say: that Pagan, not Christian Kings are spoken of. But this is neither agreeable to the Revelation, nor to their owne fiction. For the Kings, who shall give their power to the Beast and fight against the Lambe, shall be the same, into whose hearts God will put it to hate the whore and make her desolate. Now this argues that they shall not be Pagan but Christian Kings, who before being deceived through ignorance, shall sin in fact: but at length being overcome by the Lamb, that is, brought to repentance; they shall, forsaking their error, turne their hearts and power against the whore. Neither can any man ex∣cept he bee deprived of understanding deny, that these things are couched in the Text. And if credit be given unto their fiction, Ribera in Apoc. c. 12. Num. 11. &c. 13. Num. 10. there shall at Antichrists comming be no more then ten Kings in the whole world, signified by the hornes of the Beast, and of these, three being slaine, seven shal fight for Antichrist. Therfore either these shalbe Christian Kings, or else there shall then be no Christian Kings under the Sun, the falsitie whereof the Revelation doth shew Chap. 21.24. Now tel me, what harshnesse or dishonour is there in it, that (as Paul confesseth he was sometime a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, but ignorantly, and so obtained mercy:) the ten Kings have given their power unto the Beast against the Lamb: but of ignorance: and being overcome by the Lambe have repented: God putting it into their hearts to hate the whore? Tell me, I say, should this be to the dis∣honour of Kings, which is to their great glory, to have sinned indeed through ignorance, but repented through the mercy of God? Or is not rather the fiction of these Prophets very reproachfull, scanda∣lous and fatall, who say, that toward Antichrists rising there shalbe no where any Emperor or Romane Empire: that there shalbe no King in any place save those seven (that remaine of the ten) fighting for Anti∣christ. And seeing they every hour expect their Antichrist, to arise (as they say out of the tribe of Dan) what do they but threaten an ut∣ter destruction both to the Emperor, Romane Empire, and all Chri∣stian Kings? For according unto these mens doctrine, as then there shal bee no Emperor, no Empire: so neither King of France, Spain, England, Poland, Hungary, &c. or if there be any they shall be Anti∣christs Life-gard and vassals. Now tell me, who they are that cast reproaches upon Christian Kings, set their Crownes awry, and me∣nace them with eternall damnation. Wherefore blessed shall ye be, if ye hear and keep the Comman∣dements of this Prophesie, that ye may have right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the City: But he that wil hurt, let him hurt still: and he that is filthy let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. Amen. Even so come Lord Iesus: and sanctifie us in trueth. Thy word is trueth. Amen. PROVERB. 27.6. Better are the wounds of a friend, then the deceit∣full kisses of an enemy.
The Authours PREFACE UPON THE REVELATION OF THE APOSTLE AND EVAGELIST IOHN: HAPPILY BEGVN AND PROPOVNDED VNTO HIS AVDITORY IN THE VNIVERSITY. Ann. 1608. IF any of you (my Hearers) admire, wherefore, after the Ex∣position of Pauls Epistle unto the Hebrews, I should passe by so ma∣ny excellent Bookes of the New Testament, and take in hand the Interpretation of the last, viz. the Revelation, the Authour and Canonicall authority whereof hath long since variously bin disputed of: and which being replenished with great secrets, types, and darke sentences, is scarcely intelligible unto any: The Obje∣ctions a∣gainst the Revelation and though it be entitled a Revelation, yet seemeth not in the least to be a Booke re∣vealed, but rather shut up and sealed: which seemeth also to bee the reason that it is placed at the end of the New Testament: from the interpretation whereof because of its obscurity, not a few of the ablest Divines have hitherto abstained: and lastly seeing it hath long since bin held, that it doth contain some things con∣trary to Apostolicall Faith, and favour the heresie of the Chiliasts. If I say, any man wondreth at this my purpose, such a one I would have with me to acknowledge, that these very objections (besides other causes which now are not requisite to be related) with which this most Heavenly Book is injuriously charged, offereth oc∣casion unto me to interpret the same, that ye might understand that the Revelation of John is so farre from the guilt of these accusations (which do not a little wea∣ken the Canon of our Faith) that we rather may say of it, what Jerome most tru∣ly said of the Prophesie of Isaias: Whatsoever is in Holy Writ, whatsoever can bee uttered by the tongue or received by the senses of mortall man, is contained in this Booke: which least it might seeme to be spoken by me without ground, Prooem. in Isa. I thought good to praemise a few things in way of Preface: in which I will handle somethings more briefly, by other Interpreters more largely handled: and somethings pro∣perly belonging to our purpose, I shall more diligently explicate. CHAPTER. I. Of the Authour of the Revelation WHo was the Authour of this Booke, Lib. 7. hist. c. 25. Haer. 51. would never in our times have beene questioned, unlesse Eusebius and Epiphanius had left in writing, that some of old time did scruple the thing. For Eusebius recordeth, that in his time it was diversly on both parts disputed touching the Revelation. Afterward he saith, there were some who supposed from the Bookes (called De Repromissionibus) of one
DIONYSIUS an Alexandrine Bishop, and also from one Caius an old Writer, that the Revelation was not written by John the Apostle, but forged by the Here∣ticke Cerinthus, who feined an earthly Kingdome to Christ, in which the Saints should have their fill of corporall pleasures a thousand yeeres: into which sense, some whom they called Chiliasts, men in other respects of note in the Church, drew the twentieth Chapter of the Revelation. But other Divines and worthy Fa∣thers have alwayes demonstrated, that there is no such thing in that Chapter: and we also will shew it on the place. But so farre is it from trueth, The Reve∣lation not written by Cerinthus. that the blasphemous Heretick Cerinthus could be the Author of this Booke, as nothing is lesse credible, or more unlikely. For Ce∣rinthus blasphemously maintained, that Christ was not before Mary. But the Revelation throughout teacheth and proveth the Eternall Deity of Christ by such evident Arguments against Cerinthus, Ebion, Photinus, and such like enemies of Christ, as almost no Scripture affirmeth the same more clearly. However therefore it is no marveile, Lib. 4. ad∣versus Mar. that the Marcionites (as Tertulian recor∣deth) as also the Alogian and Tatian Heretickes (as Epiphanius, Augustine, and Philastrius testifie) did reject the Revelation as being contrary to their heresie: Yet the Grecians of old had no reason, neither to this day hath any man a just or probable cause, Iohn the Apostle au∣thor of the Revelation. to call into question the Authour, or Canonicall Authority of this most Sacred Booke. That John the Apostle (whose Gospell and three Canonicall Epistles are ex∣tant) is the Author, may be proved by solid and undoubted reasons. First the Title it selfe sheweth that he is the Author:  The Revelation of John the Divine. But thou wilt say, it is not said, John the Apostle or Evangelist: Lib. 3. hist. cap. 13. but John the Divine: touching whom it seems to be un∣certaine who he was: because, as Eusebius recordeth, there were two Iohns, whose Monuments were then at Ephesus, viz. Iohn the Evangelist the Writer of the Gospell, and of one Canonicall Epistle: and Iohn the Presbyter or Elder, the Author of the two latter Epistles, and of the Revelation: unto which opinion al∣so Dionysius Alexandrinus in the fore-alledged place doth assent. But verily that Presbyter is not called the Divine, which Title  in way of eminency was most deservedly by the Ancients attributed unto Iohn the Evangelist, The title of Iohn the Divine whence it arose. because none of the Apostles or Divines wrote more heavenly of the Deity of Christ. Therfore the Kings Copie of Montanus expresseth the whole Ti∣tle thus:  The Revelation of the Holy Apostle and Evangelist Iohn the Divine, the which, whi∣ther it were prefixed by John himself or afterward by the Church, is of no great consequence: seeing it sufficiently appeareth, that it is taken from ver. 1 & 2. Besides it is not credible, neither can it bee proved that the Lord Iesus af∣ter the death of the Apostles, sent his Angell unto another Iohn, then unto Iohn the Apostle. But that a certaine upstart Interpreter supposeth that Iohn beginning with that other Title (The Revelation of Iesus Christ, which God gave unto him) would not have the Title of the Booke to beare the Name of the Author, Alcasar. Vestigat. Not. 4. prooem. almost after the same manner, by which, saith he, the Author of our Society would have the same to be called the society of Iesus, not of IGNATIUS: I doubt not but all sound men do understand, that this is not onely more then insolently spoken: as if forsooth there could or ought to be an equalitie betweene the Apostle Iohn, and Ignatius the Souldier: the Revelation of Iesus Christ, and the Iesuiticall Society of Yester∣dayes hatching, but that also it is altogether inconvenient and contrary unto the purpose of the Author. For Iohn in the very first verse saying: The Revelation of Iesus Christ, which he signified by his Angell unto his servant Iohn: doth put too his name: and the Church hitherto hath alwayes called this Book, the Revelation of Iohn, and not the Revelation of Jesus. The Iesuites therefore ought not by this
example to dissemble the Name of their Author, but should be called the Society of Ignatius, and not the Society of Jesus. The Periphrasis of the Authour confirmeth the same thing, Chap. 1. ver. 2. who bare record of the word of God, and the testimony of Iesus Christ: which shew∣eth plainly that the Writer of the Revelation and of the gospel was the same: for who hath more clearly borne record of the word of God, and the testimony of Iesus Christ, then the Apostle Iohn in his Gospell, which beginneth: In the beginning was the word () &c. and in his first Epistle Chap. 1. v. 1. That which was in the beginning. &c. touching the word of God, &c. we have seen it and beare witnesse: and Chap. 5.9. This is the witnesse of God which hee hath testified of his Sonne, &c. like unto which, is that in Chap. 19.13. where hee calleth Christs comming unto judgement () the word of God: and the stile of Iohn the Apostle (whatsoever others may judge) doth plainly appear throughout the whole Book, as we shall observe in the course of our Exposition. Adde, that this Author saw and wrote the Revelation in the Ile Patmos,  I was saith he, Chap. 1.9. in the Ile, that is called Patmos, for the word of God, Iohn bani∣shed into patmos. Lib. 3. hist. cap. 18. and the te∣stimony of Iesus Christ, which Circumstance doth not obscurely denote the A∣postle Ioh. Neither read we of any other Iohn banished into Patmos for the word of the Lord, and the witnesse of Iesus Christ, then Iohn the Apostle, who, as Eusebius recordeth, was condemned for the Gospels sake, and banished into Patmos by the Emperor Domitian. Lastly,  we have the Authorities of most ancient Writers confirming the same with full consent: both of Grecians, Iustin, Martyr. Dial: cum Tryph. Irenae: Lib. 4. Cap. 37. Clemens Alexandrin. Paedag. Lib. 2. Cap. 12. Origen. Homil. 7. in Iosu. Athanas: in Synops. Epiphanius Haeres. 51.54.76. Chrysostom. Homil. 5. in Psalm. 5. Damascen. Lib. 4. Orth. fid. Cap. 18. also of Latine Writers: Tertullian. Lib. 4. contra Marcio. Cyprian. de exhort. Martyr. Cap. 8.10.11.12. Ambros. in Psal. 50. & Lib. 3. de Spir. Sanct. Cap. 21. Au∣gustine Tract. 39. in Ioh. & Lib. 2. de doct. Christ. Cap. 18. & de Haeres. Cap. 30. Et Lib. 20. de C. D. Cap. 7. Hierom. Catal. Script. Illu∣str: &c. The Arguments usually alledged to the contrary, I will not now for brevity sake set downe. Erasmus hath painfully collected the same: And by Theodore Beza in his Annotations upon this Book are solidly refuted. One thing onely I will touch, Whither the style of Iohn be di∣verse. which some do pretend touching the difference of the stile of the Revelation, and the writings of Iohn the Evangelist, but with no great reason: for an egge is not more like an egge, then Iohns stile is like to himselfe here and there. How often (to passe by other things) doth hee say that wee are washed from our sinnes by the blood of Christ, which also hee saith 1. Epist. Chap. 1.7. But to grant, what they say, that the stile doth differ, was the same kinde of speech to be used in writing the Gospell, and a Prophesie? what marveil, that an unlike matter is explicated by a different stile. Besides it is to bee observed, that Iohn wrote most part of the Booke not in his owne words, but in Phrases and words dictated by the Angell. Where he useth his owne, hee plainly retai∣neth the Phrase, which hee hath in his Gospell and Epistles, as we shall see in its place. Besides some do observe, Ioh. Foxus. in Apoc. pag. 458. that although Iohn indeed wrote the Prophesie in Greeke: yet it seemeth the Angell uttered the same in Hebrew, it being Iohns native language: This appeareth by manifold Hebrew expressions throughout the Booke, as Abaddon, Harmageddon, Hallelujah, Gog, Magog, and the often Repitition of the number Seven, touching the seven Spirits, seven Candlestickes, seven Churches, seven Angels, seven Seales, seven Trumpets, seven Vials, seven heads of the Beast, seven hornes of the Lambe, &c. Lastly the whole Phrase or forme of expression, seemeth rather to incline to the Hebrew then the
Greek: The Greek letters  make 666. Romanus. Hence the said writers suppose that the number of the Beasts name ex∣pressed in Greek by  is to be interpreted by the Hebrew letters  precisely expressing the number 666. But of this no more at present. And thus much of the Authour. CHAPTER II. Touching the Canonicall authority of the Revelation. NOw by these things the divine Authority of the Booke doth necessarily follow. For if the Apostle Iohn be the Author: the Divine and Canoni∣call Authority cannot justly bee questioned. For the Apostles writings are Apostolicall. Besides, the Author doth againe and againe testifie, that he received his Reve∣lation from Christ, and wrote the same by the Augels command. This also the testimony of the Ancient Church confirmeth. Concil. An∣cyran, in appendice. For the Revela∣tion is alledged under the name of John, and as Canonicall Scripture, by the most ancient Councell of Ancyra, which was before that of Nice: also in the Councell of Carthage III. Can. 47. and some others following. The Revelation also hath bin alwayes of Canonicall authority with the Greeke and Latine Fathers: although certaine Graecians before Dionysius Alexandrinus did some what scruple the same: as of old some of the Latine Church had their doubts touching the Epistle to the Hebrews, because it did seeme to favour No∣vatus, as Ierome writeth unto Dardanus. But the scruple of one, or a few of the Ancients can no more disanull the authority of any Canonicall Book of Scrip∣ture, then the scruple of a few now can doe. And howsoever Luther in his first Edition of the New Testament in the Ger∣mane tongue, Published anno 1526. Sixtus. Se∣nensis. Bib∣lioth. Ribera in Apoc. Pro∣oem. cap. 1. did not reckon the two latter Epistles of Iohn, the Epistles also of Iames and Iude, among the Apostolicall and Canonicall Scriptures: Not indeed (as some Papists write) because he could not beare those words, Chap. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, &c. because their workes follow them (which verily doe notably overthrow their fiction of the Soules of the Saints going into Purgatory) but ra∣ther because he thought that such obscure Visions and Figures were not so well agreeable unto the light of the New Testament: notwithstanding in another Edition Anno 1535. hee speaketh more liberally in the Preface touching these Bookes: neither do they, who at this day are called Lutherans, any longer que∣stion the Canonicall authority of the Revelation. Alcas. Ve∣stig. nota. 2. Prcoem. For our part we did not judge the Revelation was therefore to bee received, that we might abuse the darke and obscure sayings of the Booke, to vomit out the venom of our malice against the Pope of Rome: as that upstart Interpreter before mentio∣ned, hath begun to calumniate us, but because the reasons before laid down, and many more, do confirm our beliefe: and because by the Revelation we are mani∣festly taught, that that son of perdition lifting himselfe up against whatsoever is called God, and sitting in the Temple of God, as if he were God, is no other but that Capito∣line Iove, even to this day treading down all powers under his feet. But a man might justly wonder that Popish Writers do not tremble at the ve∣ry sight of this Booke: and how they are not afraid to explicate the Prophesie by their Commentaries: Why Pa∣pists write Commen∣taries upon the Reve∣lation. but that the thing it selfe speaketh they chiefly doe it (seeing they can neither wholly extinguish it, nor keepe it any longer from the people) at least to deprave the oracles thereof by their false Interpretations: the which notwithstanding they labour for in vaine: seeing it is as cleare as the Sun at Noon day, that under the Image of the Beast and False-Prophet seducing the In∣habitants of the Earth: and of the whorish woman committing fornication with the Kings of the Earth: and of the great Citie on seven hils ruling over the Kings of the
Earth, is represented the Monarchicall and Papall Sea of Rome: and under the Image of Locusts the innumerable vermine of the Clergy and Monkes: under the Type of Merchandize, which no man, (Antichrist beeing discovered) shall buy any more, are set forth Romish Indulgences, and buying and selling of Soules, &c. CHAPTER. III. Of the obscurity of the Booke: What it is, and whence, with the remedies of the same. AUGUSTINE writing of the darkenesse of the Revelation, saith: Lib. 20. de C. D. ca. 17 In this Booke, which is named a Revelation, are contained many darke things, that the Readers mind might be exercised, and in it are a few things, by the clearnesse whereof the rest with labour may be sought out, chiefly, because it so repeateth the same things after a diverse manner, that whereas it may seeme to speake of different matters, by diligent search we shall find that they are the selfe same things diversly expressed. And JEROM: Tom. 3. ad paul. Ep. 1. In the Revelation (saith he) is shewed a Booke sealed with seven Seales, which though thou give it to a man that can rend, to read it, he will answer thee: I cannot, it is sea∣led. And afterward: The Revelation of Iohn hath as many Sacraments as words. I have said but little in regard of the worth of the Booke. It is beyond all praise. In every of the words are hid manifold understandings. So indeed it is: for the sharp∣nesse of mans wit is blinder then beetles in the true understanding, as of o∣ther divine Scripture, so of this also, unlesse it be enlightned by the beames of the Holy Ghost: but the causes of this obscurity are plain. First, the whole Booke is Propheticall touching future things: Write, The causes of the dark∣nesse of the Revelation saith the Angell, the things thou hast seene, which are, and which shall be afterward. But fu∣ture things as future, because they are not in any sense, are either altogether un∣knowne, or being foreknown are conceived not so much by the understanding, as in hope. Adde, That these future things are not declared by plaine words, The diffe∣rence of Visions. neither defi∣ned by notes or markes of times, places, and persons: but are revealed unto Iohn (and so written) in darke and aenigmaticall Visions. It is true, many Visions in Scripture were plaine, as set before the eyes of the mind or bodie, Dan. 5.5. 1. Kin. 6.17 Exod. 3.2. Act. 10.11 Act. 23.11 so King Bel∣shazzar saw a hand writing upon the plaister of the wall: Elisha saw fiery Charrets round about him: and Moses the bush burning before him: Peter a sheet with foure-footed Beasts let downe from Heaven unto the Earth: Paul saw the Lord standing by him in the night, &c. In these there was no great difficultie. But there are other Visions more intricate: when the Images or Representations sig∣nifying some secret thing, are exhibited unto the minds of men, either sleeping or awake: the mysteries of which except they be revealed are so obscure, as that they cannot be found out by the understanding of mortall man. Of this kinde were the dreames of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar: the Visions also of Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zacharie, unto which we worthily may compare the Visions of the Revelation. The secrets indeed of the aforesaid dreames, God not onely revea∣led unto the singular benefit of them which dreamt the same, but also would have them written for the understanding of all. But the my steries of the Visions, al∣though he revealed them to his servants and Prophets, yet hee kept them secret from all other men, namely, that indeed prophane men might alwayes set light by things so obscure: but the godly even by the obscurity thereof be the more stir∣red up to the searching out of divine mysteries. The obscu∣rity ought not to keepe us from searthing. And although we can scarcely, and with much difficultie come unto the under∣standing of all the secrets of this Booke: notwithstanding the difficultie ought not to affright or to keep us from searching: but rather stir up a more diligent
enquiry into the same. Many things in the Booke are without any shadowes of darke Types, as speaking plainely of the punishments of the ungodly, of the blessednesse and reward of the Saints, &c. in which lies no obscurity. In many Types also the signification is plaine, and the Analogie with the things signified not obscure: as the Analogie of the seven Candlestickes, with the seven Churches, of the Lamb with Christ, of the woman with the Church, of the Dragon with Sa∣tan, of the Beast and False-Prophet with Antichrist, of the Locusts with the devou∣ring Monkes, of Babylon and the Great Whore with Rome, of the seven heads of the Beast with the seven hils of Rome. In the other more obscure Visions we have three helps, by whch in some mea∣sure wee may dive into the understanding of them, viz. the Propheticall Scrip∣ture, Historie, and experience. For first,  after we have compared the Types of the Revelation with the Visi∣ons and Phrases of the ancient Prophets, Remedies of the darknes in speciall with Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zacharie: we shall find a great likenesse in them, and thence receive much light: for example: In Chap. 4.5. it is said, there were seven Lamps of fire burning be∣fore the throne: which plainly appeareth to be taken out of Zach. 4.10. where the seven Lampes are said to be the seven eyes of Iehovah running too and fro through the whole Earth. By which undoubtedly is signified the ubiquitie of Gods pow∣er and providence. Out of the same Chapter is taken, that in Chap. 11.4. two witnesses are said to be two Olive trees, and two Candlesticks standing before the face of the Lord of the Earth: Examples of which kinde we shall observe many more in the course of our Interpretation. If from Johns time we diligently run over the History of the Empire and Ro∣mane Church, and precisely compare the principall events with the Types of the Revelation, certainly we shall see much light to come unto these Visions. The Romane and Ecclesiasticall Historie testifies, that diverse storms of persecutions were raised against the Christians by Romane Tyrants. Eusebius recordeth out, of EGESIPPUS, Lib. 3. hist. cap. 32. that the Church did not long after the Apostles time, remain an undefiled Virgine: but by little and little, through the ambition and con∣tention of Priests declined from Apostolicall sincerity: But after CONSTAN∣TINES time, In vita Malchi. saith JEROM, shee became greater indeed in wealth, but lesse in vertues. After-Histories also testifie, that the Romane Bishops by pride and subtiltie, namely under a pretence of the primacy left by the Apostle Peter, as also of Christs Vicar-ship bequeathed unto them, they, through the connivency or neglect of the Emperours, not onely usurped power over the City of Rome, but also took into their owne hands the very spoile of the Empire, and at last established this Sacred Empire of the West, the direct or indirect power whereof should wholly be in the Popes Holinesse. All which things do not obscurely teach us, what is meant by the opening of the Seales, The arro∣gance and subtilty of Romish Bi∣shops. by the stars falling from heaven to the earth, by the Beast speaking great and blasphemous things, what is intended by the Beast, False-Prophet, and Image of the Beast, what lastly by the whorish woman sitting on the Beast, and ruling over the Kings of the Earth in the great Citie upon seven Mountaines. Lastly,  if we rightly consider the experience of the present times, two nuts are not more alike, then is the Beast and Purpled Whore to the Papacy: then the Locusts unto the Popish Clergy: then the impure Frogs (proceeding out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast, and False-Prophet) unto the Popes Messengers, (being hooded like to Frogs) viz the Iesuites cracking miracles, and run∣ning too and fro by Sea and Land unto the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 16: 13: 14: to ga∣ther them unto the Battell of that great Day of God Almighty. These things, I say, will in some measure bee remedies against the darkenesse of the Booke.
Vnto which in the last place wee must adde diligent meditation, and ardent prayer, that the Spirit of God who revealed these mysteries to Iohn, do enligh∣ten the eyes of our mindes with heavenly knowledge to finde out the wisedome of this Booke. For blessed is hee that readeth: Rev. 1.3. & 22.7.14. and blessed are they that heare the words of this Prophesie, and keepe them, that is, which diligently meditate, and la∣bour exactly to weigh these oracles in an equall ballance, with the events past, present, and to come. CHAPTFR. IV. Touching Ancient and Moderne Interpreters of the Reve∣lation, and of the manner of Interpreting ob∣served by them. I Have spoken of the Authour, and Canonicall Authority, and obscurity of the Revelation, and shewed that in these things is nothing to hinder us from the interpretation thereof. The objection about the Interpreters is of no weight. I confesse that not a few Divines of great account, as Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, Martyr, Calvin, Beza, and others have abstained from the Interpretation of the Revelation. But this neither doth lessen the authority of the Booke, neither doth it preju∣dice other Interpreters: for who knowes, whither the darkenesse of the Book, or their other waighty labours, or want of time did occasion the same, certaine it is, they no way questioned the authority of the Booke. In the meane while, in all Ages there have beene excellent Teachers of the Church, who have laboured to illustrate the secrets of this Booke by their Commentaries. The Ancientest that have written upon the Revelation, are Iustine Martyr, In vita Io∣hannu. and Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, and Melito of Sardis, as Ierome and Eusebius record. But their Commentaries have not been preserved untill our times: Eus. lib. 5. hist. ca. 25. save onely that some few fragments of this nature touching the ten hornes of the Beast, the two horned Beast, of the image, Character, Number and Name of the Beast arising out of the Sea, are found in IRENAEUS Lib. 5. Cap. 21.23.25. Among Augustins workes wee finde a few Homilies upon the Revelation, which notwithstanding are ascribed to Ticonius by Bede, who himselfe also hath commented some things upon the Apocalyps. But Austine in that divine Commentary de Civitate Dei endeavours to search not a few mysteries of this Booke, touching Gog and Magog, Lib. 20. de C. D. à cap. 7. us{que} ad 18. touching the thousand yeeres of Satans binding and loosing, of the first and second Resurrection, of the Saints reigning with Christ a thousand yeers, of the fire falling from heaven and devouring the ungodly, of the casting of the devill and his followers into the lake of fire, of the dead, which the Sea, Death, and Hell, shall give up to be judged, and lastly touching the New Heaven and the New Earth, &c. Wee have also some what upon the Revelation under the name of Am∣brose: but it may plainely bee gathered from the worke it selfe, that it is later then Ambrose. In the latter Ages among Monkes and Schoolemen, almost no Booke hath had so many Interpreters, as the Apocalyps, seeing no man but thought it a fine thing to exercise his wit in the opening of such dark Aenigmaes, either for osten∣tation sake, or to delight himselfe with Allegories, a long Catalogue of which, even above an hundred, as well of such as are extant, as not, Alcasar. Vestigat. Not. 26. Prooem. that upstart Inter∣preter, before mentioned, hath reckoned up. And among these hee commends foure Manu-scripts which he found in the Libraries of Spaine. Vndoubtedly our Germany hath more. I have seene a compendious Exposition of Iohns Re∣velation
written in the yeere 1486. by Iohannes Hilten a Franciscane: who al∣so, (as they say) foretold many other things. At Heidelberg in the Librarie of WISEDOMS Colledge is extant a Commen∣tarie of two big Volumes, written a little before that time by Richard Faber of Laudenburg an Augustinian. Luther also published a short Commentary upon the Apocalyps at Witeberg Anno. 1528. sent unto him out of Livonia, having no name unto it: the which Conr. Gesnerus in his Bibliotheca ascribeth unto Iohn Husse. But it plainly ap∣peareth to be more ancient. The Postill of Lyra ascribes the prologue of that namelesse Authour, which beginneth thus, All that will live godly, &c. unto Gilbertus Pictaviensis, who flourished under the Emperour Cunradus about the yeer 1140. But by the 20th Chapter it appears not to be so ancient, for the Au∣thour there disputing touching the thousand yeeres, testifies, that hee wrote in the yeer, from the Incarnation of Christ, 1357. Which, saith he, is our present date. He often expresly interpreteth the Papacy for Antichrists kingdom, the Pope for Antichrist: which therefore I rehearse, least any might imagine, that wee were the first Authours of this opinion. Yea Pope Gregory above a 1000. yeers ago doubted not confidently to say, that that Priest should be Antichrist, or his Forerunner, who should arrogate the Title of VNIVERSAL unto himself, which a while after, as is knowne, the Bishops of Rome themselves did doe. But of this more in its place. Alcasar also hath raked together many latter Writers upon this Booke, of his owne order. But of ours not a few Divines of excellent learning, Protestant Interpre∣ters of the Revelation have in the foregoing age put their hands to this Prophesie, among whom notwithstanding in my judge∣ment Henry Bullinger of Helvetia is most eminent, whom almost all do follow, as David Chytraeus, Alfonsus Cunradus, Franciscus Lambertus, Sebastianus Meye∣rus, Nicolaus Collado, Johannes Foxus, Benedictus Aretius, Matthias Illyricus, Augustinus Marloratus, Petrus Artopoeus, Franciscus Iunius: Daniel Tossanus. And of late in this our age Iohn Napier a Scotchman, Thomas Brightman an En∣glishman, Raphaël Eglinus, Conradus Graserus a Germane, Iohannes Piscator, Matthias Hoë, Matthias Cotterius a French man, with others whom I have not seene. But thou wilt say, to what end are all these named? To wit to shew what I purposed, that nothing of the authority of this Booke is hereby diminished, be∣cause (as hath bin objected) some worthy Divines have abstained from inter∣preting the same. Touching the manner of interpretation, which every of them hath followed, and whether, being so many, they have effected what they desired and ought to have done: would be too long to explicate, neither is it to the purpose in hand. This one thing perhaps may be affirmed without injurie to any of them all, that to this Booke hath happened, what the Evangelist Marke writeth of the wo∣man diseased with an issue of blood: Mar. 5.26 that shee had suffered many things of the Phy∣sitians, and it availed her nothing, but she became much worse: perhaps not so much by reason of the Physitians unskilfullnesse, as the incurablenesse of the disease, namely the healing thereof being reserved for to illustrate the glory of Christ. For while so many (every one following the force and reason of his own wit) have uttered such various things touching these aenigmaticall Visions, piously in∣deed, as I suppose, yet little cohering with themselves, or with the scope or meaning of the Holy Ghost: it is come to passe, that indeed there are extant an heap of Commentaries upon this Booke, every of which promiseth a new light unto the Prophesie, The diffe∣rent man∣ner of in∣terpreting. whereas the obscurity thereof is not onely not lessened thereby, but in some places also more darkened. For some applie the Ae∣nigmaes of the Revelation unto the History of the Ancient Church: Others di∣versly unto the continued period of the New Church: Others in every particular
have imagined unto themselves mysticall meanings, thinking, as the saying is, that under every stone gold lay hid: Others turned all things into tropes and mo∣rall Allegories: Others have laboured prophetically to praesage and find out fu∣ture things, even more then was lawfull for men to know: yea hardly among so many (which commonly is said of Chronicles) thou shalt find two or three agree: which disagreement verily argues that the difficultie of the Booke is not yet by so great variety of Authours wholly taken away, but rather encreased: not so much by a blame-worthy ignorance of Interpreters, as in regard of the incomprehensible wisdome of the Prophesie it selfe: the full revelation whereof is undoubtedly reserved unto the manifestation of Christ our Lord. Notwithstanding I write not these things touching Interpreters, as if I would detract any thing from the labours of so many learned men, or thought that by their labour nothing of these mysteries were brought to light or explicated: and that I at length in all these Aenigmaes, had (as the saying is) hit the naile on the head. Far be it: for I doubt not in the least, but that a great part of these Types by foregoing and present events are so manifestly brought to light, that the trueth of them may daily bee seene and felt, of such, who, as the Holy Ghost re∣quireth () have understanding. Yea I ingeniously professe that I have bin very much helped by the Commentaries of most of them, especially Bullingers and Brightmans. Now what I further judge touching the whole form method, and manner of interpreting the Revelation, I will by and by shew. CHAPTER. V. Of the dignity, time, profit, and scope of this Prophesie. I Have spoken of the Authour and authority, of the obscurity and Interpreters of the Revelation: and thus I have freed this Booke from a three-fold slander: first as if it were not Canonicall: secondly obscure, as not to be understood: third∣ly of neglect, as if for this cause the worthiest Divines had hitherto shunned the interpretation thereof. There remaine two other scandals to be taken away: one of the order: that this Booke is the last of the New Testament: the other of errour: that it con∣taines somethings not agreeable to Apostollical Faith: both these clouds will be dispersed by the consideration of the dignity of this Prophesie, which (like the Morning Starre above the rest) shineth most clearely among the other Bookes of the New Testament. What therefore respects the Order, so farre is it from diminishing the worth of the Booke in any kind, as it the more commendeth the same. For it is in very deed a divine Seale, by which the Holy Ghost was pleased, not without-reason, to close up both the Old and the New Canon of the divine Scriptures: which manifestly appeareth from that propheticall Protestation at the end of the Booke, by which such are pronounced blessed who observe the words of this Prophesie: the falsifiers on the contrary that presume to adde or take ought there-from, are threatned with curses: for unto them that adde, Rev. 22.18 God shall adde the plagues that are written in this Booke: to them that take, away, The Cano∣nicall au∣thority of the Reve∣lation con∣firmed from the order thereof. God shall take away his part out of the Booke of Life, and out of the HOLY CITY, and from the things that are written in this Booke. What could be expressed more honourable concerning this Prophesie: for if it be unlawfull to adde ought ther∣to: then certainly in all respects it is absolute, perfect, divine, and the word of God, unto which nothing without impiety may bee added by men. A∣gaine if nothing may be taken away from the same, then it is Sacred, inviolable, divine, and the word of God, which onely cannot bee broken. Ioh. 10.35. Thus we see that
the Canonicall dignity of this Booke is established by the order it selfe. And hereby it is plainly made equall with the divine Bookes of Moses himself, Deut. 4.2. & 12.32. the Prince of Prophets. For as those, because they are the first of the Sacred Canon, are often confirmed with this Seale: Ye shall not adde unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, &c. So this Booke as it were closing the Holy Canon, is confirmed with the like Seale: that nothing may bee added to it, nothing taken away from it: As Moses therefore was the Chieftaine of the Prophets, leading the first rankes: So John was chiefe of the Prophets, clo∣sing up, or leading the last rankes: and here I willingly assent to Bezas opinion, most solidly and truely affirming, that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost to gather into this pretious Booke, In praefat. Apoc. those things which remained to be fulfilled after Christs comming, of the praedictions of the former Prophets: and also to adde some things, so farre as concerned us to know. Praefat. in Daniel. A like honourable Title that worthy Divine JOHN OECOLAM∣PADIUS giveth unto this Booke: That it is the best Interpreter of all the Prophets. Neither will I speake more touching the order save this one thing, that in it appeareth also a manifest reason of time. When the Revelation was written For it is the last Booke of the New Testament, not because it is last in dignity, but in time. For Ierome writeth, that Domitian raising after Nero the second persecution against the Christians, Iohn wrote the Revelation in the 14. yeer of his reigne in the Ile called Patmos. In vita Io∣hannis. With whom Irenaeus a most ancient Writer doth agree, affirming, that John saw the Revelation not long before his time, but almost, saith hee, in our age, towards the end of Domitian his Empire. Lib. 3. c. 25 Wherefore the Apocalyps was written in the ninety sixth yeer of Christ, af∣ter all the other Bookes of the New Testament were written. For Iohn out∣lived all the Apostles and Canonicall Writers, and lived (as Sophronius records) untill the third yeere of Trajane, which from Christs birth was Anno 102: and after his passion (as Ierome recordeth) 68. In vita Io∣hannis. and from the destruction of Jerusa∣lem 25. Now whereas some affirme that Iohn wrote his Gospell after the Re∣velation, it is without any probabilitie. But we come to speake of the utility of the Revelation. This Booke doth excellently shine forth in point of doctrine:  for it truely teacheth the Propheticall and Apostolicall Faith, and much illustrates many ar∣ticles of the Gospell, The profi∣tablenes of the Reve∣lation. or common places. In speciall it proveth the eternall De∣ity of Christ with such weighty arguments, as scarcely more excellent are to be found in any other part of Scripture: absolutely ascribing unto Christ many attributes, which are onely proper unto Iehovah: viz. that he is Alpha and O∣mega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end: the Almighty: that the Lambe standing in the Throne of the Deity, equall in majesty with the Father, is worshipped by all the Heavenly Inhabitants, that he judgeth the adversa∣ries, rules the Nations with an iron rod, that hee is the King of kings, and Lord of lords, &c. It plainely also maintaineth the Doctrine of Christs Mediatorship,  and work of our Redemption through his blood, calling him the faithfull Witnesse, the First begotten from the dead, Redempti∣on of christ: the Prince of the kings of the earth, the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world, who hath washed us in his blood from our sins, and made us Priests and Kings to God and the Father, &c. It sets forth the afflicted state and condition of the Church in this life,  espe∣cially in the latter times, by evident types, viz. that the woman bringing forth a Man-Child, the Ruler of the Nations, shall be driven into the Wildernesse by the Dragon and the Beast, where she shall remaine hid from the sight of men, when the two Witnesses shall prophesie against the Dragon and the Beast, and shall indeed be slaine, but being againe raysed to life, they shall bee taken up into Heaven, &c. By which verily it is manifest that nothing else is signified, then that the Church in Antichrists reigne shall bee obscure, and secret in the
wildernesse, being oppressed in Babylon it selfe: the Seat of Antichrist, The flight of the Church in∣to the wil∣dernesse. untill at length Babylon decaying shee being commanded to come out of her, shall againe come forth and be seen of men. By which that cavill is easily answered: Where the Church was before Luthers time, if the Papacy were not. The Papacy indeed was the Apostaticall Church, it was Babylon, having nothing but the bare Name of the Holy Citie. But the true Church lye hid as captivated and oppressed in the same, Where the church was before Lu∣ther. no more appearing in the world, then the woman lurking in the wildernesse, or the Seven Thousand in Israel that bowed not the knee unto Baall: or a sound kernell in a rotten Ap∣ple, untill it was brought to light and repaired by the new prophesying of the two Witnesses. Christ therefore was not without a Church, although the Pa∣pacy were not the same. It representeth also Bishops deserting the Orthodoxe Faith, The Apo∣stacy of Bi∣shops. and the studie of divine things, and cumbring themselves with wordly affaires, under the Type of starres falling from Heaven into the Earth: with their nature and plottings a∣gainst the godly: neither hath any man, after the Apostle Paul, 2. Thes. 2, 3, &c. more lively set forth the rising, person, reigne, tyranny, seat, manifestation, and destruction of Antichrist, then we have it in this Prophesie: lastly it most clearely prophesieth many things touching the comforts of the Church under the Crosse, of her deliverance, victory, and glorification, with the punishments of Tyrants and all other adversaries. By which we see, The expli∣cation of the Apoca∣lyps nece∣ssary. that this Booke is not onely worthy to be continually read in the Church and meditated on: but also to containe very profitable and nece∣ssary Doctrines, especially for this last age. For the Jesuites Antichrists chie∣fest Souldiers are very ingenious to corrupt, and wrest the plaine Oracles of this Prophesie into a contrary meaning, as if they were not onely not to be applied against the Papacy, but also did make for the dignity thereof: wherefore also it is our duty diligently to labour, that the Revelation may be familiarly expounded and knowne: not suffering the same to be depraved: least we our selves be de∣ceived by the slights of Antichrist, or that by our carelesnesse wee suffer others to be ensnared by pernitious errours. Now this wee shall the more easily attaine unto, if wee alwayes have the Scope of this Booke before our eyes, like as Mariners doe the more safely di∣rect their course in the vast Sea, by looking up unto the starres. The prin∣cipall scope thereof was. The scope of the Reve∣lation: FIRST, generall, That the Christian Church being fore-warned of her fu∣ture condition after the Apostles time, even unto the end of the world, should not promise perpetuall delight and ease unto her selfe, but timely bee prepared manfully to sustaine the battles at hand. SECONDLY, speciall: least the Godly (even then groaning under the Romane persecutions, and calamities which were to endure yet a long time) beeing offen∣ded, should be discouraged: but know that it came to passe, because the Lord had revealed unto his servant John that it should bee so: and withall that they might be raised up with sure comforts of an happy issue out of their calamities: for this cause also Christ in the Gospell forewarned his Disciples of the Crosse and future sorrow, that when it came they might remember that it had been foretold unto them: For the darts which are foreseen, strike the lesse, and we doe re∣ceive the evils of the world more tolerably, if we be fenced against them through the shield of providence, saith GREGORY. Thirdly forasmuch as not long after the Romane perfecutions, Satan, through the riot, ambition and contention of the Bishops of the Churches, was to erect An∣tichrists throne in the Temple of God, the Holy Ghost in speciall would have his forme, nature, reigne, and Tyranny to bee set forth (as it were) in lively colours unto us, that we might learne the better to know, resist, and take heed of him. Moreover he would have the destruction and punishment of Antichrist and
all other adversaries: as also the victory and future glorification of the Church to be plainly described, least either we should envy the present prosperity of the adversaries, or overmuch fear their Tyranny: but that on the contrary we might be patient under the Crosse, and constant in our Combats, retaining an assured hope of victory, deliverance, and future glory, even unto the end. Now that, besides these scopes that upstart Inquirer labours to wrest the Re∣volation to this purpose, Aleas. prooem. no∣ta. 14: &c. as if it should teach, that ROME, of old the head of Pa∣gan Idolatry, by an admirable vicissitude was to bee changed into the Metropolis of the Catholicke Church, that the Romane Church was gloriously to triumph both in respect of the Romane Citie, and the whole Empire, and that the soveraigne authority of the Romish Pope should alwayes remaine in the height of honour: is such a filthy and impudent depravation of this most sacred Prophesie: that even the Divell himselfe ought to blush thereat: and I should wonder if these goodly trifles do not cause laugh∣ter, or shame even to the Romish Court it selfe. But these things a little after are to be more neerly examined, when we come to the Argument. Enough touching the Order. Lastly, The things which have been objected against the Booke, as being er∣roneous and contrary to the Faith: in speciall that it seemes in Chap. 20. to fa∣vour the brutish doctrine of the Hereticke Cerinthus, touching Christ and the Saints worldly and voluptuous Reigne on Earth a Thousand Yeers before the V∣niversall Resurrection of the dead: doth not at all trouble me. For if the ob∣jections of Heretickes or Pagans had presently been believed, wee should long since have had nothing entire in the whole Scripture: but all these things have long agoe beene vindicated by ancient and later Interpreters: and wee referre the clearing of every of them to their proper places, least our Preface should bee too tedious. CHAPTER. VI. Touching the Argument of the Booke. TO come unto the Argument of the Booke, Rev. 1.3. however by what hath beene said already, it is not obscure, yet I will handle the same more neerly. The principall and greater part of the Booke is propheticall (hence in the ve∣ry beginning it is called a Prophesie) containing Typicall Prophesies not onely touching the state of the Church and the signes of the last times, of which Christ foretold his Disciples, Mat. 24. like as Ribera thought good to explicate the Argument of the Apocalyps, viz. that it is nothing else but certaine Commentaries upon those words of our Lord. For they extend themselves much larger unto the times next after the Apostles, and thence from the giving of the Revelation, even unto the end of the world: namely touching the present conflicts of the Christian Church, which already were in Johns time, and afterwards should continually befall her: first, with Romane Tyrants, afterward with diverse Heretickes: and at length both with the Easterne, and especially the Westerne Antichrist: as also of their insul∣tings and tyranny against her, by which as if shee were forsaken of Christ her head, they should grievously both inwardly and outwardly afflict, and almost whollie oppresse her. But withall on the contrarie of the most sweet comforts of the godly under the Crosse, that those stormes of afflictions should not befall them at a venture, or onely at the lust and will of the adversaries: but by the or∣dering hand of God, for the exercise of the Church: neither yet should they be perpetuall or continue too long: but at length bee changed with the heavenly glory of the Saints: all the wicked being by the power of Christ the Conqueror, cast into the lake of fire and brimstone for ever and ever. This Booke also is doctrinall and hortatorie mixing here and there with oracles
excellent doctrines, exhortations, and reproofes: both particular unto the seven Churches of Asia: which were committed to the care of John being banished in∣to Patmos: as also universall unto all Christians even untill this day, for doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse. These things suffice touching the generall Argument. The upstart Interpreter of the Revelation (before mentioned) having thought upon a new Stratagem, I know not whether to curry favour with the Pope, Alcasar perverteth the argu∣ment. or the more to harden him to his destruction, doth hence forge to himself new Ora∣cles touching the Church, and the Monarchicall Empire of the Pope of Rome, and with his Hypotheses doth wholly stray from the Scope of this Prophesie, and to speake the truth, doth foully deprave the Argument thereof. His Hypotheses or Positions are principally four: One general: Three speciall. Vestig. no∣ta 6. preoe. The generall is of the Argument of the whole Revelation: that it describes a two-fold warre of the Church: one with the Synagogue, the other with Paganisme, and a two-fold victory and triumph over both adversaries. But the former warre with the Synagogue was already fought before the Pro∣phesie was revealed: and the Synagogue with the Temple lay in ashes. To what purpose then should this warre have been shewed unto John as being to come afterward? Like as, saith he, things done are represented in a Comoedie. As if forsooth, Christ would represent unto John things done, and not rather, which were to come to passe afterward. As for the latter warre with Paganisme, although it was then on foot very hot already, and was further to lie more heavy upon the Christians: notwithstanding a more fierce conflict by farre with Antichrist was to befall them (not to speake of the Gogish Warre) by whom the Church (as is praefigured in the Apocalyps) should grievously be oppressed unto the very last times, and against whom victory and triumph is promised unto the Saints, the which all Interpreters, the Papists not excepted, do confesse. Of his speciall hypotheses the first is, that in the first eleven Chapters is repre∣sented the rejection of the Jewish Nation, and the desolation of the City Jeru∣salem by the Romanes. The SECOND: That in the nine following Chapters is portended the Empire of the Romane Church over Rome and the whole world, and the overthrow of Paganisme: the which forsooth should bee that horrible judgement of the Great Whore and destruction of Babylon, effected by Constantine the Great and his Successours. The THIRD: That in the two last Chapters under the Type of the Lambes Bride and the New Jerusalem, is set forth the glorious and triumphant state of the Romane Church in Heaven. But these most idle vanities will soon vanish away, if thou doest but even put them to the Touch-stone, that is, the very Text of the Prophesie: Vestig. nota 14. prooem. for Christ did reveale those things to Iohn which should shortly bee done, Chap. 1.1. and af∣terward Chap. 4.1. whereas therefore the destruction of Ierusalem, and reje∣ction of the Iewes, by Alcasars owne confession was fulfilled XXV. yeeres before the Revelation was given. Who then should believe that Christ would have revealed unto Iohn for a great mysterie, a History so generally known, un∣der such obscure Types: Iohns Revelation prophesieth of things present and to come, And. in A∣poc. cap. 12. saith Andreas out of a Treatise of Methodius; intitled SYMPOSIUM or Banket. Therefore the first Hypothesis is undoubtedly false. Neither is the second more true. For the judgement of the Great Whore, and the ruine of Babylon is represented not as a grace of conversion, but as a punish∣ment of whoredom to be inflicted on the kingdom & seat of Antichrist in the last times. Therefore to interpret this of the conversion of Rome and Paganisme un∣to the Faith of Christ, which came to passe three hundred yeers after Christ un∣der Constantine and his Successours, is to make a mooke of reason. The third is no better then the rest. The Spouse of the Lambe, and the New
Jerusalem, is the whole Church of Christ, gloriously triumphing in Heaven, from whom God hath wiped away all teares: in which shall bee nothing that is defiled and abominable, as shall be afterward shewed in its place: but that the now Romane Apostaticall Church, worshipper of Idols, mother of fornications, and driver, not of Christs asse, but of the Beast of Antichrist (while she remains such on earth) should also belong unto the Spouse of Christ in Heaven; shall then be true, when that of the Apostle is false: Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, 1. Cor. 6.9.15. nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankinde, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor blasphemers, nor extortioners shall enherit the Kingdom of God. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot: which shall be ad Calendas Graecas, that is, never. But what need I trouble my self: This new fiction of the Inquirer is abundant∣ly refuted by the judgement of Ribera, Bellarmine, and other most acute Doctors of his owne order: although scarcely there be any one of them, whom he doth not most freely censure. But of late a certaine learned and judicious Divine seemeth to have set forth in lively colours the argument of that painfull and most polished INQUIRY, in an Epistle, which I shall here annexe. Vnto thy two Letters, the Post hasting away, thus in a few lines. What was my opinion perhaps thy father hath heard long since: what now it is, I will not easily say, : FOR I GROW OLD LEARNING MANY THINGS. The Argu∣ment of Al∣casars Ve∣stigation, or Inquirie. Lately one Alcasar a Iesuite hath published an INQUIRY upon the Reve∣lation, in which he rejoyceth himself, and gratulates the Pope of Rome, affirming that the dedication of this Aenigma was of old made to the Romane Church, touching the future principallity of this Church over all Churches, and the majesty of the Pope, which others should submissively worship and humbly adore, so as he first hath out of the darkenesse of the Apocalyps shewed a light, by which the old Prophesies hitherto by others not understood, may be enlightned, namely of the authority of the Romane Church over all others, that she alone is the Spouse of Christ, Cant. 6. Psal. 45. at his right hand and married to the Lambe, Chap. 21. Rev. 19. whose founders were Peter and Paul, whom Isaias sets forth by a cou∣ple of horsemen, one sitting on an Asse, the other on a Camel, which two are the Angels that in the Revelation denounce the ruine of Babylon: before whose feet Iohn fell downe to worship: and other strange mysteries, which he having first found out, doth now flat∣teringly applie to the Pope, being lift up with incredible joy, if not madnesse and folly: or to say truely, with blasphemous impiety and sacrilegious boldnesse. I know not whi∣ther thou hast seen D. N. I suppose you have seene and read him, forasmuch as hee adorneth Commentaries on that prophesie. Its the worke of a Spanish Divine of Gra∣nata fairly printed at Antwerp An. 1614. the Author also being an eloquent In∣terpreter of his owne mind and sense: One thing I know: that of mad men he will make them more mad by his glozing Exposition of Aenigmaes: such flatterers are the Iesuites of their Antichrist, being void of truth, full of deceit, and wanting no words. The sum is: a two-fold warre of the primitive Church: the first against Iudaisme in the two first Chapters: the other against Paganisme, in the eight following: the Citie and world being converted to the Faith of Christ, and hence a four-fold Hallelujah. Lastly a long during peace to the Church, Antichrist being to bee overcome under the names of Gog and Magog, and in the last place the most glorious triumph of the Romane Church in the Heavens at the day of Iudgement: a worthy cover to the pot: March. 10. 1615. Yours to command N. N. Behold a lively Idea of the Inquirie, the which being communicated unto me by a friend, I thought good here to rehearse it, least happily the beautifulnesse of the new worke might deceive any one. For he coyneth new Oracles, hence I call him an upstart: his worke otherwise being of much labour, and more then vul∣gar wit, and not unpolished: which I could wish, the Author had more rightly placed. Enough both of the true and the false Argument of the Apocalyps. Wee come to the Parts.
CHAPTER. VII. Touching the parts of the Revelation. THe Booke ordinarily is variously divided. I shall not much differ from the common partition: but distribute the same into a Preface, Prophesie or Vi∣sions: and a Conclusion. I. The Preface containes the Title and Dedication of the Booke, Chapter 1. unto verse 9. II. The Prophesie I distinguish into seven Visions, clearly enough and distinct∣ly shewed by Christ unto Iohn in the Spirit, in the Ile Patmos: from thence un∣to ver. 6. of Chap. 22. But those that suppose, and urge that the Booke con∣sists of one continued Vision, do wholly stray from the Scope, and in vaine wea∣rie the Reader, as I shall shew by and by. The first Vision is of Christ gloriously walking among the seven golden Can∣dlestickes, and commanding John to write certaine Commandements unto the seven Churches of Asia, and also the following Visions, for the perpetuall doctrine, instruction, and consolation of the Faithfull: from ver. 9. Chap. 1.2.3. This Vision is not propheticall of future things, as the six following, but whol∣ly doctrinall, confirming Iohn in the function of teaching, and commending his Apostolicall authority unto the seven Churches of Asia. The second is touching Gods majesty sitting in the Throne, and of the Lamb standing in the Throne: and of the Booke sealed with seven Seales, and of the opening of the Seale and of the Book by the Lamb, and diverse wonders thence proceeding: Chap. 4.5.6.7. The third is of the seven Trumpets of the Angels, and wonderfull apparitions following thereupon. Chap. 8.9.10.11. The fourth is of the woman in travell of a Man-Child, and of the Dragon per∣secuting the Man-Child and woman: of the womans flight into the wildernesse, and of the rage of the two Beasts against the Saints: Chap. 12.13.14. The fift is of the seven Angels pouring forth the Seven Vials of the last plagues upon the adversaries, and throne of the Beast: Chap. 15.16. The sixt is of the Iudgement of the great whore, and ruine of Babylon, and of the casting of the Beast and False-prophet, with all his followers into the Lake of fire and brimstone: Chap. 17.18.19. The seventh and last, is of the binding and loosing of the Dragon at the end of a thousand yeers, and lastly of the Iudgement of the Divell, Death, Hell, and all reprobates that were not written in the Booke of Life, and of the figure and glo∣rious state of the Heavenly Ierusalem: Chap. 20.21.22. unto ver. 6. III. The conclusion of the Booke commends the profitablenesse of the Pro∣phesie, and by an Anathema establisheth the divine authority thereof: from verse 6. unto the end. CHAPTER. VIII. Touching the Forme of the Revelation. THe things hitherto praemised, have beene treated of by many Interpreters. That which remaines touching the forme and method of the Revelation, hath as yet beene observed but by few, nay; to speake it with modesty, I scarcely find the same explicated by any one. The forme indeed seemes to be Epistolarie: having an Epistolarie Inscription
and Subscription, and is shut up with an Epistolarie wish common to the A∣postles: all the Acts also of the first Vision, are Epistle-wise. But that which beginneth at the fourth Chapter (which is the first propheti∣call Vision) and the following unto the end, if you well observe them, have plain∣ly a Dramaticall forme, The Apoca∣lyps a pro∣phetical in∣terlude. hence the Revelation may truely be called a Propheticall Drama, show, or representation. For as in humane Tragedies, diverse persons one after another come upon the Theater to represent things done, and so again depart: diverse Chores also or Companies of Musitians and Harpers distinguish the diversity of the Acts, and while the Actors hold up, do with musicall accord sweeten the wearinesse of the Spectators, and keepe them in attention: so ve∣rily the thing it selfe speaketh that in this Heavenly Interlude, by diverse shewes and apparitions are represented diverse, or rather (as we shall see) the same things touching the Church, not past, but to come, and that their diverse Acts are re∣newed by diverse Chores or Companies, one while of 24. Elders and four Beast, another while of Angels, sometimes of Sealed ones in their foreheads, and sometimes of Harpers, &c. with new Songs, and worthy Hymmes, not so much to lessen the wearisomnesse of the Spectators, as to infuse holy meditations into the mindes of the Readers, and to lift them up to Heavenly matters. The which thing not having been hitherto observed by most Interpreters, they have wondred what was meant by so many Songs, Hymmes, and change of Angels and Personages re∣newed in diverse Visions, and what by the often iterated Representations of the Beast, Babylon, and the last judgement, which caused them to seeke and imagine Anticipations, Recapitulations, and unnecessary Mysteries in those things, which either served onely to the Dramaticall decorum, or else had a manifest respect to the method of the Visions, concerning which I will speak by and by. What Origen therefore wrote touching the SONG OF SONGS: In Prologo Cant. & Homil. 1. that it see∣med to him Solomon wrote a wedding song after the manner of a Drama: which, saith he, is a Song of many Personages, like as a Fable is acted on the Theater, where diverse persons are brought in, some comming, and some departing, that the Text of the Nar∣ration may be made up by diverse, and unto diverse men: and he calleth that wedding Verse a Spirituall Interlude of foure Personages, which he saith the Lord revealed unto him in the same. viz. the Bridegroom and Bride: with the Bride her virgins: with the Bridegroom his flock of Companions: The same thing I more truly may say touching the Revelation, that it seemes unto mee, the Lord Iesus revealed the same unto Iohn by his Angell, after the manner of a Dramaticall Representation, and that it is an Heavenly Dramma or Interlude, not onely of foure, but of diverse persons and things, by Typicall Speeches and Actions, exhibiting to Iohns sight or hea∣ring those things in the Heavenly Theater, which God would have him to un∣derstand, and us by continuall prayers, meditations, and observations to search out, touching the future state of the Church. And that ye may understand this to be so, I will endeavour to delineate and pourtray the method of the Revela∣tion, now indeed briefly as in a Type, reserving the rest to the Preface of eve∣ry Vision: But the order of the Personages, by whom this Propheticall Inter∣lude is Acted, I will by and by set downe in a short Table. CHAPTER. IX. Touching the generall Method of the Revelation TO speake accurately of the Method and Order of this Prophefie: whither the generall, by which the propheticall visions do all cohere one with another: or the speciall, by which the Apparitions of every of the Visions doe follow each other, is not for me to do, although I have imployed my study more then thirty yeers this way. Yet I will say (to stir up the endeavours of others) as much as the
Lord in mercy hath for the present revealed unto mee. It is now fiftie two yeers ago, since I first heard the Table-Propositions (as they call them) of my Master Zacharie Ʋrsinus that great Divine, in Wisedomes Col∣ledge, out of the Old and New Testament. He for five yeers together, as often as the Reader had ended with the Epistle of Jude, READ, (said he) Matthew. I desired to heare the Revelation also, being ignorant of the difficulties, which ei∣ther my Master shunned, or else would not as yet commit unto his Disciples. At length Anno 1570. being again come (in course of reading of the Scriptures) unto the Revelation, he bade the Reader goe forward. Then the Revelation was read: which he illustrated with briefe notes, in so many dayes, yea halfe hours, as there are Chapters in the Booke, yet accurately, as hee was wont to doe all things: these his Observations I with all attention gave heed unto, and as much as might be, set them downe in writing, and thereby I began to observe some∣what of the obscurity about the distinction and analogie of the Visions. Fourteene yeeres after I my selfe being called to the Government of the said Colledge (wherein also I continued so many yeers) running over seven times at least the explication of the Revelation, I at length seemed unto my selfe to ob∣serve some kind of Harmony in certain Visions, and as it were some distinct Acts of most of the Visions. Here specially of the Ancients Augustine, and of the latter, Nicolaus Collado a Divine of Lausanna, did most effect me. Lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 17 For Augustine in his Commentary de C. D. after hee had taught that the last judgement should certainly come to passe, both by other Scriptures, and largely also by the Revelation, at length, he saith: In this Booke many things are obscurely spoken, to exercise the mind of the Reader: and in it are a few things, by the manifestation whereof the rest might with labour bee found out: chiefly because it so re∣peateth the same things after a diverse manner, as if it seemed to speake of different things, whereas wee shall finde that it speakes of the very same things, after a diverse manner. By which words Augustine seemeth to me wittily and truely to say three things. First, that many darke things are contained in this Booke, to exercise the minds of the Reader. Secondly, that some things in the Booke are plaine, by the un∣derstanding whereof, the other more obscure things might with study be dived into. Thirdly, that it principally conduceth unto the searching out of the my∣steries of this Booke, to observe that the same things are spoken of in diverse Types after a different manner, although different things seeme to bee spo∣ken of. The first of which touching the obscurity seemeth plainely so to be, as hath before been shewed in Chap. 3. by which indeed the Holy Ghost hath invol∣ved this Prophesie of the New Testament, not because hee would not have the same to bee understood by the Readers: but to have their mindes and under∣standing exercised with labour, studie, and prayer: as appeareth Chap. 13.18. & 17.9, &c. The second doth notably respect the speciall method. Augustines animadver∣sions tou∣ching the method of the Reve∣lation. For almost in every Vi∣sion there are some few (if not many) things, whence the plaine understanding of the other more obscure may bee found out: either because they are properly spoken: or because, the significations of the Types are declared by the Spirit himselfe: or lastly because the Types themselves are so manifestly agreeing to the matter signified, as they yeeld no difficult understanding unto such as diligent∣ly mind the same. For example: It is plaine that in the very beginning it is said, that here those things are revealed, which must shortly be done: Rev. 1.1.19. & 14.1 & 15.1. Rev. 14.14 & 19.11. & 20.11. and John is com∣manded to write those things, which then were, and which should afterward come to passe: and expresly those last plagues, and oftentimes the last Iudgement: whence two more darke things are easily dived into. First, that the Types of the Re∣velation do not represent the foregoing Historie of the Israelitish Church: but the future state of the New Church. Secondly, that they shaddow out, not a few
Ages onely after the Revelation: nor yet the last times and Tragedie of Anti∣christ alone, but the whole period of the Church. Thus it is plaine, that the starres are the Ministers of the Churches, the great starres renowned Teachers. Whence it is not obscure, what is meant by the great starres falling from Heaven. Moreover also it is plaine, Ezech: 16.2: Ier. 3.1. Ose. 2.5. that in Scripture a whorish woman doth denote the Apostaticall Church. Whence it is cleare, that the woman clothed with the Sun, signifies the true Church: the flight of the woman into the wildernesse, her be∣ing out of sight, riding on the Beast, and sitting upon seven hils, the adulterous and domineering Church of Rome. It is also plaine, that most of the Visions doe end with the last Iudgement. Hence it is manifest, that the periods of the Church are often ended: neither is one onely continued throughout the whole Revelation. Which very thing the Third Advertisement of Austine doth intimate. For by the seven Seales and seven Trumpets different things seem to be signified, wher∣as the same things are treated of after a different manner. Thus the Beasts ap∣peare to be diverse, whereas notwithstanding they are but one. The rupture, and ruine of Babylon is diversly set forth: and yet it alwayes comes but to one thing. And this is that which also Nicolaus Collado seemes to have observed in his Ex∣position on the Revelation in the School of Lausanna, published Anno 1584. For following this observation of Augustine he learnedly sheweth: that it plea∣sed the Lord to shew a thing unto his servants in Visions, not once, but twice, yea sometimes thrice, the more to confirme the thing: like as in Act. 10. when God would shew Peter, that he should not refuse to go in to a heathen man, it is said that he saw a sheet let downe thrice to the Earth from Heaven, and received up againe: so also in the Revelation the future calamities and changes of the Church are exhibited to Iohn not once, but againe and againe in diverse Visions: and in∣deed in such a manner, that by a certaine gradation, the latter doe alwayes adde somewhat more cleare and waighty to the former. Now that the matter may appeare more evidently, I will set down his own words. After, Method pag. 19: saith he, horrible tyranny had oppressed even all the Churches, and that indeed with a wonderfull cloake of hid hypocrisie: and so all liberty was either extingui∣shed, or banished, or also more and more brought to nothing through contempt, or did weare away through neglect: Hoc opus hic labor erat: and therefore the Lord would have the servants of Christ to be forewarned of such weighty matters in a threefold Vision, least through the vniversall rage of wickednesse they might be drawne away, or least be∣ing sometime drawne away, they should never returne into the right way againe. This, I say, was chiefly the necessary cause of foresignifying the same thing diversly: and the often inculcating of it by seven Seales, seven Trumpets also, and seven Vials: Now in these is a certaine gradation most worthy of observation. For the opening of the seven Seales stirreth up indeed, and moveth the eyes of the Beholders a farre off: neither doth it suffer all the senses to bee without a part: but the most shrill sound of the Trumpets brea∣theth indeed something more terrible, and sounding in the eares of sleepy and dull persons, suffers them not to goe on in their sluggish drowsinesse. Yet these two may seeme onely to have respect to the eyes and eares: But the pouring forth of the Vials may bee said wholly to take hold on the whole man, and with heat to scorch him. It is also worthy of observation, that in this Booke are gathered together seven Visions of three sorts touching the same things, viz. of Seales, Trumpets, and Vials, so as every latter kinde is more full then the former, (which belongs also unto the Narration of things) and propounds the things themselves more neerly to the view of the eye, denoting, and more certainly defining the same with more circumstances. For example: the opening indeed of the Seales comprehends the whole matter, though summarily, yet significantly enough: but all the same things much more significantly in the sounding of the Trumpets: but the pouring out of the vials comprehends these very things most significantly of all. So in those
Dreames of Ioseph it is more expresse, that Ioseph should bee worshipped by the Sunne, Moone, and eleven Starres, then that his sheafe should be worshipped by his brethrens sheaves. So in the Dreames of Pharaoh those seven eares of corne did more neerly serve to signifie either fruitfulnesse or dearth: then the seven kine. So also the Ʋision respe∣cting the foure Monarchies in that Image, whose head was of gold, Dan. 2. and op∣posing unto them the Kingdome of Christ, yet it lesse expresseth the matter, then that fol∣lowing vision in Dan. 7. propounding the same things in foure Beasts: also the vision of part of those very things in Chap. 8. is more plaine: and in the Ramme, He-goat, and his foure hornes, &c. againe speciall particulars hee also prosecutes more specially, Chap. 11. These things COLLADO. Hence he after a new manner hath fashioned his method into the forme of an Harmonie, oppositely coupling the seven Seales of the second Vision, with the seven Trumpets of the third Vision, and with the seven Vials of the fift Visi∣on, by a singular studie and praise-worthy diligence. Now although I do not at this time dispute of his explication it selfe: On Argu∣ment of Chap. 16. What seems to be requi∣red in Col∣lado his Method. and that the combining of the seven Vials with the seven Seales and Trumpets, is not without scruple, as I shall shew in its place: as also that he restraines the whole Revelation unto the Tragedie of Antichrist, or those times onely which after the rising and growth of Antichrist felt the calamities shadowed out: nor lastly doth it from that combination or coupling sufficiently appeare, what is the mea∣ning of many other wonders touching the measuring of the Temple, and the two witnesses slaine by the Beast, of the travaile and flight of the woman into the wildernesse: of the Beast four times comming forth on the Theater, The Reve∣lation re∣presenteth not a con∣tinued Hi∣storie. of the last Iudgement so often times represented, &c. and how these things cohere with the Seales, Trumpets, and Ʋials: Notwithstanding I hence have drawn two things which are sufficiently evident: First indeed, that they do erre from the scope, who with Lyranus, Antoninus, and others, imagine that a continued course of the Ecclesiasticall Historie, from the beginning of the Revelation unto the end of the world is praefigured in this Prophesie: Unto which opinion, besides those things Collado hath noted, this in speciall is contradictorie, that almost in every of the Visions, the whole period is so evidently ended by the Type of the last Iudge∣ment, as it cannot easily bee quaestioned, or weakened by imagined Anticipati∣ons. Secondly, that of Austin in the fore-alledged place: The Revelation doth so repeat the same things many wayes, as it may seeme to speake of different things, where∣as it is found to speake the same things onely in a diverse manner: that is, it represen∣teth the future condition of the Church, so farre as it concerneth the principall events, by diverse Visions againe and againe, one while more obscurely, ano∣ther while more plainly. Hence briefly I thus determine touching the generall Method of the whole Prophesie. First, that wee stray not from the scope, we must know,  that the Revelation is not a representation of things past, like as, for example, the Historie of Daniel, That things past are not represented. Susanna, or the Baptist, is represented in a Comoedie, as Alcasar affirmeth, but that it is a Prophesie of future events concerning the Christian Church, even from the time of the Revelation (which, as before I shewed, was about the 14. yeer of Domitian, or the ninety sixth of Christ) unto the last deliverance of the Church, and utter destruction of Antichrist with all the wicked. For therefore it is called a Revelation and a Prophesie, which is onely of future things: and Christ commands John to write those things which must be done afterward. The which notwithstanding is not to bee taken so precisely, as if there were nothing at all of things past intermingled. For almost in three places, the argument of the Visions so requiring, it could not be avoided, but some things past should be mixed with things to come. The first place is in Chap. 12. tou∣ching the woman in travaile with the Man-Child, &c. where the begin∣ning or originall of the Christian Church is plainly figured out by the Type of
Christs Nativity and Ascension: which Vision therefore is more perfect then all the rest, as we shall see in its place. The second place is in Chap. 17. where the Beast, on which the whore sitteth, is said to have been in the five Kings be∣fore the Revelation. Lastly in Chap. 20. touching the thousand yeers of Satans binding, that he might no more seduce the Nations, a few yeers, to wit, twenty five, from the destruction of the Temple and Iewish Nation went before the Revelation: for Satan did not cease through the Iewes to deceive the Nations, and keepe them from the Gospell of Christ untill the Synagogue and the Iew∣ish Nation was dissipated: as shall be shewed in its place. Secondly we must remember:  That howsoever the Revelation may seeme to be one continued Vision: The Reve∣lation is not one conti∣nued vision but distinct yet indeed it is not one, neither revealed at one time, but are many distinct Visions, to wit, Seven, as it were so many sights exhibited to Iohn in the Spirit, as was erewhile shewed in the Partition of the Booke: in which least I should goe too farre from other Interpreters, I retained the seven∣fold number, which is familiar, and as it were peculiar unto this Prophesie: nei∣ther have I varied save onely in the seventh Vision, to which why I rather joyned the twentieth Chapter, then to the sixt, I will shew hereafter. Evident traces of distinction do sufficiently appear throughout in the Text, as shall be shewed Chap. 1.10. whither Iohn saw them in seven times and ecsta∣sies, or in fewer. This is certaine, that hee was not once onely, but oftentimes ravished in the Spirit, neither saw he all in one place, but somethings in Patmos, somethings in Heaven, somethings at the Sea-shoare, somethings in the Wildernesse, and lastly somethings in a high mountain, which is to be observed partly against the new faigned consequence of the Inquirer, partly against that received errour, as if one continuall Historie of the Church, from the beginning even unto the end were observed in this Booke: from which supposition many things will necessa∣ry be confusedly explicated, and contrary to the scope. Thirdly it is to be noted,  what Austin hath observed, That the Revelation speaks the same things after a diverse manner, The Reve∣lation saith the same things in a diverse manner. that is, that divers Visions by changed types do represent the same period of the Ecclesiasticall History. Of which thing that often iterated description of the last Iudgement is a most cleare Argument, which is annexed unto every one of the Visions, not by anticipation (as commonly it is imagined) but in a right order of Historie. Now least this so often repe∣tition of the same things, might bee thought to bee idle or unprofitable, the fol∣lowing observations are to be added. Fourthly therefore it is to be noted,  the same things are so diversly spoken, as (which Collado hath well observed) the former Visions are for the most part more obscure, The latter Visions are clearer then the former. the latter bring clearer light to the darkenesse of the former, if you rightly observe them. The opening of the seven Seales seem to be obscure in the second Vision: But the seven Trumpets, especially the five latter, touching the great stars falling from Heaven to the Earth: the Locusts tormenting, and yet not killing men, the Armies of the foure Angels of Euphrates, &c. are more cleare in the third Vision. The measuring of the Temple, and the Prophesie of the two Witnesses seems to be obscure, in the third Vision: but it is illustrated by the prea∣ching of the three Angels against Antichrist, in the fourth vision. The Historie of the Beast is obscure Chap. 11. & 13. but most cleare, Chap. 17. The last Judgement is more darkely shadowed out towards the end of the second and third Visions: but more clearely towards the end of the fourth, by the Type of the Harvest and Vintage, and of the fift Vision by the Type of a great Earth∣quake:  but most clearely towards the end of the sixth: and most properly in the seventh. The periods of the visi∣ons are the same, but not the same histo∣ries. Fiftly it is to be noted, that the same things are diversly spoken, not because the same individuall events are again iterated, but because the selfe same period of the Church according to different Histories more known, & sometimes also the same are shadowed out by more manifest Types. For example: In the second vision the
blacke-horse denotes the Church made black with heresies after Constantines time: The pale-horse having death fitting on, and drawing Hell after him, the Church sicke even unto death, towards Antichrists rising: In the third vision by the soun∣ding of the third, fourth, and fift Trumpets the same state of the Church is indeed represented: yet more specially the declining, corruption, and lastly the aposta∣cy of the Sea of Rome: In the fourth vision her Tyranny and Idolatry: In the fift and sixt vision is exhibited her ruine and judgement: and so of the rest, as we shal see in the Exposition. Sixtly, Also it is to be noted,  that all the visions doe figure out the same pe∣riod of the Church, yet not all the whole: but some indeed the whole, The peri∣od of the church is not whole in all the visions. others some certaine distances: For the whole period of the Ecclesiasticall Historie from the Revelation unto the end, is principally distinguished by foure distances: afterward I call them foure periods in the same sense, for, the four remarkeable di∣stances or state of the whole period. There are four distan∣ces of the period of Christs Church. The first distance was of the Church flourishing and groaning under the Ro∣mane Tyrants, untill the peace brought in by Constantine. The second distance was of the Church reigning and rioting under Christian Emperours, untill the rising of the Westerne Antichrist in Boniface III. Pope of Rome: and of the Easterne in Mahumet sixe yeers after: Of which distance HIEROM, after, saith he, the Church came under Christian Princes: Tom. 2. in vita Mal∣chi. in power in∣deed and riches she became greater, but lesse in vertues. The third distance was of the Church troaden upon, and oppressed by Anti∣christ, especially the Westerne, untill the measuring of the Temple, which began to be effected by the two witnesses JOHN Husse, and JEROM OF PRAGUE, who were slaine by the Beast in the Councell of Constans Anno. 1414. and thence untill Luther, by whose ministerie the measuring of the Temple (bro∣ken off, or hindred through the Tyranny of Popes) began to bee continued Anno. 1517. Lastly the fourth distance is of the church reformed from Popery, & of the decli∣ning of the Papacy, to endure untill the end. For the Beast goes into destruction, whatsoever the gates of hel attempt to the contrarie, Lib: 3. de P. R. cap. 21 and Bellarmin their Prophet said truely: From that time, that the Pope began by you to be Antichrist, his Empire hath been so farre from encreasing, as it hath alwayes more and more decreased. This whole period, I say, of the Christian Church, some visions doe repre∣sent, according to the foure-fold state erewhile declared: and these I call UNI∣VERSAL Visions, because they containe the universall Historie of the Church: but some shadow out not the entire, Vniversall visions. but onely the two latter distances of the whole period, or the Tragedie of Antichrist: and these I call PARTICULAR, because they praefigure not the whole Historie of the Church, Particular visions. but onely the lat∣ter part thereof touching Antichrists rage and judgement, and of the Churches warfare and victory against him. UNIVERSAL Visions I find to bee foure: viz. the second touching the seven Seales: and the third of the seven Trumpets: and the fourth of the woman in travaile: and the seventh (which is as it were a Recapitulation of all the forego∣ing) touching the binding and loosing of the Dragon, &c. The PARTICU∣LAR Visions are two, viz. the fift of the seven Vials of the last plagues: and the sixt of the Iudgement of the Great Whore, the overthrow of Babylon, and destruction of Antichrist. And these things I suppose do suffice to the plaine understanding of the generall Method of this Prophesie.
CHAPTER. X. Of the speciall Method of the Apocalyps. WHat concernes the speciall Method, because it is more diligently explicated in every of the Visions, I shall in this place speake the lesse thereof. First,  We must remember, that the forme of this Prophesie is truely Tragi∣call. For it representeth Tragicall motions and tumults of the adversaries against the Church of Christ, The forme of every vi∣sion is tra∣gicall. and at length the Tragicall end also of the wicked them∣selves. Now Writers of Tragedies usually mingle () feigned things with serious, both for preparation, as for delight sake, and to di∣stinguish their Dramaes, or Interludes into Acts, Scenes, and Chores, the which also I find to be observed in this Dramaticall Prophesie. For most of the Visions, besides the propheticall things they treat of, have somethings  Praeparatorie: They also containe certain distinct Acts of Propheticall Types: and diverse Chores or Companies beginning, or comming in between, or ending the Propheticall Action with musicall accord, serving to the decorum and plea∣santnesse of the Drama. Secondly,  In every Vision (I speak of the six Propheticall) we must prudent∣ly distinguish betwixt what is Dramaticall, what Propheticall. I cal that Dramatical which is preparatory to the visions: The Dra∣maticall matters are to be discer∣ned from prophetical. of which kind is what we have in Vision first Chap. 1. from v. 9. unto the end: in the second Chap. 4. & 5. in the third Chap. 8. unto ver. 7. in the fift Chap. 15. throughout. The Chores also, and their Prayers, Songs, Hymmes, Praises, as are, the Chore or Company of the four and twenty Elders, in the second, third, & sixt Vision: the Chore of the four Beasts in the second and sixt Vision: the Chore of Angels in the second vision: the Chore of all creatures, ibid: the uncertain Chore in the fift and sixt Vi∣sion: the Chore of Harpers in the fourth and fift: whose Symphonie and Songs are to bee read in the said Visions, Chap. 4. ver. 8, &c. and Chap. 5.9, &c. and Chap. 6.12, &c. and Chap. 12. ver. 10, &c. and Chap. 15.3, &c. and Chap. 19. ver. 1, &c. All these properly serve for the decorum of the Propheticall Drama, neither doe they containe Prophesies, but propound Morall Do∣ctrine, of celebrating the workes of God, and his Iudgements unto the Church. But they that search for other mysteries in these things, seeme to labour in vaine. Propheticall, I call those Parts or Types of Visions, which by word, gesture or action, represent future events concerning the Church, by a certaine simili∣tude of things, whither open or hid: and for the most part are repeated out of the Acts of the ancient Prophets: In the understanding and application of which unto their events past, present, and to come, the true explication of this Prophesie doth consist, and principally aime at. Thirdly,  The Method and Explication of the Propheticall Types, cannot be gathered more commodiously and safely then from the Argument it selfe, name∣ly the generall of the whole Booke, The distinct Acts of the visions. and the speciall of the Visions in particular. The generall Argument (as we heard in the foregoing Chapter) is specially in two things. For the Apocalyps forewarneth the Church of her condition and sor∣rowes at hand: and armes her with comfort against the same. The same wee have in every of the Visions. For they both foretell future evils, as also shew the Godly the remedies thereof: yet all shew not the same things, nor in the same manner. For some praefigure All, that is, both the first, and the second Battles, which I called VNIVERSAL: some the second onely and latter, which I called PARTICULAR. The former and latter battles of the church. By the first or former battles of the Church, I mean, the Combats shee had with Tyrants and Romane Adversaries, oppugning the Testimony of Jesus: as also with Heretickes diversly depraving the word of
God. By the second and later, her Combates with the Easterne and Westerne Antichrists. Hence there are as it were foure distinct scopes of the universall Visions: The foure Acts of the universall Visions. but of the Particular two onely: the which I for instruction sake do name Acts. The first Act of the universall Visions hath a proposition of the calamities, with which the Church shall bee assaulted by Pagans and Heretickes untill Anti∣christs rising. The second in way of parallell to the first, praefigureth comforts opposite to the calamities of the Godly. The third shadoweth out an amplification of calamities, or new and more glo∣rious Combats of the Church under Antichrist. Lastly, the fourth parallell to the third, sheweth the Catastrophe of all evils, viz. the declining of Antichrists Kingdom, and the casting of all adversaries in∣to the lake of fire: and on the contrary the Churches Victory, and Eternall Glory. The particular Visions are finished with the two latter Acts, The two Acts of the particular Visions. because they one∣ly represent Antichrists tragedie, rage, declining, and destruction: the which notwithstanding the former touching the seven Ʋials doth more briefly: the la∣ter touching the whore riding on the Beast more largely and clearly: therefore this also is to be distinguished into foure Acts, yet answering to the two latter Acts of the universall Visions. Now although the Parallell-Acts both former and latter are not alwayes divi∣ded by whole Chapters (like as Tragedie-writers use to doe) but sometimes are joyned together, and as it were mingled in the same Chapters, because they sha∣dow out Histories or things by the same periods, and walking (as the saying is) with equall steps: yet every where (if thou well observe the Method) they have traces evident enough, as wee have diligently shewed in every of the Visions: where also wee have noted the Markes and Periods of every of them. CHAPTER. XI. The manner of interpreting observed by PAREUS. FVrthermore by the things hitherto spoken touching the Argument and Me∣thod, the manner of interpreting observed by us will not be obscure. To every vision wee have praefixed its proper dispensation or order, with as much brevity, and light as could be: the Chapters we have illustrated with Ar∣guments, Parts, and Analysis. The Doctrines which in this Prophesie are many and excellent: we have so la∣boured to expound and applie unto the Scope of divine Scriptures shewed by the Apostle: Rom. 15.4. 2. Tim. 3.16. (being profitable, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse, and lastly for the patience, comfort, and hope of the Saints) that this Booke may with no great labour, profitablie be propounded unto the Churches by the Ministers of Gods word. Now seeing in the beginning I said, that the eternall Deity of Christ is thorow∣out in this Prophesie proved with such evident Arguments against Heretickes, as scarcely any other Scripture doth it more clearely, I thought it worth the la∣bour to note above XL. Arguments of that nature in their severall places, vindi∣cating them from the depravings of Eniedinus the Transsilvanian Hereticke (which he cals Explications:) that it might so much the more appeare, that those Anci∣ents, who (as Eusebius recordeth) denyed the Canonicall Authority of this Book, as not written by the Apostle John, but the Hereticke Cerinthus, Lib. 7. hist. cap. 25. did either not looke into the Booke, and so sinned through grosse ignorance, or else
were carried away with more then humane affection. What Method I have taken in explicating Propheticall things, hath already been said, and the Praefaces of the Visions shall shew: in which I have not onely laboured to declare the Argument, Scope, Coherence, Order, and Period of eve∣ry one, but in speciall clearly to shew the Harmonie and consent of the forego∣ing and following Types, and of the darker and more clear each with other, and with the Types and Phrases of the ancient Prophets, that so I might illustrate the Revelation by the Revelation: It is most safe to ex∣pound the Revelation by the Re∣velation. which manner of interpreting cannot bee but most safe and certaine. For seeing it is evident, that the darker Types go be∣fore, and the clearer follow after, and are notwithstanding Analogicall or agree∣ing with each other: undoubtedly the more darke must bee sought out by the clearer. Now the more cleare have no extraordinary difficult application unto the things signified by them: And therefore wee may thence with some labour draw the understanding of the darker, which also I have labou∣red to doe. In summe (following Austines advice) I have shewed these two things: that the same things are so many wayes repeated in this Booke, as it may seeme to speake of different things, whereas we shall finde that the same things are diversly related: And: that a few (yea not a few but many) things are in the Booke, Aug. lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 17. by the manifestation whereof the rest might with labour be found out: which again I say not, as if I thought that all the mysteries of the Revelation were by me unfolded: Far be it: I come short in many things. Throughout where I sticke, and where bounds seeme to be set, Eph. 4.7. there I ingenuously professe a man must stand and goe no further. For here is wisedome. 2. Cor. 12.8 To them that earnestly call upon God the Spirit is given ac∣cording to the measure of the gift of Christ. It befell even the Apostle Paul, that he obtained not the thing hee petioned of God. How much more may the same befall us, and me the least of all: especially in these things, of which the Lord hath as yet reserved much in his owne power. Wherefore to interpret the Revelation, What it is to interpret the Reve∣lation. is not to untie all the knots of Aenig∣maes, to leave unsifted or be ignorant of nothing at all in the same, or by pre∣cisely interpreting the meaning of the Image, Character, number of the Beasts name, the Beast himselfe, the woman on the Beast, the eating of her flesh, the seven, the ten Kings that shall burne her, Gog and Magog, to make all gain-sayers to bee si∣lent. For who hath ever attained unto this by interpretation or commenting on any part of Holy Writ? They therefore that require the same, are wiser then Christ, the Apostles and God himselfe: And on the contrary such are wise against God who make a mocke of the Oracles they understand not, because of their ob∣scurity, or because of the diversity of Interpreters. Many types of future things remaine secret and are known to God onely, un∣till they be fulfilled. The whole fourth Act with its accomplishment is secret: because the seventh Trumpet hath not yet sounded: neither is the seventh Viall yet poured forth into the Ayre. A great part also of the third Act is reserved unto posteritie, which in time shall see the full gathering together of the Kings of the Earth into Harmageddon, the devouring and burning of the whorish woman, the desolation of Babylon, and the event of the Goggish Warre, &c. The beginning we see, and further shall see. In the two former Acts, and the better part of the third (the accomplish∣ment whereof hitherto Histories and dayly experience do so plainly shew, that if we held our peace, the very stones would cry out) it is the part of a Faithfull Interpreter, not to draw the Readers from the scope, neither to send them from those things which are done at home before their eyes, to seek for Chymeras in the Hyperborean Mountaines, which thing almost all the Iesuiticall brethren at this day do in their Commentaries, least happily Antichrist should bee found in the Mountaines of Rome, for the discovery of whom the greater part of the A∣pocalyps was of old revealed, and circumscribed with such apparent oracles, that
after the Historie and experience of so many Ages, we may justly question, whi∣ther it were greater blindnesse in the Jews not to beleeve in Christ, then for these to deny the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist. Wherefore I shall seeme to have performed my function sufficiently, not if I discusse all the obscurities of mysteries so irresutably, that all do applaude mee: but if (so farre as God hath enabled me) by the helpe of my Method laid down, I shall congruously, perspicuously, and without deceit (according to scope and experience) explicate both the other Aenigmaes of this Prophesie, and especi∣ally that part which containes the amplification and Catastrophe of the Combats of the Church, and properly respects these last times. Now by doing hereof, if I have not kindled a Torch, to take off the darkenesse with which it seemes to be covered, yet verily I have laboured, and if I be not deceived, have lighted a Candle, by the light and guidance whereof, as by Ariadne her threed, other () Godly Divines shall after me dive more deeply into these hid∣den mysteries, and more neerly point at that Son of perdition sitting in the Tem∣ple of God as god, and exalting himselfe above all that is worshipped, shewing himselfe that hee is God: And they shall say: This is he: O Romanist be∣ware of him. AMEN.
THE APPARITIONS AND PERSONS MAKING UP THIS PROPHETICAL DRAMA, REVEALED IN SE∣VEN VISIONS. In Vision I. Chapters 1.2.3. IOHN THE EVANGELIST, Actor, and in∣terlocutor throughout. Christ in a glorious form walking amongst the seven Can∣dlestickes: The authour of the Revelation, and ma∣ker of the prologue. In Vision II. Chapt. 4.5.6.7. The majesty of God sitting on the throne. The first Chore of the foure and twenty Elders. The 2. Chore of the foure Beasts. The Book sealed with seven Seales in the hand of the sitter on the throne. A strong Angell desiring the booke to be opened. The Lambe as it were slaine opening the booke. The 3. Chore of Angels. The 4. Chore of all creatures. A white horse with his Rider comming forth out of the first Seale. A red horse and his Rider, out of the second Seale. A blacke horse and his Rider, out of the third Seale. A pale horse with death on him, hell following him, out of the fourth Seale. The soules of the Martyrs under the Altar, in the fift Seale. A great Earth-quake, out of the sixt Seale. Four Angels holding the foure winds that they should not blow. An Angell from the East with the Seale of God. The multitude of Sealed ones and Martyrs.
In Vision III. Chapt. 8.9.10.11. Seven Angels with seven trumpets, out of the seventh Seale. An Angell with a golden censer at the Altar. An Angell sounding the first trumpet. An Angell sounding the second trumpet. An Angell sounding the third trumpet. An Angell sounding the fourth trumpet. An Angell sounding the fift trumpet. Locusts comming up out of the bottomlesse pit into the earth. An Angell sounding the sixt trumpet. Four Angels bound and loosed at Euphrates. A strong Angell cloathed with a cloud, and having a Book in his hand. Iohn eating up the Booke, and measuring the temple with a reed. The two witnesses prophesying. The Beast out of the pit, killing the witnesses. An Earth-quake overthrowing a tenth part of Babylon. An Angell sounding the seventh trumpet. The first Chore of the foure and twenty Elders. In Vision IV. Chapt. 12.13.14. A woman clothed with the Sunne, bringing forth a Man-child, & flying into the Wildernesse. The son of the woman taken up into Heaven. The red Dragon persecuting the woman. Michael fighting for the woman against the Dragon. The fift uneertaine Chore. The seven-headed Beast ascending out of the sea. The two-horned Beast ascending out of the earth. The Image of the Sea-beast. A company of Sealed-ones standing with the Lambe on the Mountaine. A sixt Chore of Harpers. An Angell flying with the everlasting Gospell. An Angell publishing the ruine of Babylon. An Angell denouncing punishments to the worshippers of the Beast. Christ on the cloud with a sharpe sickle. An Angell proclaiming the last harvest and vintage. In Vision V. Chapt. 15.16. The seven Angels with seven Vials. The sixt Chore of Harpers upon the sea of Glasse. An Angell pouring forth the 1. Viall on the Earth. An Angell pouring forth the 2. Viall on the Sea. An Angell pouring forth the 3. Viall on the Rivers and Fountaines, An Angell pouring forth the 4. Viall on the Sunne.
An Angell pouring forth the 5. Viall on the throne of the Beast. An Angell pouring forth the 6. Viall on Euphrates. Three unclean Spirits like frogs out of the mouth of the Beast, &c. An Angell pouring forth the 7. Viall into the aire. The rupture of Babylon by an Earth-quake. In Vision VI. Chapt. 17.18.19. The whore riding on the seven-headed Beast. The seven-headed Beast with his description. The ten Kings waging war with the Lamb: afterward burning the whore. An Angell publishing the fall of Babylon. An uncertain voyce calling the Godly out of Babylon. Kings, Merchants, Sea-men, bewailing the ruine of Babylon. An Angell casting a milstone into the sea. A fift uncertaine Chore. The first Chore of the 24. Elders, and the second Chore of the 4. Beasts. Iohn intending to worship the angell. Christ with an heavenly armie rushing upon the Beast and the Kings of the Earth. An Angell standing in the sun, calling the birds unto the prey. The judgement of the Beast, False-Prophet, Kings of the earth, and wor∣shippers of the Beast. In Vision VII. Chapt. 20.21.22. An Angell with the key of the bottomlesse Pit, and a great Chayne. The old serpent bound a thousand yeers. The martyrs and conquerours of the beast reigning with Christ a thousand yeeres. Satan let loose seducing the Nations, and raising Gog and Magog against the Holy Citie. The casting of Satan into the Lake of fire. The raising of the dead, and the last judgement. The new Ierusalem coming down from Heaven: the Bride of the Lambe. God in the throne publishing the judgement. Iohn seeing all these things, and intending to worship the angell. The Conclusion, the Lord Iesus putting an end to the Drama.
A TABLE OF THE Principall QUESTIONS which are expounded in this COMMENTARIE. In the Preface. 1. OF the Authour of the Revelati∣on. Page 5. 2. Of the Canonicall authority of the Revelation. Page 8. 3. Of the obscurity of the Book, what it is, and whence, with the reme∣dies thereof. Page 9. 4. Of the Interpreters of the Revela∣tion, both Ancient and Modern, and of the manner of interpreting ob∣served by them. Page 11. 5. Of the dignity, time, profit, and scope of this Prophesie. Page 13. 6. Of the argument of the Book. Page 16. 7. Of the Partition of the Revela∣tion. Page 19. 8. Of the form of the Revelation. ibid. 9. Of the generall Method of the Re∣velation. Page 20. 10. Of the speciall Method of the Re∣velation. Page 26. 11. Of the manner of interpretation observed by Pareus. Page 27. In Chapter I. 12. Of the word Apocalyps. Pag. 3. 13. A disputation about the words, from him which is, which was, and which is to come. Pag. 7. 14. Touching the seven Spirits, from whom Iohn wisheth Grace to the Churches, whither they be seven cre∣ated Spirits, or the Holy Ghost. Pag. 9. 15. Whither in verse 5. there be a so∣loecisme, against certaine Popish In∣terpreters. Pag. 12. 16. The Priesthood of the New Te∣stament, whither it bee common to the Faithfull, or proper to the Cler∣gie, Pag. 14. 17. Wherher Christ be, and how hee calleth himselfe Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: against Eniedinus the Samosatenian Pag. 16. 38. 587. 18. Of the Lords day. Pag. 20. 19. Whether he that appeared among the Candlestickes were Christ, and what it teacheth, and whither the ubiquitie of Christs flesh bee thence proved. Pag. 23. 20. Whither Hereticks do rightly ga∣ther that Christ is not God, because he saith that he was dead. Pag. 26. 27. 21. How the Candlestickes are the Churches, and the starres the Can∣dlestickes, and of Sacramentall phra∣ses. Pag. 28. 29. 419. In Chapter II. 22. A disputation about the Saints how farre they may fall, or not: and of their perseverance. Pag. 34. 71. 23. Whither the Church must suffer for the sin of her Pastor. Pag. 35. 24. Of the Heresie of the Nicolai∣tans. Pag. 36. 44. 45. 25. Whither because the Papacy is not the true Church of Christ, there was no true Church before Luthers time: and where it was. 43. and in the Praeface. Pag. 19. 26. Of the woman Jezabel. Pag. 48. 49. 27. Whether, and how Christ is cal∣led the Searcher of the heart and reines: which is proved against the Hereticke Eniedinus. Pag. 50. 51.
In Chapter III. 28. Whether, because the Saints are said to bee worthy that they should walke with Christ clothed in white robes, or from the promise of the re∣ward of workes, or from the future judgement according to works, &c. it bee rightly inferred, that good works are the meritorious cause of Eternall Life. Pag. 58. 250. 357. 384. 29. Of the Book of Life, and of them that are written in the same. Pag. 60. 384. 30. That the Pope of Rome, as An∣tichrist, lifteth up himselfe, and is lif∣ted up by his followers above Christ. Pag. 63. 297. 298. 31. A dispute touching the grace and cause of conversion, differencing us from others. Pag. 67. 68. 81. 32. Of hot, cold, and luke-warm per∣sons in Religion. Pag. 76. In Chapter IV. 33. Of the four and twenty Elders, and of the four Beasts. Pag. 90. 92. In Chapter VI. 34. Of the nine persecutions of the Church. Pag. 110. 35. A discourse touching the blacke∣horse and his Rider. Pag. 112. 113. 127. 36. Of the pale-horse, and of the mortall palenesse of the Church, whence it came, and when. Pag. 116. 117. 173. 174, &c. 37. Of the soules of the Martyrs un∣der the Altar, and of their crying. Pag. 119. 120. 38. Of Intercession and invocation of Saints. Pag. 122. 147. 39. Of the rising of the westerne and easterne Antichrist. Pag. 124. 125. 127. 144. 170. 186. 289. 290. &c. 304. 40. Of the pride, and tyranny of Ro∣mane Popes against Emperours and Kings. Pag. 130. 163. In Chapter VIII. 41. Of the Angell with the Censer at the Altar. Pag. 153. 154. 42. Of the analogy of the seven Seals, Trumpets, and Vials. Pag. 137. 374 375. In Chapter IX. 43. Of the Locusts and their applicati∣on unto Antichrists clergy. Pag. 177, &c. In Chapter X. 44. Of oathes. Pag. 203. In Chapter XI. 45. Whither the Church could, and may erre. Pag. 213. 46. A disputation touching the forty two Moneths. Pag. 216, &c. 47. Of the Fable and Historie of the two witnesses. Pag. 221. 222. 48. Of the 1260. dayes Pag. 224. 225. 49. Of Antichrists three yeeres reigne and an halfe. Pag. 230. 231. 240. 286. 50. Of the great Citie Babylon, that it is not Ierusalem, but Rome, yea Popish Rome. Pag. 235. 236. 343. 344. 349. 399. 443. In Chapter XII. 51. Of the woman clothed with the Sun, and standing upon the Moone, whether shee bee the same with the woman afterward sitting upon the Beast. Pag. 257. 258. 52. Of the battle of Michael with the the Dragon. Pag. 265. 53. Diverse opinions about the wo∣mans flight into the wildernesse. Pag. 275 54. What time is noted by time, times and a halfe time. Pag. 276. In Chapter XIII. 55. It is disputed touching the former Beast ascending out of the Sea. 282 &c. And what the Authour held a∣bout it. Pag. 287. 408. 409. 415. 56. A dispute about the mortal wound
of the Beast. Pag. 293, &c. 57. Of the second two horned Beast. Pag. 304. 58. Of the Image of the Beast. Pag. 310. 311. 59. Of the Character of the Beast. Pag. 313. 60. Of the number of the beasts name Pag. 316. 317. &c. 61. That the Pope of Rome did not now of late, begin to be accounted the Antichrist. Pag. 318. 319. In Chapter XIV. 62. Riberas disputation touching the Sealed ones, and of the Virgines standing with the Lambe on the Mountain. Pag. 329, &c. 63. Of the Angell flying through the midst of Heaven with the Eternall Gospell. Pag. 338. 64. A dispute touching the great Ci∣tie against Ribera. Pag. 346, &c. 65. How the dead in the Lord are blessed. Pag. 355. In Chapter XVI. 66. Of the seven Vials, whether they bee the same with the seven Seales, and with the seven Trumpets. Pag. 375. 67. Of the seven Angels pouring out the Vials, who they are, and what the pouring out of the Vials is. Pag. 376. 68. Of the plagues following the pou∣ring out of the seven Vials. Pag. 376. 377. 69. Of the King of the East, and the drying up of Euphrates. Pag. 390. 70. Of the three Spirits snt out unto the Kings of the Earth. Pag. 394. 395. In Chapter XVII. 71. That the woman sitting on the Beast is Popish Rome, Antichrists Seat, and Antichrist himselfe. Pag. 404. 409. 72. Of the Beast which was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the pit: disputed with Ribera. Pag. 416. 73. Of the seven Mountains of Rome and the seven Kings. Pag. 420, &c. 74. Of the Pope of Rome, when hee was made chiefe Pontife, the eighth King, and Antichrist. Pag. 428, &c. 75. Of the ten Kings signified by the hornes of the Beast. Pag. 433. 438. 76. Whether Rome according to Ri∣beras fiction is to bee burned before the comming of Antichrist. Pag. 441. 77. How God giveth into the heart, that is, worketh in mens hearts, the liberty of their will remaining. Pag. 444. 78. Whither God after the same man∣ner gave good and evill into the hearts of the Kings: and whether hence it followes that he is the Au∣thour of sinne. Pag. 446. 79. How the Kings in eating the flesh of the whore, and burning her with fire did the good pleasure of God. Pag. 449. In Chapter XVIII. 80. Of the causes of the ruine of Ba∣bylon, that is, of Rome. Pag. 456. 81. How the stirring up of the Saints to revenge: Render to her: is a∣greeable to the saying of Christ: Render not evill for evill. Pag. 461. 82. How it stands with justice to ren∣der double. Pag. 462. 83. Whether God in commanding to render the double according to Ba∣bylons workes: doth command ra∣pines, theft, wickednesse, &c. Pag. 463. In Chapter XIX. 84. Whether Alcasar hath sufficient∣ly demonstrated that properly the Church of Rome is the wife of the Lamb. Pag. 481. 85. Whether Iohn did well in proffe∣ring to worship the Angell: and whether the Angell did well to pro∣hibit him. Pag. 484. 582. In Chapter XX. 86. Of the binding and loosing of Satan, what, when, and how it was. Pag. 502. 87. A disputation touching the thou∣sand yeeres of Satans binding. 506. whether they be definitely to be un∣derstood. 507. where they take
their beginning and ending. 508. what was the condition of the godly in the thousand yeeres. 511. 88. Who were the living and reigning with Christ. 514 89. After what manner, and how long they lived and reigned with Christ. 516. 90. Who are the rest of the dead, and how they lived not againe. 517. 91. Of the first Resurrection, how it is to be understood. 518. 520. 92. Of the Chiliasts opinion, the Au∣thors thereof, and its refutation. 520. 521. 93. Of the first and second death. 519 526. 527. 94. What Satan is said to do the thou∣sand yeers being ended, and when he was loosed. 530. 95. A disputation with Bellarmine and Ribera about Gog and Magog. 539. 96. Of the old and new Goggish war, its occasion and beginning 536. 97. Of the perpetuall torments of the damned. 540. In Chapter XXI. 98. The description of the new Ieru∣salem, whether it bee agreeable to the Church-Militant on earth, or to the Romane onely. 541. 99. Of the new Heaven and the new Earth. 549. 100. Ludovicus his jest on Sophisters about the Lake of Fire. 557. In Chapter XXII. 101. A Disputation against Sophi∣sters for the authority and perfe∣ction of the divine Scriptures. 580, &c. 102. Of the doctrine of Iustification by Faith. 584. 585. decorative device
A COMMENTARIE Vpon the REVELATION OF IOHN THE APOSTLE. The argument parts, and analysis of Chap. 1. After the title, and Apostolical salutation, to the seven Churches of Asia. Iohn re∣hearseth the first vision, namely the seven golden candlesticks, and Christ his glorious walking in the middest of them, and how hee was affected with the vision: and received from Christ commandement for to write the same, both concerning things present, and to come. The parts of the chapter are two: the former containes the preface to v. 9. The latter, the vision of Christ gloriously walking in the middest of the seven candle∣stickes, from vers. 9, unto the last. THe preface, containes the title, and th posto∣lical dedication of the booke. The title shewet first the argument of the booke, that it is a ∣velation of things to come, & Christ the utho of it, as also the ministerie of the Angel vers. 1. Secondly it notes the person of the author by a periphrasis, or description, vers. 2. Thirdly it com∣mendeth the profitablenes of the booke from the necessitie of it, vers. 3. The dedication containes the prosopographie, or description of the persons, who, and to whom he writeth, vers. 4. Secondly the Apostles wish. viz. grace from God, and from the seven spi∣rits, as also from Iesus Christ: whose threefold office he declareth, v. 5. Thirdly the celebration of the prayses of Christ, and giving of thanks, for a threefold benefit received from him, v. 5, 6: His com∣ming to Iudgement is promised, by the words of Zacharie, vers. 7, and in the last place, bringeth him in testifying his eternall God∣head and omnipotencie, vers. 8. The vision containes the prepara∣tion, & vision it self. In the preparation Iohn sheweth the name, how hee was affected, the place of his banishment, and the cause, vers. 9. Secondly the time and manner of the vision, vers. 10. Thirdly a command to write the vision, and to send it to the seven Churches by name, vers. 11. Fourthly his Gesture, vers: 12. In the vision are three things, first the form, secōdly the effects, & thirdly the things follow∣ing. The form of the vision which hee saw is twofold: first the seven Golden candlestickes. Secondly the form of the Sonne of man in the middest of them; whose habit, and clothing hee describeth, vers. 13: His head, Hair, and eyes, v. 14: His feet and voice, vers. 15: His right hand holding the seven starres, his mouth armed with a two edged sword, and his face, shining like the sun, vers. 16. The effects are first Iohns Great amazement, secondly his falling to the ground, v. 17. The things following are, first a twofold comforting of Iohn: first
by Gesture, the laying on of the right hand, vers. 17. Secondly by speech, bidding him not to fear, and the reason is taken, from the per∣son, & adjuncts of the speaker, viz. because hee is eternall God, the Lord of life, of death, & of hel, vers. 11: 2 The command of writing the present vision, & following prophesies. 3 The unfolding of the mysterie, first of the seven starres, that they are the seven pastors, and secondly of the seven candlestikes, to bee the seven Churches of Asia. THE FIRST PART OF THE CHAPTER. CONTAINING THE PRE∣face, title, and dedication of the booke. THe Revelation of Iesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants, things which must shortly come to passe; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant Iohn, 2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Iesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. 3 Blessed is he that readeth, Exod. 3.14. 1 Cor. 15.21. Col. 1.18. and they that hear the words of this pro∣phecy, and keep those things, which are written therein: for the time is at hand. 4 Iohn to the seven churches in Asia. Grace be unto you and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come: and from the seven spi∣rits which are before his throne: 5 And from Iesus Christ, who is the faithfull witnesse, and the first be∣gotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. 6 And hath made us kings, and priests unto God and his Father: to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. 7 Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall waile because of him: even so. Amen. 8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.
A COMMENTARIE VPON THE REVELATION Chap. 1, vers. 1. THe revelation) this prophetical title, doth expresse the argu∣ment of the booke, called in Gr. . Concerning the meaning of which word, there is extant in a colledge called wisdom colledge (of which I have before spoken) a manuscript in way of commentarie on this booke, which Giveth us an ex∣ample of their monastical ignorance: the author tells us, a monasti∣call exposi∣tion upon the word Apocalyps. that the word apocalyps is compounded, of apo, re, and clipsor, velare. O the miserable barbarisme of that age, attempting to unfold these high mysteries, and in the mean time ignorant of the very name of the title. The verbe  signifyes, to reveal a secret, from which commeth apocalypsis a revelation of a secret, such as are all future things. For it is not man, but God, who foreseeth, and revealeth things to come. But the events which were to be∣fall the Church under the new Testament were hidde both from Iohn, and us, but are revealed in this booke: and therefore it is rightly called , to which wee may ad) , that is, a revelation of things to come. Af∣terward it is sometimes called a prophefie, from the argument of it, which is a prediction of future things revealed by God. And the title answereth to the title of the ancient prophets, as, the vision of Isaiah, the vision of Obadiah, the prophesie of Niniveh, which Naum saw, the prophesie which Habacucsaw, the word of te Lord that came to Hosea, to Joel, to Micah, &c. so that it sheweth the divine authoritie of the booke. For to reveal things to come, is from God onely: so that this booke, being a revelation, is inspired of God, which argument Iohn afterwards doth more fully confirme. For as Ierom wel observeth, this mystical booke is in∣tituled, a revelation, to give us to understand, that we have need of the know∣ledge, and explanation of it, that wee may say with the prophet, open my eyes, and I will consider the marveillous things of thy law Psal. 119.18. Of Jesus Christ) that is, which Christ revealed unto Iohn. argu∣ment of the deity of Christ. So that Christ is the author of the revelation, which is the first argument to proove the God-head of Christ, in this booke. For God, by the prophet, doth assume it as a thing peculiar to himself, to reveal secrets. Isai. 42, 9, & 41, 23: Behold, the former things are come to passe, and new things doe I declare, before they spring forth I will tell you of them: and confounds by this argument all Idols, that they are no Gods, because they are ignorant of future things. But the words following, which God gave unto him, seem to weaken the argument. For to whom God doth reveal things to come, hee is not God: but God hath revealed these things to Christ, therefore Christ is not God. The answer is twofold, first the whole may bee granted, if it bee taken in a good sence, as namely, that Christ (albeit he is true God) yet wherein God his father hath revealed these things to him, that is, according to his humanitie, hee is not God. For the humanitie of Christ, not foreknowing things to come but by revelation, is not God: but the man Christ Iesus, is God, because by his divinitie, hee fore knoweth all things of himself, Secondly the assumption is not in the text, and may bee denyed: for Iohn saith not, that God revealed these things to Christ, but gave this revelation to him, as to our mediator, that hee might reveal the same
to us his servants: for it is his proper office, to reveal the will of the father to the Church. So that  speaketh of the office of Christ, as hee is our mediator, which doth not  the qualitie of the son, with the father, but supposeth it: because as he was meere man, or a creature, of what power soever, hee could not have performed the workes of a mediator: But it behooued him also to bee God. But Thirdly, there follows no absurditie, to understand it as spoken of the Godhead of Christ: for such as is the order of existence, such also is the manner of working, betwixt the father, and the sonn. For as the somexisteth not of him∣self, but as hee is the first begotten of the father, so the so revealeth things to come, not of himself, but as hee receiveth from the father: and as the father Giveth unto the son his Essence: so is also his divine wildome communicated unto him from the father by Eternall Generation. Lyra and others understand God, in this place () Essentially of the whole trinitie: and taking it in that sence, then the revelation is given to Christ by God, as unto a mediator onely, but under∣standing it of the person of the father, then God is said to give it unto Christ both, as to the sonn, and mediator also. To shew unto his servants) the end, that God Gave the revelation to Christ, was, not that hee should have it for himself. But, as being the messenger of the father, to reveal it to his servants. By servants is meant Iohn, with the pastors and teachers, yea all the faithfull of all ages: to all which the mysteries of this booke were to bee revealed by Christ. First, to Iohn that hee should write it, and then to all the rest both to read, and understand it, meditate, teach, & explain it to the Church of God. The Gr. () his, noteth the servants of Christ, for it cohereth with the word () to shew, which noteth the office of Christ, and not of God. So that Christ sheweth this re∣velation, 2 argu∣ment of Ch.deity. to his owne servants, which is a second argument; proving the Godhead of Christ. For hee certainly is the Lord of the Church, yea God Eternal, to whom Iohn, the teachers, and all the faithfull of the Church are servants: for God alone is the Lord of the Church, according to that of the psalmist, Iehovah our Lord, &c. Psal. 8.10. For albeit Christ in that hee is our mediator, is exalted to bee head, and Lord of the Church: notwithstanding (except hee had been God) hee could neither have been mediator, or Lord of the Church. So that we plainly see, that Christ Jesus, is God, seeing John and all the faithfull are his servants. Which must shortly come to passe) this noteth the subject of the booke, which con∣taines an historie of things not allready past: but of things to come afterward, both to the Church, and enemies thereof. Must come to passe, not by a fatall or absolute necessitie, 1. Cor. 11.19. but hypothetically or supposedly, according to that of the Apostle, scandalls and heresies must come. Besides God hath so decreed it, whose counsell is unchangeable: and therefore the events must happen according to the same: as also because of secondarie causes, as the malice of satan, & the rage of the enemies against the Church, which though they bee changeable in themselves, yet they are not changed: so that if accidental events bee not altered by the counsell of God, and secondarie causes, they neces∣sarily come to passe, though the contingencie bee not taken away. Shortly) but how shortly? seeing after so many ages, they are not as yet come to passe, and are for the most part to bee fully accomplished neer the very last times, which is distant from the time this was revealed, more then 1500 years: some ex∣tend this to the whole time of the new Testament, which though it were to con∣tinue more then a 1000 of yeers, yet is called short, both in regard of the age of the world then already past: Iohn 2, 18. 1 Cor. 10 12 Psal. 90 4. 1 Thess. 5.3. as also in regard of eternitie, in which shall bee neither shortnesse nor length of time. For this cause the whole time of the new Testament; is in scripture called the last hower, the last times, the ends of the world. For the whole time and age of the world is but a moment in the eyes of God, or as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. Which is the reason that Christ saith chap. 21. 12: that he will
come to judgement quickly, or shortly: that is sooner then men imagin, suddenly, in which sence the words following, come to passe, were of necessitie to bee restrained to the full accomplishment of this prophesie, which may not bee, for it is to bee extended, to the whole time, and currant of those things which were foretold. So that by shortly, is meant the beginning, and progresse of the fullfilling thereof. Shall shortly come to passe, that is shall begin: for things are said to come to passe shortly, not which are eyther already past, or else are to come a long while after, but which are beginning to bee effected, & are even in doeing. Signifying that the stormes of afflictions were not to bee differred to the last times, but that they were suddenly while the Apostles yet lived to rush in by heaps upō the Churches: Ioh. 16.12. the which Christ also foretold his disciples, and histories manifest the accom∣plishment of it. For the first persecution of Christians, began straightways under Tiberius and Nero, which tooke away Paul, and Peter: the other under Domitian, in whose time Iohn was banished. Wherefore hee foretels them, not to terrify, but to ani∣mate the godly against the dangers at hand, that it might not come upon them unawares: as Christ saith Iohn 16, 1: these things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not bee offended: for the darts which are foreseen, are the lesse hurtfull: withall hee teacheth, what is the portion of the Church in this world: namely to suffer af∣flictions, least wee should fayn delights unto our selves. So likewise hee com∣forteth us from the brevitie of the afflictions, and certainty of the promised deli∣verance: For as afflictions must shortly come, so also shall deliverance shortly, and certainly come: because Christ foretold the one, as wel as the other unto Iohn. Lastly it appeareth that the revelation treateth, not of things past but to come: wherefore they misse of the scope, who apply a great part of the types to the state of the Iewish occurrences and Roman Empire then allready past. And signifyed it by his angel) that is, Christ signified it. He declareth the faithful∣nesse of Christ in executing the charge committed to him of God, and shewing this revelation to Iohn his servant, and dear Apostle, by sending his angel, who in∣structed him in every particular of it. And signified, that is, who also signified the same, &c. for so it is expressed in vers. 6 & 16 of chap. 22: where the Lord Iesus saith, that he sent his angel to shew these things to Iohn, & to his servants in the Churches. So wee see, that the scriptures compared together, interpret themselves. Wee need not restrain the word signified to a typical, and dark manner of revelation, but rather it noteth a plain, and manifest discoverie, made unto Iohn: because that, which is here said to bee signified: is in the fore alledged place expounded by the words shewing, and testifying, &c. And hee sent) Gr. sending, this whole verse retaineth the Hebrewe phrase: 3 Argu∣ment of the deity of Christ. and is, as if it were read thus: who also sending his angel signified the same to his servant Iohn. Hence wee gather a third proofe of the God-head of Christ: much like to the second: for as Iohn is a servant, so also is the angel, and both are imployed by Christ as his proper servants, who is Lord of them both, and therefore God: for the angels are servants to none, but to Iehovah God, of whom it is said, Psal. 104.4. who maketh his angels spirits, &c. it is true, Christ is Lord of the angels, in that hee is the me∣diator, but unles hee were God, hee could neither bee mediator or Lord of the angels: by this argument, Hebr. 1.6: the Apostle proveth the God-head of the son: because the angels of God adore him. Vers. 2 Who bare record of the word of God) hence it appeareth, Iohn the Euangelist the writer of the re∣velation. that the Euange∣list Iohn is the writer of the revelation: for hee bare record of the word of God in the very entrance of his Gospel, saying: in the beginning was the word; this is the testimonie of Iohn, when the Iews sent unto him: and ye sent to John, and he bare witnesse; which things though spoken of Iohn the Baptist, yet were written by Iohn the Euangelist; who bare record to the word in setting downe of the testimonies of the word of God: besides none of the writers of holy scripture, have more ex∣presly testified the divinity of Christ then the Euangelist Iohn. For who but Iohn nameth
of the person, office, and benefits of Christ: Of the ministries of Angels & happines of the triumphant church, with the crosse, and comfort of the militant: withall teaching us to imbrace Godlinesse, to bee constant in afflictions, to hold fast faith and love, to take heed of false prophets, to Go out of Babylon, and beware of Antichrist, &c. To be short it containes many worthy, & comfortable sentences, as, blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord. &c. Promises also of the deliverance of the Church, of the mariage of the Lamb, with threatnings of destruction to the enemies. All which things, how profitable, and usefull they are, it is manifest unto all. For the time is at hand.) A reason to stir up a diligent care in us, to read, hear, and keepe this prophesie. Because the time, both of the furie of the adversarie against the Godly, as also of the deliverance of the Church, is at hand. The knowledge of evill and Good things, even at the dore is not to bee neglected: but the dili∣gent reading of this prophesie, causeth us to know both evill, and Good things at hand: therefore it is not to be neglected. It admonisheth us therefore to watch, lest unawares, we be overwhelmed, with the present troubles. It comforteth us also that we be not disheartned for feare of the present battles, but with full assurance of the presence of God, and promised victorie, we hold out manfullie unto the end. That the time was then at hand, histories make manifest: for Iohn being ba∣nished in the le of Patmos, began alreadie to feel the fury of Domitian. And here the dream of such is refuted, who binde the fulfilling of this prophesie, to the last three years before the end of the world. 4 Iohn to the seven Churches) Those things being forespoken of, which served, to gain autority & attention to this booke. John dedicates the revelation, to the sevē Churches of Asia, wishing Grace and peace unto them. By seven, Andreas under∣standeth all the Churches: Because in scripture, the number seven, is a number of perfection: but because the seven Churches in Asia, are as it were nominated by a marke to be knowen, therefore I understand, that it was purposely dedi∣cated unto them: not that the revelation belongeth not to others, but because the first vision doth directly concerne them: the rest generally belongs to the whole Church. Of Asia) He speaketh of Asia the lesser, or that part of Asia, Ptolo. lib. 5 geogra. cap. 2. which is invironed from the East, with both countries of Armenia, from the west, with the Aegean sea, from the North with the Euxine sea, & from the south with the Mediteranian sea. Here Iohn had planted seven Churches of note, whereof that of Ephesus was the greatest: but after he was banished, the teachers carelesly performing their office, he is commanded in the first vision to reprove, & admonish them of their duty. Grace to you and peace) be, or be multiplied: as in 1 Pet. 1, 2: by a familiar salu∣tation, he seekes to gaine the good will of those, whom he was afterwards more sharply to admonish. The Apostolical salutation hath beene opened in the Epistle to the Romans, and Corinthians. Grace is that free favor of God, from which doth flow, all the mercies of God, and every good thing which we enjoy. The Glosse doth wel understand it, of the free forgivenes of sins. Peace, the effect of Grace, is the tranquillity, and joy of the conscience, Rom. 1.2. of which the Apostle speak∣eth, being justified by faith, we have peace with God. The Hebrews by the word peace, understand all maner of prosperitie: and hence the Apostles in the begin∣ning all most of all their Epistles, doe not with out cause wish the same unto the faithful. Which is, and which was, and which is to come) It is manifest that this is a para∣phrase of the name of God, who alone is the author and giver of Grace & peace. But others do interpret it otherwise. Some of the father alone, from whom the Apostles generally desire grace to the Churches. Rom. 1.7. Grace and peace be to you from God our father, he is called: which IS, because he is from none, but the beginning of the deity is from him. And which was, because he was before all time in eternitie.
And which is to come, Iohn. 5.12. because he wil come to judge the world by the son: that the father is said to judge no man, is to be referred to the immediate judgement. For the father hath not so given over the judgement to the son: as not to keepe the power of judging stil in his owne hand. Others refer all to the person of the son: For he is, he which is, because Christ is the same God with the father: & which was: because the word was in the beginning; and which is to come: because he will come in the clouds to judgement, vers. 7. Others will have the three persons to be noted by three differences of time, at∣tributing the severall times to the severall persons, that is, which is, to the father, which was, to the son, and that which is to come, to the holy Ghost his coming in to the Church by proceeding from the father & the son: so Andreas, grace be to you, & peace from the Godhead, which subsisteth in three persons. To be short, others thinke that God is () essentially described, and doe apply all the words to every one of the persons: for the father is he, which is, which was, and which is to come, so is the son, and so is the holy Ghost. What then? all these expositions were right, and godly, if Iohn in these words had ended his prayer, but he addeth, and from the seven spirits, and from Iesus Christ: by which hee declareth, that he directeth his prayer in the behalfe of the Churches to the holy Trinitie. But not indeed in words commonly used, yet such as are convenient to his purpose: for the stile of this prophesie hath many things proper and excellent, fitted to the argument of visions: which not being observed by some interpreters, they vainly wearie themselves, and go astray: For seldom the name of God, or of the father, or of the son, or of the holy Ghost is found in the revelation in expresse words: But John speaking of God useth for the most part propheticall descriptions. Therefore this prayer is set downe in words agreeing to the excellent pro∣prieties of this prophesie, and in stead of the ordinarie forme of salutations, used of the Apostles, Rom. 1.7. as grace and peace to you from God our father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ: or, the grace of the Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you all: Iohn useth this kind as more proper and secret: Grace and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits, and from Iesus Christ, &c. in which words the true God, three in persons, one in essence is described, as the divine attribute, and prayer of the Apostle doe plainly manifest. Now I come to the particulars. From him which is) Thus he describeth the person of the father, by attributes proper to the divine essence, yet common to every one of the persons: Hereupon Christ assumes the same to himself, vers. 7. which is a most evident argument of his divinity. And it is a description of eternity, including and exceeding the three differences of the time, present, past, and to come: that is, from him which is, was, and shall bee, the words which is to come, being put for shall be: as in that of John 16, 13. He will shew you things to come, Act. 18, 21. that is, things that shall be: so, I must keepe the feast that cometh in Jerusalem. And it seemeth that he altogether intended here to ex∣presse that name of God in Exodus, Exod. 3.14. EHIEH I wil be, from which cometh the name Jehovah, in which word as Vatablus wel observeth the Hebrewes take notice of those three differences of time. It serveth for the great comfort of the Church, in that he prayeth for grace & peace, not simply from God the father, but from him, which is, which was, and which is to come, who alwayes remaineth the same, and with whom is no variablenes, Iam. 1, 17. nor shadow of turning. Indeed in the world the Church hath experience of diverse changes: but in God alone, she findeth constant shelter: be∣cause he changeth not with the world, but whom he once loveth, he loveth to the end. Ioh. 13, 1. Before I proceed further: here take notice, that some subtile ones, are displea∣sed, because of a soloecisme against the rule of Grammer: for it should not have
been writ, , as it is in the text, but, as they say, . But what? are these men so sharp sighted, as to set rules to God: Let them construe, if they can, that expression of God. Exod. 3.14. I am hath sent me to you. Or is the spirit of God tyed, to speak as is pleasing to Priscian. Let them therefore suffer God to pronounce his owne names () without declination: who himself is () indeclinable, immovable. 1 exposi∣tion. And from the seven spirits] Who should be these spirits hath so troubled inter∣preters, that some for this very cause, have blotted this whole prophesie, out of the canon of holy writ. Some refer it to the person of the son, in this sence: peace be to you from the son of God sitting on the throne, before whom are the seven spirits, which he holdeth in his hand: chap. 3.1. But they observe not what followeth, vers. 5. And from Iesus Christ. For indeed Iohn prayeth for grace, not from him that holdeth the seven spirits, but from the seven spirits expresly. Andreas, Lyra, and Ribera whom others follow, understand by the seven spirits, seven angels ministring before the throne of God and they take seven eyther indefinitely for innumerable, because the number seven is perfect: So Lyra: from the seven spirits, that is, from all the an∣gels, which are ministers of our salvation: or definitely, supposing there are seven great Angels, which chiefly care for the safety of man: So Clemens Alex. Lib. 6. Strom. there are seven of greatest power, the first borne princes of the angels, through whom God doth provide for all man kinde. Which seemeth to be backt with a place in Tobie 12.15. I am Ra∣phael the Angel, one of the seven, which stand before the Lord. This opinion seems to agree, with the letter of the text. Because the seven spirits before the throne of God are often mentioned, as in chap. 4.5, & 5.6, & 8.2, &c. as if they were Gods speciall ministring angels. But Iohn in praying to the seven spirits for grace, con∣futes this opinion: for it is contrary to scripture, and Christian religion, to pray for grace unto created angels, Besides none but God is the fountain & giver of grace, and peace, from whom, and through whom, and for whom are all things. Ro. 11.36. Therefore we finde, that the Apostles pray for, and desire grace from none but God alone. Alcasar saith wel: sound divinity admits not, that the grace, and peace of the Gospel, be demanded of the Angels. For such praying is a part of that worship spoken of, Matth. 4.9, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve. And concerning grace that of Iames is most true, every good gift, Iam. 1, 17. and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh downe from the father of lights. And therefore we may not un∣derstand, the seven spirits, to be seven angels, in regard of the divine attributes given unto them. Neither will the subtilitie of Ribera helpe the matter: we expect, (saith he,) the grace, & peace of our sanctification, from the angels, as from the ministers of God; for the text speaketh not of exspecting, but of a religious praying for grace: which for to direct the same unto the angels, were great impietie: Collo. 2.18. Because the religious worship of angels is expresly condemned in scripture: and the angels them∣selves forbid John to fall downe before them or to worship them, chap. 19.10, and 22.9. To be short, the Apostle maketh his prayer for grace, jointly both from him, that is, and from the seven spirits, and from Iesus Christ as working causes, or rather as from one onely cause, to wit, from one God, three in persons. Neither is that equivocation of Andreas to be allowed, who saith, the seven spirits are not, as equall in power, joyned with the most hie God, and blessed trinity: But are named, onely, as Gods chiefe servants, according to that of the Apostle, I charge thee before God, 1 Tim. 5.21. and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the elect angels. But the particle (from) three times repeated, doth plainly shew, that the seven spirits are joyned with God, as the giver of Grace. Whereas to call God, Christ, the angels and man together to witnes, is neither repugnant to scripture or sound divinity: For Christ himself, ch. 3.5. saith, I will confesse his name, before my father, and before his angels. And therefore that place in 1 Tim. 5.21: alleaged by Andreas, is not of the same nature, with this here treated of. For the literall sence seemeth not fully to agree with the following places, (as I my self have formerly minded) neither to confirme ought to angels as by and by I will it make to appear.
The third and most common exposition, 3 Exposi∣tion. both of ancient, and moderne writers, understand by the seven spirits, the holy Ghost, which onely is agreable to the scripture, Isa. 42.8. & analogie of faith: according to that of the prophet, I will not give my glorie to another. But according to the letter it seemeth to be otherwise, for these are said to be seven spirits, and the holy Ghost is but one: but we are to minde the nature and prerogative of this prophesie is such, as if every thing should be strictly urged according to the letter, we should of necessity misaply divers things. So that by seven being a perfect number, he speaketh of the holy Ghost who is but one, powring forth seven, that is sundrie gifts, and graces upon the Church: which is a figurative speech, or metalepsis, when the effects are put for the cause. Or else John wishing grace to the seven Churches, attributes to each, one and the same spirit, as if there were seven in all. Neither is it of waight that in some other places of this booke there is mention made of seven spirits, as of seven angels, for if the phrase be well observed, we may perceive, that they are noted as diverse from these here spoken of, who are absolutely called the seven spirits which are before the throne of God, by which the unitie of essence with him that sitteth on the throne, Revel. 4.5, and 5.6, and 8.2. is set forth by a divine attribute: the other are called the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth: the seven angels which stand before God, not having any divine attribute: by which it is plain, that these latter places speak of created an∣gels, who are Gods ministring spirits. Alcasar maintaineth against Ribera, according to the truth, that here the holy Ghost is spoken of; and not, as the other affirmeth, that these seven spirits should denote the seven powers of Gods providence, namely, his vertue, charity, justice, wis∣dom, patience, threatnings, and wrath. Which is a mysterie, bringing along with it an inconvenience, which he desireth to avoid; for he makes question, whither sound divinitie wil admit, that grace and peace be asked from the seven vertues, rather then from the seven created angels, yea how grace and peace can be prayed for, from menacings, and wrath: so he. And from Jesus Christ) In that he wisheth grace, and peace from Christ in the the third and last place, is neither against the former exposition, nor any way derogateth from the dignity of Christ: for as the Apostle 2 Cor. 13.14, doth not derogate from the order of the persons in the trinitie, though he put Christ in the first place: so here our Apostle for waighty causes sets downe the holy Ghost, before Christ: because he treateth of him, not simply as being the son of God, but also as he is the mediatour, redeemer, and revealer of this prophesie. Not∣withstanding great reason it is, that he should pray for grace and peace from Christ, Ephes. 2.14. because it cometh by him, Iohn. 1.17. and he is our peace. Who is the faithfull witnesse) The following titles are so many reasons, where∣fore grace, and peace is prayed for from Christ: and they set forth (as hath been shewed in the analysis) both his threefold office, with the benefit thereof, as also declare his eternall Godhead. The first title respects his propheticall office: that faithfull witnesse: which seemeth to be taken from Psal. 89.38. witnesse, because he hath brought forth out of the bosome of his father the testimonie; that is, the glad tydings of the redemption of man through his death: and from heaven hath ope∣ned to us the true knowledge of God, and way of salvation. faithfull) Because he not onely confirmed the heavenly truth by preaching, by miracles, & meekly calling of sinners to repentance, & to the faith of the Gospel; but also sealed the same by suffering on the crosse, and by instituting the ministry, he gave to the churches, Apostles, prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, who perpetually should be his witnesses, Eph. 4.12. & preach the Gospell to after ages, for the perfecting of the saincts, for the edifying of the body of Christ, according to these scriptures Ioh. 17, 6. I have manifested thy name to the men thou gavest me out of the world, and 18, 37. For this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witnes unto the truth: Io. 1.18. the son which is in the bosome of the father he hath revealed God unto us. Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession.
The father, and holy Ghost are also said to be witnesses: 1. Io. 5.7. Ioh. 5.37. there are three that bear record in heaven the father, the word, and the holy Ghost. The father, saith Christ, himself, hath borne witnes of me. And of the holy Ghost he saith, when the comforter is come, &c. He shall testifie of mee: the Apostles are called witnesses. Act. 1.18. And Antipas Rev 2.12. and two witnesses are mentioned, called Martyrs for sheadding of their blood for the testimonie of Christ. Revel. 11.3. But Christ onely ) by way of prerogative is called, that faithfull witnesse: because he first brought with him the witnesse of the truth, downe from heaven, he first, and he onely hath shead his blood for his owne testimonie, whereas all other martyrs suffered, not for their owne, but for the testimonie of Jesus Christ. Yea also the witnesse which the father, and the holy Ghost gave of him, was declared by himself; and therefore Christ as by a speciall, and proper right is called, the faithfull witnes, that is, the true and constant revealer of the doctrine of our salvation: whoever therefore hearkens not to him, Deuteron. 18.19. can not be saved: but who so heareth him shall have life eternall. This also confirmeth the authoritie of the revelation, because it was revealed to John by Jesus Christ that faithfull witnesse, who can notly, nor deceive: therefore this booke is trulie divine, and we may safely trust, and beleeve all things contained in it. It serveth also to instruct us, that if Christ onely be the true witnesse, then those are not to be heard but avoyded as Liars, which teach the Church such things as dissent from the testimonie of Christ. It may also comfort us, because Christ the faithfull witnesse will not forsake them who suffer for the cause of his truth, but will at length reward them faithfully according to his promise. The first begotten of the dead] This title concernes Christ his priestly office, who died for our sins, and was raised again for our justification. Rom. 4.25. For the word (dead) shewes that he died: and being the first begotten of the dead, it teacheth us, that he was raysed from the dead. And the whole scripture testifies, that the end and use, of his death and resurrection, was not a bare witnesse, (as Socinus blasphemeth) but chiefly a propitiation to purge us from our sins, and to justifie us before God. Paul calleth him likewise the first begotten of the dead, 1 Collo. 1.18. 1 Corinth. 15.20. and sheweth that Christ is become the first fruits of them that sleep. But how can Christ be the first fruits of the dead, seeing the scriptures testifie that Elias, and Elisha raysed up two per∣sons from the dead, before the time of Christs manifestation in the flesh. Laza∣rus also, with the widows son, and Centurions servant, were restored from death to life? Answer: First Christ is the first begotten or first fruites of the dead, because he was the first, that raysed up himself from the dead by his owne power: whereas all before Christ, were raysed not by their owne power, but Christs alone. Secondly, Christ was raysed up to an immortall life, not to dy any more: but the other to an earthly life, and became subject to death again. He is said to be the first begotten, or the first that did rise again: Matt. 19.28. Act. 13.13. Rom. 1, 4. because the resurrection is a kinde of new birth; and so Christ calleth the last resurrection a regeneration. And Paul applieth that in Psal. 2. of the father eternally begetting the son, to his re∣surrection from the dead: and hence he is declared to be the eternall and omnipotent son of God. This should greatly comfort us; that though we are borne, and brought forth in a corruptible condition: yet when we rise again, we shall be regenerated unto a state incorruptible: even while we are in this life, we are regenerated, but it is spiritually onely and in part: but when we shall by the spirit of God be restored to eternall life, then we shall be regenerated both corporally and fully, to wit, when our mortall bodies shall be made conformable, to the glorious body of Christ: let us not fear therefore, though we should suffer death for the testimony of Christ, because he who is the first begotten of the dead, Ioh. 17.24. will free us from death, according to that promise: Father I will also that they whom thou hast
given me be with mee, where I am and that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given mee. Ioh. 16.11. Againe if wee be dead with him, wee shall also live with him. And the prince of the kings of the earth] The third title of Christ declareth his kingly office, that he is farr more powerfull then kings, tyrants, and all other ad∣versaries whatsoever, and by his power can easilie subdue them, for as much, as he sitteth, at the right hand of God, and powerfully governeth all things both in heaven, and in earth: and hence in Chapt. 19.16: hee is called, the king of kings, and Lord of Lords: which serveth for the comfort of the Church, for if Christ be Lord over all the kings of the earth, why should we fear their rage against us? Christ is chiefe of all, and stronger then all: and therefore can easily stoppe their rage, Christ is the prince of all; and so hath the purposes and counsels of them all in his hand, 2 Timoth 2, 11. and will order and direct them for the good of his chosen. Satan is called the prince of the world, not by way of right, but of fact: because by Christs permission hee hath taken into his hand the principallity of the world for a season: that hee might powerfully worke in the children of disobedience, to their destruction. He falsly said, Eph. 2.2. Luk 4 6. all the kingdoms of the earth are mine: for the father hath appointed, not Satan, but the son to be the heir, and king of all. He calleth them kings of the earth, that are powerfull in this world, who for the most part oppose Christ, and but few of them receive him: yet Christ is the prince of them all, the rebellious he will break with a rod of iron as the potters vessel, Psal. 2. whose fury therefore is not to bee feared: for they are the kings of the earth, not of heaven, earthly power, is but fraile, and of no force against God. Afterwards the kings of the earth more restrictivelie are called the vassals of Antichrist. Rupertus understandeth it allegorically, that is, kings of the earth to bee such as subdue their earthly mindednesse, avoyd sinne, and are the servants of righteous∣nesse: of such onely (saith hee) Christ is prince, and all who will be Christs, must be such: but the former exposition is more agreable to the text. Furthermore, by these titles we have a fourth argument of the deity of Christ: 4 Argu∣ment of the deity of Christ. he is the faithfull wit∣nesse, the author, and revealer of the heavenly doctrine, he was raysed again from the dead, by his owne power: he is the prince of the kings of the earth: all which con∣firmes his omniscience and omnipotencie, that is, that hee is true God. Who loved us] in the Greeke, to him that loved us, and washed us. Here something is to be noted about the construction of the words in the originall. Gagneus a Papist insulting against the Greeke copies, saith, the Greeke reading is ful of soloe∣cismes, for these datives to him that loved, &c. can not be referred to any thing in the text. Ribera the Iesuite also, applauding the Latine version, above the Greeke, saith, by this it is manifest that the Latine is much purer then the Greeke that is now extant. And af∣terward, the Greeke copies that now are, are corrupt, and our interpreter hath (according to his usuall manner) followed the true, and amended ones. And there seemes to be some thing in their exception, if the words, unto him that loved us, &c. be referred, to what goeth before. But Alcasar, although a Iesuite, yet doth justly reprove them, for the false construction they speak of, is not in the text, but proceedeth from their owne fancy: there is no reason (saith hee) we should suspect that the Greeke copies are corrupted, for the vulgar Latine admitteth the same construction otherwhere, as appeareth in their translation on chap. 6.4: he which sate on the red horse, to him it was given that he should take peace from the earth, in like manner the words here, who loved us, are not to be construed, with the foregoing matter, but with that follow∣eth, to him be glorie, &c. This he taketh out of Andreas, and Aretas, who from these words to him that loved us understand the beginning of the following thanks∣giving. And indeed the construction is plain, if a period be made, and the article  who, be put before  hath made, so the whole thanksgiving would thus bee read. To him who loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his owne blood, and made us priests, and kings to God his father, to him be glorie and dominion for ever, and ever, Amen. Thus much about the construction. And who loved us] He concludeth the dedication, with a thanksgiving in which,
(the threefold office of Christ being before spoken of) hee now sheweth a three∣fold benefit flowing from the same to us. First he giveth thanks, that he loved us who is the fountaine of our salvation: for seeing the son of God loved us: there∣fore hee tooke our flesh, and laid down his life for us, Rom. 5, 8. & delivered us from death to life. God (saith the Apostle) commendeth his love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Againe, who shall separate us from the love of Christ: Rom. 8, 35. 1 Ioh. 3 16. Ioh 15, 3. hereby perceive wee the love of God, because hee laid downe his life for us. So saith Christ him∣self: Greater love hath no man then this, that a man lay downe his life for his friends, &c. The scripture setteth forth the love of the father also in this thing: that he gave his son up to the death for us. The love indeed of the son seemeth to be greater; because he loveth more, that will give his owne life for others, then hee that giveth the life of another to the death: but in this the father and the son have manifested one, and the same philanthropie, or fulnesse of love to us-ward, the fa∣ther, in that hee gave the son, and the son in that hee became obedient unto the father. The consideration of whose love ought to take away from us all opinion of merit, and selfe-trust. For the father and Christ loved us, not because wee were worthy of it, but when wee were enemies, and dead in trespasses. It should also stir up our thankfulnesse, to love him again, who first loved us, and to conse∣crate our selves wholy to him. And in the last place it is for our comfort: for those whom he hath thus freely loved, hee will love unto the end, and not leave them in the hower of death. And hath wushed us from our sinnes by his owne blood] Here followes another be∣nefit, being an effect of the former, for seeing hee loved us, therefore hee shed his blood, and gave his life for us: a golden sentence containing the summe of the Gospel, and a principall fruit of the death of Christ. Besides it yeeldeth us an ar∣gument, who was the writer of this booke, Ioh. 5.8. for this is the phrase of Iohn the Euan∣gelist: the blood of Iesus Christ the son of God, doth purge us from all sinne: that which there he calleth purging, here it is called washing by a like metaphor taken from water which purgeth away foulnesse. Now Christ cleanseth us frō our sinnes two maner of waies. First by his merit: because by the shedding of his blood he hath taken away the guilt of our sins, and justified us before the judgement seat of God. Secondly by the efficacie, of his sufferings: for by the vertue of his merit, he also giveth us the holy Ghost, and regenerateth us to newnesse of life, that being dead to sin, we might live unto righteousnes. So that Iohn in fewwords, doth comprehend many great mysteries of the Gospel. Christ hath washed us from our sinnes. So then wee were defiled with sinnes: we were guilty in te sight of God: but hee hath washed us by his owne blood: And therefore the shedding of his blood is a price fullie satisfying the justice of God for all our sinnes. Contrarie to the blasphemous falshood of Socinus, affirming that the blood and death of Christ is nothing, but a martyrdom, whereby he merited his owne exaltation. He hath washed us from our sinnes, so then wee are justified before God, by the merit of his blood. Therefore it is false, that we are washed and justified, by the merit of works. To be short, he hath washed us, being therefore once pur∣ged, let us not returne to the wallowing again in the myre: but rather seriously indeavor to be righteous, and acceptable to Christ our Saviour. 6. And hath made us kings, and priests unto God, and his father] in the Greeke there is a defect of the relative , who, common to the Hebrewes, and hath made, is put for, who hath made. For the word (kings) the old interpreter rendreth it, kingdom, and the reason of it may be, because two greeke copies have the word , that is a kingdom: but all other copies, yea the kings bible reads , that is, kings, which also is repeated, chap. 5, 10. Alcasar defendeth the vulgar translation with many words, but the generall agreement of all copies is against him, and though the sence may be the same, yet it is more probable, that persons with persons, rather then persons with things should be joyned together; besides the one is a proper speech, the other figura∣tive.
This then is the third benefit we receive from Christ, viz. that he hath made us priests, and kings: kings, not onely, in adopting us to be heirs of his king∣dom, but also through the power of the holy Ghost, hath made us conquerors, over sinne, Rom. 8.37. Rom. 16, 20. 1 Cor. 15, 57. 1 Ioh. 5, 4. death, satan, and all other enemies, as it is written, in all these things, wee are more then conquerors, through him that loved us. And the God of peace shall bruise satan under your feet shortly. Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through Iesus Christ. And this is our victory, that overcometh the world even our faith. Lastly Christ hath made us kings, hereby to shew that he will at length crowne all his members with glory and honor. And priests] to offer spirituall sacrifices acceptable to God through Christ, and to consecrate our selves as a living sacrifice pleasing unto him. Iohn heere hath reference to that in Exod. Exo. 19, 6 1 Pet. 2.5.9. 19, 6: and yee shall bee unto mee a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. Which words the Apostle Peter thus explaineth: yee also as living stones, are built up a spirituall house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spirituall sacrifices ac∣ceptable to God through Iesus Christ. And again, yee are a royall Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that yee should shew forth the prayses of him, who hath called you out of darknesse into his marveillous light. To God and his father] Whether we understand this of the trinitie, or else, (as ge∣nerally it is taken,) of the person of the father, the sence is one, that is, that we being reconciled to God by Christ, should therefore labour to give up our selves to him, as an acceptable sacrifice. Indeed this our reconciliation is a singular dig∣nitie, which God forbid, we should stain with any spots of unthankfulnes. The papists chalenge the Priesthood, as proper to their clergie: but Christ on the contrarie, hath made it common to all the faithfull. They confesse indeed that spiritually all may be said to be priests, yet properly they onely, who are anointed with the holy Christme: but it may easily be proved that their hierarchie, and order of Clarkes priests and monkes, were not instituted by Christ or his Apostles, but were brought into the Church, by a preposterous imitation of Iewish and heathe∣nish rites. Ribera on the contrarie pleads, that the Priesthood here spoken of, is not to be taken properly, but metaphorically. Now who doth deny it? therefore seeing himself striving herein with his owne shadow, he changeth his stile, and affirmeth, that the Priesthood in this place is properly spoken of, and pretendeth a rule, that offentimes that which in holy writ seemeth to be spoken of all in generall, is not to be applied to all in particular, but onely to some of the number, whom it con∣cerneth. And he alledgeth for this, Exod. 19, 6. yee shall bee to mee a kingdom of priests, an holy nation, Ioh. 3, 16. 20, 28. Exo. 19.6. &c. The rule wee acknowledge, yet doe denie, that it appertaineth unto this place. For the words of the text compared with the place of Peter, can∣not bee understood of some of the faithfull onely, but of all in generall: for as not a few of the faithfull, but all are made kings to God by Christ: so also not a few but all are made priests. It is likewise plain, that the speech in Exodus respected all the people, for as they were an holy nation, so they were a royall Priesthood, though afterward by a special priviledge, God granted the ceremonial Priesthood to one tribe alone: which priviledge if it belong to the Romish clergie also, let Ribera shew it from the holy scriptures. To him be glorie] the relative (to him) doth plainly cohere with the foregoing datives  that loved and washed. And therefore glorie and thanks is pro∣perly ascribed to Christ: Luk. 23, 3. Isay. 2, 19. for he giveth thanks, and teacheth us to give immortall praise to him, because he hath washed us, and made us kings, and priests to God, and his father. He giveth to Christ, that which he already hath, that we should acknowledge that he hath it, and that it is his will, we should ascribe the same to him, and therefore we are bound to render due prayse to him, because what he hath, it is all for our good. Glorie, that is, both the glorie of his Godhead, as also the exaltation of his glorious reigning at the right hand of the father. Dominion, this respecteth both his omnipotencie which he hath from all eternitie,
as hee is God: as also his authority over all creatures, which he received in time, as hee is the mediator. For ever & ever] The Hebrewe (ar golam) sheweth the eternity of Christ for our consolation, Amen a particle confirming, so it shall be, or so be it: 5 Argu∣ment of Chr. deity. from (Aman) to be faithful. Furthermore here we have a fift, and most manifest argument of Christs divinity. For the effects attributed to Christ are divine. For he is God, Ioh 3, 16. 20, 28. Exod. 19, 6. whose love is the fountaine & the cause of our salvation, it is God, who hath pur∣chased the Church with his owne blood. It is God who hath made us kings, and priests to himself: for none but God, can give the spirituall kingdom and Priesthood: it is God to whom glory and dominion is dew: now all those things being of right attributed unto Christ, it plainly sheweth that he is God. Vers. 7: Behold he commeth with clouds, and every eye shall see him] This confirmeth the former argument, that these things are certainly spoken of Christ: seeing it is hee which must come to judgement, it is hee whom every eye shall see to come in the clouds of heaven with power and majestie, it is hee, whom the soldiers pierced, and at whose comming all the kinreds of the earth shal waile, and the wicked shall cry, saying to the mountains fall on us, & to the hills cover us. Luk. 23, 30. Isay 2, 19. Hence it is apparent that John evē here attributes glory & dominion unto Christ: for the words, to him be glory and dominion, & behold hee commeth, doe manifestly accord. But some may say, why is there here a promise of his comming? not onely to strengthen our faith touching his glorious returning to judgement, but chiefly for the comfort of the godly, and terrour of the wicked. For now Christ being bodily absent, seemeth (as it were) to have forsaken the Church in her affliction: but our redeemer will come in the cloudes: now the wicked rejoyce, tyrants tyrannise, and Antichrist rageth against the Godly, as if they were left orphants. But they shall see the judge comming gloriously in the cloudes, him (I say) whom they have injuriously condemned, pierced, and still daily doe afflict in his poore members, yea and shall bitterly howl, when they shall hear that sentence pronounced, Matth. 25, 41. go ye cursed into everlasting fire, &c. This seemeth to bee the true meaning of the place: the opi∣nion therefore of Alcasar is absurd, who refers this to the comming of Christ, for to make the Church victorious, in the conversion both of Jewes and Gentiles: for that which followeth is contrary to his exposition. With cloudes] This is more, then in the cloudes, which is spoken of us: for wee at the comming of Christ shall be caught up in the cloudes to meete the Lord in the ayre. 1 Thess. 4, 17. And it noteth the divine majesty of Christ, for it is spoken of Iehova God, Psal. 97, 2: Cloudes and darknesse are round about him. This confuteth the ubiquity of Christs bodily presence, for he shall descend from heaven in the cloudes, and with the cloudes, therefore his humane nature is not, nor ever shal be every where. For how then could he possible come with cloudes, which are not every where: hence it is, when we celebrate the Lords supper, 1 Corinth. 11, 26. wee are commanded to shew forth his death till hee come. So then hee will come visibly with the cloudes, the which is a strong reason to prove that his body is not the mean time invisibly hid in, under, or about their host, altar, or chalice. Every eye shal se him] Synecdoche, part being put for the whole, that is all men both good & Bad, yea the very soldiers & enemies which pierced him on the Crosse shal see him, which serves to terrify all ungodly scoffers, who, because they see him not here on earth with their bodily eyes, thinke not that he reigneth glo∣riously in the heavens. But to their wo, and condemnation they shal see him com∣ming, for they shal wayle before him, that is, horror and trembling shal come on them, at the sight of the judge, and hearing the sentence of their just damnation. This is taken out of the prophecie of Zacharie, 12.10: where Jehovah speaking of himself, saith, they shal looke upon mee whom they have pierced, they shal mourne for him: in that day there shal be a great mourning in Ierusalem. A repenting mourning in the elect: but in the reprobate of final desperation. This very text John the Euangelist alled∣ged upon the crucifying & piercing of Christ by the soldiers, Ioh. 19, 37: hence we
gather two things. First that Iohn the Euangelist was the penman of this booke. For hee alone, here and in his Gospel, applieth that place in Zacharie unto Christ. The second is, concerning the deity of Christ, for that which Iehova (in Zacharie) speaketh of himself, 6 Argu∣ment of Chr. divin. they shal se me, whom they have pierced, Iohn attributes it to Iehova Christ pierced on the crosse; who is neither the father, nor the holy Ghost. Therfore the son Iesus Christ, crucified, and pierced in the flesh, is Iehovah. And this is the sixt argument of the deity of Christ. Even so, Amen,] The two particles, doe strongly confirm, the comming of Christ to judgement, to the end that the godly now in afflictions, and troubles may no way doubt of their future deliverance: neither the wicked thinke to goe unpunished, who scoff at our faith and confidence. The word nae (even so,) with the Greekes and Latins, is an asseveration. Amen with the Hebrewes is a certain affir∣mation, which two words usuallie put together, exclude al maner of doubting, as if he had said, this is determined, cōfirmed, & can not bee altered. They are too curi∣ous, who in the words seeke for a mystery, viz. the calling of al natiōs unto Christ. Vers. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending] Here some in∣terpreters beginne the vision: whereas the preface here endeth. For the person of whom he before sayd, that he should come in the cloudes, he presents here before our eyes as present, and crying from heaven, for the comfort of the Godly, and terror of his enemies: as if he should say, doe yee doubt? behold I am present: I, who am Alpha, & Omega, the beginning & the ending, the Almighty, &c. who there∣fore shal hinder my comming to judgement, or call it into question? Thus in the Gospel he cryed out to the gainsaying Iewes: Ioh. 8, 2. I am the light of the world, &c. Ribera supposeth that these are the words of the holy Trinity. But the coherēce sheweth, it is Christ that speaketh, who is described in the foregoing words, and the epithite Lord is to be understood of Christ as appeareth also from the 11, and 17 verses, and more clearly, chap. 22, 13: so that, without all question, Christ saith of himself, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending. Furthermore to be α and ο is a proverbiall speach, and meant of one that is first or chiefe in any thing: as in Martial, one Codrus is called the Alpa of poore men, that is, poorest of men. Alpha is the first letter of the Greeke alphabet, & Omega the last. Christ therefore in calling himself Alpha and Omega, the beginning, and end, and that ab∣solutely, therein doth assume unto himself, absolute perfection, power, domi∣nion, eternity, and divinity. The beginning and ending] The Latine version hath not these words, neither Mon∣tanus, but all other Greeke copies have them. Besides they are also read in Chap. 21.6, and 22.13: whereby it appeareth that they were not taken from the margent, and put into the text, as some have thought. Which is, and which was, and which is to come] Christ assumeth all those epithites here to himselfe, by which Iohn vers. 4. described God. Ribera understandeth it of the trinitie as formerly: but it hath been shewed, that Christ speaketh of him∣self, and so the fathers, Nazianzene, Ambrose, and Athanasius interpret the place. And what marveile is it, if Christ who is God, doth take to himself, what ever is dew to God. The Almighty] Another epithite proper to God, which Christ also taketh to himself, shewing that he is the true eternall, and omnipotent God, in all things equall, and coessentiall with the father, and the holy Ghost, and here we see, who, and how great hee is, which must come to judge the world. For the adversaries must stand before Christ the judge, 7 Argu∣ment of Chr. deity. not as he is simply man: but before Christ the judge, as he is the eternall, and omnipotent God. This being the seventh argu∣ment of Christs divinity, is three times repeated. He is the first & the last: which is, was, and is to come, and the Almighty, and therefore surely hee is God eternall. For so Iehovah saith of himself: Isay 41, 4 & 44, 6. Genes. 17 I the Lord the first, and the last I am hee: I am the first, and I am the last, and besides mee there is no God, I am God almighty. But Christ doth chalenge as dew to him all these divine attributes, therefore hee is Iehova, that
one eternall and omnipotent God with the father, and the holy Ghost. Eniedinus samosatenianus denieth these words to be Christs, but will have them to be the fathers onely speaking of himself. First because, it is not onely said of Christ, that hee is to come, but of many others also, as Matth. 17.11: Elias must first come. God the father is said to come, Matth. 21.40: When the Lord of the vineyard commeth, what wil be do to those husband∣men. Christ saith of himself and the father, Ioh. 14.23: We will come to him, and make our abode with him. Secondly because that description which is, was, and is to come is attributed vers. 4 to the father alone. Thirdly because that which Iohn before spake of Christs comming, he after∣ward confirmes the same, by the testimonie of God himself, after the maner of the prophets, who used to adde in the end of their sentences, thus saith the Lord. Ans∣wer, though some interpreters: yea, Lyra also & Ribera Iesuites, referre these things to God absolutely, that is to the trinity as speaking in this place: not withstanding I have already sufficiently proved the contrary. As for the hereticks reasons they proove nothing. For first we insist not upon the participle, , which is to come, (whence he vainly goes about to deceive) but on grounds formerly spoken off: neither can it be denied with any shew of reason, but that Christ speaketh of him∣self in vers. 11: J am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; and therefore the shift in this place is idle. For the strength of our argument standeth not in this: viz. that every one, who is to come is God, (as the heretick foolishly imagineth) but thus, that he is God, to whom all these divine attributes doe appertain. Secondly though that description of God which is, &c. do in vers. 4: note out the person of the father, from whom John first of all desireth grace: yet forasmuch as the essential attributes, respecting eternity, are common to the three persons, therefore they are rightly attributed to Christ the second person in the trinity. Thirdly, howsoever we acknowledge, that the stile is propheticall, yet it will necessarily follow, that Christ here speakes these things of himself, both to con∣firme Iohns testimony of him, as also that the godly might be comforted in having so great, and glorious a judge. And lastly it is for the the terror of all wicked and ungodly men. And thus much of the preface. The other part of the Chapter, the preparation to the first vision: with the vision it self. 9 I Iohn, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and pa∣tience of Iesus Christ, was in the Isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testi∣mony of Iesus Christ. 10 I was in the Spirit on the Lords day, and heard behinde me a great voice, as of a trumpet, 11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and what thou feest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia, unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and vnto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. 12 And I turned to see the voice that spake with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden can∣dlesticks. 13 And in the midst of the seven candlesticks, one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a gar∣ment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. 14 His head, and his hairs were white like wooll, as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire. 15 And his feet like unto fine brasse, as if they burned in a furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters. 16 And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword: and his countenance was as the Sun shineth in his strength. 17 And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead: and he laid his right hand upon me, saving unto me, Fear not, I am the first, and the last.
18 I am he that liveth, and was dead: and behold, I am a live for evermore, Amen, and have the keyes of hell, and of death. 19 Write the things which thou hast seen, and the things which are, and the things which shal be hereafter, 20 The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest, are the seven churches. I Iohn who am also your brother and companion in tribulation] Hitherto wee have treated of the preface, now followeth the preparation to the vision, Lib. 7, hist. cap. 20. with the vision it self. I Iohn: Dionysius Alexandrinus, as Eusebius witnesseth, draweth hence a reason for to weaken the au∣thority of this booke, as if the author were excessive in publishing of his owne praise: for, saith he, the Prophets & Apostles used not to mention so oftē their owne names, as Iohn doth in this booke: saying many times J Iohn, as if he had been writing not a booke, but an obligation or acquittance. But Iohn herein doth nothing more, then what is very seemly, yea necessary. Five times indeed, he names himself in this booke, which wil not seeme strange, if wee minde that it is one thing, to write a historie, another thing to write a prophesie. The truth of an historie requireth not the authority of the writer, but so doth a prophesie. Therefore we read that the old prophets as Jeremie, Daniel, and others did usually prefix their names to their prophecies, whose example Iohn seemeth here to imitate. Yea Paul himself expresseth sometime his name in his Epistles, I Paul with my owne hand, &c. And touching the repetition of his name here, it was very necessarie. For otherwise it might have been thought, that Christ who before cal∣led himself Alpha and Omega, had also spoken the words following I am your brother, &c. therefore his name is seasonably inserted, I John who am your bro∣ther, &c. by which epithites, hee seekes to win their good wil, & also comforteth the Churches to whom he writeth. Your brother] Not by blood, but by faith, and in the communion of Christ, for there is betwixt the members of Christ a spirituall brotherhood, straightly tying them together in the bond of love: he calleth himself their companion in three re∣spects: because they who are the members of one head, must mutually partake to∣gether in all conditions. First in affliction, for even then the Christians were grievously persecuted under Domitian, and Iohn himself banished into Patmos. Secondly in the kingdom, that is, a spirituall kingdom: For we being made kings and priests to God, do now with Christ our Lord maintain the same against all ene∣mies, and in the end shall fully injoy it with him in the heavens: by this fellowship Iohn the beloved disciple doth not a little rayse up the spirits of Christs afflicted ones, because he requireth constancy no otherwise of them, but as he himself de∣sired to be a companion with them in their common sufferings: yea assureth them, that after their afflictions, they shall enjoy an everlasting kingdom. Thirdly he was their companion in the patience of Jesus Christ: or sufferance, as the word import∣eth, shewing that in the kingdom to come we shall not suffer, but reigne, accord∣ing to that of Paul 2 Timoth. 2 Timoth. 2, 12. 2, 12. To which purpose is that saying of Tertul∣lian: we triumph being overcome, being slaine, we conquer, when we are kept downe, we escape, howbeit we are no otherwise esteemed then malefactors, and worthy to be burnt, &c. Of Iesus Christ] this may be referred as wel to the afflictions, & kingdom, as to the patience or suffrance of Christ, which is very comfortable to the Godly, for herein the Apostle giveth us to understand, that not onely hee, but even Christ himself also doth partake with us in our troubles, and as the kingdome is Christs, so also is our affliction, and our suffrance. Thus is he afflicted, and suffereth with us, that wee also might reigne with him. I was in the jle, that is called Patmos] He sheweth where he saw, and wrote the Revelation, which addes authoritie to the history. Patmos is an
Island in the sea Aigeum in circuit 30 miles as Plinie writeth. For what cause, Lib. 4, chap. 12. Lib. 3, hist. cap. 14. and in what condition he was, being there, he mentioneth not. Euschius, Hierm. and others say, that he was banished thither, in the fourteenth year of Domiti, d there he received this revelation from Christ. Tertullian addeth, that he was apprehended at Ephesus, by the governor of Asia, Lib. de prescript. and sent to Rome, where he was boyled in oyle, but receiving no hurt, afterwards was banished into this Island. It is further reported, that Domitian did cast him into a caldron of boyling oyle, in way of scorne, because he had heard, that the Christians tooke their name from Christ, that is, the anointed. Domitian being slain, & his acts for their cruelty recalled by the Senate, Iohn (under the Emperor Nerva) returned from his banishment to Ephesus, and ministred to the seven Churches in Asia, to whom he wrote the first vision. Epiphanius recordeth, that John was in Patmos in the dayes of Clandius Cesar: But it is a manifest error, Clau∣dius being put for Domitian, as the computation of the time sheweth. For the word of God] He closely notes the cause of his banishment, least it might bee scandalous, and taken as if he had been there as a malefactor: (for not the punishment, but the cause maketh a martyr:) whereas it was for his constant profession of the doctrine of Christ, which the Romans would neither suffer, in their city, or other territories, which caused the first great persecution against the Christians under Nero: and the second under Domitian, at which time many thousands of them laid downe their lives, for the cause of Christ. For the word of God, and the testimonie of Iesus Christ] Both are joyned, as here, so in vers. 2. By the word, hee understandeth the son, the essentiall word of God, Ioh. 1.1: By the testimonie he meaneth the doctrine of Christ. Thus by banish∣ments, and sufferings, the primitive Christians did triumph over their enemies, though scandalised as fooles and Galileans by the men of this world and esteemed worthy of nothing, but whipping, torturing and hanging therefore (saith Tur∣tullian) that which the enemies chalenge over us, is our joy: who had rather be candemned then forsake God: this is the Palme of our clothing: This is the Chariot of our triumph, and the reason why wee submit not to these, whom thus we have overcome. Thus much for the time and the place, when, and where this prophesy was revealed to Iohn. I was in the spirit] He sheweth how he saw this revelation, viz. not with mortall eyes, but being ravished in spirit, his mind was carried beyond it self. So we read that Peter and Paul praying earnestlie fell into a trance, and conversed with God. Acts 10, 10. & 15, & 16.9, & 18, 9. The which againe confirmeth the divine authority of this booke. For the follow∣ing visions, and the mysteries of them were revealed unto Iohn, not by the power of any humane wit, but by the holy Ghost. Interpreters observe three kinds of visions. First corporall, when we behold the objects preserued, with our bodily eyes. Secondly spirituall, when we behold the appearances of things, either a wake, or a sleepe, yet understand them not thus did Phurao, Nebuchadnezar, and Peter. The third they call intellectuall, that is, when the minde being illuminated by the holy Ghost understands the myste∣ries of those things which are presented. Thus Ioseph understood the vision of Pharao, and Daniel that of Nebuchadnezar, this Iohn saw the visions of the reve∣lation in the spirit, that is, the holy Ghost gave him to understand them. Others expound these words in the spirit, as opposite to the being present in the body, not as if such which saw visions in the spirit, did not still retain their real bodies: but being ravished, they seemed for the present to themselves, as out of the body even as Paul in the 2 Corinth. 12, 3: caught up to the third heaven, knew a man in Christ, whither in the body, or out of the body he knew not. This kind of visions, is one of the gifts of the new Testament, which Christ as∣cending up on high poured forth upō the Church according to the oracle in Ioel. Ioel 2.28. Your young men shal see visions, &c. yet was this not given to all, but a special grace and bestowed onely, on such as the Lord pleased. Neither was it perpetual, but ceased with the gift of miracles, after the doctrine of the Gospel, was sufficiently
propagated, and confirmed in the world: and hence we must beware of such who now a days boast of visions, Isay. 8, 20. Luk. 16, 29. Ioh. 5, 39. as if they were inspired, but they are deceivers, to the law and testimonie. For God hath tyed the church to the written word of the law and Gospel: they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, search the scriptures, for though an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. On the Lords day] He calleth the first day of the weeke on which Christ rose again, the Lords day. He saw the revelation, on this day, which Christians kept holy to God, being by the authority of the Apostles set apart for Church meetings, in stead of the Iewish sabbaths: as we way gather from 1 Cor. 16.1: where the Apos∣tle commandeth, that on the first day of the weeke, gathering be made in the Church, for the brethren in Iudea. So Acts 20.7. In one of the sabbaths, that is, the first day of the weeke the Christians are said to come together to break bread. So then the ob∣servation of the Lords day is warranted, by an Apostolicall tradition. Hence Gagneus and Ribera infer, that the Church, besides, yea and contrary to the scripture, may impose some things to the observed as divine: let no man thinck, (saith he) that those things onely are to be observed, which are contained in the scriptures: but they do erre. For first there is great difference betweene articles of faith, and the Lord, Mat. 15, 9. Isay 29, 13. day: no man doubteth, but the Church may lawfully appoint dayes, and outward rites belonging to order and decencie, so it be don, with∣out scandal, opinion of worship, and intruding upon the liberty, and conscience: But the question betwixt us, and the papists is, touching points of faith necessarie to salvation, which they affirme, that the Church or Bishops may ordaine, without the authority of scripture, the which thing wee denie: For God is worshiped in vain by the commandements of men: Besides the authority of the Apostles is one thing, and the authority of Bishops and the Romish Church is another. For they were not onely divinely inspired in their writings, but also in whatsoever they insti∣tuted touching Church orders. Wherefore, they not onely appointed the Lords day to bee kept, but also made it apart of scripture: now as for other ministers, they have not the same authority, so that, it cannot hence bee gathered, that any thing should bee beleeved as necessarie to salvation, besides what is contained in the holy scripture. For though the Lords day, is a matter not of faith: but of fact: yet the observation thereof is according to the word of God. Here it may be demanded, whether John saw the whole revelation upon one Lords day? Indeed it may seem by the coherence of the matter, so to be: not withstanding I thinke, that Christ did not at one time burden the minde of his servant, with so many different, and large visions: neither is it probable, because the like distinctions of time, which other prophets had in their visions, appears also to be in these visions of John: as in Chap. 4. vers. 1, 2: is evident. After this I looked, &c. and immediately I was in the spirit, so that after he had seene the first vi∣sion, he was come to himself, ere he was again ravished, & saw other visions: and in like-lihood this was upon another Lords day. The like wee may gather from chap∣ter 17.3: So he carried mee away in the spirit, into the wildernesse: and often it is said, after these things: But I doe not conceive all of them import a distance of time: but the things which I specially minde are in: Chap. 4.2, and 17.3, and 21.1: besides all things were not revealed to John in one place: but some things he saw in Pat∣mos, some in the heavens, some on the sea shore, & some things in the wildernesse: But seeing we cannot certainly determine of the thing, I will therefore leave it to the readers choise. Heard behinde mee a great voice] By this great voice, Iohn (whither sleeping, or waking) was stirred up to observe the visions, least otherwise he should have neg∣lected them, as vain fansies. The voice was great, either in regard of the great mysterie of the visions, or because it was the voice of the great God, or lastly in regard of the lowdnesse, and shrilnesse thereof. As of a trumpet] Whose sounde is high, loud, and heard a great way off: signifying that those things which Iohn saw, ought continually to sound in the
eares, and hearts of Gods people. And hence the prophets were commanded, to cry aloud, not to spare, but to lift up their voice like a trumpet: that all might hear, and have no pretence for their ignorance. Alcasar untruely affirmes, that this voice, was altogether like unto the sound of a trumpet. But the text saith, it was the voice not of one founding, but speak∣ing. Againe by this voice is signifyed, how we should be stirred up to incounter with al our spiritual adversaries, as souldiers by the found of the trumpet are im∣boldened to the battel. In that hee heard the voice behinde him, is signified, that Iohn added nothing to these visions, but that they were altogether divine for the things which are behind us we see not. Or otherwise he heard a voice behind, to denote how the things he heard, were suddenly to come to passe even immedi∣ately upon Iohns departure. 11. Saying I am Alpha & Omega, the first & the last] In this great voice are con∣tained three things. First the eternity of Christ is testified: Secondly Iohns com∣mission to write the vision: And lastly a commandment given him to send the same to the seven Churches. And hence it is very cleare, that Christ is that Son of God, who spake in vers. 8. For both there and here he taketh the same things to himselfe. And there is no question to be made, but that in this place hee speaketh himselfe, and of himselfe. Eniedinus the Samosatenian objecteth, that these words are not in all copies, nor yet in the Latin version, and for this citeth the Annotations of Beza. I answer, though Aretas and Montanus have them not, yet Andreas, and the Editions of Paris have them, with other approved copies. Beza also confesseth, that the repetition agrees well with the style of Iohn, for Christ being to command John to write this vision, declares his authority from his Godhead, to the end he might not doubt, but what he did was truely divine. In these very words Christ speaketh of himselfe verse. 17. and Chap. 21.6, & 22 13: so that it seemeth, some hereticke adventured to blot this out of the vulgar version, thereby to darken the divinity of Christ, or els some presumptuous person did it, who thought this re∣petition needlesse. And what thou seest write in a booke] The command of writing, confirmeth the authority of this booke. For John wrote this prophesie, not of himselfe, but by the commandement of Christ, for though here the commandement bee particular, to write this first vision, yet in vers. 19, it is Generall, not onely of the things which are, but which shall bee hereafter. Write, what thou seest] This serveth for the authoritie of the booke, for the Apostle is to write, not the things which he thought fit, but what God gave him to see. And send it to the seven Churches in Asia] By seven, Rupertus understandeth all the Churches: but it is to be taken restrictively of the seven greater Churches of Asia the lesse, because they are expresly named, Chapt. 2, & chap. 3. Mark. 13, 37. and epistles directed to every one of the Bishops or Pastors thereof: yet so as that saying of Christ appertaineth to this place: what I say unto you, I say unto all. Ephesus] Situated neer the sea, was the head city of Ionia, a famous mart towne, and the more in respect of the temple of Diana, which perished with the seven wonders of the world. Here a tumult being raysed against Paul, the towne Clerke cryed out: yee men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not, how the city of the Ephesians, is a worshipper of the great Goddesse Diana, and of the Image, which fell downe from Iupiter. Here the Apostle Paul taught, and constituted a Church: to whom afterward he wrote an Epistle. And to Smyrna] A sea coast towne in Ionia, and a colonie of the Ephesians: taking its name from Smyrna the wife of Thessalus, and builder thereof. In it was the porch, and temple of Homer, who as is said, was born here: it is probable, that either Iohn, or some other Apostle, gathered a Church to Christ in this place.
And to Pergamus] Or Perga, a city of Troas, or Phrygia, famous because of the Trojane tower, Ovid. Lib. 13, metamor. called Pergamus of which the poet mentioneth: it was the coun∣try of Galen the phisitian: from this place came store of that paper, which we call parchment: there is mention made no where, of this place in the history of the Apostles, unles it bee Acts 20, vers. 6: where Paul remained seven dayes at Trods, and raysed up Eutichus, being fallen dead through the window: so that it seemeth, this Church also, was planted, either by John, or the Apostle Paul. Thyatira] The Greeke () is plurall: it is a city of Lydia neer Pergamus: seated on the river Lycus. Act. 16, 14. Acts 20, 28. Of this city, mention is made in the historie of Lydia a seller of purple of Thyatira: it seemeth that Paul preached the Gospel in the place: though when Lydia was converted to the saith, shee heard him teach at Philippi. To Sardis] Gr. to those in Sardis, a city of Lydia also, by the mountain Tmolus, of old the royall, Lib. 5, cap. 29. and famous city of Croesus. Plinie calleth it Moeonia. Philadelphus] A city of Mysia: there was also a city so called in Aegypt, an∣other in Coelesyria, but this Philadelphia, was in Asia the lesse. And unto Laodicea] A city as Ptolomie saith, of Caria. But Plinie and Strabo af∣firme it to bee in Lydia. For divers cities were so named, as in Syria, and Caria, Lydia, and Media: but John was commanded to write unto Laodicea of Jonia, which was neere Ephesus: it seemeth that Paul had preached in this place: be∣cause he willeth, that the epistle, which he wrote to the Colossians, should be read in the Church of Laodicea. The Angel or pastor of this place, was an hypocrite, being neither hot nor cold, against whom Christ being highly offended, threat∣neth destruction, chap. 3. But happily it may seeme strange to some, (saith a learned interpreter) where Rome was at this time to which, for saving further labour, this epistle might have been written in stead of all other Churches, seeing she boasteth herself, to be the head of all: indeed Christ seemeth to have forgot himself, in passing by his viear, & not so much as in one word to mention him, who as it seemes, should onely have been spoken to: but the ans∣wer, why Christ wrote not to him, is at hand, he knew he could not erre, nei∣ther had neede of admonition: therefore let this omission, be one of the prerogatives of the holy sea. And I turned to see the voice] To see him who spake behinde him, to the end hee might obey his commandement. It is a figurative speech, the effect being put for the cause (for a voice is not seene, but heard,) but Iohn being turned about comes to describe, who, and what maner of person he saw speaking unto him. Thus much concerning the preparation to the vision: now followeth the vision it self, which first is described, afterward explained. And in the midst of the seven oandlesticks] There appeared to Iohn seven golden candlestiks, and in the midst of them, one like unto the Son of man, giving com∣mandement to him, to write the following visions, and to send seven epistles to the seven Churches in Asia: Christ himself propounding unto Iohn the arguments therof: all which served, for Iohns encouragement in his banishment, and that the neighbouring churches might take notice of his Apostolical authority. Interpreters dispute, who it was that appeared to Iohn, like unto the Son of man. Some take it indefinitely for any man: others for an angel, & others for Christ: but the scope & drift of the matter doth manifest, it was Christ that appeared in this likenesse, both because he commandeth Iohn to write this revelation, vers. 19: & revealed the fol∣lowing visions to John, chap. 4.1, which onely Christ did: as also because he is said in vers. 18 to have been dead, but is alive for evermore, & hath the keyes of death & hell: the which cannot be applied, neither to men nor Angels, but onely to Christ. The most of the description is taken out of Daniel, chap. 7, & 10. Now whereas Christ standeth in the midst of the candlesticks is signified, that he is alwaies pre∣sent with his Church, by his word & spirit to govern, direct, keepe & preserve the
same, according to the promise, where two or three are gathered in my name, Matth. 18.20. Matth. 28, 20. Ioh. 14, 18. I am in the midst of them. And lo I am with you to the end of the world. This is for our comfort, wee may not thinke that wee are left of Christ, while wee are here in this troublesome world: for he hath promised, that he will not leave us comfortlesse, albeit wee see him not with our bodily eyes. Therefore beeing assured of his goodnesse and power, let us not regard the threatnings, and cruelty of the adversaries. It is also for our admonition, if Christ bee with us, let us then live holily, justly, and soberly in his sight, least he being offended at our ungodly walking, we provoke him thereby to wrath against us. For as hee is present for the safety of the godly, so also he will take vengeance on the wicked, and on such as neglect their duty towards him: hence it is, that he comforteth some of those Churches in the midst of whom hee walketh, others he reprooveth, and threatneth to punish, if that they repent not. Their argument is foolish, who hence maintain the Vbiquity of the humanity of Christ. Christ (say they) standeth in the midst of the seven candlesticks. The humanity of Christ, is the son of man: therefore as man he is present in seven, that is, in all places. I answer: the assumption is false. For the words, (son of man) signify not the na∣ture, but person of Christ: wee confesse, and beleeve, that the person of the son of man, which is God, is every where. And in the midst of two, or three, yea seven, and in all places: to wit, according to his divinity grace, and power, as Augustine speaketh: though according to the flesh, and the nature of a true body, he be in heaven, and there remaine untill from thence hee come to judgement, as the scriptures testifie: otherwise it would hence follow also, that the humanity of Christ, is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, that is eternal, because the son of man speaketh this of himself also. Secondly though the assumption were granted, yet it will not follow, that the flesh of Christ, is every where, but onely in seven places, and onely within, and not without the Church, which is contrarie to the opinion of the Vbiquitists them∣selves. The contrarie followeth: for hee was seene of John. But what is infinite, Theod. dial. 2. and every where, is not to be seene with corporall eyes, as Theodore us witnesseth, , that is, the incomprehensible nature is not to be seene. In the last place no consequences contrary to the analogie of faith, may be drawn from visions: for so there would follow many absurd things, as that the humanity of Christ should have in his bodily hand, the seven angels, and Churches: and that a real sword should proceed out of his mouth, and the whole description necessarily to be taken, according to the letter. The which if it were so, then Christ should be no longer true man, who tooke our flesh really of the virgin: 1 Ioh. 5, 2. Philip. 3, 21. nei∣ther should he be our brother. For wee know, when he shall be revealed, we shall bee like unto him: but Christ at the day of judgement shall not appeare in such a manner, neither shall we be thus like unto him: so that no conclusions contrary to the doctrin of faith, may be taken from allegories. They are yet more foolish, which under the pretence of this vision, labour to maintain the images of Christ, & the saincts in temples, against the expresse com∣mandement of God: as if the son of man appeared to the end to be painted, and set up in such a forme in temples, or thus painted to be sent unto the Churches: and not rather to this end, that by these his admirable attributes, the divine autho∣rity of the following epistles might be confirmed, as by and by will appeare. Now let us consider the description. First Iohn sheweth the garments and habit wherein Christ appeareth. Secondly the admirable form of his body and mem∣bers, which plainly sheweth, that the man Christ did not appeare really, but ty∣pically, and the whole serveth to make knowne to the Churches his dreadfull majestie and power. Like to the son of man] This is taken out of Dan. 7, 13: where Daniel saw one like the son of man come with the clouds of heaven. So saith Paul in his epistles,
that Christ was found in likenesse at a man. Philip. 2, 7, 8. Rom: 8, 3. Made like  men, that hee wa in the likenesse of sinfull flesh: not that hee had onely the form of a true man, as the Mar∣cionites doe gather from this place. But because nothing is more like to man, then he that is a true man, and the Apostle seemeth to give a reason of this maner of speech, Heb. 2, 14. where he saith, that Christ himself likewise took part of the flesh, and blood of the children. And again vers. 17. That in all things it behooved him to bee made like unto his brethren. So then he was like to us, in the truth of our nature. Clothed with a gar∣ment downe to the foot, as the Greeke  signifieth, compounded of m a foot, and  to take, or lift up, by this kingly garment is shadowed out the royall majesty of Christ. And girt about the paps with a golden girdle] Though there is a mystery in all these things, yet wee must not bee too carious in searching after the meaning of every thing therein: interpreters are diversly minded about it. For our part it is sufficient we know, by what followeth, that it is to set forth the majesty of Christ. It was the maner of men in the casterne countries, to gird up their gar∣ments, being long, that they might not bee hindred, in their travaile or any other businesse: so that Christs binding up of his garment with a girdle, noteth his care, and diligence, to accomplish the work, which his father gave him to doe. In that it was a golden girdle is shewed his majesty, Isay 11, 4 of which the prophet Isay speaketh: righteousnesse shall bee the girdle of his loynes, and faithfulnesse the girdle of his reines. Now in that Christ is girded about the paps, not according to the ordinary Custom, is manifested the love of Christ towards the Church, because the heart, which is the feat of love is between the brests. Vers. 14: His head, and his haires were white like wool, as white as snow] So the haire of the ancient of dayes was like the pure wool, Dan. 7, 9: This reverend hoare∣nesse or whitnesse of haires, noteth out prudency and wisdom, for Christ is the wisdome of the father. So also eternity is signified by it. For hoarenesse cometh by multitude of yeares. And it is compared to snow, and to the whitest wool: For snow is very white. Ps. 51, 9. Isay 1, 18. Therefore David prayeth that hee might bee washed with hypose, and he should bee whiter then snow. And in Isaiah the Lord saith, though your sinnes bee as searlet, they shall bee as white as snow, though they be red as crimson they shall bee as wool. This colour like snow, noteth out purity, so that Christ appeareth to Iohn in hoarenesse venerable, in prudency reverend, in purity innocent, and age eternall. Some by the head understand his divinity: others the father, because God is said to bee the head of Christ. But the allegory, is not in the word head, (without which it would have seemed an imperfect body,) but in the white & snowy haire. His eyes as a flame of fire] From Daniel chap. 10.6: his face as the appearance of lightning: and his eyes as lamps of fire, sery eyes doe manifest the fiery, heroick, and terrible motions of the hart: Hence in Chap. 19, 11: Christ comming to take ven∣geance in a terrible maner on the enemies, his eyes appeare like flames of fire, be∣cause in his wrath hee will consume the wicked, like as fire doth the chaffe: but in chap. Rev. 2, 23. 2.23 the fiery eyes of Christ, doe nore his alseeing presence entring into the very hidde things of man: And whereas hee calleth himself the searcher of the reines and hearts: It shewes that no un can shun his presence, neither de∣beive him. 15. His feet like unto fine brasse] Dan. 10.6: his feet like in colour to polished basse: some doe take the word rendred fine brasse, to signifie a kinde of frankin∣cense hard like copper, which they call (thus masculum) others for such copper, as is digged out in the mountaine Libanus. The old interpreter rendreth it aurichal∣cum, a kinde of metall, which commeth neerest to the colour of gold, which in old time, was of a great price. The Germans, and so Luther translate it Messing, fine brasse. And it is apparent that by it the divine power of Christ, his unparaleld strength, stability, and constancy is declared. The fathers interpret it of the huma∣nity of Christ, which was tryed in the fyery furnace of his sufferings, and at length advanced to the brightnesse of his glory. Andrtas in those words searcheth
deeply after divers allegories, but wee passe by his subtilities, as having indeed but little solidity in them. His voice as of many waters] Dan. 10, 6: the voice of his words, as the voice of a mul∣titude. First hee heard his voice like a trumpet, and now like to many waters, which violently running thorow rocks and stones, make a terrible noy, neither can they be stopped, with any power or force as may be seene as the swift fallings of the river Nilus, and the Ryne. It noteth both the vehement, and terrible voice of Christ, as also the power and efficacy thereof, piercing into the very , and mindes of the hearers, for the conversion of the elect, and terror of the wicked. The which voice could not be hindred by any adversary power whatsoever, but it was spread large, and wide unto many peoples, which is signified by the many waters, Revelat. 17.15. 16. And he had in his right hand seven starres] The 20 vers. sheweth, that by the seven starres the seven postors of the Churches are to be understood, they are com∣pared to starres, because they ought to shine like starres to their flocks by the light of their life and doctrin. They are in the right hand of Christ, because it is be th giveth them to the Churches, and governeth them by his word, and spirit, and pre∣serveth them by the right hand of his power: and lastly worketh through them sal∣vation for his Church: so that this commendeth to us the dignity of the teachers of the Church. Out of his mouth went a sharpe two edged sword] This is explained Chap. 19.1: Revelat. 19, 5. & out of his mouth goeth a sharpe sword, that with it, hee should smite the nations: and he shall rule them, with a rod of iron  which serveth for the comfort of the Godly who confidently trusting on Christ the judge, ought not to fear the power of the ene∣mies: moreover the doctrine of the Gospel, may also be understood by it: which Christ by the word, of his mouth hath brought forth unto us, Ephes. 6, 17. Heb. 4, 22. out of the bosome of his father, the which Paul compareth, because of its piercing nature, to a  edged sword. And his countenance was as the sun] Dan. 10.6: his fare was as the appearance of lightning, by which is meant either his divine majesty, or else that great glory, unto which the humanity of Christ is exalted being set at the right hand of God. which glory though it giveth immortality to the flesh, yet taketh not away the nature thereof, as Augustine writeth to Dardanus. The lightning can not wel bee looked on without hurt to the eyes: So the brightnesse of the sun as high noone day dazzels the eyes of the beholders: for the greater light darkens the lesser: even such is the ex∣ceeding glorie of Christ, as that it can not be looked on. Matth. 3, 43. The just also shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of the father: but the body of Christ doth shine as the sun in his full strength, by which is noted the excellency of Christ the head, above the members. Alcasar doth compare this brightnesse of Christ, to the admirable glorie of the Romish Church, after the conversion of the empire, saying, the Church of Rome doth properly, and truly set forth the meaning of that shining brightnesse, which commeth from the countenance of Christ: which exposition the very lesuites (I beleeve) can not read without laughter. For then Christ did forget, to write an epistle to this church, wherby to cōfer this glory upon her: but I passe by this mercenary clawback, who perhaps in stead of conversion, would have written the eversion of the empire. And when I saw him] Now Iohn sheweth how hee was affected with the vi∣sion, by reason of the glorious brightnesse of Christs majesty: he falleth downe as dead: the like wee read of Daniel chap. 8.18: for such is the great weaknesse of the most holy men of God, that they are not able to behold the divine majesty: for God is a consuming fire, but how then shall the wicked stand before his dreadfull presence: surely they shall melt away as waxe before the fire. As for al∣legories, I passe them by. And he laid his right hand upon me] As a hand touched Daniel (in whom there remained no strength, when hee saw that great vision) and set him upon his knees,
and upon the palmes of his hands: even so doth Christ lift up Iohn, who was sore amazed, first by laying his hand upon him, and afterward speaking comfortably unto him. Hee toucheth Iohn with the same right hand, in which hee held the seven starres. For by his divine power, and love (which never faileth) hee upholdeth all the Churches, with their teachers, and every one of the faithfull. Fear not I am the first and the last] Hee biddeth him not to fear, because feare disturbeth the minde, & unfits men for instruction, and therefore the admonition at this time was very seasonable. And that he might comfort Iohn the more, and lift him up, hee expoundeth in order unto him the whole vision. First who he is. Secondly what he would have him to do. And thirdly unfolds the mystery of the starres, & candlesticks. He sheweth him who hee is, to the end he might know, that he saw no fancie, or spirit, but Iesus Christ his redeemer. He again calleth himself the first, and the last, that is God eternal, as in vers. 8, & 11: which is a seventh ar∣gument of Christs divinity, Isay 41, 40, & 44.6, & 48, 12. as wee have already expounded. For that which the prophet ascribeth to God alone, Christ in this chapter three times assumeth unto himself. But some heretikes object, that Christ is called first, as being the first of the Church under the new Testament. But I answer, that all the adjuncts disproove this glosse. For Christ doth absolutely call himself the first and the last, by which very words, the prophets declare the eternity of Iehovah God. Yea Christ saith: that hee was not onely before the Church of the new Testament, but also before Abraham: Ioh. 8, 58. 18. I am hee that liveth, and was dead] These words do clearly manifest, that neither man nor Angel, but Christ alone is represented here in this vision. the living, or he that liveth] Christ taketh unto himself not onely the glorious life of his humanity, Ioh 5.26. but the essential also of his divinity, of which hee speaketh in the Gospel: as the father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the son to have life in him∣self. For chiefly he calleth himself  (him that liveth,) because even then whe he was dead, he lived. Therefore he saith not, I did live, and afterwarddy, for then there would not have been any thing remarkeable in such an expression, for no man can bee said, to be dead, who formerly hath not been alive: but hee saith, J li∣ving, and was dead, that is, both together: for () I was, is but once in the text, & is referred to both words () living and dead. In which great and admirable expression, he doth openly declare his twofold nature, affirming that he lived, 1 Pet. 3, 18. as he was God, & was dead as he was man at one time. According to that of Peter, Christ was mortifyed in the flesh, but vivifyed in the spirit, that is, both dead in the flesh, and alive in the spirit together. And this is the true meaning of that place, which is the same, with that common tenet, that Christ being dead in the flesh, raysed up himself, by the power of his divinity. This is also confirmed by the following words: Behold, I am alive for evermore] Hee saith not, and I lived again, but behold I am living, or alive: by the particle (behold,) hee attributes to himself an admirable, divine, and everlasting life, to distinguish it from that life which he received again after his suffering in the flesh. Therefore he saith, hee liveth for evermore, that is, both be∣fore his death, in his death, and after his death: which I have expressed in these verses: Vivus eram, sed eram crudeli morte peremptus En vitam sine fine per omnia secula duco. J was alive, and did a sore death suffer: Yet lo I live, and so I shall for ever. This is the eight argument, 8 Argu∣ment of Chr. deity. of the Godhead of Christ, because he was dead, and liveth for evermore. Eniedinus the heretike objecteth, that Christ is not God, because he died, and so ceased to be: whereas God dieth not, neither can he cease from being God.
But it is a childish objection. For though God cannot die, as hee is God? yet Christ, as is he God nlfested in the flesh, 1 Pet. 3, 18. suffered death according unto the scriptures: mortifial in the flesh: Again, God hath psed the Church with his owne blood. Wherefore this onely doth follow, that Christ is not God according to the flesh, in which hee sunffered: which indeed it true, although it bee opposed by the Ʋbiquitisis, who therefore have need to consider how they wil answer, to what is here by the hereike objected. Further more all this, that Christ doth attribute to himself, is for the comfort of the Godly: For Christ liveth, yea is life it selfe, that wee also might live through him, according unto the prom, Joh. 6, he that eateth me, even he shill live by me, and again Ioh. 16, 28: I give lowy sheep eter∣nall life, and they sll never preish. And have the keyes of hell, and of death] That is, I have power to cast the enemies into hell. Keyes are a signe of power, the which Christ, Matth. 10.28, doth ascribe unto God: fear not them which kil the body, &c. but rather fear him, to wit God, which is able to destroy both soule, and body in hel. This power Christ here assumeth, by which he declares himself to be God, and Lord of hell and death. 9 Argu∣ment of Chr. deity. This there∣fore in order is a ninth argument proving the Godhead of Christ. Vers. 19. Write the things which thou hast seene] If this commandement be re∣strained to the first vision, by a threefold division of the things, which he had stene, which were, and which should come to passe: then by it the arguments of the seven fol∣lowing epistles are signifyed; but I rather refer it to the whole revelation: for he is required to write some things already past, which he had seene, and some∣things present, the things which are, and some things which shall be heerafter. So that the matter of the revelation is distinguished in a threefold order by Christ him∣self: some things he had seen already from the beginning of the Gospel under Nero, and the following Emperors unto Domition, some things he now saw: but the greater part he was yet to see, namely the things that were to come after∣ward. To these three heads, we must have regard, all most in every one of the following visions. The Latine version hath which must be, in stead of which shall bee. But the Gr. constantly readeth () which shall come to passe. More∣over this proveth again the divine authority of the revelation, forasmuch as it is written by the commandement of Iesus Christ. But why did he commande it to bee written? questionlesse that the whole Church at all times should continually read it for their comfort and instruction, which also is the end and use of the whole scripture: Rom: 15, 4. 2 Tim. 3.16. Vers. 20. The mystery of the seven starres] After that the Son of man had shewed who he was, whom Iohn saw, he comes to unfold the mystery of the starres, and candlesticks, viz. that the seven starres are the seven angels, or ministers, & the seven candlesticks, the seven churches of Asia, to whom he was commanded to write, vers. 11. The mistery] The vulgar hath it, the sacrament of the starres, that is, the thing fi∣gured by them: so again chap. 17.7, I will tell thee the sacrament of the woman: but it is improperly used, for the mysticallsfignification of the same. Bishops] So he caleth the starres, because they ought to shine before others in purity of doctrine, and integrity of life: like unto starres shining in the firmament: they are said to be angels, because they are Gods messengers to the Churches: and the Churches are compared to candlesticks, because like as the candle or light, is set up into the candlestike: even so the Church ought to hold forth, and preserve the shining light of true doctrine, that all may behold it, least being in darknesse, they stumble and perish thorow their ignorance. Hence we learn in the first place, that the scripture best interpreteth it self: for what was before more darkly spoken, is now clearly unfolded. So Christ opened the parables to his disciples, Matth. 13, in like maner this vision which at first seemed obscure, is now made plain by its own interpretation. For albeit the scrip∣ture doth not make clear every thing, that is darkely spoken: not withstanding; if
we diligently observe it, that of Austin will appeare most true, that there is all most nothing abscure in scripture, which is not in some other place plainly expounded. Furthermore we are to take notice of these figurative, and sacramental phrases. The starres are Angels, that is, they signifie the Angels: the candlestiks are the Churches, Gen. 41, 27. 1 Cor. 10, 4. Cont. adim. c. 12. that is, they signifie the Churches: according to that in Genesis: the seven kine, are seven years, that is, do signifie seven years. And the rock was Christ, for it signified Christ: as Augustine expoundeth it. For there is nothing more familiar in scripture, then to name signes, by the things which they signify, which maner of speech is not darke, but plaine in regard of the analogie betwixt the signe, and the thing signified: wherefore it was not obscure, but familiar to the scripture, that Christ called the bread which was broken at the institution of the supper, his body which was crucifyed for us, seeing it was a sacrament or holy signe of the same: Hence Augustine opening the etymologie or signification of a sacrament, applies it to the Lords supper, saying, that the Lord Iesus doubted not to say this is my body: when he gave the signe onely thereof. And this is so cleare a truth, that even Aloasar a Iesuite confesseth it, saying, that in the phrase of scripture touching dark sentences, and sacraments the word which is used, is to be referred to the signification of it, and that the bread and wine in the Eucharist (which they call the species) doth signify the body and blood of Christ: because Christ saith: this is my body, &c. Indeed he supposeth there are two sorts of signes: some instituted onely for doctrin and signification: as in parables, and darke sentences: the other such, as really include, and containe the things which they signifie: as in baptisme, and the supper, in which (saith he) is truly and properly contained, as the cleansing of the soule from sinne: so the body and blood of Christ: and he proveth it: First, because Christ instituted these signes to that end: Secondly the Church so teacheth: And lastly, because it were an easy thing for any one to institute meere, and naked signes: wheras it is in the power of Christ alone, to appoint such signes as are full of efficacy. I answer first: Alcasars arguments answered. that in the institution either of baptisme, or the Lords supper, there is no mention made of any including of the things signified in the signes. Secondly the primitive Church taught no such inclusion, but the new popish Church in so teaching is departed from the institution, and doctrin of the primi∣tive times. Lastly though it be true, that the sacraments are not meere signes, yet it fol∣loweth not, that they are signes including the thing signified. For there is in scrip∣ture another kinde of signes, which as they are signes, so they are seales confir∣ming to the faithfull the grace of Christ signified by them: For properly the sa∣craments are signes and seales of the promise of grace, which no creature could institute, or bring into the Church, but God alone. Another expositor denieth, Hoe in the Revel. chap. 1. that these are figurative speeches, and why? because, saith he, those candlesticks doe not signify, but are really the Churches: and the starres doe not denote, but are in truth the angels. But both is false, first because then there should be no mystery in the candlesticks, or starres. Secondly if the candlesticks, and starres were truly Churches, and Angels, then would not Christ have required Iohn to write his Epistles, as being absent from them, but he should have delivered his message unto them, as there present with him in Patmos. Thirdly because then the words (the candlesticks are Churches, the starres, are Angels) should be regular expressions: But this he denies, and truly: For they are termes of disparity. What then: the metaphor (saith he) is in the subject, which doth not import that the copulative, IS should be taken for the word signifieth. And though it were granted here, yet would it not follow, that the words of Christ at the institution of the supper were of the same significatiō, because Christ did not expound to them a vision, but institute asacrament. Now how∣soever both be true, yet doth not this take away the metonymical expression; for in typical & Sacramental assertions, the tipes & signes are said to be the antitypes, or things signified, partly indeed by a metaphor, because of the analogie, or likenesse
that is betwixt the signes, & the things themselves: but chiefly by a metonymia, Epist. 23. ad Bonif. be∣cause of the sacramentall signification. For, as Augustine saith, if sacraments had not some likenesse, with the things they represent, they should not at all be sacraments: for in regard of that likenesse, they have the name of the things themselves. Therefore as in some sort, the sacrament of the body of Christ, is Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is Christs blood: even so the sacrament of faith, is faith. Againe: that is called the soule, In Levit. lib. 3.4.5. Genes. 41.26. 1. Cor. 10.4. which signifies the soule, for it is usuall that the thing signifying be called by the name, of that which it doth signifie, as it is written: the seven eares, are seven years, with many the like places, hence it is said, that rock was Christ; the Apostle saith not the rock signifies Christ, but as if he were that indeed which in substance he was not, but by signification onely. In like maner the candlesticks are called the churches, and the starres are said to be Angels: the bread in the Lords supper, the body of Christ, not in substance, but in regard of their analogie and signification. For Christ doubted not to say: Chap. 12. cont. Adrm Dist. 1. de consec. this is my body: when he gave the signe of his body: saith the same Austine: and more clearly: the bread is the body of Christ, not in the truth of the thing, but by a mysticall signification. The Argument, Analysis, & parts of the second Chapter. CHrist walking in the middest of the Candlesticks, delivers to Iohn the seven Epistles, to be sent, to the seven ministers of the Churches of Asia, commanding him to commend the diligence of some, to reproove the negligence of others, and in the rast place by promises and threatnings, to exhort all of them to their duty and constancy therein: so also he is commanded to write, those things which he had seen, and which were; and which, should come to passe, by which threefold distinction, Christ in the former Chapter declared in generall the arguments of these Epistles. For in commanding Iohn to write, those things which he had seen, he was to declare the glorious vision of Christ, unto the Churches, that so they might receive the writing with reverence and due respect. In bidding him to write, those things which were, it shewes how he was to manifest the qualification of the Churches and Teachers; and whatsoever was either good, or evil in every one of them, that so they might perceive; how Christ our Lord taketh notice of all our actions. And lastly, in bidding him to write, those things which should come after, Iohn was to propound to the godly a promised reward, and to the wicked judgement to come, that all might acknowledge Christ to be the glorious, just, and omnipotent judge of the world. But it is better to extend the three forenamed heads, to the whole revelation. To return to the Epistles, they are all exhortatory, and not much differing in matter one from the other. The sixt to the Church of Philadelphia seemeth to be the excellentest, next to which is that unto Smyrna. But the seventh unto Laodicea, is the sharpest. A common inscription is prefixed before all, taken from the fore∣going glorious form of Christ: A generall Epiphonema is added in the conclusion provokeing them to attention by a speciall promise; by which is understood, the end of that glorious, and magnificent apparition of Christ. This Chapter doth contain the first fower Epistles; namely, to the pastours of the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Philadelphia, and Thiatyra. The com∣mon argu∣ment of the Epistles. And therefore the Chapter hath fower parts. The Analysis of them all is plain, and almost one and the same. For they consist of a Preface, Narration, Exhortation, and acclamation of promises annexed: or that I may speak more plainly, they contain three things. First, A description of Christ the author of the Epistles. Secondly, The praise or dispraise of each Angel. Thirdly, Good things are promised, to those that overcome; and destruction to such as fall away.
The first Epistle to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. 1 Vnto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, These things saith hee that holdeth the seven starres in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks: 2 I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, & how thou canst not bear them which are evill, and thou hast tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and hast sound them liars. 3 And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my Names sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted. 4 Neverthelesse, I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love. 5 Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlesticks out of his place, except thou repent. 6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. 7 Hee that hath an ear, let him heare what the Spirit saith unto the Churches: To him that ouercommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. THE COMMENTARIE. VNto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus] So he calleth the pastor of the Church; for they are Gods ambassadors to the church. A messenger is in Greeke () that is, one sent: which properly is the name of those heavenly spirits, which doe the commandements of the Lord. With this title Christ here hono∣reth the pastors of the Churches, yet not so much to commend their dignity, as to set forth the weightinesse of their spirituall function. Heb. 2, 14 It is the honour of the Angels, that they are ministring spirits sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heires of falvation. Wherefore the Angels of Churches ought not to be puffed up because of this dignity, but faithfully to demit them∣selves to their pastorall ministries. Moreover touching these Epistles, they con∣cerne not the pastors alone, but also (as appeareth by their conclusions) all the Churches, it being usuall, that such things as were to come to the whole, were di∣rected to the pastors, and by them afterwards to be brought unto the congre∣gation. The Church of Ephesus] He is commanded in the first place to write to this Church, either, because it lay neerest Patmos, as Abraham Ortelius in his ancient de∣scription of Grecia sheweth: or els for the eminency & greatnesse thereof, & being better knowen unto Iohn then the rest. Whither Timothy were then Bishop of Ephesus Histories mention not, who at this time was the Angel of that church: not indeed doth Christ name him, to the end it might appear, that he had not respect so much to any one particular teacher, as to all others which should succeed. Some thinke that it was Timothy, the disciple of Paul; but it is not probable, that Timothie so much commended by Paul in his Epistles, should lye under so heavy a censure; besides it is a received opi∣nion, Quandoque bonus dor∣mitat Ho∣merus. that Timothie suffered martyrdome, before the time of Iohns exile. But if it were hee, as Alcasar maintaineth against Lyra, Ribera, and Pererius, it is an example of the general rule: that sometime the verie best doe faile: admonishing us of our infirmity, and whereunto the saints are subject. Again it serves to stirre up all teachers to care, and vigilancy. But now whither the fault in this Bishop (for which Christ threatneth destruction) be not mortal, but venial (as Aleasar pre∣tendeth) let himselfe look to it. Write] Christ tels Iohn word for word what he should write to the Churches: for he is the author of al these Epistles, and Iohn his penman or scribe. Which fur∣ther proveth the authority of this book: for without doubt after Christ had made an end of revealing the mysteries of this booke unto Iohn, he faithfully wrote to every one of the Churches according to the commandement of Christ. These things saith he that holdeth] The first Epistle hath three parts: namely, an inscription, a narration, and a conclusion. In the inscription
Christ is brought in speaking to the church of Ephesus, by a description of his per∣son taken from the foregoing vision; which serveth both for the authority of the Epistle, and to stirre them up unto attention. The manner of the stile is prophe∣ticall. For so usually the prophets in stirring up to attention bring God in speak∣ing thus to the people; thus saith Jehovah. So Iohn: these things saith hee that holdeth; &c. not simply, these things saith Christ, but, these things saith he that holdeth the starres, &c. Thus by degrees two things are repeated, which he saw before. One of the starres: another of the candlesticks. Which holdeth the seven starres] That is, which holdeth the seven Pastors of the Churches in his right hand, as chap. 1, vers. 16. This (as we have already shewed) may be taken either in the better part, that is, of Christs loving and caring for his faithfull teachers, his governing, and preserving of them by the right hand of his power, with precious promised rewards. Or in a contrary sence, it signifies, that Christ detesteth, and by his right hand suppresseth, and rejecteth all slowbellies, hirelings and wolves; And so much here he threatneth to some of these teachers, unlesse they did repent. Who walketh in the midst of the candlesticks] First he saw him standing, but now walking in the midst of the candlesticks: signifying hereby, that Christ our Lord sitteth not still in the heavens: but is present by his providence, in the midst of the Church, beholding all things, proving our faith, and obedience, and recompencing the same with great rewards: disliking our slothfulnesse and other corruptions, punishing the ungratefull, by taking away their talent from them, and bestowing it on others. Levit. 26, 24. This walking therefore imports Christs gracious presence with his Church according to that promise, I will walke among you, and I wil be your God. So Christ: I will be with you at all times, unto the end of the world. This being so, it is our duty, to walk reverently in the sight of God, and of Christ, that so they not being offended, may walke, and abide with us, Ioh. 14, 23. according to the promise, if a man love me, he will keepe my words: and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. 2. I know thy workes] In the narration are five things. First their great dili∣gence and constancy is commended, for Christ prayseth, and rewardeth the labour and faith of his servants, because he delighteth therein. I know thy workes] This he speaketh not onely to this Church, but to the rest, yea to Laodicea also. Here I take workes indifferently to be either good or bad, vertues or vices, of which as nothing is hidde from him, so nothing shall passe without reward or punishment. For it is the part of him that is the admonisher and judge, to pronounce sentence of nothing, but what is well knowen unto him. He taketh unto himselfe not onely the knowledge of what is outward, but also a cleare and perfect sight of men, and all their inward actions, the which Iohn often in the Gospel ascribes unto Christ. He knew all men, Ioh. 2, 24, & 25. Ioh. 21, 17. and needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man, and so Peter said unto him, Lord thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee. But who knoweth all things, save God alone? for he seeth all things, searching the heart, and reynes of man. So that this is the tenth argument, 10 Argu∣ment of Chr. deity. (to be added to the former) proving the Godhead of Christ, taken from his omniscience, or knowledge of all things. And thy labour & patience] The first copulative (and) is put for to wit thy labour and patience: so the like in vers. 9.13, 18. Moreover he commendeth three sorts of vertues in this Bishop: labour in doctrine: constancy in suffering: Zeale in disci∣pline: which vertues he doth in many words commend in this and the following verse by a contrary order. First his labour, that is, his sincere, and unwearied paines in preaching the word: 1 Thes. 5, 12. 1 Tim. 5, 17. For the scripture in many places cals the office of teaching () a labour, as being full of wearisomnesse and trouble. This is the first and principall vertue and honour of a faithfull Bishop: the which Christ attributeth, to this teacher. But what would Christ now say of the mitred Bishops of
these dayes, who neither know the word of God, and for the most part regard it not. But being idle and dumbe are unfit to preach, and so spend their time, either in warre, sports, or following of their filthy lusts. The second is sufferante, that is, patience in induring, and constancy in over∣comming the dangers, injuries, and afflictions with which they were exercised, both by the Iewes and Gentiles, for the sake of Christ. For the crosse is an inse∣parable companion of the Gospel; 1 Corinth. 1, 18. and therefore is called the word of the crosse: both because it sheweth us the way to salvation through the crosse: (esteemed foo∣lishnes by the world:) As also because satan doth stirre up his instruments, to hate, persecute, and put to death, the constant professors and teachers thereof, as being the greatest opposers of his kingdome. All which things the Angel of this Church patiently induring, Iam. 1, 12. is for the same highly commended of Christ: for blessed is the man that indureth tentations, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crowne of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. And canst not beare them which are evill] The third vertue, for which Christ prayseth him, Matth. 18, 17. 1 Cor. 5, 5. Apolog. 2. Apolog. chap. 39. Treat. 35. in Matth. Rom. 7. is his singular Zeal in observing Church discipline, namely his strong opposing of such vices, as violently brake in upon the congregation, and his due administration of Church censures against scandalous persons, casting them out of the communion of the Church, as Christ commanded. And indeed Church censures were in full force in the primitive time, to the great good of the Church, as Justin, Tertullian, Origen, and others of the ancient writers testifie. And hast tried them] Now he repeateth, and declareth the particulars: shewing in the first place who those evill persons were, and wherefore he could not beare with them: But vehemently withstood the false Apostles (seeking to creep into the Church,) examined their false doctrine by the word of God, and manifested and repressed their lyes and deceit. For now at this time there were many false teachers among the Churches of Asia, as Ebion, Cerinthus and others, who though they boasted themselves to be Apostles: yet in truth were the professed enemies of the Godhead of Christ, corrupting true religion, and perverting the faith of many; Act. 20, 29. of whom Paul had forewarned the elders of this Church. For it is the duty of teachers, to defende the purity of faith, and strongly to oppose such devouring wolves, & so to follow the example of the Angel of this Church, who for this cause is greatly commended by Christ our Lord. Vers. 3. And hast borne, and hast patience] He setteth forth more clearly his patience, pointing at some special kinde of affliction (either imprisonmēt, or stripes) which he had manfully sustained. Before Christ saith, he could not beare, and here saith, he had borne: but there is no contradiction, for there he spake of his not suf∣fering of impenitent sinners in the Church: and here of his patient bearing of afflictions for the Gospels sake. And for my names sake hast laboured] The vulgar, as likewise Montanus doe somewhat differ from these words: but without all doubt this is the proper and naturall reading of the place, (agreeing with the greater and lesser copies of Robert Stephanus, imprinted at Paris.) For it appeareth that his labour, and un∣wearied indeavours in sparing no paines to preach, and maintain the faith of Christ, is again commended, that all might imitate the like diligence, and faith∣fulnes in teaching: for in this Angel we may behold a true paterne of a faithfull Bishop. But now who would not thinke (hearing so great commendations from Christ himself) that he had been perfect in every respect, and worthy of deserved reward? Iob. 15, 15 but the following reproofe sheweth the contrary: and indeed God the heavenly judge seeth not perfection in the very best of the saincts. 4. 2 part of the narra∣tion. But neverthelesse I have somewhat against thee] In the second part of the nar∣ration he reproveth him, because he had left his former love. Ambrose thinketh that he is blamed for a generall remisnesse, and omission of his former zeal and in∣deavour in holy duties. For security sometimes doth lessen the zeale even of the Godly, so that they have need to be stirred up, and provoked to holy duties.
Andreas understandeth, that he is in speciall rebuked, for not shewing, as he ought his wonted love, and charity to the poore. And indeed it seemeth, that he began by little and little to be covetous, desiring to heap up wealth, and so grew negligent of doing good to the strangers and poore brethren; now covetousnes is the roote of all evill, and most abominable in the teachers of the word; for it is one of the prin∣cipall vertues in a Bishop to be given to hospitality, and to be a lover of it. 1 Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1, 8. And this seemeth to be the reason, wherefore the cannon law allowed to Bishops one forth part of the Church revenues, to the end they should be liberall: the rest was given to the poore, & other uses. It is probable therefore that this Angel otherwise an excellent teacher is here taxed for coveteousnes. From whence we first observe, that the godly faile in many things, and have need to be stirred up by admonitions and reproose, specially when either they grow cold in their good affections, or are overcome with the cares of this present world, and the desire of wealth and honour: For the devil doth chiefly labour to ensnare all teachers by such baits, and therefore they ought so much the more to take heed, least hereby beeing over∣come, they become a scandall to the Church of God. Observe secondly that ambition, and coveteousnesse in ministers are the most lothsome vices that may be, and therefore they ought to be the more carefull for to avoid the same. We have an example of ambition in the disciples. For when Christ spake to them of the crosse, they were troubled about preeminency, asking who of them should be the greatest. Ciprian saith wittily: that ambition doth sweetly sleepe in the bosome of the ministers of the Church. And as for coveteousnes, or desire of filthy lucre, by how much it is detestable, by so much the more it doth cleave, and deeply roote it self in their harts: hence it is, that Creon in Sophocles saith; That is: The whole priestly generation is given to coveteousnesse. And certainly all the sacrilegious sale of holy things, simony, pride, and luxurie, which reigne in the Romish Church, was ingendred by coveteousnes, and at length, by little and little, overthrew the truth of Christian religion: according to the Latine proverb, Religion begate riches, but the daughter deroured the mother. For as Ierom wel observeth, In vita Malchi. after that the Christian Church had Emperors to be members thereof, it increased indeed in power and riches; but decreased in vertue and godlinesse: giving us to understand, that where coveteousnes, and pride have gotten the up∣per hand, there vertue and religion is cast off and oppressed. Observe thirdly, though Christ doth commend the excellent workes, labour, & constancy of the Angel of this Church: yet he was so farr from acknowledging any merit in him: as that on the contrary he sharply reproves him for many grie∣vous evils, and threatneth to cast him off except be repent: For Christ doth narrowly see and observe all our actions, and strictly weigheth all our workes in the ballance. Wherefore God forbid, we should imagine to merit by any good we doe: though indeed hypocrites commonly so thinke: whereas the word of God doth testifie that all the workes, even of the most holy men on earth, are polluted with sinne: and all our righteousnesses are as filthy ragges, Isay 64.6. if God should enter into judgement with us. Besides, we can do nothing, but what we are bound to doe: for we are debrors to the law. And therefore can not by our good works, Ro. 8.12. to which we are debtors, deserve any thing at the hands of God. Observe in the last place, that it is not enough to begin wel, but, if we looke for the recompence of reward, we must persevere in wel doing unto the end. For hypocrites at first seeme very zealous, but afterward they grow luke warm, and at last are altogether cold, and so receive not the crowne of glory at the last day. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen] This is the third part of the narration, being matter full of reproofe. First the teacher is exhorted to consider his fall.
Secondly to repent of his many evils. Thirdly carefully to practise all his former holy workes of love and charity, now neglected. So that in this exhortation, we have briefly the nature of true repentance propounded unto us. First to take notice of the sinne committed, A descrip∣tion of re∣pentance. for how else should we sorrow for it, or amend the same. The 2 is to eschew the evil, and doe the good. And 3 to manifest our repen∣tance by workes of piety, and love, both to God and our neighbour. From whence thou art fallen] Hence it might seem to follow, that the saintes may fall away wholy from grace, and so perish eternally: for if so holy a teacher fell from his first love, why may we not then conclude the uncertainty of the grace of faith, Whither the saintes may wholy fall away. justification, perseverance and salvation? and why should we not doubt also of these things and stand in fear thereof? I confesse, had this Angel finally fal∣len away, there had been just cause of such doubting: For no man can assuredly beleeve the certainty of his faith and salvation, who doubteth of the certainty of his perseverance. The exposition of Ribera, & Alcasar in this place is sound namely that he had not altogether lost his love, forasmuch as he indured so great things for the sake of Christ, but that he lost much of his former zeal. How farre forth the saintes may fall. In this we agree with them. For the saintes left to themselves, will soon fall from their faith, love, perseverance and salvation, if we onely have respect to secondary causes; to wit, the mutability of the will, the weaknesse of man, the scandals of the world, and the subtilty and power of satan. For how should we be able to withstand all these, who are weak men, and subject to the common frailties of others, so long as we carrie about us this earthly taber∣nacle? Rom. 11.10. Matth. 26, 41. 1 Corinth. 10, 12. 1 Pet. 5, 8. For what saith the scripture? be not lift up, but fear: least thou also be cut of: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed least he fall: for satan walking about as a roaring lion seeketh whom he may devour. So that not onely the example of this pastor, but also the manifold slips and com∣plaintes of the saintes do witnesse, that they may languish and fail in the act of faith, & charity, greive the spirit of God, to the present losse of a good conscience. But if, on the contrary, we consider either the unchangeable counsell of God, touching the salvation of the elect: or the most effectuall intercession of Christ for their faith, perseverance and salvation: or lastly the power of God, by which as the Apostle witnesseth, the elect are kept unto the end, 1 Pet. 1.5, then we may with the holy scriptures firmly conclude, that the faithfull cannot wholy and fi∣nally fall from the habit, and act of faith and love, I say, so to fall as to become Gods enemies, 1 Ioh. 3, 9. Matth. 24, 24. and perish for ever: because whosoever is born of God sinneth not (to wit, with his whole wil, & that unto death) for his seed remaineth in him, and he can∣not sinne, because he is borne of God: for it is impossible the elect should be deceived, (to wit, Ioh. 10, 28 Luke 22, 32. Se also Matth. 7, 25. Psal. 37, 24. 1 Pet. 1, 5 finally unto their damnation,) because no man can plucke Christs sheep out of his hand: but he giveth unto them life eternall. And therefore Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. And God promised to put his fear into their harts, that they may not depart from him: which is, as Augustine interpreteth it, that they might alwayes cleave unto him: for they are as mount Sion which cannot be moved, &c. These and many other such places of scripture as they doe plainly overthrow that Pelagian error of the saintes aposiasie: and the fear of being finally drawen away, and doubting about grace and salvation decreed by the counsell of Trent: so also they doe confirme in regard of the free purpose of God, the certainety of our perseve∣rance in grace unto the end: howsoever I denie not, but the elect many times by their sinnes disturbe their peace and assurance, having their mindes troubled with manifold doubtings: for as men, we are subject to humane frailties, and shall bee, so long as we are here in this life. So then we expound; From whence thou art fallen, to be, as if he had said, in what thou art gon back from thy former zeal in godlinesse, fervencie and love: and art become unlike to what thou wast before. So then Christ commends the teacher of the Church of Ephesus for his constancy in the truth, and hatred of heresie: but reproveth him for his languishing, coveteousnesse, and ambition.
Hence we so that it is not sufficient to professe the truth, unlesse it be done in obe∣dience of faith, and humility. Or else I will come unto thee quickly] This threatning is the fourth part of the narration, being a most vehement exhortation, and sheweth the pernicious effects of security, and coveteousnesse. Two things are threatned. 1: I will come to thee quickly, that is, thou shalt suddenly be punished before thou art aware of it. Thus impenitent persons provoke Christ the judge against themselves, whose wrath they are not able to bear: for he is a consuming fire. Do we saith the Apostle, provoke the Lord to jealousie? are we stronger then he? So that the first reason why we should repent, is because of the power and justice of Christ and our owne weaknesse. The second thing threatned, is the removal of the candlesticke, that is, Christ would not onely thrust him out of his office, but also remove the candlesticke, that is, the Church it self by the enemies thereof. Andreas: I will cast the Church into a trou∣blesome, and tempestuous condition, which punishment ordinarily followes security, and contempt of the word. And indeed Christ did not in vain threaten this Church, for afterward (they not repenting) he removed their candlesticke, and overthrew them by barbarous nations. Here commeth in a twofold question: first, how it can stand with equity, that the whole Church should be dissipated for the sinnes of the teacher: secondly, how the removing of this candlesticke is threatned, seeing the Church is built on the rock, against which the gates of hell cannot prevaile: and the Apostle calleth this very Church of Ephesus, the house of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth: . Tim. 3, 15. Ribera saith, that the first is a difficult question: Because Christ threatneth not the pastor, but indeed the whole Church: whereas it seems unreasonable, that the whole should be punished, for the impenitency of the teacher. Hence he suppo∣seth, that the candlesticke in this place imports, not the Church, but the Episcopal function and dignity, unto which he was advanced, to be a light before the flook: so that by the removing of the candlesticke, he understandeth a removal of the Episcpal honour, and those things in which he was wont to excell, as in the word and doctrine, and sundry other vertues and gifts with which he was indued. This interpretation is not altogether incongruous: however we need not alter the sig∣nification of the candlesticke; forasmuch as it is not unusuall or contradictorie to divine justice, that God should punish a whole congregation, for the sinnes of a few, yea for one particular person in the same, as the Apostle sheweth, 1 Cor. 5.6, & 11.30. And the reason hereof is, because oftentimes the multitude followes the examples of their governors: like priest, like people: as is the king, such is the subject: wherefore it is probable that the Church had lost her first love, as well as her reachertand hence the threatning is directed against him as chiefe; and against the congregation as being corrupted also. To the second, I answer by distinguishing the Church: which is either particular, or universal. The universal is perpetual, unshaken, and built upon the rock. But we beleeve otherwise of particular Churches, which oftentimes the Lord for their se∣curity removeth, by overthrowing whole cities, & countries, as the Easterne Greek Churches of Asia and Africa doe plainly witnesse. But although particular congre∣gations are dissipated, and the candlesticke removed, either for publick or private sinnes; so that where formerly the light of Gods word did shine, there afterwards Paganisme or Antichristianisme doth reigne: not withstanding the church it selfe is not alwaies removed: for the abode of the Church is uncertaine, Heb. 13.14. the Lord some∣time causing the faithful to wander as strangers, & exiles from place to place, not having a continued city in this world. That which is spoken, 1 Tim. 3.15, as it is most true of the universall Church: so was it likewise true of these Ephesians, yea of every particular congrega∣tion, I say in right, though not alwaies in fact: for indeed every congregation ought to be a pillar and ground of truth; though it be not so still in truth: according
to that of Mala. 2.7, The priests lips preserve knowledge, that is they ought so to doe, though they did it not, & therefore are reproved by the Prophet, vers. 8, But ye are departed out of the way, &c. so the Church is the pillar, that is, ought to be the pillar: according to that in Tit. 1.6, Mat. 5.13. a Bishop is, that is ought to be the husband of one wife: Ye are the salt of the earth, the light of the world. viz. ye should be so: &c. Hence we first observe, seeing the abode of the Church is uncertain, we must not promise to our selves a continuance in one place, in regard we are citizens of the Church. For it is in the power of Christ, to remove the candlesticks from one place to another, and many times he doth so for the sinnes either of the teachers, or of the whole congregation: Now in this we must acknowledge our own faults, as deserving it: Psal. 2.1. yet ought we not to be altogether discouraged, because the earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse thereof. For if the outward prosperity of the Church be disturbed and taken away, yet our inward graces, as faith and charity remaine for ever. Let us therefore stedfastly persevere in our first faith, and amend the evils, whither in pastors or Church, that so the candlesticke be not removed. Secondly, hence we learn, that true repentance is the onely way and means to escape publick punishment, and Church dissipation. For Christ saith, I will remove thee, unlesse thou repent: meaning if thou repent, I will not remove thee. Thirdly, observe, that in scripture, the threatnings of punishment are still with a condition, either expressed or understood: viz. except men repent. And therefore when the condition of repentance is declared, and the punishment followes not there is no change at all in the decree of God. Lastly, hence we may learn, how such as go astray are to be brotherly reproved and corrected for their evils, and brought to true repentance: the obstinate are to be terrified with threatnings: and the repentant raised up with comfort: the which Christ doth to this Church, as knowing this to be a most effectuall means to bring them to amendment of life. 6. But this thou hast, that thou hatest] The fift part of the narration, containeth a further commendation of them, for their hatred of the Nicolaitans, and this he brings in after the reproofe and threatning, as it were powring oyle into the wound, and to draw them the sooner to repentance, and to shew that they were not in a de∣sperate condition. Three things before he praysed in them: here he addeth a fourth; Thus we see none shall want praise with God, for any thing that is prayse worthy: now they are commended for their encouragement not as doing works of merit: but as exercising the gifts and grace; received of God, in obedience unto him. The deeds of the Nicolaitans] In vers. 15 their doctrine is mentioned, Lib. 1, cap. 27. but not fully expressed what they taught. Irenaeus writeth, that they held it no sinne, to commit fornication, and eat things sacrificed to idols. And most are of this opinion. But in vers. 14 it is said, Act. 6, 5. that this was the doctrine of Balaam, and not of the Nicolaitans. How∣ever it be, it is certain, they were a pernicious, and most wicked sect, both in life & doctrine. Lib. 3, hist. cap. 2. Some will have Nicolas one of the seven deacons to be the author hereof: Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Nicephorus do write of him, that being accused as jealous of his wife, who was very beautifull, he forlooke her, and left her as common to all. But Clement Alexandrine (as themselves testify) doth commend this Nicolas, for his piety and continency, Heres. 25. cap. 15. having daughters who remained virgins, and a sonne which lived holily. And therefore it is more probable that some other Nicolas, was the author of this filthy sect: and that these hereticks abused the name of this man, as a cloake for their abominable wickednesse. Of these men Augustine wri∣teth largely in his booke of heresies. A certaine writer hence gathereth, Hoe in Apoc. seeing Christ calleth these men Nicolaitans after the name of the first author, that he also may justly name such men Calvinists (who have (alvine for their author) to the end his hearers may the more carefully avoid them. Behold here a notable imitator of Christ. But let him first prove, that the doctrine, (which he falsly termeth Calvines) hath its original from him: or to be, as this was of the
Nicolaitans, filthy, impious, and damnable. Neither of which he shall ever be able to prove. Wheras we might easily retort the very same fault upon himself. For Christ calleth these sectaries Nicolaitans, because they so named themselves, the better to make way for their wicked errours: like as in the Church of Corinth, some said they were of Cephas, some of Apollo, and some of Paul; very few being contented, to be named after Christ. For our parts we count it an evil to be named after Calvin, and not rather Christians of Christ our Lord: wheras this Clawback himself delighteth to be called a Lutherane from Luther. Therefore let him take heed least he be found with the Nicolaitans among the number of the sectaries. Vers. 7. He that hath an eare let him heare] He shutteth up the Epistle with a singular promise, and an exhortation common with the rest of the Epistles, by which he stirreth them up to observe the things which formerly were written un∣to the teacher of the Church of Ephesus: But chiefly to mind the reward, promised to him that overcometh. The like advertisement Christ giveth us Matth. 13.9. And again chap. 19.12: He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. By the eare, he understandeth the eare of the hart, & not so much intending the outward hea∣ring, as to teach us to lay up in our hart and sowle, the meaning of the holy Ghost in these prophesies. What the spirit saith to the Churches] That is, speaking unto us by the prophets, for though Christ speaketh, yet he calleth it the voyce of the spirit, because the son worketh by the spirit. From whence we gather that the holy Ghost, is properly called the spirit of Christ, as proceeding from him and the Father: XI. Argu. of Chr. deity. Which is the Eleventh argument to prove the Godhead of Christ. Saith to the Churches] So then these things, were not written to the Bishops alone, but to all the Churches likewise. To him that overcommeth will I give to eat] This promise is left out in the fower latter Epistles. He is said to overcom, who manfully unto the End, hath fought the good fight of faith against the Flesh, the World, and Satan. As it is written: Mat. 24.13. 2. Tim. 4.7. He that indureth unto the End, the same shall be saved, that is, they who have kept the faith, & fini∣shed their course, shall have (with the Apostle) a crowne of righteousnesse which is laid up for them in the heavens: But here is nothing promised, to Hypocrites, to time servers & apostates, who though they at first fight wel, yet afterward doe faint, cast away their weapons, turne their backs, leave the field, and forsake the battles of the Lord. To eat of the tree of life] Christ is this tree, for he is the way, the truth, and the life. Io. 14.6. He typically alludeth to Paradise, in the midst wherof stood the tree of life, of which if our first parents had eaten, they had lived for ever. It signified also Christ our Lord, who was to restore us (beeing fallen) from death, unto Eternal life. So then by giving us to eat of the tree of life, is meant his communicating himself unto us, Io. 6.14. raysing us from death to life everlasting, according to the promise: Who so eateth my Flesh, hath life eternall: for my Flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drinck indeed. XII Argu. of Chr. deity. This is a twelfth argument of Christs deity: for God alone doth bring forth the faithful into the battle, and giveth to them that overcom eternall life, but all this doth Christ, and therfore he is God blessed for ever. They who plead for free wil, infer from these promises: To him that overcommeth, that it is in our owne power to overcom. But to conclude from the thing condi∣tionall unto the condition it self, is absurd. The promise onely teacheth, what Christ will give, unto the doers of his will, but sheweth not by what power it is performed. The like also they vainly gather from these words, he that hath an eare let him heare, as if men had some power in themselves to heare. Nay rather the contrary is true: for where as he calleth upon us to heare, it shewes, that we are deafe, Ephe. 2.2. unlesse he himself open the eares of our harts: for such as are dead in sinnes, are also deafe and blinde by nature and so remaine until by the grace of Christ they are made able to heare and perceive the things of God.
The 2. Epistle to the Bishop of Smyrna. 8. And to the Angel of the Church in Smyrna write, these things saith the first and the last. which was dead. and is alive. 9. I know thy works, and tribulation, & povertie, but thou art rich, and I know the blasphemie of them, which say they are Iewes and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. 10 Feare none of these things, which thou shalt suffer: Behold the Divel shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten dayes: Bee thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crowne of life. 11. He that hath an eare, let him heare, what the spirit saith unto the Churches, he that over∣commeth shall not be hurt of the second death. THE COMMENTARIE. VNto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna] Of Smyrna se chap. 1.11. The second Epistle is directed to the pastor of this place, being neerest to Ephesus, and it is probable, that it was written to Poly∣carpus Iohns Disciple: lib. 3. c. 3. lib 4. hist c. 14. for as Irenaeus and Eusebius write, the Apo∣stles did ordaine Polycarpus, Bishop of this Church: for seeing all the Apostles, except Iohn, dyed before Domitians time, it is likely, that Polycarpus was pastor of Smyrna, even so long as that Empe∣rour reigned: & it seemeth the rather to be true, because Christ reproves nothing in this Bishop, onely incourageth him to be constant, and foreshewes the persecu∣tion which should be raysed against him by the Iewes, by whom also he was put to death: And indeed histories testifie, that the Iewes with others were the prin∣cipal agents in preparing the fire, wherin he was burned, in the dayes of the Em∣peror Antoninus Verus. Now however the troubles in Asia, in which Polycarpus was taken away, happened sixtie-and-seven years after the writing of the Reve∣lation, which was in the 14 year of Domitian: yet doth not this any way contradict what we said, for Polycarpus, when he suffered, (testifies of him self) that he had served Christ eighty and six years. This Epistle howsoever it be the shortest, yet is it much more exellent then any of the rest: in as much as the others are mixed with reproofes, but Christ here justifies this Bishop in all things: both in commending & comforting of him. It consisteth of an inscription, a narration, and Conclusion. The Inscription de∣scribes Christ by two attributes before spoken of: chap. 1.17: 18. Thus Iohn goes forward to make knowen to the Churches, what he had seen. These things saith the first, and the last] se chap. 1.8, 11, 17. As there, so here also, Christ taketh to himself an essential propertie of God, viz. Eternitie. Esai 41.4. & 44.6. & 48.12. thus he repeateth, and againe confirmeth the seventh argument of his Godhead. Eniedinus the Samosatenian confesseth, that without doubt, Christ is here called the first, and the last: but not absolutely, for saith he, that belongs to God the Father alone: wheras Christ is called the first and the last, not in regard of essence, but as respecting his office, and because he was the true Messias, before whom there was no other, neyther shall there be any after him. But 1, Isai. 44.6. the text sheweth the falshood hereof: for as in Isai. Jehova calleth him∣self the first and the last absolutelie: so here Christ speaketh the same of himself both absolutely, . and with an Emphasis also; that is, with an expresse signification of his person. I am that first, and that last. 2. Though it be true, that this belongeth to God the Father, yet is it not true that it belongeth to him onely. For the Son beeing one in Essence with the father, assumeth it likewise unto himself, even as he saith in the Gospel: I and the father are one; For as is the Fater, so is the Son: because as among men, the Father and the Son, Qualis pa∣ter talis fi∣lius. are of one & the same essence: Even so as God the father, is the first and the last; that is, Eternall: so also is God the Son, the first and the last; that is, Eternally begotten before the world was. For the father who is Eternall cannot have a son
but, he must be Eternall also, forasmuch as the Father is not without the Son. Lastly we grant, that Christ is called the first and the last in regard of his office, because neyther before him was; nor after him shall be any other Messias: yet it is false, that Christ is onely so called in regard thereof & not chiefly in respect of his Essence. For the Word was in the beginning, not in regard of his office onely, but of his divine nature, for the Word was God: In which respect Christ said to the Iewes, before Abraham was, I am. But the heretike further objecteth, that he who absolutely is said to be the first and the last, that is, he whose essence is without beginning or ending, he cannot die: For he that dieth, ceaseth to be. But Christ saith of himself, that, although he now liveth, yet he was dead: therfore he is not absolutely called the first & the last. I answer. There is a fallacie in the argument as I have before shewed in chap. 1.18. For Christ saith not that he was dead simply, neyther according to his divi∣nity, in which regard he is the first and the last absolutelie, but as he tooke Flesh: and in this regard he coulddy, as the scriptures testify. 1 Pet. 4.1 1 Pet. 3.8 Christ suffered for us in the Flesh, he was mortified in the Flesh, &c. which limitation he himself propoundeth to us in the word () and lived; for he saith not () he lived again: nor in the present tense () he liveth, but in the preterperfect tense () he lived or was alive, to wit even then when he was dead in the flesh, he lived as he was God. Now this could not possibly be in respect of one & the same nature: Therefore there was in Christ, being dead in Flesh, another nature, to wit divine, the which su∣stained & raised up his dead body. Thus we have freed the eight argument of Christs godhead, from the cavils of the heretike: the repetition whereof was not unprofitable, because of the grievous trials, dangers, & martyrdoms which were to befal them of Smyrna, for the go∣spels sake, now here Christ doth encourage them, to be faithfull even unto death: because he once being dead liveth eternally and dyeth no more, but remayneth for ever to defend all his and to restore them from death to life. I know they workes] The whole narration is ful of prayse & comfort, and con∣taines three things: 1 a commendation of their vertue: 2. a praediction of the dan∣gers at hand. 3. an exhortation to constancle. The Vulgar omitteth (thy workes) as here, so v. 13. But the words are in the greeke copies: Workes in this place are not to be understood as before v. 2. indifferently eyther for good or evil: (for Christ reproveth nothing in this pastor, not that he was without sinne, but as irreprovable in his life and office, and blamelesse before men: 1 Tim. 3.1. Tit. 1.7. the which the Apostle requireth in a Bishop.) But to be taken of good workes onlie, the which he commendeth in this Bishop and encourageth him to perseverance in the same. I know] An hebrew phrase, that is, I approve by worker I understand in general the moral vertues wherwith he was excellently indued as also his zeal, & diligence in performing the worke of his ministrie. Hence we are taught alwayes to remem∣ber, that Christ beholds our actions, takes delight in whatsoever is good, & what is evil in us he disliketh: let us therfore walke with reverence in his presence that so he without beeing offended with us, may still walke amongst us. He addeth three other things in special concerning his commendation. Thy Tribulation] Which thou hast sustained at the hands both of Jewes and Gentiles for my name sake. And thy Povertie] that is, spoild of thy earthly estate by the adversaries of the truth: for the Governours of Provinces persecuting (as they pretended, the Christians for their religion, did chiefly thirst after their goods, & so robbing them, made a pub∣licke sale therof: even as it is to this day the common practice of the Romish harpies. But thou art rich] this (being put in by a parenthesis) mitigates the miserie of his povertie, calling him rich: because the faithful (howsoever spoiled of their outward estate,) are yet possessors of heavenly riches, Heb. 1.2. which the wicked cannot deprive them of: for by faith they inherit Christ: Who is the heire of all things: And in whom are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge.
This is indeed one of the Paradoxes of our religion: that Christians are rich in God, though poore to the world. Now this thing ought not to seem strange unto us, seeing heathen philosophers could say, that onely wise men are rich men: in as much as wisedome alone sufficeth to make a man blessed: but how much more then doth the true knowledge of God and of Christ, inrich us with all spiritual blessings, whatsoever becomes of our transitorie goods in this life. And the blasphemie of them] That is, the Iewes, who persecuted the Christians, bla∣sphemed Christ, counted him a deceiver, a magician, and justy crucified opbraiding the Christians to be idle and foolishmen, Apolog. cap. ult. worthy of nothing but stripes, torments, hanging & the like, as Tertullian recordeth. Now these blasphemers named them∣selves (for honour sake) Iewes, as if they were the onely people of God. But, Christ saith, they are no Iewes, but a Synagogue of Satan, that is, a blasphemous congre∣gation, led by Satan to their destruction. Thus Christ applies the title of their Sy∣nagogue, wherin they boasted, to their shame and approbrie. And are not] For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, neyther is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he which is one inwardly &c. Here we see that titles availe not when men are degenerated, and forsake the truth. The same may be said of the title of the Church, which the Papists so much boast of; we, say they, are the Church, the Church: we grant indeed they are so: but not a Church of Christ, but of Satan, who worship not God, but the divel in their Idols. Now wheras Christ is said to know these things, as it serves againe to con∣firme the tenth argument of his deity: So to comfort those of Smyrna, and all the godly in their affliction: for it is as much as if he thus said: Although I may seem to be afar of, & ignorant of your condition, in that I take not away your poverty, and punish the blasphemers: yet nothing is hid from me, but all things are naked and bare before mee; he patient therefore until the time of your deliverance come. And this may be added to Argum. 11. proving the Godhead of Christ, namely his immensitie and providence. 10 Feare none of those things, which thou shalt suffer] The other part of the narra∣tion, is a praemonition of their troubles at hand: for howsover they had already suf∣fered much; yet he foretelleth that they must indure greater things: not in the least to disharten them, but that they might prepare themselves before hand for the same. For darts foreseen are the lesse hurtful: as also least they should be secure, and imagine that after their former sufferings, they were to looke for no farther com∣bats but on the contrarie to fore arm themselves for them. None of those things] Signifying, that they were to expect, not one, but many forts of trialls, for through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdome of God. one soit of affliction be nameth, viz. that the divel should cast some of them into prison. In this persecution, he maketh Satan the Author: who in hatred of Christ; and mans salvation doth stir up the wicked to persecute the godly with reproches, imrisonment yea and with fire and sword. Shall cast some of you] He shall not be able to bring all into his snare: For I will cast a bridle upon him. Which is for the great comfort of Gods people. The Prison notes (by a Synecdoche) the adjuncts and consequences, as namely, torments, banishments and martyrdoms: With which not long after under the Emperors, M. Aurelius Verus, Antoninus and Commodus, Satan most cruelly persecuted the Churches, at which time also Polycarpus the Bishop laid downe his life for the testimonie of Christ. Hence briefly we gather three things. 1. In this we may behold the afflicted condition of the godly in this world, & all that wil live godly must prepare themselves for it: but if it so be, that we have a more peaceable portion let us account it as a great mercie of God, & enioy it with thanckfulnesse, XIII Ar∣gum. of Chr. denie. for owne edification, and the setting forth of the glorie of Christ. 2. Again Christs Godhead is here confirmed, in that he fore shewes the future sufferings of the saintes, now certainly this knoweth no one, but God onely. So that this is the XIII argument of Christs deity.
3. The divel is the author of all persecution as for tyrants and their execu∣tioners they are but his instruments: Whose furie though God permit for a season: yet will he not suffer his to be tempted above what they are able to bear: but at last will cast the Divel with his instruments into the lake of fire and brimstone. Revela. 19.20. That ye may be tryed] He ads a twofold consolation: the one, from the ende & use of afflictions; as being tryalls, that our faith and constancie may be the more approved, and we the patienter in our sufferings: this end is generally propoun∣ded that so we, knowing our selves to be tryed of God may approve our selves sin∣cere and unblameable in his sight. Be tryed] viz. of God: who both knoweth us, and also his owne gifts and graces bestowed upon us. Yet he tryeth us, that thereby the faith of his saintes should be manifested both to them that are within: and without the Church. For to con∣fesse Christ in times of prosperitie is not difficult, but when troubles doe arise, then is our sinceritie made manifest: according to that in the philosopher , that is, true vertue doth shine forth in adversity. And howbeit the Divel is said to cast us into prison: Yet it is God that tryeth us: for Satan is Gods bayleffe or Serieant: so that the action of God concurres with the work of Satan: yea God, and the Divel are said to doe one and the same thing, but in a different maner and end. For God doth it as using his right and power over us. But Satan usurpinglie: God doth it to try us and make us apved: the Divel to afflict and destroy us. Howsoever therfore they doe the same thing, yet is not their action all one: for the worke of God is good, but that of the Divel, is most vile. And ye shall have tribulation] The other consolation, is taken from the brevitie of the affliction, being to continue but a few days. In Cael. sub fine. Now all things of short conti∣nuance, though they be heavie, yet ought to be tollerable, faith Cicero. Ten days] Some take this properly for so many dayes: Others prophetically, for ten years, in which the persecutions dured under the afore said Emperors. Others referre it to the ten yeares persecution under Trajane, which was the twelf per∣secution of the Christians. To be short, some take it indefinitely for many years: affirming with Augustine, Lib. 8. de doctrin. Christ. cap. 35. that sometime in scripture a certaine number is used for an uncertaine. As we may se not onely in this place, but also in Chapt. 11.12.13. but again: others (with Ribera) suppose that a long time of persecution is hereby fignifyed: because the number ten containes all other numbers, as in Gene. 31.7. Laban changed Jacobs wages ten times, for, many times, so 2. Sam. 19.43. Job. 19.3. so Ribera: But this were rather to terrifie, then to comfort them, by fore shewing so long during persecution. Wherfore (with Andreas) I understand that by ten days in this place is meant the shortnes of their trouble, which should soon passe away as a cloud: for thus the scriptures encouraging us to constancie, are wont to ex∣presse: our light afflictions which are for a moment: 2. Cor. 4.17. Be faithfull unto the death] The third part of the narration is an exhortation to constancy in the faith unto the death: which is to be understood inclusively, and not exclusively: according to that in, Heb. 12.4. Ye have not as yet resisted unto blood. Wherfore we must not be afraid to lay downe our lives for Christs sake, and to cleave unto the truth notwithstanding all the cruelty of Satan and his instru∣ments: but stand fast unto the shedding of the last drop of blood, that so we may obtain the crown of eternal life. For he that shall endure into the End, the same shall be saved. Mat. 24.13. And I will give thee] He propoundeth the reward for their greater incourage∣ment unto constancie. Souldiers will fight unto the death for a corruptible crowne, much more ought we to doe the like, for an heavenly crowne, which fadeth not away. The crown of life here, as also in Jam. 1.12. 2. Timot. 4.8. 1. Pet. 4.5. noteth eternal life and happines. It is otherwhere called the crown of justice, the crown of glorie, by a meta∣phor taken from runners in a race, where there is a crown proposed as a reward to the conquerours.
Hence let us observe in the first place, that the crowne of life is promised onely to such as are faythfull to the death. 2. That one & the same crowne is promised to all that are faythful, no mention being made of any diversitie of reward. 3. That the crown is promised not of desert, but of grace, as a reward freely bestowed on them that are constant in the faith. 4. That Christ is the giver therof. Which is the fourteenth argument proving his Godhead. XIV Argu. of Chr. deity. Io. 10.28. For God alone gives eternall life: Now Christ saith, I give unto my sheep eternall life, therfore Christ is God. 11. He which hath an eare] The acclamatorie conclusion is again repeated: He that overcommeth shall not be hurt of the second death: The sence is one with the former promises, though different in words. What is meant by the second death, is explained chap. 20.14. Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. & 21.8. Murtherers &c. shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: Which is the second death. The first death is a separation of the soule from God through sin, and was the cause of corporall death, Hebr. 9.27 which is common to all: as the Apostle speaketh; It is ap∣pointed unto all men once to dy, but after this the Jugement. The second death, is the casting of soule & body into the lake of everlasting fire, wherein the wicked onely shall be tormented: for to the godly Christ hath pro∣mised deliverance: for he that overcommeth shall not be hurt, &c. Some take the first death to bneant of the dissolution of the soule from the body: and then the mea∣ning is thus; he that continues faithful unto the first death, needs not to fear the second; for he shall not be hurt therewith, but enioy eternall filicity: but of this more hereafter. This great and gracious promise, should stir us up, with courage to persevere in the fight, untill we overcom: for then we shall be free from the second death, and be partakers of life eternall through Christ Jesus our Lord, to whome be glorie for ever and ever, Amen. The third Epistle to the Bishop of the Church of Pergamus. 12. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, write, These things saith he, which hath the sharp sword with two edges: 13. I know thy workes, and where thou dwellest, even where Satans seat is, and thou houldest fast my Name, and hast not denyed my faith, even in those days, wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you where Satan dwelleth. 14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrin of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stombling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication. 15 So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. 16 Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. 17. He that hath eare, let him heare what the spirit saith unto the Churches. To him that overcommeth, will I give to eate of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it. THE COMMENTARIE. TO the Angel in Pergamus] The third Epistle to the Pastor of Per∣gamus or Troy, containes two things: first they are commended for their constancie in the faith; Secondlie reproved for maintaining amongst them the inpure Balaamites, and Nicolaitans, & by threat∣ning are exhorted to amendment of life. It consisteth of an inscri∣ption, narration, and conclusion. The inscription describeth Christ by an Epithite taken from chap. 1.16. that he hath (viz. in his mouth) the sharpe-sword with two edges. The reason of this attribute appeares from vers. 16. where he threatneth to destroye the sinners of the Church of Pergamus, with the sword of his mouth, that is, by the power of his divine word. For this sword, is the word of God sharper then any two edged sword piercing and dividing asunder of soule and spirit, &c. Heb. 4.12.
Here we have the fifteenth argument of Christs Godhead: XV Argu. of Chr. deity. For the word of God, doth properly proceed out of his mouth: and therefore he is God. Because the word of God proceedeth from Christ, not as the word of another, or as it was in the mouth of the Apostles, Prophets and other teachers, but in speciall as his owne: hence he saith, v. 16. I will fight with them, with the sword of my mouth. 13. I know thy workes, and where thou dwellest] In the narration, are three things: he commendeth what is prayse-worthy: reproveth what is amisse; and lasty ex∣horteth them unto repentance. First he saith in Generall, that he knew their workes, to the end they might take notice, that they had to doe with him who trieth and searcheth the hearts and reynes, of which se v. 2.2. In particular he commends their constancie in the faith, which with courage they maintained, and confidently trusting on Christ, overcame all such tentations as might any way occasion them to forsake him. The prayse whereof is amplified from the danger of their abode: I know where thou dwellest, namely in a most vicious and wicked city, being ful of cruel enemies, both Iewes and Gentiles, and where Christians like sheep are continually exposed to the danger of devouring wolves: Now to live Godly in such a place, and constantlie to cleave unto the profession of Christs name, is a verie hard thing: though it be not so, where the condition of the place affords us freedom and libertie: the which benefit God of his exceeding mercie, hath hi∣therto granted unto us. Where Satans seat is] A further amplifying of their constancie is taken from the infamie of the place: Pergamus is the throne of the Divel: Who in Hebr. is called Satan that is an adversarie: so that this citie was full of naughtie and vile persons, haters of Christ, and his members, among whom Satan raigned, both in the pallace (for it was the abode of king Attalus) and in their senate, & temples: forcibly drawing the magistrates and cityzens to horrible Idolatrie, and to commit all manner of outrage and wickednes against the Christians. Nevertheles Christ had a Church in this evill citie. And could he not doe the like, The Church preserved in the papacie. though the Romish Papacie for a thousand yeares and upward, hath been the throne of Satan, and the seat of Antichrist, and under the name of Christianitie, abounds in all ungodlinesse, idolatrie, and barbarous crueltie against Christ? They object, that the Church of Pergamus was visible, and separated from the Pagans: But in the papacie it was not so. I answere unlesse there had been in some sort a visible Church among the Papists, the Romish Clergie had not been so renowned, as they are, for their kil∣ling and martyring of the saintes. But be it granted: were not the seven thousand in Israel, who worshipped God, a Church: because they were not a visible con∣gregation seperated from the Balaamites, but for fear of persecution kept them∣selves close, and were not known, no not to Elias himself? Even in those days] Here he further amplifies their constancie by shewing the crueltie of the adversaries, who continually drew forth the Christians to most cruel and barbarous torments, as appeares by Antipas, a faithfull martyr of Christ, who undoubtedly not long before was put to death by those of Pergamus, and so is named instead of many others, who also suffered. It is not certain by historie, who he was. Arethas supposeth that he was the teacher of this Church, who in the days of Domitian, for his constant profession of the truth was (as some say) put into a Brazen bul and by fyre tortured to death: Andreas writeth, that he had read sometime the hystory of his martyrdom. But it is certain that Christ honoureth him with the title of his faithfull witnesse. It is probable that this Epistle was directed to the successour of Antipas, least he should be drawen aside from per∣forming his charge, for fear of the like punishment: who as it seemeth was at this time in bonds, and threatned, to be tortured to the end he might denie Christ: and therfore he is worthily commended for keeping the faith.  Gr. (And) is to be rendred even, or also in those days, which amplifies the former perse∣cution, during which time he remained constant, although Antipas had already suf∣fered death; for it cohereth with the foregoing words, & hast not denyed even in those
days, wherin Antipas my faithful martyr: to which we must ad, who was, or who de∣nied me not: for otherwise the article () who, would seem to be superfluous. Where Satan dwelleth] The fourth amplification is from the danger of the place, or a further declaring of what was before spoken of Pergamus: as if he should say, Pergamus is not onely the seat of Satan, in which he remaineth somtimes, or for a season: but it is his proper nest, and where he continually inhabiteth: for (as Are∣thas witnesseth) Pergamus was more given to Idolatrie, then any other place in Asia. Hel indeed properly is Satans dwelling place; notwithstanding he also dwel∣leth and reighneth in the harts of the children of disobedience, who by their filthie and abominable actions, doe inslave themselves unto him. Thus the hart of Judas was as a house for Satan, after he was entred into him: O what a miserable con∣dition is it, to live there where Satan dwelleth? how hard a matter is it to wor∣ship Christ, where the Divel ruleth? Let us therefore intreat the lord to dwel in the midst of us, and to make us the temples of his holy spirit, that so Satan may not have any abode amongst us. 14. But I have a few things against thee] This second part of the narration is a reproofe of the Bishop of Pergamus. And here again we are taught that the best in the Church are not without their faylings, the which Christ seeth, though men perceive them not, neither are we here to expect a Church perfect and altogither free from errours and the mixture of evill men and good togither: for which in∣firmities albeit the lord doth not condemne us, but in mercie passeth them by: notwithstanding he disaloweth and reproveth them, and requireth an amende∣ment thereof. He calleth them () a few things comparitively: not as being few or smal in themselves, but eyther as respecting the evils of ungodly men: or in regard of his owne clemencie, he accounting them but as few. Thus the Lord lessens (as it were) our evils, yet so, not that we should flatter our selves in them, but the rather amend them: for a few evils are sooner reformed then many: lesser vices are more easilie corrected, then greater. Now the evil for which they are blamed, is their remisnes in not exercising Church discipline against such persons as were infected with the venemous do∣ctrine of the Balaamites, and Nicolaitans. Now whether these were divers sects, or but one, it is not certaine. The common opinion is, that the Nicolaitans followed the wicked way of Balaam, (mentioned in Numb. 22.23.24.25.) permitting Christians to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication. For that false prophet being hired by Balack king of Moab to curse the Israelites, gave him counsel by his Moabitish woemen to entise them to worship Baal-peor, or their God Priapus: by which meanes it came to passe, that the Israelites having so don, fel to feastings and dancings with them, and afterwards committing fornication, drew upon themselves horrible plagues from the Lord. 15. So hast thou also them] Because he had before reproved the Church of Ephe∣sus for the deeds of the Nicolaitans: therefore here he saith, so hast thou also &c. By which it appeareth, that this sect, whatever it were, was crept into many Churches. Hence we note two things, concerning the dutie of Churches and their officers, touching notorious-sectaries. First, that it is meet to call them by the name of their authors. For Christ, nameth the Nicolaitans after Nicolas, to distinguish them from such as were sound in the faith. This I speak of vile sectaries, such as these were, overthrowing the very foundation. Yet it followes not, that the Lutherans do wel, to call them∣selves after Luther, unlesse they would be accounted notorious sectaries, rending Christ asunder, as in 1. Cor. 1.10. of which thing se more v. 6. Secondly, notorious sectaries ought to be seriously reproved by the Church, convinced, & if it may be regained: as for the obstinate they are not to be suffered, but to be cast out of the Church, otherwise we provoke the Lord to wrath against our selves.
But here behold the great ungodlines of the Romish Antichrist, who to bring in his divelish doctrine of forbidding marriage, accounts all such Bishops and Priests which do marrie, guiltie of the haeresie of the Nicolaitans: & this he doth, if we wil beleeve him, to preserve the puritie of the Church. See, Sigon. de regno Ital. lib. 8. & 9. 16. Repent, or otherwise] The third part of the narration, is an exhortation to repentance, with a threatning of the obstinate, unlesse they left their errour. For it seemeth that the Nicolaitans were not secretly, but openly retained in the bosome of the Church, by the indulgence of the Pastor, & so publickly maintained their wicked doctrine to the scandall of the faithful, and danger of the whole Church: For a little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe. Besides, because of this, 1 Cor. 5.6. the un∣beleeving Gentiles spake evil of the Christians, as if they committed fornication each with other. Thus we see that their sinne was of a high nature, and therfore great reason had Christ to require repentance for the same. I wil come against thee shortly] The like phrase of threatning is in v. 6. and the same kind of punishement is applied to the discription of Christ v. 12. as if he should say; It is not in vain that I have a two edged sword in my mouth: for there∣with I wil strike and wound the unrepentant. I wil fight against them] Christ then fighteth against us with the sword of his mouth, when he reproveth our evils, threatneth & punisheth obstinate sinners. For Gods threatnings are never without effect: But as it is written, unlesse ye repent, Luk 13.3 ye shall all likewise perish. Christ fighteth with a sword, to convince, wound, condemne and cast off the irrecoverable. Against them] To wit, the Nicolaitans: notwithstanding he includeth the Pastor also, with the Church it self except they repented: so that , with (or a∣gainst) them, is put in stead of , against you. 17. He which hath an eare] He endeth the Epistle, with his wonted Epiphonema, or acclamatorie conclusion, wherin though the promise differs in words, yet the sence is the same with the former. To him that overcommeth, this is put by a change of the number, for all that overcome, that al in hope of a recompence might be incou∣raged to the good fight of faith. For rewards much prevaile to harten us unto duties. By them that overcome, he meaneth such as stood fast in the faith, & were not polluted with the filthines of the Nicolaitans. To these by an allegorie he promiseth a threefold benefit. To eat of the hid Manna] This is the first. Manna was that heavenly bread, sweet in tast, with which God fed his people in the wildernes, who being pressed with hunger found in the morning without the camp an heavenly dew like to Coriāder, Exo. 16.15 1 Cor. 10.3 at which they wondring said (man-hu) what is this? And hence it was called Manna. It was a sacrament, shadowing out Christ the true bread of life. Of this Christ will give him that overcommeth to eat: that is, I wil feed him with the pleasant food of my owne bodie, & give unto him eternal salvation: for he which eateth the Flesh of Christ, Io. 6.54. & drinketh his blood hath life eternal. By hidden Manna he alludeth to the Omer of Manna, which was laid up in a golden pot into the Arke for a remembrance, accor∣ding as God commanded Moses: which signified that Christ indeed is hidde to the prophane of this world, yet seene of the godly, not with bodilie eyes, but by the eye of their faith. Ribera saith wel, that it is called hidden Manna, because eternall happines is not bestowed on all alike, but is reserved onely for the elect in the world to come. And wil give him a white stone] This is the second benefit about which interpre∣ters much differ in opinion. Some understand by it the pretious & bright shining Carbuncle. Rupertus interpreteth it of the glorious bodies of such as doe over∣come, whom Christ wil rayse at the last day, and make them shine like the Sun in his brightnes. Others understand it of an allusion taken from runners in a race, to whome was given a white stone in signe of victorie when they overcame: the which thing if it were confirmed by historie, it were then a cleare opening of the text.
Sixtus Senensis saith, that the ancient heathens caused their festival dayes to be ingraved on their publick tables, and noted with a white stone, that they might the better discerne them from other dayes. But they seem to come neerest to the litterall meaning, who thinke that Christ in this respecteth the manner of judg∣ments, where there were two sorts of stones or counters white and blacke cast into a basen. By the white the innocent was absolved: by the black the guiltie condemned: lib. 15. Me∣tamor. and hence they were named,  &  acquit∣ting or condemning stones. Of which the Poet speaketh. Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis His damnare reos: illis absolvere culpa. In ancient times with stones they did In Iudgment seat proceed: By blacke the guiltie were condemnd: The Iust by white were freed. Thus Christ wil give to him that overcommeth a white stone, that is, absolve him in the day of Iudgement, Io. 5.24. according to the promise, he that heareth my words, and be∣leeveth in him that sent me, hath eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. And in the stone a new name written] This is the third benefit, and the phrase is taken from the forenamed custom, where the names of such as were absolved, were ingraven on white stones, but on blacke the condemned. A new name] That is, an excellent and honorable name, for so much the scrip∣ture in many places doth set forth by the word New, Psa. 33. Reve. 3.12 & 14.3. as sing unto the Lord a new song: I wil write upon him my new name: They sung as it were a new song before the throne. &c. This undoubtedly is the name of Gods children, whereof the Lord speaketh, Isai. 56.5. J wil give unto them a name better then of sonnes and daughters, meaning the adoption of the sonnes of God, which infinitely surpasseth the name of car∣nall sonnes and daughters. For what is there more glorious, then to be the sons of God? surely such shall never be condemned. But some may say, how can he give them that, Io. 1.12. which they have already; for, as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God. I Answer, now we are sons, and heires in hope, but in the world to come, we shall fully enioy the right of children, and really then posses the promised inheri∣tance, and be like unto the angels of God. Luk. 20.36. for they that shall be counted worthy to enioy that world, neyther marrie wives, nor are married, for they can die no more forasmuch as they are equall unto the Angels, and are the sons of God. Thus we se that the third benefit promised to them that overcome, is a full possession of the inheri∣tance of Gods children. Which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth is] What this meaneth, which is also spoken of Christ (who hath a name, that no man knoweth but himself) I will shew in a word: Reve. 19 12. namely, it is a name which can not be uttered: because the happines of Gods children can not be expressed, for eye hath not seen, nor eare heard, &c. This name God wil not give to one alone, but to all the faithful, all (I say) shall know their owne name, because all shal have it. For to know this name, is to have it, to rejoyce in it, and to be certain thereof: thus we se that the people of God, shall not be ignorant of each others felicitie and blessednes in the heavens, how∣soever true it is that the damned shall be ignorant thereof: because they shall never have it: and hence we see, it is no mervaile, that none in this life know the heavenlie adoption, No man knoweth the new name, sa∣ving he that hath it. but such onelie as se and have it by faith in their harts: for as much as in the world to come, none shall know the dignitie of the saintship, but such as are partakers thereof. And heere the ungodly assertion of the papists is refuted, who affirme that no man can fullie and certainly perswade himselfe of his own inward justifying faith, or to be in the state of grace, and so consequently a childe of God: but is to doubt of his faith, grace, justification, adoption and salvation. For these Pro∣phane
men doe vainlie require an outward demonstration of that which no man can possibly know, saving he that inwardly hath it: which they inwardly wanting can not know it, and therfore in requiring us to manifest this unto them, doe as foolishly as they who would put a man to prove that there is sweetnes in honie, seeing no man can know it but by the tast thereof. For the knowledge of this new name, it consists not in bare speculations, but in the power and practise of the heart. Of this ful assurance we have largely treated in our comment. on Hebr. Chap. 6. v. 18. and Bellar. Castiga. lib. 3. de Justifi. cap. 9.10. &c. Moreover hence we have the sixteenth argument of Christs deitie. XVI Argu. of Chr. deity. For none can give the heavenly Manna, the white stone, & new name (which Christ promiseth to them that overcome) saving God alone. The fourth Epistle to the Bishop of Thyatira. 18 And unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, write, These things sayth the Sonne of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brasse. 19 I know thy workes, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy workes, and the last be more then the first. 20 Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Ie∣zebel, that calleth her selfe a prophetesse to preach and to seduce my servants to commit fornica∣tion, and to eat things sacrificed unto idoles. 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. 22. Behold I will cast her into a beade, and them that commit adultery with her, into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. 23. And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know that I am he that searcheth the reines and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according to your workes. 24. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speake, I will put upon you no other bur∣then. 25. But that which you have already, hold fast till I come. 26. And he that overcommeth, and keepeth my workes unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations. 27. (And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron: as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers:) even as I have received of my Father. 28. And I will give him the morning star. 29. He that hath an eare, let him heare what the spirit saith unto the Churches. THE COMMENTARIE. VNto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira] Epiphanius recordeth that certaine of the Alogians rejected the Revelation as fabulous, because there was no Christian Church at that time in Thyati∣ra. For how, say they, could Iohn be commanded to write to one, who then was not, but that old writer sheweth the absurditie of the hereticks herein, It followeth not, saith he, although in their dayes there was no Church there, therefore there was none in Iohns time: for Thyatira was vanquished and overthrowen by them and the Phrygians togither, Not long after the death of Iohn and the other Apostles, namely in the three and nynteth yeere after Christs ascension, which was the seventh of Adrian the Emperor. And that indeed the spirit of God did foreshew the defection of this Church, by prophesying of the false Prophetesse Iezabel, that is, of certain woemen who deceived many, falsely boasting of a prophetical spirit, as namely, Priscilla and Maximilla, and Quintilla harlots of Mon∣tanus, who taught the heresie of the Cataphrygians. Touching these things whither they were so, or or, I wil not now dispute of, but that which Epiphanius ads, is indeed more to the purpose, to wit, that in his time this Church was againe recovered by casting off the heresie of the Cataphry∣gians. Now, saith he, by the grace of God there is a Church in that place which flourisheth,
and some others thereabout, although formerlie the whole Church was fallen away, and had embraced the aforesaid heresie. That also is verie memorable which he writeth, that the spirit of God did reveal, that soon after the Apostles & their successors the Church should fal into many errors. Whence therefore hath the sonne of perdition taken his insolent decree, that his Church cannot erre? Now the fourth Epistle is directed to the minister of Thyatira, being more sharpe then the former. Hee is commended for his faith and workes, but reproved for suffering the Prophetesse Jezabel to seduce many, to commit fornication, and eate things sacrificed to Idols: the which woman, with her followers, Christ threat∣neth to destroy. Neverthelesse such who were not infected with her wickednes, he exhorteth to constance, and promiseth to give them power over the nations. The Epistle as the former consisteth, of an inscription, narration and conclusion. In the inscription Christ is described by three Epithites: two whereof have been handled. Chap. 1. v. 14. The sonne of God] in Chap. 1.13. he is called the Sonne of Man, and here the Sonne of God, to shew that he is both: Now Christ is a Sonne by nature, we and the An∣gels by grace. Wherefore the Church doth rightly beleeve and professe, Christ to be both God and man in the unitie of one person. His eyes as a flame of fire, his feet like to fine brasse] Of this see chap. 1.14.15. I know thy workes] The narration containes five things: 1. commendations: 2. reproofes: 3. threatnings: 4. exhortations: 5. promises. Thy workes] The Vulgar and Andreas omit this, both here, and in v. 9. Workes are generally to be taken both for good and evil, as in v. 2. & 13. in speciall he commendeth fower things: 1. his love, to God. 2. his charitie to the poore, and chiefly to them of the houshould of faith. 3. his faith; that is, his sincere preaching of the truth received from the Apostles. And lastly his patience, in suffering of afflictions for the cause of Christ: for this Church also (if it be true which Epi∣phanius writes) was persecuted by the Pagans, Jewes and Cataphrygians, notwith∣standing this Bishop remained still constant in the truth. And thy workes, and the last] The first, and, is declarative, for, chiefly thy workes, the latter, and, seemeth not necessarie, and the text may thus be read, thy last workes are more then thy first, as the vulgar, Complutensis, and Andreas read it. It seemeth that the Pastor of this Church had with much courage lately undergone some great persecution, for the which Christ here much commends him, as adding this exellent work to his former: or otherwise, because in the general course of his life he daylie became more excellent: for his latter workes were more, that is, more manifest proofes of his constancie, and more worthie of praise then the first. So that he is commended for his holie progresse in the duties of piety: which is an example unto us, that we also should labour to increase in the like workes of faith and love. 20. But I have a few things against thee] The second part, is a reproofe of few things, so the like in v. 14. not as if his evils were of no great corcernment, but Christ (like a good physitian) lessens the disease, that the patient may the sooner admit of the cure and not despaire of amendment. His evil was in permitting the false pro∣phetesse Jezabel to teach and seduce many, to commit fornication, and be present with idolaters at their worship and Idol feastings; for it seemeth this woman was one of the Sect of Nicolaitans, whose doctrine she maintained. For these decei∣vers (under pretext of libertie and Christian charitie) taught, that women were to be accounted common, & that it was lawful for them to communicate with the heathen in their services and feastings: now howsoever these things were scanda∣lous and dangerous: yet of them thought indifferent and in the liberty of Chri∣stians: and this verie practice some libertines at this day doe imitate. This was a great neglect of zeale and courage in the Pastor, in not seeking to redresse and free the Church of so pestilent an instrument, but to suffer her amongst them, to the destruction of many. Shee is called Jezabel by a similitude, as being equal in
craft and malice to Jezabel, the wife of Ahab: for as this vilde woman by false witnesses caused Naboth uniustly to be put to death, and cruelly oppressed many of Gods prophets: so this lying Prophetesse boasting of divine revelations, led aside many from the waye of God to her filthinesse and devilish worship of Idols. In∣terpreters doe differ, whither this was one woman, or many: and whither there were a whole Sect and nation of them. Epiphanius, as we have already shewed, supposeth this: to be spoken of Priscilla, Maximilla and Quintilla false Prophe∣tesses of Montunus, who blasphomously boasting himself to be the comforter, se∣duced these women to commit fornication with him, and to Prophesie in his name. But on the contrarie the text sheweth, that it is spoken of Jezabel, who at that time bore sway in the Church of Thyatira and not of any to come afterward: neither is it likely that onely this Epistle should reprove vices to come, when as all the other speak of things present. Andreas understandeth it by a figurative speech as meant of the heresie of the Nicolaitans: But wherfore should that sect be here darkned with such a kind of speech, which twife before was manifestly named and treated of. Alcasar coniectureth that by her the Iewish Synagogue is to be understood. But there is no reason to transform the Iewes into the woman Iezabel, who were before v. 9. comdemned by name, and again in cha. 3. v. 9. Be∣sides, the whole description tends to set forth in special some one particular wic∣ked woman: seing therfore there is no necessarie reason leading us to depart from the literal sence, it is probable that this woman was verie famous in the city of Thyatira for her wealth, authoritie, and shew of pietie, but in truth for her unclean∣nesse, deceit and ungodlines, was equal with Iezabel of old, seducing many to for∣sake the truth, and participate with her in horrible wickednes: But touching this woman and her mentioned chap. 17. who is called a great citie, there is no agree∣ment betwixt them. For there it is expressly said, that by her is signified a great multitude, yea Rome it self: whereas here no such thing is intimated. 21. And I gave her time] This sheweth Christs patience and the obstinacie of this woman, who made no use of his long sufferance in giving her time to re∣pent. Thus the wicked grow secure because of Gods forbearance, and seeing Iudg∣ment is not speedilie executed, they rejoyce, and thinke to go unpunished. But what their reward shall bee is plain both from this place, and Rom. 2.4.5. 22. I will cast her] The third part of the narration, is a threatning of judgment, which men by their inpenitencie bring upon themselves. The punishment de∣nounced is threefold. 1. Against the woman herself. 2. Against her lovers. And 3. against her children. Jezabel is threatned with a foule disease, for so God com∣monly punisheth impure harlots, to make them lothsome to others, and publick exampels of dishonest courses. Into a bed] The antecedent is explained by the consequence. Sick persons keep their bed: the sence is, the bed which she hitherto had abused to lasciviousnes, luxurie and pleasure, should be changed into languishing and sorrow. But the Godly man the Lord wil strongthen him upon the bed of languishing, Psal. 41.3. & make all his bed in his sicknesse. And them that commit adulterie with her] Her lovers shall also be punished, eyther externally by the sword of the magistrate or some others: or internally by torments of conscience. But I rather take it to be meant of outward shame and punishment. Ʋnlesse they repent] Behold the mercie and patience of God: he wil not destroy a most wretched harlot with her adulterers, before he cal them to repentance, being ready to forgive such as amend their wayes: thus we see how repentance is the onely means to escape punishment. Some times indeed the Lord inflicts temporall chastisement upon the repentant: but the same is both mitigated, and turned to their good, besides none of them are eternallie punished. 23. And kil her children with death] He threatneth death to the children of this harlot: which some take properly for such as were borne in fornication, whom
the Lord would suddenlie destroy by a heavie judgment, that such an adulterous generation might not be spread among men. Others take it metaphorically for her companions and lovers who defyled themselves with her. I rather approve the former sence, for otherwise the difference between the adulterers, and their children would be taken away. Hence we may learn, 1. that the lord is greatly offended with the defile∣ments both of our soules and bodies: for he is a pure and holy spirit: and requireth the same in them that worship him: Hebr. 12.14. And without this no man shall see him. 2. The corrupters of the truth shall be grievously punished, howsoever they may for a time by subtiltie cover their deceit, and draw many into their snares. 3. That God is ready to forgive most vile sinners if they truelie repent. XVII Arg. of Chr. deity. Lastly here we have the seventeenth argument of the deitie of Christ: in that he threatneth to punish these wicked deceivers: for none but God onelie is able to doe it, and ther∣fore it manifesteth his divine omnipotencie. That which the hereticke objects concerning Moses striking the Aegyptians with plagues, is of no waight: neither of Peter his slaying of Ananias: Nor Pauls striking Elymas with blindenesse. For we know, that the Prophets and Apostles wrought miracles, not of themselves, but by the power of God. Wheras Christ threatens to doe this by his owne power, Io. 5.19. Mat 10.1 & 16.17. For whatsoever things the Father doth, these also doth the Son likewise. Yea the Son giveth power unto others to doe the like things. And all the Churches shall know] The end and use of Gods vengeance on sin∣ners, is to declare both his omniscience of the hidde things of the hart: as also his omnipotencie and Iustice in rendring to evry one according to his workes: Even as God said to Pharoah: Exo. 9.16. Rom. 9.17 And in very deed, for this cause have I raysed thee up, for to shew in thee my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. Thus the lord by threatning cals sinners to repentance, by Iudgments punisheth the obsti∣nate, and hereby declareth his wisedome, power and Iustice unto all. Now it is not without cause, that Christ attributes to himselfe the knowledge of hidden things: for seeing this wicked woman, beguiled many, by couveringe her uncleane actions under a pretence of holinesse: Christ therefore here declares that none of her wayes were hidden from his eyes. Hence we observe in the first place, that one principal end of Gods exemplarie punishing of the wicked, is that all the Churches may acknowledge & declare the wisedome, power, and Iustice of God. Thus we se how profitable it is, that publike examples are propounded before our eyes, to the end we may take notice of the judgments of God, & beware least by the like wickednesse we stirre up his wrath against our owne soules. XVIII Ar∣gu. of Chr. deity. Secondly here is offred unto us the eighteenth argument excellently proving the divinity of Christ. For here Christ will be acknowledged to be the searcher of the heart and reynes: which the scripture ascribeth unto God alone. For the righ∣teous God trieth the heart and reynes. Psa. 7.9. 1. King. 8.39. 1 King. 16 7. Give unto every man according to his wayes whose heart thou knowest. Thou alone knowest the hearts of all the sonnes of men. see also 1. Chro. 28. Iere. 11.20. and 17.10. and 20.12. Eniedinus the Samosatenian, objecteth in the first place, that the searching of the heart and reines doth not here signifie a knowledge of the thoughts: But rather a most equal and just administration of judgment by Christ: and so it proveth not that he is true God. I answer. The antecedent is a manifest and bold corrupting of the text: For the divine attribute which elsewhere is ascribed to Jehova, is here without any limitation and in the verie same words applied unto Christ: not onely in regard of the administration of his righteous judgments, but also as he is the searcher of the heart: and therefore must necessarily be taken in one and the same sence. But again he objecteth. That Christ hath received all his knowledge & judg∣ment, yea and himself too, from the Father, as he confesseth, Io. 5. Rev. 5.11. & here v. 27. as I have received from my Father: so that he is not the same God with the Father.
I answer: he deceiveth by an equivocation. For Christ receiveth all things from the father two maner of wayes; Io 1.14. Prov. 8.25 God the sonne hath received his divine essence from the Father by eternal generation, for he is the onely begotten of the Fa∣ther, before the mountaines were setled. So that with his divine essence he received his divine omniscience. But as he is man, he received all his power and glorie in time, by his reall exaltation, so far forth as consisted with the nature and perfection of his manhood: in this latter respect we confesse he is not God: notwithstanding it is false, to affirme that he is not God in the former: for howsoever in this respect he hath received all things from the Father: yet whatsoever is divine, the Sonne hath it by his owne essence, even as the Father: Because the Father hath given to the Sonne, to have life in himself, as the Father hath life in himself. See Damascenus lib. 4. Orth. fid. cap. 19. Thirdly he objecteth that many Prophets and Apostles knew the hearts of men also. Io. 5.26. I answer. Eyther this, or that of Salomon is false, Thou onely knowest the hearts of all men, 1 King. 8.39. God indeed did reveal some things (not al things) unto Elisha, Peter and Paul, but not the knowledge of the hearts. To be short none of them did, or could say, that he was the searcher of the reynes and heart, as Christ here saith; And all the Churches shal know, that I am the searcher of the reynes & hearts. 24. But unto you I say] The fourth part of the narration is an exhortation, and here he turnes aside from the Pastor before commended and reproved, and from the deceivers threatned, and speakes to the rest of the Church in Thyatira, and ex∣horts such as were godly among them, and had not harkened unto the false tea∣chers, to go foreward and continue in the Apostles doctrine. And hence again it appeareth that these Epistles were written not to the officers alone, but to all the Churches. The Vulgar, as also Andreas and Montanus read it without the copu∣lative, but to you the rest, but the other Greeke copies have it, to you, and to the rest, as if he had said, to thee o Pastor and to thy fellow officers and to the res f the Church. But the sence is the same. For the Pastor also was one of those which held not the doctrine of Jezabel: although indeed he was to negligent in repressing of the same. This doctrine] To wit, of Jezabel and the Nicolaitans concerning fornication and communicating with Idolaters. And which have not knowen] This is an Hebrue phrase, and signifies, who have not approved. The depth of Satan] So these deceivers called their blasphemies, as being deep mysteries, and hidden wisedome, and things more excellent then ever the Apostles taught: Now Christ graunteth they were () depths, but such as had their ori∣ginal from Hel and Satan, and therfore ought to be opposed and utterly extir∣pated. I will put upon you none other burthen] The meaning is, however the deceivers doe again bring in and impose upon you the burthen of the ceremonial law, a yoke which neither yee nor the Fathers were able to beare: Act. 15.10 notwithstanding I doe not sub∣ject you unto it: forasmuch I have once freed you from the same; for it is sufficient to salvation, to maintain the doctrine faithfully delivered unto you by the Apo∣stles. Some by burthen understand punishment: as if he should say, this shall be the heaviest of Iudgements, that I will inflict upon you: but if it be taken in this sence, then the words should import a threatning, where as indeed they are a milde ad∣monition: and therfore the first exposition is more agreable to the nature of the words. Hence it appeareth that humane traditions are () a burthen imposed upon the Church not by Christ, but by the instruments of Satan; and here we see what to thinke of the manifold traditions of the Prelates, to wit, that they are burthens not required by Christ, but by the fonne of perdition: wherfore neyther the Church nor any of the faithfull ought to submit to them, nor to hearken unto
the voyce of that Antichristian parasite: affirming that the yoke, which is imposed by the holy sea, Gratianus distin. 19. is to be borne, howsoever it may seem to be intollerable. Ʋntil I come] To wit, bodily descending from heaven in the cloudes to judg∣ment according to our Christian beliefe, confirmed by the scriptures, & confession of the primitive Church. And therfore for men to believe as necessarie to salvation, that Christ being come in the flesh, is present, in or under the sacrament of the Altar, or that his humane nature is in all places, and filleth all things, is a most false doctrine, and a burthen not imposed by Christ our Lord. He which overcommeth, & keepeth] The fift part of the narration, is a promise with the former conclusion, 1. Io. 5.4. he that overcommeth, see v. 7. now the victorie by which we overcom the world, is our faith: and they are conquerours, who keep faith and a good conscience. Io. 5.36. & 10.36. & 14 11. Io. 6.29. My workes] Not miracles, which generally are called the workes of Christ, by which also he proved himself to be God: but that worke of faith required, Joh. 6.29. To beleeve on him, whom God hath sent: as also all other workes of pietie and faithfulnesse according to our place and vocation: hence as the workes of infide∣lity, Io. 8.41. are called the workes of the Devill: so the workes of faith and love, are said to be the workes of Christ, and hee that persevereth herein unto the end, he is that conquerour, to whom the present promise is made by Christ Jesus. Ʋnto the end] To wit, of the warfare or fight: for the full victorie is not ob∣tained, nor the crowne given, before the fight be perfectlie ended. And keepeth] The worde here used in the originall () to keep, Io. 8.57.14.23. & 15.10.20. &c. is often used by Iohn in his Gospel. So that this phrase of speech argueth Iohn the Euangelist to be the writer of the Revelation. To him wil I give power over the nations] A double reward is promised to the conquerour, power over the nations: and the morning starre. Some curiouslie inquire, whither or no, these things are given in this life. But we are to know, that so long as w remaine here, the fight dureth: For no man as yet is a conquerour, neither is the crowne bestowed: we must therfore first persevere in our course unto the end, before we can enioy the promised reward: not as if we were altogether now deprived of it: but because we posses it in hope onely, and not in verie deed. Now we are the Sons of God: 2. Io. 3.2. Rom. 8.34 but it is not manifested what we shall bee: we are saved by hope. Neverthelesse one and the same thing is signifyed by both rewards here mentioned, to wit, that glorie and power, whereof the faithfull shall partake in the heavens with Christ. Power over the nations] He alludes to Psa. 2.8. where God the Father saith unto the Sonne, I wil give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thy possession: thou shalt breake them with a rod of Iron: thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potters vessel. This power which Christ the head hath received frō the Father, he promiseth to communicate unto us his members: And as he hath receyved it for himself, and for us: so he will exercise the same, in his owne, and our name: for the saintes also with Christ shal judge the Angels, and the world, or wicked men, that is, the nations here spoken of. Even as I receyved] This we have expounded, v. 23. and there shewed after what manner Christ receiveth it from the Father, and how it no way derogateth from his divinitie. And I will give him the morning starre] That is, I will trulie communicate my self unto him, and make him conformable unto my glorie, so far as it consisteth with the proportion and measure of a member: for he saith, J wil, that they also whom thou hast given me, bee with me where J am, that they may behold my glorie which thou hast given me, &c. The morning starre] Called in Gr.  that is, the day starre, being the brightest of all the starres, and when it followeth the Sun going downe, is called () the evening starre. Hence Aristotle commending the vertue of Iustice, saith,
. that is, neither the evening, nor the day starre is so glorious. To this starre Christ is compared for his heavenly brightnesse and glorie. 2. Pet. 1.19. & Rev. 22.16. see there the sence of this place. The Argument, parts, and Analysis of Chapter III. THis Chapter containes the three latter Epistles unto the Angels of the Church in Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea: in which again John doth declare in general what he had seen, to wit, the majestie of Christ commanding him to write, what was, eyther good or evil in everie one of them: and what was to come, to wit, what good or evil they were to expect from Christ. The bishop in Sardis he reproveth for his hypocrisie and negligence: yet comforteth some few that were upright in that Church by promises of reward: and stirs up the Pastor himself by threatning to diligence. The teacher in Philadelphia is commended for his care, praeadmonished of his combats with the Jewes, and victorie over them, and also is provoked by promises of reward to perseverance. The Bishop of Laodicea is sharpelie taxed as an hypocrite, being neyther hot nor cold, and however he is by others much esteemed of for his worth and holinesse, yet Christ threatneth to root him out, except he doe repent. The fift Epistle to the Bishop in Sardis. 1. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis, write, these things saith he that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven starres; I know thy workes, that thou hast a name that thon livest, and art dead. 2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remaine, that are readie to dye: for I have not found thy workes perfect before God. 3. Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast and repent: If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a thiefe, and thou shalt not know what hower I will come upon thee. 4. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they shall walke with mee in white: for they are worthy. 5. He that overcommeth, the same shall be cloathed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the booke of life, but I will confesse his name before my father, and before his An∣gels. 6. He that hath an eare let him heare what the spirit saith unto the Churches. THE COMMENTARIE. VNnto the Angel of the Church in Sardis] By the name Angel, as we have formerlie shewed, is noted the Pastor of the Church: and not him onely, but the rest of the officers, yea and the whole Church: for it seemeth they were all alike faulty: according to that of Iesus the Sonne of Sirach: As the judge of the people is him∣selfe, so are his officers, and what manner of man the ruler of the citie is, such are all they that dwel therein. Sirac. 10.2 And therefore whatsoever is a∣misse in the people, is imputed to the negligence of the Pastor; and what is good in them, to his prayse and commendation. Some old writers affirme, that Me∣lito was Bishop in Sardis, of whom Eusebius maketh mention, lib. 4. hist. cap. 26. But neyther the argument of the Epistle, nor time when it was written doth agree hereunto. For Melito is commended for his sanctitie & martyrdome: this teacher is accused of hypocrisie & negligence. Moreover Melito was Bishop of Sardis in the raigne of Antoninus Pius, unto whom Iustine Martyr dedicated his second A∣pologie
in behalf of the Christians. This Anton: raigned more then sixty yeeres after Domitian, in whose time, John (being banished into Patmos) wrote the Revelation. Now it is not probable that Melito should so long continue pastor in Sardis: al∣though in al likelihood Polycarpus all this time was teacher in Smyrna. see cha. 2.8. Therfore howbeit it be uncercaine who he was, not beeing named, yet Christ sharply reprooves him for his hypocrisie and negligence. Hence observe, how vainly the Romish Parasites boast, as if the Pope and his adherents can not erre in matters of faith: seing two onelie of the seven teachers of Asia are commended for their sinceritie in life and doctrine: the rest accused by Christ eyther of foule hy∣pocrisie, Hor: in E∣pist. quid concinua samos, quid Craesi regia Sardis? or of the haeresie of the Nicolaitans. In Sardis] The famous and sometime royal citie of Croesus, seated (as Plinie writeth) on the side of the mountaine Tmolus: of which I have before spoken: but here again repeat it, least some might be mistaken as those who thinke, that the Synod called Sardicensis, held in the eleventh yeare of Constantine, was in this citie. For Sardica was a towne in Illyria, to which place came all the easterne & west∣erne Bishops by the commandement of Constans & Constantius Emperors. But this Epistle was not written to the Angel in Sardica, but in Sardis. It consisteth of a preface, a narration, and a conclusion. The preface by two epi∣thites declareth the majestie of Christ, the author of this epistle, and his care for the Church, he is said to have the seven spirits of God, and the seven starres, to wit in his right hand, as in chap. 2.2. from whence it might seeme that the words, & the seven starres, were taken and here misplaced: but the consent of all copies is to be allo∣wed. By the starres the teachers are signifyed, as chap. 1.20. But in the description of Christ cha. 1.20. there is no mention made of the seven spirits: & therfore some have thought, that they are the seven spirits mentioned cha. 1.4. but seing these spi∣rits are joyned with the seven starres, that is, the Bishops of the Churches, I therfore judge, that these seven spirits are Angels properlie so called, because Christ im∣ployeth them together with the ministers of the Churches for the welfare of them that are heires of salvation: see cha. 1.4. Neyther doth the article () being put before  the seven spirits, contradict this exposition: for in cha. 17.1. the article () is also put before  I wil shew thee the Iudgement () of the whore, of whom notwithstanding there was no mention before: see our exposition on that place. Thus we see, that Christ hath the seven spirits of God in his hand, that is, all the Angels who readilie doe his commandements and judgements, both in defending of the godly and punishing of the wicked, he hath also in his hand, the seven starres, that is, all the ministers & officers of his Church, that so through his grace they may shine like starres, in sinceritie of life and puritie of doctrine before their flockes. For as Christ is the author of the ministry, so hath he given it unto the Church & worketh so powerfully in & by the same, that hereby he both gathereth & preserveth continually a Church among men, according to that of Ioh. 15.6. I have ordained you, that you should goe & bring forth fruit, & that your fruit should re∣maine. Now touching the ordaining & governing of the starres, whither it be ta∣ken properly or improperly, XIX. Arg. of Chr. deity. it is onely the powerful worke of God. And therfore these Epithites doe plainly yeild unto us a nynteenth argument to prove the deity and omnipotencie of Christ our Lord. J know thy workes] The first part of the narration is a reproofe of the secret hy∣pocrisie in the heart & life of this teacher. Thy works, that is, I see al the indeavours & cariage both of thy private life & publick ministry: I know thy hidden hypocri∣sie: for so he explaineth it: thou hast a name that thou livest, & art dead, that is, thou art generally reputed to be a faithful & godly teacher; but thou art an hypocrite as beeing destitute of faith and true holines, & so dead, that is, as a painted sepulchre before the Lord guiltie of death, although thou seemest to be alive & holy before men. Hence we learne three remarkeable pointes. The first is an evident argument of Christs divinitie. For if Christ so knowes
all our workes, as that he discerneth betwixt true godlines, and hypocrisie the dead and living members of the Church, true pastors and hypocrites: then cer∣tainly he tryeth the heart of man, which is onely proper to God, and is not com∣municable to any creature, no not unto the Angels. Which further confirmeth the X. and XVIII. argument before mentioned. Secondly we are taught, that all who professe the truth, and make a shew of holines, are not truely faithful and regenerate persons, but many of them are hy∣pocrites and deceivers, as being farre otherwise then they are accounted of for hy∣pocrisie is an outward shew of inward holinesse: or a profession of faith with the mouth, beeing in the mean time destitute thereof in the heart. And hence we may conclude that a bare profession argues not true faith, as the patrones of hypo∣crites affirme, whereby they oftentimes delude themselves & others. Act. 8.13. Simon Magus is said to beleeve. Therfore, (say they) some who professe & have true faith may fall away and perish. But this place shewes us, that many are inwardly dead, who outwardly seem to be alive: being with Ananias the hie Priest, whyted walls, Act 23.3. Matt. 23.27. Mat. 8.22 1 Tim. 5.6 with the Pharises painted sepulchres, & spiritually dead, as Christ spake to the yong man: let the dead, burie the dead. And Paul speaketh of some wanton widowes, who are dead while they live: yea all men considered in their natural condition are dead in trespasses and sinnes. To be short, many have faith without love, which is dead, a faith which the Devils also have. Thus we se in scripture how they are said not onely to be dead, who are deprived of naturall life, but also not beeing regene∣rated to a spirituall: or who are sincere in appearance onely, and not in truth. Let us therfore take notice that all are not godly, who seem so to be: neyther shall all they, who say Lord, Lord, enter into the kingdome of God: for the Church consisteth of a mixture of saintes, and hypocrites: and this difference is not onely in the laitie, but chiefly in the Clergie, as they call it: that is, many who in sheeps cloathing, seem to be true Pastors & teachers, are in truth but mercenarie wolves: and howsoever these may deceive men, yet Christ knowes them: And therfore let not the Bishops of Antichrist thinke to blinde the eyes of Christ, with their titles, mitres, and royal robes. The consideration of this informeth us in the first place, of the divers condi∣tion of the Church in this world. For many are called to be members of the Church whereof some are good, others bad, some saintes, others hypocrites: like as the net takes in al manner of fishes. But howsoever the faintes elected, are not knowen of men, yet God & Christ doe discerne them. For the Lord knoweth who are his. Therefore let every one try and examine himself whether he be dead or alive: for hypocrites deceive not God, but man & their owne soules. Wherfore let us shun hypocrisie even as a pest, re∣membring what Ambrose admonisheth, not to rest contented with a bare name, & in the mean while to be greevously guilty: or with the hight of honour while we abound in sins: or with a profession of Godlinesse, while our actions are devilish. For otherwise we should onely have a name to live, when in deed we are but dead. Lastly observe, that the efficacie of the ministry doth not depend upon the goodnes of the minister. For God doth sometime vivifie and governe his Church by dead officers, as we have here an example: which serves to confute the Donalists and Popish Sophisters: who maintaine, that there was not any Church of the elect, untill the time of Luther in the Papacie but themselves, except we wil acknowledge their Bishops (for other there were none) to have been ap∣proved of by the Lord. 2. Bee watchfull] The second part of the narration is an exhortation, admoni∣shing the Angel in Sardis of divers things, to the end he might purge himself from the crime of hypocrisie: and withal he is threatned to be punished except he doe repent. First he is commanded to shake of that hypocritical drowsines into which he was fallen. Be watchful, that is stirre thy self up: for he is not onely required
to be more faithfull and careful over the Church, then formerly he had been: but also called upon, as it were, to live againe: for so faith Christ, but thou art dead. Now death in scripture is frequently compared to a sleep: so that this place, and that of the Apostle (speaking unto men fallen into a deep sleep of sin,) is of the like inter∣pretation: Ephe. 14 A wake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Not as if wee could of our selves arise from the death of sin: (for this is a worke of Grace) but because the Lord by his precept powerfully worketh in us, that which he requireth of us: and by the operation of his owne spirit rayseth us up, beeing asleep in sin, unto newnes of life. And strengthen the things] Or rather strengthen the rest, that is, such dying mem∣bers of the Church, as are committed unto thy charge, who because of thy negli∣gence decay both in faith and holinesse. For it is no wonder, that a Church should fal into a deadnesse and securitie, while the officers therof are asleep: Christ ther∣fore commndeth him to strengthen them that is, to labour by a holie life and do∣ctrine, to bring them againe into the way of life. That are ready to dy] in Gre.  that shall dy, that is, which are near unto death: like as in Luk. 7.2. it is said of the centurions servant,  he should dy, that is, was ready to dy. So these here were near unto death, though not altogither dead, and therfore the Pastor is exhorted carefully and speedily to put to his helping hand for their recoverie: This care the Apostle recommendeth unto all the faithful: Rom. 14.2. namely, to receive them that are weake in the faith: And therfore it is a speciall dutie of the ministers of God, who are spirituall physitians, to applie to Christs weaklings the holesome medicines of Gods word: 1 Tim. 2.9. for otherwise, God saith unto them by the prophet, forasmuch as ye have not strengthened the dis∣eased, Ezec. 34.4 nor healed that which was sick, nor bound up that which was broken, nor sought that which was lost, &c. Behold I am against the shepheards, and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding my flock. Montanus reads it,  which thou art ready to lose, that is, destroy by thy negligence; which is a more heavie expression. For I have not found thy workes perfect] These words containe a reason wherfore God requires him to be watchfull. But it may seem, that this reproofe is not equal & just, 1 Cor. 13.9 considering that no mans workes on earth are perfect before God, if he should enter into Iudgment with us: for, we know but in part, we prophesie in part: and there is not a just man on earth that doth good, Eccle. 7.20 and sinneth not. I answer: Christ speakes not here of the common infirmities of the saintes: but accuseth this Bishop for his notable hypocrisie, and condemnes him not, for not beeing fully and abso∣lutely perfect: but because he found him not upright in his wayes before him: for he was onelie an eye servant, outwardly shewing a Zeal to pietie, and in the mean∣while secretlie a selfe-seeker and one who fulfilled his owne lust, not at all ca∣ring what became of his flock. Now forasmuch as Christ knew this his close and wicked deceit, it proves againe that he searcheth the heart, & so is true God: se ar∣guments X and XVIII. Before God] Montanus, Arethas, and the old version read it, before my God, hence some hereticks thus reason. If Christ have a God, then he is not God himself. I answer, all other copies read it , before God, and it seemeth that these by some oversight here added,  (my) taking it from v. 12. But be it gran∣ted, Io. 20.17. that the text should so be read, yet it helpes them not: for Christ, as he is man, hath a God. I ascend to my God, and to your God; now howsoever in this respect, he is not God: yet as he is the Sonne, he is true God and life eternal, and coessential with the Father. But here we se, how manie things approved of by men, are indeed verie vile before God, who sees all things with eyes of flaming fire. Blessed ther∣fore is he, Rom. 2.29 who approveth himself sincere, not before men onely, but especiallie before the Lord. Remember therfore how thou hast received] How, that is, what. In the third place he is exhorted to be mindful of the faith delivered and committed to him by the
Apostles, to preserve the puritie therof in the Church, and leave it incorrupt to po∣steritie. For it seemeth that this Bishop was unmindful of the trust committed unto him, and named aside from the holie doctrine and way of the Lord. But all our Bishops forsooth and especiallie the Romish, are altogether infallible, yea in∣corrigible, because unto them alone, and not to any other, belongeth that promise: The spirit shall lead you into all truth. Here we are taught, that the onely way to redresse the corruptions both of life and doctrine, is to have recourse to the rule of Gods word, and to set it alwayes before our eyes. Thus Paul reproving the Corrinthians for their abuse about the Lords supper, 1. Cor. 11.23. cals them back to the first institution therof. Cyprian writing to Pompie against the Epistle of Stephen Bishop of Rome, illustrates the matter by an excellent simili∣tude: If, saith he, the conduites which before did plentifullie afforde water to the citie should suddenly be stopt, would they not go to the fountaine, there to take notice of the de∣fect, whither the fountaine were dried up, or the conduites stopped, or the water drawen some other way? that so the conduit pipes being mended, the citie may enioy the former benefit of the water. Even so it becommeth Gods ministers, when the truth of God in any thing hath been changed, & men have been unconstant therin, to returne to the first original and Apostolical tradition, that the reason of our actions may flow from whence they had their first spring and original. And repent] The last and chiefest thing required in him, is repentance, that is, to forsake his hypocrisie, and sincerely to performe the dutie of his place. For then indeed we repent, when leaving our evil wayes, we order our steps aright, and seriously turne, to the Lord: the which I confesse, is not in our owne power to doe: but God gratiously effecteth the thing which he commandeth in whom∣soever he pleaseth. Howbeit they are inexcusable, in whom he worketh it not, because they willingly disobey the commandement. But it may be objected, they cannot doe it of themselves. It is true indeed, but from whence doth this arise? for have they not of their owne accord brought this inabilitie uppon themselves, and also by a voluntarie obstinacie augmented it, wherby they have made themselves inexcusable, and self guiltie before God? If therfore thou shalt not watch] That he might be the more awakened, Christ adds to the exhortation a sharpe commination, threatning him except he be watchfull to come on him as a thiefe, that is, suddenlie and unawares, to take vengeance on him for his hypocrisie by some horrible Iudgment. On thee] , upon thee, or to thee, not in a good sence, as that saying, thy king coeth to thee, to wit, for thy good: but in an evil sence, that is, to thy destruction: and therfore Beza more significantly renders it: Against thee. Thus Christ also speakes of himself, Mat. 24.43. and Reve. 16.15. Behold J come as a thiefe, blessed is he that watcheth &c. so Paul 1 Thes. 25. which comparison as it is not dishono∣rable unto Christ in using it: so doth it no way countenance or alow thievish courses: for the similitude respects not the evil practice of theeves, but their sud∣den breaking and entring in upon men, while they sleep securely; Math. 24.43. and thus the Lord himself expoundeth it: but know this, that if the good man of the house &c. so here, And thou shalt not know what houre J wil come upon thee, to wit, to inflict pu∣nishment on thee for thy securitie. Ribera understands it of death, when thou least thinkest of it, thou shalt dy, and be called to judgment. The use Christ shewes in the place before cited: Therfore be ye also ready: for in such an houre as you thinke not, the Son of man commeth. 4. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis] The third part of the narration, is a commendation of some that were faithful in this Church. For howbeit through the negligence of the Pastor most of them were dead, or ready to dy, yet the Lord stil reserved some unto himself who were upright, according as he is accusto∣med to doe even in such Churches, as are most corrupt. For example when the ten tribes were fallen away, and had publickly set up the idolatrous worship of
their Calves, and Baal, and withall so oppressed the godlie, as that Elias verelie thought that al the Lords prophets except himself had been slaine by the sword: yet even then God had left unto himself, seven thousand, who had not bowed the knee to Baal. 1 King. 19 18. Rom. 11.4. In Pauls time the whole nation of the Iewes seemed to be rejected, and destitute of the grace of Christ: yet at that present time there was a remnant, according to the election of Grace, as the Apostle sheweth: The like may be said touching the papacie, for though in many ages togither, both the grace of Christ, and his true Church hath been as it were trampled under foot, and the same overspread with horrible idolatrie in all kinds: yet as the histories of the martyrs doe witnesse, the Lord had some few names among them continually, who resisted the publick abuses of the times even unto blood. Moreover as this commendation was comfortable to the Godly, so it did tend to the great shame of the Pastor: Therfore least the faithful should have thought that Christ also was wroth with them, they are by name (to the others disgrace) much commended for their constancie. Now what is more dishonorable then that the disciples should in doctrine excel their teacher, and the sheep the Pastor in sinceritie of life? Names] That is persons, as Act. 1.15. there were a hundred and twentie names. So Reve. 11.13. there were slaine 7000 names. A few] For manie are called, but few are chosen, almost in everie congrega∣tion. We ought not therefore to be offended at the paucitie of the faithfull, and the multitude of the ungodly. The Papists indeed glory in their multitude, and write volumes in praise of the largenes of the Romish Church, upbraiding us be∣cause of our fewnesse: but here we see how in Sardis there were many hypocrites, a few names onely who were not defiled. Here againe we have a cleare proofe of Christ divinitie, in that he is said to know these few names in Sardis, the truth is, he knowes all the faithful, and discer∣neth them from hypocrites, 2. Tim. 2.19. which is a worke onely proper to God: for the Lord knoweth who are his. see arguments X. and XVIII. Who have not defiled their garments] Their constant sinceritie is set forth by this Metaphor: and by Garments is meant thus much: as their bodies were not pol∣luted with the filthie manner and lusts of the Nicolaitans, so neither were their soules stained with their impious doctrine. Alike Metaphor the Apostle useth, 1. Thessa. 4.4. That every one should know, how to posses his vessel, that is, his soule and bodie, in sanctification and in honour; not in the lust of concupiscence, for this is the will of God, He. 12.14. even your sanctification: and without this no man shall see him. Now Christ ac∣knowledged them holy and undefiled, not as if they were altogither unrepro∣vable, but because they persevered in faith and holinesse of life, not withstan∣ding the neglect of the Pastor, and the manifold evil examples round about them. And they shall walke with mee] As hypocrites are threatned with punishment, so the Godly are incouraged with promises of reward. In white] What may this bee? by this Metaphor is signified a heavenlie triumph, a kingdome, and glorie to come. It is taken from the state of kings, & the great honour given unto mightie conquerours. With such royal apparell, Herod was cloathed when he sate on his throne, Act. 12.21 and God smote him dead for his pride. So in scorne they clothed Christ the king of Glorie: Lu. 23.11 It also was ancientlie a custome to cloath the Conquerours with a white garment. To be short white garments for their brightnesse, were signes of Glorie: here then, Metaphorically the glorie of the saintes is promised; Thus it is said, v. 5. He that overcommeth the same shal be cloathed in white raiment. & Rev. 7.11. White robes are given unto the elect, standing before the throne, and chap. 19.14. the armies of Christ are cloathed in fine linnen white and cleane: But it may be said; seeing their garments were now already pure & undefiled, 2. Cor. 5.2. therefore they needed not to be cloathed in white: To this the Apostle answereth: we groane earnestly, desiring to be cloathed, that we be not found naked. For the
puritie and righteousnesse of the saintes on earth can not abide the judgment of God: & therefore they must be cloathed with the perfect robes of absolute inno∣cencie, ere they can stand before his majestie. With me] They shal be partakers of my glorie. If the raiment of Christ, Mat. 17.2. on the mount, was white as the light: how much more doth he now shine beeing exalted: Yet so wil he cloath the saintes: for they shall shine as the sunne, according to that proportion which is betwixt the head and the members. And hence  with me, may also be translated, after me as if he should say, ye shal be cloathed in white, next unto mee. And they shal walke] Beza translates it, and therfore they shal walke, which in∣deed expresseth the sence: but not the words of the text. For they are worthie] To wit, to walke with me in white: the argument is taken from the equitie of it. Thus doe the messengers of the Centurion beseech Christ to heal his servant, because he was worthie. Luk. 7.3. But this seemeth to establish the do∣ctrine of merits: for dignitie comes by vertue. For if we shall walke in white be∣cause of our worthinesse, then we deserve the same for our workes sake. I answer the assumption is false: for the scripture no where saith, because of our worthines, or workes: but when soever it mentioneth the judgement of God, we are said to receive,  according to workes, but not  because of workes, least we should conceive any opinion of meriting by them: which Christ expresly denieth, Luk. 17. v. 10. When ye have done all those things which are com∣manded you, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our dutie to doe. We therfore shal walke in white, not because of our worthinesse, but accor∣ding to it: for the particle () for, doth not signifie any cause of merit, but a qua∣litie agreeing with the justice of God, that is, shewing not why, but who they are that shall walke with Christ according to that in Mat. 5.3. blessed are the poore in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdome of heaven, &c. as if he had said: because unto such, the kingdome of heaven is freely promised. But againe though the assumption were granted: yet would not the proposition be universally true. For dignitie in its kinde doth not alwayes proceed from vertue, but somtimes from dutie without vertue. So Nero had honour, and was worthie of honour in regard of dutie, but not in regard of any vertue in him. So in particular our worthinesse before God, is not because of the worthinesse of our workes, but of grace, by which he maketh us worthy, by calling, justifying and glorifying of us. As the Apostle plainly teacheth us, 2. Thess. 1.5. where, after he had said, that the tribulations of the Godly, were a manifest token of the righteous judge∣ment of God, that they might be counted worthy of the kingdome of God: (least this should be misaplyed to a worthynesse of merit) he prayeth v. 11. that God would count them worthy of this calling. As none therfore deserve or are worthy to be called of God: so neyther doth our worthinesse prove any thing for the doctrine of merit. If they object from chap. 16.6. For they are worthy; that as there the deserved cause of punishment is of themselves: so here the meritorious cause of reward. The con∣sequence wil not follow from the rule of contraries: for the comparisons are not a∣like. Because in order of justice al evil workes whatsoever deserve punishment: for the soule that sinneth shall dy. But good workes how great-soever, beeing debts & duties, can-not merit at the hands of God. 5. He that overcommeth the same shall be cloathed] Gr.  he, but the old translator reads it  so, shall he be cloathed. The conclusion containes a promise, with an Epiphonema as formerly. The promise is extended, not onely to those few in Sardis spoken of, but to all who overcome the world, Satan &c. se chap. 2. v. 7.11.12.26. Thus by a three∣fold promise all are stirred up to hope for victorie: the two former are metapho∣rically propounded: the third properlie: yet all seem to signifie one thing: for what can be given to them that overcome more, then the crowne of life eternal? how∣ever in the reward promised we may note a certain gradation.
First, He shall be cloathed with white raiments] This, by a metaphor, signifies the heavenly glorie with which we shall be cloathed, as with a royal garment. What more? I wil not blot out his name out of the booke of life] This further notes the eternitie of glorie: for not to have our names blotted out of the booke of life, is to have them all∣wayes remaine therein: that is, to enioy eternal glorie. What more? I wil confesse his name] A further degree, promising to make knowen the con∣stancie and faith of every one by name, even before the throne of the blessed tri∣nitie, and in the presence of the holy Angels. A glorie indeed surpassing mans op∣prehension: For what is more honourable then when a general doth by name be∣fore the whole armie, declare the valiant exploites of this or that souldiour? But this Christ promiseth here to doe: and in Mat. 10.32. Whosoever therfore shall con∣fesse me before men, him will I confesse also before my father which is in heaven: but who∣soever shall denie me before men, him will I also denie before my father which is in hea∣ven. And before his Angels.] As beeing the most holie ministers of God, and wit∣nesses of our glorie. Hence we note, first, that the saintes are said to have a two fould cloathing; for as we heard before, some in Sardis were commended for not defiling of their gar∣ments: and yet promised besides to have other white garments given unto them: the former are said to be ours, not as proceeding from our selves, but because we are enioyned to have them, meaning, both morall endowments of bodie and mind: as also the grace of faith and love, and other spiritual gifts: which we must have and preserve cleane and undefiled, 2. Cor. 5.3. that so we may be cloathed hereafter in white. According to that of the Apostle: If so be that being cloathed we shall not be found naked. For no man shall be cloathed in white in the heavens, who hath not been indued with faith and true repentance in this life. Secondlie, we are to take notice, that in scripture, God is said metaphorically to have a threefold booke. The first is the booke of his providence, which is the knowledge and counsel of God concerning the actions and events of all things first and last, of this the prophet speaketh Psa. 139.6.16. &c. all things are written in thy booke. The other, is the booke of Gods universal judgment, which is his know∣ledge concerning all those things which everie one hath don whither it be good or evil, and to be judged accordingly in the last day: as in cha. 20.12. and the bookes were opened. The third, is the booke of life, that is, Gods praedestinating both of the elect and reprobates: Ps. 69.29. Isai. 4.5. Dan. 12.2. Phili. 4.3. Reve. 18.8 & 17.8. & 22.19. the first are said to be written in this booke, the other not, but blotted out: of this the scripture speakes in many places: yet that in Rev. 20.12. then the bookes were opened, may be understood of them all: for in the same verse, the booke of life is expresly mentioned: Thus God is said to have bookes me∣taphoricallie. Not as if eyther he hath, or stood in need thereof: for so it cannot bee, but by an Anthropopatheia he speaketh to our capasitie: For God doth all things without such help or meanes, even by his eternal foreknowledge, counsel, government and judgment. But thus men cannot doe, for whatsoever is don in their counsels, cities, families, contracts &c. for memory sake is set down in writing, that so as there is occasion, they may looke it over and call to mind such things, as they desire. Now concerning the elect, Luk. 10.20. two things here are spoken of them: First, that their names are written in the booke of life. Phil. 4.3. or in heaven: as Luk. 10.20. by which manner of speech we are taught, that true beleevers doe not obtaine sal∣vation by chance, but were elected of God to life in Christ before the founda∣tions of the world: and known from them that perish. Secondly, their names are never blotted out of this booke, as it is here testified, J will not blot out his name out of the booke of life. By which phrase is signifyed, that the salvation of the Elect is certaine and sure, and that they shall never perish: according to the promise: no man shall plucke my sheep of my hand. It is impossible the elect should be seduced. All
which serves, not for curiositie, but for our comfort, that we being certaine of our salvation, might joyfullie persevere in weldoeing unto the end. Of infidels and reprobates two things are also spoken: First that their names are not written in the booke of life: as appeares, Rev. 13.8. Rev. 13.8 & 17.8. & 20.15. Secondly: they are blotted out of the booke of life, Ps. 69.28. and cast into the lake of fire: Let them be blotted out of the booke of the living, and not be written with the righteous. And, whosoever was not found written in the booke of life, was cast into the lake of fire, by which is signified, that they who are not predestinated shall certainlie perish. But this seems to imply a contradiction, as not to be written, & yet to be blot∣ted out. I answer: that this is taken in a double sence. 1: Eyther of such who in the Eternal counsell of God are thus written, and so are never blotted out. Or, 2: according to the appearance, and boasting of hypocrites: For thus they are said to be blotted out: that is, declared never to have been written therein: we see there are many hypocrites in the Church, who are taken for a while to be the elect of God, whereas in truth they are not. Therfore when their hypocrisie is discovered, and they justlie cast out of the church, then they are said to be blotted out: As Ambrose & Augustine have wel observed. Matt. 24.24. Io. 10.28. Not withstanding it fol∣loweth not, that any of the Elect shalbe blotted out, For this is contrarie to that promise of God. It is impossible the Elect should perish, none shall plucke my sheep out of my hand. This argument concerning our perseverance is full of comfort: for all the faithfull, being elected, are written in the booke of life, and shall never be blotted out. Whosoever therefore can now assure himself to be a beleever, ought cer∣tainly now to beleeve, that he is the chosen of God, and that he shall assuredlie persevere in his faith, feare and service for evermore: yet not by his owne strength (for that were presumption and repugnant unto faith) but by the power of God, who keepeth the elect through faith unto salvation, 1. Pet. 1.5. ready to be revealed in the last time. 6. He which hath an care] This needs no new explication, but practise. See chap. 2. v. 7.11.17. The VI Epistle to the Angel in Philadelphia. 7. And to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, write, These things saith hee that is holy he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth, and shutteth and no man openeth: 8. I know thy workes, behold, I have set before thee an open doore, and no man can shut it: for thou hast, a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denyed my name. 9. Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Iewes and are not, but doe lie: behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee, 10. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the houre of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwel upon the earth. 11. Behold, I come quickly, hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crowne. 12. Him that overcommeth, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and hee shall goe no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the citie of my God, which is new Ierusalem, which commeth downe out of heaven from God: and I will write upon him my new name. 13. He that hath an eare, let him heare what the spirit saith into the Churches.
THE COMMENTARIE. VNto the Angel in Philadelphia] There were divers tities of this name. Lib. 12. But this was in Asia, and as Strabo writeth much inci∣dent to earthquakes: this Church was purer then the rest, for whereas all the others (Smyrna onelie excepted) were sharpelie reproved by Christ: this Church with her teacher is singularly commended: not but that they had their faylings (for there is no Church in this life without spot or wrinkle) but because their sinceritie and faith was such, as it covered all their infirmities, God beeing plea∣sed to take no knowledge thereof. Now Christ commends the faith & constancie of this Bishop above the rest, foretels his combats with the Iewes, and promiseth to assist him in the persecu∣tion now at hand; Lib. 3. hist. cap. 37. moreover he exhorts him to be constant to the end. Some thinke he was Quadratus a disciple of the Apostles, of whom Eusebius makes men∣tion: but more of this in its place. Among the Epistles which are attributed to Ignatius, the sixt was written to these Philadelphians, in which he exhorts them to keep the unitie of the faith, and flie heresies: but in it, the Eminencie and Primacie of Bishops is too hyperboli∣cally extolled. Ignatius his Epistle to the Phila∣delphians. Yee Princes, (saith he) be subject to Caesar, ye souldiours to the princes, but let priests and deacons with the whole clergie and people, souldiours and princes, yea and Caesar also, obey the Bishop, and let the Bishop be obedient to Christ, as Christ is to the Fa∣ther. But it is apparent, at that time the souldiours, with all the princes, yea & Cae∣sar too, were so far from embracing the faith, as that on the contrarie, they cruellie persecuted both Bishops & all other Christians. Notwithstanding there is in that epistle a sentence verie observable, & carries a note of true antiquitie: I have heard saith he, Some say, if J finde not the Gospel in the ancient, J will not beleeve: but to such, J say, to me Christ is antiquitie: and whosoever obeys him not, it wil bee their certain and irrecoverable destruction. A fitt sentence to be applied against the Papist, who enquire after the antiquitie of our doctrine: but this by the way. The parts of the Epistle are three: The inscription, narration and conclu∣sion. These things saith he that is holy, he that is true] In the preface the person of Christ is gloriously described by fower Epithites. First hee is called holy, 1 Cor. 2.30 both because hee is in himself holie, and is made to us of God Sanctification: besides hee loveth holinesse, and can not abide impu∣ritie. 2. Is true, that is, constant in keeping his word, and performing his promises and threatnings, loveth truth in us, and detesteth all falshood, whither in life or doctrine: yea none shall escape unpunished that takes ought from his promises, or threatning. Here we have the twentieth argument of Christs deitie. XX Argu. of Chr. deity. Isay. 6.3. For none absolutely, save God alone, is in scripture called the holy and faithfull one. Thus the Seraphims cryed one to another: Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hostes. And who is true, or truth besides the Lord? The Lord is righteous in all his wayes and holy in all his workes. In Dan. 9.24. Ps. 145.17 he is called the most holy, and it seemeth that these two Epithites of Christ were thence taken. Christ saith of himself: J am the way the truth and the life. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Io. 5.20. This is the true God, and eternall life: So here, these things saith he that is holy, he that is true. Thus we see, the divine majestie of Christ fully declared. Here also let us note the detestable boldnesse of the Pope of Rome, who wil be called the most holy Father, yea holinesse it self: Is not this to lift himself up above Christ? doth he not herein manifest himself to bee the great Antichrist. Christ indeed is absolutelie called the holy one: but the Pope calleth himself,
the most holy one and that absolutely: Thus he proudly exalteth himself above Christ, which is proper to Antichrist. The like we noted from the title of Christs priesthood Heb. 4.14. where hee is twise called a great hie Priest. But the Pope arrogates to himself a higher title, viz. the greatest hie priest: wherein againe he lifteth himself up above Christ: and plainelie shewes that he is not his vicar, but rather the successor of the Archpriest of the Pagans, whom the Romans called Archflamins. But perhaps it will bee objected: That the Pope is called the greatest hie Priest: not in respect of Christ, but of other inferior hie priests: and beeing the supreme and universall bishop. But this unlooseth not the knot. For in what respect soever he calleth him∣self the greatest hie priest, it is evident that herein hee maketh himself greater then Christ, who is onely called the great hie priest: This therefore confirmes what we said before, that he was not Christs suc∣cessor, but the Pagans priest: neyther will the pretence of other hie priests any whit helpe or credit them: for eyther they are not great hie priests, in respect of whome the Pope must bee said to be the greatest: or if they are, then they make themselves equal with Christ, by assuming his proper title, and so are as sacrilegious in this, as the Pope is in the other. To bee short the Pope in naming himselfe the highest priest, universall bi∣shop, prince of priests, &c. doth manifestly transgresse against their own Cannons dist. 100. cap. Let not the Bishop of the chiefe citie be called the prince, or chiefest of priests, or by any name tending this way, but onely the Bishop of the first seat: againe: Let none of the Patriarcks use the name of universalitie: because if any one of the Patriarks be called universall, how can there bee any more? And the Rubricke hath it: Let not the Bishop of Rome be called universall. By this therefore he shewes himself to be Antichrist indeed: for as Pope Gregorie wit∣nesseth: Whosoever calleth or desireth to be called the universall Bishop: is in this his ambition a forerunner of Antichrist: in that hee proudly preferreth himself before the rest. Neither doth that helpe them which some vainly pretende, that the Pope takes not away the name or jurisdiction from other Bishops: for eyther he makes himself alone universal, or els it must necessarilie follow, that every Church hath two at one time. But how ever it be, yet that of Gregorie is no way answered, but he is certainlie Antichrist, who assumeth a superioritie over his fellow mini∣sters. But let us returne to the titles of Christ. Who hath the key of David] This is the third Epithite. The Kings Bible hath it,  for, . The Greeke Scoliast observes that some co∣pies in steed of the key of David, read, the key of hell, according to that in Chap. 1.18. I have the key of hell and of death: which though it well agrees with that which followes: yet our reading is approved by most copies. Beza supposeth, that it might be read, the key of the howse of David, as alluding to Jsay. 22.22. where the Lord promising to make Eliakim treasurer in steed of Shebna saith, the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall shut, and none shall open. The house of David, is the Church: the key is a signe of aeconomical power. Now Christ hath this key, that is, absolute power over the Church as Lord, and head thereof: and hath committed the ministeriall power of the keyes, to the Apostles, and their successors, which consisteth in opening and shut∣ting the kingdome of heaven by preaching of the Gospel and administration of Church discipline. Who openeth and no man shutteth] This notes a further degree of power, for he alone holdeth the key by his sole and absolute authoritie, Matt. 28.18. and so whatsoever he doth herein, he cannot be resisted: according to that in the Gospel all power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
But this seems to be a paradoxe, he openeth, and no man shutteth: how can this bee? the words seem to be taken from the place before cited. The meaning is, he onely hath right to open and to shut: but how is that? Some understand it of the sence of the scripture, which to us is as a booke shut, unlesse Christ by his spirit open our harts and understanding. This is true indeed in regard of one part of the sentence, but to the other it answereth not: for howbeit Christ openeth the mea∣ning thereof, by enlightening of us: yet hee shuts them not, unlesse it be by acci∣dent, that is, when he darkens such more and more who are alreadie blind in the things of God. But I questiō whither such an exposition appertaines to this place: For I rather thinke, it is spoken of Christs opening the dore of his Church, and of grace, and so consequentlie of heaven it self. And thus in the following verses he is said to open the dore of the church in Philadelphia: and the like he doth in all other places, when he calleth whomsoever he pleaseth, and draweth them by his spirit: for none enter in at this dore, but such unto whom Christ openeth the same. And no man shutteth] For none can pluck Christs sheep out of his hands; the gates of hel cannot shut this doore beeing once opened by him, neyther can any adversarie power hinder them from entring into the same. The which matter in∣deed is of singular comfort for his Church: for let Satan attempt what hee can, neverthelesse to whomsoever Christ openeth the doore, to them it shall still re∣maine open and his sheep shal have their egresse and regresse, and finde sweet pasture for their soules: hence we see that the condition of the elect is safe and unchangeable. He shutteth and no man openeth] As he openeth and no man shutteth, so again on the contrarie, he by his mightie power shutteth, and no man is able to open. For whosoever is not elected, called, and drawen by Christ, can never enter: for he is the doore, the way and life, Io. 10: which again proveth the Godhead of Christ: for to whom can these things be applied, XXI Argu. of Chr. deitie. except to God alone? some object, that this also was said of Eliakim Isay. 22. I answer, it was spoken of him typicallie, and in respect of his ministerial power, as being a legal hie priest: but of Christ in regard of his kinglie, divine, and proper power, as being an eternall high-priest. The Pope of Roome to establish his tyrannie, doth most impudently assume this power, which onely is proper to Christ: now Christ indeed gave power to Peter of binding and loosing, of opening and shutting, but it was by the key of the gospel, and not to him alone, but unto all the Apostles, and Pastors of the Churches. For as he said to Peter, Matt. 16.19. Matt. 18.18. whatsoever thou shalt binde &c. So he said unto the rest, whatsoever yee shal binde on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Wheras the Pope alone wil open and shut all things as he pleaseth, yet not by the key and power of the gospel, but by the a∣dulterate key of his owne Antichristian tyranny. 8. I know thy workes, I have set before thee] The first part of the following nar∣ration, is a commendation of the Pastor and Church of Philadelphia, for holding fast the sinceritie of the doctrine receyved against the haerisies of the time: and remaining faithfull in their fierie trials. This he commendeth first generallie: I know thy workes: which is not to be taken indifferentlie, as chap. 2. v. 2. or in the evil part, as it is spoken of those in Sardis & Laodicea: but in a good sence: as if hee had said, I approve thy workes. And this he doth to stirre them up to a cheerfull going foreward in wel dooing: for the prayse of vertue increaseth it: and honour provokes men to vertuous enterprises. Ovid. li. 4. de pont. As the Poet speaketh. Secondly in special: because he had kept his word and not denyed his name. Thus as in the first he is com∣mended for his sinceritie in doctrine: so in the latter for his constant profession of the same before the adversarie. These two things are required of all Christians, but Especiallie of Gods ministers: namely, to keep the faith of Christ entire, and not to corrupt the same by humane inventions: and 2. not to forsake the profes∣sion thereof in any estate or condition. Ro. 10.10. For with the hart man beleeveth unto righ∣teousnesse: and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
But least this holie teacher should be lifted up, to thinke he did these things by his owne strengeth: Christ therfore ascribes both the first constitution of this Church, as also the constancie of Pastor and people therin, to his grace alone: behold I have set before thee an open doore; that is, It is not by thy own power, that the con∣gregation over which thou art, embraceth the truth taught by thee, or that thou thy self standest fast in the faith, against all the threats of the adversaries, who dayly labour to shut this open doore: for thou hast little strength, that is little, or no outward help and assistance: but it is I who have set an open doore before thee: It is I who have opened it by my own power, and hence the enemies nei∣ther have, nor ever shall be able to shut the same. Thus we se, that which before was indefinitely spoken of Christs shutting and opening: is here in perticular ap∣plyed to the Philadelphians: J have set before thee an open doore. I am not ignorant how these words, for thou hast a little strength, may be taken in another sence: And some indeed doe expound them adversitivelie, as if they de∣served the greater commendation, for their constancie in their affliction, seing they had but a little strength, that is destitute of humane protection. But then the causal  (for) should bee a reason of the latter, that is, wherfore he had kept the word: which is repugnant to the scope of the commendation: for it is manifestly a reason of the former: namely wherfore Christ had opened a doore unto him, which no man should bee able to shut. Others again understand it as spoken for his comfort: as if Christ had said, I have gathered unto my self a Church in this citie in the midst of many adver∣saries, over which I have appointed thee a Pastor, and howsoever thou hast but a little strength to resist them, notwithstanding I will so protect both thee and thy congregation, as that no man shall bee able to shut, that is, to subvert the same, or expell the faithfull out of this place. Which interpretation I confesse containes much excellent comfort, both for the Pastor and people: but considering that the Epistle as yet treates not of consolations, I therfore allow rather the first expo∣sition. Now touching this manner of speech: An open doore, by a Metaphor is signified an occasion offered of wel dooing; that is, an opportunitie of preaching and pro∣pagating the Gospel: for as a man goes into the house, the doore being opened: even so when the Lord gives passage to the Gospel, Churches are planted & pro∣pagated: according to that of the Apostle, When I came to Troas to preach the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2, 12 a doore was opened to mee of the Lord: and 1. Cor. 16.12. a great door and effectuall is opened to me &c. Hence chiefly we are taught two things. First, this again proves the divinitie of Christ: for whereas he both knoweth the workes of the faithful, and openeth a doore to his Church, as also restraines the power of the adversaries, that notwithstanding all their malice and rage, yet can they not shut the same: it clearelie shewes that he is God onely wise and om∣nipotent. And therfore as Christ our Lord by his mightie workes, XXII Arg. of Chr. deity. proved against the blasphemous Jewes, that he was God, Joh. 10.38. so are we bound from his powrful gathering and preserving of this Church to beleeve the same. The cavill of some hereticks is of no waight: who pretend that Christ doth these workes by a power communicated unto him of the father. I answer, he doth it by his divine and essentiall omnipotencie, which he hath received from the father by eternall generation: for whatsoever the father hath, is Christs, Ioh. 16.15. Io. 5.9. and whatsoever things hee doeth, these also doth the son likewise. Not as if the power of the Father were uncreated, & Christs created: but both the Father, and the Son worke by the same divine and uncreated power. For the Son doeth all things  (alike) with the Father. Secondly, as Christ of old opened a doore for the passage of the Gospel, and no power of malice of men nor Devils could any way hinder the same: so consi∣dering at this day that among so manie enemies a doore is opened unto the Churches in Germanie, England, Poland, Hungarie &c. we ought to acknowledge,
that this happeneth not by chance, nor ascribe it to the industrie of teachers, pru∣dencie of politicians, or the power of princes, but unto the grace, efficacie, pre∣sence, and power of Christ alone: for certainly the strength of Christians hath been little or nothing to resist the tyrannical persecution, cruell edicts, and hor∣rible torments, by which Antichrist hath laboured, (but in vain) utterlie to deface our Christian faith: but by how much they have sought to presse it downe, by so much (like unto the palme tree) it hath flourished more and more: because Christ by his divine power having opened this doore, Antichrist was not able to shut the same. And indeed it is a thing admirable in our eyes: that some few Monkes and despised teachers should by the contemptible preaching of the Gospel, so shake the kingdome of the Beast, howbeit supported with the aid and power of the kings and Emperors of the earth on all sides, as that whole nations of the Christian world should turne from Antichrist, to Christ our Lord. Now this beeing come to passe, we may not thinke that either teachers, kings or princes have opened the doore: but because Christ powerfullie reigning at the right hand of God, hath so effected the same: as that none was able to hinder it. Let us therfore bee truelie thankful unto Christ for so great a mercie and divine miracle, humbly beseeching him to keep this doore still open unto us, not suffe∣ring it to be shut for our unthankfulnes, or his sheep to be scattered by the ene∣mies: but that hee graciously preserve his Churches by dwelling among them. 9. And I wil make them of the Synagogue of Satan] Gr. I give them. The second part is a consolation, against two sorts of temptations. The first, in this verse: the second, is expounded in the verse following, by a close Prolepsis, or prevention. For having said, that he had set a doore open before them, which none should shut: this might seeme impossible, considering how on the one side, the Iewes their pro∣fessed enemies did much ennoy them: againe on the other hand how the unbelee∣ving citizens, magistrates, togither with the kings and Romane Emperors did miserably afflict them: yea and how Christ himselfe foretels that they should suffer yet greater troubles for his names sake. Here then I say might they not doubt, how this doore should be kept open by Christ against the adversaries? and not rather in a short time be shut up, that is, oppressed and destroyed by them. To these feares hee opposeth distinct remedies, and to the end, that neither the Iewes perversnesse might offend them, nor the oppression of tyrants dismay them: Christ assures them that he will turne the one to their good, and deli∣ver them from the other. And this is the coherence, and sum of these two verses. That which concernes the first temptation, is comprehended in these words, behold I give them of the Synagogue of Satan &c. so he calleth the Jewes: as in cha. 2.9. I give, that is I rayse up adversaries against thee, who shal cruellie hate both thee, and the Church: for looke as the Iewes continually persecuted the Apostles, by raising up against them tumults in all places, to hinder the propagation of the Go∣spel: so would they doe unto these of Philadelphia. Now to comfort them herein, Christ useth diverse reasons. First, his provi∣dence. I (saith he) give: that is, they shall not fall upon you by chance, but by my appointment, and to the end that yee should be tryed, and therfore yee ought pa∣tiently, to endure this temptation, and alwayes to trust in mee: for I will give no∣thing, but what shalbee for your good and profit. And thus I understand these words, howsoever others are otherwise minded. But doth not Christ in this make himself the author of sinne? seeing the malice of these Iewes against the Chri∣stians was verie sinfull. I answer, it followeth not. For Christ raysed up the Iewes against his servants, not putting this rage into them, but using them onelie for the others trial: as is expressed in the end of the following verse: to try them that dwell upon the face of the earth. This is the first consolation, and ground of all the rest. For he which beleeveth, that his troubles are sent of God, wil bear them patiently, and assuredlie hope, that God wil turne all things unto his good.
Who are of the Synagogue of Satan] A second consolation is taken from the va∣nitie of their adversaries: for they lyed in calling themselves Jewes, that is, the pray∣sers of God, deriving their name from Iudah, which signifies, to prayse, as if they had been the ofspring of Iuda, the children of Abraham, and onely people of God. But indeed they were not Iewes, but a Synagogue of Satan: se chap. 2.9. by which we are taught, not to admire by pocrites for the glorious titles, which they vainlie assume unto themselves. The Papists to this day boast as beeing the Catholike Church: but they are a Syna∣gogue of Satan: because they keep not the word of Christ: but persecute it, what∣ever they pretend to the contrarie. For Christ saith: hee that beleeveth on wee, hath life everlasting: But they on the contrarie: not he that beleeveth in Christ, but hee that beleeveth the decrees of the Church of Rome and subjecteth himself unto the Pope, hee shall have life eternall. Behold I wil make them to come, and worship before thy feet] The third consolation is taken from the profitable event of their troubles: viz. the marveilous conver∣sion of these Iewes unto the faith of Christ. I will (saith hee) for a little while ex∣ercise thee, and the Church by these lying Iewes, but a while after I will convert them: suffer therfore their injuries patiently, for shortly they shall become your friends and bretheren. Their conversion is described by these signes: they shall come and worship before thy feet: that is, in a humble manner desire pardon for their offence: & joyne them∣selves unto your congregation. Hee speakes not of that religious worship which is due unto God and Christ alone: but of an outward reverence, and falling downe before the feet of the pastor and the whole Church in signe of true re∣pentance. For the word in the original  is derived of  (a dogge) and properlie signifies such a manner of falling downe before the feet of any in signe of subjection, as whelps doe in fauning on their masters: Metaphoricallie it is used for divine worship, or reverence, but here it is taken properlie. Now behold the wonderful conversion of these Iewes, which yet is not to be ascribed unto their owne free wil: for of themselves they could not have repented: but this worke was wrought in them onely by the grace of Christ: for he saith, J will make them to come, which shewes the end or consolatorie effect. And to know that I have loved thee] That is, howsoever for the present they are your enemies and account you as men appointed to destruction: yet when they shalbe converted: they will bee of another minde, and know that I loved thee for thy patience and sufferance. For I love them that love mee. Because no man will suffer adversitie for my names sake, except he love mee. Hence we may note two excellent doctrines. First, that we ought not to despaire of the salvation of our adversaries. For it is easie with Christ of wolves to make them sheep, of enemies friends: and therfore we should always pray unto the Lord, for their conversion who are elected: we know there are twelve houres in the day, and that God cals some in the morning, some at noon, and some at evening, and then worketh such an admirable change in their soules, as of persecutors they become professors, of a Synagogue of Satan, a Church and spouse of Iesus Christ: as we see in the knowen examples of Nobuc∣hadnezzer, Paul and others. Unto whom we may also adde these Iewes here spo∣ken of. Secondlie, we se that the conversion of the wicked is not to be ascribed unto any freewil in them: for Christ makes them to come and worship. Ioh. 15.5. Ioh. 6.44. And without him we  be nothing, according to that saying no man come can unto the Sonne, ex∣cept the Father draw him. The consideration whereof puts us in minde both of our erie & weaknes, which is come upon us by sinne: as also of the great mercie of God towards us: for although indeed it may in some sort be applied to our wil∣lingned; that we come and worship: to others their unwillingnes, that they come not, but rather blaspheme the name of Christ: yet the true and primarie cause,
which maketh us willing, wheras others in the mean time are left in their unwil∣lingnesse, is the free mercie and grace of Christ, by which we are differenced and made better then others, according as it is here said, I wil make them to come &c. 1. Cor. 4.7. Rom. 9.18. and again, who hath made thee to differ? for he hath mercie on whom he will have mercie, and whom he will he hardeneth. Here fals in a question how Christ makes us to come to worship. The Sophi∣sters who plead for free-will, confesse indeed that this is a worke of grace, and without which no man can come: notwithstanding they affirme, that a man before hee is in the state of grace hath a free-wil to doe good, although weak and sleepie: which will, (say they) by grace is awakened and strengthened, and so it cooperates with grace, yea prevents it in the verie act of conversion, beeing as it were a co∣working cause: as when two horses draw a chariot: or two men togither carie some waightie burden. Moreover they affirme, that free-will is like a seeing man, who albeit in the darke he discernes nothing by reason of the indisposition of the means, yet beeing brought into the light, he presentlie discerneth every thing. So likewise they discourse much, (though differing among themselves) of the sympathie or agree∣ment betwixt grace, and the will. The Scotists will have grace to worke nothing on the will, but to have its in∣fluences on the effects. But the Iesuites with Thomas affirme the contrarie, that grace workes upon the will, yet so as by an indifferent influence, and so is di∣stinguished from it, according as the will is eyther good or evill. But herein they all agree: that grace is onelie perswasive, such as is the motion of Orators unto their auditorie, unto which the will, if it will, eyther doth, or doth not give efficacie and entertainment: Ephes. 2.1 Ier. 13.23 1 Cor. 2.14 which was the heresie of Pelagius. Now on the contrarie the scripture teacheth, that the naturall man lies dead in sinne, and is like unto an Ethiopian who cannot change his skin, or a Leopard which cannot cast off his spots: hee receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse unto him: Everie imagination of the thought of his heart is onely evil continually: Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. Rom. 8.6. thus we see that mans free wil is not subject to the law of God; neither in∣deed can be. For his blinde and erroneous minde cannot bring spirituall things, savinglie unto the will, neyther can his corrupt wil refuse that which is evil, as evil: but on the contrarie chooseth and delighteth in it, as if it were good. And therfore seeing that such is the corruption of our will and faculties, as that it is Christ, who makes us to come unto him, and the Father drawes unto Christ: none can affirme that the grace of conversion is onely an indifferent influence, or mall perswa∣sion but with blasphemie against God. But they further object, that free-will makes man to differ from the beast that perisheth, and therfore sin could not take it away without the destruction of na∣ture, wherby man should become an unreasonable creature. I answer: It is true, if it be meant of free-will absolutely. But what is that to the purpose: we deny not free-will absolutely, for without it a man should bee no more a man, but a verie beast. But we deny that a natural man hath a free and understanding will unto that which is good, in things appertaining to God: be∣cause the scripture in this pronounceth man blinde, and a servant to that which is evil, yea to be dead in sinnes, and altogither disobedient unto God. And therfore that we may come unto Christ wee have need not onely of perswasive motions, but also of an effectuall worke of grace, by which the Lord illuminateth, draweth, and regenerateth us, that so we may become new creatures: but what need have we to use many words: the sum of all is this: The natural man is dead in sin, and God gives us both the will, and the deed: Christ makes us to come unto him, what now is there left unto free will? they therfore which establish it against grace, doe rob God and Christ of their honour: precipitate man by pride into extreem dan∣ger, and renew the herifie of the Pelagians, whatsoever they pretend to the con∣trarie.
10. Because thou hast kept the word of my patience] Now he comforts him in re∣gard of the persecutions at hand; of which wee might discourse, more fullie, if we had, the histories of the Church of those times. Some understand it of the perse∣cution under the Emperour Trajane: Who though he prohibited that Christians should be drawen before the Iudgement seats, yet such as were accused he com∣manded to be put to death: as Plinie witnesseth in his epistles. Lib. 10. Epist. 97. Others applie it to the persecutions of Antichrist: wherwith not onely these of Philadelphia, but all the saintes upon the face of the whole earth were greevously afflicted: but the former opinion is more probable. This consolation is also threefold. The first is an approbation of their con∣stancie in their former afflictions: because thon hast kept my word. It is a great com∣fort unto us, to hear, that our actions are approved of by men: but we ought much more to rejoyce if God approve thereof: for this worketh in us an assurance of a good conscience, and of the goodnesse of the cause for which we suffer: as suffe∣ring not as evil doers, but as Christians. He calleth the doctrine of the Gospel, the word of his patience, and Paul cals it the word of the crosse, because we must take up the crosse of Christ, and suffer afflictions patientlie for the profession therof. He cals it his patience, or sufferance because he first suffered, beeing an example unto all them that beleeve in him: for through manifold tribulations we must enter into the kingdome of God. And I will deliver thee] a second consolation, is a promise of deliverance in the houre of temptation, that is, of affliction, which figuratively is called the temptation of the Godly. Now hope of deliverance out of evil causeth constancie: because hope maketh not ashamed. Unto this hope we are stirred up, by laying hold on the promises of God concerning our certaine deliverance: which the Lord not onely promiseth here unto this teacher, but unto all such as are in the like temptation, that is, unto all the saintes dispersed throughout the whole earth. And therefore it teacheth us to be constant in the day of tryal, & to expect a ful, and perfect free∣dome by Christ our Lord. But this seemeth to establish the doctrine of merits, seeing Christ promiseth deliverance, because we keep his word. I answer: when the scriptures speake of workes & reward, they usually thus expresse it, as, because thou hast don this, I will multiply thy seed. Now we are to know, that this argues no mercenary reward due for desert sake: But a fatherly (though undeserved promise, annexed unto the con∣dition of our obedience: For no man can be said to merit in dooing that which he is bound to performe: but we are injoyned to keep the word of Christ: and besides when we have don the utmost that we can, yet we are but unprofitable servants: & God doth onely of his free grace reward our obedience & constancy. So that the speech of Christ in this place, is not an argument drawen from the meritorious cause of salvation, but frō the condition onely without which we cannot exspect the same: for Christ promiseth to deliver none, but such as keep his word. Why then doth he thus speak? not that we should be lifted up with an opiniō of merit: but by promising a reward, hee sheweth how acceptable our obedience is unto him: as also to the end that we may increase & persevere in grace. From the houre of temptation] The third consolation is contained in these words; temptation, that is, the cruel persecution of Trajane, or some other tyrant: in calling it an houre he noteth the brevity of this affliction, that they might the more cheerfully undergoe it. The crosse is compared to a womans sorrow in travel. Joh. 16.20. because of the shortnesse of the paine, and the joyfull effect thereof. See also Rom. 8.18. & 2 Cor. 4.17. To try them that dwel upon the earth] the fourth consolation is taken from the use of afflictions: They are not sent as punishments from God for our destruction: but for the trial of our faith and constancie. And in this respect they are, first just: because God hath right to trie us: and 2: necessarie, Isa. 28.19 Iam. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1, 7. least we should grow slack and dull: as also very profitable, for vexation causeth us to understand, wor∣keth patience, shakes of the drowsines of sin, makes our faith more pretious then
Gold, to be found to prayle, and honour, & glory: to be short it stirreth us up ear∣nestly to call upon God. Seeing therfore the Lord makes his trials so many wayes profitable unto us, Ps. 91.15. set us be patient & constant under the same. He useth this tem∣ptation, to try them that are upon the earth: for God tries hypocrites & wicked men, as wel as the saintes: though the effect bee diverse. For by it the ungodlinesse, in constancy, & lightnesse of the former is made manifest, God hereby separating hypocrites, & wicked men crept into the Church from the society of saintes: for these remaine constant, the other by their apostacie manifest the secret cor∣ruption of their hearts. Moreover we are to take notice, that these words them that dwell upon the earth, are alwayes in this booke taken in a bad sence, as signi∣fying unfound men, idolaters, & the followers of Antichrist; as will appear in the following hystorie. 11 Behold, I come quickly] This may be referred to the following exhortation. I will come quickly, hold fast therefore that treasure of faith, which thou hast re∣ceived. But it seemes rather to agree with that which went before, as a conclusion of the third consolation: promising to come quickly to destroy the wicked, & to deliver his children, least by delaying their deliverance they might seeme to be im∣patient. Some referre this to his last coming. If so, then quickly, notes not the time at hand: but sooner then the world is aware of. For although the Lord be not yet come, 2 Pet. 3.9. yet he is not slack, saith the Apostle, concerning his promise, but is long suffer∣ing to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. He will therfore come quicklie, that is, sooner then many thinke. For when the world shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction commeth. See Chap. 1.1. Hold that fast, which thou hast] In this third part of the narration, he exhorts them, to sincerity, and constancy in the faith, that they loose not the reward: And it is added to the foregoing consolation, least by it we should become se∣cure. The sentence is brief, but very emphatical. Hold fast that which thou hast. What had they? faith and a good conscience, as Paul expounds it: 1 Tim. 1.18. And indeed these are the chief heads of all spirituall blessings, the which whosoever hath, and keepes in this life, shall obtaine a crowne of glory in the life to come. These two, the Pastor and Church of Philadelphia had, and with them all other graces. For by faith, they had righteousnes, sanctification, adop∣tion, and hope of glorie to come. By a good conscience they increased in sincerity, patience, and constancie under the crosse: as we have alreadie shewed: These things (saith he) hold fast, to wit, unto the end. The word () here used, notes the necessitie of our uttermost indeavour, and strength considering the many lets and impediments, which otherwise might cause us to make shipwrack of faith, and a good conscience, unlesse we strive with all our power. Thus we see they are exhorted to perseverance in their integrity. That no man take thy crowne] The reason is drawen from the dangerous effect of slothfulnes: for not they that fight remisly, but onely such as hold out and o∣vercome, 2 Tim. 4.8 Iam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.4. are crowned in signe of victorie. Thy crowne, so he calleth the re∣ward of life eternall: Paul termes it, the crowne of righteousnes, which shall be given to them that overcome, by Christ the righteous judge. Iames, the crowne of life: Peter, the crowne of Glorie that fadeth not away, the which all faithfull teachers shall receive, when Christ the great shepherd of the sheepe shall appeare. Thus this crowne is distinguished from those other crownes, which in ancient times were given unto conquerours. See our Commentarie on 1 Cor. 9.24. We may here observe manie things, the which I will breifly touch. First, we are taught, that the promises of God, ought not to make us secure, but rather to stirre up our indeavour to constancie: for we cannot assuredly ap∣plie them unto our selves, except we earnestly labour to performe our duty. Christ promised indeed to this Church, to keepe them from the houre of temptation: yet he bids them hold fast what they had: intimating, that our faith and constancie
ought not to be lessened by the promises, but rather strengthened and increa∣sed. Secondlie, we are taught, that they onely shall be crowned with the promised reward in heaven, who hold fast what they have here receyved: we shall be cloa∣thed upon with our house which is from heaven: 2 Cor. 5.3. if so bee that beeing cloathed we shall not bee found naked. Thirdlie, seeing it is called, thy crowne: it seems to denote, that in heaven we shall have every one his owne crowne: from whence it may be gathered, that as there are degrees of punishment: so there shall bee differences of reward, yea un∣doubtedlie such faithfull teachers, as have brought manie to righteousnes: Dan. 12.3. shall shine as starres in the firmament. Iovinian against whom Ierome disputeth, seems to hold that all the faithfull shall have one and the like degree of glorie: the which also some orthodoxe teachers to this day doe maintaine, grounding their opinion on the words of Christ, The just shall shine as the sunne: Matt. 13.43. whose brightnesse surpasseth the bewtie of all other crea∣tures. Now however this be granted, yet we may safely conclude a degree of glorie, seeing that even the sun appears unto us, some time more, and some time lesse in brightnesse. And I beleeve, Jovinian did not denie a degree absolutely, but denied the same in respect of merit. The which we should understand more cer∣tainly, were his bookes now extant: howbeit we may probablie gather so much from the very reasons and grounds laid down by Hierom himself. In the last place we see, that no mā in this life cā come to that perfectiō or fulnes, or is so nigh unto the kingdome of God, but that he might be deprived thereof, in case he should be left unto himself, or be careles: that is, continues not faith∣full in weldoeing. And therfore we are admonished, 1 Cor. 10.12. Rom. 11.20. If we stand to take heed least we fall: and though we stand by faith, yet not to be high minded but fear. But if so be, that some of the faithfull may let go their hold, and loose the crowne: where then is that (plerophoria) or full assurance of our salvation, and perseverance of the elect, of which Christ speaketh: No man shall take my sheep out f my hand. Ioh. 10.28 Mat. 24.24 Ioh. 16.33. It is impossible the elect should be seduced, and therefore be of good cheare, I have overcome the world. I answer: however Libertines and Sophisters doe hence draw such a conclu∣sion, yet it followes not: For as Austin from this very place proveth, the number of the elect is certaine, and can neither be augmented, or diminished. For, (saith he) if one receives it not, except another loose it, then the number is certaine. And al∣though these things are spoken unto the saintes who persevere, as though it were uncer∣taine whither they should stand or not: nevertheles it onely teacheth, that we should not be wise above that which is meet, but fear. We are moreover to consider, that as the pro∣mise, so the exhortation, is directed not onely to the pastor, but also unto the whole Church, in which there is alwayes a mixture of saintes and hypocrites, of elect, and reprobates, who indeed with the mouth make confession of faith, but beleeve not with the heart unto righteousnesse; and therfore are said to be deprived of the crowne, because they hold not fast that which they have, that is, that which they seem to have. According to that in Luk. 8.18. Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken, even that which hee seemeth to have. And therefore, when such fall away, and loose the crowne, it nothing weakens the state of election: 1 Ioh. 2.19 for as the Apostle witnesseth, they are not in the number of the elect: they went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had beene of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, &c. Vnto them therefore that of the Apostle is to be applyed. Let him which seems to stand take heed least he fall, thou standest by faith be not high minded but feare: which threatnings are manifestly spoken of highminded hypocrites, such as stand in outward appearance onely. But the salvation of the elect is sure, because they are kept by the power of God through faith, and in humilitie of minde, they shall certainely hold fast, that which they have, and never be cast off.
But you will say; if this Bishop, (as undoubtedly he was) were one of the elect: what need then was there of this threatning, that no man take thy crowne: seeing the elect cannot fall away, or be deprived thereof? I answer; It is not in vaine. First, though indeed the elect cannot loose the crowne in respect of the decree of God, by which they are predestinated, and cal∣led unto salvation, yet might it be taken away in respect of their owne infirmitie, if they were left unto themselves, and in respect of other causes also which threa∣ten their destruction, except they were preserved by that power of which Peter speaketh: 1 Pet. 1.5. Secondlie, these threatnings as they respect the faithfull, are conditional. Ano∣ther shall take their crowne, if they persevere not in the faith: but they doe per∣severe. 1: Because God keeps them unto the end. 2: Because Christ doth conti∣nuallie pray for them, that their faith faile not: And 3: because they themselves always pray for the same, Ier. 32.40. and are heard, according to that promise: I will put my feare in their hearts, that they shall not depart from mee: that is, as Augustine interprets it, they shall persevere, and cleave unto me. And lastly because the Lord by such threat∣nings, & exhortations stirres up the saintes in their indeavour unto perseverance. Vnto all which we may adde the testimonies of Thomas, Hierom, Bede, Haimo, and others whom Ribera citeth. See Bell. Castigatum lib. 2. de Grat. Et lib. cap. 13. pag. 334. &c. Him that overcommeth] In the conclusion a reward of victorie is promised unto the spiritual champions, who warre under Christs banner, and to the same is an∣nexed the common Epiphonema, wherin as formerlie, the diligent consideration of this Epistle is recommended unto them. The severall rewards mentioned, doe il∣lustrate the excellencie of the crowne proposed. Now it is propounded unto all, yea even unto us if we overcome: which thing we doe, when we keep faith and a good conscience, and persevere constantly un∣der the crosse in the word of God. And this is the onely way to overcome, but cannot be effected, without great labour in resisting opposing, and putting to flight all enemies whatsoever. Such therfore as eyther fight not at all, or els doe it slacklie, or perfidiously fall away, they neyther overcome, nor obtaine the crowne of life▪ and so unto them these promises doe not appertaine. Let us ther∣fore in consideration hereof, constantly fight the battels of the Lord. And so we come to treat of the rewards, which are cleare in themselves, though metaphori∣cally propounded in a threefold promise. I will  him a pillar in the house of my God] The temple of God, is the church militant and triumphant. The pillars serve both for strength and ornament unto the temple: first therefore he promiseth to him that overcommeth that he shalbe a glorious, and firme member of the Church triumphant. The Apostles are called pillars of the Church militant, Gal. 2.9. & foundation thereof, Eph. 2.20. not as sustaining the Church (for that is proper to Christ a∣lone) but as choise instruments in Gods hand, by whom he founded, preserved, & propagated the same. Others suppose the phrase to be taken from the custome of the Romans, who used to set up pillars, that is, trophees and images of honour: now in this sence it might be taken, but that Christ saith not, I will set him up as a pillar, but I will make him a pillar. But it is more probable that he alludeth to the two brazen pillars set up by Solomon in the porch of the temple, which typified the stability of the children of God. And he shall goe no more out] This is the second promise: it shall not bee a momentanie glorie, but unchangeable perpetuall and eternall. And it seemes to be put heere in opposition to those brazen pillars, which were overthrowen with the temple by the Babylonians: but no such destruction shall befal the godly, for as the Psalmist speaketh, Psal. 125.1, 2. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which can∣not be removed but abideth for ever. An excellent place proving the perseverance of the saintes even in this life: for whom Christ hath once made a pillar in his temple,
he will never suffer them to go out any more, that is, to fall away from the state of grace. And I will write his name] The third promise, An inscri∣ption of a threefold name. is an inscription of a threefold name, viz. of God, of the citie of God, and of Christ. He seemes eyther to allude to the manner of the Romanes, who used to write on their statues of triumph the a∣ctions of the Conquerours, the titles and names of conquered nations: as for ex∣ample: To Tyberius: To Constantine alwayes Augustus: To the Conquerour of Germa∣nie, of the Gothes, of Africa &c. Or otherwise he keepes still to the former allusion of Solomons pillars, whereof the right was called Jachin, which is beeing interpre∣ted he will establish, and the left Boaz, that is, in it there is strength, the one beeing a type of the Jewish church, the other of the Gentiles: so Christ will write upon eve∣ry faithfull man, most honourable names: which exposition might stand, but that Solomon is said, not to have written those names upon the pillars, but so to have named them. Well how ever it be, certaine it is, that both these pillars with their names were destroyed: the vain inscriptions of the Romanes perished: but the names which Christ will write upon his pillars, they shall remaine for ever and ever. First he will write upon them, the Name of his God] not that these conquerours shalbe Gods: but the sons of God, that is, perfectly borne againe after the image of God: Indeed we are now Gods children by faith: but these glorious inscripti∣ons here promised, doe not yet appeare, namely, the full fruition and majestie of our adoption. And the name of the citie of my God] or, of the new Jerusalem, that is, I will make him an everlasting citizen of the Church triumphant: for as you may see Chap. 21.2.10. this is set forth unto us by the new Ierusalem. Which commeth downe out of heaven] both because it so appeared in a vision un∣to Iohn, in the place for calledged: as also because it hath its true original from heaven, as grounded on the eternal election of God: and besides in this life is borne of water, and of the spirit, and all the grace which it receiveth, commeth downe from above. From my God] Three times he calleth God his God: speaking eyther as man, and our mediatour: whose office no wayes lessneth, but rather confirmeth his e∣ternall essence, (see Chap. 1.1. & 3.2.) Io. 20.17. 1 Thess. 1.3. Christs new name. Or els God is here personallie taken for the father: as it is in these places: I ascend to my God, and to my Father. Before God and our Father. My new name] To the Godlie in Pergamus, he promised a new name, but lo here he will give his new name, which he receyved of his father, beeing exalted a∣bove everie name that is named, not onely in this world, but also in that which is to come. Eph. 1.10. see also Phil. 2.19. Touching this new name, it signifies Christs glorious exaltation, and the Fa∣thers setting of him at his right hand after his resurrection: now this his new name, and this fulnesse of glorie at Gods right hand, Christ will write on the Overcom∣mers: but how? make them pertakers of perfect happinesse, according to their measure, and proportion, as beeing members of that bodie of which he is the head. Se more of this v. 21. 13 He which hath an eare] see Chap. 2. v. 7.11. The VII Epistle to the Bishop of Laodicea. 14 And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write; These things saith the Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, the beginning of the creation of God. 15 I know thy workes that thou art neither old nor hote, I would thou wert cold or hote. 16 So then because thou art luke-warme, and neither cold nor hote, I will spue thee out of my mouth. 17 Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and
knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blind, and naked. 18 I counsell thee, to buy of me gold tryed in the fire, that thou majest be rich, and white rai∣ment that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy wikednesse doe not appeare, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see. 19 As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: bee zealous therefore, and repent. 20 Behold, I stand at the doore, and knocke; if any man heare my voice, and open the doore, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. 21 To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set downe with my Father in his throne. 22 Hee that hath an eare, let him heare what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. THE COMMENTARIE. VNto the Angel of the church of the Laodiceans] This last epistle is full of sharpe reproofe against the pastor of the Church, because of his great hypocrisie, and vaine boasting: and withall shewes him what he should doe, perswades him to serious repentance, and propounds rewards unto them that doe the same. In this E∣pistle is excellentlie set forth the lenity and forbearance of Christ our Lord: by which he suffereth hypocrites, and desi∣reth their salvation. It consisteth of a preface, a narration, and a conclusion: To the Angel] That is to the pastor & whole congregation. Now because the evils in the Church, doe usually proceed from the pastors, therfore it is justly im∣puted unto them: even as the excesse, Idolatrie, prophanenes, and other wickednes of the people, were by the prophets of old laid to the charge of their priests, and governours. It is uncertaine who this Bishop was. But certainly he was a car∣nal and craftie man: for though he bare the name of a minister, yet was he void of sinceritie and Godlines, and given over to coveteousnes, and luxury, & other vices. Paul twise mentioneth this Church in his Epistle to the Collossians: chap. 2.2. there he wisheth, that their harts may be comforted &c. and Chap. 4.16. he com∣mandeth that their Epistle be read of the Laodiceans, The Epist. to the La∣odic. Apocrypha. Vide Bibl. S. Senens. lib. 2. p. 87. and againe theirs by the Collossians. The which place being doubtfully rendred in the Latine version, hath occasioned some to thinke that Paul writ the Epistle, which is now extant unto them of Laodicea: but it is an Apocrypha writing compiled by som decei∣ver, and taken from the Epistles to the Galatians, Philippians, and Colossians. Theophilactus and some others understand it of the first Epistle to Timothie: which was sent, as they say, to Laodicea a chiefe citie of Phrygia Pacatiana: as the subscription also hath it. But that cannot be: for (as it may be gathered from Coll. 2.2.) Paul had never seen those of Laodicea. Chrysostom therefore, and others with more likelihood understand it of an Epistle, which they of Laodicea wrot unto Paul, in which without doubt they testified their faith and piety unto the A∣postle. Lib 5. cont. Marc. Tertullian saith, it was the opinion of Marcion, that the Epistle to the E∣phesians now extant was writen by Paul to them of Laodicea. Now howsoever this Church in Iohns time was grievously corrupted, yet que∣stionlesse after this vehement reproofe which Iohn from Christ delivered unto them, they repented of their evils: For Eusibius commendeth this Church, as flou∣rishing in his time, and mentioneth some of their Bishops, and among others, A∣natolius, a chiefe opposer of Paulus Samosatenus: and after him one Stephanus, who indeed in learning and eloquence was equall with the rest, but not in ver∣tue, & constancie: for in the time of persecution he denyed the faith to the great scandal of the Church of Christ. And hence it may probably be gathered that this Epistle to the Laodiceans wrought much good in them. And also we are again here taught, that pastors, & Churches may erre, and fall away, unlesse they be by the power of God preserved in the way of truth. Now we come to the Epistle.
These things saith the Amen] The preface (as formerly) proves the authority of the Epistle, describing Christ the Author thereof by three glorious Epithes: namely, that he is the Amen, the true and faithfull witnesse, and the beginning of the creation of God. These things are taken from Chap. 1.5.6.7.8. Christ calleth him∣self the Amen, from the Hebrew Aman, veritie: It is an affirmative particle, and caries with it the nature of an oath, confirming the truth, and certainty of things▪ it is in greeke nai (yea) in Latine certe, profecto, verely, verely. In this place it is put in stead of an adjective, for him who is most true both in his promises, and threatnings, and is expounded by the following words, the true and faithfull wit∣nesse, which we have spoken of on Chap. 1. v. 5. Christ therefore is the Amen, the true and faithfull witnesse, because as he is God, so he is truth it self, and the essentiall wisedome of the Father. And as he is man, he hath witnessed and brought forth the testimony of the gospell out of the bosome of his father, and by divine miracles so confirmed the truth thereof as that none but with great impiety can question the same. Now the reason why here he calleth himself thus, seems to bee, because he had to doe with hypocrites, who beeing growen secure, began to esteem of the faith of Christ as a thing indifferent, & that for the cause thereof they needed not to contend with the Pagans, or suffer affliction for the same. Now Christ to the end that he might more plainlie take them for their lukewarmenesse, doth by these epithites declare his truth and faithfulnesse. The reason wherefore Christ is called Amen, is shewed by the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.19. where he saith, that Jesus Christ prea∣ched among the Corinthians was not yea, and nay, that is, variable and inconstant: because in him all the promises of God, even from the infancie of Church, unto this day, are Yea, and Amen, that is, surely and certainely fulfilled, unto the glory of God the Father. The which as it the serves to refute their folly, who eyther call in question, or reject the faith of Christ, as doe the Turks, Jewes, Epicures, Hypo∣crites, and others: so it doth very much comfort, and strengthen the faith of the godlie. For seeing Christ is the Amen, the faithfull and true witnesse, he wil stand to his promises: and never forsake them that trust in him: Ioh. 14.18. Hebr. 13.15. according to that which is written. I will not leave you Orphants. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee, &c. The beginning of the creation of God] As the two former titles declare the faith∣fulnesse of Christ: so this shewes his excellencie and power. Observe this ambi∣guous man∣ner of speech. The beginning of the creation of God: this is ambiguously rendred. For the word which is in the text, () signifies not onely the beginning or original: But also principallity, and dominion. Now in what sence soever it be taken, it clearlie proveth the Godhead of Christ. If we render it, principallity, that is, prince of the creation, or crea∣tures: it shewes that he is God. If we render it, the beginning of the creation, it prooves the same thing: For he, as the Son did with the Father, and holy Spirit, Ioh. 1.3. give unto all creatures the beginning of their beeing: for all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made. Arius contendeth, that the Son is onely the beginning of the creation, that is, the first creature. But he falsely corrupteth the text. For Christ is said to be the be∣ginning, not passively, but actively, as appeareth Chap. 1.8. where he is absolutely called  the beginning, and ending: which can not be spoken of any creature. Some interpret this of the new creation, but that also doth no way derogate from his divinitie. For a divine power is as much required to make a creature new, as there was in the first creation. So that these two interpretations, are not to be separated, but joyned togither. Now Christ doth in this place call himself the beginning, that these blinde and naked Laodiceans, might the sooner returne unto him, as to the fountaine of all good. XXIII. Argum. of Chr. deity. This therfore is a XXIII argu∣ment, proving the divinity of Christ our Lord. 15 I know thy workes, that thou art neither cold] The narration containes many particulars: as reproofe, commination, confutation, perswasion, exhortation, and promise: unto, v. 21.
First, in this verse he sharpely reproves the Laodiceans, as not answering to the name by which they were called. For Laodicea signifies as much, as a people, just, sincere, and wel reformed in manners, faith and godlines: being derived from  (a people) and  (just). But thou, saith Christ, art neyther cold, nor hote. Interpreters are diversly minded about such as are said to be hot, cold, or luke∣warine: Alcasar brings in eleven opinions, but he seeks a knot in a rush. The thing it self plainely shewes, that Christ by a proverbiall metaphor accounts him to be neyther hot, nor cold, but lukewarme, who neyther is a professed enemy of the Gospel, nor yet a faithfull professor thereof, but an hypocrite: that is one as it were betwixt both; And it may be referred eyther to their life, or doctrine. As for the mixture of heathenish, and Iewish rites in the service of God, it began first to increase immediately upon the cessation of the persecution of the Romane Emperors, and when the Christian Church began to enjoye ease and tranquillity. And therefore I judge that these Laodiceans were not as yet guiltie of this evill, but they were lukewarme, as concerning faith and manners, in complying with the gentiles, to the end that beeing the lesse offensive unto them, they might quietly enjoy their trade in that noble mart-towne which abounded with all sorts of merchants: for however they desired to be accounted good Christians, yet did they not forsake their former frande and luxurie. The summe of all is this, They mingled Christ, and the world togither, and made use of religion, no other∣wise then might stand with their profit and trade. Thus they were neither open enemies to Christ, nor yet his true friends: but as it were lukewarme and neutrals, that is, fained and lying hypocrites, and soo worse in Christs esteem then his pro∣fessed enemies. I would thou wert eyther hot or cold] He wisheth they were hot, that is truely zea∣lous in faith and godlinesse: for the law requireth, that men should love the Lord with all their hart, and with all their soul, &c. Thus we see that to be hot, is to be up∣right in hart, ful of love to God and our neighbour. Now Christ wisheth they were cold, that is, altogither without faith and god∣linesse, not absolutely, but comparatively, in asmuch as they who are cold seem to be more excusable, then such as are lukewarme, and more easily to be reformed, & better avoyded then others, and in this respect are lesse hurtfull then they. For the sin of hypocrites is greater then theirs who are open enemies: because it is a worse thing not to follow the truth in sincerity which we know, then to be ignorant altogether thereof: for such are more easily wrought upon by the means, and sooner brought to the truth: wheras hypocrites having faith onely in shew, doe imagine they see, but are blinde, and mantaine their false opinions, hating & persecuting in the mean time the truth of God. For example, the Lutherans who beeing wedded to their false opinions, are the more hardlie drawen from them. For they hate and persecute the orthodoxe do∣ctrine concerning our spirituall communion with Christ, more then the blinde Papists: Againe a Iew who is a professed enemie of Christ, will easier be brought to embrace christian religion, then an hypocriticall Iesuite, drowned in Antichri∣stian superstitions. And therefore with great reason Christ wisheth, that this Church were rather cold then lukewarme: not that it is good to be cold, but be∣cause a lukewarme condition is more dangerous and hurtfull then the other. We see also in natural things (from whence the metaphor is taken) that hot or cold things are more approved, then those things that are lukewarme. Hot meats in cold weather, and cold drinkes in hot seasons agree best with the stomack: but that which is lukewarme, is lothsome, and disposeth to vomit. Hence Christ desired that the Pharisees had been blinde rather then hypocrites, who are uncapable of reproofe. Ioh. 9.41. 1 King 18.21. If (saith he) yee were blinde, ye should have no sinne: but now yee say, wee see, therefore your sinne remaineth. And the like Elias said un∣to the hypocriticall and idolatrous Israelites: why halt ye betweene two opinions? If Jehovah be God, follow him: but if Baal follow him. Not as if he approved the
worship of Baal: but sheweth that there is such a contrariety betweene it, & the true worship of God, as that they cannot possibly bee joyned togither. And hence we are taught, whom we are to esteem in these our dayes to be lukewarme, not such as are weak in the faith, whom the scripture commandeth us to receive with all meeknesse: but those who labour to joyne Christ and Belial together, in faith, ceremonies and manners. Such also, who though they glory, as if they were come out of Babylon, and would faine be accounted good prote∣stants, neverthelesse strive tooth, and naile to uphold the superstitions of Anti∣christ his tittles, orders, garments, surplices, miters, crucifixes, images, and the like Babylonish stuff brought by him into the worship of God. But let us here take notice what Christ judgeth of such men. 16 So then because thou art lukewarme] The second part of the narration con∣taines a threatning, with a repetition of the cause thereof: because thou art luke∣warme, I will spue thee out of my mouth. Hee goes foreward in the metaphor, com∣paring hypocrites to lukewarme water, which is so lothsome to the stomack, as it cannot retaine it: but casts it forth with lothsomnesse and paine: Even so hy∣pocrites are abominable to Christ, for he spues them out of his mouth, that is, he re∣jects them as strangers unto him I will spue thee out of my mouth] Here we se the lenity and patience of Christ, in bearing a long time with hypocrites: yea inviting of them unto repentance, & preadmonishing them of their punishment, before he spues them out for their ob∣stinacie. Gods threatnings therfore are to be understood conditionally: I will spue thee out, viz. If thou repent not. Out of my mouth] Here it will not follow that such as are cold, are in Christs mouth, or that any of the faithfull may fall from grace: As Ribera subtilly dispu∣teth. For Christ threatens this, not against the cold, but the lukewarme, who by profession and appearance are in his mouth, that is, in the Church of Christ: but indeed are hypocrites, having a forme of godlines, but denie the power thereof. But hence we ought rather to observe, that there are allwayes many hypo∣crites in the bosome of the Church, and especially among the Clergie: this mix∣ture therfore should not offend us (for the divell wil alwayes sow tares among the wheat) neyther ought we to be moved with the loftie titles of hie-priests, cardi∣nals, arch-bishops, bishops, prelates, and the like rabble of Antichrist. 17 For thou sayest I am rich] The third part is a confutation of the vaine boasting of this Church, in which were manie rich merchants, fallen into secu∣ritie and riot: for riches doe often times befoole the owners thereof: occasion∣ing in them pride and luxurie. And this seems to be the reason, why they thus boasted, to weet because they were rich, and having need of nothing. But it may also be rightly understood, that they gloried, as if they had been rich in spirituall things: for hypocrites imagine that they are just and holy, and need not grace and remission of sins as other men. Thus these gloried of their faith, but it was dead, and voyd of sinceritie and love, as is the faith of all hypocrites, and so not sufficient for the attaining of spirituall riches: And this kind of faith we willing∣lie graunt to Ribera, who here cavils against us. Christ therefore mentioneth their pride as another cause for which he will spue them out: as appeareth by the causal () because thou sayest: that is, proudlie boastest, therefore I will spue thee out my mouth. And knowest not that thou art wretched] Here he refuteth their vanity and foo∣lishnes, by a contrarie judgement of them. For as it is a vaine and foolish thing, for a beggar to boast of the riches which he hath not: even so is it for men to be lifted up with any confidence of spiritual riches before God: seeing in this respect they are altogether destitute: And though we may abound in outward goods, yet to glorie therin, is vanity, for they are transitory & perish in their use. And knowest not Here he sheweth, that ignorance is the cause of the pride of hypocrites, & indeed () know thy self, is a verie hard lesson: And ther∣fore
there is no better remedie to beat downe our pride, then to examine, and know our selves. That thou art wretched] He sheweth us in five epithites, what hypocrites are, yea, what all of us are by nature. Wretched] Gr. , The natu∣ral miserie of all men. that is, oppressed with calamitie and sicknesse: such a thing is hypocrisie, and pride before God. And miserable] Gr. , deprived of mercie, without which men must pe∣rish for ever. And poore] Gr. , that is, as destitute of righteousnesse, & true holines be∣fore God, as the poore beggar which hath not any thing to supply his necessity. And blinde] Gr. , that is one ignorant of his miserable state and condi∣tion: hypocrites ordinarily are sharpe sighted in wordly matters: yea many times they have a large knowledge of divine mysteries: not withstanding touching the knowledge of themselves, they are as blinde as beetles. And naked] Gr. , wanting Christ, the wedding garment. For hypocrites, though they be partakers of the Sacraments, yet beeing destitute of true faith put not on the Lord Iesus. Thus Christ in reproving of these men, stirres us up to the knowledge of our owne miserie, and the seeking after of Gods mercie: for knowledge is the first steppe to salvation. 18 J counsell thee, to buy of me Gold] In the fourth place he prescribeth, to such as are desirous of salvation, remedies against their evils. In which he metaphori∣cally describeth faith, and true repentance, with the fruit thereof. The first is, to buy Gold, this remedy is opposed to three evils. But what can a begger buy without mony? with a price indeed not any thing: but according to the manner of beggars onely by intreaty & prayer to God: alluding undoubtedly unto the prophesie of Isay. Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, & he that hath no money, come ye, buy & eat, yea come, buy wine & milke without mony, & without price. Wherfore doe ye spend mony, for that which is no bread. Where the Lord teacheth us, first, that the means necessary to salvation are attained by free grace. Secondly, he reproveth their hypocrisie, who thinke to obtaine it by the merit of workes. Lastly the Simonie both of the old Pharisees, and new Romanists, who sell heaven for mony: & also their foolishnes, who bestow gold on such trash, is here con∣demned. But on the contrarie he commandeth them to buy Gold tryed in the fire, by which some understand the word of God, Psa. 12, 7. & 119.127. 1 Pet. 1.7. purer then silver tryed seven times in a fornace, to be desired above gold, yea above most fine gold. Others understand it of faith: by which onely we are made partakers of all heavenly blessings: The which being tryed by the fire of afflictions, is much more precious then gold that perisheth. Both these interpretations are sound. For Christ sends hypocrites to the law & the Gospell, by which we come to know our owne misery & want, which causeth contrition, uncovers the maske of hypocrisie, stirres up earnest desire for grace, & workes in us confidence in the mercie of God: And by faith, the forgivenesse of our sins, righteousnes, sanctification & eternal salvation is obtained through Christ Iesus. Buy of me] A worthy sentence: Christ is that () or merchant, who alone dealeth in the heavenlie merchandise of our salvation, offering the same unto us in the Gospel, not for a price, or in regard of workes sake: but freely to be obtained by faith & prayer. Here is that Monopolie of Christ our lord, without which there is no salvation. They therfore who look to be saved by saintes, shall misse of their expectation: and so shal all who give credit to the indulgences of Antichrist, set∣ting heaven to sale for mony. XXIV. Argu. of Chr. deity. This therfore is a XXIV argument proving the God∣head of Christ. For that which is here ascribed to Christ, is by the prophet attri∣buted to Iehovah God. That thou mayest be made rich] They who posses much gold, are accounted rich in the world: now it is not gold, but faith by which we posses Christ with all his treasure, that makes us rich in Gods account.
And white raent] This is opposed as a remedie to the fift evill: having bought gold of Christ, we must also buy white raiment. For he saith, that we are both poore, and naked: and therfore as we stand in need of gold, to supply our po∣verty, so likewise raiment to cover our nakednes. What is meant by raiment, ap∣peares by the effects, namely the covering of our filthie nakednes, that is, the de∣formitie, and guilt of sinne, the which cannot be covered by any righteousnes, or merit of our own. Isai. 64.6. Because all our righteousnes is as filthie cloutes in the sight of God. Now Christ with his righteousnes, is this white and impolluted garment: which is put on by faith, and in a speciall manner received of the faithfull in the sacraments. Thus we see, that to buy white raiments, is by faith to seek for, & ap∣propriate unto our soules, righteousnes, and salvation in and through the alone merit of Christ. It is called white, because it is purified in the blood of Christ, that immaculate and undefiled lambe: for whitenes doth denote puritie: And he seems to allude to the manner of the Romanes called candidati, who seeking for any office or dignity in the common wealth, Vide Cicer. pro Mur. came clothed in white apparel to the place of election: by their garments testifying the integrity which becommeth magistrates. The white garments spoken of in v. 5. denote our being made parta∣kers of heavenly glorie, but not so in this place: for the former place hath respect to the reward of victory after this life: but here he speakes of white raiment, with which we must be cloathed in this life, that so we may be acceptable in the sight of God. And anoint thine eyes with eye salve] This is opposed to their fourth evil of blind∣nes. Eye salve, Gr. , which physitians call the dregges wherout an oynt∣ment is strayned, helping the blearednesse of the eyes. He commands them to aske of God the illumination of his spirit, by which their darke harts may be in∣lightned, and stirred up unto the true knowledge and love of God through faith: that so seeing their owne miserie, and Christs benefits, they might cease to be blinde. 19 As many as I love, I rebuke] This fift part of the narration, or exhortation to repentance, is mixed with comfort, least that heavy foregoing sentence, I will spue thee out of my mouth, might have occasioned them, to cast of all hope of par∣don, as thinking that now there was no more remedie for them. But Christ tea∣cheth them, that this sharpe reproofe proceeds not from any hatred, but from his love towards them, and to the end that they might repent: hee beeing herein like unto a father, who more severely punisheth that childe, whom he best loveth. The words are taken out of Prov. 3.12. and againe repeated Heb. 12.5. where we have given the meaning of them. Whom I love, I rebuke] As if he should say, for thy good I rebuke thy hypocrisy, and indeed there is great need, thou shouldest be sharpely reproved, that so I may shew how greatly I love thee. And chasten] For stubborne children must be kept downe by the rod. And ther∣fore thou mayest not thinke by hypocrisy, or lukewarmnes to escape the crosse. Here we may note, the difference between the afflictions of the godlie, and of the wicked. The godlie are chastised like children: but the wicked are judged and condemned to hell. This is the first reason of the following exhortation, beeing as it were a token of his love towards them. Be Zealous therefore, and repent] Gr. . Beza, be fervent, he requireth fer∣vencie, and zeale of faith and sincerity, in signe of true repentance, for their former hypocrisie and lukewarmnes. For he is said to be truely zealous, who is fervent in that which is good Gal. 4.18. It may also be understood transitively, that is, be a Zealous follower of thy fellow teachers of Philadelphia, Smyrna and others, who walke faithfully before me. Moreover seeing lukewarme hypocrites are here cal∣led upon to repent, we are taught, that no true repentance comes ever to late. 20 Behold, J stand at th doore, and knock] The other reason of his exhortation is taken from the effects of his love, namely, pardon and grace to all that repent:
before he recompared himself to a Marchant and Phisitian, freely selling the mar∣chandises, and salves of salvation. Here he likens himself to a rich way faring man, entring in to them that open unto him, and vouchsaving to feast with them. By which allegory he testifyeth his philantropy, as using al maner of wayes & meanes for our salvation. And this is the last part of the narration, beeing a promise of par∣don and grace directed not onely to these of Laodicea, but unto all that hearken un∣to the heavenly vocation. Behold] this particle is added, to stirre up our eares and hearts unto the more attention. He saith not, I come, or I sit: but I stand at the door: hereby signify∣ing his continuall presence, and daylie care for our salvation. I stand at the door, like as a stranger, who doth not presently goe away, but if the door be not opened at his first knocking: yet still standeth, and knocketh, untill the same be opened unto him. The door here signifyes our heart, which by nature is shut, hard and stonie, excluding God and Christ: but in v. 8. it is taken in another signification, as we have there shewed. Now Christ knocketh, and bids us open unto him diverse wayes. 1. He knocketh outwardly, by the preaching of the law, threatning destructiō, if we open not. 2. By the preaching of the Gospel, promising pardon of sin, and all kind of heavenly blessing unto them that open unto him. 3. By laying the crosse of af∣flictions on them that delay. And lastly he knocks inwardlie, by his spirit, illumi∣nating our blinde hearts and minds, making us in some measure to see and know him, who is life eternall: and so openeth the door of our hearts, by making us wil∣ling to receive, and entertaine him. Thus he opened the understanding of the A∣postles, Luk. 24.45. Act. 16, 14 that they might understand the scriptures: and the heart of Lydia, that shee attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. If any man hear my voyce and open] Having shewed by what means he outward∣lie works our repentance and salvation: he now comes to that, which is to be don by us, that is, to hear and hearken unto his knock or call, & to open the door, that he may enter in. Outwardly, we hear Christs knocking, when we attend up∣on the word preached by his ministers: and inwardlie, when by faith we embrace the same. We open unto him, when we savingly applie the promises of the Go∣spel, for then Christ with all his benefits enters into our hearts, and dwelleth in us, when by true obedience we consecrate our selves, as a living sacrifice, holy and ac∣ceptable unto him. And in deed, happie are they, that thus worke out their owne salvation: for Christ will not leave them, but perfect that which he hath begun, to their eternal comfort, as here he promiseth. I will come in to him, and sup with him] Now he sheweth what he will doe for them, that hear his knocke, to the end we might open the more willingly and rea∣dily unto him. Three excellent mercies are here promised, 1: He will come in to us, 2 sup with us, and 3: receive us to sup with him. First, he saith, I will come in to him, that is, he will with the Father and holy Ghost dwell in our hearts by faith, Io. 14.23. as it is written. Jf any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Serm. 144. de Temp. A dignitie far greater then if an earthly king should be pleased to dwel with us, and make our house, his pallace. Jt is more, saith Austin, to have Christ in the hart then in the house: for our hart is nearer to us, then our house. Hence we are called the temples of God, and of the holie Ghost, and of Christ, who by his spi∣rit dwelleth in us, XXV Ar∣gument of Chr. Deity. and wee in him. Which againe clearely proveth the Godhead of Christ. And I will sup with him] This is a second benefit. Christ sups with us, when by faith he makes us partakers of the word and sacraments, takes away our sins, covers our infirmities, and meekly stoopes to our weake capasitie: As when some great monarch comes into the cottage of a poor man, How Christ is said to sup with us. not disdaining to sup with him, and eat of his mean and cuntry fare. Christ sups with us, when he de∣lighteth in our faith and conversion, like as frindes at meale rejoyce togither.
Now this is spoken by an allegory not as if Christ needed our supper, but we make ready for him, and he is said to sup with us, when in faith and bedience we per∣forme acceptable service, and wholie consecrate our selves unto him. And he with me] to wit he shall sup with me. For Christ will not come emp∣tie, but loaden with blessings, to inrich, and replenish them with the food of hea∣ven, and communicate unto them the good things of the Gospell, as righteousnes, holines, peace, the joy of the holy Ghost, and to be short life, and eternall happi∣nesse. And thus much for the allegoricall promise propounded unto us in this place. But this allegorie is abused by Libertines, Pelagians, and Jesuites, The abuse of this alle∣gorie is shewed and resuted. (whom the Lu∣therans also begin to imitate) to establish bence (contrarie to the scriptures) univer∣sal grace, to the injuring of the free grace of Christ. For seeing, it is said: I stand and knock, Jf any man heare and open, &c. They inferre, that God hath made uni∣versally unto all this promise, and as all are counselled to open to Christ, so it is in their free-will, eyther to admit, or exclude him. For, saith Bellarmin, they at whose heart the Lord knocketh, eyther have sufficient power to open, or els they have not. If they have, then the thing we plead for is granted. If they have not, then why I pray you, doth the Lord knock? or is be ignorant that they can∣not open. Would we not account him vnwise, who should knock at his neighbours door, kno∣wing in the mean time, that there is no man within to open unto him? First, I answer with Ierom, that parables, and the exposition of darke sentences, are not to be brought for the confirmation of doctrines. Now all this is spoken allegorically, and by an anthropopatheia, and not properly: for wheras Christ is said, to knocke like a traveller at the doore, and to sup with them that open: The Iesu∣ites argu∣ment retor∣ted upon him. If this should be taken according to the letter of the text, he should not be God omni∣potent. For eyther he can open, or els he can not. If he can not doe it, except we open unto him: how then is he omnipotent? but if he can, why then doth he knocke? or what use is there that we should open to him. Would not he seem to be unwise, who should knock at his neighbours door, having in the mean time the key in his owne hand? Secondly, the consequence will not hold from what is conditional to the thing categorically required. As, If any man heare, and open: therefore it should follow, that it is in our free-will to doe the same. For conditionals prove nothing, but what ought to be don by us, and what, if don, will follow thereupon. Thus E∣rasmus disputed against Luther: If yee will, yee shall eat the good things of the earth: therefore, (saith he) men have a free-will to doe good, and repent. But this the scripture wholie denies. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Ier. 13, 23. Matt. 7.18. Philip. 2.13. then may yee also doe good, that are accustomed to doe evill. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: for it is God, which worketh in you both to will, and to doe, according to his good pleasure. Luther therefore answng to Erasmus, saith, that oftentimes these condi∣tionals, doe signifie an impossibility , If one should say: Jf thou thinkest, O Maevus, to equal Virgil in singing: Jt behoveth thee to sing better then as yet thou hast don. If thou thinkest to surpasse Cicero, O Scotus, then thou must in sted of thy subtilties, manifest more eloquence. If thou wilt compare with David: then compose such psalmes, as he hath don: which manner of speech, signifies things, which are not possible in regard of our owne strength, though to God all things are possible: And indeed the scriptures by such expres∣sions doe declare unto us, not what we can do of our selves, but what the Lord may worke in us by his owne power. Thirdlie, concerning universall grace, and power to open of our selves: First, it is false, that the same is bestowed on all in the state of nature: considering that the meanes of conversion and salvation is not alike offered unto all: But allwayes as it hath pleased the Lord, where, when, and to whom he would. We see, that the Turkes, Jewes, and Pagans to this day have not the meanes of salvation, which we Christians enjoy by the singular mercie of God: 2. we doe not deny, but such at whose door Christ knockes by his special grace, have sufficient helpe to
open, so farre as concerneth the outward means, and indeed this were enough for all, but that all by nature are deafe, and dead in sins: not withstanding it is suf∣ficient for their conversion, who inwardlie are wrought upon by the spirit of God. But it is untrue, that this sufficiencie is made effectuall and operative through a free-will in us: because while Christ outwardlie knocketh, we inwardlie are dead in our sins, beeing deafe, and blinde, blacke Ethiopians, spotted Leopards, evill trees, which of themselves cannot bring forth good fruit. And therfore the greatest out∣ward meanes are of no force, untill there be an inward and powerfull motion, rai∣sing us up from the death of sin, illuminating the minde, opening the hart, and changing the whole man: neyther is Christ ignorant that we cannot open at his knocke, much lesse unwise in knocking: but doth it, because he knowes we are inwardly deafe, and dead in sin, and unable of our selves to open: besides hereby to convince us of our miserable estate by nature, and to rayse us up from the death of sin, and to give unto us both will and power to open unto him. And lastly the scripture speaks in a twofold manner of our conversion. Some∣times the Lord attributes to us, and requires of us the whole worke therof, as if it depended altogether on our will; Isai. 1.19. Zach. 1.3. Ezech. 18.31. Mar. 1.15. Why God requireth and attri∣buteth con∣version to man. Chap. 6. de Grat. & lib. arbit De correp. & grat. Chap. 3. Esech. 36.26. Ier. 31.18. Ioh. 6.44. Ioh. 15.6. If yee bee willing and obedient, yee shall eat the good things of the land. Turne yee unto mee, and I will turne unto you: make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will yee die, O house of Israel: repent yee, and beleeve the Gospel, not, as if it were () or in our power to doe these things. For how can they spiritually move, who are dead in sins? But the scripture thus spea∣keth: 1. To teach us, that wee neither will, nor can doe any thing of our selves: but are bound to ask it of God. And 2. because God by such exhortations, threat∣nings, promises and conditions doth please effectually to raise up our desire, and by his spirit inableth us to performe his will. Austin saith wel: God commandeth us those things which we cannot doe, that we may know, what we ought to aske of him. And in another place: O man observe from the commandement, what thou shouldest have: by reproofes, what thou art deprived of by thy owne default, and in prayer acknowledge, whence to receive, what thou desirest to have. And againe, other where the Lord ascribes the whole worke of our conversion unto himself alone, and commandeth us so to acknowledge it. As, I will make you to walke in my wayes, and I will take the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. Turne thou me, and I shall be turned. No man can come unto me, except the Father draw him: without mee yee can doe nothing: fee the like Ephe. 2.1. and 1 Col. 2.13. 1 Cor. 2.14. Rom. 8.7. 2 Cor. 3.5. Luk. 24.45. Act. 16.14. Act. 11.18. All which testimonies doe plainly evince, that the grace of conversion is not indifferent or universall: but as our sufficient, so also our effectuall help doth wholy depend upon the generall and particular pleasure and motion of God. Which difference of the scriptures, and the cause thereof, because the Pelagi∣ans and their adherents have not observed: But ther abused the former places, as if they were absolutely spoken: And corrupted the latter by their equivocations about grace, calling it (as they also do to this day) a swasorie, indifferent and re∣sistible grace, limited by the will of man eyther to that which is good or evill: they have most falsly wrested the same, for to establish their Idoll of free-will. Now herewithall they must of necessity embrace all other Pelagian heresies, and impieties also: as namely. 1 That faith and good workes foreseen, doe goe before Gods predestination: and so are not from Gods predestinating of them: whereupon it will follow, that predestination beeing an effect of causes and conditions foreseen, is not to be cal∣led a predestination: but rather a postdestination. 2 That faith going before predestination, must also bee before vocation: see∣ing we are elected before we are called: And by this ground, not God, but man should be the author of faith: contrarie to that of Rom. 9.16. Jt is not of him that willeth, or of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercie. 3 That the will eyther co-working, or not co-working with foregoing grace
doth make men to differ, which is contrarie to 1 Cor. 4.7. Who maketh thee to dif∣fer from another? And what hast thou that thou didst not receive? And so the increase of faith and grace should be given according to the merit of congruitie. 4 That mans will is not corrupted, or made worse by the fal of Adam: And so eyther there should bee no originall sin at all, or els but in name onely: wheras, The heart of man is deceitfull above all things. 5 That the law is not above mans strength, but that he may absolutely fulfill the same: and bee altogether free from sin in this life, if he would: wheras the scriptures on the contrary teach. That there is not any one just man in the earth which doth good and sinneth not. All which errors establish merits of condignity, over∣throw the grace, and merits of Christ, and so consequently the truth of Christian religion, beeing nothing indeed, but in name onely: and in a word confirmes pa∣gan divinity and philosophy. For in all these positions, the names onely excep∣ted, there is nothing but what philosophie it self teacheth, both concerning the beginnings and reward of vertue: which to philosophers is faith, righteousnes and workes. To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit with mee] He shuts up the epistle with the accustomed Epiphonema, or acclamatorie conclusion: beeing a promise, and as it were a third reason of the exhortation. And it is twofold: 1. from the reward of the victorie: I will grant to him, to sit with mee on my throne. And 2 from his example: Even as I also overcame, and am set downe with my father. &c. Or els this may be a reason of the former promise, wherefore Christ will grant, or give power and part of his throne to him that overcommeth: to wit, because hee now as a conquerour sitteth on the throne of his Father. For often in scripture the par∣ticle  (here used) is causal, as in Io. 17.2. As thou givest him power. For, because thou givest &c. And Luk. 4.36. bee yee mercifull, as your Father: For: because your Father is mercifull, &c. The Throne is the seat of glorie and power. Christs throne, is the glorious power of his exaltation: the which he promiseth to make us reallie partakers of if we overcome: for we shall be coheires with him: yet so, as there shall alwayes remaine a remarkeable difference between Christ the head, and us his members: And therefore he saith not: I will grant to him to sit in the throne of my Father: that is, at the right hand of the Father: which dignity is indeed onely proper to Christ the head. 22 Hee which hath an eare to heare, &c.] See Chap. 2. v. 7.11.17.
THE PREFACE OF THE SECOND VISION. Of him that sate on the Throne: And of the booke sealed with seven seales: And concerning the Lamb opening the booke. HItherto Iohn hath recorded, those things which he had seen, & re∣ceived of Christ to be written by name unto the seven Churches of Asia. The things which follow in the rest of this booke, are of a higher nature, and concerne the future condition of the whole Church, The condi∣tion and lot of the Church in this world. but especially the churches of Europe. And all tends to teach, that the Church ought not to expect a flourishing estate in this world: seeing it should be tossed and tryed: first with manifold persecutions of tyrants: af∣terward by heretickes: And at last should bee oppressed by Antichrist, with a more heavy servitude both spirituall and corporal, then formerlie shee ever had been afflicted by open enemies and tyrants. Now least the hearts of the Godly should faint under the burden: The com∣forts of the godly under the crosse. fower kinds of comfort are contained in this prophesy, beeing taken: 1. FROM GODS PRESENT HELPE: who will not sorsake his in the battell. 2. FROM THE TIME OF THEIR TROUBLES: they shall neyther bee allwayes, or o∣uerlong upon them. 3. FROM THE END OF THEIR ADVERSARIES, which shall bee tragicall and mortall. And lastly, FROM THE HAPPIE CHANGE OF THEIR WARFARE, Christ will powerfully revenge the cause of his Church in this world, and at length glorifie her in the heavens. Moreover these things are premonstrated by Iohn, The follo∣wing visi∣ons are di∣stinct. in sixe distinct visi∣ons: And they are partlie universall, representing the entire historie of the Church from her first beginning, untill the last judgement: Of this nature, is the second, third, fourth and seventh vision. And partlie particular, onely shadowing out the battels of the Church, with Antichrist, with the issues thereof, as the fift and sixt: notwithstanding in the conclusion of every one of them, a description of the last judgement, with the punishments of the wic∣ked, and reward of the Godlie are expressed, eyther literally or figuratively; as I have allready shewed in the preface: The reason of which repetition is wondred at, but cannot be declared by such interpreters, who judge, that the historie of the Church is described in these visions without any intermissi∣on: whereas the observation of our method, doth clearly manifest the same. The second vision is contained in Chap. 4.5.6. & 7. And it consisteth first of a preparation unto the vision: in which Iohn saw the majestie of God sit∣ting on the throne, and the great attendance given unto him. chap. 4. And in his hand a booke sealed with seven seales chap. 5. At length opened by the Lambe. The fower Acts of the second vi∣sion. Secondly it containes the vision it self: representing in fower di∣stinct acts the historie of the Church from that time unto the end of theworld. In the first Act is propounded the different state of the Church from the time of the Romane tyrants, untill the rising of Antichrist, in the first 600 yeares, prefi∣gured
in the opening of the first foure seales, Chap. 6. v. 8 The second Act is an opposition of the foregoing proposition, for the comfort of the martyrs, and especially those, who suffered under the pale horse, at the opening of the fift seale Chap. 6. v. 9.10.11. The third Act is an amplification of the calamities of the Church under the Easterne and Westerne Antichrist, after the revolu∣tion of the first thousand years, and thence forward, revealed at the opening of the sixt seale Chap. 6. v. 12.13.14. And in the last place, the fourth Act containes the final end of all the combats of the Church: fearfull indeed, and tragicall unto the wicked; but happie and glorious unto the faithfull mar∣tyrs, and Christs sealed ones Chap. 6. v. 15.16.17. & Chap. 7. unto the end Now this is the true state or distribution of the second vision: And so we come to handle the interpretation thereof. THE ARGVMENT and parts of Chap. IV. THis chapter is a preparation to the second vision, and containes a de∣scription of the divine majestie of him that sate on the throne: the scope and drift thereof, is to let the faithfull understand, that however they are pressed with afflictions in this life, yet they have a glorious and omnipotent judge in the heavens, to revenge their cause. The Chapter hath two parts. In the first, appeareth the glory, and majestie of God sitting on the Throne, v. 1.2.3. The second: containeth a twofold description: 1. Of the companie of the foure and twenty Elders. And 2. Of the foure beasts, with their thanksgiving, from v. 4. unto the end of the Chapter. The first part of the Chapter. The Majestie of God sitting on the Throne. 1 After this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: & the first voyce which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet, talking with me, which said, come up hither, and I will shew thee things, which must be hereafter. 2 And immediately I was in the spirit: and behold a throne was set in heaven, and one sate on the throne. 3 And he that sate was to look upon like a Iasper, and a Sardine stone, and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an Emerald.
THE COMMENTARIE. AFter these things I saw] That is, after I had seen the first vision: for however Alcasar supposeth, that the foregoing Chapters are as a prologue to the booke: Yet Ribera, and that groundedly doth acknowledge here a second vision: because John saith, After these things I saw, that is, after those things alreadie related, I saw yet other visions. And behold, a door was opened in heaven] As formerly I have shewed, so here a∣gaine I would have it to be observed: That we are not to search for mysteries in every particular of the visions, but onely in those circumstances, which doe con∣cern the quality and scope of them. Let others (if they pleas) by heaven understād the Church: & by the door opened the sence of the scriptures there interpreted, by which we search and find out the mysteries of God. But for my owne part, I un∣derstand it simplie of the place, where these things were seen of Iohn, to wit: not, as formerly in Patmos, but in heaven, where, as upon a larg and ample theatre, the Acts of this vision were represented unto him. And thus the following visions are differenced from the first, as beeing of a higher nature. He therefore saw a door opened in heaven, that is, he saw heaven opened, & with∣in the heavens an open Pavilion or stage, alluding to the custome of commoedi∣ants. Act. 7.56. Steeven also the first Martyr saw the heavens opened, towit, corporally, but John saw this in the spirit, as it is in v. 2. however we may hence truely conclude, that neither the perspicuity of the mind, nor bodelie eyes of man, can reach to heavenlie things, except the Lord doe open heaven unto him. And the first voyce] The positive is here by an enallage, or change of words, put for the comparative () first, for () former, as Chap. 2.4. thou hast left thy first, The voyce of Christ revealing the revela∣tion. that is, thy former love. And 1 Tim. 5.12. They have cast of their first, that is, their former faith: he meaneth that great voyce as of a trumpet, speak∣ing unto him Chap. 1.10. For as there v. 1. it is said that Christ shewes unto his servants things that must shortelie come to passe. So here this great voyce saith: come up hither, and I will shew thee &c. So then both this and that, is the voyce of Christ the revealer of the revelation. Which must bee hereafter] That is, the hidden things of Gods secret counsell, concerning the future condition of his Church in the world, from this present time untill the end thereof. Thus he brieflie openeth unto Iohn the argument of the following prophesie: not for the satisfying eyther of his or our desire after the knowledge of novelties: but to arme the Godlie with comfort against the ap∣proching troubles. 2 And immediatelie I was in the spirit] that is, in a traunce, as Chap. 1.10. he ascribes it unto the spirit, least he might be thought to relate a dreame: for he saw these things waking: by which it appeareth, that he was come to himself after the first vision, and beeing again ravished he saw another vision (although it is not manifest, what distance of time there was betwixt them) and ascended from Patmos by the commandement of Christ up into heaven, not indeed by any locall motion, but inward illumination, the holy Ghost representing these things unto his understanding, and revealing the mysteries thereof unto him; which kinde of visions are called intellectual, as we noted on Chap. 1.10. And behold a throne was set] Now he expoundeth, what he saw in the heavens, namelie, a royall throne, and one sitting thereon: and an honourable session of El∣ders: thundrings, lightnings, voyces, lamps of fire burning, a sea of glasse like unto Chrystall, winged beasts full of eyes before and behinde, singing and praysing him that sate on the Throne, having a booke in his right hand, sealed with seven seales: and in the last place the Lambe opening the seven
seales, with the terrible events thereof. These things are the summe of this second vision. The throne which he saw is also spoken of Chap. 1. v. 4. and mentioned eight and twentie times in this booke: and hereby is represented the dominion and judgement of God over all things, whereof he will have us to be alwayes mindfull. 3 And he which sate on the throne] He saw not an emptie throne, but one sit∣ting thereon: whose name indeed and countenance is not declared: but his ma∣jesty and glory is magnifically described both in this and the following verse, as beeing to look upon like a Jasper and a Sardine-stone, and having round about his throne a rainbow in sight like unto an Emerald: by which similitude is set forth not an earthlie, but a divine majestie, in as much as nothing can bee imagined to be more pretious then these pearles, or more manificent then such an aspect. A lasper] There are diverse sorts of this stone, as Plinie lib. 37. cap. 9. and Isidor. cap. 6. lib. 7. doe affirme: and it is thought that the Indian Iasper called Polygrammos, is the best of them, beeing greene, cleare, and somewhat like un∣to an Emerauld: the Persian is like to brasse: that of Cypria is of a blewish co∣lour, and the Phrigian somewhat reddish: that which is found in Thracia is much like unto the Indian: but the Chalcidonian is lesse beautifull then any of them. Plinie writeth that he saw one of eleven ounces in waight, on which was ingraven the image of Neroes breastplate. It is thought that this stone is a singular preserva∣tive against all manner of deadly poyson, and withall hath manie other vertues in it. Sardine] in latine Sardius, but Plinie calleth it Sarda, which is white in colour, Lib. 37. Cap. 7. wheras the Sardine or Sardius is red. Of this stone see Exod. 28.17. The nature of this stone as some affirme, is good to expel feare, to cheare the spirit, and to pre∣serve those that weare the same from enchantments and other evils: but others say, that there is now adayes no such vertue in it. Emerauld] This is a most pleasant Germme, green of colour, and very delightful to the sight: the Scythian stone is the most pretious, although the Aegyptian and Brittish also (as Albertus Magnus witnesseth) are of great worth. They write that Nero beheld his fencers at their game through an Emerald. It drives away poy∣son, preserves chastitie, strengthens the memorie, and helpeth the sight, &c. Like to this stone, he saw about the throne a rainbow, which we see commonlie to be of white, yellow and greene colour. It is probable that this vision cheifly alludes unto the pretiousnesse of these stones. For whatsoever is eyther pretious or pro∣fitable, al is to be found fully and perfectly in him that sits on the throne. Some in∣terpret the Iasper and Sardine, of the two natures of Christ. The Jasper which is greene refreshing the eyes, they attribute to Christs divinity: & the Sardine, which is red, unto his humanity: like as his flesh was red in the blood of his passion. The rainbow they will have to bee a signe of his grace, alluding to that in Genesis, Gen. 9.13. where God is said to set his bowe in the cloude for a token of his covenant. Whence they conclude, that this rainbow like unto an Emerald, doth signifie Gods everlasting mercie, which is green, that is, never fadeth away. But such kinde of allegories, do serve little or nothing at all for our instruction. If it bee demanded who he saw sitting on the throne. I answer, that without all doubt God is here represented: for it is expresly called the Throne of God chap. 7.15. and 12.5. & chap. 19.4. Notwithstanding interpreters are diversly min∣ded about it. Lyra understands it of one God, three in persons: appearing on the throne after this manner, as beeing the governour & king of the Church militant, & judge of the whole world. Others expound it of the person of the father alone. But we may safely understad it absolutely of God sitting & reigning in the person of the son, to whom the father hath given all judgment; he therfore who is said here to sit on the throne, is the samewho before gloriously walked in the midst of the
seven candlesticks, namely Christ the son of God. And this doth plainlie appeare from v. 8. & 9. where two Epithites ascribed Chap. 1. v. 8. & 18. as proper unto Christ (to wit, he which was, which is, and which is to come, and again, he that liveth for evermore) are here attributed to him that sits on the throne. The like we may gather, from Chap. 21.6. where he that sits on the throne cals himself α and ο, the beginning & ending, who giveth to him that is a thirst, of the fountain of the water of life. but Christ calleth himself α and ο, chap. 1.8. And in Ioh. 4.14. & 7.37. we are taught, that it is he, who gives to them that are a thirst, to drinke of the water of life: to be short both the Ordinary Glosse, as also the Catholike glosse, of Marloratus, interpret this of Christ, the Lord of the Church: neither doth the reason hereof seem to be obscure. For the same, whom before he saw walking among the candle∣sticks as Lord on earth: he now sees him, sitting as Iudge in heaven. That which may bee objected concerning the Lambe, seems not to take away what wee have said: for there is no absurditie in this, that Christ should bee re∣presented unto Iohn under diverse figures in a diverse respect. Before he saw him walking among the candlesticks, as the head of the Church: Now he sees him sitting on the throne, as the Iudge of the world, and also as it were a Lambe slaine, and made a sacrifice for us. Thus also the Apostle to the Hebrewes makes Christ both high-priest, and sacrifice, and Altar in a diverse respect. Neyther are we to imagine, that Christ the son so sits on the throne, as if the Father were put by, for it is the Father which giveth unto the son to sit on his throne, as it hath been shewed Chap. XXVI. Argu. of Chr. deity. 3.21. So then the Father also sits on the throne in the Son. Which is another strong argument proving the Godhead of Christ. He which sits on the throne is Lord God omnipotent, v. 8. But Christ (as we have proved) sits on the throne: and therefore he is Iehovah, omnipotent. The second part of the Chapter. The attendance about the throne. First, the companie of the foure and twentie Elders: And secondly, the companie of the foure beasts, with the thanksgiving of them both. 4 And round about the Throne were foure and twenty seates, and upon the seats I saw foure and twenty Elders sitting, clothed in white raiment, and they had on their heads crownes of gold. 5 And out of the Throne proceeded lightnings, and thunderings, and voyces, and there were seuen lampes of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven spirits of God. 6 And before the Throne there was a sea of glasse like unto Crystall: & in the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne, were foure beasts, full of eyes, before and behinde. 7 And the first beast was like a Lyon, and the second beast like a calfe, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle. 8 And the foure beasts had each of them sixe vvings about him, & they were full of eyes within, & they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Allmighty, which was, & is, and is to come. 9 And when those beasts give glory, and honour, & thankes, to him that sate on the Throne, vvho liveth for ever and ever, 10 The foure and twentie Elders fall down before him that sate on the
Throne, & worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crownes before the Throne, saying, 11 Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and povver: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, & were created. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd about the Throne] After he had described the majestie of him that sate on the Throne, that is, eyther God absolutely, or Christ the glorious Iudge: about which we need not to contend. For the sence is all one: because God sitteth and judgeth in Christ. Now he comes to describe the attendance he saw about the throne. And this second part of the Chapter, is a descrip∣tion of the foure and twenty Elders sitting about the same: and of the lightnings pro∣ceeding out of the throne, &c. And of the foure beasts, in the midst, and round a∣bout it: with the thanksgiving of them all. In which diverse men seek diverse my∣steries. Lyra understands by the seates: the Cathedral Churches: Lyraes my∣steries con∣cerning the seats, and their El∣ders. and by the foure & twenty Elders all Bishops: alluding to so manie orders of Priests, whom Da∣vid ordained weekly for the service of the tabernacle: 1 Chro. 24. But what need of Cathedrals in heaven? Hierome understands by them the foure & twentie bookes of the Old Testament, but how fitly I will not here dispute of. Others will have so many Angels to bee noted out therby. But Chap. 7. v. 11. the Angels are diffe∣re need from the Elders. Others suppose more probablie, that hereby is repre∣sented the companie of the Patriarks, Prophets, godly Iudges, Kings, and to be short of all the saintes under the law, who excelled in faith and piety, and now triumph with Christ in heaven. They are said to be foure and twentie, a finite number beeing put for an indefinite. Some understand it of twelve Patriarcks, and twelve Apostles, but that cannot bee: for what then should become of the rest of the Patriarcks, Prophets, Iudges and other godly governours and kings? We therefore doe rather Iudge, that by this number is noted a perfect Senate or assemblie, which ordinarily is accounted entire, if it consist of 24 persons. They are said to be Elders, because age teacheth wisdom, and skill in judgement. And indeed Senatus, a Senate, comes from senium, olde age. They sit on thrones: 1 Cor. 6.2. be∣cause they rest from their labours, and shall with Christ judge the world & An∣gels: not as if Christ could not judge the world without them: for the Father hath given unto him all power, and all judgement both in heaven and in earth: but 1: Matt. 28.18. Ioh. 5.22. because he is pleased to communicate this honour unto the saintes, according unto the pro∣mise Chap. 3.21. And 2 because his judgement is righteous, which all the saintes, acknowledge and assent unto. This exposition (to let passe what others say) is undoubtedlie agreable unto the analogie of faith, in case any mysterie be hereby typified out unto us. But because these Elders doe not alwayes remaine sitting on their thrones: for sometimes they rise up, sometimes they fall downe, and worship, and sing Hale∣lujah to God, and to the Lambe, as v. 10. & Chap. 5.8. & Chap. 11.16. & Chap. 19.4. beeing the chiefe actors, in setting forth the prayses of God: I hence ob∣serve, that in the Revelation, (where diverse persons are brought in, some ta∣rying, and others departing) this first apparition or company is brought in before the amplification of the vision, not under the forme of young men, but of Elders, for reverence and gravitie sake: neither doth this any way contradict our former exposition: for in an honourable assembly, is peace and honour: by the gratula∣torie harmonie is figured out the office of the prophetical Church in heaven. And indeed I see not how we should otherwise understand, what is meant by the often signing of these Elders, except we understand it as alluding to the custome and manner of enterludes.
Clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads crownes &c.] By this twofold ornament the priestly and kingly dignitie of the saintes is shadowed out: white gar∣ments, that is, pure, bright and undefiled robes, such as become priests of righte∣ousnes. And with all the puritie of the saintes in heaven, and the integritie of the divine judgement is hereby gnifyed. Now whence the saintes have this puri∣tie, we are taught Chap. 7.14. namely, by washing their garments in the blood of the Lambe: that is, perfectly putting on the Lord Christ Iesus, who is this white robe, wherewith we delight to be cloathed, and by which we are accep∣table to God. Crownes of gold on their heads] That is most pretious crownes, (for what is more pretious then gold?) they have them on their heads, both because they reigne as kings with Christ; Reve. 1.6. who hath made us kings and priests to God and his Father: as also because they have overcome sin, satan and the world. This is that crowne of life promised to the Angel of Smyrna Chap. 2.10. and unto all who love the Lord. Jam. 2 Tim. 4.8. 1.12. This is that crowne of righteousnes, wherein Paul rejoyced, and which is laid up for all them that love the appearing of Christ: This is that crowne of glorie, 1 Pet. 5.4. which fadeth not away, but shall certainely be enjoyed by all the faithfull servants of Christ. And out of the throne proceeded] This second apparition shewes the majestie of him that sate on the throne, out of which proceeded lightnings, thunders & voyces: here we need not seek for any other mysteries, but onely to take notice, that these things are proofes of the omnipotencie and divine majestie of Christ, who sends forth such judgements from his throne against the wicked: as Andreas well ob∣serveth. And voyces] Namely the terrible voyces of thundrings and lightnings. This is spoken appositively: for thunder is the voyce of Iehovah shaking the earth, & terri∣fying the ungodlie The voyce of Jehovah maketh the desert to quake, Psal. 29.8. which teacheth how terrible and inaccessible the seat of God is. In Chap. 10.3. these thundrings are said to be seven, and to utter their voyces, wherein there is an alle∣gory, as shall be shewed on the place. And soven lamps] Namely, were, or stood before the throne of God: these are interpreted by John himself, to be the seven spirits, which he calleth the seven Angels standing before God: Alluding to the vision of Zacharie Chap. 4. where the seven lamps on the golden candlesticke, v. 2. are v. 10. called the eyes of Iehovah, which run to and fro through the whole earth. Signifying by eyes the Angels: who are as it were the eyes feet and hands of God: which is spoken after the manner of men, like as Constables and Sergeants are said to be the eyes, hands and feet of the magistrate, because by them he performeth, and knoweth all things that are don in the city. The like allusion is in Chap. 5.6. where the eyes of the lambe are the seven spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. But of this more in its place. Also before the throne] The third apparition about the throne, is the sea of glasse like unto Chrystall. Which sea some of the ancient, and they which follow them, will have to bee the sacrament of Baptisme, said to be of glasse, as Lyra supposeth, because of its puritie and like to Chrystall, because of its character, which can never be blotted out. Let them who will make use of this interpretation. But neither Ribera, nor my self do approve thereof. Alcasar also judgeth, that it can∣not bee applied, but with violence unto the sacrament of Baptisme. Andreas Ce∣sariensis understandeth it of the multitude of Angels, and heavenlie powers. Others suppose it hath an allusion unto Solomons brazen sea: and that the materiall alte∣ration of brasse, into glasse which one may see through, doth denote the difference betwixt the Law, and the Gospell: but these allegories will not hold. The inter∣pretation therefore of Ribera is more probable, applying it to the multitude of men living on the earth: who are compared to the sea of shining glasse: because the sea is a gathering of many waters, by which peoples and nations are signi∣fyed, Chap. 12.15. and they are shining, because the counsels and the most se∣cret
actions of men are before the throne, and open to the eyes of God, beeing like the clearest chrystall discerning all things. Bullinger before Ribera is yet more cleare. The sea, saith he, before the Throne re∣sembling glasse and Chrystall in brightnes and perspicuity, signifies this fraile world, which is allwayes in Gods sight. For the holie scriptures doe type out unto us by the sea (in regard, of its instabilite noyse and tumultuousnes) the mutability and inconstancie of this present world: the state thereof beeing more fraile then glasse. This exposition I well approve of, as beeing indeed most probable: As for Alcasars fiction in applying it unto his devised sacrament of Confession, it is both a violent and a false wresting of the text. So then the sea, signifies the world, which is said, to be before the throne, because the same shalbe judged by Christ. The world indeed doth swell & rage against the saintes: but it is as fraile as glasse or Chrystall, whose waves are easilie broken, and held in by the powerfull hand of the Lord. Now this thing is here inserted, both for the comfort of John and the whole Church. In this sence also, and for the same end it is said in Chap. 8.8. the great mountaine burning with fire was cast into the sea: & Chap. 15.2. they that had overcome the beast, are said to stand upon the sea of glasse, of which more in its place. And in the midst of the throne] The fourth apparition about the throne, are the foure beasts, differing in forme, but having eyes before and behinde, and each of them sixe wings: Alluding to the foure beasts in Ezechiel Chap. 1. And therefore ancient and moderne writers for the most part, Whither the foure beasts type out the foure E∣vangelists. understand by them the foure Evan∣gelists, which are commonlie expressed, and painted in these formes: Matthew, in the likenesse of a man: Mark of a Lyon: Luke of an Oxe: and Iohn of a flying Eagle. Irenaeus applies it to the foure Gospels. But Lyra refutes this, from the or∣der here observed: because the face of a man, appropriated to Matthew, is here put in the third place, he therefore here understands the foure Patriarchal Chur∣ches, viz. Hierusalem, Antioch, Alexandria, & Constantinople. But if so, where then in the mean time was Rome? did she not at all appeare in heaven? He tels us she was comprehended under one. But which of them, or how it was, he sheweth not, neither indeed could he. Besides the old writers doe not agree, about the tipes of the beasts, in applying them to the Evangelists. The common opi∣nion, is that Matthew should be the man: and Mark the Lyon: Lib. 1. de consensu Evang. cap. 6. but Austin & Bede will have the contrarie. The reason alleadged why Matthew is likened to a man is, because he begins his Gospel from the generation of Christ according to his manhood: Againe Marc to a Lyon, in regard he begins from the preaching of the Baptist, crying like a Lyon in the wildernesse: so Luke to an Oxe, beginning his Gospel with the sacrifice of Zacharie. Iohn is the flying Eagle, in writing high and great mysteries of Christs divinity. But what soliditie there is in these things, let others judge. It is tedious to set downe their reasons, why these beasts should appeare in foure diverse formes. First as a Lyon, because (say they) God under the Law of nature shewed his glorie immediately unto the fathers. Secondly, as an Oxe, be∣cause the Lord then required such beasts to be offered in sacrifice. Thirdlie, as a man, because the son of God was made man. Fourthly, as an Eagle, because the holy Ghost descending from heaven, causeth the righteous to fly upward. Ribera maintaining the common opinion, Commen. in Apoc. 4. num. 39. answereth Lyras objection concern∣ing the change of the order here. That the common exposition observes the or∣der of writing: But Iohn the things, according to their manifestation: for the Baptist began to preach before Christ. But this is to abuse the reader: besides how could Iohn see the foure Evaugelists in the heavens, he beeing himself one of them here then present upon earth? To this Ribera answers. That John saw those things which long after his death were to come to passe. But this seems to con∣tradict the text: forasmuch as he saw the foure beasts, which were then in heaven, as also the foure and twenty Elders, that is, the Church triumphant with Christ. Some interpret this of the foure Monarchies, with the diverse conditions of the Church
militant under them, and for this cause they are said to have severall formes, or faces: but the following thanksgiving little sutes with worldly monarchies. Others referre it to the foure principall mysteries of faith: If the foure mysteries of faith. The mysterie of Christs incarnation to the face of a man. His passion and death to the forme of an oxe, as bearing our iniquities, and because he was sacrificed for us. His resurre∣ction, to a Lyon, even the Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, overcoming death: And lastly by his ascension, he resembles the flying Eagle. To be short, Whither foure prin∣cipal An∣gels: there are some who expound this place of foure principall Angels: alluding to the beasts in Ezechiel, which shadowed out (as they say) so manie An∣gels. But this cannot be: For 1: the Angels are manifestly distinguished from these beasts, Chap. 7.11. Againe because these together with the Elders sing prayses to the Lambe, Chap. 5.9. Thou hast rede med us to God by thy blood: and hast made us to our God, kings & priests. which argues they were men, and not Angels. But not to use many words: They are the Church of the New Testament. Even as the foure and twenty Elders typifie the Church of the Patriarchs and Prophets: so the foure beasts shadow out the Apo∣stolicall Church triumphing with Christ in heaven. So then the Elders are types of the legal, and the beasts of the Evangelicall Church, both gloriously raigning with Christ. But why doe these appeare before the throne? because, as the thanksgiving and following visions manifest, this is the second apparition, and serves for a two∣fold use in this heavenly sight: not onely for the making up of the celestiall har∣monie, but also to beare a speciall part with the companie of Elders, thorow out the visions. The different forme of the foure beasts, Why the formes of the beasts are diverse. doth signifie the gathering of the Church of the New Testament, from the foure corners of the world, consisting of diverse nations, and peoples, and tongues: wheras the foure and twenty Elders are uniforme: because the Church under the Law consisted onely of the Iewish nation. And in the midst of the Throne, After what manner they stood. and round about the throne] There seems to be a difficulty in this, how they could stand in the midst of the throne, and in the circuit of the throne. Some doe thinke, that they so stood, and held up the throne, like as the twelve oxen did underprop the brazen sea in Solomons temple: which was so set upon them, that all their hinder parts were inward, 1 King 7.25. But that cannot bee, for then these beasts should have stood immoveable: wheras on the contrarie we read, that oftentimes they fell downe and worshipped the Lambe: yea one of them Chap. 15.7. gave unto the seven Angels, seven vials full of the wrath of God, &c. Ribora supposeth that three of them were round about the Throne: but the fourth, namely the Eagle beeing lifted up above the rest, flew within the circuit thereof: but there is no use to strive about this thing, as if there were a mysterie in it. For in the midst () doth not denote a mathematicall centre, but accor∣ding to our common expression, a neernesse, and in this place is put for about or close by: as, I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves. Satan came in the midst, that is, (as it is translated) among the sonnes of God. So these foure beasts were about, or neare the throne, even nearer then the Elders, as beeing before them in dignitie. That which is added:  and about the circuit of the throne, doth note there standing to be such, as that they were round about the sides of the throne, & as it were touched the same. So that here the copulative () And, is declarative. Full of eyes before and behinde] The like is said of the living creatures in Eze∣kiel. By their eyes is signified the wachfulnes and singular in-sight of teachers: for it behoveth them to have as it were Argos eyes, that they may be able to feed the sheep, looke well to the things committed to their charge, search the scriptures, and keep off ravenous wolves from the flock. Thus by this heavenly forme, is set forth what they had been, and also how all other teacher ought still to be quali∣fied here on earth.
And the first beast was like a Lyon] The shape likewise of every beast is a∣greeable to the vision in Ezechiel, onely there, each living creature had foure faces: wheras here each of them hath but one. The diversity of their formes denoteth the diversity of gifts in teachers, as a Lyon their fortitude and courage: an Oxe their labour and patience: a Man their understanding and prudencie: And last∣ly the Eagle their quicknesse and sharpenesse of sight: Now for other mysteries from this place I thinke it not meet for men to seeke further. But if any one be prodigal of his time, and desires to read more of these Elders and beasts: he may if it be not too tedious unto him, read Alcasar on this booke, from page 339. unto page 398. And the foure beasts] The first part of this verse containes a description of the beasts: the latter a beginning of the thanksgiving. Now because the fourth is compared unto an Eagle, he therfore attributes unto every one of them sixe wings, full of eyes before and behinde: which is taken out of the vision of Isay, Isai. 6.2. where the use of so many wings is recorded; for otherwise we se, that birds need not more then two, to fly withall. The Seraphims are said to fly with two wings: with o∣ther two they cover their faces, as not beeing able to behold the majesty of God: And with two they cover their feet: that nothing unbeseeming the divine majesty might appeare about them. In that their wings are full of eyes, Why their wings are full of eyes. it denotes that full and perfect light or knowledge, which the Church enjoyeth with God in the hea∣vens. Thus we have heard the description of the foure beasts, and it is as I said before, the second apparition or cōpanie singing prayses to God, & to the Lambe: as here, so also in Chap. 5.8. & 7.11. & 19.14. and as being ministers to God, & publishers of the following visions. See Chap. 6. v. 1.3.5.7. & 15.17. &c. And they rest not day and night] Now he shewes what was don both by the beasts, and by the Elders: the beasts incessantly worship God: The Elders rysing from their seats fall downe, before him that sits on the throne, and worship him: casting their crownes before the Throne: singing prayses together with the beasts. This is the thanksgiving wherewith the Church triumphant doth for ever celebrate God in the heavens. The harmony, is the consenting voyce of all the Prophets and Apostles. This is that excellent and most sweet accord of all the saintes, with one mouth saying, Holy, holy, holy: Thou art worthy, O Lord, to re∣ceive honour, and glory, and power. This is that which we are commanded to pray for: Thy will be don in earth as it is in heaven. The which we are bound not onely to desire, but also after the examples of the saintes in heaven, without cea∣sing to celebrate the praises of the Lord, while we are here on earth, both in thoughts, words and actions. And this is the sum. Holy, holy, holy] Thus also the Seraphims cryed one to another Isay. 6.3. by which threefold acclamation, is signifyed eyther the holie Trinity, or els a per∣petuall iteration of thanksgiving: for God is thrice holy, most holy, yea holinesse and puritie it self, the sanctifyer of men and Angels. Lord God omnipotent] These Epithites Christ attributed unto himself Chap. 1.8. The VII argum. of Christs deity con∣firmed. as being God omnipotent, which was, is, & is to come; And therefore it being ad∣ded to the former arguments, proves againe the deity of Christ. Neyther is it any way derogatorie unto him, although we referre () this threefold title of holinesse unto God himself. For God sits & raigneth in Christ, having given all judgement unto the sonne. Now in what sence God, and Christ are said to be, he which is, was, & is to come, hath been explained. Chap. 1.4. 9 And when those beasts give glory to him that sate, &c.] How can this be, seeing God who is glorious in himself, receives no glory from his creatures? I answer, Iosua said to Achan Chap. 7. Give glory to God and confesse: where to give glorie is not, as if God were made more glorious, then he was in himself before: But give glory, that is, acknowledge & celebrate the all beeing presence, omniscience, omni∣potency, truth & righteousnesse of God. Thus these beasts glorifie God, in cele∣brating his prayse and glory. Thus we also give glory to God by confession and
thanksgiving, not adding any thing which before he had not: but by acknowledg∣ing and ascribing to him that which before we did not, & this the whole world with us ought to acknowledge, and doe the like. Who liveth for ever and ever] This glorious epithite of God, is also ascribed to Christ gloriously walking in the midst of the seven candlesticks Chap. 1.18. In the Original as here, so in the following verse. It is () they will give, for, they did give, the future being put for the imperfect, by an Enallage, or change of the tense. 10. The Elders fell downe] Behold the accord of both these heavenly compa∣nies. The Elders also with all due reverence doe praise God, rise up from their seats, & fall downe before the throne, worshipping him that sate thereon. And cast their crownes before the throne] They cast not away their heavenly glo∣rie, but in glorie they humbly worship God, attributing unto him the prayse of his almightie power, creation, providence, and preservation of all things, and to be short for their victorie over the enemies of the Church. For to cast downe their crownes before the throne, Lib. 22. moral. cap. 5. saith Gregorie, is to attribute the victorie of their battles not unto themselves, but unto God the author, that he may have the glorie & prayse, from them to whom he had given strength to overcome. 11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive] that is, to whom prayse be continual∣ly rendred of all the creatures. This also the Angels acknowledge Chap. 5.12. Glorie] of divine majestie. Honour] of divine service and worship. Power] Gr.  of thy divine omnipotencie and power. For thou hast created all things] A reason drawen from the equitie of it. It is meet to give to every one his due. But the celebration of all power is due to the creator and governour of all things: And this from the act of creation he assumes as proper unto himselfe. Created all things] In the beginning thou madest heaven and earth, and all that was therein of nothing, Gen. 1.1. Ioh. 1.3. all things were made by him. For thy pleasure] It seems that () is put for () by, or, through thy plea∣sure, as Chap. 12.11. However it be, as the efficient cause, so the end and maner of the creation is here pointed out. For God indeed hath created all things for him∣self: Prov. 16.4. Not with any labour, or toyle, but by his will and word onely: for he said, and all things were made, Psa. 33.9. They are] viz. all things, that is, thou hast not onely created, but also sustainest all things for thy pleasure: for as there should never have been a world, except God had created it: so neither could it subsist, unlesse he sustained it by his provi∣dence. And therefore as the benefit of the creation, so likewise the present pre∣servation of all things, is to be ascribed to the good pleasure of God. Which is an excellent argument both of his generall & speciall providence. And were created] by this repetition he extols the worke of creation as never sufficiently to be celebrated. Ioh. 1.3. If () And, be put for () which were created, then the limitation is universall, according to that in the Gospel, all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. By which limitation the subtilty of the Arrians is taken away: who thus reason: If all things bee created for the pleasure of God: then did not God the Father beget, but create the son also. But it is false. God indeed created all things, which were created. But the son is not created, but begotten of the Father: Yea all things were created by the son Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2.
THE ARGVMENT, PARTS, and Analysis of Chap. v. THe preparation unto the second vision is yet continued: for Iohn having described the majestie, and attendance about the throne: with the thanksgiving of the Elders, and of the beasts; he now goes on to declare what he further saw: Namelie a booke in the right hand of God, sealed with seven seales: The which when no creature in heaven nor in earth vvas found worthy to open, at length the Lambe, who was in the midst of the Throne, takes the book out of his right hand, to the great joy and applause of the heavenlie inhabitants. The parts of the Chapter are three. THe first is a description of the sealed booke, v. 1. The second shewes the difficulty, about the opening of the booke, and of the seales, to v. 8. Where we must observe 1. The Angel proclaiming, if any were able to open the same. 2. The insufficiency of all creatures to open it. v. 3. 3. Iohns weeping occasioned thereby. v. 4. 4. The Elder comforting him. v. 5. 5. Who was the Lambe, that stood in midst of the throne, v. 6. And what he did, v. 7. The third is a thanksgiving, in a gratulatorie himne, sung unto the Lamb: 1. By both companies representing the Church triumphant, who celebrate the benefit of their redemption & glorification, obtained by the blood of the Lamb. v. 8.9.10. 2. By a third apparition or companie of Angels celebrating the worthinesse, power and divine glorie of the Lambe. v. 11.12. 3 By a fourth apparition of all creatures, rendring prayses, and blessings unto God on the throne, and unto the Lambe. v. 13. And last of all, the two first apparitions of the 24 Elders, & foure beasts closing up the thanksgiving by a divine adoration. v. 14. The first part of the Chapter. A description of the booke sealed. 1 And I saw in the right hand of him that sate on the throne, a booke written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven seales. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd, (or then) I saw] I will not here repeat all the diverse opinions of interpreters concerning this book (who rather obscure then unfold the obscurity thereof:) but onely will cite some of the most probable. The com∣mon opini∣on about the booke. Most interpret it either of the booke of the old Testament, or els the whole volume of Gods booke both old and new: which is in the right hand of
God: because it is inspired by the holy Ghost, and the contents thereof are in the hands of God alone. This booke is written within, that is obscurely in the old Te∣stament, & without, that is openly in the new: or within as respecting the mystical sence, without the litterall. It is sealed with seven seales, because the mysteries there∣of are hid from humane reason. 1 Cor. 2.14. It cannot be opened by any creature, because the na∣turall man receiveth not the things which are of God. The Lambe alone is worthy to open it: because he onely hath fulfilled the scriptures: and he onely doth reveal unto us, outwarly by his word, and inwardly by his spirit, the hid things thereof. These things in themselves are true, and according to godlines, but I judge they serve little to the purpose in hand: because here he treats not about the obscurity, or manifestation of legal types: neyther are the mysteries thereof revealed in this booke: but things of another nature, and which concerne the condition of the Church under the Gospel. Neither can it be said that the old and new Testament was as a sealed booke unto all creatures untill the time of Iohn: seeing it would then follow that both the Prophets, and Apostles were ignorant of the writings of Moses and the Prophets. Besides all the bookes of the new Testament were then already written: and so not shut, but knowen unto all such as had their sences exercised in the scriptures of God: even as the preaching of the Apostles opened a doore unto the faith of the Gospell unto every creature: And therefore this in∣terpretation seems to be repugnant to the holy scriptures, and injurious to the A∣postolicall Churches. They seem to come neerer the marke, Another opinion of the booke. who understand it of the booke of Gods providence. For the scriptures attribute three sorts of bookes to God, 1. Of his providence, 2. of life, and 3. of universall judgement: of which we have treated Chap. 3.5. But these also differ in opinion. Some take it in a generall way for the booke of Gods decree concerning the governement of the world: which interpre∣tation is to large, seeing not all Gods secret judgements, but onely such, which concerne the state of the Church are here intended. Therefore I rather assent to them, The booke is the Re∣velation it self. who understand it litterally, of the booke, in which all these things were contained, which Christ was pleased to reveale unto Iohn concerning the last times, the which he afterward penned, and left the same unto the Churches. This booke, I say, is the revelation it self: not as if he saw a materiall booke, but a visionall booke (so to speak) wherin was written Gods secret decree touching the future event of the Church, and her enemies. Thus also Andreas, & Ribera expound it. For first this is the same booke, which Iohn (after it was opened) is commanded to eat up, that is, fully and clearly to take knowledge thereof: And which was sweet in his mouth like hony, that is, he was much delighted with the knowledge of so high mysteries: but by and by it became bitter in his belly as gall, that is, he was much greeved in foreseeing the great calamities of the Church, as we shall see Chap. 10. for the booke there mentioned is the Revelation given unto Iohn. Furthermore the contents of the whole Revelation is taken out of this booke. For at the opening of the seventh seale, seven Angels are said to come forth soun∣ding with trumpets, signifying thereby the diverse changes of the Church, in the third vision. At the sounding of the seventh trumpet, the Dragon, and two beasts are raised up against the Church, in vision the fourth. Presently here upon follow seven Angels powring forth the vials of the last plagues upon the earth, in vision the fift. Afterward one of these seven Angels pronounceth with a mighty voyce the judge∣ment of the great whore, and ruin of Babylon, in vision the sixt. At length the new Ie∣rusalem, with the marriage of the Lamb is represented unto John, in the last vision. whence we see that the whole matter of the Revelation was comprehended in this booke: & not included in a few Chapters: viz. from 6. to 11. as Alcasar sup∣poseth. To be short the circumstances of this booke doe altogether agree with the for∣mer preface. For as Christ is there said to receive the Revelation of God, and by
an Angel to deliver it unto Iohn: so this booke was in the right hand of him that sate on the throne, & taken out of his hād by the Lamb, opened, & delivered unto the Angel, who gave it to Iohn, commanding him to eat it, Chap. 10. Forasmuch therefore as all things thus agree together, there is no question, but this booke here spoken of, is the revelation it self, delivered unto the Apostle. These things observed, the three following circumstances will bee the lesse obscure. 1. The booke is held in the right hand of him that sits on the throne] because God is the author of the revelation: in Gr. it is, , at the right hand, and is put for,  in the hand, as appeares v. 7. where the Lambe takes the booke () out of his right hand, & therefore it was In and not at his right hand, as some will have it. Now he is said to have it in his right hand, to the end to give it unto Christ to open. As men reach out with their right hands, what they give unto others: And I suppose we need not seek for any other mysterie in this expression. 2. It is written within and without] that is, there was no place emptie in it. For we are to understand this litterally. This booke was not made as are our bookes, consisting of diverse leaves, and so folded together: but it was one volume of parchment written within and without: according to the custome of the anci∣ents, who wrote in rolles: and hence volumen, a volume, comes from convolvendo, rolling. Like as the Iewes to this day at Wormes, & Franck ford, &c. have their (Torah) written out in one volume of parchment. These parchments, because they were rolled up, were commonly writ on the inside onely. Wheras this on the contrarie, was written within, & on the backside also: which manner of rols were called, (,) that is, writings, within and without, of which see Plinie. lib. 3. Epist. 5. and Iuvenal Sat. 2. I therefore judge, that this writing, within and without signifies nothing els, but the multitude of matters: that is all such things as were exhibited unto John in this Revelation. Origen saith that within were written the promises made to the Church, and without, or on the backside, the punishments of the wicked. But this to me seems frivolous. A like booke written within and without was seen by E∣zechiel Chap. 2.9. but it differs from the other both in matter and forme. In that were written the lamentations because of the calamities to befal the people of Is∣rael in their captivity: wheras this booke containes the secret counsels of God con∣cerning the last times. That of Ezechiel, was spread open before him: but this was seen of Iohn rolled up: Ierom understandeth that by both these bookes which were written within and without, is signified the litterall & mysticall sence of the scriptures. But there is no solidity in it: for neyther of these bookes, doe signify the booke of holy writ: neither doth every part of the scriptures, admit a mysti∣call interpretation. Sealed with seven seales] This is the third circumstance touching the booke. The number seven, is not here put for many, but is to be taken properly: for after these, there were no more seales opened. We need not search what manner of seales they were, it sufficeth to know that the booke was closely kept shut by them. For there is a twofold use of seales, first to keep things secret from the vew of o∣thers, as letters, doores, cabinets, chiests, and the like: and secondlie for the confir∣mation of writings, as for example, to authorise the edicts of princes, sentences of magistrates, and wills of the dead, the seales of seven witnesses make these things altogether authentick. Now this booke, was not sealed in this latter respect, but in the former, as beeing shut or kept close from the understanding of men. And therefore it could not be opened or read before the seales were taken away: which was not don until the seventh seale was removed. Let this suffice for the present, that the contents of this booke so fast sealed, were most obscure & hid, untill (the seales beeing opened) they were revealed unto Iohn by Christ.
The second part of the Chapter. The difficulty about the opening of the Booke, and of the seales. 2 And I saw a strong Angel, proclaiming with a loud voyce; Who is wor∣thy to open the booke, and to loose the seales thereof? 3 And no man in heaven nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the Booke, neither to looke thereon. 4 And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open, and to read the book, neither to looke thereon. 5 And one of the Elders saith unto mee, Weepe not: behold, the Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, the root of David hath prevailed to open the booke, and to loose the seven seales thereof. 6 And I beheld, and loe, in the middest of the Throne, and of the foure beasts, and in the middest of the Elders stood a Lambe as it had beene slaine, having seven hornes, and seven eyes, which are the se∣ven spirits of God, sent foorth into all the earth. 7 And he came, & tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that sate upon the Throne. THE COMMENTARIE. 2. ANd I saw a strong Angel] The difficulty in opening of the sea∣led Booke now followeth. The circumstances thereof are five. First, an Angel proclaimeth with a loud voyce, if any one be worthy to open the booke, and to loose the seales: by which this Angel both stirs up a desire in Iohn, and others of the heavenly inhabitants, after the knowledge of these secrets, as also gives them to understand, (as hereupon it presently appeared,) that no creature could find out the hidden, and secret counsels and judgements of God concerning things to come: but it was in the power of the Lamb onely to reveale the same. Lyra affirmes that this was the Angel Gabriel, who is called  strong, from the Hebrew geber, hence God is called, Elgibbor, Isal. 9. But this to Ribera is ri∣diculous, seeing the word  strong, is put without an article: but how then would he have wondred at Alcasars opinion, had he seen it, who makes him to bee Hosea In Chap. 10.1. a mighty Angel stands upon the sea and upon the earth: & sweareth by him that liveth for ever & ever. And Chap. 18.21. a migh∣ty Angel casts a milstone into the sea: Which some understand to be Christ, o∣thers a created Angel: and indeed it appeareth he was not Christ, seeing he was not worthy to open the Booke. Besides all the Angels of God are called Gibborei choach, mighty in strength Psal. 103.20. This therefore was a created Angel, cal∣led mighty, because he cryed mightily, so as he was heard throwout the heaven. Gr.  preaching with a great voyce, because with a mighty cou∣rage he proclaimed the questiō about the opening of the booke before the whole company in heaven. Who is worthy] he saith not, who can, but, who is worthy: sig∣nifying, that not skill or strength onely, but worthines is also required. For men out of curiositie may violently (howbeit unrightly) break open that which is sealed. What is meant by opening the booke. But this booke could not be opened eyther by violence, or for curio∣sity sake: but onely by worthinesse or merit. He that opens it must bee
worthy, that is, indued with authority and divine power. Now to open the booke, is to make knowen the secret counsell of God about things to come. 3. And no man, Gr.  none in heaven, &c.] This is the second circumstance: Vpon the proclaiming of the Angel, there is a deep silence in heaven. For all crea∣tures are dumbe as unable and unworthy to open this booke. In heaven] that is, Angels and glorifyed saintes. In earth] men and beasts. Ʋnder the earth] Fishes or sea monsters. Some also foolishly imagine, that the divels in hell, & the soules in purgatory are here called upon. But the scriptures by things under the earth meane, that which is in the sea: according to the second commandement: or that is in the water under the earth &c. Thus all created things are altogether insufficient to reveale these heavenly secrets: there is (I say) no wisedome in the creature to ap∣prehend the counsels of God, much lesse to make them known unto others. This honour appertaines to the Lambe onely. 4. And I wept much] The third circumstance, is Iohns weeping & griefe, oc∣casioned from his desire to know what was written in the booke. He saw it made fast with many seales: he heard the Angel proclaiming the opening thereof. Whence he concludes that therin was contained many worthy things necessarie to be known: but seeing all creatures were silent, as unable to open it, he weeps much, and good cause too. Now his weeping was not in vaine: for by his prayers & teares he hath his desire granted him to the ful. And here we are taught, that the mysteries contained in Gods word, whither in this or other places, are not to be understood without weeping: that is, desire study, labour and ardent prayers unto God. The which shall not bee in vaine: for though we may be ignorant of some∣things, yet what soever is necessarie to salvation, shalbe revealed unto every one, that truely seekes for it at the hands of God. 5 Then one of the Elders] The fourth circumstance concerneth the Elder com∣forting John: whom some wil have to be Jacob the patriarch, others John the Baptist, others Matthew: but Lyra will have it to be Peter the porter of heaven: but I passe by these fooleries. He was one of the heavenlie companie, and in likelihood one who sate next to him, wishing him to desist from weeping, for howbeit all crea∣tures fayled, yet there was one viz. Christ, worthy to open the booke, & loose the seales. Shewing us that all ought to direct their prayers unto Christ: & not unto the saintes. He cals him, the Lyon of the tribe of Judah, alluding to the words of Ia∣cobs blessing: Judah is a Lyons whelpe, viz. in dignity, strength, & kinglie power. Gen. 49 9. Of the tribe of Judah] For Christs mother was of this tribe. The root of David] com∣ming of the progeny of David: for Marie the mother of Christ, was the daughter of David. Christ therfore as he is man, is of the seed of David: as again he himself witnesseth Cha. 22.16. I am the root and the off-spring of David. He also is the Lyon of the tribe of Iudah, conquering by his divine power, satan, death & hell. Hath prevailed] Gr.  hath overcome, which is eyther absolutly put, for , he was found worthy (Beza hath obtained) or transitivelie, for, XXVII Ar∣gum. of Chr. deity. he hath excelled all creatures in dignity & power. Which is an excellent argument of the person and office of Christ. Of his person, both that he is true man, beeing of the root of David: and true God, because he hath overcome. Of his office, that he is the onely mediatour & revealer of the secrets of God: and not onely the Doctor of the Church: but also the redeemer therof, as we shall heare by & by. Thus we see how he admits of no creature with him into the society of this function: whosoe∣ver therfore substitutes any other mediatours together with the Lamb, herein they make this mighty Angel a liar, who proclaimeth, that neither in heaven, nor in earth, or under the earth, any creature is found worthy to open the booke of God. 6 And I beheld, and lo in the midst of the throne] This is the fift circumstance touching the Lamb. His seat, gesture & forme is described in this verse: his action in the following. Now without doubt Christ is represented by this Lambe. Before he was called a Lion, because of his dignity, and power: here a Lamb, noting his innocencie and oblation. For he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, Isai. 53 7. & as a sheep
before her shearers is dumbe, so he openeth not his mouth. And indeed nothing els was typed out by the two Lambs daylie offered under the Law, Ioh. 1.29.36. 1 Pet. 1.19. but Christs perpetual and effectuall sacrifice. For he is the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world: And by whose pretious blood we are redeemed. By the way we may take notice, that Christ is here called a Lamb, Gr.  without an article: And yet not any Lamb, but onely Christ is to be understood hereby. Which confutes their opinion, who thinke, because in Chap. 13.12, Anti∣christ is said to have two hornes like a Lamb () without an article, that there∣fore not Christ, but indefinitely any Lamb is there spoken of. Neither is the rule among Graecians, always true viz. Whensoever any certaine individual is noted, that then an article is allwayes required. For we see here the contrary: as also in Chap. 14 1. where  the Lambe, is put without an article: which cannot be under∣stood of any but of Christ. This Lamb he saw in the midst of the throne and of the beasts] that is, between God and the Church triumphant, shewing that he is the mediatour betwixt God and man. In Chap. 7.17. he is said to stand  in the midst of the throne, whereby is signified his exaltation at the right hand of God. For how∣soever in the state of his humiliation he was lower then the throne: yet now bee∣ing glorified he hath obtained to sit on the throne of the Father. And therefore he saith, Chap. 3.24. To him that overcometh I will grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am sit downe with my Father in his throne. In the middest of the beasts] See Chap. 4. v. 3.6. Stood as it had been slaine] The gesture of the Lamb is twofold. He stood, and as it were slain. By the latter his death is signified, by the former his resurrection. He appeares not slain, but as if he had been slain, not dead, but living, having the markes of his death in his side, hands, & feet. Wherefore he stood as a conque∣rour, revived from death to life, having like a Lion overcome the same. There∣fore he saith Chap. 1.18. I am hee that liveth and was dead: and behold, I live for e∣vermore. Wherefore we must not looke upon him simply as a Lamb: but respec∣tivelie, as a Lamb slain for our sins, and raised againe to life for our justification. Furthermore his appearing in the forme of a Lamb, doth not contradict what we spake before touching his sitting on the throne: for he is a Lamb, in regard of his humiliation and office, and he is God, and sits with the Father in the throne in respect of his deity. Having seven hornes] An admirable forme, for who ever saw a Lamb with seven hornes, having eyes in, or under every one of thē. But is seven here to be taken inde∣finitely for many? No, but properly answering to the number of the sevē seales. To teach us that the Lamb wanted neyther power, nor wisedome to unloose the same. His hornes denote the fulnes of his power: and his eyes, his divine insight: this is set forth unto us that, we should beleeve that the Lamb beholdeth, & governeth all things by his infinite wisedome & providence. The seven eyes are said to bee the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth: which is taken from Zacha. 4.10. & signifies the same thing. For seeing the Lamb is Lord of the spirits, or Angels, and sends them forth into all the earth, as a master doth his servant, it plainlie proves that he is true God. XXVIII. Argum. of Christs deity. For the Angels have no other Lord, but Jehovah: see Chap. 4.5. And hence the seven eyes of Jehovah in Zacharie, are here called the seven spirits of God. Seeing therefore so many hornes, and eyes are attributed unto the Lamb, let the godly know, that he wants neyther power nor knowledge for to preserve them: And let the wicked fear, and tremble before him: for he sees all their ungodlines, and is able to represse theyr tyrannie. Let us also brieflie take notice, how Antichrist Chap. 13.11. hath two hornes like unto the Lamb, signifying that he like an Ape imitates the Lamb. But he is much inferiour: For the Lamb hath not two onely, but seven. And therefore can easily destroy him by the spirit of his mouth. 7. And he came and tooke the booke] After the description of the Lamb, now followes what he did.
He came] That is, he came forth out of the midst, & went to the throne, and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that te thereon, viz. to open the same. By which action he sheweth, that he both can and will unseale the booke of God, that is, reveale this prophesie unto Iohn, and unto the whole Ses∣sion in heaven. Thus we have here fulfilled: what is spoken Chap. 1.1. to wit, that God gave the Revelation to Christ, & Christ to Iohn. For this Lamb, that is, Christ tooke the Revelation out of the right hand of God on the throne, not unwillingly, but freely giving it him, to the end it might be revealed unto Iohn, and unto the whole Church: I will not be curious in disputing what this taking of the booke was. They who understand by this booke, the whole counsel of God, interpret this taking thereof, a commission to reveal the secret mysteries of salvation unto the Church. But we have shewed v. 1. that the booke denotes the Revelation. Wherfore this taking and opening of it, signifies nothing else, but the exposition thereof. But this seems to contradict the interpretation touching Christs sitting on the Throne. For the Lamb sits not on the throne, but takes it from him that sate ther∣on. Now he cannot be both giver and receiver. I answer. It is true he cannot give, and receive in one and the same respect: but there will follow no absurdity to say he doth it in a diverse respect: to wit if we consider his person and office. Christ gives the booke as he is God, and takes it as he is God-man, the mediatour. Thus he is both author and opener of the booke: even as he is said in diverse respects Heb. 1. v. 9. & 9. v. 11.14. & 13.10. to be priest, sacrifice, altar, the anointer & an∣ointed. But if any wil contend, that God absolutely is he that sits on the throne, it comes al to one thing, as I have formerly proved. For the Father sits, and reignes in the son to whom he hath given all judgement. The third part of the Chapter. The hymne sung unto the Lamb. 8 And when he had taken the booke, the foure beasts, & foure & twenty El∣dels fell downe before the Lambe, having every one of them harpes, & golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of Saints. 9 And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the booke, & to open the seales thereof, for thou wast slaine, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation: 10 And hast made us unto our God, kings and Priests, & wee shall reigne on the earth. 11 And I beheld, and I heard the voyce of many Angels round about the Throne, & the beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, 12 Saying with a loud voyce, Worthy is the Lambe that was slaine, to receive power, & riches, & wisedome, & strength, & honour, & glory, & blessing. 13 And every creature which is in heaven, & on the earth, & under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, honour, glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lambe for ever and ever. 14 And the foure beasts said, Amen. And the foure and twenty Elders fell downe, and worshipped him that liveth for ever and ever.
THE COMMENTARIE. 8. ANd when he had taken the booke] Now followes the heavenlie thanksgiving for the taking of the booke. 1. Of the beasts and Elders. 2. Of the Angels. 3. Of all other creatures, which is the IV Apparition. 4. Againe of the beasts and El∣ders, every one of them singing a peculiar himne unto the Lamb, and unto God, gratulating the Church because of the revelation. First,  the cause of their rejoycing is noted: And when the Lambe had taken the booke. The cause of joy in the heavenlie inhabi∣tants. Here now the griefe of the creatures, as also the teares of Iohn doe cease: for in this booke is contained the whole counsell of God concerning the good of the Church, the salvation of the elect, and destruction of the adversaries unto the end of the world. The latine version reads: when he had opened the booke, which is a manifest corruption of the text: for how could he have opened the booke, while the same was shut and sealed? Ribera purposelie passeth it by. But Al∣casar seekes to excuse the matter by manie shifts: but sayes at last that he had seen it written in a Greek copie,  when he had opened, boldlie affirming, that it was by some one or other changed into, , when he had taken: which shamelesse assertion of his is confuted in the first verse of the following Chapter. Secondlie,  the gesture and habit of the beasts and Elders is set forth, somwhat diverse from what we heard before. The gesture and habit of the beasts and Elders. They fall downe before the Lamb, humblie submitting themselves unto his will, rendring not a civill, but a divine worship to Christ: whence againe is proved his deity, forasmuch as religious adoration is due to none but to God onely. Having harpes] Musical Instruments, XXIX. Argum. of Christs deity. wherewith the holie Prophets, & kings were wont to prayse the Lord: not as if God were delighted with any such thing, but because it stirred up the religious affection of the saintes to God∣ward. And golden vials ful of odours] The priests of old made odours for God with censers: but these with vials. Which are the prayers of the saintes] Their prayers are called vials by a twofold trope: First by a Synechdoche, for the odours in the vials. And secondly by a meto∣nymical denomination, or els a metaphorical translation, as signifying the prayers of the saintes. For as persumes ascend upward and give forth a sweet smell: so the saints in prayer seeke after heavenly things, and the same is acceptable unto God. They are golden vials, because as gold excels in puritie, so prayers proceeding from a pure hart are precious to the Lord: what their prayers are now fol∣lowes. 9. And they sung a new song] Both Companies of the Church triumphant with a most sweet accord prayse the Lamb the redeemer: which proveth, that these beasts and Elders are not Angels, but men redeemed by the blood of Christ. It shewes also unto us the consent of both covenants, in the point of salvation. For all the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles together acknowledge the Lamb, their redeemer. Act. 10.43 According to that of the Apostle, To him give all the Prophets wit∣nesse, that through his name, whosoever beleeveth in him shall receive remission of sins. And againe, Act. 15.11 we beleeve that through the grace of the Lord Iesus Christ we shall be saved, as the fathers. For in him all the promises are yea and Amen. 2 Corinth. 1.20. Furthermore those prayers of the saintes, Psal. 40.4. & 96.1. & 97.1. & 144.9. & 149.1. caried here by the Elders in their golden vials, are to be understood as their owne, and not the prayers of others. It is called a new song, that is, most singularly setting forth the great, rare, and excel∣lent benefits of the Lambe. For generally in the Psalmes a new song, is taken in
this sence. The former Hymne Chap. 4.8. was sung unto him that sate on the throne: but this is a song unto the Lamb. So Chap. 14.1. the saintes in heaven sing a new song unto the Lamb, which none could learn, but these hundred fourty and four thousand which had his fathers name written in their foreheads. The argument therefore of this song is new, because it is most excellent, and containes the new benefits of Christ. Thou art worthy] They acknowledge him alone worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales, because they both know and confesse with all reverence, that he is the onely mediatour of the Church, and that the cause of this his great worthinesse is in the preciousnes of his blood. For thou wast slaine] that is, by dying for the sins of the world, thou declarest thy self to be the Messias, Chap. 53. whō Isaiah foretold should be led as a sheep to the slaugh∣ter to take away the sins of the world. Here we are taught that the mediatour ought both to be slaine for us, that is, to merit: and also to take the booke, that is meritoriously to bestow life and righteousnes upon others. Seeing therefore he onely merited by his sacrifice, it must necessarily follow, that none else could take the booke, that is, reveale the counsell of God to the Church, and by his power give salvation unto her. And thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood] Now the Church triumphant prayseth the Lambe, and applyeth the price of her redemption with the effects thereof unto her self. Thus we ought so to acknowledge the benefits of Christ, as to make them our owne, not onelie in beleeving that he hath redeemed others by his blood, and made them kings and priests to God, but our selves also: for true justifying faith is accompanied with a certaine perswasion of our own salva∣tion: I live, saith the Apostle, by the faith of the son of God who loved me, Gal. 2.24. and gave himself for me. Hence we observe two things: First, that the death of Christ is truly a ran∣some satisfactorie for our sins: and that our redemption by it, is not metaphori∣cal (as the new Samosatenians blasphemouslie affirme) but proper: for the re∣demption which is made by a price is proper. But such is ours by Christ, because by the shedding of his blood, he hath paid a full ransome, and satisfied the ju∣stice of God, as the scripture witnesseth Matt. 20.28. and 1 Tim. 2.6. beeing the same with what is here said, thou hast redeemed us by thy blood: and hap. 1.5. who hath washed us in his blood, and Heb. 1.3. purged our sins by himself: unlesse that by the word redemption is properly signified the whole worke of our salvation: by washing and purging a part thereof, viz. our justification or sancti∣fication. This place therefore and many others, proving Christs satisfactorie ran∣some, are to be opposed against Socinian blasphemies. Secondlie, that the redemption made by Christs blood, is truely universal, as sufficient, and propounded not onely to one nation, or a few, but to all nations, tongues and peoples: yet not so, as if all promiscuously should be saved: but those of everie tribe, people, and language, who beleeve in Christ. And thus much the Elders teach us: Thou hast redeemed us out of every tribe. We adde in the third place, XXX. Ar∣gument of Christs deity. that this redemption proves the Lamb to be God omnipotent. For to redeem the Church from sin, death and satan, is a worke of divine power, Psal. 130.8. Hence the Apostle Act. 20.28. saith, that God hath redeemed the Church by his owne blood. 10 And made us to God] They magnifie the Lambe, for three other benefits. 1. That he hath made us kings, 2. priests, 3. given us a kingdome on the earth. The two former we have expounded Chap. 1.6. beeing meant of our spiritual kingdome and priesthood. See Rom. 14.17. & 1 Pet. 2.5. But how shall we raigne on the earth, seeing Christs kingdome is not of this world: besides earth∣ly things perish in their use: and lastly the Church in this life is to expect nothing but tribulation? Andreas saith, that the Church shall reigne, not in this present
thick and cloudie world: but in that new one, which is promised unto the meek, Matth. 5.5. But the saints may truly be said to reigne here on earth diverse wayes. First, by mortifying their earthly desires, and trampling them under their feet. Secondly, as Christ raignes on the earth, not by a secular but spirituall power, by which he forceth the adversarie unto obedience: Even so the faithfull doe raigne with Christ in the earth. For the head raigning, the members raigne also: to be short, the saintes with Christ shall judge the world, and therefore shall rule the same: however we are to understand this, not of an earthlie, but a spirituall do∣minion: 2 Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnall but mightie through God &c. But thou wilt say, how shall the saints who now triumph in heaven raigne on the earth? I answer, after the same manner, as they shall judge the world and the Angels. 11. And I beheld, and round about the throne] The third apparition is of An∣gels who sing the new song together with the beasts and Elders: for howsoever the Angels are not redeemed by the blood of Christ, as men: yet in Christ they are gathered together in one, Eph. 1.10. beeing subject unto him as to the head of the Church, whereof they are members: and therefore they also prayse the Lambe, as their Lord, and blesse him in regard of the redemption of man-kind. The number of Angels he saw, are said to be ten thousand times ten thousand & thousands of thousand, that is, infanite: for so the Hebrewes speaking of time without end: expresse it, by ages of ages. This number seems to be taken out of Dan. 7.10. where many millions of Angels stood before the fiery throne of God: which is for the excee∣ding great comfort of the godly: for seeing so many thousands of Angels are ready to doe the commandement of God, and of the Lambe: why then should we feare any adversary power which lifts it self up against God and his Church. Saying with a loud voyce worthy is the Lambe] This company of Angels with songs and prayses, set forth seven divine titles of the Lambe, all which he is most worthy to receive: not as if he received them from the creatures, but because all creatures are bound to render the same as most due unto him, seeing he hath obtained all these things by eternall generation, and by his exaltation at the right hand of God his Father. And it is worthy our observation, that however all these titles are most divine: yet the Vbiquitie of his flesh is not reckoned amongst them. Power] because he is omnipotent Chap. 1.8. and all power is given unto him, Matth. 28.18. Riches] For in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3. & knowledge. Wisdom] For he is the eternall wisdome of the Father, and of him is made wis∣dome unto us, that is, the teacher and author thereof. Strength] Because by his divine strength and power, he hath overcome satan, the world and all other enemies. Glorie] because he gloriously raigneth at the right hand of his father. Blessing] he is worthy indeed to be blessed for ever: because in and through him, all nations are made partakers of all blessings. 13 And every creature] The fourth apparition is of all reasonable creatures in heaven and in earth: and of unreasonable both in the sea, and under the earth. And all that are in them viz. whither in heaven, or in the earth, or in the sea. Ribera understands by the creatures under the earth, the soules in purgatorie: But this fiction Alcasar approves not of. Others understand it of the evill spirits which will they nil they are compelled to acknowledge, & to stand in fear of the power & glorie of Christ: not because they love him, but hate him and murmure against him. But the true meaning is, that not onely men, but all creatures, yea even the di∣vels themselves doe shew forth the prayse of God, XXXI. Argum. of Christs deity. because in some sort, they serve to illustrate and set forth his glorie. Here again we may note that Christ is adored with religious worship by all creatures, the which evidentlie proves that he is God: and this is to be added to
the former arguments. The exception of the Samosatenians is frivolous, who will have a created divinity to be communicated unto Christ. But God himself saith, that he will not give his glory, that is, the glory of religious worship, to any crea∣ture. But the Idolatrous Papists doe more shamefully dishonour God and the Lamb in attributing religious worship to Angels, to the spirits of men deceased, to Images &c: let them therfore looke to it, how they wil answer the foresaid he∣reticks, nay rather how they will answere the Lord, when he shall call them to account for it. 14. And the foure beasts] As the beasts and Elders were first in manifesting their joy: so here againe they joyne with the Angels and other creatures in pray∣sing the Lamb & conclude the thanksgiving by saying Amen thereunto: of which see Chap. 1.6. The Elders by falling down worship him, who liveth for ever and ever, that is Christ: Chap. 1.18. CHAP. VI. THE PREFACE, ARGVMENT, PARTS, and Analysis of the Chapter. THe Lamb opening six seales of the booke, wonderfull sights are shewed to Iohn in this Chapter. At the opening of the first seale, comes forth a white horse and his rider, having a bow and a crowne: At the second a red horse, and his rider being girt with a sword, taking peace away from the earth: At the third a blacke horse with his rider, having in his hand a ballance, and proclaiming famine: At the fourth a pale horse having death sitting on him, and hell following, threatning a horrible slaughter throughout the foure corners of the earth: The fift being opened the soules of the martyrs appeare under the altar, crying for vengeance to God against their enemies: At the sixt, there followes a great earth quake, the sun is darkened, the moon turned into blood, the stars fall downe to the earth, and the last signes doe follow. Now this is an amplification of the second vision continued in the follow∣ing Chapter, beeing not a little obscure. For who doubts but that many darke mysteries lie hid under these seales, the opening whereof was indeed greatly desired by all creatures, but by them not possible to be don: precisely there∣fore to define (as some doe) of the certaine events prefigured in such darke types, in my judgement doth surpasse the power of humane wit: notwith∣standing from the scope and circumstances I thinke we may and ought with∣out any controversie in a generall way gather that wherein most interpreters agree in one, viz. that in them is shadowed out the condition of the Church from the time of Iohn unto the end of the world: The prosperous successe of the preaching of the Gospel at first: by and by the rage of the adversaries: The crosse and martyrdome of the Godly: as also the increase of troubles, & at last the destruction of the ungodly, with the glorious deliverance of the Church, consisting both of Iewes and gentiles. Furthermore we will speak of particular events, following as by rule our former method: where we shewed that the generall visions, (of which this is the first) are distinguished into foure Acts or parts, of which as the second is opposed unto the first, so allwayes the fourth unto the third. The vvhich Acts now follow.
The first (to repeate a few things) is a representation of the state of the primi∣tive Church both in prosperity, and adversity, under the foure first seales unto v. 9. unto this belongs the history of the Apostolical Church, & of the following per∣secutions both under the Romane tyrants, and Arian hereticks, untill the rising of Antichrist in the first 600 years. The second is a comforting of the martyrs, whose soules were safely kept un∣der the heavenlie altar, to bee fullie glorified a little while after. v. 9.10.11. The third, sets forth a new oppression & more grievous troubles to befall the Church by a fatall darkning of doctrine and horrible apostasy both of teachers & people from the faith under Antichrist, unto the end of the world. v. 12.13. fol∣lowing at the opening of the sixt seal. And lastly in the fourth Act is shewed the end of the troubles of the Church under Antichrist, containing his and all other enemies, their utter destruction at the day of judgement, v 14.15.16.17. The two latter Acts are not fullie ended in this Chapter, but are continued in the following, wherin is represented unto us the reformation of doctrine, & final deliverance & glorification of the Church: obscurely indeed in this present vision, but more clearly in the following. Thus we have manifested the parts & logical resolution of this Chapter. Now we come to consider the vision. The I Act of vision II. The opening of the first seale: concerning the white horse and him that sate thereon conquering. 1 And I saw when the Lambe opened one of the seales, and I heard as it were the noise of thunder, one of the foure beast, saying Come and see. 2 And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sate on him had a bow, and a crowne was given unto him, & he went forth conquer∣ing, and to conquer. THE COMMENTARIE. 1. ANd I saw when the Lambe opened] Hitherto the Lambe held the booke shut, untill the heavenly companies had made an end of their himne and harmonie: And then he opened one of the seales, that is the first of them, as appears by the opening of the rest in order: as the second, third, &c. For the Hebrewes usuallie put , one, for , first, as in Gene. 1.4. And the evening and the morning was one, that is, the first day. So in the words following: And I heard one, that is, the first of the foure beasts: for afterward he heard the se∣cond, and third, &c. Opened the seale] that is, manifested. For in opening thereof he revealed unto Iohn, and so unto us the counsels of God concerning the future condition of the Church, which before were hidden or shut. To Iohn indeed he declared the same in types, and withall giving him the understanding of them: but unto us in types onely, concealing the mysteries thereof from us, to the end we should be the more exercised in the diligent observation of things, both from histories and events. One of the foure beasts] who had the forme of a Lion Chap. 4.7. We need not here with Lyra and others inquire, whither this were Marke, Matthew, or James the first supposed Bishop of the Church of Ierusalem. The other three doe in
order invite Iohn, to draw neere, and behold these wonders (for he stood off for reverence sake) that he might the more certainly write downe what he saw: so that these beasts performe the office of publick cryers, whose work it is to call in persons neerer to the throne or judgement seat. As the voyce of thunder] For such is the roaring noise of a Lion. This & the other beasts, saying unto Iohn and us: come and see, require hereby great atten∣tion: and I conceive that herein no other my sterie is contained. 2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse] to wit, went out as it is in v. 4. & also in the words following he went forth conquering. But whence came he forth: from the booke, or seale? If out of the booke, then this horseman went forth at the very first opening of the margent, that is, the mysterie of him was there both written and revealed to Iohn: giving us to understand, that such was the forme of the seales, and so set on the margent, as they served for the keeping close of the whole booke folded up together, according to our manner of sealing letters. If he went out of the seale, then it seemes these were annexed to the booke, like the great seales of princes to their letters pattents, the which are usually kept in boxes. Now one seale beeing removed, some part of the booke was thereby opened, in so much as the writing thereof did appeare. Behold a great seale, out of which went forth an armed horseman: But how great then was the booke it self, sealed with so many seales? how great was he that held so great a booke in his right hand? yea, how great the Lamb opening it? The which may lead us to con∣sider the greatnes of the events, and the omnipotencie of God, and the Lamb. The gene∣rall signifi∣cation of the seales considered. It may also be understood of the time, that so soon as the Lamb had opened the seales the spirit caused Iohn to see these enigmatical horsemen, and other things. Now to speak of the opening of the seales in general, Andreas doth justlie re∣ject their exposition: who referr all of them to the manner of Christs incarnation: as the first seale to his birth: The second to his baptisme: The third to the signes he wrought after his baptisme? The fourth to his unjust accusation before Pilate: The fift to his crosse: The sixt to his burial: And the seventh to his descension into hel: seeing, saith he, all this was alreadie don, whereas Iohn speaks eyther of things present, or what should come to passe afterward. Others more wittilie have distinguished these seales according to the future times of the Church: applying the first to the Apostles time, and 200 yeares after. The second unto the following age: viz. the time of Justinian. The third unto Phocas the usurper of the Empire. The fourth unto Charles the Great, when po∣perie was at the highest: The fift unto Ottho under whom the seven Electors were erected: The sixt to the counsel of Constans, at what time the Church was grie∣vously persecuted by three Anti-popes, and the burning of the TWO WIT∣NESSES, whereupon the elect were sealed. The seventh from that time unto the end of the world: during al which time in the diverse cōfusions of the Church, the sealing of the faithfull was perfected. But it is difficult to define so precisely the moments of the seales. Alcasar a new interpreter having numbred up fourteen opinions and rejected all of them, at last brings in his own, supposing that the conversion of certaine Iewes is praefigured in the foure first seales: and the rejection of the rest in the three latter. The which interpretation we leave unto himselfe. For our part we judge it more safe to refer all to the foure Acts noted in the preface. And behold, a white horse] I see no reason, The white horse sha∣doweth out the puritie of the pri∣mitive Church. but the common opinion of interpre∣ters is heere to be embraced viz. that this white horse with his rider, notes the puri∣ty & integrity of the Christian Church at first (for by whitenes in the revelation, purity is signified) and the speedie course of the Gospell throughout the whole earth. Neverthelesse I binde not this to the first two hundred or three hundred years, in which, (notwithstanding all the cruel oppression & persecutions yet) the Gospell was spread with happie successe far and neere. But I rather extend it to the whole time, in which Christ by the successors of the Apostles, namelie many
syncere Bishops and faithfull teachers victoriously set up his kingdome, through∣out the whole Romane Empire, not withstanding the tyrannie of persecutors, & the wickednesse of hereticks and Apostates: untill by little and little the Church decayed in this her puritie: And this I take containes the space of almost six hun∣dred years. The white horse therefore first comming out of the seales, is the primitive Church, white, and bright in puritie of doctrine and discipline. The Apostles were like horses running strongly, and with great speed, propagating the faith of Christ in the whole earth, as their Acts, and Epistles testifie: after them God raised up Apostolicall men, Bishops, teachers, and Fathers both Greek & Latine, who firm∣lie maintained & propagated the purity of doctrine delivered unto them, against tyrants, apostates and hypocrites, untill the time of Gregorie the first: although even before his dayes the whitenesse of this horse was somwhat changed, & black spots began to appeare, that is, corruptions in doctrine, discipline and worship. The which Egesippus in Eusebius complaines of in these words: Lib 3. hist. cap. 32. that soon after the death of the Apostles, and them which had received the word at their mouth, the Church remained not long a pure and unspotted virgine: notwitstanding the godly held the foundation of faith and salvation entire. viz. Christ the head. And he which sate on him] This rider is Christ. He that sate on the white horse is Christ. Act. 9.15 see Chap. 19.11. This rider was caried to and fro in the ministerie of the Apostles, and other faithfull pastors, and teachers, who suffered for the truth: this metaphor Christ himselfe useth to A∣nanias concerning Paul: he is a chosen vessell unto me, to beare my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: On these, Christ rode gloriously, en∣tring through their sincere preaching into the verie hart of the faithfull, propa∣gating and defending his owne kingdome, according to that of the Psalmist, And in thy comely honour prosper, Psal. 45.4. ride on word of truth, and of meeknes, & of justice. And he had a bow] Gr.  which signifies a bow & arrowes, and somtimes a quiver. The word of God is Christ bow. The Law and Gospell is Christ bow: from whence he sends forth arrowes that is, the efficacie of his spirit, wounding the harts and minds of the Elect, that he may heale, and restore them to life: but to terrifie and kill the wicked, as it is in the same Psalm: thy arrowes are sharp, peoples shall fall under thee: in the hart of the kings enemies. And a crowne was given unto him] to wit, Christs crowne. a regal crowne. For he is a king crown∣ed with glorie and honour at the right hand of God in the heavens: or rather a crowne of triumph: because it followeth, And he went forth conquering and to conquer] The doubling of the words notes his present and future victorie. His victory. By his death he overcame sin: and by his resurre∣ction death, hell and satan: yea the world also, according as he saith in the Gospel be of good cheere, Ioh. 16.33. I have overcome the world. This is the first victorie, with which he went forth conquering: It is true indeed he was crucified as he was meere man: but he lived againe and overcame, by the power of his Godhead. Now he went forth to overcome the world, and the tyrants thereof diverse wayes. His second vi∣ctorie was in converting the gentiles by the preaching of the Apostles: for in that he drew all nations, and brought them unto the faith of the Gospel, he conquered the world; And tyrants, in his Apostles, confessours, & martyrs, convincing them by the power of the truth: For the death of the martyrs is Christs victory: seeing in their blood the truth was sealed, and the Church propagated. The destruction of tyrants was Christs victorie: As Julian the apostate blaspheming in his extreme madnesse, confessed: Thou hast overcome O Galilean. Christ overcame, when Ne∣ro, Domitian, Diocletian, Trajan, Maximinus, Lycinius, Valens, and others (who had put to death many thousands of Christians, thinking thereby to take away the name of Christ) were destroyed, and brought to miserable perdition, while Christ raigned; and his Church increased. Christ went forth as a conquerour, when by the preaching of the Gospel, the Idol gods of the gentiles were rejected, their wor∣ship and temples abolished and overthrowen: all men beeing drawen after Christ.
He overcame when the swarmes of hereticks, as, Valentinus, Basilides, Praxeas, Manes, Martion, Photinus, Samosatenus and other most bitter enemies of Christ, were beaten downe, overcome and destroyed by the sword of the spirit. To be short, Christ overcame, when all the East and Westerne Churches were in danger to perish and come to nothing, by the pestilent doctrine of Arius: two sound ministers beeing then hardlie found in the whole Christian world, (no not in Rome) except Paulinus, Hilarius, and Athanasius. And indeed he that would understand the victories of Christ here intimated, must have (as in a table before his eyes,) the histories of the Apostles, and the Churches after them, written by Irenaeus, Clemens, Tertullian, Eusebius, Hierom, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomenus, Eva∣grius, Nicephorus, and others: for no better commentarie then their histories can be given upon the opening of the first seale. And herein I thinke (not to passe this by in silence) we are more happie then Iohn himself: for those events which he saw a far of in types, we now by the helpe of former histories, and our own experience, doe clearely see them written out, & livelie expressed before our eyes. And thus much concerning the first seale. Now here perhaps a question will be moved, seeing Christ is the Lamb ope∣ning the booke, how also he can be sayd to goe forth out of the seale: For the answere hereof, we are to minde, what I have already spoken, viz. that often∣times one and the same thing is represented in differing types, in a diverse re∣spect. Now as Christ sits & reignes gloriously with the Father and holy Spi∣rit as God: so he is the Lion of the tribe of Iudah, beeing the offpring of Iudah according to the flesh: He is the immaculate Lamb, as he is man, and as he was slaine and put to death for us: He stands in the midst of the Throne, as he is the mediatour: he opens the booke and the seales, as he is the chiefe Prophet and teacher of the Church, the revealer and author of all heavenlie doctrine. And to be short he also sits on the white horse, as king and conquerour, propagating his kingdome by the preaching of his word through the whole earth: by which also he reigneth even unto this day, in the midst of his enemies. Psa. 110.2. The opening of the second seale. The red horse, and his rider having a great sword, and taking away peace from the earth. 3 And when he had opened the second seale, I heard the second beast say, Come and see. 4 And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sate thereon, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another, and there was given unto him a great sword. The COMMENTARIE. ANd when he had opened the second seale] The scope of the matter, which here we are to take notice of, is, that the future condition of the Church from that time, viz. the end of the former seale, unto the rising of Antichrist, and end of the world, is represented to Iohn, that he might certainlie beleeve, that the Church how∣ever oppressed by tyrants, yet should be perpetually preserved in the world by the power of Christ. This her future condi∣tion
is declared to be both joyfull and sad: joyfull before in the white horse: sad in the three horses following: by their threefold colour and gesture is shadowed out a threefold figure or forme of the Church: First red: because tyrants should make her red by spilling the blood of martyrs. Secondlie blacke, because she should be stained and obscured, with the blacke doctrine of hereticks. And lastlie pale, because through the slothfulnes of governours, ambition and covetousnesse of Bishops, she should at length be pale, & sick unto death. These things are the summe of the three following seales. I heard the second beast] which had the forme of an Oxe Chap. 4.7. he calleth him to see the bloodie opening of the second seale. Now whither this were to signifie, that manie of the faithfull should be slaine as oxen before the altar, I leave for others to determine. And there went out another horse, The red horse the Church of the martyrs, that was red] As the white horse was the Church shining in doctrine & innocency: so the red horse is the Church made red by mar∣tyrdome. But who was the rider? I will relate the common opinion. Because there was given to this rider a great sword to take peace from the earth, and to stirre up men to kill each other, therefore Lyra applies this red horse unto the cruel and bloody Romane Empire: whose rider was Nero, disturbing the citie of Rome by his wicked government: so that the citizens were instigated to murder one an∣other. There was given unto him a great sword that is, Euseb. lib. 2. hist. cap. 25. Nine per∣secutions under the Romane tyrants. power to kill Christians: for he raysed up the first cruel persecution against them: and among others, the Apostles Peter & Paul suffered for the testimony of Iesus Christ. But this interpretation is too straight: for though indeed under Nero bloody persecution began, yet it ceased not there, but a long while after this red horse kept still his course in the Christian Church. For after the first persecution of Nero, which was malitiously raised against the Christians, pretending they were incen∣diaries, & anthours of the burning of Rome (whereas he himself most wickedlie had don the same) there followed another under Domitian that cruell persecutor,  who cast Iohn the writer of this booke into boyling oyle,  and seeing he received no harme therby, he afterward banished him into the ile of Patmos. Euseb. lib, 3. hist.  cap. 17. After this followed the third under Trajane, who pretending that there ought to be but one religion in the Romane Empire, appointed that Chri∣stians, as enemies of their forefathers religion should not be suffered. In his time was put to death, Simeon surnamed Iustus, pastor in Ierusalem, and Ignatius of Antioch, Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 32. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 19. Immediatelie upon this a fourth by Antoninus Verus,  under whom Polycarpus and many others suffered in the yeare 170. Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 15. A fift under Severus about the yeare of our Lord 204: who executed Leonides the father of Origen, Euseb. lib. 6. hist. cap.  2. And the sixt which dured three yeares under Maximinus in the yeare 239. Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 20. and lib. 9. cap. 8. The seventh (and the cruelst of all) under Decius, at what time Cornelius Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage were crowned with martyrdom. Niceph. lib. 5. cap 27. The eight under Ʋale∣rius,  Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 9. And the ninth under Diocletian and Maximinian. Eu∣seb. lib. 8. cap. 6. After which the Church, beeing freed from persecution, had some time of breathing under Constantine: but soon after suffered not much∣lesse under Constans, Iulian, Ʋalens, &c. by all which we may understand that this second horse was a long time red with the blood of the faithfull. The com∣mon inter∣pretation touching him that sate on the red horse. And therefore all others for the most part doe apply (and farre better) this red horse unto all the forenamed persecutions: eyther making the tyrants to be the rider, or else Satan provoking them unto so great a cruelty: Vnto whom is given power. that is permission of God to stirre the wicked to warre and bloody slaugh∣ters, but chiefly to oppresse and persecute the Church, & people of God. This interpretation (I confesse) is not improper, if we consider the causes themselves of the troubles, and persecutions which follow the Gospel.
But seeing Christ himself hath said, that he came not to send peace on the earth, Matt. 10.34. Luk. 120 49. but a sword, and fire: and to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, &c. Therefore I rather understand, that by this rider, is meant Christ, who also in Zach. 1.8. is represented as a man riding on a red horse: So that Christs horse which before was white, now comes forth red: And is said to be another, because of the change of the colour: The rider on the red horse is Christ. signifying that the Apo∣stolical Church which was white in puritie of doctrine, and innocencie of life, should now through the crueltie of tyrants, be made red with the blood of her martyrs: And yet Christ sits on this red horse, because he is present with, and governeth his Church, even in her greatest trials. Ʋnto him is  great sword, viz. the sword of the word Ephes. 6.17. beeing sharper then any two aged sword, Heb. 4.12. With this sword he tooke peace from the earth, and  oodie persecutions: not in himself, but by accident, because of the malice of tyrants and hereticks in opposing his truth. For Christ is the prince of peace: The Gos∣pel the doctrine of peace, &c. Therefore Christ takes away neyther his peace, nor yet peace from his children which he promiseth in Ioh. 14.27. but, from the earth, that is from worldlie tyrants, and enemies of the Gospel. For to the wicked there is no peace, Isai. 57.21. Here we are taught in the first place, that the condi∣tion of the Church in this life, was, and ever shall be reddish, or sprinkled with the blood of persecution. For through many tribulations we must enter into the king∣dome of God, & thereby be made conformable unto Christ. Therefore the going forth of this red horse, ought not to terrifie us. For Gods counsell is grounded on causes both just & good; in consideration whereof we ought to remame constant unto the end. Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine coepit: Sanguine succrevit, sanguine finis erit. The Church in blood first founded was, In blood beginne did shee: It had her spreading forth in blood. In blood her end shalbe. It was established I say in the blood of Christ. It began & increased in the blood of the martyrs: And in their blood it shall continue unto the end. Notwithstan∣ding the end shalbe the ruin and destruction of the adversaries. For then shall cease the blood of martyrs when the blood of the wicked shall come forth of the wine-presse of the wrath of God, unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand & six hundred furlongs. Chap. 14.20. Secondlie, though the divel & his instruments mightilie labour to extinguish the Church, yet no more can they doe, then what is given them from above. Thirdly, let us not thinke it strange that God doth suffer tyrants thus miserably to afflict his Saintes: for he doth it partly for their great good, that they might not grow wanton, but that their faith and prayer might be exercised under the crosse: And partlie, according to their just desert; for if examination be made, we shall find, that for the most part, as contentions, coveteousnes and ambition among the officers, so prophanenesse and securitie of the people drew downe common judgements upon themselves. See Cyprian de lapsis: & Euseb. lib. 5. hist. cap. 2. The opening of the third seale. The black horse, having a ballance, And pro∣claiming famine. 5 And when he had opened the third seale, I heard the third beast say, Come & see. And I beheld, and loe, a blacke horse: and hee that sate on him, had a paire of ballances in his hand.
6 And I heard a loud voyce in the midst of the foure beasts say, A mea∣sure of wheat for a peny, and three measures of barley for a peny, and see thou hurt not the oyle and the wine. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd when he had opened the third seale] First I will set downe the opinion of others, and afterward my owne. The third seale be∣ing opened, Iohn is called upon by the third beast which had the forme of a man, to behold the wonder. Our attention is here againe stirred up by this creature, as a third herald: As for other mysteries in this I approve not. A black horse comes forth with his rider holding a ballance. Lyra will have this black horse to be the armie of the Romans, with which Titus their captaine destroyed Jerusalem, killing a multitude of the Iewes, and carying the rest into captivitie, in re∣venge of the death of Christ. The ballance (in his opinion) doth note the just judg∣ment of God. The weighing of two pound of wheat and barlie sold for a pennie, the meanesse of the Iewish captives, who were sold for thirtie pence. The wine and oyle, which the rider is forbid to hurt, are the Christians, who before the siege left Ierusalem, and went over Iordan to Pella, & there were preserved: but this sence is to straight, and agrees not with the scope of the historie: for the matter here is not by types to cover former things, but to reveal things to come: Now we know Ierusalem was alreadie overthrowen, which Iohn was not ignorant off, being banished into Patmos by Domitian the brother of Titus. Andreas and others understand here some notable dearth to be prefigured: The opi∣nion of Andreas. be∣cause mention is made of a scale and wheat &c. Some take it for the famine under Claudius, which happened long before this revelation. Besides famine and dearth doth no more belong to Christians, (who ought hereat lesse to be troubled then others) then unto the adversaries: whereas it is to be supposed, that onely events proper to the Church were prefigured unto Iohn. Wherefore Bede, Tyconius and others understand more rightlie by the black horse hereticks, by the rider the divel stirring them up to make black or darken the doctrine of the Church: by the ballance, the word of God, which hereticks pretend to be on their side, and with which they labour to beautify, maintain and com∣mend their errours, to the end that people may the more readilie receive them: which exposition Ribera also approves of: for as the Apostles are the white horse, because they preached the glad tidings of salvation: so the blake horse notes here∣ticks, maintainers of pernicious doctrines, and preaching things corrupt and hurtfull. I assent therefore to their opinion who thinke the state of hereticks is here shadowed out, The black horse is the Church. yet in some things the scope is to be applied otherwise. For the same horse which first went forth white, importing the puritie of the Apostolicall doctrine: afterward was red, of the bloodie condition of the Church under ty∣rants: And now is blacke in regard of her afflicted condition by wicked hereticks, who cloude the light of the truth with their blacke haeresies, and bring in such a deformity upon the Church, that shee, who appeared white before, is now blacke. By him which sate on the horse I understand not the divel, but Christ: but after what manner he rides on hereticks we shall understand by and by. Now this blacknes came upon the Church, as diverse wayes, so by certaine de∣grees even from the time of Iohn until Antichrist. How this blacknesse befel the Church. In the first two hundred yeares many hereticks made blacke the Christian Church by weakning the verie foundation of religion: not indeed in respect of the elect, who firmelie embraced the same, but in respect of themselves and their fol∣lowers. Among whom was Cerinthus, Ebion, Valentine, Marcion, Basilides, and
many others, whose madnesse was recorded, and also refuted by Irenaus, Epipha∣nius, Augustine, Thilastrius, & others. These besides other foule errous, blasphe∣mously oppugned the mysterie of the blessed trinitie, denying Christ to be God and man, and the onely mediatour and saviour: who, although they professed themselves to be Christians, and boasted of the title of the Church, yet as much as in them lay, overthrew all Christianity, and thus by the meanes of these men the white horse was made black. Againe in the two following ages, diverse hereticks, as Photinus, Arius, Euno∣mius, Macedonins and others did exceedingly darken the doctrine of Christian religion, and with their vile errours corrupted manie, who otherwise were godly teachers. Papias and Irenaeus were Chiliasts or Millenaries, Tertullian a Montanist, (though these three lived in the former ages) Origine maintained manie errours. The heresie of the Arians (beeing mightilie supported by Constans and Valens) in∣fected almost all the hast & Westerne Bishops, in so much, that verie few held the whitnesse, or puritie of the primitive faith. For the principall fathers both Greeks and Latine as, Ambrose, Austine, Jerome, and Chrysostome had suckt in some of their dregs, mingling with the pure Apostolicall doctrine many errours touching matrimonie, single life, grace, freewill, praying to, and for the dead, & purgatorie; about fasts, difference of mets, &c. with which things, as with black spots the white horse of Christ was much stained. To be short, in the following two hundred yeares till the time of Gregorie the first, the heresies of the Pelagians, Nestorians, and Eutichinians succeeded the Ar∣rians which had before overspread the whole Church. By little and little also the rites of the heathens crept in, a new worship was devised by the Bishops, with ma∣ny beastlie vanities and superstitions. Then began hot disputations and conten∣tions about holy orders, and seats of Bishops, about the primacie of the chaire of Rome, about righteousnes of workes, merits, and humane satisfactions and the like, by which the doctrine of faith and free grace was much oppressed, and a way made for Antichrist, who shortlie after came into the temple of God, when Boniface the third obtained the primacie and dominion over all other Churches, from Phocas the usurper. Thus we have heard, how at length the white horse became black. Vpon which notwithstanding Christ sate with his ballance, that is, How Christ sate on he∣reticks with his ballanct. Lib. 2. de bapt. cont. don. cap. 6. (as I also assent too) the holy scripture: for as the ballance is the triall of a just or unjust weight: so the holie scripture is the rule of doctrine whether true or false: As Augustine wel noteth: Let us bring (saith hee) not deceitfull ballances, wherein we may put what and how we will, saying according to our owne pleasure, this is waightie, this is light: But let us bring the divine ballance out of the holie Scripture, as out of Gods treasurie: And put into it that which is waightie, nay let not us put in any thing our selves, but onely acknowledge what is put in by the Lord. But thou wilt say, how doth Christ sit on hereticks? doe these beare him up? or doe they not rather denie him, and cast him off? I answere, both is true. Now these, though in truth they denie him by their blasphemies: yet Christ is said to ride on them with his ballance in a twofold way: First in profession and appea∣rance; for the worst and grossest hereticks professed Christ, and accounted them∣selves his Church: And would pretend to weigh their errours in the ballance of the scripture, but by them abused, and miserablie depraved. For the truth is, most of them drew their heresies out of adulterat, and apocrypha bookes, corrupting some places of holie writ for a cloake unto the same, but rejecting such canonical bookes, as refuted their heresies. And thus we see, how in this respect, Christ rides on hereticks. But secondlie, he doth it also by his providence, because even in the greatest confusion of heresies he was not wanting unto his Church. Ney∣ther have, or doe heresies at any time come rashlie, or unawares, but by Gods wise ordering hand, for the triall of the Church: For there must be heresies, saith Paul, that those which be approved, may be made manifest. And therfore he hath caused such heresies as sprung up to bee continually examined & confuted by the ballance of his word, as histories abundantly testifie.
6. And I heard a voyce in the midst] We have heard what he saw at the ope∣ning of the third seale: he addes, that he heard a voyce in midst of the beasts, saying: the old version hath it: As the voyce of foure beasts saying. But  as, is not in the Greek: neyther is it  saying, in the plural number, but  in the singular. The voyce came forth out of the midst of the beasts as chap. 9.13. I heard a voyce from the foure hornes of the altar. It is not said whose voice it was. But with∣out doubt it was the Lambs, standing in the midst of the throne and foure beasts: Chap. 5.6. He cryeth the price of food, but whither at a deare or cheap rate it is uncertaine, for the words following may be taken both wayes. In that it is said, A measure of wheat, viz. shal be sould, for a penny: and three measures of barly for a penny: that is, shalbe put into the ballance. We will first consider the words, & afterward the sence; A measure, the Gr. ; was a measure of dry things containing a halfe peck: or as some wil have it, so much food as would suffice a man for the day: , saith Suidas , Choenix is a measure of a dayes provision: hence came the proverb of Pythagoras, , not to sit on the mea∣sure Choenix, intimating, though a man had gotten so much as was sufficient for the day, yet should he not therfore give himselfe to idlenes, but still goe forward in his labour & calling. A Choenix, according to Bude containes two sextaries, or foure pound: a sextarie containes 24 ounces, or two pound: by which we see that the old interpreter did erre in rendring Choenix, two pound wheras it cōtaines foure. For a penny, Gr. : so called from the number, beeing worth ten pence; So much as was given for a dayes wages, as appeares by the parable of the labourers in the vineyard. Of wheat, a more daintie, and dearer corne then barly, for that was for the poorer sort of men, beasts & other uses. I doubt not, but he alludes to the famine in Samaria which was besieged untill an asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, 2 Kin. 6.25. & the fourth part of a cab of doves dung for five pieces of silver: but soon after a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barlie for a she∣kel. Notwithstanding I take it, that here not a cheapnesse, but a dearth rather of food is foretold, seeing the measure of a dayes allowance, could hardly be obtain∣ed by a dayes wages: which must needs cause scarsity both to man and beast. But wherefore doth he prophesie of a famine, under the black horse, the same shadowing out (as we have shewed) the corrupt state of the Church under haere∣ticks? If we take it according to the letter, it seems not to cohere: For what need was there to foretell a dearth, which we know comes ordinarily to passe. Wherefore the prophesie seemes mystically to be understood, He pro∣claimes a mysticall famine. not a famine of bread, but of the word of God, threatned here to be sent upon the despisers therof, according to that in the prophet: they shall wander from sea to sea, & from the North even to the East: and run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, but should not finde it. Amos 8.11.12. Therefore in these words viz. by scarsitie of wheat & barly, the Church is threatned with a spirituall famine: that is the Gospel of Christ should be so corrupted through the ambition, Luxurie, coveteousnes, ne∣gligence & slothfulnes of Bishops: & the antiēt faith so adulterated by hereticks, as that nothing almost should remaine pure & sound. We know by wheat, the elect are signifyed, and by tares, the reprobate, as in Mat. 13.30. Wherfore by wheat in this place, I understand either sincere teachers which should be rare & precious: or els the sound and orthodoxe doctrine concerning God & Christ our saviour, of which there should be, as it were, a famine in the earth. Neverthelesse with this wheat God would feed his elect, however it should be obtained by great difficulty & labour: yea barly bread should be very scarse, that is, the comforts of the Gospel not so fullie enjoyed, as formerly. Such is the darknes, & the effects thereof, when the Church is burdened with the traditions of men. This famine of true doctrine was verie great in the dayes of Constans and some Arian Emperours after him: The time of the fa∣mine here spoken of. when the pernicious and pestilent doctrine of Arius was received by all the East and Westerne Churches. For after the Emperour Constans by sundrie councils and other meanes, had endeavoured to establish Aria∣nisme, at last calling together all the Bishops, both Arians and others, (namelie
the Westerne unto Arminensis, a city in Italie, & the Easterne unto Seleucia a citie in Isauria) he would not admit them to depart, till all had consented unto the pre∣script forme of the Arian heresie: whereupon it happened, that they being there retained seven whole months, and wearied with delay, some beeing overcome by intreaty, others with threatnings, at last they all, yea Hosius also, subscribed unto it, and condemned the word  & , essence, and coessential: Hilarius (banished out of France) onely excepted, who (as a graine of wheat) returning into France, restored the puritie of the faith, and brought most of the Bishops of Italie unto the right way of Christ: as Sulpitius Severus recordeth, speaking thus in the conclusion of his booke of this synod which consisted of 400 Bishops: the councill held at Arminensis, was dismissed, whose beginning was good, but in the end wic∣kedlie concluded. And see thou hurt not the oyle and wine.] Junius will have the words, wine and oyle, to cohere with the fore going sentence, as if it ought thus to be read, three measures of barlie for a peny, and oyle and wine: (where he puts a colon or two points:) and he renders , hurt not unjustly: that is, verie little wine and oyle shallbe given for a denarius or ten pence: thou shalt not deale unjustlie, understand, while thou metest out but a little for a great price. But in this he seems to be to cou∣rious: neyther can the former colon, cohere with  a denarie, or ten penie worth. But hurt not the wine and oyle, to wit, the orthodoxe faith, but some shall maintaine the same, and the whole not be obscured by hereticall blacknesse. And such were Athanasius and Hilarius, in the time of the Arian heresie, whom we before mentioned: they are called wine and oyle from the effect: because as wine cherisheth, and oyle purifies: so sound doctrine doth glad and cleanse the con∣sciences. This therefore is added as a word of comfort, least the faithfull, seeing heresies to get the upper hand, should be discouraged. For God will allwayes preserve some teachers of his truth, that the elect may not be hurt by hereticks. Ribera interprets this of their seven sacraments, & hence he promiseth the pope, a great victorie against the Lutherans. But as yet these things appertaine not to the times of Antichrist: and vainly he seeks for a garland, and comfort in the idle fictions of his own braine. Alcasar comes nearer to the marke, applying the oyle to the light and true knowledge of happinesse, the wine to spirituall joy, which the heavenlie voyce promiseth the elect not to be deprived of. The opening of the fourth seale. The pale horse, and death sitting on him, with hell following and killing the fourth part of the earth. 7 And when he had opened the fourth seale, I heard the voyce of the fourth beast, say, Come and see. 8 And I looked, and behold, a pale horse, & his name that sate on him was death, & hell followed with him: & power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, & with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth. THE COMMENTARIE. 7. ANd when he had opened the fourth seale] I well approve of the obser∣vation of Andreas, that the fourth beast hath the forme of a flying Eagle, who now calleth Iohn to behold the events of the fourth seale. For the Eagle with his quicksighted eyes having spied some things
on high, with great celeritie flyes thither to it. Whereby is signified, that the plagues here foretold come no otherwhere then from above. For God beeing provoked to wrath and indignation, doth justlie send them, partlie to revenge the injuries don unto the saintes, & partlie to punish the wicked, who repent not of their evils. 8. And behold a pale horse] The fourth seale beeing opened, there comes forth now a pale horse, whose rider is death, and hell his follower or companion, having power to kill the fourth part of the earth with sword, famine, pestilence, and the beasts of the earth. This horse in Gr. is said to be , that is, of a greenish colour tending to palenesse, such as is the colour of leaves in harvest time, falling from trees for want of juyce. Now interpreters are of diverse opinions what is the meaning of this pale horse, and death his rider, with hell following, and what maner of plagues are sha∣dowed out thereby. Lyra supposeth, Lyras in∣terpreta∣tion. that this horse is the people of Rome, the rider Domitian: named death, because he most unjustlie murdered manie both senatours and people: and himself afterwad by the Senate was also put to death for his crueltie, the horse he understands to be pale, because of pale death, riding thereon. Hell followed him: that is, he was immediately upon his death cast into hell fire. Power was given him to kill the fourth part of the earth, that is, cruellie to persecute the Christians through∣out the whole Romane Empire, which was then streatched out over the foure parts of the world. With the sword] for therewith he killed manie. With hunger] starving them in his prisons. And beasts of the earth] because he caused manie to be cast before wilde beasts and torne in pieces. And death] noting thereby all kinde of punishments. Andreas referrs it to the persecution of Maximianus, Andreas his inter∣pretation. Riberas o∣pinion. in whose time (as Euse∣bius writeth lib. 9. cap. 8.) such a multitude of men were taken away by pestilence and famine, as that the dead could hardlie be buried. Ribera will have all to be applied unto the third persecution under Trajan, affirming, that he and his instru∣ments in putting to death the Christians by sword, famine, wilde beasts, &c. are this horse, said to be pale, frō the effect: (for he that is slaine lookes pale) Death was the rider, because they killed many thousands of Christians. Hell followed not to de∣voure the saints beeing slaine, but those that had killed them: Howsoever they thought that none would take vengeance on thē for so great a wickednesse. They killed foure parts of the earth (for so the Latin version reads it) that is in all places of the Empire: or, according as it is in the original, a fourth part of the earth: For if the multitude of Christians which were slaine should have been reckoned, the number would have been no lesse then a fourth part of men then living in those provinces: or else said to be a fourth part, because the cities of their habitations wherein they were dispersed by reason of persecution, were the fourth part of the earth, that is of the Romane Empire. But these interpretations cannot stand: for undoubtedly the three foresaid persecutions were set forth under the red horse: besides it is not likelie that John saw the bloody face of the Church after her blacknesse, but in order of time it went before. That which Ribera pretendeth, is without all shew of reason, as if by the red horse should be noted such persecutions as the Godlie suffered by their treche∣rous confederates: But we know how under the Emperours, they had neither po∣lities, weapons, or confederates: moreover he himselfe before interpreted the red horse, to be persecutions under tyrants. A certaine namelesse interpreter (whom manie follow) understands by the pale horse, hypocrites and false brethren, who disfigure their faces that they may appeare unto men to fast. Matt. 6.16. These carie death, that is bring death upon themselves and others by their hypocrisie and deceits. Hell followes them, that is, the multi∣tude of the damned, who follow the divell. They slay the fourth part of the earth, that is, very many by the sword of false accusation & slaunder: Hunger, that
is, want of the word of God: Beasts of the earth, that is, with brutist and unreaso∣nable lusts: & lastlie, with death, that is, with all sorts of mischievous practises. I confesse there is something in what is here said, however their applying it to hypocrites is too generall and obscure. For indeed I verely beleeve, besides the bloody persecutions of tyrants, & black blasphemies of hereticks, there is here a∣nother evill of the Church shadowed out. Therefore this pale horse in kinde is the same with the three former, but of ano∣ther colour: for howbeit it signifies the same Christian Church, yet is far otherwise to looke on then before, as having now her white, red & black estate turned into a mortal palenesse, & beeing sick even unto death thorow the rising of Antichrist: she was whole and sound in the white horse: covered with the blood of martyrs in the red horse: spread over with heresies in the black: But now so infirme, weak & sicklie, as that she hath death on her back, and is neere to death and hell: For a fourth part perisheth with the sword, famine, death, (or pestilence) and beasts of the earth: And these are the foure sore plagues wherewith the Lord threatned to punish Ierusalem for her apostacie. Ezech. 14.21. To which place he here alludes by an allegorie, signifying those pernicious doctrines of hereticks and hypocrites, which tended to death and destruction, and making way for Anti∣christ. But whence came this deadlie disease, and palenesse unto the Church? When and how this palenesse befel the Church. I an∣swer, it was by accident occasioned by Constantine, that good Emperour, his ex∣cessive bounty to Christian Bishops, by which indeed he inriched, but no way bettered the Church. For as to much indulgence of parents spoiles the childe: so this liberall Emperour was a meanes to draw Bishops to pride, luxurie, idlenesse, security & other vices. For after he first had restored peace unto the Church, and heaped up honour & wealth upon Bishops (but specially inlarged the jurisdiction of Rome) presently followed such a declining & corruption in doctrine & disci∣pline, as infected the Church with a deadly poison, brought upon her (I say) a spi∣rituall sicknesse, in so much as the pest of Antichrist began now to enter into her very heart and bowels. And hence it is reported that a voyce from heaven was heard, saying; To day venome is powred foorth into the Church. Sylvestri legenda. In vita Malchi. And Ierome even in his time complained, that after princes became to be Christians, the Church indeed was grea∣ter in power and riches, but lesse in vertue. The remote cause of this so great an evill considered in it selfe, was the guile, & malice of that old serpent the devill, who laboured to supplant the Church through the ease and pompe of Bishops, beeing otherwise not able to overthrow it by the sword of tyrants: but the neerest cause was the hypocrisie of superstitious monks, with the pomp, luxury & avarice of ambitious prelates, hereby making way for Antichrists oppression of the Church and truth. Se Clemanges touching the corrupt state of the Church, Cap. 3. The original of Monks was occasioned by the persecution of Decius, The monks original. for some then to avoyde his tyranny (among whom was Paulus Thebaeus, & one Antonius) fled into deserts, where they indured a while the hardship of a solitary life: this kinde of life by others was afterward imitated, & at length new orders and reli∣gions folishly devised, wherein they boasted of perfection, & merits of superero∣gatiō. Hereupon a great multitude of Moncks, (as a sinke of mischiefe,) overspread the Church, by whom the truth of Christ (under the pretence of holines) was soon oppressed. For now such as desired the pardon of sin, and to obtaine eternal life, were sent, not unto Christ, but unto Hermites, & to the dens of Monks. And hence came this palenes, & mortal wound upon the Church; hereby drawing more thou∣sands of soules to death & hel, then eyther the foure sore plagues mentioned in E∣zech. 14. or the sword of tyrants, or the black famine of haereticks, or any other kinde of punishments wherewith Christians were brought unto their end. Moreover the riot of Bishops and the clergie, mightilie increased this pale disease: for now infinite ceremonies and humane traditions are established: as
the worshipping of the dead, images, the observation of holy dayes, orders, rites and solemnities of pagans forged by the devill himself, (the names onelie al∣tered) were forciblie imposed upon the Church, to the utter abolishing of the doctrine of free grace, and the merits of Christ. The summe of all is this: the fourth seale being opened, the Church appeared languishing with a deadlie pale∣nesse: for about three yeeres after the decease of Gregorie, Boniface the third being created Pope, sate on the chaire of universall pestilence, & began to establish monarchical tyrannie. The II. Act of vision II. The opening of the fift seale. The soules under the Altar crying to have their blood avenged. 9 And when he had opened the fift seale, I saw under the Altar the soules of them that were slaine for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. 10 And they cried with a loud voyce, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, doest thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? 11 And white robes were given unto every one of them, & it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, untill ther fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd when he had opened the fift seale] Hitherto we have heard the exposition of the preparation to the second vision: viz. the ma∣jestie of God, with the attendance about the throne: And the Lamb taking the booke sealed with seven seales, &c. We have heard also the first Act of the vision, viz. the opening of foure seales with the wonders following thereupon: namely, the white, red, black, and pale horse, prefiguring (as we have shewed) the future state and face of the Church unto the rising of Antichrist. First white in faith, then red in blood, afterwards black with heresies, and at last pale through hypocrisie and apostacie. Now followeth the second Act of the vision in the opening of the fift seale, which signifies not (as some have thought) new persecutions, but the comforts of the Church both militant and triumphant. It is not improbable that here should beginne a new Act, seeing Iohn is not now bidden by any one (as before he was) to behold the wonder of this fift seale. In it three things are recorded, first, what he saw at the opening of the seale, & the place where: namelie, the soules of the martyrs under the altar, v. 9. secondlie what they said, v. 10. and lastlie, the answere which they received. v. 11. The summe of al is, to comfort the Church against the scandal of the crosse, specially shadowed out under the red horse. For least Iohn should have been to much daunted at the effusion of the martyrs blood, or any of the faithfull so offended thereat as might have weakened their faith and pietie, but rather in hope of a more happie state, with a Christian courage might indure the furie and force of their adversaries: therefore the blessed condition of the martyrs in heaven is here exhibited, beeing
full of many comforts to the godlie, for they who in this world had been before cruellie murdered for the sake of Christ, are now seen of Iohn under the prote∣ction of Christ, as glorious conquerours clothed with white robes. The soules under the altar] The soules departed out of the bodies are invisible to the bodilie eye: but Iohn saw them in the spirit: By which we learn, that the soule is separable, subsisting in it self, immortal and dies not with the bodie. Of which matter Aristotle albeit an heathen, yet thus writeth, and thus the soule is an essential power, separable, pure, and free from passion: and againe, as it is separable, so also immortal, and eternal. Neverthelesse some have been found not onelie Epi∣cures, but even teachers in Israel (as the Saduces by name) who have denied it. Now these brutish men Christ plainelie refuteth in the Gospel: Mat. 10.28. where he bids us not to fear them which kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but him, which is able to destroy both &c. The soules of them that were slaine] that is, of the martyrs. But wherefore were they slaine? not for any evill committed, but for the word of God, and for the testi∣monie (viz.) of the Gospel, that is, for their faith in Christ, which they openlie professed and sealed with their blood: here we see, that not suffering, but the cause of suffering makes a martyr. By the slaine, are meant not (as Alcasar suppo∣seth) those that were put to death by the Iewes: neither they onelie who suffe∣red under Domitian untill Diocletian, as Lyra affirmeth: but the soules of all the martyrs, (even from Nero unto Boniface the third, the first Antichrist) whose blood had been shed for the testimonie of Christ, beeing (as some call them) the twelve persecutions. Ribera renders it, which had the testimonie, passivelie. that is, of them it was testi∣fyed, that they were true Christians: as 1 Tim. 5.10. a widow having a testimonie for good works: but in the Greeke it is not , but , and therefore to be taken activelie. And are called martyrs, in giving testimonie unto Christ, and to the word of God. So that the word  here in the ori∣ginal signifies, to professe, defend and holdfast. Whereby is shewed the great con∣stancie of the martyrs, who were terrified with no manner of torments, but still held the testimonie, that is, the profession of Christs name. Thus in Chap. 12.17. the dragon is said to make war with them, which keep the commandements of God, & have, that is, constantly maintaine, the testimonie of Christ. But now where were the soules of the martyrs? not under the robe of Marie, Where the soules of the martyrs were. as painters foolishlie represent it: but under the altar, which was in heaven before the throne of God, as we shall see Chap. 8.3. Ribera here is to be hissed at, who affirmes that Iohn in this speech hath respect to the ancient custome of Christians, laying up the relicks of saints under the altars. For when (saith he) an altar is buil∣ded, there is made under it a sepulchre for to keep the relicks; and the priest, dipping his finger in the Chrisme makes the signe of the crosse upon the foure corners of the sepulchre, saying: This sepulchre is consecrated and sanctified in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holie Spirit, peace be unto this house &c. But this custome is meerelie super∣stitious, and grosse idolatrie, idlie invented manie ages after: For Iohn saw not any relicks of bones or garments, but the soules of martyrs, not in a sepulchre, or under an altar of stone, but under the heavenlie altar, of which the Apostle speak∣eth Heb. 13.10. We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the tabernacle. This altar is Christ (as Anselmus and Haymo doe acknowledge,) under which he saw as in a type the soules of the martyrs, that is, under the safegard and protection of Christ. This beeing the first happinesse which the martyrs enjoy in the heavens, is for the comfort and encouragement of them, who are yet to be slain. For however tyrants kill their bodies, yet their soules immediatelie upon their departing, are received of Christ: according to the prayer of Steven the first martyr, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: and as Christ promised the thiefe: This day thou shalt bee with me in paradise. The which benefit Riberas glosse doth both de∣minish, and wholie take away.
Moreover here we are plainlie taught, that the soules of the martyrs, and other saintes departed, are not in the paines of purgatorie: but enjoy the presence of Christ their saviour in the heavens. But touching this sight of Christ, how, and after what manner they see God and Christ, I leave it to Sophisters to dispute of. If they bee under the altar, that is Christ, then undoubtedlie they doe behold him: Ioh. 14.9. And if Christ, why not God also: Forasmuch as Christ himself saith, He which seeth mee, seeth my Father: the fulnesse of whose sight we shall enjoy at the last day, 1 Ioh. 3.2. as the scripture teacheth. For when he shall appear we shall be like him: for we shall see him as hee is. In the mean while the blessed vision here spoken of, sufficeth for the present degree of happinesse unto the soules of the faithfull. 10. And they cried with a great voyce] Now he sheweth what the soules doe under the altar: namely cry mightilie to God, that their blood may be avenged, which argues, that their soules were not killed or died with their bodies, but live eternally: neyther are they asleep, but watch. But this we are not to under∣stand of any vocal crying with the tongue (which the soules cannot doe) but of a visionall crying by which is signifyed their earnest desire, represented here unto Iohn in the spirit, under the forme of a great cry. The phrase alludes to the death of Abel, Gen 4.10. whose blood is said to cry for vengeance to God from the earth. O Lord] Now he comes to rehearse what their crying was; and in what man∣ner they implored him that sate on the throne and the Lamb. Holie] that is, pure, hating the crueltie of tyrants. True] alwayes constant in performing thy promises and threatnings, and just also both in rewarding, and in punishing of men. How long doest thou not judge &c.] Seeing thou art holy, & true, why doest thou suffer tyrants to rage so long against thy saintes? On them that dwell on the earth] A paraphrase of tyrants, and their instruments: beeing unworthy to be named, onely approbriously they are called inhabitants of the earth, that is, earthlie and foolish men, presuming to rebell against heaven to their owne destruction: closelie also implying their own present happy condi∣tion, as free from the furie of wordlings. How long?] They desire the hastening of Gods judgements. But here it may be demanded, how the soules of the saintes in heaven can be said to be thus impa∣tient and desirous of revenge? I answer their words import no impatient de∣sire, For the glorified saintes, are altogether free from all corruption this way: and therefore here is signifyed their earnest desire, that Gods glorie be vindicated, and the Church finally delivered from the tyrannie of implacable adversaries: neyther doe they praescribe unto God any time touching his judgements, or the deliverance of the Church, but closelie submit unto the same, as unknown to them when it shall be onely they intimate that to them it seems just & equal, that he should deliver his Church, and no longer suffer the blasphemies and cru∣elty of persecutors. And therefore not desiring to avenge themselves, they commit vengeance unto the Lord: How long O Lord doest thou not avenge? not thristing after it themselves, but desire that God in righteousnesse will admini∣ster the same, as knowing the just God will not suffer the crueltie of the wicked to be unavenged, and passe without punishment: yet they leave the manner and time to the Lords own disposing: desiring it no otherwise then as it may stand with his pleasure and will. Thus we also here on earth pray to be delivered from that evill one, in which we contradict not the counsell of God, neither sin against him, in praescribing the time and manner thereof: but shewing our desire, wee attribute unto God the prayse of his justice, faithfulnes and omnipotency, belee∣ving that he both can & at length will assuredly deliver us. Much lesse therfore doe the soules of the saintes in praying for the same thing, sin against the Lord. Vide August. serm. 11. de Sanstis. 11. And white robes were given to every one of them] God heard the request of the martyrs, and answers them according to their desire, both in word and
deed. In deed, for white robes were presently given unto everie one of them. In word, for a speadie vengeance is promised. After a little season, The cause of this delay is added, not that the sins of bloodthirstie tyrants are not ripe, and wor∣thie of vengeance, but because the number of the martyrs is not yet complete. And this is the summe. White Robes] This notes out the beginning of their celestial glorie. Were given them] to wit, by him that sate on the throne, or by the Lambe. Not as if the soules under the altar were naked before, seeing even in this life they had put on Christ. For as manie as have been baptised unto Christ, Gal. 3.27. 2 Cor. 5.5. & 5. have put on Christ: and if we be not found naked here, we shall be cloathed with our house, which is from heaven, and being purged from all filthinesse, we shall stand before God, and live with Christ in eternall happinesse. Now I disaproove not their judgement touching the twofold robe after this life. While we are here our robe remaines stained with the spots of the flesh, August. tom. 10. serm. 11. de sanct. though covered with the blood of Christ, to the end they may not appeare be∣fore the face of God. After our departure, a robe is given to everie one, perfitly white indeed, yet but one, that is, a new degree of happines in heaven. But after the full deliverance of the saintes, that is, at the day of judgement, the other robe shalbe also given, that is, the saintes shalbe fully and perfectly glorified: This then is another comfort, namelie, that to the martyrs, in stead of the bloodie robe, with which tyrants here cloathed them, there shall be given them a white robe of joy and glorie in heaven. And it was said unto them] to wit, by him that sate on the throne, or by the Lambe under whose shadow they rested: neyther is it strange, that Christ is re∣presented, as a Lamb, in regard of his death, and as an Altar, in regard of his pro∣pitiation. Here are manie things touched in few words. First it is a mild admonition, that the soules for the present should be contented with their white robes, and cease cry∣ing, expecting the time of Gods appointed judgement. It is also a close commination of revenge after a litle season: for however God for a while deferres punishment: yet he certainly heares the request of the godlie, and at last will be fullie avenged on their adversaries. It is also a prophesie of the future condition of the saintes under Antichrist, by whose tyrannie manie martyrs are to brought to their end with fire and sword. And lastlie it is consolation for the godlie under this anti∣christian tyrannie: seeing their afflictions shall endure but for a moment, neyther shall Antichrist rage according to his full desire, but he shalbe be limited accord∣ing to the decree and purpose of God, who hath determined the number of mar∣tyrs, which number beeing once accomplished not one drop of blood shall more be spilt by him. And last of all, their fellow servants and bretheren which should be killed, shall also be gathered under the same Altar, to pertake with them of the same blessednes. Now Antichrists time, is said to be short, or for a little season, after the maner of the scripture, which speaking of the last times compare them as it were, unto an houre in comparison eyther of eternitie, or the age of the world alreadie past. We are taught therefore in the first place, that God doth alwayes heare the prayers of his children: although touching their deliverance hee reserve the time and manner thereof unto himselfe, as best knowing when, and how to dispose of all things for their good. Secondlie, the blasphemies & outragious cruelties of the wicked, are never for∣gotten of God: but vengeance certainlie is prepared for them, however he for∣beares them for a time. Thirdly, the goodnesse of God is the cause of this forbearance: Rom. 2.4. As to lead men unto repentance, so also that the full number of martyrs may be accomplished. And for this cause no doubt the Lord suffered the Romanes, Vandales, Gothes and o∣ther tyrants by the space of six hundred years to shed much blood (though no
more then was appointed) of the saintes for the confirmation of the Christian re∣ligion: And no otherwise he decreed but from that time unto the end of the world, many should suffer under Antichrist for the same causet that so the judgement of the whore might be the more intollerable. Hence we may not thinke, that either the Churches sufferings under Antichrist, were unknown unto the Lord, or happened against his will: but rather came to passe by his most wise counsell, in which we ought to rest, & never to be scanda∣lised at his fury, nor rage of any of his instruments, but to rest in the worke of God, if so be he have appointed eyther thee or mee to be among the number of the mar∣tyrs. To be short, here we see that there is a communion between the saints in heaven, & those on earth. For we are brethren & fellow servants, neyther are they our lords, Chap. 19.10. & 22.9. and patrones, as Idolaters imagine. And beeing fellow servants, they no lesse refuse divine worship, then did the Angel, who forbade Iohn to worship him, saying, See thou doe it not: for I am thy fellow servant, Worship God. But, say they, they pray for us: & therfore we may pray to them. I answer, were this true, yet it would not follow. The reason is: because there is a great difference betwixt praying for others, and to be prayed unto. To pray one for an other is a dutie of charity, and common unto all the faithfull. But to be religiouslie invo∣cated upon, is a worship due to God alone according unto the commandement, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10 & him onely shalt thou serve. And the reason is, because God alone is omniscient, omnipotēt, & present in al places, hearing, under∣standing, & onely able to fulfil the desires of his people. But now the heavely An∣gels, & glorified spirits are neyther omniscient, to behold all our actions: nor omni∣potent, as able to helpe us: nor can they be present with us in all places. Besides it is uncertaine, The inter∣cession of saintes is here not proved: but condemned. yea false, that the saintes doe at al intercede for us: ney∣ther can any such thing be proved from this place. For the soules of these martyrs pray not for their fellow servants, but to have their owne blood avenged; nay they knew not who they were, for else they would not have desired a hastening of di∣vine wrath: neyther at the instant was their request granted, but deferred to the time appointed of God. To all which we may adde that from visions, & allegories no doctrines can or ought to be drawen, repugnant to the word of God: as this is concerning praying to the saintes: 1 Tim. 26. 1 Ioh. 2.2. Rom. 8.34 for it is derogatory unto the honour of Christ, who according to the scriptures, is our onely advocate in heaven: There is one me∣diatour betwixt God & Man, the Man Christ Jesus: And, we have an advocate with the Father Iesus Christ the Iust: And he maketh request for us. Now if the saintes were also our advocates: then should not Christ be the onelie mediatour betwixt God & Man. In deed we doubt not, but the soules of the saintes in a general way doe know the afflicted condition of the Church here, and desire her deliverance: But in speciall to know our affaires, they doe not, nor cannot. They see (say they) in God, as in a glasse, or by a reflection all our affaires here: but this is a mere fiction, Isai. 63.16 contrarie to the scriptures: Abraham knowes us not, Is∣rael is ignorant of us. But thou Jehovah art our God and Father. But they further object. They love us: therefore they pray for us. I answer: It is true, yet they love Christ more then us: and therfore they will not intercede for us, to derogate from Christ, as if his intercession were insufficient, or that he were asleep while he is cal∣led upon. But, say they, the saints in praying for us, derogate not frō Christ, seeing the prayer of the saintes each for other on earth, is no way derogatorie unto him. I answer: the reason is not alike: for the glorified saints cannot intercede in Christs presence without great dishonour to him, but the others beeing yet in the bodie, are bound (having a commandement) to pray one for an other: Iam. 5.16. which the saintes in heaven have not: yea, say they, they have, for Paul bids the Hebrewes to pray for him. Heb. 12.28 I answer: The Hebrewes of whom this duty of love is required were not in heaven, but here in an earthly warfare. Besides if this commandement did tie the saintes in heaven, then also are they bound to pray each for other: which is absurd and false.
To be short who doth not understand, that those whom the Pope canonizeth for saintes, are as they say, spokesmen before God for others, and howsoever they may not be worshipped as Gods, yet as Advocates, that is, with a lesse kinde of worship. Now who (I say) doth not see that all this is taken from Apuleius and the followers of Plato, who fained, that their daemons (whom they called Gods) were, Lib. 8. de civit. Dei cap. 22. Ibid. cap. 23. as it were, messengers between the upper Gods and men: carying up their petitions to them, and bringing downe aide and succour from them to men: So that they preten∣ded not to worship them as Gods: which subtilty of theirs Augustine thus refu∣teth. Apuleius (saith he) denies them to be Gods: But in saying that they are so in the middle betwixt both, as that they seem to be necessarie for man before God, in this he doth not separate their worship from the religion of the high Gods: And deriding this vanity, he speaketh further: it is to foolish, to beleeve that such Gods as are made by men, should more prevaile with the Gods, whom God hath made, Ibid. cap. 24. then men them∣selves whom God himselfe hath also created. Let us therefore cast of Poperie as a heathenish worship, derived from Apuleius and Plato. The third Act of vision II. The opening of the sixt seale. A great earthquake: darkening the lights, &c. 12 And I beheld, when he had opened the sixt seale, and loe, there vvas a great earthquake, & the Sunne became blacke as sackcloth of haire, and the Moone became as blood. 13 And the starres of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a figtree casteth her untimely figges, when shee is shaken of a mighty winde. 14 And the heaven departed as a scrowle, when he is rolled together, and every mountaine and Iland were mooved out of their places. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd I beheld] Horrible wonders appeare at the opening of this sixt seale, as earthquakes, shaking of the heavens, convulsion of the starres, subversion of mountaines and Islands; the explication whereof is difficult. Arethas understands it of the darknesse over all the earth, of the earthquake, and rending of rocks at Christs suffering. Matt. 27.51. Ambrose by a trope applies this horrible concussion, to the destruction of Ierusalem. But what use was there to reveale that unto Iohn by obscure types, which was already past, and fresh in memorie, and by historie for∣merlie made known unto all? Lyra understands it figuratively of the Diocletian persecution, more cruel then the former. But the most cruelst of all was the persecution yet to come, namely un∣der Antichrist. Andreas therfore (more probablie) refers it unto the time before the comming of Antichrist, wherein the miseries and persecutions here spoken of should come to passe. But most interpreters understand it of the verie last persecution under Antichrist: of whose mind I also am: notwithstanding they erre from the scope of the history in their application. For they following the common opinion, that som one particular Antichrist shal oppresse the Church about the last foure yeeres of the world, referre these earthquakes and darknings of the sun, &c. unto the fore∣said time. Neverthelesse herein they agree not. For Ribera and others interpret it properly of the signes going before Christs last comming, spoken of Matt. 24.
Luk. 21. But most applie it, to the horrible confusions and calamities, which by Antichrist shalbe brought upon the whole earth. But for my own part, I understand this third Act of the vision, to shadow out, the manie and sore trials, wherewith for a thousand yeeres and more (as histories testifie) the Church of Christ hath been excercised under Antichrist. Now this Act consisteth of two parts. The third Act of the second vi∣sion hath two parts. The first treats of the greater & more horrible confusion of the Christian world under Antichrist: contained in the 12.13.14. following verses, which are to be separated from the last three verses of the Chapt: the reason whereof I will shew by and by. The other part of the Act is more comfortable, as beeing opposed to the former troubles, in which is pro∣pounded unto the godlie for their great consolation, the sealing of the elect in their foreheads, in the first eight verses of the following Chapter. Now unlesse this be observed, howbeit manie things (I confesse) in a general way may be truely, learnedly & piously treated of, touching this earthquake, darkening of the Sun, & other prodigious things, as miseries to befall the world: yet in deed these Generals tend, but to the darkening of the matter: And therfore for the right understanding of the sixt seale, we must of necessity have recourse to the histories of the east and westerne kingdoms, both from the time that Popery was first established in the West, and Mahumetisme in the East, as also diligently consider the state and experience of the present times: touching all which a word or two in Generall. About the yeere of our Lord six hundred, after that the Church had obtained some rest, & was freed frō the persecution of open enemies: she immediately be∣gan to be rent asunder by divisions, corrupted with diverse heresies, yea at length Pagan worship (under the cloake of Christianitie) and humane traditions so pre∣vailed, as that shee became pale and sick even unto the death: For then arose the hot contention between the Bishops of Rome, & Bizantium about the monarchi∣cal primatie over all other Bishops and Churches. Hereupon the Emperour Mau∣ritius much favouring Iovinian his metropolitan, made way for him to obtaine the primacie, under a pretence, that where the principall seat of the Empire was, there ought also to be the chiefe chaire of the Church: Now on the other hand Gregorie Bishop of Rome, invying this honour of universalitie and power in his corrival, Lib. 6. Epist. 10. Lib. 4. Epist 34.36.37.39. affirmed that this title was wicked, perverse, proud prophane, foolish and fri∣volous, neyther ought there to be any such scandal raised among the Bishops: at last he thus concludeth. I (saith he,) doe confidentlie affirm, that whosoever either cal∣leth himself, or desireth to be called the universall priest, seeing herein out of the pride of his heart he lifts himself up above his fellow brethren, is the fore runner of Antichrist. Thus we see that Gregorie makes the title of universall, to be the true badge of An∣tichrist. And indeed he so much prevailed with the Emperour, as at that time the pride of Jovinian his corrival was repressed. But Mauritius a while after beeing wickedlie murdered by Phocas, and Gregorie dying about the yeere 604. Pope Sabinian his successour (thirsting after the foresaid tyrannie) burnt the writings of Gregorie, and made void his decrees: however he attained not what he aymed at, beeing prevēted the yeere after by an infamous death. After him succeeded Boni∣face the third, who by Phocas the usurper was proclaimed universal Bishop, & Prince of Priests, notwithstanding the clergie & most of the Italian Bishops opposed the same. Thus he declared himself unto the whole world to be that Antichrist, and the first (as Platina and other writers affirme,) that established his tyrannie by these insolent expressions: as thus: we will and command: we appoint and charge, we will and require &c. From that time the Christian world began to be shaken with a horrible mo∣tion: For now Christ the Sun of righteousnes was obscured: The Moon of the Church turned into blood: The starres fall from heaven, Bishops become secular princes: heaven, or the opened booke of holy scriptures, rolled up: The mountaines, kings & princes stand in jeopardy of their power: to be short, the Islands are remooved out of there place, by beeing brought under the yoke of Romish tyrannie. Then,
saith Platina, onely the rents of Bishoprikes was looked at: Plati, in vita Bonif 3. but not what sheep were in the pasture. It would be tedious to declare, how this Antichristian tyrannie by the successours of Boniface was afterward established: As for Boniface himselfe, he in∣deed sate scarce a yeere on this chair of universall pestilence. For on all sides these ecclesiastical harpies so gaped after the prey, as that by poyson, murder, deceit, factions, seditions, enchantment and magical art one sought to dispatch the other. Balaeus hath distributed these Antichristian Popes from this Boniface unto Ju∣lius II: that is, from the yeere of Christ 606. unto the yeere 1513. Balae. in Act. Rom. Pont. into five distinct classes or orders: as may there be seen. Who for the most part (as Genebrardus a Popish writer himself cōfesseth) were Magicians, Sorcerers, Atheists, Adulterers, Mur∣derers, wicked, perjured, & impure, not Apostolical, but apostatical and heretical men: they were (I say) capital enemies of Apostolical doctrine, inventours and defen∣ders of idolatrie, superstition, and a new worship, bloodthirstie men, and so have continued even unto this day. And here indeed the earthquake began to shake all Christianity in the Westerne parts. Now about the same time, viz. in the yeere 609. Heraclius beeing Emperour (who toke away Phocas the tyrant) Mahumet an Ismaelite by open force raysed no lesse an earthquake in the East. For he (beeing a souldiour and an hypocrite) by the help of the Persians, tooke from Heraclius many provinces, and after he had established a kingdom unto himself, he caused one Sergius a Nestorian Monke to compose the Alcoran, who mixed togerher somwhat of every religion, in such a manner as might best serve to draw the affection of carnal people unto a love and liking thereof, thereby to strengthen the politie of his new usurped kingdom in the world, and the better to root out the faith of Christ. Whence it came to passe that by this commotion, most people in the East fell from Christian religion, and the Sun of righteousnesse beeing darkened, the mist of Mahumeticall superstition prevailed, and oppressed not the East alone, but all the south parts of the world also: these are the earthquakes, darkening of the lights, and prodigious wonders here enigmatically described, according to the manner of propheticall scriptures. Now we come to the words themselves. And behold a great earthquake] most dreadfull and prodigious things, with which under the reigne of Antichrist (as most interpreters both Greeke & La∣tine confesse) the Christian world, yea and heaven it self too, were to be shaken: as the darkning of heavenlie lights, the falling downe of the stars, and lastlie the the concussion of the mountaines and Islands are here shewed unto Iohn under the Image or form of a great earthquake. Indeed such kind of praedictions are diverse times mentioned both in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: But not in one and the same sence, the which thinge we are well to take notice of: for the circumstance of the places, will lead us sometimes unto a literall, & some∣times unto an allegoricall interpretation thereof. Vndoubtedly the predictions of Christ, The signes which are lite∣rally to be understood. touching the end of the world and his last comming are to be taken litterallie: as in Matth. 24. Mar. 13. Luk. 11. Then there shall be signes in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth distresse of nations, with perplexitie, the sea, and the waves roaring, Mens hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are comming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and then shall they see the Son of man comming &c. and in Revel. 16.20. Every Island fled, and the mountaines were not found, viz. in the day of judgement. For indeed all these things shall then really come to passe. Now in other places, these expressions doe set forth allegorically horrible alte∣rations, or Gods great judgements, and those eyther particular against the ene∣mies of the Church: as in Isay. 13.10. where the prophet speaketh of the horrible overthrow of the Babylonians in these words: The stars of heaven, and the constella∣tion
thereof shall not give their light: The Sun shalbe darkned, and the Moon also shall not give her light. And again in Isai. 34.4. And all the host of heaven shalbe dissolved: and and the heavens shalbe rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down &c. And from this place, as it seems by the like phrase, the words here in our text are taken. Again in Ezech. 32.7. concerning the overthrow of Aegypt. I will cover the heavens (saith the Lord) and make the stars thereof dark: I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light. Or universall, signifying the total com∣motion of the Church: somtimes in a good sence: sometimes in a bad: and som∣times in both. In a good sence; as in Hag. 2.7. & Hebr. 12.27. Thus saith the Lord, yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the drie land. And I will shake all nations: and the desire of the gentiles shall come &c. In which oracle is prophesied of an universall concussion, that is, of the reformation of the world by Christ; the which how it hath been, & shall yet further be fulfilled, we have ex∣pounded in our commentarie on Hebr. 12.27. In the evil part it is undoubtedlie taken in this place, as signifying the shaking of the heaven and earth, that is, the future corruption & oppression of the Church by Antichrist. Now this concussion both in a good sence by Christ, & also in an ill sence by Antichrist is prophesied of by Ioel 2.28. The oracle of Ioel Chap. 2.27 expounded. And it shall come to passe after∣ward, that I will poure out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesie, &c. And I will shew wonders in the heavens, & in the earth, blood, & fire, & pil∣lars of smoack: the Sun shalbe turned into darknes, & the Moon into blood, before the great & terrible day come. Act. 2.17. which prophesie Peter shewes to have been partly fulfilled, when as on the day of Pentecost, the Apostles, & the Apostolical Church were mi∣raculously filled with the holy Ghost: Partlie, to be accomplished before the last comming of Christ, at what time the Church shalbe troubled with horrible cala∣mities, not so much by hereticks or tyrants, as by Antichrist, Christs adversarie. Now these things are foretold, least the faithful should imagine Christs kingdome to bee of this world, or to expect pleasures in this life: but rather to prepare them∣selves for all manner of adversities, & in the mean while beeing fully assured, that these calamities shall no way hurt the Elect persevering in prayer and supplica∣tion: Ioel. 2.32. and therfore this is added as a consolation. Whosoever shall call on the name of Iehovah, shalbe delivered; for in mount Sion & in Jerusalem shalbe deliverance. An∣dreas Caesariensis wel observeth on this place, that the crosse and calamities under Antichrist, seem to be foretold unto the Church, to no other end, but that the godly beeing praeadmonished long be forehand, might be confirmed in the very time of these trials by Antichrist & his ministers: for evils foreseen and premeditated on, are lesse offensive, when they come upon us. Thus we have heard whence these prodigious sights are taken: what they signi∣fie, and wherefore they are foretold. Now let us consider them one by one: they are seven in number: three whereof shall come to passe in the earth. viz. The earth∣quake, the trembling of the mountains, and the removall of the Ilands. Four shall hap∣pen in heaven, viz. The darkning of the Sun: the changing of the Moon into blood: the fall of stars: and the convolution of heavens. The first is a great earthquake. This is made by the winds getting into the hollow parts of the earth and violently breaking forth. Hereupon the earth sha∣keth, houses, towers, townes and cities are throwne downe to the ground, & all things are gashlie to behold. Even so Antichrist puft up with base pride, & lead by an evill spirit, hath shaken the Christian world, overthrowen the ancient order and discipline of Christ, by changing the forme thereof into his Ecclesiasticall Mo∣narchie: the which tooke its beginning from the time of Pope Sylvester I. For no sooner were the Romish Bishops by Constantine, and the following Emperours, ray∣sed up with outward dignitie and riches, but they hereupon swelling with ambi∣tion, forthwith began to domineere, and lord it over their brethren: as the hi∣stories of Sozimus, Zaelestinus, Leo, and others testifie: notwithstanding this their
great arrogancie was at first a little kept under, as by the authoritie of Emperours, so by the canon lawes, as also the opposition of other Bishops: as may be seen by the Acts of the sixt council of Carthage: where the Pope of Rome assuming the name of universall unto his chaire, by authority (as he falsly affirmed) of the Nicean coun∣cil: he was convicted of falshood, and for that time repressed. But after Gregorie, this spirit of pride violentlie burst forth in Sabinian his suc∣cessour, and after him in Boniface III. who was (as we said before) openlie by Phocas, declared universal Bishop, that is, Antichrist was now lifted up on his throne. Then began all the bowels of the earth, that is, of the Christian world to be horribly shaken. For now the whole clergie: is brought under the yoke of the Pope, who at length imposed the law of abstinence from marriage upon them: Now the doctrine of the Church: both concerning the worship of God as also the faith and free grace of Christ, is so corrupted as nothing almost remained sound, but the bare name. Now the mountaines, viz. Emperours, Kings and Princes if at any time they displease the Pope, are sore shaken, yea troden under feet, by their buls, and excommunications. Now the Ilands also, that is, whole nations escape not, as we shall hear by and by. It would bee tedious to re∣peat all the disturbances and grievous calamities, which this Romane Antichrist hath brought, and yet daily deviseth both against Church and common wealth. By this earthquake Steeven the 11. through Pipin, wroung the principallity of Ra∣venna with all Italie out of the hands of the Graecian Emperours: from whom also Leo III. with the aid of Charles, drew away the whole Empire of the West, to settle it (as some of them boast) among the Germaines. We need not insist upon histories, seeing our owne daily experience doth sufficiently set forth the meaning of this commotion. The Sun became black as sack cloth of hair] This is the second wonder. Christ the Sun of righteousnes shalbe horriblie eclipsed, that is, the doctrine touching his offices and benefits darkned, and utterlie defaced. We heard before, how the Church lost her whitnesse, and became black in regard of the manie foule heresies of that time: yet something still remained pure in her, by reason of some sound teachers who firmlie maintained the truth of Christ. But under Antichrist even the Sun is made black as sackcloth of hair, that is, most black, and hurtfull. Not that Christ in himself can so be made: but because Antichrist by his profession both teacheth and maketh such a Christ. It is thought, that the haire of sackcloth here spoken of, What this sackcloth of hair is. is made of the black hair of goats, or horses: whereof in former time they made mourning garments, as may be gathered from many places of scripture: these garments did prick the flesh & much paine those that ware them. Hence the hypocriticall Monkes, as Carthu∣sians, Cappuzins, and other Antichristian frogs, (who glorie of perfection) weare such garments for the beating down of their flesh: but indeed hereby (as by a true badge) they testifie, that they live under the darknesse of the Sun here spoken of. But (say they) Christ the Sun of righteousnes is not darkned unto us: How the Sun is ob∣sctired in popery. For the Pope professeth Christ to be God and man against all hereticks. I answer: If he should openly cast off the name of Christ, then he could not have brought the Christian Church under his bondage, neither suppresse the truth as now he doth: But his comming as the Apostle witnesseth, 2 Thess. 2.10. is with all deceiveablenes of unrighteous∣nes in them that perish. So that by the cunning pretence of Christian profession, he hath fraudulentlie overthrowne the Church: yea herein he hath mainly op∣posed Christ, in that he was looked upon to be a preacher of his name, Contra Auxen∣tium lib. 2. cont. legis advers. cap. 12. as Hilarie and Austin write concerning him. The profession of Christs person, and of the trinitie, was indeed the maske under which he deceived the Church: for other∣wise Christians would have shunned him as the devill. But of what use, I pray you, is Christ without his offices & benefits, the which in popery are troden under foot? what profiteth it to beleeve that the Turk is the Emperour of the East, from whom, unlesse it be by thy own deceit, thou canst not exspect eyther good to thy self or others?
Yea say they, Papists be∣leeve not on Christ as the onely mediatour. we also professe Christ to be the mediatour, redeemer and one∣ly saviour, & by beleeving in whose merits we must be saved. But we have often shewed, that this their profession is nothing but as black sackcloth, if they would but see it: for if indeed they did beleeve Christ to be the onelie mediatour, they would not then have made to themselvs so many thousands of mediatours as they have don: For doe they not cry to S. Marie, to S. Peter, to S. Nicolas &c. to pray for them? If they did beleeve to be saved by the merits of Christ alone: then they would not have forged the merits of saintes, neither their owne works of Iu∣stification, or of supererogation, or a purgatorie fire, and so ascribe salvation, which is obtained by Christ alone, unto their owne inventions. Thus therefore the Sun, in Popery, is made black as sackcloth of hair: The Apostolical doctrine of faith and salvation by them is darkned, and changed into Philosophical pre∣cepts: Christs sacraments are darkned, and turned into a stage-playing Pompe or shew: The invocation and worship of God is darkned, and turned into adora∣tion of idols, and of the creature: To be short the Church it self is darkned, scars∣lie retaining any thing of Christianity except the bare name. Now the black sackcloth of hair doth signify the humane traditions, their hethea∣nish and Iewish ceremonies mingled with Christianisme, of which Augustine complaines, Epist. 119 19.20. that even in his time the Church began to be more burdened with them, then the Israelites were with theirs: to be short it signifies the decrees and canons of Sy∣nods, and Popes, by which the Church was turned into a secular kingdom, the pres∣byteny into a civil court, and their temples into very brothel houses. And the moon became as blood] The third wōder followeth; by the moon, is meant the Church, as Cant. 6.9. Fair as the moon. Rev. 12.1. The Sun is Christ as we shewed before. Now what marveile is it, if the Moon be turned into blood, when the Sun is darkned? In Eclypses the Moon appears black and reddish, and some∣times of a bloodie colour, having in it selfe but little light. But as the Moon doth receive its light from the Sun: so all light, puritie, righteousnes and salvation, or whatever else the Church enjoyes, shee receiveth it all from Christ the Sun of righteousnes. The sence therefore is, that the Church shall be turned into blood, by the commotion of Antichrist. The like phrase the Lord useth in Joel 2.31. But whence comes this blood into the Moon? I answer: by the cruel tyrannie of Antichrist, making the Church red with the blood both of the nations, and of the Saintes. For this blood was powred on her partly by wars, and partlie by martyrdoms. For the Pope not beeing content to usurp the title of Peter the prince of the Apostles, & under that pretence to terrify the world with his spiri∣tuall lightnings, he hath also drawn out the temporall sword against Emperours, kings, princes, and Christian nations, filling all places with bloodie warres. As we may see in the extravagant of Boniface VIII. touching superiority and obedience, where it is expressely said, that the Church hath two swords, the spirituall and ci∣vill: and it is further added: that the spirituall is excercised by the Church: the mate∣riall by the hand of kings and souldiers according to the pleasure and patience of priests, If this be true, then what are kings and souldiers, but the Popes vassals? And is not then that blood certainlie shed by the Pope, which is spilt at his pleasure and com∣mand by kings and their souldiers? And is it not the Pope, that causeth the Moon to become blood? but in this also there is deceit and fallacie, for the Romish Bi∣shops, have not onelie used the civill sword in the hands of princes, but also in their own: having these many yeeres together turned the Moon into blood, by the many cruell warrs occasioned and made by them. Beneven. de Rambal. lib Augu∣stali. Benevenutus de Ram∣baldis a noted historian, thus writeth concerning Boniface the eight, above two hundred and thirtie yeares agoe: that, Albertus Duke of Austria beeing by the Ele∣ctors chosen king of the Romanes, desired of Boniface that famous Pope the blessing and coronation: to whom this loftie tyrant answered, that he was unworthie of the Empire, be∣cause he had traiterouslie killed his Lord Adolph in warre: and having the crowne on his owne head, and a sword girt to his loines, he said: I AM CAESAR. Julius II. the
predecessor of Leo a better souldier then a priest, beeing borne rather for Mars, then for Christ, going forth with an army (as Wicelius witnesseth) in the yeere 1513, against the king of Navarre) threw Peters Key into Tyber, saying, If the Key of Peter cannot, let the sword of Paul prevaile. Of which Mantuan thus singeth: Ense potens gemino, cujus vestigia adorant Caesar, & aurato vestits murice reges. Great Caesar with victorious kings, Who golden crownes doe wear: They doe adore his footsteps, who the double sword doth bear. To be short the most cruel wars, which continually have been (and at this day are) among Christian princes, to the shedding of exceeding much blood in France, the Nederlands, Livonia, Poland, Muscovia, & Hungarie, have alwayes been raysed & fomented by the Popes buls and armies: & by this meanes, ever since the death of Priscillian they have continnallie murdered the saints and made the Moon red with their blood. For Priscillian beeing declared an heretick by the Pope, (although Sulpitius Severus describing his sect, doth not charge him with any he∣reticall doctrines contrarie to the analogie of faith; but onely for unlawfull con∣venticles) was by the instigation of Ithacius Bishop of Triers, put to death about the yeere of Christ 380, contrarie to the mind of Martine Thuronensis a Maxi∣mo the Emperour, the murderer of Valentinian the yonger. From that time for∣ward the Bishops went on to have the like punishment inflicted on all such as were condemned by them of haeresie: And at length the Popes adjudged to death as hereticks, all that opposed their tyrannie and idolatrie, under which pretence, what a multitude of Christians have been most cruellie murdered the bookes of martyrs testifie, yea whosoever reads those histories shall see clearely enough, that by their meanes the Moon was wholle turned into blood. The massacre at Paris committed on Bartholomewes day, in the yeere 1572, is yet fresh in memorie, at what time within the space of eight dayes there were more then a hundred thousand by the means of Gregorie XIII. most barbarously put to death in France, making all the streets, rivers, and prisons in the land red with the blood of martyrs. Thus I doubt not, but we understand what is meant by this change of the Moon into blood: touching which also I will rehearse a verie memorable ex∣ample in the end of this booke. 13. And the starres of heaven fell unto the earth] The fourth wonder, is taken out of Isai. 34.4. and Mar. 13.25. We have heard what the stars doe signifie, and wherfore they are so called: Rev. 1.20. the seven stars, are the seven Angels, or Bishops of the Churches. And Rev. 12.1. The woman, or Church hath twelve stars on her crowne, signifying the pastors and teachers of the Churches. These stars which fell, are apostates who forsooke Christ, for fear of Antichrists cruell perse∣cution: they are I say, principall Bishops and teachers, who by embracing the kingdom of Antichrist, fall from heaven unto the earth, among whom the Bi∣shop of Rome was chiefe, and with him all others who acknowledged him for their head. They fell unto the earth, by forsaking their pastoral charge of preaching the word, and becomming earthly princes, imitating the pompe of courtiers, and wholie giving themselves to worldlie affaires, as to wars, hauking, huntings, & all other vanities & pleasures in princes courts: yea far exceeding them in pride, pompe and luxurie. This fall of the stars is amplifyed by the similitude of a strong wind blowing untimelie figs from the tree. By these figs, are meant carnal bishops: and by the mightie wind, the Papal authority, unto which all of them ey∣ther for fear of excommunication, or for promotion sake readilie submitted. 14. And the heaven departed as a scroll] The sift wonder is taken out of Isai. 34.4. Heaven (Hebr. rakiagh) is that outspread firmament which God created on the second day: and adorned with lights on the fourth day. This heaven, the lights failing and falling downe, departed. But after what manner? as a scroll rolled to∣gether.
In old time they bound not up their bookes as we doe now, but rol∣led them up as upon a rolling instrument, The heaven rolled up, is the Church falling away from Christ. & so beeing shut, they could not be read. But what heaven is here meant to be thus rolled up? Interpreters understand here∣by, the Church spread over all the face of the earth, which to Iohn did seem to de∣part like a scrol, not as ceasing to bee, but as ceasing to bee seen: The which indeed is true of the Church of the Elect. For however Antichrist shall cover his king∣dome with the title of the Church: & take those things that are proper unto her, causing the word & Sacraments (though horribly depraved) to be administred by his clergie: neverthelesse they shall not be Christs Church, but a synagogue of Sa∣tan. The true Church of Christ shall depart, beeing hid & not seen to the world: to whom belonged all the martyrs and professors, witnessing against Antichrist. But thou wilt say, these were not hid: It is true indeed, they were seen, as they were men, & could not be hid as they were martyrs: but hid, as a Church, or the members thereof: for they were condemned & accounted by Antichrist, not as Christs faithful ones, but as wicked hereticks. This heaven or out spread firmament, The heaven departing, is the clo∣sing of scri∣ptures in popery. may also be rightly understood of the ope∣ned booke of holy scriptures, which by Antichrist & his instrumēts was shut or rolled up, yea, & cast under foot: using in the mean time with great reverēce, the Fathers, Scolasticks, Sentenciaries, Canonists, Legends &c. Moreover since this booke of God began againe to be opened, how have the Iesuits laboured to rolle it up, questioning the authority thereof, not accounting the same to be divine, but as it is confirmed by the judgment of the Church, Andrad. defens. con∣cil. Staplet. contr. Witak. that is, of the Pope. For thus they expresly write: That in it there is so much of the deity, as the Popes Church attributes unto it: neyther ought God to bee beleeved, but because of the Church. And all the mountaines were moved] This is the sixt wonder, which Andreas doth rightly understand of those who excell others in wordlie power. For in Rev. 17.10. by mountains, kings are understood, in which sence I judge it is here also taken: neither doth it any way crosse this exposition, that kings are expresly no∣minated in the following verse; seeing that place concernes the following Act, & is to be understood of their punishment. But how have kings been moved by Antichrist? The histories of the Popes declare this diverse wayes. First by their ecclesiastical authoritie, fraud & threat∣nings, constraining Emperours and kings not onely to maintain by fire and sword their ordinances and decrees, but even to cast themselves downe, & kisse the feet of their holinesse: The Popes tyrannie against Emperours and kings. And secondlie civily: for Antichrist spared neither King nor Keisar, but whoever would not doe all things according to his pleasure, those he oppressed, deposed and thrust out of their places. Gregorie II. having excom∣municated Leo the Emperour deprived him of his revenues. Pope Zacharie, de∣posed Childerick king of France. Leo III deprived the Graecian Emperours of the Western Empire. Alexander III. first proudlie trampled with his feet upon Frederick I. before he would receive him into favour. Gregorie VII. displaced Henrie IV. Innocent III. thrust out Otho IV. Innocent IV. took the Empire from Frederick II. Clement VI. excommunicated Ludowick IV. Iulius II. de∣prived the great grandfather of Henry IV (king of France) of his kingdome of Na∣varre. Sixtus V. sought to depose Charles IX king of France, & Elizabeth queene of England &c. To be short Antichrist powerfully moved the mountaines, against Emperours, kings, & Christian princes, through his Sophisters & councils, usurping to himself authority over whole councils, boasting that by him kings doe reigne, & that it is in his power to cast them downe when he pleaseth, & lastly that no coun∣cils are authentick without his approbation. This is a true & plain interpretation. And the Ilands were moved out of their places] This is the seventh wonder, Ilands are invironed with waters: The waters signifie peoples Chap. 17.15. and therefore by the Ilands here are meant nations or the subjects of princes: these also are moved: for all are necessitated upon pain of salvation to subject themselves unto the Romish Bishop: neither can any buy, nor sel, nor make any bargaine, but
according to his pleasure as appeares by the extravagant of Boniface VIII. We define, we say, we pronounce, we appoint that it is of necessitie unto salvation, for every hu∣mane creature to beleeve, that he is subject unto the chiefe priest of Rome. Thus the Ilands, peoples, & communaltie beeing deprived of their Christian libertie, which they enjoyed under the Apostles, were brought under Antichrists yoke, under which they serve and groan even unto this day. The fourth Act of the second vision concerning the final punishment of the wicked. 15 And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chiefe captaines, & the mighty men, & every bond-man, and every free-man hid themselves in the dens, and in the rockes of the mountaines, 16 And said to the mountaines and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe: 17 For the great day of his wrath is come, & who shall be able to stand? THE COMMENTARIE. 15 ANd the kings of the earth] Many (with Lyra) referre these things unto the times of Diocletian & Maximianus, whose cruelty against the Christians Eusebius treateth of Histor. lib. 8. & 9. because in those dayes men of all conditions & estates, both great and small, not beeing able to endure the extremitie of tyrants, sought to hide themselves in caves, mountaines and woodes. But they erre from the scope, & in my opinion offer violence to the text: for undoubtedly by kings &c. are not meant the vulgar, but men in place and authority. Now in those times there were no Christian kings, that we read of, to be persecuted, or to shun these tyrants. Besides the following words, hide us, and fall upon us, are not expressions of the godly groaning under the crosse, but of the wicked, dispairing for feare of wrath, as the cause annexed shewes: for the great day of his wrath is come: which cannot be possiblie understood of the day of the Diocletian persecution. Others therefore have thought, that these things appertaine to the last times, and the punishments of persecutours. So Andreas, The kings, saith hee, and all the princes, & rich men, &c. shall rather desire to be hid in mountaines, rocks and caves, then to feele the wrath and scourges of the Lambe, which at Antichrisis comming shall over∣whelme those miserable men: Or certainely they shall thus greatly quake for feare of the judgements prepared for them after the resurrection of the flesh, which never shall have an end. Therefore this fourth Act of the vision concerning the final punishment of re∣probates, is briefly annexed to the matter going before, and answereth successive∣ly to the third Act, howbeit neyther this nor the third is yet fullie ended in this Chapter, as before we noted. For as the third Act hath two parts: the first set∣ting forth Antichrists tyranny over the Christian world, in the three former verses: the other his restraint, and the sealing of the elect afterward described in Chap. 7. So likewise the fourth Act consists of two parts, both full of joy and consolation to the Church: the first whereof describeth the final and universal destruction of the wicked, in the three last verses of Chap. 6. The second sets forth the happy con∣dition which the saintes shall enjoy with the Lambe in heaven from v. 9. of Chap. 7. unto the end thereof.
Now we come to handle the punishment of the wicked, the which here is but briefly touched, but afterward more largely set forth in the following visi∣ons: The generall doctrine is this: that however the wicked for a while op∣presse and afflict the Church, yet they shall one day finallie perish: their rage & cruelty in seeking to destroy the godly, shall turn to their utter overthrow & ruin: for ordinarily injury goes before destruction. Now the reason hereof is, because God is just, & will not suffer their crueltie to goe unpunished: And also he is omnipotent, and able easily to cast downe the kings of the earth, which have risen up against him: to bee short, he is faithfull and true, to performe the promised deliverance and glorie unto the saintes. Now here is described 1. The condition of the adversaries: 2. their trembling and despaire: and thirdly the cause thereof. And the kings] And, here is not so much copulative, as continuative or adver∣sative, for, then the kings: or, but the kings &c. For it signifies the effect of this great Antichristian earthquake: we have not in this place, neyther Antichrist, nor his false prophets and parasites, by whose fraud he was advanced, here named: not as if they should go unpunished: but because their destruction is purposely & more manifestly described in the following history, and especially in the fift and sixt visions, by many fearfull expressions. These here are named kings, great men, rich men, tribunes, and mightie men, and all bondmen and freemen, that is, both high & low, all of the laicks (as they call them) of what degree soever, who have been instruments eyther by their authority or wealth to advance Antichrist to that hight of tyrannie and cruelty, or who for the establishing of his power, have drawen the sword, or been helpfull in making or kindling of the fires wherin the martyrs were burnt. But this also is to be extended more largely unto al the enemies of the Church, even from the beginning of the world, Who these kings and great men are. viz. as well such as persecuted the godlie under the law, as Nimrod, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Nebuchad-nezar, Antiochus &c. as those under the Gospel, viz. Herod, Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Decius, Diocletian, Julian, Valens, and whosoever else have bent their bow against Christ, and insulted over his truth, or at this day, doe seek to uphold Antichrist. But in the end, an unhappy and lamentable destruction shall come upon them. Before we come to treat of this great catastrophe: I againe desire the reader not to thinke it strange, that we expounded the mountains & Ilands spoken of in v. 14. to be kings and nations: though it seems that they are here onely expreslie named: For before they were more obscurelie and restrainedly set forth by the names of mountaines & Iland moved out of their place by Antichrist, that is, by him seduced, shaken, and subjugated: but here in generall is prefigured the over∣throw of all enemies eyther under, or before Antichrists time. This also by the way we may take notice of, that Andreas understands by kings of the earth, them whose power and studie onelie is in and about earthlie things, as having nothing to doe with Christ & heaven. Chief captaines] Gr.  signifying, captaines over thousands, such (as among the Romans) had the chief charge over souldiers: for in a Romane Legion (which consisted of seven thousand and somtimes more) there were ten bandes of soul∣diers: whereof the first bande was the greater, having 1105 footmen and 132 men of armes: and properlie such as had charge over this bande were called chi∣liarchi, collonels, or chiefe captaines. Vegetius lib. 2. de re milit. cap. 2. & 6. Every bondman and every freeman] that is, all other enemies of inferiour ranks, who were strong to shead the blood of the saintes, and to persecute & blaspheme the Gospell: now fearfull indeed, shall be the end of every one of them, as it followeth. And hid themselves in the dens] Wee read that the godlie in times of persecu∣tion often fled into mountaines, woodes and deserts, hidings themselves there for fear of tyrants, as the historie of the Machabees, and others witnesse. But
here, not the godly under persecution, but the persecutors themselves are spoken of: as is plainly to be gathered by what followeth: they hid themselves in dens, that is, they now shall doe that themselves, which formerly they constrained the saintes to doe: it signifies their extreem fear and perplexity: as not knowing where to turn themselves for to finde any succour. Now their kingdoms, palaces, for∣tresses, and munitions of warre: now their armies, legions, militarie bandes, &c. cannot helpe them: but in vain doe they fly unto dens & rocks, which shall not be open to receive and hide them. And therefore they shall despairinglie cry, Ah fall on us, and hide us] The voyce of men without hope of mercy and salva∣tion, and wishing that which no wise man would desire: to wit, to be crushed under the mountaines and miserablie brought to nothing. This is a proverbial description of the wicked despairing, by which is intima∣ted, that such shall be the horrible appearance of things, as that they shall an hundred times rather desire any cruel death, then with such a dreadfull distraction & feare of present punishment enjoy the light any more. Three times in scripture we finde these expressions. Once in Hosea 10.8. concerning the overthrow of Is∣rael by the Assyrians. Secondly in Luke 23.30. touching the destruction of Ie∣rusalem: and thirdly in this place about the final punishment of reprobates. And this here is rightlie applied to the like miseries, because in their causes they are all alike. For of old this exclamation was fulfilled in the wicked Israelites, bee∣ing cast both into temporal & eternal punishment. Afterward it was also verified in the destruction of the city, and the utter overthrow of the Iewish nation, and shall most fullie be accomplished at the day of judgement: when the wicked shal hear that fearfull sentence pronounced: Goe ye cursed into the eternal fire, which is prepared for the devill and his angels. Then shall they burst forth into these words of despaire: Mountaines fall on us: as thinking it better for them once to be crushed by the mountains and brought to nothing, then for ever to be tormented in flames of hell fire. But here, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the false and impious interpretation of Lyra, Gagnaeus and others, who are not ashamed to applie that unto the martyrs & saintes in heaven, (thereby to establish their blasphemous invocation on saintes departed) which the scripture plainly attributes unto reprobates despairing of sal∣vation. These cryes they wil have to be made by the martyrs under the Diocletian persecution: The mountaines & the rockes, to be the Saintes, called mountaines, because of their exaltation unto heavenly things. Vnto them the godlie in their straights and anguishes shall cry: fall on us: that is, come to us, and help us in our persecu∣tion. Hide us: that is, protect us by praying unto God for us. But what a horrible depravation of scripture is this? We know that the godly martyrs in their perse∣cution by prayer fled unto God sitting on the throne, & unto the Lambe standing in the midst thereof, that is, Christ the onely saviour: But for any worship to be rendred unto fained saintes the martyrs and others of the faithful were altogether ignorant of. For what can be imagined more wicked then that the martyrs in their greatest anguishes, leaving God & Christ, should implore the help of the creature, against the expresse commandement of God, call upon me in the day of trouble &c. From the face of him that sits] There are three causes of this their great fear and desperation. The sight of God & the Lamb: the day of judgement: and an evill conscience. Touching the first no marvaile, seeing God is a consuming fire, & the wicked are as stubble which the fire easely consumeth & brings to nothing. And from the wrath of the Lamb] No where in scripture is wrath attributed un∣to the Lamb, but in this place, & here it noteth that revēging justice proper to God alone, XXXII. Argum. of Christs deity. which the wicked shall tremble at when the Lamb shall pronounce the sentence, go yee cursed &c. Now here the Godhead of the Lamb is evidently pro∣ved, seeing Antichrist and his wicked instruments doe, and shall stand in fear of none but of God onely omnipotent, as is confirmed by the following reason.
17 For the great day of his wrath is come] This is the second cause of the wic∣keds horror. This great day of God and the Lamb, is the day of judgement. For in the day of judgement being asked a reason of their ungodli∣nesse & cruelty cōmitted, they shalbe mute & stand ashamed. They who under∣stand this great day otherwise then of the last judgment, doe groslie deceive them∣selves. But Alcasar applying this to the Iewish people, is more ridiculous, who would mingle an historie knowen unto the whole world with these propheti∣call types. In the mean while let the reader observe the relative , of his anger, evidentlie proving (as before we shewed) the deitie of Christ. For that great day of wrath, or of judgements, especially of the last judgement, is e∣very where in the scriptures called the great day of Jehovah. Ier. 30.7. Ioel 2.11.31. Zepha. 1.14. Mal. 4.5. Act. 2.20. Now here this day is called, The great day of the Lambs wrath. And who shall be able to stand] The third cause of their trembling, is an evil con∣science against God, Men, & the spouse of the Lamb. The words are taken out of Ioel 2.11. For the day of Jehovah is great and terrible, and who can abide it. Even the godlie themselves break forth into the like speeches, when they looke upon the rigour of Gods judgements: If thou shouldest observe iniquitie O Iehovah, who shall stand? but this they speake with a filial fear, and humbling of themselves, and not with horror, despairing as doe the wicked. To stand in judgement, is to rely on the confidence of a good cause, and to be absolved or quitted: as Cicero saith in his e∣pistles, Yesterday we stood well in the Senate. Not to stand, is to loose ones cause, and to be condemned, according to the Psalmist, the wicked shall not stand in judgement. Ps. 1.5. so againe the foolish shall not stand in thy sight, Psa. 5.5. Hence they here cry out, Who? that is, none of Gods enemyes, & the Lambs, shallbe able to stand. Thus we have heard the Acts of Antichrists tragical end: now followes the happie and joy∣ful change of the church; the sealed & holy ones shal stand before the throne, sing∣ing to God and the Lamb: Salvation bee to our God, &c. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of Chapter VII. THe wonders of the sixt seale, belonging to the third and fourth Act of vision 2. are continued in this Chapter. After the prodigious earth-quake of Antichrists kingdom, and the horrible cryes of his supporters under their punishments: Now further things are exhibited unto Iohn, some to come to passe in heaven, and others in the earth. In the earth he saw four Angels labouring to hinder the blowing of the windes: And ano∣ther Angel reproving them, and sealing of the twelve tribes of Israel, a hun∣dred fourty and four thousand saintes in their foreheads. In heaven, he saw an innumerable multitude before the throne shouting with prayses unto God, and to the Lambe, one of the four and twentie Elders shewing unto Iohn, who they were, and their happie condition. And thus the second vision is ended. The parts are two. THe first touching the indeavour of the four Angels, and their restraint, in the first 8 verses. The other containes the harmonious thanksgiving of the hea∣venly inhabitants, and of their felicity from v. 9. unto the end. In the former part is set forth the state of the godly under Antichrists king∣dome,
that is, howsoever Satan and Antichrist shall labour by all means possible to suppresse the Gospell, and tread all things under foot: yet some winds shall blow, that is, some witnesses of the truth shal strongly oppose Antichrist, the Lord still preserving certaine thousands of his sealed ones from beeing hurt by him: of whom should consist the true Church of God. This part of the chapter is opposed to the earthquake and Antichristian confusions praefigured in the third Act, treated of in Chap. 6. v. 12.13.14. with which cohereth that which here followes concerning the four Angels, and sealing of the elect in their fore-heads. In the latter part is represented the future state of the blessed martyrs, and o∣ther faithfull ones in heaven, even as many as in this life have made white their robes in the blood of the Lambe. This part is opposed to the horrible cryes and torments of the wicked, treated of Chap. 6. v. 15.16.17. In this Chapter therefore the third & fourth Act of the second vision is fully ended: and the whole Chapter is consolatorie, both for the Church militant, in the former part: and for the triumphant in the latter. These things thus premised, the rest following will bee the more cleare. The fourth Act of vision II. The first part of the Chapter. Of the restraint of the four Angels, and of them that were marked with the seale of God, under Antichrist. 1. And after these things, I saw foure Angels standing on the foure cor∣ners of the earth, holding the foure windes of the earth, that the winde should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. 2. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East, having the seale of the living God: and he cryed with a loude voyce to the foure Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, 3. Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their fore-heads. 4. And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and fourty and foure thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel. 5. Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reu∣ben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand. 6. Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Neph∣thali were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Msses were sealed twelve thousand. 7. Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand. 8. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.
THE COMMENTARIE. ANd after these things] Now John rehearseth what he further saw in the sixt seale, beeing contrarie to the former, as containing joy∣full matter. He saw before what Antichrist and his ministers had don, and what at length they suffered for the same. Here he sees what in the mean time was don by the godly on earth, & what was laid up for them in heaven. Now herein interpreters doe verie much differ, and for the most part doe rather darken then explain the matter, in not observing the method and scope thereof. Lyra goes on in applying these things unto the histories of the Romane Empe∣rours. Lyras opi∣nion of the four An∣gels. The four Angels standing on the four corners of the earth, & holding the four winds of the earth, he interprets of four Emperours, great persecutors of the Chri∣stians, who (after Diocletian and Maximianus had laid downe the Empire) affli∣cted the Church in many parts of the world at one time: Maximianus in the East: Severus in Italie: Maxentius at Rome: Licinius of Alexandria in Aegypt: these held the windes, that is hindered the teachers of the Church, that they should not blow, that is, preach Gods word: for as by the blowing of the windes the earth is made fruitfull: so the preaching of the Gospell fructifyeth the garden of the Church militant. By the earth, sea and tree he understands Christians, some dwelling in firme lands, some in Ilands, & others in woods for to avoyd persecu∣tion. The Angel having the seal of God, & forbidding to hurt the earth, and sea, is Constantine the great, bearing the signe of the crosse in his ensigne, and restraining those four tyrants from hurting of Christians. For Constantine at length overcame Maxentius, Licinius, and other their fellow tyrants, and having obtained the empire alone, he signed many thousand in the forehead, that is, beeing converted unto the faith of Christ, he bestowed many great priviledges upon the Church, & signed many thousands, that is, caused them to be baptised with the signe of the crosse on their foreheads. This interpretation I thus far approve of, What is approvable in Lyras in∣terpreta∣tion. namely, that the windes signifie prea∣chers, and the blowing of the windes, Gods word preached: and the holding of the windes, the hindring of Gospell in the course thereof. But for his application of the rest unto the short space of those four tyrants it agrees little to the scope, seeing those things were to happen a long while after under Antichrist, as appea∣reth by the circumstances, and as the comparing of these things with the follow∣ing visions will more clearly manifest. Besides hee erreth in making Constan∣tine this sealing Angel, forasmuch as undoubtedlie the outward signe of the crosse is not here at all intended, but a higher mysterie concerning the preservation of the elect, and their separation from the abominations of Antichrist, least they should be defiled thereby; as will more plainly appear by the matter following. Rupertus refers this unto the four kingdoms of the world hindring the faith of Christ: viz. the Babylonian, Persian, Greek & Romane Empires: but this is too general. Andreas (herein agreeing with most of our interpreters) doth more rightlie applie it to the times of Antichrist: to which Ribera also consenteth, but yet in this he erreth, viz. in that he thinks that the following contents of this booke are to be applyed to the four yeares reigne of his supposed Antichrist. For generally the following visions doe plainlie represent the foregoing four Acts of the history of the Church from Iohns time even unto the end, under other figures: he also dif∣fereth from al others in taking these to be good Angels, which are here spoken of: wheras all others agree, that they are evill Angels. Notwithstanding in this they doe generallie erre thorow an erroneous supposition, in restraining the time of Antichrist unto the last four yeeres of the world, considering that Antichrist hath allreadie reigned above a thousand yeares, even from Boniface the third, who (as
we have already shewed) was the first that professed himself universall priest, lea∣ving unto his successors this most wicked title and mark of Antichrist. But to let passe these mens opinions, we here take notice of a second part of the third Act of vision II. wherein Iohn is informed of the state of the godlie during the earthquakes, and Antichristian commotions. For having seen before things horrible and prodigious, even a violent alteration of all states of the Christian world under Antichrist, he having I say seen Mahumet in the East, and the Romish Bishops in the West oppressing the Church by fire and sword, and impo∣sing their decrees and idols upon all, depraving Christian religion by their mani∣fold traditions, heathenish and Iewish superstitions, in so much as unto the Churches of the West was left almost nothing, but the bare name of Christ. Now least Iohn (seeing these things) should thus have thought with himself: what shall Christ be thus opprest and kept under by Antichrist? shall there bee no more a Church? no more sincere preaching? no more faithfull & valiant teachers to op∣pose Antichrist? shall indeed the elect also be drawen away into errours, of whom Christ saith, that it is impossible they should be seduced? Now hence it is that this present sight of the blowing windes, and of the four Angels labouring in vain to hinder their operation, is exhibited unto him: shewing how the godlie should continually oppose Antichrist: and be sealed in their foreheads, signifying their safety and preservation unto the end. Alcasar presupposeth (howbeit not truly) that these things appertaine unto the seventh seale: but it is repugnant unto the very text in Chap. 8.1. and though it did, yet would it no way help the consequence which thence he draweth. Four Angels standing] Now concerning these Angels, let us see, who they are, Who are these four Angels. what they did, and the cause thereof. By these Angels, I understand Satan & his Angels, by whose powerfull working Antichrist invaded Christs kingdom, and established his owne with all deceit of unrighteousnesse: and withall I understand all Antichrists agents, both ecclesiasticall and secular, as Kings and Emperours who (to uphold his kingdom) have laboured by fire & sword to suppresse the preach∣ing of the Gospel: so likewise Cardinals, Bishops, Monkes, Canonists, Inquisitors, & Jesuites, who deceiving the world under an angelicall shew of holinesse, have stronglie advanced his kingdome: these are four (a definite number beeing put for an indefinite) as alluding to the foure corners of the earth on which they stand, that is, have their Bishopricks, Lordships, Colledges and Fraternities there fixed. Now by four corners the whole earth is meant, and here it noteth that no place shall be free from the mischievous devises of these wicked Angels. Others again interpret these Angels standing on the four corners of the earth, after this manner. The Mahumetans in the East who suppressed the doctrine of Christ: for however they seem to permit the European Christians the freedom of their religion, yet the same is don deceitfully, as thereby the easier to draw the rest of the Christian world under their power, and so if they could altogether to blot out the very name of Christianity. The South they understand to be the verie seat of the Romane Antichrist: The North is possessed by the Popes sworn vassals. And the West by the Spaniard (his first begotten son) and the most Chri∣stian French king (as they stile him) all which have hithertoo mightily hindered the windes from blowing upon the earth, sea, & trees. But we may as fitlie applie this to the Popes spirituall Angels standing upon the four corners of the earth, seeing he hath every where his Legates a Latere, his creatures (I say) to maintain his Antichristian primacie, and to hinder the blowing of the windes, by their frau∣dulent devises, preachings, writings, disputations, miracles, & all manner of work∣ing by deceit and unrighteousnesse. The reason why Ribera contendeth, that not evill Angels, but the good, Riberas opinion weighed. are here intended, is to free Antichrists ministers from suspicion. But most Popish wri∣ters doe hold the contrarie. Mart. Delrius libr. 2. mag. disquis. quaesi. 11. thinkes them to be very hurtfull & pernicious devils. Alcasar would faine refute him,
but his tongue will not let him, & therefore he leaves it undecided whether they bee good or evil: at last he faineth a dream of four Aeoluses, brideling the windes with bonds and imprisonment. Now is not this a worthie exposition of this my∣sterie? But Ribera wil maintain his opinion with arguments, The devils, saith he, are not in corners of the world, but in the midst of the great men of the earth, in provinces and ci∣ties, and to be short, wheresoever they bee they hinder the preachers of Gods word: As if Iohn understood not this same thing by the four corners of the earth. He there∣fore too childishlie restraines these corners of the earth, unto the utmost places, or mathematicall centers thereof, forasmuch as by a synecdoche the whole world is here signified. But he further objecteth, that God is wont to punish the world not onely by evill Angels, but also by the good Angels: as we see Gen: 19. and 2 Sam. 14. & 2 King 19. & Isai. 37. &c. which Austin also confirmeth lib. 9. de Civ. D. c. 5. but it sufficeth, that for the most part it is don by the evill. Neither is there any weight in this, that the other Angel as joyning himself with them, saith; VNTIL WE HAVE SEALED THE SERVANTS OF OVR GOD, for he makes not the Angels which were readie to hurt the earth, &c. com∣panions with him in sealing, but closelie he pointes out the good Angels which were present with him. Holding the foure windes that they should not blow] Now he shewes what the An∣gels did: in which we are to consider, what the four blowing windes are, and what is meant by the earth, sea and trees: and how they held the windes from blowing on the earth. Ribera understands it properlie of the four cheife windes, The litte∣ral exposi∣tion of Ri∣bera cannot hold. described in these known verses. Asper ab axe ruit Boreas, furit Eurus ab ortu, Auster amat medium solem, Zephyrusque cadentem. These windes the foure Angels indeavoured to hinder from blowing upon the earth, &c. that is, they desired to destroy all things both in the sea, and in the land, as also the fruits of the trees: For if the windes should altogether cease from blowing, all things of necessity would soon come to decay: forasmuch as all living creatures by them are cherished & preserved. Therfore he supposeth that hereby is signified the outward calamities falling upon the persecutours of the saintes: & his reason is, because the literal sence is to be followed, except a plaine reason doth necessitate the contrary. Now indeed this is true; notwithstanding if we should always expound the visions of this booke litterally, much absurdity would follow thereupon: besides the following words doe yeeld us a manifest ground that the letter here is not to be observed: for the elect are said to be sealed, & thereby to be freed from hurt. Now we know that the godly are not free from outward ca∣lamities, as pestilence & famine, wherby the earth, sea & trees are hurt: & therfore it doth necessarily follow, that we must understand it of an immunity of another kinde of hurt. Andreas understands hereby the dissolution of lawfull order & the most cer∣taine event of the evils threatned: Andreas his general in∣terpretatiō. Rupertus his exposi∣tion lib 4. in Apoc. but this seems to be obscure, & to general. Rupertus & many others expound it of the teachers of the word whom Anti∣christs Angels or ministers held, that is, laboured to keep from blowing upon the earth, sea, or any tree, that is, from preaching the faith of Christ in any provinces or Ilands, or unto any men of what condition or quality soever. So hee. Thus the windes denote the preachers of the Gospel, by a metaphor oftē used in the scriptures. For the holy Ghost, whose ministers they are, is compared unto the winde Ioh. 3. & Act. 2. by reason of his vehement & piercing efficacy. These are said to be four indefinitely according to the 4 quarters of the Christian world, that is, some of them beeing in every place. They blow, that is, sound forth the Gospel of Christ upon the earth, sea & trees, that is, unto al sorts of men. To hold the windes that they blow not, is to hinder these from preaching: now in this all interpreters agree: notwithstanding it is to bee applied more fully unto the times of Antichrist.
By the windes therefore I understand all the sincere teachers of the Gospell, The au∣thors judg∣mēt touch∣ing the four Angels hindering the blow∣ing of the windes. which for a thousand yeeres together have opposed Antichrists idols, corruptions & tyrannie: such, I say, whom the Romane Bishops by their decrees & buls have condemned as hereticks: whose names are recorded among the witnesses of the truth in the bookes of Martyrs. Among the number of these also (besides such Emperours who by opposing the popes, have caused the windes to blow,) I under∣stand such Bishops, Priests, & Doctors, as have contradicted the tyrannie of the Romish court: as Berengarius, Iohn Scotus, Bertramus &c. who more then six hun∣dred yeeres agoe have strongly in defence of the truth blown by their sermons & writings against the diol of the masse & transsubstantiation, the chiefe prop of Anti∣christ kingdome: also Bernard, Waldus, Wicklife, Hus, & Ierom of Prage, Cle∣manges & others, who by the winde of Gods spirit have maintained the faith of Christ against the pope, partlie by word & writings, & partly by sealing the same with their blood. But chiefly amōg these are to be reckoned, Luther, Melanchthon, Oecolampadius, Zwinglius, Farellus, Bucer, Hegio, Martyr, Viret, Bullinger, Calvin, and as many as in Germanie, France and the neighbouring kingdoms have in this last age begun so to blow the Gospell of Christ, as thereby a great part of the Christian world hath been restored into the pretious libertie of the faith. The earth, sea, and trees, I understand allegorically, not of the faithfull in parti∣cular, or learned men onely, but of distinct churches. As the earth, to denote the churches in the mediterranean provinces: The sea, the churches bordering neere the same, or in Ilands: The trees, churches planted in wooddie and hillie coun∣tries, as are generally those in the Northern parts. The reason why I take this to be meant of whole churches, is, because the Angels are forbid to hurt them, until such were sealed, as the Lord had appointed: and afterward they are per∣mitted to doe it. Therefore the sealed ones shalbe in the earth, sea, & trees, that is, in those Churches that are hurt, neverthelesse they beeing sealed shalbe preser∣ved in safetie. But how shall they hold the windes from blowing, and to what end? What is meant by holding the windes frō blowing. This may bee understood by the following words, It was given them to hurt the earth and the sea: and again, hurt not the earth, sea, nor trees. So that they shall hold the windes from blowing: when the Angels who professe themselves to be spirituall Bishops, & ought to blow, shall neyther preach the Gospell, nor suffer others: but oppose them by their Popish decrees and edicts, by their excommunications, by cruell persecution with fire and sword, as against hereticks: forbidding the reading & use of the holy Scriptures unto all men, least the deceits and lyes of Antichrist should be made manifest. Hence necessarilie followed the hurt of the earth, sea & trees: for the wholesome blowing of the windes now ceasing, all the churches were led into errours by the contrarie blowing of seducing spirits, and lying pro∣phets, who brought al under the yoke of Antichrist, to the destruction of the grea∣ter part of Christianity. Thus we see the meaning of the vision: now hence we observe two things. First, though Antichrist by violence and deceit hath horribly shaken the Chri∣stian world, doing much harme unto the earth and sea: yet God at all times, raysed up some good windes, that is, faithfull teachers who taught the whole∣some doctrin of Christ, to the salvation of the elect, as the histories of Popes & bookes of martyrs testifie. Yea the Lord did preserve unto himself a Church in the midst of Poperie, which Antichrist could never altogether suppresse, how∣ever he cruellie by fire and sword continuallie raged against the same. And there∣fore it is false that God had no Church, nor Christ any spouse: because the Pope and his synagogue were not the spouse of Christ. Secondly, we see by what wayes Antichrist did invade Christs kingdome, and establish his owne tyrannie: to wit, by holding the blowing of the windes, in condem∣ning for haereticks, & violently oppressing the witnesses of the truth, as also by hurting the earth, sea & trees, that is, seducing all the particular Churches by false
miracles with all deceit of unrighteousnes, overthrowing them by his impious do∣ctrines, and superstitious worship, of which the Apostle foretold 2 Thessa. 2.9. saying, whose comming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signes, & lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnesse in them that perish, &c. these things wee find in histories formerlie to have been don, and we daylie see the further accomplishment thereof, which serves for a cleare exposition on these words: now let us hear the antidote or consolation opposed. 2. And I saw another Angel] First we will consider who, & what manner of Angel this was, and secondly what he did. One Angel having the seale of the living God, ascendeth from the East against the four Angels standing on the earth. Lyraes opinion in expounding this of Constan∣tine we have already refuted. Others suppose that Elias shall come towards the end of the world, of whō Malachie speaketh Cha. 4.5. But their supposition is false, as we shall see on Chap. 11. for the prophet there speaketh of Iohn the Baptist, as Christ himselfe interpreteth Matt. 11.14. most understand it of Christ the great Angel of Gods counsell: as Rupertus, Haymo, Bede & others. Ribera indeed denies it, and will have him to bee one of the seven emissarie Angels spoken of Chap. 5.6. but he gaines nothing by his denial: neyther need we to contend at all about it: The Angel ascending from the East is Christ Luk. 1.78. Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. Eph. 1.4. For it is all one whither we understand it of Christ himselfe, or of his Angel mentioned Chap. 1.1. & 22.16. However it seems rather to be meant of Christ, in that it is said, he ascends from the east. For Christ is the sun of righteousnes ari∣sing from on high, and he it is that hath the seale of the living God: for he is the I∣mage of the invisible God, the brightnesse of his glory, & the Character of the person of the Father. Sealing the elect, because in him wee are chosen before the foundation of the world. Also hee sealeth, because he giveth faith unto the Elect, justifies, regenerates, & sanctifies them, sealing in their hearts the witnesse of the spirit, that they may not be seduced by the guile of Antichrist. Now forasmuch as these things are proper unto God, I rather understand this to be spoken of Christ then of any created Angel. The seale which he imprints on the Elect, What the seale of the living God is. the Apostle explaineth 2 Tim. 2.19. the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seale, the Lord knoweth who are his. Moreover that this is to be understood of Christ, it may be probablie gathered, because this vision is like unto that in Ezech. 9. where the Prophet saw six men, every one having a slaughter weapon in his hand for to destroy Ierusalem. He saw also one man among them clothed in linnen with a writers inkhorn by his side, to mark such with the signe Thau on the forehead, as mourned for all the abomination committed in the city, that is, all the godlie, who were not pol∣luted with idolatrie. Now here all interpreters understand Christ the mediatour. Neyther doth it any way contradict what we say, in that Christ is sayd to be the Lambe opening the seale: for (as we have shewed Chap. 5.2.) it is not strange, that he should be represented in diverse formes in this visionall Revelation. He cryed with a great voyce] This angel doth two things. First, with a great cry he forbids the evil Angels to hurt the earth, sea and trees, adding a limitation: un∣till he had sealed the servants of God: the sence is, seeing those that were to be sealed are the servants of God, therefore power of hurting is not given unto them, till this sealing be finished, least they should bee promiscuously wrapt in the danger of seducement, and so be destroyed with the rest. Secondlie, he sealed an hundred fourtie and four thousand of the twelve tribes of Israel. This great cry denotes Christ power over Antichrist and his instruments, whose madnesse he so bridleth, as that they cannot by their tyrannie proceed further, then what is permitted them. And therefore it is said; to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea. Hence it appeareth in the first place, why they held the windes from blowing: to∣wit, that they might hurt the earth and the sea, that is, destroy the Churches by pestilent doctrine. Secondly, that the devil howsoever he doth forciblie stirre up Antichrist unto crueltie against the Gospel, and endeavours to blot the elect out of
the booke of life, yet he can do no more, then is given unto him, that is, no more then what is graunted him by Christ the Angel of the East. Now the Apostle teacheth us 2 Thessa. 2. that the power which is given him, is over them that perish. 8. Hurt not the earth] what is meant by the earth, sea & trees, I have already shewed. The enemies of the windes are commanded, not to hurt these: so that we see they cannot rage & dominere as they list: Antichrist hath taken possession of the Churches of Christ. neyther is Antichrist stronger thon Christ, although he hath invaded his Churches: For it was don by permis∣sion onely. Now the reason thereof we must not too curiously search into. But acknowledg that the security, ungodlinesse and ingratitude of Christians deserved the same, as the Apostle shewes 2 Thess. 2.11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeve a lye: because they received not the love of the truth. Till we have sealed] to wit I, and my ministers. For Christ is not without his ministring spirits: But whither he had now more Angels with him as Ezech. 9.2. or not, the same is not expressed. He doth not simplie forbid them to hurt, but limits the time, and untill that prefixed time these destroyers could do nothing. Thus Antichrist hath not hurt the earth, sea and trees, that is, by his Angels brought the particular Churches of the West under his yoke, eyther against the will, or knowledge of Christ, but by his sufferance: neyther could he hurt them sooner then Christ would; nor shall he be able to doe it any longer then it seems good unto him. Now touching this sealing we are briefly to consider: who were sealed, when, with what signe, wherefore and how manie. Who they are, he shewes, saying, untill we have sealed the servants of our God: Who are these sealed ones. these are the elect in Christ, who worship not idols, or Antichrist, but God in faith and true obedience. This sealing is partly eternal, & partly accomplished in time. What this sealing is. From eternity God hath sealed all them that shall be saved in the counsell of praedestination, which is made & founded on Christ, Ephes. 1.3. In time he sealed his, when now for a thousand yeeres he stirred up many witnesses of his truth & faith, beeing in∣dued with true knowledge, excellent gifts, & heroick boldnes, who stoutlie op∣posed the impostures of Antichrist, by their preaching and writing, & preserved very many faithfull ones from his idol worship. But chiefly he hath and doth seale in these last times, in restoring almost in all the provinces of the Christian world, the lost truth of the heavenlie doctrine by his servants and excellent divines, who have dissipated the mist of popery by the light of the Gospell, and purged many Churches in Germanie, France, England, Denmark, Poland, Bohemia, Moravia, & Hungarie, from Antichristian pollutions, plucking them as a prey out of the jawes af the devill. I confesse indeed that all the members of these Churches are not elected: neverthelesse they are all separated from Antichrist, so that he cannot hurt them; yea we doubt not but that a great number of them appertain unto the election of grace. In Ezech. 9.4. W ha manner of seale this is. we read that all which were to be preserved from the common destruction were marked with the signe Thau, but here no certaine mark is ex∣pressed. Ribera will have it to be meant of the signe of the crosse. Now we know that many who are signed with the popish crosse are the bondslaves of Satan: but none of these here sealed shall perish: seeing they are marked to this end, that no man should hurt them. Alcasar saith wel, that this is no external signe, which may bee discerned with corporal eyes, neyther is it made by any created Angel, but immediatelie by the holy Ghost, who himself marketh such with the signe of the living God, to whom he graciously communi∣cates himself. Let us therefore understand it of the seale spoken of 2 Tim. 2.9. The foundation
of God standeth sure having this seale, the Lord knoweth who are his: and let every one that calleth upon the name of God depart from iniquity. This seale Chap. 14.1. is said to be the fathers name, written in the foreheads of the saintes. First therefore this seale imprinted in the elect, is Gods eternal purpose to save them: the which however it is not seen by the eye of man, yet the elect both dis∣cerne, and feel the same in their hearts. Secondly, it is a saving vocation unto faith, and wrought externally by the word & sacraments, internally through the earnest of the spirit. Thirdlie, it is a true invocation on the name of God, that is, a sin∣cere profession of the truth, by forsaking and detesting al the known wayes of An∣tichrist. To be short, it is a true conversion unto the Lord, constancy & perseverance in the faith of Christ. By these notes the sealed ones separate themselves from the dregs of Antichrist, and are easily known from all other men: therefore they are said to be marked in their foreheads, because they are not at all ashamed of their holy profession. But wherfore is this marke put upon them? The use of their seal∣ing. I answere, to the end that they may not be hurt by the evil Angels, nor seduced by Antichrist, & led into errour, & so made partakers of his plagues. That Antichrist, I say, may have no interest in them: for beeing sealed, they are secure, & certaine of their salvation in middest of all confusions and ruins. This is matter of singular comfort to the elect, in that their salvation is certaine, & that the Lord careth for them. Agreeable hereunto is that in Ezec. 9. where the marked ones are preserved, while the city in the mean time is destroyed. And Rahab, having her house marked according to the covenant with the spies, escapeth: So the Israelites sprinkling their posts with the blood of the Paschal Lamb were delivered, while the first born of Egypt perished, therfore it is said, Rev. 9.4. that the locusts only hurt them, which had not the seal of God in the forehead. For Antichrist also doth mark his servants with his character, as we see Chap. 13. but not to the end they should be preserved, but to have power to buy & sell his holy wares, make marchandise of mens soules, & trade in his kingdom. Now this Character shall not secure them that are marked therwith from destruc∣tion, but rather draw down Gods judgements upon them: for the beast, & the false prophet, & all that have received his mark shall be cast into the lake of fire & brimstone, Rev. 19. & 20. And I heard the number of them that were sealed] their number is great: yet lesse then the number of locusts, & such as had the mark of the beast in their forehead & right hand. Nevertheles much greater then men imagine & judge: a definite for an indefinite. For alwayes there have, are, & shall be more witnesses of the truth, then Antichrist or the world knowes of: a Church, I say of sealed ones preserved by thy Lord unto himself; as in the time of Elias seven thousand in Israel were re∣served, who had not bowed the knee to Baal, albeit the Prophet then complained that he was onely left. The Papists inquire who, & where the Church was before Lu∣thers time? let them receive here an answer from Iohn: that when Antichrist thought he had brought al to stoope under him, yet then the Lord hath 144000 sealed ones. We affirme therfore that a Church of sealed ones was hid in the midst of popery, even when the Angels stood on the four corners of the earth to hinder the windes from blowing (that is, to hinder the course of the Gospel) & to subject all particu∣lar Churches under the power of Antichrist. Moreover the number here specified is most perfect, twelve & ten beeing by the rule of Arithmeticke put together. For twelve beeing multiplied by ten, makes a hundred & twentie: & ten times a hund∣red and twentie, makes twelve thousand, which is the number that was sealed out of each tribe: this againe beeing multiplyed by twelve, makes a hundred fourtie & four thousand, which is the compleet number of all them that were sealed. For other mysteries I let them passe. Out of all the tribes of Israel] Ribera understands it literally of the conversion of so many Iewes out of every tribe, about the last times under Antichrist, proving
it from that of the Apostle Rom. 11.26. and so all Israel shall be saved. But in this he agrees, neyther with himself, nor yet with the oracle of Paul. For if so bee that all the Iewes shall receive and follow Antichrist as the Messias (as the Papists themselves imagine) how then shall so many thousand cleave unto Christ? And againe, if all Israel shall be converted, how then shall there bee onely 144000 sealed ones? the prophesie of the Apostle I will not here speake of, as not apper∣taining to this place, and the rather because in my commentarie on the Romanes I have expounded the same. Lyra speakes of the conversion of so many Iewes under Constantine: but yet he dares not affirme, that such a thing was then accomplished, & therfore he approves of a mysticall interpretation, and applies it to the spirituall Israel, that is, to such as were converted to the faith of Israel & of Christ under Constantine; But I have al∣ready proved that these things may not be tyed to that time, but belong to the ages after under Antichrist. There are also some of our interpreters who expound this number 144000 of beleeving Iewes, and applie the great multitude spoken of v. 9. to the Church of the gentiles. But leaving such mens opinions, I follow the exposition of my Anonymus: of all the tribes of the children of Israel, that is of all nations imitating the faith of Israel: because God hath elected some to salvation out of every part of the world: Christ also shall have his sealed ones, in all places where Antichrist reigneth. Besides the beleevers of the Gentiles are often in the new Testament called by the name of Israel, as following Israels & Abrahams faith. Rom. 4. & 9.6. For they are not all Israel which are of Israel &c. Now these are compared to the twelve tribes of Is∣rael, because they succeeded in their place: & therefore it is said they shall sit on twelve thrones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel, who were apostated from God and Christ. The distribution therefore of these sealed ones, according to their tribes, is not to be taken litterally, but by a certaine similitude, because God hath substituted other special nations, in stead of those apostatical tribes, in which he hath a cer∣taine number of sealed ones, that is, ordained to life eternal. And the reason hereof is apparent: because the twelve carnall tribes of Israel before the manifesta∣tion of this Revelation, were lost by the destruction of Iudea and Ierusalem: much lesse doe they remaine to this day: For touching the small remainder of the Iewes now in their dispersion, it is altogether uncertaine of what tribes they are. Furthermore Andreas (whom my Anonymus followeth) applies certaine vertues to each tribe, from the Etymologie or signification of their names: as for example: the sealed of the tribe of Judah are confessours of Christ: the sealed of Reuben are the pure in heart enjoying the heavenlie vision. But I passe this by, as beeing more subtil then solid: as for the signification of their names read Gen. 29. & 30. & 35. Now twelve thousand are sealed of every tribe, for many are chosen by Christ out of all peoples and nations under Antichrist. The naturall order of the tribes is not here observed. Judah is put before Ruben, both because it was the kinglie tribe of which Christ came according to the flesh: as also because Reuben by defiling his fathers bed lost his birthright. So at the numbring of the people, & pitching of the campes Iudah had the preeminence. Num. 2.3. & 1 Chron. 4. The tribe of Levi contrarie to the ordinarie custom of the Scripture is here brought in: for he had no inheritance with the rest. Ephraim againe is omitted, and Joseph is here placed in his stead, contrarie to the order of the tribes. Dan also is passed by: the reason whereof most of the fathers and some also to this day will have to be, because Antichrist should come of this tribe: grounding their opinion, on that in Gen. 49.17. Dan is a serpent in the way: & Iere. 8.16.
the snorting of horses was heard from Dan. Whither Antichrist shall be a Iew, and arise out of the tribe of Dan. And hence arose another erroneous opi∣nion. viz. that Antichrist should be a Jew: by which fiction the devill so de∣ceived the world, as that Antichrist already sitting and reigning in the Church, was not taken notice of & avoyded. But this Glosse is frivolous: Dan shall be a serpent by the way, that is, of him Antichrist shall come: neyther is there any thing to bee gathered from Ieremies words (out of Dan wee have heard nighing of horses) that doth at all concern this matter. But the Ancients are the lesse to be blamed, not having the meanes and knowledge of histories touching Antichrist, which we now enjoy, and see with our eyes, & which the Papists themselves cannot but also see, if they would confesse it; & therfore they are the more ridiculous in al∣leadging such foolish things: Lib. 3. de Papa Ro∣mano. Why the tribe of Dan is o∣mitted. the vanity whereof Bellarmin himself confesseth. For where is now the tribe of Dan? Others therefore affirme more probably, that the Danites are not mentioned, because of old they forsooke the worship of God, & leaving the fellowship of their brethren became like unto the Gentiles, as we read. Iud. 18. which seems also to be the reason why they are not mentioned with the other tribes 1 Chro. 7. But suppose it be granted, that Antichrist shall come of Dan: what doth better suit with the Pope then this? For Dan signifies to judge. Now who, but the Pope alone, judgeth all men, & himself is judged of none? doe not the Popes pa∣rasites make him to be this Antichristian Dan, or judge? See Gratian distinct. 40. Cap. si Papa. The latter part of the Chapter. Touching the harmonious thanksgiving of the heavenlie inha∣bitants: & of their blessednes. 9. After this I beheld, & loe, a great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kinreds, & people, & tongues, stood before the Throne, & before the Lambe, clothed with white robes, & palmes in their hands: 10. And cryed with a loud voyce, saying, Salvation to our God, which sit∣teth upon the Throne and unto the Lambe. 11. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the El∣ders, and the foure beasts, & fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God. 12. Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisedome, & thankesgiving, and honour, and power, and might be unto our God for ever & ever. Amen. 13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto mee, What are these which are arayed in white robes? and whence came they? 14. And I said unto him, Sir, Thou knowest. And hee said to mee, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lambe. 15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and might in his Temple: and he that sitteth on the Throne shall dwell among them. 16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sunne light on them, nor any heate.
17. For the Lambe which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, & shall leade them unto living fountaines of waters: and God shall vvipe away all teares from their eyes. THE COMMENTARIE. 9. ANd after this I behold, and loe, Lyraes opi∣nion tou∣ching this multitude. a great multitude] Lyra observes wel that here is described the comfort of the triumphant Church. Notwithstanding he restraines it to the martyrs onely who suffered under Diocletian and Maximianus. But we may easilie perceive by this 9 verse, that the multitude here mentioned is to be understood in a larger sence. Others for the most part suppose, Other mens opi∣nions about it. that as before the num∣ber of the Iewes: so here the sealed of the Gentiles are described, but in this place we find nothing spoken concerning sealing: Besides Iohn saw the hundred fourty & foure thousand sealed ones in the earth: But this great multitude he seeth before the Throne of God in the heavens, and therefore it is certaine that as the former multitude noted the militant Church: so this here the Saintes in glory: but how doth John so suddenly passe from the one to the other? this indeed I finde not to be opened by any interpreter. But the method by me propounded doth clearely manifest the reason thereof. For as the former part of this Chapter touching the sealing of the elect under An∣tichrists kingdom, doth cohere with what was spoken Chap. 6.12.13.14: concer∣ning the Antichristian earthquake beeing as it were an antithesis of Act the third: So, the latter part, touching the joy of the Church triumphant, accords with what is described in 15.16.17. verses of the said Chapter, touching the cryes and pu∣nishment of the enemies, as an antithesis of Act the fourth. So that these things by parallels are thus to be opposed as contrarie each to other. Parallell of Act the third. Chap. 6. vers. 12.13.14. Antichrist shall raise an horrible earth∣quake in the Church: and hinder the prea∣ching of the word: and bring all things un∣to a finall destruction which he hath now done a thousand yeers. Chap. 7. v. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8. Christ ascending from the East shall seal the elect in the midst of Antichristian commotions: & wil alwayes keep, and pre∣serve them safe unto himself: and hath done so these thousand years. Parallel of Act fourth. Chap. 6. v. 14.15.16.17. The Antichristian adversaries trembling for fear of Gods judgements shall cry with a horrible howling, Mountaines fall on us: who can stand, because of the wrath of God & the Lamb? Chap. 7. v. 9. unto the end. The martyrs & all the blessed & sealed ones, formerly afflicted in the world, now enjoy eternall felicity: and stand before God & the Lamb singing with joyfull har∣monie: salvation to our God; for God will protect them, and the Lamb will feed them. By which double antithesis or contrarie position the coherence doth appeare: as also hereby we understand both the consolation of the Church militant under An∣tichrist, as of the Church triumphant in the heavens. After this I saw] The transitory particle  shewes that this is a different Act from the former, therefore these words, After this, doe denote not onely the order of the vision, but also the future time in which it was done. Be∣fore indeed he saw a great companie which were sealed: but afterward he sees this innumerable multitude. Moreover the former were sealed: viz. during the persecutions of Antichrist on earth: but these latter sung a hymne, to wit, after the enemies were cast into utter darkenesse, and the Church taken up into glory. Furthermore five things are recorded concerning this multitude. 1. Who, how great, where, & what manner of multitude it was? v. 2.2. What they did?
they prayse God and the Lamb. v. 10.11.12. 3. Who they were? The martyrs & faithfull before sealed. v. 13.14. 4. What their happinesse was. ver. 15.16. 5. The cause of this their great felicitie. v. 17. A great multitude which no man &c.] This multitude is a figure of the new triumphant Church: so that it consisted both of the soules which Iohn erewhile saw under the altar, namely who in this world had fought the good fight of faith, from the time of the Apostles for the space of 600 yeeres: as also the hundred fourty and four thousand sealed ones, preserved by Christ during the troubles and commotions of THAT MAN OF SIN, from the sixhundreth yeere, unto the end of the world. This multitude is great & innumerable, as consisting of all the forenamed persons. viz. both of the martyrs under the altar, and of the hundred fourty and foure thousand sealed ones, with all other of the faithfull from the A∣postles time unto the last day. 2 Tim. 2.19. The which number, although it be small in com∣parison of them that perish: and certaine and defined in respect of God (who knowes who are his) yet in it self it is great, & cannot bee reckoned by any crea∣ture. Howsoever therefore the greater part shall follow the devill, and cleave to Antichrist: yet the Lord will have a great multitude, and by such he will bee praysed for ever. Of all nations] Thus also the Church in Chap. 5.9. singeth unto the Lord: Thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, & tongue, & people, and nation. Hence we see, that the sealed of the twelve tribes of Israel, belong to this multi∣tude: otherwise they could not bee of every tribe & nation. So that here is re∣presented the whole triumphant Church of the new Testament. Stood before the Throne] This shewes that they were in heaven, and not on earth: for this standing denotes their coelestiall happinesse, which consisteth in the per∣petuall vision of God & the Lambe. The queen of Sheba counted Solomons ser∣vants happie, in that they alwayes stood before Solomon, and heard his wisdome: but how much greater is the happines of the Saintes in heaven, who continual∣ly behold the majesty, and glory of God and Christ? Now this standing of the Saintes is opposed to the dreadfull cry of reprobates, who can stand? Clothed with white robes] Their heavenlie purity, brightnesse and glorie is here set forth: For the just shall shine as the stars of heaven. Hence againe it appeareth that the soules of the Martyrs, to whom white robes were given Chap. 6.11. and to whom it was said that they should rest for a little season, are joyned to this multitude, beeing commanded to come forth from under the altar, and placed before the Throne. Moreover palms were given into their hands, in signe of victorie. For as Gregorie observeth, these palms which the multitude held in their hands, are nothing els but the reward of victorie following the workes of Martyrs. Yet God forbid, we should with Ribera attribute this reward, to any meritorious worke: seeing a far other meritious cause thereof is noted unto us ver. 14. & 17. 10. And cryed with a loude voyce] Now followes what this multitude did: they together with the Angels, Elders, & Beasts, that is, with the whole assembly of the heavenly inhabitants, sing joyfullie to God & the Lambe. This joy of the Saintes, as I even now said, is opposed to the howling of the ungodly under their plagues: Mountaines fall on us. Here therfore is signified the most certaine change of things as now they are, joyfull indeed and desirable unto the godlie, now under affliction: but dolefull and cursed to the wicked, now lifting up their hornes: For it is a righteous thing with God (saith Paul) to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you: 2 Thes. 1.6 and to you who are troubled, rest with us, &c. According as Abraham said to the glutton crying in hell: Luk. 16.25. Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst good things, & likewise Lazarus evill things, but now he is comforted, & thou art tormented. Salvation to our God] This acclamation is not a wishing salvation, as is the man∣ner of subjects, desiring prosperity to their prince, to cry: Let the king live: but a shouting for joy, & a blessing of God and the Lambe, for mans salvation, or bles∣sed immortality and happinesse: It is (I say) no wish; but an action of thanks∣giving,
attributing to God that which is dew unto him, namely, the prayse and glorie of their salvation: and the sence is: we ascribe not our salvation received, to our owne power, but to the grace of God & merits of the Lambe. Therefore Beza to expresse this sence, hath rendred the words thus: salvation from our God and from the Lambe, to wit, is given unto us: And thus Austin in his 11 sermon concerning the Saintes: They sing with a loud voyce salvation to God, who acknowledge with much thanksgiving, that they have overcome in battle all fierie trials, not by their owne power, but by his assistance &c. The joy therefore & blessednesse of the Saintes in heaven, shalbe an eternal celebration of God & of Christ. 11. And all the Angels] The rest also of the coelestial companie, as the Angels, Elders and beasts spoken of Chap. 4. doe joyne in singing with the blessed soules of the Martyrs & sealed ones. And fell before the throne on their faces] A gesture of suppliants, who humble themselves before the most high majestie. Saying Amen] The like thanksgiving of the heavenly inhabitants we see Chap. 4.10.11. & Chap. 5.14. & Cha. 19.1. In saying Amen, they joyfully ascent to the hymne of this innumerable multitude: as if they should say: worthilie indeed yee doe celebrate God and the Lambe the author of your salvation & glorie. For hee is worthy, as Chap. 4.11. They adde also more glorious prayses: as blessing, glorie, &c. In which, as we before noted, they doe not so much pray and wish that God may have the same, as by approbatiō shew forth that which is dew unto him. Blessing] that is, celebration is dew unto God from all creatures. Glorie] Or a thankfull publishing of the powerfull works of God. Wisdom] For hee is the author and fountain of all wisdom. And thanksgiving] For the exceeding great benefits of their creation, redempti∣on and glorification. Honour] Reverence with subjection. Power] Above all the power of Satan, Antichrist & all adversaries. Might] by which he sustaineth all things, overcomes al things, & is overcome by none. By repeating Amen they confirm and desire that these his prayses may re∣maine for ever and ever. This is a most sweet harmonie of the Saintes in heaven, allwayes praysing the Lord: now wee who for the present remaine here on earth, are hereby stirred up to the like affections. Moreover we are taught, after what manner the Saintes in heaven pray before God and the Lamb, namely, by perpetual praysing of them: but we hear them not supplicating to God, neither interceeding before Christ, The Saints in heaven pray not for the Church on earth. ey∣ther for the whole Church on earth, or any particular member thereof: for this ho∣nour is dew to Christ alone. And therfore to affirme, that eyther they pray for us, or that wee ought to pray unto them, is an hypocritical invention contrarie to the Scripture and true religion: greatly derogating from the glorie of God and the Lambe, making the glorifyed Saintes to be tutelar idols. And one of the Elders answered saying to mee] Now one of the Elders, by way of conference shewes Iohn who this multitude of thanksgivers are: as did the Angel to Zacharie Chap. 1. v. 9.  answered, for, asked, by a metalepsis of the consequent for the antecedent, usual to the Hebrewes: who frequently, For an∣swer, use, ask: for hear, speake, &c. because ordinarilie questions are answered: & they that speak are heard, &c. One] Lyra laugheth at such who make this Elder to be Pope Silvester, Who this Elder was. & indeed wel he might: for Iohn could not learn any thing of him: but he himself is as ri∣diculous, in making Peter the Apostle to be this One. Now where hath he this, but from his owne foolish invention. Others therefore say more probablie, that it was Isay the Prophet, who speakes in the words of this Elder Chap. 1.18. & Chap. 19.10. but whosoever he were, it seemes he sate neere unto Iohn & was perhaps the same, who bade him Chap. 5.5. not to weep. Hee asketh who they are? whence they came? not as if he knew it not, but
hence to take occasion for to instruct him therein, as if he should say, knowest thou not who these are clothed in white, I will shew thee: these are, &c. Thus he stirs up Iohn, diligently to observe, and mind this multitude, as beeing matter full of comfort both for him and us: For if we make white our garments in the blood of the Lamb, we may then be certainly perswaded, that after the trou∣blesome warfare of this present life, we shall be partakers of the like victorie & happinesse with them in heaven. Now he describeth the multitude by two notes. The first is taken from their former afflicted condition: which came out of great tribulation; this is a paraphrase of the martyrs induring with patience most cruel persecution, and all kinde of torments for the sake of Christ: as also of all other faithfull professours, who through the manifold troubles of this wretched life, have attained the port of e∣ternall happines. For howsoever some mens afflictions are greater then others, yet of necessity all that will live godly in this world, must through manifold tribu∣lations enter into the kingdome of God. Came out] that is, obtained a glorious victory by the power of God, howbeit to the world they seemed as lost: which is partly to teach us, that we should not dream of delights and pleasures in this world, but prepare our selves for the crosse of Christ: And partlie to comfort us, least we should faint under the same: for howsoever our tribulations are great, yet we shall come out, and be conquerours. And have washed their robes] It is strange that Erasmus should rather read it  enlarged, then  have washed, seeing al our most approved copies so have it, & the analogie of this place and that in Rev. 1.5. & 1 Ioh. 1.17. doe necessarily lead unto it: for a reason is here given how they came to have their garments white: viz. by washing them in the blood of the Lambe. And this is the second signe or note of the godlie, taken from their faith & constancy. Their white robes set forth their righteousnes and purity, see Chap. 6.11. This they have not by their owne blood, that is, by the merit of martyrdom or sufferings: but by the blood of the Lambe, that is, by the alone merit of Christ. For this whitenes comes by faith, by which the godlie apply the merits of Christs blood unto them∣selves as. Rom 3.25. God hath set forth Christ to be a propitiation through faith in his blood: to declare his righteousnes for the remission of sins that are past. Whosoever therefore seeks to wash their robes in their owne merits, satisfactions, popish masses, purgatorie or indulgences, they appertaine not to this multitude: for they cast of the blood of the Lambe. He saith in the preterperfect tense,  they have washed and not in the present tense  they wash: to signifie that if by faith wee are not washed in this life, there shall not be afterward any more a wa∣shing or purging from sin. And made them white] All other blood makes red and staineth, How we are made white by the blood of the Lambe. but the blood of Christ purgeth us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. & makes white as snow. Isai. 1.18: there∣fore this is a washing and whiting not of nature, but of grace, not of art, but of the spirit. 15. Therefore are they before the Throne] Here the Elder declares unto Iohn the happines both of the martyrs and all other true beleevers. The particle  therefore, notes the cause of this felicity, that is, how it flowes not from the white∣nesse of their robes, but because they are washed in the blood of Christ: so that nothing hence can be gathered for to establish the merits of Saints. Now he describeth this coelestiall happinesse, in a fourfold degree. First: They are before the Throne of God, that is, they enjoy eternally the sight of God, & have a blessed and happy communion with him. Secondly: They serve him day & night] that is, they allwayes worship him, in celebrating his glorie & majestie. This service is the glorious liberty of the sons of God. In his temple] In Chap. 21.22. it is said, that the heavenlie Ierusalem hath no temple, viz. a material one: for the Lord God allmighty & the Lamb are the temple of it.
Thirdly, Christ shall dwell among them] Gr. , that is, shall cover them as with a shadow, & under whose wing they shall safely & sweetly rest themselves: The Latine version renders it, shall dwell over them: the which Beza also in his first edition followed, and not a misse. The sence is, they shall eternally enjoy the fa∣vour, grace, and glory of God. 16. They shall hunger no more] The two former degrees noted their positive good: The two latter, the evils they shall be freed from, taken out of Isai 49.10. For hunger, thirst, & heat are by a synecdoche put, for all the defects, wants and troubles of this life. Wherefore as the third degree of glory, signifyes their free∣dom from the wants of this miserable life: so the fourth shewes that they shalbe no more afflicted with any troubles or calamities: For in scripture the heat of the sun is put for persecution. Matt. 13.21. 17. For the Lambe shall feed them] These words containe a reason of this so great felicity & freedom from former defects. they shall not hunger, for the Lambe will feed them: who is both a saviour in redeeming them, and a sheepheard in feeding his sheep to life eternal. The food of this present life is one thing: that of the life to come is another: viz. satiety of joyes in his presence, and pleasures in his right hand for ever. Nor thirst] for the same Lambe will lead them to the fountaines of living waters: as we shall see in Chap. 22. 1. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes] A metaphor taken from mo∣thers, who not onely lay their infants (crying for hunger or thirst) to the breast, but are wont also to wipe of their tears from their eyes: of which also see Chap. XXXIII. Argum. of Christs deity. 21.4. Now here let us take notice of a XXXIII argument, proving the Deity of the Lambe. And it is twofold. 1. He that feedeth the elect with life eternal, & leads them to the fountaines of living waters, is Iehovah God: Isai. 49.10. Psal. 23.1.2. Ezech. 34.14.15. But this the Lambe doth, as wee see in this place: Er∣go, &c. 2. He that wipes away all teares, and feedeth the elect, is the same God Iehovah. Esa. 25.8. and 49.10. but the Lamb feedeth, & wipes away all teares. Isai. 25.9.10. Lo this is our God wee have waited for him: and he will save us: this is Jehovah, &c. Ergo &c. The Preface on the third Vision, contained in Chap. VIII. IX. X. XI. THe second vision is ended at the opening of the seventh seal. Now followes the third vision concerning seven Angels with seven trumpets containing more dreadfull apparitions then hitherto we have heard. What is signified by them, the same being very obscure, interpreters, are diversly mind∣ed. Yet herein they all agree, that the persecutions of the world, the afflictions of the godly, & punishments of the wicked are prefi∣gured. But what, and after what manner they are, herein they much differ: For here is wisdome indeed, neyther can any man fully declare the meaning of them, except Iohn himself (to whom they were revealed by the spirit) were present to interpret the same. To the end therefore we may in some measure attaine to the knowledge of these mysteries, (lifting up our eyes in the first place for the Lords assistance) Let the observation before spoken of, be as a leading starre unto us: viz. that as the end of the second vision was the ca∣tastrophe
or change of the Churches calamities in the last day: so likewise this third vision endeth at the last judgement Chap. 11.17. Whence we gather for tertaine that here again in a general way is represented under new myste∣ries, the historie of the state of the Church & the enemies thereof unto the end of the world. For this vision takes its beginning at the casting of the censer full of fire of the altar, The begin∣ning and ending of this vision The third vision is universall. upon the earth: that is, from the time the holy Ghost first fell upon the Apostles. & it is ended in the description of the last judge∣ment. This vision therefore is also universall, consisting of four Acts: and is of the same argument or nature with the former vision, prefiguring the successe of the preaching of the Gospell: what enemies the Church should have: what battels should befall the godly teachers in the world, especially un∣der the kingdome of Antichrist: also comfort and remedie by which the god∣ly ought to raise up themselves in the midst of so great confusions. Now in this it differeth from the former, The diffe∣rence be∣tween the second and third vision in that the types are diffe∣rent, which for the most part doe more clearly represent some speciall e∣vents, to wit, the apostasy of certain eminent teachers, and the rising of Antichrist, both in the East and West. For the sound of the trumpet, in scripture hath a plain analogie to the preaching of the Gospell Isa. 27.13. & 58.1. Hos. 8.1. And lastly the four Acts of this vision are somwhat differing & more clearly set down, then the foregoing. The first Act in the sound of sixe trumpets shadows out the state of the Church and the godly in this world, The four Acts of vi∣sion III. not onely during the first sixe hundred yeers unto Antichrist, as before: but furthermore it describeth the rising & raigne both of the Eastern and Western Antichrists: The Western under the figure of a star falling from heaven, & of locusts proceeding out of the smoake of the bottomlesse pit. But the Easterne under the forme of a very great ar∣my of horsmen: and withall it deploreth the great evils, wherewith these two enemies should afflict both the Church, and astonish the inhabitants of the whole earth. This Act is extended from the blowing of the first trumpet, or promulgation of the Gospell untill the councill of Constans, during the space of 1382 yeeres; or rather untill the time of the reformation of doctrine by Luther Anno 1482. in Chapters VIII. & IX. The second Act subalternate to the former, is consolatory, teaching us, that notwithstanding the violent rage, & cruelties of both these Antichrists, yet Christ will keep the booke open, having his foot upon the earth, & upon the sea, and alawayes preserving a Church unto himself. Chap. X. The third Act prefigureth new battles of the two witnesses, or reformers of the Church in the last times. And also the great rage of Satan, & Anti∣christ against the preachers of the Gospell, is livelie set forth Chap. 11. unto 15 ver. The fourth & last Act represents the victory of the triumphant Church, and the last judgement in which the militant Church shalbe at length freed from all troubles: but the wicked who have caused destruction to the world, shall now perish for ever from v. 15. of Chap. XI. unto the end.
The Argument and parts of Chapter VIII. THe seventh seal beeing opened, after halfe an houres silence in heaven, there appear seven Angels with seven trumpets. But before they sound, Christ comes forth with a golden censer, offering the prayers of the Saintes upon the gol∣den altar: and then he casts the censer filled with fire upon the earth, whence arise thundrings, voyces, lightnings and earthquakes. Moreover, four Angels sounding in order one after another, many wonderfull and fearfull things come to passe. At the first trumpet, haile & fire mingled with blood is cast on the earth; whereby the third part of trees is burnt. At the second, a great mountain burning with fire is cast into the sea, turning the third part of the sea into blood. At the third, a great star burning as a Lamp falleth from heaven upon the third part of the rivers and fountaines of water, turning the third part of the waters into wormwood, of which manie men died. At the fourth, the third part of the Sun is smitten, & of the Moon, and of the Stars, that they should not give light, night, nor day. After these things an Angel flying through the midst of heaven denounceth wo, wo, wo to the inhabitants of the earth, because of the three other trumpets following. THe Chapter therefore containeth 1. The preparation to the third vision. 2. Four parts of the vision it self, or four soundings of the trumpets with their events, unto the end of the Chapter. The opening of the seventh seal. And a preparation to the third vision. 1 And when he had opened the seventh seale, there was silence in heaven about the space of halfe an houre. 2 And I saw the seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given seven trumpets. 3 And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a golden cen∣ser, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne. 4 And the smoake of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints ascended up before God, out of the Angels hand. 5 And the Angel tooke the censer, and filled it with fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voyces, & thunderings, & lightnings, & an earthquake. 6 And the seven Angels which had the seven trumpets, prepared them∣selves to sound.
THE COMMENTARIE. 1. ANd when he (to wit the Lamb) had opened the seavouth seal] Rupertus and some others will have this verse to belong to the former vision, What is meant by the silence of half an hour. understanding the silence here mentioned, to be the tranquillity which followeth in heaven after the day of judgement, to wit, when the soules of the martyrs shal cease to cry for vengeance,  and the enemies shall no more af∣flict the Church. But that tranquillity shall not bee, as here it is said, for half an hour, but perpetually. Others: there was silence in heaven, that is, the Church had a little breathing or freedom from persecution: for after Constantine, suddenly followed the Arian persecution against the orthodox verity, under Constans, Iulian, Ʋalens, &c. Anselmus & some others applie the silence for the space of half an hour,  to the time that shalbe between the death of Antichrist, and the day of judgement, which (as they say) shalbe five and fourty dayes: To which purpose Ierome seemeth to speake somwhat in his commentarie on Dan. Chap. 12. But this fiction Ribera just∣ly disapproves of, albeit there is little waight in his reason. Because, (saith hee) that time shalbe so quiet, as that the wicked casting of all fear of evils to befall them shall live securely, & say: peace, peace, according to that of Matt. 24.28. & 1 Thessa. 5.1. but this is rather to confirme, then any way to confute their opi∣nion: for this silence doth note tranquillity according to these interpreters. Others suppose that the silence was,  in regard of the astonishment of the as∣sembly in heaven, admiring the weightinesse of Gods judgements set forth in this vision. But considering that as yet they had neither seen nor known them, how could they be astonished thereat? For my part I seek for no mysterie in this silence,  but take it historically for a short space, The Au∣thors opi∣nion. in which, the former vision beeing fully acted, there was a cessation for a little while from further apparitions, permission beeing graunted unto Iohn in the mean while to desist from contemplation of these high mysteries. For the opening of the sixt seal concluded the foregoing vision of the last judgement. Af∣ter which at the opening of the seventh feal, begins a new vision, the which that it might plainely be differenced from the former, there is silence for the space (as it were) of half an hour, during which time the heavenly assembly ceased from their hymnes, & John prepared himself for to contemplate on new visions. This stilnesse therfore is to bee referred to the order or decency of this apparitional Act: and to mee there seemes to be no other mysterie in it. 2. And I saw those seven Angels] here begins the preparation, & it is twofold. First appear seven Angels for to sound with seven trunpets. v. 2. and 6. But before they sound, comes forth an Angel with a golden censer casting the same upon the earth, as acting the prologue, and setting forth the argument of these trum∣petters. And I saw] He sees againe seven Angels shewing themselves on the theatre, to whom are given by him that sate on the Throne, or by the Lamb, Seven trum∣pets to sound withall. And here we are to take notice of the article  those seven, to wit, whom before he saw Chap. 4.5. & 5.6. Who stood] that is, their office was to stand before God (as heraulds) speedily to performe his commandements: Or standing, that is, ministring and ready to sound with their trumpets. For as the edicts of princes are published, their festi∣val dayes proclaimed, and people, or armies gathered together by the sound of the trumpet: so these Angels by sounding, doe publish the secret judgements of God, set forth admirable events, and provoke the adversaries to wrath and tumult. Most interpreters understand by these Angels, Who these sounding Angels are. the preachers of the word: whose office it is (like trumpetters) to proclaim the will of God unto men: now
indeed this may not unfitly bee applied to the first six of them, but not to the se∣venth: For without all doubt thereby is signified the Archangel, with whose voice and trump the Lord shall descend from heaven, and come to judgement. 1 Thess. 4.16. and when he soundeth the inhabitants of heaven shall sing a song of tri∣umph, and the dead shallbe called forth to judgement: Chap. 11.15.18. 3 And another Angel came] This is the second part of the preparation unto the vision: An Angel casteth the golden censer with the fire of the altar upon the earth. All interpreters say something touching this Angel, who he was, & what he ef∣fected: But wherefore he prevented the sounding of the others, and how this sight doth cohere with that which followes, I finde it not sufficiently expoun∣ded by any of them, the which thing notwithstanding is necessarily to be consi∣dered. First I will rehearse the opinion of others. Andreas acknowledgeth, Andreas opinion touching the Angel with the censer. (howbeit very darkely) that it is Christ the high-Priest of the Church: who also is the Altar thereof. He offers the prayers of the saintes to God, desiring, saith he, that the scourge here inflicted upon the wicked, may lessen their eternal torments &c. by lightnings, voyces, thunders, and earthquakes, he understands the terrours and threanings which shal goe before the consummation of the world. Lyra doting as his usuall manner is, applies this to Pope Damasus, The doting opinion of Lyra. the successor of Liberius about the yeere 384. who, as he saith, had the golden censer, that is, puri∣tie of hart, & zeale towards God. He offered the prayers of the Saintes to God: that is, he composed the mattins and evening songs, and glorie be to the Father and to the Son, &c, causing them to be sung by all the Churches. He sent forth the censer & fire on the earth: by stirring up the inhabitāts therof to fervent charity: After which followed thunders of preaching: voyces of praysing of God: lightnings of miracles: earthquackes, of conversion of mens hearts to God. But these things are to foolish. Rupertus understands this Angel to be him that was present with the Fathers, Rupertus opinion. by whose ministery the law was given, and the priest-hood instituted. But what use was there here, that a cleare and known historie should be represented unto Iohn by oscure types? wherefore they erre from the scope, who in expounding the Re∣velation, keep not themselves within the limits of the New Testament: seeing it is certaine, that onely the condition of the Church under the Gospel is revealed unto Iohn. Ribera denies this Angel to be Christ, Ribera de∣nies this Angel to be Christ. both because Christ is no where absolute∣ly called an Angel: as also because it is said, And another Angel: which shewes that he was one like to the other seven: as Chap. 1. I saw four Angels: and a little after: I saw another Angel ascending. Now he supposeth that it was Gabriel who appeared to Daniel, & Marie: or Michael, Dan. 9.21. Luk. 1.26. to whom the whole Church is com∣mitted. The Altar he makes to be Christ: The Censer, by a strained metaphor he applies to the bodie of Christ, full of holes like a censer, by the woundes he re∣ceived at his passion. Therefore he imagineth that the Angel offers up the prayers of the Saintes. The thunders, wyces, earthquakes, &c. he takes literally for the signes prognosticating the future calamities of the ungodly. Alcasar understands it of an imaginarie person: Alcasars opinion. shadowing out Christian cha∣ritie. My Anonymus saith wel: This other Angel is Christ, Anonymus doth right∣ly applie it to Christ. who is present with his elect to defend them from the deceit of hereticks, unto the end of the world: he offereth the pray∣ers of the Saintes upon the golden Altar, that is, upon himself who is both God and man, and also interceeds for his Church before the Father: he sends forth the censer and fire upon the earth: that is, by sending the holie Ghost upon his Apostles: And there were thundrings &c. that is, the threatning of Gods ministers against Antichrist: And earthquakes, that is, through the preachers of the Gospell Christianity was devided against it self, some fa∣vouring Antichrists super stirions, & some impugning the same. This interpretation both I my self, and most of our writers approve of, as most true. For this Angel standeth, and performeth in heaven the work of the Churches
high priest, in offering up the prayers of the Saintes and making them accepta∣ble to God, as a sweet smelling sacrifice: Now the Church hath no other high∣priest, but Christ alone: & therefore Ribera in applying this, not to Christ, but unto a created Angel, robs him of the honour of his priesthood, and makes the Saints in heaven as mediatours to be praied unto. But this wicked invention is contrarie both to this vision, and the whole drift and scope of the Revelation. His objection, that Christ is no where in scripture absolutely called an Angel, is false: for he, who delivered the Patriarch Jacob out of all his troubles, is abso∣lutely called an Angel Gen. 48.16. which must be understood of Christ Iehovah, the Sonne of God, as appears by Gen. 32.9.11. & 28.15. & in Mala. 3.1. Christ is called the Angel of the covenant. Neyther is it true, that John makes him like one of the seven Angels here spoken of. For he calls him , another An∣gel, the which must be understood, not onely of another individual, but of another kinde of Angel, as plainly appears by the office of priesthood attributed to this Angel: to be short we have already shewed, that what is alleadged in Chap. 7. v. 1.2. is to be referred unto Christ our Lord. Thus we have the meaning of the preparation: Before the seven Angels should stirr up the world by sounding their trumpets, Christ steps in as the high-priest, for to offer up to God the prayers and groanes of the Church militant against ty∣rants & Antichrist: to teach us that the complaints of the faithfull vanish not away in the ayre, but are received by Christ our mercifull highpriest, & by him effe∣ctually offered, & presented before God, thereby to procure deliverance for them. This is the lively comfort of the Church, that she hath an highpriest to fly unto in all her troubles. But as yet it doth not sufficiently appear, how these things agree with what fol∣loweth: & therefore we will more narrowlie consider the matter. That which the seven Angels shall afterward more distinctly set forth by soun∣ding their trumpets: The myste∣ry of the Angel with the golden censer ex∣plained. This Angel (as I before said) as a certaine forerunner in a general way, shadowes out the same. For as Iohn in the beginning of the forego∣ing vision saw Christ riding, and crowned as king of the Church, and conquerour of al enemies, first on a white horse, afterward on a red, thirdlie on a black, & at last on a pale: so now he sees Christ standing at the altar as the highpriest of the Church, offering to God the prayers of the Saintes, and sending into the earth the fire of the spirit, & preachers of the Gospel, at the sound of whose trumpets arise voyces, thundrings and lightnings, prefiguring the same thing, which in the former vision was typed out by the white, red, black & pale horse, viz. the diverse state & condi∣tion of the Church: and at last followeth a great earthquake. Christ therfore the high priest of the Church, the heavenlie author & directour of the ministery, is here represented unto us, that wee may be assured, that while the preachers on earth doe sound the trumpet of the word, Christ performeth for them, and for the whole Church the part of an highpriest in heaven. Now let us consider the words themselves: in which is propounded I. What this Angel did in heaven. II. With what successe he did it. III. What followed thereupon in the earth. All what he did in heaven, is accommodated to the types of the Old Testament. For as the priest beeing to pray and offer for the people, went to the golden per∣fumatorie altar, on which was preserved the continual fire, and taking a golden censer, put incense thereon, the which beeing kindled by the fire of the altar was resolved into an odoriferous smoake acceptable to God: So John sees Christ standing in the heavens, at the Altar, But in heaven there is no Altar, except Christ himself; see Chap. 6.9. Having a golden censer] what is this, but the precious passion & death of Christ, by the powerfull effacie whereof, he himself for ever appears in heaven as an high∣priest for us. Hebrew. 9.24. Much incense] that is, the prayers and sighs of the Church militant. They are
given to Christ, when as the prayers and groanes of the Saintes ascend upward unto God in the name of Iesus Christ: The word giving here used, doth not ar∣gue that this Angel is not Christ, for he himself professeth that all things are given unto him of his Father, to wit, as man and mediatour: And indeed in him are hid all the treasures of grace, the which he distributeth according to the necessity of all his members, so that he needs not to take any incense other where. But in∣cense is given him, not that he standeth in need thereof, but as beeing our media∣tour to offer the same unto the Father. To give, that is, to offer it with the prayers of all Saintes]  of all Saintes, the which expression sheweth, that no Saint is neglected: but al their sighs & groanes are received and offered up to God by our high-priest in heaven. In Gr. it is  that he should give, or offer it to the prayers, in the dative case: and it seems there is a defect of the praeposition of, or with. The Latine ren∣ders it, of the prayers materially: as Abel was said to offer the first fruites of his sheep: and Prov. 3.9. we are commanded to honour God by, or with our substance. So this incense should note the prayers themselves, or part of their prayers: because, saith Rupertus, he offered not all, but that which they lawfully pray, for many times the Saintes know not what to ask, or ask amisse: but this seems to be to subtill. Beza, and so our translation, with the prayers of the Saintes: as if their prayers were given to Christ to be offered together with the incense: in which sence, the incense, and the prayers should be distinct, as the signe, and the thing signi∣fied. But it may also be wel understood without such an Ellipsis or defect: What is meant by the incense. be∣cause the incense is given to Christ,  that he should give, that is, add, and con∣fer the same unto the prayers of the Saintes: and thus this incense should signifie the applying of the precious merit of Christ, by which onely the Saintes them∣selves, & their prayers also are acceptable and well pleasing to God. Ephes. 1.6. 1 Pet. 2.5. Eph. 5.2. 4. And the smoake of the incense ascended] The effect of the former oblation here followes, which is, that the prayers of the Saintes beeing sprinkled with the sweet perfume of Christs merits, they doe ascend (as it were) out of his hand, in a gracious acceptance before God: for even as the sweet odour of the incense of old pleased the Lord: even so our prayers through the merit & intercession of Christ are acceptable to him, and obtaine the promise. To ascend up before God, is a phrase much used in scripture speaking of sacrifices & it signifies, that God is wel pleased with them, and hears them; so the Angel said to Cornelius, thy prayers, Act. 10.4. Exod. 3.9. and thine alms are come up for a memoriall before God. The cry of the children of Israel is come unto mee, &c. Again he saith, the smoake of the incense ascended which came  that is, eyther, of, with, or to the prayers, for this fragrancy commeth to our prayers by Christs oblation, who makes them worthy to ascend up before God. Thus we have heard what Christ doth in heaven: as also the successe thereof. And in this consisteth the Churches comfort. It remayneth to consider, What the casting of the censer on the earth signi∣fies. what the effect thereof was in the earth: in which the first Act of this vision is summarily shadowed out with wonderfull analogie and brevitie. 5. And the Angel tooke] Two things remaine to be spoken of in this verse: 1. What the Angel did further. 2. with what effect, He filled the golden censer with the fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth. Many take this in the evill part, viz. of the fire of punishment, by which God will consume the wicked: But it is ra∣ther to be taken in the better part: for what agreement is there betwixt the cen∣ser, and punishment? The filling therefore of the censer with fire, and the casting of it into the earth, if it be properly taken, happily may signifie the fulfilling and abrogation of the types of the Law made by the oblation and intercession of Christ. But for my part I take it, that hereby two benefits of Christ are sha∣dowed out. First the wonderfull shedding forth of the holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, in the likenes of fiery tongues. And this I take to be the casting of the fire of the Altar into the earth. I know that some understand it of the fire of di∣vision which should follow the preaching of the Gospel, wherof Christ speaketh, I am come to send fire on the earth, Luk. 12.49. and what will I, if it were already kindled? But so it can not be, because the high-priest with this fire had formerly kindled his in∣cense. The second benefit is the casting of the censer upon the earth, which signi∣fyeth (as I have shewed;) the pretious death and passion of Christ. This he sent into the earth, when the whole world was filled with the knowledge of Christ crucified, by the preaching of the Apostles. The casting therefore of this censer &c. is the same with that of Christs riding as conquerour on the white horse: by which (as we have shewed Chap. 6.) is set forth the Gospel preached by the Apostles, & the whitenes of the primitive Churches, that is, their purity in life and doctrine. And there were voyces and thundrings] This also by most is taken in an evill sence, namely for the plagues of the wicked: But it signifies the diverse events of the Church occasioned by the preaching of the Gospell, and indeed the very same thing was before set forth, at the opening of the first, second, third, fourth, & sixt seale: yet so, as in a general way onely: The order of the words is here to be noted. The old version puts thundrings in the first place, and voyces in the second: but all Greek copies read voyces first. First therefore, there were voyces] That is, the preaching of the Gospel had a blessed successe, while the voyces of the Apostles sounded throughout the earth, drawing the whole world, as it were unto the obedience of Christ: agreeable un∣to this, is that before spoken of, concerning Christs glorious riding on the white horse. Secondly, Thundrings, this was noted by the red horse, whose rider tooke away peace from the earth, that is, by the preaching of the Gospel raysed up the thundrings of tyrants. For looke as thunder shakes, strikes and tears the highest mountaines: so did the tyrants first terribly rage against the Apostles, afterwards by axe and sword slew many thousands of good Christians. Thirdly, there were Lightnings, fyerie flashes, which burnt, and made pale & black the standing come. This was shadowed out by the black and pale horse, the Church beeing darkned by the lightnings of heresies, & by the flourishing shewes, and deceites of hypocritical monks, was brought into an irrecoverable palenes or death. To be short there follows an Earthquake] to wit, that great one spoken of at the opening of the sixt seal, meaning that Antichrist should shake the Christian world, as Mahomet in the East, and the Pope in the West. Here we may learn in the first place, that Christ our faithfull high-priest doth alwayes appear in heaven before God for his Church, and by the golden censer, that is, by the eternal efficacie of his oblation, intercedes for us to the Father, make∣ing our prayers acceptable unto him: so that neyther Satan, nor Antichrist shall ever be able to destroy the Church whatsoever in their rage they imagine against her. Secondly, that the prayers of al the Saints both in heaven and in earth, are offered up by Christ, and by him onely made acceptable to God. Therefore it is great impiety, to direct our prayers to the Saints, as thinking by them, to have them offered unto the Lord. In the last place, if we see in these our dayes thundrings, lightnings, & earthquakes to follow the preaching of the Gospell, let us not be offended (seeing John hath foretould us hereof) onely let us in such times fly unto Christ our high-priest by prayer and true repentance. 6 And the seven Angels which had] That which before was shewed in a gene∣ral way to follow after the casting of the censer full of fire into the earth (signify∣ing the powring out of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and their preaching of
the Gospell) namely the voyces, thundrings, &c. He now comes to set down in a more speciall way, by types indeed for the most part obscure, yet not so hard to be understood, if we diligently compare them with histories. The Angels prepare not themselves to sound, before that Christ had cast his censer of fire into the earth; Now what is this? but the commandement given unto the Apostles not to depart from Hierusalem to preach the Gospell, Act. 1.4. untill they had received the holy Ghost. For all these trumpettours as before we shewed, are the Apostles, & all other faithfull teachers in the after ages, except the se∣venth & last onely, which shalbe the Archangel himself. And as the apparition exhibited to Iohn in the former vision, served to unfold the mysteries of all the seales: so these here serve for the understanding of the sound of all the trumpets, which thing we are principally to observe, laying it down for a sure ground, that both there and here are signified by a certain a∣nalogie, partly the same, and partly the like events to befall the Church from that time unto the end. For Christ intended to reveal no other events unto Iohn, There is an analogy be∣twixt the seales, trumpets & vials. then what he had seen before: neyther can there be any question made, but that there is a certain agreement betwixt the seven seales, seven trumpets, & seven vials, if we diligently consider every particular, and rightly attend to the scope of the prophesie. Here then we see, that they altogether erre from the drift of this historie, who applie the seven trumpets to the seven greatest judgements of God, which have fal∣len upon the world, since the creation: as the first trumpet, to note the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha by fire. The second to the drowning of Pharaoh and his ar∣my in the red sea. The third to the Canaanites beeing destroyed by Iosuah. The fourth to the murmuring Israelites in the wildernes. The fift to the Israelites fal∣ling away from God, in the times of the judges. The sixt to Ierusalems destruc∣tion by the Romanes. And lastly the seventh, to the everlasting punishment of all the wicked at the day of judgement. But these things are altogether besides the matter: For wherefore should Christ now again represent that unto Iohn in obscure types, which formerly he plainely knew by histories of old. Therefore we shall come nearer unto the mark, if we observe that these trumpets began, from the Apostles time, and so shall continue untill the end of the world. Now let us hear the trumpets. The sound of the first trumpet. 7 The first Angel sounded, and there followed haile, and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grasse was burnt up. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd the first Angel sounded] Lyra applies the four first trumpets, Lyraes in∣terpretation corrected. to the haeresies condemned by the four generall Councils. And the first Angel hee understands to be Arius, who sounding with the trumpet of great pride and outrage, maintained his heresie, and infected the third part of the earth, that is, the whole Christian world. For the earth is divided (as it were) into three parts, viz. Iewes, Pagans, and Christians: this interpretation is not absurd, and therefore approved of by Bullinger and some others: but hence the analogie betwixt the seales and trumpets doth not appear: neyther is it like∣ly that the first Angel began not to found till 300 yeeres after Iohns time: but
undoubtedly it was presentlie upon Christs casting the fire into the earth. I therefore doe compare the first trumpet to the first seal. The first trumpet answereth to the first seale. For as Christ be∣fore is said to ride on a white horse as a conquerour, having a crown on his head, signi∣fying the prosperours successe of the Gospell, and in his hand the bow of his word, by which he moved, wounded, and converted whole nations unto him∣self: so here a contrarie effect is shadowed out in respect of the enemies of the Gospell: to wit, the grievous contradictions & persecutions raysed by the Iewes in all places against the Apostles. For the Gentiles readily inbracing the Gos∣pell, moved the Iewes through envie, tumultuously to rage, and raise up much mischiefe in every place against the Christians; the which is here set forth by the haile and fire migled with blood, alluding unto the seventh plague of Egypt: Exod. 9.24. beeing a grievous haile mingled with fire, and the blood of men and beasts, consumed by it. Haile is a congeling of the water in the ayre through cold, and it is very hurtfull unto the standing corne. Fire, is contrarie to haile: Blood, signifyes cruelty. At the sounding therefore of the first trumpet, which began by the preaching of the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, there fell haile, fire and blood, that is, contradictions, persecutions, banishments, and slaughters through the obstinate Iewes: as the Acts & Epistles of the Apos∣tles, with other histories doe plainely prove. Now the reason, why I re∣ferre this (with the Catholick Glosse) unto the Iewes and other tumultuous adver∣saries, viz. such as had lost their civill power, shall appear by the following trumpet. Now familiarly in scripture by haile, fire and blood are noted popular and common calamities, as Joel 2. Zeph. 1. and in other places. But the following effects touching the burning of the third part of the trees, and of the green grasse causeth me to expound this of the calamities befalling the godly, and not of the punishments of the wicked: because undoubtedly this is to be applied to the sufferings of the Saints. And the third part of trees was burnt up] by the trees I understand the Apostles & chiefe teachers: by all green grasse, the Saintes of the primitive Churches. For the godly are compared to fruitfull trees planted by the rivers of waters Psal. 1.3. and to grasse, noting their imbicillitie and weaknes, yet green, because of their lively faith and charitie. Of these the third part was burnt up, that is, multitudes of them were hurt, afflicted and murdered by their adversaries, the perfidious Iewes. For as tempestuous haile and lightning is verie hurtfull to the trees and grasse of the earth: even so at the first beginning of the Gospell, the Apostles & the rest of the faithfull were exercised with cruel stormes of afflictions, wherby a great part of them was taken away. The phrase seems to have an allu∣sion unto that of Ezech. 5.2. where the Prophet is commanded, to cut of the haire of his head and beard, and to burn a third part with fire, to smite a third part with a sword, and to scatter a third part in the winde, under which type the Lord threatned grievous plagues unto the Iewes for their rebellion. And all green grasse was burnt up] Not all strictly, but a great part: for often times all in scripture, is put onelie for a part, not for the whole. In saying the green grasse, it notes the extreem calamities of those times. For the dry hay may more easely be burnt, then the green grasse, or wood. Luk. 23.31. Hence it appeares that this affliction was verie grievous. How long this trumpet sounded, I will not precisely define, but thinke that is to be ex∣tended from the first preaching of Gospell mentioned Act. 2. untill the times of Domitian, who was the first of the Romane Emperours (Nero except∣ed) that persecuted the Christians. But the Iewes afflicted and persecuted them many wayes. The special use of this first trumpet belonged to Iohn & the primitive Church, that they should not (though living under the white horse) promise delight, & ease unto themselves, but prepare for cruel stormes of afflictions, notwithstanding
this was their comfort that howsoever by the cruelty & lightnings of the wicked, the third part should be burnt up: yet two parts should remain unhurt. In gene∣rall it appertaineth unto us also, that we having the primitive Church for an ex∣ample, should not be offended if we be brought to the like condition: but be con∣fident, that the Lord will still preserve some Churches notwithstanding the rage of Antichrist, who for a long time hath tyrannised over our Ancestours, & with whom we yet wrestle unto this day. The sound of the second trumpet. 8 And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountaine burn∣ing with fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood. 9 And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died, and the third part of the shippes were destroyed. THE COMMENTARIE. 8. ANd the second Angel sounded] Lyra understands this Angel to be Macedonius, who sounding, that is, Lyraes opi∣nion. proudly teaching (for he was an eloquent man, & Bishop of Constantinople) a great mountain, that is, the great Macedonian heresie, which was the denying the holie Ghost to be God, burned with the fire of perfidiousnes, and fell into the sea, that is, into the Church, resembling the sea by baptisme: and the third part of the sea be∣came blood, that is, by denying the Deity of the holy Ghost he corrupted the forme of baptisme in the third part of it: and the third part of creatures perished: that is, be∣leevers, infected by his heresie: and the third part of the ships, that is, of Prelates and Bishops whom he drew into the same heresie: untill at length he was condemned by the councill held at Constantinople. Bullingers interpreta∣tion. Bullinger much to the same purpose understands by the sea, the world: by the great mountain, the great heresies of the Valentinians, Manichees, & Montaniss: BVRNING WITH FIRE, that is, boasting of divine revelations, as if they had been altogether led by the spirit, the effects whereof were verie pestilent: be∣cause the third part of men, and such also as dwelt in Ilands dyed, that is, beeing infected with these heresies perished for ever. The opi∣nion of Aretius. Aretius also takes it for a great heresie strengthened with the arme of flesh, as the Macedonian and Eutichinian heresies, by which not onely many private Christians, but many whole Churches were seduced, and brought to destruc∣tion. Ribera understands the mountaine literally of a great fiery globe, Riberas opinion. Alcasars opinion. which should at some certaine time be throwne into the sea. Alcasar applies it to the warre, with which God afflicted the Iewes by Titus and Vespasian. But I would faine know of him, why that shoul be abscurely fore∣told, which was already fully accomplished. The greater part of interpreters both Papists & Protestants, as my Anonymus Gagnaeus, Lambertus & others (with Andreas) understand this mountaine to be Satan the prince of the world, who burning with the fire of envie at the preaching of the Gospel, is cast into the sea of this world, & causeth the same tumultuously to rage against Christ: Or: into the sea, that is, among peoples, nations, princes & kings, inforcing them to shed much innocent blood, and dissipate many Chur∣ches.
This interpretation, I confesse, in it self is pious and true, but doth not, as I judge, agree with the purpose of this vision: my reason is, because the devil from the beginning hath been a murderer seeking to devour the Church, in which re∣spect there was no use, that this thing should be represented unto Iohn in ob∣scure types. I therefore doe again (with the Catholick glosse) compare the sounding of the se∣cond trumpet with the opening of the second seal, The inter∣pretation of the Ca∣tholick Glosse. and understand it of the cruel persecutions of Romane tyrants, and the remnant of the Church which was preser∣ved from utter destruction. For as at the opening of the second seal went forth a red horse, that is, the Apostolical and following Church appeared red with the blood of the martyrs: so there by the founding of the second trumpet is shewed unto Iohn, 1. Whence this bloody condition of the Church arose. 11. How great evils she should suffer thereby. 111. Wherein she ought to be comforted. For the first, a great mountain burning with fire should be cast into the sea. The Scri∣pture familiarly by mountaines, notes kingdomes, kings and tyrants: because of their highnes, that is, their power and pride: as Zach. 4.7. the Prophet thus speak∣eth concerning the Persian kingdom: Who art thou O great mountain before Zeru∣babel? Let us therfore understand this great mountain, to be some powerfull king∣dom, having other kingdoms in subjection, as at that time the Romanes had. He saw this mountain burning with fire, that is, their Emperours in wrath cruelly raging against Christian religion. This mountain was cast into the sea] Now what is the meaning hereof? The sea is a gathering of many waters. The waters are peoples Chap. 17. by the sea there∣fore, I understand all nations in subjection to the Romane Empire, and among which the Christian Churches were here and there dispersed. This mountain was cast into the sea, that is violently nished upon the world, (not indeed of unbe∣leevers,) but of true belevers, that is, the Christian Church, when as the Romane Emperours, as Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Diocletian, Maximianus and others (imitaring the tyranny of Nero) persecuted the saintes, even untill Constantines time. What followed hereupon? The third part of the sea became blood] that is, as we heard before at the opening of the second seale, the Church was made red with the blood of martyrs, so here this mountaine with a fierie rage oppresseth many thousands of saintes. 9 The third part of the creatures died] These are the slaughters & Martyrdoms of infinite Christians, put to death by the Romane tyrants for the confession of the name of Christ. And there is an allegorical analogie betweene the sea and creatures in it: & the Church, and faithfull living in the same. And the third part of the ships were destroyed] by ships we understand the Chur∣ches with their pilots, or teachers: for by ships Churches are signified, many wher∣of were then lost and destroyed with the Apostles, Bishops & their worthy tea∣chers; these, I say, were crushed through the weight of this great mountaine, not indeed eternally, but corporallie onely. Now touching this, we are to consult with the Ecclesiastical histories of the Churches persecutions (of which we have spoken somewhat on Chap. 6.) which wil serve for an excellent commentarie on this place. Certainely the ship, or Church at Rome was in a special manner made red with blood: for all her bishops or teachers (as it is recorded) unto Melchiades, suffered Martyrdome under those tyrants. Thus therefore this trumpet allegori∣cally explaineth the efficient cause of the second horses rednesse, and further ampli∣fies the grievous outragiousnesse thereof. But what reason is there, Why onely one third of the sea was made blood. that the whole sea was not turned into blood, and that all creatures & ships died, & perished not, but onely a third part? I have shewed that this manner of speech is taken out of Ezech. 5.2. Now there the Prophet is commanded, not onely to destroy one third part of his hair, but the three thirds thereof, thereby signifying a totall destruction: But here the mountaine shall on∣ly make red one third part of the sea, and kill the third part of creatures, & cause
the third part of ships to perish, which undoubtedly was for the comfort of Iohn, and the faithful: for however this mountaine were great, and rushing with a migh∣ty violence labours to fill all places with fire and blood, yet should he be able to hurt but one third part of the Christian Church. For two thirds shalbee preser∣ved in safety. And the truth hereof is confirmed by histories: The fulfil∣ling of this type. for both in Rome and all other kingdomes, the greater part of Christians were safely kept in the midst of the most dangerous & cruel persecutions, yea the blood of the martyrs was as it were the seed of the Church, for the more Christians were put to death by tyrants, the more their number increased, in so much that many times even the executioners themselves beholding the confession, courage, & constancie of martyrs, became Christians, and obtained the same crown of martyrdom with them. Moreover it is for the Churches comfort that this burning mountain is cast in∣to the sea: for by water the fire is extinguished. However therefore tyrants doe much rage for a time: yet at length they shall perish, the victory shall remain on the Churches side: for by faith we overcome the world 1 Ioh. 5.5. The Catholick Glosse interprets this mountain (not unfitly) of the Romane Empire, great indeed, yet thrown into the sea, which is much greater, The sea swallowed up this great mountain. and so con∣sumeth and deitroyes the same. By the sea he understandeth Christs kingdom, of far greater power then the Romane, signifying that the Romane tyranny should be swallowed up by Christs kingdome: for however Christ seems to bee over∣come in his afflicted members, yet in truth he conquereth all his tyrannical ad∣verlaries, for the gates of hell shall not prevaile against the Church Matt. 16.18. Thus sad and joyfull things are here mixed together, by which we see, that the ite∣ration of this vision touching the bloody condition of the Church, is not in vain. Moreover I understand the sounding of this trumpet to be from Domitians time (under whom Iohn was banished) untill Constantine, who repressed the ty∣ranny of his Copartners in the Empire, and restored peace unto the Church, about the yeere of our Lord 312. The sounding of the third trumpet. 10 And the third Angel sounded, & there fell a great Star from heaven, burning as it were a lampe, and it fell upon the third part of the ri∣vers, and upon the fountaine of waters: 11 And the name of the Starre is called Wormewood, and the third part of the waters became Wormewood, and many men died of the wa∣ters, because they were made bitter. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd the third Angel sounded] Andrea (howbeit unfitly) takes this falling starre to be Lucifer thrown down headlong out of heaven, the Wormwood, the torments of the wicked in hell. Andreas opinion. Lyra conceives it to be Pelagius the third Archeretick, Lyraes in∣terpreta∣tion. who in the dayes of Arcadius & Honorius) denied original sin, pleaded for free will, and overthrew the grace of Christ. He fell from heaven, that is, fell away from the Church militant: And is called a great Starre, because he was a learned, and religious Monke. Burn∣ing as it were a Lampe: by shew of holines and learning deceiving many: his name is Wormwood: because, contrarie to the sweet doctrine of true grace, he taught that men by the meer help of natural faculties, (setting grace aside,) might bee converted and saved: with which pestilent doctrine he made bitter and de∣stroyed many Churches with their teachers.
Ribera desirous to be singular in interpreting the trumpets literally, doth verie foolishly apply this to some fiery exhalation falling from heaven, and takes all these signes historically. Riberaes frivolous exposition. But we know that such fierie mixtures doe often hap∣pen in the ayre. Besides the name of this Starre, and the making of the waters bit∣ter, doe sufficiently manifest, that these things cannot bee properly, or literally taken. But Ribera perhaps durst not doe otherwise, least he should have been forced to applie it to the apostasie of the Romish Antichrist. All other interpreters for the most part understand this falling starre to be some certaine eminent heretike, Diverse in∣terpretati∣ons concer∣ning this falling star. one or more. But they differ in the persons: For some referre it to Simon Magus. Others to Samosatenus, Manichaeus, Arius &c. Others againe to Pelagius, Novatus, Montanus, Manichaeus: And some unto O∣rigen. Now howsoever all these differ and erre in the hypothesis, or speciall applica∣tion: yet they all agree in the thesis, or generall position, neyther, (as I judge,) doe they herein erre from the scope. For the third trumpes with its apparitions, an∣swereth to the third seal and black horse, that went out at the opening thereof: which signifies (as we have before shewed,) the state of the Church spotted with black and foul heresies, from the Apostles time unto the rising of Antichrist, and howsoever the Church were thus defiled, & Christ with the ballance of his word was still present, reproving & condemning their haeresies by his faithfull teachers: yet in the mean time a great famine of sound doctrine much afflicted the Christi∣an world: forasmuch as almost all Churches with their teachers were drawne aside to the pestilent errour of Arius. Others referre this to Mahomet, but they little observe the circumstances of the trumpet. For Mahomet beeing a most wicked villaine, cannot bee called a starre: muchlesse a great starre shining like a Lampe: neither fell hee from heaven, that is the Church, in which hee never was: although I confesse hee hath occa∣sioned much bitternes unto Christians. My opinion therefore touching the third trumpet, is, that this great starre burn∣ing like a lampe, falling from heaven, and turning the third part of the waters into wormewood, in a generall way denoteth all apostated Arch-hereticks, spoken of Chap. 6. Who at the opening of the third seale, for the space of six hundred yeeres after the time of the Apostles, deformed the Church of Christ by their foul heresies, and brought destruction upon the four corners of the earth by their blas∣phemies, errours and tumults, as we have before declared. For it is plain that by starres, the teachers of Churches are signifyed, and by falling from heaven, their apo∣stasy from the true faith. But specially, by this starre, and his fall from heaven, is un∣doubtedly signifyed the apostasie of the Bishop of Rome, not indeed that universall departure, The apos∣tafie of the Church of Rome. which followed afterward at the full rising of Antichrist, but that first defect, which three hundred yeers before forcibly occasioned & led the Churches both of the East and West, by little and little to submit to Antichrist, namely, from the time of Constantine, unto Phocas the intruder. For the Bishops of Rome in regard of the great renowne and chiefe honour of that citie (it being the seat of the Romane Empire) were eminent lights among their fellow bishops: hence the starre is called great, burning like a torch or lampe. Hee fell from heaven] not at one instant, but by degrees: therefore it is said in the Preterimperfect tense  Hee did fall. Hee saw him here not quite fallen, as in Chap. 9.1. but falling: for as yet the Romane sea was onely declining, or in the motion of its Apostasie. Before Siluester, thirtie and one Bishops of Rome for the most part like stars in the firma∣ment brightly shined both in learning, faith, Pietie and constancie: yea they all suffered Martyrdome under the Romane tyrants. But after that Constantine had graunted peace unto Christians, and enriched the Churches by his too much libe∣rallity, heaping wealth and honour exceedingly upon bishops: then began this star (swelling with pride and ambition) like Lucifer to lift up himselfe above his
fellow ministers to bee wholy given to voluptuousnesse, to fill and burthen the Churches with Iewish and heathenish rites and ordinances, & so by forsaking the truth of the Gospell, altogether to embrace humane traditions. Sylyester was the first (if histories may bee credited) who gave himselfe wholy to the institution of their Masse-priests, orders, ornaments, temples, singing-men, sacrifices, sanctuaries, vestments, ointments, surplises, miters, embroidered gar∣ments, and the like Babylonish stuffe, bringing all these idle rites into the Church, under this pretence, partly, least Christian religion should seem inferiour in out∣ward lustre and pompe to heathenisme, partly, that the Pagans by the likenesse of these rites with theirs, might bee the more easily drawen to Christianity: And this verie thing was afterward pretended by the following Bishops, as Gregories Epistle to Serenus testifies. Now this Silvester was he, on whom Constantine (as Platina recordeth in the life of this Bishop) imposed an embroidered mitre be∣set with Gold and Pearles in stead of a Diadem: And then this great starre began to fall from heaven unto the earth. And upon the third part of the rivers] that is, as I understand, on the Romane Bishops the successours of this Sylvester, and others: for rivers doe note the tea∣chers of Churches, by whom divine doctrines ought to flow, and be derived unto others. Of these the third part, not all (for many remained faithfull and sincere) but a great number, or the third part of them that lived in Europe, leaving heaven gave themselves wholie to worldly cares, pleasures, pompe, and foolish ceremo∣nies, defiling the Church with many abuses, superstitions, errours, yea & grosse heresies also. For as Ierom and the Ecclesiasticall history both testifie, Liberius was indeed a great starre (beeing at the first a great opposer of Constantius) but over∣come by banishment, at length, he yeelded to Ʋalens and Ʋrsacius Arians, to the end he might by this apostasie regaine the Romish chaire. His successour Felix II. was a professed Arian. Yea all the Bishops of the East except Athanasius and Paulinus (as the said Ierom witnesseth against the errours of John) were infected with the Arian pest: Besides how the following Romane Bishops have behaved themselves, may be seen by the histories of Platina, Balaeus, and others, who have recorded their lives and Acts. By the Fountaines, I understand the holy scriptures, namely the living fountaines of Israel Psal. 68.27. By the waters; the doctrines and comforts contained in them. Now how far this falling starre infected the rivers, fountains, & waters, here followes. 11. And the name of the starre is Wormwood] He describeth the apostasie of this siarre by the effects; it is called Wormwood, not by a proper name, but from the events. For by pestilent institutions, he did make bitter the third part of the waters, that is, of the doctrines, and comforts of the scriptures, turning the same into a deadly wormwood, not indeed naturally (for howsoever in this respect worm∣wood bee a bitter herbe, yet, it is medicinal, & causeth digestion) but theologi∣cally, it beeing a scripture phrase, & signifies a vile depravation of justice and e∣quity: as Amos 5.7. Yee who turn justice to Wormwood: Ier. 9.15. & 23.15. And sometimes Gods grievous plagues and judgements: I will feed them, even this people with wormwood. The sence then seemes to be thus, that these Apostates should make the waters of the holy scriptures so bitter, that whosoever drinketh thereof, should hazard their eternall salvation. Hee alludes undoubtedly to the bitter waters of Marah, which the Israelites could not drinke Exod. 15.25. To this bitternes appertaine the hor∣rible confusions of the Eastern and Western Churches by the Arians: the con∣tentions of Bishops, the oppositions of Councils each to other, condemning, rejec∣ting and persecuting one the other, to the great scandall of the heathens, distur∣bance and destruction of Christian Churches: The which Emperours sometimes occasioned, otherwhile connived at, and sometimes wanted power to suppresse the pride of Bishops beeing lifted up with ambition and envie one against the other, they having before put to much power into their hands. Of which read the Ecclesiasticall histories of Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoretus, Evagrius, & Nicepho∣rus
even from the time of Sylvester untill Leo & Gregorie. For so long I judge, that the sound of this trumpet continued. Howbeit wee are to take notice, that the Church was not destitute of comfort in these evill times: For not all the rivers, nor all the waters were made bitter, neyther were all men killed with Wormwood, but a third part onely: For Christ even in the midst of all this bitternes and ruin of Bishops, did still preserve a Church unto himself: And indeed histories aboundantly testifie, that there were many faithfull, and sound professours of the faith of Christ, who resisted the pride and arrogancie of the Romish Bishops: as for example the Councill of Carthage (of which Augustine was president) openly reproved and suppressed the affected tyranny, of three Popes, (viz. Sozimus, Boniface, & Caelestinus) over the Affri∣can Churches. The sound of the fourth trumpet. 12. And the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sunne was smitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third part of the stars, so as the third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise. 13. And I beheld, and heard an Angell flying thorow the middest of hea∣ven, saying with a loud voyce, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the other voyces of the trumpets of the three Angels which are yet to sound. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd the fourth Angel sounded] This Angel sounding the third part of the Sun, and Moon, and stars was darkned, so as the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise. The former wonders happened here below in the earth, sea and waters: but these things following are above in the heaven, coelestiall signes, Riberas & Andreas opinion. and stars. Andreas, Ribera and some others, understand this trumpet to denote the wonders foretold in Ioel. 2. and Matth. 24. There shallbee signes in the Sun, Moon and Starres, &c. the which should happen alittle before the day of judgement: But as yet we are not come to the trumpet praefiguring the end of the world, as we shall see by that which followeth. Neyther is it pro∣bable, that these things should be represented unto Iohn in obscure types, seeing he well knew they should come to passe, as beeing foretold by the Prophets, Christ, & the Apostles. Neither doth the praediction of Christ, agree with what is here said touching the defect of the third part of the lights: Indeed there may bee some allusion in this trumpet to the last signes: But without doubt other e∣vents are noted by the same. Lyra understands the fourth Angel of Eutyches, Lyraes opi∣nion. who confounding the two na∣tures of Christ, said that the divinity was first changed into the humanity, & the humanity again into the divinity: By which pestilent heresie he darkened the third part of the Sun, that is, of the divinity: & the third part of the Moon, that is, of the Church: & the third part of the stars, that is, of Bishops, of whō many were infected with this heresy: & a third part of the day, Bullingers interpreta∣tion. Francis Lamberts opinion. & of the night, that is the scriptures of the old & new testament. Bullinger interprets this allegorie after the same manner, yet applies it not to the heresie of Eutyches, but of Pelagius. Franciscus Lambertus expounds it in a generall way: Christ the Sunne shall be smitten, when the light of his truth shall be hid: then also the Moon the Church, and
stars the teachers shall faile: but he shewes not when and how this was accom∣plished. For my part, howbeit the apparitions of this trumpet doe much agree with the events of the sixt seale (for as here, so there the light of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres are said to be darkened) yet I judge there is a manifest difference. For here onely the third part of lights is darkened: but there a total defect is spoken of: besides, the Analogie of the seales and trumpets is to be kept unto what possi∣bly we can. Whether the fourth trumpet doth agree with the sixt seale. Now there the total Apostasie from the faith by the darkening of true doctrine under Antichrist is denoted: but here the beginning and growth thereof onely: certain therfore it is, that the total obscuration of the Sunne shalbe at the sounding of the fift trumpet following. So that I doe here again follow the Ecclesiasticall Glosse, that the wonders of this fourth trumpet agree with that which happened at the opening of the fourth seale: As therefore we saw there a pale horse, with death his rider, and hell following, by sword famine and pestilence devouring the fourth part of the earth; by which is signified (as we have shewed) the state of the Church a little before the rising of Antichrist, beeing sick with a mortall palenes, and neare unto death: accidently occasioned by the overmuch liberallitie and in∣dulgencie of Christian Emperours, who thereby corrupted the Bishops and Christian religion: but principallie by superstitious Monkes and vaine glorious Bishops, who little caring eyther for Christ or his graces, onely laboured how they might satisfy, and fill their own bellies, and establish their Lordly authoritie, turning the doctrines of faith into humane Philosophie, and Christian religion into a stageplay and horrible idol worship. So here againe the very same thing is foretold in this trumpet under different types. For as Anonymus, and after him Gagnaeus have observed, the Sunne sha∣dows out the chiefe Prelates of the Church, as Popes, Cardinals, Arch-bishops, & Bishops, who ought to shine before others by the light of their life and doctrine: The Moon, which receives its light from the Sunne, to be inferior Ecclesiastical orders, as curates and religious persons: The Stars: beeing lesse in light are the laitie: but I rather understand by Stars, Bishops and other teachers so called as we have seen Chap. 1. Verie fitlie (saith Gagnaeus,) is the third part of the Sun sayd to be smitten, in so much that the third part thereof was darkened: considering how one part of Praelates doe shine in life and doctrine: others but in one onely, and a part in neyther of both. For many of them neyther burn in charitie, nor shine in doctrine (and I would it were but a third part of them) but the truth is, they have onelie an hypo∣criticall shew of true pastors: for after the likenes of this Sunne the third part of the infe∣riour Clergie and Laiks also, were smitten with obscuritie and blindnesse, &c. Thus he in a general way doth not with out good cause complaine of Popes, Cardinals, & Bishops their great Apostasie. But wee are (as I have said) to applie these things by an Analogie unto the events of the fourth seale. This trumpet therefore appertaines unto the darknesse & corruptions brought into the Christian Churches during the space of three hundred yeeres, viz. from Sylvesters time unto the rising of Antichrist: in which time all these things were allegorically fulfilled, as histories testifie: Yet onely in a third part, that is, in Europe alone. And this againe serves for to mitigate the evils: in asmuch as not the whole Sun but onely a third part thereof is smitten with darkenesse: For in∣deed many Bishops in the East and West both Greeks and Latine did still up∣hold the light in the Church: For as yet Antichrist was not lifted up into the chaire of universall pestilence: neyther was the Church so neere unto death by a mortal palenes, although hell had allmost swallowed up the fourth part thereof. Thus we have heard four trumpets of the Angels, with the histories thereof. 13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel] by this exclamation the Angel comman∣deth us to be much attentive to the following trumpets: because they shew forth
more grievous calamities to befall the Church. For,  the bibles of Mon∣tanus read  an Eagle: so the Latine: I saw an Eagle, concerning which Eagle many men dispute diversly: But all other copies have  an Angel. Now whither wee read it, an Angel, or an Eagle, the matter is not great, onelie wee are to be attentive unto his voyce, neyther doe I thinke, that we should seek for any allegory in it. He was an heavenly herauld, foretelling farre more grievous calami∣ties then yet we have heard in the foregoing trumpets. Neyther will I deny, but that by this Angel may be noted Gregorie Bishop of the Church of Rome, Anti∣christs predecessour, who in his Epistles to the Emperour Mauritius, pointed at him as if he had been then present. Wo, wo, wo] This is a voyce of commiseration in regard of the evils that hung over the Church. The threefold iteration, notes that the three following trum∣pets are to denounce more horrible & fatall evils unto the inhabiters of the earth, then the former. To the inhabitants of the earth] This might be understood of the Church disper∣sed thorowout the whole world: but usually in this prophesie hypocrites and wicked men oppressing the Church, are called inhabitants of the earth, as we have noted on Chap. 3.10. and 6.10. Wherefore these threatnings are not intended against the Church, but against the wicked: which serveth for the comfort of the Godly, for howsoever they be involved in the publick calamities under Anti∣christ, yet these things shalbe mortal unto their adversaries onely. CHAP. IX. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. IN this Chapter are described the fift and sixt trumpets with most sad events, in which the first Act of this vision is ended, and the apparitions of the sixt seale more fully exhibited un∣to Iohn, touching the rising and tyranny of Antichrist both in the West, who with smoake and Locusts, that is by de∣ceit and devilish instruments: And in the East, who with horses and armies, that is, by open warre and violence should horribly af∣flict the Christian world, God by them most justly punishing the idolatrie & flagitious life of Christians, and hereby calling them to repentance, but in vain. Now here principally are prefigured the wofull events which befell the Church during the space of nine hundred yeeres, or there about, both by the Popish Antichrist in the West, and Mahomet in the East, from the yeere of Christ sixe hundred and sixe untill the Councill of Constans. The parts of the Chapter are three: The first concerneth the events of the first trumpet unto vers. 13. consisting of four members. I. The apparition it self which Iohn saw: viz. a starre falling down from heaven upon the earth: to whom was given the key of the bottomlesse pit, vers. 1. II. Four effects of this falling starre. 1. He opened the bottomlesse pit: 2. raysed a smoak out of it. 3. with the smoak he darkened the Sunne and aire vers. 2. 4. Out of the smoake he brought forth Locusts upon the earth, vers. 3.
III. The locusts are described by diverse adjuncts. First from the power they had to hurt vers. 3. But limited by God three manner of wayes. 1. In re∣spect of the objects: that they should not hurt the elect, but onely the reprobate, vers. 4. 2. In the degree of hurting: not to kil, but to torment. 3. In the time: not allwayes, but for five months, vers. 5. Secondly, from the effect of their hurting, which shalbe more bitter then death it self, vers. 6. Thirdly, from the forme of the locusts, First, as touching the bodie: they are like to horses prepared to the battel: Secondly touching their members and habbit vers. 7.8.9.10. And lastly touching their head or king called Abaddon, vers. 11. IV. An acclamatorie conclusion ending the calamities of this trumpet, and de∣nouncing new woes vers. 12. The second part concerneth the events of the sixt trumpet, consisting also of four members. I. A heavenly commandement to unloose the four Angels of Euphrates, vers. 13.14. II. The execution of this commandement, or the unloosing of the Angels, vers. 15. III. Their furniture and weapons, vers. 16.17. IV. The wofull effect: The third part of men were killed, vers. 18. as also an amplification of the reason drawen from the facility thereof, v. 19. The third part is a foreshewing of the stupidity of the rest of men, and their hardening in sin, both against the first table, by serving and worshipping of idols, vers. 20. as also against the second table by murthers, sorceries, fornication & thefts, vers. 21. The summe of all is this't The rising of the Eastern and Western Antichrists, the two greatest enemies of the Church is here foretold. The first whereof should destroy the Church by locusts: The other by horses, the which how and when it should be accomplished, the fathers before Gregorie could not un∣derstand, as not so much as once imagining of the histories and events which we now have, and behold with our eyes: Hence we may note the vanity of the a∣pists who enquire of us where the fathers, as Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrisostome, and others have written that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist: neverthe∣lesse they have not spared to affirme, that he should be of the LATINES, and many other things, of which more hereafter. They had heard indeed the four trum∣pets: and some of them saw a great declyning of the Romish chaire. But as yet the fift trumpet had not sounded, which Gregorie beginning to hear, confidently affirmed, that Antichrist was even at the dore, having an armie of Priests prepared for him: and that it should bee hee who called himself, or desired the title of VNIVERSAL Priest. This, I say, Gregorie saw, & confidently affirmed, which also was accom∣plished (as histories testifie) three yeeres after his death. Now let us heare the fift trumpet: taking notice in the first place, that the sixt trumpet doth not follow the fift in order, but by way of a parallel they sounded both at one time, differing indeed in the qualitie of events, and places. For the fift doth prefigure the dissipation of the Western Churches; And the sixt those of the East: both, I say, at one time, but in diverse parts of the Christian world, & by diverse weapons or meanes.
The sound of the fift trumpet. 1. And the fift Angel sounded, & I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the bottomlesse pit. 2. And he opened the bottomlesse pit, and there arose a smoake out of the pit, as the smoake of a great furnace, & the Sun and the air was darkned by reason of the smoak of the pit. 3. And there came out of the smoake locusts upon the earth, & unto them was given power as the scorpions of the earth have power. 4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the graffe of the earth, neyther any green thing, neyther any tree: but onely those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. 5. And to them it was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five moneths, & their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man. 6. And in those dayes shall men seek death, & shall not finde it, & shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them. 7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared to battel, & on their heads were as it were crowne like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. 8. And they had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions. 9. And they had breast-plates as it were breast-plats of iron, & the sound of their wings was as the sound of charets, of many horses running to battell. 10. And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five moneths. 11. And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomlesse pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apollyon. 12. One woe is past, & behold, there come two woes more hereafter. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd the fift Angel sounded] Many (without cause) much trouble themselves about this Angel who he was. For my owne part I will onely take notice of the apparition shewed to John at the sounding of this trumpet. Hee saw a star falling down from heaven upon the earth. It is strange there should be such diversities of opinions about this starre and the actions thereof, seeing the mat∣ter in it self is not obscure. There are not a few, who make this Angel to bee the devill thurst out of hea∣ven for his pride, alluding to that in Isai: 14.12. How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer, Son of the morning? how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst wea∣ken the nations? Luk. 10.18 And to that of Christ in the Gospell, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. The smoak and darkning of the sunne, they understand to be the blind∣nesse of men: The Locusts, to be evill Angels: the hurting, a misteading of men. But this is to generall and confused. For wherefore should an historie so ancient, and wel known to the Churches, bee exhibited unto Iohn, as if it were a new pro∣phesie, under an obscure type? The inconveniency whereof even Ribera himself
saw and refuted: howbeit that which hee alledgeth, is to no better purpose. Riberas opinion. For he takes him to bee some good Angel, to whom was given the key of the bottom∣lesse pit, that bee might (as a minister of Gods righteous judgements,) open the same. Others will have this Angel to be Christ, who in Chap. 1.18. & 20.1. is said to have the key of the bottomlesse pit. But the things attributed here to this Angel, can not possiblie be applied to Christ, as, the falling down from heaven, the raysing of smoak on of the pit, darkning of the Sunne &c. Neverthelesse Iunius is of this minde, al∣ledging that in Gen. 14.10. & 24.64. & Hebr. 6.6. to falt, signifies to descend. To which I answer, it is one thing to fall, and another thing to fall from heaven, Now this latter for the most part in scripture is taken in an evill sence Isai. 14.19. Matt. 24.29. Revel. 8.10. as on the contrary to come down from heaven, is taken in a good sence. Psa. 144.5. Bow the heavens, O Lord, & come down. 2 King. 1.12. Lt fire come down from heaven. Revel. 3.12. Hierusalem comes down out of heaven from God. 10 Chap. 10.2. & 16.21. & 18.1. & 20.21. & 21.2.10. Lyra thinkes Ʋalens the Emperour to be this starre, Lyraes opi∣nion. who for some time was a good Catholick, but (seduced by his wife, & Eudoxius an Arian priest) he after∣ward fell from the hight of the Catholick faith, unto the herefie of Arianisme: To him was given the key of the bottomlesse pit, that is, power to set up the Arian here∣sie, by which meanes the Sun became dark, for he denied Christs divinity. By the are, he understands the Church, beeing enlightened by Christ: as the aire takes its light from the visible sunne. The Locusts, are the Vandales, & Gothes, who beeing infected with Arianisme, much afflicted the Churches in the East, &c. The opinion of Rupertus I am ashamed to relate, The strange opinion of Rupertus. who applies this to the apostasie of the Israelites, and to their punishment by the Mabitas & Philistinas, after the death of Iosuah. Now we know that such things as were past are not here revealed unto John: but that which should afterwards shortly come to passe. Alcasare opinion is yet worse, who will have this starre to be the Law of Moses, Alcasars opinion. the which (saith hee) as comming down from above, so presseth men, that there∣by concupiscence and evill desires (the which he makes to be the Locusts) are acci∣dentally wrought in their hearts. Ad calcem tomi tertis, in prima editione. Bellarmine confesseth that he dares not rashly pronounce any thing concerning this dark prophesie: And yet in the mean while in a long oration, or rather a sa∣tyrical invective, consisting almost of as many lies as words, he most rashly pro∣nounceth Luther to bee this starre: The smoake ascending out of the pit, to be the doctrine of Luther: and that the innumerable multitude of these horrible Locusis, doe most lively expresse his disciples. But this whole fiction is so ridiculous, as indeed Alcasar himself derides it, I wonder (saith hee) that he did not also referre it to the fall of Judas. But how should Luther a poore and obscure Augustine Monke bee this great starre? he saith, though he were poore, yet hee became rich, though at first he professed abstinencie from marriage, yet afterward hee tooke a wife, & of a Monke became a states∣man. I answer, by great falling starres none can properly bee signified, but great and mighty praelates: and therefore I wonder why be upbraideth Luther with his riches, seeing he neyther had, nor left any behinde him: now although it be true, he was poore (but no worldlie politician, onely aprofessour of divinitie) yet in∣deed he had many rich adversaries, and among the number Bellarmine himselfe was not the least, who of a Monke became a mightie Politician, & famous Car∣dinal. If Luther therefore fell from heaven, because (according to the Apostles Can∣non) he was married: then Bellarmine may as well say, that the Apostle in com∣manding a Bishop to be the husband but of one wife, doth thereby throw down the starres from heaven: But the very truth is, Bellarmine by this his wantonnesse of wit indeavours to darken this vision, that so he may preserve the Popes reputation, as if by this falling star he were not typed out, besides he would dissipate this hel∣lish
smoake (if he could) from popery, least hee himself should be accounted (as in truth he is) a leading and chiefe locust among the rest. These things I thought good to rehearse, that I may not seem to despise the opinions of other interpreters: and that the reader among the variety of expositors may take what he liketh best: and the rather, because this prophesie is somewhat darke: notwithstanding if all things bee well considered, it will easilie and undoubtedly appear, that by the fal of this great starre nothing else is praefigured, but the aposta∣sie of the Romish Bishop, who makes himself head of the Church: together with his devised Hierarchie. I will therefore, (not out of any sinister affection,) but truely as the things are, & according as the Lord hath made me to see now come to expound everie particular, leaving it unto the judgement of the reader. It is plaine, that by starres, in the Revelation are noted, not Emperours or earthly kings, but Bishops and teachers of Churches: by great starres therefore are meant, not the inferiour ministers or Bishops (as they are called) but prelates of higher note and ranke. Now the reason of the analogie I have shewed on Chap. 1.20. Mat. 5.14. to wit, because Bishops ought to shine like starres in sinceritie of do∣ctrine, and holinesse of life: they ought (I say) to bee the light of the world. And hence it is, that with the Catholick Glosse, Morelius, Alphonsus, Bullin∣ger, and other learned interpreters, I understand this great starre fallen from heaven, to signifie some chiefe and eminent Bishop: By his fall from heaven into the earth, is signified his apostasie from the heavenly truth, unto earthly doc∣trines of humane traditions. But who should this bee? In the third trumpet the great star falling from heaven was the Bishop of Rome, (who beeing accounted by Constantine as a God on earth, and enriched with wealth and power above measure) began to swell with great pride, where∣upon the successours of Sylvester by meanes of the Emperours decree, began to fall upon the third part of the rivers and fountaines of waters, that is, leaving the studie of heavenly things, affected an earthly dominion and power over the Churches and Bishops of all Europe (which hitherto was the third part of the world) and by bringing in pernicious superstitions and worship of idols, made the waters bit∣ter, to the destruction of the Eastern Churches. Now this great starr fallen from heaven is not another, but the verie same. For it is to be observed that Iohn saith not as before,  fell from heaven: neyther saith he, , and I saw to fall (although the Latine version, and Beza also so render it) but he saith: I saw the starre () fallen, or, which did fall at the sounding of the third trumpet. Now here he sees the adjuncts and effects of the same Star, beeing far more grievous then before. At first he saw it to fall upon the third part of the rivers and waters, making them bitter with wormewood, so as they became mortal to many: Yet was not the same a total corruption and Apostasie. But now he sees this starre fully fallen, neither vanished away, nor perished in the waters, but sticking fast like filth unto the earth, as doe slimy and thick vapours which fall from heaven. He saw also the key of the bottomlesse pit given unto him: to open therewithall the bottomlesse pit, &c. by which was represented unto Iohn a worse shape, or condition of the Romish chaire, The rising of the Ro∣mish Anti∣christ de∣scribed. viz. its total apostasie and monstrous corruption. By which it is plaine, that in this place the rising of the great Romane Antichrist is described: For to what other Ecclesiastical person (I pray you) can these things possibly be applied? And indeed Gregorie makes him to bee the Antichrist, who should affect the title of an universall priest: the which thing Boniface the third did three yeere after his decease, beeing declared in the yeere 606. by Phocas the intruder universall Pope, chiefe Priest, and Bishop of Bishops. And therefore it must needs be that he was this starre here said to be fallen: Neverthelesse it may not be understood of Boniface alone, but of all his successors in that sea: even as before the great falling star typed out not onely Sylvester, but also his successours untill Gre∣gorie. It is true Boniface himself sate scarsly one yeere on the chair of universall
pestilence: notwithstanding the rest who succeeded him were so far from repairing the ruin beeing once made, as on the contrary they continually proceeded from evill to worse. I am not ignorant that some learned men doe think that Mahumet is here to be understood, Mahumet cannot be here meant. who about this time caused an open apostasie from the faith of Christ in most of the Eastern parts, beeing esteemed by his followers a great Pro∣phet, and so is unto this day. But I see no reason, why in scripture he should be called a coelestiall star, seeing it is certaine that from the very first he was a most wicked deceiver, and a cruel murtherer, setting up his owne dreames by magical art, & power of the sword. Wherefore I judge that here is most plainely typed out the Romish Antichrist with his clergie: but Mahumet in the following trumpet. The sum of all is this, that we may interpret the Revelation by it selfe, the fal∣ling of this starre, is that great earthquake, which arose at the opening of the sixt seale, of which you may see, what we have observed on Chap. 6. v. 12. And to him was given the key of the bottomlesse pit] The principall thing here shewed unto Iohn, is the giving of the key of the bottomlesse pit unto this aposta∣ticall starre. And hence hee is called the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, and Abaddon the king of the locusts, v. 11. Al which may most fitly be applied unto the Popes of Rome, who after their apostasie received this key. Now we are briefly to consider what is meant by this bottomlesse deep, what by the gulfe & the key thereof, as also when, and by whom the same was given unto the Pope. It is called in Gr.  beeing derived from α & , or , which signifies a bottom, as it were without bottom: or from α and  to cover, for the deep is covered with waters. The word in scripture is used, first for the Chaos or disordered forme at the first creation, darkenesse beeing upon the face of the deep, Gen. 1.2. Secondly for the depth of the sea or waters. Gen. 7.11. And the fountains of the great deep were opened. Psal. 42.7. deep calleth unto deep at the noyse of thy water spouts. Thirdly for hell, as Luk. 8.31. where the devils be∣seech Christ, that he would not command them to goe out into the deep. & Rom. 10.7. Who shall descend into the deep? so here and in many other places of this booke. The bottomlesse pit] This is not meant of the whole gulfe, but as it were the deepest and narrowest receptacle & filthie sinck of hell. The key of the bottomlesse pit] That is, power to open and shut the same, thrusting into, and delivering out of it whomsoever he pleaseth. For keyes doe signifie power. Now who besides the Pope doth usurpe this power unto himselfe? which plainely shewes, that he is this apostaticall starre. Was given to him] by whom? by Phocas who appointed by a solemne decree that the Pope (as be∣ing universall Priest) should have absolute and full power over all Bishops and Churches, to call and dissolve Synods, to confirme or abolish their decrees, & that nothing should be ratified but by the sole Authority of the sea of Rome. And hence it is, that the Pope hath power both in heaven, and earth, and hell: in token whereof he weares on his head a triple crowne, & thus hath writen in one of his de∣crees: if the Pope should send many thousands of men into hell, no man may say unto him, what doest thou? hence he imposeth lawes on the consciences, makes new articles of faith, canoniseth bookes, saintes & images, celebrates Iubilees, sends forth innumerable indulgences or pardons for sinne, emptieth purgatorie, the which latter may not unfittly be applyed to this bottomlesse pit. But in truth this key was given unto him by Satan that old serpent, according to that of the Apos∣tle, The comming of Antichrist shallbe after the working of Satan, with all power, &c. 2 Thess. 2.9. I confesse indeed that the first Bishop or pastor of the Christian Church at Rome, received the key of the kingdom of heaven from Christ, that is, power to binde and loose the consciences of men according to the Law and Gospell. But Satan contrarie hereunto gave unto the Pope this hellish key: by which he hath
thrust aside and made voyd Christs key. And hence it is that the Pope hath two keyes crosswise in his ensignes. Neverthelesse this came not to passe without Gods secret and unsearcheable judgement, as the Apostle witnesseth 2 Thess. 2. saying, that the comming indeed of Antichrist is with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse: Yet God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeve a ly, because they received not the love of the truth: Now this we must not understand onelie of a bare permission, as if God did nothing, but looke upon that which Satan, Phocas & Antichrist should doe: but hee willingly granted this power unto him by his secret and righteous judge∣ment, that so both hee himself, and all they might bee damned who beleeved not the truth. Thus it is said also in v. 3. that power was given to the locusts to hurt men as the scorpions of the earth have power, that is, from their king the devill, yet so, as not without the ordering hand of God, who wisely disposeth all things, whither don by men or devils. And thus in Chap. 13. v. 5.7.15. it is said, that it was given to the beast to make warre with the Saintes, & to give life to the image of the beast, &c. Whence we may see, how God righteously punisheth sinne with sinne in Anti∣christs kingdome. And this thing we are to take notice of, that so in the midst of these Antichristian confusions we may not look upon Antichrist and the devill onely, but indeed cheifely consider and adore, the presence and secret judgements of God. But thou wilt say, Rev. 1.18. & 20.1. how is the key of the bottomlesse pit, (which Christ hath) given unto Antichrist? I answer, The diffe∣rence how Christ and Antichrist are said to have the key of the bottomlesse pit. Christ hath it one way, Antichrist another. Christ hath it truely and by right of his Godhead and mediation, as beeing Lord of death and hell, & that he may redeem sinners out of the power thereof: but Antichrist hath it falselie and by deceit, as beeing king of locusts, and impudently professing himself to bee Christs vicar: Besides he hath not the key of hell absolutely, but of the bottomlesse pit, or of the sinke of hel, and thence to raise the smoak of his pestilent lies & de∣ceit, to the damnation of the inhabitants of the earth. 2. And hee opened the bottomlesse pit] Now John expoundeth the pestilent effects of this power. The bottomlesse pit was shut up by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, who pluckt men out of the snares of Satan, by leading them unto the living fountaines of Israel: it was shut up, (I say,) almost untill these times; For hetherto the faithfull teachers took heed that this pestilent smoake might not spread it self over their Churches. But now Antichrist having gotten the key into his hand, unlocked as it were the verie gate of hell which before was shut. But what is this? surely nothing else but the Popes universal power, by which he labou∣red, not to open unto men the kingdome of God, but on the contrarie to unloose the verie barrs of hell, that so the world might rush headlong into the same. Now the Pope opened this bottomlesse pit, when by his authority hee established his filthy errours, superstitions, idols, &c. and tooke out of the Church the certainty of faith & perseverance, tormenting & infusing into the consciences of men feares, doubtings &c. This was the porch or entrie into hell: he opened therefore the bottomlesse pit, for the destruction of all men, like as hunters open caves & pits, whereinto the unwarie deere might fall and be taken. This was the first effect of the key. And there arose a smoak out of the pit] This second effect, is an exhalation of a pestilent smoake which necessarily followes the former, as when an house of office is uncovered there ariseth a filthy stinke. And it is called a smoake, because it ascendeth out of hell, as smoake doth from fire. Moreover it is not a thinne, but a verie thick smoke, as of a great furnace, like to bakers, brickmakers, smiths, or the like. This smoake is nothing els, but the blacke and smoaky divinity of the Pope: His wicked decrees touching images and idol worship, his taking upon him to purge sins by masses, penance, satisfactions, pilgrimages, almes, purgatorie, jubi∣lees,
pardons &c: the primacle of his Romish chaire, his power in heaven and hell: to be short the whole volumes of their Canons & Decretals, together with the inextricable toyes of Scholastick divinity, by all which the Pope hath in very deed brought a thick smoake upon the Christian world, establishing a mingle man∣gle of Iudaisme & Paganisme, in stead of Christianity, & oppressing the truth of Christ with most grosse darknesse. Now the doctrines of Antichrist are compa∣red to smoake from the effects thereof. For as the smoake obscures the ayre, hurts the eyes, causeth such a darknesse, that things cannot bee seen as they are, and he which walketh in it, is in danger to be stiffled, or to fall down headlong: even so is it with Antichrists smoake: therefore it followeth. And the Sun and the aire was darkned] The Revelation expounds it self. The fourth trumpet sounding, the third part of the Sun, Moon and Stars was smitten. But here the whole Sun is darkened, and so consequently the aire which is enlightned by the same. This signifies the same evil, with the former, but more grievous: For before onely a third part, but here a totall defect of the light appeareth. Nothing is more sad to behold then totall eclipses. (as happened in Aegypt at Christs passion) For all things then are in darke∣nesse, the day beeing turned into the night. Now as Christ is the Sun of righteousnesse: so nothing can be signified by this total darknesse, but that universall Apostasie from the faith, which the Apostle foretold should come to passe under Antichrist. Vntill the times of Gregorie the third part of the Sun was smitten, that is, much darkenesse was brought in∣to the Church by Bishops, hereticks, hypocrites, hermites and monkes, as we have before shewed upon the going forth of the black and pale horse, as also at the sounding of the the third and fourth trumpet. But after Gregorie, Boniface at length, and his successours sitting on the chaire of VNIVERSAL pestilence, a horrible night darkened Christ the Sun in the Church, for all places were filled with most grosse darknesse of Popish decrees, traditions, superstitions, ceremonies, lies, fraud and Sophistrie. The summe of all is this: The darke∣ning of the Sun which the Apostaticall Star brought in by his hellish smoake of Popish divinity, doth exactly answer to that obscurity which happened at the opening of the sixt seal. For the Sun was made black like sackcloth of haire, the Moon was turned into blood, the Stars fell from heaven unto the earth &c. by al which (as we there shewed) is mystically set forth that horrible night of blindnesse, which Christ suffered during Antichrists reigne. But thou wilt say how can this darkenesse bee applied unto the Papacy, seeing they professe the name of Christ, beleeve him to be the saviour, receive the Apostolicall faith, and to be short, acknowledge the holy Scriptures of God un∣to this day? Now here I desire the reader to consider what I have before answered un∣to this faire pretence: And what the Apostle said unto the hypocritical tea∣chers of his time (who under a shew of preaching Christ, brought into the Church Iewish ceremonies, and a flagitious licentiousnesse of life) they professe that they know God, but in workes they denie him: The which how fitlie it a∣greeth to Antichrist the fathers of old, as Hilarie, Austin and others, have wel observed. It is true indeed, in word hee professeth Christ, but in workes he denies him: For had he come as an open enemie of Christ, he could ne∣ver have invaded the kingdome of the Church: but his comming was (as the Apostle hath foretold) with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse. Thus we see that Antichrist under the name of Christ should oppose Christ, and labour to destroy the faith of Christ out of the harts of men. The proprietie of Antichrists name (saith HILARIE) is, to be contrarie to Christ: the which is now effected under the opinion of fained pietie: This is now preached under shew of preaching the Gospell, And indeed Christ, while hee seems to be prea∣ched, is denyed. So AVSTIN: Hee also is to bee esteemed the SON OF PERDITION
who under the NAME OF CHRIST which is the name of God, that is, making shew of beeing a Christian, extolles himself above Christ: whence it appeareth that these fathers were of opinion, that Antichrist under the name of Christ & the faith of Christ, should deny both. But how is this don by the Papists? This hath fully been, manifested long agoe. They pray unto the images of Marie made of stone, wood, gold, &c. Holy Marie, queene of heaven heare us, save us, O thou our onely hope, &c. In thee O Ladie I trust. Into thy hands O Ladie I commend my spirit. The Lord said unto my Ladie, sit thou at my right-hand, &c. And unto other images thus: S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Nicolas, S. Magdalene have mercie on us, save us, &c. Is not this in workes to deny God, and Christ the onely Saviour; albeit in the words of the Creed they doe professe him? They teach that the remission of sins, righteousnesse and eternal life is to be sought for in the merits of hu∣mane workes, as penance, satisfactions, Iubilees, indulgences, masses, exorcismes, processions, pilgrimages, purgatorie, &c. Is not this (whatsoever they professe) a denying of the blood and merit of Iesus Christ? The Pope boasteth to be the Vicar of Christ, the Head and Monarch of the Church on earth: But Christ neyther appointed nor gave any such office unto the Church. Read 1 Cor. 12.8. and Ephes. 4.11. where the distinct orders and office which Christ gave unto the bodie, are all reckoned up. Now if any man takes upon him to bee a Kings Vicar, without his appointment; is not such a one the kings enemie? Ioh. 19.12. as they said in the Gospell, whosoever maketh himself a king, speaketh against Caesar. The Pope therefore arrogating to himself the title of Christs Ʋicar, doth thereby plainely prove that he is Antichrist, Christs adver∣sarie. The Pope will be adored as God, In Donat. Constant. dist. 96. taking divine honour unto himself. Steu∣chus saith. Constantine adored the Pope as God. Bloudus saith: all the Princes of the earth adore and worship the Pope as the chiefe God. Mantuan thus writeth con∣cerning the pope: Great Caesar with victorious kings, Who golden crownes doe weare: They doe adore his footsteps, Who the double sword doth beare. The Fathers of the Lateran Council gave this blasphemous applause to the Pope. Thou art all things, and above all things, To thee is given all power in heaven and in earth. And another Poet thus: Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris habenas, Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus. By thy unerring word thou rulest over all; And fitt it is a god on earth men should thee call. The titles of some bookes lately dedicated unto the Pope are thus. PAVLO V. VICE DEO, To Paul the fift in place of God; The letters of which title in Latine, doe pecisely expresse the number of the BEASTS name 666. doth he not therefore deny God, and shew himself to be the very Antichrist, seeing he thus presumptuously takes a deity to himselfe? Touching mariage, meats, fas∣ting, &c. He binds where God unlooseth, & looseth where God binds. Now is not this in pride to lift up himself both against and above the Lord? He will not that the scriptures should bee beleeved, no, neither God himselfe, otherwise then he approves off. Enchi. de script. de authorit. scriptu. lib. 1. cap. 10. sect. 3. The scripture is not authentick (saith Eckius) but by the authoritie of the Church: And Stapleton: neyther doe we beleeve God, but for the Church. How therefore can he himself eyther beleeve in, or call on the name of God?
He hath made himself to bee the GREATEST high-priest of the Church, whereas Christ is called the GREAT High-priest thereof. Heb. 4. & 12. By how much therefore greatest is more then great, by so much the Pope hath lift himself up above Christ. To be short, he not onely weakens, but labours wholy to take away all faith out of the harts of the Godly, not onely in making the scriptures (which is the rule of faith) to depend on his will: but also in denying and comdemning all certainty and confidence of grace, mercie, and salvation: and on the contrarie he will have the conscience to be in perpetuall trouble, fear and doubtings. I forbear to speake more: these things are sufficient to shew how in the Papacie, the Sun was darkened by the smoake of hell. And the aire by reason of the smoake of the pit.] The Sun being darkned the aire of necessitie must be so likewise: What is meant by the darke∣ning of the aire. For the aire (darke in it self) is enlightned by the Sun. Lyra well understands by the aire the Church; because the Church re∣ceives her light from Christ, as doth the aire from the Sun. Now the Church vanished out of the sight of men, when she lay hid and bu∣ried (as it were) under the smoke of this pit, beeing changed into the chaire and kingdom of Antichrist. At first the state of the Church was oeconomicall, wherein Christ as the onely father of his houshold taking a far journy even to heaven, ap∣pointed many servants over his familie, the Church, and howsoever he gave unto them diversitie of talents or gifts, yet equall power in the dispensation thereof. But Antichrist having possessed the chaire of VNIVERSAL pestilence, altered this oeconomicall state into a Monarchie, and was acknowledged (in stead of Christ) to be the priest and head of the Church. But thou wilt say was Christ now with∣out a Church, had he quite forsaken and lost his spouse? These indeed are the objections of the Romish Parasites, but they are idle and frivolous: For in the midst of the confusions of Antichrist, Christ (as we heard before) preserved unto himself out of everie tribe and nation, & tongue 144000 sealed ones: So that there was a Church even in the bowels of Popery, although it were not in the least the Papall Hierarchie, which caried the title thereof. We may also interpret the aire to be the holy Scriptures, or the ministry of the Church: for as the aire instrumentally brings the light of the Sun unto us: so by the holy Scriptures and the opening of them, the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ doth brightly shine in our harts. But now this aire was darkened, viz. by a fatal eversion of the word, and the whole ecclesiastical order. But I rather ap∣prove the former sence. For touching, the ecclesiasticall order, how it began, the historie of the locusts will shew. 3. And there came out of the smoake Locusts] We have heard three effects of this Apostaticall Star, viz. the opening of the bottomlesse pit, the smoake of the pit, & the darkening of the sun and aire. Now the fourth followes, a monstrous brood of Locusts came out of the smoake of the pit. Locusts are a small kinde of vermine having weak wings, The descri∣ption and nature of Locusts. lifting up themselves by flight so little from the earth, that they seem rather to leap then to fly. In Africa, Syria, and the Indies they are bigger of bodie, and stronger of wings: they are verie hurtfull to the herbs, fruites and trees upon which they feed, and by touching infect them: in sommer time they leap & make a creaking with their wings. Among the ten plagues of Egypt the Locusts were the eight, beeing brought by an East-winde over the whole land: Exod. 10.13. Ioel. 1.6. In Ioel also the Lord threatneth the Israelites with Locusts having teeth like Lions, alluding alle∣gorically unto the Babylonians. Here also the whole description argues, The Lo∣custs are allegorically to be un∣derstod. Lyras opi∣nion reje∣cted. that this vermine is not to bee understood properly, but mystically of the troopes of most hurtfull enemies. Who they bee, it is hard to define, saith Ribera. And so it is, because as Papists, so also our interpreters are of diverse opinions about them. Lyra interprets it of the Ʋandales, Gothes and Hunnes most cruell enemies of
the Church, who beeing infected with the Arian pest, spread themselves by migh∣ty troopes in the East, and in Africa, and like devouring Locusts miserably afflic∣ted the Christian world. This opinion seems probable to Tossanus, although he follow it not. Ribera also understands it of cruell and Barbarous men afflicting the Church, Riberaes opinion. such as were of old the Gothes and Ʋandales. But their description here seems not fitly to agree to these natione. For these Locusts are raised and spread over the earth by the key of the Apostaticall Star, that is, by Antichrists power they come out of the bottomlesse pit: but Antichrist did neither raise up, nor send forth the Ʋandales & Gothes, unlesse it were by accident, that is, as occasioning by his ido∣latrie the Lord to punish men by these adversaries: besides they did not torment, but miserably murther many, & not the wicked alone, but the godly also, & this not for five monthes but many yeeres together. Junius interprets it of evill spirits molesting the world: Iunius in∣terpreta∣tion. but the description little agrees therewith: besides it was needlesse that any such thing should be ty∣ped out unto Iohn, seeing it is well knowen to all, that they never cease trou∣bling and tempting the sons of men. Moreover sensible events are undoubtedly here signified, as working upon mens sences: Whereas the evil spirits doe in∣sensiblie rage and hurt the world. Gagnaeus and some others (with whom our Tossanus agrees) apply it to the swarme of hereticks, Gagnaeus opinion. which in Constantines time and after, with a mighty force, prepared the way for Antichrist. For those hereticks beeing come forth from the hellish smoake of arrogancie and presumption, like Locusts far and wide devour∣ed the pastures of the Church. Now howsoever these things are true in them∣selves; Yet as Ribera wel observeth, the locusts here spoken of may not be un∣derstood of hereticks, because that which followes in vers. 5. seems not to agree unto them. It was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be torment∣ed; Now hereticks torment not their disciples, and favourers, but such as are sound in the faith who have the seale of God: whereas the locusts are commanded not to torment those which have the seale of God in their foreheads: to which we may also adde, that the state of hereticks was before described in the third & fourth trumpet: as also in Chap. 6. at the opening of the third and fourth seale: whereas it is manifest that here the rising and kingdome of Antichrist is prefigured. I therefore (leaving all these,) doe in this ascent unto the Ecclesiasticall Glosse, to the Glosse also of Illyricus and Bullinger, who following Bede and Anonymus, un∣derstand by these Locusts the disciples of Antichrist, The appli∣cation of the Locusts to Anti∣christs dis∣ciples vin∣dicated. that is, the innumerable troope of the Popish clergie, neyther is there any weight in what is objected to the contrarie. First, they say, that Antichrists kingdom is described hereafter in Chap. 13. Now howsoever this be true, yet is it not a sufficient ground to prove the thing they bring it for: For as it is both there and here described, so also (as we have shewed) it was before prefigured in the second vision at the opening of the sixt seale: yea it shallbe also againe described in the fift & sixt visions. For in every one of these prophetical visions the same is repeated, and more clearly illustrated. Secondly they object, that these Locusts shall onely rage for the space of five monthes: whereas the power of the Romish clergie hath already continued much longer: But neyther is this to the purpose: For the time of five monthes is not here precisely to be understood according to the letter, (for in this sence it would as little agree with the Vandals and hereticks, whose time of rage & cruelty lasted many yeeres:) But the words allude to that space of time, in which the Locusts are in their chiefe vigour & strength, as we shall heare hereafter. Thirdly they object: that the power given to the Locusts is not over the ser∣vants of God, but them that were not sealed. Wheras Antichrist hath power over the sealed ones, for he shall kill the witnesses of the truth. But it is one thing to kill, and another thing to hurt. He shall indeed kill the two witnesses, yet not hurt
them, for the spirit of life from God shall enter into them Chap. 11. vers. 11. therefore properly he onely shall hurt them that are not sealed, by seducing and leading them to destruction, 2 Thess. 2.10. Lastly they object, that the Locusts had power grievously to torment men, the which (say they) cannot be truly said of them in the Papacy, who have lived in all kinde of carnal licenciousnesse. But we are to distinguish betwixt the out∣ward condition of the flesh, and the inward state of the conscience. Outwardly indeed idolaters rejoyce greatly, & abound in all pleasures: But inwardly when conscience comes to worke, they feel secret torments: because seeking life and salvation out of Christ, they never finde any rest for their soules, but are torment∣ed with perpetuall anguish, feare and torture of hell or purgatorie, of which more hereafter. Notwithstanding therefore all the foresaid objections, we understand by the Locusts the Romish clergie, unto whom the whole description & all the effects ther∣of doe fitly agree. I. The Locusts remaine skipping on the ground, and fly not up into the aire: Applica∣tion of the Locusts to the Romish clergie. So this wicked clergie savours nothing but earthly things: seekes only after them, and not the things that are above. II. The Locusts goe forth in great troopes: so in the Papacy there are seen innumerable swarmes of religions orders: in so much that one of their Ge∣nerals (as Sabellicus recordeth) promised sometime unto the Pope, to send a com∣pleate armie of thirtie thousand souldiers, consisting onely of Franciscane Friers, to warre against the Turks, without any interruption of divine service unto their cloisters. III. The Locusts sing, and skippe in summer, and delight in ease. What doth this sinfull clergie: But perpetually sing, dance, and delight in pride and luxuriousnesse, beeing in the meane time serviceable neither to God or men. IV. The Locusts though but litle yet are gorbellied creatures, & fall upon, con∣sume and destroy most pleasant feilds & gardens. The false Romish clergie loves to bee in the greatest and chiefest cities, possesse the pleasantest vallies, insinuate themselves into great mens favour & families, spoile & devoure widowes howses, build their cloisters, colleges and palaces in places most commodious, gather infi∣nite riches without labour, &c. But let us see in order the rising of these Lo∣custs, their power, age, figure and politie, al which is here set down by Iohn. And there came out of the smoake] The rising of the Locusts is out of the pit. The origi∣nall of the Locusts is out of the smoake of the bot∣tomlesse pit. Signifying their greater and lesser orders, their severall religions and innumerable families of Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictines, Cistercians, begging and barefoot friers, whippers, Capuzins, Jesuites &c. all which springing out of the smoake of humane traditions have through the authoritie of the Apostated Starre spread themselves over the Christian world: And indeed the inventions of merits, satis∣factions, penance, masses, pardons, purgatorie &c. were the roote of these innu∣merable sects and orders. He that will, may read a whole volume in Hospinian touching the originall of Monkes, and so doing he shall not need any other commen∣tarie to unfold the wonderfull birth of these grassewormes, springing out of the vaine inventions of Popish darknesse, as out of the smoake of the bottomlesse pit. And power was given unto them] Now he describes their office and power. Their power. The Locust is a little and weake creature: beeing able to bite and gnaw nothing save herbs, and the flowers of trees. But these Locusts have a mightie & deadly pow∣er, like unto the scorpions of the earth, that is, who hide themselves in the earth un∣der stones, hils, and clifts of wals, to hurt them that passe by, by which is noted their most dangerous power, altogether venemous, secret and full of wiles, in so much as it can hardly be avoyded. For the scorpion is a little worme, faire and no way terrible to the sight: but striketh deadly with his taile, infusing his mortall poyson into the wound. So these spirituall flyes appeare to be weake without
sword or weapon, in their behaviour & habit reverend, insinuating themselves by flattering speeches into the mindes of men: But they infuse the venome of their pestilent doctrine into the harts of the simpler sort: And as the scorpions sting is not felt at first, but the venome workes by little and little untill it penetrate into the vitals of the hart: so at first the bitings of these grasshoppers are not felt, but rather their pious deceits, are verie pleasing unto men. But at length the deadly poyson comes forth, causing their miserable consciences to rush head long into the sorrowes of death, and gulte of utter desperation. But whence have these Locusts this great power? It is given them: by whom? First from their king Abaddon, or Antichrist the Apostated starre, by whose pow∣er so many orders were authorised and canonized. Secondly from Satan, by whose effectuall working the Son of perdition came to sit in the temple of God. Lastly from God, without whose most righteous permission, neyther Satan, nor Abaddon could have effected any thing. So that the Locusts have their venemous power from God also, yet in wrath. For it seemed him good in his righteous judg∣ment by the Locusts to punish the horrible blindnesse and idolatrie of the Chri∣stian world: 2 Thess. 2.10. as the same Apostle witnesseth: therefore God sent them strong delu∣sions &c. 4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt] The limitation of their power is here added, and it is threefold, as we noted in the Analysis. First, they are not permitted to hurt everie one, according to their owne, Sa∣tans and Antichrists lust: but some onely: in which againe we observe three things. First, it is expresly said, that it was commanded them. But by whom? by Satan, or Abaddon? no verely; for it is their desire to bring all unto destruction. But by God, who by his secret providence restraineth the tyrannie of Satan & Anti∣christ, that they cannot rage promiscuously over all. This is the first consolation of the godly, that the tyranny of Antichrist is limited by the power of God. Secondly, such whom he may not hurt, are here noted. viz: Not the grasse of the earth, These Lo∣custs are no herb de∣vourers. nor any green thing, nor any tree. Now these ordinarily are the sweetest pa∣stures of the Locusts. But God permits them not to touch these. By which we may understand, that these Locusts are no grasse eaters, or herb devourers: for An∣tichrists clergie feeds not on hay: the which also shews, that the grasse & trees here mentioned are not literally to be taken, but by allusion to the pasture of the Lo∣custs. The Grasse of the earth notes (as also Chap. 8.7.) the generalitie of the faith∣full, which shall as yet bee under Antichrist. Green things, that is, such Christians as are in civill authoritie (for the greene wood is strong) namely such Princes, What is meant by Grasse, green things, & trees. Kings, and Emperours, as have manfully opposed Antichrists deceits. Trees, such godly pastors and teachers as in Antichrists kingdome were eminent in piety & zeale of pure doctrine, & contradicted his wicked devices. These the Locusts are for∣bid to hurt, that is, to seduce and destroy them. But thou wilt say, these as he∣reticks they chiefly persecute, hurt and kill. Chap. 11. It is so indeed, but by kil∣ling they hurt them not, because they can no way hinder their salvation. This is a second consolation, that the elect shall be freed from the biting of the Locusts, by the providence of God: For it is impossible they should bee seduced: None can pluke Christs sheep out of his hand. Hence it evidently appeares that the Lord hath preserved in the greatest dark∣nesse of Poperie, Grasse, Green things, & Trees, that is, some thousands of Saintes, whose salvation the Locusts could not hurt. The Sophisters of our dayes ask where the Church was before Luther, If the Papacie was not? Now here we an∣swer, that it was in the Papacie, but not the Papacie, because some continually were saved, who held the foundation, and were not mortally wounded by the scorpions. But onely those men] Thirdly, these whome the Locusts might and should hurt are here specified: men which have not the seale of God. By which we are not to un∣derstand,
as if the Grasse, Green things, and Trees were not men also, but onely that they are not of the number of those men, that should be hurt. For in Chap. 7. Men are divided into sealed ones, and not sealed. The sealed, are the faithfull or e∣lect: These are green grasse, & trees: the which the Locusts are prohibited to hurt. The not sealed, are the reprobate: among whom is Antichrist himself, as also these Locusts, who are commanded to hurt them which are not sealed: not as if they themselves were not also men unsealed, but because here they represent not men, but Satans instruments. Thus then we see that the Locusts have power given them onely to hurt such as have not the seale of God in their foreheads, (of which see Chap. 7.2.) as the A∣postle foretold 2 Thess. 2.9. that Antichrists comming should bee after the working of Satan with all power & signes, & lying wonders, in them that peerish, The 2 Thes. 2.9.10. explain∣ed. that they should beleeve a ly, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. By which words the Apostle gives us to understand: First, that Antichrist shall establish his power by cunning and diabolicall deceit. Secondly, by his ty∣ranny he shall oppresse the greater part of men in the Christian world: as not beeing sealed. Thirdly, that Antichrists followers shall inevitably perish & run into destruction. Fourthly, that their destruction shall be voluntarie and just, because they cast off, or receive not the love of the truth, rather delighting in Popish dreames and Lyes. Lastly, that under Antichrist there shall be alwayes some sound teachers of the truth, who shall suffer grievous contradiction: as in Chap. 11.4. 5. And it was given them that they should not kill] The first limitation of the Locusts power, we have heard: here is added a SECOND, that they should not kill men but torment them: also a third limitation, not allwayes, but for five monthes. Behold the wonderfull lenitie of God even in suffering the wicked, limiting and moderating their plagues, who deserve to be destroyed all at one instant. The elect under Antichrists kingdom he altogether preserves from the mortall biting of these scorpions, insomuch as wee doubt not, but that there are still some god∣ly groaning under his tyrannie in the heart of Popery, as in Rome, Italie, Spaine, &c. The other idolatrous troop he will not suffer the Locusts suddenly to kill: to the end they may have time to repent: But onely to torment them: that thereby they might be stirred up to seek remedie for their sowles. Notwithstanding it seems that not so much a mitigation, as an exasperation is signified by the foresaid limitation: This tor∣ment notes the Eccle∣siastical Locusts. For it is far worse to bee tormented with a lingring disease, then suddenly to perish: neyther may we doubt, but that by this kinde of hurting is designed not a civill but an Ecclesiastical kinde of Locusts: be∣cause they shall not kill mens bodies, as did the Vandales, Gothes, and other open tyrants: but they shall torment mens soules and consciences, torturing them con∣tinually as on a rack by their deceitfull doctrines of penance, satisfactions, purga∣torie, &c. Now what, (I pray) can be spoken more openly against the impostures of that false and Antichristian clergie? by which indeed for the present they kill not the bodie, but torment the wretched conscience by shewing them remission and explation of sin, not in the faith of the Gospell, in the mercies of God, and in the blood of Christ, but in the merits of good workes, auricular confessions, num∣bring of sins, imposed penance, poenal satisfactions, going in pilgrimage to the sepulchre of our Lord, S. Iames, the ladie of Lauretta, in travels by sea and land, in fasting and abstinence, in masses, in almes, and legasies, building of Closters, in Moncks coules, in whippings, in going barefoot, & lastlie in the Popes jubilees, & indulgences bought for mony. Now what are all these things, but the sinful devises of men, altogether tending to the wounding of mens consciences, and no way serving for the healing and helping of the same. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9 For in vaine is the Lord wor∣shipped with the doctrines of men. This is the miserable rack of the conscience, none greater then it, nor more dangerous: Let the historie of the Romish Church and Emperours be read, and
there it will appeare that many through the furie and rage of the Locusts, have been so stirred up, and brought to such madnesse, as to quiet their consciences, they have of their own accord layd down the government of the Empire and king∣domes, put themselves into religious Covents or monasteries, built Cloisters and Colledges for Monks with great liberallity, thereby to redeeme soules, have taken upon themselves religious orders for the expiation of sins, have woren either dead or living the cowles or hoodes of begging Fryars: but in all these things, what could they find, or hereby receive, but a perpetual torture & trouble of con∣science, a dreafull feare & doubt of beeing deceived. We need not therefore seek these Locusts among the Vandales, Gothes, Hunnes, Saracens, Mahumetans, &c. For these did promiscuously rage and tyrannise by fire & sword against the persons both of the just & unjust. Besides it is verie cleare by the matter it selfe, that Ecclesiastical & religious deceivers are here meant: who torment indeed con∣tinually the fearfull consciences of men with the terrours of hell & purgatorie: but send them not for releife to Christ by faith, but to the Popes lawes, that is, in stead of Phisick administer poyson, and precipitate their soules into the gulfe of finall desperation. Moreover we are againe to take notice of the word  it was given, which I find to be twenty times repeated in this booke about Antichrists tyranny, that so we may understand, that he doth not thus rage by chance, but as beeing Gods scourge to punish the ingratitude of the Christian world: as also that he is bound & limited by God, and cannot goe bejond the same. The which serves for our great comfort. Five monthes] This is the third limitation of their power, serving also for our singular consolation: Seeing God hath prefixed a certaine time to these Locusts, bejond which they shall not longer rage & torment. Interpreters discourse di∣versly about these five monthes. Some take it properly for five Aegyptian monthes, or an hundred & fifty dayes, the time that the waters of the flood increased upon the face of the earth: some take it for so many yeares. Notwithstanding they are much troubled how so short a time should agree to the tyranny either of the Vandales, Saracens, or Popish clergie. Bullingers exposition best agrees with the nature of the place, viz. that the mitigation is taken from the age of Locusts, which ordinarily is no more then five monthes, making the sense to be thus: that as the Locusts continew not hurting the whole yeere thorow, but sing, leap, and feed upon the grasse scarsly during the five summer monthes, that is, from April unto September: even so a certaine time is defined to Antichrists seducers, after which they shall torment men no more. But this seems not to agree with histories: For the Pope hath now for a thousand yeeres & more sent forth his Locusts to spoile the field of the Church: neyther doth the end as yet appeare: Yea he shall continue devouring untill he bee consumed by the brightnesse of Christs comming. But this no way contradicts what we have before said, for what are five monthes with the Lord, seeing with him a thousand yeeres are as one day? The time therefore of the Locusts is hereby designed, not as if it should, be no longer then an hundred and fifty dayes, or yeeres, but because it should be short: a definite time, being put for an indefinite: And thus also Alcasar expounds it indefinitely, although (contrarie to the scope) he applie it to the plagues and conversion of the Iewes. But we are taught, however Antichrist shall remaine with his Locusts, yet when he shalbe revealed, his tyranny & the power of the Locusts shalbe so weak∣ned, that they shall not torment men any more, or at least not so much as before they did: The truth whereof we see through Gods mercie these hundred yeeres accomplished, both in Germanie & other kingdomes. For now the biting of these Locusts is not so forcible, but everie where that ancient power of those scorpions lies under contempt, because the five monthes are ended. And as Polydore Virgil writes & perswades in his seventh booke Chap. 3. It would bee very profi∣table
that these dregs of men, as superfluous members of Christian religion, were cut off & utterly consumed, that so they might no longer with their filthinesse staine the puritie of Gods worship. And their torment] He amplifies their torments from a similitude before spoken of ver. 3. for as the power of Scorpions was given to the Locusts: so their biting and torment is like unto that of Scorpions. The paine at the beginning is indeed not great, but suddenly so increaseth, that if remedie be not had, it will kill the person wounded, within four and twenty houres: even so howsoever at first men little regard the biting of these Locusts, but give way to carnall reason and li∣centiousnesse: yet at the houre of death all things appeare horrible and mortal. 6. And in these dayes men shall seek death] Another amplification of the tor∣ment taken from the most lamentable effect thereof, by which mens lives are not onely made bitter, but so detestable, as that they shall preferre death (of which all men stand in feare) before life: they shall, I say, desire to change life for death, and good for evill. Now this is not the property of men sober, but mad▪ no∣ting how this biting shall infatuate and besott people, no otherwise then as it or∣dinarily happens to such as are bitten by mad dogs: Even so these little beasts with their stings have befooled the greatest kings, and wise men of the earth, as that they have suffered themselves to be dwawen, lead, set on work, and sent wher∣ever they would, yea to be perswaded, that black was white, that life eternal was comprehended under the hood of Monkes, that holie water purgeth sin, & quench∣eth the flames of purgatorie; that so at least they might find some ease for their consciences, the which notwithstanding they obtained not. It is well knowen, that such was the Germanes devotion to the Papacy, and in their devotion such madnesse, and in their madnesse such brutish obedience, as that they would doe any thing how absurd soever (so it were imposed by the Locusts in the Popes name) for to redeem soules out of hell and purgatorie: Insomuch that the Cardinal CAIETAN said (as it is reported) that if Luther had not been, the Germanes at the Popes beck, would have eaten (like oxen) hay for their provender. And shall not finde it, but death shall flee from them] A further increase of sorrow: they shall not finde remedie for their torments, no not in death. For there is no man but would rather once suffer death, then to be tormented with perpetual fear and expectation eyther of purgatorie, or the flames of hell fire. Then shall that saying be in force. Mors optanda magis: sed enim sua funera passis Major ab extremo restat agone dolor. Death wish'd is rather, but her funerals beeing over, From extreme torments felt, Remaines a greater dolor. Death shall flee from them] because eyther through superstition, or feare they be shall hindered from laying violent hands upon themselves. The trembling therefore of these shall not be unlike the anguish of the reprobates, mentioned in Chap. 6.16. who cried to the mountaines, fall upon us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, & from the face of the Lamb. Notwithstanding the judgement of the last day is not here as yet treated of: but thereunto are compar∣ed the torments with which the Locusts tortured men that were not sealed. Now the Lord Iesus keep us from the venome of such Locusts. Their forme now fol∣lows. 7. And the shapes of the Locusts] The reason why they are thus lively expressed be∣fore our eyes as in a table, is, to the end we might the better take notice & shun these pestilent creatures. Their figure is so monstrous & horrid, (not like the na∣tural Locusts) that the verie sight of such a monstre would affright a man, neither may we imagine the description of this monstre, to bee like unto that which Flac∣cus jestingly describeth in the beginning of his art:
Humano capiti cervicem pistor equinam Iungere si velit, & varias inducere plumas Vndique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum Desinat in piscem, mulier formosa superne: Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? If to a humane head a painter should thus doe A horses shoulder joyne, and sundry feathers too: And that the members all did represent in show A woman faire above, an ugly fish below: The friends which came to see, would laugh at it I trow? But this monstre is formed of diverse, & those the crueller sort of shapes. The whole form at the first appearance represents a fiery warlike horse: having a mans face, and hair of a woman: but Lions teeth strong to rend asunder: a breastplate of iron to bear off blowes: the sound of his wings terrible: the taile, stinging as a Scorpion ready to hurt every one; to be short not unlike to the Chimera or monstre in Homer: . A Lion before, a dragon behinde, and a goat in the middle. Now certaine it is, that these similitudes are not to bee taken properly, but my∣stically: as wee have distinguished the forme of them in the analysis, partly by their outward proportion, as members & body: partly by their habit and armour: and partly by their head: by all which is signifyed the power and force of these beasts: And it doth so fully agree with the Antichristian clergie, as that nothing can bee more evidently spoken. But now let us consider the particulars. Like unto horses prepared unto battel] Horses prepared for warr are wel fenced, armed, fatted, & having fierce riders on their backes, thereby become very cruel, & with a blinde force rush terribly upon the enemy. With the like cruelty these Locusts, beeing fatted and pampered in their cloisters, & strengthened with the power of Abaddon their rider, they furiously oppose the Gospell of Iesus Christ, some by railing in their Pulpits, by disputations, pasquils &c. Others by cruel counsels & bloody designes, as the histories of Emperours, but chiefly of the Hen∣ries, Fredericks, & Othoes have testified long agoe: namely, that they more fre∣quent stables then temples, & better know how to handle bridles then bookes, more fitted & prepared to occasion, and wage warre to the destruction of the Christian common wealth, then to performe holy duties. An instance for this we have in Hungarie, for by the means of these Locusts she lost her two kings Ʋla∣dislaus & Ludovick, together with the two lamentable overthrowes & discomfi∣tures by the Turks at Varna & Mocha. And crownes on their heads] Ribera, (but ungroundedly) understands hereby the crowned helmets of Kings and Princes, which should make up the army hee dreameth of. But Helmets will not well suit with the haire here mentioned v. 8. Besides it is manifest that the Locusts are described by a threefold ornament of their head, viz. their golden crownes; humane face; & comely haire, the which three things may most fittly be applied to the Poopish clergy, for their heads beeing hal∣lowed, they curiously shaue, and cut their haire round, crown wise, as it is called, in which they say they are like unto kings, because they may (as kings,) command the consciences of the laity, and impose lawes upon them. The King of the Locusts weares on his head a triple crowne of most fine and bright gold, as governour both of heaven, earth and hell. The Cardinals weare mitres glittering with precious stones; which first was set on the head of Pope Sylvester by Constantine the Emperour, if it may be cre∣dited. The Bishops, and Abbats also have precious ornaments wrought with gold and silk: so that we need not much scruple what is meant by these crownes. Faces of men] They are men, but they alter their shape, by profession & habit,
separating themselves from men: however they retaine humane faces, least men should abhorre and avoyd them. This signifies the fained humanity of these spiri∣tuall Locusts: none seems more affable then they: They know how to flatter the Pope himselfe, Kings, Princes, Courtiers, &c. insinuating themselves bejond mea∣syre into the favour of all both men & woemen, beeing very acceptable to the world, & esteemed as peaceable, wise, sober and godly persons: whereas indeed they are carnal, and plotters of mischief. Many of them also are learned eloquent and wonderfull crafty, by which they gaine authority both to themselves, & to their followers. 8. Haire as the haire of woman] This is the third ornament of their head, which serues to take away Riberas literall exposition of a real military army. Synnec∣doche. Women doe much delight to cheerish, coulor, and soften their haire: so these Locusts are tender and effiminate: they curiously shave and compose their haire: moreover in their clothing are delicate, tender, and gorgeous, wearing long robes, silken & embroidered garments. Now its a question if Austin alluded not to this place, De opere Mon. cap. 31.32. up∣braiding the Monk of his time for their ricit. & effeminate nourishing of their haire: calling them hairie bretheren, who carrie about their hypocrisie to sale, fearing, least a shaven holinesse should be lesse esteemed then a hairie. And their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons] He alludes to the Locusts in Joel 1.6. Lyons are rayenous & terrible: So these under a humane face, hide theyr Lyons teeth, by which, they snatch all things, empty the common treasures, devoure wi∣dowes houses, lay wast orphans fieldes, & all under pretence of religion: towards the godly falling into their hands they are cruel & merciles; witnesse the Spa∣nish Inquisition & other histories. They make use also of their Lyons teeth, in their letters & disputations cruelly tearing, or blaspheming the truth & teachers there∣of, least they should seem to bee overcome. 9. And they had breast plaets] Iron shieldes & breast-plates keep off blowes from the hart: noting that it is not easie to hurt these Locusts, having diverse breast-plates: As first their priestly rites & priviledges, by which they are exempted from all civill power, insomuch that they may not be attached by the magistrat for criminal causes. This breast-plate Henry IV. & Frederick I. sought to break in peeces, but for this very thing they were cruelly persecuted by Apollyon the king of Locusts. Not long agoe the Venetians also unable to beare the insolencies & horri∣ble wickednesse of the Locusts, would not suffer them in their territories, but its to be feared they shall not escape the curse of their Abaddon for it. Secondly they have for their breastplate, kings, princes & other powerfull patrones, favourites & vassals of the Pope, by whose weapons, they are sheltered & defended, that none without eminent danger can doe them any hurt. Thirdly the orders & societies of Monks & spiritual fraternities are so closely linked together, that they can hardly be broken. For as a brest-plate made, & closely knit together of many little rings, cannot be pierced thorow by the edge of the sword: so these Locusts by a bro∣therhood are so linked in one, by oathes & vowes, as none can hurt them, but they on the contrary may easily hurt whomsoever they please. The sound of their wings, was as the sound of charets] Locusts have little wings; yet by beating them together make a great noyse: so these by their secret wings make a dreadfull sound. Their wings are their priviledges, by which they have lift up themselves above the condition of al other men, & growne to that hight of impudency, as to despise government speake evill of dignities, & are a terrour to Kings & Emperours. Out of these wings proceeds the terrible hishing of their sermons, disputations and seditious writings, sparing no man of what state or qualitie soever: but keeping them under with feare of excommunications. And as Chariots strongly compassing an army about, cannot easily be broken: so these by the sound of their priviledges preserve their Cloisters. They runne also to warre, and whosoever subjects & fals not downe before them, they bitterly curse and anathematize.
10. And they had tailes like to scorpions] This whole verse is explained by vers. 3. & 1. where it is shewed what is the power of scorpions; and how far the same was given unto the Locusts, viz. not to hurt all, but such onely as were not sealed in their fore∣heads: nor to kill, but to torment them with the torment of scorpions; neyther perpetually but for five monthes. All which, both what it is, and how it hath been don by them, I have there shewed. The summe is this: in their faces they seem frindlie like men: Their tailes are hurtfull like scorpions: Hony is in their mouth, but gall in their hart; such as they intoxicate with their doctrins, they mortally wound, like unto them that are stung with the scorpions taile. In word; countenance and gesture they promise salvation, but whom they strike they draw with them (thorow purgatorie) into destruction. Anonymus saith well, that Officials, Commissaries, Deacons, Registers, Chancelours, Apparitours, are the Pralates tailes, who like venemous serpents by their wicked life and doctrines, (however they pretend purity) poison both clergie and people. 11. And they had a king over them] The monarchical politie of the Locusts now followeth. In Prover. 30.27. it is said that the Locusts have no king. But these have one. For they are unlike to other Locusts & much more prudent: having set over them a king, under whose protection they may safely creak, skippe and destroy the fieldes. This king is here called the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, beeing that apostated starre, to whom in v. 2. was given the key of the pit. Now least we might have thought it was the Angel, who Chap. 1.18. & 20.1. is said to have the key of the bottomlesse pit, that is, Christ, he expresseth his name Abaddon, which is He∣brew, with the Greek or Chaldie termination, we finde the word in Iob. 28.22. & Prov. 27.20. signifying destruction, of Abad, perished, in Piel, destroyed. Iohn adds the Greek interpretation,  destroying, or rooting out: that is, the de∣stroyer of the Church. Here with out doubt, by this  or destroying king is meant that  or son of perdition, spoken of a Thess. 2. so called by an Hebraisme both passively and actively, to be destroyed by Gods judgement, & destroying him∣self & his followers. Moreover it is manifest to all, that the son of perdition is Antichrist: giving us a most certaine proofe that both this king Abaddon, & the apostated starre, is meant of Antichrist: Because in both places he is said to be the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, in an evill sence. Now seeing it hath been proved that the great star fallen from heaven, typed out the greatest Bishop, that is, the Bi∣shop of Rome, who after Gregories time was set in the chaire of Vniversall postilence: it must necessarily follow, that hee also is this Abaddon king of Locusts. 12. One woe is past] A transitory clause to the following trumpet. One, viz. of the three woes, which were yet to sound Chap. 8.13. Thus we see the woe of the fift trumpet signifies the most sad calamities under the kingdome of the Locusts, not killing men bodily, but torturing them with spiritual torments, more bitter then death it selfe. Is past] It is said to be past not as beeing accomplished, but respecting the appa∣rition: for these calamities were not as yet past, but to come to passe afterward. Yet they were past, inasmuch as they appeared no more to Iohn, & were fully written by him: the meaning is: The wofull state of the Church hitherto under the Westerne Antichrist, or king of Locusts is past, that is, hath appeared, & is written down. And behold two more] The first of which representes the calamities of the Easterne Churches under Mahumet, at the sounding of the sixt trumpet: The latter shadowes out the last judgement at the sounding of the seventh and last trumpet. Come hereafter] For, are yet to be written downe after the first: because men remaining in their sinnes, God goes on with further punishments.  hereafter, appertaines not to the time of the events, but to the order of the visions:
because the fift and sixt trumpet founded both at one time: For both the West∣ne and Easterne Antichrists, begane together to tyrannise over diverse parts of the Christian world by different wayes or weapens. Therefore the fift & sixt trumpets are parallels, as sounding at one time. The second part of the Chapter. The sound of the sixt trumpet. 13. And the sixt Angel sounded, and I heard a voyce from the foure hornes of the golden Altar, which is before God, 14. Saying to the sixt Angel which had the trumpet, Loose the foure An∣gels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. 15. And the foure Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an houre, and a day, and a moneth, and a yeere, for to slay the third part of men. 16. And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thou∣sand thousand: and I heard the number of them. 17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sate on them, having breast-plates of fire, and of Iacinct, & brimstone, & the heads of the horses were as the heads of lyons, and out of their mouthes is∣sued fire, and smoake, and brimstone. 18. By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by the smoake, and by the brimstone which issued out of their mouthes. 19. For their power is in their mouth, and in their tailes: for their tailes were like unto Serpents, and had heads, and with them they doe hurt. THE COMMENTARIE. 13 ANd the sixt Angel sounded] The second woe now followeth, the which in outward appearance is more dreadfull then the former: for whereas the former, was a spirituall afflic∣tion of the Christian world by monstrous Locusts, misera∣bly deceiving, & tormenting the consciences of men under the Western Antichrist, or apostated starre. This on the o∣ther hand is corporal, shewing how the third part of the Eastern world shal cruelly be murdered by sauvage nations, that is, under the Ma∣humetane Antichrist in the East. Now there are diverse opinions about this trumpet, & these Angels. Andreas (whom Ribera and some of ours follow) takes these Angels let loose, The inter∣pretation of Andreds & Ribera. to be foure evil spirits. Onely herein they disagree, for first the Papists suppose they were really bound in the river Euphrates by the comming and passion of Christ: yet at length loosed, for to hurt the sons of men: as in Tob. 8.3. the Angel Gabriel is said to bind the evil spirit in the utmost parts of Aegypt, &c: For they thinke it not contrarie to the analogie of faith to hold, that some evill Angels are by the Lord sometimes confined to certaine places, to the end they might not so freely rage as others doe. But the other understand the river Euphrates here mystically of the spirituall Babylon, because the armies here described go forth to a spirituall warre under the Popes kingdome, but I doubt whither this agree to the truth of the vision and histories. Lyraes opinion. Lyra interprets it of the Abettors of haereticks in Gracia & Italie about the yeer
of our Lord 493. when Anastasius an Entychinian reigned at Constantinople, Theodo∣rick an Arian in Italie there beeing then elected in Rome two Antipopes, SYMMA∣CHVS & LAVRENTIVS, by whose contention a horrible warre was occasioned, to the destruction of many thousands of men: according therefore to his opinion the foure Angels let loose at the river Euphrates are two Kings, and two Popes raised up in the Romaine Empire. By the sixt Angel that sounded he understands Pas∣chasius the Cardinall, who assisting Laurentius the Antipope against Symma∣chus, was the trumpet of those trumpets. But this seems to bee to straight an interpretation of so waighty a vision. Neither would it bee a hard thing with as much colour to applie many particular histories hereunto. But here un∣doubtedly is intended an universall and durable persecution against Chri∣stians. Brightman a learned interpreter, applies all this to the rising of the Ottoman Empire: which at first begane about Euphrates by the Saracens, who conspiring with the Turks, at length by degrees enlarged their Empire over a great part of the world, to the effusion of much Christian blood, about the yeere 1300. the which opinion doth well agree to the vision, yet it seemeth: we are to ascend higher, even to Mahumet himself the first author of the Eastern apostasie: as Bullin∣ger & Illyricus doe rightly (in my opinion) interpret it. For about the same time that the Romane Bishop was created by Phocas VNIVERSAL king of the Lo∣custs, and so (according to Gregories opinion) declared to be the Antichrist, there arose in the East a new Mahumetan sect by this occasion. Heraclius the Emperour Phocas successour having ended his warre against the Persians, The origi∣nall of Ma∣humeta∣nisme. dismissed without pay his Saracene souldiers, whom he had in his armie under their captaine Homar, these beeing returned into Arabia asked counsell of Mahumet the false Prophet, at that time famous by a new kind of doctrine patched together of Judaisme, Christianisme, and Gentilisme. (For of the Iewes he borrowed circumcision and some other rites: of the Christians the doctrine of love and duties between man and man: of the Pagans militarie discipline, &c.) Mahumets answer to the Sara∣cens. who gave them this for answer: My will, saith he, is, that yee executing the commandements of the Law doe in mutuall love and charitie stick close to each other both in riches and provertie: that ye pollute not other mens wives by adulterie, that yee abstaine from evill your selves, and hinder others also, doe good and perswade others thereunto, wage warre in the name of God, by feare and force impose lawes on the disobedient, in dooing whereof I certainlie promise paradise unto you. This doctrine (which Mahumet afterward put into his Alcoran) the Saracens with their captaine Homar received, and drawing the rest of the Arabians into a societie of warre with them, in short time they subdued and brought under their power the neighbouring provinces of the Romane Empire, as all Arabia, Palestina, Syria, Aegypt, Africa, Cypresse, and many cities of Asia the lesse even unto Byzantium, withall propagating and establishing the impieties and blas∣phemies of Mahumet, and on the contrarie rooting out Christian religion, which indeed at that time was every where much corrupted: at length they entred into Spaine, and held it in their possession, untill in the yeere 1488, at which time (after most cruell warres, and with great difficulty) they were driven thence by Ferdinand king of Castile grandfather to Charles the fift. To these Arabians and Saracens, the Tartars & Turks (professing the same Mahumetan religion) joyned themselves, who at length all of them by mutuall consent became one Empire, whereof Ottoman a Turk by nation, was the first Emperour, in the yeer 1300 as hath been said, and hence it is called the Ottoman or Turkish Empire unto this day: since which time they have by cruell wars (praefigured in this trumpet) enlarged their borders through Asia, Affrica, and almost whole Europe even into the very hart of Hungarie. Now these things thus briefly premised in an historicall way, we may the more easilie understand the types of the following trumpet.
Abh  Angel sounded] In the person of the Angel I seek for no mysterie. By his sounding he gives us a signe well to observe the future events, which shall here be represented. First he notes the author of the Revelation, viz. Christ, whose voyce he heard from the four hornes, that is, out of the midst of the golden or perfultory altar, mentioned Chap. 8.3. which under the Law was a type of Christ. The hornes thereof are mentioned in Exod. 30.10. where the high priest is commanded once every yeere to make an atonement (with the blood of the sinne offering) upon the hornes of the golden altar for the sinnes of the people: to signifie that their sins should be at length truely expiated by the blood and intercession of Christ. It was before God] Not as if there were in heaven a golden altar, but it is an al∣lusion to the ceremonial type. For the golden altar stood before the vaile by the ark of Jehovah. The allegory betwixt the four Evangelists, and these foure hornes I referre to its place. But here it is an allusion to the ancient type, as before in Chap. 6.9. Christ is said to be the Altar protecting the soules of the Martyrs. XXXIV. Argum. of Christs deity. Iohn therefore sets forth the author and matter of this Revelation, namely that he heard Christs voyce commanding four Angels to be loosed, as actors of the fu∣ture tragedies. And here the divine authoritie of Christ appeares, who commands, as the Angels in heaven, (beeing Lord of them:) so in earth stirreth up wicked and tyrannicall men, to punish the ingratitude of the world by them. 14. Saying to the sixt Angel which had the trumpet] This also may literally bee understood, that Iohn truely heard the thing here mentioned, committed to the sounding Angel, that is, having ended, he should speedily unloose the Babylonian Angels. Loose the four Angels] He shewes how hitherto they were there bound; that they might not exercise their cruelty: but now by Gods commandment are loosed to execute his judgements, in punishing the Christian world for their idolatry and other wickednesse. Here is an argument of the Lords divine providence who holds in, and lets out the enemies of the Church, as he pleaseth: Hence we should both feare the Lord, and pray to him that the enemies bee not loosed for our de∣struction: as also to trust in him, seeing against us, they can doe nothing contrary to the will of God, or without his permission and sufferance. This worke of loo∣sing is committed to an Angel: because Angels are Gods ministring spirits to ex∣ecute his judgements, whither good or evill. Now let us consider who these Angels are, Who are these foure Angels bound at the river Euphrates. & what is meant by the great river Euphrates. I have shewed you what other mens opinion is concerning these things. Some also take these foure Angels to be the same, which in Chap. 7.1. Held the foure windes of the earth, from blowing &c. But to this I can no way assent. True it is, as they there, so these here are evill and not good Angels, as the circumstances shew. Notwithstanding neyther the one, nor the other are devils; For the for∣mer were the temporall and spirituall instruments of the Western Antichrist, hin∣dring (as much as they could) the preaching of the Gospell from the Christian world: But these are onely secular ministers of the Eastern Antichrist, who hin∣dred not so much the preaching of the Gospell, In what they differ from the four Angels Chap. 7.1. as by murdering of Christians brought a lamentable destruction upon them. They are clearly differenced from the other by the circumstances of the place, beeing loosed at the great river En∣phrates: so that hitherto they were there bound, not as devils confined to a cer∣taine place, but as cruel & barbarous people kept in by the hand of God, that they could no sooner break forth to destroy the Christian world. Euphrat I take properly for that great river mentioned in the historie of the creation, & throughout the scriptures: which descending from the mountaines of Armenia did run between Chaldea & the midst of Babylon. This river hither∣to was the bound of the Romane Empire, separating the Christian world from the Barbarous people: beyond it, towards the North & East, the Scythians, Tartars & Turkes inhabited: beneath it, towards the south the Arabians & Saracens. Now
hitherto by the divine commandement, these nations kept themselves quiet. But here foure Angels, that is, peoples, viz. the Arabians, Saracens, Tartars & Turks are loosed, that is, by the will of God, goe forth as armed against Christians. I therefore take the foure Angels, to be the foure peoples or nations, who a∣bout the fore-said time gathering themselves together, Why these Barbarous peoples, are called An∣gels. brake forth by the just judgement of God with their hostile armies upon the Christian world. They are called Angels, not by nature, but as respecting their ministerie; For they were stirred up, and sent by God to punish Christians: neyther is it unusual in this booke that men whither ecclesiastical or civil, any way imployed by the Lord as his instruments, should be signified by the name of Angels. Now it will appeare by the 17 ver. that these Angels note not particular persons, but whole nations, and armies. 15. And they were loosed] God speakes, and it is don, he commands, and all creatures are ready to doe his will. By Christs commandement therefore, the foure Angels, that is, these people present themselves before God with a mightie army to destroy the world: yet not herein to obey the Lord, but to kill the third part of men: so that not their obedience, but their bloody disposition ready to kill and destroy is here signified: therefore it is said,  that they might slay. Gods com∣mand ex∣cuses not the Turks cruelty. And here we are to note the diverse and contrarie end, and worke of God, and the wicked in one and the same thing: least we might thinke, that the cruelty which the Turkes (howbeit let loose by God,) have hitherto exercised a∣gainst Christians, were excusable. For God in punishing the idolatrie and other sinnes of men sought thereby to bring them to repentance. But the enemies minded nothing but rapine, and murthers, and how to advance their Mahume∣tane power. As therefore neyther Pilate nor the Iewes in crucifying of Christ are to be excused, Act. 2.23. & 4.18. because they did that, which the hand and counsell of God had decreed: considering that they did it not to obay God, but to destroy Christ: and in this regard the worke of God was holy: but theirs most wicked: even so, the prone∣nesse of these to hurt Christians is no way to be commended or excused. In that it is said, they were prepared for an houre, and a day, and a moneth, and a yeere] It signifies their readines) and I suppose there is no other mysterie in it) at all times, whensoever the Lord would please to send them forth. And as it serves to amplifie the bloody and cruel nature of these adversaries; so it sets forth Gods watchfull providence, who determines the very moments of his judgments; so that nothing can be don in the world, but by his fore-appointement. Now we know that these are the foure divisions of time: for four and twenty houres make a day, thirty dayes a moneth, & twelve moneths a yeere. Brightman saith well, that this serves for the comfort of the godly, to whom the spirit of God would have it knowen that this most grievous calamitie hath his appointed termes and limits, Bright∣mans con∣jecture about the terme of the Turk∣ish power considered. even to the least moment, beyond which it should not be prolonged. But whither that will hold, which he further affirmeth touch∣ing the space of three hundred ninety and six yeeres, by reducing after a prophetical manner, the yeere into moneths, moneths into dayes, and dayes into yeeres: and thence by numbering from the yeere of Christ 1300. He gathereth that the po∣wer of the Turkes should last unto the yeere 1696. which should be the last terme of the Turkish name: yet in the meane time he conjectures that their strength shall decay, and tend to ruin some fortie yeeres before: I doubt, (I say) whither this wil hold. For to grant what he saith touching the day, moneth and yeere: what shall then be understood by the houre? besides hee takes a Julian yeere consisting of 365 dayes, but an Aegyptian moneth containing thirty dayes: the which little agrees. And therefore it may well bee that the Turkish tyranny shall longer last, in case the world continue. I rather assent to Bullinger who thinkes that here is noted the swiftnesse of these people in warre: they suddenly are up in armes, fal on unexpectedly, & at a word speaking give assault, they flie, and in fleeing fight.
To slay the third par,] of this see vers. 18. 16. And the number of the armie of horsemen] The number of the horsemen of warre, wherewith the foure Angels assault the Christian world is (as it were) innu∣merable, viz. (as our translation and some others have it) two hundred thousand thou∣sand] But in the Gr. it is  two millions of millions: one mil∣lion containes ten thousand: so that two millions of millions is twenty times a thou∣sand thousand. Erasmus, twenty thousand times ten thousand. Luther, indefini∣tely many times thousand thousand. The like number almost of Angels we finde in Dan. 7.10. thousand thousands ministred unto him, & ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. Now here is signified such an innumerable armie, as hardly ever was in the world: such an army as easily will discipate all things, and by humane strēght not to be resisted. And it is wel known that the Arabians, Saracens, Tartars & Turkes alwayes goe forth with huge armies, especially of horsemen, in which consisteth their greatest force: yea many times one Emperour of the Turkes alone brings forth more horsemen into the feild, then all the Christian Princes joyning their forces together can possibly doe. Moreover hitherto these barbarous na∣tions have cōquered by reason only of their multitudes. Tamberlane king of Scythia brought forth an armie of twelve hundred thousand, with which he overcame Ba∣jazet. Decad. 3. lib. 6. de reb. Vnga. Bonfinius reporteth that Ladislaus (afterward called Varnensis from the over∣throw he there received) going against Amurath with foure and twenty thousand horsemen was counselled by Dracula of Vailachia (passing thorow his borders) not to goe forward with so small an armie against the Turke, who dayly (saith he) rides forth with greater forces a hunting. And I heard the number of the] least any might question how Iohn should know the number, he shewes that he heard the same mentioned from the throne of God. 17 And thus I saw the horses] So much for the number of these barbarous soul∣diers: now he describeth their armour & cruelty. He saith: he saw the horses in a vision, that we might not thinke these beasts were reallie in heaven. By three ad∣juncts he sets forth the terriblenesse of their power. The first respects the armour of these horsemen, the two latter the forme of the horses. First, they that sate on them had breast-plates] Not of Iron, The Tur∣kish soul∣diers ar∣mour. as our cavaliers are wont to have, but of fire, Iacinct, & Brimstone. For the Barbarians seldome come into the field with heavy, but onely with light armour, the readier to assault, fight & flee away if need be. It notes their fiery naturs, that is, their earnest, bloody & en∣raged cruelty, breathing forth as it were fire, & devouring everywhere they come. The Iacinct in coulor is like a flame: for which in the end of the verse he puts smoke. Brimstone is easily set on fyer, & beeing kindled is of a purple colour giving forth a deadly smell: which signifies that their armour shalbe rather inward in their breasts, then outward on their bodies. And indeed these nations carie not so much harnasses of steele, as fiery, sauvage & cruel mindes, the which in their com∣batts they manifest by a horrible roaring noyse, terrifying therewith their adver∣saries, & many times putting them to flight, before they come to blowes. It signi∣fies also their manner of warring, devouring, & causing horrible desolation by fire: But I rather referre it to their fierie breasts. The heads of the horses, were as the heads of Lyons] The generosity, The Tur∣kish horses are excel∣lent for warre. strength and swiftnesse of horses is of much use in warr. Now it is known that the Turkish horse excels in swiftnesse & valour: & therein they chiefly trust, & hope for victorie. Alexander often times overcame by meanes of his horse Bucephalus, so named of an Oxes head: but these shal fight with Leocephalis, that is, horses having lyonlike heads. Now Lyons are generous, strong & cruel; with such horses shal these barbarians come forth: & indeed the Turkish power is lyonlike, most cruel & tyrannical. The Locusts also had somewhat of the Lyon: namely the teeth, but not the head; noting their fraudulent & secret tyranny chiefly consisting in their tongue. For the teeth are as a wall to the tongue: but the cruelty of these is manifest (like as the head is open to the view) carying forth the matter by open warre & force, as the professed enemies of Iesus Christ.
Out of their mouths proceeded fire & smoake] The relative  their, or of them, may indifferently bee referred eyther to the horses, or their riders: by these three things, as beeing the instruments of their cruelty, they shall kill the third part of men, as it followes v. 18. Concerning this I hardly finde y thing probable among In∣terpreters: I will therefore set down my owne judgement about it. Because these things are said to come forth out of their mouthes, therefore by fire I understand (as before) the terrible cryes of these savage people, and their blasphemies against Christ, which the Turkes & Tartars in their warre fighting with Christians are wont to use. Now though they kil not men simplie with their roaring noise, yet hereby they make way for it, by terrifying and putting their adversaries to flight befor they come to battle, & therupō follows horrible slaugh∣ters. The smoake proceeding out their mouth, is nothing els but the impious & blas∣phemous doctrine of Mahumet, propagated by their warres, and killing such as embrace the same, that is, causing them to runne into eternal destruction: like as we heard before the smoake that proceeded out of the boomlesse pit, signified the wicked doctrine of the Locusts. The Brimstone I take to be their bowstrings, rubd over with brimstone, used by a synecdoche for the poisoned arrowes, lances, and all other Turkish and pestilent armour whatsoever, with which these thousand yeers they have cruelly murdered innumerable multitudes of men. These arrowes also may be said to proceed out of their mouth: For they draw their bowes even to their mouth, so that the arrowes doe seem to fly as it were out of the same. I have lately read Brightmans exposition much to the same purpose, applying this to the mouth of their gunnes, out of which comes fire, smoake & brimstone: and especially to that Peece of ordinance of incredible greatnesse which Mahumet used in besieging Constantinople, for the drawing whereof there were used seventy yoakes of oxen, and two thousand men, as Laonicus Chalcocondilas reporteth lib. 8. de rebus Turcicis. And those twelve thousand Janizaries which are the ordinarie gard of his bodie, are all gunners. So hee. 18 By these three was the third part of men killed] The successe of the enemies and overthrow of Christians is here noted. For however sometimes the Chri∣stians have obtained great victories over the Turks, yet was the same little or nothing considering their multitude, whereby in the end they have had the better of them: for seldome any Christian army how strong soever, hath been able to stand against them, as the largenesse of their empire sufficiently witnesseth. But usually in their warr they have take from the Christians some provinces, cities or strong holdes. By the Greekes they have often with great losse of men been re∣pulsed, yet at length they brought all Gracia with the Thracian & Trapezuntine Empire under their power. From thence invading Hungarie they were indeed often valorously repressed by Johannes Hunniades & king Matthias: notwith∣standing by force of armes they possessed themselves of Mysia, Servia, and all the south part of Hungarie, few places onely excepted. The Venetians overcame them in a great fight at sea in the yeere 1571. Yet in the mean while they still held Cyprus, which they had taken away from them. Memorable is the holy warr (so called) undertaken by Godfrey of Boullion, who tooke all Palaestina out of the hands of the Turkes and Saracens: and it remained 83 yeeres under the power of Christians: but at length by the ambition of Popes, & dissentions of Princes it was shamefully lost and fell into the hands of Sala∣dine. Godfrey brought to this warre sixty thousand foot, and an hundred thousand horsmen: but this great armie was in a short time so weakened by the Turkes, as that when they came to the siege of Ierusalem (beeing the fourth yeare of their expedition) there were found hardlie foure and twentie thousand souldiers remai∣ning. Thus much generally touching the slaughter. It is expresly said, that these adversaries killed the third part of men, by fire, smoake and brimstone: what these three things are, which proceeded out of their mouth: & how they killed, I have shewed. Now it remaineth to shew how they killed the third part of men.
It seems that the threefold number of men slaine answers to their threefold∣kinds of weapons. Yet the third part may bee taken indefinitely, for a great part, or a perfect number: for a threefold number notes perfection. The third part of men, not the infidels, but Christians, were killed: First, the third part of their armies opposing the Turks perished in warr. Secondly, the third part of Citizens were either slaine or caried into miserable bondage. Wilhelmus Tyrius affirmeth that in the holie warre there were slaine by the Turkes two thousand times an hundred thousand in the space of a few yeeres: But of Turkes not above an eleven hundred thousand. Thirdly, a third part if not more of Christian Chur∣ches were spoiled and overthrown by them: take for example, the flourishing Churches of Balestina, Syria, Aegypt, Asia, Armenia, Thracia, Pontus, Mysia, Bosnia, &c. where now Mahumetain blasphemies doe reigne: hardly any thing of Christianitie there remaining. To be short the third part, of the provinces of the Christian world have been by them within these three hundred yeeres sub∣jugated, or laid wast. Mahumet the first, he alone tooke away two Empires, & foure kingdomes from Christians: & now in our time these enemies domineer farre and neere through all the sea coast of Africa, Aegypt, Arabia, Babylon, Mesopotamia, and both countries of Armenia, Palaestina, Syria, Asia, Thracia, & Grecia. So that in this vision Iohn saw the overthrow of Christian Emperours, Bi∣shops, Churches, citizens, and souldiers, which histories & daily report make known unto us. 19. For their power is in their mouth] A probable reason of the foresaid slaugh∣ter, is taked partly from the bloodthirstinesse, and partly from the craftinesse of the enemies. Their power, that is, facultie to hurt and kill: is in their mouth, and in their tailes, that is, they fight and hurt both forward and backward. How they fight and kill with their mouths hath already been shewed, viz. by fire, smoake & brimstone: He shewes now how they hurt backward: they have serpentlike tailes & heads: serpents have venome in their heads and tongues, with which they bite & poyson men. This may bee understood in a twofold way: eyther of the Turkes & Tartars their manner of fighting: who not beeing able to stand, in fleeing shoot up their arrowes into the aire, which falling eyther on the heads or horses of their persuers doe mortally wound them: thus they kill behind them with their tailes. Or els, of the Turkes perfidiousnesse: for as serpents fight subtilly: so these doe not onely hurt by open force of armes; but by deceit, and treacherie: For often times by laying in waite they have set upon Christians, and given them mightie overthrowes. Otherwhile they perfidiously breake their leagues and cessations of armes made with them. And indeed the Turkish warre which hath continued these sixteen yeeres in Hungarie, brake forth at first thorow their per∣fiousnesse. Thus they have hurt the Christian world with their mouth & with their tailes. The third part of the Chapter. A complaint of the impenitency of Christians after their punishments. 20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, & idols of gold, & silver, & brasse, & stone, and of wood, which neither can see, not hear, not walk. 21. Neither repented they of their murthers, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.
THE COMMENTARIE. 20 ANd the rest of men which were not killed] The third part of the Chapter is a complainte against the brutish dulnesse of the rest of the Eastern Christians: who repented not of those sinnes, which had caused so many, & so great over∣throwes unto their bretheren: This is the summe. The construction seems to bee defective: The rest of men, some understand, shall likewise perish, as beeing impenitent. But Andreas well observes, that  neither repented, is put for  repented not; and makes the construction plaine by a paraphrase: And the rest of men not suffering these things, remained impenitent. But we are to consider who are the rest of men here spoken of: and what the complaint against them is. Lyra foolishly applies this to the Saxons and Thuringians, Lyras ridi∣culous opi∣nion. who in the time of the schisme above mentioned, fell out among themselves. Such also are as much out of the way, who understand the place of some infidels (but who they name not) worshipping Mercurie, Mars & Venus. But questionles these are the rest of the Christians (at lest so in name) whom the enemies even now mentioned, had not killed: For what reason had Iohn to declare the slaughters of infidels? see∣ing such things were shewed unto him by Christ as concerned the state and con∣dition of the Church. Alcasars frivolous glosse. Alcasar therefore beates the aire, in misapplying all these things unto the Iewes. For without doubt (as we said before) here is meant, not onely the rest of the Easterne Christians, and other Provinces in subjection to Turks: but also other Papistical Churches of the West, as yet free from their yoake & slave∣ry: For as the one, so the other were horribly guilty of the evils here mentioned, but chiefly indeed they in the West. Five of the greater sort of sins are named: of which their worshipping of idols or dovils is the fountaine or spring. But what, have Christians ever worshipped devils? The idola∣tric of the Easterne & Graecian Christians. Tyrius lib. 3. cap. 11. Yes, for so saith the text, they worshipped devils & idols the workes of their handes. What workes? Idols of gold, & silver, and stone, and wood, which neither can see, nor heare, nor walke: Now to adore idols is to worship and serve the devill, as the Apostle witnesseth 1 Cor. 10.20. This overthrew the Eastern & Grecian Churches: who tooth and naile maintained the worship of idols and images, and established the same by the second general Councill held at Nice; but soon after (the Graecians beeing thrust out) the Turkes became masters of the towne, making it the seat of their Empire against those of Constantinople. It is true, that the Christian Princes of the holy warre, A remark∣able judge∣ment of God on idolatrie. expelled againe Solyman the Turke out of the same place: but they kept it not long: for soon after he not onely regained it: but at length vanguished the whole Empire of the Greekes. Thus wee see what those of the East suffered, because of their idolatrie. Which neither see] A description of Idols taken from Psal. 115.5. against which, what I pray you, can either the Graecian or Italian idol worshippers justly object: For the idols of Christians, can no more heare, see, nor walke, then did those of the Gentiles. 21 Neither of their murthers] Their other sinne is murther both attempted by the Graecian Emperours one against the other, as histories testifie: as also by o∣their mens oppressing each other against all right and reason: as if their had been no ruler over them, which brought destruction upon this Empire. Vnder one kind he comprehends all manner of injuries and oppression of the innocent in judge∣ment. Nor of their sorceries] Their third evill is witchcraft wherunto they of the East were much addicted: under this is comprehended all the superstitions, inchant∣ments, magical & devilish arts, which have been spread by Bishops & Monkes among the common sort of Christians.
Nor of their fornications] The fourth is their fornications adulteries, & all man∣ner of filthinesse, wherein the Clergie lived, under their impure unmaried estate. Nor of their thefts] The fift is their thefts, sacrilege, & rapine, not so much committed by civil as ecclesiastical persons, who by pious deceits, that is, most foule impostures, and pretence of religion devour widowes houses, exhaust the trea∣suries of Princes, and great men, & draw into their hands by hook and crook this worldly wealth: These were the sinnes for which the Lord by Saracens and Turkes punished them of the East, to the end that their bretheren of the West guilty of the same sinnes might take warning by their example & repent. But what followed? They repented not] He foreshewes by the spirit and reproveth (not to speak of them in the East still remaining in their filthinesse) the obstinacy of the Papists: who openly pollute themselves with the like idolatrie, mrthers, sorceries, fornicati∣ons & thefts even unto this day: insomuch that whosoever opposeth and re∣proveth these things in them, is accounted an haereticke and enemy of the Church. Their idolatrie is manifest: for in all their temples, highwayes, The idola∣trie of Pa∣pists. porches and corner of streets they set up idols, the workes of mens hands, images of God of Christ, Marie and the Saintes: before which whoever will not fall downe and religiously worship, is accounted an haeretick & condemned to the fire: They cannot abide to have them termed idols, but images set up, in and by them to worship God, Christ, and the Saintes. But in truth herein they worship the devill; for God will not be worshipped by images: Now whatsoever is externally wor∣shipped in a religious way is an idol: and all idol worship is don, not unto God, but unto the devill: & indeed the description here of idolaters doth plainly convince them: for doe they not serve idols of gold, silver, stone, &c. which can neither hear, see nor walk? an egg is not more like unto an egg, then the idols of Papists, and of the heathens resemble each other. And touching their murthers, we need goe no farther then to consider the in∣numerable companie of Martyrs put to death by them. As for sorceries and all magicall arts, to whome may these things be applied but to the Papists? for in the reformed Churches now of a long time the impo∣stures of the devill and magicians are rooted out. For fornication, adulterie, pollutions, sodomy, they are beyond measure com∣mitted by the Popish clergy: for howsoever marriage is honourable among all men, yet to them it is not permitted: But sodomie hath publickly been disputed for: yea commended in rime by Iohannis de Casa Archbishop of Benevent. what multi∣tudes of whores and strumpets are there at Rome? how great is the gaine which thence comes unto the Pope? It appeares by records that by them his treasurie hath of late been augmented fourty thousand ducats. To be short who is ignorant of the thefts, rapines and simonie of the Roma∣nists? or who is able possiblie to describe them? Their taxes and annales which are in print doe openlie shew the same: so that the Papists are altogether guilty of the same evils, for which they of the East were destroyed; what remaines then, but that a like punishment will surely befall them? Thus in the conclusion of this Chapter wee are taught: First what was the cause of the great calamities befal∣ling the Eastern world, and how the greater part of the Romane Empire was brought under the Turkish yoake: namely their idolatrie and much other wic∣kednesse going along with it, for as the idolatrie of the Balaamites and of Jero∣boam the sonne of Nebat caused the overthrow of the two powerfull kingdomes of Israel and Iudah by the Assyrians & Chaldaeans: So it is manifest, that idola∣trie & other sinnes thereon depending, have occasioned the destruction of whole Empires, and many mighty kingdomes and provinces of the Christian world, as Aegypt, Palaestina, Damascena, Syria, Asia, Cyprus, Thracia, Armenia, Mysia and part of Hungarie, So that it is not come to passe by chance that the Tukes have,
and still doe afflict Christians, but the Lord in his just judgement useth as a strong rod in his hand to punish their impiety. Secondly: what is the end of the calamities inflicted? not as if God would de∣stroy the Church, but rather to provoke, both the idolaters thus punished, and others also guilty of the same sinnes, unto repentance: For the Lord desidereth not the death of a sinner, but that he repent & live. Thirdly, The Pa∣pists draw the Turkes armies on Christians. here we are plainly taught, who they are that hitherto have, and still doe draw the Turkes upon the neckes of Christians, to wit, the worshippers of idols of gold, silver, wood and stones. But who be they? are they Iaponians, Ca∣nibals, or Brasilians? I affirme no: For howsoever it be granted (as these say) that these are worshippers of devils: yet not they, but ours are threatned to be pu∣nished by the Turck & Tattarian forces: but it may be demanded. Are not they of the reformed religion worshippers of idols? I answere no, but rather they have quite banished the same, shanning all manner of idolatrie as the pest. But your temples, (oye Papists,) your Cells, Altars and Highwayes abound with images of gold, silver, wood & stone: there is no corner, but ye may se one or other-beeing prostrated before the image of Marie, Peter or Paul thus mutters: holie Marie, 5. Peter, S. Paul pray for mee, have mercie on me, save me &c. Will yee deny, that you have not been the cause, that the Turkes for these sixteen yeeres have wasted the borders of the Christian world? what madnesse is this, that ye should stirre up Christian Princes to conquer the Turke, having drawen him on your neckes by your idolatrie, and made him invincible unto this day? It is time therefore that at length yee seriously thinke of these things, & repent of your sorceries, thefts & fornication, before the revenging hand of God destroy both you, and the rest of the Christian world for these your abominations. Fourthly: we are taught, that probablie the rest of the Christian world, shall suffer the like judgement: because the Papists are so farre from repenting of their idols and other wickednesse, as on the contrarie they strongly maintaine the same and whosoever opposeth them therein, they condemne as heretickes, & per∣secute them with fire and sword: what remaineth therefore, but that the same ar∣mies who by Gods commandement have killed the third part of Christians for their wickednesse, should at length also come into these parts to kill the rest for the like evils. For it is a constant rule, that they that commit like evills are worthy of like punishment. So that without doubt, the horrible idolatrie of Papists will in short time draw the Turkish armes on the rest of the Christian world. Now whereas the Lord hath hitherto spared the same, it is to be ascribed to the prayers of the godly groaning under the dregs of Antichrist, & to the reformed Churches, who with their whole hart doe loath his idolatrie, dissipating to the uttermost of their power the smoake of Antichristian darkenesse, by the light of the Gospell, that so the glory of Christ and true godlinesse lost among the false Christians, may againe be restored and flourish. Hitherto hath been treated of the first Act of the third vision, concerning the calamities of the Church under the Romane tyrants, heretickes and hypocrites: and of the Western Antichrist, king of Locusts, as also of the Eastern Angel with his armie of horses. Which Act indeed, so far as concerned the king of the Locusts was ended about the time of the Councill of Constans: but as for the other, name∣ly the Turkish destroyer he shall continue unto the sound of the seventh trumpet which shalbe bee heard in the last day. Now followes the second Act of this vision, as opposite to the former, shewing remedies for these so great calamities, or comforting the godlie under so long con∣tinued afflictions.
THE X. CHAPTER. The Argument, Vse, Parts & Analysis. THe first Act of the vision was a declaration of the Churches calamities, and a beginning of the amplification thereof, during the time of the foure trumpets, & part of the fift & sixt. The second Act followes, beeing consolatorie and op∣posed to the former calamities. A mighty Angel defcends from heaven holding in his hand a booke open, standing upon the earth and sea, crying with a loud voyce as when a Lyon roareth, inso∣much as seven thunders uttered their voyces, which Iohn went about to write, but was commanded to seale the same. The said Angel sweareth by God, that the time of so great calamities should continue no longer, the end and sound of the last trumpet now being at hand, but first Iohn is commanded to cat up the little booke which he received of the Angel, & to prophesy a∣gaine: All which are so many mysteries of consolation. For the godly are taught, that in the greatest disturbances and calamities of the Church, which she hath, & still doth suffer by the Romane tyrants, by hereticks and hypocrites, and chiefly by both Antichrists, that Christ (I say) will not be wanting unto her, but will allwayes hold in his hand the booke of his doctrine open, and set the foot of his kingdome upon the earth and sea: & by the roaring of his lyonlike voyce wil cause some faithful teachers to thun∣der out their voyces: although during the most grosse darknesse of supersti∣tions they shalbe sealed and neglected, untill at length according to Christs oath, Antichristian tyrannie hastening to its end, and the accomplishment of the divine mysterie beeing at hand, God shall rayse up other witnesses of his truth, who shall eat up the booke of the Gospell received out of the hand of Christ, and againe strongly prophesying against Antichrist, shall labour the reformation of the Church: concerning which it followes Chap. 11. Thus the whole Chapter consists meerely of consolations for the afflicted Church, the which beeing reckoned, are sixe in number. 1. Christ descends from heaven unto the Church afflicted by Antichrist: therefore she shall not be left an orphant. 2. He holds in his hand a booke open: therefore his word shal not be sup∣pressed. 3. He sets his foot upon the earth and sea: therefore both by sea & land he will reserve some remnants unto himself, neither shall his whole possession ever fall. 4. By his Lyonlike roaring he makes the thunders to utter their voyces, although they remained sealed: therfore he will allwayes raise up some faith∣full teachers, however for a time they shall profit but little. 5. Christ swares, that the time sbalbe no longer: therefore Antichrist shall not rage perpetually, but the calamities of the Church shall have an end. 6. Iohn is commanded to eate the booke: & therfore before the last trum∣pet sound, the Gospell shall againe be openly preached, & the Church purged from the dreggs of Antichrist.
The scope of all, is, that the Church faint not under the crosse, but in con∣fidence of the presence of Christ her judge; and in hope of an happy issue, all∣wayes rayse up her selfe. The Chapter may be divided into two partes. 1. TOuching the strong Angel, unto vers. 8. 2. Of the booke that was eaten up, unto the end. The first againe hath two parts. First the Angel is described by six Epithites v. 1. Secondly foure Acts of the Angel are expounded: 1. He holds in his hand a booke open. vers. 2. 2. He sets his right foot upon the earth, and his left upon the sea, ibid: 3. He roares like a Lyon, v. 3. The which is illustrated from the effect of the roaring: viz. seven thunders thence utter their voyces, as it were an Echo, ibid: and from a double consequent: First Iohns desire to write the voyces: and se∣condly the prohibition, not to write, but to seale the same vers. 4. 4, He sweareth: wherein we are to consider: 1. The person of the swearer: An Angel standing upon the sea, and on the earth. 2. His gesture: He lift up his hand to heaven, vers. 5. 3. The forme of the oath: By the living God the creator of all things, vers. 6. 4. The two things confirmed by oath: That the time of troubles should be no longer, ibid: and that the seventh Angel sounding, the mystery of God should bee consummated. vers. 7. The other part, consists of a divine commandement, with Iohns obedience & the effect thereof. In the commandement note 1. the efficient cause, the voyce before heard from heaven, vers. 8. 2. A double argument, that hee should take the booke out of the hand of the Angel, ibid: and to eate it v. 9. 3. A prediction of the the effect, ibid: Johns obedience, 1. He takes the booke out of the Angels hand. v. 9. 2. Having taken it, he eates up the same, v. 10. The effect of his obedience is twofold: 1. internal, a sweetning of his mouth, but making his belly bitter vers. 10. and external, a new vocation to prophesie: The which is amplified both from the efficient, Thou must prophesie: and from the forme againe prophesie: as also from the object, before many peoples, nations and kings, vers. 11. The first part of the Chapter. Of the strong Angel holding the booke. 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come downe from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainebow was upon his head, & his face was as it were the Sun, & his feet as pillars of fire. 2. And hee had in his hand a little booke open: and hee set his right foot upon the Sea, & his left foot upon the earth. 3. And cryed with a loud voyce, as when a lyon roareth: and when hee had cryed, seven thunders uttered their voyces. 4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voyces, I was about to write: and I heard a voyce from heaven, saying unto mee, Seale up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.
5. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, & upon the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, 6. And sware by him that liveth for ever & ever, who created heaven, & the things that therein are, & the earth, & the things that therein are, and the sea, & the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer. 7. But in the dayes of the voyce of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets. THE COMMENTARIE. 1. ANd I saw another mighty Angel saying] I finde all interpre∣ters (Alcasar onely excepted who contrary to the drift of the history applies it to the Iewes) to agree in the general argument and scope: namely that here are inserted (as it were) soveraigne medicines or consolatory remedies in re∣gard of the sad calamities and miseries of the Church, under their manifold enemies, but especially under the Easterne & Westerne Antichrist, by which the godly beeing provoked to constancy, may be certainly perswaded, that Christ the judge will alwayes take care for his people in the midst of their greatest persecutions, and preserve them in safety unto the end. But yet they much differ about the time: most restraine it to the times of the sixt trumpet. But for my part I take it, that this consolation is opposed to the e∣vils of all the trumpets which we have formerly heard, beeing as it were the second Act of this vision, as I have shewed in the argument of the Chapter. As the fift seal therfore in the former Vision, contained the comforts of the martyrs under the altar, & so respected the evils of the foregoing seales: so in this Vision, the history of this Chapter annexed to the sixt trumpet, doth containe consolations against the evils of all the foregoing trumpets. Another Angel] All interpreters for the most part consent in one, that by this Angel is represented Christ the mediatour and revenger of his afflicted Church: some few indeed are of another minde, whose opinions I wil briefly set downe. Andreas Cesariensis supposeth him to bee one of the holy Angels, Andreas & Riberas opinion. gathering it from the cloud, rainbow, & light of the sunne here mentioned: But these adjuncts ra∣ther argue the contrarie, as beeing of an higher nature then to bee applied unto a created Angel. Ribera following him, understands this mighty Angel to be the same, who in Cha. 5.2. desired to open the book that was shut. For seeing men repented not by the plagues of the six trumpets, therefore he saith, that now a mighty Angel is sent, who by an oath protests unto the world, that the end thereof, and the last judge∣ment is at hand. But this is neither the principal scope, neither are his reasons of force to prove that this ought not to be understood of Christ: And therefore Alcasar also rejects them. His arguments indeed would have seemed the more probable, if he had made this mighty Angel, to be Gabriel, so called from his strength: and Psal. 103. where all the Angels of God are said to excell in strength: moreover that Christ shall not descend from heaven untill the day of judgement, according to the scriptures: Also that this Angel sweareth by the living God, as by a greater then himself. But neither are these reasons of waight: For Gabriel doth not signifie a mighty Angel, but the mighty God: Now Christ properly is El Gibbor, the strong or mighty God. It is true indeed, that all the Angels of God are mighty: but Christ is stronger then they, as beeing the Lord of them all.
Now the descention of this Angel from heaven must not be understood of Christs incarnation or any corporal descent on earth, but visional, that is, signi∣fying his continuall presence with the Church: Hee, and God also, is said to descend and ascend by his presence and manifestation of his grace and help. To be short he sweareth by the living God, greater then himself, as he is man, but not as he is the living & omnipotent God: whom we have often before proved so to bee. Lambertus thinkes that some excellent ministers of the word are here noted, Lambertus opinion. whom the Lord sent into the Church at the beginning of the sixt trumpet: yet he shews not who they are, or shal be. But the description of this Angel cannot agree to any such ministers of the word. Lyra doting, Lyras opinion. (as his manner is) makes this Angel to be the Emperour Iustinus and his nephew Justinianus, about the yeere 518. who held in his hand a little booke open, that is, wrote letters to all places in favour of the Catholicks against the Ari∣ans. But these acts & divine description are to unsolidly ascribed unto a secular man. We therefore assent unto the common opinion, This migh∣ty Angel is Christ. that this Angel is CHRIST the revenger of his Church, because both the description of the person, & all the acts here mentioned doe plainly make good this sense: as also the scope requires the same. For without Christ, the Churches consolation would bee verie little in all these things: Besides undoubtedly this mighty Angel is the same, who in Dan. 12.7. is called Michael standing upon the waters & swearing by the living God: from whence this part of the vision seems to be taken. But Michael the great prince standing for the people was certainly Christ. Therefore this Angel is either Christ himself, or one representing his person. Now we will consider the Epi∣thites. Mightie] Gr. , strong, able, for Christ is truely El Gibbor the mightie God having two natures, who hath vanquished the devill that strong armed man, taken possession of his palace, and devided the spoile. See Chap. 5.2. & 18.21. Descending from heaven] This is farre different from that he saw Chap. 8.10. a starre falling, & Chap. 9.1. fallen from heaven. Now Christ descended from heaven for the salvation of man-kinde in taking our flesh upon him: but that descension is not here intended. Againe he ascended into heaven corporally and sits at the right hand of God, where he is to remaine untill the day of judgement. Not∣withstanding Iohn saw him descending, not by a locall motion, but by visionall grace, inasmuch as he commeth down by the presence of his spirit and special help to relieve the afflicted condition of his Church, not leaving her comfortlesse, according to the promise: where two or three are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them. Matt. 18 20. & 28 20. I am with you unto the end of the world. So Chap. 1. he appeared to Iohn walking in the midst of the Churches, not by a corporal motion, but a vi∣sional presence of his grace and spirit. Now the likenesse of the description shewes, that the same is here intended. Clothed with a cloud] Some understand this cloud to be meant of Christs flesh, hiding or covering his divinity: Others for the obscure knowledge, by which he revealed himself unto the world in the time of the sixt trumpet, beeing (as it were) as yet covered with great darknesse: making the sense thus: hee appeared clothed with a cloud, that is, he manifested himself in an obscure or darke way unto the world. For my owne part I take it (according the manner of the scripture) to be a signe of divine majesty. For Iehovah was wont to appeare unto the peo∣ple in a cloud, 2 Chro. 6.1. the cloud also leading the people in the wildernesse, & sheltering them from the heat of the sunne, was Christ: Therefore he is clothed with a cloud, to shew that he is Lord of a heavenly nature. And the rainebow on his head] The rainebow signifies grace, beeing sett by God as a signe, Gen. 9.13. that he would not send the floud any more upon the earth. Christ there∣fore appeares crowned with a rainebow, as the messenger of grace & peace; for
he is our peace Eph. 2.14. & the prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. This signe was very fit for the time confirming tidings of peace with God to the afflicted Church: shortlie to rest from all her troubles, and enjoy future happinesse. His face was as the Sunne] Thus also in Chap. 1.16. it is said, Christs face shone as the sunne shineth in his strength, that is, it was most cleare, & shining in ful bright∣nes: For hee is the sun of righteousnesse illuminating his Church, & clearing up the stormes of afflictions. For as the sunne in its vigour, dissipates the cloudes, drives away cold, alayes the windes, and brings a serenity: so Christ by the brightnesse of his spirit of grace, will asswage the stormes of afflictions, dissipate the tempests of calamities, and bring unto the faithfull a quietnesse of conscience in the midst of all their troubles, & at last by the cleare beames of his countenance will dispell all manner of adversitie. His feet as pillars of fire] In Chap. 1.15. Christs feet were as fine brasse, burning as in a fornace: by which metaphor the power and strength of Christ is signified; for pillars by their strength underprop & support the house: Fire consumes chaffe, & other things: so Christ appeares here with such feet, who by his power and strength will stand fast against the adversaries & Antichrist: the Church he will purge & defend, but consume the enemies like stubble. Hitherto we have heard the description of the Angel, who doth in this manner shew himself unto Iohn, that the Church groaning under the burden of afflictions, might know, that Christ will come to revenge and relieve her deplorable condi∣tion, especially under the fift and sixt trumpets: for hee will be present with his Church in all her troubles, because hee is crowned with a rainbow: as also he is pow∣erfull to asswage the tempests of calamities, as having a face like the sunne, whom the scorpionlike Locusts, with their horses, and Lyons heads, and tailes like ser∣pents shall no way terrifie, or overthrow: because by his feet, as with fiery pil∣lars, he so settles his kingdome, as it cannot be moved: to be short hee easily can destroy Antichrist with all his Locusts arising out of the pit, seeing he is  mightie & powerfull. This is the scope and use of the description of the Angel. 2 And he had in his hand a little booke open] Now follow the Acts of the Angel, which tend to the same purpose. The first is, that he holds in his hand a booke open. This booke open is the same, which before was shut. Here it may be demanded, whither this open booke, bee the same with the former shut with seven seales. I suppose it is the same, because Christ under the forme of a Lambe, received the booke that was shut, unsealed and opened the same: neyther doe wee read that he gave the booke being opened to any. Now who can better hold the booke open, then he that opened it? here therfore Christ under the figure of a mighty Angel, holds that book open in his hand, which before he opened. Neither is it any way cōtradictory, that there it is called () a booke, but here ) a little book, seeing both words are derived from  which signifies a booke: besides the book beeing opened was lesse, then when it was shut: or els it seemed to be lesse in waight, when the seales were taken off: or lastly it was lesse∣ned in regard many events were now revealed unto Iohn, so that it contained not so many secret mysteries as it did before. But what may bee the meaning, Why Christ holdeth the booke open in his hand. that Christ holds this little booke open in his hand? The book was written within & without: within, were contained the secrets of future things to bee revealed unto Iohn: without, was writtē the doctrine of the Gospell before published & penned by the Apostles. Christ opened the whole booke: both because the Apostles were by him inspired, and sent forth to preach the Gos∣pell to the whole world: as also because he revealed these mysteries unto Iohn. Now least it might have been thought, that by the great stormes, tumults & cruel devises of Tyrants, Locusts, & the armies of horsemen, the booke of the Gospell had been wrung out of the hands of Christ, in regard that almost throughout the whole world the doctrine of free grace, justifying faith, and the certainty of salvation had of a long time been buried, especially under Antichrists kingdom:
Therefore Christ now appears, holding the same open in his hand, thereby teach∣ing us, first, that, not withstanding the perfecution of tyrants, the superstitions, and lyes of Antichrist, by which he darkened the doctrine of Gospell, yet he held forth in his hand the booke of his word, that is, raised up continually some faith∣full professours and teachers of the truth who maintained the same against all ty∣rants and Antichrists: And indeed the bookes of martyrs, and other ecclesiastical histories doe abundantly witnesse, that there have been multitudes of such, not onely during the persecution of the Romane Emperours, and hereticks, but also these thousand yeeres many under Antichrist, condemned & cruelly put to death for heresie. But secondly it teacheth us, that at last he will also purge his booke from the pollutions of the Locusts & dregs of Antichrist, by fit witnesses of his truth, whom in the last times he will raise up for that end, in the midst of Antichrists kingdome. And he set his right foot upon the sea] The following actions of the Angel illus∣trate the matter going before: For in that he set his feet upon the sea and earth, cried as when a lyon roareth, caused the thunders to utter their voyces, and sware by the living God: all this tends, to give us to understand, that Christ suffered not the booke of his doctrine to bee wrung out of his hand, neither by the Romane tyrants, here∣ticks, Antichristian Locusts, or the devouring armies of Mahumet, but alwayes kept the same open in the world. His right foot] The feet of Christ, are said before, to be like pillars of fire. Many (and among the rest my Anonymus,) understand this of the preachers of the word: The right, to be some eminent ones: The left inferiour ministers: for the left foot is weaker then the right. By the sea they understand the world: by the earth worldly men. Now he sets his right foot upon the sea, his left on the earth: that is, by his ministers both of high & lower degree, he reproved earthly mind∣ed people. Brightman much to the same purpose, understands the right foot, to be Christs faithfull servants, whom he raised up against Antichrist out of the sea, that is, out of the viperous brood of the Popish clergie, as, William Ockam, John Wickleffe, &c. his left foot, of secular princes, as, Ludovick of Bavaria the Emperour, Marsilius of Padua, Dantes, &c. who with all their might strongly opposed the monstrous in∣ventions of Antichrist. But we need not make use of so subtile an allegorie. This part of the Vision is taken out of Dan 12.7. where Michael the great prince standing for his people, is said to have set his feet on the waters of the river. In which place no doubt is signi∣fied the great armies of the Babylonians at the River Euphrates, whom the Lord so restrained & kept down by his providence, as that they could not destroy his peo∣ple according to their own pleasure: So Christ here sets his feet upon the sea and the earth, (for so Iohn saw him truely standing in a vision,) but to what end? To set the foot anywhere, is to challenge the possession and dominion thereof to himselfe. How Christ set his feet on the earth & sea. The earth and sea denotes the whole world, with all that is therein. In this place therefore is signified, that when Christ shall seem to have lost his pos∣session in the earth & sea, yet then he shall set one foot upon the sea, that is, the sea∣coast provinces & Ilands: And his other foot upon the earth, that is, the mediter∣ranean regions of the Christian world, as preserving in all places some remnants of a Church unto himself. But when? Here now we are to have regard unto the times of the six trumpets: for howbeit in Iohns time Domitian, and after him Aurelius, Commodus, Diocletian, Maximian, & other tyrants persecuted the Chri∣stians both by sea & land, and indeavoured to root out the verie name of Christ: Notwithstanding Christ set his foot on the sea and on the earth: for the Christian Church dispersed throughout the whole earth increased the more, by how much it was persecuted. Hee set his foot on the sea and earth, by the Christian Emperours Constantine and others, at what time the whole world seemed to be in subjection to Christ. Afterward again when Christ in outward appearance seemed to be
thrust out of his possession by the Arian, Macedonian, Nestorian, Eutychinian, Manichean, & Pelagian hereticks: yet then he still held his foot fast upon the earth & sea, for he preserved continually some faithful Teachers & Bishops, who being zealous of his glory kept alwayes his possession. But chiefly when the Bishops of Rome fell from heaven unto the earth, turning the doctrine of Christ into wormwood, & opening the bottomlesse pit, whence came out the pestilent smoake of their abominations, with those devouring Locusts, which tormented men for five moneths: as also when the Mahumetane, Saracen, Arabian & Turkish armies horribly destroyed and overthrew all the Christian Churches in the East, to the great hazard, as it seemed, of Christs government and kingdom: yet behold even then Christ set his foot upon the earth and sea: For he had during al the time of Antichrists reigne in the West, alwayes some remnants in the midst of Poperie, and raised up verie many witnesses of his truth: In the East also some Churches, however burthened with the Turkish tyrannie, were preserved, & pro∣fessed the name of Christ. This therefore is a third consolation for the godly, that they might not, being under the calamities of the six trumpets, be discouraged: For neyther tyrants, nor hereticks, nor Antichrists, shall ever put Christ so out of his possession, as not to have his feet still standing upon the earth & upon the sea. 3. And he cryed with a great voyce] This cry, and roaring of Christ serves also to comfort the godly, and declares the two former acts. For as he will hold a booke open, and set his foot upon the earth & sea, so he will not be silent or mute, but have the Gospell to be preached: The saving efficacie whereof unto the faith∣full is signified by the great voyce, but the dreadful effect applied unto the wicked, by the roaring of a Lyon. Now here againe, we are to returne to the times of the six trumpets. For the more that tyrants laboured to suppresse the Gospell, the louder & greater was the voyce: the Lyon of the tribe of Juda, as he is called Cha. 5.5. roared, and prevailed, that is, Christians embraced the Gospel, and joyfully suf∣fered marty rdome for the same. It is true the enemies did mightily rage, yet were they tormented with a secret dread fearing they knew not what: like as of old the Scribes, Pharisees, & chiefe Priests taking counsell against Christ were sore dis∣mayed: What doe we? (say they) for this man doth many miracles: Io. 11.47. If we let him alone all men will beleeve on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation, And againe, what shall we doe to these men? Act. 4.16. for that indeed a notable mi∣racle hath been don by them, is manifest, and we cannot denie it. Thus tyrants albeit they stand in feare, yet consult together how to suppresse the truth: Even so howsoever both these Antichrists are terrified at the Lyons roaring, notwithstan∣ding as formerlie they have, so still they rage unto this day: but all in vaine: for at length this Lyon wil consume all his adversaries. As when a lyon roareth] The Greek  according to the propriety of the word signifies to roar or bray like an oxe, asse or camel. Lyons properly are said  to bellow: but it seems the Greeks doe not alwayes observe this diffe∣rence. Some will have that the mildenesse of this Lyon is here noted, as giving forth a voyce like an oxe, which is a milde or tame creature. But this seems to bee too curious and contrary to the scope of the matter. What he cryed, is not by John set down: yet a part thereof seems to be noted in v. 5.6.7. where the Angel sweareth lifting up his right hand &c. so that the things next following touching the voyces of the thunders, are inserted (as it were) by a paren∣thesis. Seven thunders uttered their voyces] This circumstance is obscure. Twise before mention is made of seven thunders. In Chap. 4.5. it is said out of the throne proceeded, lightnings, thunders & voyces, with seven lampes of fire burning. In Chap. 8.5. Christ casting his censer of fire into the earth, there were voyces, and thundrings, and light∣nings, and an earthquake. But in these places the Greek  (thundrings) hath no article set before it: but here it is read with an article  The thundrings,
as having reference to the former thunders. The thunders in Chap. 8. we applied to the calamities under the red horse. The thunders in Chap. 4. to the terrible threatnings of the Law, by which Christ doth strike and terrifie the consciences of Antichrist, & other adversaries, as to be self convicted, however they furiously rage against Christ: for my part therefore I doubt not, but this place is to be ex∣pounded by the others; and that these thunders figuratively doe denote undant∣ed teachers who shall thunder out the word of God against tyrants, hereticks & Antichrist, as thereby they shall be made altogether inexcusable. Seven] A definite number for an indefinite, that is, many shall thunder out their voyces against Antichrist. It is verie emphatically said, , their voyces, as dictated to them by the spirit of God, and divinely commanded so to doe: For without doubt these heroick teachers who opposed themselves a∣gainst Antichrist, were stirred up by the speciall instinct of the spirit of God. Some understand it of seven, that is of diverse gifts & graces of the holy Ghost be∣stowed upon the teachers of the Gospell: which comes all to one, in case the scope be minded, namelie that this also serves for the comfort of the godly: For Antichrist shal not alwayes have a quiet and peaceable kingdome, because Christ both by his roaring voyce, and by the thundrings of his faithfull ministers, will many times disturbe him, to the end he may not seduce all. Brightman makes the seven thunders to be the seven Angels spoken of Chap. 14.6. But there onely six are mentioned: besides it seems not to agree, because the voyces of these thunders are commanded to be sealed: whereas the others were writen by Iohn. And when the seven thunders uttered (Gr. spake) their voyces] Iohn would have written the voyces of these thunders, that we also might have had the knowledge thereof in this Revelation. But he is forbidden and commanded to seal them up, that is, to keep them secret. And write them not] The kings Bible reads it , An∣dreas , and after these things write: as if he were not altogether prohibited, but onely at this time & in this place: beeing afterward commanded to write the same, viz. in Chap. 14. where the same seems to be set downe. But other copies, as also the greater & lesser of Robert Stephanus have it, , and these things thou shalt not write. Besides in Chap. 14. there is no mention made of thunders: but however it bee, Iohn is forbidden to write, but to seale, that is, to close or keep secret: like as the booke that was sealed Chap. 6. could not be read. Now this seems to be taken out of Dan. 8.26. & 12.4. where the Prophet is commanded to seal the words he had heard. But what? will the Lord be angrie with men, if they understand not the voyces of the thunders, seeing in the mean time hee will have the booke to be shut, that is, the doctrine or meaning thereof not to bee understood? I answer; the command is not to be taken absolutely of hiding the doctrine, but onely to comfort Iohn and the faithfull against the contempt of the Gospell, for the future event is foretold, viz. that the wicked shall not hear, but despise the voyces of the thunders, thereby causing the same to be secret unto themselves by their owne de∣fault: that is the greater part of men will not hear the thundrings of the Law, nei∣ther the voyces of the Gospell, but neglect and contemne the same. Thus they shall remaine sealed unto them. Or, but thou seal, that is, doe not thou therefore esteem lightly of them, but lay them up as a most precious treasure, because verie shortly thou must again prophesie. A voyce from heaven] Vndoubtedly of God sitting on the throne, who both foresees, and by his providence directs all future events. The question which Ri∣bera takes up with so much scrupulosity is needlesse: viz. whither this Revelation be entire: and whither these voyces be not the same with them written in this booke. For not the defect of this Revelation is signified, but Antichrists contempt of the word preached, is here foretold.
5 And the Angel, which I saw stand] This is a fourth gesture of the Angel: he lifted up his hand and sware by the living God, &c. in which againe there is an allu∣sion unto the last vision in Daniel, who saw an Angel swearing by him that liveth for ever, yet there is some difference, both in the manner, and in the thing it self: He in Dan: held up his right and his left hand & sware &c. this lifts up onely his right hand, &c. He in Dan: sweareth that after the accomplishment of a time, times & halfe a time, the prophesies there foretold should bee finished. This sweareth, that there shalbe no more time, but that the mysterie of God should be finished in dayes of the sound of the seventh trumpet. Now we will briefly consider, Who, how, what, and wherefore he sweareth. The Angel swearing and standing on the earth and sea, is undoubtedly Christ, who often, as we read in the Gospell, confirmed his doctrine by oath: Verely, vere∣ly I say unto you. And God himselfe many times is said to sweare. Psa. 110.4. Heb. 6.13. The Lord hath sworn. God sware by himselfe &c. neyther is this contrary to the precept of Christ: Sweare not at all. For there is forbidden, not a lawfull oath taken in the name of God, in doubtfull & hard cases, whether before the magistrate or otherwhere: (for an oath is a divine ordinance instituted to end controversies and strife among men) but rash oathes eyther by God or the creature, Heb. 6.16. to which the Iewes (as the circumstances of the place shew) were much given: for otherwise Christ should condemne both himself, God, Angels and men for swearing. An oath therefore in it self is lawfull, touching the conditions whereof wee have largely handled otherwhere. Lifted up his hand] viz. his right hand: for so they that sware were wont to doe: as, Abraham swearing that he would not receive any thing of the spoile of the Sodomites, I have (saith he) lift up my hand unto Jehovah, &c. Hence to lift up the hand generally in scripture is put for swearing: Ezech. 20: 5. Numb. 14.30. In the day that I lifted up my hand to bring them forth of Aegypt, yee shall not enter into the land, concerning (or for) which I lift up my hand &c. And the reason hereof is not obscure: For heaven is the throne of God: wherefore they that sweare, lift up their hands to heaven, as calling upon God, to bee a witnesse and judge of the truth. Hence also comes the received custome amongs us, to lift up the right hand, and put forth the three first fingers, in signe of the blessed trinity, whom we call for a record upon our souls. 6, And sware by (Gr: In) him that liveth] by two adjunctes he denotes the true God. The first internall, that liveth for ever and ever. The other externall, who created heaven, earth, sea, and the things that are therein. The former is a most proper note of the true God, because he alone is of himself and shalbe from eter∣nitie unto all eternitie, not receiving life from any, but giving unto all life, moving and beeing. Hence with the Hebrewes the Lord is called Jehovah, that is, subsist∣ing & living of himself. And by this Epithite generally in scripture he is distingui∣shed from the false gods or idols of the Gentiles. In him] that is, by him that liveth, beeing an Hebraisme: for they that take an oath, are to sweare in, that is, by Jehovah: as Jonathan said to David, 1. Sam. 24.22. What it is to sweare by the living God. sweare unto me in Jehovah. Now to swear by Johovah, or by the living God, is to require and cal him, who is the alone searcher of the hart, to give testimony unto the truth, and to punish him that sweareth, in case he wittingly take his name in vaine. Here then we see in the first place, that an Oath is a kind of invocation upon God: and therefore often in scripture, swearing is put for invocating, and so a∣gaine invocation for the other: As Isa. 19.18. The nations shall sweare by Iehovah, It is lawfull for Chri∣stians to sweare in some cases. that is, shall call upon the true God: and 2. Cor. 1.23. I call God (saith Paul) to record upon my soule: so that an Oath is a kinde of worship, and therfore lawfull and acceptable to God, no way prohibited unto Christians, as some phantasticall men have affirmed. Secondly: that no Oath is laflul, except it bee taken in the name of God. For hee alone knowes the hart, and only i able to reveale secrets, to punish hidden
perjurie, to resolve doubtfull things, & confirme the whole truth, for he is above all, and in him alone in the last place all faith is setled. Thirdly hence we see that to sweare by Angels, It is a great wickednesse to sweare by the crea∣ture. Saintes, or any other creature, is a horrible wickednesse: both because they cannot search the hart & reines, in which regard they are vainly called upon: as also because religious invocation is a worship onely proper to God, & cannot without sacriledge bee given unto any other. They therefore who sweare by Mary, & the Saintes, doe as much offend the Lord, deceive themselves and others, as SOCRATES who was wont to sweare by his dog, or any stone whatsoever. But here it may bee demanded, if this Angel be Christ himself, how then doth he sweare by him that liveth for ever? For hereby it seems either that he is not Christ, or els that Christ is not true God, but inferiour unto him, because he sweares by the living God, as by one greater then himself. To this I have given somewhat in answer before, and sufficiently shewed that Christ is this Angel. He sweareth by him that liveth for ever, as hee is man and the mediatour, & so he acknowledgeth God to be above him: according as he speak∣eth: Io. 14.28. The Father is greater then I. Or els as he is God, and then he sweareth by him who liveth for ever, not as by a superiour, or by another, but by himself, according to that in Heb. 6.13. because God could sweare by no greater he sware by himself. But that Christ is he that liveth for ever appeares by his owne testimony Chap. 1.18. I live (saith he) & was dead, VIII, Arg of Christs deity con∣firmed. to wit, as man: and behold I live for ever and ever. This therefore (as we have before noted) yeeldeth us a worthy argument to prove the deity of Christ. Who created heaven] By this other Epithite he also distinguisheth the true God from idols, as beeing the onely creatour of all things in heaven & in earth, &c. gave them, I say, at first a beeing of nothing: the which was a worke of omnipotencie, not to be effected by false gods or any creature. Therefore the true God every∣where in scripture, as also in the common creed is celebrated as the creatour of all things: Ier. 10.11. but the gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, & from under these heavens. Neither doth this make any thing to the contrarie, but that this Angel is Christ: for he sweareth by the creatour of all things, Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2. that is, by himself: For by him all these things were made, and without him was not any thing made, that was made: By whom also God the Father made the worlds. This Epithite therefore doth also confirme the truth of Christs divinity. That there should be time no longer] Now followes what Christ sware, and to what end. Both which are to the same purpose: for the latter adversitively ex∣pounds the former: viz. that there should bee no more time, but that the accom∣plishment of the mystery of God was at hand under the seventh trumpet. The former is taken diverse wayes: ANDREAS: he sweareth there should bee no time after, or, in the world to come, or, not long after the sixt trumpet: the latter part of whose opinion is agreable to the scope, but not the former, (notwithstāding Ribera foolishly approves therof:) there shalbe no time (saith he) because this variety of time, as dayes, nightes, moneths & yeeres shalbe no more: but an unchangable eternity shall follow in the dayes of the seventh Angel. But what use was there to confirme that with an Oath, which no man is ignorant of, viz. that after the consummation of this world, time shallbe swallowed up by eternity. Alcasar wresteth it unto the Iewes, to whom there shalbe no more time, as beeing threatned of God to be forsaken. But what need was there that Christ should signifie a thing by vision and Oath, which long before was clearly declared: Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Matt. 23.28. BRIGHTMAN: there shalbe no more time, that is, no longer delay, but a verie little time shalbe remaining untill the consummation of the mysterie: the which is agreable unto the scope of the place: for Christ by a fift consolation would encourage the faith∣full, taken from the brevity of the time remaining, least they beeing dishartned in regard of the long & continued calamities of the six trumpets, should be out of
hope, as if there should never be an end of their miseries, but that Antichrists rage should allwayes continue in the world. But it shall not bee so, for the end is neere at hand, as Christ swearing by himself confirmes, to the end we might no way doubt thereof: so that this Oath serves, both for the confirmation of his pro∣mise, and for our consolation also: neyther indeed doth Christ use on oath without waighty cause; for Antichrist had so established his possession, as that it seemed impossible that his kingdom should be overthrown: Therefore Christ sweareth, that there should bee no more time, to wit, sad and mornefull unto the Saintes, as hitherto it had been under tyrants, and especially under Antichrist, who onely bearing swaye, tyrannized over all, insomuch as no man might contradict him, unlesse he meant to die for it by fire or sword: But there shall follow other times, wherein shal be a reformation of the Church, & the last down fall of Anti∣christs kingdome. The mysterie of God shall be finished] When? In the dayes of the seventh trumpet, that is, so soon as it shall begin to blow: then shall be the end of the sixt trumpet, the end of the Churches calamities, & the end of Antichristian tyranny. Alcasar applies the mysteries of God, to the casting off the Iewes, and election of the Gentiles. But the most on the contrarie understand it of the mysterie of all Israels conversion unto Christ, which shal to come to passe neer the last times, of which the Apostle Rom. 11.25. seems to treat: and indeed the prophets of old have often prophesied of their calling. But because in this place the com∣fort of the Church militant under Antichrist is onely aimed at, unto which the calling of the Iewes doth not directly much belong, therefore it is rather & better to be taken of the resurrection and day of judgement, even when the power of tyrants and all adversaries shall be abolished: of which mysterie the Apostle speaketh 1 Cor. 15.51. Behold I shew you a mysterie, wee shall not all sleepe, but wee shall all bee changed, in a moment in the twinckling of an eye at the last trumpet: for the trumpet shall blow, and we shall be changed. This is that which Christ here sweareth, that at the sound of the seventh trumpet the mysterie of God is to be finished, the Church delivered and glorified, but the enemies e∣ternally to be punished: according unto that in the Prophets: Isa. 24.26.27.66. Daniel 7.11.12. Zacha. 14. Mala. 3. & 4. Hence we plainely see, that the sound of the sixt trumpet shall continue unto the end of time, that is, of this world: and that at the beginning of the sound of the seventh trumpet, an end shall be put to the afflictions of the Church, and cruelty of the adversaries. The seventh trumpet therefore, is no other then that of the Archangel, by which the dead shal be raised out of their graves, and brought to judgement. As in the following Chapter we shall hear, so that without all doubt this trumpet respects the end of the world. They therfore doe erre from the scope, who extend the time of the seven Vialls, and of the fol∣lowing visions, beyond the seventh trumpet. The second part of the Chapter. Of the booke eaten up by Iohn. 8. And the voyce which I heard from heaven, spake unto me againe, and said, Goe and take the little booke which is open in the hand of the Angel, which standeth upon the sea, and upon the earth. 9. And I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, Give mee the little booke. And hee said unto me, Take it, and eate it up, & it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as hony. 10. And I tooke the little booke out of the Angels hand, and ate it up,
it was in my mouth sweet as hony: and assoone as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. 11. And he said unto mee, Thou must prophesie againe before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and Kings. THE COMMENTARIE. THe other part of the Chapter concerning the booke eaten by John, is a preparation to the following Act, touching the combat of the two witnesses with the beast, about the end of the fift & sixt trumpets, which yet remaine founding in this present age. John (as he is commanded,) eats up the little booke he tooke out of the hand of Christ: the which was sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his belly: And he is commanded to prophesie againe before kings and nations. Now what is this? but that towards the last times, prophesying shallbe renewed against Antichrist: after which indeed there shall follow new combats, notwith∣standing Antichrists kingdome shall be greeviously shaken: the which beeing donne, there shall be no more time, that is, like the former, when Antichrist raged according to his lust and pleasure over the Church. This is the summe. Now we are well to take notice, that this part of the vision is taken out of the prophesie of Ezech. Chap. 3. where an hand from heaven reacheth unto the pro∣phet a roule, to eat it up, beeing in his mouth as hony for sweetnesse: whereupon he is commanded to denounce judgements against the Israelites. It shadowed out the hea∣venly call of Ezechiel, as also his readines to obey God, in reproving the vices of the people, and threatning punishment against them for the same. All things are here alike: But that Ezechiel felt not the booke (as John,) bitter in his belly: & that he was sent to prophesie against the house of Israel, but Iohn against Antichrist. Let us briefly consider, who commandeth, what is com∣manded, and what followed upon the doing thereof. 8. And the voyce which I heard] To wit, that heavenly voyce mentioned in ver. 4. write not, but seale the voyces of the thunders, &c. The same voyce there∣fore who before forbade him to write, doth now command him to eat up the little booke, and to prophesie; by which is signified the admirable dispensation of the di∣vine grace: for Antichrist bearing sway in the Church during the times of the fift & sixt trumpets, the thunders indeed uttered their voyces, that is, some faithfull tea∣chers publickly thundered against the idolatrie and tyranny of Antichrist: But with little profit: The voyces remained sealed, and Antichrists power entire, yea increased dayly by suppressing those teachers, & bringing kings and nations un∣der his yoak. Now whence came this? I answere, Christ as yet had not given to John the open booke to eat it up: neither commanded him againe to prophesie, be∣cause he reserved this special grace unto the later times of the fift & sixt trumpets. Let us therefore acknowledge this singular mercie of God, that now unto us the open booke of Christs doctrine is given to be eaten up, and prophesie against An∣tichrist againe revived in the world. Take the little booke] The heavenly voyce commands two things. First, that Iohn should take the open booke out of the hand of Christ. Secondly, eat it up. The little booke on the outside contained the revealed & written doctrine of the Gospell: within the secret counsels of God touching the future events of the Church. For it was written, within and without, as we heard Chap. 1.7. and Ezech. 2.10. This little booke Christ both opened, and held open: teaching us, that as Iohn, so all the teachers of the word, must ask of Christ, and receive out of his hand the doctrine of salvation, which they are to propound unto the Church: but not from the hand of Satan or Antichrist. Now he exhibiteth a booke open,
because the holy scriptures doe open, and manifestly set forth the mysteries of our salvation. Thus we see the decrees of the Romish Antichrist, the traditions of Popes and Councils, the humane Philosophie and subtilties of Sophisters are to be quite bani∣shed out of the Church. It is expressely added, Of the Angel that stood upon the earth, and sea] that we might confidently rest on the power of Christ, and acknowledge him alone to be the revealer of the heavenly truth, and so de∣sire nothing as necessarie to salvation, but what we take out of his hand. 9. Take it, and eat it up] This is the other commandement. Bookes of pa∣per or parchment are not to be eaten properly, as not beeing fit food for man; but they are said to be eaten up metaphorically, when they are so carefully read and throughly taken notice of, that we are able promptly to rehearse and discourse of the contents thereof. So a man is said to have devoured Ʋirgil, Cicero, who is fullie acquainted with them, and hath them, as it were, by heart. So Cicero called M. Cato a devourer of bookes, because he was an insatiable reader. Thus, as the Prophet in Ezech. 3. so John here, is comman∣ded to eat up the booke he received of Christ, that is, well to understand and as it were, hide the same in the bowels of his heart, that so he might deliver no o∣ther doctrine unto the Church, but what hee had received from Christ. Now whether this booke were eaten up trulie, or in a vision onely, makes little to the purpose: the latter is most probable. For all these things were don by a vision. Here the ministers of the word are taught earnestly to devoure, or eat up the doctrine of salvation divinely written & received from Christ, that is, diligently to read, understand, search, meditate, & as it were to turne it even into their verie moisture & blood. For such onely can faithfully instruct the Church in the know∣ledge of the truth, who after this manner meditate in the law of the Lord day & night. On the contrary their sluggishnesse is condemned, who though they love to be called Bishops, Archbishops & Patriarchs of the Church, yet in the mean while are little or nothing acquainted with the scriptures of God. And it shall make thy belly bitter] He preadmonisheth Iohn of a double effect of the booke, sweet in the mouth, bitter in the belly. Sweet things are delightfull to the palate, bitter things provoke to vomit. Hereby signifying, that one effect thereof should be sweet, the other troublesome: the nature whereof is expound∣ed in the following verse. He fore shewes it should be sweet, to stir him up the more earnestly to eat up the booke: he tels him also that it should be bitter, that he might not afterward bee offended thereat: but know that this bitternesse should bee recompensed with much sweetnesse. Then I tooke the booke] He shewes his readinesse in eating the book: for neither the difficulty of the command, nor the bitternesse of the book dishartens him: shew∣ing us, that we are readily to submitt unto the command of God, & not to be dis∣mayed at any hardships or difficulties whatsoever. Now he ate the booke not really, but in vision onely, as I said before, signifying that he most readily accepted the worke imposed upon him, of which it followeth. And it was sweet in my mouth] Here the foresaid effects follow. This booke be∣ing eaten was sweet in the mouth, and bitter in the belly: the first signifies the sweetnesse of the word, as Psal. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea sweeter then hony to my mouth. Ierem. 15.16. Thy words were found, & I did eat them, & thy word was unto mee the joy & rejoycing of myne heart. This is the proper effect of the word, it brings joy to the heart, & comfort to the conscience: yea & by how much faithfull teachers doe feel this sweetnesse, by so much the more they preach the Gospell chearfully. But the effect thereof is bitter by accident, because the preaching of the word occasioneth most painefull grypings of the belly, as the hatred of the world, persecutions, banishments, & martyrdomes. This effect Christ foretold unto his disciples: They shall put you out of their synagogues, Ioh. 16.2. & who∣soever killeth you will thinke that he doth God service.
But what use was there to reveale this in a type unto John: seeing it was long before plainely foretold in the written word? It was altogether needfull, consi∣dering that this bitternesse doth not properly denote the calamities already past under the four trumpets, but to come in the end of the fift & sixt, under the king∣dome of Antichrist, the which we shall heare in the following Chapter, namely the combats of the third Act of this Vision. He foretold them therefore unto Iohn, that he might not bee offended: for he had already experience hereof, beeing sent into exile by Domitian: notwithstanding Christ doth not properly intend this here, but praefigures in his person the future calamities of the witnesses of the truth. 11. And hee said unto me] To wit, the former voyce from heaven. Thou must againe prophesie] This commandement is taken diversly. Lyra: thou must write downe more prophesies, to wit those which follow in this booke. But to write more things, is not againe to prophesie, &c. Thomas, Rupertus, and some others understand it historically, of Iohns beeing restored unto his Church: as if he had said, Thou must after the death of Domitian returne from Patmos the place of thy exile unto Ephesus, and preach againe the Gospell: or, as if it were a promise of writing his Gospell after the Revelation. The which Ribera refuteth: This (saith he) I approve not of, for to put prophesying in stead of prea∣ching the Gospell, is new: which reason is not solid: he adds another: that seeing John was gifted with the fulnesse of the holy Ghost, therefore he needed not to eat up the booke, eyther for to preach, or, to write the Gospell; wherefore he saith, the sense is thus: that although Iohn hitherto had prophesied many things concerning the last times, notwithstanding there remained as yet many things of the same nature, which he was to prophesie of, against the gentiles, &c. The which is one with the opinion of Lyra, & which Alcasar also with his subtilties doth at last come unto. But hee needed not to eat up the booke in this respect: seeing before he had received a com∣mandement to write the whole Revelation: & allthough I grant that Lyras opi∣nion touching the promise of Iohns restitution is to be approved off, yet the eating of the booke, doth make nothing for it. Andreas, and they which follow him, perceiving that here is spoken of prophesying to come in the last times, have ima∣gined (much like to the disciples of old) that Iohn is not dead to this day, but yet liveth with Enoch & Elias in paradise, with whom, after Antichrist is risen, he shall come and prophesie against him. Touching whose opinion so much indeed is true, viz: that here is treated of a future prophesying under Antichrist: but the rest is false and refuted by Iohn himself: Chap. 21.23. All the forenamed opinions therefore are to bee joyned together, and then the meaning will appear to be thus: that here is a confirmation of the Prophet, that he should not, because of his banishment, desist from his office, but goe on to pro∣phesie: and thus the commandement may include a promise of his restitution in∣to his former place: Yet the heavenly voyce is further to be applied, namely, to the prophesying which should be renewed against Antichrist in the last times. So that Iohn is commanded to eat up the book, & againe to prophesie, not so much in his owne, as in the person of all those witnesses of the truth who lived neer the end of the fift and sixt trumpets: the sence is therefore, that when Antichrist hath long enough raged, then prophesying shall againe be restored against him, &c. Now to prophesie againe, To prophe∣sie againe what it is. is to bring to light, purge, reforme & wholy to restore to its former brightnesse the doctrine of the Gospell, filthily polluted, mangled, & brought to nought by Antichrists Locusts. Againe] for although the Apostles, Pastors, Teachers & sincere Bishops had formerly published & preached the Gospell, yet afterward prophesie was oppressed by Antichrist: and therefore it was behovefull it should againe be restored by the faithfull preachers of the word. This, I say, must be don, for otherwise Antichrist, would have thrust Christ quite out of his possession, & troaden his Church under foot. Therefore for the truthes sake of these divine praedictions, & that the Church perish not, but that Anti∣christs
abominations be wholy rooted out, it was needfull that prophesie should bee renewed. The Thunders indeed uttered their voyces, but they did little good: & therefore other witnesses must be raised up, who shall more strongly strike at, assault & weaken Antichrists kingdome. Thus it is manifest, that here is pro∣mised a reformation of the Church about the last times, which shalbe expounded in the following Chapter under the two witnesses, who shall againe prophesie a∣gainst Antichrist. Before many people, and nations, and tongues and kings] The successe of prophesie renewed is set forth: for hereby many peoples nations, and kings, who before worshipped the beast, shall embrace the Gospell, & forsake Antichrist. The which how far it hath, and yet daylie is accomplished both in Germanie, France, England, Poland, Bohemia, Hungary, Denmarke & Suetia, &c. all may clearly see, who doe not malitiously shut their eyes. Thus wee see that here is a prepara∣tion and transition unto the following measuring of the tempie of God. The Argument, Parts & Analysis of CHAPTER XI. NOw are described the new combats of the two witnesses (prophesie & ministerie) with the beast, their martyrdome, and vindication: also the triumph of Antichristians because they were killed, their astonishment and ruin: and at last (the seventh trumpet sounding) the songs of joy and triumph of the Church in heaven; also the last judgement, the abo∣lition of Antichrists kingdome, with the fretting and punishment of the wicked. Who are these two witnesses, what events they doe prefigure, & of whom, is very obscure. Interpreters indeed, every one according to his under∣standing, have learnedly thought upon severall opinions. But I hardly find one, who satisfies himself and the reader. And perhaps all humane un∣derstanding doth here faile. For mine owne part I willingly confesse that herein I stick & come short. The obscurity chiefly consists in the defining of the moneths, dayes, and moments of times, the resolution whereof cannot fully be had, but by the bright beames of divine revelation. Yet notwithstan∣ding I doubt not but by blessing of God, the observation of our method will afford us some little light in this mysterie. Hitherto the two former Acts of this Vision have been Parallels, as an∣swering each to other. The first was the proposition of the Churches calami∣ties under the sound of the six trumpets, that is, under the heathen tyrants, hareticks, Apollyon the king of Locusts, and Mahumet. Chap. 8. & 9. The second is of the comforts of the afflicted Church under the said enemies Chap. 10. Now followes the third Act Chap. 11. unto ver. 15. which is an amplifi∣cation of the foresaid calamities, describing the renewed combats of the Saintes with the Westerne Antichrist, The West∣erne Anti∣christ more hurtfull then the Easterne. as beeing much more cruell and hurt∣full unto the Church then the Easterne: considering how the latter tyran∣nized by open force and warr, killing onely the bodies of them who submitted not unto his yoake: whereas the other tyrannizeth over the soules with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse & lying signes, moreover torments the
consciences of them who enslave themselves unto him, with torments far worse then any kinde of death: as we have heard in Chap. 9. But chiefly it describeth the occasion and cause of those combats, namely the purging of the Evangelical doctrine from Antichristian defilements, with the reformation of the Church by the preaching of the two witnesses in the latter times of the fift and sixt trumpets, as also the successe of the reformation, and what should happen, both to the witnesses, and also to Antichrist. Lastly the fourth Act is added by the sound of the last trumpet, rela∣ting the happie change of all former calamities in the last judgement: when as Christ the judge, destroying the kingdomes of his adversaries, will render a reward unto his servants, and punishment unto the wicked: Chap. XI. from vers. 15. unto the end. This method beeing observed, the reason is plaine, why the last judgment is againe treated of in the end of this Chapter: now without this we grope in darknesse, & many imaginarie things are in vain devised. The parts therefore of the Chapter are two. I. FIrst a prophesie of the reformation of the Church under Antichrist, unto vers. 15. II. The sounding of the last trumpet, from vers. 15. unto the end. The former part hath a twofold oracle. The first general, commanding Iohn to measure the temple, that is, to purge the Church from the filth and corruptions of Antichrist. vers. 1. To leave out the inward court, and shewes the cause thereof, vers. 2. The second spe∣ciall: declaring the manner of the future reformation, viz. by the ministerie of two witnesses: consisting of four particulars. I. A description of the witnesses. 1. From the time of their prophesie, & from their habit, v. 3. 2. From their dignitie & esteem with God, v. 4. 3. From the efficacie and authority of their office, v. 5. 6. II. Their warre with the beast: where 1. we have the description of the beast, his hostile invasion and victorie, ver. 7. 2. The martyrdome of the pro∣phets, and place of reproach, v. 7. 8. 9. 3. The joyes of the wicked for the slaughter of the prophets, with the cause of this their great rejoycing, vers. 10. III. The avengement of the prophets: where 1. we have their restor∣ing to life, vers. 11. 2. The astonishment & feare of the wicked, ibid. 3. Their glorious ascending up into heaven, v. 12. 4. The shaking and ruin of Antichrists kingdome. IV. An acclamatory conclusion of the end of the Churches calamities: & of judgement at hand, v. 14. The latter part, (the seventh trumpet sounding) declares the change of the Churches warfare in three particulars. 1. An heavenly triumph because the kingdomes of the world were become Gods and Christs, ver. 15. 2. A trium∣phant song of the first companie, viz. of the four and twenty Elders: whose re∣verend cariage & gratulatorie hymne is recited, in which 1. they give thankes to Christ for freeing his Church and kingdom from the tyrannie of the adversaries, v. 17. 2. They declare the vain fretting & wrath of the wicked hereat. v. 18. 3. They proclaime the resurrection of the dead, with the last judgement, ibid. 4. They denounce rewards unto the godly and punishment unto the wicked, ibid. The excecution of judgement on the godly & ungodly. To the godly heaven is opened, that they might see Iesus Christ the Ark: upon the wicked are sent light∣nings, thunders & eternal haile.
The first part of the Chapter. Of the reformation of the Church by the two witnesses under the Westerne Antichrist. 1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood, saying, Rife, and measure the Temple of God, & the Altar, & them that worship therein. 2. But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, & the holy City shall they tread under foot fourtie and two moneths. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, & they shall prophesie a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes clothed in sakcloth. 4. These are the two Olive trees, and the two candlestickes standing be∣fore the God of the earth: 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: & if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it raine not in the dayes of their prophecie: and have power over waters to turne them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that as∣cendeth out of the bottomlesse pit, shal make warre against them, & shall overcome them, and kill them. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodome, and Egypt,, where also our Lord was crucified. 9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, & nations, shall see their dead bodies three dayes and an halfe, & shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. 10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoyce over them, and make merry, & shall send gifts one to another: because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth. 11. And after three dayes and an halfe the Spirit of life from God, entred into them: & they stood upon their feete, & great feare fell upon them which saw them. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd there was given mee a reed] This is a generall prophesie tou∣ching the restoring of the Church beeing declyned under Anti∣christ. Before Iohn was commanded againe to prophesie: But now to measure the temple of God with a measuring reed, that is, to prophesie of the measuring of the temple of God, which should be afterwards in the times of Antichrist. The mea∣suring of the temple is the re∣formation of the Church. The measuring of the temple signifies the building & repairing thereof, as appeares, if this prophesie bee compared with that in Ezech. 40.41. &c. unto which this place doth allude. The Temple of God, signifies the Church, as almost all interpreters both ancient & mo∣derne understand it: and indeed the words here  temple of God, are so taken, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Thess. 2.4.
They who apply this to the temple of Jerusalem, are refuted by the time it self: for when these things were spoken unto John, that temple with the city beeing utterly destroyed, was never any more to be restored. Lyra, Lyras fri∣volous in∣terpreta∣tion. doting (as his manner is) applies it to the festivitie of the dedication of temples instituted by Pope Felix about the yeere 525. at which time the Bi∣shop holding in his hand a sprinckling reed, goes about the outward walles of the temple, as if he were to measure the same: and within on the floore from one corner thereof unto another he thwartwise writes downe the letters of the Greek alphabet: and so measures the space within: The words therefore, Rise and measure, he will have to be meant of Pope Felix, speaking to every Bishop about the dedication of temples: the court leave out (or cast forth) because masse may not be celebrated, except the place be consecrated. But I passe by these fopperies: For Ribera and Alcasar themselves acknow∣ledge, that the Temple here signifies the Church of God. Now let us see what instrument hee is to use, what to doe with it, wherefore, and when. First, hee shewes the instrument, A reed like unto a rod was given mee] to wit, by the Angel, who before commanded him to eat up the booke, and a∣gaine prophesie, that is, by Christ. Ribera wel observeth that it was not a writing pen, but a measuring reed: be∣cause it is said to be  like to a rod, that is, a great measuring staffe with which Architects use to mete plats of ground and buildings, a measure of six cubites, and a handbreth, Ezech. 40.5. The Rod wherewith the Church is measured, What is meant by the mea∣suring rod of the Church. is nothing else but the word of God, the most perfect rule of faith, and Church discipline. Rupertus acknowledgeth it to be the authoritie of the Evangelical scripture. So that this reed is indeed the same little booke which Christ gave unto John to eat it up: the which is here againe delivered to him under the type of a reed or rule, in regard of the measuring worke here enjoyned: Thus also my Anonymus above 260 yeeres agoe: The rod (saith he) is the sense of the scripture, because, as a rod of diverse colours, it chastiseth sinners. Rise and measure the Temple of God] First, he must measure the Temple, Altar, & Worshippers therein. Secondly, leave or cast forth the inward court. The read∣ing of both is somewhat different, yet the sense is al one. After  rod, some bookes read, , saying rise, as if the reed it self had said it. The old version seems to read, after , for he renders it, And it was said to mee, to wit, by the Angel. We here (and so our translation) follow the reading of Montanus, who after  hath it, : and the Angel stood (or stood by) saying, &c. He is com∣manded therefore to measure the temple &c. beeing a plaine allusion (as before I shewed) unto the prophesie of Ezech. Chap. 40. where the Angel is commanded to measure the new temple with a reed: The pro∣phesie of Ezech. tou∣ching the measuring of the tem∣ple, is spiri∣tuall. in which vision God promised the restauration of the temple destroyed by the Babylonians, not indeed materially but spiritually under the Gospel. For the outward temple built by Zerubbabel after their re∣turne, doth not at all answer to the dimensions of that vision, neither shall any one be like unto it: and therefore that measuring was a prophesie of the future re∣formation of the spirituall temple by Christ. By the like metaphor the restoring of Ierusalem is promised in Zach. 1.16. My house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hostes, & a line shall be stretched forth upon Ierusalem. So here by the like reason, in that Iohn is bid to measure the temple, is signified, that the same should be so wasted, rent and overthrowen, as that of necessitie it must be measured, that is, reformed & built againe. This worke Iohn is command∣ed to set himself upon, that is, by this type to foretell what should come to passe, viz. that after Antichrist had taken possession, wasted & oppressed the tem∣ple of God, then Christ by giving the measuring reed unto his two witnesses, would
againe measure, repaire, & wholy renew the same. Thus we se that this command∣ment of measuring the Temple, is a propheticall promise, of the reformation of the Church, wasted and ruinated by the Westerne Antichrist. Hence the Papists fiction is refuted, that the visible Church can never degenerate, The visible Church could erre, seeing it had need of measuring. erre & fal from her integrity. But the thing it self shewes the vanity hereof: The old Tem∣ple according to Ribera, was a type of the Church: Now we know that might be, & was laid wast & destroyed, yea the old Church it self very often degenerated: The new Church also shalbe possessed & troden under foot by Antichrist, & so need a new measuring, or reparation. Wherefore it cannot be denied, but that the Church may be destroyed & degenerate from the faith of Christ unto Antichrist. Furthermore it is manifest that the Church dissipated by Antichrist, neither can be, nor shalbe measured by any other instrument, then by the reed of the word, con∣tained in the holy Scriptures, as being indeed the onely true & infallible rule, Psal. 45, 7. ac∣cording to that of the Psalmist: The scepter (or rod) of thy kingdome is a scepter of righteousnes. Let us therfore wholy cast of all other adulterate & false rules, as hu∣mane traditions, decrees of councils & Popes, unto which the foolish builders giving way, have destroyed the Temple of God, from whose corruptions it shalbe re∣stored, as from death to life, by the reed of Gods word. Measure the Altar also] For the understanding of this, we must have recourse to the structure of the old Temple: for the spirit of God is pleased in this prophe∣sie to shadow out the state and worship of the new Church by the type and ser∣vice of the Old: not as if such types were to remaine under the Gospell, but be∣cause the things signified by them, are fitlie applied unto the new Church. We have the description of the tabernacle in the latter part of Exodus: & of Solomons tem∣ple in some Chapters of 1 King, from Chap. 4. unto 8. The Apostle also Hebr. 9. re∣hearseth the parts of the tabernacle. To be short we have a worthy portraiture of the Temple, in Ezech. Chap. 40.41.42. divided into foure parts. I. There was an outmost court, in which the people were conversant. II. A more inward, or middle court for the keeping of the Leviticall instruments, & making ready of the sacrifices. III. The most inward, or court of the Priests, in which was the great brazen Altar for burnt-offerings. IV. The Temple it self, in the entrie wherof stood the golden Altar of perfumes, with the golden candlestick & table: within, behinde the vaile was the sanctuary, in which was the Ark of the covenant. This Temple was a type of the Church: & we have shewed wherfore he was commanded to measure the same. He must also mea∣sure the Altar to wit, the golden Altar, from the foure corners whereof hee heard a voyce Cha. 9.13. This was a type of Christ. But how? Is he commanded to mea∣sure Christ? yea verely. For Christ under a pretence of his name was thrust out of his possession by Antichrist, who suppressed the faith & turned Christian libertie into miserable servitude. The Altar therefore of Christ shalbe measured, when as the faith of Christ shalbe freed from the perfidiousnes of Antichrist, & Christian liberty from his tyranny. The Altar indeed by a synecdoche may be taken for the whole worship of God. But we shal see by & by, why it is rather to be understood of the golden perfumatory, then of the brazen Altar of burnt-offering. The build∣ing of the old temple. Thus also my Anonymus, the Altar, that is, Christ. And them that worship therein] He meaneth the residue of sincere worshippers in the midst of Antichristian defilements. These he is commanded to measure, that is, (as Ribera wel expounds it,) to number and sever as chosen members of the true Church, and not to be delivered unto Antichrist: he therefore acknowledgeth that God will reserve some true worshippers of Christ in the midst of Babylon, that is, the Papacie. So then these worshippers are the same, who in Cha. 7. are said to be 144000 sealed in the foreheads, out of every tribe, and nation & tongue. Which serves for to comfort the godlie, & to refute that daylie irksome song of the Papists, viz. if the Papacie were not the Church, then Christ before Luther had neither body nor
members. Although true it is, this measuring of the Temple and Altar leads us to a farther thing, promising moreover a purging of doctrine & discipline, as we have seen the same accomplished in our times. Therein] No man did worship in the Temple properly so called, except the high-priest alone: all other worshippers stood in the court, turning their faces one∣ly towards the sanctuary. Yet here the faithfull are said to worship in the verie temple of the sanctuarie, because they are the true members of the temple, yea the temple of God it self, 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.6.16. as the Apostle saith, Know yee not that yee are the temple of God: And, ye are the temple of the living God. 2. But the court which is within cast forth] Here also the reading is different: for some copies have it , the outward court: but the most , the inward court: of both which I will speak a word or two. For the first to wit, that Iohn is bid not to mete the inward court, but to cast it forth: what is it, but that this court ought to be cut of from the Temple, that is, to be excluded & separated from the Church by the reed of the word, as not belong∣ing unto the same? but now what is meant by the court? It is plaine, that by a synec∣doche it is put for them that are conversant therein. Now these are opposed to the worshippers in the Temple, whom he commanded to be numbred, & to be sealed in Chap. 7.3. These therfore in the court, are those that worship not Christ: but administer Antichrists holy things, & therfore are not to be reckoned, but accounted as out of the Church. But if we read it , the court that is without: as the kings edition, and the old version have it, then it signifies the place of the common people, into which also the Gentiles had accesse: by casting forth whereof is signified, (as the Papists say,) that onely the promiscuous rabble of the Iewes & hereticks following Antichrist should be cast forth out of the Church, But we are to minde, how that court was before without the Temple: and how then could he bee commanded to cast it forth? as if the common sort onely, and not also kings, princes, and the rich men of the earth should commit fornication with the whore. My Anonymus indeed retaines the vulgar reading: yet he rightly expounds it: THE COVRT THAT IS WITHOVT, IS THE TEMPLE, that is, Antichrist & his complices, who labour even before the doores of the Church to maintaine their avarice & vaine osten∣tation of dignity: also false Christians & notorious or manifest transgressours in their places, who in words faine themselves to bee the Church, but indeeds deny it: CAST FORTH: that is, insinuate them to be cast out of the fellowship of the faithfull. Notwithstanding the other reading is rather to be approved off, viz. the court within: as the most exact copies both greater & lesser of Robert Stephanus imprin∣ted at Paris have it: And so Luther also renders it. This was the court of the Priests, in imitation whereof the Popish Temples have an inward Chore hallowed for the singers & Masspriests: into which the Laity is hardly allowed to looke through the Lattice. The meaning therfore of the prophesie is cleare, viz. that the clergie which appropriate the inward parts of temples to themselves, shall fall away from the faith, & have their share with Antichrist: & therfore to be utterly rooted out of the Church of Christ. And this is that which John is commanded to prophesie, by this saying, Hose. 1.1. cast forth, that is, declare that the court of Apostated priests shalbe cast out: like as it was said to Hosea: Take unto thee a wife of whordomes, for, preach that this people is as a wife of whoredomes, &c. But when doth he say, that it shal come to passe, & wherefore? both will appeare by the reason annexed. For it is given unto the Gentiles] It now followes in the third place wherfore & when the inward court should bee cast forth: because it is given unto the Gentiles, that is, because it is possessed and polluted by Antichristian priests, aliens from the Church of God. It was lawfull for the Gentiles to come into the outward court: but not into the inward. And therefore the Apostle Paul was evillie handled by the furious Iewes, Act. 21.28 because they supposed he had defiled the holy place by bringing Greeks into the Temple. Hence the reason is plaine, why it is said, that the in∣ward court should be cast forth: namely because it was so polluted by the prophane
idols of the Gentiles as that it was turned (though formerly set apart for holy uses) into a nest of devils, and den of theeves: & so deserved to bee cast forth of the temple of God, & troden as it were under foot by swine. It is given] Without doubt by God: Who the Gentiles holding the inward court are. by whose just indignation the Gentiles in∣vaded the same. But what Gentiles? this I have already shewed. They who under∣stand that the Gentiles are here properly meant, are indeed so intangled, as that they can neither shew who they are, nor when, or how they did, or shall possesse this court. They come nearer to the mark who understand it of Antichrist & his fol∣lowers, for it is manifest that here & in the following sentence is noted the time of Antichrist. Ribera therfore saith wel: It is given to the Gentiles, that is, it shall be ob∣tained & possessed by Antichrist & his ministers, &c. because Antichrists armie shall tru∣lie consist of heathenish men, worshipping not the true God, but Antichrist. Bell. lib. 3. cap. 12. de P. R. Rom. 3.29 But the good man in the mean time sees not, that it makes against their fiction, that Antichrist should be a Iew: for in scripture the Gentiles are continually opposed to the Iews: Is he the God of the Iewes onely, & not of Gentiles also? I therefore take this sense to be right, namely that these Gentiles shalbe Antichrist & his ministers. And hence it followes, that the priestlie court shall therefore be cast forth out of the Church, because the Clergy shall become heathenish, or degenerate unto paga∣nisme: not indeed by open profession, but by their coulerable idolatrie & heathe∣nish life. For they have turned the doctrine of faith, into heathenish philosophie, teaching that men are justified by good workes: & have brought the idols of the heathens, their names only being changed, into the Church of God, making of Juno, Ʋenus, Pallas, Minerva, Diana, Proserpina, Ceres, Bellona, Hecate, Rhamnusia & Isis the queen of heaven: so many Maries: of Jupiter God the father: of Mars their S. George: Mercurie, Peter: of Neptune, Nicolas; & so of other idols, their tutelar gods. The clergy also shal imitate the Gentiles, as well in their ecclesiastical order as common course of life. For after the man̄er of the heathens, they have for their Archflamins, high priests, for their flamins, priests & other orders, unto whō they forbid mariage, but permit them to wallow in whordom: And as the heathens had their feasts of Baccus, Ceres, Pan: so these keep shrovetide, Rogation weeke, & such like festivities, having altered onely the names thereof. To be short they have corrupted al Chri∣stendom with heathenish rites, & overthrown the Church. SO ANONYMVS: because it is given to the nations, that is, because they shalbe like to unbeleevers, yea worse then they: for it had been beteer for them not to have known the way of righteousnesse, then af∣ter they have known it, to turn from the holy commandement delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2. But that which followes doth expresse the thing more clearly. The holie city shall they tread under foot fourty & two moneths] He declares by an auxesis or amplification how the court is given: as if he should say, The holy city troden under foot by the Gen∣tiles is the Church. the court shall not onely be given unto the Gentiles, but all the holy citie also shall be troden under foot by them. Ribera againe rightly understands the holy citie to be the Church, typed out by Ierusalem of old. Moreover we are to observe, that the Angel, that is Christ who speaketh these things, doth allude to his own words: Luk. 12.24. Jerusalem shalbe troden down by the Gentiles untill the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled: foreshewing the besieging, taking & over∣throwing of the city & temple by the Romans; so that to tread under foot, is to fal upon, wast & destroy in a hostile manner, as was done unto Ierusalem not long be∣fore by Titus Vespasian. Now like as Ierusalem was a type of the Christian Church: so the treading down of Ierusalem by the Romans, was a type that the Church also should be troden under foote by the same nation. For Rome, as it was of Ierusa∣lem, so shal it be the calamity & destruction of the Church. What cā be said more clearly then this, that the Church shalbe possessed, troden down & laid wast by the Romish Antichrist & his adherents. So then these words, viz. the Romaine Gentiles shall tread the holy citie under foot: agrees to that of the Apostle: The man of sin (Anti∣christ) shall sit in the temple of God: that is, he shall suppresse the Romish Church by tyranny, proudly boasting himself to bee as God, the head & universal monarch. But when, & how long?
Fourty and two moneths] here is wisdome: It is manifest by the consent al∣most of all interpreters, that the time of Antichrists persecution is hereby set forth. But what time & how long it is to continue? or how to determine either of the beginning or ending thereof, is obscure, both unto mee & other interpreters: and happily it is beyond the reach of man. For it pleaseth the spirit, that we should rather still be searching into some things which concerne the times, then certainly to know them: as Christ intimated unto his disciples Act. 1.7. It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the father hath put in his own power. However I will recite the chiefe opinions of learned men. The first is of some Ancients, brought in by the authority of the Pope, which Caesariensis followeth, & so doe generally al the Papists to this day, viz: that fourty two moneths, are astronomicall moneths, making three Aegyptian yeeres and an halfe: whence arose that received poopish opinion, that Antichrist should onely reigne three yeeres and an halfe: This they collected out of Daniel Chap. 7.25. And they shalbe given into his hand untill a time, and times, & the dividing of time. And Chap. 12.7. where the Angel sweareth, that all these thinges shall bee finished at a time, times & halfe a time: The which division of time is also assigned unto the Church banished in the wildernesse, Reve. 12.14. of which we will speake in its place: Now they make the three yeeres & an half to bee the time immediatelie going be∣fore the end of the world, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17. because Antichrist (as Bellarmin affirmeth) shalbe slaine by the Iewes before the fourth yeere be ended, & then fourty & five dayes after Christ shal come to judgment. Now hence they seeke to establish two things: I. that Anti∣christ is not yet come into the world. II. And so consequently the Pope of Rome is not he. ibid. cap. 8. For Antichrist (saith Bellarmin in his V: demonstration) shall onely reigne three yeeres, and an halfe: But the Pope hath already spiritually reigned in the Church, above fifteen hundred yeeres: and more then five hundred temporally: neither can any one be noted or accounted to be Antichrist, unlesse he hath precisely reigned three yeeres, and an half. Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist, neither is he as yet come. But (to speak nothing of the most false assumption of this ridiculous demon∣stration) it is certaine, that the Romane Bishops before Constantines time, were so far from raigning spiritually, much lesse temporally in the Church, as on the con∣trary they all suffered martyrdom for the sake of Christ. True it is Sylvesters successours many times affected the primacy, but were continually suppressed by their fellow Bishops: untill that Boniface the third (many labouring, but in vaine, to hinder it) was by the authority of Pho∣cas the Emperour set on the chaire of universall pestilence. The fiction of the 42 astronomi∣cal moneths refuted. To let these things (I say) passe for the present: the proposition, which is taken from this place of the Reve∣lation is altogether false: because that Popish opinion touching the 42 astronomi∣call moneths of Antichristian persecution, is contradictorie both to it self and the holy scriptures. It consists not with its self, because the things which they faine that their An∣tichrist shall effect, are as impossible to be don in the space of three yeeres and a halfe, as for a snaile in three dayes to creep over the whole earth: he must be acknow∣ledged by the Iewish nation dispersed throughout the earth, for the Messias: he must sit in the temple of Ierusalem, which for so many ages hath lyen wast under a horrible destruction: moreover he must kill three kings of Egypt, Lybia and Ethiopia, and subdue seven other princes: he must repaire the ruins of Rome burnt by those ten kings, and chasing the Pope from thence, sit there as Mo∣narch: persecute and blot Christian religion quite out of the world, to be short bring the Church and the Empire of the whole world under him, &c. Who, I pray you, except he were a mad man, would imagine that all these things should bee possibly accomplished in four whole yeeres? What for messengers thinke ye shall Antichrist have to send abroad, who so suddenly shall tell and perswade the Iewes dispersed over the face of the whole earth, of the comming of their Messias? The temple forsooth shall be built againe in three dayes, the which Solomon, hav∣ing
all manner of materials prepared to his hand, could not finish in seven yeeres, nor Zerubbabel scarsly rebuild in fourty six yeeres. Yea this Antichrist, hardly of four yeeres standing, shall expell the Turk out of Syria, the Persian out of the East, Cham out of the South, & Prester John out of all the North. What can be ima∣gined more frivolous? shall the Emperours and Christian kings be fallen into such a dead sleep, as altogether in a moment to be suppressed by one man. Will the Pope with his Cardinals watch no better, but suffer Catholick Rome to fall to Pa∣ganisme: & shall all Christians so rashly yeeld assistance unto Antichrist so soon as he manifests himself? O foolish vanities. Thus we see this fiction is incon∣sistent. It is also diverse wayes repugnant to the holie Scriptures. For they teach us that Antichrist shall not come but by an universall apostasie from the faith. 2 Thess. 2.3. 1 Tim. 4.1. the elect onely excepted, who are sealed in their foreheads. But who would say that al Christian Bishops, with their highpriests could be led aside from the faith, within lesse then four yeeres. Besides the Scripture witnesseth that the day, Mark. 13.22. 1 Thess. 5.2. moneth and yeere of Christs last comming beeing hid from all creatures, is onely knowen unto God: and the Lord will come suddenly as a thiefe in the night, when the world shall say: Peace and safe∣ty. But according to the opinion here laid down, the day, moneth and yeere of the last judgement should not bee unknown: for from the rising of Antichrist unto his death, there should remaine but three yeeres and an halfe: and from his death, unto the last judgement 45 dayes: for so Bellarmin expresly writes, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17. that after the death of Antichrist there shall be no more then 45 dayes unto the end of the world. Seeing therefore, that the opinion being granted, there followes a falsity: the o∣pinion it self must needs be false. This reason is so strong, as that it forced Ribera to forsake that false opinion a∣bout the 45 dayes, as we shall hear on Chap. 20. To be short this onely sufficeth, that in Chap. 13.5. these 42 moneths are againe repeated touching the beast, unto him power was given to continue fourty & two mo∣neths: which cannot in any wise be understood of Astronomicall moneths, or three yeeres and an halfe. For that beast to Bellarmin, Alcasar and others not a few, is the Romane Empire, the power whereof (whither it be taken of the old or new) conti∣nued far longer then three yeeres and an halfe. For these causes therefore and many other absurdities, this first opinion can∣not possiblie stand. And this errour is the rather to be excused in the Ancients (who diverse wayes erred about Antichrist as Bellarmin himself confesseth) be∣cause they saw not the histories of future ages, Ibid. cap. 3. but is not in our dayes to be suf∣fered in the least, but banished out of the Church as a most pernitious errour. For it hath brought both a securitie upon the world hitherto, as also it keepeth the Papists to this day in their blindnes, insomuch as they neither will nor can see and avoyd Antichrist raigning in the Church, long agoe discovered by the light of the Gospell. Concerning the divisions of the times in Dan: we will speak in the following Chapter. The other opinion understands these to be propheticall moneths, The other opinion of fourty two propheticall moneths. Ezech. 4 5 6. Num. 14.34. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 4. col. 438. taking a moneth for thirtie dayes of yeeres or thirtie yeeres, and so these 42 moneths make twelve hundred and sixtie yeeres: like as Ezechiel was commanded to lie on his left side 390 dayes, & upon his right fourty dayes for fourty yeeres: by taking a day for a yeere: so the Israelites are commanded to wander in the wildernes fourty yeeres, according to the dayes in which they searched the land, counting a day for a yeere: and so the Cen∣turie writers of Magdeburg take it: and our Junius on this place; who begins the fourty two moneths, or 1260 yeeres of this treading under foot from the passion of our Lord, & endeth it in Boniface the eight who was created Pope in the yeer 1294. from which the thirty foure yeeres of Christs life beeing deducted, there remaine 1260 yeeres: now concerning this determination, I will speake afterward. Bellarmins objections against this opinion are not solid. He saith, Ibid. cap. 8 that the scri∣pture
indeed speakes of weekes of yeeres Levit. 25. & Dan. 9. but that we finde not dayes to be put for yeeres, or moneths of yeeres: Vnto which I answer, it is not true, that dayes are not put for yeeres: for the two alledged places Num. 14.34. & Ezech. 4.6. doe plainly shew the same. That which he objects, that yeeres are not taken for dayes according to the letter: otherwise Ezechiel must have lien on his left side 390 yeeres, is frivolous, for dayes doe not signifie yeeres litterally, but ac∣cording to the pleasure of God so speaking: fourty yeeres are imposed upon the Israelites for fourty dayes: and on the contrarie for 390 yeeres, 390 dayes are granted unto Ezech. so that it cannot bee denied, but the scripture in a prophe∣ticall sense doth reciprocally put a day for a yeere, and a yeere for a day. Touch∣ing the moneths of yeeres he cavils in vaine. For if the scripture allowes of dayes of yeeres, & weekes of yeeres, why not also of moneths of yeeres, seeing moneths are re∣duced into weekes, and weekes into dayes? The determination I leave to the authors: notwithstanding it seems not to bee without some inconveniences. For first as concerning the life of Christ, In heresi 51 Alogian. I rather thinke with Epiphanius, that he lived 32 complete yeeres and 74 dayes, then 34 yeeres, of which I have spo∣ken somthing otherwere. So then the end of these yeeres would come short of Boniface VIII. Secondlie, it sufficiently appeareth by what we have spoken on Chap. 4.1. I will shew thee things which must bee hereafter, that this account must not begin from Christs passion, or any other time before this vision was exhibited unto John: And therefore these yeeres are to begin after the Revelation, & so after the times of Domitian. Thirdly, although Boniface indeed most wickedlie trode under foot the holy city: yet after him it ceased not: for his successours no way inferiour to him in Anti∣christian tyrannie, have gone foreward treading down the Church unto this day: Now it is apparent that here is noted the time, how long the holy city must be troden under foot by Antichristian Gentiles. So that these XLII moneths shal not be ended, untill the holie city be freed from this treading down. And therefore this opinion also seems to have little soliditie in it. The third, The third opinion touching Sabbath-moneths. is John Fox (that excellent writer of the English booke of Martyrs) in his conjectures on the Revelation, who understands the XLII moneths of sab∣baths, weekes, or yeeres, of so many times seven yeeres, which make 294. and so many yeeres he reckons from the death of Iohn Baptist unto Constantine the Emperour, under whom the Christians first were freed from persecution: as therefore, saith he, the times of the first persecution of Christians under the Jewes and Emperours increased unto 294 yeeres: so likewise the last persecution, & treading down of the holie citie, shall endure 294 yeeres, beginning from the time that the power of the Turkes first began to increase, viz. from the yeere of our Lord 1300. So these moneths should have been ended in the yeere of Christ 1586. and the holy citie now delive∣red from beeing troden under foot by the Gentiles more then 50 yeeres. Now how∣soever I doe not at all derogate from this opinion, as beeing indeed verie pithy and ingenious: yet I scarslie dare follow it. For first, the hypothesis or argument propounded touching the Sabbath-moneths, seems to be very uncertain, neither can it easily be proved by any example of Scripture where a moneth is put for a weeke of yeeres. The which also that excel∣lent divine of great Brittaine Robert Abbad Bishop of Sarum (whom I name for honours sake) seems clearly to prove, Demonstr. cap. 8. pag. 111. in his demonstration of Antichrist against Bellarmin. Secondlie, it appeareth plainely that this prophesie is not to be understood of treading down the holie citie by the Turkes, because two witnesses are brought in prophesying against that treading down: whereas prophesies will little help against Turkish tyrannie: courage & force of armes rather must free the holy city from that oppression. Thirdlie, it is verie unlikely (according to his opinion) that the XLII
42 moneths, should now be finished and the holie city cease to be troden down by the Gentiles: For both in the East, & West a miserable desolation of the holy city is yet to bee seen. For the Turkes power is so far from beeing broken, as on the con∣trary it dayly increaseth, and sets more & more his feet upon the holy citie. The Romish tyrannie also, although it bee greatly weakned by the prophesie of the two witnesses: not withstanding it is not as yet broken, but still oppresseth the Church both in the Western and Northern kingdomes. I therefore leave the conjecture of this most learned man in the same nature, as he himself desireth, I (saith hee) doe not at all assume this to my self, to define here any thing on a certainty, or that my opinion should be any way praejudicatorie unto others far better then my self: this onely I desire, that the same liberty which others take unto themselves, may also bee granted to mee with∣out offence. In Alcasars opinion I finde nothing eyther probable or true, Vestigat. pag. 567. save that he re∣jects the common opinion of Antichrists reigning three yeeres and a halfe. For my part (saith he) as yet I may freely say, that if I take this exposition about Antichrists per∣secution, as the chiefe thing in this eleventh Chapter, then I know not how to draw the line of the REVELATION, and knit things together in order. And afterward: Not∣withstanding as the halfe houre in Chap. 8. & the five moneths in Chap. 9. are not to be taken in a proper sense but mystically: so for the more convenient connexion of the REVE∣LATION these fourty two moneths are not to be taken in a proper but mystical sense: for to take these numbers of dayes, moneths & yeeres as they sound, it were not sutable unto an enigmatical stile. In which two things are to be gathered: First, that this place serves not at all for to establish the common opinion of Antichrists reigning for three yeeres and a halfe: whereas the Patrones thereof doe hence chiefly build upon. Secondly, that our interpreters who take not the numbers of dayes, moneths or yeeres, according to the letter, but understand them eyther of Sabbath-moneths, or propheticall dayes definite or indefinite, The fourth opinion of fourty two indefinite moneths. Act. 1, 7. doe no way stray from the aenigmatical stile of the Reve∣lation. Bullinger therefore & most of our interpreters, considering that the method and drift of this prophesy is chiefly, to enlighten us somewhat in the future events of the Church, but not that we should dare define precisely the moments & sea∣sons, which the father hath set in his owne power, doe thinke, that a certaine designed time indeed of Antichristian persecution is noted, yet left unto us uncertaine so far as concernes the termes, to wit, all that which is reckoned from those fatall 666 yeeres mentioned Chap. 13. unto the last judgement. For confirmation of which opinion two reasons are brought. One, that in Chapter 13.6. this self same number of 42 moneths is attributed unto the first beast, that is, to the Romane Empire: of which we shall speak afterward. The other, because Daniel, Christ our Lord, & Paul the Apostle, doe joyntlie teach us, that Antichrists persecution shall endure unto the day of judgement: the yeere or day wherof no man can certainlie determine. Demonstr. p. 108. Abbat also before spoken of, after many things, at last assents to this opinion: I, saith he, doe willinglie consent to them who suppose that by a defined number of mo∣neths and yeeres, a certaine time indeed is appointed of God, but not so expressed by the very period of the numbers as to be discerned by the Church before hand, but numbred, and circumscribed by the counsell and providence of God alone, and can not be knowen unto us but by the event & accomplishment of them. The which opinion, seeing as yet I find no other more probable, I also far the present will follow, to wit that the time of treading down is defined by XLII moneths, a finite number beeing put for an indefinite: not as if it were not definite and certaine to God. But because it remaines to us indefinite, that is, we cannot at the present determine of the certaine time: It is circumscribed by a few moneths, that the faithfull in their tribulations might bee encouraged unto patience, knowing that their troubles shall not continue overlong, but as it were onely for a few moneths. Againe it is
enlarged unto 1260 dayes, to shew us, that we are to prepare not for trials of some few dayes or yeeres onely: but resolve to be constant unto the end. I confesse there are many things by some alledged to the contrarie, The diffi∣culties a∣gainst the fourth opi∣nion an∣swered. Gen. 31.7. Prov. 24.16. Matt. 18.22. but with little ground. They say, that the scripture doth never put a finite number for an indefinite: but the contrarie appeares by Iacobs speach to Laban: Thou hast changed my wages ten times: And Solomon: The just man falleth seven times. And Christ: Thou shalt forgive thy brother not seven times onely, but seventy times seven, &c. They say in other places of this booke an uncertaine number is not put for a certaine: as Chap. 12.6. The woman shallbe in the wildernes 1260 dayes. And Chap. 13.5. The beast shall rage XLII moneths: And Chap. 20. Satan shallbe bound a 1000 yeeres. So in Ieremie 29.10. After 70 yeeres ye shall returne out of Babylon. Ther∣fore also the number in this place is not uncertaine. I answer in the first place, that the number is not uncertaine to God: although it be so to us, for the pre∣sent. Secondly, there is a dissimilitude of places: now touching these severall num∣bers taken out of the Revelation, we shall speake of them hereafter. The seventie yeeres of the captivity are so circumscribed, as that they could not bee uncertaine, & the event manifested that they were to be taken in a proper sense: as Daniel also teacheth Chap. 9.2. Bellarmin granteth that then a certaine number is put for an uncertaine, Lib. 3. de . R. cap. 8. when the number set down is full and perfect as 10.100.1000. but not when diverse numbers great and small are propounded. But this is infirme and false, as appeares by Luk. 13.32. I doe cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shallbe perfected: which is indefinitely spoken. And Matt. 18.22. Forgive thy brother se∣venty times seven: indefinitely, for verie many times. And Revel. 7.4. & 14.1. 144000. are said to be sealed indefinitely: & Rev. 9.5.10. The Locusts shall hurt five moneth, & in this very Chapt. v. 11. the two wittnesses shall ryse againe after three dayes & a halfe. Reve. 14.20. Blood flowed out of the Lake, by the space of a thousand six hundred furlongs, all which foresaid places are indefinitely to be understood. Yet if I durst speake any thing touching the certaine beginning of these 42. moneths, I would (as most doe) by a propheticall mysterie applie them to 1260 yeeres beginning from the time that the holy city began to be troden under foot by the Romane Gentiles, not the old, but new, that is, by Antichristian Popes, whom we have shewed to be here noted by the Gentiles. They began to tread upon the Church, after they were lifted up into the chaire of universall pestilence: among whom Boniface was the first in the yeere 606. Then the star of the Church of Rome, fallen from heaven upon the earth, opening the bottomlesse pit, brought forth out of the smoke those mortal Locusts, spoken of Chap. 9. From the yeere of Christ therefore 606, untill this time the holy citie hath been troden under foot by the Romane Gentiles, which is the space of 1073. yeeres, and is yet to be tro∣den down 223 yeeres more, to wit, untill the yeere of Christ 1866. But let this terme bee indefinite, seeing the Lord hath reserved it to himselfe, & undoubtedly will shorten it for the elects sake. Wherefore I will determine nothing of these fourty and two moneths. 3. And I will give to my two witnesses] I have expounded the generall prophesie touching the future reformation of the Church, after that the Companie of priests were departed from the faith unto paganisme, and Antichrist had troden downe the holy city by his tyranny. Now followes the speciall prophesie touching the instruments, manner, successe and event of this reformation: serving for the comfort of the faithfull: for when in appearance Antichrist shall have wholy troden the holy city under foot, and thrust Christ (as it were) out of all his possession, then he will shew, that he ruleth in the midst of Antichrists kingdome, and will renew & preserve unto himself, a measured Tēple in the city troden under foot, viz. by the prophesie of his two witnesses. Now this part of the prophesie, is also full of diffi∣cultie,
as, who these two witnesses are, after what manner they prophesied, and to what times this history appertaines. For here are almost as many opi∣nions, as expositours. Yet these things will not be altogether obscure unto us, if we give heed unto the scope laid down by us in the Argument and Ana∣lysis. And I will give] So Beza , and, adversatively, yet it may well be read, but I will give, because it is as it were an exception: as if he had said: In outward appearance the whole city shall be troden down, & all prophesie extinct by Antichrists tyrannie: but I will restore prophesie, For the word po∣wer is not in the Greek, but added by the transla∣tours to make up the sense. that the city of God may be re∣builded. I will give to my two witnesses] He neither names the witnesses, nor expresseth what he will give them. Some therefore gesse one thing, and some another. Beza here adds the same, to wit, the holie city, which agrees well with the sense, because Christ will truelie give, that is recommend the same unto his witnesses, that so it may be set free from oppression, and purged from the fil∣thy smoake of Antichrist. Others: I will give them, to wit, a mouth and wisedome, which Antichrist shall not be able to resist, according to that in Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisedome, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist. Which promise is made to all faithfull pro∣fessours of the name of Christ. Others: I will give them, to wit my spirit, which is all one with the former: but it seems rather that the two future verbes are coupled together as noting the end and effect, I will give to them, and they shall prophesie, for, I will give unto them that they may prophesie, that is, authoritie or power to prophesie; and somuch such coupling of∣ten signifies, as Gen. 34.30. They shall gather themselves together against me, and smite me, and I shall be destroyed. For, that they may smite me, and I, and my house shall be destroyed. So Ierem. 9.1. Oh wo will give my head to bee waters, and mine eye a fountaine of teares: and I will bewaile night and day the slaine of my people, For, that I may bewaile, as Pagninus expresseth it. They shall prophesie therefore, to wit againe, according to the commandement: Thou must againe prophesie. But concerning these witnesses, who they are, and what time was determi∣ned for their prophesying: is a difficult question. I will briefly speak somewhat of it. The Papists, taking the whole literallie, doe vainly dream, The Pa∣pists fable about the two wit∣nesses. that when the Iewes with their leader Antichrist, shall have recovered the citie of Je∣rusalem, then these two witnesses shall be present, who by prophesying shall oppose themselves against these perfidious Iewes and Antichrist 1260 dayes, that is, three yeeres and an halfe: The witnesses they say, are Enoch and Elias, whom they affirme to be yet alive in paradise, and there reserved to this end, that returning into the world they may resist Antichrist: But beeing slaine by him, they shall againe be restored to life after three dayes and an half, at the beholding of which miracle, the Iewes, (as they faine) shall turne to Christ and put Antichrist to death in mount Olivet, and thenceforward prepare themselves for Christ who should now come fourty and five dayes after. From this fable Bellarmin drew his third demonstration in defence of the Pope, that he is not Antichrist, neyther that Antichrist is yet come: because (saith he) the two Prophets Henoch and Elias must come before Christ: but these are not as yet come, whereas the Pope of Rome hath now reigned for many ages: Therfore he is not the Antichrist, neither is Antichrist as yet come. The major of this fable he laboureth to prove, first, by foure places of Scrip∣ture. Malach. 4.5. Behold, I will send the prophet Elias, &c. Ecclus. 48.10. Elias is written in the judgements of times to pacific the wrath of the Lord and restore the tribes
of Israel. And 44.16. Enoch was translated into Paradise that he might give repentance unto the Gentiles Matt. 17.11. Helias shall come, & restore all things. And Rev. 11.3. I will give to my two witnesses, &c. Secondly, by the authoritie of Fathers, as, Hilarie, Hierom, Origen, Chrisostom, Lactantius and Austin, who affirm that the two witnesses are Henoch and Elias who shall come against Antichrist. Thirdlie, by reason, because otherwise a reason cannot be given, why these two were taken up before their death, and yet live a mortall life, and must dy at an appointed time. But verely that in Luk. The Papi∣stical fable refuted. 16.29. doth plainely contradict this fable, for Abra∣ham shewes that none are to be exspected to come from heaven and preach un∣to the world: but that Moses and the Prophets are to be heard. This whole text also, touching the martyrdom of the two witnesses, with the events that follow therupon doth strongly make against this fiction. For how unlikely is it, that those two holy men, who were taken up into heaven, & live with God, should againe re∣turn into this mortal life, to be cruelly murdered by the beast? And how should it be that their carkeises lying in the streets of the great city, should be seen in the space of three dayes & a halfe, of all peoples, nations, tribes & tongues? what shal all the whole world in so short a time flie like Eagles to Ierusalem, to behold two carkeises? And how shall they all rejoyce & send gifts to each other in three dayes time? How can two onely, within fourty two moneths, by their prophesie torment the inhabi∣tants of the whole earth? certainly the thing it self speaketh that this place cannot, nor ought to be understood according to the Letter. And therefore there is some other mysterie in it, which Hierom seeing, thus writes in Epist. 46. to MAR∣CELLA, if (saith he) we follow the litteral interpretation, then we must rest in the Jewish fables, that Jerusalem shalbe built again, and sacrifices offered in the temple, to the weak∣ning of spiritual worship, and strengthening of carnal ceremonies. To the first, I answer that the scriptures alledged, make nothing at all for the matter. Bellarmins arguments answered. For the prophesie of Malachie speakes not of a returne of E∣lias out of Paradise, but of John the Baptists preaching in the power and spirit of Elias, for so the Angel interprets it to Zacharie, Luk. 1.17. He shall goe be∣fore him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the harts of the fathers to the chil∣dren, &c. So Christ himself speaking of John, Matt. 11.14. saith, If yee will receive it, hee is Elias which was to come, namely, according to the prophesie in Malach. 4.5. teaching us, how that prophesie was fulfilled in Iohn the Baptist. Bellarmin insists on the contrarie, that Elias is to come before Christs last comming: For it is said: I send him, before that great and terrible day of the Lord shall come. But this is not of necessity to be understood of the last day of judgement, because the first comming of Christ was also great, by the mysterie of his incarnation and miracles: and terrible to the wicked, witnesse Herods and the Iewes trembling. But be it granted, that Elias shall also come before the last day. Yet Malachie saith not that he shall precisely come three yeeres & an half before the judgement. The former place of Ecclesiasticus makes lesse for the fable, both because it is aprocrypha (and so proves nothing) as also because the Latine reading is faultie as differing from all Greek copies. Of Elias it is said Chap. 48.10. Thou art writ∣ten for reproofes in times, to pacifie the anger of Gods judgement in wrath: to turn the heart of the father to the child, and restore the tribes of Israel: The which things he is said to have done not after his translation into heaven, (of which it follow∣eth afterward in vers. 13.) but in the time of his prophesying on earth. The other place of Ecclus. 44.16. is thus in Greek: Henoch pleased the Lord, and was translated, beeing appointed an example of repentance unto the Nations: But the
old version thus renders it falsly, that he might give repentance unto the nations. Now while he lived he was an example of repentance unto those of his time. The place of Matt. 17.11. doth manifestly speak of the Baptist: For Christ there plainlie affirmes that Elias was alreadie come, to wit, the Baptist, whom they acknowledged not, but put to death. That which goes before: Elias in∣deed shall first come, and restore all things, doth not make any thing for the fable, but the place confirmeth Malachies prophesie, that is, as Elias was certainlie to come, so now he was already come, and that the same prophesie was fulfilled in the Baptist. It was the opinion of the Scribes, that Elias the Thesbite should come before the Messias: who because he was not as yet then come, therefore they denied Christ to be Messias. But Christ declares the false hood of their opi∣nion, because not Elias the Thesbite, but John the Baptist, was prophesied of by Malachie. But the Baptist did not restore all things: how then is he Elias? yea but he did restore all things according to the limitation of Malachie, and the Angel in Luk. 1. For he prepared the way of the Lord, & turned the hearts of the fathers unto the children, &c. The opinion of the Fathers without the scriptures, proves nothing: neither do the fathers agree in one: some will have the two witnesses to be Elias and Henoch: Others Elias & Elisha: Others Elias & Moses: Others Moses and Aaron, because they turned the waters into blood: Others Elias and Jeremie. Now if any desire to know more of the dissentions both of the old and latter writers about these witnesses, Vestigat. p. 578. he may read in Alcasar foure wayes of opinions: The FIRST way, (saith he) is interpreted of two men beeing to preach in Antichrists time. The SECOND, of Antichrists time indeed, but not of two men. The THIRD of two men, but not of Antichrists time. To be short the fourth neyther of two men, nor of Antichrists time. Againe every of these wayes are devided as it were, into diverse divisions of Pathes: and other things there fol∣lowing. Hee himself goes in the fourth way, the worst and falsest of all, The two witnesses he makes to be two great vertues, WISDOM and HOLINESSE, as preach∣ers of the Gospel in the primitive Church against the Iewes: which new opinion needs no refuting, seeing it is manifest that here mention is made not of qualities, but men preaching against the Beast or Antichrist. They, who will have these to be precisely understood of two men, would have had more shew of reason, in applying the same to Iehoshua & Zerubbabel: seeing they two Zach. 4.3. are called two Olive-trees, & two candlesticks, unto which these two witnesses are here likened ver. 4. To his reason, I answer, that it is false that no other cause can be given of the translation of Henoch and Elias, without this fable. For they were taken up alive, that they might be examples to the world, how much the Lord ac∣counts of godlinesse, and that there is another life prepared for the faithfull in heaven. Now to these two he vouchsaved this grace before others, because he was better pleased with them then with others. That Henoch and Elias should yet live a mortal life & be subject to death, is a verie fable. For how can they prove this fiction? And what mercie would there translation into heaven be, if there they are reserved unto a more cruel death? Wheras the Scripture teacheth, that to them who are eyther in paradise, Luk. 16.26. or in the place of torment, there is no going forth or returning. Passing by there∣fore this fable, let us now goe foreward. In Austins notes or the Revelation, Whether the two witnesses be the two testaments. attributed to Triconius the two witnesses are said to be the old and new Testament: which Bede and Brightman follow, and some others of ours: as if the sence should be thus, notwithstanding Antichrists tread∣ing down the scripture, yet God would give it power to prophesie, that is, reprove his tyranny, & instruct the faithfull secretly mourning under the crosse, in the way of life eternal. For the Scriptures are Gods witnesses in the world against the wic∣ked, as Christ saith, search the scriptures, for they testifie of me. Io. 5.39. Now thus far indeed
it is true: But I see not how the following attributes (except it be by a harsh al∣legorie) can be applied unto the scriptures, viz. in that the witnesses are said to be clothed in sackcloth, killed by the beast, their carkeises thrown in the streets, restored to life and ascend into heaven. There are some, who thinke, that in the last times there shall come two most powerfull teachers, who being indued with the power and spirit of Elias, shal fulfill all these things literally, both by prophesying and fighting against Antichrist. But they doe acknowledge, that this their opinion is uncertaine. And therefore in as much as I finde nothing certainely concluded touching this matter by others, and seeing the Lord for the present doth not suggest any thing unto mee, I wil follow the opinion of Bullinger, and some others of our best interpreters, who under∣stand the two witnesses indefinitely, to be diverse reformers of religion in Anti∣christs times. The Papists indeed imagine, The two witnesses are indefi∣nitely to be understood. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 6. that they are two strictly, and no more. But it is not credible, that Antichrist sending forth infinite Locusts out of the smoke of hell into the Church, Christ should raise up onely two witnesses: besides it is im∣possible (as we even now proved) that the things spoken of v. 9.10. should be effected by two persons alone. As for Bellarmins objections, we shall have occa∣sion to examin them hereafter. We therefore by these two witnesses doe indefinitely understand, a succession of certaine maintainers of Evangelical truthes against Antichrist. Yet they are said to be two definitely, both because they are but few in respect of the Locusts, of whom the whole Christian world are full: as also because in all matters of judge∣ment two suffice to confirme a testimony, that so we might neither be deceived by the applause of the multitude of Locusts, nor offended at the fewnes of sincere teachers, wherewith Antichrist upbraides us. Besides in the last place, as of old, the Lord was pleased to use two witnesses as instruments in his hand for special de∣liverances of the Church: Thus he sent two, viz. Moses and Aaron unto Pha∣raoh, for the deliverance of the Israelites out of Aegypt: Josuah and Caleb to search the promised land: Zerubbabel & Jehoshuah to bring back the people from Babylō, unto which two there is here a plaine allusion in vers. 4. As these two latter (I say) sufficed to deliver the people of God out of the first Babylonish and corporall captivity, so two, that is, few prophesying witnesses, shall suffice to deliver the Church from the second Babylonish & spiritual captivity. And thus much con∣cerning the two witnesses. Now what doe they? They shall prophesie] to wit, againe according to the commandement: Thou must againe prophesie: We are not by prophesie, strickly to understand a praediction of things to come: but in a larger sense, for the preaching of Prophetical & Aposto∣lical doctrines, which were darkned, yea troden down by Antichrist, but again renewed by their prophesying, that is, by faithfull preaching unto the Church: for Christ will give this unto them, that is, so arme them with an heroick spirit and qualifications, as that they shalbe able strongly to oppose and shake Antichrists kingdom, which seemed to be so established throughout the Christian world, as if it had been an invincible fortresse. But when, & how long? Two thousand two hundred & sixtie dayes] This againe is hard to be understood: but we must looke back to what hath been treated of touching the fourty two moneths: for it is cleare enough, that by those moneths, & these dayes, one and the same time is designed. The Pa∣pists opini∣on touching these dayes refuted. For fourty two equall moneths precisely consist of 1260 dayes: but herein is the difference, that the Papists restraine these moneths and these dayes astronomically unto three yeeres & an half, which is the time their sup∣posed Antichrist shall reigne, and these witnesses prophesie: but this cannot be, both because the fable of Antichrists standing so short a time, hath been before refu∣ted: as also because it is contradictorie, that the time of Antichrist and of the two witnesses should be of one continuance, & yet Antichrist should slay the witnesses after they had prophesied 1260 dayes, & rejoyce thereat with his followers.
Others interpret these dayes (as the moneths also) prophetically of so many yeeres, taking the beginning eyther from Christs passion, Another opinion not probable. or from the time of Constantine, or from the beginning of the Ottoman Empire: whose opinions we have shewed to be very improbable, because according to them, the yeeres of treading downe the Church, & the prophese of the two witnesses should be ex∣pired now long agoe, but this is not likely. To be short, others understand the XIII moneths, & the 1260 dayes, The third and best o∣pinion. indefi∣nitely, for the time of the Churches oppression, and of the prophesie of the wit∣nesses, defined indeed in Gods eternall comsell, but hid unto us for the present that we should not curiously search to that, which God hath reserved to himselfe, or by knowing the term, to say with the wicked servant, Luk. 12.45. My Lord de∣layeth his comming, &c. And this is the reason why the end of the world is hitherto kept secret from men. The time therefore of reading down, and of the witnesses, shalbe the same: for all the while Antichrist shall tread the Church under foot, the two witnesses shall prophesie: because during Antchrists reign, Christ shall never want two witnesses, least he might seem to be overcome and thrust out of his pos∣session by Antichrist: now without al doubt this is the safest opinion, & sufficeth for the consolation of the godlie. If thou demand what is the reason of the change of moneths into dayes? Why the moneths are changed into dayes. We have nothing here to answer precisely; except, that the same time, & the same thing is set forth by diverse expressions, as it is familiar with the prophets: By two dreames God signified the same thing unto Pharaoh; so generally throughout this whole prophesie, the same events are prefigured by diverse types. Notwithstan∣ding it is not a misse to observe (as some have done) that the lesser number is attri∣buted to the treading down, to denote the shortnes of afflictions: the greater to the witnesses, to signifie the during and invincible power of the Gospel, both which serve to comfort the godly. Furthermore, what we said before concerning the 42 moneths, seems here a∣gaine to bee repeated of the 1260 dayes, & it may be, to the end that the time both of the moneths and dayes might hereby be defined: For why should the spirit of God rather attribute 42 moneths unto Antichrists treading down, then 10, 20, 60 or 100? and why should 1260 dayes be rather appointed then more or lesse? If therefore it might be lawfull to gesse at the termes of the moneths and yeeres from histories past and present, then I should thinke, that as Antichrist be∣gan to tread down the Church, when Boniface the third was set on the Chaire of universal pestilence, anno 606. and that the Church hath now from that time unto this been troden down 34 moneths, and an half: so the prophesie of the two witnesses against Antichrist hath continued 1036 dayes, and so are not yet ended. And as the Churches oppression was not all at one time or instant, neyther was the sorest in the beginning, but it increased by little & little, untill at length the holy citie was troden wholie under foot by Antichrist: so the preaching of the two wit∣nesses, was not alwayes alike perspicuous & powerful against him, but manifested it self in severall ages by manifold martyrdoms: untill at length (the mysterie of iniquitie beeing unfolded) it most manifestly brake forth in these latter ages. For it appeareth by histories, that the Bishops of France & Germanie, yea also of Italie, but especially they of Ravenna, Mediolanum and Aquileia, did often times most stronglie oppose the successours of Pope Boniface: As also Synods not a few have condemned the tryannie and idols of the Popes of Rome: moreover among these witnesses were John Scottis, Bertramus the Abbat, Berengarius a priest, Waldus in France, Wickleffe in England: as also Nicolaus Clemanges, & Marsilius of Patavia. Besides many of the Emperours (as Henry IV. & V. Frederick I. & II. Ludowick IV. &c.) have with all their might suppressed Popish tyran∣nie. Now the reason why I reckon these Emperours among the witnesses, I will shew in the following verse. See also the Catalogue of witnesses, published in two volummes, who by prophesying have opposed the Romish Hierarchie.
A little before the Council of Constans anno 1409. the holy citie was most mise∣rably troden down by Romish beasts, Tom: 11. concil. Con∣stant. sess. XL. art. 67. at what time three Antipopes laid claime, and by tyrannie possessed the Antichristian chaire, viz. Gregorie XII. Benedicte XIII. Alexander V. & after his death Iohn XXIII. who denied that there was any hell or resurrection of the flesh. At this time the Antichristian Church was a horrible three headed monster, the which schisme dured above seventy yeeres. Then Christ raised up two wit∣nesses in Bohemia, Iohn Husse, and Ierome of Prage to prophesie against those Beasts. Who beeing called, appeared before the Councill (Sigismund the Em∣perour having swoorn safe-conduct unto them) and laid down their testimonie in the assemblie of the Locusts, condemning the Antichristian tyrannie of Popes. But the thing here foretold happened unto them. The Beast overcame and slue them: Husse was cruelly burnt anno 1415. 8 of the ides of Iulie: Hierom, anno 1416. 3 of the Calends of Iune. Now however Iohn Husse taught publicklie at Prage in the beginning of the yeere 1400. not withstanding he begane first to maintaine the opinions of Wicleffe and opposed the Beast in the yeer 1412. from which time untill his martyrdom were precisely 42 moneths, or 1260 dayes: So that the Prophesie may seem to have been fulfilled according to the letter in these two witnesses. Now Husse, while he was in the fire, foretold, that the adversaries after an hundred yeeres should give an account to God and to him: which also came to passe: for an hundred yeeres after, the Lord stirred up other couples of Prophets against the beast, In Saxonie Luther and Melanch∣thon: at Argentine Buer and Cariton: In Helvetia Zwinglius and Oecolampa∣dius: In France Farellus and Calvin, who beeing divinely armed with the spirit and power of Elias, be gane with the reed of the holie Scriptures, to measure the temple, reforme the Church, purge the doctrine of the Gospell and cast out the court of priests: these beeing dead, the Lord raysed up other maintainers of the truth in diverse Kingdoms, Provinces, Commonwealthes, Churches & Academies of Europe, who unto this day both by word and writing have stronglie opposed themselves against the Beast, treading the holy citie under his foot. Clothed in sackcloth] The titles of the witnesses now follow, about which we are in a generall way to observe, that what ever of old was attributed in holie scripture as memorable & excellent unto the Prophets & chiefe servants of God, that is here applied unto these: not indeed in a litteral sense (which in many things can not hold) but by a certaine similitude. They shalbe clothed in sackcloth, like unto the Prophet Daniel Chap. 9.13. Two Olive-trees before God, as Zerubbabel & Iehoshua, Zach. 4.11, Fire shall proceed out of their mouth, as out of the mouth of Ieremie, Ier. 5.14. With it they shall devoure their enemies, as Elias 2 King. 1. They shall shut heaven that it raine not, as the said Elias 1 King 17. They shall turn waters into blood and smite the earth with plagues as often as they will, as Moses & Aa∣ron, Exo. 4.5.6.7.8.9.10. By which we may more clearly perceive. First, Against the fabulous o∣pinion of Enoch and Elias. that the two witnesses are not rightly applied to Enoch & Elias: seeing no∣thing of Enoch is here referred unto them. The miracles indeed of Elias are attri∣buted unto them, but not his alone: so that if we should judge by the attributes, one of them should no more be Elias, then Moses, Aaron, Ieremie, Daniel, Zerubba∣bel, or Iehoshua. Secondly, that two individuals are not onely noted, but a few at severall times, yet many successively who shall prophesie against the Beast. For those prophets unto whom they are likened, have prophesied either alone, two, or few, but succee∣ded one another at severall times in the work of the Lord. Thirdlie, The titles of the wit∣nesses are not to be taken lite∣rally. that these titles are not literally, but spiritually accommodated by a certaine similitude unto them, because of some proportionable effects between the foresaid prophets, and these witnesses. For what the former did literallie, these later shall doe spiritually. Now that all these things are thus to be taken, John himselfe shew eth v. 8. calling Rome the seat of Antichrist spiritually Sodome,
Aegypt, & Jerusalem. As therefore the seat of the beast is to be taken spiritually: so also the titles of these witnesses are spiritually to be understood: And that espe∣cially, because these things taken according to the letter, for the most part would appear to be eyther absurd or miraculous. New mi∣racles the markes of Antichrist. But God will not work new mi∣racles: because he hath foretold us, that new miracles shall be the markes of Antichrist. Furthermore the honourable titles given to these witnesses before their mar∣tyrdome, are chiefly five, declaring partly their dignitie, partly their prophetical power. The which we will briefly consider. Clothed with sackcloth] The first title declares their contemptible condition in the eyes of worldly men. Sackcloth was the habit of mourners, as the Ninevites, Title of the witnes is their con∣ttemptible habit. Daniel, Mordecai, are said to have mourned in sackcloth. Christ speaking of them of Tyre and Sidon, saith, that they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. It was also the habit of the prophets, and now is of poore and despised men. Some therefore by their wearing of sackcloth will have the argument of their prophesie to be noted metaleptice: Metalepsis is a figure, by which a word is put from its proper significati∣on. because they shall denounce unto the world mourning, and punishments at hand in regard of Antichrists abominations: and are to call men unto repentance: And indeed rightly may it be thus taken: for their prophesie shall consist in preaching of repentance. Others interpret it of their own mourning, because by their base and mean ha∣bit they shall manifest the bitternes and griefe of their mind for the destruction of the Church and horrible blindnesse of the world: even as such in old time were in bitternes of spirit who cloathed themselves in sackcloth. This also may well stand. Notwithstanding I rather take it of the neglected condition of the ministers of the Gospell. For sackcloth undoubtedly is opposed to the pompe and luxurie & Antichrist, and his Locusts: These glorious praelates, with their soft, silken & broidered garments of gold and silver bewitch the world: whereas on the con∣trarie these witnesses shalbe vile, and despised, scarsly having whereon to live or cloathe themselves. And indeed allmost all the servants of Christ who hither∣to have waged warre with the Beast, have been abject, poor and despised in the eye of the world. Bellarmin upbraides us with this sackcloth as beeing an argument of the falsitie of our religion, The Patrones of our opinon (saith he) have been great and worthie men, and followed by the whole world: but BERENGARIVS was a Deacon, a man neglec∣ted, and having for his followers a few poore Schollers. But for our parts wee need not be offended thereat: for how contemptuously soever the world judgeth thereof: yet the excellencie of the same before God we shall hear by & by. Neither is Bellarmins taunting worth the answering: Lib. 5. de P. R. c. 6. that he never as yet saw any minister of the Gospell clothed in sackcloth. For the two witnesses shall no more be literallie cloathed in sackcloth, then they shall be literallie two Olive-trees, two candlestickes, or breach out of their mouth fire, therewith to devour the adversaries, &c. 4. These are those two Olive-trees] The other title is the dignitie of the two witnesses, opposed to their contemptible condition. The digni∣ty of the witnesses. They shall not bee therefore neglected of God because the world despiseth them: For they are two Olive-trees, & candlesticks: wherby mystically the dignitie of the ministerie of the word is noted, as serving in stead of Olive-trees and candlesticks unto the Church. An O∣live-tree is allwayes green, bringing forth most wholesom fruit. A candlestick beares up the light, by which darknesse is expelled, and the whole house enlight∣ned: so the ministerie of the witnesses shalbe lively & efficacious, because the Oyle and anointing of the Spirit is powred forth through it on the elect. It is known, that the grace of the spirit is verie often compared unto Oile (especiallie by Iohn) in regard of a like efficacie. These witnesses therefore shalbe Olive∣trees, powring forth by prophesy spirituall oyle, that is, they shall be profitable in∣struments for the salvation of true beleevers. They shall also be candlesticks,
as holding forth the light of Gods word, by which they shall drive away An∣tichristian darknesse, and kindle againe the lost light of the Gospell in the Church. I said before, that this is an allusion unto the type Zach. 4.14. where God saith of Zerubbabel and Iehoshua the two captaines that brought his people back againe: These are the two sons of oyle (or anointed ones) standing before the ruler of the whole earth: by which commendatorie title the authority of these two, is set forth. The two witnesses therefore are two Olive-trees not litterally: But first by a certaine metonymia, for, they are two restorers of the Church from under the bondage and yoke of Antichrist, signifyed by these two Olive-trees of old of the Babylonish captivity. And secondly by a metaphor: for, as they rebuilded Ierusalem beeing formerly wasted by the Babylonians & repaired the temple and typicall worship: so these shall restore the Lords spirituall worship, and repaire the holy citie troden under foot by Antichristian Gentiles. Now hence it appeareth, Vnder the two wit∣nesses and Olive-trees godly princes are also to be understood. The digni∣tie of the witnesses. that under these two witnesses, godly Kings & Princes, reformers & maintainers of the true religion, being nursing fathers to the Church, are likewise to be understood. For as one of the two Olive-trees was Jehoshua the Priest, the other Zerubbabel a civill magistrate or prince, who rebuilded the temple and holy citie: So God in these last times will raise up besides the teach∣ers and preachers of his word, some godly and zealous kings and princes, to defend the orthodoxe religion against Antichrist and his followers. Standing before the God of the earth] By the words of Zacharie chiefly the digni∣ty of the witnesses is set forth. In the eyes of the world their sackcloth is vile and contemptible: but with God they are in great esteem, as most sweet Olive-trees and golden candlesticks: or els their fidelitie is noted, as performing their ministery faithfullie & with great constancie, as it were in the sight of God, whom no man can deceive. Antichrist to mans thinking gloriously reigneth with his hellish Lo∣custs, upholding his tyrannie by the favours of the great men, and kings of the earth: but it sufficeth that these witnesses enjoy the favour and blessed presence of God the King of kings, & Lord of the whole earth. The Epithite of the earth doth not lessen, but augment the authority of God: therfore by and by in ver. 13. he is called also the God of heaven. Fire proceedeth out of their mouth] The third title sets forth the power and ef∣fect of their ministerie against the adversaries: Fire procee∣ding out of their mouth a∣gainst the enemies. Iere. 5.14. Ier. 23.29. as the former shewed their digni∣tie & efficacie in respect of the godlie. It is an allusion, partly to the ministerie of Jeremie, & partlie to that of Moses and Elias. Of Jeremies preachings God saith: Behold I put my wordes in thy mouth as fire, but this people I will give for chaffe which the fire shall consume: Againe, My word is as fire, & like the hammer that breaks the rock in pieces. Thus fire shall proceed out of the mouth of the witnesses: But they that would understand it according to the letter, should be more absurd then Pollodorus faining, that a monstre called chimera, vomits flames out of her mouth, and destroyes all what comes neer her, and infecteth the cattle. Now howsoever perhaps it may be credited that fire should proceed out of a beastes mouth, yet that a man should spit fire without hurt (except it were a jugler) hath not been seen, nei∣ther can it be. This fire therefore proceeding out of their mouth is to be spiritually under∣stood of the word of God, proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses, as it is clear by the fore alledged scripture in Ieremie. Neither are the other titles of the wit∣nesses to be taken otherwise, then by certaine allegorical phrases applied to the things signified thereby, as plainlie appeares by the word, SPIRITVALLY, in v. 8. The which thing unlesse it be well observed, we shall be as absurd in ur∣ging the letter touching the killing of the witnesses, the casting of their carkeises in the streetes, their resurrection and ascention into heaven, as in the sackcloth, Olive-trees, candlesticks and ascention of the Beast out of the bottomlesse pit, &c. But against whom shall the fire proceed? Against them that will hurt them] that
is, against their adversaries called  enemies, namely the Beast with the Lo∣custs proceeding out of the infernal smoke, with all other their complices, favo∣rites & adherents. These wil hurt them] By opposing their preaching, both by sophistical dispu∣tations, & cruell proscriptions. But it shal be in vain. For fire proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses shall devoure them. But thou wilt say; The Beast shall destroy the other, for he shall kill and over∣come them. How then shall they devour the adversaries? this must again be spiri∣tually understood. The fire of the witnesses shall devour the adversaries, not by killing them corporally (for in this sence they rather shalbe devoured) but spiritually, be∣cause by the fire of the word they shal lay open to the world the abominations & impostures of Antichrist, confound his idols, & refute his lies, by which his king∣dom shal greatly diminish, & the kitchings of Locusts begin to grow cold. This fire therfore proceeding out of the mouth of the witnesses & devouring the enemies, is nothing els, but that spirit of Christs mouth, 2. Thes. 2.8. by which (as the Apostle foretold) Antichrist shalbe consumed, because the preaching of the Gospel shal utterly consume Anti∣christian lies, like as the fire consumes the stubble. But he alludes (as I said) to the two histories of Moses and Elias: Numb. 16.35. For at the prayer of Moses there came out a fire from Iehovah & consumed two hundred and fiftie sworn rebels. At the prayer of Elias, fire fell from heaven, and consumed the captaines with their fifties beeing sent to take the prophet. 2 King. 1, 9 After their example these witnesses shall devour their enemies by the fire of their mouth, not by any externall miracle, Luk. 9.54. which the disciples in a preposterous zeal desirous to imitate, were reproved for it by Christ: but by a spirituall effect, not un∣like the other, because the fierie preaching of the Gospel shall prevaile against the enemies labouring by all meanes to hinder the same. For (Gr. and) if any man will hurt them] This serves for the confirmation of the efficacie before spoken of. Many shall rise against the Gospell: Anti∣christ indeed shall indeavour to suppresse the witnesses, but to his own de∣struction. He must thus be killed] The particle  thus, or so, doth limit the destruc∣tion of the enemies: he shall not be so killed by the sword or outward force, as to cease from hurting: but he shall be consumed by the fire of Gods word, in so much that his opposition against the Gospel shalbe in vain. What I pray you can be spoken more plainly concerning the events of our age? God raysed up his two witnesses, Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Musculus, & a few other weak Monkes, out of whose mouth the fire of Gods word hath so devoured their opposites, as that they could not resist them by any forces, plots, thundrings or punishments. For by how much they cruelly opposed themselves against the Gospel, by so much the more it was spread over diverse kingdomes & provinces in the Christian world, devouring and confounding the sophistries & subtilties, armes & plots of all So∣phisters and enemies fighting for Antichrist. To be short this whole effect of the preaching of the Gospell may be declared in these words of the Apostle: The weapons of our warfare are not carnall, 2 Cor. 10.4. 2 Cor. 2.16. but mightie through God to the pulling down of strong holds, &c. Again: We are to God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish, to the one we are the savour of death unto death, to the other the savour of life unto life. For the mi∣nistery of the word is powerfull to the salvation of the elect through faith, & de∣struction of the ungodlie through their own perfidiousnes. 6. These have power to shut] The fourth title is their power to shut heaven that it rain not in the dayes of their prophesie. Power to shut heavē. This is a manifest allusion to the historie of Elias, who shut the heavens by his prayer that it rained not on Ahabs kingdom for three yeers and six moneths: whence arose a grievous famin, 1. King. 17.1. Iam. 5.16. by which God punished the wickednes of the Israelites. And from this verie place it appeares, that whatsoever is said of the 42 moneths and 1260 dayes, is not litterally to be un∣derstood
of three yeeres and an half commonly attributed to Antichrist. For then heaven should be shut during the whole time of his kingdom: and this must needs be so, because the heavens shall give no raine in the dayes of the prophesy of these witnesses. But would not this be verie false and absurd according to the letter? For how should Antichrist in so great and continual a famine lead such mightie armies, and obtaine so many great victories over most potent Monarchs? Therfore this also is here to be understood as in ver. The foure yeers stand∣ing of An∣tichrist re∣futed. 8.  shewing that these witnesses have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the dayes of their prophesie spiritually. This they shal doe by the power of the keyes, shuting the kingdom of heaven, that the grace of God raine not upon the contemners of the Gospell: because they condemn the preaching of the witnesses as a most pestilent heresie. The heavenlie raine therefore moistening the drie harts, shall not fall upon them: for they shall not be any whit the better by the preaching of the Gospell, but shall seek for eternal life in their own merits, Popish par∣dons, and paenal satisfactions, whatsoever they shall pretend touching Christ or his free grace. These wordes therefore. It shall not rain in the dayes of their pro∣phesie, doth wholy concern the Antichristian adversaries, on whom the rain of the Gospell (as we said before) shall not come, but onely plentifully moisten the Church of Christ. Hence also we may understand that the time of the witnesses prophesying, was not before properly defined by 1260 dayes, but by a certain allusion unto the historie of Elias: 1 King. 17 Iam. 5.17. For the three yeeres and six moneths in which it rained not in his time, doe make just so many dayes. And they have power over the waters] The fift title,  is their power of turning the waters into blood, To turn water into blood. and smiting the earth with plagues as often as they will, by a manifest allusion unto the historie of Moses and Aaron, who turned the Aegyptian waters into blood, & smote Aegypt with tenplagues, untill at last Pharaoh being drowned in the red sea, the people were brought out of the house of bondage. Thus we see, these things must also be spiritually understood: For when the Church shall be held captive under the Romish Pharaoh, and sigh to God under her oppression, then shall the two witnesses Moses and Aaron come, that is, God will raise up one or more faithfull teachers of the Gospell, who by the preaching of Christs free grace, shall indeavour to set free the Church out of bondage. But Pharaoh shall not hear them: therefore these shall turn the waters into blood, and smite the adversaries with plagues, as often as they will: that is, not once, but many times, like as Moses of old smote Aegypt ten times. Now this they shall doe by threat∣ning plagues against these spiritual Aegyptians, on whom God will take venge∣ance, because of their contemning of the Gospell, by sending wars, seditions, droughts, famines, pestilence and such like evills, which have since the rising of the Gospell been spread over the Christian world, as the complaintes of the common people doe testifie: who impute these miseries to the doctrine of the Gospel. And indeed not altogether without ground, for the Gospel is the occasion thereof, yet onely by accident, for not the word, but the contempt of the word, drawes down plagues from heaven upon the sons of men. Now the witnesses are said to smite the earth, How the witnesses shall smite the earth. God smiting the same upon their threatnings and sighes, which the Lord hearing doth punish the malepertnes of the world with plagues. We need not therefore make any matter of their ca∣lumnies, who impute the fault of these evils unto the Gospell: We confesse in∣deed, that it is the cause: but how? not by any fault of the Gospell in it self (and therefore unjustly imputed) but by accident: For the cause in it self is the idola∣trie of Antichrist, and his rage against the doctrine of Christ Iesus. We have heard what the witnesses shall doe, and effect both in the Church, and touching the faithfull, as also in and against the adversaries. Now followes on the contrarie what the enemies shall doe and effect. 7. Moreover when they have finished] Hitherto we have spoken of the gene∣ral
and special prophesie of the measuring of the temple, or the power and ministery of the two witnesses. Now followes the martyrdom of the witnesses. For Antichrist will not sit still, while these doe prophesie, but prepare himself to warre against the witnesses, over∣come and kill them, cast their carkeises with contempt into the streets, & so re∣joyce with his followers over the slaine: But however the witnesses be put to death, yet prophesie shal not be extinguished, but a tenth part of the great citie shall fall by an earthquake: the martyrs shall again live, & be taken up into heavenly glory. This therfore is the amplification of the Third Act, or Antichristian persecution, which in a diverse event shall continue unto the end. But that which followeth, seemes to be contrary to what we heard before touching the power of the witnesses, in that it is sayd, they shall devour their adversa∣ries with the fire of their mouth, & smite the earth with plagues as often as they will: Now here they are killed & overcome by the Beast. This is already answered on ver. 5. For it doth well agree, that the witnesses shall overcome & bee overcome. They overcome in the goodnesse of their cause by their spiritual power, warre & victory  spiritually, as it is v. 8. because the doctrine of the Gospell, notwith∣standing all Antichristian opposition, shall break forth, confound the lyes of the Beast, & weaken his kingdom. On the contrarie the Beast shall imploy his spiritual & secular weapons against the witnesses, & by tyranny overcome & kill them. The Beast overcoming the wit∣nesses is Antichrist. This Beast ascending out of the pit, is that self same Angel of the bottomlesse pit, Abaddon the king of Locusts, spoken of in Chap. 9.11. that is Antichrist, as Ribera also, Gagnaeus & Anonymus confesse. For this Beast hath his seat in the great city Babylon Rome, as shall appear Chap. 17. v. 9.18. which in the following verses is called Sodome, Aegypt, Jerusalem spiri∣tually. For Antichrist shall rage more cruelly then any beast, against Christ: but touching the Beast more largely on Chap. 13. Now let us see when, & with what successe the Beast maketh war against the witnesses. When they have finished their testimony] Before it was called a prophesie, here a tes∣timony, by which name John familiarly notes the doctrine of the Gospell. This being ended, the Beast shal make war against them, but they shall finish the same, as the Papists say, after they have preached 1260 dayes, or three yeeres & an half. The fable of the four yeeres re∣futed. But this fable we have before refuted, & here it is apparent, that it cannot consist. For after 1260 dayes, the Beast shal slay them, & triumph thereat. Therfore they shal remain, after the witnesses are slain. But according to their supposition, the Beast shalbe no more, but killed after three yeeres & an half. Now we have shewed, that the 1260 dayes of their prophesie is put indefinitely by an allusion unto the histo∣rie of Elias, who by prayer shut heaven from raining for so many dayes. Ther∣fore also the end of their testimonie is to be taken indefinitely, for the time ap∣pointed by God therein to fulfill their ministerie: And so the sence seemes thus; The Beast indeed shal raise up war, so soon as they begin to prophesie, yet he shal not overcome them before they have finished their testimonie according to the will of God. The which serves for the great comfort of the witnesses. For as the high-priests could not hurt Christ, before his houre was come, although they never ceased to lay wait for his life: so likewise Antichrist shall not be able to over∣come Christs witnesses, before the course of their ministery be finished. Therfore the words when they have finished, are not to be referred to Antichrists rage against them, spoken of in the first place, but to the two latter, hee shal overcome & kill them. For he shall alwayes war against the witnesses, but shal not kill and overcome them, before they have finished their testimony. This also serves to prove, that Antichrist shall have power indeed to kill & overcome the witnesses: but not their testimony in the least: for it is said, they shall accomplish their testimonie: And therfore the preaching of the Gospel shal endure unto the end. Thus we see who the Beast is, & what time is to bee understood. It remaines now to be handled what manner of warre it is, & what the effect therof shalbe.
Touching the war it is said, He shall make war against them] Before he had suffi∣ciently declared, what the witnesses should doe and effect against the Beast: now on the contrarie he shewes, what the Beast shall doe and effect against the wit∣nesses, for Antichrist will not sit still and suffer his kingdome to be destroyed, but with all his power wil fight for the same: And therefore as soon as the witnesses shal begin to prophesie against his kingdom, he wil prepare himself to war against them: and by how much their prophesie is powerfull, by so much the warr shall be the greater. But what manner of war, and victorie shall this bee? Rupertus saith, such as is usually betwixt truth and falshood. The war shalbe both ecclesiasticall and civill, and therefore such also shall the victorie be: His Eccle∣siastical war shalbe three manner of wayes. The man∣ner of the beasts war against the witnesses. First, by the seditious sermons of the Locusts, their venemous writings and so∣phistical disputations in the behalfe of Apollyon against the witnesses of Christ, branding them for most pestilent hereticks: They shall preach with great ap∣plause to the multitude, that the Beast is head of the Church, Christs Vicar, and ar∣med as with the key of Peter, so with the sword of Paul and Caesar, crying out with full mouths, that his kingdom is the Catholick Church. Secondly, through the Councils of Locusts, by whose decrees the Beast shall esta∣blish his kingdom, and anathematize, as heretical, the truth of Christ. For it is true, Aene. Syl. in histor. concil. Ba∣sil. pag. 79. as Julian the Cardinal freely wrote from the Council of Basil unto Pope Eu∣genius, that by the meanes of Councils the libertie and power of Ecclesiastical persons hath alwayes been strengthened and augmented. To be short by the bulles and excommunications of the Romish court, by which he shall condemne Christes witnesses with their testimony, for heresie, and de∣livering them over to the secular power, destroy them by fire and sword, to wit, as unworthy to breath or live in the world. Moreover the beast will raise up civill warres, and by his subtiltie cause the kingdomes and provinces of the Chri∣stian world, to fight against the Gospell, that so the witnesses of Christ may bee overcom and killed. Therfore it followeth: The beast shall overcome them, and kill them] The latter declares the former. This very thing doth sufficientlie shew, that these witnesses cannot be literallie taken for Enoch and Elias. For what godly man will beleeve, that those holy prophets whome the scriptures testifie to have been tranflated from death to life eternal, should again return into the earth, to be cruelly killed by Antichrist? Furthermore the Beast shall kill the witnesses, in the like manner he overcame them, partly by ecclesiastical censure, partly by the secular sword: so then not by the goodnesse of his cause, nor by the holie scriptures (for by these the witnesses shall overcome and consume Antichrist) but he shall overcome them by outward force and tyranny, by the authority of Councils, by thundring out his bulles, by cruel warre, and his hangmen. Thus, I say, he warreth against the Saintes, over∣coms & kills them, not by arguments & scriptures: but by sword, fire & excom∣munications. So also my Anonymus 260 yeers past, wrot concerning the Popes victorie: He shall overcome them in reputation of his friendes: & kill them, some corporally, eyther by burning, or murdering them with the sword, & other kinds of death, others civilly by ad∣judging them to perpetuall imprisonment: & against these, whom he cannot torment in this manner, he will at least thunder out his excommunications, insomuch as they shall not be accounted otherwise then dead men in the Church, so far as concerneth a spiritual life. What would not this author have written, had he seen the histories of our time, & the foregoing age, when the Beast anathematized the two witnesses of England: John Wickleffe that excellent teacher and opposer of Poperie (and his protectour John Earl of Leicestre,) whose carkeise not long after being taken up out of the grave he caused to be burnt: When he overcame, & burnt (contrarie to the publick faith of the Empire) the two witnesses of Bohemia, John Husse, and
Ierom of Prage, prophesying that the Ecclesiasticall court of priests should he cast forth. When by the bloodie inquisition he delivered unto death many thousand martyrs in Italie, Spain, France, England, & Belgia: when he enwrapt almost all the pro∣vinces of Europe in cruell warres, to suppresse the Gospell: when at length in Germanie God restored the slaine witnesses unto life? The Iesuites I doubt not, may find this litle commentarie of Anonymus, in their publick libraries, speaking  plainely, impartially, not respecting persons. And thence let them judge, whither the Pope of Rome were by us of late, first accounted that Beast and Antichrist: as Bellarmin falsly affirmeth. Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 21. And their carkeises] The particle, spirituallie, here mentioned, shewes that this also is not literallie to be understood, as we shall further see by that which fol∣lowes. The cruelty therefore of the Beast against the witnesses, falsly condemned for heresie, is hereby noted: forasmuch as they shall not be satiated by cursing and putting of them to death, but also insult contumeliously over them after their death. All sorts of injuries are here noted under this one, which for the kind of it is the most inhumane: namely, to hinder their carkeises (contrarie to the law of all nations) from beeing buried, but causing the same to be thrown forth unto the scorn of all in the streetes of the great city. The carkeises of the witnesses are not onely their bodies, What is meant by the car∣keises of the witnesses. unto which these things doe frequentlie happen according to the letter, (for the Beast wil not suffer any heretick to have Christian buriall, as they call it) but also their names cursed by him, and bookes which he prohibits to be made use of, read, or sold, but causeth them to be burnt, to be short their families also which he seekes by all meanes to make infamous and to suppresse: So that to lie in the streetes, is to be exposed to the publick scorn of all men. But where shall these things be done? In the streets of the great citie] It is questioned what this is. Ierom takes it to be the world; but Ribera refutes him, Epist. 17. ad Marcell. and will have it to be Ierusalem the which thing Alcasar also pleadeth for. But this the text refuteth by the word, spiritu∣ally, here added: as doth the Angel also Chap. 17.18. The woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth: now by that great citie Rome is understood, as the Iesuites themselves confesse: But certaine it is, one & the same great city is both there, and here spoken of. In the stretes of this great city the carkeises of the witnesses shalbe exposed to the scorn of the multitude, both properly and figurativelie. First properly, This great city is Rome see Chap. 14.8. & 17.18. How they carkeises shall lie in the streetes of Rome. because they shall suffer the contumelies here described in the publick places, courts, palaces, temples, theaters & streets of the Romish citie. For the lightnings & thunders of excommunications, the martyrdomes, punishments & warres against the testi∣mony of Iesus Christ, are all forged in the shoppe of Rome, & from thence with great celerity sent abroad over the Christian world: Now by a synecdoche the great city is put for the whole jurisdiction of the Pope, which extendeth it self over all Ita∣lie, France, Spaine, Germanie, Poland, Hungarie, &c. as if all were but one citie, (as the Poet sung of old touching the Romans —Cuncti gens una sumus: Wee are all one nation:) Claudianus in whose streets, & princely palaces, courts, market places, ports, theatres, &c. the martyrs of Christ are reproachfully defamed, cursed & condemned. To be short, least we should be ignorant of what citie these things are spoken, Lipsius & Stapleton have not long agoe published in print: the former the greatnesse of the city, the later of the Church of Rome. Which spiritually is called] By three titles this great city, the seat of the Beast is marked out, that so we may the better understand its shameful filthinesse, horrible idolatrie, blindnesse, cruelty & detestable impiety. Sodom] First Rome is called Sodom, not literally (for Sodom was now long agoe consumed by fire from heaven) but spiritually, or mystically, that is, allegoricallie,
and in a certain similitude: for the word spiritually, is not here put in a Theological but Rhetorical sense: And this is plain, because to speak Theologically, there is no∣thing spirituall in this city, except the bare name, as beeing called the holie city, & Catholick Romane Church. Spiritually therefore it is Sodom, that is, metaphori∣cally, because it is like unto Sodom. But wherein stands the likenes? In filthines & Sodomiticall lust, which horribly reigneth in this great city. And hence it is called the mother of fornications, Gen. 19.5. Ezech. 16.50. Rom. 1.17. ha. 17.4. Chap. 17.5. The abominations of the Sodomites are known unto us by the holy Scripture: and the like evils were practised by the Romanes in the Apostles times. But thereunto Iohn here hath no reference: For he prophesies of Rome which should be the seat of the Beast, & afterward cal∣led a woman of whoredomes. Therfore she is called Sodom, as most infamous by her Sodomitical beastlinesse. Now let us but looke upon the great citie of papacy, what is it, but as an abo∣minable warehouse of all spirituall & corporal fornications? In the city it self, in which is the seat of the Beast, filthy lusts not to be named, are commonlie & freely committed, nourished, commended, & gain made thereof. If any doubt, let him read histories, or goe to Rome: and he shall finde the truth of that, which PE∣TRARCHA complaines of: viz. that deflowring, ravishing, incests and adulteries are now but as a sport to the Pontificall lasciviousnes. He shall finde that of Mantuan true: I pudor in villas, si non patiantur easdem Et villae vomicas: Roma est jam tota Lupanar. Goe shame into the villages if they refuse Such lothsome beastlinesse: whole Rome is now a stewes. And again: Roma vale, vidi, satis est vidisse revertar. Cum Leno, meretrix, scurra Cynaedus ero. Now farwel Rome, I have thee seene, it was enough to see: I will come back when as I mean, bawd, harlot, knave to be. And what was answered to one inquiring about Rome: Roma quid est? Amor est, quem dat praeposterus ordo, Roma mares: noli dicere plura scio. But what is Rome? she is that love which natures rule doth breake, For its at Rome 'mongst males: I know much more, but wil not speake. There have been some (as I have heard) and glad I am I have not seen the same who have published bookes by the Popes authoritie in commendation of the un∣naturall villany of Romish buggerers. O WICKEDNESSE, O SODOME. And Aegypt] Aegypt was not a citie, but a kingdom: by which we under∣stand that this great citie is to be applied unto the whole kingdom of the Beast: For allegorically it is Aegypt, that is, like unto Aegypt. In what? in idolatrie, blindnesse, & cruelty. Herodotus witnesseth that the Aegyptians were beyond measure superstitious, worshipping oxen, cowes, doues, onyons, garlick, & other herbes. Juvenal also Sat. 15. sheweth, that the Aegyptians were so deprived of understanding, as to wor∣ship the Crocodyle, the bird Ibis, munkies, fishes, dogges, hogges and onyons. Oh holie nations (saith hee) who have their Gods growing in gardens. The great citie of the beast, changing the name onely, doth worship the same, or the like thinges. For there is nothing at all which the Priestes (after the example of the Aegyptians) doe not give religious adoration unto by their consecrations. Yea the Beasts idolatrie is worse, in honouring of wood, stones, brasse & gold, together with his breaden god, wheras the Aegyptians for the most part worshipped things in which there was life. Mantuan therefore Eclog. 9. taxeth the Romanists for viler idolatrie, then was amongst the Aegyptians in these verses: Fama est Aegyptum coluisse animalia quaedam: Et pro numinibus multas habuisse ferarum.
Illa superstitio minor est, quam nostra, ferarum Hic aras habet omne genus, contraria certè Naturae res atque Deo, qui dicitur olim Praeposuisse hominem cunctis animantibus unum. That Egypt did adore some living creatures, heard have we. And for her gods some wild beasts she, acknowledged to be. That superstition sure of theirs, is lesse then ours by farre, Because for Beasts of every kind, high altars now there are: Which thing against both nature is, and Gods most righteous law: For he ordaind over all Beasts, one man to have the sway. So then the great city & seat of the Beast is Aegypt, that is like unto Aegypt in wicked Idolatrie. It is also like it in miserable blindenesse: we read, that the Lord sent on the ob∣stinate Aegyptians such darknesse, as that for three dayes together they groped at noon day like blinde men. So the city of the Beast, what is it, but a kingdom of darke∣nesse, wherein miserable blindenesse and ignorance of the scriptures, yea & of God & Christ doth extreamely abound: Luther writes wel: In act. Au∣gust. lit. P 207. Italie is cast into the grosse darkenesse of Aegypt: in somuch as they are become all of them altogether ignorant of Christ, and of the thinges appertaining to him. To bee short, as Aegypt of old most cruellie oppressed the Church by a lamen∣table bondage for the space of 225 yeeres: even so hath the Church now of long time been burdened, yea & yet groaneth under the yoake of Antichrist & king∣dome of the Beast. And therfore this great city is fittlie called Aegypt, because of her cruelty. Where also our Lord] Hence Ribera and Bellarmin doe faine, In Apocal. 11. nu. 22. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 13. that the great city or seat of Antichrist, is not Rome but Jerusalem. For in what citie (say they) was our Lord crucified, except Ierusalem. But this is a vaine shift, for as before the seat of Antichrist is called Sodome and Aegypt not litterally but spirituallie: so here it is called the citie where our Lord was crucified, that is, Ierusalem in a spi∣ritual sence: This then is the third title of the great city beeing called Jerusalem where our Lord was crucified. Ierome and others dispute, how Christ was crucified in Aegypt, Epist. 1. ad Marcell. & how Ierusa∣lem is called Sodome: but it is beside the purpose: For the words  where also, doe not cohere with Aegypt next preceding (for the scripture no where saith that Christ was crucified in Aegypt) but are to be referred to the former words  of the great citie, as the particle  (and, or also) inserted doth shew: as if he had said, it is called also that citie, where our Lord was crucified, that is, Ierusalem. Furthermore it wil clearly appear on Chap. 17. The great citie is not Ierusalem. that this great citie the seat of Antichrist, is not Jerusalem literallie: for there the great citie is said to have seven mountaines, and to reigne over the kings of the earth, neither of which agrees literallie to Ierusalem, but both unto Rome: For Ierusalem had never seven mountaines, but onely three hils, viz. Sion, Moriah, and mount Calvarie: It never held the Empire of the world, as Rome hath don: To be short, It was never absolutely called the citie, or the great citie, but this title was proper to Rome onelie. Lib. 8. de bello sacr. Wilhelmus Tyrius writing of the largenesse, of Ierusalem, saith, that it is a city lesse then the greatest, yet greater then the middle sort: But of Rome Lipsius writeth, Lib. 3. de magn. Rom cap. 2. that the greatnesse thereof appeares to this day, and that her ancient walles contained in circuit XV or XVI miles. So that the Iesuites here doe falsly and guilfully send us unto Ierusalem, that we might not seek Antichrist at Rome, Furthermore why the great city of the Beast is compared unto Ierusalem, ap∣peares by the following paraphrase, where also our Lord was crucified. Ierusalem cru∣cified our Lord literallie. The great citie of the Beast doth it spirituallie. Now there is nothing more cruel or ungodlie, then to crucifie the Lord of life: yea it is more cruel for to crucifie Christ spiritually, then his witnesses literally. And
therefore the seat of the Beast is called Ierusalem, because of their unheard cruelty & impiety, killing the Prophets and witnesses of Christ against all right & rea∣son, yea (not satiated with their death) have exercised all maner of contumelies upon their dead bodies. Besides (as much as in them is) they not once, but daylie sacrifice, destroy, cru∣cifie and kill Christ himself. Epist. 19. Let us heare Petrarcha long agoe accusing Rome of this most horrid parricide in his own words: Behold thou seest a people not onely adversarie to Christ, but that which is worse, under Christs ensigne rebelling against him, and fighting for Satan, beeing druncken with the blood of Christ, and malapertly saying: Our lips are ours who is Lord over us? a hard harted & wicked people indeed, proud, hungerstarved & thirstie, allwayes gaping, having sharp teeth, crooked nailes, slippery feet, a stonie breast and hart of steel, a minde of lead, but hony in their mouth: a people unto whom thou mayest well apply not onely that of Christ and the Prophet: This people honoureth me with their lips: but their heart is far from me: But that also of Ju∣das Iscariot, who betraying his master with a kisse, said, haile master. And that of the Jewes, who clothed Christ in purple and crowned him with thornes, smote & most contu∣meliously spat in his face, & bowing the knee worshipped & saluted him, saying: Haile king of the Iewes: whom they in the mean time accounted neyther as God or a king worthie of divine or humane honour, but as a blasphemer guilty of death, reproach and judgement. But what? is not the like daily practised among Christs enemies and Pharisees of our age? doe they not buy, sell, & make marchandise of Christ himself, whose name notwithstanding they seem day and night to extoll with most high prayses, whom they cloath with purple & gold, whom they load with precious stones, salute and worship: Him I say, as if he had his eyes covered & saw not, they crown with the briars of wicked mens workes, defile him with the spittle of a most impure mouth, and inveigh against him with viperous hissings, strike him with the dart of venemous actions, and what in them lies doe again and again deridinglie drag him, as naked, poore & scourged on mount Calvarie, and wickedlie consent to naile him unto the crosse. And oh shame! oh griefe! oh indignitie! Even such are the Romanists at this day as it is reported. These things Petrarcha wrote concerning Rome. Now let the Romish Locusts see how they can deny, Rome to be spiritual Ierusalem, & themselves crucifiers againe of the Lord of life? A Recapitulation or summarie repetition of the third Vision, hitherto expounded. BEcause we have for-borne a while (upon some occasion) the interpretation of the eleventh Chapter, wherin (as we have before shewed) is contained the third and fourth Act of the third Vision touching the seven trumpets: therfore, to make way the better, for what remaines to be handled, it wil be worth our labour in a brief way to cal to memorie the summe of this Vision. We distinguished the same for methods sake into four Acts. The first whereof Chap. 8.9, was a proposition of the calamities of the Church under the sounding of sixe trumpets, that is, by Romane tyrants, until the time of Constantine, and from thence by hereticks and ambitious Bi∣shops, unto Gregorie, and at length by the Westerne Antichrist the king of Locusts, unto the council of Constans, as also by the Mahumetan tyranny, until the overthrow of the Eastern Empire, & taking of Constantinople. The second Act was contrarie to the former, as treating of the conso∣lations,
during the whole time of the Churches afflictions, the which the godly ought to oppose unto their calamities, that they might not be discouraged in regard of the long continuance of the crosse Chap. 10. The summe was: Iohn saw a mighty Angel descending from heaven, having a booke open in his hand, standing with his right foot upon the sea, & his left upon the earth: cry∣ing with a great voyce like a roaring Lyon, insomuch as seven thunders ut∣tered their voyces, lifting up his right hand to heaven, and swearing by the living God that the time of afflictions should be no more, but that even now at the sounding of the seventh trumpet an end of labours, and the accom∣plishment of the judgement of God were at hand, To be short commanding Iohn to eat up the booke that was open, and againe to prophesie before the end. By all which things we are taught, that in the midst of the rage of ene∣mies and greatest distresses of the godly, Christ doth descend from heaven, not leaving his Church as an orphant, but holding in his hand the open booke of his word, that it might not be altogether suppressed: sets his feet upon the earth and sea, that every where some remnants of the faithfull might be preserved: By his Lionlike voyce he stirs up the thunders which utter their voyces, that is, some sincere preachers opposing themselves against Antichrist, although their voyces remained sealed, nor profited much for a season: Con∣firms by oath the deliverance of the godly, and destruction of the wicked, that Antichrists rage might not alwayes continew: To be short, gives a command∣ment to Iohn to eat up the booke, & againe to prophesy, that the godly might consider that the grosse darknesse of Antichrists kingdom should be expelled in these last times, the Church reformed, & his tyranny diminished by prophesie renewed, as by a clear light breaking forth. This is the second Act Chap. 10. The third Act is an amplification of the calamities of the Church under Antichrist: describing new combats of the faithful with the Beast, their de∣liverance, & the clearing of doctrine, and a future reformation of the Church by the two witnesses of Christ. Chap. 11. in the first 14 verses. The fourth Act, at the sounding of the last trumpet shalbe a joyful change of things: For then both Antichristian kingdomes shalbe destroyed, and the adversaries cast into hell, but the godly everlastinglie rewarded: from v. 15. unto the end. This is the summe of the third vision, the which it behooveth us to have before our eyes, that the coherence & sense of the Prophesy concerning the two witnesses may the better be understood. Now I have shewed before, that the third Act concerning the reforma∣tion of the Church is propounded two manner of wayes: First generally, where Iohn is commanded with a measuring reed to mete the temple of God, the altar, and the worshippers therein: yet not to measure the inward court, but to cast it forth, because both it and the holy city also was given unto the Gentiles to be troaden under foot 42 moneths: In which we observed, that the measuring of the temple doth shadow out the repairing of the Church op∣pressed by Antichrist, & to be effected chiefly in the last times by the reed of Gods word: The which reformation the inward court or clergie should not admit: as refusing to bee measured: And therfore should be cast out, that is, declared not to appertaine unto the Church, because Antichrist hath troden down the same with more then heathenish idolatrie and tyrannie.
Touching the time of the XLII moneths I have shewed diverse opinions of learned men about it: among which two may be received as most pro∣bable: by supposing each moneth to containe thirtie dayes, which make as in v. 3. 1260 (not astronomical but) prophetical daies, by reckoning a day for a yeere, as in Ezech. 4.6. And in this sense the yeeres of Antichrists trea∣ding down the Church are 1260. But where to begin, or where to end them God knoweth: perhaps the time cannot be calculated & defined by any man. Therfore most learned interpreters dare say nothing of certainty about this, for howsoever the time of this treading down be defined by the counsel of God: yet is not to be searched into by us a priori, nor known for the present. In this sense they hold that the number of yeeres are definite in Gods decree & as revealed to Iohn, but so far as concerneth us and our knowledge indefinite: for it is not for us to know the moments which the father hath kept in his own power. Notwithstanding if any thing were by us to be defined from histories, then the time of this treading down began, when the Romish Antichrist first ma∣nifested himself unto the world by stepping into the chaire of universal pesti∣lence under the Emperour Phocas anno 606. And in this sense the treading down from that time unto this hath dured 1036 yeeres, two hundred twenty & four yeeres yet remaining unto the end: But far bee it from us, that we should dare pronounce any thing peremptorily of Gods secrets. These things generally touching the measuring of the Church v. 1.2. Secondly, the Churches reformation is more specially declared, as by whom, how, with what successe and event it should be don. Christ shalbe the author thereof: The two witnesses his administrators, I, saith he, will give unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesie, &c. The two witnesses according to the common conceit are to be Enoch & Elias, who shall descend from heaven, & prophesie against Antichrist, and be killed by him. But the vanitie of this Iewish fable hath been shewed by us. Concerning the conjectures of others we have also spoken. At last we consented to that opinion as the most safe, by which the two witnesses are partly definitely, & partly indefinitely understood. First Indefinitely, of such sound teachers raysed up by the Lord in these last times during the greatest oppression, for to purge the doctrine of the Gospel, from the filth of poperie. These are said to be two, not individuallie (for what can be more absurd then to thinke that Christ should have onely two witnesses, Antichrist having in the mean while many thousands of Locusts.) But two, that is, a few, who should suffice to hold forth the truth in all times, even as in judgement, by the testimonie of two (or three) every thing is established. Secondlie two definitely: because as God of old was wont to use the mi∣nisterie of two worthies in the execution of his singular and special workes, one of them commonly being a civill, the other an ecclesiastical person: Thus he sent Moses & Aaron to Pharaoh: Ioshua & Caleb to spie the land: Elias & Elisha unto Ahab: Zerubbabel and Ioshua to bring back the peo∣ple out of Babylon, & to restore the worship & temple of Ierusalem, unto whom there is here a manifest allusion in v. 4. so he raised up under Anti∣christ
for the most part two speciall instruments among his witnesses for the maintenance of his truth: as Iohn Husse & Ierome of Prague, whom the Locusts of the Councill of Constans most cruelly burnt against the publick faith: In our Fathers dayes Luther and Melanchthon in Saxonie: At Argentine Bucer and Cariton: In Helvetia Zwinglius and Oe∣colampadius: In France Farellus and Calvin: and so others in other places. Furthermore he described the power of the witnesses by many excellent and wonderfull phrases taken out of the historie of the chiefe prophets: viz. Their enemies that would hurt them, they shall devour by the fire of their mouth, as did Elias and Ieremie: shut heaven that it raine not for three yeeres and sixe moneths, as did the said Elias: Turn wa∣ters into blood, and smite the earth with all manner of plagues, as Mo∣ses and Aaron smote Aegypt: by which allegories is signified, that at length the preaching of the Gospell should goe forth with such force & effi∣cacie as that no opposite power or threatnings should be able to hinder the same. Notwithstanding however they shall finish their testimony, yet they shall prevaile little against the Beast: for the Beast shall warre against them, overcome and kill them by drawing out both swords, as we have declared. Neither shall the Beast be satiated by oppressing the witnesses: but shall cast forth their dead bodies as dung to the scorne of the common people into the streetes of Rome, the great citie, which is spirituallie, that is, al∣legorically called Sodome, because of Sodomiticall filthinesse reigning ther∣in: Aegypt, because of their Aegyptian idolatrie, darknesse and obstinacie against Christs ambassadours: and Ierusalem because of their wicked cruel∣ty, daylie crucifying the Lord Iesus Christ both in his members, as also (as much as in them is) destroying him now glorified in the heavens in their daylie sacrifice of the Masse. Thus far we formerly went in our interpreta∣tion. Now we goe forward. 9. ANd they of the kinreds shall see] The publick rejoycing of the Christian world in the contumelious oppression of the wit∣nesses of Christ, is here signified: for they are so far from commiserating of them, as on the contrarie they altogether approve the Beasts cruelty, in sulting & triumphing over their dead bodies, as conquered enemies. This is the summe of the two verses: in which is aggravated both the cruel inhumanitie of the Beast & his followers: and the ignominious condition of the witnesses. But wherefore? To the end that seing it to come so to passe, we should not be offended, as if some strange thing happened unto us. For the spirit here foretelleth it, as Christ also said unto his disciples: yee shall mourn, but the world shall rejoyce: Ioh. 16.1.2. Yea the time commeth that whosoever killeth you, will thinke that he doth God service. But the com∣fort, by which the witnesses should raise up themselves, is annexed. Let us con∣sider the words. And shall see] to wit, the men of this world: for Antichrists rage shall not be secret, but he will publickly oppose, & warre against the witnesses of Christ: nei∣ther shal a few onely see it: But they of the people, and kinreds, and tongues, and na∣tions] to wit, all people &c. Which Ribera rightlie interprets of all those nations which shall cleave unto Antichrist: And therefore it is false that the Iewes onely shall cleave unto him. For his kingdom shall be spread over all peoples, nations,
and tongues, that is, the whole Christian world shal close & joyne with him. Let us not therefore be moved with the vain boasting of the Papists, because of the largenesse of their Church, & that all kings, princes, great men, and peoples of the Christian world follow the Pope: a few poore and obscure men onely excepted, who professe the Gospell. As if the multitude of strayers could excuse errour: or that it had not been foretold by the spirit, that so it should come to passe. The word  shall see, here used, is changed in 11 vers. into  signifying, to contemplate diligently & with pleasure. So that they shall see the dead bodies of the Saintes with great delight & joy: for all shall applaud their king: as if his tyranny were just and righteous, yea and that in killing of hereticks he did a divine worke. But how long shal they see them? Three dayes and an halfe] For so long their carkeises shal lie unburied. Romish writers doe not agree about this time. What is meant by the three dayes and an halfe. Lyra applies this whole historie of the witnesses unto Iustinian an Eutychinian Emperour, who by Belizarius banished Pope Sylverius, & imprisoned Mena the Bishop: and this he will have to be the three yeeres and an half. Rupertus doth scarselie agree with himself, for one while he takes it definitely for three yeeres and an halfe: another while indefinitely for a short time. Ribera understands it properlie of three dayes and an halfe. Alcasar applying it to the Iewish persecution leaves it indifferently to be taken either for so many yeeres, or moneths. But to take it in any of these wayes, The fable of Anti∣christs reigning three & an half yeere refuted. the fiction of Antichrists three and an halfe yeeres reigne is thereby refuted. For if Antichrist even after that the witnesses are slaine (who had prophesied during the three yeeres and an halfe of his kingdom) shall see & rejoyce three dayes (or yeeres) and an halfe over their dead carkeises: then it must needs be false, tha the is precisely to reigne three yeeres and an halfe: for by that account he shall either reigne seven yeeres, or at least more then 1260 dayes. Our interpreters also are not of one minde about it: yet agree in the maine ar∣gument & scope. Io: Foxe applies it to the councill of Constans, which precisely dured three yeeres and an half. So long therefore the carkeises of the two witnesses Iohn Husse, and Ierome of Prague, did lie in the streetes of the great city, that is, the council gathered out of all nations, peoples, tribes and tongues: And so long the Fathers of the coun∣cill rejoyced over the witnesses beeing dead. Brightman referrs it to the Councill of Trent in which the Fathers likewise re∣joyced three yeeres and an halfe over the treading down of the scriptures of the old & new Testament, which he maketh to be the two witnesses. Now however these things be verie probable: yet I dare not conclude whither the spirit had respect hereunto. I thinke it more safe to follow their opinion who understand the three dayes & an halfe indefinitelie of a short time, in which the contumelie of the witnesses, and triumph of the adversaries shall endure, beeing scarselie the halfe of a weeke: Es ist vmb drey oder vierthalb tag zu thun, so hat der Pfaffen tantz vnd jubiliren ein ende: that is, It is but to doe for three, or three dayes and an halfe, and then the Popes dancing & melodie shal have an end. This circumstance of time therefore is inserted in way of comfort, as taken (which is usuall unto the scriptures) from the brevity of their trouble and delive∣rance at hand. Io. 16.16. 2 Cor. 4.17. Cic. in Lael A little while and yee shall not see me, &c. Our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding waight of glory. Wherefore as Cicero saith: Omnia adversa quantumvis magna, tolerabilia esse, si sint brevia: all ad∣versities are tolerable, though great, if they be short. And their carkeises] The carkeises of the witnesses we shewed to be not onely their bodies, The car∣keises of the witnesses vnburied. against which Antichrist rageth by the civill and spiritual sword: but also their bookes, writings, families and estates. These things shal lie unburied in
the streetes, that is, publickely exposed as doung to all manner of reproach. And the reason is given. For they shall not suffer them to be put in graues] The which cruelty is contrarie to nature, and the Law of nations. But who will not suffer it? The Beast with his mitred Locusts and the rest of his followers. As by their Councils may be seen. Now here one sort of the worst of contumelies is put for all kind of reproaches, which hitherto in the Papacie (as histories testifie) have been fulfilled according to the letter. For according to Popish lawes, such as are hereticks, may not be buried, as beeing unworthie to be covered with earth: but rather to be consumed in flames of fire: And therfore anno 1387 the Councill of Constans or∣dained, that the bones of Wickleffe should bee taken out of the grave 28 yeeres after his death, and burnt, that so the ashes therof might lie unburied in the streets. The said Council would not permit the carkeises of the two witnesses Husse and Je∣rome to be put in graves, but to be burned, & the ashes cast into the River Rhijne: And the like cruelty the Beast hath exercised against infinite carkeises, writings, fa∣milies and estates of Martyrs. That the bodies of Luther, Melanchthon, & other witnesses were not cast forth in like maner, was not for any want of crueltie in the Beast. For had they fallen into his hands, they should have had the like usage. Now the spirit would not have us to be offended at this kinde of contumely: for it no way derogates from the salvation of the witnesses: because, precious in the eyes of the Lord, is the death of his gratious Saintes: and to be unburied is but a small losse. 10. And the inhabitants of the earth shall rejoyce] The madnes and fury of Anti∣christians is here shewed, with the cause thereof. Inhabitants of the earth] Thus in way of contempt (as in Chap. 6.10.) he calleth worldly men, the sworn vassals of the Beast, the children of the earth, wholy given to worldly things. This is Antichrists Catholick Church here upon earth. What shall they doe? They shall rejoyce over the dead bodies of the martyrs, and send presents one to another in token of joy, as they use to doe in times of publick triumph and victorie. But this is an inhumane, not to say a divelish wic∣kednes, for to rejoyce at anothers harme, and insult over the afflicted. It is (saith Rupertus) a most foule sin for wicked men to rejoyce in their evill, and ungodly actions. But wherat shall they laugh? even at their own wickednes, which is indeed madd mirth, and to be ashamed of. During the Councill of Constans, were kept publick bankets and showes at the burning of the martyrs, as if they had overcome their enemies. And to this day as often as the Locusts condemn the Saintes unto the fire, they keep holy dayes (as they call them) and feastings, they sing Te Deum Lau∣damus: and gratulate each other by sending gyfts, and presents one to another. We therefore ought not to be offended at this furious mirth of the Beast & his fol∣lowers, but rather to be confirmed in the faith: for in this very thing, he doth ma∣nifestly shew himself to be the great Antichrist. Now what is the cause of their joy? Because these two prophets tormented the in inhabitants of the earth] This indeed Antichrist pretends, as if the martyrs were justly put to death, deprived of Buriall, and burnt to ashes, because they were troublesome by their preaching, disturbers of the publick peace, guilty of crimen laesae majestatis, blaspheming God and the Saintes, and opposing the Catholick Church. But it is a lying pretence, for the Gospell is the doctrine of peace, Antichrists false pre∣tence for his tyranny. of com∣fort and life. The witnesses therefore labour by their doctrine to keepe the inhabitants of the earth from eternall torments, and to direct them into the way that leadeth to e∣ternall salvation. Neither is it any fault in the witnesses that the ungodly are of∣fended at the doctrine of Christ, pricked in their consciences, tormented and be∣come ontragious, but it is by their own malice: who, because they love falshood, hate the light, as such which have sore eyes cannot endure the brightnesse of the sunne. The Gospell therefore torments the wicked by accident, For in its self it comforts, & makes glad the hearts of the faithfull.
Hence we learn, that it is the propertie of Antichristians, falsly to impute that unto the witnesses of the truth, which is proper unto themselves: For it said is in Chap. 9.5. It was given to the Locusts not to kill but torment men: so then it is the proper worke of the Locusts to torment and vexe the conscience by their deceits: And yet they are not ashamed falsely to accuse the witnesses of Christ, as if they tormented the sons of men. 11. But after three dayes] We have heard the martyrdome of the witnesses, and the triumph of Antichristians thereat. Now let us heare the catastro∣phe or change. The witnesses that were slaine are delivered and restored to life and glorie: the adversaries amazed, tremble and perish. Which serves to comfort us against Antichrists crueltie: considering that unto us a certaine delive∣rance is here shewed, but confusion to the adversaries. Let us therfore patiently suffer his tyrannie, for it shal neither dure long, nor hinder our salvation. For being overcome we conquer. Euseb. lib. 4. histor. cap. 12. This caused Antoninus the Emperour to forbid the gover∣nours of Asia, to draw the Christians before their tribunals, and punish them: because, saith he, by dying they overcome, for they rather choose to die for Christ, then to live. After three dayes] That is, as Rupertus saith well: After a little while, although it seem long, see v. 9. First the miraculous vivification & glorification of the witnesses is described. Secondly, the effects following upon the enemies. For the first: The spirit of life] That is their vital spirit by an Hebraisme, or life, that is, the soule or ghost which they gave up at the hour of death is said, to enter into them from God (that is, by a divine miracle) and that they stood upon their feet: which phrases seem to be taken out of Ezech. 37: and shew both Gods omnipotencie, by which he restores the dead to life as oft as he pleaseth: as also the immortalitie of the soule, which though separated from the bodie, yet is not killed by tyrants, but doth live with God, & shal return from him into its own bo∣die againe. Now to the sense. The Papists take it for the miraculous restauration of the two witnesses Enoch and Elias from death to life after three dayes: Papists o∣pinion tou∣ching the vivification of the two witnesses. And Ribera disputeth how the raising and glorification of the witnesses agrees with that of Hebr. 11. That with∣out us they might not be consummated, or perfected. But their fabulous opinion touching Enoch & Elias hath often been refuted, the which is here also mani∣festlie contradicted, in that the two witnesses are said to have tormented the inha∣bitants of the earth. Now it is absurd to imagine that two poore prophets should torment all the tribes, peoples, nations and tongues of the whole earth in the space of three yeeres. So that this dualitie of the witnesses (so to speak) cannot be restrained to two in∣dividuals, or unto two precisely. Now however the vivification of the witnesses shall literallie come to passe in the end of the world, yet unto that the spirit here hath no respect at all. But by this vivification is signified a perpetuall restoring of witnesses unto the Church militant, viz: that in stead of such whom Antichrist puts to death, the Lord will raise up others to hold forth the testimonie of Christ, and strongly oppose the Beasts kingdome. For when Antichrist shal thinke that all Christs witnesses are suppressed, then others restored to life shall renew againe the battle against him. As therfore Elias is said to have lived againe in John Baptist, not by a Pytha∣gorean , or transmigration of the sowle out of one bodie into another: but in condition or nature of office: because John came in the power and spirit of Elias preparing the way for Christ: So the two witnesses: As for example, John Husse, and Jerome of Prague being killed by the Beast, they lived a∣gaine after three dayes & an half in Luther, Melanchthon, & others, &c. And to this purpose that of Husse being led to his martyrdom doth excellently serve: At the end, said he, of an hundred yeeres (which before God are scarsly three dayes) yee shall answer to God and to mee. He said also, now indeed ye burn a Goose (for Husse
in the Bohemian tongue signifies a goose) but out of his ashes shal arise a swanne, which yee shall not be able to rost. Foretelling that which afterward came to passe, for just so many yeeres after Husse was burned, Luther begane to oppose Popish pardons, which was the beginning of reformation, and bringing down of Popery. This restoring of the witnesses to life, serves for the consolation of the Church militant: feeing there shall alwayes, (notwithstanding all Antichristian persecu∣tion) be some faithfull professours of the truth, who shall strongly fight for the glorie of Christ. So then if Antichrist kill the two witnesses, God will againe vi∣vifie them, and make them to stand upon their feet, by raising up others in their place. That which is added touching the Glorification of the witnesses serves also to comfort us. For to whom Antichrist shall deny the fellowship of men, to them God will vouchsafe a heavenly fellowship: such as he shal exclude out of the world, God wil receive them up into paradise: they whom here he will not admit to be honourablie buried, them God will crown with the glory of everlas∣ting life. This is that which followeth v. 12. 12. And they heard a great voyce from heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld them. 13. And the same houre was there a great eartquake, and the tenth part of the citie fell, and in the earthquake were slaine of men seven thousand, and the remnant were afrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. 14. The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe commeth quickly. 12. And they heard a great voyce] Not the enemies, but the witnesses restored to life, heard this voyce. This shall be Christs voyce, who according to his pro∣mise will call his witnesses unto him into glorie. It shalbe Great, because of the power thereof: for it shal bring the witnesses to glorie, and strike a terrour into the adversaries. Come up hither] To me into my glory, that where I am, yee may be also. Ioh. 17.24. And they ascended up into heaven in a cloud] After Christs example, who ascen∣ding into heaven was taken up and received by a cloude. 1 Thess. 4.17. And often the cloudes are called Gods chariot. Christ also shall return in a cloude to judgement: And we shall be caught in the cloudes to meet the Lord in the aire. Now to seek for other allegories in this cloude is needlesse. Moreover this glorification of the Martyrs begins presently at their departure out of this life, when their spirit goes unto the Lord: but shall be comsummated in the last day, the which was shadowed out before in Chap. 6. under the fift seale. Moreover this also serves for the honour & credit of the witnesses that the Lord will wonderfully preserve their doctrine though condemned by Antichrist as hereticall, and propagate the same far and neere in spite of all adversarie po∣wer whatsoever. Thus the world shall know, that they were no deceivers, but the true witnesses of Iesus Christ. And therefore in this place the spirit doth ani∣mate the professours of the Gospel, least being terrifyed by the tyrannie of An∣tichrist they should prophesie the more remissely. If he labours to put them to death, God wil restore them to life. If he cast reproach on them in this world: God will crown them with glorie in heaven: For blessed are yee when men persecute you: rejoyce, for great is your reward in heaven, saith Christ, Matt. 5.12. And great fear shall fall upon them] He rehearseth sixe kindes of effects touching the enemies.
First, 1 The feare of the ad∣versaries. a great fear fell on them. On whom? Vpon the beholders] A paraphrase of the adversaries: before they beheld the dead witnesses with delight: but sud∣denly they shall tremble at their vivification. What is the cause of this great fear? because they shall feele (but to late) that they warred not with poore man, but with God himselfe. And therefore they shall stand in fear of their kingdome, treasures, praebends, and kitchins. They shall dread the judgement of God, but not escape it. This is wonderfull in our eyes: The wicked when they most rage, do then tremble, & are forced even to fear them whom they pro∣secute with all manner of hatred. Thus the Scribes persecuting Christ, were a∣fraid, Ioh. 11.47. What shall we doe? for this man doth many miracles: If we let him thus alone all men will beleeve on him, and the Romanes shall come, &c. Thus likewise the chiefe Priests feared the Apostles whō they persecuted: What shall we doe (say they) to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been don by them is manifest, neither can we denie it, &c. Thus therefore howsoever convinced in their consciences, yet they beleeve not the Gospel, but hate it the more by how much they are affraid: be∣cause they see that their lyes and impostures are discovered and confuted by the truth and light of the Gospel. Therfore why should we feare the Antichristians, who though they seem outwardly to carie forth the matter with a high spirit: yet inwardly they tremble, and are tormented with the wound of an evill con∣science. Now such fears are not prolonged: For what the wicked fear, that comes suddenly upon them. And their enemies beheld them] The second effect of the witnesses glorifica∣tion, The asto∣nishment of the adver∣saries. is the astonishment of their enemies. For seeing them restored from death to life, and their reproach turned into glory, they stand amazed: alluding (as some thinke) to that in Wisd. 5.1. The just man shall stand with great boldnesse be∣fore the wicked, who seeing it shall be troubled with terrible feare, and shall be amazed at the strangenesse of his salvation, saying is this he whom we had sometimes in derision and a proverb of reproach: How is he numbred with the children of God, and his lot is among the Saintes? Thus the wicked shall see Christ whom they have crucified with amazement, because beeing convicted of their ungodlines and confounded with shame, they shall feel his revenging hand. Hitherto the Romish Antichrists have seen the martyrs whom they burnt at Constance, to be againe restored to life in Luther, Melanchthon, Martyr, & Calvin. They see them with amazement at this day glorified in their doctrine, the which is both lifted up (they in vain resist∣ing the same) and dayly propagated far and neere to the honour and glory of God through diverse provinces of the Christian world. 13. And there was a great earthquake the same hour] The third, fourth and fift effects doe shew the great destruction which Antichrists kingdome receiveth by the restauration of the witnesses, as also declare the cause of the feare and trem∣bling of the wicked. They are afraid least that should come to passe, which al∣ready is, viz. that the prophesying beeing renued, a ruin should befal their kingdom, as it is at this day. The same houre] Some copies have it the same day (to wit) the witnesses were vindicated, that is, a little after the witnesses were suppressed by Antichrist, God restored them again. A great earthquake] In Chap.  6.12. at the opening the sixt seal, Antichrist ray∣sed a great earthquake against Christ: A great earthquake when Pope Boniface the third being declared VNIVERSAL Bishop of the Church by Phocas the tyrant, caused an horrible shake∣ing of the Christian world by bringing all Bishops and Churches under his yoak. For thereupon followed an universall change and miserable deformitie of the Church. But in the last times Christ likewise will raise a great earthquake against Antichrist, when by the preaching of the Gospell he shall so shake his kingdome, as that it shall totter and come to ruin, howbeit he had by his deceit and tyrannie formerly so established it, as if it had been invincible. To this earthquake appertaine the seditions, warres, tumults, disputations, alte∣rations
of opinions & great contentions raised up about religion throughout the whole Papacie after the restitution of the Gospel. And indeed suddenly after the Councill at Constance, an earthquake grievously shooke the Papacy. For the Bohemi∣ans to revenge the cruel death of their two witnesses, fell in a hostile manner upon the Popish Clergy, suppressing the armies of the Empire sent against them, and ob∣tained many singular victories over their adversaries. It is true the earthquake cea∣sed a little while after the Councill of Basil by the COMPACTATA (as they called them) graunted unto the Bohemians: But not long after by the preaching of Lu∣ther in Saxonie: of Zwinglius in Helvetia: of Viret in France, there followed a more grievous shaking, accomplishing that which here followeth. And the tenth part of the great citie fell] This Ribera purposely passeth by: The ruin of the tenth part of the city. for he would not expound that, which evidētly happened unto the Papacy by the preach∣ing of the Gospel. For the great city is the kingdome of the Romane Antichrist, wherof Rome, Babylon & Sodome is the head, the which indeed was not wholy over∣thrown by the preaching of Luther & other ministers of the Gospell, but the tenth part thereof fell, that is the jurisdiction, religion and tyranny of the Pope was much diminished through Germany, together with his revenues, annuities, Commen∣dums & holy tribute. For Germany by embracing the Gospel returned from Anti∣christ to Christ, & hence worthily is accounted the tenth pa of the great city. But thou wilt say, Germany is not wholy fallen off from the Pope: For it yet hath very many Archbishops, Bishops, & others of the hierarchy, sworn Vassals of Antichrist. What then? seing som other whole kingdoms, as Great Brittain, Den∣marck, & Sweden: or in part, as France, Poland, Pannonia, have supplyed that de∣fect, by rejecting the Pope and embracing the faith. These things are so cleare as that they cannot be denyed. The fift effect followeth. Alcasar here understands this great earthquacke to be the conversion of Ierusa∣lem unto the faith. But indeed he rightly laughs at the fiction of the ruin of the tenth part thereof at Antichrists comming. And there were slaine seven thousand names of men] Names, are here put, The slaugh∣ter of Anti∣christian. for per∣sons as Chap. 3.4. A definite number, for a great many: for the number seven, is perfect: as in the history of Elias, God saith, he had reserved to himself seven thou∣sand, who had not bowed their knees to Baal, that is, very many. Now these names are the Antichristian adversaries, who perished by the ruin of the tenth part of the city. But how? some understand it of the bloody warres & commotions which Anti∣christ to his own hurt hath raysed up against the Gospel. For many millions of his followers have been consumed by this meanes, to the exceeding losse of the great city. But perhaps not lesse, but rather more blood of the Saintes hath been shed by Antichristians in the civil warrs of France, Spaine, England, the Low countries and other where. Others therfore do rather understand it of the spiritual destruction of the ad∣versaries by the preaching of the Gospel: for by it many of the Papists beeing the more blinded, hardened and enraged have eternallie perished. Brightman interprets it of the Popish Clergy, who by the rising of the Gospel be∣ing spoiled of the revenues & yeerly profits of their Monasteries & Colleges, were bereaved of their delight & former luxuriousnes, & put to such an exigent, as either to labour, or starve for hunger: But I rather allow the former, because of that which followeth. And the remnant were afrighted] The last effect is good, The con∣version of many to the faith of the Gospel. noting the conversion of the est of men from Popery unto the faith of Christ. For the ruin of the tenth part of the great Antichristian eity, shall be the building of Christs little city. Many therfore in the forsaid provinces observing the wonderful work of God in preser∣ving & propagating the Gospel, were afraid any lōger to resist the truth, but gave glory to God by forsaking the lies & idols of the Papacy. Now touching these things we may behold them as in a table, by which we have a plain description the very events, partly in the histories of our times, and partly by what we dayly see with our own eyes, so that we need not have recourse unto ancient commētaries.
14. The second woe is past] This is a transition from the third Act unto the fourth. Woe] He notes the calamities by the effect: for calamities cause woe unto the flesh. In Chap. 8.23. an Angel flying through the midst of heaven proclaimed three woes to happen under the sounding of three trumpets. The first woe un∣der the fift trumpet were the calamities of the Godlie under the Western An∣tichrist, even from the time of his rising until the Council of Constance. The second woe of the sixt trumpet is yet to this day under both Antichrists viz. the Turke in the East, and the Pope in the West. The first did praefigure the calamities of the godly alone. The second the cala∣mities commō both to the godly & the wicked. Now followes the third woe, only belonging unto the wicked, & which shal come to passe under the last trumpet. Is past] Not in event, seeing it was then to come, but in vision & description, as if he should say, hitherto I have described the second woe: the third remaines to be described. Commeth quickly] For shall come. This he opposeth to the security of the An∣tichristians, as Chap. 1. v. 1.3. And if then they were not far off, how much neerer are they now to us after so many ages, the seventh Angel being at hand, to summon men to judgment by the last trumpet. The second part of the Chapter. The scound of the seventh Trumpet at the last judgement. Containing the fourth Act of this Vision. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, & there were great voyces in heaven, saying, the kingdomes of this world are become the kingdomes of our Lord, & of his Christ, & he shall reigne for ever and ever. 16. And the foure & twenty Elders which sate before God on their seates, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, 17. Saying, we give thee thankes, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned. 18. And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the Prophets, & to the Saints, and them that feare thy Name, smal and great, and shouldest destroy them, which destroy the earth. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seene in his Temple, the Arke of his Testament, and there were light∣nings, and voyces, and thundrings, and an earthquake, and great hayle. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd the seventh Angel sounded] Of this Angel interpreters write diversely. The fiction of Lyra I passe by. Gagnaeus understands thereby the seventh order of good men or preachers, Who is this seventh Angel. who after Antichrists death and neer about the last day shal preach the Gospel: the which he takes from the common fi∣ction, that Antichrist shall die fourty & five dayes before the last judgment. But Antichrist shalbe destroyed by none, save by the brightnesse of the comming of Christ.
Alcasar speakes little of him: but applies the trumpet to the obstinacie of the Iewes, and election of the Gentiles: Which thing is unworthy of any refu∣tation. For the nations here are not said to be elected, but angrie: besides the very matter it selfe sheweth, that these things appertaine unto the last times. Brightman takes this Angel to have sounded anno 1558. when there were great voyces in heaven, that is, much joy in the reformed Church for the restauration of Christs kingdome in Germanie: at what time Q: Elisabeth also began to reign & restore the sincere preaching of the Gospel in England, &c. But it is plain, the words are to be applyed unto the last day, when both the living and the dead, good and bad, shall come to judgement: and therefore cannot be restrained to such a sence. More truly therefore Fox, Alphonsus, Bullinger, Tossanus, Marlorate, The se∣venth trū∣pet foretels the last judgement. with the rest of our interpreters (a few onely excepted) acknowledge that the seventh trumpet is the messenger of the last day: in which the kingdomes of the ad∣versaries being overthrown and abolished, Christ will immediately restore his kingdome, casting the wicked into eternall punishment, and receiving the elect into endlesse glorie: And this exposition of the trumpet plainly appeares to be right from Chap. 10. v. 7. where Christ the strong Angel expresly sweareth that the seventh Angel when he shal begin to sound, the mysterie of God should be finished. It is al∣so evident from the text. For in the last judgement and not before, all kingdoms of the earth become Gods and Christs, that God may be all in all: Then shall be the time of Gods wrath, and of the dead, that they may be judged, that the Martyrs, Prophets and servants of Christ may receive an eternall reward of their labours, and the wic∣ked who destroyed the earth, perish for ever and ever. Therefore many of the Ancients, as Andreas, Bede, Aretas, A fained anticipati∣on justly reproved. Primasius & others follow this opinion. Ribera also acknowledgeth the same: but faineth that these things are here brought in by way of Anticipation, which Alcasar justly reproveth: For what probable cause can there be imagined of an anticipation? or reason that Iohn by & by should return again by a regression unto the warr of Antichrist? This inconvenience they al run into, who observe not the order and method of these A∣pocalypticall visions, the which being neglected, we must needs wander as in a wood. So then here is described the fourth and last Act of the third Ʋision, The fourth Act of the third Vi∣sion. containing the third Woe, that is, Gods horrible judgments which shall be powred out in the last day universally upon all wicked men, adversaries, tyrants, hereticks, hypocrites, Antichrist and his locusts: the which indeed shall be an happie change of the Churches calamities. Now touching the seventh Angel, he is no other but that Archangel, Who is the seventh Angel: and what the seventh trumpet. the publisher of Christs comming with a shout and great voice. The seventh trumpet is that last trumpet of God, with which Christ shal descend from heaven, and call both living and dead unto judgement, 1. Thes. 4.16. and 1. Cor. 15.52. The members of this Act (as we shewed in the analysis) are three. The first is the heavenly triumph, because the kingdoms of the world are become Gods and Christs. v. 15. The second is a triumphing song of the four and twenty elders, rendring thanks and praises to Christ for the deliverance of the Church, and intreating him to bri∣dle the wrath of the adversaries by his judgement, and render rewards unto the godly, and due punishments unto the wicked, ver. 16.17, 18. The third is the execution of judgement on both, ver. 19. The scope is, to set forth the consolation of the godly at last: for howsoever the Church on earth be in warr against Antichrist, yet she shall at length triumph with Christ in heaven. And there were great voyces in heaven] These are not the voyces of mourners, Great voyces of rejoycings. but of them that rejoyce, tow it, of the blessed Angels and soules of the Saintes in heaven, as appeareth by the subject of the matter. But did not John threaten the third Woe? Yea he did so, but not to the heavenly inhabitants, nor unto the servants of God, but to the adversaries, not in heaven, but upon the earth. Before
the Woes therefore of the enemies (called in other places of scripture, gnashing of the teeth, the worme that dies not, unquencheable fire, tribulation and anguish, and here are named lightnings, voyces, thunders, earthquakes and haile, &c.) Iohn heard the joy of them that were in heaven, celebrating with songs the equity and righteousnes of the judgement to come. So then the third Woe shal fall, not upon the godlie, as the two former woes did on both Antichrists, but upon the adversaries, whom Christ will cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. And thus the first apparition or companie of the 24 Elders shall with songs of triumph put an end unto this third Vision. The kingdomes of this world are become] Montanus in the kings edition hath it in the singular number  the kingdome of this world is made or become: but al other bookes have it in the plural (according to our trans∣lation) : the sense beeing all one. Now it is (as I said) the triumph and joy of Angels and Saintes in heaven, because the mysterie of God was finished, according to the praediction in Chap. 10.7. that is, because at last Christs kingdome was delivered out of all danger, and the power of the adver∣saries troden under foot: The sense is thus: The adversaries had violently taken into their possession the kingdomes of the world, thrusting out, as much as lay in them, Christ: But now the kingdomes are returned unto Christ, who hence∣forward (all enemies beeing destroyed) shall reigne alone. Of our Lord and of Christ] And, here is declarative, for, of our Lord, who is Christ. So often the Apostle, God and the Father, for, God who is the Father. But doth not Christ even now also reigne? Psa. 2.6. Heb. 2.8. Phil. 2.9. Yea verily, for he sits at the right hand of God: God hath set his king upon his holy hill of Sion: And put all things under his feet: And unto him is given a name above every name. But then at length he truely shall reigne, that is, declare that he reigneth, when having thrown down the Pope, Turke, and all other tyrants and adversaries from their thrones, he shall alone with the Father and holy Ghost rule the elect Angels and Men. The best interpreter of this place is Paul, 1 Cor. 15. ver. 24. Then commeth the end when CHRIST shall have delivered up the kingdome to God & the Father, & shall have put downe all rule & all authoritie & power. For he must reigne, till he hath put all enemies under his feet: and when all things shalbe subdued unto him, then shall the son also him∣self be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. But thou wilt say, How Christ shal deliver up the kingdome to the Fa∣ther, & yet reigne for ever. how shal Christ reigne for ever and ever, if, as it is there said, he shall deliver the kingdome to God and the Father? I answer, he shal deliver the kingdom to God, not by resigning up the kingdome, but by ceasing to reigne after that manner as hitherto he had done. Now he reignes by the meanes of his word, sacraments and ministers, gathering to himself and sanctifying the Church here on earth: Then he shall reigne by immediate illumination and glorification of the Saintes in heaven. Now he ruleth in the midst of his enemies, Psal. 110.2. 1 Cor. 15.25. Then he shall reigne alone without enemies. Now Antichrist Christs corrival with all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnesse and by the power of Satan, doth subject the kingdoms of the world unto himself, Then he shal be thrown down and abolished by the brightnes of Christs com∣ming. Now God and Christ have a divided empire (so to speake) with Satan, the Pope, and other tyrants, who chalenge much unto themselves. But then all e∣nemies shall be abolished, God and Christ shall have a full and entire kingdome over all: because they shalbe all in all things. Christ the Son therfore shal reigne with the Father and holy Ghost for ever and ever, and not for a thousand yeeres onely, (as the Chiliasts dreame) of which afterward. 16. Then those four and twenty Elders] The company of the four and twentie Elders doe also with the other heavenly inhabitants give thankes to God for the vindication and deliverance of the Church and kingdome of Christ: beseeching him to execute his last judgement. Touching the Elders we have heard Chap. 4.4. One of them Chap. 7.23. concluded the second Vision, and expounded to John
the glory of the blessed Martyrs. Here all of them shut up this third Vision, with a song of triumph: not much unlike unto that in Chap. 4. and 5. It containes a thanksgiving & a prayer. They give thankes to the Lord God almighty, which is, which was, and which is to come] that is, either to Christ, or unto the holy Trinity, as before on Chap. 1.8. But for what benefit? Because thou hast taken to thee thy great power and hast reigned] But what good comes hereby unto the Elders? indeed they have great cause to rejoyce for these benefits, considering that they serve to the eternal felicity of the Church trium∣phant. Hitherto the Lord in suffering the fury of the adversaries did seem not to exercise his great power, that is, his omnipotencie: and Christ to be overcome by Antichrist: but at length by taking, that is, by exercising and shewing forth his power in casting down the adversaries, he delivered the afflicted Church out of all her trouble: and by reigning blesseth her with eternal happinesse. Rom. 14.17. The kingdome of God is righteousnes, peace and joy in the holy Ghost. And God shall then perfectly reigne, when as he shall give to his elect eternal righteousnesse, peace and the joy of the spirit. Of this see the description in the end of the second Vision Chap. 7. v. 15.16.17. 18. And the nations were angry] Now followes their wish or prayer. For by putting God and Christ (as it were) in minde of the time of judgment, they hum∣bly beseech him that he would most justly execute the same, according to the prophesies of the scripture. The nations were angry] This is as it were a former reason: Because the nations are angrie, as if he should say, they have bin angry, that is, raged long enough a∣gainst Christ and the Church. It is time therefore that thou also be angrie, that is, represse the angrie nations. Thus he calleth all adversaries whatsoever, whither Jewes, Turkes or Christians falsly so named. Thy wrath] That is, thy vengeance and judgement, or wrath for punishments, by a metalepsis as Rom. 2.5. Is come] For let it come. And the time] namely, is come, the which thou hast defined in ty eternal counsel; Vnknown indeed unto mortal men, but then revealed by Christ unto them in heaven: For without a speciall revelation no man knoweth that day, save God alone: But what time? Of the dead] That is, to be raised. Some take it of the wicked onely, dead in sins. But the following distribution of them which are to be judged comprehends all, both good and bad. For it is added, That they should be judged] But the godlie shall not come into judgement, Jo. 5.24. He that beleeveth on him that sent mee hath eternal life, and shall not come into judgement: But  judgement is there put for  condem∣nation, and therfore Beza hath so rendred it. So then the elect shall come to judg∣ment: for all must stand before the tribunall seat of Christ, however they shall come to be absolved and not condemned. And therefore the Elders further adde. Two com∣panies of them that are to be judged. That thou shouldest give reward] They make two sorts of people of such as shal be judged, some to be rewarded, the other to be destroyed: as Christ in Matth. 25. & Joh. 5. The reward of their faith shalbe given them, and of their obedi∣ence, constancie, patience, labours and miseries. What reward? eternal life & glorie. Vnto whom? They make three sorts of such as shalbe rewarded. Three rankes of such as are to be re∣warded. First they place, Gods servants the prophets: thereby comprehending the faith∣full of more special note whither under the Law or Gospel, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, &c. who were Gods servants by a more then orninary vo∣cation. Secondly the Saintes, to wit confessours and martyrs, who eyther by sincere preaching, or constant martyrdome have held forth the glory of Christ against Antichrist. Vnder whom are comprehended all faithfull teachers and preachers of the word, called Saints by an Hebraisme, as separated to some special work.
In the third place, they add the fearers of Gods name, that is, all other faithful ones (besides the two former companies) who from the beginning of the world unto the end therof have worshipped the Lord in sinceritie. What it is to feare the name of God. For to fear the name of God, is to worship him sincerely, to call upon him, and love him above all: because the feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome, & godlinesse. Great and small] They shew that the reward is common unto all, without any difference of merit either of greater or lesser condition and state: to the end, that neyther the great ones should promise unto themselves a greater reward, or the others despaire of the same recompence. Popish Sophisters dispute much touching the degrees of glorie, which rather proceedeth out of their own braine, & from a false supposed foundation of humane merits, then from the Scriptures of God. But whither the Lord wil crown his servants with equal or unequal glorie, it shal not be according to their merit, but merely of his own grace. And this is all Jo∣vinian (against whom Jerom wrote) pleaded for, except I be deceived, viz. that unto all who kept their baptisme, there should be one recompence in the king∣dome of God. For he seems not to disapprove of a degree of reward, but of merit. The crown of righte∣ousnes pro∣pounded unto all the faithfull. Paul the Apostle who was taken up into the third heaven, and inferiour to none of the Saintes, shewes us, that for him was laid up a crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous judge would give him at that day, and not unto him onely, but unto all that love his appearing. This same crown of righteousnesse the Elders doe promise unto the Prophets, and Saintes, and all the fearers of the name of God. This sufficeth for our faith and consolation. Let us leave disputing in this life touching the differences of the crowne, and rather indeavour, so to walke, as that we may be made partakers therof in the life to come. That thou shouldest give reward] Here fals in a question. For a reward is given of merit and debt. Therfore say some, the reward of eternall life is given unto the Saintes, as a due debt: otherwise it would not be called a reward. Now it is not onely here so called, Mat. 5.12. & 20.8. 1 Cor. 3.8. Rom. 4.4. but in many other places: Great is your reward in heaven. Give unto them their reward or hire. Every one shall receive his own reward according to his own labour. But to him that worketh the reward is not given of grace, but of debt. Thus the mercenarie adversaries of grace dispute. But how eternal life is said to be a reward, appeares by the words of the Apostle: The wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is life eternal. Rom. 6.23 Ephes. 2.9. It is the gift of God: not of workes least any man should glorie. Now all gifts are gratis, (and not due debts.) Forasmuch therfore as eternal life is a gift, Eternal life is mercy not merit. it is of mercy, and not of merit. And it is called a reward not due, but freely given, such a reward as a father gives to his son: not as a master unto his hired servant. Neither is it contradictorie that the Apostle denies, that a reward is given of grace. For he denies it of a reward of workes: To him that worketh, saith he, the reward is not imputed of grace but of workes. Now we denie that life eternal is said to bee such a reward. For not to workers but to beleevers is this reward given. They insist out of Thomas: Thom. 1. secundae quaest. 114. ad 1. that it is not indeed given of debt in order of justice, but yet that it is given of debt by divine ordination, in as much as every promise be∣comes a debt. I answer: That the divine appointment is not, that we should by our merits obtaine eternal life: or that eternall life should be given to any of merit: but Gods appointment according unto the Gospell is this, that eternall life bee given, not to them that worke, but to them that beleeve: not of debt but of grace: for the gift of God is life eternall. Faith works indeed (because it is ope∣rative through Charitie) but it doth not therefore worke that it may merit, but to the end that due obedience may be performed to the Lord. For no debt can be said to be a merit. But thou wilt say, Howfar a promise be∣comes a debt. every promise becomes a debt. This is true amongst men, with whom there is a natural and legal obligation. But that Gods promise should come under the nature of a debt, it is false: Both because their is no pro∣portion between God who is infinite, and a finite creature, neyther any obliga∣tion
on Gods part: as also because as wel the promise, as the thing promised is of mere grace. For it is of grace (I say) that he promiseth to give, & whatsoever he doth give, he gives it of grace. But they say, God by promise becomes indebted unto us. This Aquinas him∣self denies, saying, It followes not that God simply becomes a debtor to us, but unto him∣self. Se Bellarm. castigat. lib, 5. in prooem. & cap. 3.14.16. de justif. And destroy them that destroy the earth] The other sort to be judged, are such as shalbe destroyed with unquencheable fire, and eternall torments. For  signifying to corrupt, is not so to destroy them, as if they should cease to be; like as it is in naturall corruption, the which is motus ab esse ad non esse, a dissolution from a beeing to nothing: but to thrust them into punishment, so as they shal not be blessed, but miserable for ever. Who destroy the earth] A paraphrase of such as are to be destroyed, among the number of whom chiessy are tyrants, hereticks and both Antichrists: The sonne of perdition destroyes the earth. who in a speciall manner destroyed the earth, that is, the inhabitants of the earth, by fire & sword, by destructive lawes and doctrines, by wicked manners and examples. This is a most proper note of Antichrist; who therefore is called the sonn of perdition & , because being lost himselfe and devoted to destruction, he destroyes the earth, like a robber killing soules and drawing men by all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes and lying signes with himself into eternal destruction. So Chap. 19.2. The whore is said, to corrupt the earth with her fornication: And therefore as Antichrist is a destroyer, so he shalbe rewarded with a final destruction. Hitherto is the description of the last judgement, the which by no shew of reason can be applyed to any other thing: neyther is it here put by way of anti∣cipation, but repeated in a right order, as beeing the last Act of the third Ʋision: the which order they who observe not in this book, doe vainly weary themselves with many subtilties. 19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven] Here some begin the follow∣ing Vision. But these things cohere with that which went before: For John shewes allegorically the execution of the last judgement: viz. the reward of the Saintes, and punishment of the wicked. The temple of God in heaven] That is the Church triumphant, in which God dwelleth as in a temple. It shall then be opened when the heavenly glorie thereof shal fullie appeare: For now indeed it is inward and hid: and therefore the magnificence of the temple, beeing as it were shut, is not perspicuous. But then the temple of God shalbe opened, when the Church shall appear most glorious. And the Ark of the testament was seen] He persists in the allegory of the an∣cient temple: In the inmost part whereof was kept the Ark of the covenant (a type of Christ) beeing not to be seen of any save once a yeere by the High priest: signi∣fying that Christ of old was hid, and as through a lattice the people then had but a smal glimpse of him. Vnder the New Testament he appeared in the flesh, but in a lowly way, neither is his glory yet seen in the Gospel, but by faith. But after the judgment, the Ark of the covenant shall be seen in heaven, that is, Christ shall so appeare as he is in heavenly glory unto his elect. Now we see through a glasse darkly, but then we shall see him face to face. The sight of God is the Saintes felicity. This Vi∣sion shalbe the Saintes happines, viz. when Christ shall present himself to be per∣fectlie beheld & enjoyed, and fullie perfect the grace of his covenant. And there were lightnings] Before Chap. 4.5. in the praeparation of the second Vision there proceeded out of the throne, lightnings & thundrings, & voyces: and Chap. 8.5. in the praeparation of the third Vision the Censer beeing cast into the earth, there were voyces and thunders and lightnings and an earthquake: The wic∣keds pit∣nishment. but in sense far different, then it is in the catastrophe or change of this Vision. For now John in the description of the last judgement, as he shewed the felicity of the Saintes
allegorically: so he represents the punishments of the wicked metaphorically, by the lightnings, thunders, voyces, earthquakes, and great haile oppressing them. These things shalbe the terrible signes of the wrath to come, when the heaven, earth & all the elements shall conspire together to take vengeance on the wicked, accord∣ing to that in the Psalmist: Psal. 11.6. he will raine upon the wicked, snares, fire and brimstone, & wind of burning storms shall be the portion of their cup. Our Tossanus to the same purpose, understands here the shaking of the whole frame of this world, & melting of the elements, of which Peter speaketh, together with the destruction of the wicked. The like is spoken Chap. 16.18. at the pow∣ring forth of the seventh Viall, in Vision the fift. Thus much touching the third Vi∣sion and seven trumpets. The fourth Vision followeth touching the Woman, & the Beasts. The fourth Ʋision. Touching the Woman in travaile, and flying into the wildernes from the dragon, and of the two Beasts, &c. THE PRAEFACE. THey who thinke that in the prophesie of the Revelation, a continued historie of the Church is linked together, even from Christs first comming unto the second: begin the same from this Chapter, in which it seems the new birth of the Church is re∣presented. But at the verie first they run into a great inconve∣nience. For they are forced to bring in such an hyperbaton, and confused order of the history, as cannot be defended: For, that which was first, ought not to have been omitted til now, but to have been described in the first place. Wherefore their opinion is farr better, who observe that in this booke, the condition of the Church on earth is sundry times shewed unto Iohn in certaine distinct Visions, as in the beginning we noted. Neither is the itera∣tion to be thought needlesse: for however in the nature and kinde of the events most of the visions are alike: yet in the species and indiviaduals they represent unto us histories much different, in somuch that what is in the for∣mer was more darke & obscure, is in the later clearer & fuller set down. And hence by diligent comparing of the Visions each with other, aman shall have a singular helpe to remove that obscurity which appeares in this pro∣phesie. After the three Visions therefore formerly expounded, The first wher∣of specially concernes Christs walking in the midst of the candelsticks, and his admonishing the teachers of the Churches in Asia touching their duty: The other two generally respect the booke sealed with seven seales, The summe of the fourth Vi∣sion. and opened by the Lambe, with the seven trumpets of the Angels: Now the fourth is exhibited to Iohn, touching the woman in travaile, & the dragon standing to devour her childe and persecuting her, and of the two Beasts warring a∣gainst the Saintes: as also of the Lambe overcomming them, and of the Angels preaching at the last harvest and vintage: Chap. 12.13.14. In which types the future condition of the Church in this world is much more
evidently shadowed out then before, even from the first beginning thereof under Christ and the ministerie of the Apostles, untill the end. For the Church shall have to doe with the Dragon & the Beasts, & be miserablie afflicted and tryed by them, yet she sufficiently armed from heaven for so grievous combats, at last shall gloriously triumph over all her adversaries. This Vision is also universal, manifestly consisting of four Acts, The four Acts there∣of. like the two former general visions. The first Act containes the proposition of the Churches calamities at her birth and growth under the Iewish and Romane tyrants persecuting the woman: as also under hereticks labouring through the instinct of the Dragon to devoure her with the floodes of errours and heresies, Chap. 12. It an∣swereth to the four former seales of the second Vision, and to the first four trumpets of the third Vision, representing the historie of the Church for the space of 606 yeeres, viz. from the birth of Christ untill the rising of An∣tichrist. The second Act is opposed to the former, & containes comfort for the Church against the wrath of the Dragon, and floodes of heresies sent forth a∣gainst her: because the childe of the Woman is caught up into heaven: and Michael the Archangel fighteth for her against the Dragon: The woman with Eagles wings is caried into the wildernes, hiding herself from the sight of men: The earth swalloweth up the Dragons vomit. This Act is mingled with the former in the same Chapter: it answereth to the fift seale of the second Vision: and to the tenth chapter treating of the mighty Angel standing upon the earth and sea, Vision the third. The third Act hath two parts. The first part is of the Antichristian persecution, representing the am∣plification of the Churches calamities, or the new and more grievous con∣flicts which shee sustained during her abode in the wildernes against Anti∣christ: whose kingdome, power, crueltie and subtiltie is set forth under the image of Beasts Chap. 13. This part answereth to the sixt seale of Vision the second: and to the fift trumpet of Vision the third. The latter part is opposed to the former in way of a parallel: beeing consolatory to the godly, prefiguring Christs presence in his deserted Church, and his preserving of the same against the Beasts: as also the reformation that should be in the latter times through the Angels, that is, new teachers of truth and godlinesse, who by their preaching should oppose the Baby∣lonish Antichrist: and bring men back againe into the right way of salva∣tion. chap. 14. unto ver. 14. This part answereth to the former part of chap. 7. touching the 144000 that were sealed by the Angel in Vision second, and to the former part of chapt. 11. of the meting of the temple, and pro∣phesie of the two witnesses in Vision third: And this whole Act apper∣taines unto the historie of the Church, which now from Antichrists rising hath continued 1035 yeeres, and shal perhaps remaine unto the end of the 1260 dayes, or yet for the space of 225 yeeres, but this is onely known unto the Lord. To be short; the fourth Act from v. 14. unto the end of chap. 14. under the type of an Angel gathering in the harvest, and vintage of the earth,
represents the last judgement, in which the Church at length beeing freed from all trouble shalbe blest with eternal glorie: But Antichrist with all his followers cast into the lake of Gods eternal wrath. This part answereth to the latter member of Chapter the seventh, touching the melody of the Church triumphant, in Vision second: as also to the latter part of Chapter 11: con∣cerning the joyfull song of the Elders, in Vision third. Thus we have the whole distribution of this Vision. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER XII. THis Chapter, (in which as we have said is shadowed out the first and second Act of Vision fourth under the type of a woman in travel, and a Dragon opposing of her: and of Michael fighting for the woman against the Dragon) doth represent the state of the Church even from her infancy: with the changes of her after age: for at the very first she was cruelly set upon by Satan: yet powerfully defended from heaven by Christ, so as neither the devils cruelty, nor tyrants rage, nor the deceits of wicked he∣reticks could overcome her: although she were forced to flee into the wilder∣nes, and to withdraw herself from the sight of men. The parts of the Chapter are two. I. Two great signes are shewed unto Iohn in heaven: of a woman in travel, and a Dragon standing before her to devoure her child v. 1.2.3.4. II. The hi∣story and event of both these signes: unto the end. In the former part is described the first signe, 1. From the adjunct of the magni∣tude: It was a great signe. 2. From the place: It was in heaven: 3. From the form: It was a woman; who is described by three external adjuncts. She was clothed with the Sun, she had the Moon under her feet, and a crown of stars on her head ver. 1. Three internall also: she was with childe, travailed in birth, and for paine cryed to be delivered vers. 2. The latter signe is described; 1. from the place, it was seen in heaven. 2. From the form, it was a Dragon. 3. From the quantitie, it was great. 4. From the colour, red. 5. From the monstrous shape; having seven heads, ten horns, & seven crownes, v. 3. 6. From a double cruelty: with his taile he cast the third part of the stars from heaven to the earth, & stood to devour the Womans childe v. 4. In the second part is set forth, 1: the womans fruite or child, by a threefold de∣scription. 1. His sexe, a man child: 2. His office, a ruler of the nations: 3. The event, he was caught up to the throne of God ver. 5. The Womans flight, sus∣tentation and abode in the desert, the which is inserted by an anticipation, ver. 6. For the woman did not flie presently, but after the Dragon was cast out of heaven, and she received wings v. 14. The war that was: the place wherof is noted to be, in heaven: the Combatants, Michael & the Dragon with their Angels on both sides, v. 7. And the catastrophe or successe of the battel, Michaels victory, the Dra∣gons overthrow: with a threefold description of the said Dragon: he is that old serpent: the calumniator, & seducer of the whole world, v. 8.9. And the effect, a song of prayses of some in heaven (not named) in which they celebrate three
benefits of this victorie: viz. that the kingdom of God and Christ is vindicated: that the Church militant is freed from the accusation of the conquered Dragon, v. 10. and that the Church also herselfe was a conquerour of the Dragon, shewing three causes therof: one principal & meritious viz. the blood of the Lamb: two mi∣nisteriall: the word of their testimonie and constancy in the faith v. 11. 2. They gratulate the heavens & them that dwell in them for this victory, v. 12. They denounce woe to the inhabiters of the earth and sea, for three causes: one efficient: because the devil was come down unto them: two moving causes: because he was full of wrath: having but a little time. Ibid.  A new attempt of the Dragon against the woman by persecution v. 13. The Womans flight. And 1. her help to it: two wings of an Eagle were given her. 2. The forme: she flue out of the sight of the Dragon. 3. The place: into the wildernes. 4. The end: there to be nourished. 5. The time: for a time, times and half a time, v. 14.  Another attempt of the serpent against the woman: He vomiteth out waters to drown her: v. 15.  The womans pre∣servation not beeing hurt therby: through the earth swallowing up the waters. ver. 16. The Dragons wrath: and war against the rest of the womans seed:  the which seed is noted by two epithites: by their obedience to the Law, & faith in the Gospel. v. 17. And thus the history is ended by noting the place in which Iohn then stood, v. 18. The first part of the Chapter. Two signes in heaven: of the woman in travell & the Dragon watching to devour her child. 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moone under her feet, and upon her head a crowne of twelve starres: 2. And she being with child, cryed, travailing in birth, & pained to be de∣livered. 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold, a great red dragon having seven heads, & ten hornes, and seven crownes upon his head. 4. And his tayle drew the third part of the starres of heaven, and did cast them to the earth, and the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered for to devoure her childe assoone as it was borne. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd there was seen] This Vision goes up higher with the condition of the new Church then hitherto hath bin don in the other, viz. from the very birth of Christ, at which time the Church of the Gospel began to be born. For it is apparent that here is re∣presented, the first birth, infancy, & youthful condition of the new Church, both how it was born, educated & accepted in the world. Therfore howsoever in this prophesie are represented unto Iohn not things that were already past, but to come: neverthelesse the nienty six yeeres, which were from the birth of Christ until the time of this revelation, that is, from the 42 yeer of Augustus unto the 14 yeer of Domitian, are also included in this vision: and hence we see that it is more full and perfect then the others. was seen] to mee, or by mee. a signe or wonder] An image represented either to the eyes, or under∣standing. It is more probable it was a mental vision, because of the circumstances, which could not well al of them have been corporally acted.
Great] In signification, that is, shadowing out great and wonderfull things. For what can be more wonderful, then that a cruel dragon should stand ready to devoure the child of a weak woman in travaile, and yet not prevaile. In heaven] Here I seek no mysterie, because these mental apparitions were ex∣hibited to Iohn in heaven. A woman clothed with the sun] Ribera here moves two great and difficult que∣stions, Riberas two questi∣ons weigh∣ed. as he cals them: One: what woman this was: whither the Church? or the al∣wayes blessed virgin Marie? because some things agree to Marie: as that it is a woman clothed with the sun: that she brought forth a man child ruling the nations with a rod of iron, &c. Some things agree not, that she cryed for pain in travaile: that she fled into the desert, &c. Again, it seems not to agree to the Church: to bring forth a man child ruling the nations with a rod of iron: because the Church did not beget Christ, but is begotten of him through his word: that also the dragon is said, leaving the woman, to fight with her seed, &c. At length he concludes out of Methodius with Cesariensis, that not the virgin Marie, but the Church is the wo∣man here spoken of. The other question, as he saith, is more difficult: Whither this be spoken concern∣ing the Church in her first state, that is, before Christ comming, or at his first comming, or of that state which she shalbe in, in the last age of the world. Now rejecting the former opinion, he supposeth that all is to be referred unto the last time of the Church, and the four yeeres reigne of his Antichrist: and his reason is, because the womans flight, and her abode in the wildernes 1260 dayes, as also the fight of Michael with the Dragon, doe altogether belong to Antichrists time. But I thinke I can move here a far more difficult question, A more difficult question about the woman. that is, whither this woman flying into the wildernes, be not the same, whom Iohn saw in the wildernes sitting on the scarlet coloured Beast, or another: of all which questions I wil speak a few things. As for the first; The Monk∣ish fable touching Maries as∣sumption is not hence proved. This Vision makes nothing for the establishing of the Monkish dreames and pictures of the virgine Maries corporall assumption into heaven, and placing her on the Throne of the Trinitie, her beeing queen of heaven, and so clothed as the woman here appeared to Iohn. These are mere apocriphal fictions, and contradictorie to Christian relegion: Yea them∣selves also confesse that this type doth not in many things agree with their fables. This woman is a type of the Churches birth under the New Testament, allu∣ding to the history of Christ beeing borne of the virgin Mary: for the historie of Christs comming in the flesh, doth partly literally, & partly allegorically very wel represent the future condition of the Church. This woman brought forth a man childe: A histori∣cal compa∣ring of this type with Marie and Christ. Mat. 2.13 so in the fulnes of time God sent his son made of a woman Gal. 4.4. The Dragon layes wait for the womans child: so Herod the tyrant sought to kill Christ as soon as he was born. The Woman with Eagles wings flyes into the wildernes: so Mary being admo∣nished of God, fled with the child into the deserts of Aegypt. The Woman was there sustained, and kept 1260 dayes: so Mary remained in Aegypt neer four yeeres untill the death of Herod. The Dragon cast forth a flood of waters after the Woman to devour her: So Herod after Maries flight, murdered all the infants of Bethlehem of two yeeres old and upward, that among them he might slay the womans child. To be shortt, the childe of the woman was caught up into heaven, unto the throne of God, and made the feeder & ruler of all nations: so Christ having finished the worke of our redemption, ascended into heaven, & is set down on the throne of the Father, having all power in heaven and in earth. These things are now represented unto John, not as historical, seeing he was no way ignorant of them: neither as things to come to passe afterward, seeing they
were already don: but as types of future things, mystically setting forth the fu∣ture condition of the Church in this life. For as the virgine Marie once brought forth Christ corporally: so the Church continually (as it were) in travaile, brings him forth in his members spiritually. Se Gal. 4.19. Herod persecuted Mary with her child: so that old Dragon by tyrants & o∣ther enemies shal persecute the Church with her members. The allego∣ry of the Church & Christs birth of the virgine. Mary flying from the tyrant, withdrew herself out of the sight of the adver∣saries, yet she still had a beeing, and was preserved and nourished in the deserts of Aegypt untill her return: so the Church shunning Antichrist, withdrew herself out of the eyes of the world, yet had she a continuance still, and was nourished and preserved in the wildernes of the world, untill the measuring of the tem∣ple. Christ the son of the woman being taken up into heaven, was set on the throne of God: so the faithfull at length shalbe taken up into heaven, and reign with Christ. So that this type doth excellently represent the historie both of the birth of Christ, and of the Church: The woman, represents Mary: The child taken up into heaven, Christ: The Dragon persecuting the woman, Herod the tyrant: the taking up of the child unto Throne of God, Christs ascention into heaven, & his sitting at the right hand of his Father. Notwithstanding in a mystical sense, which onely is intended in this prophetical Vision, the woman, is the Church: the child of the woman, & her seed, are the faithfull of all ages: the Dragon is the Devill and all other persecuting tyrants of the Church. Why the Church is represented under the type of a woman. Furthermore it is not unusuall in scrip∣ture to compare both the true and false Church unto a woman: as in Isai: 54.1. it is said unto the true Church: rejoyce O barren, thou which didst not bear, for more are the children of the desolate then of the married wife: and Mica 7.8. the true Church saith to the false: rejoyce not against me O mine enemie because I fall, for I shall arise, &c. Hence generally the Church is called the spouse of Christ, a chast and undefiled virgin: so Chap. 19.7. she is called the wife and spouse of the Lambe. The reason she is so called, is both her spiritual marriage with Christ her bridegrome, as also the weaknes of that sex: for the Church being like unto a weak woman, hath no humane strength to subsist of herself. On the contrarie the Church of malignant men is compared to an adulterous woman, Ierem. 3.1. to a whore and most impure harlot Ezech. 16. & Reve. 17.18. Thus we se what this woman is, & I hope by this time Riberas first question is fully answered. Now I come to his second question: In what state the Church is here re∣presented. he rightly denies that the Church is repre∣sented in the first state, or as it was before the comming of Christ: although some doe thinke that there is an allusion unto Eve our first mother, betwixt whose seed, and the serpents, God put enmity in the beginning: but this is without al ground. Neither was Iohn to be informed of the state of the ancient synagogue: but of the condition of the new Church. Now the other two things which he affirmeth are not true. One: that the state of the Church at Christs comming is not here spoken of: for we have shewed the contrarie, because the woman in travaile of Christ corporally, was a type of the Church beeing in travaile with Christ spiritually. The other: that he refers the event of this type unto the last times of his feined Antichrist, who shal never come. As if the woman were not already long agoe fled into the wilder∣nes, & persecuted by the Dragon in her flight, as shall appeare more evidently by that which followes. Lastly unto the third question: viz. whither this woman flying into the wildernesse, be the same that sate on the Beast Chap. 17. I say, that she is, and is not: the which I thus manifest: It is plaine that the woman represents the Church. Now the Church by a diverse signification is taken eyther for the Church of the first begot∣ten Heb. 12.22. which universally comprehends all the elect before, and under
the law, Lib. 4. Epist. 38. as also under the Gospel, as Gregory affirmeth, and this is the Catholick Church mentioned in the Creed: or, for the Church of the called, which in the New Testament is the multitude of them that professe the faith of Christ in every place. In the former sense the Woman, or Church is, and alwayes shalbe the onely spouse of Christ: and never so degenerate as to become Antichrists strumpet: neither did this Church appeare unto John, 2 Tim. 2.19. for God knowes who are his: But she appeared in the latter sense, here indeed in this place, like unto a chast matrone, but in Chapter 17, as a great whore. But how then is she the same? I answer, she is the same in name but not in deed, in profession, but not in faith: in appea∣rance, but not in truth: In the same sense that Ierusalem is called a holie city, as in Psal. 122.3. and a harlot as Isai: 1.21. At the first in the Apostles time, & a while after, the whole Christianity of the East and West was as a chast matrone clothed with faith & holinesse as with the starres: just so as she here appeared. But after the decease of the Apostles and Apostolical men, she keept not long the chastitie of an undefiled matron, Lib. 3. hist. cap. 32. as in Eusebius is testifyed by Egesippus a most ancient writer: untill at length possessing the mountaines of Rome, & changing her starlike habit into scarlet, she sate on the Beast, and degenerated into a common strumpet as she appeared Chap. 17. Indeed the Romish parasites stronglie cry out to the contrary, that the true Church of Christ, such as was Rome (according to the Apostles testimonie) can∣not fall away: that the spouse of Christ cannot degenerate: The which is true of the Church of the first borne, the onely and true spouse of Christ: but of every Church of the called (or of every particular Church) it is false, as, besides very manie testimonies, the particular Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, &c. confirme: for howsoever every one of them of old was a true Apostolicall Church and spouse of Christ: Yet at this day where are they, or what manner of Churches are they become? Now what wonder is it though the same hath hap∣pined to Rome, although in a different condition: but let us return to the text. The woman therefore or Church appeares as a chast mother in heaven: although she warreth here on earth, Phil. 3.20. yet her conversation (Gr.  administration) is through faith with Christ in heaven. Clothed with the sun] For by faith and baptisme she puts on Christ the sun of righteousnes as a wedding garment. Gal. 3.17. The brightnes of the sun is now indeed darkned with the cloudes of the infirmities and calamities unto which the Church is subject during her warfare in this life: but at last this clothing of hers shall ful∣lie shine: as it is in Matt. 13.43. The righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdome of the Father: Ephes. 5.27 and the Church shalbe presented to Christ her husband, glorious in the heavens, and purged from every spot and wrinkle. Having the moon under her feet] This denotes the variable state of the Church in this world: Heca. lib. 4. c. 8. Aug. Epist. 48. ad Vin∣cent. as also her high mindednesse. For the Church (saith AMBROSE) hath her often defects and risings like the moon: having not her own brightnes, but borrowes her light from Christ, as the moon doth from the sun. So AVSTIN: The Church is some∣times darkned, and as it were clothed with the multitude of scandals: sometimes she ap∣peares quiet and free by the tranquillity of the time: otherwhile shee is covered and trou∣bled with the floods of tribulations and temptations. In Psal. 10 And againe: The moon increasing & decreasing signifies the Church: because so far as the Church is spirituall, she shineth: but so far as she is carnal, she is obscure. As therefore the moon appeares in diverse formes in the firmament: The condi∣tion of the Church is variable in this world. so is the Churches condition diverse in this life: sometimes shining in ful light: other∣while she is scarcely to be seen, and sometimes not at all, untill again her light break forth as out of darknes. This serves for the confutation of that Popish fi∣ction, which is that the Church shall alwayes be as visible in the world, as is the kingdome of Naples, or the like. Moreover in that the Woman hath the moon under her feet, what is it? but that
she despiseth all sublunary & earthlie things as vaine and perishing: The moon under the feet of the woman. seekes after & possesseth in Christ the thinges that are above. And a crown of twelve stars on her head] This denotes the faith of the Aposto∣licall Church, the profession whereof was as a crown unto her head. For the A∣postles being twelve in number, did like bright shining stars spread forth the light of Gods truth over the world. 1 Cor. 5.11 Ephes. 2.10. For however Paul and Barnabas were afterward added unto them, yet the number of 12: remained even after Iudas fell away. These by their ministery did set a crown upon the Church, by laying the founda∣tion upon which she is builded: Or in the head, that is, in the beginning of the Church they did shine like stars and principal members thereof: And thus a cer∣taine interpreter expounds it. Others make the twelve stars to be the heads of the Creed; because faith is the crown of the Church, and in them are contained the cheife points of Christian religion. Thus much of her clothing. Hence we are to observe, while the woman did shine clothed with the Sun, The church hath chan∣ged her sun like cloth∣ing into purple. had the Moon under her feet, and a crown of stars on her head, so long she re∣mained the undefiled spouse of Christ: but after she put on, (in stead of the Sun) purple and scarlet: then she left off from trampling the moon under her feet, & begane to follow after earthly things, changed her crown of stars, into a crown of gold, pearls, & precious stones: In a word, then she played the harlot, sate on the Beast, and became the mother of fornications, which things are afterward de∣scribed in Chap. 17. Let the reader diligently compare the description. And she being with child cryed] Most Greek copies have it in the present tense  cryeth, so also Andreas and the greater & lesser copies of Robert Ste∣phanus. But Montanus and the old version have it  cryed: and so Beza in his latter edition. The sense is one. But I rather take it in the present tense, because the proprietie of the stile denotes the Evangelist John to be author of this booke, unto whom this kind of Enallage or change of tenses, is verie familiar both in his Gospel and Epistles. For paine] Our Wafer-worshippers cannot tell how to applie this to the Virgine mother: for they hold, that Marie was delivered without paine, grounding this on another false opinion, viz. that she was free from the stain of original sin: but neither of these opinions can be of faith: because neither of them are grounded on the word of God. The virgins conceiving indeed was miraculous. But her bringing forth was natural, for by the opening of the wombe she brought forth her first born son, Luk. 2.23. But whither a natural delivery can be without paine, I leave to naturalists: Neither is it needfull to define that with danger, August. Enchirid. cap. 59. the which without any danger, a man may bee ignorant of. The type represents the usuall order of nature, wherby women being in labour to be delivered are commonly pained: the which Christ confirmes John 16.21. And indeed the sorrow of child bearing at first was imposed on the woman by God, as a punishment of her sin: Gen. 3.16. I will multiply thy sorrowes, &c. Hence the scripture compares vehement and inevita∣ble anguishes unto the paine of a woman in travel, which the Greekes call by a peculiar word  sorrowes and to be in sorrow. If therfore the scri∣pture hath defined childbearing to be with paine, then we cannot without dan∣ger bee ignorant thereof. So then this type signifies, that the Woman, or Church shall not bring forth her fruite without labour, sorrow and much crying: The which is to be referred partlie to the labour and care of the ministrie: and partly to the troubles and cala∣mities of persecutions: hence the Apostle traveling in birth of the Corinthians cryes out not without griefe: Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, 1 Cor. 4.11 and are naked, and are buffeted and have no certaine dwelling place: we are made the filth of this world, and are the of scouring of all things unto this day: In stripes, 2 Cor 6.5. & 7.5. in imprin∣sonments, in tumults, in labours and watchings: on every side we are troubled, without were fightings, within were feares. So likewise he speakes of the declining Galati∣ans: My little children, saith he, Gala. 4.19 of whom againe I travel in birth () untill
Christ be formed in you. So then we se, that the birth and propagation of the Church shalbe with great troubles, cares, sorrowes and crying: the which thing Christ foretold us, saying: The world shall rejoyce, but yee shall mourn: And the A∣postle: Ioh. 16.20 2 Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Now by that which followeth it will appear, that by this sorrowfull travel of the wo∣man, are chiefly prefigured the miseries, persecutions, punishments and martyr∣domes which Christians should afterwards suffer under tyrants, yet not to terrify but to comfort them: for wheras the world thought by these things to suppresse the Church; she should (though with paine) most fruitfully bring forth, and be∣jond all expectation increase far and nere. 3. And there appeared another signe] The first signe or wonder was a woman. The second followes, viz. a Dragon is seen by Iohn in heaven of a terrible shape: not in that starrie heaven, where Astronomers place the Dragon with the signe Ophiuchus or Esculapius: but in that heaven, which the Apostle speakes of, where principallities & powers, and spirituall wickednesse doe rule  that is, in the regions of the aire above us: as the Apostle himself declares it Ephes. 2.2. unlesse perhaps this signe appeared in the utmost heaven beeing o∣pened. A great Dragon] Of an huge bignesse and strength: for a Dragon is an old Serpent, who by devouring of many serpents at last becomes a Dragon, accord∣ing to the saying: : If a serpent doth not eat a serpent, he shall never be a Dragon: He is said to be a red Dragon, to denote his cruel & blood thirstie nature, as beeing wholie red with the blood of the Saints: Others thinke he is called  fierie (for it may either way be trans∣lated) to denote his fierie and hellish condition: but I rather approve the former. Having seven heads] Hence Ribera saith, it is manifest, that these things belong unto the time of his fained Antichrist: But he deceiveth and is deceived, as think∣ing, Dan. 7.8. that these are the heads, and the hornes of the fourth Beast mentioned in Da∣niel, whose little horne tipeth out Antichrist: As if the Beast with his heads & hornes there spoken of, were yet to be expected and not already come long agoe. The Dragon here, hath nothing common with the Beast in Daniel, besides the ten hornes: & yet it shal neither be this Dragon, nor the Beast in Daniel: but passing by this, let us more narrowly consider the monstre. Poets have fained a terrible monstre called Hydra Lernaea (not much unlike unto this Dragon in shape) having a huge body and nine heads, Hydra Ler∣naea, vide Apollod. Bibl. lib. 2. eight whereof were mortal, the middlemost immortal: the killing whereof they ascribe to the second labour of Hercules. Now the monstre here spoken off, How the Dragon & Beast differ differs from the following Beast, in that the Dragon hath crownes on his head; the Beast on his hornes: so that the heads and hornes in this place, doe not signifie the same thing there, as we shall see herafter. Thus there is some difference betwixt the Dragon and the Beast, yet their like∣nesse is great: for the Dragon begate the Beast, even as like begets its like. Who this Dragon should be, is very plain by the epithites: for he is called that Old Serpent, the Devil & Satan ver. 9. & Chap. 20.2. who is known of all to be that enemy of mankind. He is represented in the form of a serpent, both because in likenesse of a serpent he seduced our first parents, as also because of his rage & cruelty against the Church, and lastly because of his poyson wherwith he infec∣teth the world. The heads and hornes of the Dragon, are the devils instruments, & ministers of his furie against the Woman. In that the crownes are said to be on his heads, & not on his hornes, it argues, that the heads denote the chiefe instruments of the Dragon armed with regal autho∣rity: But the hornes inferiour and vulgar, yet armed. The crowned heads therfore
of the Dragon, are kings and tyrants persecuting the woman: The hornes, Who are the heads and hornes of the Dra∣gon. are officers under them: as, governours, captaines, soldiours, hang-men and the like, by whom they exercise their crueltie, like as the head of a beast doth push with his hornes. Seven heads] indefinitely for many, as before: the seven spirits, seven lampes &c. For a sevenfold number is allwayes indefinite, except it bee restrained, as afterward it is, where it is said, that the seven heads of the beast, are the seven mountaines of the woman or Rome. SO THE TEN HORNES indefinitelie are verie many, because there are more inferiour executioners and murtherers, then kings. Among the heads of the Dragon Herod the Ascalonite is worthelie reckoned in the first place, as first labouring to destroy the womans seed, Who are the heads of the Dra∣gon. for whose cause (almost as soon as he was borne) hee wickedlie caused all the infants of Bethlehem to be murthered. Next was Herod Antipas his son, the mur∣therer of John. The third Herod Agrippa; who killed James, and perse∣cuted Peter. After these, the Romane tyrants persecuting Christians are to be numbred a∣mong the seven heads, as Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Verus, Commodus, Severus, Decius, Diocletian and other most cruell Serpents who wholy imbrued themselves in the blood of the saintes, & most miserable af∣flicted the Church until Constantines time. Of the Dragons hornes Pilate the Romane Governour was chiefe, Who are the Dra∣gons hornes who with the Scribes and Pharisees crucified the Lord of life: also his successours, as Felix, Lysias, Festus, with all such as afterwards were assistants unto the Romane heads in persecuting the saintes. Thus of necessitie these things must bee interpreted, on∣lesse we would grope in darkenesse, for they altogether belong to demonstrate the calamities of the primitive Church. 4. And his taile drew the third part of the stars] Hitherto we have spoken of the Dragons form: now followes what he did viz. his twofould crueltie is here noted: the first against the Stars: the second against the woman. He drew the third part of the stars &c. This Andreas (but little to the purpose) interprets of Lucifer drawing with him verie many Angels into destruction: It is a Metaphoricall allusion unto that in Dan. 8.10. touching Epiphanes, The stars cast down to the earth. who (in the type of Anti∣christ) cast down the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them. The Stars in Chap. 1.10. signifie the teachers of Churches. Their casting down from heaven to the earth, signifies their falling away from the faith and hea∣venlie function, unto humane traditions and the cares of this life: as before we heard on Chap. 6.13. & 8.10. & 9.1. This the Dragon did by his taile, The fail of the Dragon. signify∣ing, as some thinke, his fraudulent subtiltie: for as dogs with their tailes faune up∣on their masters: so Satan drew by flaterie and lying promises many teachers from seeking after heavenlie things, and dasht them against the rocks of wordly honour. Now this indeed he hath don and yet dayly doth to the destruction of many: not withstanding this is not al, for the Dragon begane his battel by open violence. I therefore rather interpret the Dragons taile, (in which his chiefest strength consists) of the crueltie and long continued persecutions, by which many pro∣fessours of the name of Christ, who ought like stars to shine before others, partlie through torments and partlie through feare, have fallen from the faith and worshipped devils. This happened under the cruel stormes of former persecu∣tions, as histories testifie, & principally under Domitian, Diocletian, & Decius. For Diocletian (to alledge the words of Eusebius concerning his time onely) by a ty∣rannicall edict commanded the meeting houses of Christians to be laid even with the ground: then to burne the holy Scriptures: Lib. 8. hist. c. 3. that the leaders of Christians should be appre∣hended, fettered, and by torments constrained to sacrifice unto Idols. Then many indeed beeing constant, suffered Martyrdom, but an infinite number of others (saith he) beeing
overcom by fear, soon after the first brunt gave over wholy the combat. But what way soever we take it, it is an anticipation, that is the thinges are before related, which the Dragon did afterward. Primasius saith, that the taile are the false prophets, through whom the enemie fulfils his wickednes. As in Isay. 9.15. The prophet that teacheth lies, is the taile: namelie, because of their smooth and flattering sermons. Now the Dragon did both. And therefore we may take both the senses, making the summe to be thus: The De∣vil both by the lies of deceivers, as also by the cruelty of tyrants drew many away from the faith, &c. Of which seducement mention is made in vers. 9. So then he casts from heaven to the earth, because he seduceth from the faith unto perfidiousnes by the love of the earth, some by lies, others by tor∣ments. Not withstanding when I compare the Visions, I see that here the spirit pointes at the third, fourth & fift trumpet of the foregoing Vision: to give us to understand that the great Star called wormwood Cha. 8.10. with the third part of the stars: Ibid. v. 12. and that great Star fallen from heaven Chap. 9.1. were drawen and cast to the earth by the fall of this Dragon: that is, fell away from the sinceritie of the faith and Christian pietie, to worldlie mindednes and Antichristia∣nisme. And the Dragon stood] Another enterprise of the Dragon against the woman: he stands before her to devoure her child: like as an hungrie wolfe stands be∣fore the fowld, 1. Pet. 5.8 to destroy the sheep that come forth. Satans ravenous appetite is insatiable, the which he desires to fill with our blood: therfore Peter describes him under the type of a hungrie and roaring Lyon. But this is generall. Let us therfore applie it more nerely to the purpose. First the dragon endeavoured what he could to devoure Christ in his owne person, that is, when Herod the first head of the Dragon, beeing troubled at the hearing of Christ birth, most wickedlie murthered all the children of two yeers, that so he might not misse to devour the womans child: Also when Pilate the first horn of the Dragon condemned and crucified the son of God. Afterward he mightelie laboured to destroy him in his members: when Herod Antipas beheaded the Baptist: Herod Agrippa tooke away the life of James: Againe when the other heades, as Nero, Domitian and the following tyrants by cruel edicts, punishments, rackings and persecutions throughout the whole empire indeavoured by all meanes, to swallow up what ever the Church brought forth, that so they might destroy all Christians and utterly blot out the faith of Christ. Neither is Brightmans note to be disapproved, viz. that the Dragon by tyrants did diligentlie watch, that there might not be born any defender of the Christian religion. And if any Emperour or Governour seemed but to favour Christians, he was soon devoured by the Serpent. The enterprise we have heard: now let see the event. The Second part of the Chapter. The historie and event of both signes. 5. And shee brought foorth a man childe, who was to rule all the nations with a rod of iron: and her childe was caught up unto God, and to his throne. 6. And the woman fled into the wildernes, where she hath a place pre∣pared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hun∣dred and threescore dayes.
7. And there was warre in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought a∣gainst the dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels, 8. And prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in hea∣ven. 9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the devill and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: hee was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 10. And I heard a loud voyce, saying in heaven, Now is come salva∣tion, and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accu∣sed them before our God day and night. 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lambe, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. 12. Therefore rejoyce yee heavens, and yee that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea: for the devill is come downe unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, hee perse∣cuted the woman which brought forth the man childe. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that shee might flee into the wildernesse into her place, where she is nouris hed for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the face of the Ser∣pent. 15. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the wo∣man, that hee might cause her to be carried away of the flood. 16. And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of his mouth. 17. And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make warre with the remnant of her seed, which keepe the commandements of God, and have the Testimony of Iesus Christ. 18. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd she brought forth a man child] The woman brings forth, and a man child is born: he is set upon by the dragon, but caught up to the throne of God: so the Dragon is frustrated of his prey. This whole type may bee applyed to Christ literallie. For in the head the lot or portion of the members is repre∣sented. A man child is born] which notes his sex, strength and power: This is meant of Christ who is the mightie God: and the following attri∣bute is also proper to him. Hee shall feed (or rule) all nations with a rod of iron] out of Psal. 2. for hee is ap∣pointed by the father to be the feeder or ruler of all nations, ruling them with an iron rod, that is, a most powerfull scepter (for iron is not fraile) yet in a diverse or different way: some he quickneth by the scepter of his word and spirit, and di∣recteth them, as his sheep, into his sheep fowld of glorie: Others by the same scepter hee breakes in pieces as a potters vessel, and casts them, (as goates) into hel fire: Christ therfore doth nothing feare the Dragons open mouth, because he is a manchild: he cares not for his diadems, nor feareth his hornes: because he can beate down all things with his rod of iron.
And here it is closely answered to what might be objected, Why the Dragon did not devoure the man∣child. viz: Why did the Dragon cease? & wherefore did he not devoure the child so soon as he was born? two, or three reasons are shewed how his endeavours were frustrated. The magnanimity, that is, the divine power of the manchild did terrify him: his iron scepter made him afraid, wherewith he bruiseth his heads and hornes. But did he not swallow him up beeing dead? not in the least: for though he bruised his heele, yet he could not hurt him, because, beeing delivered from the power of death & satan, he was taken up into heaven, & sate down at the right of God. For this also which is added, and he was caught up, &c. may bee literallie ap∣plyed to Christ. However the prophetical sense of this type is here chieflie to be considered. The Woman, that is, the Church brought forth a Son collective, for, many children of God, by the seed of the word. For even in the beginning by the A∣postolicall preaching many thousands of Christians were begotten to Christ: and the elect of God dispersed throughout the whole earth were gathered by little & little. This generation is sayd to be male-children, because the elect beeing strong in faith doe manfully resist Satan: Io. 11, 52. Act. 2.39. They also in Christ their head shall rule the na∣tions with a rod of iron. Revel. 2.17. seeing the head communicates what is his, unto his members: hence the Saintes shall judge the world and Angels, 1 Cor. 6.2. They shalbe caught up to God also on his throne: because beeing supported by the power of God they shall not fall under their temptations, but finishing their warfare with courage, shall obtain, (as conquerours) a crown of glorie with Christ: For to him that overcommeth he will graunt to sit with him in his throne, even as he also over∣came, and was set with his Father on his throne, Chap. 3.21. This consolation did chiefly belong to the times of the martyrs, while Christ rode on the red horse, even from Neroes persecution unto that of Diocletian, as may plainly be gathered from v. 11. Now this allegoricall sense by me expounded would have been the more obscure as touching the members, but that the historicall sense before was very plaine and cleare in Christ the head: and therfore it was necessarilie to be set down in the first place. Brightman takes this man child to be Constantine the great, who at length was brought forth by the Church as a patron and defender of the faith against Maxen∣tius, Licinius, and other enemies: But I know not, whither with more shew of reason, then Lyra who understands it as meant of Heraclius, who reigned (Phocas beeing taken away) very unprosperously. For here the womans seed doth cer∣tainly denote the ryse, and first state of the primitive Church. 6. And the woman fled into the wildernesse] Vnlesse here we take notice of the anticipation, The anti∣cipation of the wo∣mans flight & reason thereof. mentioned in the Analysis, and which our Tossanus hath rightly ob∣served, many intricate questions will arise: as, how in this verse the woman is said to flie into the wildernesse, and again in v. 14? whither she once returned? fled twise? fled thither before the battel? how she flue before she received wings? &c. Therfore her flight is put by an anticipation, but came to passe afterward when the Dragon was cast into the earth: and after a new persecution was raised against her v. 13. For she fled not so soon as she was delivered (& in∣deed bow could she flie having newly brought forth) but some while after. First Michael thrust the Dragon out of heaven: Hereupon the heavenly inhabitants sang their triumphant song: The Dragon then to revenge the losse of his prey, and his own ruin, began to follow after the woman. She then hath wings given her, & so flies into the wildernesse. And this is the order of the Vision. Thus her flight is here brought in by an anticipation: because the spirit having shewed how the child was delivered from the Dragons fury, would also adde something touch∣ing the womans preservation from the same: Hee, by beeing caught into heaven; The woman by flight into the wildernesse: howbeit not together at one time: for betwixt these things there happened a cruel battel in heaven betwixt Michael
and the Dragon: as also the Dragons new enterprise against the woman on earth: upon this John returns unto the flight and persecution of the woman. Therfore we will reserve the interpretation of this verse, till we come to v. 14. Now onely let us take notice of the summe and drift. FIRST, the flight of the woman into the wildernes, signifies the invisibility of the A∣postolical Church, after she had fought many battels with tyrants, hereticks and hypocrites. For as the Moon comming so low as the shadow of the earth, gives noe light, neither for the present is more seen, then if it were not in the skie: so the Church that chast mother, through the shadow of worldly ambition, The Church vanished as the moon. covetousnes luxurie & power of prelates and carnal priests, lost her light by little and little, and at length vanished away, insomuch as she never appeared any where in the world in her primitive beauty. The Papists affirme that their Church never fled or vanished away: & contend that she allwayes shined in her full light: by which they deny that their Church is this chast mother. Histories indeed shew, that Rome of old was a chast mother, but ceased so to be by changing the government of Christ instituted by his Apostles, into the Ecclesiastical and secular kingdom of the Pope: the which when and how it came to passe hath already been shewed several times, & shall further be spoken of afterward. Secondly, in that there is a place prepared for her in the wildernesse where she is nou∣rished, it signifies that however the puritie of the Church shall then fade away, and the outward face thereof appear wholy discrepant from the primitive state: yet God will reserve and feed some remnants. Of the rest in verse 14. 7. And there was warre in heaven] Which happened not after the womans flight into the wildernesse, but after the manchild was caught up into heaven. For the Dragon beeing disappointed of one prey, he thirsted after the other: that is, seeing he could not destroy the child, he attempts to devoure the mother. But Michael is present in her behalfe, provoking the Dragon to combat: and thrust∣ing him, beeing overcom, with his followers out of heaven: whence arose a shout among the heavenly spirits. What is meant by this battel, and when it was, is not easie to be expounded. What the war was between Michael and the Dragon. Riberas fi∣ction. There are some who refer it to the first fall of the devill, when Lucifer with his Angels was cast down out of heaven. This Ribera rightly rejects: yet puts in the place thereof a strange fiction of his own: viz. of a battel that shalbe betwixt Antichrist and the Saintes about the last four yeers before the end of the world. But without all doubt this battel is al∣ready fought, and the Dragon cast into the earth: because the woman long agone is fled into the wildernesse. Others take it as an allusion to the battel of Michael with satan about the bodie of Moses, mentioned in Jude vers. 9. But the cause of the war there, is other then here. Brightman thinkes that Constantines victory over Maxentius, Maximinus and Licinius heads of the Dragon, is here set forth. But the effects of the victorie (celebrated with songs by them in heaven, vers. 10.11.) Seem to be more glo∣rious, then can possiblie be restrained to Constantines temporall victorie. As therefore in the signe of the woman, her deliverie, and the child, there was a double sense: One Historicall fulfilled in the person of Marie, and Christ. The other Allegoricall in the Church and members of Christ: so we may rightlie in∣terpret this combat in a twofold sense: first spiritually of the conflict of Christ and Satan, the which went before in order of time. Secondly Historicallie of Con∣stantines and the enemies battles, which happened afterward. For as Christ caught up into the throne of God: thrust Satan out of his kingdome, and brought e∣ternal peace and saftie unto the Saintes by his intercession. So Constantine bee∣ing advanced on the throne of the empire, did manfullie suppresse all enemies of Christianitie, and brought in a breathing time unto the Church, after her former & long continued afflictions. This is the summe. Now let us consider the battell:
of which: 1. the place: 2. the Captaines and armies: 3. the event: lastly the effect and benefit therof is explained. The place of the war was heaven. But heaven is a place of peace, not of war: of quietnesse not of dissention. The war in heaven is visional not reall. It is so indeed. This is therefore to bee attributed onelie unto the Vision, the which Iohn saw in the heaven above. The Captaine, and armie fighting on the one side were Michael and his Angels. On the other side the Dragon with his Angels. As the Dragon is Satan: So Michael is Christ the Manchild caught up into heaven. MICHAEI beeing interpreted is, Who is like God? Now who is like God save Christ his onely begotten son? So Daniel also brings in Christ under the name of Michael, Chap. 11. and 12. Propheticallie pointing at this battel. At that time Michael the great prince shal stand up for the chil∣dren of his people, viz. having finished the worke of our redemption in the flesh. But what manner of battel is it? The first conflict consisted in Satans temptations, The first conflict of this war. the which Christ did offten most stronglie sustaine and suppresse. The soorest conflict, was his bloodie sweating in the garden, that which hee suffered in the high priests hall, and on the crosse at his death. Then Michael indeed seemed to have bin overthrown: but a while after the adversaries power was broken: for by death Michael overcame: and rising again he bruised the Dragons heades: and beeing lift up unto the throne of his father he triumphed over all principallities and powers. Col. 2 15 Then as a conquerour hee ascended with his bodie, (on which he had born and by his blood purged the sins of men) into heaven, and by the efficacie of his eternall intercession repres∣sing the accusations of the adversarie, hath made up our everlasting peace with God. This mysterie of our salvation is shadowed out under the type of this bat∣tel, as plainlie appeares from vers. 10.11. The which typicall representation did verie much serve for the consolation of the Church, seeing she should be sha∣ken with most cruell stormes of persecutions for the space of three hundred yeers: least the faithfull beeing unmindful both of this fight & victorie, might faint un∣der the long continuance of the crosse. But how are the Angels joyned with Michael in the fight, Why the Angels are joyned with Christ and who they are. seeing Christ alone hath troaden the Wine-presse of Gods wrath, and overcom the Dragon? This is to be referred to the decencie of the Vision. For a captain doth not use to fight without an armie: And all though Christ alone hath fought the battell hand to hand (as it were) with Satan, yet hath he also left occasion of combatting unto his Angels: that so they might not stand still, and onely behold their cap∣taine fighting, but couragiouslie imitate him in the same. The Angels of Michael were the Apostles, who next unto the captaine, suffered the adversa∣ries rage: Togither with all other faithfull and elect ones, standing conti∣nuallie in battel aray under Christ their leader. So also the Dragon hath his Angels joyned with him, the which are his heades and hornes, viz. all instru∣ments of the devill whither high or low, by whom he exerciseth his violence against Christ and the Church. This is the spirituall combat betwixt Christ and Satan. 8. And prevailed not] The event of the war is, that the Dragon with his follo∣wers stood not in battell, but fleeing were cast downe to the earth. Great indeed and cruel is the Dragon: but Michael is greater and more powerfull. Satan is that strong armed man, Math. 12.29. Luk. XI. 21. Heb. 2.14. possessing his house in peace, and vex∣ing the Church: but Christ stronger then hee, beeing come, takes away his palace, overcomes him and divides his spoiles. For by death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devill, and delivered them who through the feare of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. Now as Christ sits triumph∣ing at the right hand of God: so there was no place found for Satan in heaven: but hee was cast to the earth like a champion broken and overcome: whom then
we clearely judge to be conquered when we see him lie groveling on the ground. This thrusting down of Satan out of heaven was mysticall, not historical, of which also Christ speakes in the Gospel: I beheld satan as lightning fall from heaven: And again: Now is the judgement of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out: Ioh. 12.31. For the spreading of the Gospell through the world was Satans overthrow & the destruction of his kingdom. So Christ beeing neere his death, saith, The Prince of this world is Judged. That is beeing shortlie to be Judged, he saith, he is Iudged: like as a dying man, is said to be dead, or the like. For in his death he threw down Satan by merit: In his resurrection and ascention by efficacie: viz send∣ing down the holy Ghost from heaven, throw whose grace Satan is thrust forth out of the harts of the faithfull. Andreas also gives a touch of the mysticall sense of this war and victorie of Michael: applying the casting down of the Dragon here, Andreas opinion. Vnto the second fall of Satan, by which he was overcome and thrown down through the crosse of Christ: Namelie, when the Prince of this world was judged, and thrust from that tyrannie which he before exercised. 9. That old Serpent] Now, that we might not imagine this to be a naturall Dragon, he sets him forth by his proper names or surnames, whence we may know both his naturall disposition, and who he is. He calls him, that old Serpent] as afterward in Chap. 20: vers. 2.10. To wit, 1. The old serpent. who of old by infusing into our first parents the venome of pride, was the cause of their and our fall and ruin. This Dragon therfore is the same who in Gen. 3. Is that subtil serpent, and may be called that old deceiver. De exhort: mart: in proem: He is therfore that proper ad∣versary the Devill, saith Cyprian, and the old enemie with whom we wage war, who almost for the space of six thousand yeeres, hath fought against mankind: And there∣fore through length of time hath fullie learned all kindes of temptations, and how to lie in wait for to destroy the soule. If he find a soldiour of Christ unprepared, unskilful, care∣lesse, and not vigilant with his whole hart, he circumvents him before he knowes it, he beguiles him unawares, and deceiveth him as beeing not skilfull. But if any one keeping the commandements of the Lord, and stronglie cleaving to Christ, resist him, he must needs be overcome, because Christ (whom we confesse) is invincible. He cals him , the Devill, that is, a slanderour or false accuser. 2. The De∣vill. For  or a calumnie is whē a thing wel spokē is wrested unto a malicious sense: and this is the proper worke of the Devill, beeing the first most impious ca∣lumniatour. There seem to be two causes why hee is so called: First he slaunde∣rously perverted Gods prohibition to our first parents concerning the forbidden fruit: by accusing God of falsehood and envie, as though man should not die by eating of the forbidden fruit, but become like unto God. Secondly, because he cea∣seth not to cry out against Christ who died & was raised up for our sakes, denying his satisfaction, scoffing at our redemption, and not ceasing to accuse the saintes before the judgment of God as guiltie of death for their sinnes. He cals him also, Satan] that is, adversarie, 3. Satan. for the Hebrue Satan signifies to resist. Because from the beginning he was a rebell to God and Christ, and yet ceaseth not to oppugne the childeren of God, who are Christs members. Lastlie he calleth him the seducer of the whole earth, 4. Seducer. or a most vile impostor through long and continued wickednesse. For at the beginning with his lies he seduced our Mother Eve: through his impostures he caused the old world to be drowned by the flood: and soon after again he drew aside the sonnes of men from the true worship of God unro idolatrie: and alwayes hath bin the first inventer and de∣viser of heresies and deceits by most wicked instruments. Brightman, as I said, expounds it historicallie, making Michael with his Angels to be Constantine with his legions: The Dragon with his Angels Maxentius, Maxi∣minus and Licinius, by whose tyrannie Satan did vomit out his last hatred against Christians, against whom Constantine warred. Maxentius flieing over a certaine bridge was drowned in tyber. Maximinus
perished in miserable exile. And Licinius at last was also put to death. So the Dra∣gon was then cast down from heaven to the earth, these tyrants beeing driven out of the borders of the Church. Now whither this be the meaning of the type, I dare not affirme, seeing the proper and expresse description of the Dragon seems verie much to condradict the same as here, so also afterward Chap. 20.2. Where the same apprehending of Satan is figured out in another type and to ano∣ther end. 10. And I heard a great voyce] The warre and victorie of Michael, and the overthrow of the Dragon have bin spoken of. Now followeth the Song of the Church triumphant, in which two fruites of the victorie are celebrated: viz. The joy of the Church: and the mourning of the adversaries, with the causes of both. The great voyce that Iohn heard signifies the multitude of rejoycers, and the greatnes of their joy because of the victorie. From vers. 11. it may be gathered that they were the saintes in heaven, who acknowledge the Church militant for their brethren. Therfore all the heavenlie companies sing togither, excepting the third companie of Angels, and the fourth of other creatures. The proposition of their song is in vers. 12. rejoyce yee heavens, and yee that dwell in them. In calling upon the heavens themselves to rejoyce, they amplifie the excellencie of the benefit: for great joy is caused by great mercies. This Prosopopoeja is often used, as afterward in Chap. 19.20. so in Isa. 1.2. heare ye heavens. And yee that dwell in them] that is, the Angels of heaven, whom they invite to rejoyce with them. The arguments of their joy are the worthie benefits of the victorie, which are three in number, as we shewed in the analysis. The first is, that by this victorie comes salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. The like benefits were set forth in the foregoing vision, at the sounding of the seventh Angel: Cha. 11.15 but arising from a different cause. There the dwellers in heaven rejoyced for the finall judgement, and destruction of Anti∣christ and other adversaries: here they exult for the first victorie of Michael a∣gainst the Dragon, by which is come salvation, and strength &c: Now howsoever God and Christ had this evermore before: yet the same appeared not so fullie, because of the wickeds rage and tumult, the which they seemed to winke at: But then they openlie declared their power, &c. When Michael, that is, Christ by his death, resurrection and exaltation brake the power of the Dragon, and cast him to the earth. Besides they had it not alwayes for us, that is, for our help and consolation. But at last it came to bee ours and for us through the victorie of Michael. For it is to be observed, that they say not, these things came to God and to Christ, but that now the salvation and power of God and of Christ was come, that is, was gotten, given and communicated to us. For through Christs victorie the salvation of our God is come, viz. unto us from our God. Then the power of our God did manifest it self, when it drew us as a lost prey out of the Dragons jawes. Then Gods kingdom became ours, when we beeing delivered out of the power of darkenesse, Colos. 1.13 Rom. 1.4. were translated into the kingdome of his beloved Son. Then Christs power became ours, when he, having over come death and Satan, was declared to be the son of God powerfullie according to the spirit of sanctification by the resurrection from the dead. This is the first argument of joy to the heavenlie spirits and to us: in regard that our salvation is founded in the victorie of Michael, and that the power and kingdome of our God is vindicated from the violence of the Dragon. Our God] so they call him, that we might confidentlie trust, that by this vi∣ctorie God is reconciled unto us, Ioh. 16.33. for so Christ bids us, saying, bee of good cheere I have overcome the world. To this spiritual joy may also be added that outward rejoycing of Christians,
when Constantine the Emperour had driven the foresaid Dragons out of heaven to the earth. Thus (I say) salvation, strength, kingdome and power of God and Christ did seeme to come, when a Christian Emperour was set on the throne, glorifyed God, publickly maintained Christs power, and freed the Church from tyrannie: For the kingdome of God is visiblie seen, as it were (saith Brightman) when godlie princes are placed at the stern. The which indeed is true: But here it is a secon∣darie sense. For the accuser of our bretheren is cast down] The second benefit of the victorie, and argument of joy, is the immunitie of the Godly from satans accusations. Whom before he called a slaunderer, adversarie, and deceiver: he now cals him our accuser. It is an allusion to the court, where the judge sitteth on the tribunal: Satans Iu∣diciall acti∣on against sinners. be∣fore whom is brought a guilty person, with his accuser demanding his life. This judge is God: For he will judge the world in righteousnes: and shall minister judgment to the people in uprightnes. Before his tribunal we all stood guiltie of eternal death through sin: Gods revenging justice stood against us, requiring, that we should suffer temporal and eternal punishments, For what was committed by us against his infinite majesty: Rom. 1.32. For it is the judgement of God that they who commit such things are worthie of death. Against us stood the law of God pronouncing cursings a∣gainst the transgressours thereof: Our own evill conscience also, arguing and convincing us of eternall guiltinesse. But Christ our Michael pleaded our cause before God, and by suffering death for our sakes, most fullie satisfyed his justice, and healed our wounded consciences from the sting of sin, purging and sanctifying our harts through faith by his spirit: Act. 15.9. Rom. 8.1. and therefore there is no con∣demnation to us who are in Christ. Notwithstanding satan left not off to prosecute his action, to accuse and blame us, to stirre up God against us, and to rage against the faithfull. In that he is said to accuse us day and night before God, it doth emphaticallie set forth satans malice: he knowes God is ours, that is, reconciled unto us in Christ: yet he impudently blameth us, to make him, if he could, not to be ours. But thankes be to God: Michael hath cast this impudent railer out of heaven, that hence forward he might no more molest the Lord with his lying accusations. If this great benefit gave occasion of so great joy to the heavenly inhabi∣ters, then much more to us: For the Dragon was not an accuser of them in hea∣ven, but of us, who as yet walk in the slipperie pathes of this world. There∣fore they say: The accuser of our bretheren, to wit, they who as yet have their war∣fare here on earth. This is a worthie thing, that the Church triumphant acknowledgeth us to be bretheren. And indeed the Catholick or universall Church is a communion of all the Saintes both in heaven and in earth. So Chap. 6.11. Hence first the doctrine of the Gospel touching free justification by faith is here confirmed. For if our accuser bee cast out, then certainlie, Free justi∣fication by faith here established. no man accusing us, God the judge will not condemn, but acquit and justifie them, who by faith are in Christ Iesus. It confirmes also the doctrine of the full assurance of our faith and salvation. The full as∣surance of faith touch∣ing our sal∣vation. Rom. 8.33. For if Christ hath satisfyed Gods judgement for us, and silenced our accuser: then verely henceforward we may fullie perswade our selves of the clemencie & Philantropie of God the judge, who wils not the death of a sinner, but that he be couverted and live: for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifieth: who is hee that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distresse, or perse∣cution, nay in all these things wee are more then conquerours through him, who hath looved us in Christ Jesus.
Secondly, it serves to exhort us, considering the spirit saith that our accuser is cast out, not troden under foot. It is true he can doe nothing against us before Gods judgement seat: Neverthelesse he ceaseth not to prosecute the suit against us amongst worldly men, whome he stirrs up exceeding lie to wrath and rage therefore we must not give our selves to carnall security: but watch and pray hav∣ing alwayes our loines girt, that we enter not into temptation. Brightman also interprets these accusations historicallie, applying them to the reproaches of pagans against Christians, who objected to them that they had their suppers like that of Oedipus, that they were incestuous persons, and adulterers, sa∣tisfying their lust in common, that they were manslayers and conspiratours against princes, & cause of all publick calamities, as Tertullian in his Apologie witnesseth: the which calumnies of whom learnt they them, but of the devill that old serpent and father of lies. Now howsoever this be true, yet is it to be taken in a se∣condarie sence. 11. And they overcame him] They, to wit our bretheren. The third benefit of the victorie and argument of joy, is the victorie of the Church militant over the Dragon, as if they should say: Christ hath overcome him: & we the inhabiters of heaven rejoyce at the victorie: Besides our brethren also have overcome: ther∣fore let them likewise rejoyce: But how have they overcome? By the blood of the Lambe] Hence it is apparent in the first place, The Lamb & Michael is Christ. that the Lamb & Michael is one and the same, viz. Christ Iesus. Secondly that the war with the Dragon and the victorie over him was chiefly in the blood of Christ, his death, resurrection and exaltation: in regard therefore the Lamb hath overcome the Dragon: the godly also have over come him, because they have washed and made their garments white in the blood of the Lamb: that is, they are justified and sanctified in the blood of Christ: so that the merit and victorie of the Lambs blood, 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.57. 1 Ioh. 5.4. is ours: He overcomming, we overcome: He dying for us, we are all dead with him: To which purpose is that of the Apostle: but thankes be to God, which giveth us the victory, through Jesus Christ. So Iohn in his Epistles: This is the victorie that overcommeth the world, even our faith. By the blood] Gr.  for, or, by reason of the blood: and it seems to be put for  by the blood as Chap. 4.11. , is put for  by the will or pleasure: And Chap. 13.14. , for  by the miracles. But whither we read it one way or other, the efficient cause of our victory and joy is signified, viz. the blood of the Lamb, that is, the death of Christ, by which God is pacified, the devill overcome: neither doth it unfitlie cohere, that it be rendred, for, or because of the blood, in regard it sheweth us the meritorious cause, for which the victorie becomes ours. And by, or, for the word of thy testimony] Vnto the efficient meritorious cause, he addes two instrumental cause, by which the Lambes victorie becomes ours. ONE is the word of the testimonie, Rom. 10.10. that is, the Gospel, not written, or set forth in tables, but beleeved and hidden in the hart: neither beleeved in the hart onely, but also professed with the mouth before the world: For with the heart man be∣leeveth unto righteousnes, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. There∣fore he saith not, for the testimonie, but, for the word of the testimonie, that is, for the ingenuous profession of the Gospel of Christ: which Iohn familiarly sets forth by the word  testimonie. And thus again  for the word is put for  by the word. The other cause, is the constancie of martyrdom, not fearing to shed their blood for the faith of the Gospel: And this is meant by the expression: They loved not their soules unto the death, that is, their life more then death, being willing to lay down the same for the glorie of Christ: So that  they loved not is put for  they neglected, or, contemned their life, as Brightman hath well observed. It is a paraphrase of the constancie of their faith even unto martyrdom:
for the name of Christ: without which constancy, the Dragon is not conquered in respect of us: not that all are to lay down their lives, but all, being called ther∣unto by Christ, are to be prepared for it. For he which looseth his life for Christs cause, doth finde it: but he looseth it, who layes it not down for Christ. Now it appeareth that this song of triumph is to bee extended unto the times of the mar∣tyrs under the Romane tyrants before Constantine, who then indeed put an end to the martyrdoms of Christians. Thus much of the Saintes rejoycing, containing the first part of the song, and first effect of the victory. 12. We unto the inhabiters] The other part of the song denounceth wo unto the inhabiters of the earth and sea: the particle Wo, doth denote deadly calamities, as before: The third wo shall come quickly. This shall be the other effect of the Dragons downfall: for seeing he could not effect any thing against Michael and his Angels, that is, against the constant martyrs of Christ, who by shedding of their blood (a wonder to bee spoken) overcame the Dragon: therefore he will now poure forth his choller on the children of the earth and sea. Inhabitants of the earth] Alwayes in this booke the inhabitants of the earth are taken in an evill sense for the enemies of the Church, Antichrists associates, The inha∣bitants of the earth. worldli men and idolaters: as we noted on Chap. 3.10. To these therefore the Saintes in heaven threaten woes, because of the Dragon: to whom also are joyned the inhabitants of the sea] Not fishes or Whales swimming in the sea, but men living in Ilands, and mariners who gene∣rally are very profane. Thus Satans universal rage both by sea and land is here set forth. They adde the cause of the danger: For the devil is come downe unto you] It is true, satan did never cease from raging in the world, after he was once thrust out of heaven. But this is a prophetical threatning of other plots at hand, by which, not long after this revelation, he should bring to destruction all the inhabitants of the earth, and sea through out the Christian world, as wholy given to all manner of superstition by Antichrists meanes. Seeing therefore, by what hath been spoken, and hereafter more shall be, it appeareth that the darknesse and calamities of Antichrist came into the world about the yeere of our Lord 606. this Wo is altogether to be referred unto that time. Brightman consents that the inhabitants of the earth, are all sorts of wicked men hypocritically professing Christianitie, viz. all the inhabiters of Anti∣christs kingdome. But by the inhabitants of the sea, he understands the clergie men, who broach grosse, troubled and saltish doctrine, to their counterfaite Christians, which indeed produceth hypocrisie in them, but at last gnawes their entralls, and bereaves them of understanding. Full of great wrath] They foretell Satans furie, by which he should intro∣duce Antichrists spiritual and secular power into the Christian world, establishing his kingdome to the destruction of infinite sowles. Because he knoweth] The cause of this his great furie, is the shortnes of time allotted him to rage in, or, immunitie from the eternall torments of hell, to which he knowes himself to be ordained. And therefore he will make up the the brevitie of the time with unwearied indeavour of doing mischief, not let∣ting passe a moment without satisfying his poysoned lust on the miserable inha∣bitants of the earth. But thou wilt say whence doth he know that his time is short: seeing no man knowes the day of judgement but God? Vndoubtedlie he knowes it by the signes foreshewing the same to be at hand, and by conje∣ctures which are secret to us, seeing he is a spirit of quick and deepe appre∣hension. But how is the time short, it having continued more then a thousand yeeres? How this time is said to be short Ribera restraines it to the last four yeeres of his supposed Antichrist; But
if it were so not onely the devil, but men of the weakest capacitie might know the day of judgement aforehand. But this is manifestly false: for the Beast was not as yet ascended out of the sea and earth: The Dragon had not as yet seduced the world by the Beast and fals Prophet, when he should be cast down to the earth. So then the time of Antichristian persecution, which was to continew more then a thousand yeeres, is said to be short, for the consolation of the godly: that they might know that the Dragons rage should have an end: short also in respect of the time that was past before Antichrist was revealed: 1 Ioh. 2.18 1 Cor. 10.11. like as the time of the new Testament, though long in it self, yet is called the last houre, and the ends of the world. 13. And when the Dragon saw] The things we heard before, touching the deliverie of the woman, the warre of Michael, and the ruin of the Dragon repre∣sented the state of the Church from the first birth therof, unto Constantines time: and were the first part of the first and second Act. Now followes the latter mem∣ber of both the said Acts, containing new combats, and comforts of the Church, belonging unto the three hundred yeeres from Constantine untill the rising of Antichrist. Then the Church seemed to be in a safe haven, beeing freed of outward persecutors, and having obtained Christian Emperours. But as histories witnes, no lesse stormes befell her then before. For she falling to hypocrisie, and abounding in securitie, idlenesse, wealth, luxuriousnes and ambition, soon begane by hom-bred dissentions to consume herself, and to hold forth the faith, not in the heart, but in Creeds and papers, depraving the doctrine of grace by philosophical subtilties, and to heap up without measure humane traditions, bringing in the rites and idols of Pagans, in a word, under the name of Christ to follow heathenisme and deny Christ. Then sincerity betooke it self to Eagles wings, and fled into the desert, out of the sight of men: but whatever was hypocritical and Antichristian gott the upper hand. And he persecuted the woman] Here followes a new assault of the Dragon against the woman, The second assault of the warre. now what it was, and when, is to be considered. The time wil declare the persecution: which is signified two manner of wayes: First on the Dragons part: secondly on the womans part. The Dragon is said to assault the woman after he saw that he was cast unto the earth. Now we have shewed that spiritually he was thrust out of heaven soon after the death and exaltation of Christ: but alle∣goricallie when Constantine came to the Empire who overthrew Maxentius, Ma∣ximinus, and Licinius beeing the heads of the Dragon: Then the Dragon begane to plot new mischief against the woman. The adjunct also of the woman shewes the time: who brought forth the man-child. The persecution therefore begane after the woman was delivered. Her bringing forth, was the time of sorrowes and perse∣cutions under the tyrannical Iewes & Romanes, For a woman (saith Christ) when she is in travell hath sorrow, because her houre is come. To retaine therefore the sense of the prophesie, Ioh. 16.11. it is thus: after that the Church had brought forth a man-child, that is, had gotten Constantine to de∣fend her, a new calamity more pernicious then the former befell her. The occasion whereof was partly the overmuch bounty of Constantine towards the Bishops and Churches: The occa∣sion of a new perse∣cution. Partly also his and some of his successours their incon∣stancie. For by the perswasion of ambitious Bishops, he built at Rome to his great cost, statelie and sumptuous palaces: he gifted the Churches with revenues, lands and princelike treasures: he honoured the Bishops as gods, and such as none might judge, inriching them with excessive gifts, which made them insolent: : In vita Silvestri. for fulnes breeds pride: especiallie he was lavish towards the Bishop of Rome, on whose head (if Platina lie not) he set a mitre beset with gold and precious stones: he built a royal Temple, named first Equitium of the Knight∣hood: then Lateranensis: afterwards Peters: at last Pauls and Agnets: two also at Con∣stantinople: One called the temple of Peace: the other of the Apostles, furnished ra∣ther with Persian then Christian ornaments, bestowing on them vessels of silver,
gold, and large rents, Why Con∣stantine was called Nepos. insomuch for his immoderate prodigalitie he was com∣monly called Nepos which signifies a spendthrift or a riotous person. In the first tenne yeeres of his reigne he was called CONSTANTINVS THE GREAT, because of his victories: The ten yeers after Latro a robber, because of his crueltie to his children and friends: The last ten yeeres of his reign (for he reigned 30 yeers in all) Pupillus a pupil, because of his prodigalitie: as Bapt. Egnatius recordeth. These things ministred an occasion to the Dragon of a new persecution. A new per∣secution by Bishops ambition & luxuri∣ousnesse. See Mat. 23.6. First he breathed the venome of pride into the mindes of secure & ambitious Bishops, insomuch as unmindfull of their former calamities they lifted themselves above each other, basely striving in their Synods about the uppermost sittings, primacie and the like. Witnesse the bundels of such books, which Constantine caused to be burnt. Touching Christian doctrine, they thought it sufficient to hold fast the truth of the Trinitie, although in this very thing they much trifled in their coun∣cils, making yeerly, yea monthly confessions of faith: All their other matters ten∣ded to pompe and vaine glory. It is true, Arius was condemned by the Nicene Councill, and the Arians thrust out of their places: But not long after Constantius leaning to Arianisme, Athanasius was banished, and Arius called back: Him againe the Council of Sardica condemned: and restored Athanasius: who was againe cast off by the Synod of Millane, and Arianisme was again established by the Council held at Ariminum & Seleucia, where all otherdoxe teachers were compelled to subscribe, insomuch as at that time were hardly to be found two or three Bishops in the whole Christian world that were sound in the faith: Yea Liberius also Bishop of Rome fell to the Arians: Of which pestilent corruption Mantuan thus writeth: Arius humani generis lethale venenum Legis in excidium natus fideique ruinam Polluerat gentem, totumque infecerat orbem. Arius was borne that heretick, The deadly bane of men to be: Of Law and faith he was the ruin, And all the world corrupt did he. But these things were but the beginning of sorrowes. For the Bishops being used to Synods, therby having opportunity to establish their ambition and power, did upon the lightest occasion require or force the Emperours to call a Synod, the latter councils still condemning the former: The conflict of councils. having little or no care to set forth the puritie of faith and further godlinesse: But for the most part their de∣crees were concerning Patriarchal seats, of the primacie of Old and New Rome, of the orders of clergy men, their priviledges, immunities and rents: of consecrating the holy Chrisme: of coverings of altars, adorning & worshipping of images: of Massepriests, their ordination, anointing and clothing: about the shaving of virgines and monkes haire: of mitres, surplisses, robes, copes, embroidered and fine linnen garments, holy vestiments, sacrifices, places of refuge, extreem un∣ctions, and such like fooleries. Thus we see what was the cause of the spiritual calamitie of the woman: touching which Ierom saith truly, though little to what might have been spoken: That the Christian Church, after she had princes to be mem∣bers, was made greater indeed in wealth and power, but lesse in vertue and pietie. Besides we read that the woman or Church suffered such sore trialls by the em∣perours themselves, and other tyrants, as hastened her flight. For such general∣ly was the state of the Church, as was the emperours pleasure, and affection to have it, and he for the most part was swayed by the Bishops: so likewise the issue and event of Synods, was usually according to the faction of such Bishops as were stronger then the rest, by reason of the secular power. Constantine himself waver∣ing in the faith towards his latter end, and favouring the heresie of Arius, while he thought (saith Sulpitius) to fulfill his duty in religion, he exercised THE POWER OF PERSECUTION; for Bishops were banished, the clergy persecuted, and the laitie pu∣nished, who had separated themselves from the communion of the Arians. The perse∣cution
beeing then at the hottest, when Constantius, ulian the Apostate, & Valens raging with hostile cruelty against orthodox Christians, differed in nothing, but in name from the cruellest tyrants. These calamities were seconded by the hor∣rible incursions of the barbarians as, Goths, Vandals, the Hunni, &c. who brought a horrible destruction on the Christian world. And thus the Dragon did long and most cruelly afflict, and put the woman to flight, after she had breathed a while. By these things we may understand what was this new ecclesiasticall and civil persecution, with the occasion thereof: Of which Mantuan writeth to this pur∣pose. That however peace is delightfull and much defired, yet it occasioned to the Church more miserable slaughters, opprobries, losses, disgraces and miseries, then the open force of tyrants: For by means thereof Christians did degenerate from their ancient vertue; voluptuousnes made them effeminate, and weake both in body and mind: hence Christ and true faith was forgotten, and set at nought, but all manner of wickednesse increased: and men became worse then beasts, of whome Rome was the receptacle: which caused, (saith he) the Lord for these abominable evils to punish Christians with plagues from hea∣ven, and to let loose upon them nations of a terrible and fierce countenance, regarding nei∣ther the lawes of God or man, as the people of Sarmatia and Scythia, the Hunni, Saracens and Turkes: yea such as professed one faith, like made dogges devoured each others, by mortal warre, sparing in the mean while the Turkes and Saracens, &c. 14. And to the woman were given two wings] Here we see how the woman escaped the new assault of the Dragon: having wings given her she flees into the desert. Of which thing John spake somewhat before in v. 6. by way of anticipa∣tion: save onely that there it is said, the woman fled : here,  that she might flie into the wildernesse: there, that they should feed her: here, that she might there bee nourished: There, 1260 dayes, here, for a time, times & halfe a time. The sense is one and the same. Touching all which we will speake something, especially of the flight and time. The Woman (I say) was eyther to flie or to fall under the Dragons assault. For how should an unarmed woman stand against a cruel monster? neither was she to trust unto her feet: Two Eagles wings givē to the wo∣man. therefore wings are given her of God. Concerning these wings, we need not dispute subtilly thereof. Some wil have them to be the two Testaments, the old and the new, with which the Church defendeth herselfe. Others, hope & faith: Others, prayer and desire of good workes: Ribera under∣stands it to bee the desire of Gods glory, and an indeavour to lead a spotlesse life: AL∣CASAR, the contempt of worldly, and esteem of heavenly things. But we need not seek for a mysterie: for it is a plaine metaphor taken from birds that fly: so the woman being to fly had need of wings, and indeed no lesse then two: for one would not serve to fly withal. A man is said to fly, who doth suddenly shunn the sight of men: as the Poet speakes of one fleeing swiftly: Timor addidit alas: Feare was in stead of wings. Wings therefore are given to the woman, not of a doue, which are to weake for to fly long: although David wisheth saying, O that I had wingsof a doue, that he might have a little rest from trouble: neither the wings of a kite, or of a houpe, or Storke, as Zacha. 5.9. These are unclean birds: but the wings of a generous and Great Eagle, able to fly a long time: For the woman was to fly a great while even till she came into the wildernesse. A great Eagle flyes strongly, lifts her selfe up on high, and is carried above the cloudes: hence the flying of an Eagle is commended in scripture: Deut. 32.11. Isa. 40.31. and hereby is signified that the Church was divinely inabled to this flight, that she might not be a prey unto the Dragon, according to the promise: they that hope in Jehovah, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be wearie, they shall walk and not faint. Now touching the FLIGET, let us see how, and when it was. There are diverse opinions of expositours about it, the which I list not to re∣hearse.
hearse. They spake according to their module. I also will shew myne opinion: yea I have already not obscurely shewed the same. Let us call to memorie what hath bin said before of the place and clothing of the woman, and of the Dragons persecution, the woman before was clothed with the Sun, shined as the moon, and glittering stars openly in heaven: signifying that the Christian Church untill Constantine (who brought peace, and quietnes unto her,) should under the crosse shine in brightnesse of faith godlinesse: And indeed all that while by how much persecution encreased, and Christians were hated, and and afflicted, by so much the more they were eminent and perspicuous: But peace (I say) beeing obtained by Constantine, Christians then began to disperse them∣selves over the whole Romane Empire, & the Church seemed to be againe past al danger: but the thing fell out otherwise: for suddenly new stormes of persecu∣tion overwhelmed her, causing her to flee by little and little, till at length she was forced altogether to hide herselfe in the wildernesse. The wildernesse is opposed to heaven: her flight to the ornaments wherewith formerly she was adorned. For the Church fled from heaven into the wildernesse, not by change of place, but by losse of her graces, changing her ancient sinceritie of doctrine, faith, pietie, humilitie, and Christs government, into luxuriousnes, ambition, superstition and pagan worship: when, I say, in stead of pure and virgines attire, she put on whorish habit, altering her visage, insomuch as now she was not the same, but altogether another woman, save in name onely. Nota. What it is to fle into the wilder∣nesse. Thus she fled into the wildernesse, that is, she vanished out of mans sight, so that what formerlie she had been, the same now appeared not: as things are hid and appeare not in a wildernesse. It is true in all ages there remained still many godly people: but these were of no account and suppressed: there being vere few (if any) congre∣gations, who worshipped the Lord in the purity of his ordinances: But supersti∣tion, idolatrie and tyrannie altogether prevailed. But thou wilt say, such a flight suites not with the historie. For after Constan∣tines time for the space of three hundred yeeres even untill Gregorie the Woman remained in heaven, that is, the Church did flourish both in the East and West: yea the Church hath ever since remained, and at this day the Church at Rome is more magnificent then of old. I answer: we are to distinguish the true Church from the false. The true, sincere and chast woman was forced through the Dra∣gons assaults to flee into the wildernesse, and vanished out of sight, having lost her for∣mer clothing and ornament, so as that chast mother the Church never appeared any where in the world: In her place succeeded a new Church, being a gaudish & whorish woman: so that the flight of the woman signifyes the departure of the true Church in the world. The summe is this. The true Church fled into the wildernesse, The wil∣dernesse is the Popish desolation. not by changing her place but loosing her former state: not by gooing forth of Rome, but in loosing her ornaments. This wildernesse therfore may not be imagined to bee any remote place in Ara∣bia, Lybia, or Japponia: Or a certain place unto which the true Church was limited (as the Donatists dreamt concerning their Africa,) but is that desolate & apostati∣cal state brought in by Antichrist, in which indeed there was a true Church, but not apparent to the view of men: like as of old in Israels apostacie, there was indeed a Church of seven thousand, but unknown to Elias and others: It is, I say, the spi∣rituall confusion of the Papacie: Isay. 40.3. like as the Prophet Isaiah cals the spiritual deso∣lation of the Iewish kingdom a wildernesse. In this wildernesse or spiritual confusion of the Romish Church, Iohn sees a woman riding on a scarlet coulered Beast. Chap. 17. It is verie memorable, that here, so in v. 6. it is said, The woman had a place pre∣pared of God in the wildernesse that they should feed her there] who? the Angels, as they did Elias (unto whose historie it seemes to allude) 1 King 19. Or some se∣cret nursing fathers, whom the Lord would raise up during the womans exile. For
we are to consider, that Christs spouse (howsoever during her banishment, it could not be said, that she was visiblie either here or there) neverthelesse was not extin∣guished, and no where to be found, but was secretlie kept and nourished by God, even as in the time of Elias, the Lord reserved to himself seven thousand worshippers of his name, although so much did not publickly appeare, but a gene∣rall corruption and depravation of religion had spread it self over both kingdoms of Iudah and Israel. The Papists therefore asking us where the Church was a thousand yeeres past, if the Papacie were not it? may here receive an answer, that it was in the wil∣dernesse, where not long after Constantines time she was forced to flee: which made Hilarie to complaine that in his time, Hilar. Cont Auxen. the Church was rather hid in caves and dens of the earth, then to be found in the chief seats. But how long shall the woman remaine banished in the wildernesse? A time, and times, and halfe a time. This threefold distinction of time, is taken out of Dan. 7.25. and 12 7. where Antiochus (a type of Antichrist should tread the Saintes under foot for a time, times, and halfe a time. What is here meant by it, appeares from v. 6. they shall feed her there 1260 dayes: Of these dayes hath been spoken Chap. 11.2. There it signified the time of the prophesie of the two witnesses: here it is the time of the womans exile in the wildernesse. The same time of 42 mo∣neths there is taken for the space, that the holy citie should be troden down: and Chap. 13.5. it is the time the Beast shall rage against the Saintes. Whence I gather, that the Churches abode in the wildernesse: The treading downe of the holy city: The prophesying of the two witnesses: Chap. 12.14. Ch. 13.7. And the Beasts persecution of the Saintes, shal be at one and the same time: and goe together (as it were) with equal steps: The which observation wil much illustrate the prophesie: for that which is obscure in one place, is opened by another beeing more cleare. Now it may be demaunded, Time and imes. what this time is? I have formely shewed diverse opinions about it. The Papists understand by Time a yeere: by times two yeeres: and halfe a time, a halfe yeere: so making, the twelve hundred and sixty dayes, the fourty two months, the time, times, and halfe a time to be three yeeres and an halfe: and so long they i∣magine their Antichrist shall reign in the end of the world, and thrust the Woman the Church out of Rome into the wildernesse, &c. the which (however it be an∣cient yet) is a manifest error, as before I have proved. We added some expositions of our own divines: and at length followed that which seemed the most safe: viz. that a definite time was put for an indefinite, of which also the most learned BIBLIANDER thus writes in his Chronologie: The time, times, and halfe a time doth not signifie three yeeres and an halfe: but according to the proprietie of the Hebrew language, a time not certaine and definite, whither long, or short, or betwixt both, in which God will permit Antichrist, to rage according to his pleasure against Christs servants, the holy law and true religion. This time (I say) touching the Churches banishment is defined in the eternal counsell of God, but so far as concernes the terme can not possiblie be found out by mans reckoning. Now this distribution of time is opposed unto a twofold error. What is meant by this three∣fold distin∣ction of time. A worthy observa∣tion of the Author. Lab. 20. d. C. D. c. 23 For least we should imagine that the afflictions of the Church under Antichrist would bee short, it is said they shall remaine a time, and times, not one and two, but one and many: For neither the Hebrew nor the Greek text hath it in the duall number moadaim, or,  two times, although Austin following the common opi∣nion tooke it so: but both have it in the plural number moyadim &  times towit many: the which notablie confutes the common errour about the time of Antichrists reign: and it seems that Justine Martyr tooke notice of this verie thing against Trypho confuting the Iewes, who understood a plural word du∣lly, of two hundred yeeres. And least also we should thinke that Antichri∣stian calamities should bee perpetuall, they are said to remain but halfe or part of time.
Notwithstanding if this shalbe understood of a definite time in respect of us, because the number of the dayes and moneths is again & again definitely repeated, for my part then I should thinke that a prophetical number of dayes is put for the yeeres, in which Antichrist should reigne and rage in full vigor, viz. 1260 yeeres, which begane (as before I shewed) with his first rising: for then this woman fled into the wildernesse: and the harlot succeeded in her roome. If thou demaund, seing the Church begane soon to flee after Constantines time, wherfore then are not the 1260 yeeres reckoned from thence? I answer, her flight, & the time of her exile is not altogether one thing. For her flight begane from Constantine, and dured untill Phocas, almost 300 yeers, after which time the woman begane to bee in the wildernesse. For neither are we to imagine, that the Church was caried by flight in one day, moneth or yeer into the wildernesse: but by little & little, as she lost her heavenly endowments, changed her clothing and corrupted her chastity: by degrees therfore (I say) the Apostolical sinceritie of faith & order did wear out: and the corruptions, superstitions and heathenish abominations & idols were brought in: together with that Pagan-Jewish hierarchie, which to this day Rome with so great pompe & luxuriousnes boasteth of: for Antichrists apo∣stacy was not at the highest all of a sudden, but encreased by slow paces: till the pride and tyrannie of the Romane Bishops was lifted up and established. For as the Poet saith: Nemo repente fuit turpissimus: Iuve. Sat. 2 When the flight be∣gane & how long it dured. Vntil Sylvester I. all the Romane Bishops were martyrs for the space of 310 yeeres: from that time to John 1. they were all Archbishops, for the space of 200 yeers, until the yeer 520. at which time the Romane Praelates were created Patriarchs by Justine Caesar. Then the woman almost by flying was come to the wildernesse. Notwithstanding the time of banishmēt began 86 yeeres after, when from Patri∣archs they became to be open & very Antichrists: when, I say, Phocas the parricide, contrarie to the mindes both of the Graecian & Latine Bishops, raised up Boniface the III. with a mighty tumult of men into the throne OF VNIVERSAL PESTILENCE, cau∣sing him to be worshipped, & proclaimed prince & Lord of all Bishops. Hitherto the flight still dured. After this was her exile in the wildernes. The long time of her flight is signified by the two wings, not of a dove, but a great Eagle, that is, able to cary her a long while, as I before noted. For the woman was not to fly a little time, but her flight into the wildernesse was to be through groues & great woods, through fields & seas, til she came in a certain place of the wildernes prepared by God: ther∣fore Eagles wings were required: because the Eagle holds out longest in flying. 15. And the serpent cast out] Here the Church hath a new trouble & comfort a∣gaine; The Dragon indeavours to destroy the woman while she flyes through per∣secution: casting out a flood of waters after her, for to swallow her up: but his vo∣miting is in vain. The woman flyes on high: and before she lets herself down into the wildernes the earth opening her mouth swallowes up the flood which the Dragon cast forth. These things are the summ of the two verses: The general doctrine or mea∣ning wherof, I confesse, is not obscure: for it signifies, that the Church having stood out one danger, is involued again with new calamities by that oldserpent, who seeks by all means to destroy her: but that God is never wanting for her safety, but when she is neerest to oppression, then is he neerest suddenly & unexpectedly to provide away for her escape: as here al outwardmeans failing, the earth openeth her mouth, that the woman might not be swallowed up. For al the creatures are ready at Gods appointment for the safety of the elect. But the special sense of this prophesie seems to bee very obscure: What is meant by this floud of waters. namely what these waters and flood should bee? And when the Dragon cast out the same af∣ter the woman? What earth swallowed it up, and how? The particle  as shewes that the waters and flood are allegorically to be understood. Most under∣stand this flood of waters, to be the manifold and grievous afflictions and persecu∣tions, by which satan seekes in all times to oppresse the Church, taking it to be
an allusion to that complaint of the Church of old: Psal. 124.1.3. unlesse Jehovah had bin on our side: now may Israel say; Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gon over our soul, &c. This I confesse is not amisse: But it must bee more specially ex∣pounded, now the Dragon persecuted the woman in her slight, by a flood of wa∣ters: and that also before the Beast ascended out of the sea: of which it followeth Chap. 13. Foxe makes the flood to be those horrible edicts, Fox his opinion. proscripts, and commands of Emperours, (especially of Maxentius and Maximinus) which were every where published for the taking away of Christians from the earth. But these things fel out before the former persecution: neither did the woman take her flight under the perfecutions of the Romane Dragons. Bullinger comprehends under it, Bullingers interpreta∣tion. all the Churches afflictions: This flood (saith he) signifies that the Divell powred forth a sea of evils on the Church, as sects, dissensions, tumults, seditions and persecutions, by which allmost the whole earth was over flowen. And he applies these things to the verie time of the Apostles: when satan stirred up every where the magistrates and priests against the Apostles and Apostolical trueth: this is true indeed: yet in my judgement but little agreeing to the sense of the present prophesie. Brightman understanding by these waters, Bright∣mans opi∣mon. peoples or nations, as afterward in Chap. 17.15. interprets this other persecution of the irruptions of the Franci, the Alemanni, Burgonions, Goths, Vandals, Hunni, Treballi, the Heruli, the Lumbards, and such other Northern nations, who about the yeere 400 and thence forward rushed in (the sluces being as it were taken away) upon all Europe and Asia, for to swallow up, as with deepe gulfes the Christian Church: Yet the earth, that is, the counterfaite and earthlie religion swallowed up the force of this flood: be∣cause these barbarous nations, by whom the Dragon thought to blot out the ve∣ry name of Christ, after they came into these countries more full of humanity, they embraced the Christian religion which they saw amongst them, though indeed it was most corrupt: For all of them were either Arians, or Nestorians, or Eu∣rychinians: but yet changed not their life and Barbarous manners. So the earth de∣luded the Dragons indeavour: The which exposition seemes not in the least to be contrarie to histories, and the order of this Vision. Notwithstanding I should rather consent to them, The waters cast out by the Dragon are here∣sies. Ioh. 7.38. who applie this to the foul heresies, scismes, blasphemies, and monstrous doctrines, by which the Dragon at∣tempted to drown the Woman while she fled, even under Christian Emperours. For as the doctrine of the Gospell proceeding out of the mouth of God is com∣pared to streames of waters, which none are able to resist, as Christ saith: he that beleeveth on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water: So the heresies com∣ming out of the Dragons mouth, what are they but as a violent vomit or floods, to swallow up the Church? For even in Constantines time, the Arian heresie and blasphemie against Christ violently burst forth like to a most swift stream, and overflowed all the East, and soon after the West also, whereby the Church was allmost swallowed up in her flight. After the Arian heresie against the son of God, followed the Macedonian against the holy Ghost: soon after that the Pela∣gian against the whole Gospell: That also of Nestorius and Eutyches, & the Mo∣nothelists against the truth of Christs person: the which mightily shooke the Church almost for the space of 300 yeers, as the histories of Eusebius, Socrates, Theo∣doretus, Zozomenus, and Evagrius witnesse: The Dragon by these floods thought to drown the woman in her flight: but in vain, as it followeth. 16. But the earth helped the woman] Some here by earth understand Churst in regard of his stabilitie, and because the waters of the Dragon were swallowed up, the darts and plots of the adversaries suppressed, and the afflicted Church not ut∣terly overthrown. Others of earthly men, by whom the Lord often wonderfully protects (though they aime at other ends) his Church and people: as of old by the Philistines he de∣livered
David, from the hands of Saul: by Lysas he preserved Paul from the fury of the Iewes. Brightman, (as I said before) understands this of those Barbarous nations, who comming on furiously to root out Christian religion, yet preserved the same by embracing it, though much corrupted. There are som who interpret it of Councils, which being gathered together out of all nations swallowed up the blasphemous floods of heresies, by refuting them: Thus the generall Council of Nice condemned the Arian heresie, the Synod of Constantinopel the Macedonian, and Eunomian; that of Ephesus the Nestorian; that of Chalcedon the Euychinian. But this sense seemes to be forced. It is an allusion to the historie of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed up alwe, Numb. 16.22. As therefore the earth did then help Moses & Aaron against the seditious rebels, miraculously opening her mouth, and devouring them: So the Lord no lesse miraculously helped the woman flying from the floods of most dangerous heresies, so as she was not drowned by them, that is, he wonderfully swallowed up those false doctrines with the authors ther∣of, as if the earth had opened her mouth & utterly devoured them: we need not therefore subtilly dispute about the earth: considering how the Lord continually dissipated al the heresies, which during the space of 300 yeeres overflowed the Christian world: caused the same, I say to vanish away like smoak by the power of the holy scriptures, and zeal of Orthodox teachers. 17. And the Dragon was wroth] The third assault of the Dragon, not against the woman herself (for her he lost, as being out of his sight in the wildernesse) but the rest of her seed, whom he purposed to set upon by open warre. This therfore is a preparation to the following third Act of the Beasts war with the Saints. And so this third assault belongs to the Antichristian times, which begane in the raigne of Phocas, & Boniface III. the first universal high-priest, when the Church was now fled into the wildernesse, and so none appeared any where but as a whorish woman. The meaning of the verse we take to be thus: The Dragon being angry that he could not by the flood of heresies drown the woman in her flight, & now despair∣ing of further effecting any thing against her, he stirres up a new warre against the rest of her seed by themeanes of the Beast, as it followeth. For that which here the Dragon is said to doe, in the following Chapter is attributed to the Beast, to whom it was given to make warre with the Saints. They who there are called Saintes, Who are the rest of the wo∣mans seed. here are named the rest of the seed of the woman. Now these are the faithfull, who seeing all the publick congregations in the Papacy corrupted, withdrew themselves, and privately worshipped the Lord according to his institution in their owne fa∣milies, of whom also some openly opposed the Beast even from the first rising of the Papacy until this day: against these what manner of warr the Dragon hath made by the Romane Beast, the books of Martyrs plentifully declare, as also the Spa∣nish and Popish inquisition, which hath drawen many thousands of Saintes unto the gibbet, fire, and other exquisite torments: besides the warres of Popes against di∣verse Emperours & Kings, for the upholding of their tyranny, the which for the present I wil not speak off. At that time indeed the Dragon could not warr against the woman, that is, against whole congregations of the Saintes, because such were not visible: therfore he strives by al meās possible to extirpate the rest of her seed, which was scattered here & there. But more of this war in the following Chapter. By two Epithites the womans seed is set forth: that they keep the commandements of God, & have the testimony of Jesus Christ. The former notes the life & piety of the Saints conformable to the word of God: The latter the sincerity of their faith ac∣cording to the tenour of the Gospel. So that these should not pollute themselves with the superstitions, idols & abominations of Popery; but holily & unblamably passe the time of their dwelling here, according to the rule of Gods law: neither should they receive the traditions, lawes & decrees of the Pope for articles of faith, but constantly maintain the sincerity of Christian belief: for the sake wherof they were to undergoe the contradictions & war of the Dragon through the Beast.
18. And I stood upon the sea] A transition to the following Act touching the Beasts. All Greek copies have it in the first person . I stood, that is, I John, noting the opportunity of the place where then he stood to behold the Beast that arose out of the sea. Notwithstanding the vulgar reads it in the third person: And he stood: as if the Dragon had stood on the sand of the sea: that is, as some inter∣pret it, on a weake foundation, for a sandie station is not to be trusted too: Or, as others, on the multitude of wicked men. But in this there is no use of a mysterie. Neyther is there gold under everie stone. The former reading is proper and na∣tural: the which Andreas also followes, and from this transition doth rightly be∣gin the following Chapter touching the Beasts. Rupertus also, I stood upon the sand of the sea, and I saw: to denote (saith he) the difficult doubtfull and dangerous state of that time, when the elect standing shall waver, and wavering shall stand: the which allegorie I leave to its own strength. Ribera approves not the Latine but the Greek reading: though Alcasar doth mightelie labour to defend the Latine version against all opposers. CHAPTER XIII. The Argument, Parts, Analysis. THis Chapter is a declaration or an exposition of the 17 verse of the foregoing Chapter. For it describeth the warre of the Dragon with the seed of the woman, that is, with the Saints and faithfull worshippers of Christ, managed through Antichrist: whose rising, nature, kingdome, power, deeds, suc∣cesse, character, and lastly his name and number or numberal name the Prophet sets forth as by lively colours under the type of a double beast. For he saw Antichrist comming forth on the theater, first under the figure of a Beast having seven heads, presently after under the figure of a Beast having two hornes, in which is signified the twofold person of Antichrist, viz. as he is a secular Monarch, and a spiritual seducer or false prophet, of which is spoken Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 19.20. Here therfore begins the Third Act of the fourth Vision, touching the last and most grievous Antichristian persecution, which shall endure unto the end of the world. THe parts of the Chapter are two, according to the number of the Beasts trea∣ted of in the same. The description of the first Beast is contained in 10 verses: And it is di∣verse: I. The Beasts rising is noted to be out of the sea, v. 1. II. His monstrous figure or shape: seven blasphemous heads: ten crowned hornes, ibid: with the skin of a Leopard, feet of a Bear, and mouth of a Lion, verse 2. III. His state: he hath a throne and kingly power: of which is noted 1. The efficient cause, the Dragon gives him his seat and power, ibid. 2. The degree and variation of the power, it is great v. 2. One of his heads beeing deadly woun∣ded is againe healed ver. 3.3. His divine authority: the whole earth admires and adores him, in prayses making him equal with God, yea lifts him above God, ver. 3.4. IV. His deeds: both with his mouth: he speaketh great things and blasphe∣mies: the outragiousnesse whereof is figured out by the time it dured, viz. four∣ty two moneths, v. 5. and by the objects, which he blasphemeth. 1. God. 2. His
nacle. 3. The inhabiters of heaven, v. 6. then with weapons: hee makes warre with the Saintes: the event of which is twofold. 1. The victory over the Saints. 2. an encrease of universal power, v. 7. and of worship, v. 8. V. It is shut up with an exclamatorie and hortatorie conclusion unto the god∣ly, that they should attend v. 9. comminatory against the Beast, that he should suffer like for like, v. 10. But consolatory to the Saintes: shewing them what was don, was for the exercise of their faith and patience, ibid. The description of the latter Beast is from v. 11. unto the end of the Chapter: and it containes diverse particulars: I. His originall is noted to be from the earth. v. 11. II. A threefold similitude or likenesse: 1. With the Lambe, hav∣ing hornes like his. 2. With the Dragon, speaking as he did, ibid. 3. With the former Beast, whose whole power he exerciseth, ver. 12. III. Sixe effects of his power: 1. He establisheth the worship of the former beast, v. 12. 2. He doth great wonders, v. 13. 3. By miracles he seduceth the inhabiters of the earth, v. 13.14. 4. He commands an image to be made to the former Beast, ibid. 5. He gives life to the image, makes it to speak, causing all them that will not worship the image to bee slaine, ver. 15. 6. He imprints the character, name and the number of the Beast on the right hands and foreheads of the worshippers thereof, giving them a priviledge to buy and sell, the which is prohibited all o∣thers, ver. 16.17. IIII. It is ended with an exclamatorie conclusion amplifying the mystery of the Beast: and stirring us up to the searching out the mysterie thereof: both from the possibilitie of it: because it is the number of a man, also from the facility: be∣cause it may be expressed in three numeral letters  which make six hundred threescore and six. The former part of the Chapter. Of the Beast arising out of the sea. 1. And I saw a beast rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten hornes, and upon his hornes ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. 2. And the beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: & the Dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority. 3. And I saw oneof his heads as it were wounded to death, & his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondred after the beast. 4. And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the beast, & they worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to make warre with him? 5. And there was given unto him a mouth, speaking great things, and blasphemies, and power was given unto him to continue fourty and two moneths. 6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven. 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to over∣come them: and power was given him over all kinreds, and tongues, and nations. 8. And all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the booke of life, of the Lambe slaine from the foun∣dation of the world. 9. If any man have an eare, let him heare: 10. He that leadeth into captivity shall goe into captivity: He that kil∣leth with the sword must be killed with the sword. Here is the pa∣tience and the faith of the Saints. THE COMMENTARIE. ANd I saw a Beast rise up out of the sea] In this part of the vision there seems to all interpreters some barr to lie in the way touch∣ing this prophesie, as what should be meant by these Beasts, of both which Iohn at length cryes out, as if they were but one, here is wisedome, let him that hath understanding count the number of the Beast: intimating, that here something is figured out, passing the reach of man. And indeed the thing is so. Notwithstanding from the manner of the method formerlie laid down by us, we may undoubtedly gather that the Third Ast of this 4 Vision, that is, Antichristian persecution is here represented. Beside I scarsly find any whether ancient or moderne interpreters (Lyra and Alcasar excepted) but expound either the former, or the latter, or els both the Beasts, of Antichrist. Now, whatsoever is meant by the latter, let us first consider the former. Touching this I finde diverse opinions. Some will have it to be the divell. Opinions about this sea-beast. Others some certain and special persons a∣bounding in all manner of wickednesse, such as Gensericus, or Cosroes, or his son Sy∣roes, or Mahumet: or Luther as Lindanus foolishly feigneth. Others by the Beast understand the universality of wicked men. But these opinions are not at all to bee esteemed, because indeed they mani∣festly contradict the text. For the Dragon who is the devill shal give his throne unto the Beast. Therfore he is not the Beast himself. But in a prophetical style, a Beast in scripture usually signifies not a special man, but a monarchical kingdome with the head thereof. Lastly all the wicked shall follow and worship the Beast: therefore they themselves are not the Beast. So that this Beast can neither bee restrained to one certain wicked man, nor confounded with all the wicked in generall. But there are three other opinions more probable, Three opi∣nions more probable. which I wil briefly set down and examine. The first is, that this Beast denotes the old Romane Empire with its idolatrie & cruelty against Christians. Of this mind are many of the ancients, as Tertullian, Hierome, Orosius, Eusebius, with many also of our latter divines, as Bullinger, Foxe, Osiander in his conjectures, Junius, Aretius, Whitaker: wherin Alcasar the Iesuite agrees with them. 1: sentence touching the Romane empire ex∣amined. This opinion howsoever I doe not altogether disapprove: considering, that in Chap. 17. (where this Beast againe comes forth) it is manifest that Antichrist clo∣thed with the spoiles of the Romane Empire, is represented by the same: never∣thelesse in this place I take it otherwise. For first Iohn here sees the beast arising out of the sea. So that he saw its origin∣nall: but the original of the Romane Empire he did not see. For it it had now already continued from Julius unto the fourteenth yeere of Domitian (when this prophesie was revealed unto him) CXLII yeeres. Therefore it is said afterward in Chap. 17.8. of the Romane Empire: The Beast was, to wit, before this vision, and before his rising out of the sea. Secondly, this Beast rose not out of the sea, til the Womans flight into the wildernesse, as the order of the Vision both here, and in the foregoing Chapter doth plainly
manifest. Now the flight of the woman was not under the Romane tyrants, but be∣gane under Christian Emperours and hereticks, as we have shewed in the forego∣ing Chapter. Adde hereunto that the Beast is said to rage fourty two moneths: the which is the time of the womans abode in the wildernesse, and the time of the prophesie of the two witnesses, as appeares by what hath before bin spoken. Now this time by the consent of all shall be the last, in which Antichrist shall rage. And ther∣fore it cannot possibly belong to the old or Pagan Empire of the Romanes. To be short, this seems to be a demonstrative reason, that this Beast is often mentioned throughout this prophesie, as beeing to remain in a continuall perse∣cution of the Saintes unto the end of the world: and not to be abolished but by the brightnesse of Christs comming, who will cast him into the lake of fire and brimstone, Chap. 19.10. Whereas the old Romane Empire scarsly dured three hundred and fifty four yeeres, and now hath bin in the hand of Christians, thirteen hundred yeeres and more. Therefore this Beast cannot simply be applied to the ancient Romane Empire. The reasons most probable alledged for it (though of little solidity) are three: First, that this Beast seems to be like to the fourth beast in Daniel Chap. 7.7. by which, according to the common opinion, is denoted the Romane Monarchie. Secondly, because the Romane Emperours from Tiberius unto Constantine have most cruelly warred against the Saintes, the which also the Beast is here said to doe, ver. 7. Lastly, because power is given to this Beast over every tribe and tongue & nation, in the same verse. The which most properly may be applied to the Romane Em∣perours, Lords of the world. To the first, I answer: if we compare the Beast in Daniel with this here, we shal see indeed that both of them have ten hornes, but their likenesse in all other things is very obscure: besides the fourth Beast in Daniel is diverse from all the other beasts: but this here is as it were compounded of the three former Beasts in Da∣niel. Adde to this, that the Ancient Hebrewes with great shew of reason inter∣pret the fourth Beast in Daniel, not of the Romane Empire, but of the kingdome of the Seleucides, of which Antiochus Epiphanes that little blasphemous and cruell horne was chief: notwithstanding I will not now dispute what solidity there may be in it. As for their second reason, we have shewed that the persecutions of the Ro∣mane Dragons are represented in Chap. 12. But this warr of the Beast (farre more cruel) shall endure unto the end of the world, and not against the woman (which afterward he sees riding on the scarlet coloured Beast) but with the seed of the woman, that is, with them who are truly faithfull. To be short, that the whole earth is said to wonder, and follow after the Beast, v. 3. and to have power over all kinreds and tongues, &c. v. 7. this is restrained to the dwel∣lers on the earth & reprobate worshippers of the Beast, in v. 8. Now not onely the reprobate gentiles were subject to the heathenish Romane Empire, Apolog. c. 30 and ad Scapul. Mat. 17.27. but the believ∣ing Christians also, who (as Tertullian recordeth) worshippped not the Romane Em∣perours but God alone: And Paul to escape the fury of the Iewes appealed to Cae∣sar: Our Lord himself also paid tribute to the Romane Empire: And the Apostles taught Christians to be obedient unto the Magistrates therof. In a word the wor∣shipping of the Beast imports not onely civil subjection, but religious worship, as we shall see hereafter. By all which it appeares that this Beast cannot be abso∣lutely restrained to the Romane Empire: howsoever we may perceive that the monarchicall power of the Romane Empire is in some sence taken up by the Beast, as may be gathered from Chap. 17. The second opinion touching Mahumet weighed. The other opinion (principally urged by Viterbiensis) is of those, who under∣stand this Beast of the Mahumetane or Turkish Empire.
These first consider his rising out of the sea, that is, the gathering and joyning together of diverse nations, as Arabians, Saracens, Turkes, Tartars, &c. Secondly his figure. For hee is like a Leopard, because he violently tooke into his hands the seat and power of the Graecian Monarchie, which Daniel likens unto a Leopard. He hath also the feet of a Beare: in regard he holds the pillars or props of the Persian Monarchy, the which is also there compared unto a Beare: he hath moreover the mouth of a Lyon: because he possesseth the spoiles of the first Assyrian Monarchie. For the Mahumetane Empire is extended in religion and worship over all these peoples: in regard both Persians and Babylonians are at this day Mahu∣metanes, though under diverse kings. It is also ful of blasphemies against the God of Israel, and against the Son of God. The Mahumetanes power is terrible and invincible: and hath more then nine hundred yeeres most cruelly warred against the Saintes and worshippers of Christ: and so overcome, as that all Asia, and al∣most Africa with a great part of Europe (beeing wrung out of the hands of Chri∣stians) is brought under the religion and power of Mahumet: and Christian reli∣gion forced into the outmost corners of Europe. Lastly, the time of the fourty two moneths designed to the reigne and rage of the Beast, may wel and fitly be applied to the violent rage of the Mahumetanes. But now however indeed these things have a great shew of seeming truth: yet they are not solid. For first this rising out of the sea, is rather to be understood of a coming forth out of the bottomlesse pit, then of a gathering of Barbarous nations, as by and by it shall appear. Secondly, the figure taken from the members of diverse Beasts doth also admit of a more fit interpretation. So also the blasphemies, and the large and terrible powr are more rightly to bee applied to the Romane Antichrist then to the Turke: although he also doth in a verie hostile manner act the parts of the Easterne An∣tichrist against the Christian Church, as appeared in the sixt trumpet, Chap. 9. Lasily, the time of the fourty two moneths, doth altogether agree to the warre of the Romane Beast against the two witnesses, as hath bin shewed on Chap. 11. Thus wee see that the foresaid reasons doe not sufficiently confirme this second opi∣nion. Moreover there are two things which doe plainely disprove the same: One is, in that it is often said: this Beast was wondred at, and worshipped by the inhabitants of the earth, the which (as I have shewed) signifies not simply a subjection, but a religious worship given unto the Beast: now this doth not so wel agree to the Turkish Empire: for although the Turkes worship Mahumet as the greatest pro∣phet: yet they attribute no religious worship unto their Emperours: neither doe they subject themselves unto their Empire so much thorow admiration, as for feare. The other is taken from Chap. 17. where it is manifest that this same Beast appears againe unto John a woman sitting thereon. Now there the seven heads of the Beast, are the seven mountaines of Rome, and the woman herself denotes Rome, the which is so evident as it cannot be denied, no not by some of the Iesuites them∣selves. Therefore this Beast hath his seat at Rome: But the Turke never had his seat there: hence then it seemes that this Beast doth not belong unto the Turkish Empire: unlesse perhaps it yet come to passe that Italie and Rome fall into the hands of the Turke: the which thing God knoweth. Indeed the horrible Idol∣worship of Rome may justly procure such a judgement: notwithstanding the holy Ghost threatens in Chap. 17.16. that the Romish harlot shall be destroyed and burnt with fire, not by the Turke, but by ten kings, sometimes her lovers and frindes. I come unto the third opinion, The third opinion. which is that this Beast is Antichrist. The which not onely many ancient writers as Irenaeus, Ambrose, Prosper, Methodius, Arethas, Andreas, &c. But also sundrie moderne both Papists and protestants
have followed: as Gagneus, Bellarmin, Ribera: and of ours Alphonsus, Morellus, Tossanus: with whom my Anonymus also consents. Alcasar indeed likes it not, because he sees that it cannot consist with the com∣mon fable touching Antichrist his three yeares reigne: And because he feineth that after the destruction of the beast, there shall be thousand years of peace: and hence therefore he doth justly reprove and reprehend as well the old as latter Au∣thours and maintainers of the said fable. But he is deceived touching the thou∣sand yeares of peace to follow after the destruction of the Beast, as I shall mani∣fest on chap. 20. But his caveat is good: that it is not enough for the approving of an exposition as certaine and not to be doubted of, because many subscribe unto it. Whosoever therefore the authours be, their reasons are to be examined. First, The third opinion ex∣pounded and proved. this Beast doth very well agree with the little horne in Daniel, cha. 7.8. which signifies either Anti∣christ himself, or at least is a type of him, as the most learned Christian interpreters do acknowledge: for what Daniel speaks of the little horne, Iohn doth almost in so many words ascribe unto this Beast: that he hath a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies: that he makes warre with the Saints, and overcomes them, and that for the space of fourty two moneths, or for a time, times, and halfe a time, &c. Secondly, this Beast rising out of the Sea, and that in chap. 11, ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, are undoubtedly one: because the figure and time of wrath and warre doth agree: and that it is one, not onely Arethas and Andreas, but also Ano∣nymus, Ribera, and Gagneus do acknowledge, viz. that Antichrist. Furthermore this sevenheaded Beast, and the Beast on which the woman sits, chap. 17. is one and the same altogether, as the description shews, and shall more plainly appeare after∣ward. Now the Beast there v. 11. without all doubt (though in a great mystery) denotes Antichrist with his kingdom and seat: and therefore the Beast here is to be understood of him also. Lastly, the attributes of this Beast agree to none more evidently, thē to Antichrist, First in this, that the whole earth with admiration followed the Beast, the which thing is most true, for the whole Christian world readily indeed honoureth Antichrist, as sitting in the temple of God, boasting himselfe that he is God, and holinesse it self. Now the Romanes heretofore did hardly with great force of armes subject the world under their power. And as for the Mahumetanes hitherto they have enlarged their Empire onely by slaughters and effusion of much blood. Moreover it accords in this, that on his heads he had a name of blasphemy, and with his mouth he speaketh great and blaspemous things. Now howbeit it is true, the Ro∣mish and Turkish Empire ever hath been, and still is very blasphemous: yet the Ro∣manes were, and the Turks still are blasphemers without the Church, and ignorant of God and Christ; as the Apostle speaketh of himselfe what he did when he was a Pharisee: But Antichrist sitting in the Church of God, under the name of Christ, grievously blasphemeth the same: and will be accounted by his followers a god, yea most proudly lifts himselfe up above all that is called god. It is true the Empe∣rours Nero and Domitian were sometime so athistically mad, as that they would be divinely worshipped. But that was nothing in comparison of Antichrists arro∣gancy, whose footsteps are adored by Kings and Emperours. Againe in this likewise the agreement stands, that he makes warre with the Saints: the which thing I grant that the Romanes and Turks have also done: But Antichrists warre with the Saints by the confession of all men shall be far more cursed and cruell: for it shall not be a civill warre onely, as in killing the body, and confiscating the estates of men: but a spirituall likewise, selling, tormenting, and killing of soules. Lastly, it agrees, that he hath power over every nation, kindred and tongues: it is true the Romanes did very farre enlarge the bounds of their Empire, that so they might be the Lords of the world: The Mahumetanes also Lord it far and neare, yet with∣out the limits of the Church: But Antichrist sitting in the temple of God, so far forth as the temple of God, or Christian Church did visibly appeare, should under the pretence of religion usurpe the Empire as Monarch, and Head of all. All which
things considered, I suppose that the third opinion touching the Beast-Antichrist is sufficiently confirmed. Notwithstanding, if these things are not fully satisfa∣ctory to any: such then I onely desire that they will rest in the reasons laid down, untill they heare Iohn himselfe in Chap. 17. give the interpretation of this myste∣rie. For from that fountain the sence of this place is to be drawn, howsoever those interpreters seem to me inconsiderate, who apply all the mysteries of that place to this here, for they ought to observe, that the spirit doth purposely and in great wis∣dom produce this monstre in foure distinct visions, (viz. the third, fourth, fift, and sixt) acting or suffering diverse and different things, that the former things may the more clearly be known by the latter. And hitherto indeed such of the Papists agree with our interpreters, Who Anti∣christ should be, questio∣ned betwixt us and the Papists. The Papists description of Anti∣christ. who ac∣knowledge Antichrist to be noted by this Beast whither wholly considered, or in one of his heads. But we disagree in judgement about the question, who is that Antichrist figured out by this Beast. The Papists (that the Pope might not be suspected to be he) feign such an An∣tichrist (as we have more then once before spoken of: to wit) a certaine Jew begot by an evill spirit, and to be borne of a Iewish woman near the end of the world: whom the Iews shall acknowledge for their Messias, and who (as they say) in the space of three years and six moneths shall subdue all the kingdoms of the world, yea the Romane Empire also (but yet not take up the title of a Romane Emperor) se∣duce the whole earth, rebuild the temple of Ierusalem, sit and reign there: he shall restore Rome, which ten Kings (having thrust out the Pope) had burnt with fire, there he shall reign and literally fulfill all things which here are recorded of both Beasts. Touching the vanity of which fabulous opinion (which al may see was for∣ged for the destruction of the Christian world) we have spoken enough before on Chap. 9. and 11. Our Divines on the contrary affirme, Antichrist described by the Prote∣stants. that no man is more evidently represented by this most monstrous Beast then the Papall Empire or Pope of Rome: of whom Alphonsus Mantuanus thus writeth: Iohn (saith he) being to describe Antichrists rave∣nous extortion, & venemous rage against the godly, types him out under the monstrous image of a horrible Beast, which neither could be termed a Lyon, or a Beare, or any such like crea∣ture, but one in whom was conteined the fiercenesse of all wilde beasts. By this Beast there∣fore Antichrist is undoubtedly to be understood: whensoever then Antichrist is mentioned, we need not seek him in Babilon, but in the head of the fourth Monarchie, to wit, at Rome, &c. Furthermore, I see not who he should be, save the Pope, whose kingdom and tyranny if we compare with the things spoken in Daniel of the little horn, it will abundantly appeare, that it is be who fully acts all the parts of Antichrist, &c. This opinion seems indeed to Alcasar to be foolish and vain: Alcasars reasons an∣swered. but not so unto us in the least, but rather he himself is ridiculous in deceiving both himself and others by his idle and foolish reasons. Jt is apparent (saith he) that the Popes authority, is founded, stablished, and erected by Christ our Lord. As if forsooth whatsoever seemes right and apparent to them, must needs be true & certain. What I pray you is more apparent, then that the Priesthood of Aaron was appointed of God? And yet was not Cayphas the high Priest his Successour a wicked murtherer of Christ? Besides the ancient Bishops of Rome were not guilty of that filthinesse and corruption, with which afterward the succeeding Popes having invaded the Chaire of univer∣sall pestilence, defiled the sea of Rome. Further, he feigneth, that if the Popes of Rome be this Beast, then the Divel made war against the Church by the ministery of the Romish Popes immediately when (the Iews ceasing) the Gentiles became the Church. But the consequence which he supposeth, is false, viz. that the transferring of the Church unto the Gentiles is not described till in Ch. 12. for what was the treading down of the holy city by the Gentiles, before treated of in Ch. 11? Wherefore it certainly follows, that the Romane Popes by the instigation of the Dragon made war against the Church troaden down by the
Gentiles, that is, as Ribera interprets it, by Antichrist and his ministers. But saith he, it is altogether improbable that the Revelation should omit to mention that most cruel war, by which the idolatrous Romane Emperors oppressed the Christian Church, together with that most glorious victory, wherein the Church obtained; notwithstanding the persecution of the Romane Empire. I confesse it is improbable. But Alcasar might have learned from the foregoing war of Michael with the Dragon, that neither this war was omitted, nor the victory passed by in silence, if he would wipe off from his eyes the disease occasioned by his own foolish consequence. Fourthly, he objects, that the fourth Beast in Daniel figures out, not the Pope, but the heathen Romane Empire. But this hath been answered in what we spake unto the first opinion. Lastly, he saith that the descriptiō of the Sea beast cannot but with contradiction be applyed unto the Pope. But the reason thereof is, because he disdaines out of a Spanish pride, Alcasar strongly re∣futes the hereticks by hear-say. to read what hath been published hereabout by the authours of the said opinion: for this subtile man acknowledgeth, that he knows nothing but by heare∣say, and refutes the hereticks by the report he hath heard. But he should have learned ra∣ther to believe his eyes then eares, and so doing, he would have made the bet∣ter application. Thus I have expounded the most probable opinions of others touching this Sea-Beast. Now for my own part, The authors opinion. I conceive that neither the first touching the Romane Em∣pire, nor the third concerning the Romane Antichrist is simply to be approved or disproved, but that in a certain sence, both are to be joyned together. First therefore I take it undoubtedly (seeing it is usuall to the Prophets under the type of a Beast enigmatically to figure out Empires and Monarchicall kingdoms, because of their violence, cruelty, and other horrible excesse) that by this Beast is also noted some certain Monarchicall Empire. Secondly, I suppose the thing it self makes it clear, as in its place shall be shewed, that this and the seven headed beast mentioned Cha. 17. is one and the same, and that the seven mountaines, signifie Rome. Thirdly, I affirme with the foresaid interpreters, that this Beast, as hath been even now proved, signifies Antichrist. Fourthly, Lib. 8 in Apoc. Bel. lib. de R. P. C. 25. (with Rupertus & Bellarmin) I judge that the same Antichrist in a diverse regard is figured out by both Beasts. The Beast (saith Rupertus) is said to be twofold, be∣cause of his double, viz. warlike, or Kingly and magicall force: Or as Bellarmin: By the one, Antichrist is expressed, in regard of his kingly power and tyranny: But by the other, in regard of his magicall art, by which he subtilly seduceth men: More rightly according to Revel. cha. 13. by one is meant his tyranny: by the other his deceit and seducing: for which cause afterward he is often called a false prophet: And so ch. 17. he is again re∣presented by this Beast as a Monarch: and by the woman riding thereon, as a Queen, or seducing Church. Fiftly, I conclude, that Antichrist is figured out by a double beast, and by his twofold rising out of the sea & earth, as it were living on the land & sea, having two bodies, two shapes, & a twofold nature, in a certain likenes to Christ: here indeed as a secular Monarch and ecclesiasticall seducer: but afterward as the Romane Monarch and adulterous Church. Sixtly, I conclude, that neither the old nor the new Romane Empire simply, nor the Romish prelateship is absolutely repre∣sented by this beast (for absolutely neither the one nor other is Antichrist) but that Romane Pontificall Empire and authority, which the Popes of Rome have exercised these many ages. Lastly, I conclude, that this double bodied and faced Antichrist li∣ving both on the land and sea, signified by both the beasts is none other but the Romish Pope, clothed with the spoiles of the Romane Monarchie, and preten∣ded Vicarship of Christ, and armed with the sword of Paul, and key of Peter, that is, with both powers: The Temporall to set up and put downe Emperours and Kings, &c. The Spirituall to give Lawes both to them in heaven, on earth, and under the earth: that Antichrist, I say, who first under the figure of a Sea-beast, presently after under the figure of a land-beast doth
here come forth on the theatre, who one while is cloathed in his pontificals, an other while comes armed into the councell with imperiall ensignes, saying I am Caesar. This is my opinion of Antichrist, who is here so evidently figured out by the seven-headed beast, and fained likenesse to the Lamb: and afterward Chap. 17. by the seven-headed beast and woman riding thereon: that no man, unlesse he willingly shut his eyes against the light, cannot but perceive the same. This light our me∣thod brings to al (who without it are in darknes) the which henceforward we will labour to illustrate by our interpretation unto Gods glory. But thou wilt say, See Ver. 18 wherfore then doth not John expressely name the Pope or Antichrist? because here he stands not in the place of a teacher, but of a Prophet. Teachers indeed are to expresse things plainly: but Prophets foretelling things to come especially of dangerous consequence, (set them forth under dark and ob∣scure types:) hereby to stir men up to the more diligent searching out of the e∣vents: and to shun unnecessary displeasure. Iohn in his Epistles, where he onely teacheth and exhorteth the Church, often names Antichrist, and bids us avoid him. But here as a Prophet he paints out his person and kingdome, under the type of a Beast: and thence would have us to judge of the mystery thereof. So Paul Prophesying of Antichrist, purposely abstains from naming him, yet sets him forth in such lively colours, that whosoever looks but on the Romish Prelacie, may plainly see, who, and what manner of person he is. And I saw a beast rising out of the sea] We have heard who this beast is. It fol∣loweth now touching his rising; he ascends out of the sea. Before in Chap. 11.7. and afterward Chap. 17.8. he ascends out of the bottomlesse pit: the sense is all one; for the sea also in Scripture is called abyssus, because of its deepnesse; See Chap. 9.1. The preposition OF, may as well note the place, as the beginning, whence the beast derived his originall, and received his power. Vnderstanding it originally of the place: The sea out of which the beast a∣riseth. by the sea then is meant, the infernall bottomlesse pit, or the throne and kingdome of Satan; Whence also the Locusts came forth, Chap. 9.13. for Antichrist is the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, whose comming is after the working of Satan, with all deceitfulnesse of unrighteousnesse, lying signes and wonders. So that these places do excellently expound themselves. For the Beast in this place rising out of the sea: and out of the bottomlesse pit, Chap. 11.8. and 17.8. is the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, Chap. 9.11. Whose comming is after the power of Satan, 2. Thess. 2.9. and to whom here, vers. 2. the Dragone gave his throne and power: All which things shew, that Antichrist is raised up by Satan and armed with his power. But if we understand it of the matter from whence he took his originall or be∣ginning (like as a living creature is begotten of seed, or as trees grow from the root) in this sence the sea is nothing else but that flood which the Dragon cast forth out of his mouth after the woman, Chap. 12.16. that is, the sinke of Heresies, er∣rours, traditions, superstitions, and all other abominations which increasing in the Church, the sincerity of faith, and purity of Christian religion was corrupted and depraved, the Church forced to flee into the wildernesse, Christ thrust out of his possession, and Antichrist set up in his stead. But here some may say, How the beast arose out of the sea. how could Antichrist arise out of the dregs of the he∣resies of Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Pelagius, Coelestius, Julian, &c. Seing it is certain that those heresies were chiefly condemned by the Romane Bi∣shops? It was so indeed: neverthelesse Satan through Synods condemning heresies, did subtilly and secretly work the mysterie of iniquity. For under pretence of rooting out heresies, almost yeerly, yea monethly these councils like seas flowing together, continually devised new laws, rites, forms, creeds, &c. insomuch as it came to be a proverb that Christians had a monthly faith. Now with the new forms of faith, were forged new canons of erecting & purifying temples, consecrating altars, of seats &
chief places, of orders, garments, immunities, powers, priviledges, and rents of praelates and priests, of establishing and encreasing of the clergie, &c. Who though they were all alike ambitious and covetous, in affecting power over each other, as the Romane over the Constantinopolitane, he over the Alexandrine, the Alexandrine againe over the Antiochian, and this later over him of Ierusalem: yet at length the Romane praelates under the favour of the emperours and primacie of their citie, together with the pretence of the Peters chair, keys, and vicarship of Christ overcame all other in ambition and power. In the Nicene Council, the power of the bishops of Rome, Can. 5. mos anti∣quus. The limits of the Ro∣mane Church. Alexandria and Antio∣chia was limited within certain bounds: that of Rome extended no farther then the confines of Hetruria, Picenum and Latium, as IACOBVS, GOTHOFREDVS the son of Dionysius the great, a diligent searcher into antiquities, hath brought to light. But the Romane Praelate not contented with his jurisdiction, invaded the empire over all the Christian world: first by spirituall, and afterward by temporall deceit: allthough for a long time he wanted not his corrivals, viz. the Bishops of New Rome, as also those of Alexandria, Lib. 7. hist. Chap. 11. as may be seen in the register of Gre∣gorie: Socrates complained that in his time the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria were promoted beyond the priest-hood unto a temporall lordship and principallitie. By the decree also of the III. Council of Carthage Chap. 26. it appeares: Dist. 99. C. primae sedis. that the Romane Bishops under pretence of the first seat, which they held for honours sake, desired to be accounted Princes of Priests, Chief and universall Priests: but this title was denyed them, and a decree passed that no man should so be called. Yea the craft of Satan was more openlie manifested in the sixt Councill of Car∣thage, at which Augustine was then present: where first Zosimus, afterward Bo∣niface and at last Coelestinus Popes of Rome (for these three succeeded each other in the Chair, while this councell continued) by their Legates, (falslie pretending a decree of the Nicene Councill) contended, that the Africanes ought to appeal to Rome as to the chief court of justice: but their fraud beeing discovered, they were frustrated and derided. That also is memorable which Bright-man observes out of Bellarmin, Lib. 3. de Concil. cap. 19. that the Romane Popes would never be present at the Eastern Councils, but by their Le∣gates, for two causes: First because it seemed not convenient that the head should follow the members, (as if it were inconvenient, that a sound head, should follow an in∣firm body:) Secondlie least the Emperours beeing present, and taking the Chief places, they should be forced to give way thereunto. By which thou mayest see that the Ro∣mane Bishops did long agoe with an inveterate ambition plot and strive for the Monarchie over Emperours and their fellow Bishops: untill at length they ob∣tained it by, and after many councils, where they themselves beeing Presidents by their legats, did authorise thesame, not regarding whether they did right or wrong The Beast therefore rose out of the sea, not suddenlie, nor in one day, moneth or yeere: but by certaine steps continuing almost three hundred yeeres, viz. from Constantine unto Phocas: or from Julius I. untill Boniface III. In this tract of time, Antichrist was formed in the Bosome of the Church, as it were in the wombe of a mother: And when the woman fled into the wildernesse (into which she came in the yeere 606.) Then also the Beast (as it were) was fullie hatched, and risen out of the sea: The which rising happened at the opening of the sixt seal, and the sounding of the fift trumpet. Now he is described here, not what he was in his youth, or presentlie upon his first rising, but as he was at length in the vigor of his ful age. For no man is at the highest or worst on a sudden: Thus much for the rising now followes the figure. Having seven heads and ten hornes] The beast is verie monstrous and terrible, not much unlike unto the Dragon. He hath seven heads] Therefore he is a monster and not unlike to the Poets Hydra Lernea. A naturall beast hath but one head. Antichrists kingdom there∣fore
is monstrous and unnatural, having Emperors and Kings lying under its feet. It hath also ten hornes like to the Dragon: Wherein the beast differeth from the Dragon. yet differing from the Dragon: for the Dragon had seven crowns upon his heads: but the Beast weares his ten crownes on his hornes; and on his heads the name of blasphemie: being in his spotted skin like to a Leopard: in his feet to a Beare, in mouth to a Lyon: all which the Dra∣gon had not. What is meant by the heads and hornes, we need not here labour to expound. Hornes by an Hebraisme very usually signifie strength because the strength of hor∣ned Beasts is in their head: and hence are called Cornupite, strikers with the horne. The Angel, Rev. 17.10. teacheth us, that the seven heads are seven Kings, and the seven mountaines of Rome: and the ten hornes so many Kings: and therefore for the present I purpose to speak no more about them. But let us carefully take notice of the gradation which the spirit useth: first he named the Beast, Chap. 11.7. Here he disciphers him out: and in Chap. 17. gives the interpretation thereof. And upon his heads the name of blasphemie] The Kings Edition of Montanus for  name, Antichrists kingdome holy in ti∣tle, but re∣ally worldly. hath  names. Afterward in Chap. 17.5. the woman sitting on the Beast, hath on her forehead a name written, Mysterie: by both signes noting the same thing: because there shall be a mystery in her secret blasphemies: and the kingdom of the Beast being indeed secular, shal mystically be called Sacred. There∣fore the Beast himselfe shall not weare his crownes on his heads, but set them on his hornes, to wit, the Kings being his vassals: but in stead of them he shall have on his head written, mystery, that is, his mysticall or spirituall kingdom shall be in shew employed about holy things, as doctrines, lawes, traditions, religions, sacrifices and worship. Blaspemie] is rayling against God: What bla∣sphemy is. from , babling or dissolute and  fame, or name and reputation: or as others will have it from  as it were, a hurting of the reputation and name. This he shall have in his forehead, not by open profession (for he would not be accounted a blasphemer) but in works and in very deed, as bringing in and defending blasphemous doctrines, religion and worship. Yet he will cloak the same with the name of Mysterie, as being di∣vine and holy worship instituted by the fulnesse of his power, as if he could not erre. Therefore his pretended title shall be mystery: but his true title blasphemie. 2 And the Beast which J saw] here follows the rest of his description, being monstrously compounded of a Leopard, Beare, and a Lyon, three most cruell wilde Beasts. It is a manifest allusion unto the Beasts in Daniel, the first whereof being a Lyon represented the Babylonish Empire, the second a Beare the Persian, the third a Leopard the Macedonian: the fourth having no name was more terrible then the rest: to whom this Beast seems to answer, as having something of the nature and property of the three former: The which mixture denotes the monstrous disposi∣tion of Antichrist: because he shall be as mercilesse to the servants of Christ, as Beares, Lyons and Leopards are to flocks of sheep. Like to a Leopard] The Gr.  signifies a she Leopard. For this beast is called a Woman: although it hath the outward forme of a man. The she-Leopard hath a skin speckled: giving forth an odoriferous smell, being swift, subtile, and most hurtful to man: It signifies first that Antichrists kingdom is spotted and gar∣nished with diverse colours: And indeed his policie & state is as it were a mingle-mangle of diverse heresies, superstitions, idols, & traditions parched together of the spots of Iudaisme, Paganisme & Christianisme: hence their whole hierarchie con∣sists of diverse and different colours of religions, sects, Monks, Clergiemen, even from their Arch-flammins unto the Porter or Sexton: yea the whole hide is spotted with heresies, errours, superstitions, and blasphemies. Secondly, it is very odoriferous: for by the sweet smelling enticement of digni∣ties, superfluities, honour, wealth and pleasure, it hath so allured the Christian world, as no man but would desire the voluptuous life of Clergiemen, as if they were gods.
Furthermore it is most crafty: for through subtilty and under a shew of piety, by feined wonders, lying signes, superstitious impostures, or seeming pious deceits, he hath gotten the dominion and riches of the world. It is also most swift, for after that the Christian world was once perswaded that Rome was the seat of Peter the Prince of Apostles the Pope Christs Vicar and Apostoli∣call heire of Peter, and universall Bishop, &c. it cannot be spoken with what swift∣nesse this Apostolicall sea not onely subjected unto it all the Bishops and Churches of the west, but also Emperours themselves, Kings, Princes, Common-wealths, and communities were brought under that yoke. To be short, it is most hurtfull to the eyes of men, to their purses, I say, estates and soules, which hitherto Rome hath with no lesse perill ravished, devoured and destroyed, then if a Leopard had fixt his nayles into the eyes of a man. And his feet as the feet of a Beare] the Beares feet denotes the stability of his king∣dom, for the feet of a Beare are flat, large, and having sharp nayles, which he fix∣eth in the ground: and therefore goes and stands the firmer: so Antichrists king∣dome hath large feet: insomuch as it cannot easily be shaken. The feet are Grants of Emperours, the Canons of Councils, and Decrees of Popes, against which, who∣soever doth but mutter, he is presently crushed with the Beares feet: witnesse the Histories of the Ottoes, Henries, and Fredericks Emperours, who if at any time they assayed to bridle the insolencie of the Beast, were soon smitten with the Capitoline thunder, and deposed from the Empire. Not to speak of others of lower rank: thus then the Beast stood with the feet of a Beare. And his mouth as the mouth of a Lion.] A Lyon is a generous creature: but the Beast hath nothing of a Lion, save the mouth, being terrible and roaring, and of a horrible devouring nature: and what I pray you, is more outragious then the Papacie: For Quic quid non possidet armis, religione tenet. What he by armes cannot get, Doth by religion hold fast it. What is more terrible then the Pope, whose footsteps are adored by Kings and Emperours? What is more devouring then Rome? into whose Courts there are brought great summes of money for all flagitious facts and vile wickednesse committed wheresoever: where no Priesthood is given to any but the first reve∣nues must be brought into their treasury? What is more ravenous then the Cler∣gie, who suffer none either to be borne, live or die freely? Hereupon Frederick the Emperour writing to Pope Hadrian touching the prohibition of Cardinals: Baleus in vita. Hadr. IV. his Churches (saith he) are shut: neither are his Cities open: for we see them to be, not preach∣ers, but robbers, not peace-makers, but money-takers: not repairers of the world, but insa∣tiable heapers up of gold. Lastly, what is more horrible then the Popish Edicts, Bulls, Writs, Amos. 3.8. written at Rome, not with inke, but in blood. If the Lyon doth reare, who will not feare? The Romane Beast roaring against Emperours, Kings, Electours, Princes, Bishops, Vassals, who will not tremble? Thus we see how the prodigious disposition of Antichrist is lively represented by this monstrous Beast. And the Dragon gave him his power] Here follows the Beasts power. But from whom hath he it? The Dragon gave it to him. Now there is no power but from God. And therefore the Beasts power is not lawfull: but a corruption of power and tyranny, having for its authour him, who said: All these things will I give thee, if falling down thou wilt worship me. viz. the Devill that lying Serpent. His power] Gr. : some render it vertue: but I rather allow the former, least there might be an ambiguity in understanding it of a naturall or morall ver∣tue: The power of the Dragon is his malice, fraudulency and strength to hurt: so that the Dragon did fill the Beast (God so permitting the same, as Ribera well ob∣serveth) with all deceiveablenesse, of unrighteousnesse and wickednesse, to seduce
and destroy. And his seat] Or Throne, as all Greeke copies have it: But the Vulgar omits it. The Throne of the Dragon is his kingdome and rule which he hath in the children of disobedience, in regard whereof he is said to be the god of this world. This kingdom he gave to Antichrist by making him the god of this world, who by a pretended power gives the kingdomes of this world to whom he will, according to that of the Lateran Fathers, crying out to Julius II. Thou art all in all and above all, to thee is given all power in heaven and in earth. According to that of the Poet: By oracle of thine own voyce, the world thou governest all, And worthily a god on earth men thinke and do thee call. And great authoritie] The which will appeare in ver. 5.6.7. And by it we understand who is Antichrists benefactour: here then we may see what before was obscurely spoken: viz. He ascended out of the sea, that is, came forth out of the bot∣tomlesse pit of hell, unto the height of the Ʋniversall Chaire: is here more clearly expressed in these words: 2 Thes. 2.9. The Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great au∣thority. And most plainly by the Apostle: Whose comming is after the working of Satan with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, with all deceiveablenesse of unrighte∣ousnesse, &c. 3. And I saw one of his heads] The Kings edition omits  I saw: but the sence and consent of copies requires it. It signifies the weakning and restitution of the Beasts power, of which some say one thing, some another. It is a weak fiction of the Glosse (displeasing also to Ribera) viz. that Antichrist should feine himself to be dead, and afterward rise againe in imitation of Christ and by this deceit gaine to himself that admiration here spoken of. But John saw not the Beast dead, or as it were dead, but one of his heads wounded as it were unto death, that is, so mortally wounded, as that he was not farre from being dead. But if the words  as it were slaine, be understood really of the slaughter and death of the head, as in Chap. 5.6. the Lamb appeared , as it were slaine, that is, truely slaine and dead: yet it no way helps the fiction: for howsoever by the killing of one head, the Beast indeed was hurt, yet not wholly dead. But the former sence is hereby confirmed, that this stroke is twice called a deadly wound: and againe , a wound inflicted by the sword. Our Interpreters, who understand this Beast of the old Romane Empire, do all agree that here is noted some remarkable weakning thereof: but others apply it otherwise. Some understand the one head of Julius Cesar the first Emperour, who being slaine, the Empire received a deadly wound: but was healed again by Augustus. Others referre it to the death of Nero, in whom the family of Caesars ceased: and then the Empire seemed to be near a dissipation, when in a few moneths after were slaine three Emperours, viz. Galba, Ottho, and Vitelius: yet this wound was healed by Vespasian, whom the Common-wealth of Rome (as Aurelius Victor reports) being almost spent by the cruelty of tyrants, obteined by a providence for their Emperour after LVI. yeares, that it might not utterly be ruinated. But these wounds were before Johns time, whereas here he prophesieth of the Beasts wounded afterward. Others understand it of the scisme of the Romane Monarchie under Heraclius, occasioned by Mahumet in the East, and the Pope in the West, by which division the Romane Empire was so shaken, as it had much adoe to subsist: the which wound they conceive was again healed by Charles the great. But we have shewed before, that the Beast or Antichrist doth not here absolutely denote the Romane Empire. Now whatsoever this be (we may wel referre it till we come to Ch. 17. v. 11.) yet here we must consider, what is meant by the Beasts deadly wound, and what
by the healing thereof. Concerning which, although our Interpreters (who in∣terpret the Beast to be Antichrist) doe not precisely agree in every thing: yet hence the Papists have no cause to insult. For the verity of our tenet, viz. that the Pope is Antichrist, may firmely stand, although it be not so easie to define all the particulars of this mystery, (for Histories testifie that the Beasts head hath already been diversly wounded) or know to what mortall wound of Antichrist the holy Ghost here properly points at. Lib 3. de P. R C. 15. In Apocal. 13. Beside the Iesuites are no lesse differently mind∣ed about it: Bellarmine approves of the fable touching the feined death and re∣surrection of Antichrist. This Ribera refutes, and imagineth that not Antichrists head, but a head of one of the ten Kings (a member and fore-runner of Antichrist) was wounded. Alcasar rejecting both, contendeth that Nero being this Head mortally wounded, did live againe in Domitian. I forbeare to rehearse more. Three of them we see disagree each from other: And why may not ours also hold∣ing to the main dissent in some thing without a manifest note of errour? Brightman a most learned Interpreter, is of opinion, Ennead. 7. l. 7 sub fin. that this wound is to be re∣ferred to the sacking of Rome by the Barbarians: of which see Sabellicus. For who doubts but that the seventh head of the Beast was then wounded unto death, when Rome being forsaken of her Emperours (who retired to Bizantium in the East, or to Ravenna in Italie) was overwhelmed under the new government of Popes with that great tempest or irruption of the Gothes, Vandals, and the Hunni, &c. By which the whole West was most miserable afflicted, and Rome well nie wholly brought to nothing. For within the space of XLII. yeares, it was five times be∣sieged, taken and spoiled by the Barbarians, insomuch as sometime for fourty dayes there was found in the City neither man nor woman. Adolphus King of the Gothes also determined to alter the name thereof, and instead of Rome to call it Gothia. Who would not have thought that then there had been an end of the Popes seat and kingdom in Italie: notwithstanding this wound was healed by little and little, first by Iustinian the Emperour, who sending Belisarius and afterward Narses with an armie, rooted the Gothes out of Italy, restored the Pope to his for∣mer place, and enlarged his dignity and power. For when the Constantinopolitane and he of Alexandria affected the Primacie, as thinking that Rome was now wholy brought under, the Emperour gave forth a new constitution, saying, We decree, and will according to the Decrees of the holy Synods, that the most holy Bishop of ancient Rome be the chiefe of all Priesis. Afterward Phocas fully healed the wound, attri∣buting to Boniface III. not onely to be accounted the chief, but Ʋniversall. This interpretation of Brightman I should follow, but that he doth two much anticipate the wound and the healing thereof. For he makes the Beast to be woun∣ded before he was fully manifested, for he was not as yet ascended out of the sea into the Chaire of Vniversall pestilence, untill Boniface III. and therefore could not be wounded and healed before his rising. Leaving therefore the opinions of others, I will here propound two things. The Au∣thours opi∣nion of the wound of the Beast. First, there is in this stroke and healing, an , as we observed in the wo∣mans flight, namely, how that is first related, which hapned after. For the Beast was not presenly wounded and healed so soon as he rose, or was set on his throne, but some while after: Neither did the whole earth then begin to admire and wor∣ship the Beast upon his wounding and healing: and when he blasphemed God and made war with the Saints: but immediately, or so soone as he received his throne and power from the Dragon: which indeed evidently proves the anticipation. Secondly, seeing it is not expessed by whom the mortall wound was inflicted, neither by whom healed, we are therefore to conceive that it was inflicted and a∣gaine healed, either by the Dragon, as not being able (as it were) to indure the pride of the Beast: Or else by the Lord, provoked to wrath, but healed again by the second Beast. For the wound of the sword, as it is called, ver. 14. signifies not a wound willingly made, but inflicted by some other. Now it could not be inflict∣ed on the Beast, unlesse either the Dragon did it (as being more powerfull then he)
or the Lord. For touching all others his admirers cry out v. 4. Who is able to fight with the beast. If we take it in the former sence, I finde not when the head of the beast sitting on his throne, The capital scisme of Popes. was more grievously wounded then by that deadlie scisme of Popes, wherewith the Papacie was afflicted more then fourty yeeres, viz. from the yeere 1378. unto the Council of Constance, when almost Antichrists kingdom was wholie ruinated by the discords of the Antipopes, occasioned by the Dragon. For when Clement V. a Gascon, removed the Romane court to Avinion in France, where it remained Eightie three yeeres, Gregorie XI. indeed recalled the Papal seat from thence to Rome: but beeing dead, the Romanes chose Vrbane VI. for their Pope, whom the Italians, Germanes, and English followed, and he sate at Rome. On the contrary, the French and Spaniards created Clement VII. for their Antipope, and he remained at Avinion: who being dead the scisme was conti∣nued by new Antipopes, viz. Boniface IX. and Benedict XIII. (before called Pe∣trus de Luna.) The first approved as Pope by the Italians, the latter by the French. Boniface IX. being dead, Innocent VII. succeeded, and after him Gregory XI. a∣gainst whom the said Benedict XIII sate Antipope at Avinion. Chro pag. 690. This scisme (as Ge∣nebrad witnesseth) when two and three Popes together strove for the Popedom did migh∣tily afflict the Popish Church for 40 years together: of which wound also Franciscus Petrarcha, Petrach. Epist. 19. who scarcely notwithstanding had seen the beginnings of the wicked scisme thus writeth: Our two Clements (saith he) have in a few yeares more wasted the Church, then seven of your Gregories will be able to repaire in many ages. These things considered, who will deny, but that the Beasts head was then deadly wounded. And now who inflicted the same but the Dragon, by setting those Antipopes full of Diabolicall pride, one against the other, to the scorne as it were, of the Beast and his throne. But thou wilt demand how this wound was hea∣led? Divers remedies were indeed sought for by many: and sundry plaisters in vaine applyed to the sore. Sometimes a reconciliation was laboured after by parties on both sides, betwixt Gregory XII. and Benedict XIII. and so far forth effected, that Gregory promised to lay downe his Popedom, if his Corrivall would do the like. The which the other assented to: and an oath passed betwixt them: But when they should come to the doing of it, their pride hindered the same: for soon after both of them repented of their promise. Qui vellet Cathedra cedere nullus erat. Afterward a Council is gathered at Pise in Hetruria, Anno 1410. for to heale this deadly wound. but the same availed not: But rather it increased the sore: for as the foresaid Genebrad reports, The scisme was not only not repressed, but made greater: for the two Antipopes being in vaine deposed, a third was chosen, viz. Petrus Cre∣tensis, a Franciscane, named Alexander the fift. Thus we see the others refusing to resigne, the Council was so far from healing the wound, as that on the contrary it made the Papacy before a two headed monster, now to be three-headed. Alexander the fift, that proud hypocrite being taken away in the eight moneth of his Pope∣dom, John XXIII. was placed in his room by the Italians: so the Papacy remained three-headed, and the wound made greater and greater. At length therefore the Dragon fearing the utter overthrow of the Beast, (and the rather because the preaching of Iohn Husse in Bohemia now added a deadly symptome unto that old wound) prepared a medicine by the Council of Constance, Anno 1414. for in the third yeare it was celebrated, it wickedly condemned John Husse, and Jerome of Prage the two witnesses of the Gospel to be burnt, and displa∣cing the three Antipopes Gregory, Benedict, and Iohn, it substituted Martin V. and so the deadly wound of the Beast, was at length as it were healed by a divine Aescu∣lapius or Chirurgion, one onely Pope being againe set on the Romish Chaire. Notwithstanding the ulcer burst forth in divers places, first in Spaine and France: for Benedict XIII. dying, Anno 1424. the Cardinals by his commande∣ment, and authority of King Alphonsus created Aegidius Munyos a Canonist, na∣med
Pope Clement VIII. Afterward in Bohemia, where in the Hussian warres it is wonderfull to consider how much Christian blood was shed for the wound of the Beast: untill at last Pope Martin regaining the favour of Alphonsus, Aegidius was forced at the commandement of the King to lay down his Popedom: And to the Bohemians the Councill of Basil permitted marriage to their Priests, to have the Liturgie in the vulgar tongue, the use of the Cup in the Eucharist, and some other things (which they called Compactata) on this condition that they should acknow∣ledge the Romane beast to be head of the Church. Now I suppose there is no man but sees that these things do very wel suite with this prophesie touching the deadly wound and healing of the Beast. Notwithstanding I leave it to the judgement of the Reader, for whose sake I here briefly set down a rype of the Antipopes du∣ring the wound of that scisme. ANTIPOPES During the schismaticall vvound of the Romane Beasts. At Avinion.   At Rome. Clement VII. dieth, Anno 1392.   Vrban VI. dieth, 1390. Benedict XIII. depo∣sed at Pise, 1410. and at Constance, 1417.   Boniface 9. dieth 1404.   Innocent VII. dieth, 1407 Gregory XII. depo∣sed at Pise, 1410. and at Constance, 1415. Alexander V. dieth, 1411 Clement VIII. giving place to Martine at Constance, 1421.   Iohn XXII. deposed at Constance, 1415. Martine V. created Pope at Constance, 1417.
But if so be we are to understand the wound and the healing thereof in the latter sence: Alphonsus his opinion touching the deadly wound of the Beast. then I should altogether embrace the opinion of Alphonsus Mantuanus, a learned Italian Interpreter. One of the Beasts heads (saith he) as it were wounded to death, seemes to me to denote that age of impiety, in which the Gospell began to be prea∣ched, and the Popish kingdom opposed through the ministery of the Gospell, and the abo∣mination thereof so manifested, as it is even known to the ignorant themselves, that the Pope who hath on his heads written names of blasphemy, is the Beast, and a most wretched man, who presumes to be esteemed a god. For then the Beast was seen to have received a deadly wound, when those impious doctrines, by which hitherto the Popes kingdome hath remained in its strength, were reproved as meere lyes, and Diabolicall deceits, by the free preaching of the Gospell of Christ. Thus far he. By the mortall wound of the Beast therefore he understands the separation of the Professours of the Gospell from Popery, whence first a deadly disease befell the Papists in Germany, and soon after in the neighbouring Kingdoms of France, Po∣land, Hungary, and England: Like as the ach of a wound ordinarily is irk∣some to the parts adjoyning. This wound could not be inflicted on this powerfull Beast, but by God himself, who at last taking compassion on Germanie, confoun∣ded the deceits of Rome, by raysing up Anno 1516. Luther, Melancthon, and o∣ther excellent Divines, as the instruments and organes of his grace and favour. The sword wounding the Beast, was the preaching of the Gospell, by which in a short space the props of Popery were so sore shaken throughout Germany, as it was not far from an utter ruine. Notwithstanding our sins so deserving, we see this wound now healed, the Pa∣pacie again prevailing, and reassuming her strength and vigour. But by what medicines or potions? This is cleared by Histories: And as Alphonsus well wri∣teth, this deadly stroke began to be healed: When the Kings and Princes of the earth, began through fire and sword to force men unto the Popes obedience. To this end was raised the Smalcaldick war against the Protestants: The wars of the Spaniard in the Low-countries, and the Massacres in France, that the mortall stroke of the Beast might be healed: But the false prophet ver. 11. seems to have made the true medi∣cine, The Beasts Chyrurgi∣ans. by his Chyrurgians, Campegius, Caietane, Polus, Faber, Prierates, Eckius, Latomus, Staphylus, and the like Physicians, who excelling in art, fraud and sophistrie, have held up the tottering state of the Papacy: Notwithstanding the Councill of Trent acted the part of chiefe Physicians, as applying with great skill wonderfull potions for to heal this wound. To these we may adde the Popish Academies, and especi∣ally that of the Sorbonnists at Paris. The last are the jugling Iesuites, by whose industrie, boldnesse and craft, the Head of the Beast is daily more and more resto∣red to its former health. And I could wish that the unhappy contentions of the Professours of the Gospell were not as oyle and wine powred into this wound: for I verily believe, that our own dissentions have more strengthened the Beast, then all his own force and policy whatsoever. Thus much concerning the wound, and the healing thereof. And all the whole earth wondred after the Beast] First, I desire the reader to take notice of the anticipation even now laid down. For we are not to think that the world admired not the Beast till he was wounded and healed again: for the Beast never was without his followers, and people wondring at his throne, and great power: and therefore by way of a parenthesis, the stroke and cure was spoken of before, which came to passe afterward. Now the authority of the Beast, and the besotted stupi∣dity of men to worship him, doth immediately cohere with his seat and great pow∣er: for although this be not so plaine in the verse, yet is it clear by the following: For wherefore is the Beast so much wondred at? was it because he was healed? certainly it is a matter of no great admiration that a wound should be cured by a Chyrurgian: and therefore this cure could not be the cause of so great an admi∣ration, as the Glosse imagineth, in applying it to the feined death and resurrecti∣on of Antichrist: the which thing even the chiefest of the Iesuites are ashamed of.
The true cause of the worlds wondring, is the seat and great power given to the Beast by the Dragon: as we shall see in the following verse: for as the Philosopher saith, admiration begets Philosophie, so here the worlds admiring the Beast, Aristot: lib. 1. Metap. c. 2. begets Antichristianisme. At first men admiring the Keyes, and pretended seat of Peter, together with the majestie of ancient Rome, did easily attribute to the Romane bishop primacie of ho∣nour, and agreed, that every Church should bring their cases to the Church of Rome, because of her power and principallity. This admiration encreasing by little and lit∣tle, and turned into superstition, by giving unto the Pope right of Ʋniversall ju∣risdiction, with divine honour, they made him to be the Antichrist. And so much is signified by the phrase , wondred after the Beast, that is, men being bewitched with the admiration of his power, they worshipped him as god, and subjected themselves by willing reverence under his feet, adoring all his decrees and commandements as divine oracles: for thus the Scripture usually speaks of divine worship: Walke after the Lord your God, Deut. 13.4 1 Sam. 7.2 for Worship God: All the house of Israel rested after the Lord, for, persevered in his true worship. So also of the false: They committed fornication after strange gods, for, they worshipped idols: Walk not after strange gods, for, Iudg. 1.17. Ier. 8.6.9. serve not the idols of the heathens: with many the like places in Ieremie: so that not a civill or forced, but a religious and willing subjection is here signified. Whence first, we see that neither the old Romane Empire, nor the Mahume∣tane kingdom is properly this Beast: for they required and forced men to a civill obedience onely. And hence Alcasars Glosse is frivolous and fabulous, that perse∣cution being renewed, the nations of their own accord subjected themselves unto the Beast: for no nation but by force of armes subjected its selfe unto the Romanes. Secondly, it appears that the throne which the Dragon gave to the Beast, is not onely a secular Kingdome, but also a sacred Monarchie, and grounded on religion: Thirdly, it is cleare that this Beast is no other then the person whom the Apostle speaks of, 2 Thess. 2.4. Who opposeth and exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: that is, the Romane Antichrist, after whom the world hath wondred these thousand years: ascribing unto him these verses of triumph: By oracles of thine own voyce the world thou govern'st all, And worthily a god on earth men think and do thee call. And lately dedicated to: PAVLO V. VICE DEO, To Paul the fift being in Gods stead (which letters in Latine doe expresly containe the number of the Beast 666.) THE INVINCIBLE MONARCH OF THE CHRISTIAN COMMON-WEALTH, AND MOST ZEALOUS PRESERVER OF THE PAPAL OMNIPOTENCIE: And againe: Thou art all in all, and above all, and to thee is given all power in heaven and in earth: who saith: My peace I give unto you: my peace I leave with you. And lastly, who usurps all things unto himselfe, which belong to God and to Christ: he takes away the sins of the world: rules from sea to sea: is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, the Sa∣viour and light of the world, &c. Thus much touching the admiration. But now who are these admirers?  the whole earth] in which we may observe two things: first, that this admiration is Catholike and universall: Secondly, that these CATHOLIKE ADMIRERS, are said to be the earth, that is, all both great and smal, bond and free, given to earthly worship, pomp, wealth, dignity and pleasure, as it follows in ver. 16. And therefore we must take heed not to be taken up with admiration of these admirers, or follow them: but rather mourn in regard of their stupidity and destruction. 4 And they worshipped the Dragon] this declares the former: for whereas be∣fore he said, they wondred after the Beast, he now shews it to be the worshipping of the Dragon, and attributing titles of divine majestie and power unto the Beast. Religious admiration (as the Scripture witnesseth) is onely proper to God and
Christ: Deut 6.13 Mar. 4.10 Psal. 97.7. Phil. 2.10. Psal. 72.9. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve. All the An∣gels of God adore him. In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow: before him the inhabi∣tants of the desart shall fall down. But these admirers adore the Dragon and the Beast: and therefore attribute divine worship unto them. And that we may not imagine it to be a civill worship, the words and exclamations of these wondrers are added: Who is like to the beast? Who is able to make warre with him? as making the Beast equall with God. For by the first they extoll his majesty: and by the latter the divine power of the Beast: In imitation of the Scripture, saying: To whom will ye liken God? What likenesse will ye make to him? Who is like to me saith God? As therefore the Saints and worshippers of God cry out, Isa. 40.18. Psal. 113.7 Who is like the Lord our God? O Lord who is like thee? so the admirers of the Beast cry out, Who is as the Beast? Who is like him? And as the Saints cry out to God: Lord, who shall resist thee? Who shall withstand thy will? so these idolaters cry out: Who can fight with him? So that by these expressions, they liken the Beast to God and Christ: yea if thou well observe it, they make him greater: for these exclamations are absolute ne∣gatives: Who is like thee? Who is able to fight with him? as if they should say, no man; no not God nor Christ: whereby they openly professe the Beast to be  adversary to God & Christ, lifting himself above al that is called God: This is one of the clearest argumēts proving the Beast to be Antichrist. But how are they said to worship the Dragon? Not by profession but in works. For they religiously worship Saints and Angels in heaven who are not God: They worship images of wood, stone, and brasse: but all religious worship attributed to the creature, is an honouring, not of God, but of the devill, whatsoever the in∣tention and profession of the worshippers be: according to that of the Apostle, That which the Gentiles sacrifice, 1. Cor. 10.20. they sacrifice to devils and not to God. And yet we know that the Gentiles (as the Indians and Brasilians to this day) did intentionally sacri∣to God. As therefore they that worship Christ, worship God, so they that wor∣ship Antichrist, worship the devil, of whom he received his seat and power. 5. And to him was givē a mouth speaking great things] Thus much of the figure, power & worship of the Beast. Now follows the declaration & usurpatiō of that power received from the Dragon. The which will be the lesse obscure, because in part we have heard formerly the like in chap. 11. The declaration of the power is in this verse: The usurpation in the two following. This great powr is two fold: 1. to bla∣spheme: 2. Thes. 2.9 2. to do. Now this is said to be givē to the Beast: But by whō? by the Dragon the devil, v. 2. for the cōming of Antichrist is after the efficacy of satan. His mouth in figure is like a Lyons v. 2. but speaks like a man who is a blasphemer: for metonymi∣cally the mouth is put for boldnes in evil speaking: as a hard mouth is an ill speaking mouth. Great things & blasphemies, is put for great blasphemies: which are rehearsed v. 6. Here observe, that the little horn also Dan. 7. v. 8.20. hath a mouth speaking great things: whence it is conjectured that by it Antichrist is shadowed out: spe∣cially seeing the three following things are also attributed to him: as blasphemies against the highest: warre with the saints: and the time of his rage to be XLII moneths, vers. 25. Historically indeed that horne seemes to be Antiochus the scourge of the Iewes: but Mystically it figured Antichrist. For as Antiochus afflicted the Iewish Church: so doth Antichrist the Christian. Thus we see that the old & this new pro∣phesie excellentlie agree both in phrases & deeds, and illustrate one the other. And power was given him to do] The first part of his power we have heard: now follows the other  power of doing: The OLD VERSION TO DO OR MAKE: some copies adde  warre: which seems to be taken from v. 7. The sense is all one, yet it is better to take it absolutely of making, but is not making here put for sacrificing? I wonder our Sophisters have not observed this, that so they might make the beast a sacrificer or masse-priest. But TO DO here is put for to rage and destroy according to his pleasure. This is given him by the Dragon, (God permitting the same,) yet holding the bridle in the midst of the beasts rage. And that we might not imagine the beasts fury to be absolute, a term is prefixed unto him for the comfort of the godly.
Fourty two moneths] his rage shall continue long, but not alwaies. What is meant by these moneths, I have shewed on Chap, 11. ver. 2. The Gentiles shall tread down the holy city XLII. moneths. The time is the same, because the History both there and here is all one, so that the treading down of the city by the Gentiles, is this very rage of the Beast here, being to endure XLII. moneths, and it will clearly appeare by the sixt Vision (treating of the destruction of the Whore and Beast) that these moneths took their beginning at the Beasts ascention out of the bottomlesse pit, and are now for the most part expired. 6 And he opened his mouth in blasphemie] The usurpation of his power follow∣eth, both by his mouth, in this verse, as also in action, in the following. He opened his mouth in blasphemie, that is, he began to blaspheme in a horrible manner. These are the great things which were given to the Beast to vomit out with open mouth, that is, publikely, and in the very height of pride and malapertnesse. Now what are these? but those great priviledges, the Romish Beast boasteth of, as that he is in Gods stead, yea a god, and Christs Ʋicar on earth, Peters successour, ha∣ving alone the Keyes of Heaven: that he is the invincible Monarch of the Christian world, the Prince of Bishops, the head and spouse of the Church, the King of Kings, the Lord of heaven, earth, and hell, the alone interpreter of the holy Scriptures, chiefe Judge of all religion, having all laws and mysteries lockt up in his breast, the chiefe decider of the Catholike faith, judgeing all men, but to be judged of none: to whom none may say, though he lead thousands of soules with him into hell, My Lord the Pope why dost thou so? to whom is given all power in heaven and in earth: who opens, and no man shuts, shuts & no man opens, who loosing no man bindes, and binding no man looseth: forgiving iniquities, taking away the sins of the world: with many other blasphemies which proceed out of his lascivious mouth. But distinctly or in particular, the bent of his blasphemies are against God, his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. Now to shew again how he blasphemeth God and his name. It is by doing that which the Apostle foretold of Antichrist: and which we see the Pope of Rome to do even at this day: viz. he opposeth and exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God: for he arrogates to himself the name and honour of God: suffereth his Clawbacks to cry out, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make war with him? he challengeth to himselfe all the rights and works of God: that he can create God: make some thing of nothing, make the word of God: that he cannot erre, that his decrees are of like certainty and authority with the divine Scriptures: that it is of necessity to salvati∣on to be subject unto him: that it belongs to him to give the kingdoms of the world, to set up & depose Kings as he lifteth, &c. All which things if the Pope doth, what is left for God? Is not this blasphemie against God & his name? The tabernacle of God, is the Church in which God dwelleth: this he also blasphemeth: for he falsly affirmes himself to be the Head, Bridegrom, and Lord therof: tyrannically oppresseth and infects her, by the poison of wicked doctrine, seduceth and as much as in him lies, thrusteth her into eternall destruction by his lying signes and horrible idolatry. Andreas understands this Tabernacle  to be the flesh of Christ, in which the word  dwelt with us, Ioh. 1.14. This tabernacle of God he also blasphemeth divers waies: for what blasphemie is more horrid against the Son of God, then that the Pope should boast daily by his Locusts to create Christ of a piece of bread in the Masse, to sacrifice and to destroy him. What blasphemie more odious against the office of Christ, then that the Pope boasting himselfe to be the greatest high Priest, proudly should exalt himselfe as above Christ the great high Priest? he denies that the alone sacrifice of Christ is sufficient for the expia∣tion of the sins of the Church, unlesse it be again and againe iterated by his Masse-priests, he denieth that the merits of Christ alone suffice to take away sins, & the pu∣nishment thereof, unlesse through his indulgences he adde a supply from the trea∣sure of the Church, which is the merits of the Saints. Other things I passe by.
And them which dwel in heaven] I see not why we may not understand these heaven∣ly inhabitants, properly of the Angels & blessed souls triumphing with the Lamb in heaven, for against these the Pope also poures forth his blasphemies more waies then one: for will they, nill they, for his own gain sake he obtrudes false honour upon them, makes them gods, and builds temples, altars and images unto them: and by this worship exerciseth a most filthy trade: and the most of them he forc∣eth to succeed in the places of Heathenish idols, and doth weary them as if they were houshold and tutelar gods, with diverse troublesome and sordid services, set∣ting one over Hogs, another Horses, another Asses: one over this City or Town, another over that, for the preservation thereof, and to prosper Handicrafts, to heale diseases, and drive away calamities: but of them all no one is more unhap∣py, or put to a greater task then the blessed Virgin Mary, unto whom are sent, as unto a sure anchor, all kinde of people, women with child, such as are baren, old and young, boyes and girles, the whole, the sick, Merchants, Fishers, Sailers, Horsekeepers, Horse-riders, &c. There is no favour so great, but is obteined of her: no necessity so pressing which she takes not away, yea she is far more liberall in curing then God himself and to her chiefly they run: She continually is saluted as the Queen of Heaven, the Lady and onely hope, salvation and Patronesse of men. To her they sing this song of praise Tu spes certa miserorum, Vere mater orphanorum, Tu levamen oppressorum, Medicamen infirmorum, Omnibus es omnia. Thou art the hope of comfortlesse. True mother of the fatherlesse, A comfort to the poor in thrall, The sick a sure salve have thee shall, To all things thou art all in all. God and Christ are nothing with the Beast: But Mary is Alpha and Omega, the haven and helper of all men unto salvation, she alone supplies the place of Isis, (the Pagans Queen of heaven) of Ceres, Venus, Proserpina, &c. And in very deed the Beast seems to be educated in the same schoole and religion of L. Apuleius the Platonick, who thus prayes to the gods for a Metamorphosis or change of an asse into a man: Apul. l. 11. Metamor. O thou Queen of heaven, or thou O sacred CERES, the first inventer and teacher of tillage and sowing of seed, who (rejoyced with the finding againe thy daughter) didst take away from men the former pasture of wilde fruit, Papists prayers like to the Pa∣gans. and shewest in place thereof a more milde and temperate, & now art honoured in the Eleusian fields: Or thou heavenly VENUS, who at the first being of things, coupling the diversity of Sexes by an en∣gendring love, and propagating mankinde by a perpetuall issue, art now O Goddesse worshipped in the holy places of Paphus: Or thou DIANA, sister to Phoebus, who (easing the paines of them that are ready to be delivered by thy softning medicines, bringing up so many and great nations) are adored in the Ephesian temples: Or thou PROSERPINA, who (dreadfull in regard of thy night howlings, and with thy threeformed countenance restraining all ghostly assaults, ruling in the vaults of the earth, and wandring thorow divers darke and loanly woods) art appeased with ma∣ny sacrifices: And thou who with thy womanly light shinest over all cities, and with moistning heat dost nourish all living seed: and sometimes by thy revolutions takest the light of the Sunne out of our sight: by what name soever, by what rites, or in what manner it be lawfull to call upon thee: O helpe thou now in this my extream misery, raise up my lost fortune, put an end to my manifold sorrows, and give peace: Let my former troubles suffice: put an end to all my misfortunes: take from me this hor∣rid visage of a bruit beast, and restore me to the sight of my acquaintance. And so in all places where the Beasts kingdom extendeth it self, Mary is saluted as Queen of heaven, and worshipped and wearied with more sumptuousnesse, cost, devotion and religion, then God or Christ. Is not this to open the mouth in blasphe∣mie against God, against his tabernacle, and the dwellers in heaven? For as Cassianus well writeth, When any thing is spoken of God, Christ, or the Saints, otherwise then it is, though in pretence to honour them, yet it is in truth to dishonour them. Of this natrue is
that blasphemous Antidote compounded (by one of those juglers) of the Breasts, and milke of Mary, together with the blood of Christ: in these verses. Haereo lac inter meditans, interque cruorem, Inter dilicias Vberis & Lateris, Et dico (si forte oculos super Vbera tendo) Diva Parens Mammae gaudia posco tua. Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto) O Iesu Lateris gaudia malo tui. Rem scio; prensabo, si fas erit, ubera dextrâ, Laeva prensabo Vulnera si dabitur, Lac Matris miscere Volo cum sanguine nati: Non possum Antidoto nobiliore frui, &c. O quando lactabor ab ubere, vulnere pascar? Deliciisque fruar Mamma latusque tuis? &c. I musing do stick fast betwixt the milke and dropping blood, Betwixt the pleasures of the breast and side that is so good: And thus I say when on the breast I think to cast mine eye, O holy Mother grant the joy of thy sweet duggs to me. But afterwards if I againe upon the wounds look wide, O Iesu I would rather have the comforts of thy side. This I will do; with my right hand Ile take (if it be fit) The breast, and with the left his wounds if granted may be it: Thus in the Mothers milke I wil the Son his blood infuse Then which a better antidote I cannot surely use. O when shall I thy sweet breasts suck, and with thy wounds fed be, Enjoy thy duggs, thy wounds, O Christ, even such felicity? And thus much touching the Beasts blasphemies. 7. And it was given to him to make war with the Saints] The other usurpation of his power, is not with his mouth, but in worke. This is that power () of doing, that is, of making war with the Saints, and overcomming them XLII. moneths: And it is the same that Daniel spake of the little horne, Chap. 7. vers. 21. And I beheld, and the same horne made warre with the Saints, and prevailed against them. This warre and victory of the Beast over the Saints, is the same over the two witnesses before treated of, Chap. 11. vers. 7. for the former witnesses with their congre∣gations, are these Saints: and however they are said to be two onely, that is, a few in respect of the Locusts: yet they suffice to confirme Gods testimonies: like as in judgement by the testimony of two or three every thing is established. Now what warre that was, and when, appeares by what before was spoken. What man∣ner of war the Beast maketh. The two swords of the Beast, It is not so much a civill, as an Ecclesiasticall war: for the Beast hath two swords: One spirituall, which he draws out against the Saints by bitter calumnies, lies, and ac∣cusations of his orators, by anathematismes of Councils, by proscriptions, bulls and decrees of the Romish Court. The other secular, which at the Beasts beck the Kings of the earth are forced to unsheath, to rage by fire and sword against such whom the Beast hath excommunicated: In this sence the Beast is said to over∣come: and the Saints vanquished: because (bellis & bullis) he persecutes them both by battles and buls: But the Saints being conquered, overcome: Rom. 8 37. according to that of the Apostle: In all these things we are more then conquerours, through him who loved us. This victory in overcomming the world and the Beast, is the faith of the Saints, against which the Beast shall never prevaile. The same thing speaks Daniel touching the little horne, and the issue of the war made with the Saints: He prevailed against them (saith he) untill the Ancient of daies came, and judgement was given to the Saints of the most high. And therefore the Beast shall not alwaies prevaile against the Saints, but at length they shall judge the Beast: for his power shall endure no longer then XLII. moneths: which serves for the comfort of the godly, lest fainting under their long-during calamities, they should cast away their hope of victory.
If thou enquire after the time of the warre, When the war began. it began to be made of old, when the Beast first trod down the holy city, and tyrannically persecuted al opposers by fire and sword. In speciall, the warre was at the height after the measuring of the temple, which through the great mercy of God was effected in these last times. By this warre the Councill of Constance tooke away the two witnesses, Iohn Husse and Jerome of Prague: and was afterward strongly prosecuted against the Saints by the Councill of Trent, and yet is to this day. And power was given him over all kindreds and tongues] We have heard the decla∣ration and usurpation of the power. The uni∣versal pow∣er of the Beast. Now he addes the largenesse and great∣nesse thereof: for that which in vers. 3. was generally spoken: The whole earth wondred after the Beast, is now distributively spoken: Power is given him over every tribe, and tongue, and nation. It is therefore an amplification of his power from the largenesse of the territories in subjection to the Beast. His power is univer∣sall, so as none, whither high or low in the Christian world, but do either desire, or are forced to submit to the Romish yoke. Behold here again, whither the spi∣rit of God doth not point at the Catholike state of Rome, that so Antichrist (Christs adversary) might be known even by the largenesse of his kingdom. Psal. 2.6. Psal. 72.8. Hebr. 1.2. Rev. 5.9. For as CHRIST is appointed by the Father to be heire of all things from sea to sea. He it is that hath re∣deemed us to God by his blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation: so on the contrary, the DRAGON hath given power to the Beast over every tongue, and kin∣red and nation, &c. Yet lest we should think that Christ was wholly thrust out of his possession by Antichrist: a limitation is annexed. 8. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him] He much amplifies the dignity and worship of the Beast, but withall limits the same: He shall be wor∣shipped as God: in vers. 4. it is said in preterperfect tense  have wor∣shipped. Here in the future  shall worship. So that the Beasts ma∣iestie shall not be for a short time: but shall long endure, untill it be fully mani∣fested. Notwithstanding, the holy Ghost comforts the godly by a twofold restriction: first, in that he calleth the worshippers of the Beast, inhabitants of the earth. And therefore none but earthly men shall worship him: for the Elect are not the inhabitants of the earth: Phil. 3.20. but Citizens of Heaven, in regard that their conversation is there. So that Gods chosen shall not adore the Beast, neither shall their salvation or Christs Kingdom be in jeoperdie: but theirs onely who follow the Beast: for they shall all of them be cast with him into the lake, Chap. 19.20. The other restriction is more expressely set downe, viz. that they onely shall worship the Beast, Whose names are not written in the Book of life, &c. that is, who were not elected in Christ unto salvation, but reprobated unto death before the foundations of the world: THEREFORE NO MAN CAN BE SAVED IN THE ANTICHRI∣STIAN CHURCH: because all who are not written in the Book of life, shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, Chap. 20.15. Let all therefore who love their salvation forsake the Popish Church. The names of the Elect are said to be written in the Book of life, The Booke of life. by an usuall me∣taphor: for we commonly write down the names of such who are deare unto us, that we may continually remember them: so God, having in his eternall coun∣sell elected some to salvation, hath written their names in the Book of life: so saith Christ: Rejoyce, because your names are written in Heaven. The metaphor also may be understood of the Sonship of the Elect, so that to be written in the Book of life, shews that they are heires of glory, for we know that such are to inherit, whose names are written in the last will or testament of men. The Booke of life is Christ: for in him God hath elected us: Therefore it is cal∣led the Booke of life of the Lamb, that is, of Christ, because election is made in Christ, hence none shall obteine eternall salvation, but such who are ingrafted in him through faith: the Lamb also is said to be slaine: because election includes the blood and death of Christ for the sins of all true beleevers: for God hath so decreed to save the Elect, as that (Christs satisfaction comming in as a
ransome for their sinnes) his justice might stand with his mercy. From the foundation of the world] This may be referred either to the next fore∣going word, slaine: or else to the words before, who are not written. And so Aretas, How the Lamb is slaine from the begin∣ning of the world. Ephes. 1.3. Rupertus and some others take it: because of another place, not unlike to this, Cha. 17.8. They that dwell on the earth shall wonder at the Beast, whose names are not writ∣ten in the Booke of life from the foundation of the world. And Paul saith: that we were chosen in Christ before the foundation of the World. Notwitstanding, the spirit doth not without cause immediately joyne the words from the foundation of the world with the Lamb slaine: For he would commend unto us the sufficiencie and large∣nesse of Christs sacrifice: in as much as the efficacie of his death and passion is ex∣tended to the very first beginning of the world, and so unto all the faithfull from Adam untill the end thereof: to shew that no man living shall obtaine eternall life, except he be redeemed by the blood of the Lamb. But how could the Lamb be slaine before he was? I answer. 1. Pet. 1.19.20. Gen. 3.15. Heb. 11.1. Act. 9.4. It is true he was onely slaine once on the Crosse some sixteen hundred yeares ago, by a reall suffe∣ring: yet he is in divers respects said to be slaine before. 1. in Gods eternall pre∣ordination, viz. that he should be slaine in the appointed time. 2. by promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head. 3. in beliefe of the fathers which was the substance of things hoped for. 4. in the sacrifices of the fathers, which sacramentally were the Lamb himself. 5. and lastly, in his members, as suffering in their sufferings: Thus Christ was slaine in Abel: because (saith Lyra) the slaying of innocent Abel was a figure of the Lambs slaughter. 9. If any one hath an eare] Here the Vision of the first Beast is shut up with an acclamatory conclusion many times before used in the Epistles by which the holy Ghost doth again raise us up to attention, that by the due contemplation of the Beast we might know who is the Antichrist: lest unawares we might be cir∣cumvented by his subtiltie. Here is signified that his impostures shallbe so subtile as not easily to be discer∣ned: but as a Wolfe lies hid under a sheeps skin: so Antichrist under Christs title, shall deceive the world, comming in a mysterie with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse, 2 Thes. 2.10. 10. He that leadeth into captivitie] By this condemning commination he doth not terrifie, but raise up the godly, lest they should faint, being offended with the cruelty and successe of the Beast. It is true, he shall lead into captivity, and destroy the miserable soules of them that worship him: yea, he shall also take away the estates of the Saints, and kill their bodies with the sword: But he shall suffer the like things: for he shall be led into captivity, and slaine with the sword: because he shall be cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 19.20. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints] He shews the antidotes by which these great evils may be borne and overcome. Here (saith he) is need of patience, which faints not under afflictions: And faith of the Saints, the which overcomes the world: As also it is a promise of Gods presence. The Beast indeed shall endea∣vour to break the patience of the Saints, and extinguish their faith: but God will turne it to their good: so as in suffering they shall not be conquered, but their faith tried, being much more pretious then gold. The second part of the Chapter. Touching the Beast rising out of the earth. 11 And I beheld another Beast comming up out of the earth, and he had two hornes like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon.
12 And he exerciseth all the power of the first Beast before him, and cau¦seth the earth and them which dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. 13 And he doth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men. 14 And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the meanes of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the Beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live. 15 And he had power to give life unto the image of the Beast, that the image of the beast should both speake, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. 16 And he causeth all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads: 17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name, 18 Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I saw another Beast] Touching this Beast Interpreters are as diversly minded as of the former. To repeat all their opinions is needlesse. They who understand the former Beast to be the old Romane Empire, take this other to be meant of Antichrist. But such who interpret the former of Antichrist, take this later to be his armour-bearer or gardian. Now both these in my opinion are not unfitly applied, provided the Armourbea∣rer be not childishly understood of one carrying the shield, but by a synecdoche of the whole and primarie order of the Antichristian officers, together with their head: for here Antichrist is represented not as Lord, but as one acting, or putting in execution his full power: as the workes of this Beast do plainly shew. Gregory applies it to Antichrists preachers, Lib 33. Moral, cap. 26. Vestigat. pag. 693. Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 15. who glorie in their earthly power. But, saith Alcasar (whose new found opinion deserves not to be rehearsed) They who understand the Sea-beast of Antichrist, are repugnant to themselves, if they also apply this beast of the earth unto him. But (good sir) if so, then thy companion Bel∣larmine is no lesse contradictory to himself, who thus writeth: The same Anti∣christ is expressed by two Beasts: by one in regard of his kingly power and tyranny, by which he violently forceth the sonnes of men: by the other in regard of his magicall art, by which he subtilly seduceth thē. But herein there is no repugnancy or inconveniency, for it is not unusual in this Revelation, It is not in∣convenient that Anti∣christ be fi∣gured out by a double Beast. that one and the same person have divers formes, & in different respects be represented under sundry types. For so Christ in the first vision, walked amongst the Candlesticks as a man, or the son of man: In the second vision he sate on the throne, as God: The Lamb stood before the throne, as a sacri∣fice: Again, as a conquerour, he is called a Lion: An Altar, as the receiver of the blessed soules: The Angel of the East, as the sealer of the Elect: In the third Ʋision, an Angel making perfume, as the Priest of the Church. So also Antichrist in the said third Ʋision, is the Starre fallen from heaven, as he is an Apostate: The angel of the bottomlesse pit, Abaddon, Apollyon, as he is king of the
Locusts: The Beast ascending out of the bottomlesse pit, as the persecutor of the wit∣nesses: Again in this fourth Vision, he is the Sea-beast, as a tyrant and persecutor of the Saints: so also he is the earthly Beast, as an hypocrite and seducer of the in∣habitants of the world, Againe in the fift Ʋision he is in the same respect a Beast and false prophet, as king and deceiver. Lastly, in the sixt Ʋision, he is the Beast and Woman riding on the Beast, as a king and Church that beareth sway. The whole Revelation, I say, represents Antichrist under divers formes, not simply as one person, but as divers, having a twofold life and original out of the sea and earth, a double body, a twofold shape and person, viz. as being a secular and ecclesiasticall person, a tyrant and a false prophet, an Emperour and high Priest. And indeed after this manner the Pope hath shewed himselfe more then once: One while as Caesar in his warlike armour: another while as Pope with Peters Key for his Ensigne: Of which see Albertus Crantzius Saxon, lib. 8. cap. 26. Thus therefore Antichrist the high Priest comes forth on the Theatre, first as a Romane Monarch: but now laying aside his Imperiall habit, he is represented under the person of a seducer. Which opinion is confirmed, because this second earthly Beast, hath no figure proper to it self, onely his two hornes, and words are expressed, as proper to this new birth or appearing: in all other things, as it seemeth, being both alike: of which more afterward. This also confirmeth it, that he exerciseth all the power of the former Beast: now the Dragon gave not the same power to two, but to one Antichrist. Thirdly, in that he makes the former Beast to be worshipped, from whom if he were different, oranother in number, he would rather have taken this honour to himself, seeing he was of the same power and ungodlinesse. Fourthly, what argument more evident then this, viz. that towards the end of the Chapter both the Beasts close and grow up as it were together in one, so that the Character, name, and number of the name is not said to be of two Beasts, but of one Beast onely. Lastly as in Chap. 17. The woman sitting on the Beast in a different respect notes one Antichrist with the Beast: so here the earthly Beast making the image of the Sea-beast to be worshipped, doth represent with the said Sea-beast one and the same Antichrist, and that without any repugnancie. These things thus observed, the seeming contradiction in the text will easily be reconciled, viz. that this Beast is said to be another, their originail and rise to be different, and that one acteth in the sight of the other, &c. But these and the like things do onely serve to denote under divers types the different nature, disposition and actions of one and the same Antichrist, as by the interpretation it will appear: unto which now we come. 11. And I saw another Beast] BEZA: then I saw: as if it were  or  after these things: But I rather take it copulatively: And I saw, for, also I saw; lest we might imagine that this Beast did not ascend till after the XLII. moneths of the former Beast: for indeed he either ascended with him, or a little while after. Another] To wit, in shew and rising different from the former, but in sub∣stance the same with him: because it is one Antichrist, though appearing under a new person or shape: for now he comes forth on the stage, not as a king or tyrant: but as a seducing Prelate. Therefore henceforward he shall be called a false prophet, misleading all the Inhabitants of the earth by his lying signes and deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse: but that this should be done by one sedu∣cer, and that in three yeares and an halfe (as some foolishly imagine) certainly it is most ridiculous. This Beast therefore denotes the Head with the members, that is, Antichrist with the whole crew of his seducing priests: of whom Gregory in Registro thus wri∣teth:
The king of pride is at hand: Lib. 4. Epist. 38. and that which is not fit to be spoken, an armie of Priests is prepared: It is true most copies have it, Exitus Sacerdotum est preparatus: The end of Priests is prepared. But the following words shew that it is a de∣ceitfull falsefying of the authours intent: Because (saith he) the Clergie warre and strive for mastery and advancement, who were appointed to this end, to go before others in humility: which words cannot be referred to the end of Priests, but certainely to their armie and proud war. Vnder this Beast therefore is comprehended the high Court of Cardinals, the Catholike authority of Papall Decrees, the sacred power of the Legates a Latere, and fa∣thers of the inquisition: The craftinesse and shamelesnesse of preaching Monks, espe∣cially the deep wickednesse and courtly malapertnesse of the upstart Iesuites: for these hitherto have been the chief architects and inventours of all artificiall falli∣cies to seduce the world, and principall physicians in healing the deadly wound of the Beast. Beast] Forasmuch as the Vision expresseth nothing touching the forme of this Beast, save onely of his two hornes, & blasphemous words, but afterward is three times termed a false prophet: there are some who think that he had the figure of a man having hornes, or of some Devill who in such a shape (as Jerom reports in the life of Paulus) met one Antonie in a wildernesse, and spake to him of Christ. There are some also who think that excepting his hornes and speech, he had all other things common with the Sea-beast. But let us not trouble our selves about his shape. His actions will declare that he was a mishapen monster, or rather one that had a thousand shapes, teaching us that no one figure was sufficient to represent all his severall plots and deceitfull devices. Comming up out of the earth] Brightman wittily interprets this rising out of the earth, His rising out of the earth. of the power which the Beast obteined over earthly kings and people: as if it were  upon the earth. But touching his power the same is spoken of afterward: And the like phrase vers. 1. shews that this comming or rising out of the earth, doth signifie his beginning: for as the former Beast drew its originall out of the Sea: so this out of the earth. Neither do I dislike Riberas observation: That the rising of this Beast signifies that he was not of a terrible and huge forme, like unto the sea-monster, but such whom we see here on the earth, as a Lamb, or the like: or that he rising as it were but from small be∣ginnings, yet did suddenly draw after him an incredible multitude of men: for they are said to rise out of the dust, who of small beginnings become great. Therefore it seems more simply to denote the ignoble and earthly rise of the Beast, See Cle∣mang. de corrupto ecclesiae sta∣tu. cap. 10. both in respect of himself and his whole Clergie: for as the beetle is en∣gendred of horse-dung: so for the most part the Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Pre∣lates and Monkes, all children of the earth, have from a low degree and state been raised up to the hight of worldly glory, being altogether vassals to earthly plea∣sures and honours. The order of Cardinals arose out of the earth, and began to be in esteeme about the year 1004. as Baleus shews from Bacandorpius in the life of John XIX. O∣thers say it was after Benedict VIII. Lib 3. Chron. pag. 426. anno 1023. or thereabout: which indeed Ge∣nebrad in his Cronologie denieth, and contends that Jerom was a Cardinall Priest: but without authority: for it appears the seven Cardinall Deacons distributed to the holy offices, according to the seven divisions of the City Rome (of whom mention first is made in the decrees of Fabian and Sylvester) were far differring as being scarcely Parish Priests: Yea Clemanges affirmeth, that of old time it was their proper charge to carry the dead, and to serve about buriall affaires. Thus of carriers of the dead, they are become the Lords of the Church. The sects of Canons and Monkes arose one after the other out of the earth: neither is their originall very ancient, as we may see in the History of Hospinian touching the originall of Monkes: As for the Jesuites it is certaine they sprung up even in the memory of our fathers, Anno 1540. out of the dunghill of the Spanish
Souldier. As therefore the former Beast did not rise at one instant out of the Sea, but by degrees: so this riseth out of the earth not all at one time, but leisurely and as it best stood with Antichrists necessity and profit, and established his kingdom from time to time, by sundry instruments. Having two hornes like the Lamb] This Beast in his hornes is likened to the Lamb or Christ: in his speech to the Dragon or the Devill: in his power to the former Beast or Antichrist. Now what is all this but to teach us that Antichrist should seine himself to be Christ, or Christs Vicar (which title Gregory VII. that most wicked Sorcerer, did first assume unto himselfe) and by his diabolicall doctrine seduce the world. Hornes signifie power. The Lamb hath seven hornes, Chap. 5.6. signifying his absolute and perfect power. The Beast hath two like unto these: In the similitude I observe his hypocrisie, in that he hath but two his defect of power: he arrogates indeed all the power of the Lamb unto himself: But he comes farre short of it, for Christ remaines infinitely more powerfull then he: The which makes much for the consolation of the godly. Some understand the two hornes of the Popes double sword, which is not amisse. For howsoever the Lamb never exercised any secular power, but alwaies put it off from him: Extra de major. & od. C. unam san∣ctam. yet Antichrist in pretence of the Lamb hath violently taken it unto himself: because the Lamb said: Behold here are two swords, it is enough. Like a Lamb] In the Greek it is  without an article, for,  like to the Lamb. Hence some doe thinke that these hornes are not likened to the hornes of the Lamb Christ, but indifinitely to the hornes of a common Lamb or Sheep. But it hath been shewed before, that Christ is called a Lamb  as well without, as with an article, and more examples hereafter follow. Let the antithesis here suffice: And he spake  as a Dragon, where the words of the Beast are not likened to a Dragons speech indefinitely, as Ribera feineth (for Dragons, indefinitely taken, do not speak) but to the speech of that Dragon, viz. the Devill, which in v. 2. Gave his seat to the Sea-beast. And yet it is said  like the Dragon, without an article. The likenesse therefore of his hornes to the Lambs, signifies not in generall a lam-like hypocrisie, that being a goat he should feine himself a sheep: But in particular his Christian hypocrisie, who being indeed the Antichrist, should yet falsly boast himself to be Christ or Christs Vi∣car. To this also we may referre the hypocrisie and fraud of his whole ecclesia∣sticall fraternity: Franciscus they say, that Angelicall Monke, bore in his body the wounds and marks of Christ: Thus also the hypocriticall Jesuites falsly assuming the Lambs name, speciously deceive the world, &c. But let us hear his speech: And he spake as the Dragon] And, for, But. In his hornes there is a feined simplicity of the Lamb: But his speech bewrayes his guile: like the asse by braying was discovered, though in the Lyons skin: so this Beast had not the voyce of a Lamb, but of a Dragon. Hitherto we read not that the Dragon spake, but gave his throne to the former beast: as also his mouth, by which the same is governed vers. 5. the which the Beast opening, spake great things and blaspemies, vers 6. The Beast therefore speaking like the Dragon, uttereth likewise great things and blasphemies by the instinct of the Dragon, that is, the Devill: for the Dragon is the Devill, Chap. 12.9. This is the letter. Now the speech of the Beast is nothing else, but the doctrine he preacheth as if it were the Lambs: but in truth it is the Dragons. The Apostle calls it a lye, be∣cause the Dragon is a lyer, and the father of lies. his comming is after the effectuall working of Satan, with all power and signes, and lying wonders, that they might beleeve a LYE, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Antichrists doctrine therefore is false and blasphemous touching the Scriptures, justification of sinners, of merits and humane satisfactions, of the sacraments, indulgences, ju∣bilees, fasts, forbidding of meats and marriage to Priests: 1 Tim. 4.3 the which the Apostle expresly termes the doctrine of Devils: and for this diabolicall language the Beast
here, is generally afterward called the false prophet, as Chap. 16.13. and Chap. 19.20. and Chap. 20.10. 12. And he exerciseth all the power of the first Beast before him] Thus much of his hornes and speech: his power followeth, and it is the same with the former Beast: Because howsoever this Beast differs in rising and type, yet really, and in power he is the same Antichrist, all whose power no man but himself shall ever exercise. Now this power was both to speake great things and blasphemies, as also to make war with the Saints, and lastly, to command every kinred, and tongue, and nation: all which this Beast also exerciseth. In that it is said  before him] or in his sight, it imports the manner how he exerciseth the same power, because he not onely blasphemeth, makes war and seduceth immediately by himself, but also by the help of his Legates a la∣tere, who do all things in his sight, that is, according to the appointment, beck and pleasure of the Beast: whatsoever things these do, the Beast is said to do. Now what is this, but that for these five hundred yeares and more (as Histories testifie) the Legates a latere, or Cardinals do all things in Emperours Courts by the autho∣rity of the Pope their master, determine Councils, direct the decrees thereof at his beck, and for the establishing of his power: Thus also his Inquisitours and chiefe Apostolicall Notaries, & such like agents execute al wicked acts against the Saints according to the wil of the Pope: see Sextus Decret. l. 5. tit. 2. de Hereticis per totum. And causeth or maketh the earth and them that dwell therein] Here follow divers effects of his power, Six effects of the beasts power. which he executeth, partly by himself, and partly by his vassals. He maketh] This respects his doctrine, that is, he preacheth, commandeth and forceth (viz. by his Emissaries and inquisitours) all men to worship the first Beast.  But thou wilt say how is this Beast said to cause the inhabitants of the earth to do that thing now, He causeth all to wor∣ship the first Beast. which they did before, and that of their own accord? The rea∣son hereof is intimated in the following words: Whose former wound was healed] that is, howsoever the Beasts authority began not a little to be lessened by that wound: Neverthelesse by the unwearied endea∣vours of this Beast (which here the word  causeth or doth signifies) together by his subtilty, eloquence and violence it was effected, that all men remained con∣stant in adoring the Apostolicall sea. But who are these worshippers? The earth and the inhabitants thereof] Now who, and what these are, see v. 8. We need not to envie this worship of the Beast, seeing that not the salvation of the Elect, but only of reprobates shal be in jeoperdy thereby. But are al in the Papacy reprobates & damned? God forbid: for even in the midst of Babylon God hath his peo∣ple, Rev. 18. v. 4. The spirit therefore speaketh this onely of those, who persevere to worship the Beast, and do not renounce his blasphemies. 13. And doth great wonders] Another effect of his power are Great signes or wonders, He doth great won∣ders. by which he shall perswade and induce the inhabitants of the earth to worship the Beast. For as the devill is Gods Ape, so is Antichrist, Christs: as God and Christ, therefore confirmed the doctrine of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles by many wonders and miracles: so Satan shall establish the Beasts great words, and Antichrist his great power by wonderfull signes. Signes] that is, miracles, or workes either really or in appearance surpassing the strength of nature. Great] that is, wonderfull and terrible. These he shall both do himself, as also cause his agents to do the like, as Bellarmin well observes: Not onely Antichrist, saith he, Lib 3. de P. R c 15. but also his ministers shall do wonders. The same thing Christ foretold us, Mat. 24. vers. 24. There shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signes and wonders, in so much (as if it were possible) they shall seduce the very elect. Now what signes they are the Apostle tells us, 2 Thes. 2.9. What An∣tichrists miracles are. with all the causes thereof: Whose comming is after the effectuall working of Satan with all power and signes, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse in them that perish, &c. The efficient cause is Satans efficatious working: The materiall, the prodigious
events beyond nature. The formall, the deceits and subtill illusions of the devill, by which the sences of men are bewitched. The small, How they differ from true mira∣cles. his lies and deceiveable∣nesse of unrighteousnesse, that the world may be seduced. And indeed in all these causes false miracles differ from the true, which are works truely surpassing the order and strength of nature, and are done by the power of God to the manifest∣ing of his omnipotency and confirmation of doctrine divinely revealed, such the Lord sometimes wrought by the Prophets under the Law: Yet not by all, nor at all times, lest they might have been little regarded, or else that the world should depend upon them. In the New Testament also Christ and his Apostles, with many other of the faithfull wrought great miracles for the confirmation of the Gospell of Christ: De vera re∣lig. c. 5. de util. cred. lib. 6. in 1 Cor. 2. Hom. 6. ca. 49. in mat. But these (as Augustine and Chrysostome in many places witnesse) ceased in the third age after Christ. And therefore Austin admonisheth, that we are not rashly to beleeve miracles, because Christ foretold such things of deceivers, and bids us to beware of them. Whereby we see how soundly the Jesuites quit themselves and their Pope from the impostures of Antichristianisine, in glorying of the ma∣ny signes and wonders that every where are to be seen in the Papacy: Not per∣ceiving in the mean time that in this very thing, they discover Antichrist, seeing the Scriptures do make great wonders and miracles to be the proper marks of him. So that he maketh fire come down] he rehearseth one of the great signes of the Beast: namely, that he makes fire to fall down from heaven in the sight of men. Antichrists miracles according to the Ie∣suites. The Iesuites reckon up three miracles of Antichrist: One is, that he shall feine himself to be dead and rise againe. But in ver. 3. we have shewed how this fable is without all probability. The second, that he shall bring down fire from heaven. The third, that he shall put life into the image of the Beast, and cause it to speak, 1 King 13 38. 2 King. 1.10. of this we shall treat on, vers. 15. The second, he shall do by a certaine imitation of Elias, who by fire from heaven consumed the sacrifice: and also devoured the Captaines with their fifties, to shew that he was a man of God: To which it is probable the spirit here alludeth: for Antichrist will be accounted a man of God. But it seems rather to allude to that wicked action of Satan, who with fire from heaven consumed the sheep and servants of Job. For whatsoever he doth, Iob. 1, 16, he shal do by the effectuall working of Satan unto the destruction of men. Now hence it followeth (saith Bellarmin) that the Pope is not Antichrist, for neither any Pope himselfe, or any of his ministers did ever make fire to come down from heaven. The consequence is not good: for it is apparent the species or one great wonder is put for the whole genus. But the species being denied, the genus is not denied. As therefore it will not follow that none of Christs Disciples were true Apostles, Mat. 17.20. because none of them removed mountaines according to the letter of the text: the which notwithstanding Christ promised unto his Disciples (for it was enough that they did other great miracles) so neither doth it follow, that the Pope is not Antichrist, although he hath not according to the letter brought down fire from heaven. For it is enough that many Popes (of which Bellarmin boasteth) have been renowned for working great signes and wonders, and that the whole Papacy is full of miracles, to wit, false and lying ones, such as the holy Ghost here and in 2 Thes. 2. do ascribe to Antichrist: and of which Christ himself forewarned us: Mat. 24.24. beleeve them not. Now the spirit rather attributes this species of wonders unto him, then any o∣ther, as respecting the manner of speech then common to the Hebrews: and still is to this day: for the Iews say: If a man cause fire to descend from heaven, for, if any one with a heavenly miracle would prove himself to be a man of God, and deny the Law of Moses, let him be accursed. Vestigat. pag. 701. Because no miracles can verifie false and blasphe∣mous doctrines. Adde to this, that Alcasar the Iesuite, contrary to the common opinion, acknow∣ledgeth that a litterall sence doth not at all agree with the stile of this aenigmati∣call sentence: which undoubtedly is most true, although he brings in a most idle
glosse, taken not from the Scriptures, but out of the conception of his own braine. Antichrist therefore by an allusion unto the litteral history of the Scripture causeth fire divers waies to descend from heaven. In the likenesse of fire rushing from heaven the Apostles received the holy Ghost: How the Pope cau∣seth fire to descend from hea∣ven. so Antichrist boasteth, that he by power given him from above, doth con∣fer the grace of the holy Ghost in consecration, confirmation, confession and ab∣solution, to wit, by a great and miraculous working. In the likenesse of lightning the devill made fire to descend from heaven, and devoured the sheep and servants of Job. And doth not the Pope boast, that he ful∣minates against Emperours, Kings and Princes by his excommunications? for so Gregory VII. said that the Emperour Henry IV. whom he excommunicated, was stroken with lightning, And therefore in excommunicating, the Pope casteth down burning torches or firebrands from on high, that even hence we might understand that it is he, who causeth this dreadfull fire to descend from heaven, by which the sheep and servants of Job are devoured, to wit, by a marveilous wonder. In that it is added: In the sight of men] it signifies, that he gaines authority to himselfe and his deceitfull working, by striking great amazement, feare and de∣lusion in the hearts of men. For he bewitcheth the eyes and mindes of the people, and so terrifies the conscience with his signes and lightnings, as that the simpler sort are held in false devotion, and the more prudent in feare and obedience. 14. And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by those miracles] Gr.  for the miracles, Seducing by his signes. and it seems to be put for  by, or by means of those miracles, as Chap. 4.11. & 12.11. This is the third effect of his power, he drives wretched men from Christ to Antichrist, from the truth to a lie, and from the path of salvation to the way of destruction. For to seduce, is properly to bring out of the right way, and lead into errour. It is a metaphor taken from travellers ignorant of the right way: for so Antichrist seduceth the inhabitants of the earth] that is, earthly minded men, ignorant of God and of their salvation, to wit, as cast∣ing all care of religion upon their spirituall fathers, and hence being bewitched and terrified with the signes and lightnings of the Beast, they devoutly swear obedience unto his lies. For as by true signes, being the seales of true doctrine, the Elect are helped and moved to believe that it is divine. (For God who is true and the authour of miracles, gives no testimony save to the truth:) so the lying miracles of the Beast are the seales of his lying doctrine, which earthly men em∣brace for true, because of his miracles, thinking that they are divine signes, and so his doctrine also: But thus thinking they are deceived and seduced. What there∣fore are our workers of miracles but seducers? And in this sence it is truely said , for, or because of the signes, as being the formall cause of his impo∣sture. Now they work their signes in the sight of the Beast] that is, by the Popes authority, because the miracles of these deceivers must of necessity be Canonized by the Pope, that they may be authentick to the faith, that is, to the seducement of men. Saying to them that dwell on the earth that they should make] Observe how often the holy Ghost doth reiterate the dwellers on the earth, The image of the beast. lest the faithfull should be offended with the multitude and readinesse of them that follow the Beast against Christ. And this is the fourth effect of his power: he commands the inhabitants of the earth to make an Image to the Beast which was wounded by the sword and did live. With which cohereth the first, that he gave life to the Image of the Beast, and also that the Beasts image should speake, and cause, that whosoever would not worship the image of the Beast should be slaine. Ribera in c. 13.32. For these two verses agree together, by which indeed most interpreters amongst the Papists will have the third miracle of the Beast to be de∣scribed, viz. that he should perswade men to make an Image to Antichrist, and worship him in their temples, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 15. to which image he would give life and speech, &c. Whence againe it followeth, saith Bellarmin, that the Pope is not Antichrist, be∣cause none of them have made an Image to speake, &c. But first this fable touch∣ing
Antichrists image placed in temples, speaking and to be worshipped, Alcasar re∣futoth Bel∣larmine. Al∣easar himselfe refuteth, and expounds it of heathenish idols, which they imagined by an heavenly miracle should receive and give answers; This opinion is far more tollerable, although not agreeable unto the text, which openly speaketh, not of Satans delusions among the Gentiles already past, but of the future impostures of Antichrist sitting in the temple of God. Secondly, (to let passe the fable) do not the images in the Papacy speak? and hath not the Pope caused and commanded them to be worshipped on paine of death? Such of ours who understand the former Beast of the old Romane Empire, interpret this Image of the Beast sometime wounded, and again healed, of the Romane Em∣pire re-established by the Pope. Which they think was done when Steven II. and Leo III. transferred the decayed Empire of the West on Charles the Great, and as it were repaired the same: The which was no more then a certaine image, or rather a shadow of the old Empire, comming short both in the majestie, largenesse and power thereof. But we have before shewed that the former Beast denotes not the Romane Empire, but Antichrist. Neither doe the circumstances of the text agree to it. The Pope (say they) made the image of the Romane Empire: But the second Beast (or the Pope) made not the image of the former, but the inhabitāts of the earth did it by the commandement of the Beast. That also which is added touching the worshipping of the image, doth little agree. For as much as none of the Germane Emperours commanded either themselves or their Empire to be worshipped on paine of death. The participle , saying, referred to that which goes before, makes the sence cleare, to wit, that to the two former waies of power and seducing (being his false doctrine and great miracles) now are added two more, to wit, worshipping of I∣mages, and outward violence. And the spirit doth plainely allude to Daniels Hi∣story, where the King set up a golden image (Hebr.  Gr. ) whose height was sixty cubits, and breadth six cubits, proclaiming, Dan. 3.4. The Baby∣lonish I∣mage. that all should fall down and worship the golden image: whosoever falleth not down and worshippeth, shall the same houre be cast into the midst of the burning fierie furnace. This was that Babylonish idolatry, main∣tained by a furnace of fire, in imitation whereof Antichrist hath set up a Golden I∣mage to the Beast, that is, to his own wicked inventions, commanding that all who will not worship the same, shall be burnt in a furnace of fire. By these two latter waies therefore, far more effectuall then the former, he universally seduceth the earth. But both these waies seem to require a more full exposition. That they should make an image to the Beast] Both Alcasar and Ribera acknow∣ledge that by an Enallage or change of number one image is put for many, The Image of the beast what it is. though they apply it to a different sence. The holy Ghost calleth the whole Papisticall worship of images, or Antichristian idolatry the image of the Beast. That they should make] to wit, the inhabitants of the earth. In the construction there is no ambiguity. The Beast himself maketh not the image, for he being covetous, will not be at the cost: but he saith to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make it, that is, he teacheth and commandeth the nations in the honour of God and of the holy Trinity, to make and set up in all consecrated places and temples the images of Christ crucified, of Mary the mother of God, the Queen of heaven, of Peter the Prince of Apostles, and of all the Saints in heaven: Images, I say, of wood, stone, brasse, gold and silver: neither may they be set up naked and without attire, but must be adorned and clothed in silke and purple, have waxe-candles and lights set before them, men must humbly and devoutly make requests and pray∣ers unto them, yea and contribute unto their worship yearely revenues for the salvation of soules. This commandement the world (being delighted with Ba∣bies, and desirous of a glorious worship to the eye) at length obeyed, sparing no cost: and hence the Papacie doth so much abound with Palaces, temples, conse∣crate places full of pictures, altars, waxe-candles, lights, purifying vessels, &c. as being a kingdome of images.
15. He gives life to the beast, makes it to speake and to be worshiped. And he had power to give life to the Beast] Gr.  And it was given him to give life, &c. The first effect of his power, he puts life into the Beasts image, makes it to speake, and to be worshipped upon paine of death. It was given him] by whom? by the Dragon, that is, Satan the inventour and architect of all idolatry, God permitting the same: yea also in his most righteous judgement sending them that dwell on the earth strong delusion that they should beleeve a lie, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Now it is very apparent unto all, how in the Papacy the Image is made to live, speak, weep, laugh, and do other actions of the living, through the fraud and devillish cunning of Monkes: And hence followeth that mighty running after this and that Mary, Crucifixes, Peter, &c. Hence are al the pilgrimages, wonders, canonizations, sacri∣fices for the dead, and vows, in so much as none of the inhabitants of the earth, whi∣ther of the simple or wiser sort, but have thought it necessary for the salvation of soules, The Beasts image ex∣celleth that of Nebu∣chadnezzar to offer, bequeath, and give unto this Image whatsoever they possessed. Furthermore the Image of the Beast hath this as proper to it, and above that of the Babylonish: for we read not that Nebuchadnezzar made the same to live or speak: In this great wonderment therefore Antichrists image was to excell the other, that he might more prevalently seduce: otherwise in idolatry and madnesse they are a∣like, as it followeth. And to cause that whosoever] Gr.  and should make, to wit, the image which speaketh, for the words  and  are both governed by the word  image: and this is the common reading. But the sence sheweth that not the image, but the Beast caused them that would not worship to be slaine: therefore the Kings Bible seems more rightly to read it  and causeth, or maketh, that is, the Beast doth it. However it comes all to one purpose, whither the Beast himself, Dan. 3.6. or the Image by the Beast cause all that will not worship to be slaine, the which we plainly see, is taken out of Daniel: Whosoever falleth not down and worshippeth, shall the same houre be cast into the burning fierie furnace. Thus the Beast besides his doctrine, miracles, and worship of Images, addes out∣ward force, that so whosoever will not submit by the former, may notwithstand∣ing be compelled to worship through feare of punishments. For such a spirituall madnesse possesseth idolaters, that with fire and sword they punish the contempt of their idols: hence Idol-worship is in Gr. called  as it were, a mad and befotted worshipping of Idols. Now let us see whither the like hath not been hitherto practised in the Papa∣cy. This setting up of Images first did rend the East from the West with many tragicall tumults and uproares. And afterward was the utter overthrow thereof, by the Turkes: For Constantine that furious Pope, by sedition thrust Philippicus Emperour of the East, out of his government, because he prohibited the Image of the Beast to be worshipped: also he caused John the Emperours Generall to be slaine at Ravenna Gregory II. deposed Leo the Emperour, for the same cause, command∣ing them of Ravenna to put to death Paulus, the Emperours chiefe officer: He also put out the eyes of Peter Governour of Rome, and by that means made himself Lord thereof. Behold the power of the Beasts image, of which if any be desirous to know further, let him read the Book of Martyrs: Or let him go to Rome or Spain, and see whither all men are not constrained to bow the knee, and adore the Image of the Beast. Babylons Law is universall: Whosoever will not fall downe and worship the Image:  Let him the same houre as an heretick be cast into the fierie furnace. 16. Impression of a Chara∣cter. The diffe∣rence be∣tween Cha∣racter and Charagma And he causeth all] The sixt effect of his power: he imprints a Marke in the right hand, or in the forehead, with a priviledge to buy and sell. Marke, Gr.  not  Character, as most render it. A Character represents the expresse image of the Archetype or first pattern: as for example, a child being like his father in countenance, is said to be the character of his father: by which ana∣logie, Heb. 1. vers. 3. The Son of God is called
that is, the Character (or as it is translated) the expresse Image of the Fathers person. But the word Charagma here used is of a larger signification, and taken for any signe or marke put upon things, thereby to difference them from others: like sheep or such like cattle have a marke set upon them, as also houshold stuffe, as vessels, clothes, and other merchandise, that they may be known who is the owner thereof, or what their price and value is: of this use also are the colours, among Souldiers: Thus Princes distinguish their servants by different habits. And so the Charagma here properly denotes the Beasts livery. But let us, if you will, call it his Character. This he causeth to be imprinted up∣on all, without any distinction of age or stature, great and little, young and old, of every estate, rich and poore, bond or free, noble, ignoble, Emperours, Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Subjects, none exempted. So then this is a CATHOLICK CHARACTER, and must be received of necessity to salvation: by which as by a solemn marke the Beast shall distinguish all the adorers of his power. The Beast apishly imitates Christ. What the Character of the beast is. Now herein he imitates Christ, who in Chap. 7. Signed all the servants of God with the seale of God, as by a Character, separating them from the world. So the Beast by his Marke separates all such as are his from Christ the Lord. In their right hand or in their foreheads] The distinction shews, that there is a cer∣taine difference in the Character, of which more by and by. But what may this Marke be? Ribera feineth that it is the forme of the Dragon, which Antichrist shall com∣mand to be worshipped: But because he sees there is no waight in the fiction, therefore he will have it a future Character, or some marke, which secretly shall shew that name in which he most glorieth, that is, the name of Christ or the Messias, by which he shall deceive the Iews, many Christians and Sarazens also, to wit ☧ or Χ—Ρ wherby Constantine in his Ensigne did in short include the name of Christ, in token that he was deliverour of the world, expellour of tyrants, and settler of publike peace, such as Antichrist would also seem to be. Bellarmin, being ashamed of these triffles, saith that it cannot be known what this Character is, till Antichrist shall come: in the interim he pleasantly derides our inter∣preters, as being ignorant of this Character, which he willingly refuseth to know, lest he bewray the Pope: But undoubtedly the marke of the Beast, should not so often have been used in this prophesie, if it were altogether hid, for then it should be no Character. Neither doth it follow, that our Interpreters know not what it is, although some seem to understand thereby the unction of their holy Chrisme; Others the profession of the Romish faith: Others their oath of fidelity to the Pope. For all comes but to one thing, as noting an obligation or bondage to Antichrist. But put case we were ignorant of the Character, will it therefore follow that the Pope is not Antichrist, in whom all other Markes of him, doe evidently con∣curre together. First therefore we are not to imagine that it is a visible marke burnt or imprin∣ted on the forehead or right hand, What ma∣ner of Cha∣racter the beasts is. 3, Q 63. Art. 3. ad. 3 whatsoever Alcasar triffeleth touching a mili∣tary Character out of Vigetius: for it suites not with this aenigmaticall stile: And therefore Thomas saith well, that the Character of the Beast is a profession of unlaw∣full worship. Secondly it appeareth, seeing the Antichristian Beast is the Romish Pope, clo∣thed with the skin of the Romane Empire, and coat of Christ, that the Character of the Beast is the profession of the Papisticall worship: like as we heard before, Christs Character was no materiall marke, but a profession of Christian worship. This Character of the Beast they receive in their foreheads, who onely by professi∣on and obligation to beleeve all things the Pope beleeveth, acknowledge them∣selves subject to him, and receive all the Sacraments. But such receive it in the
right hand, who either by generall or speciall vowes, whither Clergie-men or o∣thers, Demonstra. Antichrist. c. 11. Sect. 25.26. The Cha∣racter of the Beast twofold. do oblige themselves strongly to defend the Romish Sea. But in my opinion Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury doth excellently expound this Character, understanding it from the foresaid distinction to be twofold: One common to all, the other proper to them, who buy and sell. To the common Character appertaine (saith he) the things which usually are pra∣ctised by al Antichristians: as the observation of fasts & holy dayes instituted by the Pope: the worshiping of their breaden god in the Masse, and of images: kissing of the Pix, auricular confession, doing penitentiall rites and other things not commanded of God, but by him, in which things notwithstanding he makes the whole life of a Christian man to consist. But the peculiar, belongs to those spirituall Merchants, buying and selling the Oath, by which being obliged to the Pope, as by a speciall tye, they promise subjection and obedience unto him, and in witnesse whereof they separate and divide themselves from the rest of the Church by certaine rites, vowes, unctions, shavings, garments, and religious institutions by the Beast. This Character therefore they beare in their forehead, that is, by open professi∣on: as also in their right hand, that is, by oath,—behold my right hand, and faith: more peculiarly the whole Clergie, as Bishops, Priests, Monkes, and other religious and anoynted shavelings, promise a blind obedience unto the Pope: in testimony whereof they openly teach and professe, that in their ordination they receive a Character not to be put out, God undoubtedly by his providence so directing the matter, that we thereby might know who are these stigmatised varlets, bearing the Character of the Beast. 17. The privi∣ledge of Antichrists signed ones. And that no man might buy or sell] The priviledge is added, which they onely shall enjoy who have the Character, all others in the meane time being de∣prived thereof. Onely the marked ones may buy and sell, but others not; whicht thing whither it be understood either of temporall or spirituall merchandise, i altogether agrees unto the Papacy. For none may spiritually trade among them, that is, buy, receive or sell the holy wares of Masses, indulgences, absolutions, dispen∣sations, tithes, &c. but these spirituall hucksters marked with this perpetuall Cha∣racter, to wit, Bishops, Priests, Monkes, and the like merchants of soules: of whom Peter speaketh: 2 Pet. 2 3 2 Tim. 6.5. Through covetousnesse shall they with feined words make mer∣chandise of you. And Paul: they suppose that godlinesse is a gaine or merchandise. But if we extend it to the common Character: it may also most truely be ap∣plied to civill trading: For whosoever acknowledge not the Beast, they are so farre from having freedom and liberty to buy and sell: that on the contrary fire and water is forbidden them, as being hereticks, and so by Popish edicts are depri∣ved of all honour, dignity, offices, courts, priviledges, and common rights, but condemned to exile, torture, and horrible punishment. This Pope Martin V. hath most clearly expressed in his Bull annexed to the Councill of Constance: where he enjoyneth by an oath all such as professe themselves ad∣dicted to the Romane Sea, whither Emperours, Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Barons, Souldiours, Protestants, Rectors, Counsellours, Presidents, Communities and Ʋniversities of Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns, Castles, Villages and such like territories and places, as also all other who exercise temporall jurisdiction: also all Clergie∣men and inquisitours, that they expell all such as hold not the faith and communion of the Romane Church, as being scabbed sheep, infecting the flocke of the Lord: nor permitting them to preach, nor to dwell in their dominions, neither to make contracts, bargaine or trade with them, or suffer them to enjoy with Christians the comforts of an humane life. Now is not this the very thing here testified by the spirit, that the Beast should do, viz. that all of what estate soever, as receive not his Character might not buy nor sell. Thus we have Pope Martin himself to be the best interpreter, and indeed a full practiser of this prophesie, who as a Rat by his own marke declares himself to the world to be that Antichristian Beast.
Save he that hath the Character of the Beast] What meaneth he to say of the Beast and not of the Beasts: but to shew, that they are both one, and represent in a dif∣ferent respect the same Antichrist, as before we declared, Furthermore he seems to distinguish them that enjoy the priviledge of the Beast into three orders: having the Character, or the name, or the number of the name of the Beast: about which some dispute, whither these things be not declaratively coupled together, as three names conteining all one thing, seeing that which is here and in the foregoing verse, absolutely said to be the Character: is Chap. 15.2. and 16.2. and 19.20. called the Character of the Beast: And Chap. 14.11. the Chara∣cter of the name of the Beast. Of this opinion is Alcasar: But Ribera thinketh that the Character is to be distinguished from the number of the Beast and his name: with whom I rather agree: for it sufficiently appeareth from Cha. 15. v. 2. that the Character is distinct from the number of the Beast: for there it is spokē of such as had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his image, and over his Character, and over the number of his name. Now thus I distinguish them, that by the Character is under∣stood the more proper Marke, The proper and more common Character of the beast how they differ. which is set on the Clergie by their speciall vow and oath: By the name and number of the name, the common Character imprinted on all of the Laitie, by their ecclesiasticall obedience unto the Pope. But of the name and number of the Beast we shall speak more by and by. 18. Here is wisdome] Because all those things which he had spoken of the Character, name, and number of the Beasts name, are aenigmaticall and very obs∣cure. Therefore John sets forth the very same by an exclamation here is wisdome, to wit, hid: Or here is need of wisdom to search out the meaning of these three things: because by the understanding of these, all other mysteries of the Beast may easily be understood. Now difficult and dark things cannot be enquired into but by the help of wisdom, the which, as Aristotle saith, is the Prince of Sciences, consisting in understanding and knowledge. And therefore the holy Ghost doth here againe (as in vers. 9.) stir up our attention, lest we with deafe eares and blind eyes passe by, not onely these most hurtfull Beasts with their image, but the Character, name, and number also. For except we be very wary, he will devoure us. But we cannot shun him, except we know him: we cannot know him but by wisdom which searcheth into all obscure and dark matters. This is the first part of the exclamation. But whence shall we attaine this wisdom? by prayer, as James tells us, Ch. 1.5. If any one lacke wisdom let him aske of God who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him, if he aske in faith nothing wavering: For as Sirach saith: All wisdom floweth from God. Now here we want wisdom, Sirc. 1.1. and yet it is necessary for the searching into this obscurity. Let us therefore earnestly pray unto God, to teach us what these monsters signifie, what we are to know touch∣ing them, and what to shun. But behold we have the wisdom revealed unto us in this very place, in the second part of this exclamation. He that hath understanding let him count the number of the Beast] In the number, saith he, is hid the name of the Beast, his Character, and all other mysteries touch∣ing the same. He therefore that will know  let him count, that is, dili∣gently discusse the number of the Beast: for by his number he may know his name, by his name his Character, by his Character his Image, & by the Image the beast himself. But that he may know it, saith he,  let him have, or set to his minde, that is, he must with great skill count or reckon up this number, shewing that with earnest prayer to God, there is need of great study and paines-taking to compre∣hend the knowledge of the mysterie. What the number of the beast is. But wherefore will he have us so carefully to minde the number? Or why hath the Spirit hid the rest in the number of the Beast? he would unfold all other things by the number, because (saith he) it is the number of a man] that is, a man by much diligence may search it out: so this clause is understood of most, as a reason taken from the possibility of the thing, accor∣ding
as we also observed it in the analysis. Neither do I altogether dislike Riberas exposition, that it is a reason taken frō that which is proper to man: because (saith he) to reckon is proper onely to man endued with understanding. And thus number should be put for to nūber, for it is not said  The number, with an article, but inde∣finitely  it is a number of a man: as if he should say: for this cause the spirit hath hid the knowledge of this whole mystery in the number of the Beast, that men (who excel bruit Beasts in knowledge and in the art of recko∣ning, and weary themselves in casting up infinite accounts of other kindes) should also diligently exercise themselves in searching out the number of the beast, for that being once known all the rest will easily be discerned. Behold how familiarly the Holy Ghost descends to our capacity, therby leading us to an infallible know∣ledge of the Beast and his mysteries. And his number is six hundred sixty six] In the Greek the number of the Beast is set out in three numerall letters . But here againe is need of wisdom to gesse what is meant by these three letters. The reading is twofold, Whether the time of Antichrists rising be here noted. Lib. 3. de actis Ponti. Rom. sub. initium. the which we are well to take notice of, because it much serves to know the sence: Montanus and all Latine copies expresse it not in three numerall letters, but in full words  six hundred sixty six. Hence some thinke that John expresseth not the numerall name of Antichrist, but the number of yeares after which he should be revealed: viz. after 666. years: of this opinion is Balaeus: Bullinger and others: But many things seem to make a∣gainst the same. First, the beginning of the years would not accord, for if we reckon from the time of Christs birth, there will be, not 666. years, but onely 606. till Antichrist did rise: if from the time of the Vision (as it seems it must be done) then there will be onely 510. years: If with Balaus sixty years before Christ, or at the Consulship of Cicero when Judea was reduced by Pompie into a Province under the Romane Empire, there can no sufficient reason be alleaged for such an anticipation. Secondly, by this means the wisdom which John hence promiseth could not be attained by the number of the Beast: for he teacheth that by the number the name, by the name the Character, & so the rest might be searched into: which indeed may be gathered from the numerall letters, but not by the words themselves of the number. Adde to this, that vers. 17. and Chap. 15. vers. 2. John calls it expresly the number of the name of the Beast, but not the number of the Beasts rising. There∣fore it is not a number of time but name. This makes me rather assent to them who judge that by this number Antichrists name is opened, The nume∣rall letters shew the name of the beast. of which opinion are not onely the most of our Interpreters, but also the ancient Writer Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. penult. Yea all Popish writers of these times, Alcasar excepted, who here imagineth altogether strange & absurd things. Now the ground of this our opinion is twofold: First, that all other Greek copies expresse this number not in full words, but in three Greek numerall letters  whereof  according to the Grecians is 600.  60. and  is six. But with a marke above it is faulty, as most Greek copies have it, through the un∣skilfulnesse of the Printers. For  thus marked, makes not 6. but 90. Some Ancient writers notwithstanding have thought that for the middle letter  was to be written, so making the same to be  by which Cha∣racters the Greeks have abreviated the name of Christ, because they thought that by this signe Antichrist should vaunt himselfe both to Christians and Iewes to be the Christ, and then the number should not be 666. but 706. because  with the Greeks doth not denote 60. but 100. the which number indeed might also not un∣fitly agree with Antichrists rising, in case the number here did respect the same: for by taking of 96. from 706. (for so many yeares were expired before this Revelation was given) there remaine 610. yeares, at what time sate at Rome Bo∣niface
IV. the Successour of the first Antichrist, who therefore it seems is not con∣sidered in the number, because he was taken away in the first yeare of his tyranny, viz. Anno 606. But the things before spoken make against this: neither have any Greek co∣pies to this day  But all have it either in full words six hundred sixty six, Irenaeus re∣proveth the alterers of these let∣ters. or in the three Characters  Which number and numerall letters Irenaeus testifieth, were put in all the old most approved and ancient writings, whereupon he doth mightily inveigh against such as rashly changed this middle letter: lib. 5. cap. 15, The other ground is because Chap. 15. vers. 2. this number here, is directly said to be of the name of the Beast. And therefore Antichrists name consists of numerall letters, making up the number 666. But the greatest doubt about it is, Whither we are to understand Greeke or Hebrew letters. Fox in A∣poc. p. 458. whither these numerall letters be Greek or Hebrew? It is very certain that John wrote the Revelation in Greek: howso∣ever there are some (whose conjectures are not to be sleighted) who maintain that this prophesie was dictated to John by the Angell not in the Greek but He∣brew tongue, as being Johns native language, and best known unto him, the which afterward he turned into Greek, because of the Grecian Churches unto whom he wrote. Now this in the first place seems to be so, in regard of the stile which a∣bounds with Hebraismes, as in many places we have observed. Secondly, conside∣ring the Hebrew words which are oftentimes inserted, or left out, as Abaddon, Harmageddon, Gog, Magog, &c. Also by an often expression of a sevenfold number, which is proper to the Hebrewes. Thus also the words of Christ, Saul, Act. 9.4. Saul, why persecutest thou me? howbeit, they are written in Greek, yet undoubtedly were at first spoken by Christ, either in the Hebrew or Syriack tongue. But whe∣ther this be so or no, the number of the name, or numerall name of the Beast, seemes long ago to have been discovered by the prudent search of the godly. Let us take it for granted that the Revelation was written in Greek, and that we are to reckon with Greek numerall Characters: as Irenaeus also a most ancient writer affirmeth. Now it is knowne that the Grecians in their accounts used the letters of the Alphabet, distinguishing them into three rankes: of which the first consists of unites from α unto ι: the note σ being inserted for seven: The other ranck is of of Decades or Tens from  with a mark upon it, which is 10. unto ρ which is put for an 100. σ' with a mark being here also brought in for 90. The third is of centenaries or hundreds from ρ' unto ο' which signifies 800. unto which they adde π for 900. Their thousands they denote by the foresaid unites with a little straight line under them, viz. from α β, &c. unto ι. Now if we count the nume∣rall Characters according to the word λατεῖνοσ (lateinos) we shall precisely finde the number of the Beasts name 666. after this manner. λ α τ ε ι ν ο σ   30. 1. 300. 5. 10. 50. 70. 200. 666. This numerall name of the Beast is not of my invention, neither was it of late thought upon by our Interpreters: But Irenaeus a most ancient writer 1400. yeeres ago by a divine insight found out and discovered the same unto us as being very agreeable unto this mystery: his words are these; The name  (Lateinos) containes the number six hundred sixty six; and it is very likely, because the truest kingdom hath this name. For they are Latines, that now reigne: but in this we will not glory. Now who possibly can be marked out unto us by this name, except the Latine or Romane high Priest? for he long ago hath possessed the kingdome of the Latines, and Rome the seat of the Latine kingdome. The Popes Latine Church. His Church the Graecians call the Latine Church, and indeed it is altogether Latine: for their Letanies, Masses, Prayers, Exorcismes, Indulgences, to be short their whole service is in Latine, inso∣much as with them it is unlawfull to performe the same in any other language but the Latine. Wherefore undoubtedly this is that numerall name of the Beast, which
here the holy Ghost bids us number after the computation of the Greekes. But if the Spirit would have us to count the same not in Greeke, but rather in Hebrew Characters, we are again by the like name led as by the hand unto the Pope of Rome: for as John Fox (a most diligent searcher into this mysterie) hath found out, the Latine name Romanus expressed in the Hebrew letters שונעמר doth repre∣sent the number of the Beast 666. after this manner, ש ו נ ע מ ר 300. 6. 50. 70. 40. 200. In this nothing is forced or obscure: for who, these many ages hath been this Romanus, that is, Lord and head of Rome, but the LATINE MONARCH possessing the kingdom and the royall Metropolis of the LATINES, viz. the Pope of Rome? of which thing if any be ignorant or doubt, let them read the history of Carolus Sigonius (who either by entreaty or for lucre sake was hired to set forth the affaires of the Romish Popes) touching the kingdome of Italy, Carol. Sigo de regno Ital. after the Lum∣bards and Graecians were expelled out of Italy, in his third and fourth booke unto the end. Certainly, it is not without the singular counsell of God, and intention of the spirit, that both the Hebrew and Greek reckoning should aime at one and the same thing, and point out by the finger as it were him onely, who is (LATI∣NUS and ROMANUS) the Latine and Romane Monarch. Him therefore we cannot but confidently judge to be the Antichrist, for as much as in him all the markes of Antichrist do evidently concurre and agree together. Neither are we the first who have held this opinion: but many in the ages be∣fore us, and indeed in the midst of grosse darknesse have observed and constantly affirmed the Papacy to be Antichrists kingdom, and the Pope Antichrist. Gregory surnamed the Great: The Pope long agoe called An∣tichrist. Lib. Regist. Epist. 8. Lib. 6. Epist. 30. perceiving that Antichrist was at hand, brake forth into these words a thousand yeeres agoe. The king of pride is neare, and that which is not lawfull to be uttered, an army of PRIESTS is prepared for him, because the CLERGIE who should goe before others in humility, fight or strive for mastery. Gregory therefore foresaw that Antichrist should be a King of Priests, that is, some Bishop or Pope, who should call himself or desire to be called UNIVERSALL: prophetically as it were pointing at Boniface the third, Successor of Sabianus, who manifested himself to be the Antichrist by arrogating the wicked, foolish, idle, perverse, proud, vaine-glorious (for by these Epithites it is there set forth) title of Ʋniversall Bishop. Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans spake these words 600. yeeres agoe in the Rhe∣mish Council: What thinke ye him to be, who sits in his lofty throne, glittering in purple, and embroydered garments? Verily if he be destitute of Charity, and onely puffed and lifted up by knowledge, he is the ANTICHRIST. Bernardus Clarevallensis an Abbot above 464. yeers agoe, wrote such invectives against the luxuriousnesse of the Pope, Bishops and Clergie of his time, that if any man now did the like he should be accounted as an Arch-heretick. Anno 1240. a Councill of the Princes and Bishops of Germany was held at Ratisbon: where Eberhardus Archbishop of Salisburg spake these words: We feele (saith he) except we be blinde, under the title of the highest Priest a most cruell wolf cleathed in the skin of a Pastor. The Romane Popes warre against all Christians, and be∣ing become great by their bold attempts, deceits and sowing wars, they kill the sheep, &c. HILDEBRAND 170. yeeres agoe and more, first laid the foundation of ANTICHRISTS Empire: he first began this wicked warre, which is continued to this day by his Successours. And a little after, Babylons highest Priests desire to reigne alone: cannot endure to have an equall: beleeve me who am taught by experience they will not cease, untill having brought under the Emperour, and loosed the honour of the Romane Empire, oppressed true Pastours, they by this way extinguish all things, tread all things under their feet, and sit in the temple of God, and are lift up above all that is worshipped: He that is servant of servants, desires as if he were God, to be Lord of Lords. This wretched man daily medi∣tates how to set up an Empire proper to himselfe, he alters the lawes, establisheth his owne
sinfull devices, robs, spoiles, and defraudeth every one: him they usually call the ANTI∣CHRIST, in whose forehead is written: I am god, I cannot erre: he I say, sits in the tem∣ple of God ruling far and near, &c. These things he: See Aventinus lib. 7. annal. fol. 685. About those times lived the Abbat Joachin Calaber, who affirmed that the Pope was Antichrist, and illustrates the Revelation with propheticall pictures, and short expositions in the Italian tongue. My Anonymus in his Booke written 260 yeers agoe, doth many times in ex∣presse words call the Pope of Rome Antichrist. Page 78. The first Angel, saith he, whosoever he were, did first of all declare the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist. And a little after: It came to passe by great boldnesse, that euery one durst declare the Pope, who is called Apostolicall, to be apostaticall and Antichrist. Page 108. No man except he become a spirituall temple of the holy Ghost in e∣vangelicall conversation and doctrine, hath received grace to interpret the mysteries of Christ and Antichrist his adversary: or to understand that that great Praelate the Pope of Rome should be the great Antichrist. And page 115. In Pope Ʋrban VI. all the mysteries of Antichrist are fulfilled. And page 117. Antichrist is a Libard spotted with divers heresies, also because he saith he is Christs Vicar on earth, although he oppose Christs Law more then any: and so is an adulterate mongrill, as being Apostolicall in name, but apostaticall in deed: Like as a Libard and a Lion comming together engender an adulterate Leopard. Page 119. he saith, that the worshippers of the Beast worship the Divell in the Pope. And againe: That the Pope hath it from the Dragon, that he is a sacrilegious and tyran∣nicall person, wasting on himselfe and his creatures the goods of the poore, and destroying men for his filthy dung sake. And whereas he is the greatest hypocrite, and calleth himself Apostolicall, yet he despiseth Apostolicall conversation above all men living. Ibidem. Who was able to fight with the Beast, or resist his will, in regard of his two∣fold supreme power, viz. Imperiall and Priestly, which be pretendeth to have ever the Church Militant. And page 120. It appeareth therefore, when the Pope sitting in the Temple of God, extols himselfe above all that is called God, or is worshipped, that he boasteth as if he were God: and so consequently bewrayes himselfe to be that son of perdition, who commonly is called Antichrist. With many like places. Franciscus Petrarcha a most eloquent Philologer of Italy in his time, wrote such things Anno 1370. against the Pontificall sea, as almost Luther never spake worse. In his 15. Epistle lamenting the oppression of the Catholick Church: That worthy Court, saith he, of Jesus Christ, that excellent Tower of divine worship, is now at length because of our sins, being destitute of divine helpe, become a den of cruell theeves. And of the Popes tyranny; I see indeed, saith he, afar off, but not being able to hinder it, I refuse to see nigh at hand: It is a cruell and infamous guile, by which this ecclesiasticall Dionysius vexeth and spoileth our Syracusaes. And Epist. 16. I speak not what I have heard, but seen: I know it by experience, that there is no charity there, no faith, no piety, no reverence, or feare of God, nothing that is holy, just, equall, laudable, or humane: as for love, shamefasinesse and purity it is bani∣shed thence. Touching the truth indeed I am silent: for what place is it where all things are so full of lies: The aire, earth, houses, townes, sireets, court-yards, porches, halls, beds, roofes of houses, clefts of walls, the secret and close roomes of houses and temples, the seats of Judges and Popes, yea in the last place the very mouthes of men, their becks, gestures, voices and countenance. And Epist. 19. Behold now thou touchest with thy hands, and seest with thine eyes, what that last Babylon is: viz. angry, raging, dishonest and terrible: To which neither that Egyptian Babylon the worke of Cambyses, nor the more ancient & royall Assyrian Babylon built by Semiramis, is equall, &c. Behold thou seest a people not onely adversary to Christ, but that which is worse, under Christs Ensigne, rebelling against him, and fight∣ing
for Satan, &c. For what else I pray you is daily practised by Christs ene∣mies, and the pharisees of our age? doe they not buy and sell, and make mer∣chandise of Christ himselfe? whose name notwithstanding they seem day and night to extoll with most high prayses: whom they cloath with purple and gold, whom they load with pretious stones, salute and worship: him I say they put to sale and make merchandise of here on earth, and as if his eyes were covered and saw not, they crown with the bryars of wicked treasures, defile him with the spittle of a most impure mouth, and inveigh against him with viperous hissings, strike him with the dart of venemous actions, & what in them lies, The Pa∣pists cru∣cifie Christ doe again and again deridingly drag him, as naked, poore, and scourged on mount Calvary, and wickedly consent to naile him to the crosse. And O shame! O griefe! O indignity! even such the Romanists are at this day, as it is reported. Whereupon one merrily made these pithy verses: Roma tibi fuerant servi domini dominorum: Servorum servi nunc tibi sunt domini. Once Lords of Lord; O Rome thy servants were, But servants now of servants thy Lords are. Petrarcha goes on Epist. 20. touching the Pontificall Babylon: In the kingdom of covetousnesse nothing is counted as lost, so that mony be safe: there the hope of life to come is but a vaine fable, and what is spoken of hell is all fabulous: The resurrection also of the flesh, the end of the world, & Christs comming to judgement are esteemed as fopperies, &c. O Babylon the worst of things, situated on the fierce bancks of the river Rhone, thou famous or ra∣ther infamous whore cōmitting fornication with the kings of the earth, in very deed thou art the same whom the holy Evangelist saw in the spirit: Thou art (I say) the same and no other, sitting upon many waters, &c. The woman clothed with purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold, pearles, and preci∣ous stones, having a golden cup in thy hand full of the abomination and filthi∣nesse of thy fornication. Babylon knowest thou thy selfe? Certainly that which followeth onely agrees to thee, and not to any other: BABYLON THE MO∣THER OF FORNICATIONS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Hear the rest: And I saw a woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus. Why art thou silent? Either shew some other that is drunken with this blood: or else if thou canst, deny that thou art not this drunken woman. And Epist. 21. against the Popes, the Princes of darknesse: Let the gods and goddesses: nay rather the God of gods destroy them all both living and dead with their treasures and wicked works, who being fatted with the blood of the heavenly Lamb, doe spurne and rebell, &c. But why, or to what end? that we may see the good overwhelmed, the wicked raysed up, Eagles to creep, and Asses to flie: to see Foxes on chariots, Kites on towers, Doves on the dunghill, Wolves at liberty, Lambs in fetters; to be short, Christ banished, ANTICHRIST to be Lord, and Beelzebub judge, &c. These things wrote Petrarcha, and more also. Besides more then 230. yeeres agoe, lived Michael Cesenas chiefe of the Minorite Friers: The Pope Antichrist. who openly accused the Pope to be ANICHRIST: and called the Romish Sea, the Babylonish harlot drunken with the blood of the Saints.
But for brevity sake I refer the Christian reader unto the Catalogue of witnesses of the truth: where it is most clearly proved, by innumerable witnesses of Christ, Catal. testi∣um verit. Tom. 2. p. 79. before Luther was borne, that the Pope of Rome was Antichrist. Now let us consider the wisdome that is in the number of the Beast: of which John cryes out: Here is wisdome. From the number laid down 666. he closely bids us to search our al the other mysteries: for here we have the name of the Beast Latinos, Romanus. This name both the Greek and Hebrew number doth declare. By the name also we have the Character: for all that will buy and sell must professe the La∣tine service, or Romane faith, and be sworn vassals of the Romish Church. By the said name and Character is manifested the Image of the Beast that all were to a∣dore, viz. that mad worship of stocks and stones, by which every one is constrained at the sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harpe, Sackbut, Psaltery, Organ, Dulcimer, and al kinds of Musick to adore the image or idol that is nearest to him. Lastly, by the name, Character and image of the Beast appeareth what was both the land and Sea-Beast exercising the same power, and eccasioning all the evils which hitherto have been spoken of. But what is the reason, Why the holy Ghost doth not expresse the Pope of Rome. See the notes on vers. 1. that the spirit doth not more clearely expresse this name? Why doth he not openly say, the name of the Beast shall be the Latine or Romane chiefe Priest? It might also be demaunded, why he doth not plainely say that the Beast is Antichrist? Touching this we are to know that typicall oracles of future things, are not wont to be plainly set down till they be fulfilled. Now it pleased the spirit thus to manifest these mysteries even by darke expressions, that the faithfull hereby might be stirred up to diligent searching after them, and lest that hence disturbances should be occasioned before the time, and the Church endangered. The Apostle, 2 Thes. 2. might have said more openly, that the son of perdition should sit in the Church of Rome: and that  that did let, was the power of the Romane Empire, the which in the appointed time should be weak∣ned and assaulted with the citie it selfe by the Romish Pope: But it was usefull to the Church to speak more closely of the mystery of iniquity as then secret. And if John had openly written that the Pope of Rome should be Antichrist, &c. Certainly either the Popes themselves would have laboured long ago to take away this Re∣velation out of the sight and memory of men, that they might not be bewrayed. Or else the mystery of iniquity which was a growing, should never have broken forth, because the Romane Emperours would soon have cast down the Popes out of their seat, lest they should be forced to kisse their feet, and try by experience their great tyranny: Now thus the counsell of God (a thing impossible to be done) should have been hindred, and this prophesie never fulfilled. But Bellarmin disputes much against these things, Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 10. Bellarmins subtilties answered. I. He saith that Irenaeus onely applieth the name Lateinos probably to Anti∣christ: but that to him the name  seems more probable, which signifies the Sunne. I answer; That which to Irenaeus seemed onely probable is unto us most cer∣taine, both by history and experience. The things we see, Irenaeus indeed was ig∣norant of, and saw them not: but undoubtedly had he lived to see the state of the Romish Church as now it is, he would have judged as we now doe. Yea it is not without admiration, that Irenaeus did even then suspect and feare that Antichrist should sit at Rome: Perhaps the arrogancy of Victor might occasion the same, Euseb. lib. 5 hist. c. 24. who was not ashamed to excommunicate all the Churches of Asia for a difference a∣bout Easter: certainely he mightily blamed him for it. It is true indeed he did not affirme the thing as certaine touching the name of Antichrist, because he ei∣ther could not, as wanting sufficient arguments, which now we have, or else he durst not, because of the scandall and danger that thence might befall the Christi∣ans by the Romanes: notwithstanding his words there added are not without a propheticall mystery, though perhaps few have observed them: BUT IN THIS WE WILL NOT GLORY: What is this but to shew that that name of the Beast,
should be the greatest infamie of the Church of Rome: as if he should say: in this we have no great cause of boasting, but rather of shame. I beseech the pru∣dent reader well to weigh this feare of Irenaeus. II. He saith, that the Latines possesse not now that most potent kingdome, which they held in the times of Irenaeus. I answer: It sufficeth that the Pope hath a long time held under him the king∣dome and seat of the Romanes in Italie: the rest of the Christian world also being subject to his power and beck. III. He saith that Latinus is not written with ei; but simply with an i. I answer: This cavill is too childish, for who is ignorant that the Ancients were wont to write their j longum by ei, as queîs for quis, so queîbus, preîmus, capteîvi, usuall to Plautus: And thus the Englishmen to this day pronounce the i as if it were ei. IV. He saith, that the word Latinus is not the proper name of any Pope: And that onely one was called Romanus, who lived no more then foure moneths: and therefore could not be the Antichrist. I answer: It is a frivolous evasion: for it appeareth that the spirit speakes not of a personall but nationall name and profession: for he will have the numerall name to be the marke, whereby it might be known where Antichrist should reign: as it shall further appeare on Chap. 17.18. to wit in Italie at Rome. Now perso∣nall names are common to many: Therefore the holy Ghost intends here no such name. V. He saith, that innumerable other names besides Lateines make up the same number, and therefore hence nothing can be concluded. And he alleadgeth out Hippolitus the word  to deny: out of Arethai  illustrious:  the Sun:  a conquerour:  an evill guide:  truely hurting:  invying of old:  a wicked lamb: Out of Primasius  contrary: Out of Rupertus  and the two La∣tine words, DIC LUX: Out of Lindanus, Martin Lauter: Out of the Crono∣logie of Genebrard  (Lulther:) so himself addes two  all which words, faith he, make the same number. I answer most of the old words he alledgeth are wrested, for  which makes onely 664. and therefore must be written barbarously  to make 666. for  which is 672. abruptly  to make 666. Neither have the other words the like evidence with these two  and Romanus. The new are allfoolishly feined. The Germanes write Luthers name Martin Luther: not Martin Lauther or Lauter. But put the case they did, who ever hath heard, that the Germane letters are all numerall, or used in stead of ciphers, according to the manner of the He∣brew and Greek? Certainly he that feineth that this agrees to the proprietie and truth of the Germane tongue, is altogether foolish. But Genebrard (saith he) hath noted that Luthers name in Hebrew makes 666. by writing it  Lulther, O subtil heads. What Devil I wot taught that Monk this mysticall ciphering? If we write the true name of Luther, whether in He∣brew or Greek, it will not make the number 666. If in Greek  its 908. If  717. If  847. If in Hebrew  637. If  703. To be short, as often as you change the letters, you shall finde an excesse and falsity. As touching the name of David Chytraeus, if we write it in Greek so as it ought to be  it makes the number 1698. which is more then twice the number of the Beast. If in Hebrew  it will be 709. and what way so ever you alter the letters, you may see the excesse and foppery. Bellarmin
besides the other wresting of the name, doth also cut of the last letter ο that so he might extort 666. which shewes his unfaithfulnesse, neither is there any great cunning in it: Alcasar not much unlike him, labours ridiculously to forge the num∣ber 666. out of the words . is written faulty for : neither can the last vowel saving one being short in  be written with  as in  for as much as ni in Saxonius if pronounced long is barbarous. The name Bellarminus Jesuita doth more elegantly by farre yield us the number of the Beast, thus written in Hebrew: א ט י א ו ס ע י   ס ו נ י מ ר א ל ל ע ב   1. 9. 10. 1. 6. 60. 70. 10.   60. 6. 50. 10. 40. 200. 1. 30. 30. 70. 2. 666. For so the Germane Iews write רעד der: and so in holy writ is rendred by e: as in ןועדג Gideon לאונמע Emmanuel רצע יבא Abi ezer, &c. Notwithstand∣ing I confesse Bellarminus is not the Beast as yet: though perhaps he cleave to his horne. Some also observe the number of the Beast in the name Ι τ α λ ι κ ά   Ε κ κ λ η σ ί α   10. 300. 1. 30. 10. 20. 1.   5. 20. 20. 30. 8. 200. 10. 1. 666. Or thus one letter being taken out. Ἐ κ λ η σ ι α   λ α τ ὶ ν α   5. 20. 30. 8. 200. 10. 1.   30. 1. 300. 10. 50. 1. 666. To which I adde a name most convenient to the Beast. π α ρ ά δ ο σ ι σ   80. 1. 100. 1. 4. 70. 200. 10. 200. 666. For what is the Papacy save a kingdome (παραδόσεων) of traditions? Thus with more likelihood the jest might be retorted upon Bellarmin, then as Alcasar foolishly feineth it in the words, ἡ ά λ α ξ ο ν ί α   β ί ο υ   8. 1. 30. 1. 7. 70. 50. 10. 1.   2. 10. 70. 400. 665. in which one is wanting: and the article  is cut off, which alone maketh 770. But here we may not passe by the Embleme of Pope Paulus V. so as it is in ma∣ny Books dedicated unto him printed at Rome and Bononia: which expresly con∣teine the number of the Beast. P A V L O   V.   V I C E   D E O       5. 50.     5.   5. 1. 100     500.     666. Besides what may be the meaning also of his Ensigne, a Dragon flying under an Eagle, I leave to them that can understand it: about which if you please read Al∣casar vestigat. pag. 372. for it belongs not to me to declare such great mysteries. Now to returne to the matter. Although Bellarmin should feine six hundred such like numerall names, yet it will no way weaken the force of our argument. For we doe not goe about to prove who is Antichrist, by the numerall name one∣ly: but by the name joyned with other markes of the Beast. For example: al∣though it would be no sound reasoning thus to reason: he that is borne at Bethle∣hem is the Messias: But the Son of Mary is borne at Bethlehem. Ergo he is the Messias. Yet thus it doth most firmly follow. He that is borne at Bethlehem, and
hath all other propheticall notes of the Messias, he is the Messias: But the Son of Marie hath them all: Therefore he is the Messias. So touching Antichrist it will not altogether firmely follow by the numerall name alone: but yet it follows most firmely from the numeral name joyned with the rest of the notes of the Beast, all concurring in the Pope of Rome, as hitherto hath been shewed. The Latine, Papa Lati∣nus vel Ro∣manus, ha∣bet nomen numerale bestiae. or Romane Pope hath the numerall name of the Beast, he hath also the other Apostolicall markes of the Beast or Antichrist. Therefore he is the Antichrist. V. He saith, that Irenaeus professeth himselfe ignorant of Antichrists name, and that this the truest opinion. I answer: he falsyfies Irenaeus words. For he saith not that Antichrists name cannot be known: But because there are many names of this number, therefore he saith, it is more certaine and without danger to stay till the prophesie be fulfilled, then to suspect and gesse at severall names. Now this makes for us against Bellarmin: for Irenaeus giues us to understand, that the prophesie being fulfilled, we may more cer∣tainely and safely judge of the name. But long agoe the fulfilling of this prophe∣sie began to be accomplished in the Pope of Rome, as the comparing of histories and times with this prophesie doth evidently manifest: The which if Irenaeus had seen, he would undoubtedly have concluded with us that  Lateinos was not onely probably, but of a certainty the name of the Beast. Bellarmin therefore doth here deceitfully require ignorance, feining that both he and the generality of men are ignorant of Antichrists name: & hence concludeth that he is not yet come: thereby to turne away the eyes of the simple from the Romish Antichrist: As if forsooth, that which he will not know, or the rude multitude is ignorant of: cannot therefore, neither be, nor be known of others. If so, then Irenaeus indeed had added in vaine: viz. that John sheweth this number of the name, that we might avoide him when he commeth, knowing who he is. Therefore by the number of the name it may be known who he is, and so consequently the name it self also. VI. At last (to draw a vaile over his pretended ignorance) he saith, that after Antichrist is come, his name shall be most manifestly known, like as the name of Christ (Iesus) after Christ was come, began to be openly knowne unto all, where as before it was unknown unto the Iewes, although the Prophets had foretold many things of him: as also a certain Sybill in verses had declared the number of his name to be 888. Hence he infers, seeing the greatest controversie that is, See Abbot demonst. ca. 2. p. 34. sect 17. is touching Antichrists name: therefore Antichrist is not as yet come: and so consequently the Pope is not Antichrist. This he calleth an insoluble argument, but there is no waight at all in it: for the things he feineth are all false. I. It is false that Antichrist being come his name shall then be clearely known by all: for his comming shall be with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnesse, 2 Thes. 2. Therefore he shall not come openly, but by a feined and fraudulent name he shall deceive the world, so that it shall be a very hard thing to know him: for he will transforme himselfe into an Angel of light, Contr Auxent. lib. 2. Contra ad∣vers leg. cap. 12. and come under a feined shew, viz. under the name of Christ, as Hilarie and Austin affirmed long agoe. Therefore his name shall not be openly known unto all men: but as the Devill came to sow tares in the Lords field not openly, but when men were asleep: so Antichrist shall creep in while the world is not aware there of. II. It is false, that the Prophets foretold any thing of the name : And to thinke that God should foretell that by the idolatrous Sybills, the which he spake not of by his own Prophets, let him beleeve that listeth. III. It is also false, that after Christ was come, his name was most certainely known to all: for Iohn expresly speaketh of the Iewes living in the time of his comming: Ioh. 1, 10. that the world knew him not: And that he came unto his owne, and his own received him not. However therefore they were not ignorant of the name Iesus, yet they knew that it was common to many other men: but they did not know nor beleeve, that it was the name of Christ the Messias: therefore the name Iesus
who should be the Christ, was not known unto the Iewes. To this day also the name Iesus, who is the Christ, is no way known unto the Iewes, Turkes and Pagans: for however they know indeed the name Iesus, yet they neither know nor beleeve, that it is the name of Christ the Messias: By the like reason we may conclude, that although Antichrist is come, yet to the Papists and many others Antichrists name is not certainely known: for the Papists take not their Pope to be Antichrist, for although they well know the number of the name  and Romanus: yet they neither know, nor beleeve, that it is the name of Antichrist. But as the ignorance and obstinate deniall of the Iewes could not hinder the name of Iesus to be the true name of Christ: so the igno∣rance and obstinate deniall of the Papists lets not, but that the name Lateinos and Romanus, is truely the name of Antichrist. IV. That is also false which he affirmeth touching the great controversie about Antichrists name. For howsoever the Papists raise a controversie about it: yet to us (who know Antichrist as being revealed by the Spirit of Christs mouth to sit in the Latine Church) his name is no way controvertible; for there is none of us, but easily assents to the opinion of Jrenaeus, that his name is  or Ro∣MANUS, which are names of the same number, demonstrating the Pope of Rome. V. The conclusion of Bellarmine is false, that if Antichrist were come, there should be no question about his name. For this is sufficiently apparent to all who doe not purposely shut their eyes against the light of the Sun: And hence the insoluble ar∣gument of the Papists is turned upon themselves, for as much as the number of the name of Antichrist is generally known, so as all do point as with the finger, at the Latine Pope: It being certaine that Antichrist is now come, and that he is the chiefe Priest at Rome. VI. And lastly, that is false which he gathereth out of Marlorate touching the obscurity of this place: viz. that this oracle being most obscure and aenigmaticall, is not as yet fulfilled, for all prophesies, saith he, when they are fulfilled are most cleare. But O Bellarmine, are not the prophesies touching Christs comming in the flesh fulfilled? and are they now most cleare unto the Iewes? nay they remaine most obscure and aenigmaticall unto them even after their full accomplishment, because their mindes were blinded, and the vaile of Moses remaines upon their heart even unto this day: not to speak of us Christians: unto whom many visions of this Revelation, undoubtedly fulfilled, doe neverthelesse remaine obscure in regard of our negli∣gence: like as many oracles touching the abolition of the ceremoniall and judicial Law of Moses, about the difference of meats and peoples which were taken away and fulfilled in Christ, remained obscure and controvertible even to the Apo∣stles themselves, as the Acts & Epistles of the Apostles witnes. Prophesies therfore become most cleare by the fulfilling of them, to wit, not to them who maliciously shut their eyes, or open them not to receive the light: but to them alone who di∣ligently attend unto the accomplishment of them. This is the cause that this pro∣phesie touching Antichrist, after the fulfilling thereof in some measure (for yet it is not fully accomplished) remains most obscure unto the Papists: who seeing wil not see, although an egge is not more like to an egge, then the Pope of Rome un∣to the Beast.
CHAPTER XIV. The Argument, Uses, Parts, Analysis. AFter the Beast, or Antichrist the seducer of the world, ap∣peareth the LAMB standing on mount Sion with 144000 sealed ones, singing to God with melody a new song before his throne: three Angels in order goe forth to reveale An∣tichrist. Of which the first bad the everlasting Gospell, by which men received light to call upon God in the name of Iesus Christ, and not in the name of Saints: The second threatneth the fall of Babylon: that is, he shewes that Antichrist sits in Babylon, or the Church of Rome. The third exhorteth all men to take heed that they wor∣ship not the Beast, neither his image, upon paine of eternall damnation. And lastly, the harvest and vintage of the earth is gathered in by the Angel sit∣ting on the cloud. In which types is shadowed out, first Christs presence with his Church op∣pressed by Antichrist. Secondly, the purging of doctrine (corrupted by An∣tichrist) by the preachers of the Gospel, with their combats against Anti∣christ, raised up in our times by the singular mercy of God: And thirdly, the last judgement is signified, in which Antichrist with all other enemies being cast into the lake of Gods wrath, shall be eternally punished for their perfidi∣ousnesse and tyranny. This whole Chapter therefore is diverse wayes consolatory. First, how∣soever the whole earth for these thousand years hath followed the Beast, yet Christ still will have a Church and people: because even in the midst of the Beasts reigne, the Lamb reserveth unto himselfe 144000. sealed ones, who shall truely invocate the name of God: like as of old in the corruptest time of Israel, he reserved 7000. worshippers, who bowed not their knees to Baal. Secondly, howsoever Antichrist hath a long time suppressed the Church and doctrine of the Gospell: yet Christ will at length purge the same by his Angels or ministers: the which he hath truely done in our age. Thirdly, howsoever these thousand yeeres and more Antichrist hath op∣pressed by horrible punishments, and condemned such as haereticks, who would not adore his image: yet they were most blessed Martyrs, and enjoyed rest, and the reward of their labours in heaven. Lastly, howsoever Antichrist no way lessens his furie, but goes on to perse∣cute still in an hostile manner the Gospell and ministers thereof: yet we ought not to be terrified by him, but on the contrary, manfully oppose him by the preaching of the Gospell: because in the last harvest and vintage, he shall be abolished by the glorious comming of Christ, and eternally punished in the lake of Gods wrath. The parts of the Chapter are three. I. TOuching the Lamb standing on Mount Sion, in the five first verses. II. Of three Angels, preaching against Babylon and the worshippers of the Beast,
unto, v. 14. III. Concerning the harvest and vintage of the earth, unto the end. The first part concernes the Lamb standing on Mount Sion with 144000. sea∣led ones, verse 1. II. A mutuall song of the dwellers in heaven is heard: vers. 2.3. III. Seven worthie titles of the sealed ones are declared. 1. their teach∣ablenesse, that they alone could learne this heavenly song, vers. 3. 2. Chastity, they are virgines, and are not defiled with women. 3. Society with the Lambe, whose inseparable companions they are, ibid. 4. Liberty, they are redeemed from among men, ibid. 5. Their prerogatives: they are the first fruits, and holy to God and the Lamb, ibid. 6. Integrity, they are without guile, vers. 5. 7. Innocency, they are without fault before the throne, ibid. In the second part the three preaching Angels are described. the first Angell is described. 1. by his gesture and place, he flieth  in the midst of heaven, vers. 6. 2. His habit, he holds the everlasting Gospell, ibid. 3. His office, he preacheth the Gospel to all the inhabitants of the earth, ibid. 4. The thing it selfe that was published, viz. A threefold exhortation. 1. that they feare God. 2. that they give glory to him. 3. adore the Creator of heaven and earth: inserting a perswasive reason, from an inforting cause: for the houre of judgement was at hand, verl. 7. The second Angel publisheth the ruine of Babylon, vers. 8. with a reason taken from the meriting cause: because she had mingled the wine of her fornication unto the Gentiles, ibid. The preaching of the third Angell is comminatory: and here is shewed: 1. Whom he threatneth; viz. the worshippers of the Beast and his image, &c. v. 9. 2. What he threatneth: two things: 1. they shall drinke of the wine of Gods wrath, vers. 10.2. be tormented with fire and brimstone, ibid. This he ampli∣fies, 1. from the eternity of the punishment, v. 11. 2. that it is continuall, with∣out any intermission, ibid. 3. By an hortatory conclusion he stirs up the Saints to constancy, v. 12. Here is patience: And he comforts them from the rest and felicity of the Saints, opposed unto the eternall torments of the wicked, ver. 13. In the third part is represented, 1. Christ the Iudge on a white cloud, with a reaping sickle, ver. 14. 2. He is required to gather in the Harvest, by a reason from the conveniency: because the Harvest was ripes vers. 15. 3. The execution, which is the reaping of the earth, v. 16. 4. The said Iudge with a sharpe sickle to cut the vine, ver. 17. He is bid to vintage the earth, by reason (as before) of the ripenesse, ver. 18.6. The gathering the vintage of the earth, and treading downe the winepresse of Gods wrath with the effects, viz. exceeding much blood flow∣eth thence, vers. 19.20. The first Part of the Chapter. Touching the Lambe standing on Mount Sion vvith 144000: sealed ones, as also a sist apparition of unknovvn Harpers: CHAP. XIV. 1. ANd I looked, and loe, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred fourty and foure thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads. 2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, har∣ping with their harps. 3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the foure Beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learne the song, but the hundred and fourty & foure thousand which were redeemed from the earth.
4 These are they to hich were not defiled with women: for they are virgins These are they which follow the Lamb whethersoever he goeth: These were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. 5 And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault be∣fore the throne of God. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I looked, and loe, a Lamb] The former part of the third Act was touching Antichrists rage against the Church: here followes the latter of the Churches preservation and reformation of do∣ctrine under the same: viz. The preservation is typed out in the first part of the Chapter. The reformation in the second. The Author of this preservation is the Lambe, The Lamb is Christ. that is, Christ, as appeareth both by what we have already heard, and by the things following, See Chap. 5.6. and 6.1.16. & 7.9.17. & 19.17. &c. Christ is said to be a Lamb by a sacramentall Metonymia, because he was praefigured by the Paschall Lambe and sacrifices of Beasts: And by a Metaphor, because of his innocencie: hence the Baptist: Behold (saith he) the Lamb of God, who takes away the sinnes of the world.  (a Lamb) without an article, for, , for the Greekes of∣ten omit articles speaking of a known thing. Stood on Mount Sion] that is, Why he standeth on a mount. in the Church, which standeth firmly as Mount Sion against all the devices of the Dragon and the Beast. Wherefore sits he not, but standeth? Same say, because he was slaine and rose againe: Others, because he is the judge and avenger of the Church. But he comes forth afterward as the Iudge sitting on the cloud, vers. 14. Here therefore he stands as a watchman on the tower watching for the Churches safety, as Isay 21.8. And he cryed, A Lyon: My Lord I stand continually upon the watch tower in the day time; Hab. 2.1. And I am set in my ward whole rights, &c. I will stand upon my watch. Neither standeth he alone, but with 144000 sealed in their for theads. Now let us consider wherefore the Lambe ap∣peareth here standing on the Mount, with so many sealed ones: And to what times this prophesie belongs: and who these sealed are. Touching the scope I finde interpreters to agree. viz. that the Lamb is op∣posed to the Beast, Christ the preserver, to Antichrist the destroyer. And now Ribera acknowledgeth that this serves for the comfort of the righteous, The scope of the Lambs appearing on the mount. to cause us assuredly to beleeve that during the rage of the Divell and Antichrist against the Saints (before spoken of in Chapter 13.) Christ is not asleep, nor neglects his Church, but stands on the watch for her safety, lest the wheat should be corrupted, although indeed the chasse or wicked by Gods permission follow and adore the Beast, and run into destruction. But when and how this should be, seemes unto him most difficult to be expounded: neither hath he any thing to say, but accor∣ding to the vulgar errour, he refers the following things unto the foure yeeres reigne of his Antichrist. Our interpreters also still keepe to the position: that howsoever Antichrist shal sway farre and neare, yet Christ alwaies will have his elect and sealed, which shall stand with him on the Mount, where their salvation shall remaine safe and unmoved: which indeed is most truely spoken: but this thing is generally trea∣ted of through the whole Revelation: And the question still remaineth touching the order of the vision, and the time when Christ chiefly stood with his sealed Ones. I say therefore, When the Lamb stood with his sealed ones. when the Beast ascended out of the Sea, & out of the earth then also the Lamb appeared on the mount with them that were sealed: When Antichrist (I say) had invaded the Church, brought the same under him and seduced the
world. Then the Lamb in appearance had lost his possession. Then the woman flying into the wildernesse vanished out of the sight of men, so as she appeared no where, as if there had been none. This hapned, when a little after Gregory, the Romane Pope sate on the Chaire of Ʋniversall pestilence, as before we have shew∣ed. Then the Church fled into the wildernesse, not by change of place (for it remai∣ned in the Romane Empire) but by losse of her ornaments and change of shape. Because even from that time it reteined indeed the name of the Church (for Anti∣christ was to sit in the temple of God) but in very deed it began to be changed in to a worldly kingdome of Antichrist. And that gashly forme of the Church re∣mained in the West, which we now see, but the Church gathered by the Apostles being thrust into the wildernesse, did no where appeare, all publick congre∣gations either at Rome or other places being polluted with idolatry, untill God taking compassion on the seed of the woman in the wildernesse, vouchsafed againe to measure the temple, and purge the Church in the age of our forefathers. Now the godly may thinke, and so much indeed the Sophisters doe object, Whether there were no Church under An∣tichrist. did the Church therefore then utterly cease to be? Was there no Church before Husse or Luther? Was Christ either negligent, or unable to defend his spouse? Is it not written. The gates of hell shall not prevaile against her? But behold the Lambe standing here on mount Sion with the Elect and sealed; so that Christ was no way wanting to his Church: he suffered indeed by a secret and just judgement, that Antichrist should take in his possession, and to the out∣ward view make spoile (as it were) of all things, notwithstanding in the midst of Antichristian corruption, he alwaies stood as a carefull watchman preserving to himselfe 144000. that were sealed, who worshipped not the Beast nor his Image, and these were his Church and Spouse, like as in the corruptest time of Israel, when no true worshippers, save onely Elias, seemed to remaine, God reserved to himselfe 7000. who had not bowed the knee to Baal. But thou wilt say, wherefore did he permit Antichrist thus to invade the Church? I answer, she justly deser∣ved such a triall, chastisement and dissolution. See Cyprian de lapsis. This standing of the Lan be therefore belongs to all the time (even a thousand yeares and more) which hath been since Antichrists rising, untill the reformation of the Church: begun by Wickleffe in England, John Husse in Bohemia, and in the ages after them, by Luther, Zwinglius, Melanchion, and their fellow bre∣thren in Germany, being all great opposers of Popery. But these sealed did then no where appeare, they had no publick meetings: for al Churches together worshipped the Beast. What then? because they appeared not to man, were they therefore hidden to God? The 7000. in Israel had no uncorrupted congregation: but were mingled (in outward appearance) with the idolatrous Balaamites. The same thing is to be thought of these here, sometimes they lay hid in the Popish Church, and sometimes openly made warre with the Beast by the sword of the Spirit. For those Saints against whom the Beast made warre and overcame, Chap. 13.7. who were they? not whole Churches (for such were all subject to the Beast) but such teachers, confessours and martyrs as oppo∣sed the idolatry of the Papists: of whom the histories of their time make menti∣on. Thus it appeareth to what times this prophesie appertaineth. Now it remaines to speake of the sealed who they were: Who these sealed are. The Papists doe much weary themselves about it. Lyras fancy I passe by, who tells us of 144000. Monkes professing virginity, Lyras opi∣nion. and slaine by the Agarens in the caves and dens of Syria and Antiochia towards the end of the Empire of Heraclius. But this fiction is absurd to the Papists themselves. Ribera alleadgeth Hieroms opnion, that they were the 144000. Riberas dis∣pute about the 144000 sealed out of the twelve tribes of Israel, which should be converted unto Christ in the last foure years reigne of Antichrist. Of which Chap. 7. But he proves nothing. For first, it is not likely that the Iewes then to be converted should all be Virgines: seeing
the Hebrews did never highly prize such a state of life. II. Hence it would fol∣low that no married person should be converted. III. The Virgines of the Gen∣tiles should be excluded. But as the opinion touching the Iewes to be converted is fals (as Chap. 7. we have shewed) so his reasons are frivolous, grounded on a false supposition of virgines, of which more by and by. He therefore alledgeth the opinion of Arethas as more probable, that the 144000. sealed, spoken of in ch. 7. are not here to be understood: and that because the article is omitted, for here it is not said , but , intimating that these were others, namely such of the Gentiles as should be converted. But nei∣ther doth this please him, because it is not likely that there should so few thou∣sands be converted out of so many nations, and in so many ages. And indeed he justly rejects it. For the reason taken from the omission of the article is of no waight, his argument also proves nothing: because a great and difinite number is put for an indefinite, as Beda hath rightly observed. At last he affirmeth, that they are 144000. virgines to be converted to Christ both of the Iewes and Gentiles under Antichrist. But he is deceived. I. Touch∣ing the time of Antichrist, which is now, and hath been these many yeares, and is not (as he supposeth) yet to come, namely in the last foure yeares of the world. II. Also in the Epithite of Virgines, the which (as afterward I will shew) is not corporally but spiritually to be understood. Alcasar makes these sealed, Alcasars o∣pinion. to be the faithful of the Primitive Church under the Romane Emperours. But he erreth: for these as conquerours stood with the Lamb even while Antichrist reigned. First, therefore we are to hold, that these 144000. sealed, are the same spoken of Chap. 7. because this part of the Chapter doth altogether answer to the se∣venth Chapter, in which as we said, is conteined an antithesis of the third Act of the second Ʋision. Secondly, that this multitude of sealed ones, are no other, then the remnant of the womans seed, with whom (after her flight into the wildernes) the Dragon, made war Cha. 12.17. as appeareth by the description there added, and repeated in the 12. verse of this Chapter. Thridly, that they are no other then those Saints, to whom it was given to make warre with the Beast, Chap. 13.7. Lastly, that they are the faithful, whether teachers or hearers of: the godly, I say, who from Antichrists rising until the reformation withstood the tyranny of Popes, and retained the purity of the Gospel, to wit, al the martyrs, and professours, touching whom, see the Bookes of Martyrs, and the Catalogue of the witnesses of the truth. They are said to be sealed in the name of his Father] To wit, of the Lambes: The Kings Bible reads it, in the name of the Lamb and of his Father: What is this, but to shew that they constantly professed the doctrine of the Father, and faith of the Lamb against Antichrist, by an allusion unto the Character of the Beast. For as the Beast imprints a Character in the right hand or forehead of his worshippers, Chap. 13.16. which is an obligation to Antichrist. So the Lamb imprints a Cha∣racter in the foreheads of his worshippers. The name of the father and of the Lamb, which is a profession of the true Christian religion, and open deniall and separa∣ting from Antichrists idolatry and abominations. And I heard a voice from heaven] We have heard who the multitude of the sealed are. Their titles should now be spoken of in the next place: but the joyfull shout of the inhabitants in heaven is put in between, because of the preservation of so many sealed ones from the idolatry and tyranny of Antichrist, and then their excel∣lent commendations are afterward rehearsed. The connexion and sence seemes to be obscure unto interpreters. But I doe expound this part of the third Vision, by that part of the second Vision, in Chap. 7. touching the 144000. that were sealed, seeing all things excellently accord.
There John saw the 144000. sealed in their foreheads: here, the same multitude standing with the Lamb. There he heareth an innumerable multitude clothed in white robes, singing to God and the Lamb before the throne. Here he heareth a voice as it were of many waters, a voyce, I say, of harpers finging a new song. There enquiring who they were arayed in white robes: it is answered: These are they which came out of great tribulation, &c. Here not enquiring, he heareth from the company of the heavenly inhabitants: These are they, who are not polluted with women, &c. The Scrip∣ture inter∣prets it selfe. All things being thus alike containe the same history. Thus we see that the whole Scripture, especially the Revelation interprets it selfe. But I will more clearely touch every particular. There are three parts of the comparison. First, there John saw 12000. servants of the living God sealed in their foreheads by an Angell, The compa∣ring of the sealed here with these in Chap. 7. out of every of the tribes of Israel: making together 144000. Here he seeth the same multitude of the sea∣led ones standing with the Lambe on Mount Sion: The name of the Lamb, and the name of his Father being written on their foreheads. Thus he expoundeth, what was that Seale of the living God. In both places the multitude of the sealed signifies the combate of faithfull Martyrs and Professours whom the Lamb had reserved with himselfe these thousand yeeres on Mount Sion, that is, in the Church groan∣ing under Antichrist, even from the time of the Womans flight into the wildernesse, until the new measuring of the Temple, that is, from the rising of Antichrist unto the reformation of the Church and doctrine, accomplished in the age of our pre∣decessours. The second member of the comparison here followeth. There John saw a great and innumerable multitude before the throne, clothed in white robes, in the sight of the Lamb, and of all the Angels, the foure and twenty Elders; and of the foure Beasts: and singing with a great voice salvation to God and the Lamb, &c. The which multitude we shewed to be the triumphant Church succeeding the Apostolicall times, who having finished their warfare, did now rest in heaven, continually praysing God and the Lamb: Here he heareth a voice from heaven as of many waters] This is the voice of that innumerable multitude out of all nations and kindreds and tongues mentioned Chap. 7.9. for many waters (as the Angell interprets it, Chap. 17.15.) are many peoples, multitudes, nations and tongues. This voice by and by he calleth a new song. In the beginning indeed he heard as it were a confused sound of a multitude: but by little and little he more narrowly observed what, and whose voice it was: Even as the singing of Musicians afarre off seemes to be confused: but by approaching nearer and nearer the gravity of their accord, and sweetnesse of their harmony is more distinctly perceived. Presently, therefore he also heard as it were the sound of a great thunder] which some apply to the terriblenesse thereof. But this little agrees with the follow∣ing Epithite, and is repugnant to the scope of the harmony. I therefore expound it of the vehemency of the voice: viz. that now these singers did not lightly strike or passe thorow the eares of John: but they thundred it out with all their might, which undoubtedly denotes the vehement joy of the Saints in heaven. At last he heard the voice of harpers] He saith not, as it were of harpers, as before, as it were of many waters, as it were of thunder, &c. intimating that now he did plainely heare and perceive the harmonious accord of harpers playing on their harpes, as being most delightfull, artificious and sweet, such as is the musick of most skilfull harpers. In Chap. 5.8. The foure Beasts and foure and twenty Elders were brought in as Harpers before the throne: but these Harpers here are diffe∣renced from the Beasts and Elders, for they are said to sing before them, vers. 3. This therefore is a distinct troop of blessed Martyrs and Professours of the Church triumphant, who as I said even now, were departed this life, The allego∣ry of the Law and the Gospel is not here set forth. & had finished their warfare before Antichrists rising. I am not ignorant that most interpreters allegorically apply this voice, first thundring, & afterward pleasant: the first to the preaching of the Law, which is ter∣rible
to the wicked: the second of the Gospell, which sweetly affects the consciences of the godly: but this application here seems to me to be strange and uncouth, for after the appearance of the dreadfull monsters, viz. the Dragon, Beasts, &c. Now comes, this company of harpers  to delight the heavenly theater, before that the preaching Angels went forth. Neither was that voice any thing else, but that new song, of wich it followeth. 3. And singing as it were a new song] Gr.  and sung by changing the participle into the verbe, for,  singing, or  who also sung. He expoundeth what the melodious accord of the harpers was, and where. As it were a new song] New harmonies usually more delight the hearers then such as are old, and often heard. Such was the Song of these Harpers, rare, new, and worthy to be heard. Or New, that is, excellently setting forth the new, rare and unspeakeable benefits of God and the Lamb: for so the Hebrewes (as generally may be seene in Davids Psalmes) call that a new song, which is rare and most sweet. The Argument of this new song, John here indeed doth not speak of: but he de∣clared it before in Chap. 5.9. Where the Beasts and Elders sung a new song to the Lambe saying: Thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof: for thou wast slaine and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, &c. And Chap. 7.9.10. Where the innumerable multi∣tude clothed in white robes cried with a great voice: Salvation be to God who sitteth on the throne, and unto the Lamb: And a little after: Amen, blessing and glory, and wisdome, and thankesgiving, and honour and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever, Amen, &c. Vndoubtedly this song was the same. As for the circumstance of the place, It was before the throne and before the foure Beasts and Elders] Hereby he intimates two things: first, that this voice was in heaven, and so we are to thinke that John heard the same from thence. And there∣fore it was a song of the Church triumphant in heaven, not of the militant in earth. Secondly, that this multitude of singers is distinct from the Beast and Elders: for they are said to sing before them. They were therefore a certaine troope of trium∣phant Saints who afterward came to the company of Beasts and Elders, for the Church triumphant is not yet full, but daily increaseth with new members, who finishing their warfare here on earth, are added unto them, untill in the end it be∣come truely universall and catholick. Touching the Beasts and Elders, see the notes on Chap. 5. vers. 4.6.7. and Chap. 7. vers. 9. And no man could learne that song] Now he turnes his speech to the multitude that were sealed, honouring them with excellent titles, which are seven in number, as we observed in the analysis: of which some were proper unto the state of their warfare in this life. But the most appertaine unto the state of Glory. For the drift of this place is to teach us, that Christ will not onely preserve his elect or sealed in their conflict against Antichrist: but also at length gather them unto the heavenly multitude of Harpers, that with like joy they may sing a new song to God and the Lamb. This chiefly serves to comfort the godly here groaning under the crosse. Now this is the third member of the comparison, for as Chap. 7.13. One of the Elders asking John, Who are these? did declare the like titles of them that were clothed in robes: These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, &c. So here John doth either himselfe, or heareth this multitude of sea∣led ones to be adorned with like honourable prayses (for perhaps these were the words of the harpers touching them that were sealed) These are they which are not defiled with women, &c. These epithites seeme to be diverse: but most are of the same nature, or are consequents, as we may see by the diligent comparing of them together. The first title in which they differ from others,  is their teachablenesse, that no man could learne the new song but they] Here first it appeareth, Teachable∣nesso. wherefore this com∣pany
of Harpers in heaven were here brought forth, to wit, as examples of the sea∣led yet remaining on earth: for our indeavour & studie ought to be the same with theirs in heaven. By which very thing the most sweet communion of the Saints, both in heaven and in earth is signified. Secondly, the docility and praerogative of them that were sealed, is commended: They, and they onely could learne this new song. But how can they doe it? not indeed by their own wisdome, but by the speciall illumination of the Spirit, which God onely vouchsafeth unto them, & therefore the reprobate cannot learne it. But doe not many of them know the doctrine of the Gospel? True, yet have they not a saving knowledge. They doe sometimes professe and boast of faith, &c. but they never can apply the benefits of the Lamb by faith unto themselves, and praise him with their whole heart. For no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, 1 Cor. 12.3. but by the holy Ghost. This teachablenesse therefore is a priviledge of the sealed. Thirdly, hence it appeareth, what this seale of the living God is, which the faithfull are said to have in their foreheads, Chap. 7.3. In vers. 1. it is called the name of the Lamb, and the name of his Father. Now he saith that it is a new song, the which onely the sealed can learne. It is, I say, that rendring of honour and prayse for the benefits of God and the Lambe, the which the Elders and multitude clothed in white, ascribed unto them in Chap. 5. & Chap. 7. viz. their sincere faith and confidence in God and the Lambe joyned with a continuall celebration and thanksgiving. By this signe the worshippers of the Lamb are separated from the followers of the Beast. Fourthly, it appeareth that this seale is attained and imprinted in the foreheads of the Saints in this life: It is attained, I say,  by learning, without which we cannot have it, and for to learne it, we must continually exer∣cise our selves in the reading, meditating, and hearkning unto the word of God, and calling upon his name. And hence the benefit and worth of the ministery is commended, as being the meanes by which we come to know this new song, even while we are here in this life: for in the world to come there shall be no use of instructing, but all shall be , taught of God. Moreover it hence appea∣reth that this multitude belongs to the Church militant, who by learning the new song of the harpers, shall also at length stand before the throne, and be joyned unto the Saints triumphant in heaven, as we shall see in vers. 5. These were redeemed from the earth] Gr.  bought.  This is the second com∣mendatory title of the sealed, Freedome. The liberty which the Lambe hath purchased for them. They are bought, I say, that is redeemed: But with what price? by the blood of the Lamb, as Ch. 5.9. Whence? out of the earth, that is, by a synecdoche from among the inhabitants of the earth, by which name John in this Revelation, doth al∣waies denote the reprobate worshippers of the Beast, as being children of the earth, given to earthly desires: nay he closely intimates that these also sometimes were of the number of them being servants of Satan and sin, but by speciall mercy are brought into the liberty of Gods children through the blood of the Lamb. 1 Pet. 1.18 Peter excellently interpreteth this place, Chap. 1.18. Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver & gold from your vaine conversation received by tradition from your fathers: but by the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. The same benefit of redemption the Elders celebrate, Chap. 5.9. Thou hast re∣deemed us to our God by thy blood. And indeed this benefit we enjoy in this life: for now, as many as through faith, are sealed in the blood of the Lamb, are redeemed; howbeit the fulnesse of our redemption is reserved to the life to come. But are not all redeemed by Christ, dyed he not for all? 2 Pet. 2. saith not the Apostle Peter that he bought the false prophets, by whom he is denyed? To this Augustine well answereth, that all are said to be redeemed, according to the digni of the price: which would suffice for the redemption of all men, if all by faith did receive
the benefit offered. But as many as passe the time of their being in this life in in∣fidelity, they remaine unredeemed through their own fault. The sealed therefore are onely redeemed, because they alone by faith receive the grace of redemption, through the grace of election, which God vouchsafed them (not to the others) from all eternity. 4. These are they who are not defiled with women] Their third commendation is Chastity: Chastitie. They have not defiled themselves with whoredome. The reason is added, for they are virgines, that is, undefiled, or else the causall may be adversative∣ly taken: They are not defiled, but are Virgines. Before I give the true meaning. I will in a few words vindicate the depravation of the place. The ancient hereticks called Hieracites urging the letter, The depra∣vation of this place by the hiera∣cites. forbad matrimony, as an uncleane thing, and hence established the merits of virginity: because, said they, they who are not defiled with women, that is, unmarried persons onely, shall follow the Lamb whether soever he goeth. Thus they expounded it litterally: The same thing Tertullian also affirmed, and after him Jerom who though he did not condemne marriage, yet he called it a pollution, lifting up the merits of virginity into heaven: for besides innumerable scoffes in detestation of matrimony, he also wrests this place against Jovinian, who taught that virginity was of no greater merit before God then matrimony, his words are these: Lest we should thinke, that they are said not to be defiled with women, who abstaine from fornication, therefore he addes, for they are virgines: By the undefiled therefore he understandeth such as have no wives, by vir∣gines such as have no husbands. Therefore it shall be the merit of virginity to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth: where the married cannot follow him. This Ribera also is not ashamed to maintaine. But it may be clearely shewed that this place serves neither to disgrace marri∣age estate, The vindi∣cation of this place nor to establish the merit of corporal virginity. First, the Scriptures testifie that matrimony is an ordinance of God, and is ho∣nourable among all, and undefiled. Who therefore without blasphemie may say that marriage is a pollution and defilement? Secondly, the Apostle commandeth married persons to give due benevolence to each other, and calls the very conjugall worke , 1 Cor. 7.3 It is false therefore, that husbands rendring the due to their wives, are defiled with women. Theod. l. 4. epist. 22. But as Paphnutius said in the Nicene Councill (which went about to prohi∣bite Bishops to marry) marriage is honourable, and to lie with ones owne wife is chastity. Now if the words, for they are virgines should be understood of virgines accor∣ding to the flesh: as Ribera the Iesuite following Hierom will have it, then many absurd, blasphemous and impious things will necessarily follow. I. It is proved that corpo∣rall virgi∣nity is not here under∣stood. That none of the holy Patriarches, Prophets and Apostles, who all were married (Iohn perhaps excepted) can follow the Lambe. II. That al both of the Iewes and Gentiles to be converted to Christ under Antichrist, should be unmarried persons, none married, then which nothing is lesse credible. III. Seeing  properly signifies maidens that have not known man, it would follow, that this company of Harpers consisted all of pure virgines or maidens, which is absurd even to Alcasar himselfe. IV. That all virgines according to the flesh should follow the Lamb: and so consequently the Priest of Cybele and the Goddesse Diana, who, loosing their geni∣tours by taking in poison, remained virgines according to the flesh. V. Not one of a thousand of the Popish Priests who vow chastity should fol∣low the Lambe, because they are no virgines, but are all for the most part whore∣mongers and have concubines. VI. Hierom himselfe should be excluded from the Lambes society, because howev he extolled virginity with praises even up to heaven, yet himselfe had it not, as he confesseth in the Apologie to Pammius: where he saith: I lift up vir∣ginity
to heaven, not because I have it, but because I the more admire that I have it not. Therefore he being polluted with women was no virgine. Lastly, the holy Scripture doth so joyne all the faithfull with Christ, whither they be married or unmarried, as members with the head, so as they can never or no where be separated from him: as Christ saith: Father, Ioh. 17.24 1 Thes. 4.17. I will also that they whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. We shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord, and so ever be with the Lord. Therefore we shall all follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth: not onely virgines or unmar∣ried persons according to the flesh: but all the faithfull, who live chastly whither in a conjugall or unmarried life, for in Christ there is neither male nor female, but a new creature. The same the old Church professeth in their hymne. Gal. 3.28. & 6.15. O how glo∣rious is the kingdome in which all the Saints rejoyce with Christ, and clothed in white robes follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. Away therefore weith the Hieracites, who beleeve that onely unmarried virgines shall follow the Lamb. What then? It is certaine the chastity of the sealed is commended: The chasti∣tie of body and minde is praised And it is twofold, viz. of body and spirit, and both may be here understood: If of the out∣ward, the sence will be, These are not defiled with women, that is, by unlawfull co∣pulation: for no man appertaines to the company of the sealed, but such as are chaste, whither in widdowhood, married or unmarried estate: not that none of the sealed have ever beene defiled, as may be seene in Lot, Judah, David, Magdalene, &c. but because through faith they have purged themselves in the blood of the Lambe before their departure out of this life. But if it be understood of spirituall Chastity, the sealed are said not to be polluted with women, that is, with idolatry, which is spirituall fornication, but they are vir∣gines, to wit, in spirit and faith. Thus Austin interpreteth it: They have not defiled themselves with women, that is, have renounced carnall lusts, nor cleaved to idols, strange gods, heresies, errours, and wicked workes, but are spirituall virgines, of whom Christ is the Bridegrome. So Ambrose on the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have prepared you for one husband, that I may present you as a chast virgine to Christ: he will have them, saith he, to be virgines in faith, such undefiled ones as Iohn in the Revelation doth assigne to Christ in the day of judgement: These are they who have not defiled themselves with women; for they are vir∣gines, these follow, &c.  with women, he interprets metaphorically, with errours or heresies. By women, saith he, he signifieth errour, because errour began by the wo∣man: As before in Cha. 3. by the woman Iesabel he understood idolatry, by which the manners and verity of faith are corrupted: for if thou so understand women, to thinke that therefore they are said to be Virgines, because they have kept their bodies untouched, thou excludest the Saints from this grace, who all of them had wives, the Apostles Iohn and Paul onely excepted. By which he directly refutes Tertullian, Jerom, and Riberas depravation of this place, as being absurd and wicked. To whom Alcasar also consenteth, understanding virginity here metaphorically of the integrity of life and doctrine, and all such to be virgines who defile not themselves with an inor∣dinate love of the creature. But the observation of our Tossanus doth much delight me, that here is an an∣tithesis betwixt the faithfull, and the inhabitants of the earth, who have committed fornication with the Babylonish Whore making the sence to be thus. These signed ones are not defiled with women, that is, they have not committed fornication with the great Whore, but are virgines persevering in the faith and sincere worship of Christ. To all these I adde (which notwithstanding comes all to one thing) that this title is to be compared with that in Chap. 7. These are they which have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. He speakes, I say the same thing here in other words: These are they which have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgines. Our robes are carnall concupiscences, these must be washed and made white in the blood of Christ through the remission of sinnes, and white robes put on by the imputation of Christs righteousnesse and sanctification of the
Spirit. The signed therefore are said not to be defiled with women, that is, with car∣nall concupiscence, and other sinnes, because they have washed and made white their defiled robes in the blood of the Lamb. For they that are washed from their filthines are not defiled: And they are virgines: because they are made white in the blood of Christ, that is, justified and sanctified by the merit and spirit of Christ. The sence, as we see, is all one. And I doubt not but that the spirit had respect unto that which the Apostle expresseth more clearely: And such were some of you, but now yee are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11. but yee are sanctified, but yee are justified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God. They follow the Lamb whethersoever he goeth] The fourth title is their individuall society with the Lamb: Their inse∣parable communion with the Lambe. which being referred to the state of their warfare, notes the sincerity and constancy of their faith and obedience under Antichrist: And it is an antithesis of that which is said, Chap. 13.4. The whole earth wondred and follow∣ed after the Beast: and vers. 8. All the inhabitants of the earth worshipped the Beast. These sealed, I say, have not followed the Beast, but FOLLOW THE LAMB WHITHER∣SOEVER HE GOETH, that is, exactly walke in the precepts and steps of the Lambe, whithersoever he leadeth them: Now he leadeth them unto the fountaines of living waters, Chap. 7.17. These therefore suffer not the decrees and idols of the Beast to be obtruded upon them, but wholly cleave to Christ their guide. But if we understand it of the sealed in the state of glory: then this title must be ex∣pounded by that in Chap. 7. vers. 15.17. These serve him day and night: And the Lambe will feed them and lead them unto the living fountaines of waters. In which words the most holy and blessed communion of the faithfull with God and the Lamb, and their unspeakable happinesse is noted, as we there observed. These are bought from among men,  being the first fruits to God and the Lambe] The fift commendation is an amplification of the second, Their pre∣rogatives, they are the first fruits. he said before that they were redeemed out of the earth, here, from among men, the sence is one, that is, out of the multitude of vile and earthly men, perishing under the captivity of Satan, sin and death. Now he addes to what they are redeemed: The first fruits to God and the Lamb] for, that they may be the first fruits, &c. It is an allusion unto the first fruits under the Law, the first of their ripe fruits being then consecrated to God in the feast of weekes. These were most holy, so the sealed are most deare to God and the Lambe. The first fruits were peculiar to the Priests: so these are a pecu∣liar and elect nation, a royall Priesthood to God and Christ, &c. 5. And in their mouth was found no guile] The sixt title is their integrity, they are without hypocrisie both in faith, Their inte∣grity. word, and manners. This indeed is truely said of Christ alone, Isay 53.9. But attributed to the sealed by participation with Christ their head, August. hom. 11 in Apoc. and by imputed righteousnesse, He saith not, saith Austine there hath not been, but there is no guile found, &c. for such as the Lord findes a man when he cals him hence, such also he judgeth him to be, &c. For they are without fault before the throne of God] These words  the Kings bible hath not: Innocency: yet the old Latine, and the other Greeke copies have them. The last commendation is their innocency, and full perfection be∣fore God. The cause both of this and the former commendation, is shewed be∣fore, viz. because they have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb: There∣fore they all are without guile, and spot. The which if it be referred to the state of this life: we must againe understand it, that they are such by imputation and and inchoation: And then the words: before the throne of God, signifie not the place, but their esteem in Gods judgement, as if he should say: They are without fault not in themselves and before men, but in the eyes & judgement of God freely absolving the faithful from all pollution, and accounting them as without fault be∣cause of the blood of the Lamb: If unto the state of the life to come, then before the throne not onely signifies the place, but also the cause of the blessednes of the sealed ones in heaven: for being without fault they shal enjoy the perpetual sight of God,
which shall be their persect blessednesse. And this is that which he said, Chap. 7.15. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve them day and night. The second Part of the Chapter. Of the three Angels publishing the everlasting Cospell against Antichrist. 6 And I saw another Angell flee in the midst of heaven, having the ever∣lasting Gospell to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. 7 Saying with a loud voice, Feare God, and give glory to him, for the houre of his judgement is come: and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters. 8 And there followed another Angell, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great citie, because she made all nations drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. 9 And the third Angell followed them, saying with a loud voice, if any man worship the Beast and his image, and receive his marke in his forehead, or in his hand. 10 The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, which is pow∣red out without mixture in the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy An∣gels, and in the presence of the Lamb. 11 And the smoake of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever. And they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the marke of his name. 12 Here is the patience of the Saints: Here are they which keep the Commandements of God, and the faith of Iesus. 13 And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their workes doe follow them. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I saw another Angel] Here followes the second part touch∣ing the Angels preaching against Antichrists kingdome. Who these are, and to what times the prophesie appertaines, is much questioned, All agree in this, that these Angels represent the Preachers of the Gospell in the times of Antichrist. But Popish expositours referre the same to the last foure years of the world, in which time they absurdly imagine that Antichrist shall beare the sway. For how should all those things which are treated of touching the Beast and the Whore from the 13. Chap. unto the end almost of the whole Book, be accom∣plished in so short a space. Ribera supposeth they are three renowned Preachers of the Gospell in the time of Antichrist. But Alcasar by his consequence is forced to reject this interpre∣tation of the Papists: And therefore he feineth that these are the three princi∣pall
writers of holy Scripture, Peter, Paul, and John: The which foolish fiction is refuted by the very naming of it. Our interpreters doe generally acknowledge that these things appertain to the times of the reformation of the Church: but by what occasion this vision is here againe demonstrated, seeing it was before foretold in Chap. 11. touching the mea∣suring of the temple, they expound not. By our Method it is plaine, seeing here we handle the Third Act of this vision, that these things are to be compared with the Third Act of the foregoing vision. In the second vision indeed, there was nothing answering to this, because there onely the preservation of the sealed or elect under Antichrist was manifested to Iohn, the which is here also treated of in the first part of this Chapter. But in the third vision we have the measuring of the temple, and the prophesie of the two witnesses, Chapter 11. representing unto us the reformation of the Church that should be in the last times, unto which therefore we are to returne: for the two, that is, a few prophesying witnesses there mentioned, are here said to be three preaching Angels, that is, they are more then before. And this very thing Anselmus, as Ribera reports, acknowledgeth, taking the first Angell to be Elias: the second another Prophet and companion of him: rightly indeed according to the scope, but he erres in the persons. But as before we shewed that the measuring of the temple began about the time of the Councell of Constance, or a little before: so without doubt these three Angels began to preach from that time forward: whose ministery no sooner shall be ended, but the Beast shall be thrust into utter destruction. I saw another Angell flying] No Angell had gone before: Therefore he was not one of the Harpers, or of the multitude of sealed ones. Which signifies, that from this time another state of the Church was to be looked for: An Angell] that is, a Preacher of the Gospell, as before in Vision first, the singular number (by an enallage) being put for the plurall: for there should not be one onely but more, although at the first but few should zealously set themselves upon the worke of reformation. The first Angell is Wickleffe. One therefore is named, because one should excell and with an he∣roicall spirit begin the worke. This Angell is John Wickleffe Professour of the Vniversity of Oxford, a man no∣ted throughout the whole world. For when the whole West admired and fol∣lowed the Beast, he Anno 1371. thundred out the everlasting Gospel in England both in his Sermons and Writings against Antichrist: Wickliffes doctrines a∣gainst An∣tichrist. Balae. Cent. 6. c. 6. viz. That in Christs Church there ought not to be any supreme Bishop. That the Pope is not the Vicar of Christ, but Antichrist: that is, his priviledges, bulls, dispensations and indulgences were idle, fruit∣lesse, and wicked: that ecclesiasticall officers ought not to have civill authority: That the Pope and his Clergie had violently taken the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, and that neither themselves entred into the same, nor suffered others to enter: he disproved trans∣substantiation, Masses, offices, canonicall houres, and other vaine bablings: he disallowed the Chrisme in Baptisme, and taught that the faithfull were to be baptized simply with water, according to Christ example: he condemned auricular confession, as also the Popish doctrine of poenitence, satisfaction and worship of relicks, teaching that the Saints ought not to be called upon, because they also are servants: he utterly rejected the Romish rites, new shadowes and traditions: he denyed that it was lawfull for any to adde any thing in matters of religion which was not comprehended in holy writ: or to make the same more difficult which he complained that the Pope had done. He thought that the glorious temples, and all the pompe and worship of the Papacy, together with the diverse degrees of the Clergie ought to be taken away, condemning the orders of Monkes as superstitious, im∣pious, and very hurtfull to true religion, and therefore ought speedily to be forsaken: he maintained that the Lords supper ought to be administred in both kindes. He wrote (as Aeneas Sylvius witnesseth) more then two hundred volumes, most of them against the Papacy, and the wicked life, traditions and abuses of Monkes, &c. To Wick∣leffe were joyned many excellent instruments in England, Richard Killington: Ro∣bert Langland, and others.
Many in Italy also, as Dantes, Marsilius Patavinus, Franciscus Petrarcha be∣gan to take notice of the Romish Antichrist. Wickleffe also left many disciples be∣hind him, who after his death (which was Anno 1387.) manfully opposed Popery. A while after the the two witnesses in Bohemia, John Husse and Jerome of Prague began more forcibly to oppose Antichrist and plant the everlasting Gospell in the Churches of Bohemia, which yet flourish and grow to this day. About the same time Nicolaus de Clemangis a man (as Trithemius witnesseth) ex∣celling in divine and morrall discipline, in many Books opposed the Papacy, Trithe. de scriptor. eccles. but chiefly in his book, of the corrupt state of the Church, of yeerly pensions not to be paid to the Pope: of the Simony of Praelates, &c. Adde to these all the witnesses of the truth, which are recorded in the Catalogue of witnesses, Tom. 2. lib. 19. Now let us consider the actions of this Angell. He flyeth  in the middest of heaven] Like to the Angell who Chap 8.13. proclaimed woe to the world, but this here is more prosperous, for he publisheth not woes, but the everlasting Gospell. Middest of heaven] that is, say some, through the middest of the Church: Others openly, so as he might be seen and heard of al, like as such things are conspi∣cuous which appear in the middle of heaven. For however the foresaid preachers remained in their places and Churches, yet their doctrine and writings were spread through the whole Church. Brightmans conjecture I dislike not, that by this fly∣ing betwixt both is signified the imperfection of the doctrine first published by these teachers: for however they saw and reproved the grosser sort of errours in Popery, yet in many things they clave unto the dregs of earthly rudiments, so as they could not with full flight soare up into the highest heaven: for as a man be∣ing on a sudden brought forth into the light, who along while was in darkenesse, lookes upon all things with dazeling eyes: so they who many ages together were kept in the darkenesse of Popery, could not behold the light of the Gospell, but with dimme eyes. Having the everlasting Gospell] The message or thing published by this Angell he sets forth by an excellent title, calling it the everlasting Gospell: by which is declared the authority, effect and constancie thereof. Antichrist indeed will con∣demne this his preaching and writings as haereticall and full of poyson, and la∣bour by the authority of Councils to represse and refute them, not by arguments, but by fire and sword. So did he to Wickleffe, whom first he greevously vexed by the Masters of Schooles: and afterward thrusting him out of England into Bo∣hemia (though he were againe recalled by the King) he miserably persecu∣ted him untill his dying day. Neverthelesse he went on constantly in teaching and writing: And after his death the Councill of Constance caused his body to be taken out of the grave, and together with his Writings to be consumed with fire. The like they did to the two witnesses John Husse, and Ierome of Prague, con∣demning, oppressing & burning them as haereticks with their books and doctrines. Now howsoever the Beast affrighted the world with this tyranny, and kept the same a while under his yoke: neverthelesse he gained nothing by it. For there remained some remnants in England, and Churches in Bohemia, who constantly maintained the doctrine of those Martyrs untill this day. The ever∣lasting Go∣spell could not be sup∣pressed. For it was the Gospell brought by the Son of God out of the bosome of the everlasting Father, to wit glad tidings of the remission of sin, righteousnes and life eternall freely to be given through the faith of Christ. The Gospell, I say, not of yesterdayes rising, as An∣tichrist calumniates, but everlasting, revealed indeed from the begnining to the Fathers and Prophets: but at length fully manifested and consummated by the Son of God, and henceforward shall remaine eternally. Whatsoever therefore the Beast and his sophisters indeavour and bable to the contrary, yet they shall never be able to overthrow and suppresse the same. To preach unto the inhabiants of the earth] The effects and lawfull calling of
these teachers is here maintained, The lawful calling of Evangeli∣call teach∣ers. Gal. 1.7. touching which if Antichrist shall plausibly moue any question, as from whom they received this new Gospell? what Church before them held this faith? by what miracles they can prove their calling, &c? The holy Ghost answereth: They have the everlasting Gospell: The which is one onely received from Christ and the Apostles, and of old abundantly confir∣med by miracles, so that there is no use of new: And they have it, to evangelize the same, that is to declare and preach it to the inhabitants of the earth. They have therefore a lawfull calling to teach in the Church. To them that dwell on the earth] Thus the followers and worshippers of the Beast, the adversaries of Christ are continually called. First then the difficulty of their charge is intimated, they must have to doe with the inhabitants of the earth, grosse and earthly men, superstitious maintainers of Antichristian idolatry, obstinate adversaries, from whom they shall suffer grie∣vous contradiction. Secondly, the successe of their doctrine is noted, not to be very great. They shall labour indeed to reforme the Papacy, Caecis sabu∣lam canent, Aethiopes lavabunt. to call the blinde unto the light: but according to the proverb: they shall sing to the deafe, and wash Black-moores: because Antichrist will resist them by all meanes possible, and labour to keep his kingdome in peace: And indeed it shall be so by the just judgement of God. For because the world rather loveth lies then truth: God shall send them strong de∣lusion, that they should beleeve a lie: that they all might perish, who have not received the love of the truth, 2 Thes. 2.11. The consideration hereof serves both to illustrate the goodnesse of God, who graciously caused the everlasting Gospel to be preached unto the inhabitants of the earth, that is, the sworne vassals of Antichrist drowned in superstitions and idolatry: As also to lessen the scandall that we be not offended at the small successe the Gospel then had at that time. For what wonder was it, that the inhabitants of the earth received not the same, who were accustomed to heare and beleeve nothing but the dreames and lies of Antichrist. And to every nation and tribe] This partition is taken from Chap. 13.7. sig∣nifying that the fame of this Gospell should be spread as farre as the Papacy did extend. For however those teachers should remaine in their places: yet their doctrine by their writings was made knowne every where, and found adversaries in all places. Before I goe further let us here take notice of one thing touching the devils subtilty. Cyrillus fei∣neth a new gospell. We finde by history, that a little before God raised up this Angell in England, the devill had begun to spread abroad his eternall gospell through one Cy∣rillus a carmelite Monke, consisting of most foule errours, and monstrous opinions, pretending that it was the everlasting gospell of this Angell. And indeed the Monkes under pretext of this prophesie did readily imbrace the same: because he confirmed their monasticall rites, rules, superstitions, and fables. He taught that the Gospell of Christ was to remaine unto this time, but thence forward his new Gospel was to take place in the Church. This was a wicked depravation of this prophesie, 1 Pet. 1.25 Rom. 10.8. Rev. 2.25. Gal. 1.8. and blasphemie against the expresse word of God: The word of the Lord remaineth foe ever. This is the word of faith which we preach. Hold fast that which yee have, till I come. If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospell let him be accursed. To this ungodly fiction many learned of that age opposed themselves, insomuch that Pope Innocent himselfe was forced by the Lateran Council to condemne this impudent assertion: because it also touched the Popes kingdome. Some say Joa∣chim the Abbot was the broacher hereof: but it is false. See Centur. Ecclesiast. 13. cap. 5. To discover therefore the imposture of the Devill, the Lord began to bring to light in the same age the everlasting Gospell here prophesied of, by Wickleffe in Eng∣land, and by other teachers in other places. We may easily Iudge which of these
two was that everlasting and true Gospell. For the one abolished the Gospel of Christ, and writings of the Apostles: The other brought forth the same out of darknesse. The former therefore was false, the latter true. Saying with a great voice] The zeale of the Angell in publishing the Gospell is commended. And indeed the foresaid teachers performed their office with un∣wearied labour and paines both in teaching, preaching, & disputing: for when they came into the world, the world was in a deep lethargie of superstitions, drunken & buried in the wine of the wrath of Babylonish fornication: So that they were forced to cry aloud so mightily, to the end that they might be heard of the drow∣zy (or rather deafe) inhabitants of the earth. This voice is to be understood not onely of their preaching, but writings also, by which they manifested the do∣ctrine of the everlasting Gospell. Feare God] The argument of his preaching hath three parts: yet the whole is doctrinall and hortatory. The first part is the feare of God, which is the beginning of wisdome. Here rightly the teachers begin. Sometimes by it the whole worship, but here properly is signified that part of worship which consists in the true knowledge and reverence of God: and it is opposed both to the carnall security of the whole world, whence ariseth prophanenesse and the wicked contempt of God: as also to the preposterous feare, by which Antichrist hath along time kept the world under his yoake. Both these I will briefly now expound. The Papacy did abound with security and feare. Security & feare in the Papacy. This carnall security was fo∣stered by their bewitching confessions, absolutions, satisfactions, Masses, indul∣gences, &c. No wicked act how great soever, but by money, and such remedies might be expiated: Hence Gods judgement, neither was, or to this day is feared in the Papacy: as having present remedy for their sins in their confessions, satisfa∣ctions, and indulgences. Hence springeth that bruitish security and liberty to sin. So againe the feare of Antichrist hath, and still doth vex the world: because it is held a greater offence to neglect the edicts of the Pope, then to violate the commandements of God. So that they were easily frighted with the feare of ex∣communication, poenall satisfactions, purgatory, &c. insomuch as Emperours and Kings were forced to kisse the feet of Antichrist, yea all both great and smal did tremblinglie submit to his beck. Now this Angell recalling the world both from this prophane security, as also from their preposterous feare, bids them, FEARE GOD, not the Beast: for it is not the Beast but God that can cast both soule and body into hell fire, Math. 10.28. And give glory to him] Secondly, he requires faith and obedience unto the Gos∣pell: for then is the glory of Gods truth, goodnes and power truely attributed unto him, when his word is received by faith, and performed in obedience. In the former member the Angel prepared the world for the Gospell, because without the feare of God, that is, so long as prophanesse and contempt of God doth reigne, there the Gospell findes no place. By this other member, he instructs them thus prepared, to give glory to God by receiving his word in faith, and conforme their life according to his commandements. And indeed this is all God requires of us. So Moses: And now O Israel, what doth Jehovah thy God require of thee, Deut. 1.12 save that thou feare Jehovah thy God, and walke in all his waies, and love him with all thy heart. For the houre of his judgement is come] A reason confirming what he had said, is taken from threatning of judgement at hand: the serious consideration whereof will recall a man from his carnall security to the feare of God and working of righteousnesse, except he have a heart of steele, for as much as in the day of Gods judgement, a most exact account of what hath been done in the flesh must be gi∣ven by all, the greatest Kings and Potentates not excepted. When without any re∣spect of persons they that have done well shall possesse life eternall: They that have done ill shall be cast into everlasting fire. The Angell therefore could not use a more forcible reason, to deterre men from the contempt of God and his word. To this purpose
is that in Sirach, Chap. 7.40 In all things that thou sayest or doest, remember thy end, and thou shalt not sin. Now if any aske how this prophesie is true and accomplished, seeing it is so long since John said, 2 Pet. 3.9. Gods judgement was at hand? Let him heare Peter answering the mockers of his time. The Lord is not slacke concerning his promise (as some count slacknesse) but is long suffering towards us, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto repentance. The Angell saith  is come, for, shall certainly come, by an usuall Enallage of the preterperfect tense instead of the future, so a little after, is fallen, for, shall certainely fal, noting the immutability of the events decreed by God: so formerly he often said, he will come shortly, that is, sooner then we are aware of, that the deepe fleepe of security might be driven out of us, and lest with the wicked servant we should say, Luke 12.45. My Lord deferreth his comming: But rather let us consider seeing the Apostles did presage the day of judgement to be then at hand, how much nearer is it now unto us after so many ages. And worship him that made] In the third member, he recalls the world from po∣pish idolatry, unto the service of the true God alone: whom he notes by a peri∣phrasis from the worke of the creation of heaven and earth, the sea, and fountaines of waters: The Old version ads, and of all things that are in them: which words are not in the Greeke: but seem to be taken out of Psa. 146.9. unto which place the spi∣rit here alludeth. The fountaines of waters are reckoned up among the chiefe works of God, because the continuance of the fountaines is indeed a very wonderfull worke of the Lord: concerning which Phylosophers have much disputed with great admiration: Psal. 104.10. & 114 8. And it is also celebrated in the Psalmes: He sendeth the springs into the valleyes, which run among the hills. Which turneth the rock into a standing wa∣ter, the flint into a fountaine of waters. Furthermore, that religious worship is onely due to God, both the Scripture and nature it selfe teacheth. For God alone is omnipotent, knowes all things, and is present in all places. He is able to heare and helpe all that call upon him wheresoever they be. He alone is the Author of nature, governour and Lord of the world: wherefore all ought to depend upon him onely, in him alone we must beleeve and put our considence. Ier. 17.5. But cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and ma∣keth flesh his arme. Hence faith and prayer are in Scripture coupled by an indivi∣duall tye as the cause and effect: Rom. 10.14. Mat. 4.10. How shall they call on him in whom they have not beleeved. Therefore it is an expresse commandement: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve. Now howsoever this be an undeniable and manifest truth, yet the world for∣saking the Lord, followed and wondred after the Beast, all (I say) both great and small, bond and free, worshipped the Beasts image: kissed his feet, and attribu∣ted divine honour unto him, as though he were God on earth: And this the wor∣shippers of the Pope doe not denie: according to that of the Poet before men∣tioned: Ense potens gemino, cujus vestigia adorant, Caesar & aurato vestiti murice Reges. Nay all have not the priviledge to worship before the Beast and kisse his feet: this onely is permitted to Kings and Emperours: Others must be content devout∣ly to worship his image, and call upon the Saints that are canonized by the Beast, and adore his Crosses, Crucifixes, Altars, set up by him in temples, groves and highwaies, &c. From this beastly worship of idols the Angel here dehorteth the world, as calling them to the worship of the true God: Neither will he any whit esteeme their vaine pretenses: That the Pope is not worshipped as God, but as Gods and Christs Vicar: for they falsely affirme him to be that, which he is not: That they call not on the Saints with a worship of  but  for this is a
false distinction, the religious worship both of Latreia and Douleia being in Scrip∣ture onely attributed to God, and signifie both one thing. That they worship not graven images but God in them: this also is false, for Images are no gods, neither will God be worshipped in or by them: Thou shalt not doe so unto the Lord thy God. Deut. 12.31. Thus far of the everlasting Gospel published by the first Angel, or reformer of Po∣pery. The summe of which is in these three things. I. That God is to be feared, and Antichristianisme to be repented of. II. That glory is to be ascribed to God by beleeving in his sonne. III. That God is to be worshipped by fleeing the Image of the Beast: and per∣forming obedience to God. 8 And another Angel followed] because the former Angell, although he cryed with a great voice, did little profit unto the inhabitants of the earth, who were drowned with the wine of Babylonish whoredome for after Wickleffe, Husse, and Jerome of Prague were burnt, the Papacy remained stil in its vigour & furie. There∣fore another Angell followed, who more forcibly assailing Antichrist, weakened his kingdome in many Provinces. And here againe by an Enallage, One Angell is put for Angels: for there shall be divers succeeding each other in divers places. But One shall excell and continue the ministery of the former Angell, who was a while interrupted. Now this Angel, if we looke into histories, who can he be save Luther? This second Angell is Luther. who followed 130. yeeres after Wickleffe: and 100. after Husse and Jerome: he first be∣gan in Saxony, by word and writing, to thunder against the Popes Pardons pub∣likely put to sale: soon after against the whole Papacy, anno 1517. To him was joyned Philip Melanchton as a most faithfull assistant: and soone after many o∣ther excellent men: who by little and little restored the everlasting Gospell in di∣vers parts of Germany and expelled Popery. About the same time Zwinglius and Oecolampadius began together to oppose Popery, and  Gospell in Helvetia. But let us heare what this Angell publisheth. Babylon is fallen, is fallen] He threatens ruine to Babylon for her wicked forni∣cation, by which as with a pestilent plague, she had infected the Christian world, her horrible idolatry (I say) and cruelty, by which she defiled and oppressed the Church. The commination is taken out of Isai. 21.9. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground. And Ier. 51.8. Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed, howle for her: In which words the Prophets threaten ruine to Babylon of the Caldeans, which had grievously pressed Gods people by 70. yeares captivity. Now it may be demanded whither this Babylon here threatned, be the foresaid Chaldaean Babylon, or another, and which? That it is not Babylon of Chaldea appeares by many reasons. First, that Babylon neither was is, or shall be the Seat of Antichrist. This is not the Caldeā Babylon. For how∣ever there be an ancient fable of Antichrists rising out of Babylon: yet the same makes not Babylon but Ierusalem to be his seat. Now the Babylon here threatned by the Angell, shall be the Seat of Antichrist by the consent of all interpreters. Secondly, This Babylon is that great city, the which in Johns time ruled over the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. But then the Caldeans held not the Monarchie, but the Romanes. Besides this Babylon defiles all nations of the earth with her fornication. But now, how the Caldean Babylon should so doe in these last times no sound reason can be given for it. Lastly, the people of God are bid to goe out of this Babylon, Chapter 18.4. But Gods people for these thousand yeeres have not been, nor shall be in the Easterne Babylon, &c. Therefore this Babylon, is not Babylon in Caldea, although the holy Ghost doth apply the propheticall threatnings of old against Babylon, to good purpose and fitly here.
from the letter therefore wee must necessarily come to the figure, which thing Ribera also acknowledgeth. Now secondly some of the Ancients will have this Babylon to be the world, as being the great city of the wicked, in which the Devill ruleth: So Ambrose, Bede, Arethas, Andreas, Ansbertus, Haymo, Primasius, Anselmus, &c. But this opini∣on cannot stand. For first, This Babylon is that Great whore making drunke the inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her fornication. But how shall the world make drunke the inhabitants of the earth, seeing themselves are the world made drunke by the whore? shall the world make the world drunke? the whore therefore which maketh drunke is plainely distinguished from the inhabitants of the earth, who are made drunke. Secondly, the sence would be absurd: Babylon is fallen, that is, the world is fallen: for by the ruine of Babylon the whole world shal not decay, but there shal remain Kings, and merchants, which shall see and bewaile the ruine of Babylon: whereas after the ruine of the world there wil be no kings nor marchants. Thirdly, we are commanded to goe out of this Babylon, Chap. 16.8. But we are not bid to goe out of the world, 1 Cor. 5.10. except in a spirituall sence. But out of this Babylon a locall departure is commanded. Fourthly, it is the common opinion that John prophesieth of that Babylon, which is the seat of Antichrist. But the whole world shall not be Antichrists seat: For he shall sit in the temple of God, 2 Thes. 2.5. the which cannot be meant of the whole world. Fiftly, This Baby∣lon is Rome see Chap. 11.8. & 17.18. Ribera addes that this Babylon standeth on seven Mountaines, Chap. 17.9. Now that the citie of wicked men, or the world, should stand on seven moun∣taines, cannot be true in any sence. And therefore Ribera concludeth, that we must expound it otherwise. And indeed at last the said Iesuite doth ingeniously confesse that this Babylon is ROME, for which opinion he alledgeth many old wri∣ters, as Austine l. 8. de C, where he amimeth that Rome was built by the fall of the Assyan kingdome, and calleth the same the Daughter of Babylon, or another Babylon. Orosius lib. 2. cap. 2. Eusebius lib. 2. hist. cap. 14. Bede, Occu∣menius, Victorinus, Hierom in Isa. 24. in his Prologue in lib. Dydimi & lib. 2. against Jovinian, & Epist. 15. q. 11. to Agasia. & Epist. 17. to Marcel. Tertullian lib. 3. against Marcion, and against the Iewes. Some also of the latter Writers as, Sixtus senensis lib. 2. Bibliot. in vocabulo Meretricis Magnae. Bellarmine lib. 2. de P. R. cap. 2. & 13. Ludovicus Vives in lib. 18. de C. D. cap. 20. Lindanus lib. 4. Panop. cap. 82. the which confession of his we willingly approve of: he alledgeth also that of Peter, The Church that is in Babylon salutes you, 1 Pet. 5.13. that is, in Rome, as Eusebius lib. 2. hist. cap. 15. expoundeth it, the which the Papists doe therefore gladly lay hold on, to shew that Peter sate at Rome: but it is a weake conjecture, for it may more pro∣bably be said, that Peter wrote from Babylon of the East, as Calvin in his Com∣mentary on the place sheweth. But be that place in Peter what way soever understood: Many things perswade us that this Babylon is Rome. First, the description and situation of this great citie agrees not so fully to any as to Rome: for it is said to stand upon seven Mountaines, which cannot so well be said of any city as of Rome, built of old by Romulus on seven hills, named Palatinus Quirinalis, Aventinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Aesquilinus, Janicularis: Hence Virgil., lib. 6. Aeneid. Scilicet & rerum facta est pulcherrima Roma. Septem quae una sibi muro circundedit arces. Rome is become the famoust place of all. Which hath inclos'd seven hills within her wall.
And Ovid lib. 1. Trist. Eleg. 4. Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem, Montibus imperii Roma, deûmque locus. Rome is the place of gods, and royal seat, Or'e lookes the world with her seven mountaines great. And Horace: Diis, quibus placuere colles, dicere carmen, Vnto the gods a verse to tell, Whom the seven hills doe please full well. And Propertius: Ʋrbs septem alta jugis toti qua praesidet orbi. The lofty citie on seven hills hie, Which rules the world continually. Secondly, this Babylon is called a great city: Rome the great city. and that indeed emphatically with a double article  That great City. Now it is known that Rome is called the City, and the great City () by way of Pra-eminence: hence Tityr in Virgil thus speaketh: Ʋrbem quam dieunt Romam Melliboee putari, Stultus ego huic nostrae similem, &c. The city called Rome O Melibee, I as a foole like ours did thinke to be. Besides this great citie Babylon in Johns time, Having rule over the world. had dominion over the Kings of the earth, Chap. 17.18. and no city then but Rome, had monarchicall power. But we need no further proofe, seeing this opinion is backt with the authority of many Ancient writers, Bellar. li. 2. de P. R. 1. Rib. in A∣poc. 14. s. 39. A lca pag. 721. nay the Iesuites themselves (Alcasar not excepted) do not now oppose the same. Yet lest they should any waies prejudice their Pope, they feine that by Babylon here is meant, not Christian Rome, as it hath been more then a thousand yeers under the government of holy Popes: But heathenish Rome, as of old it was under Emperours. But it will easily appeare, that this is a vaine evasion. For first, Heathenish Rome, was not the seat of Antichrist, touching which seat (as all consent) Iohn here prophesieth off Neither was Antichrist come, so long as Rome remained heathenish: Therefore the former Rome is not this Babylon. Secondly, It cannot be understood of the Old, but Popish Rome, Babylon is no Pagan but Popish Rome. that she in∣deed it is who hath made drunke all the inhabitants of the earth, with the wine of her for∣nication, and that all the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her. For Old Rome, however it did abound with most foule idolatry: Yet she alwaies gave liberty to all nations subjected to her, for to exercise their owne religions and superstitions, yea suffered the gods of all other people to be set up and worship∣ped even in Rome, Christ onely excepted, as Eusebius records out of Tertullian. Nei∣ther can it be proved by any history that ancient Rome forced their worship on for∣raine people: whereas on the contrary Popish Rome compelleth and imposeth on all nations and kings her superstitious and idolatrous worship on paine of excom∣munication, seeking to be esteemed the Mother of Churches, and in very deed the whole East lucked their abominations and idolatries from her as from the paps of a mother. Thirdly, In the time of the Fathers before alledged, Tertullian excepted, Rome was no longer heathenish, being under the power of Christian Emperours: and yet they call her Babylon: Therefore they understood it not of heathenish Rome, such as it was not, but of Christian Rome, such as then it was.
Fourthly, That Rome is Babylon, of which it is here said: It is fallen, it is fallen: and which was to be destroyed in the latter times. But the ruine of heathenish Rome is not here published (as Alcasar vainely feineth) for that Rome is ceased long agoe: but the destruction of Popish Rome is yet to come: for it is foretold, to be in the last times. These things therefore belong to Popish Rome. Fiftly, that Rome is Babylon, which makes merchandise of the soules of men, Revel. 18.13. Now this beastly trade was not driven by heathenish Rome, but by the Popish Rome, as we shal fee heareafter. Lastly, that Rome is Babylon out of which in the last times Gods people are commanded to goe forth. Now they are not bid to depart out of heathenish Rome, which hath ceased to be long agoe. Neither doe we read that ever any Christians by vertue of this commandement did forsake heathenish Rome, but did alwaies constantly there persevere even in the times of most cruell persecutions. Gods people therefore are commanded to goe out of Popish Rome: Thus we see Rome is this Babylon which must be destroyed. Ribera the Iesuite not daring to deny so evident a truth, changeth himselfe into divers shapes, to salve the Pope. First, he propoundeth a weighty scruple, the which he saith is not yet unfolded by the Patrons of his opinion, viz. wherefore John doth foretell so many evills to befall this city, which although of old it were the chiefe seat of idolatry: yet now is the head of sanctity, and defender of the Catholick faith: and the proper seat of him that is head of the Church, &c. But O Ribera, Riberas de∣fence of Po∣pish Rome. thy doubt is here clearely unfolded by the Angell, viz. that this shall be the cause of all these evills, because Babylon-Rome, makes drunke all the nations of the earth with the wine of her fornications. And that which thou speakest of the seat of holinesse, in this very thing thou unwittingly accusest the Pope, The Pope Antichrist. and makest him to be Antichrist. For he that possesseth the sea of Antichrist is Antichrist. The Pope sits in the seat of Antichrist: For Rome which is to be overthrown, is the seat of Antichrist: &  that is to be destroyed is the seat of the Pope: The seat therefore of the Pope, is the seat of Antichrist: And so con∣sequently the Pope is Antichrist. Secondly, Riberas e∣vasions touching Popish Rome con∣futed. he objects that it cannot be understood of Papal Rome. First, because John here describeth a most potent and wealthy city, which was the Queen of the world. But Papall Rome neither is so now, nor ever is likely so to be. Secondly, be∣cause in Chap. 18.20. The heaven, and holy Apostles and Prophets are bid to rejoyce over her: because God had avenged them on her: but whom (saith he) of the Apostles, or which of the Prophets hath the Romish Church or Popish Rome persecuted? What inju∣rie hath she done unto them, that they should rejoyce at her punishment? Therefore he concludeth that Babylon here spoken of, is to be understood of heathenish Rome, which persecuted the Apostles and Prophets. But in vaine he seekes for pretenses in so cleare a matter. For he granted be∣fore that the future state of Rome is here spoken of, therefore he is contradictory to himselfe. And as for his objections they are easily answered. To the first it sufficeth, that Rome did then Lord it over all nations, when John wrote this booke. The same Rome the Pope now holdeth. And besides this even Papall Rome is a most wealthy and powerfull city, and the Queen of the world: for all the treasures and delights of the Christian world, have now long agoe by thousand enticements been drawn unto Rome alone. She challengeth the Empire of the world unto herselfe, for she boasteth that the Emperours and Kings of the earth doe reigne by her favour and benefit. All must be vassals of Popish Rome, yea, if we beleeve the Iesuits, even in temporall things. Papall Rome therefore is Lady of all, and Empresse of the world, according to the verses: Roma caput mundi, quicquid non possidet armis relligione tenet.
To the second I say, that which he pretends is ridiculous, as if because Papisti∣call Rome had not persecuted the Apostles and Prophets: therefore they ought not to rejoyce at her destruction: for then also the heaven ought not to rejoyce: for was heaven I pray you slaine by Papistical Rome? Nay, how could heathenish Rome kill the Prophets, which never saw Rome? Notwithstanding the Apo∣stles and Prophets, and heaven it selfe are worthily bid to rejoyce for the destru∣ction of her, both because in persecuting the Saints she persecuteth the Prophets and Apostles: as also because all creatures ought to rejoyce for the vindicating of Christs glory and destruction of Antichrist, whether they have been hurt by him or not. Lastly, if Popish Rome (the which Ribera was not afraid to write) shall be punished for the wickednesse of heathenish Rome, which herselfe hath not committed: Why then may not the Prophets rejoyce for the destruction of Popish Rome, though they were not hurt by her? Vnderstanding therefore that these things cannot be put off, Riberas new fection about the Pope. he is forced neces∣sarily to grant that Popish Rome is Babylon. Notwithstanding to keep up the cre∣dite of the Pope, he deviseth a new prophesie, namely, that Rome towards the end of the world, expelling the Pope with all the Catholick Saints, shall againe apostate to their old wickednesse and idolatry. And then indeed Rome shall be Babylon and the warehouse of all filthinesse and idolatry, when she shall fall off from the Pope, and expell him thence with all other Christians. Whatsoever ther∣fore Iohn prophesieth touching the ruine, burning and horrible plagues of Babylon, appertaines, saith he, to Rome after that she shall have thrust out the Pope Christs Vicar: Without which fiction this subtil Writer saw that the Pope of Rome could not be freed from Antichristianisme: and thinkes by this artificial device to shift off this our argument: He that in the last times holds Babylon the seat of Antichrist, is Antichrist. The Romish Pope in these last times holds Babylon ROME the seat of Antichrist. Therefore the Romish Pope is Antichrist. The assumption he labours to weaken, not indeed by denying, that Rome, which the Pope possesseth in the last times is Babylon: nor also that Babylon in the last times is the seat of Antichrist: But by denying that Rome now so long as it is held by the Pope, is the seat of Antichrist: Because Rome (as he saith) before Antichrists comming shall decline to Paganisme, and thrust out the Pope. But O Ribera, by what authours, by what Scripture, Lyras ficti∣on refuted by what reason wilt thou prove unto us this thy new Oracle, or rather dotage, hitherto unheard of even a∣mong Papists: as, I. That Rome at length shall fall from Christianity and re∣turne to Heathenisme. II. That she shall drive out her most holy father the Pope, and give place to Antichrist. The latter indeed of these thou thinkest to make out well enough after this manner: That as long as Rome is obedient to the Pope, so great evills cannot befall her: Because the Pope is Christs Vicar: And that Rome so long as the Pope is present, shall be the maintainer and mistresse of the Apostolicall faith, and mansion of piety: Not therfore to be destroyed, before the Pope be driven thence. But O friend, thou seest not how often thou dost beg the question, and how many things thou takest for granted not onely doubtfull unto us, but also incredible to the Papists them∣selves. I let passe thy common assertion that the Pope is Christs Vicar. Thou must prove I. That Babylon and Rome to be ruinated, is to fall to Hea∣thenisme. Certainely herein thou hast Alcasar opposing thee, who on the con∣trary faineth more absurdly, that Romes ruine is her conversion to Christianity. II. That Rome having the Pope present with her, Roma est jam tota Lupanar. is the mistresse of the Apo∣stolicall faith, and mansion house of godlinesse, of which it was long agoe truely said: Rome is now wholy a Brothelhouse. III. That Rome the most holy citie having her Pope and Cardinals there pre∣sent (but perhaps fallen into a fatall Lethargie) should cast off the profession of Christianity, and decline to the idols of the Heathens.
IV. That Rome being thus fallen to heathenisme, the Pope with his Cardi∣nalls shall miserably be deprived and thrust out of the seat and patrimony of Saint Peter. Now unlesse these things be solidly proved by thee, all men may see that our argument stands firme, and proves the Pope to be Antichrist. To the first, Riberas reasons touching Romes fal∣ling away examined. second, and fourth, Ribera saith nothing. But the third (of Romes declining from Christianity to Pagan idolarry) he indeavours to prove by some reasons. I. He saith, that the place of ancient Rome, was of old stained with abomina∣ble wickednesse: and therefore of necessity she must one time or other be pur∣ged by fire. But first, he may as easily prove the apostacy of the whole Christian world un∣to Heathenisme. For we know that of old the whole world was full of abomina∣ble wickednesse. Secondly, that which he saith touching the defilement of ancient Rome is true indeed. But I wonder how any can without crimen laesae majestatis object unto the Popes holinesse, that the guiltinesse of ancient Rome should not yet be expiated by the religion and holinesse of so many ages. What? have not so many Processions, Masses, Consecrations, Prayers, so many merits of holy Popes for these thousand yeeres, been able to purge away the defilement of ancient Rome? Besides what can be more contumeliously spoken, then that the Pope the most holy Vicar of Christ, should have his seat in a place defiled with such horrible wickednesse and offences? Ribera con∣tradicts himselfe. And how doth this agree with what thou saidst before, that Rome under the government of her Pope is the mansion of piety, if so be that as yet it be not purged from its old guilt and defilement. Let Ribera looke to it, how herein he may answer the Popes holinesse. II. He saith, that there are many to this day at Rome who boast that they are of the name and stock of the old Romanes: And therefore it is probable that they shall againe fall to the idolatry and wickednesse of their Ancestours, and so be destroyed. But this also is altogether frivolous, and a most injurious infamie and accusation of the noble families of Rome. For it is certaine that in Constantines time there were many more noble families of the pedegree of the ancient Romanes then now, who notwithstanding forsaking the idolatry of their forefathers, embraced the faith of Christ: so neither will it necessarily follow that the ancient families which yet remaine at Rome, should fall away from Christianity. But put the cause they should, He argueth the Pope of extream neglect. doth not the Iesuite herein accuse the Pope, Cardinals, Bi∣shops, and all the Iesuites which then shall live in Rome of extreem negligence, in not performing their duty, but to suffer all the people committed to their charge to fall away from the faith of Christ. What shall all of them fall into so dead a sleep? Or rather now by their impiety and heathenish riot, make way to such horrible prophanenesse. Let the Iesuite againe see too, how he will answer these things. III. He saith, howbeit they are not of the linnage of the ancient Romanes, yet forasmuch as they dwell in the same city, the which they inhabited, they are to be accounted as one body with them. But by this reason the Pope and Cardinals too, are one body with the Romane Pagans, and guilty of the same apostacy: seeing they also dwell at Rome. Thus the Pope should be the head of that body and city, which is one with the wick∣ed common-wealth of old Rome. Now the truth is, nothing can be more vainely spoken. And I wonder that the Iesuite when he wrote these things, had not considered, that he himselfe lived in Spaine, where the ancient Moores former∣ly inhabited. IV. He addes from Chap. 16.19, That Great Babylon came in remembrance be∣fore God, & 18.5. Babylons sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities. Therefore saith he, towards the end of the world her old sins, which hitherto for religion sake seemed to be forgotten, shall againe be remembred
and punished because of the new and like transgressions added to the former. But first, not onely things done long agoe are said to come in remembrance be∣fore God, but also such things as are newly done: by an Anthropopatheia: for so in Act. 10. The prayers and almes of Cornelius, which he daily performed, are said to come up for a memoriall before God: Secondly, albeit his glosse were granted: yet there were no need that new Rome should be punished for the sinnes of the old, for as much as Popish Rome for these thousand years and more hath abounded in all manner of villanies, for which the Lord most justly may take vengeance on her. Lastly, he flees unto the Oracles of the Sybills. But they speak nothing touching the Popes ejection, or apostacy of the Ro∣manes from the faith of Christ unto Heathenisme, but only touching the destructi∣on of Rome, therein agreeing with the prophesie of this booke. By all which things it appeareth, that whatsoever the Iesuite alledgeth for the upholding of the credit of the Pope, it is nothing but a frivolous dotage of a drea∣ming writer. The summe of the place is this: That Babylon here threatned with destruction, is Rome, not of the Pagans, which ceased in Constantines time: Nor new heathenish Rome, the which (as the Iesuite feineth) shall thrust out the Pope: But Popish Rome which a long while hath boasted her selfe to be the Mother of Churches, and from whose breasts all the nations and kings of the earth have sucked their errours, su∣perstition and idolatry. Thus our insoluble argument is no way weakned by the Iesuite, but stands firme against the Romish Antichrist. But now when we speak of Rome, we understand not simply the walled city, or palaces, towers and stately walkes thereof: but chiefly the Pope himselfe with his whole kingdom and power over the Westerne Churches, of which after∣ward in Chap. 17.18. Now why is Rome named Babylon? Why Rome is called Ba∣bylon. lib. 2. cap. 3. hist. The cause may be the likenesse that is be∣tween them, of which OROSIUS: Behold, saith he, the rising of Babylon and Rome is alike: their power is alike, their greatnesse, times, good things and also evill. But I rather thinke the reason is, their likenesse in tyrannny and destruction. The old Babylon afflicted the ancient Church: Rome the new Babylon hath op∣pressed the new Church. The Old is fallen: The New shall fall. Babylon is fal∣len, is fallen] The doubling of the threatning denotes the certainty and hastning of the destruction. Therefore also it is said in the preterperfect tense, hath, that is, is fallen: because it shall certainely and suddenly fall: like as we say of a dying man, that he is dead, or the like. Neither did the Angell prophesie vainely. For even during the preaching of this Angell, while Luther, I say, yet taught, a great part of Babylon fell both in Saxony, Germany, and other neighbouring Coun∣tries. But touching the destruction of Babylon it followes in Chap. 18. Alcasar againe by his consequence is forced to make blacke white, applying the ruine of Babylon to the conversion of heathenish Rome to the faith of Christ: making the sence of the words, Babylon is fallen, is fallen] that is, is converted to Christ: Now who ever heard so great an absurdity? The whole context and consent of all interpreters evinceth that the ruine of Babylon signifies not mercy, but punishment: And therefore so impudent a depravation of holy Scripture is to be rebuked. Because she made all nations drinke] This reason evidently refutes Alcasars ab∣surdity: The cause of Babylons destruction shall be her fornication, by which she hath most foully defiled her selfe, with the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth: for she is the Mother of all whoredomes. This fornication (as before was shewed) is idolatry, by a propheticall and meta∣phorical phrase: for idolaters like harlots do by spirituall uncleannes perfidiously violate their faith to God, prostrate themselves before their Idols, and run head∣long into utter destruction, as we have largely expounded in our Commentary on Hosea, Chap. 1.2.
Of the wine of her fornication] For the Pope obtrudes his idols on all nations: who therefore are said to drinke of the wine of his wrath, because idolatry (through the corruptnesse of mans nature) is more pleasing to all, then the true worship of God. : is a figure when with a little change of a word the sence is wholly alte∣red. In the Greeke is an elegant * parenomasia in the words  and . For as Antichrist gave all to drinke of the wine of his fornication: so shall all drinke of the wine of Gods wrath: because they suffered themselves universally to be drawne aside to the worship of Idols, by the pretended authority of the Catholick Church. Idolatry is compared to wine, because by its sweetnesse and outward lustre it is pleasing unto the flesh, and much desired. Also from the effect: for it makes ido∣laters madde, furious and blinde: like as wine takes away the sence of a drunkard. The wine of wrath] so named from the effect, because it stirres up Gods wrath, and drawes downe his judgements: As also from the efficient cause, because God in his anger doth justly inflict blindnesse on the worshippers of Antichrist: accor∣ding to that of Paul, 2 Thes. 2.11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeve a lie, that they might be damned, who received not the truth. It might seem the words here, should thus be read:  of the wine of her fornication: as in Chap. 17.2. The inhabitants of the earth, are said, to have been made drunke with the wine of her fornication, &c. be∣cause the wine of fornication is opposed to the wine of Gods wrath, vers. 10. The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God: But all copies have  of the wine of the wrath, &c. Not here onely but also in Chap. 16.19. & 18.23. The use of this preach∣ing. The use of this Angels preaching doth plainely respect both the godly and the wicked. The godly are exhorted to the duty before published by the former Angell: To feare God, and not the Beast: To give glory to God, not to Antichrist: And lastly, to worship God the Creator of heaven and earth, not the Beast or his Image: Also in Chap. 18.4. he admonisheth all such as desire to be free of Babylons plagues, to goe out of her. The ungodly worshippers of Babylon and the Beast, he terrifies by threatning of punishment, the which the Angell following will denounce more plainely, that if they goe on delighting themselves with the wine of fornication, and to worship the Beast, they shall eternally be tormented with babylon and the Beast. 9. And the third Angell followed them] The former Angel denounced Woe to Babylon. This terrifies Babylons inhabiters, to the end they might not thinke to be scot-free, while Babylon was destroyed, but understand (that except they left off their fornication) they should be thrust into eternall destruction with her. The Thesis, or position therefore of this Sermon is very horrible: viz. That none of the worshippers of the Beast, Pow. lib. 2. de Antich. cap. 36. if they die in that estate, can be saved, but all of them must ne∣cessarily perish for ever. The Beast is the Romane Antichrist, with his Monarchical kingdome, as we heard Chap. 13. The worshippers of the Beast, are the idolatrous Papists, zealous observers of the Popes injunctions. Now what their end shall be, is here declared unto us by the Angell. Who this Angell should be, the Popish Writers mention not, except Lyra, who feineth him to be Pope Gregory. Who is the third An∣gell. But this Angell was to be after Antichrists rising: for he preacheth against him. Now Gregory was Antichrists fore-runner, viz. of Boniface III. who first built Babylon by claiming the title of universality. This Angell is said to follow the two former: who denoted all the preachers of the Gospell, and opposers of Popery from Wickleffe unto Luther and his fel∣low labourers: so that their ministery dured for the space of 175. yeeres, or there∣about, viz. from Anno 1371. when Wickleffe began to publish the everlasting Go∣spell, untill the yeere 1546. at what time Luther ended his ministery, leaving be∣hinde him this propheticall verse:
Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa. I living was a plague O Pope to thee, And dying now, thy death Ile surely be. This third Angell therefore is a figure of all such evangelicall Teachers, who since the ministery of Luther have preached against Babylon, and they are to con∣tinue unto the end of world. For there followes no fourth preaching Angell af∣ter the third: but Christ sitting on the white cloud comes forth to judgement, vers. 14. And therefore the ministery of the third Angell is to remaine unto the end. Now among the number of excellent Teachers, who by word and writing since that time have laboured to bring men from popish idolatry unto the faith of Christ; Of the Germanes, are Bucer, Capito, Hedio, Brentius, Hyperius, Alesius, Snepfius, &c. In Helvetia, Bullinger, Simlerus, Myconius, Pellicanus, Gualterus: Aretius, Stuckius, &c. In France, Farell, Viret, Calvin, Marlorate, Beza. In England, Cranmer, Hooper, Latimer, Whitaker, Reynolds. In Denmarke, Palladius, Hemmingus, &c. Out of Italy, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Tremellius, &c. In Po∣land, Johannes a Lasco, &c. In Hungary, Michael Statinus, Stephanus Szegedinus, Petrus Melius, Paulus Thurius, with innumerable others who now rest in the Lord, or yet fight, or hereafter shall fight for the faith of Christ against the Beast. With a great voice] like the second Angell, that is, with great zeale and labour, because these Teachers, as the former, shall not be wanting, but use all diligence to bring men to Christ, and recall them from worshipping the Beast. And indeed it is needfull they should cry with a great voice: for the greater part of men shall stop their eares at their preaching. If any man worship] This hypothetical commination: If any man worship the Beast, the same shall drinke, &c. is universall, as if he had said. Whosoever he be that worshippeth the Beast, shall drinke, &c. He speaketh hypothetically, to teach us, that the punishment may be avoyded, so that the condition be observed, that is, if a man leave off to worship the Beast. Whence it appeareth, that not all the worshippers of the Beast shall be tormented with these plagues, but such onely as alwaies persevere therein, and repent not, being admonished. Now it seemes that this Hypotheticall threatning closely is opposed to the wicked anathematismes of the Beast, which also are hypothetically propounded. For example: If any one worship not venerable images, let him be accursed. If any man teach not from the heart to the Christian people the worship of Saints, Anathe∣maes of the 11. Nicene Councill. Act, 1. and of the honourable images of all the Saints, Let him be accursed. If any man salute not images in the name of the Lord and of his Saints, Let him be accursed. And in the Councill of Trent, If any man say that the wicked is justified by faith alone, Let him be accursed. If any man say, that justifying faith is nothing else, but a confidence in the mercy of God forgiving sinnes for the sake of Christ, and that we are justified by this confidence alone, Let him be accursed. If any man say, that by Gods commandement all Christs faithfull ones ought to receive the Eucharist in both kindes, Let him be accursed, &c. Now on the contrary, let the worshippers of the Beast and his image heare the anathema, or curse of the Angell. If any man worship the Beast, &c. Let him be accursed. Furthermore who these worshippers of the Beast and his image are, who, I say, are marked with the Beasts Character, I have before shewed. Now let us consider the curse. 10. The same also shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God] The curse of the wicked is typed out by a propheticall phrase including the sinne, for which Baby∣lon was threatned by the former Angell. Babylon gave her worshippers to drinke
of the sweet and voluptuous wine of her fornication: But God will give them to drinke of the deadly wine of his wrath: as if he should say: they have drunk the former wine, so they shall drinke the other likewise: the meaning is: They have committed fornication: therefore they shall be punished. The punishment of the wicked by a propheticall phrase is compared to Wine, a Chalice, and Cup, alluding to the excesse of the wicked, who swallow down full cups of wine. Which is powred without mixture into the cup] But in the Gr. it is, , as it were, with unmixt mixt wine, which words seem to be cōtradictory to themselves: because  called in Latine Merum, is not wine mixt or alaied wine, but such as is without mixture: Yet there is no contradiction in it, for with the Greeke the word  mixt, signifies not wine allaied with water, but such as is powred forth for to be drunke, although it be without any mixture: And hence the Latines sometimes use the word MISCERE, to mingle, simply for to powre out drinke: Iuvenal. Satyr. 5. —Nescit tot millibus Emptus Pauperibus miscere puer. Here the words miscere pauperibus, sig∣nifie to fill drinke to the poore. So that, to drinke out of the mixt cup (for so the words may be translated) is to drinke out of a cup filled with the wine of Gods wrath: and this wine is called  not allaied with water, to denote its strength and efficacy to make drunke. Brightman understands this pure wine said to be mixt, of divers kindes of wines mingled together, which mixture (saith he) doth much sooner beget drunkennesse. The sense is all one. Of his indignation and anger] The Gr.  signifies furie or great indignati∣on: and is more then  anger. The words seeme to be taken out of Psal. 75.9. A cup is in Jehovahs hand, and the wine is red, it is full of mixture: And Ier. 25.15. Take the wine-cup of his furie at my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I send thee, to drinke it. This Cup of his anger the Lord in the following Chapter divides into seven vials, the which being full of his wrath, he will powre forth on the Antichristian idolaters, six of them in this life, but the last in the end of the world. Therefore he threatneth temporall and eternall punishments. The temporall he expoundeth specially in Chap. 16. here the eternall are more clearly described. And he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone] This is a declaration and an amplification of their punishment: He shall drinke of the wine of wrath, that is, he shall be tormented: for as he drunke the wine of pleasure: so likewise he shall drinke the wine of torment, and that eternally. He addes the matter of the torment, With fire and brimstone] Brimstone is soon set on fire, burnes strongly, is not easily extinguished, and causeth a filthy smoak and deadly stinke. Fire, is nourished by brimstone, it devoures and destroyes combustible things, & the burning therof is intollerable torment to the body. Not as if there were materiall fire or brimstone in hell, but the grievousnesse of the torment is hereby noted. It seemes to be an allusion unto Psal. 11.6. Ʋpon the wicked he shall raine snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest shall be the por∣tion of their cup. This is expounded in Chap. 19.20. where the Beast and they that worship him are to be cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. This is the torment of hell, Luk. 16.24. Isai. 66.24. Mark. 9.43. Luk. 3.17. in which the glutton being to this day crieth, Father Abra∣ham have mercy upon me, for I am tormented in this flame. The Scripture doth not finde words, as it were, sufficiently to expresse the unspeakable torments of the wicked. Isaiah saith: The worme of transgressours shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. Christ Math. 8.12. calls it utter darknesse, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth: & 5.22. hell fire: & 25.41. ever∣lasting
and unquenchable fire. Paul saith, Rom. 2.9. 2 Thes. 1.8. Tribulation and anguish shall be on every soule that doth evill: and againe: The Lord will take vengeance in flaming fire, on them that obey not the Gospell. IN THE PRESENCE OF THE HOLY ANGELS, AND IN THE PRESENCE OF THE LAMBE] The Lambe shall be the Iudge of the ungodly, who despised him, and as much as in them lay exposed him to be torne by the Beast. The Angels are added to the Lambe as sumners, by whose ministery, all men shall be gathered from the foure corners of the earth, and presented before the tribunall seat of Christ to be judg∣ed. The word therefore,  before, which is attributed as well to the An∣gels as to the Lambe, signifies, that the Angels shall not onely be beholders of the torments of the wicked: but also executioners of the same: So the Apostle: They shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thes. 1.9 and from the glory of his power. Holy] to distinguish them from evill angels, concerning whom Paul saith: Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? 1 Cor. 6.3. 11. And the smoke of their torment] He further amplifies the torments of the wicked, if happily the kings and inhabitants of the earth might be restrained from worshipping the Beast by the horrour of cruell torments. The smoake of their tor∣ment, by an hebraisme he calleth it a tormenting smoak: Or by a metonymia of the signe the fire tormenting them. But I rather approve the former, because he had before spoken of their torment by fire. Now what is more bitter, then to be tor∣mented, broyled, and stifled with smoak? Before in Chap. 9. the smoak of the bottomlesse pit did denote in a sence some∣what different, the darknesse of doctrine, brought into the Church by the Pope of Rome through the operation of Satan. And this belongs to the matter of the in∣fernall torment: What smoak is, & whether it be in hell. not that there is a reall smoak in hell (for properly smoak is an exhalation or fume arising out of a materiall fire, which is not in hell: otherwise the smoak must cease, when the matter is wholly consumed) but the Scripture doth metaphorically shadow out the grievousnesse of the torments in hell from things known unto us, and very hurtfull, as calling the same, smoake, fire, brim∣stone, the worme, &c. Ascended for ever and ever] Smoak by its lightnesse ascends upward: and so the smoak of eternall fire shall ascend  into ages of ages, that is, for ever and ever: for it is an unquenchable fire, Isai. 66.24. Hence we see that the torments of the wicked in hell shall be everlasting and without end. Before in Chap. 8.4. The prayers of the Saints are called a smoak ascending up before God, by a more noble metaphor. That smoake was sweet and pleasing to God, as be∣ing the smoake of incense: But this here is stinking and pestilent unto the wick∣ed, as being the smoak of brimstome. The verbe  to ascend, argues that the place and fire of hell is beneath: but where it is, they shall feele, who too cu∣riously seek it. And they have no rest day nor night] He signifies their continuall torments with∣out any intermission: they shall not now and then have rest: but shall be perpe∣tually tormented. Thus hitherto the Glutton cryeth in hell without intermission, I am tormented in this flame. For as hell fire shall not be extinguished, no not for a moment: so the wicked shall not have so much as a moments respite from tor∣ment, but in this unquenchable fire they shall be like incorruptible firebrands, ne∣ver to be consumed. O most miserable men, whom the cogitation (and perhaps horrour also) of so great tormenrs, hath not hitherto moved to repent, and for∣sake the worship of the Beast. Before Chap. 4.8. this same phrase is applyed to the foure Beasts: And they rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty: And to the sealed in their foreheads: Chap. 7.15. They serve God day and night: But in a contrary sence: for there is noted the continuance of the Saints their joy in heaven: here the perpetuall torment of the damned. In the meane while it appeares, that by the phrase  day and night
is signified, alwaies, perpetually, and without intermission: for however there be no light or day in hell, but a perpetuall night or darknesse: yet the holy Ghost spea∣keth after the manner of men, who have dayes and nights interchangeably. Who worship the Beast] That the worshippers of the Beast might leave of to say that these torments are prepared for hereticks, whom they so terme, the holy Ghost doth expresly repeat, that they are prepared for them that worship the Beast and his image: Touching whom we have before treated. And whosoever receiveth the marke of his name] This is that large and Catholick symbole of the Romanists: for as we heard Chap. 13. the Beasts name in Greek is  Lateinos, in Hebrew  Romanus. 12. Here is the patience of the Saints] An hortatory and consolatory exclamati∣on unto the Saints, to stir them up to patience under the trials of Antichrist: & not to decrease in faith and obedience under the crosse: but looke up to the promi∣sed reward in heaven. This is the summe of the two following verses. The first member, here is the patience of the Saints, is taken out of Chap. 13.10. yet the scope is something different. For there it was spoken in respect of Antichrists tyranny: the sence therefore was thus: seeing Antichrists tyranny is so great, the Saints ought to prepare themselves patiently to endure, lest falling from their constancy, they make shipwrack of salvatiō: Here it is spoken with respect unto the torments of the Antichristians. Hence therefore the holy Ghost suggesteth an argument of patience to the Saints, that seeing so tragicall an end, is certainely to befall An∣tichrist and his followers, therefore they ought quietly to endure his tyranny, knowing the other are to suffer eternall punishment for the same: which horri∣ble destruction of the adversaries ought to provoke the Saints to constancy. Here are they that keep] A periphrasis of the Saints, for they are called Saints, not who are canonized in Antichrists Calender, but the observers of the commandements of God, and faith of Jesus: and both is opposed to the false worship of the Beast. The faith of Jesus, is our confidence in Christ the alone Saviour. The keeping of the com∣mandements of God, is obedience to the Gospell, not according to Antichrists de∣crees, but according to Gods Commandements. Both these cohere, for without obedience faith is hypocrisie, here, saith he, are they that keep: for, henceforward they shall, or let them keep: that is, we are exhorted to persevere constantly in the faith of Iesus and obedience of Gods commandements, that we may be free from Antichrists punishments. 13. And I heard a voice] Thus much of the exhortation. The consolation of the Saints followeth. It is an argument stirring up to constancy taken from the reward of heavenly felicity, for to use Brightmans words, the last evill which the wicked could bring upon them, is the meanes of the present felicity of the faithfull. It is opposed to the temptation of anathemaes, by which the Pope shall strike the three Angels, accusing them: as broaching a new Gospell: That they were enemies of the Catholick Church, and damnable hereticks: On the contrary the heavenly voice pronounceth them, Blessed, &c. this is the connexion and scope, let us now see the words. The particle (and) is continuative: for, Then, as Beza renders it, or causall, for, therefore be constant in the faith of Jesus, and obey God against the Beast: because, or, for I heard a voice. The words are Johns declaring with what comfort the Saints should raise up themselves to constancy: And whence he hath it: I heard a voice from heaven: Therefore being proclaimed from heaven it is certaine and true: he saith not whither it were a voice of God or an Angell. But it is the voice of Christ: Ioh. 5.24. Ioh. 8.51. who published the same in the Gospell: He that heareth my word, and be∣leeveth in him that sent me, hath life eternall, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life: And: If a man keep my word, he shall never see death. The heads of the voice are three. I. a commandement to write. II. The argument of the writing. III. The proofe and declaration of the argument. Write] Before in Ch. 1.19. he had a general commandement to write the Revela∣tion
This is a speciall commandement to write the heavenly voice, Bel l. 4. de verb. c. 4. touching the bles∣sednesse of such as die in the Lord. Both places teach (against the Iesuites) that the Apostles were commanded by Christ not onely to preach, but to write their doctrine. Now wherefore is he bid to write? That we might understand the dignity of this doctrine, the which the holy Ghost would not have to vanish in the aire, but to be set down in tables, that it might perpetually serve for the con∣solation of the Church, and that Antichrist might not in any wise be able to de∣ny, deprave, or suppresse the same. Write] to wit, to comfort the Saints, and refute the monstrous judgement of Antichrist touching the godly, that they are damnable hereticks: to refute also the wicked fiction of Purgatory, in which they say that the soules of them that die in the Lord, are first to be tormented, before they can enjoy felicity. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforward] By the second argument of this most comfortable writing, the dead in the Lord are declared to be bles∣sed: by which is refuted the prophanenesse of Epicures, who say, that death is the end of things, and that the dead are wholly brought to nothing. And the wicked opinion of Antichrist, touching the unhappy estate of the godly, by him accur∣sed as hereticks. But the heavenly voice pronounceth them blessed in death. Therefore Antichrists beastly thunder-bolts should not terrifie us. But let us see who are said to be blessed, and when. Of the former it is said, Who being dead are said to be blessed. Mat. 5.11. What it is to die in the Lord.  the dead who die in the Lord. Beza renders it, which die for the sake of the Lord, or, because of the Lord: ac∣cording to the saying: Blessed are ye when men shall say all evill against you falsly for my sake: The which Ribera also approves. And so indeed the words  in the Lord do sometimes signifie, as Rom. 16.1. Receive Phebe our fister in the Lord, as becommeth Saints, that is, for the sake of the Lord. Salure Amplius my be∣loved in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis which laboureth much in the Lord, that is, for the cause of Christ: Thus taken, the consolation should onely belong to Martyrs that die in the Lord, that is, who lay downe their life for the glory of Christ. But undoubtedly the consolation is more largely to be extended even unto all whosoever die godly: who as they are said to be, and abide in Christ: so also they are said to die in the Lord, that is, To be, and to die in Christ. to depart out of this life in true faith and in∣vocation on the Lord, and so to goe unto him. For to be in Christ, is to cleave un∣to Christ by true faith, Rom. 8.1. & 16.7. Who were before me in Christ. To a∣bide in Christ, is to persevere in the faith of Christ unto the end, Ioh. 15.4.7. Abide in me, &c. If yee abide in me, &c. So to die in Christ, is to fall asleep in the faith, 1 Cor. 15.18. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, The conso∣lation be∣longs as wel to professors as to mar∣tyrs. that is, in the faith of Christ, and in the hope of the blessed resurrection unto eternall glory. In this sence the consolation belongs not onely to the Martyrs, but to all true professours also: which exposition in my judgement doth best agree with the drift of the place. For here he speakes not of those sad times of Antichrist, when he raged in his full furie against the Saints, but of the more happy age of refor∣mation, when the power of Antichrist shall in many places be broken, neither shall the martyrdoms of the Saints be so frequent as before. Hence therefore we are taught, who after this life, are translated from death into eternall happinesse. Not such as die in the faith of the Beast, Act. 4.12. Ioh. 14.6. Antichrist, the Pope, or Mahumet, &c. But that die in the Lord. For there is no salvation in any o∣ther, neither is there given any other name whereby we must be saved, &c. He is the way, truth and life: no man commeth to the Father but by Christ. All that goe out of him are deprived of blessednesse, and shall be tormented with the plagues before described. But when shall they be blessed?  from henceforward] This particle in all Greek copies, save in that of Montanus, closeth up the sentence. But the old Latine makes it to cohere with the following words: a modo jam dicit spiritus,
rendring the word  also, or yea, viciously and sencelesly, jam, now, as Ribera con∣fesseth. For what sence is it to say, from this time now saith the spirit, that they may rest? Beza joynes  henceforward with  blessed henceforward. But it matters not where it be put in the sentence, so that it be not taken from it. Commonly it is understood of the terme or beginning of happinesse: and the question is, what that terme is? Some referre it to the time when this voice was heard, What is the terme or be∣ginning of happinesse. as if he should say, from the very instant of this revelation the dead in the Lord are blessed. But the question will be, whether the dead in the Lord were not blessed before the time of the revela∣tion? It is cleare that all the Apostles, and many of the Saints were departed in the Lord before this time. Now Christ extends blessednesse unto all the faithful, Mat. 5.11. & Ioh. 5.24. And seeing in this place is treated of the last times of the Church to be reformed by the three Angels, I see not, by what way he should goe back to those former times of John. Others therefore referre henceforward to the houre of every ones death, in a sence I confesse true and godly, but scarcely native or proper. It is true, they that depart hence in the faith, doe presently passe from death to life: for so Christ teacheth, Ioh. 5.24. This opinion also is pious, and becomming charity, not to deny that blessednesse to them that die in the Lord, which is promised them in Gospell. Ioh. 3.36. Ioh. 5.14. He that beleeveth in the Sonne of God hath everlasting life. He that beleeveth in me comes not into judgement, but is passed from death to life. The which also the carrying of Lazarus soule into the bosome of Abraham doth plainely confirme. Yet I know not whether henceforward can here properly be understood of the houre of every ones death. And this indeed the Papists deny, The Papists Glosse. to confirme their fiction about Purgatory, in which, as they feine, even they that die in the Lord are first to be tormented and purged (both from the pollution of veniall sins, as also from the guilt of temporall punishment, in which they died) before they can obtaine blessednesse in heaven. And they will have henceforward to denote the time of the last judgement, making the sence thus: Blessed are the dead, &c. a modo jam, from the time now, that is, from the end of the last judgement they shall eternally rest from their labours. So An∣selmus and Lyra, Lb. 1. de purg. c. 13. The Glosse refuted. the which BELLARMIN confirmes, because saith he, this whole Chap∣ter treats of the last judgement. But first, this last is false: for the last judgement, being the fourth Act of this vision, is not handled through the whole Chapter, but in the end onely, viz. from the 14. verse, for undoubtedly the three Angels publishing the everlasting Gospell with the ruine of Babylon, & future torments of idolaters, go before the last judge∣ment: And therefore henceforward cannot be applyed to the time of judgement. Secondly it is false, that men dying in the Lord, carry with them any pollu∣tion to be purged thereof: Ioh. 3.36. Rom. 8.1. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Act. 15.9. for this crosseth the Gospell: He that beleeveth in the Sonne of God hath everlasting life. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The blood of Christ purgeth us from all sinne. Purifying their hearts by faith. Therefore, whosoever die in the Lord, are without any mortall sinne cleaving unto them, much lesse veniall, and so being purged through faith in the blood of Christ from the guilt both of eternall and temporall punishment, they are translated into everlasting happinesse. Neither is this their wicked fiction confirmed by Austins authority: he saith rightly: Lib. 3. con. duas epist. Pelag. c. 3. that the faithfull in this life are partly the children of God, partly the children of this world: for so the Apostle affirmeth, Rom. 7.15. & Gal. 5.17. for all of us are spirit and flesh in part. But he saith not that we die such: for before we de∣part, by faith in the blood of Iesus Christ we are purged from all sin. I know that the 110. Chap. of Austins Enchiridion is objected touching the threefold condition of the soules departing: Augustine vinaicated. that some goe hence very evill: some very good, but others betwixt both, and so according to their merits are kept in hidden recepta∣cles either in rest or paine unto the resurrection. But I doubt whither Austin ever
saw that Platonick Chapter: and doe beleeve it was foisted into the Enchiridion by some body else: my reason is, because Austin in other places doth expresly speak but of two conditions of them that die, and of two places after this life, altoge∣ther denying a third. As through one, saith he, all go to condemnation: Lib 1. de peccat. M∣rit. c. 28. Lib. 5. hy∣pogn. circa medinm. so all by one to justification. Neither is there any middle place for any: but he that is not with Christ must needs be with the Divell. More clearely in another place. The faith of Catho∣licks doth by divine authority beleeve, that the first place is the kingdome of heaven, from whence, as I said, the unbaptized are excluded. The second GEHENNA or hell, where all apostates, or infidels shall feele eternall torments. A third we are altogether ignorant of, for we finde it not mentioned in the Scriptures of God. And againe: Serm. 14. de verb. Apostoli. I have given no di∣visions of places, save ONELY OF TWO, &c. So likewise: There is left no middle place between the right hand and the left. To returne to the particle , henceforward, although it be not applyed in the least to the houre of death: yet the assertion of the Saints happinesse remains certaine and true, even from the very instant of death, not onely by many Scrip∣tures before alleadged, but from this place: Purgato∣ries fiction resuted. for it is not said  they that were dead, but  they that die, in the present tense. There∣fore so soone as the godly are dead, they are blessed. Thus Purgatorie is hence not∣withstanding excluded. But what then is meant by henceforward? We are to observe that the time of this Third Act, is the time of the reformation and deliverance of the Church from Popery by the three Angels: from henceforward therefore, that is, The Au∣thors opini∣on touch∣ing the par¦ticle hence forward. from the time the three Angels published the everlasting Gospell against Babylon and Antichrist, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that is, they not onely are or shall be so: but the three Angels shall publish and preach the same, refuting the heathenish ficti∣on of Purgatory, Satisfactions and Indulgences. For these Angels shall not one∣ly teach that Antichrists Bulls are vaine, but also prove by the Scriptures of God that the paine of Purgatory is a wicked and feined imagination, there being no such place: And as hereby the godly shall be freed from that errour and vaine feare: so Antichrists gaine shall be much lessened. Yea saith the spirit, that they may rest] This is the third. The holy Ghost seems to adde two reasons of their blessednesse: ONE is, because they rest from their la∣bours, to wit, which they have suffered in this life, for, they have attained the end of their labours and combats, henceforward enjoying everlasting rest: The other, because their workes follow them, by a metalepsis, for, because they now have the fruit or reward of their workes, which was laid up in heaven for them. The merit of workes is not here e∣stablished, but refted It appeares that both reasons are taken from runners in a race, who having attained the marke, enjoy a twofold benefit: rest and reward. So  that, is here put for the causall  be∣cause they rest, &c. Their workes are said to follow them, or  with them (as it is in the text) being as it were the followers of faith in this life. Hence the merits of workes are rather overthrown then established. For seeing they follow, therefore they merit not, otherwise they should goe before as causes. Rom. 6.23. Now they draw with them a free reward, because the gift of God is eternall life. The third Part of the Chapter. Of the Harvest and Ʋintage of the last iudgement. 14 And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sate like unto the Sonne of man, having on his head a golden crowne, and in his hand a sharpe sickle. 15 And another Angel came out of the Temple, crying with a loud
voice to him that sate on the cloud: Thrust in thy sickle, and reape, for the time is come for thee to reape, for the harvest of the earth is ripe, 16 And he that sate on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped. 17 And another Angell came out of the Temple which is in heaven, he also having a harpe sickle. 18 And another Angell came out from the Altar, which had power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharpe sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharpe sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. 19 And the Angell thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepresse of the wrath of God. 20 And the winepresse was troaden without the city, and blood came out of the winepresse, even unto the horse-bridles, by the space of a thou∣sand and sixe hundred furlongs. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I looked and behold a white cloud] Hither to we have handled three Acts of the fourth Viston: The first (briefly to repeat them againe) comprehends the condition of the Church in its beginning and growth, with her many combats under the Ro∣mane Emperours, both Pagan and Christian untill Antichrists rising, in the first 600 yeeres, Chap. 12. The second opposed to the former, contains the consolation of the godly under the foresaid conflicts, in the same Chapter. The third having two parts, represents 1. Antichrists persecutions, which from his first rising till now have continued more then a thousand yeeres, Chap. 13. 2. The Churches preservation under the same, and also her future purging from the dreges of Antichrist in the last times. Chap. 14. The fourth Ast here followeth, describing the joyfull Catastrophe or change of all the Churches afflictions in the day of judgement, the forme where∣of is figured out in two parables, viz. of the Harvest and Vintage, in the rest of this Chapter. Furthermore, The consent of nterpre∣ters about the last judgement. I see all interpreters (a few onely excepted) unanimously to agree that the last judgement is here treated of: And I wonder that any should dissent in a matter so cleare and evident. For by types and words not much unlike, the judgement to come is described in Dan. 7. touching the Sonne of man comming in the clondes of heaven to judgement: and Mat. 3. & 13. of the harvest of the tares and wheat. They agree also in the scope, that these types serve to comfort the godly, and terrifie the wicked. For the godly doe groane under their afflictions & trou∣bles, desiring to know what end at length shall be put to their evils: On the contrary Tyrants and Antichrist doe-tumultuously rage without let or punish∣ment, promising to themselves perpetuall prosperity: Lest therefore the faithfull should be discouraged, seeing the sonne of perdition thus to rage, and themselves overwhelmed with divers sorrows and calamities, here the last judgement is pro∣pounded to John, in which shall follow a wonderfull change of things. For then the Wheat shall be gathered into the heavenly Barne, and the chaffe burned with unquenchable fire. This I say is the scope and use of the remaining matter in the Chapter. But in the coherence of these things with the foregoing, I finde all equally at a
stay, as not perceiving wherefore the last judgement is here againe represented, Touching the Cohe∣rence inter∣preters are troubled. seing it was before shewed unto John, Chap. 6. towards the end. & Chap. 11. to∣wards the end. and afterward againe in Chap. 16. and most clearely in the end of Chapters 19. & 20. Ribera (as before Chap. 11) hath nothing to say, save that the day of judgement is here described by an anticipation: because the context of the things themselves requires that the punishment of the wicked be here de∣scribed. But no reason can be given why these judgements should be so often described, and that indeed at the end of every Vision, except our method be ob∣served, in which we have noted that all the generall visions consist of foure Acts answering each to other. This therefore is the true cause why the last judgement is here againe represented, because the last Act of the fourth Vision now follow∣eth. Let us see the words. And I saw] This is the last part of the vision. The last Iugdement figured out by the Har∣vest and Vintage. The day of judgement is figu∣red out by two types, The Harvest and Vintage: because there shall be two acts of the same: The gathering of the godly into heaven, and the casting of the wicked into hell fire. The former is set forth by the Harvest, in which the wheat shall be gathered into the barne, according to the parable of Christ, Mat. 13.30. The latter, by the Vintage, because the wicked shall be troaden downe in the lake of Gods wrath, that is, be tormented with eternall paines of hell. So these types may not unfitly be distinguished. Notwithstanding it is not amisse to difference them as the whole and part. For the Harvest shall not onely gather the wheat out of the Lords field into the garner, but also burne the tares that are gathered, as we see in the said parable, Mat. 13. Thus the Harvest should represent the whole judgement. But the vintage shall cast and tread all the grapes in the lake of Gods wrath. Now the godly shall not be cast into this lake, for they shall not come into condemnation, Ioh. 5.24. But the ungodly onely. And therefore by the vintage the punishment of the wicked seemes onely to be represented. Thus much of the parables in generall. And behold a white cloud] The person of Christ the Iudge is gloriously discri∣bed in this verse, by foure adjuncts. 1. by his forme: that he is like to the Son of man. 2. by the gesture of body, he sits on a white cloud: 3. by his habit, he hath on his head a Crown of Gold. 4. By the Instrument: He holds in his hand a sharpe Sicle. In these words is no obscurity: therefore I will not dwell on them. They who deny or doubt, (as Ribera and Brightman) that the Son of man doth here denote Christ, because it is not said the Son of man, but like to the Son of man: Neither with an article  seeme in my opinion to ground it on a very slight conjecture. For in Dan. 7.13. It is plain; Christ is said to be like to the Son of man: I saw in the clouds of Heaven as it were the Son of man. And Paul Philip 2.7. Being made in the likenesse of men, he was found in fashion or habit as a man. And Rom. 8. He sent his son in the likenesse of sinfull flesh. And Heb. 2.14. He likewise tooke part of flesh and blood: and Verse 17. It behoved him to bee made like his brethren: In which Phrases the verity of Christs humane nature is not denyed, but the priviledge of the Man-Christ is noted: that though he bee like unto us in all things, yet is he not (like us) man onely, but God also; neither as man is he borne a sinner of mans seed, but conceived and begotten of a Vir∣gin by the operation of the Holy Ghost, being not defiled with any staine of sinne. That which they say of the Article, is infirme: For before also in Chap. 1.13. Iohn saw CHRIST  like to the Son of man (without an Article) standing in the middest of the seven Candlestickes: Here he sees him sitting as a Iudge on his Tribunall.
On a white cloud] Noting his divine Majesty: For God in the Psalms is often said to be carried and ride on the clouds, because of his heavenly power. This white cloud is that throne of glory, whereon Christ saith he will sit, Mat. 25.31. The which throne he himselfe interprets of the clouds of heaven, Mat. 26.64. Here∣after yee shall see the Sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the clouds of heaven, according to that in Dan. 7.13. The crown of gold on his head, is the ensigne of his Kingly Majesty. In Chap. 19.12. he hath many Diadems on his head: and on his thigh a name written, The King of kings, and Lord of lords. The Beast also had crownes on his hornes, but not of gold, and ten onely. This Iudge therefore is more powerfull then Antichrist and all tyrants, for with an iron rod he will crush all adversaries as a potters vessell in the day of judgement. The sharp sickle of a reaper, which is in his hand, to wit, in his right hand, denotes Christs judicary and divine power, to whom it is as easle to execute his judge∣ment on the whole earth, as for reapers with a sharp sickle to cut down the ripe corne. ANDREAS: the sickle, saith he, is a symbole of consummation, for Christ himself cals the end of the world, a harvest, Mat. 13. 15. Another Angell came out of the temple] This Angell and the other two comming forth out of the temple and altar, vers. 17.18. are not preachers of the Gospell, as Brightman supposeth (for at the harvest and vintage of the last judgement preaching shall cease) but it is one of the chiefe Ministers of Christ, by whom he will execute the judgement. He comes out of the Temple, to wit, of heaven, as vers. 17. & before Chap. 11.19. By and by another comes forth from the Altar of Heaven, which is visionally to be ta∣ken: because properly there is no Temple nor Altar in heaven: but formerly in Ierusalem it was fashioned and made according to the heavenly patterne. The great cry of the Angell (saith ANDREAS) denotes the common supplication of all vertues, desiring to see the glory indeed of the just, but the excision of the unjust and all iniquity, that transitory and unstable things might have an end, and that which is stable and eternal appeare. Thrust thy sickle] It is no commanding but a supplicating voice, for the Angels command not Christ, but worship him: The words are taken out of Joel 3.13. where Iehovah saith: I will sit in the valley of Jehosaphat to judge all the heathen round about. Put yee in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. The Angell knew that the day of judgement was neare, and intreateth therefore, that the judge would stay no lon∣ger, but thrust the sickle into the harvest. Thy sickle, saith he, to wit, which is thine by office. But how doth the Angell bid Christ to reap, seeing Christ calls the Angels rea∣pers, Mat. 13.39? I answer, In all Allegories circumstances doe often varie. Christ is here said to doe that, which there is applyed to the Angels, because Christ reapes by the Angels his ministers, yea the Angell here offers himselfe to the Lord to reape. Because the time is come for thee] Gr.  thy houre, &c. The An∣gell addes a twofold reason of his petition. The former from the first cause, for, saith he, the terme of judgement prefixed in the counsell of God is at hand. But whence doth the Angell know this, seeing that day and houre is not manifested to any creature, Mar. 13.9? I answer, by revelation from God: Or else, by the signes which he saw were either all past or at hand. In saying, for thee, he acknowledgeth him to be appointed by the Father the onely Iudge of the world: Ioh. 5.12. as he saith himselfe: The Father judgeth no man, but hath given all judgement to the Sonne. Here by the phrase we have no obscure argu∣ment, that Iohn the Evangelist is the Authour of the Revelation, with whom we finde nothing more familiar then to expresse a defined time by  houre, as Cha. 2.4. My houre is not yet come, Chap. 5.25. My houre is come and now is, Chap. 7.30. No man laid hands on him because his houre was not yet come, Chap. 13.1.
Jesus knowing, that his houre was come, Chap. 17.1. Father, the houre is come, glorifie thy Sonne, &c. To reap] That is, to take away men from the earth: by gathering the good as wheat into the barne: but the tares into bundles to be burnt, as is declared, Mat. 13.30. For the harvest is ripe] This is the second reason, from the next cause, or order of nature, requiring harvest when the corne is white, Ioh. 4.35. Lift up your eyes, saith Christ, and looke on the fields, for they are already white to harvest: Therefore be∣ing ripe, the time of harvest is at hand. This ripenesse signifies that the measure of the Churches calamities, Antichrists tyranny, and the iniquity of the wicked was now full, as God in Gen. 18.21. saith touching the sinnes of the Sodomites: that he was come to see whither they were come to the full height or not: And Christ of the Pharisees: Mat. 23.32. Fill yee up then the measure of your fathers. 2 Pet. 3.9. Rom. 2.4. This also commendeth both the patience and justice of God: The Lord is not slack in his judgement, but is patient towards us, not willing that any should perish: but by long∣suffering leadeth us to repentance. So then he will execute judgement most justly, because he will not doe it, till there be no hope of the worlds recovery, and that the sinnes of men are come to that height as none shall have cause to complaine either of the overmuch haste or severity of the Iudge. 16 And he that sate on the cloude thrust in his sickle] Christ readily yeelds to the request of the Saints: for its no sooner desired, but he thrusts the sickle into the earth, for, into the ripe fruits of the earth, by a Synecdoche, that is, on men themselves. When therefore the houre of judgement shall come, Christ will finish the harvest of the earth, without any delay, labour, or hinderance, for he is a most carefull and powerfull Iudge. And the earth was reaped] that is, both the living and the dead being cited be∣fore the tribunall seat of judgement received rewards, according to that in Joh. 5.29. & Mat. 25.46. The declaration of this parabolicall harvest is best expounded by Christ him∣selfe, Mat. 13.39. The harvest is the end of the world: The reapers are the Angels: then the Sonne of man shall send forth, and say, gather yee together first the tares, and binde them in bundles to burne them: but gather the wheat into my barne. The tares are the seed of the wicked one: the good seed are the children of the Kingdome. Then therefore the Angels shall gather out of his kingdome all things that offend, and them which doe ini∣quity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth: but the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdome of their Father, &c. This is that harvest which John saw, by us indeed who walke in faith, longed af∣ter: but it shall be dreadfull unto the worshippers of the Beast: for we shall be ga∣thered into Gods barne: but as many as have not repented of their Antichristian idolatry, being threshed with the eternall scourges of Gods wrath, shall be burnt in hell fire. If thou demaund how Christ himself is said to thrust the sickle into the earth: seeing this charge was committed before to the reaping Angels: we have even now answered, that Christ is said to have done that which the Angels are to doe by his commandement, as in Ioh. 4.2. Christ is said to have made and baptized more Disciples then John, yet it is added, he baptized not, but his Disciples did, to wit, by his authority and commandement. 17. And another Angell came out of the Temple] Another type of the foresaid judgement, properly representing the horrible punishments of the wickedunder the forme of a vintage. First Christ doth againe come forth in the likenesse of an Angell with a sharpe sickle not to reap, (as before) but to cut downe the vine, which again represents Christs judicatory power. Some by this Angell understand the Saints, who in that great Day, as assi∣stants to Christ, shall judge the world, according to that in 1 Cor. 6.2. But I dare not attribute this sickle to the Saints. Perhaps this Angell is one of the chiefe mi∣nisters
of Christ the Iudge: Or it is an Enallage of the singular for the plurall, be∣cause as the Angells shall be Reapers, so also Vintagers in the end of the world. Yet I see nothing to hinder, why Christ the Iudge may not here be understood, who alone holdeth the Iudicatory Sickle, because he onely hath received all power from the Father. For often Christ is said to be an Angell: as in Chap. 7.2. & 8.3. & 10.1. To wit, the Angell of the Covenant, and great Counsell: neither is it unusuall that Christ in respect of his divers functions in divers Visions, should also be represented under divers Types, as sometimes being called the Son of man, otherwhile a Lambe, a Lyon, an Angell, &c. He is said to come out of the Temple, the which Iohn in Chap. 11.19. saw open in Heaven: for the Temple, especially the Sanctuary: was a figure of Heaven: Heb. 9.2. so then he came out of Heaven from whence the Iudge shall come. We see that all things are dramatically acted in this Revelation: for as in Comoedies among men, divers persons comming out of divers Scenes, do act their parts on the Theatre: so it is in these Visions, to the end we might more easily perceive Heavenly things by a certain similitude of things done amongst us. 18. And another Angell came out from the Altar] Seeing the former Angell having the Sickle, was Christ the Iudge: We therefore do rightly understand this Angell to be some chiefe Minister of Christ: whose Cry; Thrust thy Sickle, is not a commanding voyce or admonitory, as if the Iudge were slack in his Office, but supplicatory, desiring him not to deferre the Iudgement any longer, but to ex∣ecute the same, because of the inveterate malice of the world: as in verse 15. He comes out of the Altar] Or from the Altar, that is, from Christ who is the Heavenly Altar: namely as a Herauld, who in the name of all the rest proclaimes the time of the last Iudgement, testifies the desire of all the Heavenly Powers, for the vindication of the Church, and punishment of the adversaries, and offers as it were his most ready ministery to the Iudge. Having power over fire] Hence we learne, saith Andreas, that God hath set the an∣gelicall powers as administrators of things created by him: One over Water, ano∣ther over Fire, Dan. 10.13.20. another over another part of the world: This exposition I do not alto∣gether reject, seeing the Scripture other where testifies, that some Angells were set over particular Kingdomes. Yet I neither will affirme, nor deny whether some are set over one Element, others over another: because afterward in Chap. 16.5. What is meant by this fire. mention is made of the Angell of the waters: Neverthelesse it is clear, God useth them to execute some one judgement, some another. Furthermore what this Fire is, over which he is said to have power, is diversly disputed: some understand the fire of the holy Ghost. But no created Angell can have power over the holy Ghost, who is the eternall God. Others, the fire, which shall consume the world: as if this Angell who is said to have power over fire, should set the whole world on fire. But God shall need no Incendiaties to burne the World. Ribera hereby understands the fire of the heavenly Altar, by which the Sacrifi∣ces of the Saints were burn'd: probably indeed, but by an allegory not safe enough: for seeing the sacrifices of the Saints in Heaven are their prayers and thanksgi∣vings, by which they allwayes praise the Lord: I see not how it agrees to Chri∣stian beleife, that any created Angell should have power over this fire. But I won∣der that none have applyed it to the fire of Purgatory. Bede applyes it to the fire of Punishment: which Ribera approves not, be∣cause the punishment of the wicked is here Metaphorically figured, not by fire, but by the Wine-Presse of Gods wrath: yet a little before we heard that the un∣godly should be tormented with fire and brimstone, the smoake whereof should ascend up for ever and ever. This interpretation Bullinger followeth, and we also approve of: for fire in the Psalmes, and generally through the whole Scripture, denotes Gods plagues and punishment on the wicked, the which he executeth by his Angells.
This Angell therefore hath power, to wit, ministerially over Hell fire, because by this Angell, or by these Angells (for it may be an Enallage of the singular for the plurall) Christ the Iudge will cast the tares into eternall fire: which agrees with the Parable of Christ. Mat. 13.42. They shall cast them into a Fur∣nace of Fire. And gather the Clusters of the Vine of the earth] A Vine doth sometimes de∣note the Church: Isa 5.1. Mat. 20.1. Into which the Lord sends divers labou∣rers to dresse the same. But here it signifies other the Church of malignants, or the world of ungodly men: therefore he calls it the Vine of the earth, for, the whole multitude of the wicked, who are not those ripe grapes, which the Lord looked for and found not in his Vineyard: Isa 5.2. but it is taken in the evill part for the wild, unripe and sowre grapes, which God in wrath threatens to cut off: And they are said to be ripe, not for new Wine, but Verjuyce: because when the wickednesse of the ungodly is grown to its full ripenesse, destruction & ru∣ine necessarily followes. 19. And the Angell thrust in his Sickle] The execution will be short: for the Iudge, when the houre is come shall without any let cut downe the Vintage of the earth, that is, execute wrath on the wicked, by casting them into the great Lake of Gods wrath. The lake of Gods Wrath is great. Hell metaphorically is called the lake of Gods wrath, or the place of infernal torments, for as the clusters of the Vine are troden in the Wine-presse, so the Reprobates shall be punished in bell. It is great, that is large enough to con∣taine all the multitude of the wicked that perish. A large Vintage requires a spatious place: now this Vontage shall be the greatest, to wit, of all the wicked even from Cain the first parricide,  the last , which shall be death▪ And therefore the lake must be great. 20. And the Wine-presse wa troden without the City] This shall be the thru∣sting of the wicked into eternall torments. Without the City] viz. the Heavenly Ierusalem, which is described Chap. 22.15. Without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers and murtherers, and Idola∣ters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie: which is the proper description of the Grapes of the Vine of the earth to be troden in the great lake of hell, and to be cast forth into utter darknesse, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And blood came out of the Wine-presse] The Scripture is wont to call red wine the blood of the grape, of the like rednesse thereof. Here he calls the liquor, flow∣ing out of the lake, Blood, not by reason of the colour, but to denote the bloody and horrible kinde of punishment that is to befall the wicked; for seeing they could not be satiated with the blood and slaughter of Saints, therefore hell also being made red with their blood, shall not be satiated for ever and ever. Ʋnto the Horse-Bridles] He aggravates the horriblenesse of their plagues from the great abundance of blood flowing out of the Wine-presse, both by the space, of a thousand and sixe hundred furlongs, and the depth so great, that it reacheth e∣ven to the horse bridles. For there shall be an innumerable multitude of the clusters of the earth, that is, of all the wicked from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, who being together cast and miserably crushed in the Wine-presse, there shall on all sides flow forth so much blood, as it shall encrease to such a wide and deep Lake or Sea. A Furlong containes an Hundred twenty and five Paces. Eight Furlongs make an Italian or English mile: Thirty two a Germane: so then a Thousand six hundred Furlongs make fifty Germane miles. Why the holy Ghost doth assigne precisely this number to the lake, needs not to be known by us. Andreas thinkes it is to signifie the consummated iniquity of those men, and the greatnesse of their punishment: seeing a millinary number is most perfect, and most consummate: And in the sixe hundred yeer of Noah, we read that sin was overwhelmed by water. But it is more safe to say that a great definite number put for an indefinite.
But what is meant by the Horse bridles? I thinke it serves to upbraide the adversaries, who being mounted on stately horses, were wont to behold the Mar∣tyrs in their sufferings, and proudly to trample their blood under their horses feet. But then those proud horses shall swim in blood (not of the Martyrs) but of their owne Lords and Riders. Also I do not disaprove that some suppose it to be an Allusion unto Conque∣rours, who after the fight and great slaughter of their adversaries, usually go forth to behold the carcasses of the slain: and because the fields do flow with blood, they go not a foot but ride on horses: Now if the blood shall ascend even to the bridles of the horses, certainly hereby is signified the slaughter of infinite adver∣saries, Is 66.24. and a most horrible effusion of blood: by a like figurative Speech Isaiah describeth the destruction of the wicked, and the victory of the Saints: They shall go forth and looke upon the Carcasses of men that have transgressed against me, for their worme shall not die, neither shall their fire bee quenched, and they shall be an hor∣ror to all flesh.
The PREFACE of the Fift VISION: Touching the seven Vialls contained in Chap. XV. & XVI. IOhn points at a new Vision, in saying; And I saw another great signe: for so he began the fourth Vision Chap. 12. This Vision therefore is the Fift, more short indeed (for it is comperhended & ended in Chapters 15 & 16.) But not much plainer then the former, therefore it is called a Marveilous Signe. He saw seven Angells going forth out of the heavenly Temple, with seven Vialls full of Gods wrath, & pouring out the seven last plagues up∣on the worshippers & throne of the beast, & on divers elements: whence there follow dreadfull events: Now it manifestly appeareth, that grievous punish∣ments are hereby denounced to the Kingdome, and followers of Antichrist. But it is very obscure to define what manner of plagues, and what the effects are, whether they are properly or tropically to be understood, and to what times they belong. Lyra applyes all these things Metaphorically unto the Acts of the Ro∣mane Popes, Hadrian, Leo, Hildebrand, &c. against the Emperours Constantine the Image Breaker, and Henry IV. and others, untill the Holy Warre raised by Peter the Hermite, that is, from the yeere 742. untill the yeer 1094: But his grounds are insufficient, for if so, then these plagues should have been ended long agoe, whereas they are called the last, filling up the wrath of God. Ribera applying it litterally to the foure yeers of Antichrist, supposeth, that there shall be reall plagues like the Egyptian, unto which there is here a plain allusion; But it will manifestly appeare in its place, that the litte∣rall sense cannot generally stand: Yea even hence it appeares, that the Kingdome of Antichrist is absurdly straitned to the time of foure yeers: because the History of the seven plagues requires a far greater time. We will collect from such things as are plaine the darke and obscurer matters. Two things seem to be cleer. First, that the beginning of these plagues belong to the time when the beast was allready ascended out of the sea and earth, and when the whole world worshipped his image: Yea, when the beast began to be overcome by some, that is, after Popery had stood a long while in its flourishing estate, and began now again somewhat to decline: This appears by the first and fift Viall poured out upon the worshippers & throne of the beast. Chap. 16. ver. 2.10. as also by the song for the victory over the beast. Chap. 16.2. The Second is, that the plagues shall end in the fall of Babylon, when the Islands shall flee away, and the mountaines shall not be found, that is, in the end of the world: which appears by the seventh Vial: see also Chap. 20.11. The fift vision is not universall. By which, first it is manifest, that this Vision is not universall, neither doth it contain the whole History of the Church, as did the three foregoing, but is particular and restrained to Antichrists Kingdom: Therefore it doth
not consist of the four Acts, which we shewed were in the former: but onely of the two latter: so that the seven Vials answer not to the seven Seales and Trumpets, as some have thought, because of their likenesse in some effects: for the beginning of the Seales and Trumpets extended it selfe even to the times of the Apostles, and first birth, (so to say) of the Christian Church as before appeared: whereas the pouring out of the Vials only shadowes out the last plagues of the Kingdom of the beast. Secondly, It belongs to the last times. It is manifest that this Vision belongs to the last times, and shall be finished indeed at the end of the world, but takes its beginning about the time that the measuring of the Temple (treated of in Chap. 11.) was already begun, that is, about the time of the Churches Reformation in Do∣ctrine and maners, whereby the throne of the beast was grievously shaken, and the Popes Kingdom much weakned by Luther, and other evangel∣licall Preachers. Thirdly, It plainly appears that the seven Vials of these angels, an∣swer to what was published by the three, or more clearly, by the two latter Angels (for the preaching of the first took no great effect) of which before in Chap. 14. verse 8, 9, 10, 11. Teaching us that the thundrings of those crying Heraulds: Babylon is fallen, is fallen. And If any one wor∣ship the beast, he shull drinke of the wine of the fury of Gods Wrath, &c. shall not passe away without effect, but be very terrible and mortall to Antichristians, what ever they attempt to the contrary by fire and sword: because from that time forward they shall receive one plague upon another, untill they be utterly destroyed. For as the Gospell is the sa∣vour of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.16 to them that are saved, so a savour of death unto death, to them that perish. The scope therfore and use of this Prophesie is Doctrinall and Consolatory. The scope and use of this vision. For First it teacheth, that after the beasts kingdom hath flourished and vexed the Saints a long time, it shalbe weakened by preaching of the Gospell. Secondly, It shall allwayes notwithstanding remaine in some power, not ceasing to make War with the Saints untill the end. Thirdly, Howsoever it shall tyrannically rage against the Reformation of Evangelicall doctrine, yet it shall never be able again to suppresse the same, but there shalbe many Angels to poure out the vials of Gods wrath on the throne thereof. Lastly, as the Gospell shalbe pleasing and saving to the elect: because by it they overcome the beast, for which they shall celebrate God with perpetu∣all praises: so to Antichristians it shall be grievous and mortall, because being turned into rage in regard of the successe thereof, they shall fret and grieve to see their kingdom, which seemed immoveable, to be weakened, lessened, and go to ruine, untill (being wasted with the last plagues) they shalbe cast according to the threatning of the third Angell Chap. 14.10. into everlasting tor∣ments of fire & brimstone. Now hence the spirit suggests a twofold comfort unto us. The first, from the often renewed plagues of the beast: whose power, wealth, luxuri∣ousnesse and oftentation was great, as we heard Chap. 13. But we need not be offended at those shadowes, for she shall receive and feel inward torments and gnawings by the prea∣ching of the Gospell, and in the middest of her delights be tormented by Gods wonderfull judgements and severe plagues.
The second, from the finall fall of Babylon: the Popes parasites affirm: that the seat of Saint Peter shall endure for ever: that the Catholick Romane Church be∣ing founded and strengthened by God shall stand, &c. That the Gates of Hell shall not prevaile against her: but Babylon shall come in remembrance before God, and in a moment be cast down by an earthquake: so she shall cease to vexe the Church and perse∣cute the Saints. We have heard the Argument, Scope and Ʋse of the Ʋision: now it is partly dra∣maticall, partly propheticall. The Dramaticall part containes certaine preparatory ap∣paratitions serving for the Order, and preparation of the vision Chap. 15. The Prophe∣ticall part foretelleth the kinds and encreasing of the seven plagues on the worshippers of the Beast. Chap. 16. CHAP. XV. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. This vvhole Chapter is a preparation to the follovving Ʋision, for Iohn declares here vvhat, & vvhat manner of things he savv be∣fore the pouring out of the seven Ʋials, The parts here are three: I. THe seven Angells with so many plagues, ver. 1. II. A com∣pany of Harpers, ver. 2, 3, 4. III. The clothing of the Angells, vers. 5, &c. In the First he expoundeth what he saw. I. generally, A great and marveilous signe in Heaven. II. specially, seven An∣gells, with their Instruments: having seven plagues: The which he describeth by the Epythite, Last, with the reason hereof: because in them is filled up the wrath of God: verse 1. In the second he expoundeth I. The place of the harpers: A sea of glasse. II. The harpers themselves, whom he describeth 1. by the effect: They had gotten the Victory, &c. 2. By their station: standing on the sea of glasse. 3. By the Instrument having the harpes of God vers. 2, 4. By another effect, And they sang, verse 3. III. The Argument of the song, generally from the Author and subject: The Song of Moses and of the Lamb. And specially, so far as concerneth the words and the sense: consisting of a Preface, Proposition and Reasons. The Preface is laudatory, figured out by an exclamation to God: I. They de∣clare his power and Majesty: Lord Almighty, King of Saints. II. His workes by the adjuncts of quantity and quality: They are great and marveilous. III. His Iudgements by the adjunct qualitie of Iustice and Constancy: Just and true are thy wayes ver. 3. The Proposition: The Lord is to be feared and glorified. It is figured out by an Interogation. Who shall not feare, &c. The reason is threefold. 1. From the Property of God: for thou onely art holy. 2. From the worship due to him: All nations shall come. 3. From the moving cause: Thy Iudgements are made manifest. v. 4. In the third he rehearseth 1. The receptacle of those Angells: The Temple of the Tabernacle opened in Heaven ver. 5. 2. Their gesture: They went out. 3. Their habit: having seven plagues. 4. Their ornament: clothed in white and pure lin∣nen, ver. 6. 5. The Instruments given them: he gave them golden Vialls: which he describeth by the number: seven: And what they contained: full of the wrath of God, &c. verse 7. 6. Two effects 1. The smoake of Gods Majesty fil∣ling the Temple. 2. A shutting out of all persons from entring into the Tem∣ple, during the time of the plagues, verse 8.
The first Part of the CHAPTER. The Argument of the Vision: seven ANGELS, with so many PLAGUES. 1 And I savv another signe in Heaven great and marveilous, seven Angells having the seven last Plagues, for in them is filled up the vvrath of God: THE COMMENTARY. I. Why the Visions are iterated. AND I saw another Signe] Iohn is not informed by one Ʋisi∣on, but by many touching future things, that so by comparing the obscurer types with the plainer, the Revelation might the better be manifested: The iteration therefore of the Ʋisions is not in vaine. Now it is to be observed, The follow∣ing things doe all be∣long to An∣tichrists judgement. after that the Beast, that is, Anti∣christ was once mentioned, his tyranny and pompe plainly described in the fore∣going Ʋision: the remainder of this whole Prophesie containes descriptions of the judgements, by which God will restraine and destroy Antichrist, but deliver the Saints from his Tyranny, and bestow the rewards of Victory on them: both to the end to meet with the scandall of desertion of the godly, And to the terrour of the wicked, and comfort of the godly. least it should be thought that Christ neglects his under the Crosse, or to be a sleep, or want power to suppresse Antichrists rage: as also that in hope of Victory and glory to come, they might with the more alacrity resist Antichrist, and persevere constant under their long during troubles. To this end tend the seven last Plagues, which God in the last times will poure out on the Throne and followers of the Beast: Let us henceforward keep this use in memory. Iohn therefore saw another signe, What a signe is. that is, another Vision signifying events, di∣vers from the former: for a signe is that which makes something divers from it selfe to come into the cogitation, Austin lib. 2. de doctr. Christi cap. besides the shape or forme it suggesteth to the senses. But as signes are not the things themselves: so the things themselves are not to bee sought in the signes as if they were included,  according to the common errour now adayes, touching the Sacramentall signes: which except thou affirme them to be changed into the things they represent, or really to containe them, pre∣sently they are reputed as vaine and empty things. But its enough for the Sacra∣mentall use of signes, if they make spirituall things to come into our minde and beleefe. But this by the way. In Heaven] That is (as most interpret it) in the Church: But there is no need of an Allegory: for these are heaveny Visions: And Iohn saw these sights acted on the heavenly Theatre. Great] A great signe (as Chap. 12.1.) shadowing out great things: It re∣quires attention, as also the following Epithite Admirable, representing things worthy of admiration: to wit, the great & wonderfull judgements of God in de∣livering his Church, and casting down Antichrist: for it is a thing indeed to be wondred at, that the powerfull Kingdom of the Romane Antichrist, should be only weakned by such a contemptible and weak meanes as the preaching of the Gospell. It is also admirable, that the faithfull, men despised should fight against and overcome the Beast. Thus these Epithites serve to comfort us, knowing that the Church shall certainly overcome Antichrist. Seven Angells] He summarily propounds the whole Vision, which he expoun∣deth
afterward. Therefore we will not stay long upon it. Of seven Angells mention is made in Chap. 1. ver. 4. and Chap. 8. verse 2. & 16. 1. & 17.1. & 21.9. In all which places they are said to be  seven with the article  excepting in this place: whence it might be questioned whether these seven be the same with the former that sounded the Trumpets. Brightman thinkes they are not the same: neither do I dislike his opinion if we take the Angells for the Ministers of the Gospell, because the time of the six former Trumpets and these Ʋialls is different. Yet we may rightly under∣stand they are the same: because the said seven Angells that is, many (for a sep∣tenary number doth indefinitely signifie perfection) doe type out divers per∣sons in sundry Visions. The last plagues. Having the seven Plagues] That is, as we have it expounded in ver. 7. Se∣ven golden Ʋialls full of the wrath of the living God, &c. The Plagues, which God in wrath will inflict on Antichristians, are said to be the last, because they shall happen in the last times: For the christian Church hath four periods. One under the Rome tyrants: The second from Constantine under Christi∣an Emperours untill the times of Phocas: The third under Antichrist sway∣ing in his full vigour, from Pope Boniface III. unto Leo X. in whose time Antichristian power began to decline: The fourth under Antichrists declining from Luthers time to the end. Unto this last period, belong the last plagues. The foure periods of the new Church. Thus John himselfe expounds it: because in them is filled up the wrath of God:  is filled up, for,  shall be filled up: by an Enallage of the Preterperfect for the Future usuall with John, because of the certainty of the events; he signifies therefore that the plagues should continue unto the end: One Plague following another, till the last did put an end to Antichrists rage, and the Churches troubles. They are said to be seven for the number of the Angells, that is, divers, and continuated, as we shall see hereafter. Ribera moves a Question how Iohn should returne from the Harvest and Ʋin∣tage of the last judgement even now described, A questi∣on about the order. unto the seven Plagues which are to be before the judgement: neither indeed is it a frivolous Question, yea inso∣luble to Ribera and all such who make the Revelation a continued History: he him∣self hath nothing to answer, save his  saying that the Prophets do not alwaies observe the order of things as they are done: & that it was needfull the plagues of the wicked should often be inculcated: of which the last indeed is true: but for the other there is no reason (viz.) why the last judgement should so often be anticipated, unlesse we observe that all the Ʋisions (the first excep∣ted) do end in the last judgement: because every of them do represent either the generall History of the Church, as the three former universall Visions: Or else the last times of Antichrist, and of the Church, as doe the three following speciall ones. The second part of the Chapter. The Fift Company of Harpers 2. And I saw as it were a sea of glasse, mingled with fire, and them that had got∣ten the Ʋictory over the beast, and over his Image, and over his marke, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glasse, having the harpes of God. 3. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lambe, saying, Great and marveilous are thy workes, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy wayes, thou King of Saints. 4. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorifie thy Name? for thou onely art holy: for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Indgements are made manifest.
THE COMMENTARY. II.ANd I saw as it were a sea of glasse] Before the Angells pour out the plagues, a company of Harpers come forth on the Theatre, celebrating the power & judgement of God. And why so? to prevent the thoughts of the godly, lest they might think that the following plagues were repugnant to the goodnesse and justice of God: and the blasphemies of the wicked, that they might not accuse God of cruelty, and complaine of injury done unto them. It serves also to the decency of the Ʋision: for as in Commoedies musicall in∣terludes are againe and againe iterated at the ending of their Acts, to delight the beholders and drive away tediousnesse: so in this apparitionall Revelation are heard almost in every Vision, a company of singers, as it were in distinct Acts: least either Iohn in the contemplation of so long a Revelation, or we in the me∣ditating thereon, should be over wearied. We have heard the scope of this apparition. Now let us see who these sin∣gers are, where they were, how, and what they sang. First the place is noted: A Sea of glasse mingled with Fire: the meaning whereof we shall the better un∣derstand, when we know, what this company of singers is. I saw them that had gotten the victory] If they got the victory over the Beast, then the beast had fought with them, Who these harpers are. to wit the same who made war with the Saints Chap. 13. verse 7. These Harpers therefore are those Saints there mentioned. The successe of the war is not prosperous to the Beast, he sought to devour them: but on the contrary he himselfe was vanquished, though indeed it was a bloody victory to the Saints. This divine miracle ought to animate the godly cheer∣fully to fight against the Beast. But how do the Saints overcome the Beast: seeing in Chap. 13.15. the se∣cond beast caused all that would not worship the first to be slaine? How they overcame the beast. how then do they conquer, seing they are slaine? I answer: the victory of the Saints is spirituall: They are indeed bodily o∣vercome and slain by the Beast, suffering punishments and torments this way: yet spiritually they overcome the beast, while by refuting and condemning his false and idolatrous worship, they constantly persist both in life and death in the true faith of Christ: This is the victory of the holy Martyrs and Confessours, of which it is said: 1. Ioh. 5.4 The victory that overcometh the world is our faith. It is bloody in∣deed, and not obtained without great resistance, yet it so far excelleth all the triumphs of Alexander and Caesar, by how much the Beast is more cruell then those Monarchs. They by force of armes brought some part of the world under their power: But to this Beast the Dragon gave great power, so as the whole world followed and wondred after the same. This victory of the Saints John makes as it were fourfold. The victo∣ry of the Saints fore∣told. I. They got the victory over the beast] that is, over Antichrist himselfe, whose power, threatning, and Tyranny they despised and contemned, cleaving con∣stantly unto Christ. II. Over his Image] to wit, which he caused to be made for him by the In∣habitants of the earth. This we have shewed to be that whole Idol worship, by which the worshippers of the Beast rage againstall, who refuse to adore him and his Image: Now to contemne this so great a madnesse, and overcome it by their blood, is to get the victory over the Image of the beast. III. Over his character] viz. which the second beast caused to be imprinted in the right hand or foreheads of the worshippers of the first beast. Chap. 13. verse 16. This we shewed to be both a common and speciall obligation to the profes∣sion and worship of Antichrist. Over this Character the Saints and Professours
get the victory when they cast off the beasts religion, and constantly refuse to be obedient unto him. IV. Over the number of his name] which in Chap. 13. vers. 8. he shewed was 666. being Antichrists nationall name expressed in the Hebrew letters of ROMANƲS, and the Greek LATEINOS, as before we shew∣ed. Over this number and name also the Saints get the victory, by communi∣cating no more in the Romish Idolatry, Latine service, Masses, &c. This is the victory for which the company of harpers sing songs of Prayses to God. Whether these har∣pers are the Martyrs or other Pro∣fessours. But are these harpers the Martyrs in Heaven, or the faithfull in the Church Mi∣litant? Some interpret it of the Church Triumphant, others of the Church Mi∣litant, applying it to the Protestant Churches in Germany, France, England, and other places, who are said to have overcome the beast, by casting off the yoake of the Pope, having obtained the liberty of a more sincere doctrine from their Emperours and Kings. For my part I understand it simply to be the same company of harpers, who in the foregoing Vision Chap. 14. ver. 3. by a new song did gratulate the compa∣ny of sealed ones, standing with the Lambe on Mount Sion. Neverthelesse Bright∣mans opinon is not altogether to be rejected, because the word  who overcome, is in the present tense: for if the triumphant Church were onely meant: hee would have said in the preterperfect , or in the Aorist  who have, or had gotten the Victory: The participle therefore  being put in the present doth also include such who obtain Victory over the beast even in this life. Furthermore from this place there ariseth unto us a most sweet consolation, touching the spirituall victory we obtaine over the beast by the sincerity and constan∣cy of our faith, although the Beast bite, kicke, persecute and kill us: It serves also to stir us up stoutly to resist him. Besides it furnisheth us with three things, for the true understanding of the foregoing matter. The Sea∣beast is An∣tichrist. First, that the former beast ascending out of the Sea, could not be the old Romane Empire, but necessarily Antichrist: The reason is, because these holy harpers, sing not a triumphant song for any conquest they had over the Romane Empire, seeing they never made war against it: for Christians according to the precept of the A∣postle were allwayes obedient to Emperours: The Sea∣beast and that rising out of the earth is the same Anti∣christ. but they celebrate the victory o∣ver Antichrist, with his sinfull deceits and inventions. Secondly, that the first and second beast in a divers respect, denotes one and the same Antichrist, as before we have declared: The reason is, because one, that is the former is onely mentioned, who being overcome the latter was so like∣wise: Now the Saints rejoyced and sung because Antichrist was overcome. Thirdly, Antichrists Kingdome cannot bee straitned to four years. that Antichrists Kingdom cannot possible be restrained to the space of foure yeers, as the Papists will have it: The reason is because many Martyrs and Professours had already gotten the victory over Antichrist, before the Plagues were poured out upon the throne and worshippers of the beast. Now all the plagues cannot be comprehended within so short a space, but must longer torment the followers of Antichrist, as we shall see hereafter. Therefore it necessarily fol∣lowes, that Antichrist bare sway and made war with the Saints long before those foure yeers, forasmuch as here it is said he was overcome by them. Thus much touching the persons of the Harpers: now let us see where they were. I saw as it were a sea of glasse] Lyra (whom Gagnaeus followeth) makes this sea the Sacrament of Baptisme: which is glasse, that is, pure: mingled with fire, that is, with the regenetating grace of the holy Ghost. Andreas will have it to be meant of the multitude of them that shall be saved, in which sence the sea and harpers should be the same: which is not proper. Lambertus, of the large knowledge of the truth: Brightman, the doctrine of the Gospell, said to be glasse, that is, perspicuous and clear: but mingled with Fire, to wit, of contentions and strifes
which Satan hath raised amongst the teachers of the Gospell. But these opini∣ons I passe by. Before in Chap. 4. verse 6. John saw before the throne, a sea of glasse like to chry∣stall, which is the purest glasse. Now here he sees the same sea: It denotes the world of wicked men. Ribera rightly calls it the multitude following Antichrist, for the sea is called a gathering of waters: The waters are the wicked nations o∣beying Antichrist, as in Chap. 17. And Ierem. 51.42. Cyrus Army that van∣quished Babylon is called, a sea comming up upon her and covering her with the multi∣tude of the waves thereof. The sea therefore is a gathering of people, or the whole multitude of the ungodly, that is, the world tossed like the Sea with many waves and confusions. It is of glasse, Why the sea is said to be glasse. so said, first because it is clear as glasse, that is perspicuous and o∣pen to the eyes of God: for God sees the secret counsells and hidden endeavours of the world and Antichrist: secondly, because it is bright like Chrystall: for the pompe and lustre of the world bewitcheth Antichristians. Thirdly, because its weak and brickle as glasse: for the world passeth away with the lust thereof. The favour and prosperity of the world is glassie, for when it most shineth it is then broken. Lastly, The sea for the most part is like glasse in colour: hence the Poets call the Sea Mare vitreum, undas vitreas, the glassie Sea and glassie waves. It is mingled with fire, viz. of afflictions and calamities, in which the godly also are often involved: however they stand as conquerours upon this sea, because they trample the world with the delights and baites thereof under feet: neither are they of the world, nor removed from their station by the fire of af∣fliction, but persist constantly in the faith unto the end. This indeed the Saints triumphant have fully attained unto, and we, who are yet in the body in part: for it is our duty also to stand on the sea, that is, to trample the world under our feet. Or they stand  nigh or besides the sea] because they are not part of the sea or world, but separated and redeemed from the world, as in Chap. 14. ver. 4. And this sense I like best: because by the following verse it appears, here is an allusion to the red sea, by which the Israelites standing, saw the Egypti∣ans drowned, and rejoicing over their destruction, sang songs of praises to God. Having the harps of God] By an hebraisme the harps of God are put for such as are rare and of a most sweet sound: The harps of God. for with the Hebrews whatsoever are said to be the things of God, are excelling things, worthy his high Majesty: so the mountaines of God, the Caedars of God, the City of God, that is, very high and great. It is op∣posed to the harpes of David and of other Saints, by which they sometimes prai∣sed God. These are infinitely sweeter in sound: for these harpers sang a new song which none could learne but they that were marked with the seale of God: unknown also to the former Saints, viz. touching the weakning and ruine of Antichrists kingdome by these harpes, that is, by the preaching, Prayers, and sweet con∣fessions of these Champions. 3. And they sing] for, they sang, viz. with their harpes, together with their voyces, like to joyfull harpers. But what sing they? The song of Moses the ser∣vant of God] We have a twofold song of Moses: One of thanksgiving which he sang with the Israelites by the red sea, for the overthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyp∣tians: I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed glorioussy, the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea: Exodus 15.1. The other of praises, celebra∣ting Gods wonderfull benefits unto the Israelites, Deut. 32. Both may bee here understood, but cheifly the former, because of the similitude: for as then the Israelites standing by the red sea, sang with Moses their leader a triumphant song unto God for the drowning their adversaries, under whose bondage they had a long time groaned: so the saints being brought thorow the vast sea of this world, do joyntly sing praises to God, and blesse him for their deliverance from the most cruell bondage of Antichrist. And hereby they intimate not obscurely that
Pharaoh and the Egyptian servitude was a figure of the Churches bondage un∣der Antichrist. And the song of the Lambe] that is, praising the Lambe for his benefits be∣stowed on the Church. Divers songs we have already heard. In Chap. 4.11. The songs of the Re∣velation. The elders sing to him that sate on the throne: Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory. Chap. 5.9. The Elders againe sing a new song to the Lambe: Thou art worthy to take the Booke and to open the seales thereof: for thou wast slaine and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, and hast made us Kings and Priests to our God, &c. Vnto which song the Angells and all creatures do there by mutuall accord sing Amen. Chap. 11.17. they likewise sing to God: Wee give thee thankes Lord God Almighty, &c. A like song wee heard Chapter 2. ver. 10. Now is come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, &c. Againe in Chap. 14. the company of harpers sang a new song to the Lambe standing on Mount Sion. This therefore is the song of the Lamb, by which the triumphant Church, or the heavenly companies celebrate the Lambes victory, and their own over Antichrist. Now this title affords a cleer argument to prove the divinity of the Lambe, 34. Argu∣ment of Christs de∣ity. considering that to him this wonderfull worke of the conquest over the beast is attributed by the Saints. But now let us hear the song. It seemes to be collected out of divers places of the Psalmes and Prophets, by which these divine singers commend unto us the authority and dignity of the Scriptures. As from Psal. 86.10. they publish the great and wonderfull workes of God. Great, because they fill heaven and earth: Wonderfull, because they are unsearchable and beyond humane reason: such are the works of creation, and the government of the world, our redemption, and preservation of the Church in this life. from Psal. 25.10. they celebrate the true & righteous wayes of the Lord: for all his paths are mercy and truth. Gods wayes are his counsells and judgements about the Church and the enemies thereof: And though he suffers the godly to be af∣flicted and fore troubled, and the enemies to bear sway and flourish, which in∣deed seems unjust to flesh and blood, yet the wayes of Jehovah are righteous: for he knowes wherefore he doth the same, and the event shews that his wayes are all right and good: for in the end he performes his promise to the Saints, in pre∣serving and delivering the Church, and in punishing and destroying the adversa∣ries: by which he declareth that he is constant in his promises, true and omnipo∣tent in his threatning. Lord Almighty, King of Saints, Thou onely art holy] By these Epithites the Saints extoll God above all adversaries, and stirre up their own confidence and joy, for seeing he is omnipotent, he can easily cast downe his enemies. If King of Saints, then he can strongly defend his holy Church: If onely holy, or most pure, then he alone, (not the creatures) is to be served and cleaved unto.  O King of Saints] so all greek copies read it, excepting Montanus, who reads it  King of the Nations, and also Andreas from Ierem. 10.7. Who would not fear thee O King of nations? The old Latine:  King of eternity, which the interpreter seems to have read for  of Saints. 4. Who shall not feare thee O Lord] An exclamation taken out of Ierem. 10.7. Or rather out of the everlasting Gospell Rev. 14. ver. 7. where the first Angell cryed: Fear God, and glorifie his Name: They shew the madnesse of the Anti∣christian adversaries, who lift up their hornes against Almighty God and the Lambe; and the stupidity of the world, which is not moved by the considerati∣on of the great and wonderfull workes of God to feare and glorifie him. To feare God is in true faith and obedience to submit to God. To glorifie God, is not to make him glorious, as if he were not so before, but to celebrate his due glory and praise Onely holy] They condemne the pride of Antichrist, boasting himself to be holy and holinesse: whereas God alone is holy and holinesse it selfe, purifying the heart, and sanctifying the elect. For all nations shall come] As in Psal. 86.9. All Nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee O Lord, and shall
glorifie thy Name: shewing not absolutely what all shall do, but what all ought to do: the Antichristian adversaries shall never come: for they will not amend by their plagues, but persevere in their Idolatry and rage against God, as we shall see in the fourth and fift Viall. Neverthelesse some remnants of the Christian na∣tions shall come adoring and worshipping God sincerely through Iesus Christ: to wit, the elect in Italy, Germany, France, England, &c. The Church therefore celebrates the effect of the Gospell in the last times, that she shall not decrease amidst her divers afflictions, but be encreased by divers nations: who forsaking Antichrist (his fraud being discovered) shall turne to Christ. Which effect the Antichristians have now a long time seen, and we yet daily do: And God grant that our posterity may see the like more and more. For thy judgements are made manifest] That is, are begun to be manifested: for as yet they speake not of the finall judgement, nor generally of Gods ancient judgements, but they celebrate in speciall those wonderfull judgements of his, by which he began in these last times to weaken Antichrists kingdom, and bring the Church into the liberty of Christ: for it is wonderfull to consider that the power and authority of Antichrist, which had so long beene formidable to Chri∣stian Emperours, and Kings, as causing them like so many unreasonable dogs to cast down themselves and licke his feet, and as most vile slaves to hold the bridle or stirrup while he mounted on horseback, should by the preaching and ministery of a few poor and contemptible teachers, be exposed to the common contempt of men, insomuch as no man but the Popes sworne vassalls, should any more stand in awe of his anathemaes and threatnings: Now this worke, these Coelestiall har∣pers do worthily pronounce not to be of man, but a wonderfull judgement of God, for the which he ought to be praised continually of all creatures. The sense therefore is, that because God in the last times by the preaching of the Gospell hath manifested Antichrist, and by his wonderfull judgement poured contempt upon him, it shall come to passe, that by degrees one Nation after ano∣ther shall leave him, and be converted to Christ: and so indeed it shall be. Onely let not us by our sins stop this judgement of God, which he hath begun to reveale. Thus much of the Triumphant Song. The third part of the Chapter. The Furniture and clothing of the seven Angells. 5 And after that I looked, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven was opened. 6 And the seven Angells came out of the Temple, having the seven Plagues clothed in pure and white linnen, and having their brests girded with golden girdles. 7 And one of the foure beasts gave unto the seven Angells, seven gol∣den Vialls, full of the wrath of God who liveth for ever and ever. 8 And the Temple was filled with smoake from the glory of God, and from his power, and no man was able to enter into the Tem∣ple, till the seven plagues of the seven Angells were fullfilled.
THE COMMENTARY. 5. ANd after that I looked, And the Temple was opened] After the coelestiall interlude, Iohn returnes to the description of the Angells, declaring from whence they came forth, in what ha∣bit, what the Vessells were wherein they bore the Plagues that were to be poured out, whence they received them, and what he saw in Heaven during the time thereof: such was the Furniture of the Angells to declare the judgements of God, the which, as it appeareth, is dramatically inserted, to illustrate the order of the Vision. Now whether in every of the particulars lie hid such mysteries as some looke after, I know not, neither do I beleeve it. But as in dramaticall shewes, the preamble of the singers being ended, the Sceenes are opened, and other persons come forth in new apparell to act other things: so these Angells came out of the Temple, that was open in heaven, unto a new Act of this Revelation. 6. And the seven Angells came out of the temple] Who these Angells were, we shall more fitly manifest in the following Chapter. In that they came out of the temple in Heaven, most do hereby understand the holy and irrevocable judgement of God against Antichrist. For it shall be most righteous, although the wicked shall gnash their teeth against it, and gnaw their tongues. Some understand hereby to be signified, that God judgeth according to the decrees of his word, preached by his Ministers the Angells: because the ministe∣ry here on earth is instituted according to the heavenly patterne: Or also, that all Antichrists plagues proceed from Christ the high Priest of the heavenly Ta∣bernacle: now these things being plous I reject not: but leave to the judge∣ment of the Reader. Clothed in pure linne] The old Ʋersion hath it, having on a pure stone, which is a ma∣nifest errour, as Alcasar the Iesuite acknowledgeth and correcteth: Ribera con∣fesseth it also, but doth not correct it, yea on the contrary he labours to establish or hide the apparent untruth of that version, to the end it might remaine authen∣ticke, but with what conscience it may easily appear. The pure linnen garment, some expound of the joy of the Angells, because of the judgement of the wicked: Others of Angelicall purity. With a golden girdle about the breast] This some understand of the love of An∣gells towards such as here on earth exercise themselves in the worship of God: Others, of their strength in executing the commandements of God: 1. Pet: 2.13 Eph. 6.14 in which sense a girdle is generally taken in scripture: for the garment not being girt up hinders in going. They are golden girdles, so before in Chap. 1.13. Christ appeared, the which we interpreted of the Majesty of Christ: Therefore the Angells have golden girdles representing as it were the Majesty of Christ their Lord. But these mysteries in my opinion have little solidity in them, for I judge that this habit Im∣ports nothing else but to set forth the Angelicall decencie: Angells have no bo∣dies, but are spirits: yet they take corporall formes for our sakes: neither is it meet they should appear naked, but some clothing was requisite for them, how∣beit not common but holy garments, such as God of old prescribed to the Priests & Levites, which were of linnen, long, white and girded with a girdle: In such ha∣bit the Angells commonly appeared: so Ezech. 9. verse 2. the sealing Angell ap∣pears clothed with linnen: so the two Angells at Christs resurrection, Luke .24 Ioh. 20.11 which ap∣peared to Mary were clothed in white and shining garments: And againe at his as∣cention, Acts 1.10. Let this suffice. 7. And one of the foure beasts] Of these beast we heard Chap. 4.6. & 5.6. & 6.1. & 7.11. & 14.3. One of them gives to the seven Angells the seven gol∣den Ʋialls. We need not enquire whether it were the first or second, or why
one, and not rather two or all four. Also in Chap. 5.8. the Elders and beasts had se∣ven vialls but full of odours, which were the prayers and thansgivings of the Saints: here they are full of Gods wrath: The former I leave, and retaine the dramati∣call Allegory. The plagues of Gods judgements are metaphorically called the wine of the wrath of God Chap. 14.10. Wine is drunke out of cups, pots, and vialls. In Chap. 14.10. the third Angell threatned to the worshippers of the beast, a mixt cup, and full with the wine of Gods fury: here hee sheweth how God will dispense the same unto them. That great cup he devideth into seven Ʋialls, that is, into divers kinds of punishments, to be poured out by these Angells. A Ʋiall] the Greek phiala as it were piala from  to drinke) as Athenaeus will have it, containes so much as a man can drinke at a draught, and saith it is greater then a cup: which agrees not with the place here, for out of this cup the seven vialls are filled with the wine of Gods wrath: And therefore the Ʋialls were lesse then the cup. It is need∣lesse (I suppose) to seek a mystery, in that they are said to be golden ones: for they are so called according to the customary use, because Ʋialls are not wont to be made but of gold or of silver. The Epithite of GOD living for ever and ever doth amplifie the heavinesse of his wrath, as if he should say, This shall be a terrible wrath, because it shall endure for ever and ever: Thus he signifieth that both temporall and eternall punishment doth wait for the wicked. 8. And the Temple was filled with smoake] John saw moreover two things, which put an end to the preparation: First, The temple was filled with smoak pro∣ceeding from the Majesty and power of God: And secondly no man could enter in∣to the temple, untill the seven plagues were fullfilled. Here he manifestly alludes to the History of the tabernacle, Ex. 40.33 which in the dedication thereof was wholly filled with a cloud of the glory of the Lord, so as Moses could not enter into it: And to the history of the Temple, 1: King 8.10. which likewise at the dedication was filled with the cloud of the glory of God, so as the Priests could not stand to minister, so long as the glory of Jehovah filled the house. That cloud was undoubtedly a signe of Gods gratious presence in the Temple and Tabernacle, Whether the cloud be a signe of grace or wrath. of his approving the worship therein, and his hearing the pray∣ers there poured out to God. But this smoake cannot be any such signe, seeing here is not treated of the worship and prayers of the Saints made in the heaven∣ly Temple: But of the plagues of the wrath of God to be hence poured forth upon the adversaries. Interpreters therefore are of divers opinions, and much trou∣bled about it. Most will have it to signifie in the thesis, that Gods judgements are unsearch∣able, and however they are most righteous, yet are they not so acknowledged untill they are accomplished, because this smoake hinders the knowledge thereof: the which indeed is true, but too generall. Others confesse that the smoake is a signe not of grace, but of the wrath of God, because of the disparatie between the cloud and smoake. But yet they do not suf∣ficiently expound wherefore the wrath of God filled the Temple in Heaven, and who were kept out of the same, and how long. Ambrose and Arethas expound this latter (as Ribera saith) that no man in bo∣dy and soule shall enter into heavenly blessednesse, untill the seven plagues are en∣ded, that is, untill the Day of Iudgement. But what is this to the present matter. I acknowledge the allusion of the Histories, but I gather another sense from the scope, viz, that the whole serves for the terrour of Gods adversaries. The smoake therefore is a symbole of Gods anger in his Temple, The authors opinion: and ready to inflict smoake, that is, horrible blindnesse on Antichristians, yea even on their quicke-sighted and most acute Doctors and Sophisters, The smoake of Gods wrath: Psa: 18:9. so as none of them could enter into the Heavenly Temple, that is, understand the just judgements of God, and that these plagues were inflicted on them by God in wrath, because of their
wicked Idolatry: and so cannot repent, untill the seven plagues were fullfilled, that is, never. For in Psal. 73. ver. 17, by entring into Gods Sanctuary, is signifi∣ed, the acknowledging of his judgements. This sense the events of the Vialls and plagues in the following Chapter will make good unto us. This smoake therefore denotes the blindnesse of Antichristians under their pu∣nishment. It comes not out of the bottomlesse pit, but from the glory and from the power of God, because it shall be inflicted by his most righteous and powerfull judgement, according to the threatning of the Apostle: 2. Thes. 2.11. There∣fore God will send them, &c. for seeing the Pope raised a smoake out of the bottom∣lesse pit of hell Chap. 9. verse 2. therefore also he shall be punished with smoak for ever and ever. The universall No man I restraine to the Antichristian adversaries, who one∣ly shall be kept from entring into the Temple, that is, from the acknowledging of Gods judgements, and from repentance, as will appeare in the following Chapter. The particle Ʋntill I understand of eternity, as in the saying, Thou shalt not go out untill thou hast paid, that is, never: He knew her not untill, for, never: And indeed the plagues shall never be ended, because they shall proceed from the glory of the living God, and from his anger against the Devill and his instru∣ments for ever and ever. The obstinacy and finall blindnesse of Antichristians is signified, of which we shall heare Chap. 16.9. They repented not to give glory to God. And verse 11. They blasphemed the God of heaven, and repented not of their deeds. This is my opinion touching the smoake, untill I understand that some∣thing more agreeable is alleadged. CHAPTER XVI. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. The Preparation of the Vision we heard: viz, Seven Angells stand in the Theatre of Heaven with seven Vialls full of the wrath of God ready to poure out the same. Now followeth the vision or the pouring of them out, with the events, namely horrible plagues and the effects thereof: for the Angells having received commandement, in order poure out the Vialls upon divers elements and places, whence followes the joy of the godly, the misery of the Antichristian adversaries, and at last their rage and destruction. THe Parts of the Chapter are two: The former containes the com∣mandement of God, verse 1. The second, the execution in the rest of the Chapter, distinct in their pourings out according to the number of the Angells, and seven Vialls: The first on the earth, with the effects thereof, A noisome sore fell on the wor∣shippers of the beast. verse 2. The second on the Sea, with its twofold effect: The corrupting of the Sea, and death of all li∣ving creatures in it, verse 3. The third on the Rivers, the effect whereof is first internall, the waters are turned into blood. ver. 4. secondly, externall, a two∣fold gratulation. 1. of the Angell of the waters praysing the righteousnesse of God, ve. 5. in rendring like for like. ve. 6.2. Of a voyce out of the Altar assenting to the former, ver. 7. The fourth on the sun: the effect whereof is threefold: 1.
The scorching of men, ver. 89.2. Their blasphemies. 3. Their impenitency, ibid. The fift on the throne of the beast, the internall effect whereof is the darkning of the Antichristian Kingdome, ver. 10. and a twofold externall effect, 1. blas∣phemies against God, and the moving cause: viz. their paines and sores. 2. Their obstinacie in sin, ver. 11. The sixt on Euphrates, the internall effect whereof is the drying up of the waters thereof, and the end of it, to prepare the way for the Kings of the East: The externall, three unclean spirits, who are described, 1. by their originall: out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet: ver. 13. 2. By their figure or shape, they are like to frogs, ibid. 3. by their disposition, it is divelish ver. 14. 4. By their cunning and impostures, wor∣king miracles, ibid. 5. By their function or office: to raise up warre against God, ibid. here an exhortation to the Saints is inserted, in these troubles to be watchfull, ver. 15. 6. By the execution of their charge: the gathering of the enemies into Harmageddon, ver. 16. The seventh on the aire, the event whereof is the last judgement or consummation of all things: This is proclaimed, 1. By voyce  it is done, ver. 17. 2. It is figured in foure types. 1. By horrible tempests, verse 18. 2. By the division of Babylon, and the ruine of the cities of the Nations: And the efficient cause hereof: Gods remembrance of Babylon ver. 19. 3. The flight of the Islands and Mountaines, ver. 20. 4. Haile of a talent weight fals on the wicked, the effects whereof are blasphemies against God. v. 21. Thus we have the Argument and Order of the Chapter: to the understan∣ding whereof it seemes requisite in a generall way to premise a few things. 1. Of the scope, and of the seven Vialls, whether they be the same with the seven Seales and seven Trumpets: 2. Of the seven Angells pouring out the same. 3. Of the last Plagues following thereupon. I. Of the Scope and Vse of the Plagues: and of the seven Vialls, whether they be the same with the seven Seales and seven Trumpets. COnsidering that I spake in the Preface of the Scope of the Vision, I will now onely adde, that the considerati∣on of the Order makes very much for the comfort of the godly, and terrour of the adversaries. In the former Vi∣sion indeed are contained the plagues, by which the beast with his associates afflicted the Saints. In the third Visi∣on, the beast fought against and killed the two witnesses, contumeliously abused their Carkasses, and the inhabiters of the earth triumphed over them being slaine: In the fourth Vision the Dragon persecuted the woman, and made war with the remnant of her seed: The beast also molested the Saints by Warre and overcame them, to the great applause of his wor∣shippers, and to them onely it was permitted to buy and sell: such as re∣fused to worship the beast were slain. Thus the tyranny of the beast stood in its vigour, and his kingdom flourished and was greatly admired at. Here on the contrary we shall heare of the Plagues by which the beast and his followers shall be tormented. Now in the end indeed of the foregoing vision Babylon and the worshippers of the beast were vexed by the preaching of the Angells: But in this Vision the Saints begin to sing in triumph o∣ver the beast, and the Angells are joyned to them pouring out seven Vials &c.
Touching these it may be demaunded, whether they agree with the seven Seales and seven Trumpets. It is answered, although there be some like∣nesse of effects in the six Trumpets, and six latter Vialls, yet the seven Vials do not altogether answer to the seven Seales and seven Trumpets. The rea∣son is plaine by verse 2. both of this and the foregoing Chapter from the time, because the vialls begin to be poured out on the marked ones of the beast, Chap. 16.2. long after the beasts rising, even when he was already in part overcome Chap. 15.2. But the originall of the beast is first treated of in the sixt Seale, and fift Trumpet, as we noted on ver. 1. of Chap. 13. The pouring out therefore of the vialls followed after the opening of five Seales, and the sounding of foure Trumpets, the sixt Seale and fift trum∣pet being almost ended, and the fourth period of the Christian Church begun, which, as we noted on Chap. 15.1. tooke its beginning from the measu∣ring of the Temple or Reformation of Evangelicall Doctrine in the West, and is to endure unto the end. II Of the seven Angells pouring out the Vialls, Who they are, and what the pouring out of the Vialls is. THese seven Angells are thought by most to be such preachers, whom Christ in the last times will raise up against Antichrist, and accor∣ding to their threatning inflict these plagues on Antichristians. If so, then these Angells of the fift Vision, should analogically answer to the two witnesses of the third Vision, and to the three angels of the fourth Vi∣sion: because all these are publishers of the Gospell against Antichriste un∣lesse perhaps they so differ in time, as what at first was done by two, that is a few, afterwards was done by three, that is more: and at last by seven, that is, very many were raised up to oppose Popery. If we take this sense, then the golden Vialls given to the Angels should be that golden and eternall gospell, which the first of the three angels flying through the midst of heaven evangelized to the inhabitants of the earth, saying with a great voyce, Fear God, &c. Chap. 14. ver. 6. And the pouring out of the vials should be the preaching of the Gospell, which worketh indeed in the elect the fear of God, joy and life, 2 Cor 2.15 but to the marked ones of the Beast it occasio∣neth sores, diseases and death: as the Apostle foretold: That the Gos∣pell should be a savour of death unto death to them that perish. This sense Ribera the Iesuite likes not of, Because it is not the worke of Preachers to inflict plagues, but to foretell and denounce them, Riberas opi∣nion exa∣mined. and to deterre men from their evills. But these Angells saith he, do not foretell the plagues but inflict them. Therefore they are true An∣gells, by whom the Lord inflicts plagues, with he doth not by the Ministers of the Gospell. But these things are not solid. For first these Angells are not said to cause the plagues, but to poure out the vialls of Gods fury: Therefore properly the plagues were caused by the wrath of God. The angels were onely ministers of the pouring out, which lets not, but that it may metaphorically be understood of the
publishing and denouncing of the wrath of God. As God therefore by his ministers saves some, and condemnes others: so also he inflicts these plagues by their preaching. Secondly, How farre ministers of the word are said to cause plagues. it is not absurd to say that the Preachers of the Word do in∣flict plagues, because they communicate in the worke of God, which he ex∣ecutes by them. Therefore they are said to beget, and to save them that heare them: because in this worke they are  Co-workers with God. They are said to forgive sinnes, because in the name of God they declare and confirme the remission of sinnes to them that repent. 1 Cor. 4.15 1 Tim 2.16 1. Cor. 3.9. Ioh. 20.21 Why then may they not also be said to strike the wicked with plagues and condemne them, as being Co-workers with God that doth the same? certainly in Chap. 11. ver. 5. the two witnesses slew their enemies with fire that came out of their mouth, and they had power to smite the earth with all man∣ner of plagues as often as they would. And therefore the Iesuites rea∣son doth not weaken the former opinion, that they are preachers of the word, neither doth he solidly prove the contrary, that they should be reall Angells forasmuch as God doth equally dispense his judgements as well by the prea∣chers of the Gospell as by Angels, although in a divers manner. What then? Who the Angells of the seven trumpets & of the seven vialls are. I so judge touching these seven Angells of the Vialls, as of the seven Angells of the trumpets. The six former might denote prea∣chers: because at the sounding of their Trumpets, the temporall events there described did happen. But the seventh could not: because he openly denounced the last judgement as present; Chap. 10.7. & Chap. 11.15. he therefore was that Archangell, by whose voice and Trumpet the dead shall rise up at the comming of Christ. 1. Thes. 4.16. 1. Cor. 15.52. now this no preacher can do. So likewise these six former may signifie ministers of the Word, be∣cause during their Vialls the marked ones of the beast shall be smitten with these plagues in this life: But the seventh proclaiming the consumma∣tion  It is done, cannot be any other, but that Archangell the chief Herauld of Christ the judge: neverthelesse (as before I noted) there is no necessity to fasten on this exposition: for the angells which Iohn saw, were so in appearance, and ministers of the plagues in a Vision: by which represen∣tations God shewed to Iohn, what he was about to doe: what kinde of plagues he would inflict on antichristians towards the time of the measuring of the Temple and Reformation of the Church. But there is no necessity urging us to affirme, that he precisely shewed unto him the manner and persons, that is how, and by whom he would accomplish the same. III. Touching the Plagues that followed the pou∣ring out of the VIALS. LAstly touching the plagues it is demaunded, whether they are properly or allegorically to be understood, and whether they are to fall univer∣sally on all antichristians, or on some onely, and in what time every one of them is to be inflicted, and after how long time one is to follow the other?
The two latter of these questions, touching the time, are more curious then profitable, seeing they can hardly be defined by the understanding of man, further then hath been formerly spoken of the beginning and end of the vialls: Whence it is most certaine that Antichrist shall reigne much longer then foure Yeeres. For the other question on whom they are to be inflicted, whether universally on all, or on some onely, we shall learn by the severall vialls. Lastly it were in vaine generally to dispute touching the quality of the plagues: seeing we shall more rightly understand every of them apart in their places. Ribera indeed thinkes that all of them are to be taken litterally, because these plagues are like to those of the Aegyptians, which happened not me∣taphoricallie, but litterally: him Alcasar refutes, and interprets the plagues mystically: yet however it sufficiently appears there is an allu∣sion unto the plagues of Aegypt: notwithstanding neither are they all alike, nor would a litterall sense hence follow: for the history it self is one thing, and a Vision alluding to the history another. In the History all those things happened really to the sense: in the Vision all these things are aenigmati∣call, as, the Angells, Vials, pouring out, &c. And therefore wee may not doubt that the plagues also are aenigmatically set forth. Now we will speake of every of them in order. CHAP. XVI. The first Part of the Chapter. A Command touching the pouring out of the Vialls. 1 And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels, Go your vvayes and poure out the seven Ʋials of the vvrath of God upon the earth. THE COMMENTARY. I. ANd I heard a great voyce] The Angells having received the Vialls full of Gods wrath in Heaven, do not hasten to poure them out, but wait for a heavenly Commandement to doe the same: for the ministers of God neither do, nor indeed may do any thing against the wicked of private affection, but in all things are to containe themselves within the limits of their vocation, that so they may righteously execute the judgements of God. John therefore heard A great voyce, that is, vehement and terrible: like as he heard Chap. 1. ver. 10. and Chap. 6. ver. 1. & Chap. 11. ver. 12. and doubtlesse it was the Lamb, or of God sitting on the throne as chiefe moderator of the plagues: Out of the temple, which ere while was filled with the smoake of the glory and power of God. Poure out the seven Ʋialls of Gods Wrath] that is, of my wrath. If wee understand this of the pouring out of the preaching of the Law and Gospell against Antichrist, then the commandement here is a testimony of the divine calling of such ministers as
in these last times have opposed the Romane Antichrist, the Popish Sophisters do enquire after their calling, by whose commandement they are sent, or who ordained them to preach the Gospell against the Church of Rome? here they may see a commandement, Go, poure out. But if it be understood of the infliction it selfe of the plagues, then the commandement is a testimony of Gods providence, not onely in permitting them to be inflicted on the wicked, but also comman∣ding his ministers, and himselfe powerfully inflicting the same by them. In vaine therefore do the Antichristian adversaries rise up, and tyrannically rage against the ministers of God, and publishers of the Gospell: for herein they have to doe with God himselfe. They are also deceived in thinking it is by chance that they are overwhelmed by so many plagues: for they lie under Gods hand, avenging his own glory Poure out] this is a word of aggravation: They are not bid to let fall the plagues by drops as it were, but to poure them forth abundantly on the heads of wicked men, that they may feel the weight of Gods hand. On the earth] the first Viall was onely poured out on the earth, and all the rest on other elements, as the Sea, Rivers, Sunne, Aire, &c. Therefore it is a Sy∣necdoche, one part beeing put for all: for the calamities of all the other parts or vi∣als shall also fall on the earth, that is on the inhabitants of the earth, by which name the idolatrous worshippers of the beast are allwayes signified in this Prophesie. The pouring out of the first Viall upon the earth. 2. And the first vvent, and poured out his Ʋiall upon the earth, and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men vvhich had the marke of the Beast, and upon them vvhich vvorshipped his Image. THE COMMENTARY. II. AND the first went] To wit, the first Angell: here we may note the readinesse and prudencie of the Angells in executing the comman∣dement of God: for being bidden to go & pour out, the word is no sooner spoken, but they incontinently do it, yet not confusedly, but every one in order, and upon such parts as they were commanded, although for brevity sake Iohn doth not expresse the distribution of the Commandement. Here obedience unto the precepts of God is commended unto us: and likewise it signifies that the troubles of the adversaries even in this life shall long endure, and follow one upon another: for all the evils shall not be pour' dout in one month, or yeet, or foure yeers, (as the common fiction is) but the seven plagues shall succeed each other in order, that is, the Antichristians shall be vexed most grievously and a long while by many divine judgements, untill such as are recoverable, being broken by their long continued affliction shall repent: and the rest that are incor∣rigible perish without excuse For the word seven, as before, I take indefinitely for a full and perfect number: as in Levit. 26.28. I will smite you seven times for your sinnes. On the earth] This (as I said) is either by a synecdoche put for the inhabiters of the earth, on whom all the seven vialls are to bee poured out: Or by the earth; in a stricter sense is signified certaine regions of the earth, on which indeed the first
viall was poured out, but the effect thereof was on all the inhabitants of the earth. Now what was done? A noysome and grievous sore] Greek  An evill and miserable boyle or botch. The old version: a very evill and cruell wound, but improperly: for he saith not  a wound, but  an ulcer, that is, a filthie and incurable discase, as biles and venemous impostumes, which in a few hours disperse their poyson into the heart, and either kill or make men to runne mad. Ʋpon men] Beza, against men. He expoundeth and limiteth the foregoing words, upon the earth: neither are all men promiscuously smitten with these boyles, but the marked ones of the beast, and worshippers of his Image: now who they are we have heard Chap. 13. ver. 16. & Chap. 15. ver, 2. viz. both great and small, rich and poore, bond and free, who alone had power to buy, sell, and ex∣ercise the Antichristian trade or merchandize. It is plaine he alludes to the sixt E∣gyptian plague, by which the Egyptians, and their Magicians also were smitten with boyles breaking forth with blaines, so as they could not stand before Pharaoh: but the Israelites were not touched by them: so these boiles or fores shall not touch the Angells or ministers of the Vialls, and other conquerours of the beast, although they also shall be in the earth, but onely the adherents of the beast. Here it may be demaunded whether the beast shall be free? not in the least, but for brevity sake he is not mentioned, nor such as have the number of his name: because imme∣diately a peculiar and grievous plague attends both him and his throne. Now let us see what manner of fore this is, Lyras opi∣nion. Lyra takes this first Angell to be Pope Hadrian pouring out Anno 740. the boile of excommunication upon Constan∣tine, whom he cals Iconomachus or Image-breaker. The Popes excommu∣nication is a noysome sore. Rightly indeed he calls the Papall excommunication a boile: for never was there a more cruell pest depopulating the Church then it: however it is not to the purpose here: because this is a plague of the last times. Which thing Foxe not observing (otherwise a diligent interpreter of the Re∣velation) very unfitly applies this noysome sore unto the raging pestilence which a little before the Diocletian persecution (for fifteen yeers together) over spread the whole Romane Empire under Gallus and Volusianus about the yeere 125. In which sense this plague should not at all belong unto the worshippers of the beast in these times. Riberas o∣pinion. Ribera understands it properly of incurable Vlcers, lying hid in the inward parts of the body, (like to the sixt Egyptian plague) with which the worshippers of his feined Antichrist shall be tormented. Bullinger also and Aretius interpret it of the Spanish or French disease, common to the Clergy in their impure single life. Others apply it to other grievous diseases. But such the godly also are inci∣dent too: But not to the boile or sore of this Viall. Andreas therefore more rightly understands it of spirituall ulcers, or inward tortures and pangs of a corrupted heart, continually like a Scorpion biting and gnawing the minds of Apostates, that is, because Antichrist whom they worshipped as God, cannot helpe them in their plagues and distresses. Notwithstanding he addes, that happily externall ulcers also shall torment their bodies, to augment the griefe and torment of their ulcerous consciences. Brightman doth well observe that the construction it selfe (There came a noysome and grievous sore upon men, for, in men) doth intimate an inward ulcer, inwardly troubling and vexing the hearts and consciences of men, and he addes withall it is nothing else but malice and envy, Hora. lib. Ep. 2. then which the Sicilian Tyrants could not devise a more exquisite torment, &c. By which indeed the Papists were wonderfully tormented at the pouring out of this Viall: for as soon as Luther began to oppose popish Indulgences in Saxony, Zwinglius and Oecolampadius to extinguish Purgatory in Helvetia: It is wonder∣full to consider what hatred, malice, sorrow, fury, and madnesse these ulcerous Priests, Monks, Schoolmen, Cannonists, & Bishops were possessed with, what argu∣ments
and counsells sought they not, to extinguish this new flame? Certainly this griefe was more tedious and painfull unto them, then any Egyptian ulcer. The first Viall therefore being poured upon the earth, that is, on the Regions of Bohemia, Germanie, and a while after on France, England, Denmarke, &c. begate foule ulcers in the minds of the Papists, which are so far from being cu∣red as yet, as on the contrary we see the Monks and Sophisters of our time more ulcerous then those of old. I apply the Earth, The first viall chief∣ly fell on Germany. under the first Ʋiall principally unto Germany, because (I know not by what destiny) Antichrist hath more bewitched the Germanes then other people, so as they are ready to beleeve, do, or suffer any thing whatsoever, for the sake of the beast, yea some have not been ashamed to boast, that the Ger∣manes, at the Popes Commandement, for the redemption of soules, would with the beasts of the field have eaten grasse, had it not bin for Luther: O wretched soile! yet by how much Germany was deeply drown'd in the Gulfe of Superstitions, by so much the Lord in mercy hath pittied them, and vouchsafed the greater grace unto them, above other Nations. For though it is true indeed, that the first Ʋiall being pou∣red out on this earth, occasioned a noysome and filthy ulcer on the worshippers of An∣tichrist: yet on others who overcame the beast, it wrought the true feare of God, encrease of joy, and to be short, it recalled the greater part thereof, from Anti∣christ to Christ, as we may see at this day. CHAPTER XVI. The pouring out of the second Viall on the Sea, 3 And the second Angell poured out his Ʋiall upon the Sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soule died in the Sea. THE COMMENTARY. III. ANd the second Angell powred out] The first plague hath wrought but little effect on the skabbie Monks, for as yet they many wayes bewray that ulcer of venome and malice which lies hid in their hearts against the Gospell, neither will they suffer themselves to be cured, being blinded by a just judge∣ment of God. Ex. 7.20, And therefore the second Angell proceeds to poure out the wrath of God upon the Sea, which became as the blood of a dead man] that is, corrupted and filthy: and every living soule died, &c. It is a plaine allusion unto the first Aegyptian plague: when Moses turned the wa∣ters of Nilus into blood, that the Egyptians could not drinke thereof, and all the Fishes of the River dyed. Now we come to the meaning. Some take it according to the letter, The litte∣rall exposi¦tion of An∣dreas & Ri¦bera. that the Sea is to be turned into blood, either miraculously by Elias and Enoch, as of old by Moses: or else by the slaughter of Sea-combats (and such as dwell neer the Sea) under Antichrist. So Andreas whom Ribera followes, All things shall be so as is here spoken. The Sea shall be like to blood, which is poured out when a man is slain: or it shall be so red as if it were dyed with the blood of many men, and all Fishes in it shall die, as in the River of Egypt. But the greater part of Interpreters acknowledge that this corrupting of the
Sea is mystically to be understood: for indeed the turning of the Ocean into blood, It cannot hold. cannot be a more heavy plague to Antichrist, then to the rest of the sonnes of men: The losse also of the Fishes would be common to others as well as to him: yea his losse would be lesse: for being the greatest Monarch he could the ea∣sier beare it, though there should not be a Fish left alive in the whole Sea, see∣ing the Land can furnish him with infinite dainties: Therefore we must not at all keep to the Letter. To come therefore to the mystery, Lyras opi∣nion. first I passe by the historicall glosse of Ly∣ra, touching Charles the Great, who, as he saith, poured out this Viall, that is, the vengeance of God upon the Sea, viz. on the Saxons whom he vanquished, which are signified by the Sea, because of the multitude of that people. The conje∣cture of Gagnaeus. I passe by also the conjecture of Gagnaeus the Popish Commentator, that the sea signifies the gentiles, because of their manifold worshippings of divers gods whose blood (whether it be corporally or spiritually taken) is largely to bee pou∣red out. But they erre from the Scope, not observing that here is treated of the plagues of Antichrist. Most of our Interpreters understand the sea to be the world, or the chiefe men of the world, or Ilanders, who shall become like corrupted blood, because God will bring upon them all kinds of horrible warres, pestilence and destruction, that every soule, that is, the greater part of the wicked shall miserably perish, or, that all that assent to Antichrist in persecuting of the Saints shall perish through finall damnation: which opinion is not unfit, yet too generall: forasmuch as the world was never free from war, pestilence, and destruction: And the godly have allwayes had no lesse share in these evils then others: but these plagues shalbe pe∣culiar to Antichristians. Therefore we are more nearly to consider what this sea is: What this Sea is. whether that of Glasse which Iohn saw before the throne Chap. 4.6. and on which stood the Conquerours of the beast Chap. 15.2? But it seemes not to be the same, because this here is a watery Sea, the other of glasse. Again, whether it be that into which the burning Mountaine was cast, Chap. 8.9? It is not, for that denoted the world of the faithfull, that is, the Church, which the Mountaine of the Romane Em∣pire had almost overwhelmed: But this here is the Antichristian SEA, because one of the last plagues is poured upon it. Or, whether it be that out of which the Beast ascended, Chap. 13. ver. 1? It seemes to be the same: for the sea there spoken of, may be taken two wayes: either for the pit, whence the beast ascended, Chap. 11.7. but so it is not here taken: Or for the vile assembly of Episcopall councels by whose authority, chiefly after the sixt age, the Monarchicall power of the Romish chaire was establi∣shed: thus it should be the same. Therefore Brightman doth not unfitly (as it seemes) determine, that this sea, is the Councell of Trent, into which from the yeer 1545. unto 1563. under five Popes, viz. Paulus 3. Julius 3, Marcellus 2. Pau∣lus 4. and Pius 4. the Rivers and Fountaines out of all parts of the Antichristian world did unburthen themselves as it were into a Sea, that is, thither were gathe∣red 9. Cardinalls, 3. Patriarchs, 33. Archbishops, 233. Bishops, 7. Abbats, 8. Generalls, 4. Counsellours at Law, 149. Divines, 11. Ʋicars of Bishops, in all 467. together with an infinite number of servants, Pages, and Scullions out of every Nation, Tribe, and tongue: For the Angells going forward to pour out Gods Vialls, that former grievous ulcer compelled the Antichristians to flow to the La∣tine Sea to get remedy for their disease. But what was done? The waters of the sea became as the blood of a dead man, that is, corrupted and mortall, hence every soule living in the sea dyed, for the Decrees of Trent were bloody, that is written (and so indeed generally they were) with the blood of hereticks: But (being false and destructive) by their filthy and deadly savour, they killed the soules of all li∣ving creatures, swimming or seeking for life in this sea.
CHAP XVI. The pouring out of the Third Viall on the Rivers and Fountaines of Waters. 4 And the third Angell poured out his Viall upon the Rivers and Fountaines of waters, and they became blood. 5 And I heard the Angell of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus. 6 For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drinke, for they are worthy. 7 And I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgements. THE COMMENTARY. 4. ANd the third Angell poured out] This Angell poures out the wrath of God on the Rivers and Fountaines of Waters which became blood, Greek , which the old version ren∣ders and blood was made, but  is to bee referred to the Rivers and Fountaines of Waters, They to wit,  the Waters became blood. The sense of this effect the Angel will declare verse 6. Thou gavest them blood to drinke, (for, thou didst shed their blood) because they shed the blood of thy servants: The tur∣ning therefore of the waters into blood, denotes a bloodie vengeance on bloodthir∣sty adversaries: Hence it appeareth, that this plague is divers from the former: although in both there be an allusion unto the first Egyptian plague. Now we are to see, who these wicked are, here signified by the Rivers and Fountaines. Lyra thinkes Charles the Great to be this Angell, Lyras opi∣nion. who poured out the Viall, that is, the vengeance of God, upon the Rivers and Fountaines of Waters, that is, on the Moores or Hunni, who anciently inhabited neer the Poole Maeotis, where there are many bublings of waters after the manner of fountaines: And they be∣came blood: because Charles his army killed many of the Hunni. But he erres from the scope. Ribera also here urgeth the letter, but absurdly: For have ever the Rivers and Fountaines shed the blood of the Saints according to the Letter? Rib. opinion Or hath God given blood to drinke to the Fountaines? Gagnaeus therefore doth more rightly apply it metaphorically to the persecu∣tors of the godly, Gagnaeus o∣pinion. because rivers and flouds of waters do often in Scripture de∣note grievous persecutions. Now it may bee demaunded who these Perse∣cutours are? Foxe understands it of the Romane tyrants, Foxe his o∣pinion. who by Ten persecutions shed the blood of Saints in abundance, to whom likewise God gave blood to drinke, be∣cause scarcely one of them dyed a naturall death: But neither is this to the scope: for it is certaine this place intends not the punishment of the adversaries of the primitive Church, but the last plagues of Antichristians. Others of our Interpreters come neerer to the scope, understanding the rivers
and fountaines of Waters, the fse Prophets and false teachers of Antichrist: Bullinger. Marlorate. because Peter calls them  Fountaines, or wells without water, that is, decei∣vers: for as dry wells frustrate the hope of the Traveller, 2. Pet. 2.17: who thinkes to find water in them, and doth not: so false Prophets deceive such who looke for sound doctrine and consolations from them, whatsoever they promise or make shew of. Notwithstanding these also shew not who are here meant, nor do they suffi∣ciently unfold the kind of the plague here signified: but keep for the most part to the thesis, that to Antichristians the waters become blood, that is, unprofitable, yea deadly to drinke of: for as to the godly all things, yea even their sinnes do work gether for their salvation: so to the ungodly the good creatures of God come a curse, and are turned to their destruction. This indeed is true, but expres∣seth not the meaning of the prophesie, because that which followeth: Thou ga∣vest them blood to drinke, doth not cohere with this sense: for God gave not blood to drinke to these rivers and fountaines, that is, layd not a cruell punishment on them, in regard they had shed the blood of the godly. Therefore such false Prophets are not here simply to be understood, who one∣ly by their false doctrine kill the soules, which the Sea of Trent did by its filthy and corrupt blood, killing all that tooke in the same, which was the second plague: But such cruell false prophets, who either with their owne hands, or by their bloody counsells: and condemnatory sentences shed the blood of innocent Chri∣stians. But who are they? We must keep to the Allegory of the Sea, Rivers, and Fountaines. The sea hath its continuall course, and is nourished by the flowing waters of rivers and foun∣taines: so likewise the fountaines and rivers have their moistnesse from the va∣pour of the Sea: hence they are rightly called the breasts of the Sea, because they both suck for themselves, and give nourishment to the Sea. The Sea was the ga∣thering together of Bishops and Doctors in Councill. The Rivers therefore and foun∣taines of Waters, who are they, but Bishops and Doctors, not indeed belonging to the Councell, yet chief Antichristian Pillars and Champions for Popery. Thus also in Chap. 8.10. the Rivers and Fountaines were Bishops and Doctors of the Church, viz. the successours of Pope Sylvester, whom he (being corrup∣ted through the favour and liberality of Constantine) drew with himselfe from Heaven into the Earth, and made bitter the wholsome and sweet Doctrine of Christ by the wormewood of humane traditions, as there I declared. Therefore here also the Rivers and Fountaines are Bishops and Teachers, but in time diverse from them. Those were made bitter before Antichrists rising: These here ex∣ercise their cruelty after Antichrists declining. These therefore became blood, that is, they shall pay their own blood for the blood which they shed of the Saints. The time and manner whereof the Lord knoweth: 1. Pet: 2.17. whom I beseech to bring these rivers and fountaines to repentance. Therefore I thinke that the event of this Viall is propheticall, which as yet wee have not seene, and perhaps under∣stand not. 5. And I heard the Angell of the waters] In Chap. 14. ver. 18, This Angell is said to have power over the fire: here he is called the Angell of the waters, hence arose the opinion that sundry Angells are set over severall elements. The Papists also hence have feined that their tutelar Saints are appointed over diseases, Arts, Handi-crafts, Cities, Countries, and every member of man. But hence nothing can solidly be gathered: for the Angell of the waters, is not a Nep∣tune set over the waters: but it is the same Angell pouring the Viall on the Ri∣vers and Fountaines: so called, because God by his ministery turned the waters into blood: after the same manner the first Angell might be called the Angell of the earth, the second the Angell of the sea, the fourth the Angell of the Sun, &c. because they poured out the Vialls on the earth, sea, sunne, &c. Because thou hast judged thus] He declares God to be just in judging these things, that is, because he turned these cruell and cursed Rivers and Fountaines
into blood, to vindicate Gods judgement from the slaunders of the wicked: for it might seem that the Plagues of Antichristians were not altogether righteous, but rather too cruell. Now the Angell ascribes them not to men but God, affirming them to be most just, in regard they singularly agree to the rule of distributive ju∣stice, which renders rewards to the just, and punishments to the wicked. O Lord which art] Sundry times before the true God, yea Christ is thus de∣scribed: See Bezas annotations on this place. save that in stead of  which is to come (before used) here it is  who shalt be (as Beza hath brought to light out of an ancient maniscript) though it commonly be read,  and holy, as cohering with the forego∣ing word  righteous, as if he should say, Thou art righteous & holy, that is, pure from all unrighteousnesse. Let us learn therefore ratherto adore Gods holy judge∣ments, although we do not fully comprehend the causes of them, then to repine and murmurre against them as being unrighteous. For they have shed the blood of Saints] By the Law of requitall they celebrate the justice of God: because they shed blood, therefore with blood shall they be punished. For hee that sheddeth mans blood: by man shall his blood be shed. Gen. 9.6. Thou gavest them blood to drinke] Bloody waters are not to be drunke, yet such shall be the drinke of the adversaries. The history of Cyrus is knowne, whose head being thrown into a great Tub full of blood, Tomyris queen of Scythia upbraiding his cruelty, said: Drink thou blood who couldest not be satiated with blood. But thou wilt say, whose blood either of the Saints or Prophets have they shed? For answer to this, (not to speake of the secret Plots, Conspiracies, and poyso∣nings ordinary to Monkes and their Confederates) read Foxe his booke of Mar∣tyrs and thou shalt see who they were that put to death, even in England alone, multitude of Saints and Prophets, many Bishops, Doctors, and Teachers, very ho∣ly, learned, and innocenr persons: As Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, with o∣ther Martyrs, who in Queen Maryes dayes for their constant profession of E∣vangelicall Doctrine, and opposition of Idolatry, were condemned, some to the fire, others to other torments: Who I pray have been the architects of all Con∣spiracies, Plots, and Commotions in the neighbouring Nations? Let Histories speake. Rightly therefore the innocent blood of the Saints is imputed unto them by the Angell. For they are worthy] Their cruelty is the reason why they justly drinke blood. The Angell rejoyceth not simply over the plagues of the wicked, but declares the justice of God by the law of requitall. Every one shall be rewarded accor∣ding to what he hath done: for this is the judgement of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, Rom. 1. verse 32. God therefore is righteous, and so are his judgements on blood-thirsty men. Before in Chap. The merits of workes hence not established. 3.5. it is said of them that overcame: they shall be clothed in white: for they are worthy: hence the merit of good workes seemes to be confir∣med: for if these of right are punished for their cruelty, because they are worthy, that is, because they have merited the same: Then also the other must of right be clothed in white, because they are worthy: that is, because they have merited the same. As cruelty therefore is the meritorious cause of punishment: so innocency should be the meritorious cause of reward. I answer. The consequence will not hold from a contrary dissimilitude. E∣vill workes in order of justice do merit punishment: but good workes doe not merit life eternall; because in order of justice, the creatures good workes are due debts to the Creator: now nothing that we do can possiblie merit: conside∣ring we are obliged unto it by duty: But to merit, is a worke not due, ma∣king a reward due, by the work done, which before was not due. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar] The old Version: I heard another,
omitting the words, out of the Altar: some Copies also have it, And I heard the Altar: which is a manifest errour as Ribera himself cannot deny. Iohn there∣fore heard another, (to wit) Angell comming out from the Altar, undoubtedly being the same spoken of in Chapter 14. verse 18. Even so Lord God Almighty] see ver. 5. The pouring out of the fourth Viall on the Sunne. 8 And the fourth Angell poured out his Viall upon the Sunne, and power was given to him to Scorch men with fire. 9 And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repen∣ted not, to give him glory, THE COMMENTARY. 8. AND the fourth Angell poured out] The two former Vialls were Historicall to us: the events whereof we have, and do yet see. The third as I said is propheticall: such also are the four following, the events of them being yet to come, & therefore the searching into them is the more obscure and difficult, the last excepted, which containes the finall pu∣nishments of the adversaries, the ruine of Babylon and the World. Yet I will speake of each of them that which shall seeme to bee most probable. The fourth Viall is poured out on the Sunne, the events whereof are, 1. Ascor∣ching heat, , a most violent and burning Feaver engendring intollerable paine. 2. Blasphemies of men against God. 3. desperate obstinacy in sins. Riberas o∣pinion. If with Ribera we take the Sunne properly, then a horrible scorching by rea∣son of an excessive heat is portended to the Antichristians, that their bodies as by a burning flame should be inwardly broiled, like such as are right under Zona tor∣rida, who are tormented with continual heat, & forced in the day time to shadow themselves in Caves under the earth. Drinesse followes heat: and barrennes the drought of the earth, barrenesse is accompanied with want of corn, pestilence, hun∣ger and intollerable thirst: by which plague the ungodly shall rage, and poure forth horrible blasphemies against the Name of God, and at last rush into utter despaire: so the sense should be thus, he poured out his Ʋiall on the Sunne, that is, by it so powerfully wrought on the Sun, that it scorched the earth with its beams more vehemently then formerly. And thus Bullinger, Meyerus, Aretius, Foxe, Why the li∣terall expo∣sition can∣not hold. Chytraeus, (who notwithstanding alleadgeth also a mysticall sense) interpret it Now the reason why I assent not unto them is, first, because this shall be a plague peculiar to the Antichristians: whereas heat, drought, barrennesse, hun∣ger; and thirst are common calamities incident to the godly and wicked: neither are we to doubt, But that these words, It was given to this Angell, or to the Sun (for the relative  may be referred to either, though more properly to the Sunne) to burne or scorch men with heat, are onely to be referred to those ulcerous ones having the marke of the beast. ver. 2. Secondly, The second effect should but little agree, for why should men blaspheme God because of the heat? They would rather curse the sunne it self
thus scorching them, Lib. 4. pag. 135. after the manner of the Atlants who, as Herodotus reports in Melpomene, curse the sun rising over them, and bitterly raile on it, because with his scorching beames it spoiles both them and their country. Thirdly, although afflictions for the most part are Sermons of repentance: yet this plague seemes chieflly to worke inwardly on the conscience, thereby to insti¦gate men to repentance, but they on the contrary do obstinately blaspheme: Therefore I rather understand it of an inward, A divers mysticall sense. then outward plague. Now (passing by the letter) the conjectures of Interpreters are very divers touching this sun, and its scorching, which I thinke it not amisse briefly to re∣peat, Lyras opi∣nion. that by comparing them, we may gather a truer sense. Ly doting as his manner is, makes this Angell to be Pope Leo III. whom the Romanes by sedition displaced, evilly intreated and cast into prison, out of which notwithstanding he made an escape by the meanes of some, as Writers report: he poured out his Viall on the sunne, in declaring the griefe of his mind to Charles the great, King of France: because as the Sun in its light excells all other Planets: so he shining in faith and magnaminity excelled all the Kings of the earth. To him it was given to afflict men by heat: because Charles came to Rome with an Army and grievously afflicted the Popes Rebells, and restored Leo to his seat. Hereby men were scorched, to wit, the seditious Romanes by the heat of wrath, and blasphemed the name of Charles. The rest I mention not: The unsavourinesse of the glosse being as it plainely appeares altogether con∣trary, to the scope. Some interpret the Sun to be Antichrist, Gagnaeus o∣pinion. who falsly affirmes himselfe to be the Sun of the Church. So Gagnaeus the Papist and our Marlorate. He shall torment men with heat: 1 Pet 4.12 that is, afflict them with grievous persecutions: for heat and fire de∣note afflictions. But this exposition cannot stand, because Antichrist will not persecute his followers, but the godly only who by no torments will be brought to blaspheme the name of God. Others understand the Sun to be Christ the sun of righteousnesse, to whom it shalbe given, to torment the consciences of Antichristians with the heat of his wrath, as it were by fire: for because they can by no meanes resist the Gospell of Christ (by the heat of wrath being turned into fury) they shall blaspheme the name of God, that is, the truth of the Gospell in its clearest light, as if it were divelish and he∣reticall, being far from repentance and giving glory to God. If this be the sense, we may then understand, what we are to expect henceforward of the Papists, and how we are never to hope for any reconciliation with them. Bright∣mans inter∣pretation. Here also I will alleadge Brightmans opinion not altogether divers from the former. The sun he interprets of the holy scriptures, by whose light our darke mindes are enlightned. The Ʋiall is to be poured out on these, not to hurt them, as the former vialls were hurtfull to the earth, sea and rivers, but to give a force and set an edge upon them, that may more sharply pricke and penetrate into the consciences of men: for although the scriptures in our times have been very much illustrated, yet many things (especially propheticall) are as yet not sufficiently explained. And although indeed Antichrist be plainely discovered: yet what shifts and feined pretences doth he daily make, to the end the world may not take notice of him? But by how much the day of Iudgement drawes nearer, by so much the more shall the light of the Sun, that is the Scriptures, bring to the eyes of the world a more abundant and clearer light: The summe of all is, that a grea∣ter perspicuity of the Scriptures seemes to be expected, by which Antichristi∣ans as by a more vehement heat of the Sun, shall be very much tormented: be∣cause the filtinesse of Antichrist will hereby be more discovered, which shall oc∣casion them to persecute men with the greater hatred, yea such shall be their ex∣ceeding folly, as they will rage and fret against the Sun, because their filthy whoordomes are laid open to the view of all the world. This sense is clearer then the former: yet both are to one effect: for Christ
by the scriptures will send forth a great light and new heat, which indeed should rejoyce the adversaries, amend them, bring them to repentance, but through their owne malice they shall be the more enraged thereby. Now all things will be cleare. And it was given him to scorch men]  the phrase denotes some extraordinary judgement of God: For indeed neither Christ nor his word do in themselves, or of their own nature worke this effect, viz. to torment men with the scorching heat of fury, but the sunne is given or attributed unto them accidentally: God sending on Antichristians strong delusion that they should beleeve a lie, because they received not the love of the truth. They ought indeed by the beames of the Sun of righteousnesse so cleerly shining in the holy Scriptures, to be enlightned, warmed and stird up to acknowledge, love and imbrace the truth of Christ: but they maliciously in heat of fury will rage against Christ, and be tormented by fire, that is, extreame malice and envy. In that he saith with the article  The men, he expresly points at them in ver. 2. 9. And men were scorched] Again with the article  that we might not indifinitely understand all men, but onely the ulcerous marked ones of the beast: who are like dogs over heated, gaping and hanging out their tongues: for the more their eyes are smitten with the beames of the Gospell, the more despite∣fully they shall hate the same; and be scorched with heat, or rage, because they shall find no way how to darken the Sun, and extinguish the light thereof. And they blasphemed] A second accidentary effect on the Antichristians, is by des∣perate oppressing of the truth, they shal break forth into blasphemies against God, to wit, by attributing the worke of God to the devill: like the blasphemous Iews in Mat. 12. neither is it strange: for they learned to blaspheme of the Beast their head, unto whom as we heard in Chap. 13.5. A mouth was given, spea∣king great things and blasphemies against God, his name, his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven: It is true the beast did long before cast out blasphemies, but they were nothing in comparison of those which these ulcerous blasphemers shall pour orth against God. Having power] By this attribute he aggravates their fury: they ought hum∣blie to intreat God to take away the plagues: who onely hath power, (as to in∣flict, so) to remove the same: but they like mad men, will not cease to set their faces against the sun, and to blaspheme God to their inevitable ruine and destru∣ction: for at last they shall be necessitated to fall under their plagues. Here by the way we are admonished that God is the orderer of all scourges: from which if we desire to be freed, we must humbly turne our selves by sup∣plication unto him. We are admonished also of the end of Gods scourges: for the words, And repen∣ted not: shew, that therefore men were thus afflicted, that they might be r ecal∣led by this rod, unto true repentance and detestation of Idolatry. Lastly, we are informed how to shun and turne away the rod: for had these men repented, God would have mitigated and taking away this scorching plague. Repentance therefore lessens and takes away plagues, but impenitencie increa∣seth them. Now to repent is to forsake evill workes, and endeavour truly to lead a pious life. To give God glory] An increase of their obstinacie, in that they would not by repentance, give God his due praise. But what glory? I. The glory of his ju∣stite, that he had inflicted the scorching plagues on them, for their deserts, and that it were just to lay more heavy punishments on them except they repented. II. The glory of his truth, that onely the Doctrine of the Gospell revealed in the word of God, is true and saving. III. The glory of his mercy, that for∣givenesse is prepared for the Repentant, viz. for such who forsaking Antichrist, do by a livelie faith turne to Christ. Lastly the glory of his almighty power,
that he will utterly destroy the beast and all such with him, who persevere in their blasphemies: Behold in our repentance how many wayes Gods glorie is manifested and attributed unto him, and our salvation furthered by it. The pouring out of the fift Viall on the Throne of the BEAST. 10. And the fift Angell poured out his Viall upon the seate of the Beast, and his Kingdom was full of darkenesse, and they gnaw∣ed their tongues for paine. 11 And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their paines, and their sores, and repented not of their deeds. THE COMMENTARY. ANd the fift Angell poured out] The fift Viall being poured out on the Throne of the Beast, his Kingdom is filled with darkenesse, his worshippers fret, blaspheme, and remaine obstinate unto the end: which effects are not much differing from the former. And therefore this plague is the lesse obscure, provided we un∣derstand what the throne of the beast is, and the darkening of his Kingdome. Now we are to observe that touching this Ʋiall alone, scarce any Interpreter keepes to the Letter, but all bring forth Allegories, howsoever some more pro∣perly then others. Lyra takes this Angell to be the Emperour Otto, Lyra makes the Romane sea the throne of the beast. who poured out the Ʋiall, that is, vengeance on the throne of the beast that is, on Pope John, whom Crescentius thrust into the roome of Gregory, living the life of a beast: now howbeit he erres from the scopes, (as ordinary he doth) yet here he dotes not, but acknowledgeth the Romane Sea to be the beasts throne. Andreas thinkes the throne of the beast to the be Kingdom of Antichrist, which (saith he) shall be darkned by this pouring out, because it shall altogether so ap∣peare, and be wholly destitute of the light of the sun of righteousnesse. He understands it therefore of the darknesse of doctrine, wherewith Antichrists Kingdome shall be utterly overwhelmed: from which opinion our interpreters, as Bullinger, Marlorate, Alphonsus, Artopoeus, Aretius, and Chytraeus do not much differ, save onely that they interpret the throne of the beast more clearly then he, viz. of the Popish Kingdom and its grosse Idols, errours, and horrible darkning of the truth, which at last shall be discovered by the light of the Gospell. But hardly any one is so absurd as Ribera, who saith that the Kingdome of his feined Antichrist shall be darkened, because all his worshippers shall be smitten with grievous wounds, and so their prosperity and joy obscured. But he too much wresteth the metaphor of darkenesse, for not the prosperity of Antichristians, but the Kingdome, that is, the power of Antichrist is said to be darkened: Hereby also this plague should nothing differ from the first. But what if the throne of the beast be the seat of the Pope of Rome? and the dark∣ning of Rome, its spoyling and ruine: of which see Chapter 17. ver. 16,
Artopoeus therefore thinketh that the spoyling of the City Rome by Charles V. Duke of Borbon anno 1527. is here signified, but so this plague should not have been very great: for the Emperour soon restored the Pope again: neither did there thence follow greater darkenesse to the Papall kingdom then before. Brightman applies this darkening of the beasts throne to the last destruction of the Rome, by which the dignity thereof shall not onely be a little lessened, but wholly perish according to the verse of Sibyll  Then thou shalt be wholly in ashes, as if thou hadst never bin Rome. Ne∣verthelesse he thinkes that the beast shall remaine sometime after the destruction of the City, not to regaine his former dignity, but that soon after a more horrible destruction may befall him. Therefore his Kingdome is said to bee darkened, not wholly exstinguished, but deprived of its former lustre. For mine owne part, I dare not simply disapprove of this propheticall sense: especially seeing the Iesuits themselves begin to prophesie of the destruction of Rome, and banishment of the Pope, as before in Chap. 14. I shewed out of Ri∣bera. For though the Turke sit still, yet certainly Christian Kings and Princes will put their hands to this worke of God, for to thrust the Pope out of his nest: as Iohn Chap. 17.16. doth not obscurely intimate. Notwithstanding if it be thought more agreeable not to restraine the Throne of the beast to the City Rome, but rather to understand the same of his whole King∣dome, which is said to be darkened, because in the Egyptian Type (for it is a plain Allusion unto the ninth plague of Aegypt) not onely Pharaohs royall Court, Ex. 10: 23 but the whole land, except the dwellings of the Israelites, was overwhelmed with most thick darknesse three dayes together: I see not to whom I should rather assent, then to our foresaid interpreters, who expound it of the darkening, or totall dark∣nesse, in which Antichrist hath deeply involved and plunged the Christian world these thousand yeers, which shall wholly be dissipated by the cleare light and preaching of the Gospell. How the beasts king dome is darkened. The darkening therefore of Antichrists Kingdome, is not a bringing in of a new darkenesse: for his kingdom was never inlightned with the light of true doctrine: But began to be darkened even from the first, after that the smoake of the bottomlesse pit had filled all parts and places thereof with a most grosse myst or blindnesse, al∣though the world in regard of its externall lustre thought it to be most bright and shining. But the full manifestation of the darkenesse, and dispelling of the smoak, shall be a fatall darkning unto Antichrist, when the most cleare light of the Gos∣pell shall breake forth and shine in all parts of the world: for then the beasts abo∣minations shall be layd open to the view of all men: whereupon many shall de∣sert him: his glory shall be obscured, his authority despised, and his Kitchin grow cold. This plague shall be more grievous then the former: or certainly an extreame encreasing thereof: for then the beast shall be neerest to utter ruine: of which more afterward. And they gnawed their tongues] Now follow three secundary effects of this Viall on the Vassalls and Worshippers of Antichrist. First, they gnaw their tongues: By which proverbiall Speech is noted the ex∣treame rage they shall fall into: And the cause is added: to wit, for the paine or griefe in which they shall be because of the fatall declining of the Popish King∣dome: for mad or furious persons use to bite their lips, tongues, and fingers, and gnash their teeth as beasts not able to revenge themselves. It may also be an Allusion to such as have the Falling-Sicknesse, who by the sharpe sits of their disease are wont to bite their lips and fingers: with the like madnesse or phrensie, the Papists shall then be vexed, when they see the Popes Kingdome to be darkened, exposed to contempt, and the authority thereof taken away: when Kings, Princes, and the Vulgar sort shall deny obedience unto the same. Secondly, They shall blaspheme the God of Heaven] As before: for because
they goe on to condemne the Gospell of Christ as divelish heresie, and wicked∣ly accuse the same as the cause of all the Commotions and troubles which them∣selves have raised. Thirdly, They repented not of their deeds] viz, which we have expounded verse 9. and before in Chapter 9. ver. 20.21. The pouring out of the Sixt Viall on Euphrates. 12 And the sixt angell poured out his Viall upon the great River Eu∣phrates: and the Water thereof was dryed up: that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. 13 And I saw three uncleane Spirits like Frogges come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. 14 For they are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battell of that great day of God Almighty. 15 Behold, I come as a theefe: Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments, lest he walke naked, and they see his shame. 16 And he gathered them together to a place, called in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon. THE COMMENTARY. 12 AND the sixt Angell poured out] The sixt Ʋiall is poured out on that great River Euphrates, which, as histories testifie, run∣neth through Babylon, & is the bound of the Eastern Palestina. Two events do follow, The drying up of the waters of Euphra∣tes, And the sending forth of three uncleane Spirits unto the Kings of the earth to make Warre against God, &c. By the for∣mer, the plague it selfe, by the latter, the last endeavour of the Beast to keepe off the plague is signified. The drying up of Euphrates is by some properly, by others mystically expounded. Andreas expounds it properly, Andreas o∣pinion tou∣ching the drying up of Euphrates. yet doubtingly: Perhaps, saith he, Euphrates by Gods permission shall be shallow, as that it will be easie for the Kings of the Nations and other men to passe over for to kill each other: Now these Kings of the East for whom the way shall be prepared, he guesseth to be Gog and Magog, who shall come out of the region of the Scythians: Or Antichrist, with other Kings out of the eastern Persia, where the Tribe of Dan shall inhabit, of which Tribe Anti∣christ is to be borne, and passe over Euphrates to the destruction and death of the soules and bodies of very many. The first clause of which sentence, touching the litterall drying up of Euphrates, Ribera approveth: but the latter hee rejecteth, viz. of Antichrists comming out of the East with other kings over the River Eu∣phrates being dryed up: because (saith he) Antichrist shall sit in Jerusalem on this side of Euphrates: and therefore shall not come out of the East which is beyond it, but supposeth that the seven Kings of the East shall be called forth by the three
impure spirits, to joyne themselves with Antichrist in that generall battell against Christians. Wonderfull darknesse, and fabulous toyes: no token of any plague doth appeare in these things: whereas it is certaine that the beasts last plague save one, is here denounced. Here also I see our Brightman to keep to the Letter about the drying up of Eu∣phrates, but in a diverse sence and end. Euphrates in this place, as in Chap. 9.14. in the sixt Trumpet, he understands to be the River of Mesopotamia which made the passage of the Easterne People into Judea very difficult: The waters whereof he thinkes after the overthrow of Rome, shall be dryed up by a like miracle as of old it happened at the red Sea and the waters of Iordane. To what end? That the way of the Kings that come from the rising of the Sun might be pre∣pared: that is, that the Iews dwelling in the East may the easier and more speedily returne unto Ierusalem their native Countrey, not to restore the Iewish worship, but to embrace the Gospell of Christ. Rev. 5.10 And he saith further that the converted Iews are called Kings, because all Christians are Kings and Priests to God: And Kings of the East, because they shall come from thence, and all the Eastern peo∣ple shall be in subjection to them. Bright∣mans rea∣sons. This opinion he backes with four reasons. First, because it was never heard, that such a miracle happened to any Nation, but the Iews, who passed thorow the red Sea and Iordan as on dry ground. Secondly, because the Prophet Isaiah in Chap. 44. ver. 22. & 51.10. & 63.11. semeth to promise unto the Iews such a kind of passage, namely that the Ri∣ver should be dryed up in their return unto Ierusalem. Thirdly, because the Apostle Rom. 11.25. hath foretold that in the last times the Iewish Nation shall with great zeale turne to Christ. Fourthly, because it is not probable that so great a mysterie as their conversi∣on should be passed by in this prophesie. Now either it must here be mentio∣ned, or else it is not at all spoken of in this Booke. Thus I have clearlie laid downe the opinion of this Interpreter, Not very solid. which indeed is pious, ingenious, much desired by the godlie, and perhaps probable also: not∣withstanding his arguments are of little waight. For though it be granted that the drying up of the Sea and Iordan was peculiar to the Iews:  yet hence it will not follow that the Kings of the East signifie the Iews to be converted to Christ. Concerning the drying up of Euphrates we read nothing thereof,  but only in this place now in question: neither is the same promised by the Prophet Isaias, but the Iews assurance touching their deliverance out of Babylon is confirmed by the miracles which God of old had wrought for them. The mysterie foretold Rom. 11. hath partly been already accomplished,  some Iews now and then having been converted to Christ: and partly yet remaines to be fullfilled, when many every where in Europe Asia & Africa, shall imbrace the Gospell, yet without a miraculous passing over Euphrates (beyond which it is not certaine that any Iews do inhabit) or returning into their countrey: seeing the faith of Christ is not in the least tyed to the Territories of Iudea. Lastly, this mysterie is not passed by in silence,  but was before plainely figu∣red out in the Vision of the 144000. sealed ones out of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Chapter 7. But what ever his reasons are, this one thing moves me not to assent thereunto: because either in these words of the drying up of Euphrates, the sixt plague is pointed at, or else here is no plague at all; for the following words set not forth a plague, but the Beasts endeavour to defend himselfe (although in vaine) a∣gainst the same. The drying up of Eu∣phrates is mystically to be under stood. I think therfore that the drying up of Euphrates is rather mysticallie to be taken. Now I find two mysticall interpretations (for Alcasars new and foolish o∣pinion I leave to himselfe) which suppose, that the place here is a manifest allu∣sion
unto the taking of Babylon by Cyrus who drawing the streame of Euphra∣tes another way, made the River shallow and passable, to the spoyling of the ci∣ty, through the middest whereof it ran. Euphrates denotes the Turkes now possessing the same: Artopoeus opinion. The waters thereof drawne out into other Brooks, the stronge incursions of the Turkes on the Romane Empire, whose Princes being distracted because of the darkening and weakning of the Beasts Kingdome: some of them desiring to see it overthrown: on the con∣trary others wishing the safety thereof: hence refuse to joyne their forces toge∣ther for to resist the power of the Turkes, who by this meanes shall the more easily breake in from the East and spoile them, as hitherto experience hath taught us. This is the opinion of Artopoeus, which I rehearse, not because I altoge∣ther approve thereof (for so the Plague should no more appertaine to Anti∣christ, then to us) but because it is not altogether disagreeing from what we see by daily experience. Bullingers opinion. But the other I much preferre before all the rest, viz. which Bullinger, Aretius, and Illyricus have learnedly expounded, that Euphrates signifies the prin∣cipall Fortresses of the Antichristian Babylon, and by meanes whereof it grew to so great power, and hitherto hath stood in its strength: namely their spirituall Revenues, Tithes, First-fruits, Taxes, Annuities, Copes, Indulgences, Peter-pence, Impropriations, Dispensations, Vacancies, Commendums: to be short, all the wealth and riches that were wont to flow to Rome out of all parts of Christen∣dome. The waters of Euphrat. These waters shall be dryed up, because these Taxes and Tributes former∣ly payed to the Beasts kingdome shall be as was said, darkened, that is, no more flow to Rome, but be bestowed otherwhere, so as the Chests, Cellars, Kitchins, and Store-houses of the Pope shal grow empty. The Way shall be prepared for the Kings of the East, to take Babylon, that is, without any let or hinderance kings, Princes, and People of all sorts shall foresake Antichrist, Tread the Beasts kingdome under foot, & embrace the gospel. The Kings I say of the East metaphorically are such as hitherto were adicted to Antichrist, but then embracing and professing the Gospell: (for the faithfull are Kings) & shall come from the East, that is, from Christ, who is the Day-spring from on high, Luke 1.78. The Analogie of this mysticall interpretation is proved both by divine and humane historie. Herodotus, and Xenophon witnesse, that Babylon had two prin∣ciple Fences: One without, viz. Their Walles, being fifty Cubites thicke, and two hundred Cubites high: The other within, viz. Euphrates running through the middest of the Citie, being of such a depth that two men, howbeit standing one on the necke of another, yet no part of their bodies would appear above water, as Gobryas in Xenophon speaketh: The history of Cyrus in taking of Babylon. so that the River was of greater strength to the City then the Walles. Notwithstanding the kings of the Medes came and besie∣ged Babylon, viz. Darius the Mede, and Cyrus the Persian, according to the pro∣phesie of Ieremy in Chap. 51.28. Prepare against her the Nations, with the kings of the Medes, that is, the kings comming from the East: for Media and Persia lies to the east of Babylon. Now the Besiegers despairing to winne the Walles took counsell how to divert Euphrates: for which purpose having made many deepe ditches, in the same night that the Babylonians were at their riotous feastings and so overcome with wine and sleep, the waters of Euphrates were brought into the aforesaid ditches, and the enemy passed through it into the City on dry ground, took the pallace of Belshazzar, killed him, and wonne Babylon, as we have it in Daniel 5. ver. 30. & Ier. 51.32. her passages were stopt, &c. To this Type the thing in hand doth very well answer: for the Antichristian Babylon hath chiefly by two Monuments stood unmoveable. Outwardly in stead of walles, The walles of the Ro∣mane Ba∣bylon. she hath Emperours, kings and nations, who as Vassals to the Pope do at his becke, take up Armes in defence of Babylon: Within her is Euphrates draw∣ing to Rome as through a deep channell, the treasures of the world, in so much as the Churches Eschequer doth far surpasse the Treasures of all Monarchs in the
earth. It hath bin observed, that in most Provinces Clergie-men have had Two-thirds of all rents, scarcely one third remaining to the Prince and people: Thus as Babylon gloried because of her deep waters: so Rome boasteth of her excessive riches: but like as the waters of Euphrates being diverted, the River was dryed up, The deepe waters of the Romish Babylon. and thereby an easie passage was prepared for the kings of the East, who tooke Babylon in one night: Even so Romes holy tribute being intercepted and deri∣ved otherwhere, there will be an easie way made for faithfull kings and tea∣chers to passe as through dry Foordes, Rev: 18.8 that new Babylon may fall in one day and bee destroyed. If thou aske, who shall make the ditches, and turne these Tributes of Rome a∣nother way: See the History of Cyrus: his army wrought day and night, till at length the worke being finished, Cyrus himselfe opened the Sluces and drew the waters from the City: so the continuall labours and endeavours of Gods mi∣nisters shall prepare the ditches: and Cyrus the Lords anointed Isay 54.1. that is, faithfull kings and princes shall themselves open the more thus prepared, draw backe the Rivers of Babylon, and convert her Tributes to better uses, as in Chap. 17. ver. 16. is plainely taught unto us. Thus we have heard the meaning of the sixt Viall, which without doubt is pro∣per and true, for Babylon shall receive no plague more grievous then this, before the totall destruction thereof. Neither is this interpretation new, or lately thought of by us: but even my Anonymus hath exprest the same 260. yeers agoe, in these words: He dryed up] that is, The preaching of the Gospell doth and shall cause men to take away all temporall things, that is, Possessions and earthly Dominion from the Clergy, and they shall no more be given unto them. Neither are the waters of Euphrates onely begun to be dryed up a little: but almost a hundred yeers the way hath bin a preparing for the kings of the East, to in∣vade Babylon: Thus Bohemia in a great measure is fallen off from Antichrist, and long agoe hath denied to encrease Babylons waters: The like we see in En∣gland, Scotland, Denmarke, Swethland, with a great part of Germany, France, Po∣land and Hungarie: And what would ye thinke, if at last the waters of Italy and Spaine should be dryed up also? But let us see the industry of the Beast in keeping off this plague. While Cy∣rus of old prepared the motes and built Turrets before the walles of Babylon, they scorned him, and therefore it was no wonder they perished on a sudden be∣cause of their securitie. But the Romish Babylon will more carefully stand on her watch, and make the siege of the Easterne kings tedious and difficult, as it followeth. 13. And I saw come out of the mouth of the Dragon] The internall effect of the sixt Viall we have heard spoken of: The drying up of Euphrates, being the sixt plague of the Beast. The externall effect now followeth, viz. the Beasts Am∣bassage unto the Kings of the earth to make Warre, for to keepe off the plague. The Connexion is to be considered. By six Plagues the beast is almost wasted. I. By the venemous ulcer on such as had the marke of the beast. II. By the death of every living soule in the corrupted Sea. III. By the blood of the Rivers and Fountaines. IIII. By scorching of men by the heat of the Sunne. V. By the darkenesse of the Beasts kingdome. VI. By the drying up of the River of Euphrates. Now because the Beasts kingdome shall seem by all these plagues to be brought to a most desperate condition: he on the contrary will leave nothing unattemp∣ted for to uphold the same: And as the Poet speaketh: Flectere cum nequeat superos, Acharonta movebit. And therefore to advance his throne againe, and bring backe the waters of Eu∣phrates into the Channells of Babylon, he will not feare to lift up his hand against
Heaven: but by an unheard of fury will move warre against God, and by his Legates sollicite, and draw the kings of the earth into the Confederacie of this warre. But with what event? Here indeed it is not mentioned, but shall be declared in the following Vision Chap. 19. Namely that this his last rage shall expose the Beast, his kingdom, and the kings his Associates, unto utter destructi∣on. This is the summe. But because this last tumult shall be raised by the Beasts Legates, Iohn here ex∣poundeth in order, from whom they are sent, and to whom, who, and what manner of Messengers they are, wherefore they are sent, together with the suc∣cesse of their Message: all which things we will briefly consider. The Authours of the Ambassage are, The au∣thors of this war & am∣bassage. the Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet. Of the Dragon and Beast we spake in Chapter 13. The false Prophet is here first mentioned. Now there we shewed that he is the same Land-beast, who by great signes caused the Sea-beast to be worshipped, and this will more clearly appeare in Chap. 19.20. where the same effects are attributed to the False Prophet, which before were spoken of the beast rising out of the earth. Moreover we there made it appeare that both Beasts do represent one and the same Antichrist under a divers shape. The former, as a King: The latter, as a deceiver: Out of the mouth therefore of these three goe forth these three Messengers, that is, they are sent by their invention, counsell, commandement and authority, for this is meant by the Type of going forth out of the mouth: How the three Le∣gates pro∣ceed out of the mouth of these three. seeing Satan properly hath no mouth. Neither is the sense, as if one should proceed out of the mouth of the Dragon, another out of the mouth of the Beast, and the third out of the mouth of the False Prophet: for thus their originall and authority would seem not to be equall: But that they all three go forth as it were out of one mouth, by the common con∣spiracy of the three aforesaid parties, for to performe their interprize, viz, with lies, in behalfe of the Dragon, who is the father of all lies, and by tyranny in the behalfe of the Sea-beast, who represents Antichrist as he is a secular Monarch, and withall deceit of unrighteousnesse in behalfe of the Land-beast, that is, Antichrist as he is a spirituall Impostor. Now let us consider the Messengers themselves. Three impure Spirits] Ribera understands them to be Three Devills, whom they call familiar spirits, such as Magicians send forth at their pleasure. But they shall be men properly, because they go, speake, and have to do with Kings in a civill way, all which little suites with Devills. Notwithstanding they are said to be spirits, because by profession they shalbe Spirituall Fathers: And Three, because there shall be many of them, sufficient for to performe what they shall undertake: for a threefold number denotes perfecti∣on: as before in Chap. 11. the two witnesses were indefinitely put for a few, yet sufficient for the Testimony of the truth. Yet here it seemes they are said to be three rather then seven (which number the Scripture more frequently useth) be∣cause they shall be the choisest and subtlest out of the flockes of Locusts, who or∣dinarily are not very many. Notwithstanding they shall be of the true kind of the Locusts: however they differ in forme and office. Impure Spirits] Not onely being of an impure originall, but nature and man∣ners also, labouring to staine both divine and humane things, even as the Locusts who came out of the filthy bottomlesse pit, did defile all things with their ve∣nemous mouths and tailes. Like to Frogs] They shall not be Frogs, nor in the forme of Frogs (for so they should be unfit messengers to be sent to Kings) but like to Frogs, in filthi∣nesse, impudencie, and loquacitie, because like as Frogs with their continuall croaking () are most irkesome to our eares: Aristoph. in Ranis: so these E∣missaries of Antichrist living a most impure life within their Covents, and being taught much to bable, do fill the eares of Kings with their cries, untill they in∣duce them unto their holy Warre: Neither are they much unlike to the Locusts: for Locusts skip like Frogs: besides they resemble the foure square heads of Frogs by their geometricall hoods.
14. For they are the Spirits of Devills] He further describes them by their nature and craft: they are instructed in the Schoole (not of the holy Ghost, but) of the evill one: and therefore they shall have the nature and disposition of their master: yet will some of them make a fairer shew, and thereby prove more hurtfull, and are the more carefully to be avoided. Working miracles] They shall gaine credit to their Ambassage, not so much by words, as by signes and miracles, and thereby allure and deceive the Kings of the earth. But by what signes, and whose? by lies and the efficacie of Satan, from whom they originally proceed: for the wonders they worke are delusions of Sa∣tan, which are spoken of in 2. Thessa. 2.9, & Rev. 13.14. & 19.20. Which go forth unto the Kings of the earth] Thirdly, he declares their office: they shall leave the function of teaching unto others of their order, and shall be imployed in Warlike Messages. Here Ribera erreth, in thinking that these Kings are the same unto whom the way was prepared by the drying up of Euphrates: for they were Kings of the East, spoiling the beast: But these are the Kings of the earth and of the whole world: The former were against, These shall be for Antichrist. The Kings of the earth] Thus he calleth (as before) the sworne Vassalls of the Beast, and therefore they are said to be of the earth, however by profession they would seeme to be Christians. And of the whole world] That is, all Forraigne Kings whatsoever: for at last the beast will labour to have the friendship and assistance of them all. For in re∣gard he shall see that they of his owne profession are more remisse and negligent then he would have them, therefore by Ambassages he will stirre up Forraigne Princes, and by all meanes labour to draw them on his side. Now if thou demaund who these Legates are, I answer: Who these three spirits are that are sent forth. (howsoever undoub∣tedly they shall manifest themselves so much the more, by how much Antichrists fighting against God shall appeare, and the nearer we come to the day of Iudge∣ment: yet) it seems not to be obscure in the least, both by history and experience. For it is plaine that the chiefe of these Messengers, are the Legates a latere: who are sent with full power unto the Kings of the earth to negociate for Babylon: next to them are the Bishops who order and direct the affaires of the Court: In the next place are the Monkes and Iesuites who insinuate themselves into the clos∣sets of women, dive into counsells, and are Architects of dissention; These (as their own Epistles witnesse) are daily sent as Legates to the kings of India, Ame∣rica and Africa, to bring them into the fellowship of this warre that is a prepa∣ring. And now of late (if I be not deceived) they have made the king of Per∣sia bounden to the Sea of Rome. And indeed without the religious interposi∣tion of these men, scarse any counsells of peace or warre can be handled in Court, as experience teacheth. Moreover this Type doth very fitly agree to Frogs. They are Spirits, viz. spirituall fathers: but uncleane like Frogs] Because (saith my Anonymus) they remain in the mire of riches prating and tatling against the truth of the Gospell. Spirits of de∣vills] because (saith the same Authour) they are inspired by the Devill onely so to doe. Working miracles] or doing signes, that is, making shew of outward holinesse, though in truth they be the greatest hypocrites, having their affections set on the earth and wordly Pompe, and therefore howsoever they be the truest Proctours of Antichrist, yet being out∣wardly cloaked with so many signes of Sanctitie, they captivate as it were all men, so that they are esteemed of them more holy then the rest of men. These things Anonymus: but we are further to consider, that by prodigious and false miracles they shall gaine credit to their Ambassage. viz. such by which the beast himselfe is said to seduce the Inhabitants of the earth Chap. 13.14. Now it is notorious, that there are none at this day in the world, who arrogate to themselves the glory of working signes and miracles, but the Popes Emissaries. Thus we see, who the Legates are, and to whom they go forth.
To gather them to the Battell] They will not professe to make warre against God: for then they should never induce any but mad men unto it: but pretend that it is a warre undertaken for Gods glory, and against hereticks, for the safetie of the Catholicke Church: although in very deed it shall be against the God of Heaven: they shall, I say, prepare a great Dyet, to cut off at last all the heri∣rickes in one battell, and at once restore the affaires of the Romish Sea. But O great folly! for it shall not be the day of Hereticks but of God: Namely, Of God Almighty] Whereby the faithfull should be stird up to consider the wonder∣full judgements of God. The Frogs indeed shall gather the Kings of the earth to Warre, thereby to root out the Gospell of Almighty God. But by that war God will root them both out together. It is called a great Day, because the judge∣ment of that day shall be great and wonderfull by the slaughter of all adver∣saries: of which in Chap. 19. 15. Behold I come as a thiefe] By a prophetical Parenthesis, he exhorts us un∣to watchfullnesse. And it is inserted by the occasion of that great Day in which the enemies shall come to fight against Christ. Christ then on the contrary shall come to cut off the adversaries. Now this his comming shall be sudden and un∣expected like a thiefe in the night as Mat. 24.43. Luke 12.39. 1. Thessa. 5.2. Reve. 3.3. We must watch therefore, least being brought asleepe by the cares of the World, we be on a sudden oppressed by that great day of the Lord. And keepe his garments] That they be not polluted with the defilements of the flesh, and of this World: or rather, that they be not secretly stollen away: for if their garments be taken from them, they shall be forced to goe naked, ha∣ving nothing wherewithall to cover their shame. 2 Cor. 92 This exhortation agrees with the doctrine of the Apostle: We desire to be clothed upon with our house, which is from Heaven: if so be that being clothed we be not found naked. And with that of Christ, unto the Bishop of Laodicea Chap. 3.18. I counsell thee to buy white raiment, that thou mayst be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakednesse do not appeare. See the exposition on that place: And indeed Beza supposeth that this Parenthesis is for some reason from thence here inserted: but there is no cause of such suspicion, see∣ing the occasion of the Parenthesis is manifest: and that the metaphor taken from garments is familiar to this Booke. 16. And gathered them] The old Version: And he shall gather them, as if it were  Beza in his latter Edition: he gathered them, (accor∣ding also as it is in our English Translation) to wit Christ, or God, referring it to the foregoing Verse: But in his former more rightly: And they gathered them: viz. the three uncleane Spirits: for the words  and  do cohere: as if he had said, The spirits went forth to gather the Kings of the world and they gathered them: the 14. verse, as we have shewed, being inserted by a parenthesis: It is true, the Verbe  being in the singular number, may carry both senses: notwithstanding it plainely appeares from the end of the Spirits going forth, that in the Text by an Atticisme (usuall to the Greekes) the Noune  Spirits being plurall is joyned with a verbe of the singular num∣ber. Now the end of the Ambassage of the uncleane Spirits was to gather the Kings: least therefore it should seeme they had bin slacke in their office: their endeavour is added: And they gathered them, viz. to the Battell, for by their im∣portunitie, subtilty, and jugling, they perswaded the kings to take up this warre. The Kings therefore of the earth, and of the whole world are in readinesse with their armies for to defend the Beast against God Almighty. O detestable madnesse! The whole world will be up in armes: no corner shall be in quiet, or free from the warre of these frogs. And indeed it seemeth that towards the end of the world it shall come to passe, that not onely Popish kings (who then shall be but few) but also forraine and barbarous nations, as of India, Asia, & Africa, being induced by the craft and deceit of the frogs, shall joyne their forces against the professours
of the Gospell, for to restore the authority of the Pope. What a confusion shall there then be in all places? And how great shall the feare and trembling of the godlie bee? Now what shall be the event of this unhappy expedition? This is reserved to the following Ʋision: onely the place where the battell shall be fought, is set forth by the Hebrew word Armageddon: Of Arma∣geddon the place of the battell. concerning which if I should alleadge the severall guesses of Interpreters (seeing it seemes not to be manifested either by Scripture or Histories) time would faile me. In the writing of the word copies do differ, generally it is writen  Harmageddon with two dd: some have it Harmagedon with one d: some  Hermagedon with E: divers significations are also alleadged. Jerome expounds it The mountain of thieves: Others A cursed Troup, from  and : Others, The army of malediction or destruction: Others, The deceit of destruction: Others, The ruine of the River or streame: Others, The mountaine of the Gospell: Others, The mountaine of apples or fruit. Two of these opinions I like best. First theirs who render it, The deceit or guile of destruction from  subtle, and . which signifies cutting off or ruinating: that the very place of the battle it selfe might discover the impo∣sture of the Frogs, who having put the Kings in hope of a great prey, should de∣ceitfully bring them into the place of their destruction, where they shall be slain in a horrible manner, not by the sword of men, but by the sword of Almighty God: for while they tumultously rage, and fiercely fight against the Gospell, in a moment they shall all be oppressed by the last judgement, and be cast into the Lake of brimstone with the Beast, false Prophet, and the Frogs, as it is in Chap∣ter 19. verse 19. The other opinion of Beza I rather approve, that Armageddon is that place where Josias unhappily fighting with Necho king of Egypt, was slaine, as we read 2. Chron. 35.22. & Zechar. 12.11. where it called the field or valley of Me∣giddon: here  The mountaine Megiddon: for at the foot of the mountaine was a valley or large field for Combat, but Megiddo was not the name of the mountaine or field, but of a citie, after which the field and the mountaine called Gilboe neer unto the same, took their denomination. Neither doth it hinder that the field Megiddo was tragicall, not unto the adver∣saries, but to good Iosias: for it may be answered, that two things are here aimed at: The opportunity of the place, as being most fit for battle: and the mourning which there was of old for the death of Iosias: the which at last shalbe here, in re∣gard of the destruction of the adversaries. The summe is this: This cursed armie here treated of, shall bee gathered into the place of its destruction, which is not meant of one certaine place, but wher∣ever it be that these unblessed Troupes shall then gather themselves and rage a∣gainst God, there the day of judgement shall come upon them. The pouring out of the seventh Viall into the Ayre. 17 And the seventh Angell poured out his Viall into the ayre, and there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven, from the Throne, saying, It is done. 18 And there were voices and thunders, and lightnings: and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great.
19 And the great City was divided into three parts: and the Cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath. 20 And every Island fled away, and the mountaines were not found. 21 And there fell upon men a great haile out of Heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God, because of the Plague of the haile: for the Plague thereof was ex∣ceeding great. THE COMMENTARY. ANd the seventh Angel poured out] Now the Battle is expected: but yet it is intercepted by the seventh Angell pouring out the se∣venth Ʋiall, and last plague, the which respecteth the last judge∣ment, and the casting the Fighting Adversaries into eternall punishment. It is so apparent that this is a true description of the last judge∣ment, that almost all Interpreters acknowledge the same. Yet none of them give a sufficient reason why it is here again repeated, seeing it hath so often before been described, save onely they say it is done by way of anticipa∣tion. But what cause is there that this Anticipation should be so often iterated? certainely none at all, except it be because this is the last Act of the fift Ʋision: Now every of the Visions, as hitherto wee have seene, doe end with the last Judgement. So that this part of the Vision is to be compared with the former Analogies of Chap. The latter Act of Visi∣on 5. 7. towards the end of the second Ʋision: and Chap. 11. towards the end of the third Vision: and Chap. 14. towards the end of the fourth Ʋision. Now in this they differ, that in Chap. 7. the last judgement is onely described by the deliverance of the godly: On the contrary in Chap. 11. & 14. and here also, it is only figured out by the destruction of the Antichristians. This also is to be observed: That the seventh Ʋiall doth answer to the seventh Trumpet in Chap. 11. but not to the seventh Seale in Chap. 8. the opening where∣of did not shut up the foregoing Vision, but made way for the following. Now to the words. The last Viall is poured out into the Ayre, which is the common receptacle of all living creatures. The ayre therefore being smitten with the fury of Gods wrath, and infected with pestilence, what should follow but the common destruction of the creatures and end of other things: of which that we might not doubt, there came a great voyce, saying, , It is done. It is a great voyce, because with mar∣veilous earnestnesse it proclaimeth the judgement of the last Day. It came out of the Temple of heaven from the Throne] that we might understand it was the voice of God, or Christ the Iudge sitting on the Throne. The voice, It is done, is as it were abrupt or suddenly broken off: because in a moment it shall put an end to the fatall battle of the wicked against God. The word  is expounded It hath bin, or, It is done: in both which senses is proclaimed the end of the world: Beza limits it, It hath bin, to wit, Babylon: as it is in the Poet: Troja fuit, fu∣imus Troes. But it is better to take it absolutely, It is done, that is, now is the end of all wordly matters: for it is a dramaticall clause: As when the Comoedie is ended, one cryeth out, in dissmissing the Spectators: Acta est fabula: Plaudite: So then the fashion of this world shall passe away and come to an end, when it shall be proclaimed  It is done: as Christ dying on the Crosse cryed out  It is finished, signifying that the mysterie of our redemption was now accomplished by his death, that we might not seeke or exspect any thing
otherwhere as necessary to salvation. In a word, by this voyce we are sent backe to what was before spoken by the Angell sounding the seventh Trumpet Chap. 10.7. That the mysterie of God should be finished. As before therefore at the sounding of the Trumpet, so now at the pouring out of the seventh Viall, the Angell cryeth  It is done, or It is finished. 18 And there were voyces, and lightnings, and thunders] These horrible effects of the last Viall do figuratively signifie the comming of Christ the Iudge, the end of the world, and the destruction of the ungodly, as Chap. 11.19. Now the effects are Four. 1. Respects the Aire. 2. The Earth. 3. The Sea. 4. Men. First, there are voyces, and lightnings and thunders in the Aire: 1. Signes in the aire. These are not such lightnings as came forth from the throne Chap. 4.5. Neither such as happened at the casting of the censer upon the earth Chap. 8.5. (for they were effects of the preaching of the word) but such as concluded the third Ʋision Chap. 11.19. Beeing Signes I say, of Christs comming to judgement, and taking vengeance in flaming fire on them that know not God, who shall be punished with everlasting destru∣ction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: to wit, 1 Thess. 1.8 those shakings of the powers of Heaven, the melting of the elements and horrible tempests spoken of by Christ and Peter, Mat. 2429 & Pet 3.10 with these things the Lord will at last come to judgement, and take away the furious weapons out of the hands of all such as fight against God. Secondly, In the earth, is an earthquake such as was not since men were upon the earth] And no wonder: for this shall be no naturall earthquake, Signes in the earth. but the earth being smitten with lightning from Heaven, shall be shaken and rent into a thou∣sand pieces, and be burnt with fire, with all the workes that are therein. Now the Antichristian earthquake, before mentioned in Chap. 6.12. and 8.5. differs from it. 2. Pet 3.10. 19. And the great City was divided] Or rather broken &c. Now he expoun∣deth what (in this common destruction) happened in particular to Antichrists Seat, and Cities of other adversaries, that is, their kingdomes, Forts, Armies, and Palaces. The great City was broken] that it, rent asunder by the earthquake into three parts, that is, It fell being broken to pieces: for here three parts denote the de∣struction: and the threefold number, the perfect, full, and utter ruine thereof: for a Citie being divided by an earthquake into divers parts cannot remaine entire, but must of necessity perish. Thus I understand this rupture, not of a light sha-, king, or rent, but of a totall subversion of the great City: The which sense the following word  Fell doth necessarily import: for the Great City shall suffer no lesse overthrow then other cities of the nations. But what Great City is here intended? Vndoubtedly, The great City broken into parts: see chap 11 8. & 14 8 & 17.18. the same in whose streets the bodies of the two witnesses did lie unburied, Chap. 11.8. that is, the Citie, Dominion and Church of Rome, which is the Kingdome of Antichrist, being as it were one Great City, because it is governed by one head, the Pope. Brightman includes the Turkish kingdome or Empire, because here is treated of the totall destruction of all the ungodly. But the Mahumetane tyrannie is more rightly comprehended under the Cities of the Nations: that so wee might take notice that Rome is set forth by the Great City, both formerly, here, and in the following Chapter also. The Allegory of some seems to me not to be proper: namely that the great Ci∣tie, that is, the universallity of men shall be divided into three parts, that is, in the last time there shall be found three sorts of men in the Church, Christians, Pa∣pists, and Neutralls: for these three sorts shall not then take their beginning, see∣ing they have already bin a long while in the world. Ribera following Andreas, makes Jerusalem to be this great citie, understanding the division of it into three parts, to be three sorts of people living in the same, Christians, Iews, and Saracenes. But the following Chapter doth evidently shew
that not Ierusalem but Rome is this citie, as standing on seven Mountaines, and in Iohns time having dominion and power over the Kings of the earth, and there∣fore Alcasar doth justly reject this opinion, although himselfe doth wholly erre from the scope. Neither is it materiall that Ribera supposeth that Rome must be overthrowne before these things do happen, unto which also Brightman seemes to assent in his exposition on the fif Viall: for of this wee shall see more in the following Chapter: however the Iesuite erreth, feining that Rome shall be destroyed be∣fore Antichrists rising, seeing Iohn in Chapter 11. and againe Chap. 17. doth not obscurely make the great City standing on seven hills to be the Seat of Antichrist. But how long before the end Rome shall be cut off, the Lord knoweth: If some time before, it makes nothing against the sense by us alleadged. For by the great City we are not onely to understand the walles and streets of Rome, but all pla∣ces wherever the Romish Antichrist hath any jurisdiction: which as the Iesuite confesseth may stand (although Rome bee destroyed before) even unto this last Earthquake. And the Cities of the Nations fell] Wee have heard of the ruine of Rome, An∣tichrist, and his kingdom. Now is added what happened to the other Adversarie kingdomes: They also fell by the foresaid Earthquake: for the Cities of the Na∣tions I take to be the kingdoms, Provinces, Forts, and power of the Barbarians, not belonging to Antichrists kingdom, as Iewes, Turkes, Saracens and the like, disper∣sed throughout the whole world, which shall all at the same time be ruinated: And thus it must necessarily be understood: for if here we should understand the Na∣tions figuratively, viz. of the Antichristian Papists, who worshippe God after the manner of the heathens, as it is before taken in Chapter 11.1. it would seem to be a tautologie not to be approved of. And great Babylon came into remembrance before God] That which be∣fore he called the Great City: here he calles it great Babylon, and so much we may plainely gather from the voice of the second Angel, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, Chapter 15.8. & 18.10. Wherefore I see no reason why we should here seeke for another Babylon, to wit, a new Rome, that is, Constantinople as Bright∣man supposeth: for seeing Constantinople to this day, and so without doubt shall continue in Mahumetisme and idolatry, the same shall fall with the Cities of the Nations. But to imagine that the Westerne Christians after Popery shall bee a∣boshed, and also drive the Turke out of the East, and recover, or overthrow Constantinople, the Metropolis of the Turkish Empire, this, I say, seemes to me to be a thing rather to be wished then expected, in regard that our owne sinnes shall fight for the Turke, even against our selves: untill such time that the great Citie Babylon, and all the Cities of the nations shall be utterly overthrowne by the universall Earthquake. Wherefore then doth he repeat the name of the great City? I answer: hee doth it by an Emphaticall  or reversion, that we may not thinke the division, which before he spake of, to be small, or to happen by chance, but un∣derstand the just and horrible judgement of God in the destruction thereof: for then the Lord will give unto her the cup of the fury of his wrath: by which phrase is signified the most fearfull judgement of God executed on her, in regard of her idolatry and tyranny, according to the threatning of the third Angell Chap. 14.10. as if he had said: The great City is broken, Babylon, I say, the great is come into remembrance before God, that forasmuch as she hath made drunk the world with the wine of her fornication, she herselfe also shall have her fill of the cup of the fu∣ry of Gods wrath, that is, God will punish her in a horrible manner. Shee is said to come into remembrance before God  or after the man∣ner of men. For God did seeme for a thousand years and more, to connive and forget her as it were, in not punishing her wicked Idolatry and tyranny, but at last by his horrible judgements he will make it knowne, that she was never out
of his remembrance, and that he never approved of her flagitious workes. Now in what sense, and how many wayes both in the good and evill part, God is said to forget and to remember, and wherefore the Scripture speaketh thus of God, we have fully expounded in our Commentary on Genesis, touching these words, And God remembred Noah. Chap. 8.1. 20. And every Island fled away] The third kind of wonders are in the Sea, Signes in the Sea. intimating how they that live (though never so remote) in the Islands, shall also be overwhelmed by this fatall Earthquake: for every Island shall flee away, that is, shall vanish away and perish, either by water or fire. Now by Islands the Hebrews understand all places seated neer the Sea: The Mountaines also which are either in the Islands or other mediterranean places, shall not be able to shel∣ter the adversaries, because there shall none be found, but all bee swallowed up by the violence of the Earthquake. In the dayes of Noah when the flood came, men ranne to the Mountaines for safety: and at the destruction of Ierusalem, Christ counselled his disciples to flee unto the Mountaines. But here now the wicked cannot flee to the Islands or Mountaines: because then they shall not be: by a like manner of Speech the end of the world is set forth afterward in Chap. 20.11. Before in the Antichristian Earthquake Chap. 6.14. the moun∣taines and Islands too, are said to be removed out of their places in an allegori∣call sense, but not to have fled and vanished away, as in this place. Now af∣ter what manner Antichrist removeth the Mountaines and Islands both civilly and ecclesiastically, we have there declared. 21. And there fell great haile of a talent waight] The fourth kind of signes are on men, haile of a talent weight falling on the heads of the ungodly, In men: It is an al∣lusion unto the seventh plague of Egypt: where haile mingled with fire very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a Nation, Ex. 9 24. smote all that was in the field both man and beast, and broke every herbe and tree of the field: We read also of another grieyous kind of haile, when great stones from Heaven fell on the Canaanites, and slew more of them, then did the sword of the Isra∣elites. Ioshua 10.11. But the foresaid was nothing in respect of this, which shall be of a talent waight, that is, he will cast downe haile like to huge Bullets of an hundred pound, such as a strong man is hardly able to move, much lesse escape without being hurt or killed if they fall on his head. Thus I rather take the talent for our hundred pound weight, then for the money talent of 60. or 80. Minas, as Luther hath rendred it: the Greekes indeed call any thing that is great  Talentary. This haile fell on men, yet not on all men, but onely upon blasphemers, as the effect sheweth: for their punishments are here alone described: whereas the godly shall be as free from this haile, as were the Israelites of old: so that it notes the dreadfull destruction of the ungodly, which shall be as terrible as if haile of an hundred pound weight fell on them, and crushed them to pieces: And who knows, but that this very thing shall be litterally accomplished: for touching the signes of the last day, nothing must be thought incredible. And men blasphemed God] A horrible effect of the plague. The wicked being crushed by the haile (after the example of the Aegyptians and Canar∣nites) will cry, as before, to the Mountains fall us, and to the hills cover us, &c. wishing that they might perish and bee consumed by the same, but they shall onely be smitten therewith, their plague not being ended in one day, but shall bee tormented for ever and ever, as we heard before in Chap. 14.11. Therefore being turned into furious rage, they shall blaspheme and accuse the LORD as it were of cruelty, as having lost all hope of being ever freed from the torment of the haile. Therefore hee saith: They blasphemed God because of the plague of the haile: for the plague thereof was very great. The which is a briefe description of the eternall torments of the Reprobates, who will never repent of their wickednesse.
Because of these blasphemies Brightman supposeth that the end is not here spoken of, for then, saith he, the wicked shall themselves subscribe to the sentence of the Law, and say Amen unto the same: But wee are to minde, that howsoever they shall inwardly indeed subscribe as being convinced in their consciences that they suffer justly: yet outwardly with their tongues, they will never cease to poure out blasphemies against Gods administrations, for if they feared not to breake forth this way against him while they lay under temporall plagues: what won∣der is it then, if they doe the like, or more when they shall bee tormented with the last plugue of the haile, that is, in hell for ever. Thus we see that the fife Vision endeth with the end of the world. The PREFACE to the Sixt VISION, Touching the Iudgement of the great Whore, contained in CHAP. XVII. XVIII. XIX. THe sixt Vision comprehended in Chap, 17.18.19. is a sup∣ply, and gives light to the foregoing Visions, especially to the third, fourth, and fift, as far as concernes the two latter Acts which treated of Antichrist: of these, I say, it is as it were a plaine Commentary: so that wee may no longer doubt, but Rome is certainly the seat of Antichrist, and that the Pope of Rome is the very Antichrist figured out, and revea∣led in this prophesie. In the third and fourth Vision Iohn saw a monstruous beast rising out of the bottomlesse pit and the Sea, Chap 11: 7 Chap 13: 1 having seven heads and ten hornes, which killed the two witnesses, made war with the Saints, &c. now there it was somewhat obscure what should be signified by this monster: But here the whole mystery of the beast is explained, viz. who he is, who his heads are, & his horns. In the fourth Vision also he saw a woman ready to be delivered, Chap 12: 8 9: 10.11: 12: 16 whom the Dragon immediately persecuted and caused to flie into the wildernesse out of the sight of men: here now he rehearseth, how in stead of the woman formerly hanished: he saw another, viz. a whorish woman clothed in scarlet and sitting on a beast, and that this woman is the great citie on seven hills, the Queen of cities, and Empresse of the world, that is, Rome. In the said Visions, chap 11: 7 chap 14: 8 he made mention of the great city Babylon, whose de∣struction was proclaimed by the second Angell, here he prophetically fores hew∣eth that that great Babylon is Rome, and that it shall at last be burnt with fire, even by the hornes themselves of the beast, that is, by such Kings who before gave their authority unto her. In the fift Vision he saw the great citie divided into three parts, chap 16: 19 cap 18 29 and o∣verthrown by a great earthquake. Here by a propheticall demonstration he more plainly describeth the fatall ruine thereof. In the foresaid Vision (the sixt viall being poured out) he saw the kings of
the earth, and of the whole world gathered together by three unclean spirits, chap 16 14 chap 19.11 to war against God Almighty in defence of the Beasts kingdom. Here excel∣lently he describeth the batell it self, and the dreadfull issue thereof, the victo∣ry of Christ, and the casting of the beast and all his confederates into the Lake of fire. By all which it is manifest in the first place, that this vision, as I said, doth give a most clear light to the things before, yea to the whole Revelation. Secondly that the scope and use indeed of this vision in generall, is to ter∣rifie the adversaries, that they might not be lifted up, The use of this Vision, because of their pro∣sperity, and presume against the church in hope allwayes to escape unpunish∣ed: as also to comfort the godly, least being offended with the present outward lustre and power of Antichrist, and overcome by their manifold calamities, they should faint under the same, but in hope of a happy issue persevere con∣stantly under the crosse, fighting the good fight of Faith against the heast, and holding Faith and a good conscience unto the end. But the speciall use thereof is clearely and manifestly to set forth to the world Antichrist and his seat: For in regard the son of perdition shall sit in the Temple of God, and by a pretended divine shew and lying signes be∣witch the world, so as he shall be thought not to bee Antichrist, but rather christs Vicar, and his kingdome the Catholicke Church: Therefore the spi∣rit of God would once for all unmaske him, and by his owne finger as it were shew, that Rome is his seat, to the end that we might not suffer our selves any longer to be deluded by impostors, as if we were to seeke for Antichrist at Ierusalem, Babylon, or elsewhere. Thirdly, It is not obscure unto what times this vision belongeth: The an∣gell distinguisheth the age of the Beast by four periods of time: in which he was or had bin, in which he was not, in which he shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and lastly in which he shall goe into destruction. The first denotes the time in which the Beast was before Iohns time, To what times this vision be∣long: so farre as concerned the Monarchicall power, although hee were not as yet the Antichrist. The second denotes Iohns time, and foreward along till the Emperour Phocas, even so long as the Beast as yet was not that which afterward hee came to bee. The third is the time from Antichrists rising under the foresaid Phocas, so long as the Papacy stood in its vigor and strength, untill the declining ther∣of through Luther: for then the beast was ascended out of the bottomlesse pit. The fourth is from the declining untill the future destruction: for from that time forward the Papacy began, and still by little and little doth goe into perdition: of which Bellarmine himself complaineth: from that time, Lib.  de P R: p: 21 col: 97: c: saith he, that you began to make the Pope Antichrist, his dominion hath bin so far from encreasing, as that it hath more and more de∣creased: The which he truly said in a propheticall way: because in that yeere the Popes Legate was sent unto Paris to disturb the kingdom of France: notwithstanding the first part of his Speech is not true; for the Pope long be∣fore our time was reputed & known to be antichrist, as before we have proved. Hence fourthly, it appeareth that this beast is the same with that in Chap. 11.7. & Chap. 13.1. yet not absolutely: for so far as this here was before his
rising out of the bottomlesse pit, and the Sea, in that respect indeed, and so far forth he is not that Antichrist there, but denotes the monarchicall pow∣er of the Romane Empire, and so his originall extends it selfe unto the first beginnings of the Romane monarchy. But againe so far as hee afterward ascended, and came under the yoake of the woman, hee came to bee Anti∣christ: and so his originall doth belong unto the times of the Emperor Pho∣cas, which Wretch did no other good but onely this, that he was the first that discovered Antichrist unto the world, but of this more largely on ver. 3. Fiftly, We are also to consider, seeing the beast is Antichrist, what then should he meant by the woman sitting on the Beast? Is shee not the Anti∣christ? yea verily, for as a rider with the Beast makes one horseman: so here, the woman with the beast makes one Antichrist: we are therefore to remem∣ber, that like as in vision fourth, C. 13. Antich. was figured out not by one, but by a double beast, in a divers respect: so in this sixt Vision he is represen∣ted not under one but a twofold figure, viz. of a beast and woman, yea a wo∣man having the beast under bit and bridle. How Anti∣christ is the woman and the beast. And indeed Antichrist is a whorish woman, because the Church of Rome (as the Angell sheweth) is an adulterous church: he is also a beast, not at liberty as of old, but under the yoak of the woman, who doth not lead the beast but rides on him, and con∣straines him as with a sharp bit to go whither she pleaseth: for the Pope hath two bodies holding the bridle of the Empire: And thus Boniface VIII. as a filthy beast did publickly shew himself in the first Iubile at Rome: appearing indeed in the first day of the solemnity in his pontificalibus, and imparting his apostolicall benediction unto the people: but the day following in a souldiers habit, with the Emperors armes and a naked sword before him, crying aloud from his throne, Lib: 8 sax∣on cap 36, Behold here are two swords: The which Cranzius recor∣ding: Thou seest, saith he, O Peter, thy successour: and Thou O Sa∣viour Christ behold thy Vicar. Behold to what pride the servant of thy servants come? And in the margent: The Pope, saith he, acteth a two∣fold pe in the theatre of the Jubile. My Anonymus calles the beast Antichrist the wife, spouse & church of Antich: which comes to one thing. Lastly, The foure Acts of the sixt vision: I serve, that this sixt Vision is not universal touching the whole course and time of the church, as were the second, third and fourth: but more particular touching the history of Antichrist only, yet much more clearer then all the other. For it most plainely represents the rising of Antichrist from his first Parentage, as it were, together with his seat, Kingdome, va∣ssalls, successe and tragicall destruction. Now however it be particular, as is the fift, notwithstanding it is not like that, distinguished by two Acts onely, but manifestly by foure. In the first Act Antichrist is exhibited to the view of all men under the Image of a Whore riding on a Beast: and the whole mystery thereof is o∣pened Chapter 17. The second Act by a propheticall description represents the burning of Babylon or Rome, together with the sorrow and mourning of Antichristians for the same, Chap. 18. In the third Act the heavenly companies do after each other declare the just judgements of God, and the mariage of the Lamb. Chap. 19. to verse 11. Lastly the fourth Act, is a full manifestation of the Vision, declaring the
last battle of the beast, and the kings of the earth in Harmageddon against Christ, and the issue thereof, the beast with all his assistants, is throwne into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, from the eleventh verse unto the end of the Chapter. And thus much of the Preface. CHAPTER XVII. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. A whorish woman is shewed unto Iohn, sitting on a Beast, at which he wondring, the mystery thereof is unfolded, first, who the beast is: se∣condly, who are the seven heads and ten hornes thereof: And their un∣happy fight against the Lambe: who afterward fight more prosperously against the whore herself. Lastly it is declared who the woman is. The Parts of the Chapter are three. I. THere is a generall Preface shewing the occasion and Argument of the whole Vision, ver. 1.2. II. The Vision it selfe ver. 3.4.5. III. The interpretation of the Vision, in the rest of the Chapter. In the first Iohn is invited by the Angell to contemplate a new Vi∣sion, ver. 1. The Argument thereof being the judgement or condemnation of the great whore, ibid. Whose person is described generally by two adjuncts. 1. Of her seat or throne upon many waters. 2. Of her abominable fornication, as the cause of her condemnation, v. 2. with whom the kings have committed fornication, &c. In the second is noted. 1. The place of the Vision, in the wildernesse. 2. The Vision it selfe: A woman sitting on a beast, ibid. 3. The monstrous shape of the beast, ibid. 4. The attire of the whorish woman, ver. 4. The name on her fore∣head, ver. 5. and her cruelty, ver. 6. In the third is shewed a twofold occasion of the interpretation. Iohns great admiration, ver. 6. and the readinesse of the Angell to interpret, ver. 7. The interpretation followeth, 1. Of the Beast, ver. 8.9.10.11.12.13.14. 2. Of the woman, ver. 15. unto the end. The beast is unfolded: first in the whole, se∣condly, according to his parts. Of the whole Beast is shewed 1. The fourefold state: also his authority among the inhabitants of the earth, ver, 8. to which is an∣nexed an exclamation, stirring up to attention, ver. 9. The parts of the beast are unfolded, 1. The seven heads: that they are so many mountains, and so many kings, ver. 9.10.11. 2. The ten hornes, that they also are so many kings, ver. 12. 3. The conspiracy of the kings with the Beast against the Lambe, ver, 13. 4. The fight of the kings with the Lambe, ver. 14. To  the woman here is shewed, 1. her seat on many waters, ver. 15.2, her  desertion and burning, ver. 16. The secondarie causes whereof shall be the hornes of the beast, ibid. The first and chiefe, the divine motion, ver. 17. 3. The surname of the woman: the great city reigning over the kings of the earth, &c. that is, Rome, ver. 18. CHAPTER XVII. The first Part of the Chapter. The Preface of the VISION. 1 And there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew unto ee the judge∣ment of the great whore, that sitteth upon many waters. 2 With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabiters of the earth have bin made drunke with the wine of her Fornication.
THE COMMENTARY. AND there came one of the seven Angells] The occasion of the Vision is the invitation of the Angell unto a new Vision. Now whether this Angell were the first of the seven by an hebra∣isme, it matters not. Brightman takes him to be the fift, who poured out the Ʋiall on the throne of the Beast. But it may be as well any one of the other: for every of them did poure out the last plagues on the beasts kingdom. Notwithstanding it seems to be the seventh or last, who with his Viall raised an earthquake whereby Babylon was destroyed: for this shalbe the judgement of the great whore, to which Iohn is now invited to behold the same, he had heard indeed by the preaching of the second Angell in Ʋision fift, chap 14 8 the fall of Babylon, and even now in the earthquake he saw the division or rent thereof: chap 16.19 but the Type was something obscure: here therefore in a more evident vision the tragical judgement of Babylon is manifested to him. Come hither, I will shew unto thee] The sense is not: I will reveal or expound unto thee in words: but I will bring thee to the very beholding of the thing it selfe, as if he should say, I will no longer describe Antichrist in words, but will now set him forth plainely before thy eyes. Now as this was a Vision, so it was a mentall transportation, as appeares verse 3. The scope or drift was, that Iohn should wrire these tragicall apparitions to the terrour of Babylon and com∣fort of the godlie. The friendly manner of speaking, Come hither, and the whole matter teacheth us what the Apostle speaketh Heb. 1.14. that the Angells as ministring Spirits, are with alacrity imployed about these things which serve for our consolation and salvation: not to the end that we should worship them (for thus Iohn is prohibited to do) but that we might rejoyce and give thankes to God, chap 19:10 & 22.9 who so careth for us, as for our sakes to send forth the Angels as ministring spirits. The judgement of the whore] In one word he shews the Argument of the Vision:  the judgement of the whore, for  the Condemnation: which is not meant of a temporall spoiling and burning which the whore shall suffer by her lo∣vers: but to be cast for ever into the lake of fire and brimstone, the which Christ the Iudge shall himselfe execute at the last day. Of the great hore] Gr.  with a double Article, Regula articulo∣rum non semper perpetua. as if he spake of a whore before known, whereas indeed there was nothing formerly men∣tioned of her. And therefore the rule will not alwayes hold, that articles are never put but before things that are knowne. Vnlesse perhaps he denotes this Whore by a double article, because she was knowne to the Angell, as if hee should say, I will shew unto thee that famous Harlot, or Strumpet, well knowne to all the heavenly inhabitants, and what her end shall be, seeing as yet thou knowest it not. She is not that woman Jezabell, which seduced some of the Church of Thiatyra by her fornication, Chap. 2.20. For the description shews that here a far more famous whore is noted: For this Strumpet sits not in Thiatyra, but upon many waters: and upon the beast: the meaning whereof shalbe opened on ver. 3. & ver. 15. By calling her a whore, and a great one, that is, insatiable, and far exceeding o∣ther Strumpets in lust and filthinesse, he teacheth us, that the guilt and cause of her horrible judgement shall be her fornication, and not simply fornication (the pu∣nishment whereof might happily not have bin so capitall) but joyned with dete∣stable perfidiousnesse, namely her loathsome adultery: as when a Bride forsaking her Bridegroome, or a wife her husband, shamefully prostitute themselves unto strangers, which sin both by humane and divine lawes is punished by death. This may not be taken of corporall fornication: for this harlot is afterward called a Citie, and fornication could not be committed with the walles or houses
thereof. Therefore it is rather to be understood of spirituall fornication, viz. aposta∣cy from God, perfidiousnesse and Idolatry: Now wherefore the scripture doth so often compare this to Fornication, I have shewed in my Commentary on Hosea, Chapter 1. and Chapter 2. Betwixt Christ and the Church is a spirituall mariage: Eph. 5: 32 Hose: 2: 18 He as the Bridegrome hath espoused the Church as his owne Bride in faithfullnesse, righteousnesse, and judgement, and will shortly consummate the mariage at his last comming, as we shall heare Chap. 19.7. in the mean while enjoyning her to remaine pure and chast unto him. And thus the Apostle laboured to present the Churches of Rome, Corinth, &c. as chast Virgins to Christ, that is, free from the leaven of Superstition, idolatrie and humane traditions: such a Church I say, was at Rome in the Apostles dayes and some while after, and here is represented in her apostacy by this woman the same Church as shall appear by that which followes. Isa: 1.21: But how is she now become a harlot? Because as of old Ierusalem that holy City casting off the worship of God, and polluting her selfe with traditions, su∣perstitions and idolatrie, is therefore called an Harlot. So the Christian Church (as Egesippus witnesseth in Eusebius) remained not long after the Apostles death a chast Virgin. But touching the declining condition of the Church, and especi∣ally that of Rome enough hath bin spoken in the foregoing Visions, and more shall bee said hereafter. The forni∣cation of kings with the Romish whore. 2. With whom the Kings committed fornication] The cause of her judgement is more expresly signified: viz. her Fornication with the Kings of the Earth; for this is a noble Strumpet, enticing Monarchs and Kings of the Earth to lie with her. But how? by perswading the kings her lovers under the Title of the Catholicke Faith, to receive her Superstitions, Idol-worship, Decrees, and Decretalls, and so bewitching all of them by her faire shew of holinesse: that as Samson was enslaved to Dalilah, and Hercules to Omphala: so these willingly serve, dedicate, and give themselves, and their kingdomes as Tri∣butaries to the Apostolicall Sea, Christs Ʋicar, and Peters Successour, that ava∣ricious Strumpet. Now who these Kings of the Earth are, we shall see in the opening of the hornes. To the Kings are joyned the Inhavitants of the Earth, that is, Earthly men, Idolaters, and sworne enemies of the Gospell: for with these also shee play∣eth the Harlot, as despising no sorts of people, but with an unsatiable lust doth promiscuously prostitute her selfe unto all both rich and poore, bond and free, Imprinting the Character of her Idolatry on them all, Recogn: lib. 9: and giving them power to buy and sell her spirituall wares: herein imitating those wo∣men of Susia, who anointing themselves (as Clemens writeth) with costly ointments, and adorned with Ornaments and precious Stones (like unto this Whore verse 4.) used to goe abroad with great Pompe, accompanied with hand-maids, indifferently alluring whosoever would, whither strangers or servants to commit follie with them: This being permitted them by their owne Husbands. By the wine of her Fornication hee understands the glorious Superstitions and Magnificence of the Apostolicall Sea, and Vizard of the Catholicke Church, The wine of fornica∣tion: the which earthly men have as greedily embraced, as thirsty lovers drink the wine offered them by their beloved ones. Therefore they are said to be made drunke, because being bewitched with a blind love of Superstitions, they stand for their Idols beyond all sense and reason, furiously hating and persecuting the Gospell of CHRIST. If thou kill a man, its a finne with them to bee bought off with a little money. Romes ido∣latry: But if thou uncover not thy head to the Idol Image of Marie, or turne thy backe upon it, its a wickednesse to bee punished by death, as having committed Crimen lesae Majestatis against her. Behold the mad drunkennesse of Idolaters, occasioned by this wine of Fornication.
The second Part of the CHAPTER. The Vision of the Whore upon the Beast. 3 So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wildernesse: And I saw a woman sit vpon a scarlet coloured Beast, full of names of blasphe∣my; having seven heads and ten hornes. 4 And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearles, having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthinesse of her fornication. 5 And upon her forehead was a Name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, The Mother of Harlots, And abominations of the Earth. 6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus: and when I saw her, I wondred with great admiration. THE COMMENTARY. AND he led me in the Spirit] Thus much of the Preface: Now followes the first Act of the Vision: Where first we are to ob∣serve the motion unto the same, and the place. In that Iohn doth againe say he was led by the spirit, as Chapter 1.10. and Chapter 4.2. it shewes that hee was not in a continuall Extasie of Visions. The motion unto the Vision was not of the body but the minde: for bodily he remained in Patmos, beholding there the wildernesse and the sights with the eyes of his mind: like as Ezechiell bodily remaining in Chaldea, was in spirit in the Temple of Ierusalem. The place where he saw this, was the wildernesse. But what? Is the Woman, the Beast, Rome, and Antichrist in the Wildernesse? Do they not inhabit the lar∣gest possessions and most sumptuous palaces? I do not dislike, that some understand by wildernesse, Gentlilisme, which Anti∣christ under the name of Christ hath brought into the Church: hence in Chapter 11.1. the Antichristian Clergy is signified by the name of Gentiles. And indeed the Antichristians imitating the Paganes, do fall downe before Idols of wood and stone made with hands: And as Paganes, so Antichristians make God beholding to them by the merit of workes: save onely that these abuse the holy Name of Christ as a pretence for their Idolatry: which the other know not of. Notwithstanding in my opinion there is an higher mysterie in it. Before Chap. 12. the chast Woman, Mother, or Church, being persecuted by the Dragon, fled into the wildernesse: when as after Constantines time being shaken with the floodes of Heresies and Superstitions, she withdrew her selfe by degrees out of the sight of men. Now here Iohn sheweth what he saw in the wildernesse in stead of that woman. He saw indeed a Woman also, or Church, but a whoris woman, or a∣dulterous Church, riding on a beast, that is, being Antichristian. There, I say, where before he saw the Woman clothed with the Sun, the chast spouse of Christ, viz. at Rome, he now finds a whorish woman. This forsooth is that continuall succession of the Romish Popes: This is the vene∣rable antiquity of the Popish Church: The succes∣sion of the Ro∣mish Chur. to wit, like as in the wildernesse the whorish woman succeeded the chast woman and banished matrone: so at Rome the whorish Apostaticall succeeded the true Apostolicall Church, and in place of Bi∣shops, holy Martyrs, and Confessours excelling in faith and godlinesse, are come
in the great high Priests of Rome, terming themselves universall Monarchs, being indeed proud and wicked Idolaters: who (as Genebrard confesseth) are altogether fallen away from the vertue of their Ancestours, and are rather. Apostaticall then Apo∣stolicall. Rome therefore and Popery is a wildernesse, not properly (for the for∣mer is a policie, Lib. 4. chronol. .553. and the latter containes many Common-wealths) but spiritual∣ly, the true Church being vanished thence (like as a wildernesse is remote from mens eyes) and in which the adulterous Church hath succeeded the true: of this see Chap. 12.14. see also Hieron. ad Algasiam. Quest. 11. I saw a wom in sitting on a Beast] A monstrons vision. A woman being of the wea∣ker Sex, and trembling as it were at the sight of a mouse, how she should not then be afraid of so cruell a Beast? But she mounts on the beast, guides and sets him for∣ward. The holy Ghost hereby intimating that this woman being stirred up by the infernall spirits, did with more then humane audacity climbe upon, and bring this beast under the yoake. Now let us briefly consider who this woman is, who the beast, and what the sitting on the beast doth signifie. That this woman is Rome is so clearly declared by the Angell, The woman is Rome. that the Iesuites dare no more deny the same: For Ribera howsoever on this place he seeks to shift off the matter, and altogether passeth by verse 18. In Apoc. c. 17. se. 5. & cap. 14.33 et seq. yet he denies not but that as before under the name of a Cay, so here under the name of a woman Babylon is spoken of. Now that Babylon denotes Popish Rome, wee have be∣fore clearely proved. Bellarmine howsoever he jestingly contendeth that Ierusalem shall be the Seat of Antichrist: yet at length he granteth that Rome, Lib. 3. de p: R: c. 13 yea Popish Rome is the scarlet coloured whore to be burnt by the Kings: but he miserably intangles himselfe: for if Popish Rome be the purpled whore, and the same whore is that great Babylon, which certainly is the Seat and habitation of Antichrist, then Popish Rome must needs be Antichrists seat, which notwithstanding both the Iesuites deny. Neither doth that fiction helpe them, viz. that Popish Rome shall be burnt by the ten Kings before the comming of Antichrist, and therefore cannot possible be Antichrists Seat: for this Fiction is not onely contradictory to it selfe, but is greatly reproachfull to the Pope also. First it is inconsistent, Inconsistent because thus the whore should have bin burnt before she had committed fornication with the Kings and inhabiters of the earth, and before she rode on the beast Antichrist, that is, she should be punished before she had sin∣ned: whereas the cause of her burning and punishment must necessarily goe be∣fore her punishment. Now the only cause of Babylons judgement shalbe her An∣tichristian whoredome, and riding on Antichrist, that is, her Antichristianisme: Rome therefore shall commit Antichristian fornication, and bee the Seat of An∣tichrist before it be burnt. Secondly, And oppro∣brious to the Pope and cardinalls: Nothing can be imagined more contumelious against the Pope then this Fiction: for if Popish Rome is to bee burnt for her Antichristian sornication, then of necessity the Jesuites must confesse one of these two things: Either that the Pope doth, or shall give to drink the wine of Antichristian fornication to the Kings of the earth (for this cannot be understood of any other whoredome) and so the Pope now is, or shall be the Antichrist: Or that the Pope with his Cardinalls shall some time or other be taken with such a Lethargy of Prophannesse, and be so carelesse in their office, as to suffer the wine of the Babylonish fornication to increase in their Citie and Church, and then to be given unto the Kings of the earth: Now could this cursed wine grow in Rome, except the Pope and Cardinalls were the Authors and furtherers thereof? And by whom, if not by themselves should it from Rome be proffered unto the kings of the earth? Let them therefore take which of these two they will, and it must necessarily follow, that Rome is Antichrists seat, and the Pope Antichrist. Thus much touching the woman. The summe of the mystery is this: The woman, as she is a woman, is the Church, see Chapter. 11.1. as she is whorish, the false and adulterous Church: as she to
scarlet coloured, making the Kings and inhabitants of the earth to drinke of the wine, &c. she is the universall Church, giving the law to all: as shee rides on the Beast, The sum of the mystery of the Ra∣ish whre the Antichristian Church armed with both swords: as she sits on seven moun∣taines, she denotes the adultorous, Catholicke, Antichristian Romane Church. Touching the beast the adversaries doe wonderfully contradict themselves in their writings. Ribera makes the beast to be the devil reigning, or the kingdom of the devill: but its a false glosse, and were it true, it would no way salve the Pope and Rome. First, This beast as not the devill reig∣ning. this beast was not yet in Iohns time, but was to ascend out of the pit: but the kingdome of the devill was in his time most cruelly exercised by the Ro∣mane tyrants against the godly. Christ indeed destroyed Satans kingdome so far as concerned spirituall violence, but not as yet in respect of civill tyranny. This beast therefore is not the kingdom of the devill, or the devill reigning. Secondly the Dragon and the beast are not the same: for the Dragon gives his throne to the beast: And the beast receives his authority from the Dragon. In their punishment also they are distinguished, as is manifest by comparing Chap. 19.20. with Chap. 20.10. Now the dragon is the devill that old serpent: The beast therefore is not the devill. Thirdly this beast so far as he comes up out of the pit, is the same mentioned in Chapter 11.7. who is there said to ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and Chap. 13.1. out of the Sea. Therefore hee saith  which thou sawest, to wit, before Chap. 11. & 13. but that beast was Antichrist: And therefore this also. The major Ribera labours to disprove by a grammaticall reason: because the beast in Greeke is called  without an article, not  and so the wo∣man  not  with an article: that we might understand saith he, that here the woman and beast are brought in, which were not before: but this reason is vaine and of no validity: for by that which went before it is plaine, why the article is not put before  the woman, viz. because in the first verse he had with a double article called her  that great whore. Therefore it was not needfull here againe to repeat the article. And in that he cals the beast  not  it doth not argue him to bee a divers beast from the former: for though the article be ommitted, yet in stead thereof is the rela∣tive  which thou sawest, to wit, not now onely, but twice before also. Besides the rule of articles on which the adversary grounds his deniall, is alto∣gither sandy and weake, as not beeing strictly observed, neither by humane or divine Writers: especially in this prophesie, as many examples might bee alledged for it both wayes: as Chap. 13.11. & 14.1. where the Lambe and Dragon which had bin before spoken of are in the Greek written  without articles, in stead of  &c. And on the contrary the whore not spoken of before, with a double article . as before we noted ver. 1. Therefore the Iesuites exception is childish. But that this and the former is all one beast appeareth, See the Preface. first, by the same ascen∣ding out of the bottomlesse pit: secondly, the heads and hornes of both are the same. Thirdly, by their blasphemies, wherewith they are both full, Fourthly, their wor∣ship is the same. Fiftly, both have all one kind of worshippers. to wit, the repro∣bate, inhabiters of the earth, not written in the booke of life. Lastly, Ribera himself confesseth, that the beast in C. 19.20. and 20.10. which shal be cast into the lake of fire with the false prophet, is Antichrist, and not the devill, because there the devil is expresly distinguished from the beast. Now nothing can be more clear then this, viz. that that beast and this is one: and therefore there is no shew at all to imagine that this beast should be the devill. Notwithstanding if Ribera will needs have it to be so understood, what will be gaine by it? namely this, that Rome and the Pope shall ride on the devils back, for who is this horseman that sits on the devill, but Antichrist? And what also the
womans riding on the beast is, I have shewed in the Preface. Now let us see the co∣lour and blasphemous names of the beast, the habit also of the woman, her fore∣head and belly. Sitting upon a scarlet coloured beast] He describes the forme of the beast that ca∣ried the woman, to the end his nature might bee the more easily and bet∣ter knowne. First he is scarlet coloured, or rose-coloured, because, as Plinie saith, its like to the cleare and precious red coloured rose, most pleasant to the eyes. For coccum or cocc, (the word here used) is a grain to die withall, growing of a red hearb, serving to die purple or scarlet: of which colour were the armour-coates of Kings. This Kingly colour therefore of the beast, denotes his royall magnificence, as also his deepe hypocrisie: for Antichrist makes a very faire shew to the world, blinding the eyes of men, and deceiving their mindes with Vizards and Impostures: It may also signifie his bloody disposition: for scarlet is of the colour of blood: now in verse  Iohn sees the woman drunk with the blood of the Saints. And it is well knowne that the Romish Court for some ages hath used this colour, that so it might set forth the proper Livery of the Romish Court: whose purpled fathers (in whom resides the power to create Popes) are clothed in scarlet. Secondly the beast is full of blasphemous names] Which may be understood ei∣ther because in stead of trappings or barbes which horses have, he weares the names of blasphemies on his head: or because he vomits them out with full mouth: Both which agree to the former description Chap. 13. ver. 1. & 5. where the beast bad names of blasphemies on his head: and afterward opened his mouth blas∣pheming God, his tabernacle and the inhabitants of Heaven, at which thing a godly minde cannot but tremble very much. This shall bee the Theologie of the Beast: such his kingdome; full with names of blasphemy. The Names are either persons, as before Chap. 3.4. Or blasphemous doctrines: For the beast as we have formerly shewed shall be wholly defiled with blasphe∣mies, insomuch as not a haire shall appeare without it: Now what these blas∣phemies are, it hath been opened in Chap. 13. I. He blasphemeth God, in boa∣sting himselfe with his Tripple-crowne, to be Lord of Heaven, Earth, and Hell. II. The Tabernacle of God, in transforming the Spouse of Christ into a loath∣some and filthy Strumpet, the Temple of the Lord into an impure Brothelhouse. III. The Inhabiters of Heaven, in making them, whether willing or not willing, to be their gods and faviours, and for more sake gives divine honour unto them. Thirdly the Beast (like to the monster Hydra) hath seven heads and ten hornes, fully resembling the beast before mentioned, save onely that the hornes here have no Diadems: the which thing was not indeed needfull to bee added, because af∣terward in verse 12. the hornes are said to bee the kings, on whom he set the Crownes. Touching the forme of the rest of his body, as his belly, mouth, and feet, it is not here expressed: because we had it in Chap. 13. notwithstanding if we consider his chiefe parts wherein lies his whole power, the rest of his body may be easily knowne, as a Lion by his Claw. Thus much of the beast. 4. And shee was arrayed in purple] Now followes the description of the woman: first by her glorious, luxurious and whorish attire, as if shee were ano∣ther Cleopatra or Rhodopa. Purple and Scarlet is Queenes clothing, such as af∣terward the woman boasteth herselfe for to be: being according to the Proverb, like lips like lettice. The colour of the Beast and the woman agrees: viz. The colour of the beast & woman is the same. being royall, hypocriticall, and tyrannicall, arguing the proud, wicked, and cruell minde of both. The rest of her attire bewrayes her whorish luxuriousnesse, viz. Gold, Pearles, and most precious Stones, with which her haire, head, eares, necke and fingers are made glorious and transplendent in the eyes of the world. This is the Persian religion and Sybaritican luxury of Popes, The who∣rish luxu∣riousnesse of the Popes. and the whole Romish whorish worshippe, which is to be seene in the Palaces, Steeples, Corners of streets, high Arches, Images, Baths, Temples, Roofes, Crosses, Altars, Idols, Robes, Mitres,
and other Babylonish Monuments, all of them glistering with gold, purple, scar∣let, and precious stones, whereby the whore bewitchingly allures the inhabitants of the earth, like as Daniel foretold that Antichrist should adore his god of Forces with gold, silver, pretious and desireable stones. Now howbeit the blind world is delighted with these fancies: lib: 2 offic. c: 28 yet the wor∣ship of God doth not stand in need of these toyes: for as Ambrose saith, The sa∣craments, want not gold, neither are such things which are not bought with gold, pleasing to gold. If thou aske, whence hath the woman all these great treasures? I answer, by her fornication with Kings, Merchants, and Mariners, the riches of the whole world have flowed to Rome, as into an unsatiable gulfe, as wee shall see in the following Chapter. The participle  is observeable, it properly signifies gilded. Now Instruments are commonly gilded thereby to deceive, outward∣ly appearing to be gold when as inwardly they are scarse Copper. It notes the hypocrisie of this whore, shewing that with vaine and idle shaddows she shall deceive the world. Here Ribera sends us backe unto the Ancient Romanes, Conquerours of all Nati∣ons, who brought the riches of the world into their City. Notwithstanding he acknowledgeth that these things are also to be referred to future times: Indeed be had said more rightly, if to the time some while past and present: for as yet the woman hath not put off her whorish habit. Secondly, the Instrument in her hand is a golden Cup: which she presented to the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth: The whorish inticemants of Antichrist are no∣ted: much like the description in Proverbs 7. for cups serve to stir up lust. This golden cup, are the golden titles of the Pope, by which hitherto he hath perswa∣ded the world to drinke the wine of his fornication: namely that he is Pope, the Father of Fathers, the Pastor of Pastors, the most holy father, Holinesse, Christs Vicar, Peters Successour, the head of the Church, Spouse, & Foundation: Prince of priests, A∣postolicall Bishop, lib: 2 de P R cap 13. Ʋniversall, Ruler of the Citie and world, &c. from all which Bel∣larmine labouring to demonstrate that the Pope is an Ecclesiasticall Monarch of the whole world, what doth he but hence uncover the whores nakednesse? But now what was within her, Full of abominations and filthinesse of her fornication] Out∣wardly she is gold, inwardly poyson: he understands the filthy blasphemous do∣ctrines, and detestable Romish abominations and wickednesses, with which the whore hath made drunke the Christian world. The Prophets call the worshipping and trusting in Idols and creatures, which God abhorreth, Abomination: because it is the foulest fornication, drawing with it all kind of impurity and wickednesse. And indeed the Romish Strumpet hath poured these deadly poisons out of her bewitching cup. Ribera doth againe send us backe to heathenish Rome, who induced the nations under them to serve their Idols. Euseb, lib: 2 histor cap 2 Tertull. in Apol ca: 5 But the contrary is true: for the Romanes were so far from forcing the Nations they conquered to forsake the worshipping of their own Gods, and embrace theirs, as that they would have all strange gods e∣rected & set up at Rome, lest any of them should not be there worshipped, Christ onely excepted, whose worship the Senate rejected at the perswasion of Tiberius, because he had not first approved of the same. Popish Rome therefore it must needs be which to this day holdeth this Circean cup in her hand. 5 And upon her forehead a name written] The third note openly setting forth the filthinesse of the woman is her name: which she carries written upon her fore∣head, that by the very sight thereof she may allure every one shee meetes with, to commit folly with her. It sheweth, that this publicke Strumpet is most im∣pudent as shewing her name openly to the world: MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT. THE MOTHER OF FOR∣NICATION, &c.
It is a question whither or no the word MYSTERY be spoken of the name. If it be, it bewrayes the profession of the whorish kingdome, which chiefly is im∣ployed about Mysteries, Sacraments, Ceremonies, Pompes: it shall be, I say, an ecclesiastical Monarchie, having both swords. Notwithstanding Andreas joynes Mysterie with the name written, as it were ap∣positively, A name written, Mystery, that is, having a mystery in it, or beeing mysticall: for Rome is Babylon the great, not properly but mystically, as before it was called Sodome, Egypt, Hierusalem , by a spirituall Allego∣ry, because of likenesse in idolatry, blasphemies, abominable filthinesse and ty∣ranny against the Saints. Thus Anonymus 260. yeers agoe: Babylon the great the city Rome, or the Papall Court. This woman is called a Mother in imitation of the former, but very unlike in respect of issue: for the first was mother of the man-child caught up unto God, or of blessed Confessours and Martyrs: This is the mother of fornication and abo∣mination of the earth: for all the abominations that have reigned these thousand yeeres in the Christian world, have by this mother beene sowed, and brought forth and propagated. And therefore Rome doth to this day glory in the name of Mother of Churches: neither is it to be admired, that her daughters, as heires of their mothers abomi∣nations and fornications, should be followers of her steps. But as for the reformed Churches in Germany, France, Brittane, Poland, and Hungary, who in these lat∣ter ages worship God and Christ the onely Saviour without Idols: they are so farre from acknowledging this whore for their mother, as that they detest her abo∣minations with all their hearts, and flee from them. 6 And I saw the woman drunken] We have seen the habit and forehead of the woman: Now he shewes us her belly also, swollen, not with wine, but with blood: which againe is very monstrous: for as it was unnaturall for a woman to ride on the backe of a cruell beast: so it is no lesse horrid to consider the cruell mind of this woman, & her belly full of blood: by which nothing undoubtedly is signified but her unsatiable cruelty and bloodthirstinesse. Of this drunkenesse, thus my Anonymus: because, saith he, Antichrists Church, being finally condemned for her wasting and abusing the goods of the Church, shall suffer so great vengeance, as through paine she shall be past feeling, like a drunken man. Ther∣fore he thinkes that she is said to be drunke, because of her astonishment, beeing like a drunken man without sense or feeling of her punishment. But because she is expresly said to be drunken with blood, it is certainely to bee understood of her cruelty against the Saints and Professours of the Gospell: Which Anonymus adding in the following words: Of the blood, saith he, of them, who feare not to professe the doctrine of the Gospell in spite of the whole Colledge of Antichrist. Therefore she is said to be drunke, that is, full of blood, The belly of the wo∣man filled with blood. by a metaphor usuall to the scriptures taken from men drunken and enraged with strong wine. But with whose blood? Of the Saints and Martyrs of Iesus] Against whom the Beast made war Chap. 13. and whom he slew Chap. 11. Ribera acknowledgeth that this agrees to no City so well as to Rome, yet hee labours againe to send us to Nero, Domitian, Diocletian and other Persecutors of Christians, but absurdly: for how should the Emperours be the woman: Or how should this woman drunken with blood, whose judgement is next joyned with the judgement of the Beast, and shall be accomplished at the end of the world, be Ancient Rome which hath not for thirteen hundred yeeres shed any blood of the Saints, but hath ceased to be? What Mystery also should be applyed to old Rome? certainely this mysticall name is as absurdly written by the Papists on the foreheads of Romane Tyrants, as if they made Alexander the Great Priest of Cybele. The cruelty therefore of Papall Rome horriblie exercised above six hundred
yeeres, hath made the whore drunke. But here they will demaund: which of the Saints the Popes have killed with their own hands? or with whose blood they have bin made drunke? As if forsooth the woman be not therefore drunke with blood, because shee her selfe hath not with her owne hands made the gallowes, swords, fires, and other deadly weapons, wherwith the Saints have bin taken away. Histories do witnesse by what cunning endeavours the Romish Antichrist hath stirred up Christian Kings and Princes to rage even against their owne bowells, and those chiefly whom under the name of Waldenses, Albigenses, Leonists, Wiclevists, Hussites, Lutheranes, and Hugonots, they condemned as Heretickes, because they refused to take in the vemone of her whorish cup. Read the bookes of Martyrs of the French, Germanes, and English, and principally the Acts of the Spanish Inquisition: and not to be tedious, See Abbat demonstra. Antichri. Chap. 7. where Bellar∣mines subtilties touching the future persecution of the Church under Antichrist are refuted. Read, I say, these, and thou shalt sufficiently understand the bloo∣dy surfet of this whore, which to this day, wherever she hath any footing, doth vomit and breath out cruelties and still thirsteth after more blood, and so will un∣till the heavenly Iudge put an end to her fury. And I wondred with great admiration] Hitherto the Vision: the interpretation followes, occasioned by Iohns admiration. He wondred with great admiration: that is, very much. But at what was it? at the monstrous beast? nay this he had seene before: At what then? Is it at the woman riding on the beast? yes verily, as at that, so also at all other wondrous things in the woman, viz. her attire, whorish luxury, the title on her forehead, and bloody drunkennesse. Iohn wonders not with an admiration of worship, as did the inhabitants of the earth, Chap. 13.3. but it was an humane astonishment at so horrid a sight, and desire to know the mystery: for as yet he knew not what was meant by the wo∣man, neither by her riding on the beast. The third Part of the CHAPTER. The VISION Interpreted. 7 And the Angell said unto me. Wherefore didst thou marveile? I will tell thee the mysterie of the woman, and of the beast that carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten hornes. 8 The Beast that thou sawest, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and goe into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, (whose names are not written in the booke of life from the foundation of the world) when they beheld the beast that was, and is not, and yet is. 9 And here is the minde which hath wisedome. The seven heads are se∣ven mountaines, on which the woman sitteth. 10 And there are seven kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he commeth, he must continue a short space. 11 And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eight, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. 12 And the ten hornes which thou sawest, are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdome as yet: but receive power as Kings, one houre with the beast. 13 These have one minde, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast.
14 These shall make war with the Lambe, and the Lambe shall over∣come them: For hee is the Lord of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with him, are called, and chosen, and faithfull. 15 And he saith unto me, the waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, multitudes, and nations, and tongues. 16 And the ten hornes which thou sawest upon the Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire. 17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their kingdome unto the beast, untill the words of God shall bee fullfilled. 18 And the woman which thou sawest, is that great City, which reig∣neth over the Kings of the earth. THE COMMENTARY. AND the Angell said to mee] Here we have fullfilled the pro∣mise: hee that seeketh findeth: To him that desireth wisedome, it shall be given. Of old, admiration begate Philosophy, here it begets prophesie. The Angell observing Iohns desire by his countenance, doth of himselfe open the mystery to him. Why didst thou marveile?] He blames him not: Mat: 7 8: Iames 2.5 but shewes his desire to reveale the secret: as if he should say: I see thou art astonished at the wondrous sight: but go to, I will open the whole my∣stery now unto thee. The mystery of the woman] The old Version, The sacrament, which Ribera ap∣proveth: because both words signifie somewhat that is secret and lies hid in another thing: And the Church, saith he, hath seven such Sacraments. But why then do they not also reckon the purple and cup of the whore among their sacra∣ments? And why did they not render also  Mystery in ver. 5. by the word Sacrament, that so Babylon herselfe might become a sacrament unto them? 8. The Beast which thou sawest, was, and is not] The Interpretation of the Beast followeth: first of the whole: secondly of the parts, that is, of the seven heads and ten hornes: lastly of the woman, but aenigmatically, touching which perhaps thou maist say as Aristotle said of riddles or deepe sentences, Gel: lib 20 cap. 4 that they are so pub∣lished, as if they were not at all published: so this Ʋision is so expounded as if it were not in the least expounded. And so it is: neither did it otherwise beseeme the Prophesie. Why the explication of the beast is darke. It was enough that the spirit did declare the future events by such signes as might not provoke the wicked: And by which the godly through con∣tinuall searching might attaine some knowledge of the Mysterie. Vnto the wic∣ked the matter ought certainely to remaine obscure, least foreknowing the e∣vents, they might furiously presume to hinder the same, and their rage bee the more encreased: But as for the godly, the holy Ghost would stir them up by an aenigmaticall interpretation, to the end they should the more carefully attend to the events and histories of their times: Notwithstanding all things are not in∣involved with such darke sentences, but that he doth bewray with Characters e∣vident enough to such as do not willingly shut their eyes, both the beast, that his seven heads are the seven hills of the City Rome: and the woman that she is the Romane City and Church. These Characters therefore are as it were the Touch∣stone of our interpretation: because they will point out unto us as with the fin∣ger, the beast and the woman. To the Beast he ascribes foure conditions or states according to the times: He was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and shall goe into perdition.
The three former, seeing they so cohere together, doe argue that the beast is not simple or single, but to be considered in a divers respect and forme. Ribera takes this beast to be the devill reigning, Riberas o∣pinion of the beast false. as in Chap. 3. but it is absurd, for the devill never ceaseth to reigne in the children of unbeleefe, and even in Iohns time the Apostle Peter wrote, that the devill is allwayes going about like a roa∣ring Lyon seeking whom he may devoure, and therefore the Angell could not say to Iohn, The devill reigning IS NOT. Neither is it of waight what he pre∣tends of Christs Victory. Satan indeed is overcome according to his spirituall power, that he cannot exercise the same over the elect: but not according to his civill violence, by which in Iohns time he mightily raged in the Romane Ty∣rants against the godly. And what need was there I pray that Satan (of whose continuall rage the holy Ghost had so often advertised us without any figure) should now be represented unto Iohn under an obscure type, as if it were an un∣knowne Mystery. This colour is too slender to hide the truth; The beast there∣fore is not the devill. The common opinion of our Interpreters is, The com∣monopinion of our ex∣positers tou∣ching the beast: That the beast is the old Romane Empire, as before Chap. 13. That WAS] viz. most powerfull and largely extended while it was heathenish. AND IS NOT] to remaine so, because it shall bee destroyed by the Vandalls, Goths, and Hunni, which happened under Theodosius, when Rome in a short space being foure times taken destroyed and burnt, the Empire of the West seemed whollie as it were overthrowne. And ascended out of the bottomlesse pit] The new Papall Empire which the Pope of Rome by an hellish ambition erected in the West, seditiously thrusting the lawfull Emperours of the East out of Italy: Not as if the Empire of the West were from the Devill (as some do wickedly calumninate us) for all Empires are of God: but when Empires are corrupted, which the Pope caused in the West, then those corruptions doe not descend from Heaven, but ascend out of the bottomlesse pit. And shall goe into perdition] For by Christ comming he shall bee cast into the pit of eternall damnation. Touching this opinion thus farre it may seeme to be imperfect, viz. that it distinguisheth not sufficiently the Romane Empire from Antichrist: as also that it draweth the second terme, IS NOT, unto the future destruction of the Empire: whereas the Angell denyeth that the Beast was in his time: lastly that the third terme HE SHAL ASCEND OƲT OF THE BOT∣TO MLESSE PIT is most properly to be interpreted of Antichrists rising. Brightman somewhat varies from the common opinion. Bright∣mans opi∣nion. The Beast is Antichrist. He was] to wit, after publick persecutions were taken away by Constantine. And is not] to wit, when the Pontificacie was so weakned by the incursions of the Barbarians in Italy, that men might truly say, that the Beast was no more. And is to ascend out of the bottomlesse pit] to wit, when by Iustinian and Pho∣cas the pope of Rome was restored, and as it were recalled out of Hell, that thence forward with the Empire hee might bee Chiefe Dictator and Ʋni∣versall Bishop. And shall go into perdition] to wit, when the renewed dignity and power of the Pope began to be weakened by the Gospel, and by little & little consumed away. This exposition in the fourth term is true: How farre true or not true: but in the three former he confounds the times, which the Angell hath accurately distinguished, not by saying, The beast shalbe, and shall not be, and shal againe ascend out of the bottomlesse pit: But by distingui∣shing expresly the time past, present, & to come: He was, in the preterperfect tence: is not, in the present: And shal ascend, in the future: which differences of time can no more be here confounded, then in v. 10. Five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come, and when he commeth, &c. where the said differences are necessarily to be observed.
Notwithstanding he seemes to hold that the beast soone after Constantine did ascend out of the Pit, which agrees not to the Visions, and Histories: For al∣though the Church, as soone as Christ left off riding on the red horse under Con∣stantine, began to be blacke with heresies, and with divers diseases grew misera∣blie pale even unto death, neverthelesse the Dragon had not as yet with his taile cast downe that great Starre from Heaven unto the Earth, neither had the smoake out of the bottomlesse pit wholly filled the Church with Antichristian Cloudes. That was the time of the secret conception & generation of Antichrist, in the womb of the Romane Church, being about 296. yeeres, In Vita Sylv: namely from Sylvester on whose head Constantine (if Platina lie not) set a Crowne of gold beset with most pre∣tious Gemmes, untill Gregory I. who as a most cleer-seeing Prophet, shewing as with the finger Antichrists Birth-day then at hand, said, Lib: 4. Eph: 30. I confidently affirme that whosoever calleth himselfe universall Priest, or desireth to be so called: he in his lof∣tinesse is the Fore-runner of Antichrist, because by pride he sets himselfe before others: Lib: 4 Eph. 38. And again: The King of pride is neere, and that which is unlawfull to bee uttered, an Army of Priests is prepared for him. But Antichrist came forth fully ten yeeres after, when Sabian caused the wri∣tings of Gregory publickely to be burned, pretending that he affecting popular praise, by his munificence and profuse gifts, had wasted the Patrimony of the Church: but it was indeed out of hatred, because he had declared the Ʋniversall Priest to be Antichrist. After him at length Boniface III. having obtained the title of Vniversall Bishop from Phocas, manifested the Beast unto the world. I will therefore lay downe what the Lord hath suggested unto mee, The Au∣thors judge¦ment tou∣ching the Beast. touching this darke matter, not new, neither much contrary to the foresaid opinions, but yet comming neerer to the scope. I shewed before that the Beast is Antichrist, not absolutely but in respect of the three latter states: neither is he simple or single, but having two bodies: nei∣ther naked, but clothed with the skin of the Romane Empire, armed both with the ecclesiasticall and imperiall sword, as some ages have seen in the Romish Popes. According therefore unto the prodigious and different state of Antichrist, So he is said prodigiously to have bin, and not to be, and to come afterward. The Beast was] or hath bin, viz. formerly, according to the monarchicall and secular power, which before Iohns time was in Kings, Consulls, Decem∣viri, Dictators, Tribunes, Caesars, as in verse 10. for although that power was not then as yet the power of Antichrist, yet it began afterwards to be his, when he by force tooke the same unto himselfe. And therefore he is said to have bin then, because then something of him was: and hee was then according to that power, although in another respect he were not as yet. And is not] To wit, in this time of the Revelation, when the Romane Bi∣shops had not yet so much as dreamt of a Monarchicall Spirituall or Secular pow∣er, but all of them for the space of 300. yeers, untill Melchiades suffered Mar∣tyrdome for the Name of Christ: Although Bellarmine foolishly boasteth, that Clemens received the Ecclesiasticall Monarchy from Peter. And is to ascend out of the bottomlesse pit] To wit, 510. yeeres after the Re∣velation of this Prophesie, when Sabian attempted to invade the ecclesiasticall Monarchie, Boniface III. really invaded it, and so transmitted the same unto the Popes his Successours. And about 649 yeers from this Prophesie, Steeven II. also laid hold on the secular power, who first thrusting the Greeke Emperours out of Italy possessed the chiefe government. He was the first that deprived the French King Hildericke of his kingdome: He was the first that admitted Pipine (upon whom by his Antichristian power he bestowed not his own, but the king∣dome of France) to kisse his feet  he first would be pontificallie carried with great triumph in the midst of the people on mens shoulders, as it were another Alexander or Iulius, unto the Lateran Palace, which thing hath ever since bin ve∣ry religiously observed of his Successours, namely being men, as Balaeus recor∣deth,
not worthy that the Earth should beare. Not long after also the beast in Gregory VII. and Boniface VIII. ascended to the highest step of Monarchie, when the Pope said: I AM CAESAR: for he ascended not in a moment, but by divers degrees, of which see Chap. 13. He shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit] As Chap. 11.7. or out of the Sea, as Chap. 2: Thes: 2: 9: 13.1. the sense being one: understanding  either properly of the pit of hell, to denote the procreating cause, of which the Apostle speaketh, that his comming should be after the working of Satan with all deceiveablenesse of unrighte∣ousnesse, and signes and lying wonders: or metaphorically of the deep of the Sea, that is, the sincke of Bishops in Papall Councills, by which under praetext of establi∣shing the faith, and routing out of heresies, the priviledges of Emperours and kings were overthrowne, the monarchy of the Pope established, the power of the Clergy augmented and confirmed: the which Julian the Cardinall alledging thereby to allure Pope Eugenius unto the Councill of Basil: It is a wonderfull thing saith he: I find that the power of the Church, and Ecclesiasticall Libertie hath al∣wayes bin strengthened, defended, and augmented by Councills, and now doe we feare it should be taken away? And shall goe into perdition] Here I assent to Brightman for the clearnesse ther∣of: for this going of the beast into perdition, foretold by the Angell, is by the wonderfull judgement of God begun in our age: and now the beast goes on in the way of destruction, so that he is not now far from his end: And this Bel∣larmine himselfe confesseth; who thus writeth, From that time you made the Pope to be Antichrist, his Empire is not onely not encreased, but more and more decreased. The time therefore is neere at hand, in which the Church of Christ shall sing with the rest of the Heavenly Companies HALLELƲJAH, Salvation, and Honour, and Glory and Power be to the Lord our God, because his judgements are true and righteous. Revelat. 19.1. And they that dwell on the earth shall wonder] Thus much of the fourefold state of the beast: his authority followes, which hath largely before been expoun∣ded in Chap 13. here it is briefly touched. Shall wonder] Not at the monstrous sight, as Iohn did verse 6. but shall a∣dore and worship the woman Queen that rides on the beast as a Goddesse: so Chap. 13. verse 3.4. And the world wodred after the Beast and worshipped him, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? And verse 8, And power was given him over all kinreds and tongues and Nations, and all the Inhabi∣tants of the earth shall worship him. But what then? shall none remaine with Christ? I answer. Least we should thinke so, in both places the inhabiters of the earth are onely comprehended in this number: Whose Names are not written in the Booke of life from the foundation of the World: by which limitation is intimated, first, the chiefe cause of this great mad∣nesse of men, to worship so monstrous and execrable a thing: it is because they shall be children of the earth and not of God: Reprobates, not Elect: secondly, the Elect are freed from the Impostures of the beast, for it is impossible they should be seduced. Mat. 24.24. Whose Names are not written] See Chap. 13.8. Beholding the beast that was and is not] He reckons up some titles of the beast, and not in vaine: for it shall bee one cause of the worlds wonderment, that the beast having divers shapes (like unto another Proteus) WAS, AND IS NOT, AND YET IS: Whence the Admirers of him shall conceive in their minds something divine touching him. Now these things are evident by what wee said before. Was] viz. before Iohns time, so far as concerned the monarchicall secular power. Is not] viz. in Iohns time, because the Romane Bishops had not assumed this, no nor as yet the Ecclesiasticall monarchy And yet is] viz. in Iohns time, in respect of the Imperiall power, which then
the Caesars had, and afterwards should be usurped by the Popes. Thus we must reconcile these seeming contradictions: Is not, and yet is: according to the dif∣ferent state of the beast, least we might imagine a repugnancy to be in the words, which to avoid, the old Version hath wholly ommitted the words  And yet is. But Andreas and Arethas whom Montanus followes, for  reade  Is at hand, or is to come, which agrees with the third terme, shall ascend out of the bothomlesse pit, for he saith that he shall come, that is, in his time as∣cend out of the bottomlesse pit. The fourth terme is not here mentioned, because that served not for admiration, but belongs to the future wayling, of which in Chapter 18. 9 Here is the minde having wisedome] This is added that none might com∣plaine and say, Why are all these darke expressions? what may be the meaning of the heads and hornes of the beast? he cryes out as before, Chap. 13.9. at the rising of the first beast. If any one hath eares let him heare. And after the second, verse 18. Here is wisedome, let him that hath understanding count, &c. so now Here is understanding, to wit, hid above mans reach. Here, may be understood of the divers states of the beast euen now mentioned: but I rather referre it to the following matter: Here, for, in these things which yet remain to be expoun∣ded touching the heads and hornes, greater wisedome is contained. Now the words of the Angell consists either of one comma, here is the minde which hath understanding, to wit, hid: for, herein is a mystieall sense that cannot be searched out by the mind of man: Or of two commaes, or clauses, One being, Here is wisedome: the other, he that hath wisedome, that is, let him understand. And this latter seemes to be according to the mind of the Angell, because of the ar∣ticle  he that hath: though the sense be all one: viz. that the mystery of the beast is above mans wisedome, except it be revealed: And therefore the An∣gell offers himselfe to declare the same: And he stirres up our desire by an excla∣mation, lest we should be slothfull in taking notice, and shunning of the beast. The seven heads are seven Mountaines] Now he opens the wisedome which he promised by expounding the mystery of the beast according to his severall parts. Where first wee may observe, the Metonymicall Phrase of the signe for the thing signified, being ordinarily used in Sacraments, and therefore are called Sa∣cramentall kind of speeches. The seven heads are seven Mountaines: Gen: 4: 28 & 17.10 by a Metonymia of the signe and the thing signified, for, the seven heads signifie seven Mountaines: so also, The seven kine are seven yeeres, that is signifie seven yeeres: Ex: 12:11 1 cor 10: 4 Ioh. 1: 32 Ma. 26: 26 Circumcision is the Covenant: for the signe of the Covenant, as God himselfe interpreteth it. The Lambe is the Passeover, that is, signifies the Passeover. The Rocke was Christ: for it signified Christ. The Dove was the holy Ghost, for it was a signe of the Holy Ghost. And so: The bread is the body of Christ broken for us: for: Aug: dist. 2 de consec: c: hoc est: contra A∣dem cap: 12 Luk: 22: 20 it signifies that the body of Christ was broken for us, and is given unto us for food: so Au∣stin saith: The bread is the body of Christ not in verity of the thing, but by a signifi∣cant mystery: And againe: The Lord doubted not to say: This is my body, when he gave the signe of his body: So: The Cup is the Now Testament: for it is a holy signe of the New Testament, &c. Now this I doe the rather speake of, because some inconsiderately do contend, that neither in Scriptures nor good Authors any examples are to be found, that the signe is put for the thing signified, with the copulative Is betwixt. But here they may see it: The seven heads are seven Mountaines: and a little after, They are seven Kings. Againe: The ten hornes are ten Kings: The waters are Peoples: the woman is the Great City: what will they have more? Secondly, that we might not seeke these Mountaines in the Moone (as they say) he addeth. The seven heads are seven Mountaines on which the woman sitteth. But the woman verse 18. is the great City that had dominion over the Kings of the earth in Iohns time, that is, Rome: so then the sense is, upon which Mountaine
the woman fitteth; that is, upon which Mountaines Rome is built that rules the world: hence Rome is called  seven hal'd, see Chap. 14.8. These Hills are called Capitolinus, Palatinus, Caelius, Aventinus, Aesquilinus, Vnninalis, Quirinalis, in honour whereof was yeerely kept on the third of the Ides of December, the Festivitie of the seven hills in memory of Romulus the buil∣der: or rather for the three Mountaines that were added by Servius Tullius, that the Citie might stand upon seven: for that which Romulus before built compre∣hended but foure Mountaines within the walles. This ngell therefore doth plainly marke out Rome situated on seven hls as the seat of Antichrist. Neither can the Iesuites any longer deay the same, The Iesuits wrangling. but onely by cavelling they would perswade us that Ancient or heathenesse Rome is here meant, such as it was in Iohns time. But themselves know it is a meere evasion, for this Pro∣phesie respecteth Rome that shall be in Antichrists time. At last therefore they confesse it is meant of Popish Rome: but here they seeke out another starting∣hole: viz. that this Rome shall not be the seat of Antichrist, because it is to be burnt before Antichrist come. But they well know that this is also false: For why shall Rome be burnt? Is it not because of her fornication with the Kings of the Earth, and for being the seat of Antichrist. They say that Rome shal apostate from the Christian faith unto Heathenisme: See before chap: 14: 8 But what then shall the Pope doe in the meane time, will he looke no better to his cure? but a lyar had need have a good memory. They say that Rome shall commit fornication with the ten Kings, and for the same bee burnt: And yet they say, that those ten Kings, or at least seven of them shall follow Antichrists Campe: How then can it bee burnt before Antichrist come? It is also observeable, how diversly the seat of the woman is noted. In verse 1. How the woman sits upon the waters, up∣on the beast & upon the mountains: she sits upon many waters: afterward verse 3. upon the beast, and here up∣on the mountains, the which are the heads of the beast. All which things doe well agree. ROME sits upon many waters: as she beares rule over the Kings and Inhabitants of the Earth. Rome sits upon the beast: as she is born up of the beast: and ruled by Antichrist. Or if the beast be the Romane Empire, Rome sits upon the beast, as she swayeth the beast or Empire: for by sitting, dominion is noted. Lastly, Rome sits upon the heads of the beast, which are the seven Mountains, as sit∣ting on them herself, and giving them for a dwelling place to Antichrist. Observe also the admirable union and mixture between the beast and woman, and the mutuall metaneorphosis of the one (as it were) into the other, so as the one is the other, or a part, and of the essence thereof, yea both are one, even the same Antichrist. The seven Mountaines are the heads and strength of the beast: and the se∣ven Mountaines are the seat of the woman, what doth hence follow, but that the heads of the beast are the strength and seat of the woman, that is, of Antichrist. Now the Mountaines of the woman are the mountaines of Rome. And if the mountaines of Rome are the heads of Antichrist, and the woman sit on the mountaines of Rome: The woman then sits and reignes upon the heads of Antichrist: Furthermore, he that reigneth upon the heads of the Beast and the Mountaines of the woman is Anti∣christ. The Pope of Rome reigneth on the heads of the beast, and the mountaines of the woman, therefore the Pope of Rome is Antichrist. But Ribera contendeth, that the beast is the devill not Antichrist: yet he grants that the mountaines of the beast are the mountaines of Rome. Now what will he ga∣ther hence, but that the mountaines of Rome, and Rome it selfe are a part of the devill? yea his strength and dwelling place: which is worse then the for∣mer: See verse 3. 10. And they are seven Kings] Now that wee might not sticke in the bare Mountaines of Rome: He addeth another mystery, viz. that the seven heads are also seven Kings: thus of one type he makes two antitypes. But what Kings?
Ribera, that wee should not seeke them at Rome, and so perhaps find the Pope amongst them, saith that they are the Kings of the whole earth, This is wonderfull: before he said that the beast was the devill: therefore either the whole world is the devill: or else these are not the Kings of the whole earth: unlesse perhaps he would rather say, that the devill reigneth on his heads the mountaines of Rome, and that Rome rides upon the devill: out for shame with so vile and wicked a fiction. For whose the mountaines are, the same are the Kings also: but the mountaines are of the woman Rome: therefore the Kings al∣so are of the woman Rome. Let this once for all be minded as a sure position. But who are these kings? Wonderfull Riddles are propounded by the Angell: Five are fallen, One is, the other is not yet come, and when he commeth he must conti∣nue a short space] This is a Gordian knot, and not to bee untyed, had we not the benefit of histories: Now passing by the opinion of many, I will record three of the principall: the comparing of which will somewhat ease us. First that of Victorinus, whom our Bullinger and Iunius follow: 1: The opi∣nion of Vi∣ctorinus a∣bout the se∣ven Kings: that these are the seven Kings, which reigned at Rome after Nero. Five are fallen] viz. Vi∣tellius, Otto, Galba, Ʋespasianus, Titus. ONE WAS] viz. Domitian who in Iohns time reigned at Rome. The other was not yet come] Namely Nerva his Successour, who, being come, was to remaine a short time, because hee rei∣gned not full two yeeres, Which opinion, howsoever backt with the authority of these great men, I cannot follow. Why it is rejected: First because before Iohn not onely five Caesars were fallen at Rome, but six o∣thers besides: Fulius, Augustus, Tiberius, Caius, Claudius, and Nero: neither can any reason be given why these should be excluded. Secondly, because these seven Kings are not singular persons, otherwise those se∣ven being dead, all the heads of the beast should have perished: and the Beast ei∣ther should have remained without heads, or new heads must have growne upon him (as Apollidorus fabulously writes of Hydra) or else being without heads he should have bin extinct, All which things are contrary to the prophesie, for the beast yet lives, and is reserved unto the last judgement. This Ribera saw, and doubted not to affirme, that all Expositors, In chap. 17 S. 25 except Vi∣ctorinus, understood that in every of these seven, many were comprehended: al∣though he joynes a foolish fable that not the Kings of Rome are meant, but of the whole world, which Fiction we erewhile refuted: Notwithstanding as if hee forgot himselfe he affirmeth, and strongly proveth that it is not unusuall to the Scriptures, that in one king, many like (as it were of the same body) are signified: which, saith he, is carefully to be observed: alledging for example the Ramme and Goat in Daniel: of which two the first denotes the Kings of the Medes and Per∣sians: the other all the kings of the Macedonians. But (good Sir) this; say I, is carefully to be observed against your selfe: for by this reason of yours, is manifestly refuted or wholly weakened your Ficti∣on that Antichrist shall be onely one singular person, and that because hee is said in the singular number to be the man of sin, the son of perdition, the Beast, False Pro∣phet, &c. for behold what followes. If Antichrist be one of these Kings, then verily he shall not be one singular man, but a king having others succeeding him in his kingdome: as had the Kings of Medes, Persians and Macedonians, in their kingdomes. But thou thy selfe makest the seventh of these kings to be Anti∣christ: The other, saist thou, is not yet come, that is, Antichrist, who shall come in the seventh age. Now to come to the second opinion, which is Riberas out of Gagnaeus, viz. 2: Riberas opinion a∣bout the beast: that the seven kings are the seven ages of the world, or seven kingdomes adver∣sarie to the Church. The first age from Kain to Noah. The second from Noah to Abraham. The third from Abraham to David. The fourth from David unto the transpor∣tation into Babylon. The fift from the transportation unto Christ. The sixt from
Christ unto Antichrist. The seventh from Antichrist unto the end. Of these, saith he, five are fallen] because five ages were past before Christs birth. One was] because the sixt age of Christ did then run on. One is not yet come] because the seventh age of Antichrist was not as yet. When he is come he shall remaine a short space] because Antichrist shall onely reigne three yeeres and an halfe. A wonderfull Metamorphosis of kings into ages. But what reference have the ancient ages unto the heads of the beast, that is, unto the mountaines and kings of the Citie Rome? for it cannot be denyed but that the Angell precisely speaketh of these: These kings therefore are not to be sought any where, but there even where the mountaiues are: because the heads are mountaines and kings: Now the mountaines are at Rome: and therefore the kings are there also. But truely the Iesuite doth subtilly send us to Kain, Nimrod, Nebuchadnezzar, &c. The subtilty of the Iesu∣ite. least we should find Antichrist at Rome. Nay but the kings are to bee sought in Romes mountaines, for here they sate, reigned, and at length have also born up the woman. I passe by that there is no proportion of the seventh age with the six former. For what are three yeeres and an halfe to the former ages which all of them dured many hundred yeers. By which very thing the fiction of Anti∣christs three yeers reigning is refuted. III: Opinion touching the seven kings: Now I come unto the third opinion, viz. of Aretius, Napier, Brightman, and o∣thers, to whom the seven kings are not seven Emperors, nor seven ages: but they wil have them to be seven kinds of goverment of the Romane Monarchie, six whereof Tacitus mentioneth in his first booke: Kings saith he, at the beginning governed Rome: Libertie and Consulship was set up by Brutus: The Dictatorship was onely taken up for a time: Neither did the power of the Decemviri last above two yeeres: Neither did the Consulary authority of the Tribunes of Souldiers remaine long. The power of Cinna and Sulla was but short. Pompie and Crassus soone gave place to Caesar: And Lepid us and Antony to Augustus, who received the Empire (all things being confused through ci∣vill discords) under the name of a Prince. He reckons up, Castig: Brightman pag: 110. I say, six sorts of government: viz. Kings, Consuls, Dicta∣tors, Decemviri, Tribunes, and Princes or Emperours, neither is there any more, as Eudaemon the Iesuite cavills against Brightman: for betweene the power of Tribunes and Princes, Tacitus puts no ordinary government, save onely civill dis∣cords. The seventh he saw not, because it came after him. Now of these in Iohns time Five were fallen] to wit, Kings, Consuls, Dicta∣tors, Decemviri, Tribunes: because these formes of government were put down at Rome before Iohns time, for the Consuls which then were, wanted Monarchi∣call power, and their power was limited within the City. ONE IS] The sixt government of Princes or Emperours which then was. Now in this Expositours varie. Difference about the sixt & se∣vent kind of gover∣ment. Some make the sixt kind of government, which Domitian held in Iohns time, to be of such Caesars as descended of Iulius, that is, home-borne Princes, but the seventh of Forraigne Caesars, which, say they, the Angell intendeth in the words, One is not yet come] to wit, Ʋlpius Traianus the Spaniard, after whom thenceforward Forraine Emperors governed Rome. That which followes. And the Beast is the eight, and is of the seven] They understand of the French and Germane Emperours at length created by the Pope. Which opinion unto me seemes to have little ground, first, in that they divide domesticke and forraine Emperours into two orders or rankes, seeing both held the same Empire at Rome. Secondly, that they passe by Nerva before Traiane. Lastly, that they observe not, how the eight is the whole Beast, or An∣tichrist, Verse 10. Brightman herein consenteth touching the five that were fallen: but the sixt hee understands of the Emperours, who in Iohns time, and thencefore held the Em∣pire: The other not yet come, that is, the seventh, he makes to be the Pope, for how∣beit
there was a Bishop at Rome while Iohn lived: Neverthelesse hee did not Lord it, nor take any Papall jurisdiction on him. The Epithite,  Other, he understands not of the number but quality of the kingdome, because the seventh should have a kingdome far divers from the former, who all had been politicall Kings: but this should bee of a mixt kinde, viz. Ecclesiasticall and Politicall. The following words: When he commeth hee must remaine a short space: He thus expoundeth: After that the Popish kingdome takes its beginning under Con∣stantine, the pontificall authority shall remaine in safety but a little while, viz. about an hundred yeers: for then Rome by the incursions of Barbarians shall bee taken, and so wasted and ruinated, as that it shall appeare to bee wholly de∣stroyed: The which thing was done by the Gothes, Ʋandals and Hunni. That which followeth: The beast was and is not, even he is the eight, hee thus expoundeth: The beast, that is, the Pope, which was the seventh king already manifested or come (and yet is said, not to be, by reason of the discomfiture the Barbarians brought upon him) shall be the Eight, that is, againe recover himself after his overthrow, and attaine his former strength, which, saith he, happened in Gregory II. and his next Successours by the helpe of their two hornes Pippine and Charles. And is of the seventh] that is, the Pope the Eight being againe restored, will be of the same disposition, manners and regiment as he was before his overthrow, while he was the seventh: so that he makes the seventh and Eight to be al one, viz. the Romish Pope, with this difference, that the seventh signifies the Pope before he was discomfited by the Barbarians, seeming then to have bin wholly extingui∣shed: But the Eight to signifie the Pope againe restored to his ancient dignity by Pippin and Charles: This (as I take it) is the sum of his words. The which things I confesse are wittily and probably written according to hi∣stories. But yet this hath no small difficulty in it, how the same Pope can bee both the seventh and Eight, seeing Iohn doth distinguish them as the part and whole: for he names the seventh, one of the Beasts heads: but the Eight the whole beast himselfe. The Beast, (saith he) which was and is not, he also is the eight. Neither can the two states of the beast repeated verse 11. (which was and is not) be drawne vnto the rising and overthrow of the seventh head, seeing Iohn in verse 8. makes them to be the states not of one head, but of the whole beast. The Au∣thors opini∣on: To untie this knot: I understand (as before I proved) that the beast is Anti∣christ: whence it followeth that the seventh head is not Antichrist, because the seventh head is not the beast, but a part thereof. Now a part of the beast, and the beast are not the same. Furthermore, the heads are the strength of the Beast. Therefore the seven kings are the strength, that is, the Monarchicall power of the beast, which be∣fore was in the seven kings or regiments, but at last shall be in the beast himselfe, as it were in the eight king or Antichrist: so then the seventh king is not the same with the eight: because the former is but one head of the beast: The other is the beast it selfe or Antichrist. But what then? Five Regi∣ments. Five (kings) are fallen] That is, the five Regiments of kings, Consulls, Dicta∣tors, Decemviri, and Tribunes were already in Johns time put downe from the mountaines of the woman, that is, in Rome. One is] The sixt order of Pagane Emperours: which in Iohns time and thenceforward unto Constantine, did in Domitian and his successours sway the Scepter on the mountaines of the beast and woman, that is, at Rome. The other is not yet come] The seventh order of Christian Emperours, which was not yet in Iohns time, being to come after in Constantine the great. But it may be said, that these held the same Empire with the former, The sixt, viz: of pa∣gan empe∣rours: and had no new Regiment. These therefore are not distinguished from the sixt. I answer, The face of the Empire began to be altogether new, and fit for the conception of Antichrist. For this seventh head reigned not as did the former
on the mountaines of the beast and woman, Constan∣tine the great is the seventh. that is, at Rome, but out, or from the same, viz. in the East: when Constantine, either because he was hated of the Gentry and Commons of Rome for his Christian Religion, as Baronius feineth, (for what needed he to feare the Citizens, who had blotted out the names of so many Tyrants) or to encrease the greatnesse of his name, Why the Empire of Constant. is distingu shed from his prede∣cessours. leaving Rome, re∣moved to Bizantium, and would have it to be called after his owne Name, Con∣stantinople, An. 19. of his Empire, and of his conversion 12, and of Christ 324. Now this is that which the Angell saith, When he is come, hee must remaine a short space] that is, he shall not reigne long at Rome in the mountaines of the beast and woman, but onely nineteen yeeres, not that the seventh head was then presen∣ly to perish (for then the beast also having lost all his heads must have perished) but that he was not to remaine in the mountaines of the beast and woman, that is, Rome, where the other heads of the beast had remained with the Empire 1078. yeers. This exposition is illustrated by the following verse. 11 And the beast that was and is not, the same is also the Eight] First here I pro∣pose that this beast is the same with the former, verse 3.8. of which there is no Question, seeing the Angell repeats the three states of the beast in the same words: One, that is, Emphatically declares the third, that it may be made manifest. Whence I conclude that this Beast is Antichrist (because the other was Antichrist) but the seventh head was not Antichrist. Furthermore let it be observed that  and, the first word of the verse is not simply copulative, but a note of order and opportunity, as Beza renders it al∣most in all the Chapters: , Then I saw, then he came, &c. so here  Then the Beast, Let the opportunity (I say) be noted, by which the Beast came to be the Eight King, that is, usurped the mountaines of Rome, The beast the eight king is An∣tichrist: and tooke the Monarchicall power of the seven heads unto himselfe, as his owne: for after the seventh king Constantine (with his Successours) leaving Rome, had taken up his Seat abroad, The Pope remaining at home upon the mountaines of the Beast, that is, at Rome, thought it now a fit time to take this oc∣casion, How the Pope came to bee the eight king. under the pretext that he was Bishop of old Rome, the Imperiall Seat. And first indeed by reason of the superfluous devotion of Emperors, they being al∣lo wearied through the continuall invasions of Barbarians, he by wonderfull cun∣ning and rapine drew from them great gifts especially from Constantine; who be∣cause of his unreasonable prodigality to Bishops, was commonly called Nepos and Pupillus, as Egnatius witnesseth: by little and little also he begged Kingly priviledges. And not contented to be called Bishop of the chiefe Seat: a while af∣ter he made himselfe Greatest, or chiefe Priest, which dignity till then was pro∣per to the Romane Emperours. For after Augustus all the Romane Princes, Lib: 5: Fastor. who governed the Romaine affaires un∣der the name of Emperors, either took on them (as Onuphrius writeth) the chiefe pon∣tificacie, or else suffered themselves to be called Greatest Priests, as Constantinus, Constan∣tius, Valentinianus, Ʋalens, and Gratianus: Who although they detested the Functi∣on of Chiefe Priesthood, being addicted to the Christians: Neverthelesse they despised not, nor rejected the title thereof: Gratianus the Emperour being the first (as Zosimus teacheth) who forbade by proclamation that the title of GREATEST PRIEST should bee given unto him: and so that dignity of the Priesthood first failed in the Emperours. Thus he. Now these Augustall titles despised and condemned by the Emperours, The Pope assumeth the August∣all title. be∣cause of the impiety thereof, the Pope assumed unto himselfe as being the first Character of the Empire, and so by this prophane title and function made him∣self the greatest Priest, and soon after Oecumenicall, Catholick and Ʋniversall Bishop, being stiled Prince of Priests, head of Churches, from whom all the Bishops of the world were to receive lawes, that is, hee was acknowledged Ecclesiasticall Monarch: Thus was borne the Eight King though not in full growth. Wherefore not long after the Pope finding an occasion (when the Lombards
grievously disturbed Italy) as if he had bin deserted by the Greeke Emperours: (whom he notwithstanding by his Antichristian Anathema thrust out of Rome and whole Italy, seditiously stirring up the Romanes to thrust their Governour out of the City, and put out his eyes, and them of Ravenna to kill their Prince or Vice-Roy) he sent for Pipin with an Army out of France, by whose helpe he suppressed the Lombards, and thrust the Greeke Magistrates out of Raven∣na, and all Italy, usurping the principallity of Ravenna (which at that time did represent the seventh head or imperiall power in the West) by the gift of Pipine the Conquerour, unto whom in recompence thereof (a thing never heard of before) hee gave the Kingdome of France, thrusting Childericke the lawfull King into a Monastery or Cvent. Notwithstanding as yet the Pope sate not in the mountaines of the Beast and woman with full power, Anno 773: wherefore a few yeeres after Charles the son and heire of Pipine, comming with an Army out of France suppressed the Lombards (who againe had raised great tumults) confirming and augmenting the Donation of Pippine to Pope Hadrian I. And afterwards the Romanes making insurrecti∣on against Leo III. because of his detestable pride, the said Charles comming a∣gaine with his Army into Italy, and taking knowledge of the cause, absolved the Pope: Hereupon the Pope, not to be ungratefull (out of the fullnesse of his power) gave unto Charles the Title of the Romane Empire (the which belonged unto the Greekes, and therefore was not his to dispose of) crowning him Em∣perour of the West: On the other hand, Charles the new Emperour to grati∣fie the Pope, forced the Citizens of Rome to sweare fidelity unto Leo, and ap∣pointed him Lord of Rome, the which donation Ludowicke son of Charles after∣wards confirmed and encreased. Then was the Beast at length fully ascended out of the earth, and came to be the Eight King: Then Anno 800. the Pope of Rome together with the Ecclesiasticall Monarchy which he got from Phocas, ob∣tained also the secular power of the seven heads of the Beast with the mountaines of the great City: for alwayes from that time the Pope usurped the power of translating Kingdomes, and casting downe Kings, and creating Emperours; hereby declaring to the world that hee was the true Beast, the Eight King or Antichrist. These things thus observed, wee may easily understand, what in verse 11. is spoken of the Beast. And] or Then, when Constantine the seventh King with his successours shall place the seat of the Empire, not in Rome but otherwhere. The Beast which was] that is, before Iohn the Monarchicall power had bin in Five Kings which were fallen. And is not] that is, In Johns time neither the secular nor the Ecclesiasticall Monarchie was as yet in the Pope, for the Bishops of Rome that then were medled not with either of them. Even he is the Eight] The relative  Hee, according to the sense is refer∣red to the antecedent  Beast: but according to the construction to the following word  Eight: hence the Old Ʋersion hath it: The beast himself is the eight king. Bestia est ipsa octava: for, octavus Rex, for in Greeke it is  Eight, to wit,  KING. IS] for, is made, or began to be, or shall be, as in the following words: Is of the seventh] for, shall be: Goeth into perdition, for, shall goe, by an enallage of the Tence usuall to Iohn: for he speaketh of the rising and future destruction of the Beast the Eight King. The Eighth King] that is, the eighth Regiment, consisting of an Ecclesiasticall and Politicall Monarchy. Thus the sense is plaine: Then the Beast shall be the Eighth King, that is, the eigth Regiment, or Romane Pontificacie, being Ecclesiasticall and Politicall much differing herein from the seven heads: because they onely had a politicall
Monarchy, which the Pope shall joyne with the Ecclesiasticall, having in his bands the Empire and Pontificacie together: armed with both swords, and saying: Behold here are two swords: EGO SƲM PONTIFEX: EGO SƲM CAESAR: I am the High Priest: I am Caesar. Therefore hee is much unlike to the other Kings: for they all of them were politicall onely: but this is  spirituall and secular, or  living and having a twofold originall out of the Earth and Sea, exercng under pretence of Eccle∣siasticall power his secular Monarchy, by translating Kingdomes, setting up and casting downe Kings and Emperours at his pleasure, rightly therefore hee shall be named the Eight. That which is added: And is of the seven (for, shall be,) is not to bee taken as if the Beast were also the head, or one of the heads: (which hath deceived some Expositours) for there is a difference betweene the whole and a part, the Beast and the head: but it implies that the Beast shall himself exercise the Monarchicall power; which before had bin in the seven heads: yet in another forme, and un∣der another title: to wit, by his hornes, touching which it followeth: And goeth into perdition] for, shall goe. In the former member the Angell in∣timated the three states of the Beast before expounded in verse 8. First, in which he had bin. The second in which he was not. The third in which he came to be the Eight King. Here he addes the fourth, in which he shall goe into perdition: Now as he ascended not all at once out of the bottomlesse pit, but by degrees, and was almost five hundred yeers ere he came to his full height of both Monar∣chies, so he shall goe into perdition not on a sudden, but by little and little. Therefore he saith  he goeth, not  runneth, but step by step, and as it were, by the same degrees that he ascended out of the pit, so shall he descend into the same. The Beast began to goe into perdition in the age of our predecessours, when the Gospell being againe restored, The beast begins to go into perditi∣on. his fraud was manifested, and his impostures laid open to the view of the world, viz. his lies, as that he is Christs Ʋicar, Peters Successour, Moarch, Head, Spouse of the Church, and the rest of his proud and foolish Titles: when as also the waters of Euphrates began to be dry∣ed up, and the Tributes and Revenues of the Romish spirituall wares were for∣bidden in Germany, France, England, Scotland, Denmarcke, Sweethland, and Bo∣hemia. And he daily goes forward, the divine judgement pressing him more and more unto destruction, by revealing the light of the Gospell to divers king∣domes, Provinces, and Cities, who shall detest the Beast, untill he come to his last period (the time whereof the LORD knoweth) and so set his last foot into destruction. 12 And the ten hornes] We have seen the heads of the Beast: Now let us view his hornes: Touching which, first the false opinion is to be refuted: and in the next place the true sence to be sought out. Ribera, In Apoc. Chap. 10.11. Lib. 30 de. p. R. Cap 16. and Bellarmine feine, that towards the end of the world, ten Kings shall divide the Romane Empire between them (Woe therefore to our Emperour) and reigne thorowout the whole earth one houre, that is, a very short time before. Antichrists comming: but that Antichrist when hee is come shall kill three of these Kings, viz. of Egypt, Lybia, and Aethiopia, making the other seven to yeeld unto him. And least this fiction should not bee beleeved, they labour to prove the same by the oracle of Daniel, Chapter 7.24. And the ten bornes out of this kingdome are ten Kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them, and hee shall bee greater then the first, and shall subdue three Kings. And Chapter 11.43. Hee shall have power over the treasures of gold and silver, and over all the pretious things of Egypt, and the Lybians and Aethiopians shall be at his steps. That these things are spoken of Antichrist, they prove by the authority of Jerom, who in his Commentary on that place, saith, that all Ecclesiasticall Writers affirme that neer the end of the world, when the
Kingdome of the Romanes shall be destroyed, ten Kings shall arise and divide the Romane World among them: and that an Eleventh a ltl out shall stand up (Antichrist) who is to overcome three of th  King viz. of Egypt, Lybia, Aethiopia, Who beeing overcome the ot also sall submit unto the Conquerour. But surely it is not the propertie of a good Interpreter to expound one darke thing by another, and that as darke as the other: for this is, as the saying is, Daniels O∣racle most divers from this: to beg the Question. The type in Danel is no lesse obscure then this of Iohn: what will they then prove by that? Besides, the Type there is unlike to this in every particular, so that we cannot but wonder considering the present light of doctrine, and helpe of histories at the impudencie of these Interpreters. The Fathers whom they pretend, are to be excused though they delivered some things amisse of matters so remote, seeing they had not the meanes which wee have now. The dissimilitude I spake of, appeareth. The dissi∣militude. There the ten hornes are of the fouh Beast, which according to the received opinion was the Romane Empire: ac∣cording to others, the Asian kingdome of the Seleucians erected by Selcus Nicanor, one of Alexanders foure Princes. Here the ten hornes are of the Beast, who according to Ribera is the devill: Now are the hornes of the Romane Empire the hornes of the devill? There between the n hornes did arise a little hore. Here nothing is spoken of that little horne. There the little horne plucked up three hornes: Here the plucking up of the three ornes is not mentioned. There the Angell expoundeth that the little horne is a king arising from a meane estate, who was to suppresse the other three Kings. Nothing of this in the whole Revela∣tion. But the spirit of God would not certainely have passed all this by, if any such thing should have happened in the end of the world. There the little horne was Artiochus Epiphanes who expelled Ptolomaeus Philopator, Seleucus and Demetrius, these three Kings out of their kingdomes. Here is treated of such Kings as shall receive their power from the Beast Antichrist. Their proofe there∣fore is nothing to the purpose. Neither doth Jerome helpe the matter in applying the Oracle of Daniel to Antichrist. Ierom helps not the Ie∣suits fiction. For first Jerome acknowledgeth that the same was in some measure fullfilled in Antiochus. Now however we will not contend whither or no Antiochus were a Type of Antichrist, but willingly grant it: because of their likenesse in Ty∣ranny: Notwithstanding it is not necessary to apply all things strictly to the an∣titype which are spoken of the type, for if so, there would be no difference be∣twixt the one and the other: Neither is it of necessity that similitudes agree in all particulars: Certainely what there is recorded of the three hornes that were plucked up, can with no shew of reason be applyed unto Antichrist: because the Angell is silent of it, which he would not have omitted, if the same should have come to passe: For why should Christ conceale that from Iohn, which be∣fore was revealed to Daniel. Besides we may not give credit to Jerome in this without the Testimony of Scripture, Lib. 1. con∣tra Iovin. Rom. 8. no more then to his argument by which he condemned his own pa∣rents in their mariage estate: They that are in the flesh cannot please God: My pa∣rents being married are in the flesh: Therefore they cannot please God. Or to his inconsiderate depriving of such as are twice married from the Grace of Christ, where he saith The first Adam was once married, The second Adam was unmarried: Let such therefore as are twice married, shew a third whom they should follow: what more unworthy so great a man? But he appeales unto the tradition of all Ecclesiasticall writers: In cap. 23. Mat. the which we have not: and although we had the same, yet ought we as the said Jerome otherwhere speaketh, hold to this certain truth, That whatsoever hath not authori∣tie in the Scripture, may as asily be rejected as approved. The which is most true
touchching this Fiction: for a is not taken out of the Seriptures, but first delive∣red by one Papia a man of small parts, (as Enschius writeth) and afterward with many other uncertain things taken up and divulged by other Fathers as if they were certain. Lib. 3. hi∣stor. cap. 39 In speciall that Fiction is very unsavoury, touching the Kings of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia to be slain by Antichrist, for nothing here of is spoken by Daniel, but he saith that the little horne shall subdue three Kings. not that he shall kill them: neither doth he say that they shall be the Kings of Egypt, Lybia, and Ethiopia, But thus: be shall rule over the treasures of gold and silver of Misraim: and the Ly∣bians and Ethiopiand shall be in his steps: as Pagninus renders it: but Tremellius, the Lybians, and Ethiopians shall follow his steps: which was accomplished in Antio∣chus: for when he had vanquished Egypt, then the Lybians and Ethiopians (neigh∣bouring Nations to Egypt) who before served Bolomaeus Philometor, fell to An∣tiochus and warred under his banners. This Fiction being now sufficiently refuted (which Alcasar also likes not) we come to his opinion no lesse false then the other. Aleasars fable. The ten hornes, saith he, denote the Senatours and chiefe men of the Romane Empire, figured out in the Beast himselfe, namely ten being put for a great multitude, These, as he feineth, were to fight with the Lamb untill Constantines Empire: and then being conver∣ted unto the faith they should hate whorish Rome, burne her with fire, and root out the heathenesse idolatry thereof. Onuphr. Com: in Lib 1 Fa∣stor: This is a new glosse, false and repugnant to the Text: for who taught him to make of the Ten kings two hundred Sena∣tours (for so many by Romulus were appointed to be chosen out of Romanes and Sabines?) besides if the Senatours be the Kings, how then could it be said, that they had not yet in Iohns time received their kingdom? Lastly the lamentation made in the following Chapter, will most clearly refute the absurdity of this Fi∣ction: viz. that the burning of the whore cannot be understood of her Conver∣sion to the Faith. Letting passe therefore both these Fables: we will now labour to find out the true meaning: And here againe, I propound two undoubted truths. One that the hornes of the beast are not the heads of the beast. The other, that the hornes are something growing out of the heads. The first appeareth: The ten kings are to be distingui¦shed from the seven former. because the heads and hornes differ in forme and number, hence it followes: that these ten Kings are not Christian Emperours, viz. Con∣stantine the Great, with nine of his Successours, as some do thinke, for these Emperours do necessarily belong to the sixt or to the seventh head: because they reigned before the beast came to be the Eight King or Antichrist, and they were true Emperours of the East and West, neither received they their power with the beast: But these Ten shall receive their power in one houre with the Beast: neither shall they be such Kings as the heads formerly were, but shall be  as it were Kings, neither of so great, nor of so absolute power: and therefore these ten Kings denoted by the hornes, may not be mingled with the seven Capitall Kings. As for the second supposition, (that the hornes as they are not the heads, so they are something, or some part of the heads) we know that the horne is an excrementall matter of the creatures skull, The hornes sprang out of the se∣venth head: growing hard into a crooked horne: hence with Priscian, Cornu a horne, is quasi curuor crookednesse. These hornes therefore did grow out of the heads: yet not out of all, but in my opinion out of the seventh: as springing from the Christian Caesars, in place of whom succeeded the Emperours and Kings of the West: for after that the Beast had devoured the seventh head belonging unto the Christian Emperours, and came to be the Eight King: he reserved the Prerogative of Monarchicall power unto himself, yet not under the title of a Romane Emperour (for this, as Bellarmine confesseth, Antichrist was not to do so, Lib. 3. de P. R. : 15 least hereby he should seem not to be Christs Vicar) but under the Title of Saint Peters Successour, Ʋniversall Bishop, Head of the
Catholicke Church, he createth Emperours and Kings, who must as his creatures and Vassalls compose themselves to his pleasure, making them the Actors and Ministers of his Monarchicall power: The first Parents of which generation (as Histories manifest) were Steven II. and Leo III. Ten hornes] I do not thinke that we are here precisely tyed to the number Ten, seeing as Bellarmine confesseth either 10. 100. 1000. Gen. 31. Num. 14.22. or any perfect number in Scripture, may be taken indefinitely. Therefore by Ten is meant some cer∣taine number of Kings arising out of the Ancient Romane Empire onely: as in these expressions: He changed my wages ten times: This people hath tempted me ten times: for, many times or often. Now this could not be said of the seven for∣mer heads, because the Angell did distinctly number them. Thus it cannot be obscure who these Ten Kings are. Vndoubtedly they are all such as hitherto have held the Christian world at the appointment and com∣mand of the Romish Pope. Of which read Angustinus Steuchus touching Con∣stantines donation against Valla, Sect. 94.97.103. where he maintaines that all kingdoms in Christindome, as Hungarie, Spaine, France, England, &c. are subject and tributary to the Pope. Which have received no kingdome as yet] We have shewed who the Ten Kings are: now of their originall, when, and with what successe they should reigne. At the time of the Revelation they had not as yet received the kingdome: for hi∣therto the sixt head reigned in the Romane tyrants: The seventh head also was to reign a short space on the mountaines of the woman in Rome: and afterward, some while out of these mountaines at Constantinople in the Christian Emperours: be∣fore this also the beast having swallowed up the seventh head, was to be made the Eight king. The word therefore  not as yet, notes the time from the revea∣ling of this Prophesie, which was Anno 14. of Domitian, and of Christ 96. un∣till the Empire of the West taken from the Greeks by Pope Leo and given to Charles anno 800. being, I say 704 yeers. But receive power] For, shall receive, by an ennallage usuall to Iohn: which the Particle not yet sheweth: for if they had not then as yet received the same, it shews that they should receive kingly power afterward. But when? In one houre with the beast] Gr.  One houre, and so rendred, it sig∣nifies the little time their kingdom should continue. But the Angell sheweth not how long their power should continue, but when they should receive the same. For what kind of kingdom would that be to continue but one hour? Ther∣fore the old Version and Beza do more rightly render it, In one houre, as in Chap. 3.3.  what hour I will come, that is, in, or at what houre. And Iohn 4.52.  Yesterday at the seventh houre. Now here an houre is not astronomically taken for the twelth part of the day, 1. Ioh. 2.18 but metaphorically for an indefinite article of time, as Iohn in his Epistle: little children it is the last houre, that is, the last time: so here in one houre, is to be understood at one and the same time they shall receive their power with the beast, namely when the beast shall come to be the Eight king, usurping the Empire of the West, and armed with both Monarchicall swords. Thus undoubtedly the holy Ghost points as with the finger vnto the history of Leo III. that when he began to create Emperors and Kings, then also he began to be the Beast and the Eight King. With the Beast] The old Version: After the Beast, as if it were  but it is in the Text  with the Beast: Neither do I find it other∣wise in any Copy, though Alcasar saith he hath, but alledgeth no Author. The sense comes much to one: for whither they shall receive power one houre af∣ter the Beast, or at the same houre with the beast, yet shall they reigne together: but we are rather to keep to the Greek reading, and sense, They receive power in one houre, that is, at one and the same time with the Beast. They receive] From whom? from the Beast? who out of the fullnesse of his
power shall give kingdoms unto them? not so, for the Angel sath not from the beast, but with the beast: for how soever they shall receive it through the wicked means of the beast, yet they receive it from God: to whom onely it appertains to give and transfer kingdomes, and from whom is all power: But the holy Ghost thus speaketh, that they are to receive their power with the beast, for two causes. First, The kings received power from God. because although the translation of the Empire (under which the wel∣fare of other kingdomes is contained) was brought to passe by the rashnesse and boldnesse of the Beast: Notwithstanding God himself intending to punish the in∣testine dissentions and other sins of the Eastern nations, did by means of a necessa∣ry and lawfull war of Charls against the Lombards (the destroyers of Italy and the Empire) justly translate the Imperial state from the Greeks unto the French: seeing it is God that ruleth in the kingdoms of men, Dan. 4.25. and giveth them to whomsoever he will: And therefore the kings here, received their power not from the Beast but from God, although the perfidiousnesse of the Beast came in between; like as in the Schisme of the ten tribes, notwithstanding the sedition of Ieroboam, yet that alteration of the kingdome is ascribed to God: Return ye every man unto his house, because this thing is of Iehovah. 1. kings 12: 2. Therefore by this circumstance, the spirit again points unto the history of Leo, that when he began to create Emperors and kings, Then also he began to be the Beast, and Eight king. Whence it is manifest that when the Romane Pope, boasteth of the transla∣tion of the Empire from the Greeks unto the French and Germanes, he glorieth in nothing but in his owne wickednesse and seditious perfidiousnesse. Secondly, because the kings were so to receive power, as to have the same with the Beast, that is, to reigne with his favour, they should have it, I say for his advantage not without the Beast, but with him, that so the Beast might reign with them and by them. For the Pope will not be accounted an Emperor or king: but will have with and under him other Emperors and kings of his own inauguration and making, as his vassals. Therefore are they said to be  As it were kings] which indeed shall bear the title and ensignes of kings: yet shall they not be absolute kings, as the seven heads were: and therefore Ribera saith most truly: They shall have indeed the name of kings: But in truth Antichrist himself shall reignt, and they obey him. For they shall onely be intrusted by the Pope, and hold their kingdomes from him, evther directly as Fee-Farmes or Coppy-holds: or indirectly as sworn to the Church of Rome. Thus I rather take the particle  As, because of the following matter which confirms this sense, then of the obscurity of these kings, who in comparison of the former Mouarchy shall be but the shadows of kings as it were: although this sense be also true, and agrees with the former. Notwithstanding that which is spoken of (one hour) is not so to be taken as if all these kings received their power together, but with some difference of time: for if the last hour with Iohn in his Epistle includes diverse ages? why then may not one hour here include certain years? As therefore those kingdomes which were taken from the Romane Empire by the Barbarians, received not the Christian faith together: so they received not their power all together with the Beast, but some before, others after (as it followeth) and so gave the same unto the Beast. viz: Italy, France, Germany and Britany sooner: Spaine, Poland and the Northern king∣domes, later. Lastly it is to be observed, as before I noted, that the old version (in stead of  at one houre with the beast) hath it in one hour after the beast as if it were . So the sense should be, That these kings should reigne a little while after the Beast, which is contrary to Riberas fiction that they should reigne a little before. Neither wil his wrested Glosse help him. They shall receive power after the beast, that is, into the obedience of the Beast, because they shall obey Antichrist, as Chap. 13.4. The whole world wondred after the Beast. For
there it is not Meta to Therion, but Opiso to Therion. Besides if they shall obey Antichrist (the which thing he confesseth) because they shall receive power after the Beast, how doth this agree with his former fiction, that the Beast here is the devill, and not Antichrist. 13 These have one minde] We have heard who the Kings are, when, and by whose favour and helpe they received the kingdom: Now we shall heare their counsells and intentions: These, to wit, Kings have one mind. The old Version and Beza, one Counsell. The consent and great conspiracy of the kings among themselves and with the Beast, is hereby noted, which is recorded not as a thing praise worthy in them, but as wonderfull: For they shall be Kings very different in manners, nature, tongues and people, who ordinarily by mu∣tuall discord and hatred make great wars each with other: but yet for all this when the Beasts matter is on foot, laying aside their hatred, they shall have one mind and counsell, as it followeth. And shall give their strength and power to the Beast] that is, vide concil: windeck: in progn: pag. 12. hinc petitum. shall conspire together in defence of the Pope: they shall all I say, joyning their armes and forces together, mightily labour to uphold the Idolatry and power of the Romish Sea: And indeed he must be very ignorant in Histories, who knows not that this hath fully, for divers ages, bin accomplished: for although some Em∣perours and Kings being provoked by the arrogancy of the Beast, have some∣times taken up arms against him: The Pope notwithstanding by the help of other Princes, and by his Capitoline fulminations hath evermore easily suppressed them: Neither indeed did such oppose the Idolatry of the Beast, but the fla∣gitiousnesse of his person, or else the perfidious counsells of his Cardinalls, and still reverenced the Monarchicall pontificacie. Moreover this place plainly shews, what king∣domes are signified by the hornes. that the Ten hornes do not promiscuously denote all and every of the Kings and kingdoms, which of old belonged to the Romane Empire: but those only which shall remain in these latter times, in the Western Christian World. And therefore as for other kingdoms of Africa, Asia, Thracia, Mysia, Greece, Albania and Seruia (which long agoe have bin wasted by the Barbarians, being now under the oppression of Perfians, Turks, and Saracens) are not to be numbred amongst these, the names of any of them being scarse left to Christians. And this is evident, because these ten Kings have one mind, imploying their power and strength in defence of the Beast: whereas the Turkes and Barbarians now lords of those kingdomes, have not one mind with these Kings, but in a hostile manner oppugne both them and the Pope also. 14. These shall make warre with the Lambe] It followes, for what end they will give their power and strength to the Beast: viz. to oppose the Lambe, or make warre with him: The Lambe is Christ, as formerly we heard. The Beast therefore shall be the head and Captaine of the warre: The Kings his Auxiliaries and Intrusted ones. But here it may be demaunded whither this war be the same with that before spoken of in Chap. 16.16. and shall follow afterward in Chapter 19.9. or another? And whither these be other KINGS, then the kings of the earth there? A hard Question which can scarsely be here resolved: If it be the same war, then how are they said to be here overcome by the Lambe? being to begin their war afterward in Chap. 19. and then to be vanquished by Christ? But if it be another, then the question will be what war this is, What that: Again, if they be the same Kings, how then is it said v. 16. of this Chap. that they persecute the woman, and Chap. 18.9. that they shall bewaile Babylon, and mourne over her, whom themselves have burnt with fire? And shall again war against Christ, Chap. 19. And why are they here called Kings onely, but there Kings of the Earth? If they be divers: Who are these, and who the other? I will answer to both in a few words here: but more fully hereafter.
In respect of the parts and cause, Whether the warre here be the same with that in chap 19.18. the war is the same: for the Beast with the Kings his Tenants both here and there, doth fight, and shall fight against Christ in defence of his throne: Neverthelesse it is divers, in time and manner. This fight of the Kings against the Lambe, began presently after they had received their power and strength, and given the same unto the Beast, that is, they have de∣fended the Monarchicall Power, Idolatry, and decrees of the Romish Pope a∣bove 600. years against Christ. But the other Battell, unto which were ga∣thered the Armies of the Kings in Hermageddon (and so shall be fought afterward) was at length begun to be managed after the drying up of the Waters of Euphra∣tes, that is, after the Kings of the East had diverted the holy Taxes and Trea∣sures of the Romish Jupiter, and this war shall be prosecuted with the greatest fury against Christ untill the end: yet not altogether by the same Kings: for many of those ten Kings who of old fought against the Lambe (despairing of the Victory) shall repent (at least most of them) and turne their sword against the whore and burn her with fire, These kings here & the kings of the earth are not the same. as is said ver. 16. But such other Kings as re∣main with the Beast, being stirred up by the uncleane spirits, shall at last take up armes and with greater fury fight that Fatall Battle, the issue whereof shall be the Beasts and their utter destruction: so that the latter properly with their Associates (not these) are named Kings of the Earth. Now we return a∣gain to the war here treated of. Where first it may be demaunded, how these Kings should be guilty of so great madnesse? The Fight of the kings with the Lambe. Shall the Pope and the Kings his Creatures fight with the Lamb? The Angell saith yea: But do they not stoutly war for the glory of Christ? I an∣swer, It is true, so much indeed they pretend, and are perswaded of, but they are willingly blinded, and while they shed Christian blood for to establish the Popes authority, they in very deed make warre against the Lambe: For the Pope doth lie in saying he is Christs Ʋicar. Now to defend a false Vicar of Christ, is to op∣pose Christ. The victory of the lamb over the kings. But let us hear the successe. The Lambe shall overcome them] This is not as yet that last Victory: but that wherein the kings shall before the end submit to Christ: and it is both spirituall and civill also. The Lambes spirituall Victory was of old in his faithfull mem∣bers, Spirituall victory. whose constancy could not be overcome by any cruelty of Kings, nor aba∣ted by the Popes Excommunications, nor shaken by the fraud of Sophisters. It is also in overcoming the Kings themselves, who being in their consciences at last convinced of the truth of the Reformed Religion according to the word of God, shall forsake the whore, lay downe their armes, and joyne to Christ, by setting up his Throne in their Territories. Thus the Kings have been, and fur∣ther shall be overcome to their own good. There is besides an externall Victo∣ry: Outward Victory. for howsoever the Antichristian armies have many times (especially in this our age) shed abundance of Christian blood in Germany, Spaine, England, and the Low-Countries, unto the end they might suppresse the Lambe, and his Gos∣pell: yet have gained nothing, but rather by this meanes (though unwittingly) spread and propagated even that which they accuse to be heresie far and neer a∣mong divers Nations: wasted and destroyed their own Provinces, bringing them under the power of strangers, and been forced to give liberty to the Gos∣pell: neither have they much oftner obtained bloody victories over the Godly, then they themselves have miserably perished by the sword of Christ. For he is Lord of lords] The reason of the Victory is added, taken from the Majesty and Power of the Lambe, in comparison whereof all the forces of the Beast and kings are but vanity: for the Lambes power and majesty is divine and eternall. 1. Tim: 6: 15 That this is signified by these Titles, the Apostle teacheth, in ascri∣bing the same otherwhere unto God alone, blessed and only Potentate king of Kings and Lord of Lords, &c. This again Chap. 19.10. is attributed to Christ under the person of the word of God, comming forth on a white horse to battell against the Kings of the Earth.
Now as this doth clearly prove the eternall deity of the Lamb Christ, XXXV. Ar∣guments of Chr. deity] so also that he is God-Man in one person. For none but One and the eternall God is King of kings and Lord of lords: If Christ therefore be King of kings and Lord of lords, then verily he is that One and eternall God with the Father. Furthermore being called a Lamb, is signified the Man-hood and Mediatorship of Christ: Rev. 13.8 1. Tim. 2.6 for he is said to be slain, because the Man-mediator gave himself a ransome for all men. If therfore the Lamb be King of kings, &c. then verily the Man-Christ in unity of person is the same King of kings, Lord of lords, Eternall God. Explicat: locor. p. 439 Eniedinus the Samosatenian Hereticke excepteth: If this Title should make him Eternall God, then also Artaxerxes and Nebuchadnezzar should be eternall Gods: the one indeed being stiled King of kings, Ezr. 7.11. The other Dan. 2.37. and Ezech. 26.7. But this is an ungodly and vaine Sophistry: first touching Artaxerxes calling himself King of kings in his Epistle, seing he was ignorant of the true God, it may be said, that it was only of fact, but not of right: yet will we not deny the right to Artaxerxes the Persian Monarch, which Daniel attributed to Nebuchadnezzer, the Monarch of Babylon, each of them being a King of kings, The lambe is King of kings abso∣lutely. because to both of them many earthly Kings (yet not all) were tributaries. But the Lamb is not cal∣led the King of kings in this sense, for he hath no Kings tributaries here on earth, as they. But is King of kings absolutely: both in respect of his deity, being true God blessed for ever, as he is the word, and son of God, and so more powerfull then all Monarchs and Kings: as also in respect of his office received from God, not as Cyrus received the Persian kingdom from God, as the heretick intimates: but as media∣tor betwixt God and man, and as being God-man the Saviour of mankind, thus he is exalted unto the right hand of God above all principality, and every name that is named in heaven or earth. In vain also the heretick seeks a grammaticall shift: God, saith he, in the Greek is called King of kings, with an article: but the Lamb and Word of God (,) without an article. For the Greeks do not tie them∣selves to articles, but sometimes prefixe them before indefinite words, as Mat, 12.35. , THE good man out of the good treasure of his heart, &c. Luke 4.4. Man () shall not live by bread onely, &c. Sometimes also omit them, even in an excellent and certain thing: as in this prophesie Christ is called  without an article, C. 5.6. & 13.11. & 14. 1. The devil  Dragon without an article Ch. 12. Antichrist and Rome his Seat  without articles, Chap. 13.1. and 14.8. and 17.3. &c. It is enough therefore that the proper attribute of God alone be ascribed unto the Lamb, whe∣ther the article be added or not: Otherwise the heretick might as well say, that neither the father, nor Christ the son is truely blessed for ever, because as the father Rom. 1.35. so the son Rom. 9.5. is said to be  without article. And they that are with him are called, elect and faithfull] They also shall overcome them, which is greatly to comfort the godly in their fight with Antichrist: For as they are the Lambs Partners in fight, so shall they also participate with the Lamb in victory: And therfore they shall neither fight alone, nor without victory: for the Lamb overcomming, they overcome also. That are with him] to wit, in the fight, are called elect and faithfull] By three E∣pithites he closely implies three causes of their victory. I. Because they are elect in Christ before the foundation of the World. II. 1: Io: 5: 4 Because they are cal∣led by the Gospell of salvation. III. Because they are faithfull: For this is the Ʋictory that overcommeth the world, even our faith. Here also observe that election is put after vocation by a gradation from the effect to the cause, as 2. Pet. 1.10. 15 And he said to mee] Hitherto of the Beast, his heads and hornes: Now followes the interpretation of the whore. I. He declares her Empire. II. Her destruction, and the cause. III. Her name or surname.
And he said] for, Then, or moreover he said, for  And, belongs to the or∣der as also in ver. 11. and throwout hitherto. Where the woman sitteth] Least Iohn should scruple how here the woman sits on the waters, How the where si∣t  waters up∣on the beast and peoples. which he saw before sitting on the Beast, the Angell interprets the many waters to be many Peoples: by which he might easily reconcile the matter: for to sit upon Peoples, is a known Phrase, signifying rule or dominion over ma∣ny People. The sitting notes the largenesse of her Territory. To sit upon the Beast, is to hold the Monarchicall Power of the Empire in subjection, or to rule the Empire by the Title of the woman, that is, of the Church, which thing Antichrist doth. The Waters are Peoples] By a Metonymicall Phrase, that is, they represent Peoples. The reason of the Metonymia is grounded on the similitude, because peoples are like to waters in rage and unconstancy: for as many waters by their forceable running carry down all things before them lying in the way, So popu∣lous kingdoms and great armies wast and subdue all things: And as waters filling still the stream with a perpetuall motion are unburdened into the Sea, so peoples by continuall succession of each other are swallowed up one after another by the gulf of death. Ier. 47.2 So saith God touching the army of the Chaldeans: Behold waters rise out of the North. and shalbe as an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the Land, &c. Now by many Peoples we understand both the mighty Armis and Le∣gions of the Romanes, by which of old they obtained the Empire of the world for themselves: As also the People themselves brought under their subjection. These the Angell distinguisheth into multitudes, nations, and tongues, because of the variety, being of Europe, Asia, and Africa, very different in Nation, Tongue, Nature and Manners. Ribera well observeth that not onely those Peoples are signified which then o∣beyed the Romanes, but such also as shall afterward obey Antichrist. These Peo∣ples therfore are principally such as are spiritually subject unto the Pope either di∣rectly or indirectly, viz. all the Laity of what nation soever, and Clergy (who for number are thought not to be lesse then a third part of the Laity) on whom he hath imprinted the Character of his name. 16 And the ten hornes which thou sawest on the Beast] Now he begins to de∣clare the destruction of the whore, which he promised to shew, ver. 1. The argu∣ment or scope whereof he will further shew in the following Chap. Now he ex∣poundeth by whom it shalbe inflicted, how, and the Author thereof. The ten hornes which thou sawest] that is, the ten kings (which thou heardest to be signified by the ten hornes ver. 12.) shall destroy the whore. In the reading it is to be noted, that Montanus in stead of  on the Beast, hath it  and the Beast: as if the Beast also should hate Rome: the which Bellarmin makes great use of, denying that Rome shall be the Seat of Antichrist, for if Antichrist shall hate Rome and make it desolate: how then, saith he, shall Rome be the Seat of Antichrist? will Antichrist make his own Seat desolate? but he knowes the reading is false though he thus dallies: for not the Beast, but the hornes or Kings shall hate Rome: as all Copies both Greek and Latine have it, yea the Old Ver∣sion also, unto which the Iesuite is tyed, and this reading the Relative These (to wit Kings) doth require. And so Ribera holds against Bellarmine, Ribera a∣gainst Bel∣lar. that the Ten Kings shall overthrow Rome: although he addeth, that they shall do it before the comming of An∣tichrist, which we erewhile proved to be false. In the mean while out of Bel∣larmines reasoning against Ribera, we gather that the Beast is Antichrist, according as we truly expounded it, but Ribera applying it to the divel, doth grosly erre. The Kings therfore shall labour to destroy the Whore: yet not accomplish it in a moment,  but by five degrees. They shall hate her] And therefore they shall then cease to commit Whoredome with her: The kings hatred of the whord. But shall hate her which is the beginning of
repentance: For to hate sinne is to avoide the same, which is the first de∣gree of repentance. Thus in regard of the following matter, I expound this Hatred. The occasion went before verse, 14. viz. the Ʋictory of the Lambe, against whom these Kings had formerly unhappily taken up armes: for they were, and shall bee overcome: yet so as with a different effect, for some shall remaine still in their hostility: beeing the KINGS of the Earth, who will againe encounter with Christ, and shall feele his sharpe sword, Chapter 19.15. Others beeing overcome and convicted in Conscience, shall give glory to God, open their eyes unto the light of the Gospell, and oppose the Tyranny of the Beast, the Cup of the whore, and Idolatry of the Pope. Thus these Kings beeing converted to the Faith of the Gospell, shall hate the Whore, and bid Rome farewell. But others shall remain Kings of the Earth. Notwithstanding the Ten are said to do that, which the most of them shall do, by a Synecdoche familiar in Scripture. And shall make her desolate] The second degree and effect of repentance: By deser∣ting: Lea∣ving Rome, they shall with their Kingdoms, Provinces, and Territories turn to Christ and restore the true worship of God, according to the Gospell. And naked] This they shall doe both by publicke confessions and writings, By making her naked. in declaring and demonstrating the filthinesse of Romes Idolatry, to make her detestable, like as an harlot having her whorish attire puld off, is odious to the view of all honest people: As also by taking backe the gold, pearles, and pretious stones, Purple, Scarlet, Manours, Possessions, Territories, Taxes, and Riches, which the Whore had drawne from former Kings their Ance∣stours, through seeming piety, and with which (like Aesops Crow) she proud∣ly adorned herselfe, as with the feathers of another. Now this they shall do not without, but within their owne Territories, doing herein injury to none, nor violently take that which is anothers, but with all right keep that which is committed to their Faith, Custody, and Government, taking care that the same may be imployed for the maintenance of Churches, Schools, and Hospitals. Out therfore with Sycophants, who calumniate the making naked of the whore, as if it were Sedition and Rebellion against Empe∣rors, Kings, and Princes who are still adicted to the Romish Religion. Nay ve∣rily from this Prophesie it is to be hoped, that as these kings have begun already to make the whore naked, so they shal also in due time most certainly perfect the same. And shall eat her flesh] Not in love, as some have thought, but in hatred. By eating her flesh. Now this cannot also be understood according to the letter: for the kings which shal do this work are no Canibals or men-eaters of Brasilia. Therfore most expound the flesh of the whore, not corporally but mistically of the whores kitching, fat revenues, anuities, vacancies, commendums, tithes, and holy rents hitherto brought to Rome from all parts of Christendom, with which the whore being fatted, grew to such fleshi∣nesse and great strength. This flesh the kings shall eat, by denying these revenues to the whore, & appropri∣ating the same to their own provinces, kingdoms, churches, schools, hospitals, and almes-houses. So Bullin. Illyr. Chyt. Artop. Napier and others. This sense agrees with the uncovering of the whore: or certainly it notes the last degree of the same. However it be, this phrase of Scripture doth also in other places signifie great hatred, persecution, wounding and killing, Iob 19.22 Psal. 27: 2 being taken from Beasts tea∣ring the flesh of their prey, as in Iob, Why are yee not satisfied with my flesh? When the wicked came upon me to eat my flesh, they stumbled and fell: on which place Au∣gustine thus, They eat our flesh, saith he, that persecute us. Shall burn her with fire] Rome I say, that whorish seat and nest they shal take, By burning destroy and burne. This prophefie is so open and cleare touching the overthrow of Popish Rome, as the Iesuites dare no more deny the same. And therefore we here see that Papall Rome shall be made desolate, not by the Turkes, but by Christian KINGS, the definite or certaine time thereof we know not:
yet by what goes before it may be gathered without obscurity that the time is near: for some Kings have already begun to hate and forsake the whore, making her naked, and eating her flesh: some of the Ten yet remain with her: into whose hearts, what the LORD will put for them to do, himself knoweth: Perhaps more shall forsake the whore. And though some Kings of the Earth may remain to make war still against Christ: Neverthelesse these also will not spare her flesh no more then others, as the present times do witnesse: for do they not equally gape after the holy Revenues? Neither will they any more fight gratis for the Whore, but sell their protection of her for filthy lucre, emptying her Purse as much as they can. Here by the way to gratifie the Reader, I thinke good to set downe a prophesie taken out of an Ancient Munuscript found in the House of Sale∣zianus, and lately sent to mee: which every one may credit, so far as it likes him. Certainly so much of it as concerns the destruction of Rome doth not aberre from the present Prophesie of his Booke. Now the words are these. There shall arise a King out of the Nation of the most Illustrious Lilie, having a long Fore-head, high Brows, great Eyes, and an Eagles Nose: He shall gather a great Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his kingdome: and slay all that flye and hide themselves in Mountaines and Caves from his face. For righteousnesse shall be joyned unto him, as the Bridegroome to the Bride: with them he shall wage warre even unto the fourtieth yeere, bringing into subjection the Ilanders, Spaniards, and Italians: Rome and Florence he shall destroy and burne with fire, so as Salt may bee sowed on that Land. The greatest Clergy-men who have invaded Peters Seat, he shall put to death: and in the same yeere obtaine a double Crowne. At last going over Sea with a great ar∣my, he shall enter Greece, and be named King of the Greekes. The Turkes and Bar∣barians hee shall subdue, making an Edict: that every one shall die the death that wor∣shippeth not the Crucified one. And none shall be found able to resist him: because an holy arme from the Lord shall allwayes be with him. And he shall possesse the Do∣minion of the Earth. These things being done, he shall be called the rest of holy Christi∣ans, &c. Thus far the Prophesie. Now to return to the Kings, Whether these kings be ten in succession. Brightman understands by the hornes, Ten Kings: not reigning all at one time in so many kingdoms, but so many Emperours suc∣ceeding each other in the Romane Empire: and thinks that Charles V. was the first of those, who taking Rome by force Anno 1527. did not a little shake it: Foure followed, none of which received their Crown from the Whore after the manner of their Ancestours, or came to Rome to kisse his Holinesse feet: yea all of them according to their clemency and prudencie gave freedom to publish the Gospell in the Romane Empire: and by their example invited neighbouring Kings to the like clemency. God is to be intreated, that he will further put into their hearts to do what his pleasure is. As for the succession, the Angell made the same most plain in the seven heads: but of the seven hornes not so: for these Kings shall receive power together in one houre with the Beast, and shall have one minde togither: first in defending, after∣ward in opposing the Whore. Therefore they shall be together, some space of time onely excepted. Neverthelesse Riberas fiction (which before I touched) hath no place of Ten Kings, Riberas fi∣ction is in∣consistent. who suppressing the Romane Emperour shall reigne thorowout the whole world towards Antichrists comming, and destroy Rome before Anti∣christ begin to reigne. For first in this he agrees not with himself: in Apocal. 17. Sect. 18: 19. When, saith he, Antichrist is ri∣sen, They indeed shall have the names of kings, but in truth Antichrist shall reigne, and they shall obey him. Here he will have that the Ten kings shall obey Antichrist. And afterward: The devill, saith he, and Antichrist his chiefest limb assisted with the helpe and power of these kings, will be able to doe all the things, which are foretold by
God: Now it cannot be questioned but that the things he speakes of are the same which the Angell foretold ver. 16. viz. of consuming the whores flesh, and her burning by the kings. How therefore should Rome be burnt by the Ten kings before Antichrists comming, if the Devill and Antichrist shall do this very thing by the helpe and power of the Ten kings? and how doth the fable confist, that three of them shall be wholly extinguished by him, if all ten shall give their faithfull assistance unto him? Secondly, it is an assertion altogether unprobable, that these ten shall then rule the whole universe: nay rather it is refuted by evident reason: For when Anti∣christ (whom they expect doth come) certainly there shall be some Christian Kings to burne the whore. There shall also be some kings of the Earth, who shall lament her, and gathering themselves into Harmageddon, shall fight an unhappy Battell against Christ. But the former and latter shal not be the same in the least, as Ribera is forced to feine Chap. 18. Sect. 21. and Chap. 19. Sect. 34 because both these and the other shall never have one and the same mind: therefore there shall others rule in the world beside them. Thirdly, that false Fiction hath often bin refuted, viz. of Romes burning before Antichrists comming: for Babylon shall not be burnt before Antichrist come: But Papall Rome is Antichrist. Therefore Papall Rome shall not be burnt be∣fore Antichrists comming. The assumption is before proved, neither can it be any longer denyed. The most certain proofe of the major is this, viz. Rome is to be burnt not before but after Anti∣christs com∣ming. Babylon shall be burnt because of her Antichristian fornication: but Babylon shall not commit fornication before, but after Antichrists comming: because the Beast, which is Antichrist, & whose hornes are the kings committing fornication with the whore, carries her on his back, yea on his seven heads, being the Mountaines on which the woman sitteth: The which carriage or bearing doth signifie the mon∣strous commixture of both. Therefore Babylon shall be burnt not before, but after Antichrists comming. Lastly adde hereunto, that the whore shall not be burnt before she shall sit up∣on the Beast. But the Beast is Antichrist, and so Ribera, whether willing or not willing, is forced to confesse, Chap. 19.19. Sect. 31. and Chap. 20.10. Sect. 73. The Beast, saith he, that is, Antichrist. Therefore the Where Rome shall not be burnt before Antichrists comming. There is yet one scruple, Whether Rome being burnt, An∣tichrist shal be abolished whether these Kings by burning the whore are to abolish Antichrist. I answer, they shall not: for it should be contrary to that of the Apostle: The LORD shall consume that wicked one with the spirit of his mouth, and shall de∣story him with the brightnesse of his comming: not therefore by the arme of flesh. Besides it should be contrary to this Prophesie, the which Chap. 19. affirmeth, 2. Thes. 2 that the Beast with the False Prophet, and the kings of the Earth shall be cast into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, after that the Beast with the false Prophet, and kings of the Earth have fought their last battell against Christ. So that the burning of the whore shall indeed be very great, yet not the last or utter over∣throw of Antichrist. Antichrists Nest shall be burnt: The shop of abomina∣tions, fullminations, tyranny, Popish Idolatry, and conclave of Cardinalls shall be destroyed. The Pope himselfe and false Prophet shall flee out of Italy unto such kings which yet shall adhere unto him, suppose the Spaniard, Ribera con∣fesseth the Pope shal be thrust out of Rome. or some other by whom he may find shelter. Neither doth Ribera deny this, but often confesseth that after the destruction of Rome, the Pope notwithstanding shall be the Romane Bishop, although he sits not at Rome: like as the Emperour of the Germanes is called Romane, howbeit he have not Rome, and as the Popes during the seventy years scisme were called Romanes, though they sate at Avinion, and not at Rome. Thus we see the guil∣ty confesseth the Fact. Ribera A∣pocal 14 sect: 48. Onely herein he staggers, as not knowing where to turne himself, for some∣times
he feineth that these kings themselves, other while that Antichrist by their as∣sistance shall destroy Rome. But his Fiction is frivolous: for the Kings that are to destroy Rome, shall not be Antichrists friends, but his enemies: because they shall hate the whore, who as she is the Whore riding on the Beast, is one with Antichrist, yea Antichrist himself, as before we shewed. Therefore Antichrist shall then be: neverthelesse he shall not destroy Rome by their helpe. The Pope therefore or Antichrist shall remaine some while after Rome is burnt, yet his strength shall be mightily weakned. Now what he will further enterprize, we shall hear Chap. 19. viz. that last battell unto which he shall gather by the three uncleane spirits, the Armies of the Kings of the Earth in Har∣mageddon: the which beeing unhappily fought, hee shall bee cast into the Lake of fire. 17 For God hath put in their hearts] We have heard, by whom, and what the overthrow is that shall befall the Romish whore: Now thirdly he addes, who is the authour inflicting the same: and here the Angell by a certaine Anticipation, bids us to ascend higher even unto God: For it might be thought a wonderfull thing, how the Kings, having been so long obsequious unto the whore, should so suddenly change their mind, and turn their love into hatred, and ceasing to op∣pose Christ, bend their sword against the whore. Now this saith the Angell, happened not at a venture, but by the direction of God, for God gave, or put it into their hearts, that is, moved and bent their wills and counsells so to do: For the kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the Rivers of waters: Pro: 21: 1 he turneth it whe∣thersoever hee will. But what did he put into their hearts? he joyneth three acts of the Kings be∣fore mentioned, as singular benefits of God. To doe, or full fill his will] to wit of God, as the Old Ʋersion rightly hath it, to doe that which is pleasing unto him. And so Beza in his former Edition: but in his latter: to execute his sentence or mind. The word  His, is rather ren∣dred relatively then reciprocally, least in regard of the ambiguity thereof it might be applyed to the will, not of God, but of the Kings. The sense is: that they might execute on the whore the judgement decreed by God, that is, the ha∣tred, desertion, making naked, eating and burning of the whore, described in verse 16. God therefore shall overthrow Rome: and the Kings shall bee his Ministers. To doe one minde] namely their own, that is, to agree together with the Beast for to defend the woman, as before ver. 13. And to give their kingdome unto the Beast] that is, to lend all their power unto the Romane Antichrist, fighting with all their might for his Hierarchicall Em∣pire, as in verse 13.14. Ʋntill the words of God shall be fulfilled] This limitation is not of the finall consummation, which is to happen at the sound of the seventh and last trumpet, Cha. 10.9. for after the burning of Antichrists Seat, and the alteration of the coun∣sell of the Kings, he shall notwithstanding remaine and rage some while, but with very broken and weake attempts. Now the terme prefixed by God is shewed, that is, how long this holy League of the Kings, and Conspi∣racy of the Beast, and so consequently their opposing of the Lambe shall endure: which being finished, God put into the hearts of the Kings, that (their love of the whore being turned into hatred) they should execute his judgement upon her. The sense therefore is, The Kings have thus long conspired with the Beast, and committed fornication with the whore: Ʋntill the words of God] that is, his decree touching the rising of Antichrist, revealed in the words of the Prophets and Apostles be fulfilled: After the fullfilling whereof, God put into their hearts to hate the Romish Strumpet, that is, detest Popish Idolatry, embrace the Gos∣pell of Christ, forsake, yea and oppose the Whore.
Why therefore should we wonder, that so many great Emperours, so ma∣ny religious Kings, of Germany, France, Spaine, England, &c. have with such zeale defended Popish Idolatry, the Romish Church, and Antichrist the Pope, almost these 800. years, in defence of whose magnificence and glory, they have made so great wars, and shed so much Christian blood? We hear that God did put it into their hearts, that they should do so, and not otherwise, so that the Angell wills us to rise from the events and secondary means unto the secret, yet just judgement of God. Here againe we have cause greatly to admire, that after so long fornication, some of the Kings, as of England, Scotland, Denmarke, Sweethland: Many pow∣erfull Princes also of Germany, Bohemia, France, Poland, and Hungary, having laid down their armes against the Lambe, and embraced the heavenly Doctrine of salvation, brought to light by the Two Witnesses in the ages of our predeces∣sours, do at this day hate the Romish Adultresse, and make her naked: We have cause, I say, to admire the Fact, and extoll Gods judgement to Heaven. Certainly the Kings did not repent either rashly, or by their own understanding, God put it into their hearts that they should repent of their whoredome, hate the whore and make her desolate. The LORD is to be intreated that he will put the same into the hearts of the rest of the KINGS, that is, to take knowledge, shun, and hate the Whore, and to give their power no longer unto the Beast, but unto the Lambe. Some Textuall scruples do here offer themselves, which I shall explain, after I have opened what yet remains in the Text. 18 The woman which thou sawest is the City] The Angell openeth the whole mysterie of the whore: This wo∣man is po∣pish Rome: see chap. 11.8. & 14.8. & 16.19 that we might not think the woman sitting upon the wa∣ters to be an Asian or Ʋtopian Nymph. It is, saith he, that great City] before he often calls it Babylon: Now he sets it forth by a more remarkeable note. Having dominion over the Kings of the Earth] Now what is this? Is it the whole multitude of ungodly men in the world, as some of the fathers (wanting the experience which we have now) have thought? Nay it is Rome, yea Popish Rome: For the Writers, saith Ribera, In cha. 17 sec. 20.22 who have otherwise interpreted it, are forced by the truth it selfe to yeeld unto us, that Rome is that whorish City, to be destroyed and overthrowne: Again: The foregoing words: God put it into their hearts, belong to the desolation and burning of Rome, for they shew the cause of so great desolation effected by them, who rather were thought should have proved friends: With this sense which is certainly true, &c. Thus we have the inter∣pretation of one sworn Iesuite. Let us hear another: Lib. de P. R. cap. 2 Babylon saith BELLARMIN that great City stan∣ding on Seven Mountaines, and having dominion over the Kings of the Earth, is ROME. Neither was there any other City which in Johns time had dominion over the Kings of the Earth then ROME, and it is most notorious, that ROME is built upon seven Mountaines. Let us hear a third: Vest: pag. 817 This Verse saith ALCASAR causeth no small diffi∣culty to them, who expound it otherwise then of ANGIENT ROME: But in our exposition nothing is more cleare. What can we desire more? The great Ci∣ty is Rome, both because the same is built upon seven Mountaines: As also, be∣cause it onely in Iohns time had dominion over the Kings of the Earth. But now perhaps it hath not? yea but it hath: For whatsoever it possesseth not by force, Quicquid non possidet armis. Rel∣ligione te∣net: it holds by Religion. Wherefore the two latter Iesuites do in vain seek an evasion, that not Popish but Heathenish Rome is this City: for they are confuted by Ribera their own companion, ingeniously confessing, that Heathenish Rome long agoe burnt to ashes, by the Gothes and Vandalls, hath no place here: but that it is Popish Rome that now is: yet notwithstanding he saith, that it is to be burnt before
Antichrists comming: which latter refutes the former. It remains therefore that the whore sitting on the Beast is Papast Rome. O Rome hearken to Clemanges, De corrup. Eccle: statu Cap: 26 What, saith he, dost thou thinke of thy Prophe∣sie, to wit. of John in the Revelation? Dost thou not beleeve that it belongs at least in some measure unto thee? Thou hast not so lost shame and sense to deny these things. Wherefore looke on it, and read the damnation of the great whore, sitting upon many Waters, and there contemplate thy worthy actions, and what shall befall thee. Again therefore we gather this argument: Babylon that Great City, standing on seven Mountaines is the Seat of Antichrist. Popish Rome is Babylon that Great City standing on seven hills: Therefore Popish Rome is the Seat of An∣tichrist. Furthermore. He which ruleth in the Seat of Antichrist, is Antichrist. The Pope of Rome ruleth in Antichrists Seat, Therefore the Pope of Rome is ANTICHRIST. There remains three scruples to be discussed from ver. 17. I. How God puts into the hearts of Kings, that is, worketh in the hearts of men, with∣out impeachment of their liberty. II. Seeing God is said to put three things into the hearts of the Kings: One in its owne nature good, viz. The hatred of the Whore. Two things in themselves evill, viz. Their agreement with the Beast, and fight with the Lambe: Whither he puts this af∣ter the same manner into their hearts: and whither it will not hence follow that hee is the Authour of sinne? III. In granting (which thing some maintaine) that these Kings were not converted, how then are they said in spoiling of the whore to doe the will of God, seeing they were ignorant of it: Neither spoiled they her so much out of affection to piety, as of desire to the prey. Now first, how God workes in the hearts of men, the liberty of their will remaining. Of this Question both in the Hypothesis, and in the Thesis the explication is the same, being not a little difficult: For if God workes in the hearts of men, he seemeth to determinate or limit their wills to one thing: Now if God limit the wil, then man seems not to act freely: seeing that is said to be free which is unli∣mited in respect of a thing: Furthermore God seems to move and bend the wills of men according to his own will or pleasure. But that which is moved and bent by anothers will, seems not to act freely. Now the Scripture on the contrary saith: The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he inclineth it to whatsoever he will: So the Holy Ghost in this place: God put into the hearts of the Kings that they should do these, and not other things, I ANSWER: Sophisters do much labour and sweat to unty this knot touching the concurring of Gods providence, Lib: 5. de C. D. ca. 9 and mans free will, but after long toyle, they put (as the saying is) the Cart before the Horse, that is, they subject the operation of God to the will of man, the Creator to the creature: and that befalls them (which Austin wrote of Cicero) that by making men free, Lib. 4. de Grat. & lib. Arbit: cap: 14 they make them sacrilegious. BELLARMIN doth diversly torment himselfe through∣out his six bookes of Grace and Freewill. And after all he falls with both hands in∣to the same mire of blasphemy. And alledgeth divers opinions touching this Concurring. Caiet. in 1. qu. Art. 4 The first is of Caietan: That the concurring or accord of the divine provi∣dence and free will is inexplicable, and not to be understood in this life. Bel∣larmine confesseth it to be dark, but not inexplicable. The second he ascribes to Durand: Duran in 2. dist. 37 qu. 1. That there is required no concurring of the divine operation unto actions of secondary causes, but that is enough, if God preserve the natures and vertues of the same. This Bellarmine rejects as false, for it is repug∣nant to Scripture. But whither it be Durands, let himself look to it. I have sought
for it, but find it not. It is absurd. For how doth God not concurre unto actions, if hee concurre unto their vertues: seeing there is no influ∣ence of the action, save from the influence of the vertue thereof. The third is of others whom he is afraid to name: That God indeed by his concurrence doth determinaters or limit the will of man, and that in regard of it, Mans will cannot but act, and yet remaines free: either because the concurring of God is not of the things requisite unto the action of free will: or because the divine deter∣mination hinder not the judgement of our reason about choosing or rejecting of objects, which is the root of the liberty in the will. Against this opinion (which is true) hee largely disputes. First by the say∣ing of Siracides, Chapter 15.14. That man is left in the hand of his owne Counsell: which is nothing to the matter, because hee speaketh there of man as hee was first created, or before his fall. Secondly, by the authority of the Fathers, which make nothing against it. At length by reason, viz. That this de∣termination should make God Author of sin, The wicked excusable, both being false, Scot. in 2. de 37 as shall appear in the following Question. At last he alledgeth two opinions, as he saith better, but indeed they are worse. The former is of Scotus, That the di∣vine cooperation is not of the part of the cause, but onely of the part of the effect, that is, that Gods concurrence doth not determinate the will, or imprint any thing in the same, but flowes immediately into the effect, and produceth the same in the very moment in which it is produced from our will. As when two Porters carry a great burden, which one alone could not do: here neither of them addes strength to the other: but onely both bear the weight. This opinion pleaseth him, yet not altogether: for he sees it is repugnant to the Scripture, which saith not, that the divine influence is in the actions, but in the hearts of men. As here God put into their heatts: he saith not, into their actions: A∣gain, The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he inclines it to whatsoever he will: he inclines, I say, the heart, and not only the effects of the heart, or of the King. It is repugnant also to the prayers and practise of the Saints, who fervently desire of God, to have not onely their actions and wayes directed, but likewise to have their minds enlightned and bearts guided by God. The other opinion is of Thomas, which saith he, C. 1: q. 105 art. 5. & Lib. 3. con. Gent. ca. 7 Et qu. 3. de potentia artic. 7. perhaps is more probable (so ignorant is hee of that truth, which he undertakes to expound) viz. that the divine cooperation so concurres with the will of men, as it gives not onely strength unto, and preserves the same, but also mooves and applies it to the worke. The which opinion beeing candidly taken, differs nothing from the third, and is true. But because the truth pleaseth not Bellarmine, he subtilly pretends that this opinion also hath its difficulties, and again by cavelling seeks to deceive: For you would thinke him to be some Iugler: for being a Thomist he dares not refute his master: therefore he shuffles by subtilty, and at length against Tho∣mas hee comes to this: that Gods concurring to the will of man, brings nothing save a negative determination, that is, none at all: and that the motion of God re∣maines subject to our will, and is in our power. Thus God and his grace should be subject unto us: and so againe the Cart drawes the horse. Thus I say, the Sophister to make men free, makes them sacrilegious. What therefore? The opinion of Caietane is most true, that this concurring of God remaines in∣explicable to us in this life: for the divine providence hath a thousand inexplicable wayes to insinuate it selfe unto us, inwardly to incline, turne, bend, draw, and cre∣ate our hearts a new, that we by doing what we wil freely, yet do nothing but ac∣cording to the divine determination and appointment. But if any thing can bee expounded touching this concurring, then the third and fift opinion must bee true: neither is our liberty endangered thereby: for to incline, move, bow, draw, and determinate the heart, is not to force men as
if they were brutish or against their will: because this inclination, motion, determination is not without the proper judgement of reason, and free electi∣on of the will. Now nothing but coaction, is repugnant to the liberty of the will. Whether the divine determina∣tion be re∣pugnant to the will. Yea, saith he, also determination is repugnant. This was the first argument: That which acteth determinately to one thing, acts not freely, &c. This is true if determi∣nation be put without the judgement and proper choice: otherwise it is false: for God himselfe out of perfection of nature, wills that which is good, and hates the evill determinately, yet doth both most freely. Bell armine cannot deny this, But excepteth, that God is determinated from himself, Bellar. lib: 3. cap. 7 & lib. cap: 7. and not by any other. What of what? The question is not whether li∣berty stands with this or that determination: but whether with any. If it may stand with some: he hath beaten the air by a long disputation. But also man de∣terminates himself in the act of election, through the last judgement of practicall reason: for without such a determination the wil and choice of man should be no∣thing at all. Now howsoever this judgement of practicall reason (which the So∣phisters confesse is the root of liberty) be sometimes also determinated out of it self, Act: 14.16 that is, by God (I say sometimes, not alwayes: for God doth not determinate all acts of the will, but oftentimes leaves men to their own wayes, and suffers them to run headlong into destruction.) Notwithstanding this determination is not done without the voluntary judgement of our reason and choice of the will, with∣out any coaction, yet in a manner to us indeed inexplicable, but known to God: Who worketh all things after the counsell of his owne will. Ephe. 1.11 To the second Argument: That which is governed by the divine providence, acts not freely, &c. I ANSWER, it is false, unlesse it be understood with the same distinction: to wit, if it be governed by a providence without our own delibera∣tion and choice. For that which God governeth, shewing the object to the under∣standing and efficaciously moving the will to chuse the same: that notwithstand∣ing man doth freely chuse, although he be inclined by the will of God to whatso∣ever he pleaseth. What it is to act freely For the creatures freedom in acting, is not to act without the government of any, but with deliberation, and by a voluntary motion of its own will: although this motion be raised and ruled by another. And that I may return unto the determination of the will: It is not repugnant even to morall Philosophie: For Aristotle lib. 3. Ethic. Cap. 5. saith, That man is the originall of his own actions, as of his children: and denies not but that in some oc∣currences the will is determinated to one thing, the liberty thereof remaining: suppose in vitious men, drunkards, and incontinent persons, who after they have brought a vitious habit upon themselves, do indeed commit their vices free∣ly, yet also necessarily and determinately, because their will, by a vitious habit (which they are not able to shake off) is determined to vice. To conclude it is plain from these things in the Hypothesis, that God put into the hearts of the Kings, the liberty of their will remaining, to doe, what they did, determinately: and in the Thesis, that the concurrence of God governing and determinating the will of man, as he pleaseth, doth not at all take away the liberty of the same. II. Whether God after the same manner put good and evill into the hearts of the Kings: and whether hence it will follow that he is the Author of sin. Touching the good there is no question about it, for this all that are godly doe willingly grant, viz. that God, as the Scripture saith, workes both the will and the deed, without overthrowing the liberty of our will, as before we shewed. Notwithstanding Pelagius did not grant the same: and a Philosopher will no more grant the determination of the will in vertue, then in vice. But the Phi∣losopher is answered by the doctrine of heathens themselves, as erewhile wee heard out of Aristotle. Pelagius, and such as follow him, object the Theologicall knot in evill things
touching the cause of sin. For if God also determine the evill of man (as for ex∣amples the hearts of the Kings) as touching things evill in their owne nature, as suppose, to conspire together with Antichrist, and to fight against the Lambe: hereby God seems to be the Author, as it were of their evills, and the Kings ex∣cusable. This indeed Pelagius of old objected to Austin, as at this day the Pe∣lagian Relickes, in pretence to maintaine the righteousnesse of God, as if it could not be otherwise maintained, but in the sense of bare permission, viz. that God is said to do that, because he permits it to be done. But first the glosse of bare permission is a manifest abusing of sundry places of Scripture, in which it is plainely affirmed, that God did, and that indeed most ho∣lily, which men have done most wickedly. Joseph (touching the parricide of his brethren) saith Gen. 45.8. It was not you that sent me hither: but God sent me hither before you. Touching the hatred of the Egyptians against the Israelites, Psal. 105. verse 25. God turned their hearts to hate his people, to deale subtilly with his servants. Touching Shimeis cursing, 2. Samuel 16.10. The Lord hath said unto him: Curse David. Of Absoloms incest, 2. Sam. 12.12. Thou didst it secretly: But I will do this (viz. give thy wives unto thy neighbour) before all Israel, and before the sun. Of the Rebellion of Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes, 1. Kin. 12.24. This thing is from me. And in the same place touching Rehoboams tyrannicall answer, ver. 15. Wherfore the King hearkned not unto the people: for the cause was from the Lord. Touching the spoiling of the Babylonians, Isa. 10. ver. 6. I will give him a charge to take the spoile, and to take the prey. Touching the seduction of the false Prophets, Ezech. 14.9. I the Lord have deceived that Prophet. So of the seducement of Ahab by the false Prophets and Satan. 1. Kin. 22.20. Who shall perswade Ahab, &c. and the Lord said, Thou shalt perswade them, and prevaile also: Goe forth and do so. Of the Rapine of the Arabians, Iob, 1.21. The LORD gave, and the Lord hath taken away. Touching Christs crucifying, Act. 4.27. Herod and Pontius Pilate have done those things which thy hand and counsell determined before to be done. By these and the like places both the evill works of men, and Satan are ascribed unto God, not absolutely, but in some respect, viz. so far as God by the same ac∣complisheth his secret judgements: not as the authour of mans wicked deeds (God forbid) but as a most righteous performer of his judgements in, and by them: for to imagine that God executeth not his judgements, but barely permits them, a∣grees not with faith and godlinesse. Secondly, the glosse of bare permission in many places would be blasphemous: take for example the place in hand: Wilt thou say, that God put it into the hearts of the Kings, that is, permitted it to be put? Who then put it into their hearts? Thou wilt say, the divell: and hereby thou makest the divell to put that into the heart, which the Scripture expresly saith, that God did: wilt thou make the devill to be God? Besides the divell will never perswade the kings to oppose the whore. Con∣sider therfore whither this thy glosse doth not by an open blasphemy attribute sa∣tans work to God, and on the contrary the work of God to the divell. Thirdly, the glosse of bare permission imports heresie: for under it lies hid the Pe∣lagian denyall of the divine grace and providence: and the establishing of humane strength against grace. For this glosse hath flowed if not primitively, yet chiefly from the School of Pelagius, as may be seen in Austin, Lib. 5. Cont. Iuli∣an cap: 3: against whom Julian the Pelagian disputes after this manner. As God is to be considered about the will in evil, so al∣so in good, but in the evil will he only works permissively, by suffering the same to rush on by its owne motion and desire, but not by moving the same: Otherwise he should be the Authour of sinne. Therefore also he workes good in the will onely permissively suffering the same to act by its own strength,
but not by moving the same: otherwise the liberty thereof should be taken a∣way. This was Pelagius Logicke, the which very thing now a dayes, the Patrons of bare permission, and Preposterous Defenders of Gods righteousnesse, do unwittingly maintain. But Austin shews both the premisses of the Pelagian subtilty to be false. The Proposition is false, because God workes one way in the good will, ano∣ther way in the evill. The former he makes good of evill, whereas by nature he finds all to be evill, none good: but being made good by himselfe, he moves them effectually: yet so as their liberty remaineth, as hath bin expounded. The latter he makes not evill, but finds them so. The assumption is also false: for he not onely forsakes and suffers the wicked will (which he findeth) to rush on whether it pleaseth, but also delivers the same over to Satan and their own desires, yea moving and inclining the same how he will, that by doing the evill it wills, it becomes subject unto his judgement, secret indeed, but never unrighteous, in a manner whither explicable unto us, or inexplicable, as Austin speaketh: and as in the fore-alledged examples we have seen. Notwithstanding he is not the cause of sin, Lib: 5: Cont. Iuli∣can cap. 3 for he useth the wicked will to execute his judgements most holily: neither is he any more the cause of the sin which evill men commit, by executing his judgements by them: then the ungodly are the cause of the good which he worketh through them. Luther against Erasmus doth perspicuously declare the matter by similies: A Rider rideth well though he use a lame or halting horse: De ser. arb. cap. 148: The Artificer formes of putre∣fied wood an artificious image: Notwithstanding there is halting in the riding, not by fault of the Rider, but by the defect of the horse. In the image is putrefaction, not through fault of the Artificer, but by defect of the wood. So by the selling of Ioseph, the betraying of Iudas, God brought to passe unspeakable good: yet in both wickednesse was committed: not indeed on Gods part, but by the perfidious∣nesse of the brethren, and of Iudas. But thou wilt say, the same sinnes are attributed, as to the wicked, so to God: True, if thou consider the words onely, and not the meaning of the Scripture. Now this is done with great difference. They are ascribed unto Satan and wic∣ked men in regard of themselves, and as they are wicked actions committed by them against the Law. But to God, so far as by accident they serve unto his secret judgements, which he useth to execute most righteously, even by wicked men doing most wickedly. The reason of the diversity comes partly from the divers end, partly from the forme of actions: The rule of final causes for a different end makes different actions, according to the rule: Finall and impulsive causes make the differences of actions. Hence two do∣ing the same thing, yet do not the same: though both do somewhat, which is ei∣ther good or indifferent, when as they have divers ends differing in mo∣rall qualitie. Gods end is allwayes good: wicked mens evill: in the selling of Ioseph his brethren fulfilled their hatred, against the Law; Thou shalt not kill. In the op∣pression of the Iewes, the Babylonians enlarged their Tyranny to the injuring of their neighbours, against the Law: Thou shalt not steale. And therefore both these and the other did sinne. But God to whom both these are attributed, Gen. 45.8. & Isa 10.7.19. had a most holy end in both, viz. Iosephs exalting Gen. 50.20. and his peoples chastisement according to the Law, Isa 10.6. Therefore he sinned not. Read the tenth Chapter of Isaiah touching this diver∣sity of ends in the same worke, and thou shalt learne, that what the Chaldeans did most evilly, God by them did the same most righteously. In the forme of actions the distinction is more evident: for three things di∣stinctly to be considered, concurre in those actions of wicked men, which God is said to do. 1. The Motion. 2.  or the vitiousnesse of the motion, and 3. the
secret judgement of God. Motion is a naturall good thing: And therefore it is from God, in whom also the wicked live, move, and have their beeing. The se∣cret judgements of God, are morally good, even workes of justice and mercy: And therefore are of right attributed to God. The  or pravitie of the motion prohibited by the Law, makes the motion vitious and sinfull. This therefore is not of God: but remotely flowes from the devill, and more nearly from the fro∣ward will and malice of men: whensoever therefore the workes of evill men are in Scripture attributed unto God, as affirming that God doth them, or that they are from God. This is not to be understood simply, but with limitation, that is, not in respect of the disorder and pravity, but first in respect of the motions, so farre as they are naturall motions: secondly and chiefly in regard of the secret Iudgements, which God executes in, and by the same. But here thou wilt happily demand whether it may not rightly be said, that God doth permit sins? yea verily: yet with a twofold limitation. First, that to permit and to grant is not the same thing, as if God did permit men to sin without punishing the same, like as some Magistrates permit Brothel∣houses, where fornication is committed without punishment. Now God doth not so: for his permitting of sin is not to hinder, but suffer that they should be committed through the vitiousnesse of men, and concur with his Iudgements. Secondly, we must not understand such a bare permission as is a cessation altoge∣ther of the divine providence in the workes of evill men (which thing onely is in question betwixt us and the Pelagians) but restrained unto the vitiousnesse of their workes, being repugnant to the nature and Law of God. For herein God himselfe doth something, something he doeth not, but permits it to be done by men. He permits sins to be done, as they are sins, not hindering the doing of the same, nor correcting sinners, that they should not sin, whereas he could do both. But he doth two things. I. The motions and naturall actions themselves of evill men, by a generall influence (as the Schools speak) sometimes also by a spe∣ciall. II. His Iudgements or events, agreeing to his goodnesse and justice, the which if he did not respect, he would never permit sins to be committed, and this he doth by moderating and effectually directing as the sins, so other means al∣so comming in between, to make them serve to his judgements and ends, which he intends most holily: not only by a generall influence, but alwayes by a speciall. Hence the wise man: she also reacheth from one end unto another, Wisd. 8.1 mightily and comely doth she order all things. These things no man will deny unlesse an Athiest, who makes God the governour of the world, no other then to be a slothfull or brutish Idol of Fortune. See Luther touching the slavish will, Chap. 143. III. How these Kings in eating the flesh of the whore and burning her, did that which was pleasing to God. This Question in regard of our interpretation, is of no weight, for we have proved, that the Kings who before had given their power unto the Beast, and all their assistance to the whore, did afterward by a certain divine metamorphosis or change, repent of the same. As therefore they hated the whore, according to the revealed will of God: so they shall rightly and in obedience to God, forsake, make naked, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: according to the commande∣ment of the heavenly voice: Goe out of her my people: Render unto her double: thou shalt overthrow their Idols: burne their Images with fire. But put case they did not repent, and so were not without sin in spoiling & burning the whore, yet herein they did the good pleasure of God, not as it was their act but accidentally: for in committing the manifest wickednes which they intended: they together executed the secret judgement of God, which they intended not: Like as the Jews, Herod, Pontius Pilate in condemning Christ, did together, Act. 4.8. howbeit wickedly that which the hand and counsell of God had well decreed should be done by them. But the former opinion is the better. And thus much touching the Questions propounded. Now let us return to the Prophesie.
CHAPTER. XVIII. The Preface touching the Coherence. WE now take in hand to expound the second Act of the sixt Vision, touching the lamentable destruction of Babylon, the royall Seat of Antichrist, that is, of Rome; The which (God is my witnesse) I speake not of humane or evill affe∣ction against the Pope of Rome, or as being lead by a darke conjecture, but induced by this divine Prophesie, and the clear Demonstration of the foregoing Chapter. The Angell did shew unto Iohn in the wildernesse in stead of the woman, the chast Mother of the Man-child, that is, the true Church of Christ, a Scarlet-coloured woman, a whore drunken with the blood of the Saints, sitting on the Beast, that is, the adulterous Antichristian Church. For Ribera (though he deny it on Chapter XVII.) is forced Chap. XIX. and XX. (where the casting of the Beast into the Lake of fire is described) to confesse that this Beast denotes Antichrist. Now the Angell had plainly said before, that the woman was the great City, which in Iohns time had domi∣nion over the Kings of the Earth, the which could not be any other City but Rome. Of the same it was said, that the Ten Kings sworn-unto the Beast, who before had imployed their power in defence of his kingdome (at length his abominations being discovered, and hating his fornication, God so go∣verning their hearts) should detest the whore, forsake, uncover, eat her flesh and burn her with fire. All which considered, these things do evidently follow. First, that Rome is the Seat of Antichrist. Secondly, that the Pope of Rome is Antichrist. Thirdly, that Papall Rome before the last judgement, shall be miserably burnt, and utterly overthrown. The First thus: Where the purpled woman sits, there is Antichrists Seat, because shee sits on the Beast, which is Antichrist. The pur∣ple-coloured woman sits at Rome, because shee sits on the Seven heads of the Beast, which are the Seven Mountaines of Rome. Rome therefore is the Seat of Antichrist This deduction the adversaries can no longer deny: Onely they dally, as if Rome were not yet, but should here∣after bee the Seat of Antichrist, viz. when Antichrist shall come, who thrusting out the Pope shall possesse Rome. Which fiction hath often before bin refuted, and overthrowes it selfe: neither doe the fictions consist: That Rome should be the seat of Antichrist, and that Rome before Antichrists comming should be burnt by the Ten Kings: and that Antichrist is to have his Seat in the Temple at Ierusalem. The Second thus: He which in the last times possesseth Rome, the Seat of Antichrist, he is Antichrist: The Romish Pope doth now possesse Rome Antichrists Seat. Therefore he is Antichrist. The third thus: Babylon the great City shall be destroyed before the last judgement, because after its desolation, there shall be godly and ungodly, rejoycing and lamenting at the destruction thereof. Po∣pish Rome is Babylon the great City. Therefore Popish Rome shall be destroyed before the last judgement. The Iesuites seeing they can∣not
deny the assumption: would shift it off by their fiction; that Rome as yee is not, but shall be Babylon hereafter: but in vaine, as hath appeared. The Proposition the XVIII. Chapter will illustrate. Thus much of the Coherence. Now after our wonted manner, wee will first lay downe the Argument, Parts, and Analysis of the Chapter, as the Basis or ground of our fol∣lowing Interpretation. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. THis Chapter is an exposition of verse 1. and 16. of the foregoing Chapter, touching the judgement and burning of the great whore, viz. of the great Seven-hild City, Antichrists royall Seat or Rome: For the fatall judgement and lamentable ruine hereof, is solemnly published from heaven, and tragically figured out by an Angell: And the godly are commanded speedily to depart from her. Afterward the lamentation and mourning of Kings. Merchants, and Mariners of the Earth, because of the losse of their traficke by the ruine of the city, is represented by a prophe∣ticall Hypotyposis or illustration; The Saints on the contrary are comman∣ded to rejoyce because of the divine vengeance. Lastly the judgement is con∣firmed by the Symbole of a milstone cast into the Sea. These things are done in order by three Angells. Therefore the parts of the Chapter are three. The first is the voyce of the first Angell touching the ruine of Babylon, ver. 3. The second voyce is of the departure of the Godly out of Babylon, the mour∣ning of the wicked, and joy of the Saints unto ver. 21. The third voyce is of the third Angell casting a milstone into the Sea, unto the end. In the first voyce, is first the description of the crying Angell, set forth by three adjuncts. 1. From of his originall, he descends from heaven. 2. From of his power, which is said to be great. 3. From of his forme, the earth was light∣ned with his glory, ver. 1. Secondly, the thing published by the Angell, both whose crying is noted; as also the two-fold Argument of the cry. 1. A sentence touching the destruction of Babylon: It is fallen &c. which is amplified by three horrible consequences: that it is become the habitation of devills: the hold of unclean spirits, and Cage of uncleane birds: ver. 2. 2. Two causes of the destruction: One fornication, by which she hath defiled all nations and Kings of the Earth: The second, Luxuriousnesse and most filthy trading with the Merchants of the Earth, verse 3. In the second voyce are three things. I. An exhortation unto the Godly under Antichrists kingdome, ver. 4.5.6.7.8. II. The lamentation of the Kings, Merchants, and Mariners of the Earth. This shall be the former effect in the ungodly, from verse 19. unto verse 20. III. A turning to the heavenly in∣habitants: Rejoyce, &c. This shall be the other effect in the Saints, ver. 20. I. The exhortation unto the Godly living under Popery is two-fold: First to go out of Babylon: Come out of her my people: with three reasons. 1. Least they might be defiled with conversing with the wicked. 2. Least they be par∣takers of their plagues and ruine, ver. 4. 3. Because the inevitable time of vengeance is at hand, ver. 5. Secondly that they might render double unto her: which I. he amplifies by Phrases foure times changed, and prophetically set forth ver. 6. 7. II. He perswades by a reason from the equallity: because she proudly
lifts up her selfe: I sit a Queene, ver. 7. III. He expounds the kind of punish∣ment, ver. 8. she shall be burnt with fire, and the first cause hereof: Gods pow∣er and righteousnesse, ver. 8. II. The lamentation is distributed into three sorts of men. The first are the Kings of the Earth: of whom it is said, 1. What they did before: They committed fornication and lived deliciously with the whore ver. 9. 2. What they should do beholding the smoake and fire. 1. They shall see it burning a farre off, trembling and mourning, saying, Alas, Alas. 2. Ac∣knowledge the judgement of God, ver. 10. The second, are Merchants of the Earth: whose wayling is described, first ge∣nerallye: They shall weepe and mou and it is Illustrated, both by the procreating cause, Their gaine ceasing in regard of the contempt of their wares, verse 11. As also, by a Register of their divers merchandize, among which also are the soules of men, ver. 12. 13. Lastly by the effect on Babylon it selfe, which shall be deprived of all her delights, verse 14. Secondly specially: what th did before: They bad gathered riches: and what then they will doe: Treme and mourn to behold her burning afar off. v. 15. 2. Cry, Alas, Alas, and the cause of their wavling is shewed, viz. by comparing the present condition of the whore with her former, ver. 16. The third, are the Shipmasters and Saylers, of whom likewise is noted. 1. What they did before, They reaped gaine, to wit, by Babylon. 2. What then they will doe. 1. Behold her destruction a farre off, ibid. 2. Cry out, What City is like? &c. ver. 18. 3. Testifie their griefe, both by signes, as ca∣sting dust on their heads, ver. 19. As also by weeping and crying Alas, Alas. adding the procreating cause of their sorrow, ibid. III. The turning of the second voice unto the heavenly inhabitants to close up the lamentation with joyfulnesse: The Proposition is, Rejoyce. The reason is taken from the remote impelling cause, because Babylon is punished for her Tyranny exercised against the Saints, ver. 20. In the third voice is the finall and irrecoverable destruction of Babylon. I. Figured out by a Symbole: which is, both acted by an Angell: A mighty Angell tooke a stone like, &c. As also expounded: Thus with violence shall that great City be throwne down, ver. 21. II. It is amplified by the effects. 1. She is deprived of musicke. 2. Of trade. 3. Of all manner of corne. 4. Of light. 5. Of Mariage-Feastings, ver. 22. 23. III. This is approved by three inforcing causes. 1. The Luxuriousnesse of Popish Traders. 2. Their witchcraft, and seducing of the Christian world, ver. 23. 3. Their cruelty against the Saints. verse 24. The first Part of the CHAPTER, Publishing the Ruine of BABYLON. 1 And after these things, I saw another Angell come down from heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightned with his glory. 2 And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils; and the hold of every unclean spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hatefull bird. 3 For all Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornica∣tion, and the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her, and the Merchants of the Earth are waxen rich with the a∣bundance of her delicacies.
THE COMMENTARY. ANd after these things I saw another Angell] What Origen wri∣teth touching the song of Songs, that the History thereof is after the manner of an Interlude, acted by four persons: ap∣peares more clearly to have bin observed in this Prophesie, as hitherto we have still observed. For as in Comoedies divers persons come and go on the Theater: so we see done here. In this sixt Vision the first person was the Angell having se∣ven Ʋialls, leading John into the wildernesse, and shewing unto him the Baby∣lonish Strumpet on the Beast, and expounding the mystery of both, which things being done, another Angell came forth on the Scene to declare the judgement of the whore under the Type of Babylon. Therefore Iohn saith that he saw another Angell  After these things viz. which were acted and spoken by the former Angell: Of whom is expounded in three Verses, whence he came, what for an Angell he was, what he did, and spake. Descending from Heaven] The place from whence he commeth gives divine authority to his Message. For he comes from Heaven, as Gods Herauld: and therefore publisheth the judgement of Babylon in the Name of God: that so we might not question, but all shall certainly come to passe, Who this Angell is. which is foretold by this heavenly Messenger. Who he was, it is not needfull to enquire. The following description sheweth, that he was one of the chiefe Emissarie Angells of God: Neither is it of necessity, to understand it of Christ, seeing the action of this Vision is distributed between many Angells. This might be demaunded, whether these three Angells proclaiming the ruine of Babylon, be the same with the three mentioned, Chap. 14. The first of whom proclaimed the eternall Gospell. The second the destruction of Babylon in the same words, in which this also proclaimed it: The third deterred men with threatnings from worshipping of the Beast, and committing fornication with the woman. I suppose they are not the same: Because the time and argument of the Act differs. The former came forth long before these, viz. when God in compas∣sion to his people was about to restore the Gospell, suppressed by Antichrist, and purge the Church from the dregs of Popery, which as we shewed, was first done by Wickleffe, Husse, Jerom of Prague, afterward by Luther, Melanchthon, Zwinglius, Calvin, and the following Preachers of the Gospell: for these resto∣red both the doctrine of Grace, and first denounced the ruine of Babylon. Ther∣fore those Angels were preachers of the Gospell. But these here come down from heaven long after, viz. when now the destruction of Babylon was at hand: and they declare onely prophesies revealed unto them in speciall by God; touching particular future events. Therefore they signifie not ordinary Preachers, who now know not, nor foretell things to come, but are reall Angells, publishing new Oracles in the Name of God: Yea the middlemost seems to have bin either God himselfe, or Christ, ver. 4. Having great power] What he was is shewed by two Epithites, by which ge∣nerally the Angells in Scripture are commended, viz. strength and glory. The An∣gells indeed are not omnipotent Spirits, yet they have great power, insomuch as One was able in one night to destroy an Hundred and Eighty Thousand of the Assyrian Army. Hence they are called strong, mighty, Psal. 103.20. Blesse the Lord ye his Angells, mighty in strength, &c. The third also of these Angells is called  Mighty, ver. 21. as before Chap. 5. ver. 2. and Chap. 10.1. which we there interpreted of Christ because of the circumstances, which
are not here. Great power therefore is attributed to this Angell for the comfort of the Godly, that they might not thinke, that the power and glory of Baby∣lon should be invincible. The power of one Angell shall suffice to overthrow the same. Notwithstanding in the Greek, it is not  might, but  Great power, by which the greatnesse of the businesse committed by God to this Angell seems to be noted. And indeed the overthrowing of Babylon shall be a work more then ordinary. And the Earth was lightned with his glory] This Majesty shews that he was a heavenly Ambassadour of God, to terrifie the Adversaries, and strengthen the Godly. The Angells have not allwayes appeared with such glory, but onely when there was occasion: as at the publishing of the Birth of Christ: The Angell of the Lord came on the shepheards, Luk. 2.9. Act. 12.7. and the glory of the Lord shone round about them. At Peters deliverance the glory of the Angell that delivered him filled the prison. So here With the glory of this Angell the Earth was lightned, that men should the more carefully receive his Message. I like well what Ribera addeth, that hereby is noted, that the judgement of Romes desolation should not be secret, but manifest to all. He confesseth therfore that here is treated of Romes destruction. 2. And he cryed with a great voyce] Now follows what he did: Hee cryed mightily. Most Greek Copies have it  He cryed in a strong great voyce: The Old Version: Cryed in strongth. The sense is the same: The voyce of this heavenly Herauld was vehement and most strong, so as he might be heard of all, that none, through ignorance of the judgement at hand, should remaine in Babylon. The stupidity also and deep security of Ba∣bylon is noted, which shall so lie drowned in pleasure, that while her judge∣ment shall sound thorow the whole world, she alone shall not be able, nor wil∣ling to hear the same. Babylon is fallen, is fallen] He proclaimes the ruine of Babylon, as did the second Angell, Chap. 14.8. Now it is an Enallage and propheticall Anadiplosis, for, it shall fall, it shall certainly, shortly, utterly perish: the Proclamation of the former hath bin, and still is dayly published: for the Preachers of the Gos∣pell have above an hundred years denounced ruine to Babylon: And not altoge∣ther without effect: for Babylon is fallen in many Provinces of Europe, Popery being overthrown and dissipated by the preaching of the Gospell: But the words here, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, are not yet fulfilled; because she is not as yet wholly brought to nothing: And therefore the time of this Angell is not yet come, but shall be a little before the desolation of Rome. Now the forme of the Exclamation (as before we said on Chap. 14. ver. 8.) is taken out of Isai. 21.9. & Ierem. 51.8. speaking of the Typicall ruine of Babylon. In the like forme Isaiah foretold the destruction of old Assyrian Babylon, which had oppres∣sed Gods ancient people about an hundred years before it happened: After the same manner perhaps an Angell now may foretel an hundred years before it come to passe, the ruine of the new Italian Babylon, which hath suppressed the Church of Christ. Now who this Babylon is, there is no question about it: for before on Chap. 14.8. we have shewed it to be Rome. And Chap. 17. the Angell makes the seven Mountaines of Rome to be Antichrists Seat: Lastly the adversaries them∣selves confesse it. And therefore the desolation of the Roman City is here pro∣claimed, and it is indeed to happen before the last judgement: as the whole fol∣lowing matter sheweth. And is become the habitation of divells] From the horrible consequences, he aggra∣vates the desolation of new Babylon, by such as of old the Prophets described the o∣verthrow of ancient Babylon. They are also taken out of Isai. 13.21. & 14. & 21. & Ier. 50.51. Ezechiel also Chap. 26.27. describeth the desolation of Tyrus al∣most
by the same threatnings. Now three things are threatned. It is made, or become] For, it shall be the habitation of devils. Isa 34.14: Isaias names these devills SEGNIRIM, that is, rough and rugged, as hairy Goats, be∣cause in such shapes they sometime appeared, likes the Satyres of which the Po∣ets speak: The Germanes call them FELD-TEƲFEL, Field Devills, un∣to whom the Heathens of old sacrificed, and is forbidden by God, Levit. 17.7. They shall not offer their sacrifices any more to, SEGNIRIM, rough, or hairy devills. And the hold of every foule Spirit] Greek  custody, that is, recep∣tacle. Before he noted a speciall kind of devils hanting the deserts, called Fayries, or Satyres: unto whom he now joyneth other devills: or by every foule Spirit he meanes diabolicall apparitions, Night-spirits, and the like terrours: such as of∣ten appeared unto Antony the Hermit in the deserts of Egypt: Hieron. in vitae Anto∣nij. and yet to this day are wont to appeare in desert places. And Gage of every uncleane and hatefull bird] Not only such as by the Law were unclean, and might not be eaten, Lev. 11. But dreadfull to the sight of men, or which in nature are hatefull and hurtfull to men, as Scrich-Owels, Kites, Vulturs, Gripes, Ravens, &c. All these denote horrible desolation: for experience teach∣eth, that old Castles, Townes, and unhabited places, are for the most part the a∣bode of Devills, Ghosts, Beasts, Harpies, and hatefull birds: for such kind of creatures delight in deserts, and desolate places, remote from the company of men: so that the Angell proclaimeth a horrible change of the Babylonish state. For where before stood the stately walles, Royall places, high towers, and Chap∣pels of Romish Saints, there shall lie broken walls, rubbish, and ashes: where before the most holy Father the Pope, with his Purple Cardinalls, Anointed Fa∣thers, Coped Bishops, Silken Prelates, fat Monkes, Glittering Clergy, and multitudes of people did abound in all manner of riot, and luxuriousnesse: there shall Devills, Ghosts, Scrich-Owls, and all manner of hatefull birds inhabit. This horrible judgement, if the Pope, Cardinalls, and Clergy did read, it were wonderfull if they could containe from teares, and not thinke of repentance and flight from Babylon. But to be inraged against me, against the Prophet, and against God, what is it but to kick against the prickes? Ribera demands, wherefore evill spirits rather love and inhabit desert places, then to frequent the company of men? Before Christ they did so, to the end, ap∣pearing to travellers, they might by terrour induce them to Idolatry. After Christ he feineth another cause, viz. to deterre Hermits and Monkes from abi∣ding in the wildernesse. But as the Question is foolish, so the answer is as ri∣diculous. The Lord Iesus, Mat: 12.43. saith, that the devills being cast out of man, do wander through dry places, seeke for rest, but find none: So that it rather seems they are banished into desert places, as it were into a large prison, that they might not disturbe the society of men: And so much the word  (sig∣nifying properly an hold or prison) seems to import: Not that they never return unto men, but this they cannot do, unlesse God permit them: Indeed their pro∣per domicile or abode is Hell, into which Satan is thrust with his Angells: yet in the mean while by Gods sufferance they often go forth, some raging in the ayre, others wandring through the deserts. Now what do the wicked differ from de∣serts? And therefore they more familiarly insinuate themselves, and delight to be with them. Hence it is that in the Papacy many are troubled with appariti∣ons, and evill spirits (whether truly or feinedly others know) that so Exorcists may have matter and occasion for their impostures. Now this kind of Devills is wholly vanished from us by the shining light of the Gospell of God. 3. For they have drunke of the wine] The causes of so horrible desolation are di∣vers times declared in this Chapter, The causes of Babylons destruction. that we might understand the righteousnes of Gods judgement. Neither would the justice of God inflict so horrible punish∣ments, but for grievous wickednes: Now their are two, or three, if we divide the former.
The first cause is: In regard all Nations had drunke of the wine of her fornication, that is, because Babylon hath filled the Christian world with abominations and Idolatrous worship. The Propheticall Phrase is before expounded on Chap. 14.8. where in stead of  have drunke (here used) it is  made to drinke: And so the Kings Edition reads here also, the sense being one, on∣ly if we read it  as it is in Chapter. 14. the guilt of the whore is more expressed thereby. The second cause is fornication with the Kings of the Earth. Not corporall, for that could not be committed with a City: therefore we must understand it of spirituall fornication, that is, the Idolatry which Rome hath obtruded on the whole Christian world, and which she hath maintained by the approbation, de∣fence, and zeale of the Kings her Vassals. Now what was that? Ribera sends us backe to the Idolatry of old Rome, the which we have before refuted. First it is contradictory to histories, which shew, that the Romanes did not obtrude their Idols on other nations, but made the Idols of all peoples their own, least any of the gods should not be worshipped at Rome, Christ only ex∣cepted. Secondly, God hath not till now differred the punishment of Old Romes I∣dolatry and wickednesse: This forni∣cation is no∣thing but Popish I∣dolatry. but most grievously punished the same long agoe, through the Vandals, Gothes, Hunni, who three or four times spoiled and ruina∣ted the Romane City. Lastly, here is treated of Rome in the last times, which can be applied to no other then Popish Rome: now she shall not be punished for a∣nothers, but for her own whoredom: And therefore this fornication can be nothing else save Popish Idolatry, which the whole Christian world hath drawne from the breasts of Rome their Mother. And the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich] Here is a third cause, which hi∣therto hath not bin mentioned: The lasciviousnesse and riot of her Merchants. Through riot Magnesia and Colophon were lost, according to the Proverbe: It was also the overthrow of Sibaris, and shalbe the ruin not of old Rome, which now is not, but of new Popish Rome, of whose riot, lasciviousnes, Sodomie, simo∣ny I need not say any thing, it being notorious to the world. Read if you please the selected Epistles of Franciscus Petrarcha, The riot of Popish Rome. who above two hundred yeares agoe most eagerly upbraided the Papall Court for its most excessive luxuriousnesse and Pompe. What would he have done, had he lived till now? But thou wilt say, the Angell seems not to note the riot, but the richnesse of these Merchants. Now should this be the cause of so great a judgement? Is wealth or merchandize in it selfe vitious? not in the least: but because these Merchants, being as it were masters of new delights and pleasures, were not inriched by honest trading, but as it is in the Text  by the power, (or abundance) of her lasciviousnesse, that is, because to their own excessive gain, they have most earnestly furnished the Romish whore with all manner of riot and delicacies. But who are these Merchants? Ribera here also sends us to the riot, and merchandize of Old Rome. I con∣fesse old Rome did much abound in these things: but she hath ceased to be for a long time, and so it makes nothing to the thing here in hand: Neither did Old Rome obtaine her power and wealth by merchandize, but force of armes, not by Mercury, but Mars. Besides these Merchants are called Great men, and Prin∣ces of the Earth, ver. 23. Therefore they are not common Merchants, who bring in, and carry out ordinary wares, profitable and necessary for mans use. But that singular kind of merchandize, spoken of ver. 13. sheweth that a speciall rank of merchants is noted: for they shall buy and sell the soules of men. What more palpable then that these Merchants are no other save Prelates and Princes, whom they call Ecclesiasticall, and all the sacrificing traders in spirituall wares, Friars, Monkes, &c. And that this merchandize is that whole Court of conscience, reser∣ved and unreserved Cases, Indulgences, Annuities, Vacancies, Commendums, Dis∣pensations,
Tithes, and sale of Ecclesiasticall riches, through which Channels the wealth and treasures of the Christian world have flowed to Rome, and the whole Popish Clergy hath every where gathered so much riches, as that Kings, Princes, Earles, Cities, Communities, have scarcely wherewith all to maintaine their Politick State honestly. Pope Alexander the sixt was a mighty Merchant in these things: Of whom it is commonly said: Vendit Alexander cruces, Altaria Christum: Vendere jure potest, emerat ipse prius. Allexander sels Crucifixes, Christ, and Altars high, And reason good he should do so, for first he did them buy. Of such kind of Merchandizing MANTUAN: —Venalia nobis Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae, Ignis, thura, preces; Coelum est Ʋenale, Deus{que} Temples, Priests, Altars, Sacred things, and Crownes renowned too: Fire, Frankincense, Prayers, Heaven, and God here sell we do. Who now will wonder that this merchandize shall hasten Romes destruction? Hitherto the first Angell: The second comes forth. The second Part of the Chapter. An Exhortation to the Godly to go out of BABYLON: The lamentation of Kings, Merchants, Shipmasters: and the rejoycing of the Heavenly Inhabitants. 4 And I heard another voyce from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that yee be not partakers of her sinnes, and that ye receive not of her plagues. 5 For her sinnes have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remem∣bered her iniquities. 6 Reward her even as shee rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her workes: in the Cup which shee hath filled, fill to her double. 7 How much she hath glorified her selfe, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. 8 Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and shee shall bee utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God, who judgeth her. 9 And the Kings of the Earth who have committed fornication, and li∣ved deliciously with her, shall bewaile her, and lament for her, when they shall see the smoake of her burning. 10 Standing afarre off for feare of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great City Babylon, that mighty City, for in one houre it thy judgement come. 11 And the Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her: for no man buyeth their merchandize any more.
12 The Merchandize of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearles, and fine linnen, and purple, and silke, and scarlet, and all thin wood, and all manner vessells of Ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of brasse, and iron, and marble. 13 And Cynamon, and Odours, and oyntments, and frankincense, and wine, and oile, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and soules of men. 14 And the fruits that thy soule lusted after, are departed from thee, all things which were dainty, and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all. 15 The Merchants of these things which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear of her torment, weeping and wailing. 16 And saying, Alas, alas, that great City, that was clothed in fine lin∣nen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearles; 17 For in one houre so great riches is come to nought. And every Shipma∣ster, and all the company in ships, and Sailers, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off: 18 And cried when they saw the smoake of her burning, saying, What City is like unto this great City? 19 And they cast dust on their heads, and cryed, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, wherein were made rich al that had Ships in the Sea, by reason of her costlinesse, for in one houre is she made desolate. 20 Rejoyce over her, thou heaven, and yee holy Apostles and Prophets, for God hath avenged you on her. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I heard another voyce from Heaven] This Angell is only heard, but appeares not on the Theater. Therefore Brightman calls him  Namelesse. Now wherefore he is not named, nor comes forth, we need not enquire after it; perhaps it might be, because he treats of things displeasing: but the former also was no lesse odious to the Romanes. Therefore we leave this to the wisedome of God. We know that in Interludes sometime a voice and words are uttered by persons that are hid, that the Assembly may be the more astoni∣shed. Let therefore this unknowne voyce stir up our attention: unlesse perhaps it were the voyce of God or Christ, because he calleth the people His. Now the First part (as we shewed in the Analysis) is an exhortation to the Godly: Afterward the lamentation of Kings, and Romish Chapmen: Lastly, the joy of the heavenly inhabitants. In the Exhortation the people of God are commanded, First, to goe out of ROME, least they pertake of her sinnes and plagues: Secondly, to render unto her double. Come out of her my people] This in Ieremy 51.45. was the voyce of God un∣to the Israelitish people: Goe yee out of the midst of her, and deliver yee every man his soule from the fierce anger of Jehovah. Therefore here also it seems to be Gods voyce, because (as I said) he calls the people His. The words do a little differ (yet the sense is the same) and are directed unto all the Godly whomsoever, that either have bin, are, or shall be at Rome, not
onely within her wals, but the limits of the Romish Iurisdiction. We see there∣fore that as there was in Babylon of old, the very stocke of abominations, a peo∣ple of God, but captive: so in the new Babylon, although it be the Seat of Anti∣christ, yet there alwayes hath bin, is, and shall be, some Godly and Elect, God hath some of his in Babylon. but Captives. For by this people Rupertus well understands the Elect onely accor∣ding to the counsell of God. Therefore as often as the Papists demand, If the Papacy were not the Church, where then was it before Luthers time? Let us also aske them, if Babylon were not, where then was the Church in the time of the Babylonish Captivity? The church before Lu∣ther was in Babylon. wher∣fore as the Old Church was in Babylon, but oppressed thorow captivity: So the Christian was under the Papacy, captivated and oppressed. Goe out of her] The Israelites were commanded to goe out of Babylon, first in heart: by shunning her Idols and abominations: After Seventy yeers bodily al∣so, by returning into Iudea under Cyrus. Both goings out of the new Babylon are commanded unto us, viz. with our hearts to flee and detest her Idols and abominations, and corporally also, as much as may be, to depart from Rome, and shake off the yoake of Babylonish Tyranny by vertue of the comman∣dement; Goe out of her. By which first we may readily justifie our separating from Popery: They in∣deed accuse us to be Schismaticks, Hereticks, who are fallen off from the Church: But we have not left the Church of Christ, but the Babylon of Antichrist, God so commanding us. Secondly the stupidity, or madnesse of some is here reproved, who by an un∣happy desire to see Rome, the Pope, Cardinals, and Romish Idolatry, run to Italy to the great danger of their health, Life, Estates, Conscience, Salvation. Such also who enjoying the profits, and delights of Babylon, had rather remaine in her and perish, then obey the commandement of God. Yea such also who being ensnared by her baites, fall from Christ to Antichrist, returning with the dog unto their former Vomit: Like to the Israelites who loathing the Heavenly Manna in the Wildernesse, desired to returne to the onions and flesh-pots in E∣gypt: but remembred not their former miserable bondage, Taskmasters, Scour∣ges, Brick-ovens, &c. So these indeed greedily embrace the fat Kitching of the Papacy, but thinke not upon the miserable slavery of the Conscience and Tyranny of Antichrist. But as they lusting after their flesh-pots and onions, at last miserably perished in the wildernesse, and entred not into the promised Land: So let these looke to it, how in regard of their Apostacy they will satis∣fie their wounded consciences at the hour of death, and what answer they will give Christ the Iudge at the last day. Least ye be partakers] Some weighty causes of the Commandement are added. The first is, least they be defiled with her sins: for he which dwels near a cripple learns to halt: and he that rubs a scabby person, may easily be infected. Our admirers of Rome, plead indeed that they can without wounding of the consci∣ence be conversant there, and behold the Masse, Idols, and Pompe of Babylon: But their pretence is false, because God forbids the same, and experience proves the contrary: for they are forced (at the least) to uncover the head, bow the knee to the Masse, Idols, Pope, and by outward shews to give approbation to Babylons Idolatry, except they would endanger themselves: But that this is to participate in their sins, cannot be denyed by any sound reason: for to shun sinne is to avoid the occasion thereof. Let such therefore call to mind that true saying: Esto procul Roma, qui cupis esse pius. And of her Plagues] Another cause, Lib. 8. cap. 28. least being overthrowne by the fall of Babylon, we suffer justly for our rashnesse and backwardnes. Mice (as Plinie writeth) depart out of the house when it is ready to fall: and the Spiders first fall downe with their webs. A little before the Siege of Jerusalem by Titus, there was
heard a voice in the aire: Let us depart hence, whereby the Christians were in∣duced to go over Iordan to Pella. Having therefore these examples, why should not the Godly depart from Rome, being near to destruction, that they be not partakers of her plagues: for when a house falls, all that are under the roofe must of necessity perish. 5. For her sinnes have reached] A third reason is taken from the revenging justice of God, which although it sometimes deferre, yet at length it re∣quires the punishment of wicked deeds: , God hath a revenging eye. This reason is amplified two wayes: First in respect of the sins which are said to have reached unto Heaven: Generally all greek Copies have it  They followed each other, one begetting another, so that like chaines fastned to∣gether with many rings, What is meant by sins to reach to Heaven. they reached as it were up to Heaven. Andreas and Montanus have it  glued together, or as it were with lime or morter raised up to so great an heape, as it reached even to Heaven. This signifies the abominable heaping up, and filthinesse of sins, which is said to reach up to Heaven, that is, by excessive guilt to draw down vengeance from God: By a like meta∣phor God makes Kains parricide detestable, Gen. 4:10. The voice of thy brothers blood cryeth to me from the earth: And the filthinesse of Sodom, Gen. 18:20.21. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great: the cry of their sinne is very grievous which is come unto mee. RIBERA on this place saith well, That there is no sinne, though never so little, but it comes even to Heaven, that is, unto the knowledge of God, although the scripture useth so to speake onely of greatest sinnes, ripe for punishment. Now hence is refu∣ted the distinction of veniall and mortall sins: for to reach to heaven, is not onely to come unto the knowledge of God, seeing he takes knowledge even of the least that are committed, but so to take knowledge of them, as being a sinfull vio∣lation of the Law, and therefore deserving the punishment prescribed in the Law. If therefore all (even the least of sins) do reach, and come unto the know∣ledge of God, it followeth that all deserve the punishment of the Law, namely death eternall: and that none in their kind are veniall, that is, do deserve par∣don, not punishment: yet indeed by accident they become veniall to the faith∣full through the mercy of God. Secondly the grievousnesse of her sins are aggravated on Gods behalfe: who is said to have remembered them: by an  or humane affection often in Scripture applyed to God, by which is signified not any forgetfullnesse, but Gods goodnesse and lenity: he is said to forget sinners, when he differs their punishment, and affords time of repentance, and wholly forgiveth them that re∣pent: And he is said to remember, when the time of punishment is at hand: Thus in Chap. 16. ver. 19. Babylon is said to come in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the fury of his wrath: which is repeated in this place. Hence three things are briefly to be noted, the consideration whereof ought to recall us from sin, and stir us up to repentance. First, that all our sins, even the least are taken notice of by God, and deserve to be fearfully punished, especially if they be heaped up without repentance. Let no man therfore think to escape unpunished, as if his evills were forgotten, or hid from the eyes of the Lord: for all the actions of men, as well evill as good, are open and bare unto him with whom we have to do. Secondly, If we have a long time gone on in sin without punishment, it is to be ascribed to the patience of God, by which he leads us to repentance: Let us therfore take heed that we abuse not his long suffering and forbearance unto security, Rom. 2.3. Lastly, that at last sins being heaped up, God doth call them to remembrance, and will certainly punish them the more grievously, by how much he hath for∣born
the same; Let us therefore not persevere in sin, in hope to go allwayes unpunished, but while God calls not our sins as yet to remembrance, let us forsake them. Now it may be demanded, what is that chain of sin reaching to Heaven? Ribera here is silent, being conscious to himself, that they are the abominations of Papall Rome, for either they are of Old Rome, or else of Popish Rome. Of Ierusa∣lem they cannot be, forasmuch as this Babylon by the Iesuits own confession is Rome; not Jerusalem, though before he falsly and against his knowledge so seined in Chap. 16.19. Neither can they be sins of Old Rome: seeing the chaine of them was broken long ago by the rooting out of Paganisme: Adde to this that the guilt thereof was long since expiated by the worship of Christian Religion, as also by the punishments inflicted through the Gothes, Vandalls, Hunni, before Antichrists rising at Rome. Besides God would not impute to Christian Rome the wickednesse of others: for the soule that sinneth, it shall die. Ezec. 18.4. It remains therefore that this chain or heape of sins, is of Papall Rome. Furthermore these sins shall be either of Popish Rome, or else of Rome inva∣ded by Antichrist, who (as they seine) is to reigne three yeeres and an halfe. Of this feined Antichrist they cannot be: both because Ribera gloseth, Chap. 16.11.14: that Rome before the comming of Antichrist should utterly be destroy∣ed by the Ten Kings: As also because in the space of three yeers the sins of their feined Antichrist cannot in any probability encrease to so great an height, if we seriously consider what is here spoken of his whoredomes, wares, merchandize, and great wealth: so that whithersoever the Iesuites turne themselves, this heap of abominations reaching to heaven, is meant of none save Popish Rome, now ex∣tant. Thus the Papists themselves, except they be altogether brutish, may un∣derstand what is to be determined of the worship, superstitions, Idols, and uni∣versall politie of the Romish Church. 6. REWARD (Gr. render) HER EVEN AS SHEE RE∣WARDED (rendred) YOƲ] The second Part of the Exhortation, that the godly should repay double to Babylon: Which God inculcates by divers figu∣rative words. 1. That they should render, for, reward her, to wit, judgement. 2. Double unto her double according to her workes, for, afflict her twice as much as she hath afflicted the Saints. 3. Fill to her double the cup of wrath, the sense be∣ing one with the former. 4. That by how much through pride and luxurious∣nesse, she had lift up herselfe above all Churches, Bishops, Kings, Princes: by so much they should not onely bring down, but also afflict her with torment and sorrow: In the latter of which he alludes unto that in Daniel, Dan. 11.36 Thess. 2.4. And hee shall exalt himselfe: And to that of Paul: And exalteth himselfe above all that is called God. By this diversity of Phrases her sins are so much aggravated, as no punishment, or torment seems to be great enough for them: Withall the godly are stirred up in taking vengeance on her, to exercise all manner of severity and punishment, not out of their own affection, but by the commandement of God. But here two doubts are to be cleared. First how this stirring up of the godly to revengement stands with charity, pi∣ety, and the commandement of Christ, Render not evill for evill: For the godly are rather to be dehorted from cruelty, then to be edged on therto. The second, how it agrees with equity and justice to render double, that is, to in∣flict a heavier punishment then the nature of the fault seems to require. Vnto which two a Third may be added, seeing he commands us to render to Antichrist according to his workes, which were wicked and abominable sins: whither then we are commanded to reward wickednes with wickednes, theft with theft, murder with murder, perjury with perjury? Thus God should command that which is abominable: Now that which God commands is right and just: and so it should be no sin to steale, commit adultery, forsweare, kill, Christianus Gottlieb. &c. Which thing of late a Masqued Sycophant did hence labour to maintain.
But to the first it is answered, that the godly are not commanded to take ven∣geance, but to rejoyce because of the same, that is, they themselves are not bid to burne Babylon, but to rejoyce that God by the Kings had brought so heavy a judgement on her: as if they should say, take vengeance on her with God, and gladly subscribe unto his righteous judgement: by how much she hath rejoyced in doing injury unto you: by so much rejoyce ye over her just punishments. In this sense it is said that the Saints shall judge the world and Angels, 1. Cor. 6:2.3. and the Twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28. to wit, as approoving of the judge∣ment to be executed by Christ the Iudge. This opinion many of ours follow: Ribera also holds the same: If we take it thus, then it is not contradictory to Christs commandement touching shunning of revenge. Neither are the Saints bid to rejoyce over evill, or the torments of Babylon, but the righteous judgements of God. But thou wilt say, they are not only commanded to rejoyce over her judgement, but to take vengeance on her themselves: for as by the words: Goe out: they themselues are commanded to go out: so by the words, Render unto her: they themselves are commanded to do it: which seems to contradict the commande∣ment of Christ in the Gospell. I Answer: This must be understood by a Synecdoche, part being put for the whole. Therefore my Anonymus refers the command unto Preachers: REN∣DER ƲNTO HER, that is, Preach yee that so much be done unto her. Thus there is no difficulty: Neither is there any, though it be referred to the whole Company of the Godly, which consists not only of private men, (unto whom indeed private revenge is prohibited by Christs Commandement:) But of godly Princes and Kings also: Anonymus a true pro∣phet: for some of them, saith the said ANONYMƲS, speaking of the ten hornes or Kings, who now hold with Antichrist, shall at the preaching of the Gospell be turned against him: the which thing we have before spoken of. So that here is commanded no private revenge to private men, but publick to godly Kings and Princes, into whose hearts the Lord will put this, using them as instruments for the overthrow of Babylon. Vnto them therefore and their military forces, this part of the Exhortation doth principally belong: and the manner is declared how God put that into their hearts, namely, because by an expresse commandement he stir'd them up to this revengement. Vnto the second the Answer is more easie: he commands not to render double punishment for a single sin, or to afflict Babylon more grievously then she deser∣ved: the which should bee contrary to justice: but commands them to in∣flict the double of those afflictions, with which she had tormented the Saints: and so much her sins did require: for he saith expresly: Double unto her double, according to her workes: as if he should say, because her sins deserve double pu∣nishment. For no punishment can be double in respect of sin in the judgement of God, that is, more grievous then the fault: forasmuch as all sin deserves eter∣nall punishment: Or we may understand double not Arethmetically, but Geome∣trically, that is, of a most fearfull punishment agreable unto her deserts. And the word Double is thus taken in the Prophets: Isa. 40.2. God promiseth to the people deliverance out of their Captivity, for, saith he, shee hath received of the Lords hand double for all her sinnes: that is, she hath grievously and sufficiently bin punished. And Zach 9.12. he promiseth to the new Church double happines, or double benefits in respect of the old Church, Even to day doe I declare that I will render double unto thee. So here: Double unto her double: for, punish her suf∣ficiently according to her deserts: In which sense also Christ saith Luk. 6.38. Good measure, pressed down and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosome. Wherfore he wills not that the punishment should exceed measure. Vnto the third: It is a malicious cavill from the aequivocation or double mea∣ning of the Phrase: for to render double unto Antichrist according to his workes, is
not to recompence his wickednesse with twice as much wickednesse (for the heavenly voice cannot command sin) but to inflict double punishment on him. For the works of Antichrist, wherwith he afflicts the godly, in respect indeed of himselfe are most vile sins: but in respect of the godly afflicted by him, they are but sorrowes and torments, which only they are commanded to double to Anti∣christ: for thus God himselfe interpreteth it, ver. 7. how much she hath glori∣fied herselfe, and lived deliciously: so much sorrow and TORMENT give her. 7. Because she saith in her heart] The Pompe and riot of Rome is so plainly set forth, as the chief cause of its destruction, as that it cannot be denied, but he speaketh of Popish Rome: who in the foregoing words is commanded to be brought low by sorrow and torment, by how much she had glorified () herselfe by pride and deliciousnes: Now what Nation or City, in pompe, glo∣ry, deliciousnes, is equall to Rome. She alone these thousand years hath gloried to be Head of all Churches in Christendome. The Pope hath made himself Ʋniversall Bishop, from whom the whole world is to receive Rights, and coactive Lawes: Which arrogancy Gregory I. expressely attributes to Antichrist, saying, I con∣fidently say, that whosoever calleth himselfe, or desireth to bee called ƲNIVER∣SAL PRIEST, in his exaltation is afore-runner of Antichrist, because by pride he sets himselfe before all. The pride therefore and arrogancy of Rome is no∣thing save the Antichristian Monarchy of the Pope of Rome. He indeed boa∣steth to have received the same of CHRIST: But here the Holy Ghost makes him a lyar. For Babylon hath glorified herselfe] That is, hath usurped and taken the same unto her by wicked devices, with all deceitfullnes of unrighteousnes: And therefore the Lord who is an enemy to pride, will justly cast her downe by how much shee hath exalted herselfe: according to that saying, Luk 14.11 1. Pet: 5:6. Whosoever exalteth himselfe shall be abased. And that of Peter: God resisteth the proud. This pride of the Romish Sea doth most manifestly appeare by her shamefull boasting, and Thrasonicall lifting up: I sit a Queene, and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow] It is an allusion unto the boasting of Ancient Babylon, with which the Lords upbraides her, Isa. 47.8. Thou sayest, saith he, in thine heart, I am, and none else besides mee: I shall not sit a Widow, neither know the losse of chil∣dren. Thus Babylon gloried because of the Monarchie, as having none equall or superiour in strength and power, but like an Empresse had all Provinces and Kingdoms under her: neither could be endammaged or overthrowne by any. The vanity of this arrogancy God doth there reproove, and the event confirm'd it: for not long after she was overthrown by Cyrus and the Persians. The pride of the Romish Sea is no lesse: Not only saying in her heart, but publikely boa∣sting so much. Now the words here are a proper Mimesis or imitation of the words, by which the Popes of Rome, and their flatterers have hitherto bin accusto∣med to glorifie themselves. I sit] A word proper to the Pope, for he boasteth, that he sits, that is, reig∣neth, and Commands in the Chaire of Peter, the Apostolicall Seat: Namely, to manifest that he is the Sonne of perdition, who, as the Apostle saith, 2: Thes. 2.4 SITS in the Temple of God: thus this Angell sheweth him sitting on the Beast, that is; like Antichrist swaying the Romane Empire. I sit a Queene] And this is proper to Rome: for she boasteth, that she is Lady, Staplet: Relact: Princip. Edit Anno. 1596. or Queene of all Churches and Kingdomes. In signe whereof they paint the Church of Rome, sitting as a Queene on a Throne, Crowned with a royall Diadem, holding in her right hand the Booke of Decretalls, with a Papall Cope on it, in her left hand two Keyes, crosewise: treading under her feet the Heretickes, Luther and Calvin with their Bibles. Is not this to sit a Queene? My Anonymus thus: I sit as a Queene] to wit, ruling all, and exceeding all in the riches and glory of the World: and therefore I am a Queene as well in secular ho∣nour, as in spirituall dignitie.
And am no widow] This also is Romes language, who boasteth that as she is Mother of Churches, so the Spouse of Christ, whom Christ will never forsake, who can never erre, be defiled, or slip, to wit, having the Holy Ghost as friend to the Bridegrom, allwayes to preserve her Chastity. Anonymus as though he had been living in our times, Thus: I am no Widow, (Although the greater part is turned to Christianitie, and gone from mee) because as yet a great part of Christendome holds with mee, and I have singular consolation in the Subsidies of Simonists. And shall see no sorrow] Either by losse of children or any other calamity. This boasting also is proper to Rome, whose Parasites would perswade all men: That Rome is the Church built on the rocke, against which the gates of hell shall not prevaile, that she is Peters Boate, which may be tossed, hurled, shaken with the winds, but can∣not be sunke by the waves. Hence Bellarmine gives two notes of the Catholicke Romane Church. The prosperity of the defenders, and unhappinesse of Romes adversaries. Anonymus: And shall see no sorrow] which my adversaries threaten shall befall me in Hell. The summe is: That this Cathedrall Queene is the Romish Seat, the Lady of all Churches, Kingdomes, Bishops and Kings. Now how truely she boasteth, that she shall allwayes be free from widow-hood, losse of children and sorrow, let us hear further. 8. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day] The pride and security of Rome is here reprooved by a deadly sentence pronounced by God, after the manner of a Iudge, as it were on the Tribunall. And 1. he shews the equity thereof. 2. Swiftnesse. 3. The grievousnesse. 4. The necessity. The judgement shall be just; for it shall be inflicted  Therefore, that is, because of the pride, riot, and sins even now reckoned up and confessed. He will most swiftly fall upon her in her security, for  in one day (which is taken out of Isai. 47.9.) yea  in one houre (as it is in ver. 10.) shall her plagues come: she shall not bee besieged by the Kings a long time, or many years, but be suddenly taken, because of her security (like as in one night Cyrus suddenly tooke carelesse Babylon) being forsaken of her friends, and driven to despair, having no power to defend her self. The grievousnesse of the punishment is aggravated by enumeration of four Plagues, Death, Mourning, Famine, Fire: every one of which shall answer to her sins: she promised her self perpetuall happinesse: but Death shall cut her off: she delighted in all kind of pleasures, therefore sorrow shall overthrow her. She continually gave her self to gluttony, riot, &c. Therefore Famine shall kill her: she burnt the godly Martyrs as Heretickes: therefore with Fire shall she be utterly consumed, by the Kings (sometimes her lovers) who shall fall from her, and turne their swords (which they formerly imployed for her against the Godly) into her own bowels. See Chap. 17. ver. 17. For strong is the Lord] He prooves that her lot and portion shall be irrecovera∣ble, from the omnipotencie of the Iudge: the which he opposeth to the Romane power, that we might not think the thing foretold impossible, the which im∣magination hath beguilded many even to this day. Stapleton hath writ a Booke of the admirable greatnesse of the Romane Church: which he saith shall so remaine for ever. Lipsius also had no other end then to flatter Rome in his Book (which he published about the same time) touching the admirable greatnesse of the Ro∣mane City. Iohan. Paul. Windek. About this time also a certaine Parasite of the Romish Seat, spread a∣broad a Prognostication about the future state of the Church, wherein he affir∣med, that the Evangelicall Doctrine, and Christian Churches, should shortly pe∣rish: The Romane Seat remaine stable and constant: so is this opinion settled in the mindes of Papists, that it is impossible the Romane Power should be over∣come through any Plots or devices, or the Romish Hierarchy linked and fastned together with iron bonds as it were, should ever be overthrown by any: But:
2. Strong is the Lord which judgeth her] Gr.  Judging, in the present tence: Andreas and Montanus , who hath judged: because in his unchangeable decree he hath devoted her to condemnation: some thinke because this shall hap∣pen in one day, and suddenly, that (like Sodom) she shall be burnt with fire from Heaven: but because it was said before, that the Kings should burne her, it seems rather to be meant of fire suddenly thrown into the City by the Victorious army. Hitherto the Exhortation, the Lamentation followes. 9. And the Kings of the Earth shall bewaile her] The wicked lament the wret∣ched condition of Rome: First Kings, then Merchants: Lastly Shipmasters. Now what, and how great their mourning shall be, and the cause thereof com∣mon to them all, is shewed to be the losse of their former riot and gaine: And therefore there is the lesse difficulty and reason to insist upon it. This generally is to be noted from the lamentation, that a temporall judgement on Rome is here described, not the last judgement in the end of the World: for wicked Kings, Merchants, and Shipmasters, shall see, and bewaile the same. In the first place the Kings of the Earth are brought in mourning, as be∣ing more worthy and powerfull: who were chiefe in committing filthines with the Romish Strumpet. They shall bewaile and lament for her] That is, because of her sudden and mise∣rable destruction: who these are, is noted by two Epithites: they are Kings of the Earth, committing fornication, and living deliciously with her. By both we may understand that they shall be enemies of the Gospell: Vassalls, Sonnes, Spiritu∣all Lovers of the Romish Seat. For the first Epithite  of the Earth, is all∣wayes in this Prophesie taken in an evill sense, for Kings, Nations, and worldly men given to earthlie worship. By the latter Epithite, the cause also of their mourning is shewed, they shall lament excessively because they are deprived of their sweet converse with the whore, by means of her unexcepted destruction. What that converse was, we have opened on verse 3. and divers times before. It may be demanded who these Kings of the Earth shall be? Ribera feineth, that they shall be the same Ten Kings who burned her with fire, who these Kings of the Earth are. repenting and bewailing the destruction of the most renowned City, like as Ti∣tus is said to have mourned for the burning of Ierusalem and the Temple. But it is a vaine Fiction: for those Kings shall be converted unto the faith: These shall be Kings of the Earth, Enemies of the Gospell. Ioseph, lib: 7: de bell. Iud. c. 24. The cause also of the mour∣ning is different: These shall lament because they can no longer commit fornica∣tion and riot with her. But the former Kings after they had once by the divine mercie of God repented of their sinne, refused any longer to commit fornication with her: for it is said, They shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate. Therefore we affirme that these Kings of the Earth shall be such of the Ten, as still remaine with the Pope. 10. Standing a farre off for feare] The gesture and voice of these Mourners is noted: standing a farre off and crying: Alas, alas. In which he prevents an objection: Why shall they not rather take up Armes, and succour the distressed Citie? Feare and trembling shall hinder them: signifying, that the Lord will so astonish them, as that they shall not so much as thinke upon armes, or succour, for the feare of the divine judgement will make them to seeke shel∣ter for themselves. For in one houre] Before, In one day, Her judgement shall be so sudden, that before the report of her Siege be far spread, the Citie shall lie in ashes. Thus high things are on a sudden brought to nothing: Trees of great height are long in growing, but rooted up in one houre. They call it judgement, to wit, of God, the just Iudge, whose vengeance shall be so manifest, that the very enemies shall be forced to confesse that so great a Citie was thus suddenly overthrowne not by humane force, but by the judgement of God being angry.
11. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weepe] Merchants succeed the Kings in mourning, the Merchants, I say, of the Earth, whom we have shewed to be spirituall Traders, Treasurers of the Popish Court, Paenitentiaries, and Granters of Pardons, &c. The which plainely appeares by the adjunct cause of their sor∣row, and kind of Merchandize. Because no man buyeth her merchandize any more] But gold, silver and pretious stones, shall not be out of esteem, because of the destruction of one Citie. For by the overthrow of one Mart-Towne, trading is not taken away from other pla∣ces: but the fall of one is rather the rising of another: as not long ago in the low Countries, Antwerpe sometime a noble Mart-Towne decaying, was the flouri∣shing of Amsterdam. Therefore it is manifest, that here properlie merchan∣dable wares are not noted, but the gainfull hunting of the Romanists, their Bulls of indulgence, and spirituall tributes, by which they have emptied the treasuries of the Kingdomes, Provinces, and Cities of Christendom. Buyeth them no more] For these things shall be discovered to be but bastardlie wares, meere impostures, which the Pope, falsly claiming to be Successour of Pe∣ter and Paul, had obtruded on the world, to be beleeved as necessarie to salvation. ANONYMƲS: Their wares] By which they merchandized with the goods of the Church: No man shall buy them any more. Because all simonie and covetousnesse shall then eternally cease from the Church: And by these Merchants are meant hypocrites also, who sell great holinesse for a temporall reward. 12 The merchandize of gold and silver] This whole Catalogue of wates, is taken by a certain allusion from Ezechiel 27. where the destruction of Tyrus, then a most noble Mart-Towne, is likewise described, for like riot and pride. There the neighbouring Nations and Peoples are reckoned up, who all of them brought both their own and forraine merchandize unto Tyrus: The Edomites, brought Caedars and Firre trees from Lebanon: The Macedonians Ivorie: The Ae∣gyptians fine linnen and broidered worke: They of the Isles of Elishah silke and purple: They of Tarshis silver, iron, tin, lead: Tuball and Meshech, slaves, horses, mules, &c. So here the Holy Ghost would have us to understand the diversitie of peoples, who have brought those wares to Rome, that is, enriched the Romane Sea with treasures and rich tributes: In vita syl∣vestri. Ʋnto this royall Court (saith Platina) flowes the encrease of Tarshis in Cilicia: from the possession of Tyrus comes Oyle, Spices, Cassia: Baulme also from the places where it growes, with Saffron, Salt, Peper, Cynnamon, &c. Here the conjecture of most learned Brightman is verie propable: The merchandize of gold, silver, pearles, the Spaniards by their Navigations bring to Rome: Italy fur∣nisheth her with Cinnamon, Frankincense, Ointment, Wine: Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, with fine floure and wheat: Germanie with beasts: England with sheep: France with horses and chariots: Helvetia with men: And all of them together with soules of men: all of them being forced to beleeve, that it is of necessitie to salvation to be subject to the Pope: all alike are affrighted with feare of Purga∣tory, from whence they cannot bee redeemed but by meanes of gold and silver: To be short, through covetousnesse and feined speeches, the Romane False-Pro∣phet makes merchandize of the souls of all men. Now to dispute of the qualitie of each sort of this merchandize, I think it need∣lesse: some are known and in use amongst us: Others being out-landish are an∣knowne to these parts, the descriptions whereof may be sought in Plinie, Dio∣scorides, and other Writers of naturall things. Fine linnen] called Byssus, a most excellent sort of linnen. Of Purple and Scarlet, See Chap. 17. ver. 4. Silke] Or silken cloth spun of the finest silken threed, being of a great price. Fine flowre] being made of the flowre of wheat. And all thyine wood] Or odoriferous wood, as the Cypresse, Juniper, Caedar, the word comes from the Greeke  THUOO, to send foorth a
smell. And of horses] viz. the merchandize of horses. And slaves Greek () Bodies] from Ezechiel 27.13. Meshech and Tuball traded with the souls (or persons as most translate it) of men, and vessels of brasse, &c. the which all do expound of selling slaves: But here the Holy Ghost doth distinctly put  the bodies and souls of men. The Old Version: Of slaves and the soules of men. Therefore this merchandize of souls is different from that of slaves, neither can we otherwise understand it, then of that spirituall trade which is exercised about the redemption of soules out of Pur∣gatory: For hence comes up their Courts, Temples, Altars, Masses, Monaste∣ries, Cloysters, Legacies, Pilgrimages, Annuities, Waxe-candles, and all other gain∣full workes in Popery: All I say was done to redeem soules. Therefore RIBERA on this place doth vainly feine two sorts of slaves, of whom some were sold to serve: Others to be slain, that is, to fight with beasts in the Circle. The which although it be true: yet no reason can be given, why these latter should be called soules. The soule, saith he, signifies the life: with the Hebrews indeed, but not so with the Greeks: and it is against him: For thus soules should signifie slaves appointed not to death, but life. 14. And the fruits that thy soule lusted after] Gr. The harvest of thy lust is gone from thee: The Old Version, Apples of thy desire: because the Autumne is Apple∣time: It is an Hebraisme, for, the desirable fruits of thy palate shall faile thee: namely, their delicious Banquets, delicate Iunckets, with which though the Ro∣mane Clergy glut themselves twice or thrice in a day, yet they fast. And all dainty and goodly things] He understands the variety of dainty dishes, with which the riotous Fathers use to fill their tables: now all this shall cease. The fire will put an end wholly to these delights. The change of the construction is here observeable: For whereas before the Heavenly voice declared the mourning of Merchants, and their severall wares: here he suddenly directs an Apostrophe to Rome it selfe: and so it is againe in the third voyce, ver. 22.23. Therefore BEZA conjectures that this verse is here inserted from the Apostrophe there. Which opinion is the more probable, be∣cause it is certaine that this Booke of old was greatly neglected, and the autho∣rity questioned by the speciall subtiltie of Satan, least these mysteries should in time be manifested: yet he leaves the verse in his place, because of the consent of Copies. Now we know that such an Enallage or change of persons, is not unusuall to the Prophets, and to John in this Prophesie, as we had it in the begin∣ning of Chap. 1. verse 7.8. Are departed from thee] Montanus  are perished from thee: Andreas, , the sense being all one. 15. The Merchante of these things] He returnes to the mourning of the Mer∣chants, and describes the cause thereof, with the manner. Which were enriched] The cause of their mourning shalbe, in regard of the losse of their gainfull wares, by which they gathered abundance of wealth, insomuch as one Canonship was worth by the yeer ten or twentie thousand florines: One Bishoprick or Cardinalship, an hundred, yea three hundred thousand. At so high a rate hath the Pope sold these Places. Now by the destruction of Rome, all the hope of ga∣thering wealth this way shall be cut off: yea the riches which they have gathe∣red shall expose them to danger, because the Annuities, Legacies, Tithes, &c. shall be ceazed on. This therefore is no small cause of sorrow. They shall stand a far off] Namely, for feare least they be hurt by the flames thereof: And indeed how should her Merchants any way helpe her, seeing her Kings stand a far off, trembling for fear. 16. Alas, alas, that great City] The Merchants shall imitate the howling of the Kings: but speak of their merchandize of fine linnen, purple, scarlet, gold, pearles, and pretious stones, the which they be waile, not onely as being now con∣sumed
in this fire, but also because they should never trafficke any more with such like wares. 17. And every Shipmaster] After the Kings and Merchants of the earth, Sea∣men also shall mourne: who are divided into four rankes: first Masters, or Go∣vernours of Ships, signifying Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops of the greater Nations. 2. Pilotes, or Masters mates, being in company and fellowship with the former: as the familiars and domestickes of Cardinalls have partners in profit and losse. 3. Sailers, Bishops of inferiour note, and Abbates, Gardians, Pri∣ors,, Rowers in Peters boate. 4. As many as trade or gaine by Sea: the whole Clergie, as Canonists, Regulars, Monkes, Jesuites, Capuzines, who helpe forward, and live upon the profits of the Romish Court. Shall stand afarre off Not daring to approach for feare, like the Kings and Merchants: Gr.  Stood  and Cryed: by a propheticall certaintie he rehearseth the thing as if it were done: Now they shall testifie their feare and astonishment: First in words by crying. What City is like to this City, from Ezech. 27.32. Till now they boasted that the gates of hell should not prevail against Rome. But they shall grievously bee astonished by her unexpected de∣struction. Experience therefore shall be the Mistresse of these fooles: Secondly they testifie their feare by gesture, of which it followeth. 19. And they cast dust on their heads] Like unto sad Mourners, as Joshua 7. the Israelites mourning for the sacriledge of Achan threw dust upon their heads, so did the messenger that brought tidings of the Israelites overthrow, 1. Sam. 4. And Iobs friends Chap. 1. But the mourning of these shall be more grievous then the other, because the destruction of Babylon will more grievously touch their Kitchings. Therefore lamenting they shall sing the same Funerall-Song with the Kings and Merchants, bewailing not the sins and abominations of Rome, neither their own offences against God, but the losse of their riches, all occasion of encreasing their treasures being taken away, and because they shall no longer furnish the Clergy with their merchandize, but be faine to feed on brown bread, (as the saying is.) This is a Judas-like repentance: for they mourne not because they have sinned, but because they may sin no longer. The Songs of the righte∣ous sound otherwise: Just art thou O Lord, and righteous are thy judgements. Is made desolate] This desolation is again and again inculcated, that Rome may not question, but that it shall certainly come to passe, though she now securely mockes at the same. In one hour] Suddenly, and in a moment, so said the Kings, ver. 10. and in one day, ver. 8. 20. Rejoyce over her thou Heaven] We have heard the wickeds lamentation on earth: Now followes the Saints rejoycing in Heaven: unto which the second heavenly voyce exhorts them: It is an Apostrophe unto the Heaven, the holy A∣postles and Prophets, to Rejoyce over her, that is, over her destruction. Some by Heaven understand the Church: By the Apostles and Prophets, the Publishers of the Gospell that then shall be. But it appeares to be a Propheticall Prosopopoeia: as Isa. 1: 2. Heare O Heavens: to testifie the greatnesse of their joy. Before Heaven mourned because of Babylons sins heaped up to Heaven, ver. 5. Now it is bid to rejoyce, because so great filthinesse is taken away. Or it is a Synec∣doche: Rejoyce O Heaven, for, Ye Angels, and other heavenly inhabitants. Thus I rather take it, because of that which followes, Chap. 19. ver. 1. By the name of Apostles and Prophets are meant the soules of the holy Martyrs slaine by the Romane Tyrants, and Antichrist for professing the doctrine of the A∣postles and Prophets: which we may gather from ver. 24. In her is found the blood of the Prophets: and yet we read not that any of the old Prophets were slaine at Rome: which I mention because of Riberas starting-hole on Chap. 14. verse 8. where he denies that Papall Rome is Babylon, because not Popish but Heathe∣nish Rome killed the Apostles Peter and Paul, but in vaine saith he, should the Apostles and Prophets be commanded to rejoyce over the vengeance of Popish Rome, by
whom they were not killed: but it is false: for Heaven and the Prophets also are bid to rejoyce over her, although neither Heaven nor the Prophets were slaine by her. The soules therefore of the ancient and latter Martyrs to whom (requi∣ring God to avenge them before the time, were given White robes, that they might in the meane while rest content with their felicity) are now at length bid to rejoyce, because the time of vengeance is at hand. yea, because God had now avenged their blood, and abundantly answered their desire. This cause of joy is added: For God hath avenged you on her] In the Greeke the Hebraisme is very Emphaticall: Because God hath judged your judgement on her: For both the cause of their Martyrdome is approved: that it was a judge∣ment, that is, righteous and pleasing to God: as also the punishment of Baby∣lon is wholly attributed to God the Iudge, and the avengement of the innocent blood of the Saints is made the most righteous cause thereof. But he seems to command rejoycing over evill; not in the least: But bids them to rejoyce, because the riot and tyrannie of Babylon is repressed, and the Church freed from the same: as also because Gods glorie is vindicated from the blasphe∣mies of the ungodly. Now the deliverance of the Church, the suppressing of the wicked, the vindicating of Gods glorie, and Declaration of Gods righteous∣nesse in punishing the ungodly, are not evill things, but excellent and the most just judgements of the Lord. So that the Heavenly Inhabitants are bid to rejoyce not over evill but good things. And this is the meaning, Psal. 58.10. whensoever in Scrip∣ture the Saints are commanded to rejoyce over the enemies: The righteous shall re∣joyce when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked: where straightway a reason is added: A man shall say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: Doubtlesse there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. Whence it appeareth, that this rejoycing of the Godly is opposed to two weightie Tentations: I. Least it might bee thought Godlinesse should want its fruit. II. Least the Godly might seeme to be quite forsaken of God under the Crosse. If therefore thou object. To rejoyce over anothers harme is prohibited other∣where: but here the Saints are bid to rejoyce over other mens harmes: Therefore they are commanded to doe that which is forbidden in other places: The Assumption is false: Or there are four termes: for to rejoyce over evils, as they are evils and torments, not as they are a righteous avengement, and an illustration of Gods glory, is forbidden in Scripture. The Third Part of the Chapter. The Voyce of the third Angell, figuring the destruction of Babylon, under the Similitude of a Milstone cast into the SEA. 21 And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shal that great City Ba∣bylon be throwne downe, and be found no more at all. 22 And the voice of harpers and musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpe∣ters, shalbe heard no more at all in thee, and no Craftsman of what∣soever craft he be, shal be found any more in thee: and the sound of a milstone shal be heard no more at all in thee. 23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee: and the voice of the Bridegrome and of the Bride shal be heard no more at all in thee: for thy Merchants were the great men of the Earth, for by thy sorceries were all Nations deceived. 24 And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slaine upon the Earth.
THE COMMENTARY. AND a mighty Angell] The second voyce leaves speaking: And another Angell comes forth on the Scene: Greeke  One Angell indefinitely, that is, One of the com∣panie of the ANGELS, who was to seale up the whole acti∣on of Babylons judgement by an externall Symbole. Strong] Hee is said to be mighty because of the Symbole, which did require more then humane strength. For he takes up (as if it were but a straw) a stone, like a great Milstone (which ten strong men can hardly move) and casteth it with force into the Sea. Therefore in Scripture the Angells are worthily commended for their strength, to comfort the Godlie, and terrifie the wicked. But what is meant by this throwing? It would have seemed frivolous, had not the signification thereof bin added, Tract. 81. in Iohan. for signes without the word are dead Cere∣monies: Therefore our Sacramentall signes which we call Sacraments, have the word annexed touching the things signified, according to that of AUSTIN, Let the word be joyned to the Element, and it becomes a Sacrament. The word there∣fore is the soule of the Sacrament, The soul of signs is the word. because it expoundeth what the signe in eve∣ry Sacrament doth signifie. Whence it is certain, that signes testifie the same thing to the eye, that words sound to the eare, and that Sacraments signifie the same benefits of Christ, which are taught in the Word or Gospell, hence also Austin often calls them Ʋisible words: De catal. Chap. 3. Cantr. faust. Cap. 16. Tract. 18. in Iohan. because, as I said, they represent the same thing to the eye, which the word sounds to the eare: But to the matter. Thus with violence shall the great City Babylon be cast downe, and shal be found no more at all.] Hence it appeares, that signes represent the same thing, that the word doth, but much more effectually, because they work upon two Sences together, & stir up to faith, viz. The eyes by the Symbole: The eares by the word. For the same judgement which hitherto we have received or heard by the voice of the Angels, and the Iamentation of the wicked: we now also as it were behold with our eyes under the Type of a Milstone throwne into the Sea. So that the thing which before was certaine to the eare, is now made far more certaine, the Sence of the Eyes confirming the same. The Particle  so denotes the force and a∣nalogie of the Type. The Ana∣logie be∣tween a milstone, and Baby∣lon. For as a great Milstone cannot be easily moved: so the great Citie Babylon, is hardlie to be conquered. As a Milstone is thrown down, so Babylon shall be cut off. As a stone is throwne with force: So Rome shall suddenly, and with force be overwhelmed. As a stone is swallowed up by the Sea: So fire (a contrarie Element) shall devour Babylon. As a Milstone thrown into the Sea, remaines covered in the bottome thereof, and can no more be drawn out: So Rome being once burnt with fire, shal not be found or repaired any more, but remain in ashes. This is the analogie of the type and antitype. We are to know, Ier. 51.63. that the same Type was of old used about the destruction of Ancient Babylon: for Ieremie is commanded to bind the Booke of his Prophesie, not indeed to a Milstone, but another stone, and cast it in the midst of Euphra∣tes: saying, So shall Babylon sincke, and shall not rise from the evill that I will bring upon her, and they shall bee weary. Thus Old and New Babylon go borh one way in Gods judgement. The Great Citie BABYLON] This is so often reiterated in this Pro∣phesie, as it confounds with shame the boasting of Papists touching the great∣nesse of the Romish Citie and Church. 22. And the Voyce of Harpers] The Angell aggravates the most sad desolation, which shall there appeare, where now lofty Rome doth pride it, by propheticall phrases, threatning the privation of such good things, which are re∣quisite
for the pleasure and necessitie of a flourishing Common-wealth. To the pleasure of a Citie belong musicall Instruments, Harpes, Fluites, Trum∣pets, and Artists that have skill to use them. By Harpes, men are occasioned to rejoyce at Feasts: At the sound of the Fluite, they use to dance: By Trumpets, the people are called to holy and civill meetings, and Souldiers stir'd up to war, whither for exercise, or in earnest. Nothing, saith he, of these things shall bee heard in thee any more. Therefore there shall bee nothing but meere desolation and sadnesse. To the necessitie of a Citie are required all kinde of Artists, Arist. in Eth: and Handicrafts men: For a City consists not of a Physitian alone, but of a Physitian and the husband∣man. But no Craftsm shall be found in thee any more: so that in stead of the de∣licioussse and abundance of these pretious wares, shalbe misery and desolation: To the upholding of mans life Corne also and Millers are requisite: by whom the seed is grinded, and the meale prepared for bread and necessary food. The voyce saith he of a Milstone shalbe heard no more in thee] In stead of abundance of fine floure and delicacies, shall be povertie and want. Also burning lights are requisite for the night season, without which wee should beforced to passe the halfe of our Life in darkenesse. These also, saith he, shall shine no more in thee] Therefore there shal be datknesse and desolation. Lastly to the preservation of Cities, there must of necessity be procreation of children in lawfull Matrimonie, for without Weddings and Marriage a Citie must needs perish, (either by death of her Citizens) or bee full of Bastards. Also there shall bee no more Weddings in thee] For the voice of the Bride and of the Bridegrome shall bee no more heard in thee. Thus thy delosation shall bee consummated. Behold in what a horrible manner the destruction of Rome is aggravared. Now these things because of the similitude are here applied out of the Ancient Prophets: See Isa. 24.8. and Jerem. 7.34. and Ezech. 26.13. In the for∣mer, the desolation of Iudea, in the latter, that of Tyrus is set foorth under the like Figures. Because thy Merchants are the great men of the Earth] He concludes with re∣peating the causes of this horrible judgement: that the Romanists might not complaine of overmuch rigour. In the Analysis we shewed the causes to be three. 1. Riot. 2. Witchcraft. 3. Slaughter of the Saints. Their riot is noted in one most evident signe onely, because her Merchants are  The great men of the Earth, as if he should say, not minding their condition, and originall, they cary themselves as Princes, usurping authoritie over all men. Who now will say, that these are ordinarie Traders? what if one or two Merchants come to be Princes, what is that to all these? As therefore their wares were al∣legoricall: So these are Allegoricall-Merchants, Spirituall-Prelates, Ecclesiasticall-Princes, Cardinals, Palriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, &c. as before we shew'd. At first the seven Deacons of Rome were Cardinals, severallie placed through the Citie to preach, and administer holy things: But now there are sixtie eight purpled Fa∣thers, being as they say, the chiefe Senate of the whole world, who according to their instruction may not stand up though a Prince or a King salute them, or give them the way, and chiefe seat at Banquets. What therfore can be more ar∣rogant then the pride of these Merchants? For by thy sorceries] This cause hath bin often declared: He cals the Idolatrie, false doctrines, ungodlie and superstitious traditions (by which Antichrist hath seduced the Christian world) Witchcraft, both in regard of like efficacie: be∣cause as with Charming-cups they infatuate worldly men, and draw the souse to de∣struction: because also Magicke is alwayes joyned with Idolatrie, as we find in speciall among the Idolatrous Papists. 24. And in her was found the blood of the Prophets] The crueltie of both old and new Rome against the Godlie is here noted: but chiefly of the new, who
under pretence of the Catholicke Religion, hath for these thousand yeers shed as much Christian blood, if not more, then the old Pyrants in the first three hundred yeeres. Is found in thee] Because the greater part of Martyrs are slain at Rome. And of all that were slaine upon the Earth] Because also the Martyrs that suffe∣red in other Kingdomes and Provinces, were slaine by the authoritie of the Romish Strumpet: And therefore all that blood shall be justly avenged on her: The same was before said Chap. 16. ver. 6. For they have shed the blood of Saints, and thou hast given them blood to drinke. Of which see more on the place. The Coherence, Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER. XIX. THe third and last part of the Sixt Vision touching the Iudgement of the great Whore and the Beast, that is, of Rome and Antichrist, remaineth to be treated of. The destruction and burning of the City (to bee executed by the Ten Kings, once the Vassals of the Romane Anti∣christ, but afterward converted to Christ) the Angell had revealed to John in Cap. XVII. and described the same by a Propheticall Hypotyposis in Chapter XVIII. But seeing the whole Papacy shall not utterly perish at the sacking and burning of Rome (Antichrists Seat in Italy) but that the Pope shall find en∣tertainment, either in Spaine or otherwhere, and shall persevere to oppose Christ, and persecute the Gospell unto the end: therefore in this XIX. Chapter is revealed the destruction also of the Pope himselfe, and of the whole Papacy. The Chapter is full of manifold doctrines, and consists of a most artificious structure. Therefore the Reader may conceive the Argument, Parts, and I ogicall resolution to bee thus. The company of Saints rejoyce over the judgement of Babylon, their de∣liverance from his Tyranny, and the Wedding of the Lambe at hand. By and by is described a type of Christs comming to judgement, and casting of the Beast and all his followers into the Lake of fire. The parts therefore seem to be two. The Saints rejoycing, and Anti∣christs judgement: Iohns errour about worshipping the Angell being brought in by a Parenthesis. But we may more fitly cast the same into three Heads or Branches. 1. WHat Iohn heard, in the first nine Verses: Aften these things I heard. II. What he did ver. 10. And I fell downe, &c. III. What at length he saw, from verse 11. And I saw, unto the end. Touching the first: Hee heard a two-fold voyce of glad∣ne and praysings: The first celebrate the righteous judge∣ments of God, in the five first Ʋerses. The other triumph, because of the wedding of the Lambe: in the four following Verses. In the former rejoycing is noted. 1. Who they were: A twofold Chore or Company: first, a great multitude leading or beginning the Triumph-Song in three Verses. The second, viz. the
twenty foure Elders, and foure Beasts Isinging after them, verse 4. 1 Where they were: In Heaven, verse 1. Both Companies therefore de∣note the Church Triumphant. The Hyinne of the first Chore consisteth of three Parts. 1. A Proposition, God is to be praised: Halelujah, saivation, &c. ver. 1.2. The Confirmation, from the justnesse: First in the Thesis: because Gods judgements are true and righte∣ous: Secondly in a double Hypothesis or application: because in righteousnesse he hath judged the whore: and avenged their blood, ver. 2.3. The conclusion iterating the praises of God, ver. 3. Touching the other Company is noted. 1. Their gesture, And they fell downe. 2. Their Religion: and worshipped. 3. Their assent, or concluding the Song with AMEN, ver. 4. &c. In the Latter rejoycing is noted: First the provoking cause, and of this: 1. What it was: A voyce proceeding out of the Throne: 2. What it commanded, viz. to praise the Lord, 3. Who are commanded, All the servants of God in gene∣rall verse 5. Secondly, the effect of the cause is annexed: viz. The rejoycing it selfe, in which is noted: 1. Who the Rejoycers were: A great multitude: whose voyce is aggravated by the similitude of the noise of waters, and thunders, ver. 6. This multitude are the Servants and Feaers of God, that is, the Vniversall Church of Saints in Heaven and Earth. 2. A Gratulatorie Hyinne, consisting of two Parts. In the first they blesse God with praises of Hallelujah: adding a reason: For the Lord God omnipotent reigneth: that is, hath vindicated his Kingdome from the blasphemies of An∣tichrist, verse 6. Secondly, they stirre up themselves to joyfullnesse and to praise the Lord: Let us rejoyce: with a reason from the joyfull circumstance of time: for the marriage of the Lambe is come. The which they commend. 1. from the presence of the Bride or wife: she hath made herselfe ready, &c. ver. 7. 2. From her ornament and pure attire, ver. 8. And to her was granted. 3. From the saving effect, or blessednesse of the wed∣ding guests, ver. 9. Blessed are they that are called, &c. The certainty whereof is ratined 1. by the Angels command to write it, Write, Blessed are, &c. 2. By as∣serting the truth of the sayings of God, Ibid. In the second what both Iohn and the Angell did. Iohn doth two things, 1. he falls downe. 2. with intention to worship the Angell, verse 10. The Angell forbids it: See thou do it not: with a twofold reason, 1. From the person, to whom worship is not dew, I am thy fellow servant. 2. From Gods pe∣culiar property: Worship God, Ibid. In the third: What he saw: 1. CHRIST comming with his Elect to Iudge∣ment. 2. The casting of Antichrist and his followers into hell, under the Type of two warlike Armies: Of which Type there are two parts. 1. A description of each Army, from ver. 11. unto 20. 2. The event of the Battle, ver. 20. 21. Touching the former army is noted, 1. The originall place whence it came: from heaven being opened, ver. 11. 2. Christ the Captaine of these Forces: and the Forces themselves. The description of the Captaine is magnificall and divine. I. By the placing of his body: Sitting on a white horse. II. His nature or disposition: True and faithfull. III. Office: He judgeth and makes war in righteousnesse, ver. 11. IIII. His fiery eyes seeing all things His eyes weke as a flame of fire, v. 11. V. The Royall Ornaments of his head: Many Crownes, ver. 12. VI. The Majesty of his Name, ver. 12. 13. 16.
VII. His bloody Vesture, verse 13. VIII His armour: A two-edged sword proceeds out of his mouth, ver. 14. IX A reason both of his Vesture and Armour: by changing the order. The latter; because he rules the Nations with an iron red: the former: because he treadeth the Wine-presse of the fiercenesse and wrath of Almighty God, Of which Chapter 14.20. His Armies are noted to bee two. First. His Attendants of honour, who follow the Captaine on white horses, not to fight, but for office sake: Therefore they are not armed, but clothed in fine linnen. verse 14. Secondly, His ministring servants; whom God will send against the adversaries. Of these is noted. 1. By whom they are to be enrolled and called, ver. 17. I saw an Angell. 2. Who they are, All the foules flying in the midst of Heaven, Ibid. 3. Their assembling: Come and gather your selves together, &c. Ibid. 4. To what: first figuratively: Ʋnto the Supper of the great God, ver. 17. se∣condly properly: That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, as if he should say, not to beat downe the adversaries (for that Christ will doe by the word of his omnipotencie) but to eat up the slaine: Of whom he reckons up divers orders, verse 18. Hi∣therto of the former Army. Of the hostile army is noted 1. the Captain, the Beast-Antichrist. 2. His auxiliarie Vassalls, the Kings of the Earth, with their forces. 3. Their Counsell to suppresse Christ and his Army, ver. 19. Lastly the Event of the Battle, the adversaries are overthrowne, which is ag∣gravated by certaine degrees. 1. By apprehending or taking of the Beast, the False-prophet, and them that were sealed with his Character, and all his worshippers. 2. The casting of them all into the lake of fire, that is, into hell, ver. 20, 3. Slaying the rest, viz. all that fought for Antichrist. The Authour of this slaughter is Christ, mounted on a white horse: The Instrument, his sword. The Ministers, the Foules, filled with the flesh of the Adversaries, Verse 21. The first part of the Chapter. The Gratulation of the heavenly Inhabitants for the righteous Judgements of GOD, and the mar∣riage of the LAMBE drawing neere. 1. And after these things, I heard a great voyce of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia, salvation, and glory, and honour and power, unto the Lord our God. 2. For true and righteous are his judgements, for hee hath judged the great whore; which did corrupt the Earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand. 3. And again they said, Alleluia: and her smoak rose up for ever & ever. 4. And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts fell down, and worshipped God, that sate on the throne, saying, Amen, Alleluia. 5. And a voyce came out of the throne, saying, praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that feare him, both small and great. 6. And I heard as it were the voyce of a great multitude, and as the
voyce of many waters, and as the voyce of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord our God omnipotent reigneth. 7. Let us be glad and rejoyce, and gi bour to him▪ for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready. 8. And to her was granted, that shee should bee arrayed in sine linnen, clean and white, for the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of Saints. 9. And he saith unto mee, Write, Blessed are they that are called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lambe. And hee saith unto mee, These are the true sayings of God. THE COMMENTARY. 1. ANd after these things I heard a great voyce] Now comes forth the joyfull Company, which celebrate the righteous Iudgements of God: and as other things, so in speciall such plagues as be∣fore were mentioned to be inflicted on the Romish Babylon. In the words is no difficulty: therefore we passe them over, and come to the Coherence. The use of this rejoy∣cing in the thesis and hypothesis. They who say in the Hypothesis, that the ruine of Babylon shall affoard unto the Saints a most delightfull argument of rejoycing and praising God: and in the Thesis, that the Saints, however they bee many times offended in regard of the prosperity of the wicked in this life, and complaine as if God dealt hardly with them; yet at length they shall perfectly know, and openly confesse, that the Iudgements of God are true and righteous in the whole government of the world: They draw indeed a true and profitable doctrine from this place, which is wor∣thy of observation. Notwithstanding in my opinion they doe not sufficiently touch the occasion and cause of the renewing of the Vision by this Chore or Company. The occasion indeed Gagnaeus and Brightman do rightlie observe in their notes, The occasi∣on of the re∣joycing from ver. 20. Chap. 18. where the Angell exhorted the Saints to rejoyce over the judgement of Babylon: Rejoyce over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles, &c. whereupon Heaven and all the Saints do now rejoyce, and joyfully applaud the Iudgement of God. But what is the reason that not here onely, but formerly also the Company of Rejoycers are so often brought in? For the Company of the foure and twenty El∣ders and foure Beasts singing to God sitting on the Throne, and to the Lamb, made entrance to the second Vision touching the Booke sealed with seven Seales, Chap. 4. & 5. The said Company of Elders closed up the third Ʋision with praising God and his Kingdome, Chap. 11. In the fourth Ʋision after the Antichristian perse∣cution the Company of 144000. sealed ones sang a new song before the Throne, Chap. 14. Againe the Company of Harpers began the fift Vision with the Song of Moses and of the Lambe, Chap. 15. Now here the Company of Rejoycers con∣clude the sixt Ʋision with rejoycing and triumphing because of the judgements of God, and the Marriage of the Lambe. The cause, I say, of this often iteration of thanksgiving and praysings, The cause of the often iteration of Gods prai∣ses. to me such seeme not to touch, who observe not that the Revelation is a Propheticall and dramaticall representation distinguished into certaine visions, and subdivided into certaine visionall Acts, which ever and anon (as we have often observed) are renew∣ed with Chores of singers both for a dramaticall decencie, as also for a sacred plea∣santnesse and delectation. In the first Act of this vision, Iohn saw the beast and the woman sitting on her, the Angell shewing the mistery thereof, and her destraction, Chap. 17. In the second Act, Three Angels proclaimed the burning of Rome, commanding the saints to go out of her, & heaven to rejoyce. There was heard also mourning &
wailing by kings, merchants, shipmasters and saylers for Romes desolation by fire. Now in the Third Act appeares on the scene, the company of Saints rejoycing in heaven, who first being divided sing artificially, by course one after the other, Haleluiah, The third Act of the second visi∣on. Praising the judgement of God: Afterward all together with one con∣sent celebrate the marriage of the Lambe. The fourth Act will at length represent unto us the last battle of the beast, & kings of the earth gathered in Harmageddon, against Christ (the which in Chap. 16. v. 26. was broken off) and the event of that battle. These things for the help of the reader I have briefly repeated, by which the matter of this whole visi∣on may be the more clearely understood. Now let us hear the Companies sing∣ing. After these things] that is after the burning of Babylon, and the mourning of the merchants. Of much people] instead whereof The old version corruptly hath it of many trumpets, both here, and v. 6. This company is no other, save that innumerable multitude, Chap. 7.9. which were clothed in robes with Palms in their hands, standing before the throne, and singing, salvation to our God. viz. The company of saints trium∣phing with Christ in heaven. Therefore he heard a voyce in heaven. Neither doe I here seeke an allegory, as some, understanding by heaven the Church. For Iohn heard the multitude visionally, singing not on earth, but in heaven: Haleluiah] The summe of the Hymne, we shewed in the analysis.  Haleluiah with the Hebrewes is, Praise ye the Lord, with an aspiration from  which in Piel and hithpael is, to praise (in Kal and Poel tobe mad) and  one of the ten proper names of God taken off from  Iehovah. With this Da∣vid begins many of his psalms. And therefore it is a word by which not onely the Iewes, but Greekes and Latines also, yea the Germaines and many other nations stir up themselves to praise and celebrate God: so that the mystery which some say lies hid under this word, in my understanding is of little Validitie. Ierom to Marcella asking why Iohn writing in Greeke useth Hebrew words, Epist. 137. answereth, because the first Church was gathered of Iewes, the Apostles would not for fear of offending the beleevers innovate any thing, but so deliver things as they had received them from the Cradle: afterward the word being to be spread among all nations, they could not alter what once they had taken up. But this doth not touch the cause why these heavenly inhabitants praise God in the Hebrew tongue. Perhaps it may be to signifie the conjunction of the new Church with the old: for which cause also certaine other Hebrew termes as Hosanna, Amen, Abba, &c. Seem to have been commonly used among Christians. Brightmans reason (If true) were plausible, viz. that hereby after the over∣throw of Rome, the Church of the Gentiles shall provoke the Jewes unto the faith. The said Author before on Chap. 16. touching the sixt vial powred out on Euphra∣tes, affirmeth, that by the Kings of the East who should passe Euphrates, being dryed up, are meant the Jewes who then in great number shall be converted to Christ, according to the prophesie of the Apostle Rom, 11. which conjecture is indeed pious, but of lit∣tle certainty, as we there shewed. Salvation and honour] All Greeke copies have it  to the Lord our God: The kings copie  of our God. Ʋnderstand  or  Is or bee: the sense almost being the same. But in stead of the four atributes, salvation and glory and honour and power to the Lord our God, the old version hath onely three, Praise and Glory and Power to our God, Omitting  Honour, and  to the Lord. Observe O Papists the manifest defects of your version. These same attributes the heavenly inhabitants sang to God, Chap. 5. v. 13. & 7. v. 12. Where we expounded every of them. Here onely we observe two things. First, that this is no wish by which the glorifyed Saints and Angels pray that
God might obteine these good things, as if he had them not: for he is  The God of sufficiencie, possessing all salvation, glory, honour, and power in himself, and abundantly powring the same forth on his creatures: But it is a confession of praise, in which the saints of heaven celebrate and professe that God hath all these good things, and that all creatures ought to ascribe the same to God. The second, that this rejoycing over Babylons destruction, is not  a rejoycing in evill. For they rejoyce not over the afliction and torments of the whore, which were contrarie to charity: but that the glory of God is vindicated from her blasphemies, the which is very good. Wee therefore, after the example of this multitude, ought to ascribe our salvati∣on, & all honour, glory and power to the Lord our God, that is, with all our hearts and soules to blesse the Lord for his incomprehensible mercies unto us in Christ Iesus. 2. Because true and righteous are his judgements,] This cause of the saints rejoy∣cing shewes more clearely what I erewhile said, that they insult not over the tor∣ments of the wicked out of an evill affection, but are wholy bent in celebrating the righteousnesse and glory of God. The first cause, that the judgements are true and righteous, is generall and before expounded on Chap. 16. v. 7. and Chap. 15. v. 4. The wicked under their punishments like dogs barke against God, as if he were a tyrant. The saints on the contrary silence their blasphemous mouthes by confessing that the Lord in punishing of them is not tyrannicall in the least, but a most righteous Iudge. For it is just to give every one his own: but in order of justice punishment for wickednesse is due to the ungodly. When therefore God punisheth them, his judgements are righteous. And true] that is, certainely to be accomplished: for though God doth a long while delay the punishments threatned against the wicked, yet at length he truly executes the same. So Psal. 9 v. 9. Jehovah judgeth the world in righteousnesse, he mi∣nisters judgement to the people in uprightnesse. For he hath judged the great whore] Specially they celebrate two examples of Gods righteousnesse, as it were the neerest matter of their joy: the condemnation of the great whore, and the vindicating of the servants of God. Both being mani∣festly worthy to be celebrated. For that Great whore hath corrupted the earth by her fornication. Now what is more agreeable to justice, then that such a pest which hath defiled the inhabitants of the earth with her most filthy whoredome, should be adjudged unto eternall damnation. Moreover with her hand, that is tyranical∣ly, with fire and sword she hath oppressed, & killed the servants of God. Now it is a righteous thing to avenge the innocent blood, and such as are uniustly oppres∣sed. But God hath avenged the blood of his servants on the whore, by rendring unto her such like punishments, as she had before exercised. For the destruction of the adversaries is the vindicating of the Saints. Furthermore who this great whore is, what her whoredoms, what earth, and how she hath corrupted the same: need not on this place to be repeated. Let us learne to acknowledge and celebrate Gods righteous judgements in de∣stroying the adversaries: And continuallie labour to walk with fear and trem∣bling, intreating the Lord that the like judgements fal not upon us. 3. And again they said] They conclude the thankesgiving by repeating the exhortation of Halleluiah, to testifie the greatnesse of their joy. They adde further. And her smoake] AND, hath here an adversative sense: as if he had said: Yee praise God: But the whore shall burne for ever and Ever. Ribera interpreteth the smoake more coldly of the remembrance of the burning, which saith he, is alwaies to re∣maine, and shall never be forgotten. But they amplifie Gods judgement on the whore, because the smoake of her burning and torment shall have no end but remaine for ever, from Chap. 14. v. 11. And the smoak of their torment shall ascend up for ever and E∣ver, signifying the everlasting torments that attend Antichrist and his followers in
hell fire: If perhaps the miserable Romanists by feare thereof might bee deterred from their Idolatrie. Rose up for ever] The present flame of her burning which they shall see with their eyes, yeelds matter of joy. Now the smoake ascendeth up. Therefore Ba∣bylons condition is altogether deplorable. 4 And the foure and twentie Elders] The former Chore desisting, another comes in, singing, that so God might be praised with a most sacred Symphonie of all the heavenly dwellers. This was the company of Elders and Beasts often before men∣tioned Chap. 4.14. and Chap. 5.8. and Chap. 7. 11. and 11. 16. Here they serve as it were for a heavenly senate (reverend in gravitie and majesty) unto the former promiscuous multitude of the heavenly inhabitants, whose joy, and celebration of Gods judgements they approue of by their most grave acclamation, closing up, and as it were sealing the same in two words, Amen, Halleluiah: as if they should say, It is so, as ye have before sung: salvation and glory is truely due to our God: His judgements are truely righteous: Iust indeed is the condemnation of the whore, and the vindicating of the innocent blood of the saints: for Amen with the He∣brews is a particle confirming the truth, and signifies, Truely, certainly. God there∣fore is to be truely celebrated with praises. Now who these Elders and Beasts are, hath been largely declared on Chap. 4. and Chap. 5. The Elders represented the Company or Chore of Patriarchs and Prophets: The Beasts the Apostles: although (as hath bin before shewed) these may also be understood of the stationary Angels before the throne of God. Who∣ever they bee, certaine it is, they are a more honourable company of the Church triumphant. what the a∣doration of the heaven∣ly inhabi∣tants is. For the Elders weare golden crownes on their heads, and are clo∣thed in white raiment, holding harpes and golden vials in their hands, &c. And they sit upon foure and twenty thrones, being as it were honorable administrators of the judgements and counsels of God: But for reverence sake in this solemne as∣semblie they fall downe from their thrones on their faces, before the feete of the divine Majesty, casting off undoubtedly their crowns also (as before Chap. 4.10.) and religiously worship and adore God, togither with the Beasts. This adoration was an admiration of the powers of God, a celebration of his judgments and workes, a ready publishing of his mercies, and lastly a testimony of their reli∣gious subjection. In which they afford us an example of religious worship and thankesgiving. For if the Saintes in heaven who are come to their journeyes end praise God incessantly: how much more ought wee poore traveillers to worship the Lord without intermission. Neither doe they adore one another, but God sitting on the throne. And therefore such as direct their worship unto others, shall never come to this Chore: of which thing the Angell will by and by instruct us. 5 And a voyce came out of the throne] Both companies had finished their Hal∣leluiah: notwithstanding the song of praises was not as yet ended. Therefore a∣nother Chore is invited unto a new gratulation, by another voyce. A new voice out of the throne] not of God sitting on the throne, as before Chap. 14.13. A voyce from heaven: and Chap. 16.17. A voyce out of the Temple. The author of this voyce is not shewed, being uncertaine: yet we may easily gather, that it was divine, because it proceeds out of the throne: yet not of God sitting, but of the Lambe standing on the throne: because he saith: Praise our God. Now Christ acknowledged God to be his and ours: because he is the Lamb and Media∣tour, as if he should say, The prayses of God, touching his righteous judgements, are not yet ended: There remaine other works and benefits farre exceeding these judgements to be celebrated. What these are, the following Hymne shall teach us. Now whom doth he invite? All ye his servants] The servants of God are all that are and shall be saved: both Angels & men: For also the good Angels are preserved by grace in their integrity, & hence throughout the Scripturs they are named the servants of God, as being spi∣rits most ready to execute the ministries of God. But as for men, they are Gods
servants, both such who continually serve him with praises in heaven, viz the saints triumphing with Christ: as also who yet are here on earth serving him with seare in faith and true piety viz. all the Elect and faithfull of the Church militant here below. Whereas therefore the heavenly Herauld doth stir up in generall all the servants of God to praise him, and in speciall all his fearers, he sheweth, that not on∣ly God is to be celebrated by the companies of the heavenly inhabitants apart, but with ioynt wishes and voyces of all Gods servants together, as wel of Angels, as men, as wel of the Saints triumphant in heaven, as of the militant on earth, that is, by the vniversall consent or accord of the whole Catholick Church: This exposi∣tion is not obscurely confirmed by the Vniversal particle All ye his servants, No one therefore of Gods servants is to be silent. The distribution also prooves the same small and great] Therefore both children and old men, men and Angels are invited to this duty of prayse. Hence now may easily be understood, what is meant by that great multitude, whose loud and terrible sound Iohn did erewhile hear. Moreover we see this voyce belongs to us also. For if God be our God, we must wholie imploy our selves in his service, we must not be the servants of men, and slaves of sinne: but if we be Gods servants, him we must feare above all things and onely worship. If we feare God then let us joyne our selves to this Chore, and gladly celebrate the Lord with all his servants. 6 And I heard as it were a voyce] Behold the essicacie of the heavenly voyce, the willing obedience of Gods servants: being commanded to prayse the Lord, they all readily lift up their voyce to his praise. Of a great multitude] The old version corruptly renders it a great Trumpet. This great multitude, is the Vniversall Church of Gods servants in heaven and earth: as we see by the voice comming out of the throne. Therefore this voyce & accord is great, divers, and weighty, as it were of many waters, running swiftly through un∣even places (so as a man cannot heare himselfe speake) or of many thunders with whose eccho heaven and earth is filled. Thus the holy Ghost aggravates this voyce, not that it was terrible (saue to the ungodly) but so vehement and weightie, that the Beast and Dragon with all his for∣nicators might, yea were forced to hear the same. By such like metaphors the voice of the 144000 sealed ones is amplified Chap. 14. 2. See the exposition on that place. And they are taken out of Ierem. 51.55. This song of prayses be∣longs to the last times. Now it will appeare from the following Hymne, that this whole praysing song belonges to the last times, not long before Christs comming to judgement: in which undoubtedly we now live: and therefore we are bound to joyn our voyce with the same: the Church triumphant sings in heaven: & the church militant hath with joynt desires almost these hundred yeers (since which the Church began to be purged from the dregs of Antichrist) sung, & praised the Lord, because he hath set up among us the kingdome of his Son, and freed us from the tyranny of Popery, intreating him at length to deliver that great whore to condemnation, and avenge the blood of his servants on her. Halleluiah for the Lord reigneth] They begin the hymne as before, with Halleluiah: But the argumentes of their joy are more magnificent then before: And they are two. One properly concernes the glorie of God: the other of the Church. Of the former they say: Because the Lord God omnipotent hath reignea] that is, hath now at length declared that he is truely king omnipotent. God indeed alwaies reigneth, How God now reign∣eth and is to reign af∣terward. and did never cease governing the world and Church. But now his kingdome is obscure because of Antichrist and wicked mens cruelty: who hitherto have as it were without punishment tumultuously raged in his kingdome. But at length God shall reigne alone and manifestly, having sub∣dued all adversaries and abolished all powers in this life. Then he shall be said truely to reigne, when he shall appeare so to reigne, as that in regard of his follow∣ing glory, he seemed not to have reigned before. For many things are then said to bee, when they begin to be manifested. Therefore he is said then to reign, not
according to the essence, but forme of his kingdome, in which respect also Paul saith 1. Cor. 15. That then Christ is to deliver up the Kingdome to God his Father. 7. Let us bee glad and rejoyce] By another more effectuall argument, they stirre up to gladnesse and praysing of God, from the circumstance of time. At joyfull times we are to rejoyce: But weddings are times of gladnes, then the bridegroom, and the bride with great applause of kindred and friends goe to embrace each other. But least they might seeme to rejoyce for their owne good onely, they adde, And let us give honour to God] Not by conferring on him that which he hath not, but by acknowledging, and celebrating his infinite justice and power in punish∣ing the wicked, his goodnesse and mercy in vindicating his servants, the which he hath from, and by himselfe. So that they shew unto us the fountaine and manner of true rejoycing in God: For then we truely rejoyce, when we give honour to God, when we acknowledg and confesse with a willing mind, that God is the author of that good we enjoy: so saith the Apostle, I rejoyced greatly in the Lord, Philip. 4.10. and bids us to re∣joyce in the Lord our God, that is, to attribute the glory of all good to God. Hi∣therto the exhortation. Now let us consider the reason. Because the marriage of the Lambe is come] The Lamb is Christ, as before we shew∣ed: His wedding or marriage, is the solemne and most joyfull copulation of the bride and bridegroom. Christ is the bridegroom, so he calleth himself Marc. 2. 19.20. 1. Tim. 2.6. Ephe 5.27.26. and so the Baptist cals him, Iohn 3.29. But who is the bride? The holy Catholick Church 2. Cor. 11.2. Ephes. 5.26. whom Christ hath espoused by giving himselfe a ransome for her, sanctifying and cleansing her with the washing of water, by the word, to present her to himselfe a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, &c? According to the promise: I will betroth thee unto mee for ever in righteousnesse, Hosea 2.19. and in judgement, and in loving kindnesse, and in mercies: J will even betroth thee unto mee in faithfulnesse, and thou shalt know the Lord. Now although this betrothing between Christ and the Church be in this life, so that wee are Christs, and Christ ours, and dwels by faith in our hearts: neverthe∣lesse the marriage is not yet. Now is the espousal time, the marriage being differred to the end of the world. For the bridegroom is yet as it were in a farre countrey, viz. in the heavens: neither is the bride as yet prepared: because all the Elect that are to be gathered, are not yet gathered: Therefore the time of joy is not yet come: But the marriage shallbe in the end of the world: for then the Bride∣groom shall returne, and the Bride shalbe prepared in her perfect beautie, for the embracing of her bridegroom: and then shalbe the time of perfect joy. Then all Gods servants and all his fearers, both small and great shall sing together, Let us be glad, and rejoyce, and give honourto him, for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made her selfe ready. This marriage in one word denotes the full and finall redemption and glorification of the Churchof the Elect with Christ in hea∣ven. The marriage is come] For, is neer or at hand. Therefore this voyce belongs to the Church of the last times, in which we are, and therfore we are stirred up to glad∣nesse, that with joyfullnesse we may meet our bridegroom, who is comming unto us. They adde: And his wife hath made her selfe ready] This is spoken after the manner of men: For the marriage day being come, the bride prepareth and ador∣neth her selfe with nuptiall ornaments, that in her full beautie she may be brought to the embracing of her bridegroom. They call her, wife, for bride, because of the neerenesse of marriage: For now indeed so long as she remaines in the world, she is but hetrothed: How the e∣spoused and wife differs. but then she shall be the wife, when she is brought unto the heavenly house of her bridegroom. For the betrothed bride is one not yet deli∣vered over to the bridegroome, but remaining at her owne house: but the wife is delivered and goeth into the house of the bridegroom. Or the word  is a name of the Sex: signifying a woman, whether it be meant of an unmarried
maiden, or married wife, as mat. 1.20. & Chap. 19. v. 3.5.8.9. & 22. v. 24.25. and Luk. 14.20. The which I note because of the place, 1. Corin. 9.5. have we not power to lead about a sister () a wife: where some also of the fa∣thers urge that the word  signifies any woman, nor a wife, that so they might maintaine the impure Coelibate of the clergie: but it is without authority of scripture, or historie. Hath prepared her selfe] This favours not the Palagian strength & preparation of free-will. For it presently followeth, And it was given or granted her, that shee should be arayed in fine linnen, &c. Therefore the ornament of the spouse is freely given by the bridegroome: so that shee hath it not of her selfe: Neither doth the Text speake of preparation to grace, but to glory: Now she prepares her selfe by grace, prepared, or granted her of Christ her bridegroom. For the bride receiveth her ornament from the bridegroome, as it is said: Hee sanctifyed her with the washing of water, by the word, that he might present her to himself, &c. And, Eph. 26. Ephe. 2.10. we are created un∣to good workes, which God hath before prepared () that we should walk in them. Notwithstanding we also make our selves ready, because by faith we put on the ornament of the bridegroome, and in holinesse of life declare our faith. The multitude therefore thus speake, to teach the duty of the bride, what shee ought to do, and doth al the time of her espousall: To wit, she must & doth make her selfe ready for her marriage at hand. Like as the Apostle saith, If a man purge himselfe from these, he shall be a vessell unto honour. And: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthi∣nesse of the flesh and Spirit. 2. Tim. 2.21. 2 Cor. 1. Before we goe forward, Alcasars impudent fiction is to be refuted, who would obtrude to us the Babylonish strumpet instead of Christs spouse, eagerly contending, that this wife of the Lambe, can be no other, save the Romane Church. And why? First, this place alludes, saith he, unto the history of Hester, who alone, among many Ʋirgins became wife to Ahasuerus. Secondly, she is the wife of the Lamb, Alcasar Pag. 849. to whose manchild was given an iron rod to rule the nations. But this rod is given to the Church of Rome alone above other Churches. Thirdly, Onely the Queen, saith he, married to Solomon, Ps. 45. and Cant. 6.7. (unto which places is clearely alluded in this marriage) is wife of the Lambe. But onely the Romish Church is that Queen. Therefore the Church of Rome onely is wife of the Lamb. Who can withhold laughter at such childish fopperies? The first allusion is feined, and were it granted, yet the assumption is false, viz. that the Romane Church is that, which Hester was. In the second, he goes altogether from the matter. For to rule the nations with a rod of iron, is promised to every one that overcommeth, Rev. 2.27. But the iron rod with which the Pope smiteth, not the nations, but all Churches, he hath re∣ceived from the dragon who gave his power and throne to the beast, Rev. 13.2. In the third, he againe feineth an allusion, which is not: and if it were, yet could it not beare such a sence, which this flatterer would hence draw by feined allusions. Wherefore to his fopperies we oppose a true and solid demonstration, which he hath framed against himselfe, not being able to take away the difficultie there∣of. viz. The demon∣stration a∣gainst Al∣casars dream. Shee is the wife and bride of the Lamb, whom the Lamb hath redeemed to himself, washed and sanctifyed in his own blood, Ephe. 5.16. Rev. 1.5. and to whom he gives life eternall, Iohn. 10.28. But this onely is the whole Catholick Church of the first borne, Act. 20.28. Hebr. 12.23. Therfore she only is the wife & bride of the Lamb. Morover the bride & wise of the Lamb is no harlot, but the Romish Church, that now is, is the great whore, siting on the beast (as before we heard) who daily commits whordome with her idols and graven images. Therefore she is not the Lambs bride and wise, but is groslie deceived by this Sycophant. Now we goe forward. 8 And to her was given that she should be arayed in fine linnen] Now he sheweth
how the bride hath made her selfe ready: First, by putting on nuptiall ornaments. The old version renders the passive  that shee should be clothed, actively, that shee might cover her selfe: the sense indeed being the same: yet not so much the active as passive clothing of the bride is intimated: although the active be not excluded. For the metaphor is borrowed from an earthly bride, who both is arayed by others, and puts on ornaments her selfe also. Secondly: whence she hath her ornaments. Not of her selfe. For so she is desti∣tute, naked and uncovered, Ezech. 16.7. But  it is given her] to wit, by her bridegroome. He persists in the metaphor of a bride, unto whom, if poore, her rich bridegrome of his owne cost giveth wedding garments, that she may be∣come beautiful, and adorned for marriage estate, whence we are put in mind of our naturall want and poverty: Rom. 3.23. for we all come short of the glory of God, beeing naked and destitute: Also of Gods beneficence, unto whose liberall hand we owe all the good we enjoy, that so none of us with mercenary hypocrites should boast of our owne merits. Thirdly he shewes what this ornament, & what the wedding garment of the bride is: First, figuratively: Fine linnen, cleane and white]  is a kind of most tender, pretious and white linnen, as we shewed Chap. 18.12. touching the merchandise of the whore, beeing like our purest silke. Now if any man might thinke, seeing the merchants of the whore doe likewise sell fine linnen, whether the garment of the bride and whore be the same? I Answer: There is a twofold fine linnen. The one true: the other adulterate. The true is given to the bride by Christ: The adulte∣rate, viz the Saints merits instead of Christs, is sold by the Popes spirituall agents. Secondly: they declare the wedding garment properlie, yet by a figurative phrase. For the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of the Saints. Gr.  the righ∣teousnesses or justifications: The causall, for, containes a reason, why he called the fine linnen, cleane and white: for, that is, because it is righteousnesse, which is cleane and pure, because it is conforme to the Law and to God: without which no∣thing can be cleane and white, because the Law is holy, and God most pure. It is a metonymicall phrase, fine linnen are the righteousnesses, For, it signifies the righte∣ousnesse of the saints: As, The seven kine are seven yeeres, For, they signify seven yeers: and so the like of other sacramentall phrases. Now it is demanded, what these righteousnesses are? Ribera interpreteth it of merits, The Justfications, saith he, that is, workes of righteousnesse and holilie done. But the word  given, contradicts him. For this righteousnesse is freely given by the bridegroom. But good workes are not freely granted, but performed by us. Yea, saith he, they are also given, because we do them of grace, and they are the gifts of God. It is true indeed: But good works cannot be  righteousnesses: First: because they are not pure and cleane, Isa. 64.6. Isa. 3 2. Eccles. 7.20. Mat. 22.12. but defiled with blemishes: for all our righte∣ousnesses are as a menstruous cloth. In many things we offend all. There is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good and sinneth not. The Guest in the Gospel had good works: in that he obeyed the call and sate down with others at the banquet: and yet was not clothed in fine linnen pure and white, But wanted the wedding garment. Lastly the good workes of the Saints what ever they bee, cannot bee merits, see∣ing they are due debts: Now nothing how good soever beeing a debt, can be rightly considered as meritorious. Therefore this fine linnen or wedding garment is Christ himself with his righte∣ousnesse, This gar∣ment of fine linnen is Christ, Ie∣rem. 23.6. 1. Cor: 1.30. with which we being clothed are acceptable to God: For Iehovah is our righteousnesse, that is, he is made righteousnesse unto us: in consideration whereof the saints are said Rev. 7.15. to be clothed in white robes, not because they had ador∣ned themselves with merits of good works, but because they had washed and made white their robes in the blood of the Lamb. Now we put on this garment outwardlie indeed through the word & Sacraments, hence it is said: As many as have bin Bapti∣zed into Christ, have put on Christ: INWARDLY through faith & the holy Ghost.
Therefore are they called the righteousnesses or justifications of the saints, because they are imputed to the Saints by Christ the bridegroome. But why in the plurall  Righteousnesses? Is it because Christ hath many righteousnesses? I answere, he hath indeed many, the Divine, humane, active, passive, &c. but the multitude respects not this, but use the plurall because of the pluralitie of saints: of whom every one shall have his righteousnesse from Christ: neverthelesse they all put on one Christ, and shall wholie possesse him. Thus there shall be many righteousnesses. Ribera demandeth whether this marriage be the same with that in Mat. 22.1. Vndoubtedly it is: save onely that there is mention made of the calling to the wed∣ding, here of the solemnitie and marriage it selfe. 9 And he saith unto mee, write] To wit the Angel, who hitherto had familiar∣ly spoken unto Iohn, and before also Chap. 17.1. had said, I will shew thee the judge∣ment of the great whore. For he commands him in speciall to write (besides those things which he had hitherto seen, heard, and written) the joyfull sentence of the Lambs marriage: Blessed are they that are called unto the marriage Supper of the Lamb: For this is a new matter of joy: that the wedding guests should be blessed. But why? I. Because the guests themselves shall be the spouse and wife of the Lamb: now the bride is blessed. II. Because the feast is not earthly and vanishing, but Eternall life and glory in heaven. Vnto the Supper] Why not unto the dinner? Is it because they were wont to keep weddings towards evening, or Supper time? But in Mat. 22.4. the king saith: I have prepared my dinner. Therefore I rather think it is called a supper, be∣cause the marriage shall be at the Evening, or end of the world. Mat: 20.16. But how shall all that are called unto the Supper be blessed, seeing our Saviour saith, Many are called, few chosen? I Answer: Some are onely called externallie: and of such Christ there others inwardlie also in faith and newnesse of life: and of these the Angell speakes in this place. For these called, are all predestinated, Rom. 8.30. as the Apostle teacheth, whome he did predestinate, them he also called, justified, and glorifyed. Neither doth Ribera denie, but confesseth this. These are the true sayings of God] Wherefore is this Clause added: The more to confirme the hope of blessednes unto us. These words, saith hee, are not mine, but Gods, and therefore are most true, and must certainely be beleeved. Indeed all Gods words are true in themselves, because God is trueth, and cannot lie: But in speciall we ought to be most fullie perswaded of this promise of blessednesse, viz. That if wee obey the heavenly call on earth, then we shall enjoy the blessednesse of the Lambes marriage in heaven. But the doctrine of Sophisters denyes the truth hereof. For they wil have the wedding guests alwaies to doubt of their blessednes, & feare as beeing deceived, that is, not to beleeve, but hee that beleeveth not God, 1 Iohn 5.10. makes God a lyar. Therefore the  or certaintie of the salvation of the Godlie is here established.
The Second part of the CHAPTER. IOHN is forbidden to adore the Angel. 10. And I fell at his feet to worship him: and he said to me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Iesus, Worship God: for the testimony of Iesus is the spirit of Prophecie. THE COMMENTARY. 10 AND I fell] Thus farre of the things which Iohn heard: Now followes, what was done, both by himself, and the Angel. Antichrists kingdome must be for∣saken He fell at the feet of the Angel to worship him: The Angel forbids it, because it is an abominable thing that a servant should be worshipped by his fellow servant, God alone must bee worshipped. A remarkeable place of the Saintes infirmities, and the pronenesse of mans nature to idolatrie: of the office of Angels, and of religious a∣doration, which is due to God alone: refuting most clearly both the blasphemous madnesse of the Romane Antichrist, why Iohn would wor∣ship the An¦gel. who not onely suffereth, but commandeth and forceth Emperours and Princes, to fall downe and kisse his feet, and worship him as a God on earth: as also the horrible idolatrie of Papists, who not onely worship and adore Angels, but dead men (beeing by the Pope mustered among his Saints) and their bruit images also: which one thing sufficiently sheweth that the Papacie is Antichrists kingdome, and must be wholie left by the Saints. Touching this fact of the Apostle, it may be demanded: Why now he would worship the Angel, and not before? with what kind of worship? and whether rightlie? Some say, it was because he knew him to bee greater then himself: but this is no satisfactorie answer: For not every one excelling others, is to be worshipped: Iohn knew that the Elders, & diverse Angels before spoken of, were greater then himself, and yet he fell not downe to worship them. Perhaps the most sweete prophesie of the certaine blessednes of the wedding guests of the Lamb so delighted him, as for joy he fel at his feet, & would have worshipped him in way of thanks∣giving. Perhaps he thought the Angel to be Christ, and therefore would reve∣rence him with religious worship: But all what is spoken on this place touching Iohns intention is uncertaine. Therefore I passe it by. It was no civil kind of adoration (as we read that Abraham and Lot civillie worshipped Angels, It was no civill ado∣vation. taking them for travellers) but religious, as evidently appears by the Angels refusall: neither doe the Papists denie it: but say there is a twofold religious worship: One due to God alone, which they call  Latreia: the o∣ther due to Angels and saints called  Douleia. But they are at variance, which of these two Iohn ascribed to the Angel. Lib. 1. de Beat. sanct. Cap. 1. Bellarmin holds it was the worship of Latreia; for he saith, Iohn was reprooved not for the errour of worship, but for the errour of the person, because he thought him to be God to whom Latreia is onely due, In Apoc. 19. sect. 16. and not an Angel, to whom Douleia doth appertaine. Ribera on the contrarie denies that it was the worship of Latreia, or that Iohn er∣red in the kind of worship, or in the person: but that he would have worshipped
him as an Angel and with a worship due to Angels. Behold how well these wor∣shippers of Angels doe agree, whom the Apostle most plainlie condemneth Collos. The diffe∣rence about this adora∣tion. 2.18. Besides if Ribera speake truely, Why then would not the Angell admit thereof? he would not, saith he, be worshipped by Iohn, in honour of Christ, as shewing how highlie he esteemed of Christ, seeing he so much honoured his faithfull friends. ALCASAR to reconcile his companions, and flatter the Pope, Vestig. Pag. 856. saith it is in vaine to be troubled about rendring a reason, why the Angel refused to be wor∣shipped, because he was not an Angel, but the Apostle PETER, before whom as chief Priest and Christs Vicar Iohn prostrated himself to kisse his feet. But passing by this fopperie, FIRST the distinction of religious worship into Latreia and Douleia is denyed, because there is no such thing. For both are one and the same worship due to God alone, neither doe the words Latreia and Douleia more differ among Grecians, then the words GLADIVS and ENSIS with the Latines, Latreia & Douleia signifie one thing: which all know who understand the Greek, or have read the Greek Bible. SECONDLY it is false that the religious worship of Douleia is sutable to creatures: and so much (to let passe other things) the Angell here refusing it, and Riberas confession doe sufficiently evince. They alledge Austin as author of the distinction, but they deprave his minde and words. Lib. 10. de C. D. cap. 1 It is true indeed he saith that the worship due to God alone is to be called Latreia: although there be little weight in it: Forasmuch as Latreia also is rendred to men: It is true also that he so distinguisheth Latreia from Douleia, as he makes the former due to God onely, the latter to creatures also: although this likewise is not very sound: Augustines opinion vindicated. for in scripture Douleuein and Latreuein, signifie to serve, whether God or creatures. But it is false that Austin makes Douleia to be a religious worship due to Angels or Saints: But saith, that Douleia is onely a civill worship, by which we honour men of worth they being alive, but denyes, that a religious Douleia is to be rendred to saintes de∣parted: Let us not, saith he, maintaine the worship of dead men: De vera re∣lig. Cap. 55. because if they have lived godlie: we may not judge of them, that they seek such honours: but they would have that GOD he worshipped by us, &c. They are therefore to be honoured for imitation, Not worshipped for religion sake: And afterwards: Wherefore we honour them in Charity, not with (DVLEIA) service: neither do we build temples unto them: For thus they wil not be honoured of us: because they know that we our selves, if we be upright, are the temples of the most High God. This very thing also doth the said Author affirme De civitat. Dei. Lib. 8. Cap. 27. and Lib. 22. Contra Faustum. Cap. 21. But the Papists doe build temples to saints departed, and worship them with re∣ligious Douleia both which Austin denies to be lawfull, but granteth that the dead are to be honoured only in charity and imitation. Thus Austin, whom they would make their Patron, openly refutes them. Thirdly, Riberas fiction is false, that Iohn would have worshipped the Angel, with the worship of Douleia only: For so from their Hypothosis he ought not to have bin reprooved: Besides this foolish glosse is contradicted by the commandement of the Angel: Worship God: For the worship Iohn would have rendred to him, he commandeth to ascribe the same to God, But he commandeth to render to God the worship of Latreia: Therefore Iohn would have rendred that to the Angel. But granting the thing which Ribera would have, yet the worship of Angels is thereby overthrowne. For they themselves denie that Latreia is to be rendred to Angels, Now Duleia the Angel refuseth by his owne supposition. Therefore neither the worship of Latreia, nor of Duleia is due to Angels. Moreover the cause Ribera feineth of the Angels refusal, is false and frivolous. False: because the Angel makes his owne person, not the reverence of Christ, the reason thereof, I am thy fel∣low servant. It is also frivolous: For so the Angel ought to have worshipped Iohn, that he might honour Christ in his Minister or servant. But the Angll was not ig∣norant, that he also was Christs Minister, and indeed greater then Iohn, as shall appeare Chap. 22. Therefore he ought not to have refused this worship, that in him Christ might have been honoured. Behold what shifts idolaters are put too,
and how they are ensnared by themselves. Now whether Iohn did well or not, Whether Iohn did well in worship∣ping the Angel. is no great question: Rightly (saith Ribera) he adoreth the messenger of the most High God, declaring most joyful things unto him: But this is false: because not Gods nessenger, but God himselfe must be adored: otherwise all the Iesuites, who call themselves messengers of the most High God, and companions of Iesus, ought religiously to be worshipped by us, and so much perhaps they desire. But the Angel forbids the thing: Therefore Iohn did erre, either through humane frailtie, or by mistaking the person. Otherwise the Angel should have reprooved him vnjustly: For that which is rightly done, is unjustly reprooved: And therefore Bellarmin contradicts himself, in affirming so boldlie: Lib, 1. A∣dorson. Cap. 14. That Angels in respect of themselves are to be worshipped, and yet they doe well in refusing to be worshipped, This Italian supposeth that they may sport with Angels in religious worship, as they use to doe in their complements, where one servilely bowing himself, is ambitiously restrained by the other: And thus also Alcasar the spaniard toyeth. See thou doe it no:] He simply forbideth al manner of religious worship, not this or that kinde, as Idolaters feine. In the Greek the words are  See to, Least: breaking of his speech as it were for haste, the sooner to lay hold on Iohn, and hinder him from worshipping of him, To worship the crea∣ture, an a∣bom inable wickednes. to signify how great an abomination it is, religiously to worship an Angel or any creature. Therefore the Angel refuseth the honour of worship simply, whether we respect the kind of honour, or Iohns intention. For the honour was unlawfull: because no religious worship is due to the creature, but onely to God: Iohns intention also was erronious: for he erred either in the fact or in the person, intending to worship him, whom he might not, or thinking him to be, who he was not. But undoubtedly his errour was not in the person, but in the Fact. I am thy fellow servant] The reasons why the Angel refuseth this strange honour, are two. The first is taken from his person, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy bre∣thren: as if he had said: It is no way lawfull to worship fellow servants: because hereby we should make our selves servants of servants. But the Angels are our fel∣low servants. Therefore it is not lawfull to worship Angels. This argument of the Angel cannot by any destinction of worship be shifted of in the least. For the Sophisters themselves confesse that the worship of Latreia is not to be rendred to Angels: neither doth the worship of Duleia, by the Angels reasoning belong to them: because they are our fellow servants: the which Peresius a Popish writer (De tradit. Part. 3. Consid. 7,) hath well observed. Now they are our fellow servants, because they serve with us, the same Lord, who is God and Christ. And of thy brethren] The rest of the Apostles and ministers of Christ. That haue the testimony of Iesus] For, who preach the Gospel revealed by Iesus Christ. The phrase shewes, that the Evangelist Iohn was the writer of this pro∣phesie, who familiarlie cals the Gospel, the testimony of Iesus, as we have observed before. Worship God] The second reason is taken from that which is proper to God. The proper worship of God, is not agreeable to Angels, but God alone. But all religious a∣doration () is Gods proper worship. Therefore it belongs not to mee, but to God alone. Let Popish sophisters studie what they can, they shall never avoyd the Angels argument, vnlesse they say: Either that the Angels are more ambitious now adayes, then this Angel was: Or they must obtrude on them against their wils strange worship, and make them sacrilegious supplanters. For the Angel saith not  Worship God with Latreia: nor  worship him with Donleia: But  adore him, referring the whole kind of religious adoration to God alone. The testimony of Jesus] A reason, why he cals himself Iohns fellow servant, and of his brethren: because the same testimony of Iesus committed to Iohn and the rest
of the Apostles, was committed to him also: to wit, the spirit of revealing the prophesie to Iohn: It is a synecdoche: The reason is thus: Vnto whom the same testimony of Iesus is committed, they are fellow servants: To me and to you is commited the same testimony of Iesus: The reason: because the testimonie of Iesus is the Spirit of prophesie: But it is committed to mee to reveale this prophesie to thee: Therefore, &c. The third part of the CHAPTER. Christ prepares himself to the judgement of the Beast, and kings of the earth, with the casting of these into the Lake of fire. 11 And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he that sate upon him was called faithfull, and true, and in righteousnesse he doth judge, and make war. 12 His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crownes, and he had a name written, that no man knew but he himself. 13 And he was clothed with a vesture diptin blood, and his name is called, The Word of God. 14 And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linnen, white and cleane. 15 And out of his mouth goeth a charp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and he trea∣deth the winepresse of the fiercenesse, and wrath of Almighty God. 16 And he hath on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 17 And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cryed with a loud voyce, saying to all the fowls that fly in the middest of heaven, Come, and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God: 18 That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captaines, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free, and bond, both small, and great. 19 And I saw the Beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies ga∣thered together to make war against him that sate on the horse, and against his army. 20 And the Beast was taken, and with him the false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a Lake of fire, burning with brimstone. 21 And the remnant were slaine with the sword of him that sate upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth: and all the sowles were filled with their flesh.
THE COMMENTARIE ANd I saw heaven opened] Thus farre of what Iohn heard and did, Now what he saw, remains to be treated of, being the fourth Act of the Last vision save one: In which is represented Christ the Iudge, under the type of a glorious captain coming with a great army from heaven, Here is pro¦ved that the last judg ement is discribed in this place 2 Thes. 2.8. against the forces of the Beast, and the kings of the earth gathered together in Harmageddon, before spoken of in Chap. 16.16. And I see no reason why any should doubt that the last judgement is here described: For it is certaine by the testimony of the Apostle, that Antichrist shall not be consumed but by the brightnesse of Christs comming in the end of the world. But here the glorious comming of Christ, and the destruction of Anti∣christ is evidently prefigured. Adde to this, that the present vision is closed up in this type,  as it were, by the last Act. For the following vision is new & altogether diverse from this.  But all the former visions (the first excepted, which was speci∣al) had this common, that they ended in the last judgement, as we clearely shewed in every one of them: Therefore we may not doubt but the same thing is here re∣presented also. Neither doth Ribera deny this, if his words be well weighed. Notwith∣standing he feineth, that here is described I know not what for an invisible de∣scention of Christ from heaven before the last judgement, to succour the saintes wrestling and striving with Antichrist and his ministers. But what is his reason? Because, saith he, Antichrist shall not then be in the last judgement: But this is false and against that of the Apostle even now alledged. For Antichrist shall be destroyed by the last comming of Christ: 2. Thes. 2.8. Therefore he shall remaine till then. Now Ri∣beras fiction depends upon another, viz that Antichrist shall be killed fourty five dayes before the day of judgement, which we have before refuted, besides it is manifestly repugnant to the saying of Christ, But of that day and houre no man knoweth, no not the Angels: The which Ribera acknowledgeth in the following Chapter, v, 8. and thereby not unwittingly rejects the fiction of 45 dayes. The said Ribera doth here also not obscurely confirme our opinion, namely, that this comming of Christ proves that which before the heavenly chore had said: For the marriage of the Lamb is come:  Now the marriage shal not be til the end of the world, and full accomplishment of the punishments of the wicked. But here he commeth to be avenged on the adversaries: Therefore this shall be Christs last comming, in which both his enemies shall be abolished, and the marriage of the Lambe celebrated. For the adversaries destruction and the Saints glorification shall be both together. To this Last Act therefore of the sixt vision, doth answer (in way of Parrallel) the Last Act of the third vision in the end of Chap. 11. and the Last Act of the fourth vision in the end of Chap. 14. touching the harvest and vintage: and lastly, the last Ʋiall of the fift vision in the end of Chap. 16. For this Act doth cohere with the history of the sixt Ʋiall, touching the kings of the earth gathered together in Her∣mageddon to the battle of that Great day of God Almighty: the which battle was there broken off by the last voice , It is done: and is here at length represented, Whence we haue a fourth argument for our opinion:  for that great day of God Almighty, shall be no other but the day of judgement, Whatever Ribera feineth to the contrary in Chap. 16. Num. 11. For the seventh plague shall not be powred forth before the day of judgement (as he pretendeth) but in the very day of judge∣ment and consummation of all things: But this battle shall be in that great day of God Almighty. Therefore this battle shall be in the last day of judgement. Which things thus laid downe, the historie of this type is not obscure. For what we shall here see touching Christs comming from heaven with an army of horsemen to fight against the Beast and kings of the earth, to take and cast all of them into the lake of fire and brimstone, is indeed the very thing which Christ
saith in the Gospels. Matth. 2.30 and 25.30. Then shall ye sie the Sonne of man comming in the cloudes of hea∣ren with power and great, glory, &c. Again, When the Son of man, shall come in his glorie and all his holy Angels with him: then shall be sit upon the throne of his glory; and all nati∣ons shal be gathered before him &c. And what Iude speaketh from the prophesie of Enoch: Behold the Lord commeth with thousands of his saintes, Iude v. 14. to execute judgement upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him: And that of Paul: 1. Thes. 4.16. 2. Thes. 1.17. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voyce of the Archangel, with the trump of God: And the dead in Christ shall rise first: AND: The Lord Iesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ. Who shall be punished with overlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Lastly the best and briefest interpreter of all this warlike preparation is the same Apostle, where he saith: 2. Thes. 2.8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed whom the Lord will consume with the brightnesse of his comming. This, I say, shalbe that bright day of Christs comming: when this glorious Emperour shall come from heaven with innumerable compa∣nies: This shall be the destruction of that wicked one, when the Beast (Antichrist) and his followers shall be taken and cast into the Lake of fire. Now let us consi∣der both armies going forth to battle, with the event thereof. I saw heaven opened] In this there is no allegorie: But Iohn doth historicallie set down what he law viz, heaven opened and Christ Comming thence with his ho∣ly Angels, under the likenesse of a Captaine and troups of horsemen: as horsemen use to rush forceably through the gates of a citie, being opened. And behold a white horse] To wit, Went worth. The Maiesticall descri∣ption of the Captaine figureth the glorious comming of Christ from heaven, to judge Antichrist and the ungodly. Therefore we are not to imagine that it is meant of corporall horses, or horsemen, or swords, or any such thing. But under the allegorie of military forces, that brightnes of Christs comming (spoken of 2. Thes. 2.8) is here represented. For Generals use not to goe on foot, but to be moun∣ted on brave horses, that with facilitie and swiftnesse, they may be here & there in the army to put forward the battle the more hotlie. So Christ sits on a white-horse, by which is signifyed the divine majesty, power and glory of the judge: For the white colour here denotes excellency. Before at the opening of the first seale came forth a white horse with his rider &c. The rider indeed is the same both there and here, namely CHRIST: but the white horse is diverse. For the former signi∣fyed the Apostolicall Church, pure and white: on which Christ riding obtained the first victory over Paganisme. Here he comes forth on a white horse of majesty and heavenly glory, to obtaine the last victorie over Antichrist: And that the world might know him to be that Great Pontife of Rome: he himself causeth his God as often as he takes on a journey to be carried on a white horse with a silver bel, and to be sent a day before him with his servants and scullions. Was called faithfull and true] The General for our consolation is set foorth by diverse titles illustrating his divine Majestie and power: Other Generals indeed use to goe forth with great warlike furniture: but are ignorant of the event. For it is not in their hands to dispose of the doubtfull successe of battles, but instead of conquering they are often overcome, or slain. But the titles of this Generall do al tend to certifie us that he shall undoubtedly and certainely obtaine the victorie, bee the power of the adverse partie never so great. Faithfull] In authorising and maintaining his forces. TRƲE, in rendring wa∣ges and rewards to such as have fought stoutly: This sentence is enough for the allegorie. For faithfullnes in preserving, and trueth in rewarding souldiours doth much commend a General. And in righteousnesse he doth judge and make warre] This Captaine comes not onely as a warriour, but also as a judg: both offices he administreth in righteousnesse,
that is, righteously: He will execute Judgement righteously: because to the upright he will render the promised reward of life and glory, to the wicked the wages of death eternal, according to the declaration of the Gospel, Rom. 2. v. 6.16. And o he shal fight the battle altogether in military equity. No man shalbe injuri∣ously spoiled or hurt by his forces, which otherwise is customarie in warre. The adversaries onely shall suffer by this conflict, beeing either slain or taken. Which againe is no obscure argument to proove that here is intended that righteous judgement spoken of, Rom. 2.5. 12. And his eyes as a flame of fire] Like to the eies of the Sonne of man walk∣ing in the mids of the Candlesticks, Chap. 1.14. Flame gives light. Fire burneth. It signifies mightie quicknesse, in sight and fervencie of this General: The which vigilancie of Christ for his Church was before also set forth. But here it denotes his quicknes in perceiving al things: For he shal Iudg even the secrets of the heart: It signifyes also the providence and valour of this warriour, who not onely lookes to the necessities of his armie, but knows also the hidden plots and counsels of the adversaries, bringing the same to nothing, like as fire consumes the stubble. And on his head were many crownes] Our General weares a royall diadem on his head: The Beast also had ten crownes on his heades, or three upon one. But Our Captaine hath many more. And therefore is not lesse in Dignity, but in Power farre exceeds Antichrist, his pretended Vicar. A name written that no man knew] This name Iohn himself doth by and by ex∣presse. The word of God, The King of kings, And Lord of lords. This is the name of the Sonne of God: Ephes. 1.21. Philip. 2.10. The which name the Father hath giuen him, farre above every name: That in the name of Iesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, In earth, and under the earth. But how is it that none knowes it but himself, seeing Iohn wrote and revealed the same unto us? I answer: he saith truely, No man knowes it, because no man knowes the Sonne but the Father, and to whom the Sonne will reveale him. Now this name he revealed to Iohn, How no man knows the name of this Ge∣neral. and by him to us. Therfore all are excluded from the knowledge therof except it be by Revelation and faith. We know him, because he hath revealed himself unto us: and because we haue beleeved on the Sonne of God. The wicked know him not: Either because it is not revealed unto them: Or because being revealed, they beleeve not the same. Before, to him that overcame, was promised a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, Chap. 2.17. saving he that receiveth it: This is the name of the children of God, which none know, but such as apprehend their adoption in Christ: like as no man knoweth the sweetnesse of hony, but he that tasteth it. Therefore the Pa∣pists are prophane and wicked in requiring us to proove our adoption by argu∣ments: and because they apprehend not the same in themselves, therefore they make a mock of it: tormenting themselues and others with doubting and despare of salvation. 13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipt in blood] His bloody vesture shew∣eth that he was to returne victoriously from the slaughter of his adversaries. For he is sprinkled with blood, as if he had already fought the battle, to signify the cer∣tainty of the victory. The reason will more clearly appeare in v. 15. Now that which some doe here bring in touching Christs body appearing bloody, and his wounds yet remaining, is not to the purpose in hand. And his name is called, The Word of God.] This name Iohn in his Gospel and Epi∣stles gives to the Son of God: Whereby we know that this Captaine, is Christ the Sonne of God. As also it gives us a mark, to note, of the writer of the book. For it is the peculiar Phrase of the Apostle and Evangelist Iohn, to cal the Sonne of God  The Word of God, either in respect of his person: Because he is the wisdome of his Father: Ioh. 1.18. Or of his office, because he is the spokesman of the Father, through whom he revealeth unto us his wisedome and counsell. 14. And the armies which were in heaven] These armies accompanie Christ the Captaine, not so much for helpe, as for honour sake. For he alone, as God omni∣potent,
shall slay the adversaries with the sword of his mouth, v. 21. Therefore he comes accompanied with an armie for decencie sake: because without follow∣ers he should seeme to be no Captaine. Yet in that his armies are not harnesed but clothed in white linnen, it appears he led them forth not to fight, but to triumph: being apparelled as if they went to a marriage feast. Neither is there any other allegorie in this linnen, but to signify the purity and splendour of his armie, the which thing is also denoted by the white horses, on which they sate. And therefore both the Captaine and his armies ride on white horses, because the purity, splendour & majesty both of the head & members shall be exceeding great. Vndoubtedly, in this also the Decorum of the Metaphor is kept. For Generals and Princes love to have their followers alike in colour, both in horses, liveries &c. Furthermore it is not obscure, who these heavenly armies are: For by them the Scripture vsu∣ally understands troopes of Angels. This armie therefore represents those thou∣sands of Angels, with whom Christ will come to Iudgement, Math. 24. and 25. 15 And out of his mouth goeth a sharpe sword] Gr. . The kings Edition  a sharp two edged sword, taking it per∣haps from Chap. 1.16. and Chap. 2.16. The sense is one. And it is evident, that both this Captaine, and that Sonne of man, represents under a diverse person the same Christ, there appearing as a President and Bishop: Here as an avenger of the Church. He comes not unarmed: Nor yet burdened with any weighty kind of armes, as other Generals are used to doe with helmets, brest plates, and coates of male, that their bodies lie not open to the strokes of their adversaries, holding in their hands swords, speares, Iavilins, arrowes, &c. therewithall to strike the e∣nemy: This Captaine hath onely a sword (very sharp indeed) not in his hand, but in his mouth, which shewes that it is no material sword, which is guided not with the mouth, but the hand. Therefore this spirituall sword, proceeding out of the mouth of the Captaine, If we respect the time next going before the Last judgement, what is it, saue the word of God, of which the Apostle Ephe: 6.17. Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: And Hebr. 4.12: The word of God is quick, and powerfull, and sharper then any two edged sword. With this sword he both strikes the adversaries himself: as also commands us therewith to fight against all spiritual powers, and in speciall against Antichrist. But if we respect Christs last coming, of which is here treated, then this sharp sword proceeding out of his mouth, is the spi∣rit of his mouth, with which (according to the prophesie of the Apostles) the Lord will destroy that wicked one, to wit, his Divine power, by which at his pleasure Anti∣christ and all adversaries shall be consumed. That with it he should smite the nations] He adds the vse of the sword: viz: not therewith to defend himself or his armies (for they are subject to no dangers) but to smite the adversaries: Whom he calleth Gentiles, or the nations, because Anti∣christ vnder the name of Christianity imitates the heathens in Religion, life and tyranny: In this sense Chap. 11.2. the inward Court was said to be given to the Gentiles, that is, to Antichrist and his clergie: And at the sounding of the seventh Angel, the GENTILES VVERE ANGRY, that is, Antichrist and his followers did fret against Christ!: But wrath without power is vaine: Neither shall the holy Citie be allwayes trood under foot, because our Captaine will slay the nations with the sword. And he shall rule them with a rod of iron] He illustrates by testimony of Scri∣pture, what he had said before, touching the armour & clothing of the Captain, the former from Psa. 2. the latter from Isa. 63. For his armour he needs no more then a sword, for he is that king whom God hath annointed and set upon Sion his holy mountaine, unto whom he hath subjected the heathen, that he might breake them with a rod of iron: The word break, or bruise, the SEPTVAGJNT render  Feed or rule, whom Iohn followeth. Now what is a sword, but a rod of iron? And he treadeth the winepresse of the fiercenesse and wrath of God Almightie] Now
he renders a reason why in v. 13. he said that his vesture was dipt in blood, taking it from Isa. 63.5. where the Lord being about to take vengeance on the Edumeans, adversaries of the Church, by a Metaphor of a victorious Captain returning from the slaughter of the enemie, hauing his garment dipt in blood, also of a grape ga∣therer treading in the wine-fat, and besprinkling his garments with the blood of the grapes, Why (saith the text) art thou red in thine apparell, &c. The Lord answe∣reth, I have troden the wine-presse alone, and of the people there was none with me: For I will tread them in my anger, and trample them in my furie, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and J will staine all my raiment. It is a prophesie of Christ, who alone, assuming the clothing of our flesh, did tread the wine-presse of Gods wrath, by suffering a cruel and bloody death on the Crosse for our sakes: For when he appeared bloody on the Crosse, he triumphed over his and our enemies. Hence it is that many interpret this garment sprinkled with blood, of his humanity, according to which he shed his blood. But here is intended, not the passion, death and blood of Christ, but the destruction of the adversaries which he will execute on them at his Last comming. The blood therefore, with which he is here said to be sprinkled, is not his owne, but the adversaries, not indeed as yet, but soon after to be slaine, yet he is now figured out as if he were alreadie sprinkled, because of the certainty of the victory. Notwithstanding chiefly he con∣tinues in the Metaphor of the wine-presse, into which the adversaries or clusters being cast, shall be troden by him, so as his garment shall appeare stained with their blood: yea, their blood came out of the wine-presse, even unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand and sixe hundred furlongs: see, Chap. 14.20. This title serves I. to terrify the wicked. 2. to comfort the godly. 3. For the glorie of the Captaine, who alone is a perfect redeemer: because he alone treadeth the wine-presse of the wrath of God: he is the invincible conquerour of the adver∣saries, The xxxvij. argu∣ment of Christs Dietie. because he shall tread the wicked in the wine-presse, being that one God omnipotent with the Father: For it is the wine-presse of his wrath and furie, in which the adversaries shallbe troden: Now this in Isai. 63. is applied to God Iehovah, which againe plainely proveth the Divinitie of Christ our Lord. 16. And he hath on his vesture, and on his thigh] That he may once for all ful∣lie set forth the invineible power and immense Majestie of this Iudge, he cals him King of kings, and Lord of lords: The which title many Monarchs have indeed arrogated to themselves, as Nebuchad-nezzar, Xerxes, Alexander: but falsely: It beeing proper to this Captaine, who alone is the Monarch of Heaven and earth: for to him alone is given all power in Heaven and earth. Given, I say, not onely in time according to the dispensation of the flesh, through his exaltation at the right hand of God: but also from al eternity, according to the nature of the Dietie by eternal generation of the Father: As the Father hath life in himself (viz. from eter∣nity) So he hath given to the Son to have life in himself. (viz. from eternity): that as all men honour the Father, so they should honour the Sonne also. Therefore he hath this title, King of kings, and Lord of lords, common with the Father, as being one God with the Father, The xxxviii. argument of Christs Dietie. whom the Apostle sets forth by this his proper title: which again is an evident argument of Christs Dietie. Now how the Samosatenian hereticks la∣bour to shift this off: with the vindicating of the same, hath before bin expounded on Chap. 17.14. This name he hath written on his garment, to signify, that the Divine Power and Majesty of this Captaine, shall then be apparent to all creatures, that he may be openly acknowledged & worshiped by all. It is written also on his thigh, to denote the eternity of his power and Monarchie. For by the thigh the scripture usually vnderstands the generative force, and propagation of posterity: as often we have it in Genesis and Exodus. Therefore he carries the name on his thigh, because his kingdome shal be propagated & endure to all posterities, that is, unto eternity. 17. And I saw an Angell standing] Thus much touching the honourable armies, the troopes of Angels: Now other administring forces are called foorth, which in some manner are to be imployed in executing vengeance, viz. all the ravenous
birds of heaven: Notwithstanding they are not called to the fight, but are invited to the banquet Who this Angel standing in the Sunne should bee, needs not curiously to be en∣quired after. He was an he rauld proclaiming the Captaines comming, being an Angel either really, or in appearance. For Iohn records what he saw: Neither is it necessarie to seeke for mysteries in every circumstance of the visions. He cals him indefinitely  one Angel, for, A CERTAIN AN∣GEL: because he stood before the other without the Camp, going before like an Herauld of armes. Standing in the Sunne] That is, in the midst of heaven, in a cleare and high place, that he might be seen and heard of al the foules: which serves to the decencie of the Action. For Heraulds, when they publish the Edicts of Princes, Vsually stand in some Eminent place, that they may be the better seene of all men. And here I seeke no other my stery. And cryed with a great voyce] Like as Heraulds use to doe, that they may be heard afar off, also the efficacie of the voyce is here noted: for this cry shal not be in vaine: but at the very instant the foules are in readinesse. Now perhaps we may say, that this Angel is the Archangel, & this voice, that great trumpet of God: with which Christ shall descend on the clouds 1, Thessa. 4.16. Come and gather your selves together unto the supper] This whole Propheticall allegory is taken out of 39. of Ezech. v. 17. For the Revelation hath many things common with the visions of Ezekiel and Zacharie. There the Prophet thus pro∣phesieth against Gog and Magog (understood by many to be the two Antichrists, viz. the Turke & the Pope, touching which we shal Treat in the following Chap. v. 8.) Assemble your selves & come, gather your selves on every side to my sacrifice (Hebr.  slaughter) that J doe slay for you, The compa∣ring of the present place with Ez. 39.17. even a great sacrifice upon the mountaines of Is∣rael, that ye may eat flesh, and drinke blood. Ye shall eate the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the Princes of the earth, of Rams, of Lambs, and of goats, &c. Al things are alike: save that the Prophet is there commanded to proclaime: Here the An∣gel proclaimeth: There both the fowles and beasts also are called: here the fowles onely. There they are called to the sacrifice: Here to the Supper of the great God. There to eat flesh and drinke blood: here onely to eate flesh: There to eat the flesh of the Mighty and the Princes of the earth: here to eat the flesh of Kings, Captains, mighty men, of horses, and of them that ride on them, of free-men and bond-men, of small and great, &c. The sense of both Allegories is the same. This indeed shall not Litterallie be accomplished at the last judgement for the birds of the ayre, and beasts of the field, with all the elements shall be consu∣med with fire. But under this similitude is set forth the horrour of the last judge∣ment. For as after some bloodie combate, the Ravenous birds, (as Crowes, Ravens, Kites and such like Harpies) flie to the prey (as it were to some great Feast) and feed upon the dead carkeises: so after the like manner the enemies beeing over∣throwne by a great slaughter, and torne as it were by vultures, shall be cast into the everlasting fire of hell. This supper therefore is the judgement of God it self, by which the wicked shall be consumed. He cals it, the Supper of the great God] Because it shal be prepared by him. The xxxix argument of Chr. deity. Now This great God is the same who even now was called the King of kings, and Lord of lords, viz. Christ the Iudge: which again is an evident argument of his Divinity. 18 That ye may eate the flesh of kings] To wit, of the earth, whom the three un∣cleane spirits gathered in Harmageddon, to fight against the Lamb in defence of the Beast, Chap. 16.14. It seemes to be doubtful, whither these kings be those ten, who were (as in Chap. 17.) to give al their power to the Beast, to fight with the Lamb, and be over∣come by him. The reason of the doubt ariseth hence, that those ten kings, should hate the whore, and burne her with fire, that is, destroy Rome, the seate of Antichrist. But it is not probable that they should defend the Beast, who shall destroy the
whore and seat of the Beast. The thing therefore shall be thus. If not all, yet cer∣tainely many of those Ten Kings, forsaking the Papacy, shall turne to Christ and destroy Rome: And that which many shall doe, all are said to doe; yet some shall still adhere to Popery, who, after the burning of Rome shall prepare themselves to this battell in defence of the Pope. These shall draw all the o∣ther Kings of the Earth (the adversaries of the Gospell in Asia, Africa, America) into the societie of this war, and so with joynt forces shall goe to oppresse the Gospel of Christ. But while they thus plot, God will be present, and prepare this supper for the birds of heaven, that is, Christ shall come from heaven to judgement, and cast Antichrist with his raging kings and associates into hell fire. Now he promiseth diverse sorts of flesh (as it were varietie of dainties) unto the foules, not onely of kings, but also of Captaines, Mighty men, them that sit on horses; to intimate the greatnesse and sumptuousnesse of the Supper. For variety of messes delighteth. Now it is an Allusion unto the divers orders, of which great Armies usually consist, and are led, all whose flesh being given to the birds to be devoured of them, sheweth that all of them shal utterly perish, and not one escape the hand of the Iudge. 19. And I saw the Beast] Hitherto of the Heavenly Armies and CHRIST their Captain: Now he briefly toucheth the opposite Army, with their Leader Antichrist, and describeth the event of the Battell. The Jesuite at length con∣fesseth this Beast to be Antichrist. Rib, Apoc. 19. S. 31. Now this Beast is the same which Iohn saw before Chap. 13. and Chap. 17. (as Alcasar acknowledgeth Page 864.) There∣fore he calleth him emphatically  that Beast: whence it appeareth that Ribera without any shew of truth did idlie feine this Beast (in Chapter 17.) The beast is Antichrist. to be the divell. Furthermore he saw not the Beast alone, but with the Kings of the Earth and their Armies. These Kings shall be all the Vassals and friends of the POPE, which shall seek to defend him after the destruction of Rome. They shall not be the Ten, because some of those ten shall hate Rome, and lay her wast. To make warre] He sheweth the madnes and fury of Antichrist and the Kings, who will presume to joyne battell with the King of kings, and Lord of lords, with Christ, I say, the Heavenly Iudge, and against the Angells, his Armies, the least of whom is able in a moment to destroy millions of adversaries. This therefore shall bee more then the furious  of the Giants. But let us see the event. 20. And the Beast was taken] The event of the battell is unfortunate to the Beast and Kings. In the first conflict their Armies are scattered and put to flight: so some (as it happeneth after the routing of Armies) are taken, and all the rest of them slain. The victory remains on Christs side and his Army. Now hee distinctly expoundeth what befell the Beast, and what the rest. Great Armies do many times fight a long while with doubtfull successe. Here. at the first brunt the hostile Army is routed, the Beast taken, Gr.  bound or fettered. The word  is familiarly used in Iohns Gospell, and properly signifies to take, or apprehend, as you may see John 7.30.32.44. Chap. 8.20. and Chap. 10.39. & Chap. 11.57. & 21.3.10. &c. Here the Beast, though he be monstrous, seven-headed, full of hornes, and guarded with a strong band of Kings and Confederates, notwithstanding is without difficulty apprehended and taken, to wit, by Christ the Captain. Now the Leader being taken, what can the rest of the Army do? Here now the fight is ended, now they cast away their armes, and they would willingly flie, but cannot, every one of them is slaine: yet first he sheweth the miserable lot or condition of the Beast and his Compani∣on. With the Beast also is taken the False-prophet, the individuall Achates and O∣rator of the Beast. Of this False-prophetal so mention is made before Chapter 16.13. but is not there set forth with any markes: Here with two, That hee
wrought miracles before the Beast, The false Prophet is the same with the Beast with two hornes. and that he deceived the stigmatized worshippers of the Beasts Image. Whence it plainly appeareth that this False-prophet is that other Beast with two hornes, Chap. 13.11. for hee is there said to doe these things. Now howsoever he shewed before, that both Beasts in a diverse respect figured out one Antichrist: Notwithstanding as before the Spirit represented him by two Beasts, also by a Beast with a woman sitting thereon: so now he speaketh of the Beast and of the False-prophet, as it were of two distinct persons: because before with the Pope Antichrist or Head, he joyned the Senate of Cardinals, and the whole Clergy, Architects, and ministers of deceits and wickednesse. These there∣fore shall go forth with the Beast to warre against Christ, as it were ALA∣TERE on the side of the Generall. But they shall justly suffer for their mad∣nesse, for the Beast and they shall be taken together. Furthermore touching the signes of the False-prophet, of the Character of the Beast, and of his Image. I will here repeat nothing as being before treated of Chap. 13. Now we come to the punishment of the Beast, and the False-prophet. Both were cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone] IN STAG∣NƲM IGNIS ARDENS, so is the naturall reading in all Greek Co∣pies, and also in the Old Latine. Notwithstanding Ribera contendeth that the truest reading is, IN STAGNƲM IGNIS ARDENTIS SƲL∣PHƲRE, and that it is so in the Greek. But it seems the Iesuite looked not upon the Text, for all Copies have it constantly . The Kings Edition of Montanus without the article  as Chap. 14.10. where  cannot be rendred ardentis but ardens, because it cohereth not with the genitive  fire, but with the accusative  Lake: though the sense be the same in both readings: for both the fire, and the lake by the fire, burns with brimstone. This must be the miserable end and de∣struction of the Romane Beast and his sacred Clergy: to wit, Num. 16.33. like to that of Co∣rah, Dathar, and Abiram, who of old seditiously rising up against Moses, were swallowed up alive of the Earth, and so cast into Hell. For this is no obscure allusion unto that History, as it were unto the type of that horrible punishment. Not that the Earth shall litterally open her mouth and swallow them up (neither doth the Letter say so) but because Christ the Iudge will thrust them alive (that is, not like other men taken away before by ordinary death) into the most ex∣quisite flames of the burning lake, (as a horrible example to others) before the rest. For the devill also, whom the Earth cannot swallow up, shall be cast into the same lake of fire and brimstone, Chap. 20.10. wherefore it signifies a terrible kind of destruction, into which the Beast and the False-prophet, shall be cast be∣fore their other associates. For the rest being slain by the sword, shall be cast for a banquet to the infernall Vultures to be devoured by them. But these shall be cast alive into the Lake of brimstone. Every of the words serve to amplifie the grievousnesse of the punishment. Were cast] This sheweth that it shalbe a horrible ruine and fall from the height of power and riot, with which they are now puffed up. Alive] Death therefore shall not put an end to their punishment, but they shall be tormented alive for ever. It is more tollerable once to die, and then to bee burnt being dead. But these alwayes living, shall never be altogether consumed by the fire, but burn in the flames of hell. Into a lake of fire burning with brimstone] A Periphrasis of hell, which afterward in Chap. 21.8. is called the second death, that is, eternall: He calls it metapho∣rically A Lake of fire: because as fishes in a Lake are invironed with waters, so these shall be covered with infernall fire in the Lake of hell, then which nothing can be thought on more miserable: yea in the Lake burning with fire and brimstone, that is, unquencheable, as before in Chap. 14.10. with many other like pla∣ces: For brimstone is a most durable nourisher of fire, and much thereof being
cast into the same, makes the flame unquencheable. Wherefore as Antichrists torment shall be most horrible, so shall it remaine for ever, the which is more clearly mentioned in Chap. 20. where not onely the Beast and False-Prophet, but the devill also shall be cast into this lake of fire and brimstone, there to be tor∣mented day and night for ever and ever. Ribera moveth (as he saith) a great and difficult Question: How Antichrist shall be cast alive into the Lake of fire, seeing the Lord will consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, 2. Thessa. 2.8. After many things he answereth: that properly he is not to be slaine, but to remaine no more among the living, be de∣prived of all power and joy, and brought to the place of the dead. The Earth, saith he, shall suddenly open its mouth for him, and violently he shallbe carried alive with his False-prophet by divels unto the fire of hell. But this Question cannot seem great, or difficult, in case we rightly consider the words of the Apostle. For he saith two things touching the destructi∣on of ANTICHRIST: Neither of which are in the least shew repugnant to this place. First he saith not: Whom the Lord will slay: but he saith , Whom he will consume with the Spirit of his mouth. This shall be the first degree of the destruction of Antichrist and his Kingdome: the which hath beene begun these hundred yeers: in which the Lord by the spirit of his mouth, that is, by the prea∣ching of the Gospell, hath, and yet doth consume the Papacie more and more: no otherwise then the flame by burning diminisheth and consumeth the match: For as Bellarmine confesseth, Lib: 3 de P. R.C. 22. from that time since wee affirmed the Pope to be Anti∣christ, his Empire hath not onely not encreased, but allwayes more and more decreased. Whence we see that Pauls words are not repugnant to the present place: because they speak nothing of a corporall killing. Secondly hee addeth, and shall destroy him by the brightnesse of his comming: which againe is undoubtedly to be understood not of any corporall slaughter, but of a totall and finall destruction; that is, of the last punishment, which is here revealed unto Iohn, to be accomplished at Christs last coming to Iudge∣ment. As for other things which Ribera here disputeth of, from the opinions of certaine Writers, and from the Sibylls touching the death of Antichrist, and of the brimstone in Hell, seeing even Alcasar judgeth them too uncertaine and cu∣rious, I leave to their Authors. 21. And the remnant were slaine with the sword] That is, (besides the two Leaders) the Kings, Captains, Souldiers, and Armies of the Beast: Every one of them were slaine. Therefore the overthrow shall be universall. But by whom? By the sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ. He goes on in the Metaphor: for the Generall being taken and slaine, usually the rest of the Ar∣my goes to wracke. None therefore that follow Antichrists Army shall escape unpunished. But shall not these also be cast into the lake of fire, and be damned for ever? yes verily, as before he plainly affirmeth, Chap. 14.9.10. and the Scripture in other places sheweth; for all the goats standing on the left hand shall be sent into everlasting fire, and hear that terrible Sentence: Goe ye cursed into the Everlasting Fire, which is prepared for the Devill and his Angels. Mat. 25.41. The destru∣ction therefore of the adversaries is so set forth, that we may understand the pu∣nishment of the Beast and the False-prophet to be more grievous, and the others somewhat lesse. For there shall be degrees also of punishments in hell: and they who have sinned most shall there suffer forest plagues. And all the foules were filled with their flesh] After the overthrow, all the foules are gathered together to the Supper, and are filled with the flesh of the slain: by which is signified the miserable and totall destruction of the wicked. Ribera here is frivolous, in understanding this properly without a metaphor:
for he feineth, that such a battell shall really happen, and that the Carkeises of the enemies being left in the fields are to be devoured by the foules. As if for∣sooth this event were rare, and that it were not most frequent, that after great discomfitures of Armies, the foules and wild beasts should be filled with the Car∣keises of the slaine. But the Holy Ghost persists in the Propheticall Type be∣fore expounded, Verse 17. intimating that what of old was litterally done to God and Magog, should allegorically be fulfilled in these, after such a manner as is agreeable to the last Iudgement: for then indeed all the ungodly shall bee killed with the sword of Christs mouth, that is, being by his Sentence adjudged to the everlasting torments of hell, they shall be cast as a prey unto the infernall har∣pies: but first Antichrist and his purpled Senate shall be thrown alive into the lake of fire; that is, be tormented with more exquisite tortures in Hell. This there∣fore shall be the end of the Romane Antichrist and his Associates. And here en∣deth the sixt, and most notable Vision of all. The Preface of the Seventh ƲISION. Which is a Summary Repetition of the former, tou∣ching the binding, unloosing, and judging of the DRAGON: And of the Heavenly Ierusalem, Contained in CHAPTERS 20.21.22. THe last Vision doth summarily represent the Vniversall Historie of the Church, from the publishing of the Gospell among the Gentiles, untill the glorification of the Church, under the type of a Dragon bound a thousand years in hell: afterward let loose: at last with all the ungodly cast into the lake of fire: also of the new heaven and earth, and of the Heavenly Jerusalem built with ineffable magnificence, from Chap. 20. unto verse 6. of Chap. 22. This Vision therefore being as it were a Recapitulation of the former, doth answer indeed in respect of all the four Acts, unto the three Vniversals of the second, third, and fourth: but as it respects the two latter Acts, the two particulars of the fift and the sixt: Lastly unto all in respect of the last Act, which is the Catastrophe of the condition of the wicked, and the calamities of the Church, because it propoundeth the same very clearly by a far more evident Hypotyposis or description of the last judgement, the tor∣ments of the wicked, the redemption and glorification of the Saints. The first Act of this Vision is a Proposition, touching the overthrow of Paganisme through the coming of Christ, and the propagation of the Gospell unto the Gentiles, Satan being bound by the hand of Christ, that hee might no longer seduce them: and of the various condition of the Church, partly bloody under the Romane Tyrants, by whom many millions of the Saints were slaine with the sword for the Gospels sake: partly most corrupted and afflicted under the Romane Antichrist, who forced all to worship him and his Image, and to receive his Character: all that worshipped not, or
received not his character he most cruelly persecuted. This Act is contained in the foure first verses of this Chapter: The analogy and in the first part indeed touching the binding of the Dragon, that hee might no more seduce the Nations, it answereth to the first Seale of the second Vision, where Christ riding on the white horse of the gospell, conquered a∣mong the nations, Chap. 6. ver. 2. but in speciall to the woman traveling to bring forth the man-child, and to Michael fighting for the woman and over∣coming the Dragon, in the third Vision, Chap. 12. But in the other part touching them that were beheaded, it answereth to the second Seal of the second Vision, where there came forth a red horse, the Church as it were being in blood, Chap. 6. ver. 4. and to the three former Trumpets of the third Vision, Chap. 8. ver. 7. Lastly in the third part, touching them that worshipped not the Beast, it answereth to the fift Trumpet of the third Vision, Chap. 9. ver. 1. and to the raging of the Beast in the fourth Vision, Chap. 13. ver. 1. The second Act is an Antithesis of the Proposition, so far as it respects the two latter parts, declaring the consolation of the godly that were behea∣ded for the testimony of Iesus, and killed by the Beast for denying to worship him, that they should live and reign with Christ in blessednesse. This Act is mingled with the former, The Ana∣logy. ver. 4. and is continued vers. 5.6. and answereth partly to the fift Seale of the second Vision, where white robes were given to the soules of the Martyrs, crying under the Altar, &c. Chap. 6. v. 9. partly to the joyfull multitude of the Sealed ones, in the same Vision, Chap. 7.10. and to the said multitude of Sealed ones standing with the Lamb on the mountaine, in Vision fourth, Chap. 14. ver. 1. as also to the multitude of harpers standing upon the Sea of glasse and singing to God, in the Fift Vision, Chap. 15. ver. 2. The third Act is an amplification of the calamities and Combats of the Church after the thousand yeeres, and the loosing of the Dragon under both Antichrists, viz. the Western, who by the seducement of Satan, shall under the name of Christ bring in new Pagamsme: the Eastern also, who under the name of Gog and Magog shall most grievously trouble the Christian world yet he shall not be able to overthrow the Church, God from Heaven protecting the same, and casting fire upon the adversaries, Chap. 20. verse 7.8. and the first part of verse 9. This Act answereth to the Sixt Trumpet of the third Vision, The Ana∣logy. touching the foure Angels let loose at Euphrates, and with an innumerable Army wasting the third part of the earth, chap. 9.14. Lastly the fourth Act shalbe the Catastrophe, or end of the State of all things, terrible indeed and mortall to the Wicked: because they shall all be cast with their head, the Dragon, into the lake of fire, that they might cease to rage against Christ, and that in the last judgement, which is repre∣sented by a most evident Type, from the latter member of the ninth verse of the twentieth Chapter, unto the end of the said Chapter. But joy∣full and plausible to the church and godly, because, the face of heaven and earth being renewed in the heavenly Ierusalem, they shall enjoy eternall hap∣pinesse and glory with God and the Lamb: Chap. 21. the whole, and the first five verses of Chapter 22.
This Act therefore hath two parts: in the former touching the punish∣ments of the ungodly it answereth to the Harvest and Vintage of the fourth Vision, ch. 14. and to the seventh Viall of the haile like Talents, in the fift vision chap. 16.21, and to the victory of Christ casting the Beast and the False-prophet, and Kings of the Earth with their Armies into the lake of fire and brimstone, in the sixt Vision, Chap. 19.20. In the other part touching the felicity of the godly, it answereth unto the end of the second Vi∣sion, describing the blessednesse of the godly before the throne serving God day and night, Chap. 7. This is the true Order of the last Vision, which indeed seemes to be exceeding obscure in the three first Acts thereof, and hath diversly troubled all Interpreters: But being compared with the former, after the manner which I have shewed, it shall receive much light, that wee may not curi∣ously or dangerously grope in darknesse. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis of CHAPTER XX. THe Dragon is bound with a chaine, and by an Angell cast into the bottomlesse Pit a thousand years, that be might no longer seduce the Nations: In the mean while the soules of the Martyrs and the Con∣querours of the Beast and his image, do live and reigne with Christ, as the Blessed and Holy Priests of God and of Christ, the remnant remaining in death. After the thousand yeers the Dragon being let loose, doth again seduce the Nations, and raiseth Gog and Magog to battell against the campe of the Saints: but they being consumed with fire from Heaven, the Dragon is cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone; and the Vniversal Iudgement of the dead is set forth. The Parts are three. THe First of the Dragons binding a thousand years: in 6. verses The Second of his loosing after the thousand yeares: and of his attempt, vers. 7.8.9. The Third of the casting of the devill and all adversaries into the lake of fire: from the latter part of ver. 9. unto the end of the Chapter. In the first part which concernes the binding of the Dragon, 1. Is noted the Author, An Angell descending from Heaven: and the Insiruments, the Key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chaine, Verse 1. 2. His forceable falling on the Dragon: Hee layed hold on him. The Dragons Surname and binding: and the time of thousand yeers, ver. 2. The place also and the manner of the imprisonment: He cast him into the bottomlesse Pit, and shut him up, &c. and the end, that he should deceive the Nations no more: and the time of his loosing: Afterward he must be loosed a little season, ver. 3. 3. By a certaine Prolepsis or prevention: whither in the meane while the af∣faires of the Church should be in peace? and whither the Dragon being bound, Tyrants should not persecute the godly, and the Beast rage and invade the king∣dome? John seeth the soules of them that were beheaded for the testimony of
Iesus, and them that have not worshipped the Beast, sitting on thrones, living and reigning with Christ those thousand years, ver. 4. Whose happines is figured out by the Antithesis of the wicked, who lived not againe during those thousand yeares, but remained in the death of sin, ver. 5. And it is amplified by an Exclamation, ver. 6. In the second part touching the loosing of the Dragon is shewed, 1. when, and whence the Dragon was loosed, Ver. 7.2. What he attempted being loosed: to seduce againe the Nations, and to gather Gog and Magog to battel, Ver. 8.3. What was the successe of the attempt: They compasse the campe of the Saints about, and the beloved City: this attempt is broken off in the former part of verse 9. In the third part, which is the Catastrophe of the Gogish battell: the destruction of the adversaries is described. 1. Specially, both the overthrow of Gog and Magog in the latter part of Verse 9. as also the punishment of the devill him∣selfe, verse 10.2. Generally, the last judgement of all: In which type is noted 1. the majesty and preparation of the Iudge, ver. 11.2. The guilty to be judged: all the dead, and the sentence taken out of the Books, ver. 12. 3. A prevention touching such as were swallowed up of the Sea, Death, and Hell: that they were all delivered up, ver. 13. 4. The execution of the Sentence both on the last adversaries, Death and Hell, Verse. 14. as all others, Verse 15. CHAPTER XX. The First part of the CHAPTER. Of the DRAGONS binding a thousand Yeeres. 1. And I saw an Angell come downe from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chaine in his hand. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon that old Serpent, which is the devill and Satan, and bound him a thousand years. 3. And cast him into the bottomlesse pit, and shut him up, and set a seale upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more: till the thou∣sand yeers should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a lit∣tle season. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sate upon them, and judgement was gi∣ven unto them: and I saw the soules of them that were beheaded for the witnesse of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his image, neither had received his marke upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand yeers. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again untill the thousand yeers were finished. This is the first resurrection. 6. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first Resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.
THE COMMENTARY. ANd I saw] Beza: Then I saw: which must be understood of the order of the Visions (for this he saw after the former) not of the order of the events, as if this taking of the Dragon, The order observeable and these thousand yeers should in time follow the damnation of the Beast: For seeing the Beast is Antichrist, certainly his destruction and casting into hell, shall not be but by the brightnesse of Christs coming, and in the last Iudgement, as was shewed in the foregoing Vision. 2. Thes. 2:8 But after the last judgement, there shall not be a thousand yeeres in which Satan shall be bound, and these things be done, which Iohn now seeth. And therefore the Events of this Vision shall not follow, but in time goe before the events of the foregoing Vision. This is a certaine Argument, that this Vision is diverse from the former: and is no particular Vision, which supplies the former: and that in the Visions a con∣tinuated order of History, or Times, is not to be observed, as most Interpre∣ters imagine. Wherefore after all other apparitions, This last Vision is a recapitula∣tion of all the forego∣ing visions. this last Vision (as it were in place of a conclusion) is exhibited unto Iohn, in which under new types, and the won∣derfull binding, loosing, and condemnation of the Dragon, and of the description of the Heavenly Ierusalem, is set forth unto Iohn the entire face of the Church, prefiguring the History from the first gathering thereof among the Gentiles, un∣till its last glorification in Heaven, not indeed by a vaine repetition of the same things, but a most profitable revealing of things divers from the former mysteries: viz. touching the overthrow of Paganisme among the Gentiles through the co∣ming of Christ, of the tempests and distractions of the last thousand years: with which (besides the cruelty of the Beast) the Church shal be exercised, and of the most joyfull end of all the calamities of the Church. For touching the First, Iohn till now had seen nothing: Of the Second, he had seen somewhat, but ob∣scurely, under the sixt Trumpet: Of the third also he had heard but very little by one of the foure and twenty Elders, towards the end of the second Vision. Now it was very much for Iohns (and ours) instruction and consolation, that none of these things should be hid from him. Therefore, there was weighty reasons, why after the other Visions, this also at last should be exhibited. Thus much briefly touching the Order. An Angell come downe from Heaven] This Angell figures out CHRIST, as the adjuncts and effects do prove. For he hath the Key of the bottomlesse Pit, that is, the power of hell and death, which Christ before attributes to himselfe, Gen. 3:15. Heb. 2.14. Luk. 11.22 Chap. 18. ver. 18. and he bindeth Satan, which is proper to Christ: for hee it is, that bruised the head of the (old) Serpent, Who through death destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devill: He, I say, is that Stronger, taking the house and dividing the spoile of the strong armed man: Neither is it new that Christ should be represented by an Angell in this REVELATION, as we see Chap. 7.2. Chap. 8.3. Chap. 10.1, &c. But that it should be some ministeriall Angell, who (while Christ was suffe∣ring on the Crosse) coming from Heaven, bound the devill in the bottomlesse Pit, is a fiction of Ribera's, contrary to the truth of the Gospell, Tob. 8.3. and is not in the least to be proved by the Apocryphall History touching Raphael, apprehending the devill, and binding him in the desarts of Aegypt. Iohn therefore saw Christ in the forme of an Angell, not falling, but descending from Heaven, to wit, by his Incarnation: Eph. 4.10. Ioh. 3.13. Hee that descended is the same also that ascended. And no man ascended up to Heaven, but he that came downe from Heaven, even the son of man which is in Heaven. But thou wilt say, to what purpose was it, that Iohn should see the Incarna∣tion
of the Son of God, a thing known and past some while before? Yea it was to great purpose, at least in a word to note the originall of the Authour of so great a worke, which then began to be done, and which was to continue a thousand yeeres, that Satan being restrained from seducing the nations, the fullnesse of the Gentiles should come into the Church, he therefore saw Christ descending from Heaven, that he should bind Satan, that is, destroy the workes of the devill, as other, so chiefly that horrible Idolatry and diabolicall worshippings, by which (Iudea excepted) he had hitherto seduced all Nations. This end of the Angels descending, and this cause of the Dragons binding is plainly declared ver. 3. For if Satan should have been permitted to sway any longer among the Gentiles: in vaine the Apostles had preached the Gospell un∣to them. Therefore Satan was to be bound, that is, by the singular power of God restrained, that he should no longer bewitch the Nations, who by the prea∣ching of the Gospell were to be gathered unto the Church of Christ. Now I see no reason why we should leave so cleare and plaine an Interpreta∣tion: especially seeing such as like not the same, alledge nothing more pro∣bable or agreeable to the present Type. The first birth or beginning of the Church gathered of the Iewes and Gentiles, was somewhat more manifestly shewed unto Iohn, under the Type of a woman in travell, Chapter 12. unto which the History of this Chapter doth much accord, as I touched in the Pre∣face of the Vision. Having the Key of the bottomlesse Pit] Touching this Key and Pit, See Chap. 1. ver. 18. and Chap. 9.1. The Key of the bottomlesse pit is the power of Hell. This Christ hath one way, Antichrist another way, as was there shewed. The Pope hath the same by preva∣rication: How christ & the Pope have the keyes of the bottomlesse pit. Christ by power given him of the Father. The Pope hath it to open the Pit of Hell, and thence to draw out the pestilent smoake of his doctrine, and the hellish Locusts. Christ hath it to shut up the Dragon in the bottomlesse pit. A great Chaine] That is long and strong enough, to bind the most cruell ad∣versarie, as the forme of a Dragon Chap. 12.13. shewes him to bee. This Chaine doth metaphorically denote the omnipotency of Christ, and all other meanes by which he hath bound Satan, as his Passion, Crosse, Death, and Bu∣riall, Resurrection, Ascension, the sending of the Holy Ghost, and chiefly the doctrine of the Gospell, by the preaching whereof, Christ hath as strongly bound Satan, by destroying and rooting out Paganisme among the Gentiles, and con∣verting them to the Faith: as when a mightie adversary is bound by the Con∣querour with a great chaine. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon] What is this, but the casting out of the Dra∣gon, and his Angels into the earth by Michael, as in Chap. 12.9? This Angell therefore and Michael there spoken of, is one, viz. Christ, whose Victory over Satan was there figured out generally, that he should no more accuse the Elect in the sight of God: but here specially, that he should no more seduce the Na∣tions, as it is in verse 3. And that we may certainly know that this Dragon is the same, whom Michael there did vanquish, The same dragon that is here bound, was overcome in chap. 12. he is here set forth by the same Titles: The old Serpent, the devill, Satan: the reason of which we there expounded. Now this so exact a description doth altogether constraine us to understand here by the Dragon none other save the devill and Satan. For wherefore should hee be defined with so many names which alwayes in Scripture denote the devill, if some other adver∣sary ought to be understood. Therefore in this place I can no more subscribe to Brightman (who will have this Angell to be Constantine, the Dragon Maxentius and Maximinus, whom he destroyed for the good of the Church) then to Ly∣ra interpreting this Dragon of the Emperour Henry V. being bound with the Chaine of Excommunication by Pope Calixtus. Bound him] This binding, saith ANDREAS, is the casting downe of the devill,
which was done by the force of the Lords Passion: The bin∣ding of Sa∣tan. for thereby the power of Satan is bound: a token of which thing was seene in the destruction and overthrow of the heathe∣nish Idolatry, the demolishing of Idolatrous Temples, the ceasing of Sacrifices on their Altars, and at length the knowledge and obeying the will of God revealed throughout the whole world: the sum is, It is Christs victory over Satan, of which mention is made in the Gospell: The Prince of this world is judged. Io. 16.11. Luk. 10.18 Ioh. 12.13 I saw Satan as lightning fall from Heaven: Now shall the Prince of this world be cast forth. But the manner of his binding is more exactly expressed in the following verse. 3. And cast him into the bottomlesse Pit] That is, thrust him, as it were fettered, into the Infernall Prison. And shut him] For, shut him up, locking as it were the bottomlesse Pit, that the Dragon might not come forth. And set a seale upon him] To wit, on the doore of the bottomlesse Pit, that nei∣ther he should breake out, or any dare to breake open the prison before the time: as the Iews sealed the doore of Christs Sepulchre. Mat. 27.66. Dan: 6.17. And Darius with his owne Signet sealed the Den of Lions, that there might come no deliverance to Daniel, save onely from God. All these things are spoken after the manner of men, to signifie the fullnesse of Christs victory over Satan, for by his power and dominion Satan is kept as fast bound, as a Malefactor in Prison, and shackled by the Iudge. An evidence hereof we have often in the Gospell, where the devils beseech Christ that he would not send them into the bottomlesse Pit, or prison: Luk. 8.31 but the end which is added, is well to be observed That he should no more seduce the Nation] To wit, with so free and full sway as formerly he had done. The Particle  no more, is very emphaticall. This is the end for which Christ bound Satan, that he should deceive the Nations no more. Formerly therefore he had freely seduced them: now he is bound, or hindred from further seducing them, that is, from hindring any longer the faith and prea∣ching of the Gospell unto the Nations. Now hereby is intimated, that Paganisme, Aug: l, 4. de C. D. c, 25 & L. 6. c. 2, &c. in which divers kinds of gods were worshipped in stead of the true God, the Sacrifices that were offered to Idols, the Oracles which they had from devils, with the exercise of their foule and un∣godly worship, came not so much by humane invention, as by the deceit of the devill: but after Christs coming and suffering on the Crosse, and the Gospell by the preaching of the Apostles being published, not onely to the Iewes, but by little and little to the Gentiles also: hereupon the Oracles of the devils were al∣together silenced, the Groves, Altars, and Temples of the false gods began to lie wast: yea the Gentiles detesting the Impostures of Satan, embraced the faith of Christ, giving over their Magicall Bookes to Vulcan: a remarkeable example whereof we read touching the Ephesians, Act. 19.8. Suidas also recordeth that Augustus enquiring of the Oracle of Apollo, what man should rule after him, received this Answer from Satan. An Hebrew Child, the King of Gods Commands mee to avoyd This place, and forthwith to returne To Pluto's darkesome shade. From these our Altars bid thou art In silence therefore to depart. Augustus having received this Answer went away, and set up an Altar in Capitolium, with this Inscription in Romane Letters. . THIS IS THE ALTAR OF THE FIRST BEGOTTEN OF GOD.
Thus therefore the Angell hath bound the Dragon, Christ by his coming over∣threw Paganisme, delivered the Gentiles from the seduction of Satan, and brought them to the light of the Gospell and faith of the Church. But it may be demanded: Was not Satan of old thrust into prison, and bound with the chaines of darkenesse, as it is said, 2. Pet. 2.1. & Jude ver. 6. Besides, hath not Satan even after Christs coming raged powerfully, and yet doth? Unto the former it is answered: that the evill Angels indeed from the time of their first Apostacie, were adjudged unto the prison of hell: yet not so, but that they might very freely goe abroad to hurt the sons of men, so farre as the judgements of God should permit and suffer the same. The devill therefore by his free raging in Paganisme, held as it were his Kingdome among the Gentiles before Christs coming, by Gods permission. But now by Christs coming from Heaven, Satan is said, by a speciall judgement, to be bound, and thrust into the bot∣tomlesse Pit, because Christ did chiefly destroy his workes and kingdome among the Gentiles, when by the light of the Gospell he opened the eyes of the blind, that the deceits of Satan being discovered and condemned by them, they might give themselves on to Christ. Vnto the latter I say: That Satan hath very many Emissary Angels under him, by whom (howsoever bound himselfe yet) he is hurtfull to mankind, and to the Church: and ceaseth not to reigne in the hearts of the children of disobedience. But the head being bound, what should the servants doe? for though God per∣mit these to wander abroad the thousand yeers, notwithstanding they could not any longer uphold Paganisme. But thou wilt say, In Chap. 12.9. not onely the Dragon is said to be cast into the Earth by Michael, Christ, but his Angels were also cast downe with him. I answer. That more generall Type of the fourth Ʋision noted, that the devill with his Angels, was so overcome by the death and resurrection of Christ, as that neither he, nor they could suppresse the Church in its birth and growth. But this more spe∣ciall Type of the last Vision denoteth, that the Prince of devils was so bound in the first thousand yeers, that neither he himselfe, nor his Emissary Angels could any longer uphold Paganisme, Satans bin∣ding is not to be un∣derstood absolutely. or hinder the course of the Gospell among the Gentiles. The binding of Satan therefore must not be understood absolutely, as if he then ceased altogether to do mischief, but comparatively, & with limitation, that he could no longer bewitch the nations with such grosse Idol-worship, as he had before done, Lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 7. of which Augustin: To this end, (saith he) the devill is bound and shut up in the bottomlesse Pit, that now he should not seduce the Nations, of which the Church consisteth, which before hee powerfully seduced, so long as they were out of the Church: for neither is it said, that he should deceive none, but that now he should not se∣duce the Nations, in which undoubtedly he would have the Church to be understood. And in the following Ch. he expounds the binding more fully: The binding of the devil is this, viz. not to be permitted to exercise the whole tentation, which he can either by force, or fraud, to seduce and draw men unto him, by violent or fraudulent deceiving of them: the which if it should have been permitted in so long time, and in so great weaknesse of ma∣ny, hee would have cast downe very many whom the LORD would not suffer to be overcome, and have hindred the faithfull from beleeving, which that he might not do, he is bound. Thus he. Enough of the binding, how, and why Satan is bound. Let us see the time; It is said in ver. 2. He bound him for a thousand yeeres: Here he saith, That he should deceive the Nations no more, till the thousand yeers be fulfilled: and after that, hee must be loosed a little season. In which he sheweth three things. First, how long he shal be kept bound: not alwayes, but a definite, or set time, untill those thousand yeeres should be fulfilled: so that Satans Imprisonment shall continue a thousand yeers. Secondly, what shalbe afterward: He must be loosed, that is, from his chaine out of the bottomlesse Pit, to rage or sway freely. For as the binding was a restraint that he could not rage freely among the Nations: so his loosing shall be a permis∣sion
to sway freely among them, yea among the Christians also. But least thou shouldest demand, How satan must beloo∣sed. why this hurtfull Dragon shall not rather be kept up in prison? he saith, , He must be loosed, that is, set at li∣berty, viz. by the Angell Christ, who had bound him before: which may not be understood of coaction, as if he should force Christ to let him go, and that Christ through weaknesse could keepe him in captivity no longer: nor yet of any abso∣lute necessity, as if God could not do otherwise: but of a necessity of the divine Counsell; the reasons of whose counsell are known by the events, Why God would have the Dragon loosed. which shal fol∣low the loosing, ver. 8.9. It seemed good to the divine wisedom againe to make use of Satans actions after his loosing, for to execute some of his judgements in the latter times, in the deceiving of the Nations, and Gog and Magog, that they should trouble the campe of the Saints: but at length bee devoured by fire from Heaven. Therefore the Dragon must be loosed, because God hath so decreed, and that for most righteous causes: First, that it might appear how great the fury and power of Satan is, unlesse he be restrained by God. Secondly, that the glory of God might be illustrated in the admirable overthrow of the adversaries, and the pre∣servation of the Saints. For if he should never be loosed, saith Austin, Lib. 20, de C. d. cap. 8. his maligne power would the lesse appeare, and the most faithfull patience of the holy City be the lesse tryed: to be short, it would bee the lesse discerned how the Omnipotent God hath so well made use of Satan to his owne hurt, who hath not altogether taken him away from the tentation of the Saints, although he be cast forth according to the inward man from true beleevers, that they might withstand his assaults without: and in this respect hath bound him, least innumerable persons should be infected by the pouring out, and exercise of his full malice: or that such who ought to encrease and multiply the Church (as some by com∣ming to the faith, others already beleeving) should be kept off and withdrawne from the same. Thirdly, he sheweth how long Satan shal freely goe about after his loosing: A lit∣tle season: which Ribera according to the common opinion of Papists, under∣stands to be three yeeres and an halfe, or of the Kingdome of ANTICHRIST: but this cannot stand, because the Beast, or Antichrist, shall also reigne some while before this little season, the thousand yeeres yet during, as shall appeare from verse 4. Alcasar makes it to be a few years or dayes, from the end of the thou∣sand yeers, unto the day of Iudgement: But neither can this stand: because the things shal not be of a few years or dayes which are spoken touching the Dragon being let loose, verse 8. I ASSENT indeed that the last time, from the end of the thousand yeares, untill the day of Iudgement is here to be understood. But this time cannot be meant of a few years or dayes, as I shall shew, verse 8. What the little season of the Dra∣gons loosing is. but shall containe some ages. Yea now already from the end of the thousand yeeres, to wit, from the yeare of our Lord M LXXIII, when the Beast, Gregory VII. began to reigne with both swords, five Ages, and that which runs on, hath hither∣to dured, and shall dure to the day of Iudgement. Notwithstanding he rightly calleth the same a little time, for many reasons, Why it is called little whi∣ther we respect GOD, to whom a thousand yeers are as yesterday, the seventy yeers of the Captivity a small moment: Or the Dragon: unto whom all the time of his raging is but a little and a short season, though it continue some ages: Psal. 90.4. Isay. 52.7. (See be∣fore in Chap. 12: 12.) because his rage and malice can never be satiated. Or the ages past since the Creation, in comparison of which Iohn calleth the whole time of the Gospell the last houre. 1. Ioh. 2.18 Or lastly (and so I thinke Iohn intended) in respect of these thousand yeeres which that short time shall not exceed, but shalbe shorter then the same: because God according to the promise, will for the E∣lects sake shorten those dayes of Satans rage, and of the Gogish war, Mat. 24.22. by the sudden coming of Christ to judgement, the which is also intimated in this Prophesie, v. 9. To these I adde a morall Reason: that as for the comfort of the Godly, the whole time of our tribulation in this life, is by the Apostle called, A light af∣fliction
for a moment, 2. Cor, 4.17 although in it selfe it is often long and heavy: so for the comfort of the Godly, the time of Satans raging is called a little season, least the Godly for fear thereof should be dis-heartened: For his rage shall dure but a short season: now all things that are of small continuance, are tollerable, though great, saith Cicero. Cicero de Ancit. It commendeth also the wisdome, goodnesse, and power of God, who knowes indeed how to prove, and exercise his Church: Notwithstanding hee permits not Satan to rage any longer, then himselfe pleaseth, and so farre as may stand with our weaknesse. But now at length we come to treat of the Thousand yeers: The diffi∣culty about the thou∣sand yeers. And I confesse that I take in hand this argument tremblingly: because I see that many Interpreters, both Ancient and Moderne, have stumbled at this stone: And the more I thinke upon it, the lesse I finde how to unty the knot that hath troubled so many: And ha∣ving done all that I can, I find it more easie to say what these thousand years are not, then what they are. For it seemeth that the Holy Ghost was pleased as it were to seale this Booke to all men by this darke mysterie, the searching whereof might indeed exercise our study, but restrain the boldnesse of a rash definition. Wherefore I do not promise, after all others, so to unloose this knot touching the thousand yeers, and millenary reigne of the Martyrs, as to satisfie all men: but will speake what the LORD hath given me to see, following the steps of o∣thers so farre as I may. First observe, that the thousand years are here six times iterated. Thrice it is said that Satan was bound for a thousand years and afterward loo∣sed, verse 2.3.7. Twice it is said that the Saints shall reign a thousand yeers with Christ, ver. 4.6. Once, that the rest of the dead lived not again, till the thousand yeers were finished, v. 5. There are therefore a thousand yeers of Satans captivity, and of the rest of the dead: There are also a thousand yeers of the Saints reigning with Christ: Whence ariseth the first necessary Question of all, Whether these thousand yeeres bee the same, or diverse? Of old, the Chiliasts or Millenaries affirmed them to be diverse (whose opi∣nion is anon to be examined:) And some learned Interpreters of these times also, and among the rest, BRIGHTMAN, These thousand yeers, saith he, in which the Saints shall reign with Christ, do begin where the former ended. Thus Satan should be bound a thousand years, and afterward Christ should reign a thousand years. But I judge that one, and the same terme of a thousand yeers is denoted, and the reason is plain in the Text: because in verse 2. & 6. the thousand yeers are said to be  without an article: but foure times afterward with an article , These thousand yeers, emphatically, and significantly, as if he should say, Satans Imprisonment shall continue a thousand yeers, and during these thou∣sand yeers, the Martyrs shall live, and reign with Christ, afterward Satan shall be loosed. Wherefore the same terme of a thousand yeers is noted: although in ver. 6. it be more largely extended, as there we shall see. There is also another reason, ab incommodo: for it seems not convenient to say, that the Saints, after Satans loosing, and when he again rageth, should then reign: Nay, rather they shall reign, Satan being as yet bound: for this raging enemy being loosed, would scarce suffer them to reign. Besides, the other opinion doth with the Chiliasts and Papists too much de∣terminate, and circumscribe the time of Christs comming to Iudgement, against the expresse saying of Christ: Mat. 24.26: Of that houre and day no man knoweth, &c. And therefore I say, that both Satans binding, and the Saints reigning with Christ, shall bee in the same thousand yeeres. Now touching these things, It is demanded, I. Whither the thousand yeeres be definitely, or indefinitely to bee understood? II. If definitely, where they are to begin and end?
III. What condition John did see the Saints to be in, during these thousand yeers. IV. What Satan is said to attempt, after the accomplishing of these thousand yeers. In the expounding of these Questions, those things are contained which follow in Verse 11. I. WHITHER THE THOƲSAND YEERS BE DEFINITELY TO BE ƲNDERSTOOD: whether I say, the thousand yeers be definitely or in∣definitely to be understood, in both appeareth a difficulty. If thou say indefinite∣ly, taking a thousand for many, or for all unto the end, then in vaine it were said: Afterward Satan shall be loosed. If definitely, then the difficulty will be so to expound the beginning and ending thereof, and how in the meane time Satan was bound, afterwards loosed, that we runne not into the errour of the Chilasts, or some other inconvenience. Augustine, whom most of the ancient, and latter Writers follow, Lib. 20, de C. D. cap. 7 understood the thousand yeers indefinitely, that is, for the whole time from Christs death and resurrection, (when Satan began to be bound, that he should no more seduce the Nations) unto the end of the world: because that sometimes in Scripture a thou∣sand signifies indefinitely, a very long time; as: Psal. 105.8 He hath remembred his Covenant for ever: the word which he commanded unto a thousand generations: Notwithstan∣ding he doth not precisely extend the thousand yeers, unto the end of the world, but untill the time of Antichrist, who, as he thought, (following herein the er∣rour of his Predecessours, mislead by Papias) should come in the last foure years of the world, and reigne three years and an halfe: but he questioneth whether An∣tichrists time should be added to the thousand yeers, or rather to the little season, in which Satan is to be loosed. This opinion Ribera prosecutes at large, shewing, Com. in A∣poc. cap. 20 N. 36.37 &c. that these thousand yeeres sig∣nifie the whole time from Christs Resurrection, unto Antichrists Kingdome: because by thousand, in Scripture we often understand a very great, and indefinite number, Joh. 9.3. Psal. 91.7. 1. Sam. 18.7. Psal. 90.4. &c. The like also we find in Heathenish Writers. Virgil. 1. Aeneid. 11. Aene. 2. Pers. Sat. 5. Ovid. Met. Lib. 13. &c. But this opinion cannot stand, for many causes: for first, we may not rashly, and without necessity goe from the Letter to Figures: Now here no necessitie urgeth us to turne from the proprietie of the letter (about the thousand yeers) un∣to a trope of indefinite signification. Besides, neither the Subject, Yeers, nor the Epithite, Thousand, doth here ad∣mit a Trope. Not the Subject, because howsoever other names signifying time, as houres, dayes, weekes, moneths, are often in Scripture taken improperly. Yeers also attributed to God do improperly signifie eternity, Job. 10.5. & 36.26. Psal. 102.25.28. Heb. 1.12. Or by an Hebraisme the time of divine Iudge∣ment, as Isa 61.2. Luke 4.19. the acceptable yeere: Isa 34.8. the yeere of recom∣pence: Jerem. 23.12. the yeere of Visitation: Notwithstanding Yeers with a nu∣merall Epithite, as in this place, have never any other signification, save propet and definite. Againe, neither the Epithite, Thousand, the which howsoever it doth sometimes, both in sacred and humane Writers, only amplifie a matter inde∣finitely: as may be seen in the Examples before mentioned: Notwithstanding being in Histories and Prophesies of Scripture joyned to yeers, I shall alwayes beleeve that it is never taken but in a definite signification, except any man can shew me the contrary. Thirdly, the Text it selfe yeelds us a weighty reason: because Iohn indeed at first in verse 2. determinates the thousand yeers without the Article, having it only , but afterward emphatically repeats it foure times with the Article,  these thousand yeers, and undoubtedly defines the same. Fourthly, from the Text wee have another evident reason, viz. that during those thousand yeers Antichrist was worshipped: for within those thousand yeers they also that worshipped not the Image of the Beast, that is, of Antichrist, lived, and
reigned with Christ: and therefore it cannot be understood that these thousand yeeres were finished before Antichrists coming, nor indefinitely untill his coming. We are therefore to embrace their opinion who hold that these thousand yeers are definite. And now let us come to consider the termes. II. Where these thousand yeers have their beginning and ending. Such as understand the thousand yeers definitely, are diversly minded about their beginning, as by and by I will shew. I suppose it best to take their beginning from the Angels descension: because otherwise the determination of the thou∣sand yeers, so often repeated, should be uncertaine and vaine: I say, in case they should have an indeterminated beginning elsewhere: Now the descension of the Angell was in the Incarnation of the Son of God, as before we shewed. Not∣withstanding Satan was not bound presently upon his Nativity: because the Son of God did not immediatly exercise his power in his Child-hood. But the true beginning is understood from the cause, why the Dragon should bee bound: which was: that he should deceive the Nations no more: to wit, by keeping them in Paganisme, Where we are to begin the thou∣sand yeers. and turning them from the Gospell of Christ. Therefore when the Dragon began to desist from deceiving the nations, then he was bound. Now he desisted from seducing the Nations any longer, not presently, at the begin∣ning of the Ministery, or Resurrection of Christ, or of the preaching of the A∣postles, (although the Angell did then begin to cast the great chaine upon the Dragon) but especially after the dispersion of the Iewes, and the destruction of the Iewish Temple, and worship by the Romanes: for before that time, the be∣ginnings of the Gentiles conversion to Christ were but small: because the Dragon never ceased to hinder the Gentiles from the Gospell of Christ, by meanes of the turbulent Iewes, as the History of the Acts of the Apostles testifies. But after∣ward, Ierusalem being destroyed, the Iewes were rejected and dissipated, and in their roome the Gentiles were called, and added to the Church, as Paul teach∣eth, Act. 13.46. Rom. 11.11. &c. Then at length it appeared that Satan was bound, because he was not able to seduce the Nations any longer, or uphold Pa∣ganisme. But that was in the yeer of our Lord LXXIII. This yeare therefore we make the beginning of the thousand yeers of Satans binding. From hence unto the Yeer of our Lord 1073. The end of the thou∣sand yeeres. are a thousand yeers, at which time Pope Gregory VII. a Celtiberian Monke, and diabolicall Iugler, poysoning Alexander II. invaded the Papacy by most wicked arts: who sitting on the Papall Chaire, the devill began againe to be loosed, and to rage tumultuously, filling the Christian world in a horrible manner with wars and slaughters, by the means of this his cursed instrument. But thou wilt say; Whether the Dragon were bound in the first thousand yeers. Did not Satan in the first three hundred yeers after the de∣scension of the Angell, most cruelly afflict the Church by the Romane Tyrants: and in the three hundred following yeers, defiled the Christian world with most grosse heresies: and in the four hundred succeeding yeers, raised up the Romane Antichrist out of the bottomlesse Pit, giving unto him his Throne and great power, working with all manner of unrighteousnesse and cruelty in the very heart of the Church? How then could Satan be said to be bound these thousand yeers, in which he raged so outragiously? I answer: The binding of Satan (as before I said) may not be absolutely understood, as if he then could not, or did not hurt the Church at all, but re∣strictively unto the cause expressed in the Text, so farre as he was then restrai∣ned from seducing the Nations any longer, that they should not embrace the Faith of Christ. To this binding of Satan it is sufficient, that then he could not by the Tyrants, Iewes, or Philosophers, hinder any longer the propagation of the Gospell among all Nations. And therefore howsoever in great number, the Gentiles were converted to Christ, and Paganisme every where decayed; yet no marvaile, though Satan did rage in his principall members, and breathed out threatnings by the Tyrants of the Romane Empire, and by Hereticks in the
Church it selfe: Hence arose so many persedutions of the Saints, and such great conflicts of the Church with Hereticks; during sixe hundred yeers: neither is it strange that Antichrist was then raised up by Satan: for seeing hee was bound himself, he gave his throne and power to Antichrist, that the Beast might be the Vi∣car of the Dragon while he was in bonds, and the more furiously exercise all his power. Hence the Dragon is said to have given his Throne to the Beast, Revelat. 13.2. By which it plainely appeareth, how far these thousand yeers do agree with, The compa∣ring of the thousand yeers with the 1260. dayes & 42. months. or differ from the 1260. dayes, and the 42. moneths, in which the Holy City is said to be troden vnder foot by the Gontiles, Chapter 11.2. and the Beast was to rage, Chap. 13.5. In some part they agree: for in the last foure Ages of these thou∣sand yeers, those 1260. dayes and 42. moneths began to run on: because in them the Beast began to tread the Church under foot. But they differ, in that these thousand yeers are referred to Satans binding: the 1260. dayes, and the 42. moneths to Antichrists tyrannicall reigne: They are already ended, more then five hundred yeeres: these are not fully ended: because the Beast hath as yet scarcely reigned a thousand yeers. Now those things that are brought against this our opinion, Objections taken away. are easily taken away. FIRST, the Order of the Prophesie is objected, viz. that the Dragon shall at length, after the Beast is cast into the Lake of fire, be bound a thousand yeers in the bot∣tomlesse Pit: but the casting of the Beast, shall bee the ruine of the Papacy; Therefore the thousand yeers shall not be begun, till at length after the ruine of the Papacy. But the major is denyed: because the casting of the Beast into hell praecedes indeed the binding of the Dragon in order of the Vision, but not in order of time: Before, I say, Iohn saw the Beast to be cast into the lake, in the foregoing sixt Vision: be∣ing as it were the last Act of that Ʋision: but not in this last Ʋision, in which is now afterward related the binding of the Dragon, the which notwithstanding praeceded the casting of the Beast, or ruine of the Papacy many Ages, being as it were the first Act of this last Vision. The plaine and forcing reason hereof is, that the Beast and False-prophet shall not be abolished, but by the brightnesse of Christs comming to judgement. But it is absurd to imagine that Satan should be bound a thousand yeers after the last Iudgement. The cause therefore of the errour is, that the diversitie of that, and this Vision, is not observed. Secondly, they object: That if the thousand yeers must begin from the destruction of Je∣rusalem: then that time, in which Satan shall be again loosed, cannot be called a SHORT SEASON, because it containeth above five hundred, yea about sixe hundred yeeres. But the consequence is denyed: for although the time of Satans loosing, hath now bin for these five Ages, and perhaps shall continue an Age or two more, even un∣till the end of the 1260. dayes, the which thing the Lord knoweth: Notwith∣standing we have a little before clearly demonstrated, that it is rightly called a LITTLE SEASON, both in respect of God, as also in respect of the Dragon, and of the Ages past, and lastly, and that indeed principally, in respect of the thousand yeeres of Satans binding, then which that time shall be shorter, because God will shorten those dayes for the elects sake. Thirdly, they object: that such as have not worshipped the Beast, nor received his Character, should not then reigne with Christ those thousand yeeres. But this is de∣nyed: for the thousand yeers were ended in Gregory VII. unto the time of which filthy Beast more then 460. yeeres of Antichrists reigne were run on, during all which time very many Martyrs and Professours worshipped not the Beast and his Image. All these therefore after death, did according to their soules, live, By the fi∣gure called Synecdoche, a part is ta∣ken for the whole. and reigne with Christ in blessednesse those thousand yeeres, by a Synecdoche, because they lived with Christ in the last foure hundred yeers of the said thousand. Now in verse 4: I will plainly shew that this Synecdoche is neither unusuall in common speech, nor in Scripture, or that it derogates any thing from the happinesse of
the latter Martyrs. As therefore the Martyrs lived not altogether, or were all put to death at one time, but successively: so also they began not altogether to live and reigne with CHRIST in Heaven, but successively during those thousand yeeres. Lastly, It is objected, that the devill was not bound in those first thousand yeers, be∣cause he seduced very many. But this was resolved in the first Question: for nei∣ther are we to imagine, that Satan was so bound, as that he could not seduce, or hurt none at all, neither by his Emissary Angels, or by other his instruments, as Tyrants, Hereticks, Antichrist: but onely (as it is expressed in the Text) that he should not deceive the Nations any longer, that is, uphold Paganisme, and hinder the course of the Gospell among the Gentiles. Thus I have laid downe my judgement, agreeing with other most learned In∣terpreters before me, as Bullinger, Junius, &c. not that I do tye any man unto it, but leave it to consideration: but they who begin the thousand yeeres from Christs nativity, as Aretius, or from his Resurrection, as Chytraeus: or from the time of universall Christianisme under Constantine the Great, as Brightman, Napier, &c. although they differ a little in the termes, yet all have this common with us, that the first thousand yeers from Christs birth is to be ascribed to Satans impri∣sonment; and that the Dragon is now long agoe loosed out of prison. There are two other opinions of them, who referre the thousand yeeres unto the last times, as if they were not yet begun. One of the old Chiliasts, of which I will speak afterward in verse 5. The other new, of certaine learned brethren, that these thousand yeeres, are not to begin till after the casting of the Beast into the Lake of fire, that is, after the overthrow of the Papacy. Then they thinke that he shall be bound a thousand yeers in the bottomlesse Pit, and that the Martyrs which have beene slaine by Tyrants and Romish Popes, shall then corporally live again, and reigne with Christ in Heaven those thousand yeeres: and then at the end of these thousand yeeres shall be the Resurrection of all the rest of the dead, and the last Iudgement. Now what I thinke in this opinion to be wanting, I will here touch onely in a generall way, reserving the rest to its place. First, I cannot approve, that these thousand yeeres are not as yet begun: nor past: because two false Hypotheses are supposed: One, that Satan hath not as yet bin bound, that he should seduce the Nations no longer in Paganisme, the which is repugnant to the History. The other, that the world should yet con∣tinue a thousand yeers after the overthrow of Papacy, which is repugnant to the divine oracles, touching the abolishing of ANTICHRIST by the brightnesse of Christs coming, after which, to expect a thousand yeers in this world, to me feemes very absurd. They object that the Oracles of the Prophets are not yet fulfilled, Ierem. 30. and 31. Mich. 4.3. unto 8. & Mich. 5.9.15. the answer of Christ, Act. 1.6.7. & Mat. 23.28. Rom. 11.25. But in all these, not to be tedious: I would first desire them to seeke their thousand yeers: Secondly, that they diligently consider whether those Oracles (spoken of in verse fourth) are Prophesies touching the Kingdome of the Mar∣tyrs in Heaven, or not rather of Christs Spirituall Kingdome and State of the Church of the Gospell on Earth, partly already fulfilled, and partly not, but in time to bee accomplished. Secondly, that opinion contradicts it selfe. For it propoundeth, that the Pope before these thousand yeeres shall be cast into the Lake of fire, and that Popery shall be a∣bolished: and withall: that the Pope during the thousand yeeres, shall by little and little gather his strength, and at the end of the said yeeres, joyne himselfe with Pagan Kings, to make warre against the Saints. But how shall the Pope doe this, being in the Lake of fire? They answer, that the same Pope indeed that is cast into the Lake, shall not
reassume strength: but there may bee some other after him, who shall not bee abolished till the brightnesse of Christs comming. But this is to dally in a serious matter. The ruine of the Papacy, in which they fixe the beginning of the thousand yeers, we understand not to be the casting of one or two of the Popes into the Lake, (for many are already cast away) but the overthrow of the whole Papacy. Here then, let them explaine themselves, whether they understand it of the overthrow of Papacy in part, or totally. If they understand it onely in part, they must say, that Satan hath bin bound above an hundred yeers, because, since that time Papacy hath gone to decay in Germany, and some other Kingdomes: which thing Bellarmin also confesseth: for, saith he, Bell. Lib. 3. de P.R. Cap. 21. from that time, since you affirmed the Pope to be Antichrist, his Empire hath beene so farre from encreasing, that it hath alwayes more and more decreased. If of an univer∣sall or totall overthrow, how then shall the Beast gather strength by little and lit∣tle, especially while he is in the lake of fire? Thirdly, they take up another absurdity against the Text, viz. that in the be∣ginning of the thousand yeeres, the Martyrs shall corporally live againe, and reigne with Christ a thousand yeers: whereas the Text expressely speaketh of their soules, not of the bodies of the Martyrs: neither saith it, that they lived again, or were rai∣sed up from death, but that they lived, of which in ver. 4. Fourthly, they frame another absurdity, in pretending a two-fold resurrection of the dead: One of the Martyrs after the overthrow of the Papacy: the other, of the rest of the dead, after the thousand yeers reigne of the Martyrs: the which is contrary to an Article of our Faith: I beleeve the resurrection of the flesh, that is, of all the dead at the last day: and it is refuted by experience. Again, if they understand the overthrow of the Papacy in part, seeing this hath bin accompli∣shed more then an hundred yeeres agoe: they must shew that the first bodily Resurrection of the Martyrs is also past: If totall, seeing this shall not bee, but by the brightnesse of Christs coming to Iudgement, they cannot deny that then the Martyrs also shall be raised with the rest of the dead. Fiftly, I know not how they can make their opinions hang together, for they say, that Christ shall come to Iudgement a thousand yeers after the overthrow of Papacy: and that after those thousand yeers, Gog and Magog shall make warre against the Christians. What? shall this warre be taken in hand after Christs last comming to Iudgement. Lastly, this opinion doth fully agree with the errour of the Chiliasts, long a∣goe condemned by Christians, (of which I will speake by and by) viz. in this, that the world shall remaine a thousand yeers after the abolishing of Antichrist, directly contrary to the Apostle, 2. Thess. 2.8. affirming that Antichrist shall bee over∣throwne by the brightnesse of Christs comming. And in that it imports two particular Resurrections, contrary to the Scripture, touching the resurrection of all the dead together at the last day: Onely herein it differs, Lib. 20. de C.D.C. 7. that it makes not the thousand yeeres reigne (as they) Earthly but Heavenly: although Augustine con∣fesseth that there were also among the Chiliasts, some who beleeved, that the spiri∣tuall delights in that Sabbath, should come to the Saints through the presence of the Lord. But more shalbe said of this opinion, in ver. 5.6. These things therefore shall suffice, touching the Termes of the thousand yeers. It followeth. III. What was the condition of the godly, first on earth, after∣ward in heaven, in these thousand yeers. The Explication of this Question is contained in Verses 4.5.6. which now we come to Treat of. 4. And I saw Thrones] Beza: Then I saw: but it is better copulatively, And I saw, for, also I saw, least these things should be thought to be done after Satans binding a thousand yeers. For Iohn saw both Satan bound in the bottomlesse pit,
and thrones set in Heaven all at one time. Augustin doth very well joyne these things to the former, and observeth the scope, although he vary in the ex∣plication of the Thrones: When, saith he, he had said that the devill was to be bound a thousand yeers, and afterward to be loosed a little season, by and by, by recapitulating what in these thousand yeers the Church did, or was done in her: And I saw, saith hee, Seats, and them that sate upon them, and judgement was given unto them: we may not thinke this to be spoken of the last Judgement. Thus far he saith well, but he addeth: But Seats or Thrones of the Officers by whom the Church is now governed. In this he strayeth from the Scope: for Iohn intended to speake, not of the Hie∣rarchy of the Church, but of the lot of the godly, what that was in the meane while, both corporally on Earth, and spiritually in Heaven. And indeed, as for the corporall condition of such as among the Gentiles had received the Faith, he saw the same troublesome and bloody: for, he saith, they were beheaded for the wit∣nesse of Jesus, that is, both by Heathenish Tyrants, and Hereticks in the first six hundred yeers of the thousand: Secondly, they were slain by the Beast, because they would not worship him and his Image, nor receive his Character This was the lot of the Godly upon Earth, representing the first Act of this Vision. But their spirituall condition he saw to be joyfull and royall, because these slaine or beheaded, however, in the eyes of the ungodly thought to be miserable, and that they peri∣shed, yet sate on thrones, lived, and reigned with Christ those thousand yeers. This was the lot of the Martyrs in Heaven, exhibiting the second Act of this Ʋision. If this sense and meaning of the fourth verse be well observed, there will be little ob∣scurity in the place, otherwise most obscure. For hence it appeareth, as I said in the Preface, that in this Ʋerse is briefly contained the first Act of this Ʋision, touching the calamities of the Church, under the Romane Tyrants, Hereticks, and Antichrist beginning to rage: as also the second Act, touching the consolations of the Godly, who in those thousand yeers shed their blood for the witnesse of the truth. Iohn therefore expounded what he saw, 1. Thrones, 2. them that sate thereon, 3. their state and condition. I saw thrones] Thrones or Seats are placed either for rest, for judgement, or the Kingdome. Before in Chap. 4.4. he saw foure and twenty Thrones, and so many Elders sitting on them, that is, resting from their labours, as also adorned with judiciary and royall Dignity. These thrones may bee understood as placed for all the said ends: but properly for the Kingdome, as is shewed in the end of the Verse. And they sate upon them] Kathizein is properly transitive, to place, or cause to sit. Thuryd:  placing his Army. Often also neutrally to sit: Be∣cause an action may passe into the Actor himselfe, or a man may place himselfe, which is to sit. This transition is expressed in the Hebrew  he placed him∣self, in Hithpael, that is, sate down. So the transitive signification remaineth, whether it be rendred they sate, or placed themselves upon them. Iohn therefore saw thrones, not empty, but having Sitters on them. But who were they? by and by he names them  The soules of the slaine with the sword: but first he shewes what honour was done unto them. And judgement was given unto them] This Judgement some understand actively of power given to judge the Adversaries: Others passively of the judgement spo∣ken unto them, against the Adversaries. But nothing of such a judgement doth ap∣peare in the Text: And Augustine in the fore-alleadged place hath rightly ob∣served, that here is not yet treated of the last Iudgement, which shall at length bee described in the end of the Chapter. I therefore take this Iudgement to bee the royall Dignity given unto them, as in Psal. 72.1. O God give thy Iudgements to the King, because by and by it is referred to the Kingdome: And they reigned with CHRIST. And the soules] Now he nameth those that he saw sitting on the Thrones, the soules
of them that were beheaded.  And, is referred to the Verbe  I saw, and de∣claratively to  sate: as if he should say: I saw, soules sitting on the thrones, as Brightman and Tossanus have well observed. Now he makes two rankes of such as sate, Martyrs and Confessours. The Periphrasis of the Martyrs is, the soules of them that were beheaded, that is, put to death any kind of way. These again he de∣stinguisheth by the times, from the distinct cause of their Martyrdom: for some were slaine for the witnesse of JESƲS: others for the Word of GOD. The witnesse of Iesus] He meaneth the Gospell of Christ (as in Chap. 19.10.) for the cause whereof the Gentiles that were converted to the Faith (seeing they professed and testified the same with great zeale) were troubled and murthered by divers kinds of torments, throughout the whole Romane Empire by cruell Ty∣rants, in the first three hundred yeers. Now he seeth the soules of these sitting upon Thrones, not indeed on Earth, but in Heaven: neither as yet restored to their bo∣dies, as the Chiliasts would have it, but without them: (otherwise he would not have said: I saw the soules of them that were beheaded: but rather: I saw them that were beheaded,) the which Augustine in the said place hath rightly observed: How Iohn could see the soules which are invisible. nei∣ther are we to enquire how he saw these soules, being invisible spirits: for he saw them by the Spirit of his minde, not with his bodily eyes. Now these soules, (to adde this in a word) for the greatest part are the same which Iohn saw un∣der the Altar, in the second Ʋision at the opening of the fift Seale, who requiring a∣vengement of their blood, had white robes given them, and were bid to rest untill, &c. Here therefore he seeth the same sitting or resting on Thrones. Touching the other ranke of Martyrs, he saith. And for the word of God] It is no Tautologie: for the article  is added to  That word, giving us to understand these soules were slaine for that Essen∣tiall word of God, who in the foregoing Ʋision Chap. 19: 13. sate on a white horse, that is, the eternall Son of God, for whose sake many thousands laid downe their lives in the Arian, Macedonian, and Nestorian tempests, &c. in the three hundred following yeers. Wherefore he saw both the soules of these, and of the other Martyrs resting on thrones in Heaven. And them that worshipped not the Beast] Gr. , Whosoever. The Ellipsis or defect, is to be supplied from the foregoing part, Thus, I saw also the soules of such sitting, as had not worshipped, &c. These he distinguisheth from the former, because they are latter in time, which the adjuncts shew: They worshipped not the Beast and his Image, &c. Perhaps also all were not Martyrs, but some of them Pro∣fessours onely, though but few, seeing the Beast caused all to be slaine that worship∣ped him not, and his Image: Chap. 12.15. These therefore had to doe with the Beast. Now the Beast began to reigne, rage, and to be worshipped in the last Ages of the thousand yeers, viz. from the six hundred and sixt yeer, as we shewed in Chap. 13. & 17. whosoever therefore from that time, even unto the end of the thousand yeeres did constantly oppose the Beast, and got the victory over him, (which was said of the multitude of Harpers, standing on the Sea of glasse, Ch. 15.17. and unto which multitude these also belong) are here spoken of, and commended for their constancy in banishments, torments, and all manner of punishments, which they suffered in maintaining the Faith of Christ, against the Beast: Whence we gather these certain conclusions. I. That the Beast, his Image, and his Character, were within these thousand yeers: because there were then some who worshipped the Beast, to wit, all the In∣habitants of the Earth, Chap. 13.8. and they that would not worship him, were either Martyrs or Confessours. II. That Antichrist was again to rage within the said thousand yeers: because the Beast then was, and would be worshipped. Now the Beast is Antichrist, as ap∣peared Chap. 13. & 17. and Ribera confesseth Cap. 13. Numb. 1. & Cap. 19. Num. 31.32.
III. That these yeers are not indefinitely the whole time from the Vision, un∣till the end of the world, or untill the comming of Antichrist: because Antichrist began to rage between them, or while they were running on. IV. And lastly, that the Papists Antichrist, who, as they feine, shall come and beare sway in the last foure yeeres of the world, is but a vaine Skare-crow, by which they deceive themselves and the world: because Iohn foretold that the true ANTICHRIST should bee manifested within the first Thousand yeeres after CHRISTS descension. Ribera saw this knot in Apocal. Cap. 20. Num. 33. therefore to untye the same he saith: that which followeth: And lived, and reigned, is not to be referred to those that worshipped not the Beast, but onely unto the soules of them that were behea∣ded for the testimony of Jesus. But this subtilty is too repugnant to the Text, and sheweth that here the Papists are at a Non-plus: for John saith of the very same: they lived and reigned: Of whom he had before said: they sate upon thrones. Now these were not onely such as were beheaded, but also the Conquerours of the Beast. But (saith RIBERA) he saith not that these were dead or slaine: What of that? It is enough that he maketh the Confessours also Conquerours of the Beast, and saith that they sate with the Martyrs, or certainly he meaneth that these also were slaine, because before in Chap. 13.15. he had said: that all that worshipped not the Beast, and his Image were slaine: but these worshipped not the Beast and his Image: therefore they were either slaine, or Confessours, that were Conquerours of the Beast: and it remaineth, that they sate with the Martyrs. It remaineth that they lived and reigned in these thousand yeers. It remaineth that the Beast was within the said first thousand yeeres: for betweene this time, Iohn saw the soules of the slaine for the Testimony of Jesus, and of them that denyed to worship the Beast: but the worship of the Beast could not be refused before he was. Lastly it re∣maines, that the Papists Fiction touching the Beasts coming in the last four yeers of the world, is as repugnant, as the opinion of the Chiliasts, to this most manifest place of Scripture. And they lived and reigned with Christ these thousand yeeres] Now comes, as it seemes, the inextricable knot, which of old drove the Millenaries into by-wayes, while they did not sufficiently consider neither the Scope, nor the words of the Prophesie, nor the Analogie of Christian beleefe. The which, least it happen to us also, let us well ponder the sense of the words, directing the same to the scope before declared. Let us therefore, I say, consider of these things in order. I. Who they were that lived and reigned with Christ? II. How, and how long they lived and reigned with him? III. Who were the rest of the dead, and how they lived not againe? IV. What the first Resurrection may bee? V. LASTLY, What the opinion of the Chiliasis or Millenaries was, and how to bee refuted? What concernes the first, Beza renders  & , lived and reig∣ned, (which are Preterperfects) by the Futures, shall live and reigne: because he saw, ver. 6.  shall reigne, is in the Future. But here the Preterper∣fects are to be retained, because they answer to the Preterperfect  sate, notwithstanding the difference in respect of the sense is very little: for John speak∣eth of things to come, as past, by a Propheticall manner, for the certainty there∣of, but the words  with Christ, belong in common to both, They li∣ved with Christ, Who they are that li∣ved & reig∣ned with Christ. and with him they reigned. But who? To wit, They, which sate on Thrones: also reigned and lived with Christ, namely, the Soules of them that were slaine by Romane Tyrants, and by the Hereticks for the witnesse of Iesus, and the Soules also of the slaine or tormented, for denying to worship the Beast, as erewhile I shewed against Ribera's subtilty. For John declareth the condition of those
whom he saw sitting on thrones, what it was during the thousand yeeres, both corpo∣rally on Earth, (already spoken of) and spiritually in Heaven, which here he de∣clareth: They lived and reigned with Christ, to wit, contrary to the foolish opi∣nion of the world touching them, which is for the consolation of the Godly. The world indeed judged these slaine to have miserably perished: but death to them was life, Oppression a Kingdom with Christ. This is the First: that the soules of the slaine, not restored to their bodies, but being out of them (as before wee shewed) did live and reigne with Christ. The Second seems more difficult to be expounded, viz. how they lived and reig∣ned with Christ, and how long? But the matter is not obscure, if the words be rightly considered, and not wrested against the Scope and mind of the Spirit, as the Chiliasts did, rendring  they lived,  they lived againe, that is, How the Chiliasts corrupted the text. they rose up out of their Sepuichres: and what the Spirit speaketh of the soules of the Martyrs, they wrested to their bodies, and so feined a corporall Resurrecti∣on of the Martyrs, a thousand yeers before the last day. This first Falshood, was the ground of the Millenaries errour, against which we must firmely hold too, and urge the simple word,  lived, in stead whereof, The ground of the Chi∣liasts error. they evilly suborned the compound  lived againe. For here is spoken of the soules of Martyrs li∣ving in Heaven, which, as being immortall Spirits, could not die with their bodies, or be slain on Earth, therefore cannot bee said to live againe, but (as it is in the Text) they lived with Christ. They object to the contrary, that  lived, is put for  lived again, as before in Chap. 2. ver. 8.  for . But both is denyed, because these two words doe much differ in sound and in sense: and therefore may not be confounded neither here, nor in the place alledged. Not here, because this con∣fusion imports two absurdities. ONE Physicall or naturall, that the soules of the Martyrs were flaine: The OTHER Theologicall, that a Corporall Resurre∣ction of an infinite number of the dead, shall be before the last Day, contrary to the Faith of all Christians, taught by Christ himselfe: The houre is comming, Ioh. 5.28. in the which all that are in the Graves, shall heare his voyce, and shall come forth: They which have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they which have done evill, unto the Resurrection of death. Neither before in Chap 2. because Christ in saying: which was dead, and lived: gives us to understand, not onely that he was dead and raised againe, but also that he lived, even while he was dead in the flesh, or that he was living in his Divinity, to demonstrate his two-fold nature, as before we shewed, Chap. 1.18. and Chap. 2.8. Adde to this, that although it ought there so to bee taken, yet here it cannot, because of the Arguments following, which ad∣mit not the same. Moreover, they urge the Antithesis of the following Verse: But the rest of the dead lived not againe: By which (say they) it seemes to bee plaine that  is put for , but thence the contrary doth plainely follow, viz. that the Holy Ghost by a different word, noteth a diverse sense: for the Antithesis is not of a contradiction in Synonymaes, but of a metaphoricall contrarietie, both in the subject and attribute, because the same thing is not denyed touching the Remnant of the dead, which was affirmed touching the soules of the Martyrs properly, that they lived and reigned with Christ: But another thing, contrary to a happy life, Metaphorically: that they lived not againe in the first Resurrection, for, that they repented not: which, as by and by I shall clearely shew, is the proper and genuine fense. To returne to the Question, The soules of the Martyrs live with Christ, How the soules lived and reigned with Christ not onely a Naturall Life (for this after death is common to the soules of the Godly and ungodly, being immortall Spirits) neither onely a Spirituall Life of Regene∣ration, which the Martyrs had (before they were slaine) on Earth: but a bles∣sed and glorious Life, which Iohn saw them enjoying with Christ in Heaven.
They reigned also with Christ, not in the Kingdome of Grace, which is in this Life, but in the Kingdome of Glory, which is in Heaven: according to the pro∣mise: I appoint unto you a Kingdome, as my Father hath appointed unto me: And: To him that overcometh, Luk. 22.29 Rev. 3.21. will I grant to sit with mee in my Throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne. But they do wholly erre, who suppose that we interpret this clause of the life of Regeneration, and of the Kingdome of Grace, and thence draw Sophismes for the Chiliasts opinion, which shall be trea∣ted of in the following Verse. Iohn therefore saw the Soules of the Martyrs that were beheaded here on Earth, living blessedly, and reigning gloriously with Christ in Heaven. But how long? Those thousand yeers] viz. How al the Martyrs li∣ved a thou∣sand yeeres with Christ in which Satan was kept bound in the bottom∣lesse Pit: not that the Martyrs were all slaine together, about the beginning of the thousand yeeres, and so all of them lived the whole thousand yeers with Christ: But he speaketh of a continuall succession, that none during the said yeeres, in which they were slaine for the Testimony of Iesus, or for refusing to worship the Beast, did miserably perish, but lived blessedly, and reigned with Christ in heaven. Wherefore in the thousand yeers is a Synecdoche, familiarly used in our ordinary speech, and in Scripture, as before I said: For example: A man is said to come to day, though hee come not in the Morning, but at Noone, or E∣vening: or, A man is said to live or die in this yeer, not onely if he live or die at the beginning, but also towards the middle, or end of the yeer: so the Martyrs are said to live and reigne with Christ a thousand yeeres; although all of them were not slaine at the beginning, but some towards the middle, others towards the end thereof. Mat. 12.39 Ioh. 2.19. By a like Synecdoche, the Son of man was three dayes and three nights in the heart of the Earth, and in three dayes raised up the Temple of his body, al∣though hee lay not much longer then one day and two nights in the Sepulchre. The Iewes were Lxx. Iere. 29.9. yeers in the Captivity of Babylon, although Daniel was lon∣ger: Zerubbabel, and they that were born in the Captivity, were Captives few∣er yeers: Gen. 6.3. So God granted from the five hundreth yeere of Noah, unto the flood, an hundred and twenty yeers unto men, although, all they that were born within the 120. yeers, had a shorter time of repentance, &c. Away therefore with their scoff of 400. The Mar∣tyrs shall also reigne after the thousand yeers. Crownes in stead of a thousand. Neither is this Synecdoche any way derogatorie to the happinesse of the latter Martyrs slaine by Antichrist, for we are not to thinke that they ceased to live, and reigne with Christ after the thousand yeeres were ended: for they shall reigne with him for ever and ever, as wee are taught, Revelat. Chapter 22.5. It was enough for Iohn to shew, what condition the blessed Spirits should be in, those thousand yeers; in the mean while not denying, that both they and other Martyrs should further live and reign with Christ. But thou wilt say, Why the thousand ers are fined. to what end was it to define a thousand yeers, if the Martyrs were to reign longer? I answer: It was meet they should be defined, because of the wonderfull events that were to come to passe in those first thousand yeeres, bringing as it were a new face on the whole Earth: for Ierusalem being destroy∣ed, Iudaisme was to be overtowne: Satan being bound, Paganisme was to de∣cay: and on the contrary, Christianisme established in the whole Romane Empire, not without shedding of very much blood: lastly in the midst of Christianisme, Antichristianisme was to bee erected, and toward the end of the thousand yeeres, confirmed and brought to its height, with no lesse spilling of Christian blood, in Gregory VII. that cruell Beast. 5. But the rest of the dead lived not againe] Having expounded the state of the Godly, what it was in those thousand yeers, first on Earth, afterward in Heaven: now he addeth the state of the wicked during the said time on Earth: that they li∣ved not againe, in the first Resurrection, that by this Antithesis he might the more set forth the happinesse of the Martyrs, and withall teach us, that Satan was not so bound, but that he still held very many, even all the time of the said yeers in Paga∣nisme
and Antichristianisme, who would not embrace the testimony of Iesus, and live againe, or be raised from the death of sin: least we should imagine that the thousand yeers should be altogether a Golden-Age, or that the Church were to expect the applause of the whole world. This is the summe. By the Rest therefore, are understood all others (the Martyrs and Confessours excepted) who embraced not the Testimony of Iesus in all this time, but were either professed enemies of Christ, as Iewes and Pagans without the Church, or false Christians or Antichristians in the Church: These hee saith are DEAD, not by a corporall, but a spirituall death in sin, of which death the Apostle speaketh, Ephe. 2.1. 1. Tim. 5.6 Mat. 8.22. Ioh. 5.25. When ye were dead in sinnes: And, she that liveth in pleasure, is dead while she liveth: so Christ: Let the dead bury the dead. The dead shall heare the voyce of the Sonne of man: for he speaketh of the state of the ungodly living on Earth, whom he op∣poseth to the Martyrs, not as then living with Christ in Heaven, but as formerly embracing and professing the witnesse of Iesus on Earth: Therefore in the words The rest of the dead; the distinction is not betwixt the dead, but after the Greeke Phrase the Genitive is put for the Nominative: The rest of the dead, for the rest being dead, so in Chap. 9.20. the rest of men, that is, other men, or at least it is a distinction of such as of old were living on Earth, but dead spiritually: for of old the Martyrs also, before they repented, and embraced the Testimony of Iesus, were dead spiritually, as the rest: but because they lived againe spiritually on Earth, therefore after death they lived and reigned gloriously with Christ in Heaven. But the rest lived not again] To wit, from the death of sin through Faith and Repentance, but despising the Testimony of Iesus, remained in Paganisme, Or repented not of their Idolatry, Hypocrisie, and other sinnes in Antichristia∣nisme: as in Chap. 9.20. The rest of men, which were not killed by these plagues, repented not of the workes of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and Idols of gold, &c. which place doth excellently interpret this. But that he speaketh not of a corporall living againe, as the Chiliasts did interpret it, shall by and by appeare by Iohns Declaration. Ʋntill the thousand yeers were finished] That is, during the whole thousand yeers wherein Satan was bound: for againe he addes the Article  These thousand yeers. But did they live againe afterward? no certainly, for they which live not againe in this life, shall never live againe in the life to come. Therefore the Particle  Vntill, limits not a time of living again, but simplie denyeth the same: they lived not againe untill, for, never. As: Thou shalt not come forth untill thou hast paid the very last mite, for, never. Hee knew her not untill shee had brought forth her first borne, for, never. The Chiliasts said: They lived not within, but after the thousand yeeres: but by the same reason they should say, that the Soules of the Martyrs lived in, but not after those thousand yeers. Both is false: for the Mar∣tyrs have never ceased to live and reigne: neither have the rest of the dead ever li∣ved againe. It therefore noteth their voluntary contumacie in Paganisme and An∣tichristianisme: that however Satan was bound in a speciall manner, and could not deteine them in Infidelity: yet they would not, after the example of the Mar∣tyrs, repent, and embrace the witnesse of Iesus, so as the fault of their de∣struction was onely in themselves. The fourth thing followeth, touching the first Resurrection. This is the first Resurrection] In the Greeke IS is left out: but the Ellipsis is expressed ver. 6. This is the second death. By this Addition Iohn doth expresly declare, what kind of living againe he meant, that the rest of the dead lived not: namely in that, which is the first Resurrection, as if he should say: they lived not again in the first Resurrection: the meaning is thus: This is the first Resurrecti∣on: for: This living again, in which I said the rest of the dead lived not, is to be un∣derstood of the first Resurrection: for the monstrative  This, is not to be re∣ferred to the soules of the Martyrs which he said LIVED, but onely to the rest of the dead, who he said, lived not again, which the particle  in the Verbe
lived againe, and repeated in the Noun  Resurrection, doth in∣timate. The Declarat o also of the contrary sheweth the same, ver. 14. This is the Second Death: where likewise the Demonstrative  This, is not to be referred unto all that were judged, ver. 13. but only to them that were cast into the Lake of Fire, and were not found written in the booke of Life. Now it followeth to speake of the manner of this Resurrection, and what it is. The Chiliasts said it was corporall, but here is solidly demonstrated, that a corporall raising up of the Martyrs out of their Sepulchres, is not proper unto the Martyrs, but that it must be understood of a Spirituall living again from the death of sin, in all that shall be saved. THE DEMONSTRATION. That the first Resurrection is not to be understood corporally, but spiritually. First, from the differences dividing the whole Subject. This first Resur∣rection is either corporall, or spirituall. But it is not corporall: Therefore it is spirituall. The assumption is proved: If this Resurrection should be corporall, then it could not be called the First, because many Corporall Resurrections are spoken of in Scripture before. I. The Resurrection of the Son of the Widow of Sarepta, corporally raised up by Elias, 1. King. 17.22. which is the first resurrection mentioned in Scripture. II. The Resurrection of the son of the Shu∣nammite, raised up by Elisha, 2. King. 4.35. III. The Resurrection of one put into the grave, by touching the bones of Elisha, 2. King. 13.21. IIII. The Resurrection of a Widows son, raised by Christ, Luk. 7.15. V. Of the daugh∣ter of Jairus, Luk. 8.55. VI. Of Lazarus, Iohn. 11.44. VII. The Resur∣rection of many of those Saints, who came forth out of the Sepulchre, when Christ suffered on the Crosse, Mat. 27.52. VIII. The Resurrection of Tabi∣tha, raised by Peter, Act. 9.41. IX. The Resurrection of Eutychus, brought from death to life by Paul, Act. 20.10, &c. And therfore if the Resurrection here spoken of were corporall, it should not be called the first, but at least the tenth. Neither helps it to object, that the foresaid Resurrections were onely of a few: but that this shall be of very many: for the Question is not touching the number of them that are to be raised up: but of the Qualitie and Order of the Resurre∣ction, and it followeth (seeing that is not the first of the same Genus, which hath many other before it) either that this cannot be called the First Resurrection, be∣fore which there were many other: or else that it is not of the same kind with the other Resurrections, that is, it is not corporall. Secondly, This Resurrection being taken corporally and properly, must be un∣derstood either of the Soules of the Martyrs, or of the rest of the dead, or of none. Of the soules of the Martyrs it cannot be understood: both, because it is not said of them, that they were raised, or lived againe; But, that they sate on thrones, lived, and reigned with Christ, as before was shewed: As also, because properly a cor∣porall Resurrection is not agreeable to Soules: seeing Soules properly die not, as not being bodies, neither of the nature thereof: nor can it be understood of the rest of the dead: because of these it is expresly said, that they lived not againe. Therefore this first corporall Resurrection cannot be true of any at all. Thirdly, The whole Scripture testifies, that ALL, I say, ALL the dead, shall in one Resurrection, at the last day be raised by the Trumpet and Voyce of the Archangell, some indeed unto eternall Life, others unto eternall shame: Iohn 5.28. The houre commeth, in which ALL that are in the Graves shall hear his voyce, and shall come forth: they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evill unto the Resurrection of damnation, Iohn 11.24. I know that my brother shall rise againe in the Resurrection, at the last day. Iohn 6.48. This is the will of him that sent mee, that every one that seeth the Sonne, and beleeveth in him, should have Eternall Life: And I will raise him up at the last day. From this
universall, the Martyrs cannot be excepted, because they beleeved on the Sonne of God. 1. Cor. 15.52. We shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpe, for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall bee raised. 1. Thess. 4.16. At the comming of the Lord, they that dyed in Christ, shall rise first. Therefore the Martyrs also who dyed in Christ, shall rise at the com∣ming of the Lord. Iohn also toward the end of this very Chapter, describeth the Second Resurrection, which shall bee at the last day, so universall, as that all the Elements shall give up their dead, (a great part whereof shall bee Martyrs, being destroyed by Fire and Water.) By all which, I suppose that no Godly man, can, or ought to gather any other thing, then that all the dead shall be raised together in one Resurrection at the last day: but that many millions of Saints should be raised before the last day, cannot without errour be beleeved. Fourthly, the Apostle Paul most exactly describing the whole History (and what we ought to beleeve) of the Resurrection, opens indeed a Mysterie unto us: 1. Cor. 15.51. viz. That all shall not die, but in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, all shalbe changed. Yet not a word touching the mysterie of the Mil∣linarie Resurrection of the Martyrs before others. If thou say, that it was not revealed unto him: Consider that the Apostle was caught up into the third heaven, 2. Cor. 12.4. and heard unspeakable words, that is, all kind of mysteries, especi∣ally such as were to bee revealed unto the Church. And therefore undoubt∣edly hee should have heard that also, for to reveale the same unto us, and would have revealed it, if it were true. Fiftly, from the nature of Opposites: So as is the first death, so on the con∣trary is the first Resurrection to be understood. For I suppose none will deny, but that these two are privatively opposites, as being contrary-wise affected about the same subject. But the first death, was not of the body or corporall, The first death what it is. but the death of the Soule, or Spirituall through fin: by which man was first separated from God, made mortall, and deprived of Life Eternall. For by this death Adam was dead in Soule, although in the body he lived nine hundred yeeres after. But the death of the Soule drew with it corporall death, as it were by a necessary con∣sequence, and so perpetually drawes the same with it on all the Posterity of A∣dam, by the threatning of God: Thou shalt die the death. Of this first Spiritu∣all death the Apostle speaketh: Through sinne death entred into the world, Rom. 5.12. and so death passed upon all men, for all have sinned: including indeed the Sequell of a corporall death: but especially shewing the deliverance from spirituall death, through the death and life of Christ. Of this death also Austine: The soules al∣so (saith he,) have their death in impietie and sinnes, according to which death they are dead, of whom the Lord saith: Let the dead bury their dead: and according to this first Death, wee are all dead in sinnes, no man excepted: because it is said of all men: when ye were dead in sinnes, &c. Seeing therefore the First Death was a Spirituall destruction and alienation of the Soule from God, and eternall Life through sinne: certainely the first Re∣surrection (being an opposite medicine to the first death) must bee a Spirituall conversion, and restoring of the Soule from sin to God. Sixtly, If the First Resurrection were corporall, and properly belonging to the Martyrs: then onely the Martyrs should bee blessed, but all others that rise at the last Day, should be excluded from happinesse. But this is very absurd. And therefore the other also. The reason of the consequence is, because in the following verse, onely such are said to be blessed, who have part in the first Resur∣rection: of which we shall there speak. Seventhly, from the same verse: If the First Resurrection were corporall, and proper to Martyrs: then all the dead at the last Day should bee raised unto the second death, or unto eternall damnation, none of them unto life eternall. But the latter is false, and contrary to Scripture, Ioh. 5.24. Dan. 12.2. &c. Therefore the former also. The consequence of the Major is grounded on the
following Verse, where the Second, or Eternall Death is said to have power onely over them that have no part in the First Resurrection, as there wee shall see. Lastly, in the same Verse it is said, that they onely shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, which have part in the first Resurrection, as shall be shewed. Whence againe it would follow, that the Martyrs onely should be the Priests of God and of Christ, in case that the first Resurrection were corporall, and proper to Mar∣tyrs. But Peter teacheth the contrary, 1. Pet. 2.5.9. And Iohn, Rev. 1.6, &c. These things I suppose may satisfie the Godlie minded, and such as are not contentious: unto which I will onely adde this one thing, touching the Etymo∣logie of the First Resurrection: that as the first death is so called, because it first seazed on man, Why the first Resur∣rection is so called. according to the soule, as soon as he had sinned: so the first Resur∣rection is so called, because it first vivified man according to the Soule, as soone as he repented by hearing the promise in Paradise. Or also (which comes all to one thing) because it is the vivification of the first or more noble part, that is, of the soule: as also because it is wrought in the First, that is, in this naturall life: and la∣stly, because it must goe before the Second resurrection, which shall be the resur∣rection of the bodyes to glory or, if the first went not before, unto con∣demnation. Here I could adde the Authorities of ancient Divines. But it's needlesse: Let Augustine suffice for all the rest, who most diligently searched into this prophe∣sie; The first Resurrection (saith he most truely) is to Grace, the second to Glorie, Lib. 20. de Civ. Dei. C. 7.18. Him Ribera unjustly reproveth, restraining the First Resurrection unto the immortality of soules, that the Martyrs, though estee∣med as if they had utterly perished, yet according to their better part, they live. Then which, nothing is more unsavoury: for in this hee attributes nothing more to Martyrs, then to the worshippers of the Beast, who themselves also after the death of their bodies, lived in their better part, and yet never lived in the first Resurrection. Objections against the First Spirituall Resurrection, cleared. IT remaineth that I briefly answer the Objections of the Chiliasts, about their Corporall Resurrection of the Martyrs. OBJECT. I. That which falleth not, neither dyeth, is not raised again. The soules fall not, neither dye, but the bodies. Therefore the First Resurrection is not of soules, but of bodies. Austine moving this cavill denyes the minor, Lib. 20. de C. D. cap. 10. Rom: 14.4 1. Cor. 10.4 Ephe. 2.2. Mat. 8.22. that soules fall not, nor rise againe: dye not, nor live againe. For it is said: He standeth or falleth to his own Master. When ye were dead in sinnes. Let the dead bury their dead: which things are certainely spoken, not of the fall or death of the body, but of the soule. The soule of man therefore fell through sinne, and lies dead in sinne: liveth againe through Faith, and riseth againe by repentance. Therefore there is a Re∣surrection of the Soules also: but not the Second: for this shall be of the Bo∣die: Therefore the First. Object. II. The Soules of Martyrs lived againe, either in respect of themselves, or in respect of their bodies, or in respect of other men, who professed the same Doctrine. But they lived not againe in respect of themselves, because they were never dead: Nei∣ther in respect of other men: because it would follow, that the rest of the dead should likewise live againe: which is false. Therefore they lived againe in respect of their owne bodies. I answer: I do not well understand whether this be in earnest or in jest: The whole is so frivolous, and hangs no more together, then if they should say: The Soules flie, either in respect of themselves, or in respect of their bodies, or in respect of other men, &c. Not in respect of themselves, because they have no wings, neither in respect of other men, because they also should flie: which is false. Therefore in respect of
their bodies: The Hypothesis is false, the distribution vaine and lame, the conse∣quence nothing, for this is wanting: or they flie in no respect. So here the conse∣quence is to be denyed: because they take up a falsehood, viz. that the soules did live again, for in the Text it is said they lived, not that they lived againe: Hence the distribution is vaine and imperfect, for a fourth is wanting, viz. that the Soules lived not againe in any respect, to wit, corporally, which is the Question here in hand. For a false attribute divideth not, but overthrowes the subject by its falsitie, neither is it truely affirmed of the same but denyed. Adde, that the first clause, with the reason thereof, is ambiguous: for howsoever soules dye not, nei∣ther live againe in respect of themselves, that is, in respect of their essence, yet they do dye, and live againe in respect of themselves, that is, in respect of Grace and Salvation, as hath been shewed. The other is superfluous and figurative. For no man liveth againe in respect of others, except metaphorically: as for example: A father liveth again in his children, in likenesse of nature and manners: The two Witnesses, Chap. 11.11. lived againe in their Successours, in likenesse of doctrine. And therefore in this also is an aequivocation or ambiguitie. The third, which is concluded, is also a figurative Synecdoche, or is false. For as properly not the Soules, but the Martyrs were dead in respect of their bodies, so properly not the soules, but Martyrs shall live againe in respect of their bodies at the last day. Therefore ingeniously, and without Sophistrie, the Object: should thus have bin formed. The Martyrs lived againe either in respect of their soules, or in respect of their bodies. Not in regard of their soules: therefore in respect of their bodies. But thus also the whole major is false; the minor ambiguous, the Consequence nothing: for then the Martyrs lived not againe, but lived according to their Soules: but they shall live at the last day, according to their bodies. Therefore properly there are as many faults, as words. Ob. III. From the Antithesis, ver. 4. & ver. 5. If the word LIVED in the former part of the Antithesis, must be understood of a Spirituall Resurrection, then by the like reason the words LIVED AGAINE in the latter clause, must be under∣stood of that spirituall Resurrection. But this cannot bee: for it would follow that none did spiritually live againe (that is, were converted) in the thousand yeeres, but the Mar∣tyrs alone. Secondly, this absurditie would also follow: that the thousand yeeres being fi∣nished, all which Spiritually dyed, did, or shall spiritually rise againe: the which thing is contrary to manifest experience. I answer: 1. Again they take up a false Antecedent, viz. that in the former mem∣ber a spirituall Resurrection ought to be understood: for the former clause speaketh of no Resurrection, whither Spirituall, or Corporall, but of the happy living of the blessed Soules with Christ: for he saith not,  And they lived again, but  And they lived with Christ, which two we deny to be of like force and signification. Now from a false Hypothesis or supposition, the consequences which are thence drawn are also false. Hence. 2. the whole conclusion is false, be∣cause the diverse words lived, and lived again, make both members or clauses to be of a diverse sense: neither are they truely Opposites, as was shewed in ope∣ning of the Text. III. The Assumption is also denyed, that the latter member cannot be under∣stood of a Spirituall Resurrection, for a little before we shewed, that it ought so to be taken. IV. The former absurditie followes not, both because to the Mar∣tyrs are added the Professours also, which received not the Character of the Beast, that is, who refused to embrace and professe the Papists Religion, verse 4. Hence Ecclesiasticall Histories testifie, that besides the Martyrs, there were al∣wayes some other professing Christians: As also because the Speech is indefinite, and usuall in Scripture: The rest of the dead were not converted: not as if none at all were converted, but very few: as appeares from a like place, Chap. 9.18.20. where at the sounding of the sixt trumpet, it is said, that the third part of men being
slaine, the rest repented not, the which unlesse it bee indefinitely understood, a greater absurditie then this should follow, viz. that not one man in the whole world did then repent. LASTLY, the latter absurditie, that the thousand yeeres beeing ended, all Spiritually dead should also spiritually rise againe, (which were much to be wished) doth no more follow, then, that the said yeers being ended, the soules of Martyrs and Professours should neither live nor reign any longer with Christ. Objec. IV. From the same Antithesis: If the latter member ver. 5. speaketh of the Resurrection of bodies: then the former in ver. 4. speaketh of a Resurrection of bodies also, where its said of the Soules of the Martyrs: And they lived, that is, lived againe. The reason of the consequence is: because in every lawfull distribution, as this is, (for who should taxe the Holy Ghost of absurditie) members are set downe under the same Genus or generall word. Now the Genus here is the Resurrection of the dead. I answer. The falsitie both of the Antecedent and Consequent of this Objection hath already bin so fully demonstrated, that there needs no more be added. The reason of the consequence is not solid: neither can hence the Holy Ghost be taxed of absurdity, both because often a Genus of one and the same name is taken in a diverse signification: so the living againe of the dead in this place: As also, because it were wickednes to deny that to the Spirit (especially in this aenigmaticall Pro∣phesie) which Philosophers, Poets, and Orators frequently take to themselves, viz. in distributions to oppose things metaphoricall to things proper, or proper to fi∣gurative, for the thing it self. Now in v. 4. was shewed that this Antithesis is such. Objec. V. They who so live againe or rise, as they begin to reigne with Christ, that is, by Christ in Heaven: they certainely rise in their bodies, But the Soules of the Martyrs are so to live againe, or rise in the beginning of those thousand yeeres, as that they begin to reigne with (that is, by) Christ in Heaven: for John saith: They lived and reigned with Christ. Therefore, &c. Answer. I. The major is denyed a non causa: for to the end, that the Soules of Martyrs and Confessours should live blessedly, and reigne with Christ in Hea∣ven before the last day, a corporall Resurrection is not necessary. But at the last day it shall be necessary, to the end that the Martyrs both in body and in soule, may gloriously live and reigne with CHRIST for ever, according to the pro∣mise of the Gospell. II. The assumption is refuted by the proofe it selfe, or by Iohns owne words: for he saith not, that the Soules lived againe, or were raised: but they lived ( not .) The difference whereof children in schooles do understand, and hath bin demonstrated, ver. 4. Therefore the first falsehood so often repeated, is a continuall begging of the Question. They insist: To live and reigne with Christ, is to live and reigne after the similitude of Christ, or so to live and reigne, as Christ now reigneth in Heaven. But Christ liveth and reigneth in soule and bodie. Therefore the Martyrs not onely lived and reig∣ned with him in soule, but in body also. I answer. I. This glosse overthrows the former: for if to live with Christ, be to live after the likenesse of Christ in Heaven: then it is false, that it is to live a∣gaine, or be raised from the dead on Earth. II. The major shall be true after the Resurrection of the dead at the last day, when all the Martyrs, Professours, and Beleevers being raised from death, shall in soule and body be allwayes with the Lord, 1. Thes. 4.17 1. Ioh. .2. and see him as he is. But before the Resurrection of the dead, this is false: Otherwise the Soules of such as die in the Lord should not goe unto Christ, nor live with him: but the Apostle testifies the contrary touching himselfe, Philip. 1.23. and of all the faithfull. 2. Cor. 5: 8, &c. Ob. VI. It is agreeable to the justice of God, that such as suffered more grievously then others, for the confession of Christ, should also enjoy longer delight and glory. Therfore the Martyrs are to be raised from the dead before the rest of the Faithfull, to enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven all those THOƲSAND YEERS before the other. Answ. The major, not being universall, is false: for God doth not all what is agreeable to his justice now, or before the Day of Iudgement, but will doe the
same at that Day; See 2. Thess. 1.6.7.8.10. Neither is every thing agree∣able to divine justice, which seemes so to us, but whatsoever is revealed in the Scripture: otherwise indeed it might seeme to us to bee more agreeable to the justice of God, that the Martyrs should presently be raised after their sufferings, and be carried with their bodies into Heaven, that so they might longer, and be∣fore others, enjoy the Kingdom of glory. Objec. VII. The two Martyrs, Rev. 11.11. were corporally raised: There∣fore these also. Answ. I. The Antecedent is denyed: for neither doth that type speake of a corporall Resurrection according to the Letter, but of a successive living againe, as was there shewed. II. They who confound them with these, shew that they are but strangers to the Revelation: for these Martyrs and Confessours belong to the first ten Ages from Christs birth: The other two unto our last times, in which the Temple was to be measured, or the Church purged from Popery. Objec. VIII. The Prophets, and many Martyrs, came forth out of their Sepul∣chres at Christs death on the Crosse: Mat. 27.53. according to the Prophesie of Da∣niel, Chap. 12.2. Neither was that corporall Resurrection any way derogatorie to the Article of Faith, touching the future universall Resurrection: Therefore also these Martyrs lived againe corporally, neither is it any way derogatorie to the universall Re∣surrection of the dead. Answ. Whether those Saints (whose bodies came out of the Sepulchres, and appeared to many, after Christs Resurrection, to testifie the efficacie of his Death) were Prophets or Martyrs appeares not from the Text: neither is it a point of Faith to know the same. However the Prophesie of Daniel cannot with∣out wresting bee applied to these, which expresly speaketh, not onely of the Re∣surrection of such as shall be saved, but of the damned also, that is, of the last Ʋ∣niversall Resurrection. But that speciall and corporall Resurrection of those Saints, is certainly to be believed, because it is written: neither can it be derogatorie to our beleefe of the universall Resurrection, seeing the Scripture doth plainely ex∣cept this from that. But this Resurrection of the Martyrs a thousand yeers be∣fore that, is not to be beleeved, because it is not written: but onely (as we have shewed) sought to be maintained by wresting the words of this Prophesie: yea, it derogates from the Faith: because he that beleeveth this, cannot beleeve the other, viz. that there shall be a universall Resurrection at the last day. Objec. IX. Christ promised it should be so, Mat. 19.28. & Luk. 22.28. In the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, &c. Answ. These indeed are most sweet promises of our Saviour, touching the singular rewards of the Apostles in Heavenly Glory, and touching the large re∣compence of their labours and losse of all things, which here they sustained for the sake of Christ. But it is erroneous to beleeve, that here any thing is promi∣sed touching a corporall resurrection of the Martyrs that shall be before the rest of the dead, and of a golden Age to continue a thousand yeeres before the last day, in which (the Martyrs reigning with Christ in Heaven) the Iewes beeing joyned to Christians, and freed from the yoke of all adversaries, shall (as the opinion of some is) serve Christ in all manner of prosperity and peace. Let such, I say, see too, least they erre: and diligently consider, Act. 3.21. that those rewards are promised to be fulfilled in the regeneration or restitution of all things at the last day: promised also, Mark 10.30. with persecutions: which things are plainely repugnant unto the Millenary Resurrection, and peace before the last day. Lastly they pretend, that it were greatly for the comfort of the Martyrs, if they knew, that a little after their martyrdome (the thousand yeers being near at hand) they should rise againe, and ascend both in soule and body into Heaven, and reign with Christ a thousand yeers before the rest of the Faithfull. Answ. To seek for comfort in a doubtfull thing, is to feed upon the wind: in a
false thing: to mock with ones selfe and with God: neither is it without impiety, how pleasing soever it seems to humane wit: forasmuch as faith cannot be had in a doubtfull or false matter (such as is this Corporall Resurrection:) and so no solid consolation. But this is solid and double comfort to the Martyrs, if from the sure word of God, they do beleeve that their Soules, as soone as they goe out of their bodies, shall live and reigne with Christ in Heaven, and that at the last day, (when their brethren and fellow servants, who are to be slaine on earth, shall be fulfilled) their bodies also being raised up by the Son of God, Rev. 20.4. Ioh. 6.40. Rev. 6 11. Rev. 22.5. they shall reigne with him for ever and ever in Heaven. TOƲCHING THE OPINION OF THE OLD CHILIASTS. HAving expounded and vindicated the true meaning of this Prophesie, it re∣maineth in the last place to lay downe, and weaken the false opinion of the Old Chiliasts, who understanding this Prophesie corruptly according to the Let∣ter, and not according to the Analogie of Faith, did thence invent this Jewish Fa∣ble, which Austin hath set forth in these words, Lib. 20. de C. D. C. 7. That as the world was created in sixe dayes, and the seventh was a Sabbathisme: so the world should continue sixe thousand yeers: and afterward should follow a Sabbathisme in the last thousand yeers, namely, by the Saints that shall rise, and celebrate the same: which opinion he saith, might be somewhat tollerable, if it were beleeved in that Sabbathisme, some spirituall delights should come to the Saints through the presence of the Lord. For we also were sometime of this opinion, but seeing they affirme, that such who should rise againe, shall enjoy carnall Feasts, and eat and drinke beyond measure and modesty, these things cannot be beleeved but by carnall men, and therefore such as were spirituall, called them that believed these things CHILIASTS, being a Greek word, and by us may be rendred MILLENARIES. The first Author of this opinion, Papias au∣thor of the Chiliasts o∣pinion. as Eusebius recordeth Lib. 3. Hist. Cap. 33. was Papias, whom Irenaeus and Hierom (at which I wonder) make to be a hearer of the Apostle Iohn: where as Papias himselfe in the Preface of his worke con∣fesseth, that he never heard or saw the Holy Apostles: but saith that he received this tradition from the Elders of the Apostles. Now Eusebius also writeth of this Papias, that being pious, yet too credulous and of little soliditie, he tooke up many Fables for Apostolicall truths, because he understood the Apostolicall Interpretations amisse, and that he became ringleader of the Chiliasts error unto many who followed his traditions, among whom also was Irenaeus. Hence almost all the Elder fathers, Many of the fathers held the opinion of the Chi∣liasts. following the antiquity of the tradition and authority of so great a man, who was accounted a Disciple of the Apostles, be∣came Chiliasts: IUSTINUS Martyr, dial: cum Tryphon: Judaeo. IRENAEƲS Lib. 5. Cap. quin{que} extremis, not long since published at Paris, and annexed (as a filthie clout) to his workes: but it had bin better they had buried the same in e∣ternall oblivion, then to uncover the secret shame of so worthy a Father: NE∣POS a Bishop of Aegypt, whom DIONYSIUS ALEXANDRINVS refuted, as Eusebius writeth Lib. 7. Hist. C. 10. TERTVLLIAN: Lib. 3. Cont: marcion: Lactantius. lib. 7. instit. Cap. 23. disputes at large of this Fable: VIC∣TORINƲS PICTAVIENSIS in his Commentary on the Revelat. How un∣certain the antiquity of tradition. and the au∣thority of the fathers is. Austin also himselfe in the aforesaid place confesseth that hee sometime held the same. Hence all men may see how little is to be ascribed to antiquitie of TRADI∣TIONS, and the authority of the FATHERS. For antiquity without truth, What is it but the oldnesse of errour? Who more ancient then Irenaeus? Hee writeth, that he was the hearer, or Disciple of Papias, and Papias of the Apostles: Papias on the contrary denyes, that he heard or ever saw the Apostles with his eyes. (Behold antiquity without truth.) The said Papias received the Chiliasts Fable by tradition of the Elders, and drew many to embrace this errour by his
authority. The fable of Antichrists four yeeres reigne. And without doubt from the said Author Irenaeus sucked another fa∣ble (which by this means was generally received) touching Antichrist, that hee should reigne not fully foure yeeres in the end of the world: for the most ancient Writers were ignorant thereof. IVSTIN, the oldest Writer extant, affirmeth, that Antichrist the man of sinne, was already at the doore: Dialogo cum Try∣phone. CLEMENT who wrote next to IVSTIN, hath not one word of Antichrists three yeers reigne. Ter∣tullian who lived at the same time affirmed that Antichrist was neare at hand. Cy∣prian also next to the former writeth Lib. 5. Epist. 7. yee ought to know, hold, Libro Defuga persecut. and certainly beleeve, that the day of triall is begun already, and that the decay of the world, and the time of Antichrist draweth on: Ibid: Antichrist commeth. Wherefore the Fables of Papias were not taken on till at length in latter Ages. Furthermore the Chiliasts Fable occasioned many which dis-approved the same, but were not able to refute it, to fall into another errour worse then the former, affirming, that the Revelation was to bee rejected, as written by the Hereticke CERINTHVS. Among these were Cajus and others, touching whom (in EVSEBIVS) DIONISIVS ALFXANDRINVS speaketh, who opposed NEPOS the Egyptian. Others on the contrary to keep up the authority of the Revelation, laboured to divide the opinion of Cerinthus and the Fathers, as if Ce∣rinthus indeed maintained a voluptuous Millenary kingdom, full of lust and riot. But the Fathers the spirituall delights of the Saints. But Ribera affirmeth, Comm: in Apoc. 20. N. 26. that there was no difference betwixt the opinion of Ce∣rinthus and the Fathers, because Irenaeus, Tertullian, Lactantius, &c. wrote the same things about the Millenary Kingdome, which are contained in the opinion of Cerinthus. And this Dionysius, and Caius also an old Writer affirmeth, Euseb. Lib. 3. Hist. Cap. 28. however it be, the Chiliasts opinion was by the Christians condemned, for ascribing to Christ contrary to the Scriptures, a voluptuous and earthly Kingdome, and for bringing in, contrary to the Apostolicall Faith, one (and so making a two-fold) Resurrection after another: the which opinion how improbable it is, hath, I suppose, bin sufficiently shewed: so as I trust, that such who think it ought again to be renewed (as far as concernes the latter part there∣of) will, after the due consideration of these things, in the fear of God (with Au∣stin) change their opinion. Now for the refuting of this old Fiction of the Chiliasts (which Jerome in the life of Papias calleth a Jewish tradition) we may briefly observe, that it consists neither with the present Vision, nor with it selfe, nor with other Scriptures, nor Christian beliefe. Now this (besides what formerly hath bin spoken) I will shew by foure clear Arguments. First: I have made it manifest already, that the thousand yeers of Satans binding, A refutati∣on of the Chiliasts errour by experience. and the Kingdom of the Martyrs with Christ in Heaven, (beginning from the overthrow of Ierusalem, unto Gregory VII. that Romish Beast) are now past above 548. yeers. And yet there hath not bin any corporall Resurrection of Martyrs, or Golden Kingdom of Christ on earth. The experience therefore which we now see (but the fathers could not) refuteth this Fiction. Secondly, 2. From the text. That Millenarie Kingdom is expresly ascribed unto the soules of the Martyrs and Confessours, when (as Austin well observeth) they were not restored to their bodies. Then, I say, their soules sate upon thrones, lived and reigned with Christ in those thousand yeeres: this therefore is not to be applied unto the Resurrection of the body. Thirdly: This errour, as arising from a false Chronologie, is plainely refuted: 3. From the errone∣ous chrono∣logie. For the Chiliasts following the erroneous computation of the Greekes, affirmed that Christ was born in 5199. yeer of the world: since which are past 1621. yeers, which number being added unto the former, would make 6820. yeers from the Creation. But thus not onely the sixt Millenary (or the thousand yeers) which they ascribe to the binding of Satan, should bee past, but also there should but a few yeers of the seventh Millenary, and their voluptuous Kingdome of the Saints
with Christ, should already have dured above eight hundred: the which is refu∣ted by History and experience, so that if Irenaeus, Tertullian, Lactantius &c. did now live, they should bee necessitated to confesse that they much erred from the truth. Lastly the whole Scripture holds forth, IV. From the difficulties of the last times. Ioh. 18.36. Ioh. 18.20 Mat. 24.21 Luk. 18.8. 2. Tim 3.1 that the last times shall not be volup∣tuous in the least, but difficult and sorrowfull unto the Church in this world: Be∣sides Christ did often foretell that his Kingdom should not be earthly: My king∣dome is not of this world. The world shall rejoyce, but yee shall mourne: In the world yee shall have tribulation. Then shalbe great tribulation, such as was not from the be∣ginning of the world unto this time. Watch therefore, that ye may be found worthy to e∣scape all these things. When the sonne of man commeth shall he finde Faith on the earth? Through manifold tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This know that in the last dayes perilous (or difficult) times shall come, &c. These and such like testimonies of Scripture: which speake of the afflicted state of the last times, doe abundantly refute the Millenaries Fiction. Now wee goe forward with the Text. 6. Blessed and holy is hee that hath part] By an Exclamation he extolleth, and commendeth unto us the felicity, and necessity of the first Resurrection, or spiritu∣all living againe, by which of old those Rest of the dead in Paganisme and Anti∣christianisme, obstinately refused to live againe: by which all, and they onely shall be blessed and holy, Act. 8.21. Ioh. 13.8. What it is to have part in the first Resur∣rection. The profi∣tablenesse & necessity of the first resurrection who have part in the first Resurrection. To have part in a thing, is to become partaker of that thing: as appeares from the contrary: Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter, saith Peter to Simon the hypocrite: And Christ to Peter, refusing to be washed by him: If I wash thee not thou bast no part with me, for, thou shalt not have no communion with me. Therefore to have part in the first Resurrection, is to be partaker of the first Resurrection, that is, through faith and repentance, to rise from the death of sinne unto newnesse of Life with Christ. For we clearly shewed erewhile, that this first Resurrection, is not of the body, but of the soule. By which we see the great benefit and excellency of the first Resurrection: because in it consisteth true blessednesse and holinesse. The necessity also, because no man shall bee blessed and holy without the same. But is it the cause of blessednesse? yea verily: not indeed the meritorious (for that Christ onely is, for he hath merited blessednesse for us,) but causa sine qua non, a cause without which it is not: for without holinesse, which the first Resurrection bringeth, Heb. 12.14 no man shall see God: yea it is also the formall cause inchoated or begun. For the first Resurrection is inchoated holinesse, and part of the future blessednesse, which shall be perfected in heaven. Hence first it followeth, that all having part in the first Resurrection, that is, being truly born again in this life, shalbe blessed, and holy with Christ in the other Life: and on the contrary, that none which rise not againe with Christ, unto new∣nesse and holinesse of life on Earth, shall be blessed and holy with Christ in Hea∣ven: Lib. 20. de C. D. ca. 6. For none can belong unto this first Resurrection, but such as shalbe blessed for ever saith Austin. They therefore which have no part in the first Resurrection, shall not bee partakers of blessednesse: for wee shall bee clothed upon with our house, if so bee that beeing clothed, we shall not bee found naked. 2. Corinth. 5.3. Secondly it followeth, as before we proved, that the First Resurrection is not corporall, but spirituall: for if it were corporall, then by this Exclamation, all that shall be raised at the last day, should be excluded from blessednesse, because none of them should have part in the first Corporall Resurrection. But this is absurd, because in the last day, some shall rise unto blessednesse, others unto eter∣nall death. The reason of the consequence is, because all, and they onely that have part in the First Resurrection shall be blessed. All indeed thou wilt say, but not they onely: Yea because all, therefore onely: for in an enunciation of the property touching the subject, or of the effect touching
the cause without which it is not, or else an Antistrophe, such as this is, not only a sim∣ple conversion and contraposition will hold, but a contrary sense also, which be∣gets exclusives: Blessed are they that have part in the first Resurrection, therefore they that have no part in the first Resurrection, are not blessed: which is of like force with the exclusive: Onely they that have part in the first Resurrection are blessed: Ps. 119.1. Psal. 32 1. Rom. 4.7. Rev. 12.14 Rev. 19.9. like as it followeth: Blessed are the pure, therefore the impure are not blessed: Blessed are they whose sinnes are forgiven: They therefore are not blessed whose sins are not forgiven. Blessed are they that keep his Commandements: They therefore that do not keep them, are not blessed. Blessed are they that are called to the marri∣age Supper of the Lambe: therefore they who are not called, are not happy: and a thousand such like places are found in Scripture. But perhaps thou wilt say, it will not hold: because as in Chap. 1.3. a speciall blessednesse is promised to the keepers of the words of this Booke, so here also some speciall and eminent felicity of the Martyrs is commended, by which notwithstanding other be∣leevers are no way deprived of their blessednesse. THIS is nothing: for they that keep not the words of this Booke, shall be deprived both of speciall and common blessednesse. Therefore they onely who keepe the words and Commande∣ments of this Booke, are blessed: and so are they alone, who have part in the First Resurrection. Lastly, either they onely that have part in the first Resurrection shall be bles∣sed, or not they onely. If they onely, it confirmes, what we sayd: If not one∣ly, then Blessednesse shall not be a speciall priviledge of the Martyrs, agreeable to the justice of God, viz. that they who have suffered more then others, for the Confession of Christ, should bee longer in joy and glory: as before they said. For either there shall be some other Martrs on earth in these thousand yeers, who shall suffer as much, or more also for the Gospell, at the hands of Antichrist (regaining, as they say, his strength) or of other enemies, then the former suffered by Romane Tyrants for the witnesse of Jesus: or else there shall be none. If some: then either these shal enjoy shorter happinesse and glory in Heaven, which stands not (according to their opinion) with Gods justice: Or else it was not agreeable to his Iustice, that those other should enjoy longer happinesse and glory. If there shal be no Mar∣tyrs, but that the Church Militant during the THOƲSAND YEERS shall be free from all hostile invasion of the ungodly, living in peace and securi∣ty, as they promise: then it followes, 1. Cor, 2.18 that the Gospell shall cease to be the word of the Crosse: and the true Oracles of Christ and his Apostles, touching the difficul∣ties of the last times, Luk. 18.8. Mat. 10.34. Act. 14.22. 2. Tim. 3.1, &c. shall cease. Thirdly, we learne the certainty of the Salvation of all that are borne againe: for if all, and they onely that have part in the First Resurrection, are blessed: and that none can belong unto the First Resurrection, but such as shall be blessed for ever: then certainely all, and they onely that are borne againe, shall infallibly obtain eternall blessednesse. Ribera objects, that very many rise againe from sinne, and yet die againe, In cap. 20. N. 49.50. by their relapse into sinne, and so depart out of this life in their sinne: Answ. This is true of dogs and swine, returning to their vomit, and wallowing in filthinesse: that is, of hypocrites, who in appearance indeed rise againe from sinne, and seem to others to be truly purged from the defilements of the world, but yet are not truly pur∣ged before God: which for the most part the event sheweth: but of such as are truly regenerate, and rise againe from sinne, it is said: 1. Ioh. 3.9. Ps. 37.24. Whosoever is borne of God commits not sinne: for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God: And: Though the righteous fall, he shall not be utterly cast downe: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. On such the second death] He addes three causes or parts of their blessednesse, that have part in the first Resurrection. 1. Because the second death hath no power on them.
2. Because they shall be Priests of God, and Christ. 3. Because they shall reigne with Christ a thousand yeers. These are either the effects or consequents of the first Resurrection, and as it were the priviledges of the regenerate, first indeed, they are to be referred to the Martyrs, but secondly also unto all others that are partakers of the first Resurre∣ction, or spirituall living againe. For least we should say: shall the Martyrs alone live and reigne with Christ in blessednesse? he extends the blessed life, the Priest∣hood and Kingdome of Christ unto us also, pronouncing us blessed, and that indeed by a three-fold name, not the Martyrs (I say) alone, but whosoever have part in the first Resurrection: that by so many spurs as it were, he might stirre up all men unto the desire and studie of the First Resurrection. Therefore the first blessednesse of them that live againe, shall be an immunitie or security from the second death: for they that have part in the First Resurrecti∣on, on such the second death hath no power, that is, they can never perish. For the second death, is the casting of the wicked, both in soule and body into hell fire, which shall be at the last day, as appeares ver. 14. Of which our Saviour in the the Gospell: Mat. 10.28 Feare him that can destroy both soule and body in hell. This other∣where is called Eternall death: because it shall be an eternall losse of life eternall, and an everlasting torment in everlasting fire. Here it is called the Second, to difference it from the First: because as the second doth next, and certainly fol∣low the first: so the second death shall follow the first in order, and certainly, un∣lesse the First Resurrection come in between, and that deliverance from the First death be obtained by Christ. Now before we shewed that the first death is a spi∣rituall perdition of the Soule in sinne, drawing with it temporall death as its nece∣ssary sequell: Rom. 5.12 This death entred into the world through sin, and passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Therefore it hath power over all men, and it is universall, yet mutable through the First Resurrection, that is, true repentance and faith in Christ. But the second death shall not have power over all, but them only whom it findes lying in the First death: for these shall be throwne head-long from death into death: or rather the Second death shall be unto them an everlasting continua∣tion of the First death, and a horrible increasing in eternall fire. But such as through faith and true repentance, have risen with Christ from the First death, on them the second death shall have no power: because according to promise of the Gospell, Ioh. 3.36. Ioh. 5.24. they that beleeve on the Sonne of God, do not come into condemnation, but are passed from death to life. Therefore the second death shall not be universall, because the First resurrection shall make the particularitie: yet it shall be immutable for ever, because there can be no redemption from hell, but the smoake of their tor∣ment shall ascend up for ever and ever. Psal. 49.8. Rev. 14.11 Cont: De∣metr: For after the departure out of this life, there shall be no more place of repentance: no effect of satisfaction: Here life is either lost or kept, saith Cyprian. These things ought to awaken and raise up such as lie in the death of sinne: And on the contrarie, to confirme the assurance of their salvation, that are risen with Christ. For if the second death hath no power over them that have part in the First resurrection, then certainly they need not fear condemnation, but may and ought to be certainlie perswaded of their salvation. But some may say, It is uncertaine, who truely have, and alwayes unto the end shall have part in the First Resurrection. Answ. If it be uncertain to thee who hast not tasted hony, whether it be sweet or not: it is not therefore uncertaine to them who have tasted the same. So likewise, If the First Resurrection be uncertaine to them, which neither have, nor know the same: it is not therefore uncertaine to them which have it, and feele it in their hearts: for some apprehend not faith in their hearts, Lib. 13. de Trin. C. 2. but others do which have the same, saith Austin. And how should such be uncertaine of their new birth, who dayly endeavour, and desire to die unto sin, and to live unto Christ? They certainely who run on in all wickednesse, and as Peter saith walke in laciviousnesse, lusts, excesse of wine, revellings, banquettings, and a∣bominable
Idolatry, know that they doe such things, yet out of an evill con∣science commit the same with great delight. And therefore why should not such, who by an earnest desire of minde resist the concupiscence of the flesh, and labour by good workes to make their election sure, know, feele, and be perswa∣ded (the Holy Ghost witnessing the same to their Spirits) that they are children of God, and have part in the first Resurrection? Furthermore, they which now have part in the First Resurrection, shall allwayes have part of the same unto the end: because, To him that hath, shall bee given, Luke 8.18. Otherwise Iohn should have done ill in saying, that they are blessed who have part in the first Resurre∣ction: which to thinke were blasphemy: from the part therefore of the new birth which we have in this life, we may, and ought certainly to beleeve we shall have part in the life to come, that is, be eternally blessed. Here again by this first priviledge of them that rise againe, is ouerthrowne the Chiliasts opinion, touching the first Corporall Resurrection, as before wee touched. For if it should be Corporall, and proper to the Martyrs, it would follow that the Martyrs alone should bee free from the second death: and that all the rest in the Second Resurrection should remaine subject to the same, for as much as by this priviledge they alone are exempted from the power of the Second death, who have part in the First Resurrection. But this is wholly contrary to Faith and Charity. But shall be Priests of God and of Christ] The second part of blessednesse, and the second priviledge of the regenerate, is that they shalbe Priests of God and Christ: XLI. Argument of Christs deity. Beza in the DATIVE, To God and to Christ, as it is Chap. 1.6. & 5.10. in the same sense. He distinguisheth God and Christ, not to seperate Christ from God, or to deny that he is God: but because Christ the Mediatour hath made us Priests to God the father, Chap. 16. & 5.10. Yea hereby he plainely affirmeth Christ to be God, in that hee saith wee shall bee Priests both to God, and to Christ. Now we shall be Priests to none but to God. But what manner of Priests? Of this see Chap. 1. ver. 6. & Chap. 5.10. The future  shall be, denyeth not that now also the Faithfull are Priests of God: but noteth the continuation and consummation of our Priestly dignity in the world to come. Hence first it appeareth, seeing the Scripture extendeth the Spirituall-Priest∣hood unto all the regenerate, that are washed from their sinnes in the blood of Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Rev. 1.5.6. that this priviledge doth so agree unto the blessed Martyrs, as it derogates nothing from other Confessours and regene∣rate. Secondly, that for the same cause, the First resurrection v. 5. is not to be understood corporally but spiritually: because otherwise the Martyrs alone should become Priests of God and of Christ, in case they alone should have part in the first Resurrection. And shall reigne with him a thousand yeeres] The third blessednesse and privi∣ledge of them that live againe, is to reigne with God and Christ a thousand yeeres.  with him, saith he, to denote the unity of both persons in the deity. XLII. Argument of Christs deity. But who shall reigne? The Martyrs onely, or the other blessed also? In my former Edition, I restrained the same to the Martyrs from verse 4. But having more seriously weighed the whole Epiphonema or exclamatory conclusion, I am forced to extend, as the Priest-hood and blessed Life, so the Kingdome gene∣rally unto all that have part in the first Resurrection: that is, unto all the regenerate. And so much the words do demonstrate, if well observed: For seeing John had said before of the Martyrs in the Praeter Tense  They reigned with Christ: of these he now saith  They shall reign with him, in the future: Besides, touching the Dragons binding, and the Martyrs reigning, he had before said thrice with the Article , Those thousand yeeres: Of these now hee saith indefinitely, They shall reigne  a thousand yeeres. Hence I observe this diversity, both in the persons reigning,
and in the thousand yeeres: that John for the comfort of the rest of the Saints, and blessed ones, doth in this verse extend the Kingdome of the Martyrs with Christ, beyond the thousand yeers before defined: as if he should say: The soules indeed of the Martyrs lived and reigned with Christ those thousand yeers of Satans binding: but with them afterwards, others also having part in the first Resurre∣ction, shall as Priests of God and Christ reigne other thousand yeeres, that is, for ever and ever, as is interpreted Rev. 22.5. Neither matters it, that also in ver. 2. he said  a thousand yeers, without an Article, and yet definitely: for no man but understands, that there it ought not to have bin said with the Article , Those thousand yeers: because no mention was before made of a thou∣sand yeers. But afterwards, that we might not understand the thousand yeers both of Satans binding, & of the Martyrs reign with Christ (in v. 3.4.5.) to be divers, but the same, it is said rightly with the Article  those thousand yeeres: and for the same cause the Article  is againe repeated ver. 7. where he men∣tioneth the period or end of Satans binding. The Second Part of the CHAPTER. Touching the new attempt of the Dragon (being loosed at the end of the Thousand yeers) by the Gentiles, and by Gog and Magog, against the Church. 7. And when the thousand yeeres are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison. 8. And shall goe out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quar∣ters of the Earth, Gog and Magog to gather them together to bat∣tle: the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea. 9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, and compassed the Campe of the Saints about, and the Beloved-City: and fire came downe from God out of Heaven, and devoured them. THE COMMENTARY. 7. BƲt when the thousand yeeres are expired] Now followes the Second part of the Chapter, of the loosing, and new raging of the Dragon, after the thousand fatall yeers were expired, containing the THIRD ACT of the last Vision, being an amplification of the Churches calamities and combats, under both Antichrists of the East and West, who shall againe grievously trouble the Christian World, as we shewed in the PREFACE. And thus at length we come to the explication of the fourth Question before pro∣pounded in ver. 3. IV. What Satan shall doe after the thousand yeers are expired. He had said that Satan being bound with a great chain, should be thrust into the bottomlesse pit for a thousand yeers, and afterward againe loosed, ver. 3. and shew∣ing in the following verses what in the meane while was done in the Church,
and what was the state of the ungodly both without and within. Now Kat' anaphoran or in relation to what was before, he saith that Satan was to be loosed after the thousand yeers, and expoundeth what he attempted, with the successe thereof, yet aenigmatically: so as this part of the Prophesie is very obscure, neither may we scatcely so much as guesse what the meaning thereof is: notwithstanding the most diligent Interpreters do thinke, that somewhat about the same may bee observed from the Histories of former times: whose steps (seeing nothing more certain is revealed unto me) I am willing to tread in. When the thousand were finished] In which Satan remained in chaines, and in which in the mean while Christ enlarged his Kingdom among the Gentiles, and the Martyrs had lived and reigned with him. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison] Hence it plainely appeareth (as before I said) that the thousand yeeres of Satans imprisonment, and of Christ his kingdom, are not diverse, but the same: for it is said with the Article: When THESE thousand yeers () shall be fulfilled, Satan shall be loosed. This very thing Austin well observeth, saying: Lib. 20. de C, D. c. 13. The Chili∣asts opinion cannot stand. That the Scripture by the same thousand yeeres determinates both, to wit, Satans binding, and the Saints reigning. Which being observed, it appeareth that the Chiliasts opinion cannot stand, viz. that Satan should be bound in the sixt Millenary of the world (in which they af∣firme Christ was borne:) and that in the seventh Millenary the Saints shall reigne with Christ on Earth: Besides neither can the opinion of Brightman hold, that Satan was bound a thousand yeers from Constantine, untill the yeere of our Lord 1300. after which Christ should reigne another thousand yeeres, by the Gospell on Earth with his Elect, untill the yeer 2300. in which Millenary the Gogish or Turkish battles should be fought: whence he gathereth that the truth of the gos∣pell shall triumph among the Nations seven hundred yeers: a thing indeed more to be wished, then expected with any probability. Thus by what hath been said before it is cleare: When the thousand yeers of Sa∣tans impri∣sonment be∣gan, and when they ended. that the fatall thousand yeeres of Satans Imprisonment are finished, and when. They tooke their beginning at the destruction of Ierusalem by the Romanes, when the Iewes (who furiou∣sly blasphemed the Gospell of Christ, and sought by all meanes to hinder the Gentiles from embracing the same) were dispersed through the whole world, and the fulnesse of the Gentiles began to enter into the Church: for then it chief∣ly appeared that Satan was thrust into Hell, and bound with the chains of darke∣nes, that he might no longer keep the Gentiles from the faith of Christ. 2. Pet. 2.4. Besides be∣fore we shewed that these bonds continued untill the times of Gregory VII. Wherefore the thousand yeers were finished more then five hundred yeeres agoe, and Satan loosed from his imprisonment: When Sa∣tan was a∣goin loosed. which sufficiently appeared by the fatall tumults that were raised up both in the East and West, by that raging ene∣my. For chiefly in these five hundred yeers, the Westerne Antichrist by the im∣pulsion and efficacie of the Dragon, violently laid hold on the Monarchicall power of both swords, miserably oppressing and enslaving all Christendome in the West: which Bellarmine himselfe denyeth not. And on the other side, Lib. 3. de P. R. cap. 9. that Thracian adversary of Christ having brought almost all the East and South under his power, doth with so great fury encompasse the Campe of the Saints, as it seemes impossible he should be stopped, but by fire descending from Heaven. 8. And shall goe out to deceive the Nations] By the word going out, is signified Satans free raging, and outragious endeavour to turne all things upside downe. In the same sense it was before said of the three Frogs, the spirits of devils: Rev. 16.14 They goe forth unto the Kings of the Earth. And indeed there and here is treated of one and the same attempt of Satan, being the same third Act, there of the Fift, here of the seventh Vision. Satan therefore being let loose out of prison shall rove about, going to and fro through the Earth, and with great fury setting all things every where in a flame, both in the world and Church: not as if he shall no longer bee
kept in by the bridle of providence: but because God will let loose the reines unto him more then before, for reasons expounded ver. 3. Now his enterprises shall principally be two. One to seduce the nations in the four corners of the earth. The second, to stir up Gog and Magog to battell. Thus these things are to be distinguished: for the Verbe  Deceive is both to be referred to the Nations, and also to Gog and Magog, because he shall de∣ceive both the one and the other, yet so, as in a diverse manner and end. The Nations he shall seduce from the Faith unto new Paganisme: The Pagans Gog and Magog he shall seduce, Satans twofold at∣tempt after his loosing. Vestigat. pag. 896. that is, stirre them up to war (in hope of Victory) against the Campe of the Saints. The former attempt shall bee Ecclesiasticall, and so more neerely tending to the destruction of the Church: The latter civill, and tending to the overthrow of the state and policie of Christians. Which Alcasar also seeing: It shall not, saith he, properly be a war for Religion to speake ge∣nerally, but for the Empire. By the nations, as before Ch. 11.3. I understand false Christians, who having em∣braced the Faith of Christ, did again degenerate from the sincerity thereof in the times of Antichrist. These nations, I say, he shall deceive, that is, under the name of Christ they shall return unto Paganisme, How the nations were de∣ceived. as to their old vomit, worshipping God after the manner of the heathens, and living more heathenishly and enormous then before. This Pest, saith he, shall rage, not in one corner, but in the four corners of the earth] By a Phrase repeated from Chap. 7.1. that is, in all parts of Christendom, throughout the whole earth: for no corner shall be free from his seducement: but apostacy shal every where get the upper hand, yet chiefly in the East and West, where the Crownes of the Empire shalbe, and where ambition and carnality of Priests shall chiefly reigne, and withall corrupt the other corners of the Earth. For Gregory VII. Gregory the VII. an ex∣quisite In∣strument of Satan, loo∣sed. sitting at Rome, in the Chaire of universall pestilence (to the end it might appeare that Satan was loosed from the yeer 1073.) the devill began to rage farre more cruelly by him, then ever he had done by Romulus, Tarquinius the proud, Tiberius, Nero, Domitian, Heliogabalus, Diocletian, Decius: or by the Persians, Scythians, or Saracens: the cruellest of all which Tyrants, being compa∣red with the said Pope Gregory, (according to what the Cardinall Benno, and o∣thers have published of him) would seeme to be a Saint, in respect of this filthy instrument of Satan. Its true, he was not the first Antichrist, neither did the seduction of Christians from the faith, begin with him: for the Romish Antichristianisme had bin grow∣ing and greatly encreasing above three hundred yeers before. But because Satan was as yet bound (for the Dragon being bound, the Beast was to ascend out of the Pit, and possesse his throne and power as his Vicar) so as the former times might seem more tolerable, in respect of the times which followed: for at the end of the thousand yeers Satan being loosed out of his prison, began to puffe up the Romane Popes with such swelling pride, as they feared not to tread upon, and oppresse the most powerfull Princes, Kings, and Emperours of Christendom. After much contention, Hildebrand called Gregory under a false pretence of si∣monie wrang out of the hands of Henry (that valiant Emperour) and his Sonne Henry V. the Episcopall Investures, as they terme it, which till then were be∣longing to the Right and Crowne of the Empire: yea also thrust Henry himselfe from the Empire through his wicked sonne. Priests also that were married, he cast out of the Church, as Nicolaitans (as if the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.2. & Tit. 1.6. had instituted Nicolaitans:) moreover he published two Cannons which ever since have bin, and yet are to this day the sinews of the Popes Tyranny. 1. If any man receive Priest-hood at the hand of any Lay person, let both the Giver and Receiver be accursed: 2. If any Communicate with a married Priest, or if a Priest having a wife, doth not put her away, let him be accursed. By this compendious way hee exempted at once all Bishops, Clerks, Churches, and all that thereunto belonged, from the power of Emperours, and brought them
under his owne Empire: 1. Tim. 3.2 Tit. 1.6. 1. Cor. 7.2. withall taking unto himselfe the right of all Ecclesia∣stical goods: condemning also marriage estate (not only granted unto Bishops by Paul, but also commanded, to shun fornication) as the wickednesse of the Nico∣laitans, by open Antichristian Tyranny, banishing the same out of the Church: which thing indeed was justly abominable to Emperours and the Christian world: Genebr. chronol. lib. 4. pa. 593. yet formidable, because of the enchantment of the Apostolicall Church: Not∣withstanding Popish Writers doe glory in this most filthy Beast: That HEN∣RIE was the first among the Westerne Emperours, whom the Pope deposed. Histories also testifie, that after those thousand yeeres, the God of Strengths fore∣told by Daniel Chap. 11.38. that is, the Idol of Transsubstantation, and Stage-like Masse was chiefly erected and confirmed, in which the whole strength of the Papacie hath hitherto consisted. With this grew up the innumerable fraterni∣ties, and families of Clergy-men, Sacrificers, Monkes, and Religious Sects, who all of them being exempted from civill jurisdiction, are onely subject to the Popes Scepter. Then were invented the Jubilees, the gainefull trafficke of Popish In∣dulgences, or Pardons, and a thousand trickes to draw monies from all Provinces into Romes Exchequer. Then infinite Ceremonies, Superstitions, and Idols were brought in and established: so that if now thou compare Popery with Pa∣ganisme, thou shalt scarce see any difference but in names. Therefore it is not said without cause, that Satan being loosed after the thousand yeeres, should de∣ceive the Nations of the whole Earth. Neither was this horrible declining of Christianitie in the West onely. For it is knowne, that many most flourishing Churches of the East, which yet stood in the first thousand yeeres, were in the next five hundred yeeres, either cut off, and miserably dissipated, or by the seduction of Satan filthily corrupted. On the contrary we see that Mahumetisme, although it began somewhat sooner, yet within the latter five Ages was more generally spread both in Asia, Africa, and Europe. This therefore was Satans former seduction. Gog and Magog to gather them to battle] Greeke : which commonly is taken appositively: That he might seduce the Nations Gog and Magog: for: which Nations are Gog and Magog: but so Satans fury seemes to be lessened, as if after his loosing he were onely to deceive, and draw the barbarous Nations unto a civill battle. Whereas he shall chiefly be busie about the intestine seduction of the Church, within indeed labouring to trample her under foot by the slights of the domesticke Antichrist, and outwardly by force of armes to sup∣presse her, by a forreigne Antichrist. It is therefore an Ellipsis or defect of the Copulative: for: And Gog and Magog, because the Verbe  ruleth the three Accusatives, : the middlemost of which did least need the Copulative. The seduction therefore of Gog and Magog shall be diverse from the seduction of the Nations, being not Ecclesiasticall, as the for∣mer, but politicall. For Satan shall stirre up, not the nations, but Gog and Ma∣gog to this cruell battell: which appeareth by the Relative (not , but)  to wit,  Gog and Magog: by whom he shall set all things in confusion and blood. Now what manner of adversaries or peoples these should be, may scarcely be guest at: For there are almost as many opinions about the same, as Writers, both Ancient and Moderne. Bellarmine reckons up ten, Lib. 3. de P R. cap. 17. Vestig. pag. 877. all which (his own excepted not a whit better then the rest) yea even that of the five old Fathers Lanctantius, Eusebius, Theo∣doretus, Hierom, and Austine he disproves. Alcasar also brings in many more. But we will not weary our selves in rehearsing the conjectures of other men. Magog (to begin with this as the more knowne) was the second sonne of Iaphet Gen. 10.3. of whom, Lib. 1. An∣tiq. cap. 7. as Iosephus writeth came the Magogites (so cal∣led after him) or Scythians, that is, the peoples which inhabit beyond the moun∣taine
Caucasus, neer the Lake Maeotis, and the Caspian Sea, unto the Northern India. Hierom therefore by Magog understandeth the Scythian Nations: un∣to whom some doe joyne the Cappadocians and Arminians, seated beyond Coele∣syria: lib. 5. c. 23: whose Metrapolitan Citie, Hierapolis (where Papias sometime was Bi∣shop) is in the Syrian tongue called Magog, as Plinie recordeth. Touching Gog there is nothing mentioned in Scripture save in Ezech. 38. & 39. where you shall finde a long Prophesie against Gog and Magog, of which the Phantisies of the Iewes, Mahumetans, and Papists are not much unlike. The Iewes feine that Gog and Magog are the Northerne Nations, shut up by Alexander the Great, beyond the Mountaine Taurus, who breaking out towards the end of the world, shall by war wast the whole earth, especially the Land of Israel, and the Citie Ierusalem. But then the Messias shall bee at hand, and slay Gog and Magog, according to the Oracle of Ezechiel: which Fable Gala∣tinus hath refuted Lib. 5. Cap. 12. The Mahumetans Fiction touching Gog and Magog is much like to this, Alcor. A, 20.28.32. &c. save onely that it is somewhat otherwise touching the Messias and Ierusalem. The Papists dreame, that their Antichrist shall come in the end of the world, with great forces, and that in his Army (which mostlie shall consist of the barba∣rous Scythians) he shall have seven Kings (for so many, and no more shall then be remaining in the world, as Ribera affirmeth. The Emperour therefore of the Romanes, the King of France, of Spaine, &c. shall then either have no being or fight for Antichrist) among whom Gog and Magog shall bee most powerfull, Lib. 3. de P. R. c. 17. Apoc. 20. (yea Gog, according to Bellarmine shall be Antichrist himselfe) which Ribera de∣nyeth) and in the space of lesse then foure full yeeres most cruelly over-runne, and bring into subjection the whole world, especially Christendome: and to this An∣tichristian warre they applie the Prophesie of Ezechiel, and of Iohn in this place. As the Iews therfore dream, that their Messias is not yet come, because Ierusalem hath not bin assaulted by Gog and Magog, who are to be slaine by the Messias: So the Papists feine, that their Antichrist is not yet come, because Gog and Magog are not come, who with a most numerous Army shall fight under Antichrists banner, Ezech. 39.4.6.9.12. The fiction touching Gog and Magog re∣futed. and with him oppose the Holy City, that is, the Romane Church. Both Fictions are alike frivolous, and are easily refuted by the Prophesie it selfe: for i Ezechiel God threatneth, that Gog shall fall upon the mountaines of Israel, and that he will send a fire on Magog, whereupon the Inhabitants of Ierusalem shall goe forth, and burne the spoile with fire seven yeeres: and that the slaugh∣ter of the enemy shall be so great, that the land shall be seven yeers in cleansing, because of the carkeises of the slaine: But the Papists say, that Antichrists king∣dome, and the Gogish warre shall not continue full foure yeers: and that from this Victory of the Church unto the day of Iudgement, there shall not be seven months (much lesse seven yeers) but XLV. dayes onely. Therefore either this latter Fi∣ction of theirs, or else the former is false. This difficulty, (by which they see their Fable overthrowne) Ribera seeks to shift off one way, Bellarmine another. Ribera saith, In apoc. 20. N. 70. the words of Ezechiel signifie power, not the Act: not as if they shall spend seven months in burying the carkeises. But the number of the car∣keises shall be so great, that if all should be buried, there would be need of se∣ven months time for the doing of it. Bellarmin understands it, that the Prophet speaks not properly, but figurative∣ly, putting seven yeers, for a very long time. But by these slights they take not away the difficultie in the least. Riberas glosse de potentia, is by the Text there refuted, ver. 1.3. All the people of the Land shall bury them. Therefore they shall bury all the carkeises ipso actu, be∣cause the Land must be cleansed of the carkeises, and therefore they shall spend seven months actually in burying of them. This Ribera saw: therefore at last he
was forced contrary to Bellarmine, and the common opinion, to grant, not onely XLV. dayes, but seven yeeres after Antichrists slaughter, unto the day of Iudgement. As for Bellarmines shift, it makes the difficultie yet greater, for whither the Prophet understands properly and definitely seven moneths and yeers, or figurative∣ly and indefinitely a very long time, it appeareth the Fiction is false which Bel∣larmine there affirmeth: That after Antichrists death, Ribera re∣futeth Bel∣larmines Fiction. there shall be no more then XLV. dayes unto the end of the world: the falsitie whereof Ribera himselfe doth so∣lidly confute by two places of Scripture, both because those things which in Mat, 24.38. are spoken touching the security, and riot of the world at Christs comming, cannot in the least be done in XLV. dayes: as also, because then as soon as Antichrist should begin to reigne, it might certainely be knowne when the day of Iudgement should be: which to thinke, saith he, is absurd: 1. Thes. 5.2 because the day of the Lord shall come as a thiefe in the night. But he pretends, Mat. 24.36. that perhaps it can∣not be knowne by the unlearned: No, nor by the learned: for it is said. Of that Day and Houre no man knoweth, no, not the Angels of Heaven. Therefore beeing convinced by the truth, he at length ingenuously confesseth, that no man can know how long time shall remaine from Antichrist. Therefore, O Ribera! thou seest that time to be foolishly defined of thee by the space of seven yeeres, and more foolishly by Bellarmines XLV. dayes. Behold the power of the trueth, and the Iesuites discord. Now however it belong not to this place, Whether Ezechiel & Iohns Pro∣phesie tou∣ching Gog be the same. to shew whither the Prophesie of Ezechiel, and this here in the Revelation be the same or not: yet contrary to the Iesuites affirmation we are to hold: that here indeed is an allusion unto the Pro∣phesie of Ezechiel, both in the name of the adversaries, and in likenesse of pu∣nishment: yet this Prophesie is diverse from that. For that did belong unto the times going before Christs comming: and indeed hath been fulfilled alrea∣dy: but this is to be referred to our, and the following Ages: in case there shall be any more. What I said of the accomplishment, is manifest from the Argument of the pro∣phesie, which is directed unto the people in the Captivity of Babylon: for first God promiseth to bring them againe into their countrey: Ez. 39.25. Now will I bring a∣gaine the captivity of Jacob, &c. When I brought them againe from the people, &c. Secondly he foretels new calamities, which afterward shall befall them by their Adversaries Gog and Magog, &c. of whose horrible slaughter he prophesieth: Lastly he promiseth a Spirituall reformation of the Church by the benefits of the Messias, shortly after to come in the flesh: Ibid ve. 29. Neither will I hide my face any more from them, when I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord Jehovah. Now it is certaine the first and third part of the Prophesie was fulfil∣led: And therefore without all doubt the middlemost also, it being the chief. It is objected, that Gog was to come in the latter, or last of yeeres, that is, Eze. 38.8. in the end of the world. But the Glosse is infirme: It is also said ver. 16. that he shall come in the latter, or last of dayes. Now nothing is more frequent to the Pro∣phets, then by this phrase to denote the term of some certaine time: Ierem. 49.39. In the latter dayes I will bring againe the Captivity of Elam, that is, at length, or after much affliction, Ierem 30.24. In the latter dayes yee shall consider it, that is, after your deliverance out of Babylon: Ezech. 38.8. After many dayes thou shalt be visited, in the latter yeers thou shalt come. And afterward, In the latter dayes I will bring thee, &c. that is, after I have brought backe my people. Therefore here also by the latter yeers, an indefinite term may be understood. Hence Theodoretus wrote, Nehem. 4. & 6. that these very Nations did straightway invade the Iewes after their returne, to hinder them from building the Temple and City. But our Interpreters Tremellius and Junius do in my understanding more rightly (according to the circumstances of the name and time) applie the Oracle of E∣zechiel, to the cruell warres raised up against the Iewes by the Macedonians, An∣tiochus,
&c. but often put to the worst (not without a divine miracle) by the Macchabees: for they learnedly shew that Gog and Magog do denote the Na∣tions of the lesser Asia and Syria (so called after Gyges King of the Lydians) with the Kings Antiochi, Seleuci, Demetrij, and Nicanors, mighty Oppressours of the Iewes: which happened not presently upon their returne out of Babylon, but long after, in the end of yeers or dayes, that is, about two hundred yeeres after the Prophesie. To these Ribera doth frivously object, In Apoc. 20 S. 57. that Josephus and the Iewes write no∣thing of the accomplishment thereof, which had it bin fulfilled, they would have mentioned the same, neither would they any longer expect the Messias. As if for∣sooth, so manifest, or at least so probable a truth, were to be called into question, be∣cause of the blindnesse of the Iews. Therefore in a word, this I do hold: That Ezechiels Prophesie touching Gog and Magog, grievous enemies and wasters of the Holy Land, was not indeed then fulfilled litterally, (for it clearly appeareth, that part of the Prophesie is an Allegory of a Slaughter from Heaven) but Analogically, or with reference, when the Tyrants of Syria and Asia were repressed by the valour of the Macchabees. The old & new Gog∣gish war. But that there by a certain allusion unto the Prophesie of Ezechiel, and the accom∣plishment there of (like as the Revelation is full of such Allusions unto the words and Histories of the Prophets) another warre not unlike unto that of Gog and Magog is here foretold, and the victory promised: The sense is thus: Like as of old Gog and Magog invaded the Holy Land with very great Armies, misera∣bly afflicting the people of God: So Satan being loosed at the end of the thousand fatall yeers, shall raise up against the Church a new Gog and Magog, that is, most cruell adversaries, who with most numerous Armies over-spreading all parts of Christendom shall cruelly make spoil of all things. And as God did often by won∣derfull overthrowes suppresse Gog and Magog of old, that is, those Asian, Syrian, and Egyptian Tyrants in the middest of their fury, that they might not utterly de∣stroy the Holy-City: so he will with fire from Heaven devoure the new Gog and Magog, that is, the adversaries of the last times in the midst of their fury that they shall not be able to accomplish their designe to blot out the Church of Christ. Now who should these Adversaries Gog and Magog be, but those foure Angels bound at the River Euphrates? Rev. 9.14. who after they were let loose by Gods Commandment, invaded the Christian world (most horribly corrupted through Antichristian Idolatry) with an Army of two hundred thousand thousand horse-men, Gog and Magog are the foure Angels of Euphrates. cruelly murdering the third part of men: which An∣gels we interpreted of foure Peoples, most cruell adversaries of the Christian name, viz. the Arabians, Saracens, Scythians or Tartars, and Turkes: for undoubtedly the same Adversaries, the same battell, and the same overthrow, at the sounding of the sixt Trumpet in Vision third: and in this Oracle of the seventh Vision is signified by way of parallel: for after Satan was loosed, the Armies of the Saracens, Tar∣tars, and Turkes began in a speciall manner to over-run Christendom, and by hor∣rible slaughters to weaken the state of Christians, as Histories and dayly experi∣ence do manifest. Wee have heard who the adversaries are. Whose number is as the sand of the Sea] He amplifies their multitude by a si∣mile usuall to the Scriptures. For it is no Hyperbole, by which is spoken more then truth: but a metaphor, by which a thing is aggravated. For as the sand of the Sea is unto us innumerable: so these barbarous Nations use to fight with in∣numerable Armies. 9. And they ascended] He foretels the forceable attempt of the Adversary by a Verbe in the Praeter Tense in stead of a Future, beeing a Propheticall Enallage or change of Tenses usuall to Iohn. By the word Ascend, he notes their obscure rise or originall, intimating that these barbarous Nations did suddenly from a low condition grow to the greatest height of power: or that being raised up by Satan, they ascended as it were out of Hell.
On the breadth of the Earth] That is, they shall not remaine in one place, but spread themselves far and neer, to wast and destroy all. And compassed the Campe of the Saints about] By this Camp BRIGHTMAN understands Europe, in which almost all Christendom is included. But five or sixe hundred yeers agoe, Christianisme was larger by farre, The Chri∣stian world is the camp of the saints when there were yet flou∣rishing Churches in all the coasts of Asia and Europe. Wherefore he calleth the Christian world the Campe of the Saints, or the Church in which the godly do fight against Satan and the world, as it were in a Campe. But however Chri∣stianisme was every where most corrupt, yet it is called the Camp of Saints, viz. Mat. 4.5. Luk. 19.46 The beloved city is the Church. of right and profession: although not of Fact. Like as Jerusalem is called the Holy-City DE IVRE of Right, because she ought to have bin holy, whereas DE FACTO In deed she was A denne of thieves. In the same sense he calleth the Church the Beloved-City: because notwith∣standing her great corruption, yet God had, and still hath many beloved ones, and Elect in her. It is a Metaphor taken from IERƲSALEM, which of old was Gods Beloved-City, and the Type of the New Church, as appeares by the following Allegory. By the word, compassing-about, he intimates the treacherous attempts, enter∣prises, and divers irruptions of the adversaries: as if he should say: They shall not once, or in one place onely, vexe and trouble the Christian world, but often, and in divers places, one while in Asia, another while in Africa, and in Europe. He notes their subtilty also, and earnestnesse in mannaging their affaires and oc∣casions: for while Christian Princes did weaken themselves by continuall dis∣cord, hatred, and intestine warres at home, the Turkes and Tartars were al∣wayes in readinesse with their Forces to devour one Province after another. The holy war was the occasion of the Gogish war. called Sacrum quasi mini∣me sacrum. The first occasion of this Gogish battle was that warre in Palestina against the Saracens, raised by the Popes of Rome after the expiration of the thousand fa∣tall yeers, called Holy as it were most unholy: the first Author whereof was that Hildebrand called Gregory VII. who began to solicite Christian Emperours, Kings, and Princes to recover the holy Land by force of Armes. After him Ʋr∣banus II. (for his turbulent counsells called Turbanus) obtained, that many great Armies, wearing the signe of the Crosse, should be sent into Syria under divers Cap∣taines. And indeed at that time Ierusalem, and all Syria was recovered out of the hands of the Turkes and Saracens, by the prowesse of Godfrey, Duke of Bul∣len, but was scarce kept LXXVIII. Yeers by the Christians. For Saladine a Tur∣kish King, Calyph of Damascus and Egypt, being drawne on through the intestine discord of Christian Princes, and by the treachery of the Tripolitan Earle, over∣threw al the Christian Forces in one day, bringing their Princes with King Gwi∣do himselfe, and all Palestina under his power. This was the beginning of the Gogish battell: The begin∣ning of the Gogish war for the Saracens taking this oc∣casion, and seeing that the Christians, whose power before they much feared, were not unconquereable, they began to thirst after whole Christendome, and by degrees brought under subjection by their cruell Armies all the Maritime Africa, all the East and Babylon even unto Bersia, at last also the lesser Asia, both Countries of Armenia, Thracia, Pontus, Bulgaria, Greece, Sclavonia, even unto Hungarie, and the borders of Germany: driving Christianisme into the utter∣most corner of Europe. This is that Gogish warre, which Satan after the thousand fatall yeers, hath with great successe waged above five hundred yeeres against the Christians by Gog and Magog, that is, by the Eastern Antichrist. Against this opinion it's objected, FIRST that these adversaries shall compasse about, or besiege the Campe of the Saints, and the Beloved-City, that is, the Church. But neither the Christians that undertooke that warre, can be understood by the name NATIONS: Neither can these Easterne Nations, against whom the warre was undertaken, be understood by the name of SAINTS, or of the Beloved-City. I answer:
The occasion of the warre is distinguished from the warre it selfe. The occa∣sion indeed of the Holy Warre begun by the Christians, is in this Prophesie silently passed over: and touching this it is true what is objected: but false of the warre following thereupon. For it cannot be denyed, that the Easterne People being first provoked by the Christians, have by Satans impulsion compas∣sed about the Campe of the Saints above these five hundred yeeres, not ceasing to trouble the same unto this day. Secondly it is objected: That the Gogish warre shall not begin till the end of the thousand fatall yeeers: But these thousand yeers are not as yet begun. Answer: The former is true, the latter is false: for as we have shewed in the foregoing con∣sideration, those thousand yeers are expired long agoe. Thirdly they object, That this Gogish warre shall continue but a little while: be∣cause in ver. 3. Satan shall be let loose but for a short season. I Answer: Its a falla∣cie, figurae dictionis (as it is termed:) for the time of Satans loosing is called a short, or little season, not that it shall be but for few yeers (for so great a warre cannot be undertaken and finished in a little time) but in respect of the thousand yeeres, then which it shall be shorter, because God for the Elects sake, will shorten those dayes: of which see more ver. 3. Wherefore the Gogish warre (as undoubtedly it seems) is not indeed that very same Holy Warre raised in Syria by Hildebrand and Turbanus Romish Pontifes: but the TVRKISH WARRE against Christendome, which arose a while after out of the other, and continueth unto this day: The Catastrophe or issue whereof now followeth. The Third Part of the CHAPTER. Declaring the issue of the Gogish war, the wonderfull slaugh∣ter of the adversaries, and the casting of the devill himselfe into the Lake of Fire: With a Type of the last Iudgement. 9. And fire came downe from God out of Heaven, and devoured them. 10. And the devill that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. 11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sate on it, from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and the Bookes were opened: and another was opened: which is the booke of Life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the bookes, according to their workes. 13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it: and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their workes. 14. And death and hell were cast into the Lake of fire: This is the Second Death. 15. And whosoever was not found written in the Booke of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire.
THE COMMENTARY. AND fire came downe] Here begins the last Act. The event of the Gogish Warre shall bee joyned with the last Iudgement at Christs comming: the which is set forth by a most evident Type. First specially, briefly shewing what was done to Gog and Magog with their Army: and what to the devill, in this and the following vers. Afterward generally, what unto all in the last Iudgement, unto the end of the Chapter. The Gogish Army was at length consumed by fire. It is an allusion unto the Oracle of Ezechiel 38.22. against Gog of old, I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood, and I will raine upon him and upon his hands, an overflowing raine, and great haile∣stones, fire and brimstone: So here against the new Gog, Fire came downe from God out of Heaven, and devoured them; by which Phrase the Scripture usually sets forth the wonderfull and horrible Iudgements of God upon the Adversaries, by which at length the wicked are so suddenly destroyed, and the Church delive∣red out of distresse and oppression, as the Victory cannot be ascribed but to the Divine Power, as in Psal. 11.6. Ʋpon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brim∣stone, and an horrible tempest shall be the portion of their cup. This serves greatly to comfort the Church: for although our sinnes doe too too much fight against us: this Oracle notwithstanding sheweth Gods benigni∣ty to bee so great, as wee may undoubtedly believe, that the Turkish pow∣er shall sooner bee overthrowne by the most powerfull hand of God from Hea∣ven, then that the Church of Christ should be extinguished by the same. There are some who thinke that this kinde of destruction by fire from Heaven, shall lit∣terally be accomplished upon the Adversaries. But I rest in the allusion men∣tioned: for as God himselfe overthrew the enemies from Heaven, when as the strength of the Iewish people was nothing to resist the Asian Tyrants: so when the power of Christians shall be no way able to chase away, or overthrow the Go∣gish Armies of the East, God will suddenly as it were reach out his arme from Heaven to fight for the Church, and extinguish the adversaries: if not before, yet certainly at the brightnesse of Christs coming to Iudgement: for untill then, this Gogish war, as likewise that other of Antichrist, shall continue. This fire therefore comming from Heaven, and devouring the adversaries, what shall it be, but that sharpe sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ the Iudge, and killing all the wicked Chap. 19.15.21. that is, that flame of fire, 2. Thes. 18. Lib. 20. de in which the Lord Jesus shall bee revealed from Heaven, to take vengeance on them that know not God. 10. And the devill that deceived them] AVGVSTINE confesseth that in this description are certaine , that is, C. D. c. 14 some things are before repeated that were done after. Among these, the first seemes to be, that the E∣nemies being devoured with fire from Heaven, by and by the devill also is said to be cast into the Lake of fire. For it seemeth that this shall not be till the last Iudge∣ment be past, which followeth after. This verse therefore by a certaine Anti∣cipation cohereth with ver. 14. where Iohn saw Death and Hell to be cast into the Lake of fire. Now he joyneth the casting of the devill next with the slaughter of the wicked aversaries, to teach us, that the devill shall not goe free for seducing the Nations, and raising Gog and Magog to battle against the Church: but at last bee punished for his great malice, together with other adversaries: See also 1. Cor. 15.24.25.26. By the devill wee cannot with reason understand any other, then that wicked Spirit himselfe: for he is the same here, who verse 2. is called the Dragon, the old Serpent and Satan. But the Emperour of the Turks whom BRIGHTMAN
here understandeth by the devill, belongs in my Iudgement unto the Gogish ar∣my, devoured with fire from Heaven. Satans punishment therefore is descri∣bed by the place, companions, and eternity of his torments. The place of his punishment shall not bee simply the Pit, in which he was before shut up a thou∣sand yeers, but the very sinke of the bottomlesse Pit, the Lake of fire and brim∣stome, into which he shall be cast by Christ the Iudge. It is a Periphrasis of hell, which the Scripture sets forth by the place of torments, unquencheable fire, the worme that dies not, utter darkenesse, weeping and gnashing of teeth, and such like horrible Epithites, to terrifie the wicked: signifying, that the torments of Satan and the ungodly in hell shall be unutterable, like as the glory of Christ and the Saints in Heaven shall bee unspeakeable. Now of the Lake of Fire and Brimstone hath beene spoken Chap. 19, 20. unto which place Iohn sends us backe, saying: Where the Beast and the False-prophet are] For hee there saith that these were cast into this Lake. The devill therefore shall find them there as his compani∣ons in torments: The Romane Antichrist, I say, with his Cardinals, Vassals, and Followers. These shall bee cast into the Lake before the devill: for he shall finde them there: yet both shall be done in the last Iudgement, as Christ ex∣pounds it in the Gospell: depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is pre∣pared for the devill and his Angels. Mat. 25.41 And they shall bee tormented] To wit, the devill, the Beast, and False-Prophet: for they shall all alike suffer everlasting torments: of which see Chap. 14.11. & Chap. 19.20. Night and day] Not as if there should be an enterchange of dayes and nights in Hell: for in utter daakenesse it is alwayes night: but thus he sheweth the e∣ternall continuation of their torments: for that which is continued day and night, is perpetuall. The same he saith Chap. 14. of the torments of all the worship∣pers of the Beast and his Image. By the same phrase Chap. 7.15. he sheweth the continuall joy of the Saints in Heaven: Who are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple. Now that the punishment of the devill and wicked men shall be perpetuall, Lib. 21. de C. D. c. 23. Ps. 77.10. The punish¦ment of the damned e∣ternall. Augustine doth largely prove against such as (pretending Gods mercifullnes from the Psalme: Will God forget to be gracious, will he in anger shut up his tender mercies:) did imagine, that the devill and wicked men after most grievous, and long during punishments should be purged and pardoned, thereby to patronize their owne, and other mens wickednesses. But he demonstrates from this and such like pla∣ces, that the torments of Satan and the ungodly shall simply be eternall. First: because here its expresly said: The devill which deceived them was cast in∣to the Lake of fire and brimstone, there to bee tormented with the Beast and the False-Prophet day and night for ever and ever: which altogether signifies eter∣nitie. But it were false, if at sometime or other they should be redeemed out of their torments. Secondly, Mat. 72.3. Mat. 25.4 What is meant by Eternall. because the divine sentence, cannot bee made voide or weakened: which Christ will pronounce at the day of Iudgement: depart from mee ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devill and his Angels: what here is said to be for ever and ever: in the place alledged is said to be eternall, or everlasting, by which the Scripture denotes time without end. Lastly: because the life and glory of the blessed Saints shall simply be eternall. Therefore on the contrary, the death and torments of the damned shall also bee eternall: for Christ in the same sentence pronounceth to the wicked eternall tor∣ments, Mat. 25.46 and to the godly life everlasting: And these shall goe into everlasting pu∣nishment: but the righteous into eternall life. 11. AND I SAW A THRONE] The Type of the universall Iudge∣ment followeth, in which all the wicked being cast into eternall torments, the Church shall bee crowned with everlasting glory and joy. Now that this is a
description of the last Iudgement, is so manifest from the words, that I judge it needlesse to demonstrate the same. It is proved that here the last judgement is typically set forth. Mat. 25.46. 1. Cor. 15.16 Dan. 7.10. Mat. 25 41 Iohn saw the Iudge on a Throne: he saw the dead to be judged before the Throne, and them that were judged out of the books being opened, according to the phrase of the Prophet Dan. Chap. 7.10. where without all controversie, the Type of the last Iudgement is described. Lastly he saw the Devill, Death, and Hell, which are the last Enemies, to be cast with all reprobates into the Lake of Fire: which certainely shall not come to passe but in the last Iudgement, when the Iudge shall say unto all these: Goe ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devill and his Angels. Neither ought we to seek an Allegorie in circumstances so manifestly agreeing with the Evangelicall History, because it cannot here have place: forasmuch as all things are sutable unto the proper description of the last Iudgement, expressed in both Testaments. Besides our method confirmes the same, by which it hath hitherto bin shew∣ed, that every one of the Visions, (the first excepted, which was speciall) doth end in the description of the last Iudgement, either openly or covertly: the which why it should so often be iterated in this Booke, cannot be explicated by them who give no heed unto the distinct Acts of the severall Visions. Adde to this, that all Interpreters (whom I have seen) both old and new are unnanimously minded: that here is figured out the casting of all the adversaries into eternall punishment: and the placing of the godly in everlasting glory, which shall be accomplished in the last Iudgement. Brightman alone leaving this exposition, interprets the whole, Bright∣mans Alle∣gorie. Allegorically of the full restitution of the Iewish Nation, which he thinkes shall come to passe after the Dragon is cast into the Lake of fire, that is, after the destruction of the Turkish Emperour and Empire: This hee supposeth shall be about the yeere 1690. moved hereunto by a conjecture too obscure and uncertaine, from a place in Dan. 12.12. the which how far different a sense it beareth: I shall not at this time (for brevity sake) stand to demonstrate. But the reasons, which he opposeth to the received and manifest trueth, to me indeed seem to have little or no waight in them. He saith, that the following description agrees not unto the New Jerusalem in Heaven, but to that on Earth only, in that the Holy City is said to descend from Heaven: that the Bride is prepared and adorned for her Husband, not yet deli∣vered: that in ver. 7. the reward is put off till afterward: Whether the descrip∣tion of the new Ieru∣salem a∣grees to the Church Militant. that one of the seven Angels sheweth all these things to Iohn, whereas there shall be no such ministe∣ry in Heaven: that the Apostles are said to lay the foundation of the wall of the the holy City, whereas rather that belongs to Christ: Lastly that the Kings of the Earth are said to bring their glory unto this Citie, ver. 24. and that in it shall be medicine for the Nations: which things are not to be understood of Heaven, but of the Earth. But there is nothing here touching these things, which may not easily be ap∣plied unto the state of the glorified Church, if wee well minde the scope of the Allegoricall Vision, and observe other things, which doe not at all agree with the state of the Church here on Earth, as we shall shew in its place. Cer∣tainely the glory of the Church shall never be so great in this life, as to bee alto∣gether without tares, that there should bee none in her but Elected Ones, that she should be stained with no scandals and feined Christians: in a word that there should be no Temple, nor Sun shining in her, &c. He saith secondly that the vocation of the Iews unto the Church, Whether this Resur∣rection of the dead be the calling of the Iews. is in Scripture often called a Resurrection of the dead, as Rom. 11.15. for if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead, Isa 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, my Carkasses shall rise againe, &c. Ezech. 37.12. I will open your graves, O my People, and cause you to come up out of your graves. &c. Dan. 12.2.3. And many of them that sleepe in the dust of the
Earth shall awake, some to everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting tor∣ment. Hosea 13.14. I will ransome them from the power of the grave: I will redeeme them from death. But verily it would bee a long worke for him to prove that these places of Scripture, the first excepted, doe at all belong to the calling of the Iews, seeing Some doe manifestly speake of their deliverance out of Babylon: Others of the Spirituall Redemption of the whole Church by Christ: Others of the last Re∣surrection of the body. Onely the Testimony of the Apostle is to the matter, but proves nothing. For neither doth it follow from the particular: because there the conversion of the Iewes is called a Resurrection, therefore here also. There the thing is cleare: here not so. Nay here is no mention of a Resurrection, but it is set forth under other figures. And all the circumstances doe most evidently represent the Type of the last Iudgement. AND I SAW A GREAT WHITE THRONE] After these things, saith AVGUSTINE, Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14 he briefly declareth the last Judgement it selfe (and how it was revealed unto him) which shall be at the second Resurrection of the dead, viz. of their bodies: First therefore he describes the Iudge, with his preparation in this verse. Secondly them that should be judged, ver. 12. Thirdly the processe and sentence. ibid. Lastly the execution of the sentence, viz. the casting of the adversaries in∣to the Lake of fire, vers. 13.14.15. but the placing of the Elect in the Heavenly Jerusalem, in Chap. 21. & 22. This is the summe of the things remaining. A Great Throne] As set up for the Great, that is, Vniversall Iudgement of the whole world. White] bright with celestiall splendor and majesty. And him that sate on it] Namely the Iudge, him undoubtedly, of whom Christ himselfe speaketh, Mat. 25.31. When the Sonne of man shall come in his glory, and all his Holy Angels with him, The white throne of christ his glory. Ioh. 5.12. Act 17.31. then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory. Where∣fore the white Throne is the Throne of his glory, or glorious Throne: neither are we to imagine it to be made of gold or Ivorie, but thus the Iudicatory Power of Christ is called: For the Father hath given all Judgement to the Sonne: that by him the whole world should be judged. Here therefore Christ the Iudge appeared un∣to Iohn sitting on his Throne, in the Spirit: that none should question, but that the world shall at last be judged. Why the last judge∣ment is so often exhi∣bited: XL: Argu∣ment of Christs de∣itie: For this Iudgement to come is so of∣ten foretold in Scripture, and exhibited to the sight of Iohn in this Revelation, that the Godly indeed should wait with joy for that day of their deliverance, but mockers be raised up from their security. Furthermore without all doubt this Iudge sitting on the Throne is Christ, because the whole Scripture agrees hereunto. Now a little after in ver. 12. he is cal∣led GOD, before whom the dead shall stand to bee judged. Therefore un∣doubtedly also, he that sate on the Throne Chap. 4.2. was Christ gloriously reigning in Heaven. That which followeth serves to signifie his unspeakable majesty. From whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away] The splendor and majesty of the Iudge is such, Husterosis is when a thing is be∣fore put down which should come after; or, contrari∣wise. Lib. 20: de C. D. c. 14. as neither Heaven nor Earth is able to behold or abide the same. How then shall the wicked stand before him? Augustine understands it of the future renovation of Heaven and Earth, and here also he acknowledgeth an , for the Heaven and Earth fled, not before, but after the Iudgement, to wit, saith he, the Iudgement being finished, then shall this Heaven and Earth cease to bee, when the new Heaven and Earth shall begin: For this world shall passe away, by a change of things, not by an utter destruction, the Heaven and Earth, I say, shall flee away, that is, this shape of Heaven and Earth shall passe away, because they shall be changed from vanitie through fire, that so they may be transformed into a much better, and more beautifull state: Of which innovation the Apostle Peter professedly writeth: The Heaven shall passe way with a great noyse, and the Elements melt with heat: but we expect new
Heavens and a new Earth: wherein dwelleth righteousnesse: And Paul saith: 2. Pet. 3.12. 1. Cor. 7.31 The fi∣gure or falshion of this world passeth away: Of which AVGVSTINE, The figure, saith he, of the world passeth not away in nature, for we expect a new Heaven and a new Earth, in which judgement and righteousnesse shall dwell: Of which Iohn in the next Chapter: I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, that is, purged from all vanities. Rev. 21. v. 1 Of which innovation, not a totall destruction, the words following must be un∣derstood: And their place was found no more] not as if it were no where, but that it remained not such, as it was before. But whether Heaven and Earth shall so change their place, as that the Earth should be moved out of the Centre of the universe, the Heaven by its bending downe, no longer inviron the Earth; is not known either by this place or any other. This we must leave to God and to time. The same was said before in the last Act of the Fift Vision: Rev. 16.20 Rev. 6.14. Every I∣land fled, and the Mountaines were not found. Also in the last Act of the Second Vision: And the Heaven departed as a Scrowle rolled together, and every Mountaine and Iland were mooved out of their places: Which place notwithstanding we inter∣preted somewhat otherwise, because of the circumstances. But I see not by what shew of reason this change of Heaven and Earth here, can be darkened by an Allegory. Now it shall not be till towards the last Iudgement: and therefore it remains firme, that the same is here described. The dead corporally are here understood. 12. And I saw the dead, small and great] He had seen the Iudge girded about with Iudgement. Now he seeth the guilty standing before the Iudgement Seat: whom hee describeth, First from their former state, by calling them The dead, after the common Law of nature, but then raised from death to life by the pow∣er of God: he speaks not of men dead in sins, as in ver. 5. but of such as dyed cor∣porally, and now were raised up to Iudgement. But shall not the living also then be judged? Yea verily: 2. Cor. 5.10 Rom. 14.9 10. for we must all appeare before the Iudgement Seat of Christ, That he may be Iudge of the quicke and the dead, and be Lord both of the dead and the living. By the dead therefore are understood the living also, by an Argu∣ment from the lesser: If the dead shall appeare before the Iudgement Seat, how much more the living? But the dead alone are named, either because the num∣ber of the dead from Adam till the last day, 1 Cor. 15.52. shall be far greater then such as live on Earth, when that day commeth: Or because those that remain living shalbe accounted as dead, because they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye. Secondly he describes them from their age and condition: for the words may be understood of both: Great and Small] That is, as well the powerfull Tyrants of the world, Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Great men: as Subjects and men of low condition: Or properly, Great in Age and stature, that is, growne men and women: Small also, that is, dying in their child-hood: by this partition he sheweth that all and every one without any exception are to be judged: for the Iudgement shall be universall: no man shall bee so Great as to escape the same: none so small as to be excluded, 2 Cor. 5.10 but every one shall have right without respect of persons, as the Apostle witnesseth: We must all appeare before the Iudgement Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Lumb. lib. dist. 44. SCHOOL-MEN suppose that in the Resurrection all shalbe as if they were about 33. yeers old, which was Christs age: but we leave it as uncertain. What they speake of the stature, that every one shall receive his owne measure of body, is more agreeable to this place. Thirdly he describes them from their future state: Standing in the sight of God] or before God, to wit, to bee judged as guiltie. To stand before God, signifies sometimes in this Booke (as above) the Heavenly Ministery of the Saints and Angels: Here it signifies to be brought to Iudgement, as appeares by what fol∣loweth. By the dead standing, he meaneth them that were raised from death to life. XLI. Ar∣gument of Christs de∣itie. Before God] The Iudge hee absolutely calleth God, but CHRIST is the Iudge: Therefore Christ is God absolutely.
And the Bookes were opened] The judiciall processe is noted by imitation of humane Courts, in which the whole processe is wont to be drawn into Protocols, from whence the Iudge at length determineth and pronounceth sentence ac∣cording to the Acts and Proofes: not that it shall bee so really: for God, from whose eyes nothing is hid, will not make use of long examination: but the equity of the Iudge is noted, by a Metaphor taken from humane Courts, where the Iudge pronounceth sentence according to the written Law, and the Acts and Proofes agreeing thereunto. It is an Allusion unto the words of Daniel, speaking thus of this IVDGEMENT: Dan. 7.10. The Iudgement was set, and the Bookes were opened. Origene understands it of the books of conscience, Comm. ad Rom. 14. which now are hid, not to God, but to men: For the hidden things of the heart are not now known: But then they shall be Opened, that is, manifested to the consciences of all and every one, so as there shall be no place left of excuse, or withdrawing. Thus no man shall be injured, because every one shall either be accused, or discharged by his own conscience. Augustine takes it a little otherwise, Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14 of the bookes of the Old and New Testament, in which God hath prescribed unto all what is to bee done or Omitted in this life: which shall then be opened, because according to them the Iudge will pronounce sentence: Rom. 2.16. When God shall judge the secrets of men, Marke 16.16. Io. 12.48. Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14 by Iesus Christ, according to my Gospel. He that beleeveth and is baptised, shall be saved, but he that beleeveth not shall be damned. The word that I have spoken the same shall judge him in the last day. And another Booke was opened] This Austine understands of every mans Booke of Life, what he hath done, or not done according to those former Books: But the word  of every one, is not in the Text: but simply, which is the Booke of Life, to wit, in which God hath written from all eternitie, the names of them that shall be saved through Christ: of which often mention is made in this Revelation, Chap. 3.5. & 13.8. & 17.8, &c. Not that God hath neede of a Booke, but  or by humane affection, is noted the certainty of Praedestination, viz. that God knowes all and every of the Elect, even as men know a thing, which for memory sake, they set downe in writing. This Booke therefore shall also be opened: because then it shall appear, who were Elect, who Reprobates, who truely beleeved in Christ, who not: who truely worshipped God, Mat. 25.32. who were hypocrites, for then Christ will sever the sheep from the goats, who in this life were mixt one amongst another. And the dead were judged] This shall be the denouncing of the sentence, the equity whereof is commended by a two-fold reason: both because every one shall be judged out of the things written in the Bookes: As also, because he shall receive according to his workes. For what concernes the Bookes, whither we take them for the scriptures, which are now the rules of our Faith and actions: Or the inward working and witnesse of the Conscience, Rom. 2:5. which shal suggest to every one the exact memory of his Actions, whether good or bad, the sentence pro∣nounced shall be most just according to the same: and Gods judgements shall bee righteous: for the Holy Scriptures containe a most exact written rule of righte∣ousnes, unto which most righteously all are obliged, and whosoever hath confor∣med himselfe unto the same, shall most righteously be acquitted: whosoever hath swarved from it, Orat. in Plag: gran: shall most righteously in the day of Iudgemen bee con∣demned. The Booke also of every mans conscience, is of such exact righteousnes, as it deceives no man, doth injury to no man: for the conscience, saith NAZIAN∣ZENVS is a domesticke and true Tribunall: And the Poet siath well, —Prima haec est ultio, Iuven: Sat: 13. quodse Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur: improba quamvis: Gracia fallacis prae oris vicerit urnam.
This vengeance takes, if judge it bee, None that are guilty, quitt doth hee: Though that the Praetor through falle Grace, Sometimes puts wicked men in place. How much more therefore shall the conscience in the day of Iudgement bee a righteous rule to judge by. The holy Scriptures are the rule of truth & righteous∣nesse. By the way observe: If God will then judge according to the written word, how much more doth he require that faith and our works be now done according to the said rule of Holy Writ? According to their workes] Good or evill. This shall be the other infallible rule of righteousnesse: for it is a righteous thing with God to render rewards to the righteous, and tribulation to the wicked. Every one therfore shall righteously receive either good or evill, according to what he hath done. It is observeable, that here and every where in Scripture it is said, Iudgement shall be ac∣cording to workes. we shall be judged  according to workes, never  for our workes: no man therefore shall be saved for good workes: notwithstanding the wicked shall be damned for their evill workes: because there is a different reason between good and evill workes. Evill workes are the wages of (or merit) death: Eze. 184. Rom: 1.28 Good works merit not life eternal. for the Soule that sinneth shall dye: And, It is the judgement of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death. Good workes merit not life: because all are due to God the Creator and Redeemer. But no debt comes under the notion of merit. I passe by, that the best workes of the Saints are imperfectly good, polluted with many blemishes, so that if God did judge them to his severity, they would be found to be nothing but unrighteousnesses: as the Church of old confesseth, Isa. 6.46. We are all as an uncleane thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: Therefore we pray: forgive us our trespasses. Wherefore least Hypocrites should be bold to inferre, if the wicked shall be condemned for evill workes: therefore the Iust are saved for good workes: The Holy Ghost would have it no where written, that the judgement shalbe  for workes, which might signifie the meritorious cause: but alwayes , according to workes, which signifies the condition. But why not according to Faith? or infidelity? Why the Iudgement shal not bee according to faith & in∣fidelitie. because Faith and infidelity are hid to the eyes of men. But workes whither good or evill flowing from the same, shall be conspicuous and open unto all. Therefore in that open judgement, Christ the Iudge shall alledge the cleare rule of righteousnesse, that it may ap∣peare unto all, that the wicked are justly condemned, having done evill: and the Godly righteously acquitted, who have done good: this is a great encourage∣ment to good workes, that we follow after them: and touching evill workes that we should shun them: because according to them we shall all be judged. 13. And the Sea gave up her dead] AVGVSTINE by the Sea doth not un∣properly understand the world, Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 15 which like to the tempestuous Sea is alwayes tossed with waves: By the dead is meant wicked men dead in sinnes, as is the greater part in the world, or all men having mortall bodies. Notwithstanding I thinke it is more proper to the sense, to understand it of such as perished or were drowned in the Sea or Rivers, or whose burnt bodies, and ashes were cast into the same, in times of persecution. For humane reason judgeth it very ab∣surd, that the bodies of such as have been devoured by the fishes of the Sea, or torne by wild Beasts, and eaten by wormes on land, should be restored. John therefore saw, what shall come to passe, when all the Elements, through the power of God, shall render up the consumed Carkeises. The Sea shall vomit up (as it were out of a Sepulchre) the dead she swallowed up. The same Death and Hell shall doe, that is, the Earth, which hath received (in Sepulchres) all the bodies of the dead, as it were in her lap or bosome: and opening her mouth hath swallowed downe some alive also.
By death here AVSTIN understandeth the dead bodies of the Godly, which the Earth shall render up: By hell the damned soules of the wicked, which thence shall be brought forth to Iudgement. Ribera extends it unto the bodies of such, as Hell swallowed downe alive, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. The summe is, by what kind of death soever they perished in this life, (what∣ever became of their soules after death) all are seen by John, as brought forth to Iudgement. The Soules therefore of the Saints shall return from Heaven with Christ the Iudge: the wicked shall be called forth out of Hell to Iudgement. All mens bodies shalbe raised up to life, and being restored to their own soules, shall stand before Christ to be judged. 14. And death and hell] In a few words, hee toucheth the execution of the sentence pronounced against the ungodly. The state of the Godly he more largely Treats of in the following Chapters. First he sees hell and death to bee cast into the Lake of fire, and soone after all that were not found written in the Booke of Life, that is, reprobates: in which again is an  or inversion: for first the wicked shal bee cast into torments: Afterward the last enemies, viz. death and hell: by which names AVGVSTINE thinks here is signified the devill himselfe (as being the Author of death and hellish punishments) and the whole company of devils, which very thing he had said before by an Anticipati∣on: And the devill was cast into the Lake, &c. So death should be put for the de∣vill causing death: 1. Cor. 15.54. 1. Cor. 15.26. Hell for the devill drawing men to Hell: As by a like metony∣mia it is said: Death is swallowed up in victory: And: The last enemie that shall be de∣stroyed is death. In my judgement this Prosopopoeia serves to the dramaticall Vision: neither is it to be pressed according to the Letter: according to which neither Hell can bee cast into the Lake, seeing the Lake is in Hell: nor Death, seeing death is a meere privation of Entitie or Being, as Albertus M. calleth it. The summe is, whatsoe∣ver was deadly, noisome, hurtfull, and contrary to happinesse: shall all be cast in∣to the lake of fire: so as nothing shall remaine to hurt the New Ierusalem. Which is the Second Death] That is, Eternall, of which Christ: And the wicked shall goe into Everlasting Fire. This shalbe the last separating of man from God through eternall damnation: as the first death was the seperation of him from God through sinne. See verse 5. CHAPTER. XXI. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. AFter the Capitall adversaries, with the rest of the ungodly were judged and cast into the Lake of fire, here is exhibited unto John the renovation of the world that shall bee, as also the Heavenly glory of the godly, under a two-fold Type, viz. of a Bride gloriously at∣tired, and of a most magnificent City: The illustration of which Type, this whole Chapter so sets forth, as that the wit, art, hand, or tongue of man is able to expresse nothing more beautifull, more magnificent, more glorious, and sumptuous then this structure. For whatsoever may seem to con∣duce to the glory and comlinesse of an Earthly City in respect of wals, gates,
foundation, figure, streets, Temples, Air, and lastly wealth of the Citizens, ornament and pleasantnesse of life: all this Iohn sees here to be most eminent and glorious in this Heavenly Ierusalem. By which allegorie the ho∣ly Ghost would in some measure shadow out that unspeakable glory and fe∣licity, which the Church now militant on Earth, shall after the end of her wearisome labours in this warfare, receive in the Heavens, the which, eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, nor hath entred into the heart of man. This Allegory is continued, unto the 6. vers. of the following Chapter. The Chapter may not unfitly be divided into two parts: in the for∣mer of which Iohn recordeth, what he saw and heard in a generall way af∣ter the judgement of the ungodly in 8. verses. In the latter, what he saw in particular: thence unto the end. In the former hee generally rehearseth. FIrst, what he saw, two things: 1. The renovation of Heaven and Earth, and overthrow of the former world, ver. 1. 2. The New Jerusalem, which he sets forth from the adjunct holinesse, and its heavenly originall, comming downe from Heaven: and the adjunct ornament: which he amplifies by a metaphor of a Bride adorned for her Bridegroome, ver. 2. Secondly, what he heard: both a great unknown voyce from Heaven: As also, him that sate on the Throne speaking. The great voyce proclaimes the heavenly blessednesse of the godlie: Behold, &c. consisting in two things: I. the abundance of good things, which God will bestow upon the Godlie: The tabernacle of God is with men, &c. v. 3. II. The ab∣sence of things evill, all which God will remove: He shall wipe away all tears, v. 4 The sitter on the throne, 1 testifies the renovation of the world wrought by him∣self, v. 5. Behold, I make all things new. II. He confirmes the blessednesse of the Godlie erewhile proclaimed, I. By a command of writing: Write. II. By a serious asseveration, that the words of the great voyce are true, v. 5. III. By an asseveration of a thing so certain, as if it were alreadie done: It is done. IIII. From his nature, that he is eternall and cannot lie: I am Alpha and Omega. 5. By a promise taken out of the Gospel, I will give to him that is a thirst. III. He sheweth to whom the blessednesse belongs, and what it shall be: Ioh. 7.3 7. He that overcommeth, v. 7. IIII. By an Antithesis he amplifies, what punishment is laid up for the ungod∣ly: whom he sets forth by eight fowle Epethites, v. 8. But the fearefull &c. In the latter part he expoundeth, what he saw particularlie. I. The occasion, by which he saw the same: the speech of the Angel: Come hither, I will shew thee, v. 9. II. The manner and place of the Vision: He carried me to a great Mountaine, &c. ver. 10. III. The Vision it selfe: He shewed me a great City, ver. 10. the magnificence whereof he againe declareth, first generally, secondly specially. Generally, 1. From the greatnesse: A great City: 2. From the Sanctitie: Ho∣ly. 3. From the originall and architect: Descending out of Heaven from God, ver. 10.4. From its glory: Having the glory of God, ver. 11.5. From the splendor or light: which he illustrates by comparing it to a Jasper, cleare as Chrystall, v. 11. Specially he describeth 1. The magnificence of the structure both outwardly and inwardly, ver. 12, &c. 2. The excellency of the light, v. 23. 3. The felici∣ty of the inhabitants, v. 24, &c.
In the externall structure he commends chiefly the wall, gates, form and matter. The wall he commends from the greatnesse and height, vers. 12. And had a wall. The gates, 1. From the number, There were twelve. 2. From the keepers, At the gates were twelve Angels. 3. From the inscriptions, Which are the names of the twelve tribes, &c. Ibid. 4. From the situation or coast, On the East three, ver. 13. The greatnesse and strength of the wall he commendeth from the number, and excellency of the foundations, upon which it is built: It hath twelve foundations, and in them the names, &c. vers. 14. Touching the form of the citie he sheweth. 1. Whence he learned the same: from the Angel measuring: Whose instru∣ment, A golden Reed, and purpose he sheweth, To measure the Citie, ver. 15. 2. The Figure, it is four square, equall in length and breadth, ver. 16. 3. The di∣stance on every side: 12000. Furlongs. The whole Citie containing 56000. furlongs verse 16. The height of the wall he sheweth by the measure, to be 144. Cubits, ver. 17. and the matter of Iasper, ver. 18. The matter or substance of the City, was pure gold, like unto clear glasse. ibid. Returning to the foundations of the wall, he sets forth every thing by the ex∣cellency and variety of the matter, that is, of precious stones, which, he saith, are twelve. The 1. Iasper. 2. Saphir. 3. Chalcedonie. 4. An Emerauld. 5. Sardonyx. 6. Sardius. 7. Chrysolite. 8. Beril. 9. A Topas. 10. Chrysoprasus. 11. A Ia∣cinct. 12. An Amethyst, ver. 20. The gates also he commendeth from the like matter: being cut out of so ma∣ny pretious stones, ver. 21. Thus much of the outward building. Touching the internall structure, hee commendeth 1. the street or Market∣place, from the matter and clearnesse thereof: Pure gold, &c. ver. 21. II. The Temple, which 1. he denyes to be externally materiall: Neither saw I a Temple therein. 2. What kind of Temple it was: The Lord God himselfe, verse 22. III. The light of the City: 1. It came not from the Sun or Moon. 2. But from the glory of God and the Lamb, ver. 23. IV. The Citizens of the Citie, 1. who they were: The Nations that were saved, and the Kings of the Earth that bring their glory unto it. 2. The security and peace of the City from a signe: The gates are not shut at all, ver. 25. 3. The glory of the Citie. ver. 26. 4. The puritie and holinesse of the City, It shall consist of Elect onely: no Reprobates enter therein, ver. 27. The Former Part of the CHAPTER. The New Heaven and New Earth: The Heavenly Ierusalem and its building. 1. And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth: for the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. 2. And I Iohn saw the Holy Citie, new Ierusalem, comming downe from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband. 3. And I heard a great voyce out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall bee his people, and God himselfe shall be with them, and bee their God. 4. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes: and there shalbe no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more paine for the former things are passed away. 5. And he that sate upon the Throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithfull. 6. And hee said unto mee, It is done: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end: I will give unto him that is a thirst, of the Fountaine of the water of Life, freely. 7. He that overcommeth, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall he my sonne. 8. But the fearefull and unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murthe∣rers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all lyars, shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the Second Death. THE COMMENTARY. ANd I saw a new Heaven] We have heard of one part of the lāst Iudgement, viz. the casting of the Adversaries into torments: Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 16. In which, saith AVSTIN, he declared what was briefly spoken by the LORD: And these shall go into everlasting punishment. Now followes the second part, the placing of the Elect in glory, in which also is expounded, what Christ there addeth: And the just into life everlasting. As the former did serve to strike a terrour into the ungodly, so the latter to lessen the fear and sorrow of the godly, and stir them up to alacrity and joy. For seeing the Saints in this life are compassed about with innumerable calamities & miseries: no wonder though they should weare away with continuall sorrow and mourning. But in this part of the Vision, they are strengthned in their hope. For at last there shalbe a change of all things, an end of all adversitie, abundance of all good, as Christ said: Ioh. 16.20. Yee shall lament and mourn, but your mourning shalbe turned into joy. The new Ierusalem is not the Church mi∣litant: much lesse the Church of Rome. How farre Alcasars o∣pinion is approvable. Wherefore after the wicked were judged, Iohn saw a new Heaven and a new Earth. Afterward a new Ierusalem glistering with gold and pretious stones. That this latter is wholly allegoricall, cannot be questioned by any: although it be di∣versly expounded: For some say it shadows out the magnificence of the Church Militant, much spoken of by the Prophets: yea there are some, who spe∣cially applie it to the glory of the Romane Church in this world. But Alcasar reproves both justly, and giveth reasons that the Vision of the two Chapters is proper to the Church Triumphant. Notwithstanding afterward foolishly contendeth that it is to be applied in speciall unto the glory of the Ro∣mane Church in Heaven. Now this he doth not because hee thought it to bee true: but to flatter the Pope (it may be for the Cardinals hat sake) and vex the he∣reticks, as he pretendeth. Which now I passe by. Now to returne to the former againe, Touching the new heaven and the new earth. 2. Cor. 5.17 touching the new Heaven and the new Earth, whither it be allegorically, or properly to be understood. Some understand it allegorically of the renewing of the world by Christ, tou∣ching which the Apostle. If any one be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things are past away, Behold I make all things new. This Spirituall renovation began e∣ven from the preaching of the Apostles: and is undoubtedly an allusion unto the
Prophesie of Isaias: Isa. 65.17. Behold I create new heavens and a new earth, &c. which seems to be spoken of the new state of the Church in the Kingdom of Christ on earth: and so BRIGHTMAN, as I have shewed, interprets it metaphorically of the renewed state of the Church, through the conversion of the Iewes, shortly to be accomplished. But all these things cannot without violence be applied unto the state of the Church on earth. The Chiliasts indeed applied it unto that golden age, in which they dreamt they should voluptuously reigne a thousand yeeres with Christ on earth. But this opinion is repugnant to the praedictions of Christ and the A∣postles, that the state of the Church in the last times, shall not bee voluptuous or joyfull at all, but sad and mournfull, as above we shewed. Therefore we are rather to understand the former touching the new heaven and the new earth properly: What is meane by the new heaven & the new earth. for it is so evident, that here is treated of the last Iudge∣ment and the consequents thereof, as it can scarcely be doubted of. So that this new heaven and this new earth, which Iohn saw after the judgement of the ad∣versaries, is that new heaven, and that new earth, which as the Apostle Peter expresly foretold, 2. Pet. 3; 10 is to be expected after the burning of the world: For these heavens shall passe away with a great noyse, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, the earth al∣so and the works that are therein shall be burnt up: But we according to the promise looke for new heavens and a new earth wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. By which plainly we gather that a new heaven and a new earth is to bee looked for Historically and properly, and here likewise it is so to be understood. Hence also it followeth: that the Oracle of Isaias touching the new heaven and the new earth is to be understood not onely metaphorically of the renewed state of the Church on earth, but litterally also of the renovation of the world, which shall be at the last day. For Peter saith that wee looke for a new heaven and a new earth according to the promise. Now this promise is no where else but in Isa. 65.17. & 66.22. Therefore undoubtedly God by the Prophet speakes not onely of the inchoated spirituall renovation which is in this life, but also of the consummated litterall and proper renovation, which we look for at the com∣ming of Christ. Now the Heaven and the Earth shall not bee new in Substance, How hea∣ven and earth are new. but in Qualities, as puritie, brightnesse, and glory: for that which is added: The first heaven and the first earth are passed away: and before Chap. 20.11. From whose face the heaven and the earth, &c. doth not signifie, that they should bee brought to nothing, but that they are to be purifyed by fire from all present vanity and defilement. So Peter interpreteth the same: The heavens burning shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. Whence the Apostle gathers this weighty instruction: seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of men ought yee to bee in all holy conversation and godlinesse? And indeed to meditate, and doe this, tends more to Salvation, then curiously to search after the manner of the Renovation. Now if any one should say: These things John saw: but the Heavenly glory, Eye hath not seene, Eare hath not heard, &c. therefore the Vision speakes not of this glory: The answer is easie. Iohn saw not the thing it selfe: but he saw cer∣taine representations and types of the things to come. Therefore it remaines true, that Eye hath not seene, &c. especially seeing Iohn saw not the same with his eyes, but in the spirit. And the Sea was no more] AVGVSTINE thinkes that the Sea may be understood of the turbulent world, 1. Cor. 7.31 which then shall no more bee: for the world passeth away with the fashion thereof: yet hee retaines the proper sense also: but doubteth whither the Sea shall be dryed up by that fervent heat: or whither that also shall be changed and purged. Indeed we read that the Heaven and the Earth shall bee renewed: but I remember not that I have read of a new Sea,
save onely what is said in this Booke touching the Sea of glasse, like to Chrystall: Rev. 4.6. but there he speakes not of this world. Andreas Caesariensis supposeth that then there shall bee no Sea: The reno∣vation of the Sea. for what use should there be of it, seeing then men shall saile no more. Schoole-men thinke that the Sea shall so bee renewed, as indeed it shall not retaine its substance: because the water is to be consolidated into the globe of the Sphere, remaining no longer flowing: But these curiosities we leave unto themselves. By the New Heaven BRIHGTMAN understands a new worship and puri∣tie in godlinesse: By the new earth, new Israelites, which then shall joyne unto the Church of Christ: By the former heaven that passed away, the Iewish worship which they shall no longer exercise: By the former earth the Iewes themselves, who of Iewes, shall become Christians: By the Sea, which was no more, cor∣rupt doctrine which shall have no place among the new people: for then the Iewes shall cast off their errours touching the Messias, which now they main∣taine tooth and naile, &c. What manner of Allegories these are, I passe by, cer∣tainely they depend upon a very improbable conjecture, viz. that the Easterne Iewes after the overthrow of the Turkish Empire and burning of Rome, should be added unto the Church of Christ. 2. And I Iohn saw the holy City] Now also the glory of the renewed Church is exhibited to the view of Iohn, under the Type of a most beautifull Citie, as it were a Bride most curiously adorned. The Kings Bible omitting the name of Iohn, reads it, And I saw, which John inserts for certainety sake. For Iohn was an Apostle, an Evangelist, and witnesse of the truth: therefore he writeth a thing that is certaine. Furthermore the Scripture generally calleth the Church of the Elect Ierusalem: because Ierusalem was the Seat of the Church, and worship of God, according to the Psalme: This is my rest for ever, here I will dwell, because I have chosen her. Ps. 132.14 But because that Old Ierusalem polluted with the blood of Christ and his Apostles, was at length overthrowne: He distinguisheth this new Ierusalem from the other by divers Titles. He cals it a Citie, because of the beauty of its building, and afterward addes, holy, because it shall shine with Heavenly purity and perfect ho∣linesse. Here indeed it begins to bee holy, Eph. 5.27. Christ sanctifying her unto himselfe with the washing of water in the word: but as yet she is not without spot and wrin∣kle: but then he will present her unto himselfe gloriously holy, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. He cals it New, to difference it from the old, and because of its new brightnesse. For then the righteous shall shine in glory as the Sunne, Mat. 13.43. Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 19 COMING DOWNE FROM GOD OƲT OF HEAVEN] Because saith AVSTIN, It is heavenly grace, by which God hath made her. Therefore it is said to descend from God out of heaven: because God hath chosen her from all e∣ternitie: therefore originally she comes downe out of Heaven. so Chap. 3.12. Ʋpon him that overcommeth I will write the name of the Citie of my God, the new Ieru∣salem that commeth downe from my God. And Hebr. 12 22. it is called the Hea∣venly Ierusalem. Gal. 4.26. Ierusalem , which is above. How the new Ierusa∣lem comes down from heaven. But this Epithite seemes to be contrary to our opinion, for the Heavenly Ieru∣salem shall never come downe, but remaine firm in Heaven. I ANSWER: First it may be said, that the Vision is to bee distinguished from the thing it selfe: The Image of the Heavenly City, which Iohn saw in the Spirit, came downe: or if the Citie it selfe came downe, it is visionally to be un∣derstood. But Secondly, this comming downe, as above Chap. 3.12. must be taken not of a locall motion, but of the originall beginning of the new Ierusalem, for whither her existence be said to be above or here below, as God from Heaven hath chosen, so hath he called, justifyed, and gloried her. Prepared as a Bride] By another metaphor he amplifies the dignitie and glory of the Triumphant Church: Unto her dignitie belongs, that hee saw her as a
Bride, to wit, of the Lambe, ver. 9. To her glory, that he saw her adorned for her husband, that is, in full beauty, now delivered into the hands of Christ her Hus∣band. For then shall bee the eternitie of the Heavenly Wedding. Above in Chap. 19.7. The Bride made her selfe ready, while as yet she was absent from the Lord: But now she is prepared, because the Wedding Feast is at hand. But hence BRIGHTMAN: He saw her, saith he, prepared, adorned, not as yet delivered: Therefore shee was not as yet glorified. Answ: The participles , Prepared, adorned, argue the contrary. Now she is a preparing and adorning her selfe. But then she shall bee prepared, ador∣ned, that is, fully beautified with Heavenly glory. The same thing the words  doe import not , for her husband, not for her spouse. Then therefore she shall bee delivered unto her Husband: for before the Marriage-Feast, the Bride is preparing for her Bridegroome: but the Feast being en∣ded, for her Husband. For he who was before the Bridegroom, is then a Husband. 3. And I heard a great voyce] Thus much touching the things he saw, a new heaven, and a new earth: and the Heavenly Ierusalem adorned like a Bride. Now he recordeth, what he heard: a two-fold voyce: one unknowne, the other of one that sate on the Throne: both confirme the happinesse of the Bride. The former voyce comes from heaven. Therefore it sheweth joyfull and true tidings unto the Bride. It was GREAT, vehemently piercing Iohns eares, that he might give good heed: because the matter delivered is weighty: But what was it? Behold the Tabernacle of God with men] As if he should say, the Marriage-Feast is ended: Hence forward the Bridegroom and Bride shall dwel together under one roofe for ever. And he wil dwell with them] An allusion unto the Bridegroomes abode with the Bride after the Marriage-Feast. Now he fully comprehends the happinesse of the Bride, as above Chap. 7.15.16. in two parts: the fruition of all man∣ner of good things, and freedom from all evill. The chiefe good is God. To enjoy his presence and the sight of his face is the chiefest felicitie. This hee seems to describe by a two-fold reason: his presence, and his communion with men. Touching his presence he saith, the Tabernacle of God is with men. The which Ta∣bernacle least it might be thought to be emptie and transitorie, he addes: And he will dwell with them: Rev. 7.15. intimately and unseparably: as above: : which seemeth to sound: His Tabernacle shall be upon them: namely, thereby to refresh, and preserve them from the heat of the Sunne. By an allusion unto places subject to the Sun: where men in respect of the heat hide themselves in Tabernacles, or Caves under the Earth. But here he saith , he will dwell with them, be in one house, as it were, constantly and perpetually with them. Therefore they shall enjoy the perpetuall sight and presence of God. By Men he understandeth not al, The habi∣tation of Gods grace and glory. but the Elect acquitted in Iudgement. Now he speaketh of no personall habitation (like as God the Word dwelleth in the temple of his flesh) but of grace and glory. But doth not God now also dwell with his Church? Yea verily, according to the promise in Levitic. 26.11. whence this whole place seems to be taken, and is repeated by Paul, 2. Cor. 6. but he shall then dwell with us after another manner then now hee doth. For here he hath dwelt with us 1. Personally in Christ; 2. By his gratious presence in the Church, bestowing on her the benefits of the Gospell, and first fruits of the Spirit: Then he will dwell with us through his glorious presence, fully enrich∣ing the Saints with Heavenly brightnesse and glory: and he shall be all in all, and we shall see him as he is face to face. Touching his communion with us, it is added: And they shall be his people, and God himselfe shall be with them, and be their God] Now also he is our God, and we are his people: but this communion is onely by inchoated grace: for now he
bestoweth grace upon every one of us but in part, 1. Cor. 13.9 Eph. 4.7. 1. Cor. 12.11 2. Cor. 3.18 Phil. 3.21. Mat 13.43 1. Ioh. 3.2. according to the measure of the gift of Christ, as he will. Then shall be the consummated communication of glo∣ry, when with open face we shall all behold the glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same image from glory to glory: when he shall change our vile bodie, that it may be fashioned like unto the glorious bodie of his Sonne: they shall shine as the sunne: we shall be like unto im: the proportion notwithstanding being kept that is between the head and the members. The summe is: Then the promise made unto the Church, Lev. 26.11. shall be most fully perfected: I will set my tabernacle a∣mongst you: and my soule shall not abhorre you, I will walke in the midst of you, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. Now God dwelleth with us by com∣munication of grace: then hee shall dwell in us by communication of glory, the which eye hath not seen, nor eare heard, 1. Cor. 2.4 neither hath it entred into the heart of man. 4. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes] The second part of feli∣city, is that we shall be subject to no miseries, vexation, or troubles of this life. To be free from evill, is a great happinesse, of which also God is Author. For he will free his people from all evill. Now he reckons up five kinds of evill, ma∣king this life bitter, under which the opposite good things are to be understood. The evils accompa∣ning this life. Teares] Teares are expressed by the feeling of evill. Now this life what is it but a vale of teares? But then God will wipe away all teares from our eyes, that is, he will make it, that we shall weepe no more, by taking away all cause of teares, turning our teares into joy according to the promise: They which sow in teares, Ps. 126.6. shall reape in joy. The phrase is taken out of Isa. 25.8. and is an allusion unto the naturall affection of a mother to her child, which useth to flatter the crying babe, and wipe away the teares thereof. And death shall be no more] Neither the first nor second: Isa. 25.8. for it shall bee cast into the Lake of fire, and utterly abolished according to the promise, Hee will swallow up death in victory. But hath not Christ by his death, overcome death long agoe? True: but not as yet swallowed it up. Notwithstanding although we now remaine subject unto corporall death, yet whatsoever in it belongs to punishment, that Christ hath taken away. But then he shall abolish death wholly. In the meane while he converteth the corporall death of the Saints into a resting from sinne, and a passage to life: for whither we live, Rom. 14.8 Col. 3.4. Rom. 8.38 or whither we die wee are the Lords. Christ is the life of the dead: neither can death separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Now death being taken away, what shal then follow but life everlasting? Neither mourning] As now we do for the death of friends,  and losse of such as are deare unto us. This shall not bee then: because there shall bee no death. Our friends departed shalbe restored unto us, to see, salute, and rejoyce for ever with them. Nor cry] Which ariseth out of the evills, turmoyles, disturbances of this life. For there shall bee everlasting peace and tranquilitie: all tumults and quar∣rels shall be farre from thence: but on the contrary we shall sing to God everla∣sting Songs of joy. Nor paine] Gr. , Labour, which may be taken for any kind of trouble, and metaphorically for Griefe, as BEZA renders it, after the Greeke Phrase: Sophocl. in Antig. , griefe by griefe brings griefe. But then there shall be no labour, trouble, paine, or griefe of body or mind, occasioning teares, death, sorrow, or crying. There shalbe no cause of evill: but on the contrary everla∣sting joy and pleasure at Gods right hand. For the former, (or first,) things are passed away] That is, the miserable state of this present life: in which all those evils doe abound because of sinne. Then they shall passe or vanish away. There shal bee a new heaven and a new earth: A new state, full of joy and happinesse.
Vnto the illustration of this place, that in Chap. 7.15. helps very much, where in the end of the second Vision one of the foure and twenty Elders explicated the Heavenly felicity of the Saints almost in the same words: They are, saith he, before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell among them: they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sunne light on them, nor any heat: for the Lambe that is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountaines of waters, and God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes. This place doth plainly confute their opinion, who hold that here is treated of the state of the Church Militant in this world: for it is certaine, that this removall of all evils from the Church, neither is, nor shall be in this world: neither is any such happinesse to be hoped for in this life: but it is reserved for the Church in the world to come. These things therefore cannot be applied unto the state of the Church on earth, gathered of Iewes and Gentiles. Neither do the Futures, will dwell, will take away, contradict what wee say. For these are retained emphatically out of the Prophesie: as if he should say, the things which Isaias foretold should come to passe, shall bee then fulfilled: the which the Verbe  are passed away, in the Praeter Tense, doth easily evince. 5. And he that sate upon the throne] Here followeth the voyce of the Sitter on the Throne, of whom above Chap. 4. where wee shewed it was either the Holy Trinitie, or the Son of God gloriously reigning at the right hand of God in Heaven: because he saith, I am Alpha and Omega, which above in Chap. 1: 8. was the voyce of Christ: I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. Now he confirmeth unto Iohn the things before seen and heard. All things were new, a New Heaven, a New Earth, a New Ierusalem: Least we should doubt or aske, whence this innovation should come: Behold, saith hee, I make all things new. This innovation of things shal be effected by the divine power. Neither spea∣keth he of the spirituall renovation of the Church, which began long agoe by the grace and power of Christ, but of the super-naturall change of the whole universe which shalbe at Christs last coming, 2. Pet. 3.13 as Peter sheweth. And hee saith to mee write] The Verbe  saith in the present Tense; be∣ing the proper stile of the Evangelist Iohn, argues that he was Authour of this Booke. He is commanded to write this Vision of the future renovation, and in speciall the most sweet voyce of Gods eternall abode with men, and the future blessednesse of the godlie: that it might allwayes remaine extant to future times, for the Churches consolation: for Christ knew that the Churches condition should unto the end be mournefull, by teares, death, sadnesse, paines, &c. Least therefore she might faint in her warfare, the Lord would have this most joyfull Catastrophe of all evils to be set down in Holy Writ. For these words are true and faithfull] Above Chap. 19.9. after a like Com∣mandement of writing: Write blessed, &c. He annexed a like reason: These words are true. Here he addeth: faithfull, that none should doubt of the future hap∣pinesse. Hee understands by WORDS here, Gods future dwelling with men, as also the eternall rewards of the faithfull, and everlasting punish∣ments of the wicked. 6. And he said to mee, It is done] Above Chap. 16.17. the Angell of the se∣venth Ʋiall, in the same phrase proclaimed the end of Babylon and the whole world,  IT IS DONE. It is a weighty asseveration, that the thing is as certaine, as if it were already accomplished. I am Alpha and Omega] As above Chap. 1.8.11. I will give unto him that is a thirst] Hee confirmes eternall rewards unto the faithfull out of the Gospell. For this is the voyce of Christ Ioh. 7.37. whence he that sate on the throne is knowne to bee Christ, the Author of this Prophesie.
To them that thirst, he promiseth the water of life freely, that is, everlasting joy with∣out any desert of ours. But then no man shall thirst any more. But these Fu∣ture Verbes: I will give: shall inherit: and as before, shall wipe away, seeme to make against our opinion, but they doe not, as erewhile I shewed. For because it is a Prophesie of future things, he rightly useth Verbes of the future Tense. He therefore that thirsteth, to wit, after righteousnesse in this life, to him Christ will give the water of Life: now in a beginning onely, then fully: as if hee should say, then I will truely fulfill the Evangelicall promise, of which I now grant a tast to the faithfull. He that overcommeth, shall inherit all things] Gr.  receive it by in∣heritance: Not therefore of merit but freely. All things] As it were an only Heire, that possesseth all the substance of his Parents. But all the Elect are heires: and yet every one shall receive the whole inheritance: Therefore this shall not be after the manner of other inheritances. Now the inheritance is promised to him that overcommeth, to wit, the world, the Beast, and Satan, because before the victory there must needs be a fight. Therefore the Faithfull are here exhorted to fight couragiously against all their Adver∣saries. See Chap. 2.10. And I will bee his God] From 2. Sam. 7.14. He then at last promiseth to them that overcome the fulfilling of the promise of adoption, which now by faith they possesse in hope. Now are wee the sonnes of God? but it doth not yet appeare what we shall bee, but we know, that when he shall appeare, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as hee is. This is Johns owne most true interpretation of this di∣vine voyce. 1. Ioh. 3.2. 8. But the fearfull and unbeleeving] From the contrary, he extols the felicity of the Godly: because contraries being set one by another, they are the more apparent. Therefore he could not more effectually set forth the excellency and worth of Heavenly good things, erewhile promised unto the Conquerours, (viz. eternall abode with God, his everlasting amitie, absence of all evill, abundance of all good things, the Eternall and Heavenly refreshing, and last of all the co∣inheritance with Christ in the new Heaven and the new Earth, and of all things that are:) then by giving a touch on the contrary, of the miserable and unhappy portion of the ungodly. But the fearefull, saith he, and unbeleevers shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: whose horrible judgement hee repeateth from the end of the foregoing Chapter: Whosoever was not found written in the Booke of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire. This part of the judge∣ment he expoundeth more fully, that the godly may the more contentedly beare the troublesomnesse of their warfare, and miseries in this life, which shall short∣ly be turned into joy: and the lesse be grieved at the successe and delights of the ungodly, who shortly shall be cast into the torments of Hell fire. Furthermore he reckons up eight rankes of reprobates, whose names are not written in the Booke of Life: unto which all the wicked belong, in speciall the worshippers of the Beast and his Zealots are set forth in their colours. For of these chiefly it is said, Chapter. 13.8. That their names are not written in the Booke of Life. And truely these wickednesses have notoriously born sway in the Papacy. Fearefull] These he opposeth to Christs strong champions and Conquerours, Fearfull. understanding indeed generally those delicate professours, who for feare of dan∣ger would have nothing to do with Christ, nor suffer any trouble for his sake. But chiefly noteing those most base Vassals of ANTICHRIST, unto whom a servile dread and spirit of fearfullnesse is proper. For they are never taught certainely to trust in the mercy of God, touching the remission of sinnes, of faith and salvation, but torment themselves with perpetual doubting, false conje∣ctures, and feare of beeing deceived, all their life time standing in dread of Purgatory and Hell fire.
Ʋnbeleeving] Such indeed bee all that are Alients from the Faith of Christ, Vnbelievers Iewes, Pagans, barbarous Infidels, of whom it is said: Hee that beleeveth not in the Sonne of God, Ioh. 3.36. the wrath of God abideth on him. Yet none are more bitter ene∣mies of justifying faith, then Antichrists Zealots: for these both by Arguments, and force of armes, furiously oppugne free justification by Faith. They there∣fore are principally these  Ʋnbeleeving, seeing the Scriptures of the new Testament usually call other faithlesse men, The abo∣minable. , disobedient and obstinate. Abominable] Both actively, who abhorre God and Christ: and passively, who because of their abominable wickednesses are odious to God and men. Andreas reads it  Abominable sinners: such indeed are blasphemers out of the Church. But principally it agrees to the worship∣pers of the Beast: for they imitate the nature of the Beast, and his blasphemous mouth against God, his Tabernacle, and those that dwell in Heaven. But what more cursed abomination can there be, Cha. 13.6. then for Popish Priests really to sacrifice and kill the Sonne of God, under the species of bread in the Masse: mortifying, destroying, and offering him unto the Father, if they be beleeved. Murderers] Such indeed have been all the robbers from Cain, Murderers. and Nimrod the Tyrants time, cruelly spilling mans blood: but none are more cruell man∣slayers then Antichrists zealots and actors in the Inquisition, who for many Ages have indeed by fire and sword killed innumerable bodies of the Martyrs: but infi∣nite soules of men by their devilish doctrine. Whoremongers] Such indeed are all impure adulterers and fornicatours,  whom God will judge. Notwithstanding the Romane Clergy, are the chiefe Adul∣terers and whoremongers, who under pretence of vowed chastitie, have long agoe polluted the Christian world with whoredomes, adulteries, sodomie, and filthy secret lusts. Sorcerers] Or such as mingle poysoned cups, Sorcerers. or serving the devil by magical Art, and so are hurtfull unto men. Many Popes and Monks have excelled in this kind of wickednesse: never was Magicke more used or esteemed of, then in the Pa∣pacie: Never were Kings and Princes in such danger of beeing poysoned as by these men. Idolaters] Among these indeed are comprehended Pagans who worship false Gods, Idolaters. for the true: Govetous men, whose Mammon is there God: Epicures who make a god of their belly. For all these are Idolaters: but no Idolatry is so horrible, as is in the Papacie, where under the Image of God and Christ, and of the Saints, Idols of wood, stone, gold, and silver, are religiously worship∣ped and adored. All Lyars] That is, Lyars. Pro. 12.12 Iohn 8 44. all Liars, and framers of lyes in generall, adversaries of trueth, of whom it is said: Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord: Every lyar is of the devill, the father of lyes. But the Papacy is as the very sinke of falsehood. Their head the Pope is a lyar, falsely affirming himselfe to be Christs Vicar, Peters Successour, Monarch of the Christian world, Head of the Church, and Lord of Kings and Emperours. Their Religion and whole worship is false. Their do∣ctrine of meritorious works, of Purgatory, of satisfactions, is false. Their Do∣ctors are lyars: To bee short, their blasphemies and calumnies, by which they continually defame the Gospell of Christ, are most false. Thus we see whom the threatning respects. Now for the punishment. They shall have their part in the Lake] An Hebrew Phrase: Psa. 11.6. Psa. 16.5. Psa. 63.10 Act. 8.21. Fire and brimstone is the part or portion of their cup: Jehovah the part of my portion and of my cup. They shall be the portion of Foxes. So PETER to Simon Magus. Thou hast nei∣ther part nor lot in this matter. By an Allusion unto Heires, among whom the in∣heritance is divided into certaine parts, that every one may have his due portion. Now because he had said, that such as overcame, should inherit all things: Here on the contrary he saith: the portion of the wicked shall be in the Lake of fire, that is,
this shall be the inheritance of the ungodly. Gr. , the part of them. The Relative  of them, is after the manner of the Hebrews, a redundance or over-plus: And the Verbe , Is; or shall be, is wanting. Beza rightly, Is assigned, to wit, the sentence being now pronounced. For erewhile he said: all that were not written in the Booke of Life were cast into the lake of fire. The lake of fire. Lib. 20. de C. D. c. 14 Touching this Lake of fire and brimstone, we need not with idle Sophisters dis∣pute, what kind of Lake it is, and where, and what kind of fire, Elementary, or not. AVGVSTINE: This fire, saith he, in what part of the world or things it shall be, is I think known to no man. Ludovicus his jest on Sophisters disputing of this fire. On which place Ludovicus Dives pleasantly jesting and de∣riding the vanitie of Sophisters: what, saith he, to no man? O Augustine, thou hast not heard our Scholasticall Swash-bucklers: of whom the least in degree, is not ignorant, that it shall be that Elementary fire, whose abode is between the Ayr, and the Globe of the Moone, namely it being to descend. But if thou approve not this, there will not some be wanting to swear religiously, that this fire shall proceed from the heat of the beams of the Sunne, raised in the middle Climate of the Aire, most thicke and ardent beames closing there together, as it were into an hollow glasse or mirrour. But it is no wonder. In thy time (O Austine) there was no such use of fire, as now: seeing, not to speake of Divines, our Philosophers, whither it be in the middle of December, or in the middle of July, they with mouth, hands, and feet, handle and treat of nothing but fire. Of Philosophers they become Divines, and so transferre this kind of Philosophy into the more sacred Schooles. They therefore can more casily define the fire, then either Thou, thy equals, or Praedeces∣sours. Thus hee. These delights therefore we leave unto incendiary Monkes, who from the fire of Purgatory and Hell doe daily warme their Kitchins: and daily threaten the E∣vangelicall Heretickes with fire and fagots. The Holy Ghost himselfe inter∣prets this Lake, and this Fire, not by the place or matter, but by the miserable con∣dition thereof, Which is the Second Death] Of which Chap: 20.6. The first death. They that have part in the First Resurrection, on such the Second, that is, Eternall Death hath no power: which shall be the casting of the damned with the devill and the Beast into everlasting torments. For the first death is the falling away of the Soul from God. The remedie whereof is the First Resurrection, which is a raising of the Soule from the death of sinne, through Faith and Repentance in this Life. These are not in danger of the Second death: because they shall have part in the Second Resurrection, which is a raising up unto life and eternall glory. See what was said before Chap. 20.5.6. The Second Part of the CHAPTER. Beeing a Speciall VISION and Type of the Heavenly Jerusalem. 9. And there came unto mee one of the seven Angels, which had the seven Vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, say∣ing, Come hither, I will shew thee the Bride, the Lambes wife. 10. And he carried me away in the Spirit, to a great and high Moun∣taine, and shewed me that great City, the Holy Ierusalem, de∣scending out of Heaven from God. 11. Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone,
most pretious, even like a Iasper stone, cleare as Chrystall. 12. And had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates: and at the gates twelve Angels: and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel. 13. On the East three gates, on the North three gates, on the South three gates, and on the West three gates. 14. And the wall of the Citie had twelve foundations: and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. 15. And he that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the City, and the gates thereof, and the wals thereof. 16. And the City lyeth foure square, and the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the Citie with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equall 17. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and fourty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angell. 18. And the building of the wall of it was of Iasper, and the Citie was pure gold, like unto cleare glasse. 19. And the foundations of the wall of the Citie were garnished with all manner of pretious stones. The first foundation was Iasper, the se∣cond Saphir, the third a Chalcedony, the fourth an Emerauld, 20. The fifth Sardonix, the sixt Sardius, the seventh Chrysolite, the eight Beryl, the ninth a Topas, the tenth a Crysoprasus, the ele∣venth a Iacinct, the twelfth an Amethyst. 21. And the twelve gates were twelve Pearles: every severall gate was of one Pearle: and the street of the City was pure gold, as it were transparent glasse. 22. And I saw no Temple therein: For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. 23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lambe is the light thereof. 24. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walke in the light of it: and the Kings of the Earth doe bring their glory and honour unto it. 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall bee no night there. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, nei∣ther whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lambes booke of life.
THE COMMENTARY. 9. AND there came unto me one of the seven Angels] Hitherto of what John saw and heard generally. Now followes a speciall Vision and Type of the Heavenly Ierusalem, in which is alle∣gorically shadowed out, not so much the pleasantnesse and magnificence of the place, in which we shall bee in blessed∣nesse, in the highest Heaven, as our future unspeakable blessed∣nesse it selfe. For this Citie is not Heaven it selfe, but the glorified Church in Heaven: for bee calleth the Citie here described, the Bride and Wife of the Lambe. But the Bride and Wife of the LAMBE, is not Heaven, but the glo∣rified Church. Now he recordeth, as we shewed in the Analysis, first the occasion of the Vi∣sion: secondly the manner and place of the Vision: lastly the Vision it selfe. The occasion is in this verse. Hitherto Iohn stood in the desert, where he was carried in the spirit by one of the seven Angels, pouring forth the Vials, Chap. 17.3 to see the judgement of the great whore sitting upon the Beast. What things he there saw and heard, he hath declared at large. Now that same Angell being one of the seven Pourers forth of the Vials, (for I understand it of the selfe same, who seemed, as above I said, to be the seventh, pouring out the last Viall into the Aire, and proclaiming the end of the world) comes unto Iohn] that is, returnes unto him, (for undoubtedly he had turned aside) and as before he had said: Come hither, Chap. 17.1 I will shew thee the judgement of the great whore: So now he saith, I will shew thee the Bride, the Lambes wife. A wonderfull affabilitie of the Angell, touching which above: without being demaunded he is present, undoubtedly by Gods Com∣mandement, now to shew unto Iohn, to whom before he had shewed horrible things, things acceptable and pleasing. Before he saw a most filthy Harlot, the Beasts Whore: now he sees a chast Spouse, the Lambes Wife. This Bride is the glo∣rified Church. Therefore he cals her the Lambes wife, now deservedly brought and delivered unto the Heavenly Marriage Feast. But how saith he, I will shew thee] Seeing Iohn saw her before ver. 2. I an∣swer: he had seen her a far off, being in the wildernesse. But now he is invited to looke upon her more neer at hand. Hitherto the occasion. 10. And he carried me away in the spirit] This is the third time, that he was ravished in the Spirit: First in the Ile Patmos, Chap. 1.9. which ecstasie or trance was without any locall translation. Secondly when he was carried into the Wildernesse, Chap. 17.3. Thirdly now beeing carried to a great moun∣taine. In Chap. 12. v. 18. it is said, he stood upon the sand of the Sea, when he saw the Beast ascending out of the Sea: But that place hath it ambiguously  and , in the first and third person: neither is there any mention of an ecstasie. But here , hee carried mee, saith he, in the Spirit, intimating a tran∣slation, not corporall, but visionall. Thus much for the manner of the Vision. He addes the place. To a great and high Mountaine] Some from this Mountain observe divers Allo∣gories, touching the greatnesse and height of things caelestiall, and of the Church it selfe: applying to this the promise of God, Isa. 2.2. In the last dayes the mountaine of the Lords House shall be established in the top of Mountaines, and shall be exalted above the hils, and all Nations shall flow unto it: and many people shall goe and say, come yee, and let us goe up to the mountaine of Jehovah, &c. In which O∣racle is contained the calling of all Nations unto the Church of the New Testa∣ment, which of old was shadowed out by the Temple of mount Sion. But the present place respects not at all the gathering of the Gentiles unto the Church but the glorified Church is exhibited to Iohn from this Mountaine. Therefore I
see no other use of this great and high Mountaine, then that from it Iohn might the better view the Holy Citie and Bride of the Lambe. And he shewed unto me a great Citie] He had promised before to shew him the Bride, the Lambes Wife, For which he shewes him a Citie: because the glorified Church is both the Lambes bride, and the Citie of God. A Bride, because of her Spirituall Marriage with the Lambe, and her Chastitie and Heavenly ornament, with which shee shall shine for ever with Christ. A Citie, because of the most magnificent building, comely order, invincible strength and steadfastnesse, by which she shall stand for ever against all the gates of Hell. The Greeke  is here rather to be rendred by the latine word, Ʋrbs, then Civitas. For Civitas commonly signifies the multitude, and the priviledges of Citizens, but Ʋrbs the building it selfe, as the Wals, Gates, Streets, Palaces, Houses, Tem∣ples, &c. He calleth it Great (as before v. 2.) viz. in largenesse, ornament and glory: for it is the great Citie of the Great God, full of Citizens. Holy in purity and heavenly cleannesse, without all defilement and filthinesse. The name thereof is Ierusalem, that is, where peace is seene: from the Hebrew Jireh salem, Lib. 7. de bello Iudai∣co, cap. 18. that is, to see peace: of old it was the head Citie of Judea, builded by King Melchisedec, as Iosephus writeth, and was the Court of David, the Seat of the Temple and divine worship, and a Type of the new Church: and therefore the glorified Church retaines the same name, because she shall see everlasting peace. Comming downe from God out of heaven] It did then indeed visionally descend, that Iohn might see it: But in truth the Church also descendeth from Heaven, be∣cause hence it hath taken her originall, See ver. 2. as being founded in the eternall election and love of God: and all the glory and happinesse she receiveth, is from the grace of God. 11. Having the glory of God] Being to declare the most magnificent structure of this Citie, he begins from the glory and light thereof. For Cities take not the least commendation from the qualitie and heathfullnesse of the aire, and plea∣santnesse of the place. This Citie for its aire and most healthfull situation, hath the glory of God, that is, the majesty of that inaccessible light, which God inha∣biteth, then which nothing can be thought on more excellent and glorious. This glory is expounded ver. 23. And her light] The Gr.  signifies properly, not light, but a lightsome body, casting forth light from the same. Two such great Lights God in the begin∣ning set in the Firmament, the Sunne and the Moone. What this is, he wil shew us in ver. 23. Now he speakes of the qualitie thereof, LIKE ƲNTO A STONE MOST PRETIOƲS, even like a lasper] By which Allegory he in∣timates the unspeakable excellency of the light. For a most pretious stone is incom∣parable, most bright and most desirable. Like a Jasper stone] This is a most noble Gemme, of it are divers sorts, of ex∣cellent vertue: Lib. 37. c. 9 and as Plinie writeth it is used in all the East, for a preservative a∣gainst the most pernicious poyson. Like to Chrystall] Then which nothing is more bright, See before Chap. 4.3. or cleare, striving as it were with the Sunne in brightnesse. See above Chap. 4.6. It sheweth there∣fore that the light of this Citie is not onely healthfull, dispelling all poysonous and hurtfull things: but also most bright. Why doth he not liken it to the Sunne? This Citie shall have neither Sunne nor Moon, but that which is clearer then the same: Perhaps also, because the heat of the Sun is troublesome: the coldnesse of the Moone is usually hurtfull to the body, but here shall bee nothing either troublesome or hurtfull. 12. And had a wall] Now he describes the parts of the Citie most obvious to the sight, externall and internall. Hee begins with the wall, compassing the streets about: for it is convenient that a Citie bee invironed and fortified with wals, that the lives and estates of the Citizens may be preserved from the incur∣sions
of adversaries and wild Beasts. For wals are called Mania a muniendo of fortifying. These must be high, thicke, and strong. Such was this wall: great in thickenesse, and very high: as in ver. 17. ANDREAS saith: By this wall, we may understand the hedge of Gods safeguard and protection. Wherefore it signi∣fies, that the life and safety of the glorified Church is sure, and in no danger of externall force or hurt: because the wall of Gods omnipotencie defendeth and keepeth the Citie. But it will not hence follow, seeing the safety of the glori∣fied Church is out of all danger, that therefore there is no need of this wall. For this very security is here signified by the Allegory of a wall. And twelve gates] In the wall, gates are made, for the Citizens and others to go out and in. This wall hath twelve gates, excellently placed, guarded, and beauti∣fied. For all the gates have Guardians to keep them, not men, but Angels, who are watchfull, strong, and unwearied. Every one hath Emblems written on it: the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel: Three gates are ordered unto the severall corners of the world: that there might bee most easie accesse from all parts unto the same. By the Gates they understand the doctrine of the Gospell, by which Heaven is opend unto us: by the Angels, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles: who by their preaching have shewed us the way to Heaven: and doe all belong unto this Citie. By the names of the twelve Tribes written thereon, they understand the full gathering of al the Elect of the Spirituall Israel into the same. Three gates stand towards the East, three to the North, &c. because this Church is gathered from all parts of the world. Whether by the number of the Gates (being three on each side of the wall) bee a mysterie of the Trinitie (as Andreas supposeth) I neither know, nor date affirme: least according to the number of the Gates, the number of the divine persons should be also multiplied. It is more agreeable to observe here an Allu∣sion unto the type of the holy Citie described by Ezechiel, Chap. 48.30. for that also had twelve gates, named after the Tribes of Israel, viz. Three gates North∣ward: One of Reuben, one of Judah, one of Levi. Three Eastward: One of Ioseph, one of Benjamin, one of Dan. Three at the South: One of Simeon, one of Issachar, one of Zebulon. Three Westward: One of Gad, one of Asher, one of Naphthali. Now that Citie represents the Church Militant of the New Testament, because all the Tribes of the spirituall Israel, that is, all the Elect from al the corners of the Earth were to be gathered unto the same. Such also in this place is the repre∣sentation of the Church Triumphant in Heaven. 14. And the wall of the City] He commends the strength of the wall from the foundations, on which it was built. For without a firme foundation a wall is ruinous, and must needs decay. The foundations he saith are twelve, the preti∣ous materials whereof, are expounded ver. 19. to wit, so many pretious stones, most firmely sustaining this wall, and having the Names of the Apostles in them. But Christ is the onely foundation, holding, and keeping up the Church: 1. Cor. 3.11 nei∣ther can any other be laid, &c. How then are the Apostles foundations? And if the Apostles be foundations, then saith BRIGHTMAN, this is not that Eter∣nall Citie in the Heavens. I Answer: Why the names of the Apostles are written in the foun∣dations. Iohn saith not that the Apostles are foun∣dations. But that the names of the Apostles were written or graven on the foun∣dations, that is, they were called after the names of the Apostles, one being cal∣led Peters, another Iohns, &c. Why so? for honour sake, because the Apostles in this Citie shall excell others in glory. But why written in the foundations? Be∣cause they by their preaching laid the onely foundation, which is Christ. For what Paul saith of himselfe: As a wise Master-builder I have laid the foundation: that every one of them could say also of himselfe. Which is the reason, that how∣ever the foundation bee but one, yet he saith they are twelve, according to the number of the twelve Apostles, because that one Foundation was so fully laid by
every one of them, How there are twelve foundations as there might seem to be twelve foundations, the same being as it were laid twelve times, or by the twelve Apostles. But why is Paul omitted, seeing he laboured more then the twelve? Because at first CHRIST chose twelve onely, unto whom Paul was afterward added, co∣ming as it were into the labours of the rest. But seeing the names are not expres∣sed, no one of the Apostles can be said to be omitted. Of the Apostles of the Lambe] Or of Iesus Christ: for so the Apostles stile themselves in their Epistles. 15. And he that talked] Now also he describes the most ample and absolute figure of the Citie: first shewing, whence he received the exact knowledge ther∣of: viz. from the Angels measuring. He that talked with me] That is, one of the Angels of the seven Vials, who had said before unto me, Come hither, I will shew thee, &c. Had (in his hand) a golden Reed] That is a measuring Instrument to mete the wall and gates, like as Master-builders use to examine the whole building by a measuring rule, whither all things do well agree. Now the end of measuring was to make known the quantitie, so as Iohn might precisely understand and de∣scribe unto us the most absolute figure of this mysticall City. This also is taken out of Ezech. 40.5. where the Prophet saw the Architect Angell of the Church, that is, Christ with a measuring Reed of six Cubits and foure fingers, to measure the Court of the new Temple, and of the situation, and of the City. 16. The City is just foure∣square. And the Citie lyeth foure-square] The City he describeth to be just foure square: which kind of forme is most solid, constant, and perfect: because the longitude and latitude of all the parts is equall: for this Citie equally con∣sisteth of all the Elect: wherefore hee denotes the immoveable firmenesse of the same. The quantitie is 12000. Furlongs, which make 375. Germane miles. It is am∣biguous, whether this were the measure of the whole Circumference: or of eve∣ry of the sides or squares of the Citie: If of the sides, then the Circumference was 48000. Furlongs, that is, 1500. Germane miles: but the whole Circumfe∣rence seemes to be noted: so that every side contained 300. Furlongs, that is, 93. Germane miles and three quarters. Therefore this Ierusalem is far greater then Babylon of old, The great∣nesse of Ba∣bylon. which as Herodo∣tus describeth was foure square, in Circumference 480. Furlongs, that is, fif∣teene Germane miles: each side 120. Furlongs, that is, three Germane miles and three quarters. It had also a great and high wall, fiftie royall Cubits in thicke∣nes, and two hundred in height, of Brick stone and morter. But this City is much more magnificent and strong. For Babylon was taken by Cyrus, by Alexander, and spoiled by divers adversaries. But this is inaccessible, and cannot be vanqui∣shed by any enemy, but remaines stable for ever. 17. And he measured the wall thereof] Thus much of the Cities Circumference: The measure of the wall was 144. Cubits. Therefore hee rightly cals it a high wall, which no adverse power can easily overcome. Hereby, saith Andreas, is signified the fruitfulnesse of the doctrine of the Apostles: for the measure of the wall is made up by multiplying the twelve Apostles by 12. A Cubit com∣monly is from the Elbow unto the fingers end: hence the measure of a Cubit, is sixe hand-breadths or 24. fingers. So much is the common Cubit. The Roy∣all Cubit, saith Herodotus exceeded the common by three fingers. The Geome∣tricall Cubit is as much as six ordinary Cubits. The mea∣sure of a Cubit. Herod. lib. 1 Here wee may understand or∣dinary ones, which seemes to be intimated by the following Addition: This is the measure of a man, that is, of the Angell] The meaning is, that the Angell mea∣sured according to the ordinary measure of men. But BRIGHTMAN de∣mands, what use there is of this kinde of measure in Heaven? But by the same reason we might aske what of the Angels measuring on Earth? Iohn saw the Citie out of Heaven. Therefore he saith it was measured of the Angell by
the measure of a man, that is, commonly used among men. 18. And the building of the wall] He goes on to set forth the excellency of the wall, foundations, and the whole Citie from the incomparable worth of the matter. The wall is built of Jasper. Before he said, that the light which the Citie had (in stead of the Sun) was like to Iasper, cleare as Chrystall. Who ever saw the like? Historians commend the wall of Babylon for the height, thicknesse, and soliditie of the matter, which was brick, with sand, Pich and mortar betwixt the same. This wall is of meer Iasper, a pretious stone. Therfore this structure of the wall denotes the happie and alwayes flourishing life of the Saintes. The citie was pure Gold] The raritie and worth of gold is commonly known, Lib. 37. and Plinie commends it largelie: for it is a most pretious metall, and being often tried in the fire, comes out very pure & without drosse: not consumed by the use ther∣of as other metals. Such is the excellent matter of the whole citie: wholy Gold, and that most purely cleansed from all drosse: what can be more excellent, more desirable then such a citie. That of Horace is known: Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia cogis pectora? Now if wee are taken up with a desire of Gold, 1. Pet. 1.18 why should wee not long much more after this Golden Citie? All other gold how excellent soever it bee, is corruptible, as Peter witnesseth. This is incorruptible, because it is  Pure from all dregs of corruption. Like to cleare glasse] The wonderfull brightnes of the City glistering with gold, like pure glasse, as it were Chrystall. The former belongs to the excellency of the matter: the latter unto the brightnesse thereof. Gold shineth, and is solid: Glasse is cleare, but not solid. Therefore it is both a Golden Citie, and brightly shining in glory. The Holy Ghost found nothing so pretious, so beautifull, and deare unto us whereby enough to commend the excellency and splen∣dor of the Caelestiall Citie, that so our hearts being drawne off from the filthy de∣lights of the world, hee might stirre us up to long after the Heavenly Ierusalem. Now this most pure gold and most pure glasse sufficiently argues, that this Type is not as yet sutable unto the Church Militant on Earth: for she is not yet wholly gold, not yet wholy bright, but is mixed and obscured with diverse dregs of sin, so long as she defiles her feet with the dirt of this world. Therefore undoubted∣ly this is the Heavenly Ierusalem. 19. And the foundation of the Wall] The matter of the Wall and Citie being expounded, hee also sets forth the matter of the Foundations, not lesse pretious: gold they are not, but pretious stones, more pretious then gold. And this serves to the decorum or grace of the matter. For gold in regard of its lustre and purity is set forth to the view of men, digged out of the Earth, not put into the same: But foundations of buildings are digged deepe into the earth, being ordi∣narily of stone (because of its incorruptible solidity) to support the building-Therefore the foundation of the wall of this Citie, are of stones, not cut smooth or made of bricke, but of most pretious and polished pearles. In that hee saith, they were garnished with all manner of pretious stones: it may be understood, either that all the foundations were adorned with diverse pearles, or that they were all of whole gemmes, as it were so many props and pillars of the wall: which latter is more agreeable to what followes. Now because the twelve foundations have the Names of the twelve Apostles, In chap. 21 S. 38. Ribera labours much about the order  which wee should follow in the num∣bring of the Apostles names. But Iohn saith not that the Apostles were Foundations, but that the Names of the Apostles were written in the foundations. Besides, the same order of the Apostles is not every where observed in the Gospell, as Mat. 10. Mark 3. Luk. 6. Act. 1. which he himselfe confesseth. For although Peter be alwayes set in the first place
(not that he was Prince of the rest, but because he was first called, as Chrysostom and Theophylact have well observed) yet in the rest the order is not kept: for sometime Andrew is second, sometimes Iames, sometimes Iohn: sometime Iohn is the third, otherwhile Iames: sometime Iohn is the fourth, otherwhile Andrew, and so forward. Furthermore he carefully enquireth which gemme is to be applied to each of the Apostles. Also he searcheth out the reasons and manner scrupulously, wherfore, and how this stone should agree to this, or that Apostle. But verily, seeing there is no certaine order of the Apostles set downe in Ho∣ly Writ, this labour of his is frivolous: Neither was the Angell troubled a∣bout the same: but counted it sufficient to name every one of the foundations by severall stones. BRIGHTMAN sheweth another mysterie in the pretious stones: for hee thinkes that by them are denoted, not the twelve Apostles, but so many Iewish Doctors, who shall become Teachers of the Christian Church, and beare the names of the Apostles, because they shall succeed them in number and society of rewards: and that generally the common excellency of the gemmes shadowes out the dignity of those Evangelicall Doctors: But that the severall gemmes sig∣nifie in what Regions and Places these Preachers of the Gospell should severally arise, like as pretious stones grow in divers places: some in the East, some in the Indies, others in Scythia, or in Persia, &c. The which how solid it is, I leave unto the judgement of others. Andreas observeth that eitht of these twelve gemmes were of old set in the high Priests Breast-plate: (foure onely being changed) whence he draweth the consent of the Old and New Testament: Yet the excellency of the latter. But to let this passe, we come to the stones themselves. The first Foundation was Iasper] Here wee had need of an Artist or Lapidarie, Iasper. fully to lay open the nature and vertue of every of these stones: and the inter∣pretation also of the Angell to discover the mysteries of them. For mine owne part, I confesse my ignorance in the same. Therfore leaving these hidden myste∣ries, I will onely shew the opinion of some Authors touching these gemmes. Diverse vertues of the Iasper are recorded by Writers saith FRANCISCVS RVEVS: Rueus lib. 2. c. 1. de gemnis. But that which by the Indians is called Grammatias, by others Po∣lygrammos, and which is somewhat like to the Emerauld in its green brightnesse, is the most excellent. By this, saith Andreas, in probability the Apostle Peter is signified: because he bore Christs death in his bodie, and alwayes shewed a lively and flourishing love towards him, &c. But this undoubtedly the rest of the Apostles had also aswell as Peter, and were crowned with Martyrdome for the sake of Christ, being full of lively and flourishing love towards him, unto the end. The second Saphir] This is a gemme of the East Indies:  The Medes also have excellent ones: Saphir. Ex. 24.10. Eze. 1.26. Lib. 37. c. 7 It is in colour like the clearest skie, blue, and as it were repre∣senting transfused clouds. It asswageth lust, and therefore is chiefly used by such as love chastitie: which makes me to wonder why Interpreters do not attribute it to Iohn, who onely, as it is thought, was unmarried. But Ribera appropriates the same to Andrew: CAESARIENSIS to Paul because of its bluish colour like to the Heaven: for Paul was rapt up into the third Heaven. The third a Chalcedony] PLINIE cals it Carchedony.  Andreas noteth, that for the Chalcedonie, A Chalce∣dony. there was a Carbuncle in the Breast-plate: and that perhaps it is here to be understood. And Plinie testifies that Carchedonie is a kind of Car∣buncle. It is said to be engendred of the Heavenly showres falling at Thebae in Aegypt. They affirme also that they are found betwixt Basilea and Argentina. It's of the colour between the Beryl and Iacinct, or a purple colour: and out of Loraine comes red ones also. They say it is good against the symptoms of the blacke choller, that is, sadnesse and feare. And being made warme it drawes
out splinters. This Ribera ascribes to the Apostle Iames: CAESARIEN∣SIS unto Andrew. The fourth an Emerauld] Of all pretious stones which are of a greene colour, An Eme∣rauld. the Emerauld is the most pleasant: for no colour is so delightfull to the eye. The best grow in the highest Mountaines of Scythia, and in Golden Mines. They write that it is of singular vertue against all kinde of poyson, as also the Falling-sickenesse which it driveth away, if it bee hung about the necke, or worne in a Ring. It is thought also to preserve chastitie: And they adde, that it strengthens the memory, refresheth the sight, and encreaseth wealth, &c. This therefore Ribera and Andreas attribute to Iohn. 20. The fift Sardonix] Of this stone there are divers sorts. Sardonix. Those in the Indies are the most famous: the next the Arabian, in colour resembling a mans naile, and hence it takes its name: for Onyx signifies a naile. Now the Sardonyx in the upper part resembles the colour of a mans nayle, in the nether part the co∣lour of a Fish called Sarda: see more of this Rueus lib. 2. cap. 5. de gem. It is thought to drive away pride of mind, and other hurtfull affections. RIBERA attributes this stone to Philip: ANDREAS to Iames. The sixt Sardius] This is of a dark red colour. They say it expels fear, Sardius. em∣boldens them that weare it, and frees them from poyson and charmes, stencheth the blood at the nose, rejoyceth the minde, and sharpens the wit. Ribera attri∣butes this to Bartholomew: Andreas to Philip. The seventh Chrysolite] It growes in Arabia: Chrysolite. and also in Germany in the Mines of Misnia. The best are in India glistering somewhat like the Sea-speakles. They say it much helpeth the shortnes of breath. RIBERA appropriates this stone to Mathew: ANDREAS to Bartholomew. The eight a Beryl] It is one of the green and bright gemmes: Beryl. such are the best which do resemble the greennesse of a calme and clear Sea. They grow almost no where but in India: they are wrought into a forme of sixe corners, by reflex whereof the colour (otherwise dimme) is raised. For else though polished, they scarcely shine. It is good, they say, for waterie eyes, sighes, and illnesse of the liver. Andreas because of its Sea-like colour, and place where it grows, appropriates it to Thomas, who by Sea journeyed even unto the Indians, being sent thither by God to bring that people to life and salvation. The which Ri∣bera also approveth. The ninth a Topas] The Topas is of a golden colour, A Topas. mingled also with a kind of whitish greene tending to graynesse. Andreas saith it is not unlike to the red Carbuncle, casting forth a liquor like milk, which as some Authors affirm, helps the diseases of the eyes, and is medicinable against the irruption of blood, and presently, if laid to a wound stops its bleeding. It gaineth and looseth vertue according to the encrease and decrease of the Moone: whence they say it hel∣peth lunatick persons. This stone they ascribe to the Apostle Mathew. The tenth a Chrysoprasus] Or as PLINIE calleth it Chrysoprasius, A Chryso∣prasus. signifying gold and greennesse. For this stone is green like a Leeke, inclining to the colour of gold. It refresheth the powers of the heart, and helpeth the weaknesse of the sight. This Caesariensis ascribes to Iudas Thaddaeus: who, as he saith, preached to Abgarus King of Edessa, that Christs Kingdome is denoted by gold, and his death by greennesse: which indeed Eusebius recordeth, Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. extremo. The eleventh a Iacinct] This stone is named after a flower of the same name, A Iacinct. whose violet colour resembles the purple, though they make a threefold diffe∣rence thereof. For some do incline more to red, being of a fiery purple colour, which they say are most esteemed. Others yellow, resembling Saffron, and are more darke then fire. Thirdly others are yellow, and inclining to blew, and thence are called Saphirins, being the most pretious as some affirm: because this stone by its colour seemeth to comprehend the nature both of the Jacinct, and of
the Saphir. It causeth sleep by its coldnesse, preserves the powers of the heart, and such as wear it are kept, as they say, from the raging pestilence. And therfore it is hung about the necke for a preservative, as neer the heart as may be: some affirme that the Iacinct encreaseth wealth, the which thing I do beleeve it will ef∣fect in such as have abundance of these stones. Andreas appropriates it to Simon. The twelfth an Amethyst] Among the violet coloured stones, An Ame∣thyst. the Amethyst is of chiefe reckoning, of which indeed there are divers sorts. Those of India chal∣lenge the supremest majestie, resembling the most absolute Purple. After these, the Arabian, Armenian, Egyptian, and those of Galatia: the worst grow in Cyprus. Notwithstanding all of them in some kinde resemble the violet: Neither is the Amethyst much unlike the Iacinct, as Plinie noteth. The difference is this, that the brightnesse of the Amethyst, Lib. 37. c. 9 is mixt in the Iacinct. It seems to take its name from the vertue thereof: for Aristotle writeth that the Amethyst beeing laid to the navel, first drawes the vapour of the wine to its selfe, then dispels the same, and so preserves him that weares it from drunkennesse: Whence this Pearle is a Conservative of temperance: being derived from the Privative  not &  to be drunk. They ascribe it to Mathew the last Apostle. They who desire to know more about these stones, may consult with Artists and Naturalists, as Plinie, Isodore: and in speciall Franciscus Rueus his Book tou∣ching pretious stones, whence I have briefly taken most of these things. It is enough for us to observe, that by so many pretious stones (then which nothing in the world is accounted more pretious,) is signified the excellency and firmnesse of the foundation of Salvation, 1. Cor. 3.11 the which indeed is, and for ever shalbe but one onely, viz. CHRIST IESVS. But set forth under the names of the twelve A∣postles: because all of them laid the same fully by their preaching, all of them (I say) adorning it by their excellent Faith, admirable Charity, unwea∣ried Diligence, unconquerable Constancy, and at last gloriously confirmed the same with their blood, laying downe their Lives for the Gospels sake. 21. Ioh. 10.2.9 & 14.6. And the twelve gates] Christ is the onely gate of Salvation, who saith: I am the doore, by me if any man enter in he shall finde pasture: I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man commeth unto the Father but by mee. Notwithstanding here are twelve gates, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel, as in ver. 12. or according to the number of the twelve Disciples of Christ, as it seems to Andreas: because by their ministerie we come to know the dore and way of Sal∣vation: so that they may not unfitly bee called by a Metonymia the twelve gates, for the twelve Keepers of the Gates. The worth of the gates is set forth by the excellency of the matter. For all of them are of most pretious pearles. The diffe∣rence of gemms and pearles. Gemmes and Pearles do differ. For Gemmes are little pretious stones of divers colours growing in the earth, and are reckoned among Metals, called by the Germanes EDELGESTEIN. Pearles also are little pretious stones, white in splendor, but growing in shelles. They are sometimes called in Latine Ʋniones: because two together are never found in one shell, Lib. 9. c. 35 according to Plinie. They seeme to signifie that the Teachers of Righteousnesse, who have shew∣ed the use of the Gates to bring many to Christ, shall shine like unto glorious Pearles in the Heavenly Ierusalem. Notwithstanding all these pearles shall re∣ceive their brightnesse and excellency from that one most pretious Pearle, Mat. 13.48. which is Christ Iesus. And the street of the Citie was pure Gold] Hitherto of the externall stru∣cture and ornament of the Citie. Now hee also will shew us the inward beau∣ty thereof. The street] Greek. , which denotes the publick wayes of the City. BEZA renders it Market-place called in Greek , a spacious place of the Citie commodios for publicke meetings and driving of trade. His reason is
because in Chap. 22.2. In mid'st of the street, seems to be put for, In the Market∣place. And because it is said in the singular, Street, whereas usually there are many streets in a Citie, and but one Market-place. The sense is the same: for all the streets do lead to the Market. The streets and Market-places of a Ci∣tie are faire, if paved with flint, tyles, and smooth stones: and yet (by reason of continuall use) they can never be free from durt. But the street of this Citie is much more curious. It is all gold, and that most purely purged of all drosse, cleare as glasse, like unto the whole Citie, ver. 18. Now who should dare with defiled feet to tread upon a golden Pavement, and a golden Street? Therefore here is signified the inward cleannesse and unutterable brightnesse of the Ci∣tie, together with the most pure and sweet habitation and conversation of the Caelestiall Citizens. The Market, or rather Court may also metonymically be taken for a civill Com∣mon wealth. This is wholly of gold. Therfore golden righteousnes shal have place among the Citizens. But the gates of the new City in this life, that is, of the Church-Militant are not yet pure gold, but carry much durt, by which the feet of such as walke thereon, are defiled, and have need of continuall washing. Also the Market or Court is not all gold, but as yet subject to many strifes, injuries, and troubles. So that this Golden-Citie cannot bee applied unto the Church-Militant. 22 And I saw noe Temple in the same] Two things are the principle Orna∣ments of a Citie. The Court, and Temple. In the former judgement is admini∣stred. In the Temple religious worship is performed. The first he saith is of pure gold: for in the new Heaven and in the new Earth shall dwell righteousnesse, not in civill contracts, or distribution of civill goods, which then shall cease: but because in the most sweet converse of the Saints, unrighteousnesse shall have no place. He saith not that he saw a Temple of gold in the Citie, for had hee so said, it had bin no great matter: seeing Solomons Temple did glister with pure gold within, by which splendor the magnificence of Christs spirituall Kingdome was figured out. Therefore he saith: I saw no temple therein: whereby hee distinguisheth this Heavenly Citie, from the Earthly Ierusalem, in which there was a glorious Temple dedicated to Gods worship. But in the Coelestiall Ierusalem Iohn saw no temple: for here is no need of a place for Church gatherings, preaching of the word, administration of Sacraments, Rites, and outward excercises of Religion: God is ex∣ternally worshipped only in this life. Ier. 31.34. because the Ecclesiasticall Ministerie shall be no more, neither shall God be ser∣ved with externall worship, the which in this life he requires of us, to the end he may be honoured of us, and our weaknesse and piety sustained by these out∣ward helps: for then all rule, authoritie and power (both Ecclesiasticall and Poli∣ticall) shall be abolished, 1 Cor. 15.24. Then shall the Oracle of Jeremy be full∣filled: And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his bro∣ther, saying, Know the Lord: for we shall all from the least unto the greatest bee fully () taught of God. And therefore no use of a temple. For the Lord God] Least it should bee thought that this Citie should want so necessary an Ornament (for what Citie can bee perfect without a temple, and Gods worship?) hee sheweth that God himselfe and the Lambe shall bee for a temple unto it: However therefore it hath no Temple of stone, Marble, or gold, yet it shall not be destitute of a temple, or performe no worship unto God: for God himselfe and the Lambe shall be the temple of it. And as now God is worship∣ped and praised with Hymnes and spirituall Songs in Temples: So then all the Saints shall exult in God himselfe, and in the Lambe himselfe, with eternall prai∣ses, Iubilees, and Songs. For then God shall be all in all: because hee shall fill all things with joy and with his majesty. Then shall the Saints worship before God, and rejoyce in him without ceasing from one Sabbath unto another, Isa. 66.23. Rev. 7.25. as a∣bove he said: They shall stand before the throne, serving God day and night in his tem∣ple: which temple is here shewed not to be materiall, but God himself, the mea∣ning
is: In his temple, for, in God himselfe, who shall be a temple unto them. Mention also was made of the Coelestiall Temple in Chap. 11. ver. 1. & Chap. 15. ver. 5. But that temple was onely visionall, shadowing out the Church-Militant. Notwithstanding that in Chap. 11. ver. 19. And the temple of God was opened in Heaven, we applied not unfitly to the Triumphant-Church, because it was the end of the third Vision touching the Catastrophe of all calamities. In that he joyntly makes God and the Lambe to bee that one temple of the Saints, XLIII. Argument of Christs Deity. it is a cleare Argument of Christs Deity. For if Christ be the temple of all the Saints, of necessity He must be immense, omnipotent, and infinitely good, as God himselfe. Now hence againe their opinion is overthrowne, who interpret these things of the glory of the Church-Militant. For neither the Church during her war∣fare in this life, can no more be without a Temple or Church gathering, then to want the outward ministerie it selfe. 23. And the Citie had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moone] He expoun∣deth what in ver. 11. he had said touching the light of the Citie. In this life no Citie can subsist without the light of the Sunne and Moone. But our Citie shall need neither: because it shall enjoy a farre greater light: the glory of God himselfe and of the Lambe, that is, that unapprochable light, in which God dwelleth. He doth not say that it shall have no Sun, 1. Tim. 6.16 nor Moon, but that it shall not need them to shine in it: closely intimating, that then indeed these lights shalbe (for neither shall the New Heaven be deprived of the ornament of the brightest stars, which are now so glorious in this present Firmament, yea according to that of Isaias, Isa. 30.26. the light of the Moon shalbe like the light of the Sunne, that now is, and the light of the Sun shalbe seven times more bright) but then they shall not serve for use of light, as now. For there shalbe no need of a created light, when the increated light, Gods immense majesty shall enlighten us. Wherefore even as now the greater light doth obscure the lesser: so then the glory of God shall darken the light of the Sunne and Moone. Therefore the whole Citie shall shine continu∣ally with the immense light of divine majesty, being subject to no change of dayes and nights, which now the continuall risings and fallings of the Sun and Moone doe effect, so as there is no Citie in the whole world, no not under the Pole, which hath alwayes light. For although the Polarie Regions have the light of the Sun six months: yet afterward the Sun going under the Horizon, they are as ma∣ny months in darknesse. And the Lambe is the light thereof] In the light also he joynes the Lambe unto God, to shew that the majesty and glory of both is equall. For however the Lambe in respect of his most glorious flesh shal bee under God: Notwithstan∣ding in the majesty of his Deity, he shal be that one light of the Citie, with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Furthermore this place cannot be applied unto the Church Militant. For she shall need and enjoy the light of the Sunne and Moone, all the time of her war∣fare in this life. But the contrary opinion appeares rather to be confirmed, Isa. 24.23. because al this seems to be taken out of the Prophesie of Isaias touching the illumination of the New Church under Christs Kingdome in this Life: Then the Moone shall be confoun∣ded, Isa. 60.19 and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall reigne in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem. And afterward: The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightnesse shall the Moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall bee upon thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sun shall no more goe downe, neither shall thy Moone with-draw it selfe: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the dayes of thy mourning shalbe ended. I ANSWER: We must indeed confesse, that the Prophet speaketh of excellent graces, and of a glorious light of doctrine and knowledge that shal be
under Christs Kingdome in the Church of the New Testament, which light shal excell the shadowes of the types of the Old Testament, like as the glory of God himselfe surpasseth the Sun and Moone: so it is said figuratively: The Sun shall shine no more in thee: nor the Moone give light any longer unto thee: because Iehovah shall be thy light for ever: for: the shadowes and types of Sacrifices and Burnt-Offerings shalbe no more: because Christ being exhibited (who is as it were the Sunne of righteousnesse) the New Church shall shine most gloriously beyond the Old, in the knowledge of the Gospell, and the mysteries of God, by the pou∣ring forth of the light of Gods Spirit upon all flesh. But we deny, that this is the full sense of these Prophesies. For the Prophets almost in all their Oracles touching Christs Kingdome, prophesie not onely of the Inchoation, but also of the Consummation of the glory thereof. Otherwise the fulfilling but of very few of them could bee shewed in this Life. And this chiefly bewitcheth the Iews: in that they seeke and expect a literal accomplish∣ment of the Prophesies touching the Kingdome of the Messias, in this world: not observing that the Prophets with the beginnings of this Life, in which the glory of Christs Kingdome is onely begun, joyne also the full accomplishment which shal be at last in the life to come. Therefore the Oracles of Isaias tou∣ching the abolishing of the light of the Sunne and Moone, although they bee now fi∣guratively fulfilled: yet the literal accomplishment thereof shal be at last in the Church gloriously reigning in Heaven: And therefore they are rightly applied unto the illumination of this City in Heaven. Neither are the Arguments for this opinion obscure in the Prophesies them∣selves. For saith the Prophet: Iehovah shall be upon thee an everlasting light. But Everlastingnesse is not of this Life. He saith also: The dayes of thy mourning shal be ended. Now the mourning of the Church shal not be ended in this Life: but in the Church-Triumphant, where God wil wipe away all teares from our eyes, there, I say, shal be no longer mourning, nor cry, nor death, nor sorrow, as in ver. 4. 24. And the Nations that were saved] Thus much of the building and glory of the Citie: Now also hee speakes of the Citizens, who they shal bee, what good things they shall enjoy: and who shalbe kept out of the same. For the first, he saith, that the INHABITANTS of this Citie shall bee, THE NATIONS THAT ARE SAVED: consisting not onely of the com∣mon people, but Kings also: for he saith: Kings shall walke in the light of it, that is, shall eternally enjoy the glorious presence and majesty of God: How the nations are the City & Citizens. And the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into this Citie. Here first it is demaunded if this Citie bee the glorified Church, how then are the Nations distinguished from the same, seeing the Nations that are saved, are nothing else but the Church it selfe? I ANSWER: The order of the Vision is to be observed: for seeing he saw the glorified Church under the forme of a Citie: it was convenient that hee should see also some Inhabitants of the Citie. Although therefore the saved of the Nations be the Church it selfe: Notwithstanding he doth not unfitly distin∣guish the Church taken collectively; from the Church it selfe distributively conside∣red: for thus also an Earthly Citie may be collectively considered, as a Common∣weal or communitie of Citizens: and distributively as many, or particular Ci∣tizens. Adde to this, that the Nations are not the whole City: for the Elect Patriarchs, Prophets, and Iewes belong also unto the same. Secondly it may be demaunded how the Kings should bring their glory into this Heavenly Citie, seeing all Authorities, Kingdomes, 1. Cor. 15.42 How kings shall bring their glorie into the heavenly Ierusalem. and Powers shall then be put downe: and that there shalbe no Kings then: and that in the Heavenly City, no earthly thing can be brought: Lastly, seeing all shal rather receive their glo∣ry there, then bring any into it? Which seemeth to be the chiefest argument of them who hold that here is intended not the Heauenly, but the Earthly
glory of the CHURCH in this Life. The Answer is easie. First, we are to note that this verse also is taken out of Isai. 60.3. And the Gentiles, saith he, shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightnesse of thy rising: the which is spoken indeed of the conversion of the Gentiles and Heathenish Kings. But, as before I said, that whole Oracle speaketh not onely of the inchoated glory of the Church in this Life, but with the beginning joynes the full accom∣plishment thereof that shalbe in the Heavens: as there it evidently appeareth in ver. 11.18.19.21. Wherefore that place is to be applied unto the Heavenly Citie, not as it began in this Life, but as it shall be at last consummated in the life to come. And the meaning is, that then that oracle shall truely and perfect∣ly bee fulfilled, when as the Nations that are saved, shall walke perfectly in the light of Jehovah: And that the KINGS also who in this life have brought their glory and honour into the Church, that is, subjected themselves unto Christ, shal enjoy the same light for ever and ever. Therefore he intendeth not as if then there should be any Earthly Kings, to bring their earthly glory into heaven (for we shal al be Kings and Priests to God) but that the Kings which now bring their glory to Christ, shall together with the Nations walke in the light. This sense is confirmed by the Participle  Saved. So that then they shalbe saved already, and not after∣wards, Rom. 8.24. as yet beeing in this life. I confesse we are saved also in this life, but it is in hope. But then they shalbe saved in deed: because they shall walke in the Everlasting light. Thirdly also it may be demaunded, How the kings of the earth are joyned unto the inhabi∣tants of the heavenly Ierusalem. seeing hitherto in the Revelation the Kings of the Earth are called for the most part enemies of Christ, and followers of An∣tichrist, Chap. 6.15. & 16.14. & 17.1.18. & 18.3.9. & 19: 19. How they should here be reckoned among the Inhabitants of the Heavenly City. ANSWER: They are here called Kings of the Earth, not that they shalbe Kings when they enter into this City, but because sometimes they were such. For in Chap. 17.16. it appeareth, that some (if not all) of the ten Kings of the earth which had given their power unto the Beast, should desert the Beast, eat the flesh of the whore, and burne her with fire: therefore some of them shalbe converted unto the Lambe, and with the Nations that are saved shall walke in the light of this Citie. 25. The signes of assured peace. And the gates of it shall not be shut] This is the Second Part, viz. the fe∣licity and firme peace of the Citizens: the which while Cities enjoy they flou∣rish in riches and glory: but the peace, tranquility, and security of this City shal be perfect and perpetuall. This he sheweth by two signes: One is,, because the gates shall not be shut by day. But thou wilt say, the gates of our Cities also are not shut by day. It is so indeed in time of peace: but in war, the enemy besieging a City, and labouring to break in, of necessity the gates must be shut, that the Citizens may be preserved from hostile invasion. But the gates of the Citie on high shal not be shut by day, but alwayes stand open: to signifie that there shalbe no danger of adversaries, but everlasting peace to the Citizens thereof. For there shall be no night there] This is the other sign of their everlasting peace. For in the night while the Citizens sleep, the gates are shut, least they should be set upon unawares in the dark. There shall be no night: because the glory of God shal expell the darknesse by everlasting light, so that the rising, or setting of the Sun or Moon shal not cause night or darknesse. Therefore the Citizens shal ne∣ver sleep, or shut their gates for fear of danger. These things being spoken after the manner of men, do in some sort shadow out unto us that eternall security and peace, which we shal enjoy in Heaven. To this also is applied out of Isaias, the 11. ver. of the said 60. Chap. (though there spoken in a sense somewhat different from what it is here) Therefore thy gates shalbe open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that they may bring unto thee
the forces of the Gentiles, and their Kings may bee brought: where is signified ano∣ther cause of not shutting the gates, then here. Here it shalbe of security: There for the exercising of spirituall trading night and day, that is, for the gathe∣ring of all Nations, and the Kings of the Nations unto Christs kingdom; There∣fore the gates shall not be shut, that is, no man shal be kept out of the Church: but they shall alwayes stand open, that is, all men shal be called unto the Church by the preaching of the Gospell. Whence it is evident, that the Prophesie there spea∣keth properly of the state of the Church-Militant: and that the same is here ap∣plied unto the security of the Church-Triumphant. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the Nations unto it] What in ver. 24. he had said of the Kings onely, he extends unto all Nations, viz. that hither they should bring their glory and honour. They shall bring the glory of the Nations, for, the Nations shal bring their glory. By an Hebraism, he nameth the GLORIE AND HONOUR OF THE NATIONS, for the Nations that shalbe glorified, which then shal walk in the light of this City. Which again makes nothing for the Church-Militant, unto which indeed the Nations do bring their glory, that is, subject their wealth, Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms to Christ. But by doing of it in this life, they also bring the same un∣to the Heavenly City: because for this Earthly glory they shall receive Hea∣venly glory. Now this also is taken out of Isa. 6. ver. 11. and therefore is to be applied in the same sense as the former, unto the Coelestial Citie. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth] This is the Third: who are to be kept out of the Citie, as enemies and unworthy Inhabitants: who on the contrary are to be admitted, as worthy dwellers. There are three sorts of men to be kept out: Defiled ones, Workers of abomina∣tion, and Lyars, they being such, as in ver. 8. he had said should bee cast into the Lake of Fire: namely, the fearfull, unbeleeving, murderers, whoremongers, sorcerers, Idolaters, and all lyars: Of whom we there spake: neither is the reason obscure, why these should have no entrance: for all such persons are excluded out of the kingdom of God in this life, by the expresse voyce of the Gospel: Be not deceived: 1. Cor. 6.9. neither Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of them∣selves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revisers, nor extortio∣ners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Rom. 2.16 Because therefore Christ will judge accor∣ding to the Gospell of Paul, all these shall not onely be kept out of the Heavenly City, but also by the Judge his sentence be cast into the lake of fire. Now this also is contrary to the opinion touching the Church-Militant: for much defilement enters in it, and many dregs have as yet their influence there: forasmuch as the Church of the called is a Field mixt with wheat and tares, a floore containing chaffe and wheat, a not drawing good and bad fish. But the purity and perfect cleannesse of this City, altogether agrees to the state of the Saints in Heaven. But they which are written in the Lambs Book of Life] That is, the elect onely, and faithful that are borne again in this life shall enter into the City above. See our Exposition on Chap. 3.5. & 13.8. & 17.8. & 20.15.
CHAPTER XXII. The Argument, Parts, and Analysis. THe Heavenly Citie he further commendeth by the River of living water running through it, and by the tree of Life, allwayes bea∣ring fruit, and standing in the midst of the street, and on either side of the River: Lastly by the Seat of God and the Lambe in the same, as al∣so by the happinesse and eternall glory of the Inhabitants thereof. At length hee concludes the whole Prophesie by a short recapitulation of the things hitherto spoken, and by the commendation of much profit thence flowing unto the godly, as also by establishing the inviolable Authority of this Booke. The Parts therefore are two. THe former endeth the description of the Coelestiall Citie, in the first five Verses. The latter is a conclusion of the Prophesie, thence unto the end. In the former are foure commendations of the City. I. The pleasantnesse, by the running River: the excellency whereof he commendeth both by the purity of the waters, as al∣so by its originall, ver. 1. A River of water, &c. proceeding out of the throne, &c. II. The fruitfulnesse and abundance of necessaries from the tree of life: whose seat or place he first describeth: In the midst of the street, and of either side of the River, ver. 2. Secondly he commends the fruit both from the abundance: It beares twelve manner of fruits: as also, from its continuall bearing: Every moneth. Thirdly hee praiseth the leaves by the excellency of their effects: for healing, &c. III. The puritie and majesty of the Citie: both by removing of all corrupting causes: There shall be no curse in it, ver. 3. Neither night or darknesse, ver. 5. as also by an exposition of the great majesty, because it shall be the throne of God and the Lambe: and because his servants shall serve this great majesty, ver. 3. IV. The eternall felicity of the Citizens. This he sets forth by foure degrees. 1. By the sight of God. 2. By the name of God written in their fore-heads. ver. 4. 3. By divine illumination. 4. By the everlasting Kingdom, ver. 5. In the latter part, (which is a very Patheticall conclusion, respecting the com∣mendation of the Prophesie:) three persons are brought in speaking one after a∣nother, every one almost twice, viz. The Angel: the Lord Iesus, and Iohn. The Angell first commends unto Iohn the dignity of this Prophesie, ver. 6. And he said to me, these sayings. Rendring two Reasons: 1. The authority of the Revealer: The Lord of the Holy Prophets, &c. 2. The truth of the matter re∣vealed: these sayings are faithfull: and from the time: which must shortly bee done, ibid. The Lord Iesus (first promising his comming shortly) commendeth the Prophesie by its saving effect: Behold I come quickly, Blessed is hee that kee∣peth, &c. Iohn setting down his name, repeateth his error in worshipping of the Angell, and the Angels forbidding him to do it, ver. 8.9. I John, &c. The Angel in the second place forbids Iohn to keep this Prophesie secret, ver. 10. Seale not: adding a two-fold reason. 1. From the certainty, because the time is short, ibid. 2. From a two-fold effect: one hurtfull, accidentary: It shall pro∣voke
the wicked to wrath, ver. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust: the other saving and proper: which shall confirme them that are righteous and holy: He that is righteous, &c. Againe the Lord Iesus by proclaiming his comming to be at hand (ver 12. Be∣hold I come quickly) commendeth the Prophesie (ver. 14. Blessed are they that, &c.) by divers Arguments: 1. From the end of his comming, ver. 12. My reward is with mee to give to every man, &c. 2. From his eternity and constancy, ver. 13. I am Alpha and Omega. 3. From the profitable effect of the Prophesie. ver. 14. Blessed are, &c. that they may have right, &c. 4. From the hurtfull ef∣fect of wicked contemners, ver. 15, For without shall be dogs. 5. From his singu∣lar good-will to the Churches, to whom he would have the Prophesie revealed. This he sets forth by an Apostrophe ver. 16. I Jesus have sent: and by titles pro∣per to himselfe, I am the root, &c. 6. By an argument from the lesse: the Spirit, and the Spouse (the Church Triumphant) desire my comming, therefore every faithfull man in the Church-Militant ought to learne from this Prophesie much more to long after the same, ver. 17. And let him that heareth say come, &c. This he amplifies by the profitablenesse: Let him take water: and by the facility, let him take it freely. 7. From the inviolable authority of this Book, unto which no man upon paine of damnation may adde, or take ought there-from, ver. 18.19. For I testifie, &c. He concludes with a repitition of the promise of his sudden com∣ming: Surely I come quickly, and closeth up all with Amen, ver. 20. Iohn applauds, or earnestly wisheth the same: Even so come Lord Jesus: and wisheth the grace of the Lord Iesus to all the Churches, and Saints, ver. 21. The grace of Our Lord, &c. CHAPTER. XXII. The Former Part of the CHAPTER. Foure Commendations of the Coelestiall Citie. 1. And he shewed me a pure River of water of life, cleare as Chrystall, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lambe. 2. In the middest of the street of it, and of either side of the River, was there the tree of Life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yeelded her fruit every moneth: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing (or health) of the Nations. 3. And there shalbe no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lambe shalbe in it, and his servants shall serve him. 4. And they shall see his Face, and his Name shall bee in their Fore-heads. 5. And there shalbe no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sunne, for the Lord God giveth them light, and they shall reigne for ever and ever.
THE COMMENTARY. AND he shewed me a pure River] He goes on to celebrate the excellencies of the Heavenly Citie, by attributing unto it all whatsoever may be required unto the necessity, pleasure, and happinesse of any Earthly Citie, that under these types wee might in some measure learne to conceive in our minds, and long after that unspeakable glorious blessednesse, which is laid up for us in Heaven. To the necessity of a Citie belongs the having of healthfull and potable waters. The plea∣santnesse of the City. Vnto commodiousnesse to have navigable waters. Vnto pleasantnesse to have Ri∣vers running through the midst of the streets. Hence the Citizens have cleannes, refreshing, much profit, and delight. All these things are here in our Citie, even in a perfect and full degree. For it hath not a Cisterne, or Well, or one Fountaine of water to drinke off, but a whole River: not muddie, but most pure, like unto cleare Chrystall, not of corruptible water, but of living water, not running downe from the Mountains, whence Rivers take their originall, but proceeding out of the Throne of God and the Lambe: not running about the wals without, but watering the Market and Streets within: I pray what can be imagined more pleasant and beautifull then this City? who would not desire to be a dweller therein. But here we are not to mind any thing Earthly. For thus God speakes to us as to children, and by earthly things which seem most faire and pleasant unto us, he in some measure shadoweth out the pleasantnesse of Heavenly things. It seemes indeed to be in some kind an allusion unto the Earthly Paradise, which was watered by the River comming out of Eden running through the midst of it, and divided into foure heads. But that River was not cleare as Chrystall, but drawing filth along with it, neither was it of living water, but corruptible, nei∣ther did it proceed out of the throne of God and the Lambe, but out of Eden: name∣ly Euphrates, which is yet to this day in Mesopotamia and Babylon. Therefore the elegancy of the Earthly Paradise is nothing to the pleasantnesse of this Coe∣lestiall Citie. It is also an Allusion unto Ezechiels waters, Chap. 47.1. whence the descrip∣tion of this is taken in a great part. Allusion unto Eze∣chiels Wa∣ters. But those waters do not equall the praises of this River. The difference in speciall is, that the waters in Ezech. came out of the Temple. But this River not so, (for the City had no Temple) but out of the throne of God and the Lambe. The reason of the diversity is this, Their di∣versitie. that the Vision of Ezechiel sets forth the state of the Church-Militant, under Christs Kingdome in this Life: and by the type of waters flowing out of the temple he shadowes out the doctrine of the Gospell, by which Christ (signified by the temple) should savingly water the whole world. Here is typed out the state of the Church-Triumphant after this life, whose Chrystaline River shall proceed no longer out of the temple, but immedi∣ately out of the throne of God and the Lambe. Now this most pure River of living water (above in Chap. 20.6. called the Fountaine of living water, and in Chap. 7.17. in the plural, Fountains of living water, in the same sense) that is, not only al∣wayes flowing, but also preserving eternall life, is nothing else, but the full know∣ledge of God, which the Faithfull shall have, not by the Ecclesiasticall Mi∣nisterie, as now: but by the immediate Vision of God himselfe and of the Lamb: as also the unutterable puritie, consolation, joy, and life, which the Elect shal en∣joy by eternall familiarity with God, Christ, and the Holy Angels. By the River, ANDREAS understandeth the washing of Regeneration or Bap∣tism: but Baptisme shall have no place in the Coelestiall Jerusalem. Therefore
he more fitly addeth: that this River of God, which abundantly watereth Jerusalem above, is the holy Ghost, which proceeds from the throne of God the Father through the Lambe. God therefore shall immediately vivifie the Elect, and shed forth up∣on them his owne light, righteousnesse, joy, and life, through the Holy Ghost, which proceedeth from the Father and the Son. 2. And in the midst of the street of it, and of either side] Thus much of the pleasant∣nesse of the Citie: Now followes the fruitfulnesse and abundance of all things ne∣cessary to lively-hood, and health of the Citizens. Commonly Cities have their lively-hood and gaine by handicrafts, commerce, navagation, tilling of the ground, fruitfulnesse, and encrease. Our City shalbe enriched with the tree of life, the Gr.  Wood, by a Synecdoche is put for a Tree. Of Life] For, vivifying, conferring and preserving life, unto them that eat thereof: such a tree stood in the midst of Paradise, but might not be touched. This stands in the midst of the street of the Citie, kept from none, but all have free accesse unto the same. For though it be but one (O wonder) yet it stands on either side of the river: therfore some do think there were more trees of this kind standing here and there: because in Ezech. Chap. 47.7. (unto which he apparent∣ly alludeth) mention is made of many trees planted on the side of the streame. There is but one tree of life. But this tree is one standing in the midst of the street, and on either side of the River: because the River runneth through the midst of the street: and because this one tree with his leaves and roots is on both sides of the River, so as there is no want on either side. And that it is to be understood of one Tree, the type teacheth: for there was but one Tree of Life in the midst of Paradise, Rev. 2.7. which shadowed out the tree here: Hence Christ said before: To him that overcommeth, I will give to eat of the tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Hence al∣so it followeth that this tree is onely one, and that the street of the Heavenly Ci∣ty is the Paradise of God. Furthermore this tree of life is Christ himselfe, the Fountain and Author of our life: for he is the bread of life, Ioh. 6.51. the water of life, Ioh. 4.7. the Resurrection and Life it selfe, Ioh. 11. & 14. He stands by the River, because he never withereth, or is fruitlesse. For a tree planted by the Rivers of waters is alwayes green and fructifies. Psal. 1.3. Now Christ alone is sufficient for life unto all: for all the Elect he immediatly doth quicken for ever and ever. Therefore the Tree is one. Ezechiel saw more trees on the sides of the stream of the Church-Militant, because howsoever Christ onely vivifies the same in this life also, notwithstanding hee worketh and communicates life unto the Elect by manifold wayes or means. Bearing twelve manner of fruits] That is, alwayes plentifull (whether of one sort of fruit or diverse) so as there shall bee no want at any time: therefore hee addeth: Every moneth yeelding fruit: A yeere hath twelve months. This tree therefore brings forth twelve times a yeere, yeelding fresh fruit every moneth. The like tree was never seene, Poets commend the Gardens of Alcinous, Homer. lib. 7. Odyss. Lib. 18. c. 17 and Semiramis, &c. For yeelding fruit twice a yeere: and Plinie the Countrey of Babylon where were two harvests in one yeer: but under heaven there is no place yeelding monethly fruit. Now this continuall fruit is nothing else but that perpetual joy, What this perpetuall fruit is. Ioh. 15.16. by which (as by a most delightfull fruit of faith) the Elect are fed in eternall glory through the continuall presence of God and the Lambe. The first fruits and tast whereof we indeed have in this life according to the promise of Christ: I have ordained you that ye should goe and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remaine: but these fruits are shaken by divers tentations and tempests of failings, yea and some∣time do fade: and are again renewed and increased. But then our fruit shall al∣wayes remain from the first month unto the last, that is, eternally: viz. when we shal eat bread with Christ in the Kingdom of his Father. But let us remember that this fruit is prepared for such onely as conquer, as in Chap. 2.7. To him that overcommeth will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Wherefore untill wee fully enjoy this fruit, we must fight couragiously and overcome in this life. And the leaves were for the healing] The leaves also have a medicinall use for to preserve the health of the Nations, whereas the leaves of other trees fade, fall, and perish: but this tree is alwayes green with leaves. Thou mayst say, to what end, seeing in Heaven is no disease, no sicknesse? He saith not to recover health, but to preserve health: Not as if the Saints should feed on these leaves (the fruits are sufficient unto a blessed life) but the Metaphor signifies that no∣thing of this tree shall be un-usefull, but wholly serve to the preservation of life and happinesse. This also is taken out of Ezech. 47.12. Whose leafe shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed, it shall bring forth new fruit according to his moneths, be∣cause their waters issued out of the Sanctuary, and the fruit thereof shalbe for meat, and the leafe thereof for medicine. Notwithstanding it doth not hence follow that these leaves serve to cure the diseases of the Nations, or repaire their health. For it is manifest that Ezechiel speaketh of the state of the Church-Militant, yet subject to many diseases and troubles. Wherefore by the leaves he understandeth the Gospell, under which as it were is covered a healing fruit, The leaves of the tree of life what they are. satiating all Nations. But here hee describeth the state of the Church-Triumphant, in which neither sicknesse, nor medicine have any place. BRIGHTMAN urgeth that of the Nations: whereas in the life to come there shal be no difference betwixt Iewes and Gentiles. But neither doth the Angell make this difference: but hee calleth the Elect Saints, the Nations, because formerly they were Gentiles: alluding unto what he had said Chap. 21.24. The Nations of them which were saved, shall walke in the light of it: and ver. 26. They shall bring the glory and honour of the Nations unto it. 3. AND THERE SHAL BE NO MORE CƲRSE] He further am∣plifies the majesty of the Citie, and happinesse of the Citizens. The contrary whereof he removeth. There shall be no curse, Gr. . And opposeth the formall cause: But the Seat of God and the Lambe shalbe in it. The Copulative  (And) Beza renders by the Adversitive But: but it seems rather to be put for the causall  because the throne of God is in her: not suffering any curse. And amplifies it from the Correlate: and his servants serve him: unto which he annexeth the happinesse of the servants: And they shall see his face, &c. This is the summe of the things remaining. Curse] Greek. The expo∣sition of A∣nathema.  or , or , as some Copies read it, is two-fold, saith Andreas: FIRST it is taken for that which is consecrated to God alone, and might not be medled with by the promiscuous multitude, as being things devoted to God. SECONDLY, for that which is not lawfull to be put to holy services, or touched by any creature, as being devoted to the devill, and it is called a cursed or execrable thing: Hebr. . The latter is understood in this place, of a thing devoted to the devill, and with him subject to condemnation, as being pro∣phane, and to be troad under foot. Such kind of Curse or Katanathema shall bee no more, to wit, as formerly it had been. He understandeth the Dragon, Beast, Whore, False-Prophet, Locusts, Sinne, Death, Sorrow, Torment, and whatsoever is adverse to Gods majesty, and the felicity of the Church. Indeed all kinde of Curse shall be in the Lake of fire with the Dragon, Beast, False-Prophet, and all o∣ther reprobates: but no curse shall be in the Coelestiall Citie, or any thing to op∣pose the majesty of God, or disturbe the joy of the Saints: There, I say, shall be full freedome from all evill. BEZA expresseth the Emphasis of the compound , Katana∣thema. thus: Neither shal there be any more anathema () against any man: making the sense, that then
the Church shall be without all spot or wrinkle, from which it cannot in this life be wholly purged. Thus it should note the absolute puritie of the Church in glorie: of which also before: Nothing that defileth shall in any wise enter into it. Both senses do agree: and lead us to understand these things of the state of the Church-Triumphant. For of the Church in this life it cannot yet be said that no curse or  is in it. It is true that Zacharie in Chap. 14. ver. 11. saith, that in the Church of the New Testament, there should be no  Curse, or devoted thing: but he understands it finally, or of the consummated state of the Church in Heavenly glory. But the Throne of God and of the Lambe shall be in it] This shall bee the remo∣ving cause of all curse from the Citie: because it shall be filled with the majesty of God and of the Lambe, which consumeth all pollution and averse power, as fire doth the stubble. For our God is a consuming fire, to wit, Deutr. 4.8. consuming all  things cursed, devoted. Therefore he saith: The Seat or Throne of God shall be in it, that is, God will dwell, reigne, and reside there, as it were in his Royall Pallace: which is spoken  after the manner of men. For by the Seat is noted either the place of abode or government. Before he had said: Chap. 21.3 He shall have his tabernacle with them. Seeing therefore the King of kings shall fill the Citie with majesty, certainly neither defilement, nor hostilitie shall have any place there. Thus we see that this most holy Citie of God shall be con∣trary to the Great Citie where the Whore, Beast, Dragon, and all ungodly men had their Seat. In that again he placeth God and the Lamb on the same throne, XLIV. Argument of Christs Deity. he manifestly con∣firmeth that the divinity and majesty of both is alike. For two Vnaequals cannot sit in the same Seat. He confirms also the unity of both, by what followes; And his servants shall serve him: for the Relative  HIS and HIM is referred neither to GOD alone, nor to the LAMBE alone, but to both as one. By the servants of God and the Lambe, he understands the Holy Angels and bles∣sed Saints, who standing before the throne do serve him day and night, as in Chap. 7.15. that is, are ready with all reverence, alacrity, and joy to doe his Com∣mandements, and performe most acceptable services according to his will, not that God needs their service, but that they may partake of his majesty. This shall be a part of our glory and happinesse: 1. Kin. 10.8 2. Chr. 9.7. for if the Queene of the South said truely of Solomons servants: Blessed are thy men, and blessed are thy servants, who stand before thee alwayes hearing thy wisedome, &c. then much more ought wee to count the servants of God blessed, who stand before the throne, beholding his face without ceasing. Therefore it followeth. 4. And they shall see his face] Christ speaking of the Angels blessednesse, saith: The happi∣nesse of the Citizens. Mat. 18.10 They alwayes behold the face of my father in Heaven. The same thing the Holy Ghost attributes to all Gods servants, namely, to be alwayes before God. By the face of God is meant by an Anthropopatheia the majesty and glory of God. Now how we shall see him, whither with our minds onely, being most fully enlightned with the knowledge of God, or whither also with our corporall eyes we shall behold the invisible majesty of God in the glorious face of Christ, it is not for us to determine. It sufficeth to know the thing it selfe, that we shall see God and the Lambe, and that this shall be our unspeakable blessednesse, Mat. 5.8. 1. Ioh. 3.2. Heb. 12.14 according as it is said: Blessed are the pure in heart: because they shall see God: And: When he shall appeare, we shall be like him, () because we shall see him as hee is. And: follow peace and holinesse, without which no man shall see God, that is, no man shall obtaine Heavenly blessednesse without the same. Let us willingly bee ignorant of the manner of seeing him, untill we know it by experience: Thom. 4. qu. 92. wherefore we passe by these Questions of School-men: Whither we shall see God through his essence? whi∣ther with the bodily eye? whither by seeing God, we shall see all things which God
seeth? and the like, as too curious and high for us. And his Name shall be in their foreheads] The Relative  His, is againe referred to God and the Lambe. Therefore the Name of both is the same. Be∣fore also Christ writing to the Churches of Pergamus and Philadelphia, promised that this should be a part of their happinesse, Rev. 2.17. & 3.12. to have his Name written on them that overcome: and of this John saith Chap. 19.12. No man knew it but himselfe. This Name saith he shall be written in their foreheads, by which some doe under∣stand the publicke profession, wherewith we shall alwayes praise God and the Lambe: Others take it, to be the Saints participating of the divine nature, wis∣dome, life, power, joy, and glory. It seemes to be an allusion unto the Character of the Beast, imprinted on the right hand and fore-head of Reprobates. Now that, what was it but a note of propriety, that they did properly belong to the Beast? On the contrary therefore the Name written in the fore-heads of the Saints, what shall it be, but a marke of propriety, that we shalbe consecrated to the ser∣vice and praising of God and the Lamb for ever and ever. 5. And there shall no be night there] What before he said of the light of the Citie, he now applies to the happinesse of the Inhabitants. The darknesse of the night is sad: and though it in some measure be supplied by lights and Candles, yet they cause troublesome vapours and smoake: neither doe they give light any great distance. Therefore we stand in need of the Sunne or Day-light. But the servants of God shall not then want any of these things. For there shall be no night: and therefore no use of lights: no not of the light of the Sunne it selfe: be∣cause the Lord God shall enlighten them with the brightnesse of his majesty: as before he said: Ch. 21.23. The glory of God did lighten it, and the Lambe is the light thereof: and the Nations which are saved shall walke in the light of it. And they shall reigne for ever and ever] This shall be the very height of our glory in Heaven, that wee shall reigne with God and the Lambe for ever more. Now indeed Christ hath made us Kings and Priests to God and the Father, but our Kingdome is yet hid in Christ. But then the Kingdome of God shall be manifested in our selves. Now is the Kingdome of grace: then it shalbe of glory. Before in Chap. 20. ver. 4. they that were beheaded, reigned with Christ a thousand yeeres. Then we shall all of us reigne with Christ for ever and ever: and this is that which he there added in ver. 6. touching the rest having part in the first Resurrection: They shall reigne with him a thousand yeeres: See the exposition there. Now we shall so reigne, as that God and the Lambe shalbe the head of the Kingdome. But shall not the Son then deliver up the Kingdome to the Father, 1. Cor. 15.28 and be subject to him? Yea verily: but this he shall not do by laying downe the Kingdome, and so cease to reigne, (For how should the King of kings, and Lord of lords, of whose Kingdome there is no end, Luk. 1.33. ever cease to reigne?) but by changing the present and mediate forme of the Kingdome into an immediate, and by abolishing all the adversaries of the Kingdom: as we have elsewhere declared.
The Second Part of the CHAPTER. The Conclusion, asserting the profitablenesse and Authority of the whole Prophesie. 6. And he said unto mee, These sayings are faithfull and true. And the Lord God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angell, to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly bee done. 7. Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the Prophesie of this Booke. 8. And I Iohn saw these things, and heard them; And when I had heard and seene, I fell downe to worship before the feet of the An∣gell, which shewed me these things. 9. Then saith he to mee, See thou doe it not: for I am thy fellow ser∣vant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keepe the sayings of this Booke: worship God. 10. And hee saith unto mee, Seale not the sayings of the Prophesie of this Booke: for the time is at hand. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. 12. And behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with mee, to give every man according as his worke shalbe. 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning & the end, the first & the last. 14. Blessed are are they that do his commandements that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates in∣to the Citie. 15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murde∣rers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lye. 16. I Iesus have sent mine Angell to testifie unto you these things in the Churches, I am the root and the off-spring of David, and the bright and morning Starre. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hea∣reth say, Come. And let him that is athirst, come. And whosoe∣ver will, let him take the water of life freely. 18. For I testifie unto every man that heareth the words of the Prophesie of this Booke, if any man shall adde unto these things, God shall adde unto him the plagues that are written in this booke. 19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the booke of this Prophesie, God shall take away his part out of the booke of Life, and out of the holy Citie, and from the things that are written in this booke. 20. Hee which testifieth these things, saith, Surely, I come quickly: Amen, Even so, Come Lord Iesus. 21. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all, Amen.
THE COMMENTARY. AND he said unto mee] Thus farre of two Parts of the Booke: the Preface and the Visions. The third or Conclusion remaineth, in which somethings, respecting the Authority of the Booke, are taken out of the Preface, and some other things added, by which the great utilitie and sacred Authority thereof is further commen∣ded, as we shewed in the Analysis. After the concluding of this Revelation, an Angell saith unto John, (to wit, one of the Seven pouring out the Vials, who before shewed him the judgement of the whore and the Beast, and after∣ward the magnificence of the Heavenly Ierusalem) These words are faithfull and true] That is, not only what was last spoken, but the whole Prophesie, as Chap. 19.9. This is the Proposition, unto the confirmation whereof the whole Con∣clusion respecteth, that wee might beleeve the Prophesie to be () Divine, true, profitable, and saving unto the Church, and so bee stirred up unto the continuall meditation thereof. The Holy Ghost was not ignorant, that many would call into Question the divine authority of this Booke: for it was a long while rejected, as being composed by the hereticke Cerinthus: which errour we have before confuted in the Prologue. But they ought to have be∣leeved the Angell, saying: These words are faithfull and true. Faithfull, to which we may safely give credit. True, which shall certainly be accomplished. And indeed so it is: for we, who are now more then fifteen hundred yeers after the Re∣velation, do, if not see with our eyes, yet certainly feel as it were with our hands, the manifest accomplishment almost of all the Visions. Here therefore wee have an evident note of divine authoritie and truth imprinted on this Prophesie, against the most impudent assertion of BELLARMINE, Lib. 4 de verb. cap. 1. which is, that it can no way be gathered from the Scripture it selfe: that some Scripture is divine. What I pray is this? but to give the Angell the lie, who saith: These words are faithfull and true. But the liar condemneth himselfe in saying elsewhere: that, besides other arguments, Lib. 1. cap. 2. de verbo. the divine authority of Canonicall Bookes of Scripture, may be proved from the scripture it selfe. The Sophisters and adversaries of Scripture object, that this Argument is not sufficient to Faith, unlesse it be before proved and beleeved that the Angell or Writer, uttering these things, spake truth. ANSWER: First principles are not proved, but laid downe and beleeved: because therefore the Holy Scripture is the principle of Christian beleefe: with Christians it needs no proof, but beliefe. Secondly, that the scripture is divine, and these words of the Angell true and faithfull, is beleeved either by divine or humane Faith. That it may be beleeved by humane Faith, it can bee made out by probable, yea forcing Arguments, as from the majesty of the matter and style, from the con∣sent of this Prophesie with other Propheticall Scriptures: But especially from the truth of the Oracles (which we know for the most part are fulfilled) tou∣ching the woman in travell, and fleeing into the Wildernesse, also of the Beast deceiving the world, of false miracles, of the great whore, making drunke the Kings of the Earth with the cup of her spirituall fornication, &c. For this is Bellarmines Ar∣gument in the foresaid place: If the praedictions of Scripture touching future things are true, as the event hath proved, why should not the testimonies of things present be true? And indeed this his saying is alwayes to be retorted against Popish Sophisters, de∣maunding us: How we know that the Scriptures are true and divine. But that any man should beleeve this with divine Faith cannot possiblie bee effected by outward arguments, unlesse God by his spirit doth inward∣ly perswade the heart. For divine Faith is not wrought by humane Ar∣guments,
but wrought in the heart by the testimony and power of God. Lastly, by such kinde of cavelling all Authority both of God and man is made a mocke of, and all Faith both of God and men is taken away. For thus Adam, Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, who heard God to speake, might have ex∣cepted: Who knowes whither it be the voyce of God? Thus the Apostles might have shifted off the authority of Christ, and Ecclesiasticall men the authority of the Apostles: And why then I pray, may not we much more the Authority of the Pope? Touching humane authorities of Histories and Writers what more easie, then to object: whence knowest thou, that Cicero, Aristotle, Plinie, or Livie wrote these things: or ever had a being in nature? Thus no Faith should be safe, but a meer  or uncertainty shall reigne in divine and humane matters: which Sa∣tan labours to effect by these his Instruments. But we go forward. And the Lord God of the Holy Prophets] Hee confirmes the truth of the Pro∣phesie from God the Author thereof, the faithfullnesse and truth of whose words cannot be questioned. The Copulative () And, hath the force of the causal () because. He calleth Christ the Revealer of this Prophesie, the Lord God of the Prophets, as appeareth by the following words, sent his Angell: for this Christ did, as in ver. 16. I Jesus have sent my Angell: See also Chap. 1.1. XLV. Argument of Christs Deity. This Argument of Christs Deity is beyond all exception: the which Eniedinus the Samosatenian (of whom mention hath often above bin made) durst not med∣dle with. For if Christ be the Lord God of the Holy Prophets: then verily he is the same true and eternall Iehovah with the Father, who by his spirit stirred up the ancient Prophets, Moses, David, Isaias, Jeremy, &c. by revealing his O∣racles unto them: therefore he was: yea he was the God of all the Prophets, of Moses, and Author of the Law. These things considered, who can ima∣gine that CERINTHUS should write this, which he beleeved not, but op∣posed with all his might. The difference of the reading is also to be noted, which notwithstanding les∣sens not, but confirmes the Argument. Andreas, and the Kings Copie for  Of the Holy Prophets: read , Of the spirits of the Prophets (and so the Old Latine Version hath it) that is, who of old inspired the Prophets, that is, Propheticall Revelations. The sense comes all to one. For therefore he is called the Lord God of the Prophets, because by his divine power he moved them to Prophesie. His Angell] That is, Mee. For they are the words of the same Angell, who hitherto did exhibit by Christs commandement divers Visions unto John. That hee might shew to his servants] These things have been expounded in the Preface, whence they are taken. And that in speciall, how at the giving of the Revelation, such things could be said shortly to come to passe, which yet are not altogether fulfilled after so many ages. In a diverse respect he saith, they should shortly be done. I. In respect of eterni∣ty, unto which all times are but a moment, which is short. II. In respect of the beginning, for the Prophesie began soone after it was revealed, and yet is a ful∣filling. III. In regard of the security of men, unto whom all these things have happened, and yet daily do, quickly, that is, suddenly and unawares. Now thus the Scripture speaketh of all future things, that they shall shortly bee done, Luk. 12.45 2. Pet. 3.4 to stirre us up to watchfulnesse and care, least with the wicked servant we should say: My Lord delayeth his comming: or with mockers, where is the promise of his comming. And therefore it followeth. 7. Behold I come quickly] It is the voyce of Christ, the Lord God of the Pro∣phets. By this acclamation hee approveth the words of the Angell, that the things revealed must shortly be done: as if he should say, Indeed they shall shortly be done, for I come suddenly, or, I will come, to wit, unto judgement, as in ver. 12. For all these things must be done before I come: but I will come shortly. There∣fore
they must shortly be done. They are no Prophesies which shal not begin to be fulfilled til after many ages: even now they begin. Therfore now, even now there is need of comfort: 1. Thes 5.3 or, as before, shortly, that is sooner then men imagine. For when they shall say, peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them. This variation of persons belongs to the forme of dramaticall representa∣tions, in which divers persons use to be brought in speaking. Blessed is he that keepeth] He commends the Prophesie from its profitablenesse. Now not onely they doe keep the sayings of the Prophesie, which diligently search out the accomplishment of them, but they much more, who conforme their Faith and Life according to the same, who worship not the Beast and his Image, who detest the whoredoms of the whore, flee out of Babylon, and lastly who in faith adhere to God and the Lambe. This Argument wee have more largely treated of in the Preface, Chap. 1.3. whence it is taken: Now let it suffice to note, that blessednesse in vaine is promised unto the Keepers of the Revelation, if it could in no measure bee kept. But surely it is not promised in vaine, and therefore the Visions of this Booke are not so intricate, but that by diligent meditation and observation, we may in some measure finde out the un∣derstanding of them. 8. And I John] John also speakes of the same thing, asserting to us the cer∣tainty of the Prophesie, by the testimonie of his senses: because he heard and saw al things to be so. Now an Eye-witnesse is worthy of credit, especially he being a good man, yea an Apostle: whom the Character also here doth not obscurely shew to be the Writer: for thus also he confirmeth the truth of his Gospell by professing himselfe to be an Eye-witnesse and Faithfull Disciple of Iesus Christ. And he that saw it, Ioh. 19.35 & 21.24. bare record, and his record is true. And afterward: This is that Disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things, and we know, because his testimony is true. And when I had heard and seene] Againe hee recordeth his failing about wor∣shipping of the Angell, and that the Angell reproved him for the same, comman∣ding him to worship God onely. The same thing fell out Chapter 19.10. see the Exposition there. Some may wonder how an Holy Apostle should so suddenly twice stumble at the same stone. For a little before he heard, that the Angell was his fellow ser∣vant, unto whom to ascribe the honour of adoration, due unto God alone, was sacriledge: notwithstanding forgetting both his failing and reproofe, he againe falleth into the same errour of vitious worship. Now what should this teach us, but that such is the infirmitie, and inconside∣ratenesse of the Saints oftentimes in this life, that except they bee sustained by God, they fall not once, but many times even into the same error. In speciall it sheweth the pronenesse of our nature unto Idolatry. For if it happened unto the Apostle Iohn, that he could not, as it were, abstaine from un∣lawfull worshipping of the creature: what wonder though the Christian world be wholly fallen to worship Angels and Saints? yet least the world should abuse Johns example to maintaine their Idolatry: he not onely ingenuously confesseth his failing, but also sets downe the Angels reproofe, attributing adoration to God onely, that such as fall into the same sin might likewise repent. 9. Worship God] By this thunder-bolt the whole Idol-worship of Papists is dash't, who not content after Iohns evill example, to worship Angels, fall down also before dumbe Idols, Religious a∣doration is simply de∣med unto creatures. and religiously adore the creature. As for the frivo∣lous cavil of Idolaters, that the Angell refused not the worship of Duleia, but on∣ly of Latreia it is altogether false: for absolutely without any distinction hee re∣moveth religious adoration from himself, saying,  Adore God. Brightman thinkes that John did not fall downe againe to worship the Angell: but telleth what happened before Chap. 19. ver. 10. But the order of the nar∣ration argues the contrary. For John seemeth as it were to bid the Angell now
farewell, and so in a way of thankfullnes would againe thus reverence him. The words also of the Angell, ver. 9. somewhat differing from his former, do argue that Iohn would have worshipped him the second time. For before hee said: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren, that have the testimony of Iesus. But here: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this Booke. However it be, it is observeable that he saith: I fell downe to worship him: therefore he did not yet worship him: but composed his bodie to do it: wherefore also his unseemly gesture is by the Angell reproved. Whence it appears that Idolaters falling down before Idols, sin grievously, not onely in adoration, but also in their idolatrous gesture it selfe. 10. And he saith unto me: Seale not] Before Chap. 10.4. he was comman∣ded to Seale the voyces of the thunders: here hee is forbid by the Angell (for the word SAITH belongs to the Angell) to seale the words of this Prophesie, which commands seeme to be repugnant: but are not: because they respect di∣vers times and objects. He was commanded to Seale the voyces of the thunders, and not to write them, to signifie that the Gospell should bee despised in Antichrists Kingdome, as there we expounded. Here he is forbid to Seale, that is, con∣ceale this Prophesie, but to publish the same, that it might be read and known of all, least any man under pretence of ignorance should not beware of Antichrist. Now it is a metaphor taken from Notaries who seale Letters, that every one may not read them: Or from Book-sellers who keepe such Bookes shut with claspes, as they will not have read, as above wee said touching the Booke that was shut and sealed. For Letters and Books that are sealed, and shut, cannot bee read and understood. Now God used to command the Prophets to Seale their Prophesies, when the accomplishment of them should be a long while after, so as it was not so needfull for the present to be read. Thus Isaias is commanded to Seale the Testimony. Isa. 8.16. Dan. 8.26. Dan. 12.4. And Daniel to shut up the Vision: but thou, saith he, shut up the Vision, because it shall bee for many dayes. And afterward: But thou Daniel, shut up the words and seale the Booke, even to the time of the end: signifying that the Iewish people should not see those things, which were a long while after to come to passe under Antichrist. Iohn on the contrary is forbid to shut up his Prophesie: because the time is at hand, to wit, in which the Prophesie shall begin to be fullfilled, touching the persecutions of the Christian Church, and the remedies thereof (as wee ob∣served ver. 6.) and therefore this Prophesie was to be spread abroad that all men might know the same. If then the Angell commandeth that this Book be published, and made known to all, it followeth that it ought to be read, understood, and observed by us: and that we in the diligent reading and meditating on the same, doe obey the Angels praecept. But Antichrist on the contrary commandeth that this Prophesie, The rea∣ding of holy Scripture ought not to be prohi∣ted. and all the rest of Holy Scriptures remaine sealed and shut up, saying, that they can∣not be understood, and forbids all (excepting a few of his Clergy) the reading thereof, that hee may the more securely impose his vile impostures upon the common people. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still] Gr. , He that doth inju∣ry, &c. He alludes unto the words of the Angell, Dan. 12.10. Many shall be purified, but the wicked shall do wickedly, &c. some take the words, as a free per∣mission unto every one to doe and live according to his liking, as if he should say, Let every one do what pleaseth him best: I will force the will of no man: Andreas. Ribera. In the meane while let every one expect an issue, according to his deeds: the latter indeed of which is agreeable to the scope: but the former brought in to establish free will is alto∣gether contrary to the scope, and to the nature of God, who doth not freely per∣mit, but expresly forbid us to injurie or hurt others, or to give our selves to filthi∣nesse and pollutions. Wherefore it is a prevention of a secret objection against the Commandement of publishing this Prophesie. Thou commandest the Pro∣phesie
to be published: but the world will abuse the publishing thereof. For some hereby will do hurt, that is, be occasioned to do injurie to Christians, as Ty∣rants and Antichrist, applying to themselves the Visions touching the Dragon, and Beast, the fall of Babylon, the judgement of the whore, and her casting into the Lake of sire. Others shal be filthy, that is, will turne all things unto laciviousnesse of the flesh, and in hope of going unpunished, will commit all foule iniquities, be∣cause they shall see their judgement to be deferred: wherefore it seemeth far bet∣ter that the Prophesie should be sealed then published. Vnto this care of Iohn the Angell answereth: first by a comminatory conces∣sion or grant: He that will hurt, let him hurt still: Hee that will bee filthy, let him be filthy still: as if hee should say: It is true indeed, some from this Booke will take occasion to hurt and do injury: others to be filthy: But what of that? Let them hurt, let them be filthy to themselves, the mysteries of God are not there∣fore to be kept secret. These shalbe accidentary effects of the Booke, hurtfull to none, but to hurtfull and filthy persons. For they shall doe injury and be fil∣thy to their owne destruction. So Dan. 12.10. The wicked shall doe wickedly: unto which words our Prophet seemes to allude. Therefore they are not words of permission, or approving of injustice and silthinesse: but of threatning a secret judgement: because the adversaries of the Church, and impure swine, being de∣livered up of God unto a reprobate sense, shall by their wickednesse most of all hurt themselves. This is the first cause of not sealing the Prophesie. Secondly he answereth by a comfortable promise: He that is righteous let him bee righteous still: He that is holy, let him be holy still: The imperatives . Let him be righteous or justified (for which the Kings Copy hath it  Let him do righteousnesse) and  Let him be holy or sanctified, with the Hebrewes have the force of futures, for, , they shalbe justifiyed and sanctified still. This is the other reason of not sealing the Prophesie: because properly it worketh saving effects in righteous and holy persons: as if he should say, although the wicked shall wrest this Scripture to their destruction, yet therefore it is not to be kept secret from the Elect, who by the promises, exhortations, and consolations thereof, shal be more confirmed in righteousnesse, piety, and holinesse. This I take to bee the naturall mea∣ning of the place. Here first we may see the two-fold and contrary effect of the Scripture and Doctrines. The two-fold effect of Holy Scripture. For some thereby grow worse and worse to their owne hurt: but o∣thers are furthered thereby to Salvation: That indeed by accident, because the wicked understanding the Scripture corruptly, pervert the same to their destru∣ction. 2. Pet. 3.16 Rom. 1.17. But this by it selfe, because the Gospell is the doctrine of Salvation to e∣very one that beleeveth: Wherefore although all are not reformed by our Do∣ctrine, but that some abuse the Gospell unto laciviousnesse: neither ought we to be offended: nor yet the wicked to accuse the Gospell as the cause of wicked∣nesse. For so the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles was saving unto belee∣vers: but to the offence and destruction of the dis-obedient, by their owne de∣fault. 2. Cor. 2.15 We are, saith Paul, unto God a sweet savour of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish: To the one we are the savour of death unto death: but to the o∣ther the savour of life unto life. Secondly we learne, The Do∣ctrine of justificati∣on by faith not to bee kept close because of the abuse thereof. that the doctrine of the Gospell touching free justification by faith is not to be past by in silence, because some abuse the same unto licenti∣ousnesse of life. For he that is filthy let him be filthy still. Neither is the doctrine of Praedestination therefore to be past over, because some abuse the same unto carnall security, others to despaire, by saying: If I am praedestinated, I shall bee saved, although I defile my selfe with all manner of filthinesse: If I am a reprobate, al∣though I labour after holinesse, yet I shall be damned. This is the devils most false and unsavoury Logicke, or rather calumnie, of old objected against Augustine
and Orthodoxe Teachers by the Pelagians. For they joyne repugnant, Tom. 7. Aug. lib. 5. hypognost. in prooemio yea impossible things together: for Praedestination cannot stand with the purpose of filthinesse: because it is made not onely to Salvation, but also unto the antece∣dents of Salvation, viz. Faith, Repentance, and Holinesse, as the Apostle teacheth: Ephe. 1.3. He hath electe us in Christ, that we should be holy, &c. Reprobation on the contrary cannot cohere with holinesse or a purpose thereunto: because Reprobates by their owne malice neither will, nor can labour after holinesse. Now in whom there is a serious desire of holinesse, they have a sure Testimonie in themselves, not of reprobation, but of their election. Thirdly, this place teacheth, Iustificati∣on & San∣ctification distinct be∣nefits of Christ. 1. Cor. 1.30 1. Cor. 6.11 that the benefits of Iustification and Sanctification are distinct: which the Papists do corruptibly confound. For Iustification con∣sists in the free pardon of sinne and imputation of Christs righteousnesse. San∣ctification in regeneration and newnesse of life. The former is in relation, the latter in action. So the Scripture distinguisheth these two, where it saith: that Christ is made unto us Righteousnesse and Sanctification. And againe: Ye are justi∣fyed, ye are sanctifyed. Fourthly Papists do vily abuse this place to establish their second justification, which they say, is actuall and meritorious through good workes. For the words, let him be justifyed still, they expound, let him be justifyed yet more, or let him being righteous become more righteous. Therefore, they say, they that are ju∣stified can bee made more righteous, or more just through charity and good workes. ANSWER: First although the Particle  still, might signifie increase of Righteousnesse: yet the inference would not follow touching increase of righte∣ousnesse through Charity. For we are no where said to be justified by Charity: but alwayes through, or in Faith. Secondly  doth rather signifie perseverance then increase. For as hee said: The Parti∣cle  stil, noteth con∣tinuation of time. Let him be unjust still, let him be filthy still: for, let him goe on to doe injuriously, and to be filthy: so he saith: Let him be righteous still, sanctifyed still, for, let him persevere in righteousnesse and holinesse: for the Particle  still, doth in this Prophesie rather signifie continuation of time, then the encrease of a thing: as in ver. 3. There shalbe no more () curse, or henceforward: and Chap. 10.6. The Angel sweareth that there shalbe no longer () time: and Chap. 3.12. He shall goe no more out: where RIBERA himselfe noteth that the Adverbe  more, doth onely with the negative respect the future, not the time past Thirdly, though we should wholly grant it to be understood of the encrease of justification: neverthelesse it would not make for their second meritorious justi∣fication through workes. For it will not follow: Let him bee justifyed yet more: Rom. 8.1. Therefore through workes meritoriously: for he may also be more and more justified by Faith through the grace of God. For although we that are justified by faith have the forgivenesse of all our sinnes: Lam 3.23 and so are perfectly justified by Faith before God: so as there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus: yet this Iustification may be said to admit encrease two manner of wayes. FIRST in respect of Continuation. For seeing we sinne daily, wee have need continually of pardon: and so Iustification which consists in the remission of sins, is daily con∣tinued unto the Faithfull, being as it were renewed and augmented: for the mercies of Iehovah are new every morning: therefore Gods children doe daily pray: forgive us our sinnes: that is, quit us, and justifie us from our sinnes: How farre justificati∣on of Faith doth admit encrease. Some therefore of our Writers say well, that justification is effected in an instant, because it comes not by a successive motion, as Sanctification: but it is to bee understood of an instant flowing, or daily renewed through the mercy of God. Secondly in respect of our sense: for we have indeed Iustification with God by Faith: but wee feele it in our hearts through the effects, viz. Peace of Conscience, Newnesse of Life, and desire of New obedience. By how much there∣fore
thse do encrease in us, by so much also the feeling of our Iustification hath its greater encrease. LASTLY; this place cannot be understood of actuall Iustification by works: for such a Iustification through workes is Sanctification it selfe, as the Papists confesse. Now of Sanctification it distinctly here followeth: And hee that is holy let him be sanctifyed still. Wherefore they either accuse John of vaine Tauto∣logi, by repeating the same thing twice: ore else they must confesse that Iustifi∣cation here is no actuall Iustification (so to speake) or Sanctification. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me] These are the words of our Lord Iesus unto the midst of the twentieth verse. BEZA supposeth that these two verses are transplaced and should come after ver. 16. But we shewed in the Analysis, that after the manner of Dramaticall Representiations, three persons, the Angell, John, and the Lord Iesus spea by course, so that an exact coherence is not to be required, but the alteration or variation observed. Once already the Lord Iesus had promised his sudden comming, ver. 7. Be∣hold I come quickly, to confirme the words of the Angell: which must shortly bee done. Here again he promiseth the same, to confirme the next words of the An∣gell: He that is unjust, let him bee unjust still, &c. And the sense is: the Pro∣phesie is not to be sealed neither in respect of the wicked, nor of the godly: be∣cause the former shall goe forward to hurt, and to be filthy to their harme: the latter shall further be confirmed in their desire after righteousnesse and holinesse to their owne good: For behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me to give to every one, &c. The reason is taken from the righteous judgement neer at hand: in which every one shall receive of him his reward: The righteous and holy, keeping the Commandements of this Prophesie, blessednesse in the New Ierusa∣lem: The unjust and filthy dogs, sorcerers, fornicatours, murderers, liars, &c. tor∣ments in the lake of fire and brimstone. This is the coherence and sense of the foure following verses. My reward] Not passively, which should be given unto me: but actively: which I will give, as appeares by the Infinitive  to give, for, that I may give. With mee] That is, in my power and right: for the Father hath given to the Sonne all judgement, Ioh. 17.2. that is, power to judge all men. That his judgement shall be righteous he sheweth, in that he will reward every one, both the unjust and im∣pure, as also the righteous and holy, as their worke shall be. In other places it is said, he shall judge men  according to workes: here , as his worke shall be. The reward of good workes shall be good, of evill, evill: because in order of justice good things appertaine to the good: to evill men,e∣vill things. Wherefore  &  According, and As: do not signifie the meritorious cause of reward, but the rule of righteous judgement. For although evill workes shall truely be the meritorious cause of damnation: yet the Scrip∣ture saith no where (except perhaps in some particular) that the wicked shall be damned  for their workes: Rom. 6.23. Eph. 2.8. but alwayes circumspectly  according to workes: least on the contrary good workes should bee thought the meritorious cause of Salvation. The gift of God is eternall life. By grace wee are saved through Faith, not of our selves, it is the gift of God: not of workes least any man should boast. Wherefore the reward of evill workes shall properly be called re∣ward, that is, a due damnation de jure: But the reward of good workes, shal not bee called a reward properly, Reward due & not due. that is, not due of right, but blessednesse gratis. Now wherefore the Lord will rather judge men according to their workes, then faith, XLVI. Argument of Christs deity. hath been declared above Chap. 20.13. Futhermore this place doth also most clearly prove the eternal deity of Christ: who attributes here unto himselfe that which Isaias ascribeth unto Iehovah: Be∣hold
the Lord Iehovah will come with a strong hand, and his arme shall rule for him; Ch. 40.10 his reward is with him, and his worke before him. And Chap. 62.11. Say yee to the daughter of Sion, behold, thy salvation commeth, behold his reward is with him, Psal. 9.9. and his worke before him. It is proper to Iehovah to judge the world in righteousnesse, and the people in uprightnesse. For none but God can render to the Righteous life and eternall blessednesse: none but God can inflict eternall punishment on the un∣godly. But the Lord Iesus will doe both: for he shall render both to the one and to the other a just reward sutable to their workes, as it is said: Ioh. 10.78 Ioh 11.25. Mat 25.34 I will give unto my sheep eternall life. I am the Resurrection and Life. He will say unto the righ∣teous: Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. And to the unrigh∣teous: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devill and his angels, &c. Therefore he is truely God-Jehovah. 13. XLVII. Argument of Christs Deity con∣firmed. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end] Hee confirmes and illu∣strates what he said touching his righteous judgement. He confirmeth it from his eternity and constancy: I am Alpha, that is, the beginning, the First: from whom all things had their first existence: I hold the primacy of justice and power in all things. I am Omega, that is, the end, for which all things do exist: and the last: unto whom all things are directed in the last place. And therefore why should I not render to every man righteous re∣wards according to his worke? The same hee said of himselfe a little before in Chap. 21.6. and in Chap. 1.8. the which hereticks indeed Question whither they are the words of God or of Christ, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the be∣ginning and the ending, saith the Lord which is, which was, and which is to come. But here they cannot question: but that he who saith: I am Alpha and Omega: and a little after: I Iesus have sent my Angell: is one and the same. Notwithstanding Eniedinus the Samosatenian (that he might put a samous con∣clusion of blasphemies unto his Explications, that is, Explicat. locor. p. 400 depravations) bendeth all his wits in this place, (besides what formerly Chap. 1.8. he had disputed against this attribute of Christ) to overthrow the Deity of the Sonne of God: helping himselfe with most frivolous cavillations, taken out of prophane Authors, as Pli∣nie, Martiall, and Homer. Wherefore I thought it worth the labour diligent∣ly to examine all his particulars, least the heretickes wickednesse might deceive the more simple Reader. First: These things, saith he, are spoken either by Christ himselfe, or by an Angell representing the person of Christ: yea he denyeth that Christ spake them, but a representative Angell. But why, and how Christ should bee, and is called the First and the Last, he saith that he hath explicated Chap. 2. Answer: That these things are spoken by Christ himself, the foregoing verse doth evidently shew. But if an Angell representing Christs person should say: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: certainly he should lie: like as an Ambassadour representing the person of God or Caesar, if he should say, I am God, I am Caesar, verily he should bee as great a liar, as was Boniface VIII. in saying, I am Caesar. For Ambassadours indeed, speake or treat in the Name of God, or of Caesar: but cannot without treason assume unto themselves the names or titles of their Lord. But how well the Hereticke hath above declared, or indeed deceitfully handled, why, and after what manner Christ is said to be the first and the last, we have there made knowne unto the Reader. Secondly he saith, that this kinde of speech: I am Alpha and Omega: is prover∣biall, by which the first and the last, yet not absolutely, may be signifyed: forasmuch as Alpha and Omega are not absolutely the first and the last, but only of the letters and Greek Elements: neither alwayes and every where: but onely in that order or course, in which the Letters of the Alphabet are now set downe: Lib. 7. c. 56 the which notwithstanding that it was not alwayes the same, we may learn out of Plinie: for Omega hath not alwayes bin the last Letter of the Alphabet: and that therefore this forme of speech signifies neither an abso∣lute, nor naturall prioritie and finality, but rather temporarie and arbitrarie.
ANSVVER: 1. Whatsoever might be said touching the Phrase: I am Alpha and Omega: yet the explication annexed stands firme: I am the beginning and the end, the first and the last: the which Christ speaketh absolutely of himselfe, nor can it be applied to any save unto God alone: as not signifying an arbitrarie or temporarie prioritie, and finallitie, but that which is absolute, simple and naturall. This alone sufficeth to confirme our faith and refute the heretick. II. What concernes the order of the Greeke Letters, Plinie indeed writeth, that Omega was added unto the Greek Alphabet by one Simonides Melicus, af∣ter the Trojane Warre: notwithstanding the said Author affirmeth out of Aristotle, that Alpha with the Ancients, was alwayes the first or beginning of the Letters: whatsoever therefore may be said touching Omega: yet if Christ be Alpha, the beginning, not of the Letters, but absolutely of all things, then verily he is God Eternall. But neither shall the Hereticke thus shift it off touching Omega. Lib. 19 c. 14. For Gellius affirmeth out of P. Nigidius a most ancient Writer, that A. and O. were alwayes the principle Letters. Besides it is sufficient that Alpha and Omega were the first and the last Letters of the Greek Alphabet in Johns time. Therefore the rea∣soning of the hereticke taken from the Greeke Letters is vaine, being grounded upon a most false hypothesis or supposition, viz. that Christ is called, and is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, no otherwise then as Alpha and Omega are the first and last Letters of the Alphabet. Thirdly he objecteth, Lib. 11. hist cap. 30. that these words Alpha and Omega, doe sometime signifie time, as in Nicephorus, the Emperours Valentinian, and Gratian write in their Epistle: We indeed have used patience, from Alpha it selfe unto Omega, that is, from the beginning unto the end. But that this signification is not agreeable to Iesus Christ, because many things are more ancient and later in age then he. ANSWER: First Epiphanius Scholasticus, who translated the Historie cal∣led Tripartita, Trip. hist. lib. 7 cap. 9 following another reading (as the most learned Langus Interpre∣ter of Nicephorus hath observed) hath rendred the words of the Emperours o∣therwise, viz. We indeed are subject to him, who is the first and the last, that is, unto God: the which sense the antithesis there following (but ye do arrogate to your selves, &c.) doth altogether require. For the Emperours by their humilitie in sub∣mitting themselves to God, reproved the arrogancy and high-mindednesse of the Bishops, who by their continuall brawlings and contentions abused their Impe∣riall majesties. Let the place be looked into: Wherefore these words A. and O. doe signifie, not time, but Eternall God, or Eternitie. II. Whatsoever may be said touching the place of Nicephorus, the Emperors say not: We are Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: so as Christ said: I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last. Therefore that place makes nothing against the words of Christ. III. Although those words in the place alledged might signifie time and con∣tinuance: yet the reason for which the adversarie denyeth that this signification is agreeable to Christ, is absolutely false and hereticall, viz. that many things are more ancient and later in age then Christ. For according to his Deity Christ pro∣nounceth himselfe to be Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, as beeing the onely begotten of the Father before the Mountaines were setled. Nothing therefore is more ancient and later, (Christo ) then Christ God-Man. Fourthly he thus Syllogiseth: Relatives are together by nature. The son is a Rela∣tive having a correlative Father: Therefore the Son cannot be before the Father and so nei∣ther the first and the last. ANSWER: I. It was never affirmed that the Sonne was before the Father. II. The adversarie overthrowes himselfe with his Sophistrie: for if Relatives are together by nature: as indeed they are: then verily God the Father, and God the Sonne are together by nature: But the Father by nature is the first and last,
that is, eternall. Therefore also the Sonne by nature is the first and last. For the Father was never without the Son. FIFTLY he dallieth out of Martiall, that these words signifie the esteem or worth which men put upon a thing: so that which is most excellent, is called First and Alpha, that which is most vile is called Last and Omega: in which signi∣fication Martiall should have said. Lib. 2: E∣pigr. 57. Lib. 5. E∣pigr. 27. Ioh. 14.28 Ioh. 01.29 Non ipse Codrus Alpha penulatorum: And againe, Quod Alpha dixi, Codre penulatorum te nuper. But yet that this signification cannot be applied to Christ: both because the Father is more worthy then he, himselfe con∣fessing it: My Father is greater then I: as also because it should follow, if Christ bee called Omega, that he is the vilest and most abject of all things. ANSWER: 1. Martiall calleth Codrus, Alpha Penulatorum, by a poeticall taunt or scoffe, not as being the most excellent, but the chiefe or first of beggers, that is, poorest, according to the Proverbe: CODRO PAUPERIOR, poorer then Codrus. But whatsoever he may say touching Alpha: where hath the Here∣ticke ever read that Omega is put for that which is most vile? And though hee had read it: will hee interpret the Divine Revelation by Martiall a scurrilous Poet? II. Howsoever this signification is taken, it is false that it is no way to be ap∣plied unto Christ. For Christ is Alpha, because according to his Deity hee is most excellent, the beginning and the first of all things: And Omega, not as the vilest, but because he is the end and last of all things: for so he himselfe inter∣preteth the same. That the Father is more worthy then Christ in respect of the assumption of the flesh it is true: according to which hee himselfe said: Ioh. 10.30. Ioh. 14.10. Ioh. 5.23. The Father is greater then I: in respect of his Deity it is false, for in this respect hee saith: I and the Father are one: I am in the Father and the Father in me: The Father hath given all judgement to the Son, that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. Wherefore as the Father and the Son are one by nature, so in honour and dignity: for which cause above Chapter. 4.11. & 5.11. the Church-Triumphant ascribes to God and unto the Lambe, the same honour glory and power. Sixtly he reasoneth from the Metaphysickes: That these words, the FIRST and the LAST signifye the cause: But Christ, as the Trinitaries confesse (thus the He∣reticke termeth Orthodoxe Writers) hath a cause: Therefore he cannot be called the FIRST in this sense. ANSWER: 1. Nothing is more frivolous then this kinde of Logicke: for there are foure termes in the Syllogisme, to signifye the cause, and to have a cause, being put for one, which are not one in the least: and from two affirmatives in the second figure, he inferres a negative, then which nothing is more vaine. II. The major is not true, but of God being absolutely the first and the last, the beginning and the ending, and therefore he is truely the first and last cause of all things: and so likewise of Christ saying absolutely of himselfe, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, and therefore the first and last cause of all things: but of all others it is false. For of what are Alpha and Omega the cause? Is it of the Letters that are betwixt them? And suppose that the first man may in some sort be said to bee the cause of others: of whom shall the last man be the cause? III. The assumption unlesse it be understood with limitation, is false also: for we confesse that Christ hath a cause not absolutely, but according to his huma∣nitie, beeing according to his Deity the creating cause of all things with the Father: For all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, Ioh. 1.3. that was made: Neither hath he any cause, unlesse improperly by understanding the cause of the beginning of eternall generation from the Father, otherwise the Son should be the effect of the Father, which is false: For God created all his effects
or works (in the kind of substance) in the beginning of time: Ioh. 1.1. Prov 8.25 Mich. 5.2. But the Son he crea∣ted not in the beginning of time: (for the word  was in this beginning:) but begate him from eternity: I was brought forth, saith the wisedom of God, be∣fore the mountains were setled. Because his goings forth were from of old, from everlasting. Thus therefore let the Hereticke learne to correct his Paralogism or deceit∣full arguing, least he faile in the forme: Hee that hath a cause, is not the first and the last as the cause. Christ hath a cause. Therefore he is not the first and the last as the cause. Thus the whole is granted touching Christ in respect of his humanity: But in respect of his divinity, in regard whereof he saith of himselfe, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, the consequence is denyed, because of the aequivocation of the word Cause: or the assump∣tion is false. Furthermore he saith: a thing is said to be first, which is by nature before the rest. Christ is not before the Father, because correlatives are together by nature: Therefore Christ is not the first after this manner. ANSWER: This we willingly grant of Christ according to the flesh, but ac∣cording to the Deity the adversarie dallieth by foure termes: because before other things: and, before the Father are two termes, or the major universally taken is false: for in this signification he is not the first, who is before God: else God also should not bee the first by nature, because God is not before himselfe: But he which is by nature before others, in whose respect he is said to be the first: to wit, before all creatures. Besides wee may (as before) retort the adversaries weapon upon himselfe: Correlatives are by nature together: The Father and the Sonne are correlatives, and the Father is the first, because by nature he is before all: Therefore also the Sonne is the first, because hee is before all things by nature. Lastly he saith, that a thing is said to be the first and the last, Alpha and Omega: in regard of order and placing; like as the First Booke of Homer is called Alpha in this Monosticke, or single Verse: . Which signification, saith hee, is most convenient to this place; because God hath appointed Christ to be the First Messias and Mediatour of the Nations; neither will he give unto him any Successour in this office: this honour he will not give unto another, but Christ was, and shalbe the First and the Last Redeemer; Hence hee is here rightly called Alpha and Omega. ANSWER: This indeed is the thing which the Hereticke after all his blas∣phemous shiftings would needs vomit out. But this signification is the same with the first touching the arbitrarie priority of the Letters Alpha and Omega: Why then thus much belching? we deny not that Christ alone is ordained the Redee∣mer by God the Father. But we deny these three things. I. That Christ in respect of his Office of Redemption, calleth himselfe Al∣pha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: which in Scripture are titles onely of the Eternall Deity. II. We deny, that this signification and example is agreeable to Christ: for he which is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last in order and place (like as the Heretick maketh Christ to be Alpha and Omega, that is, the first and the last Re∣deemer) he certainly hath a second, a third, and others betwixt: like as after Homers Alpha followeth: : Gamma, Delta, Epsulon, &c. also follow even unto Omega. Therefore accor∣ding to the Hereticke after the Redeemer Alpha, there should follow the Re∣deemers Beta, Gamma, Delta, &c. unto Omega: Yea Christ should no way be Alpha and Omega: because Homers Alpha is not Omega also, neither is Ho∣mers
Omega also Alpha, and it should be false, that Christ in this Office had no Successour, and that he was, as the First, so the last Redeemer. III. We deny, that the Heretick beleeveth, what he saith, or that the thing he saith is true. For he affirmeth, that Christ was and shalbe the first and the last Redeemer. Notwithstanding he beleeveth not, that Christ was the Redeemer of Adam, Abraham, and the Fathers of the Old Testament: but beleeveth the Fathers were not redeemed by Christ, yea that Christ had no being, before hee was manifested in the flesh: Both which assertions are false, hereticall, and blasphemous. Now briefly wee will bring all the Heretickes subtilties into this one Sophism. Christ is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, &c. either in a certain order, that is, an arbitrary and temporary priority, and finality (like as Alpha and Omega is in the order or ranke of the Greeke Letters:) or in time, or excellency, or as the cause, or in priority of nature, or lastly in order and place: But he is not the first and the last in time, nor excellency, nor as the cause, nor in priority of na∣ture. Therfore only by an arbitrarie priority, viz. in rank, order, and place: be∣cause he is appointed by God to be the first and the last Redeemer. ANSWER: 1. The Heretick though he reasoneth much touching A. and O. the first and the last, yet he meddles not at all with the other title annexed, the beginning and the end, because he could not darken the same by his cavils. Now seeing this Title doth absolutely denote that Christ is he, from whom, Rom. 1.36. and through whom, and for whom are all things, it alone sufficiently proveth the Deity of Christ. II. The assumption, (as hath been shewed) is wholly false. III. The con∣sequence is to be denyed: from the insufficient enumeration of significations: for the Hereticke omits the principle signification of Eternity, by which properly God is the first and the last, Isa. 14.4. & 44.6. & 18.12. 14. Blessed are they that doe] The OLD VERSION: Blessed are they that wash their robes in the blood of the Lambe, which words are here repeated (from Chap. 7.14.) against the authoritie of all Greek Copies: See Bezas Annotati∣ons. The Relative  His, is not referred unto the person of Christ here spea∣king: for hee would have said in the first  my Commandements: but unto  Booke, as in ver. 7. Blessed is hee that keepeth the sayings of the Prophesie of this Booke: Here he repeateth the same: Blessed are they that doe the Commandements , to wit, of this Booke: There hee calleth them  sayings: here  Commandements, namely which were touching the not worshipping of the Beast and his Image, the leaving of Babylon, perseverance in Righteousnesse and Holinesse, and such like. Although the Enallage were not very harsh, to apply the relative unto Christ: That doe his, that is, My Com∣mandements: like as the Angell in ver. 6. speakes of himselfe in the third person: sent his Angell, that is, my selfe. The reward therefore of them that do the Com∣mandements of this Booke shalbe blessednesse. That they may have right to the tree of life] Greek : Their power shall be on the wood (or tree) of life: The blessednesse of the Coelestiall Citizens, he declareth by two benefits: That they shall have power to the tree of life, (of which ver. 2.) and enter in through the gates into the City: They shall, I say, be perpetuall and most happie Inhabitants of the Heavenly Ierusalem. How the Saints have right to Christ. But be∣ing Christ is the tree of life, it may bee demanded how they shall have power on Christ? He understandeth it of a right, not of ruling, but of enjoying Christ and his benefits. He is the Lord and Head: we Subjects and Members. The Head hath right of Dominion over the Members, to command them: The Members have right to the Head, of enjoying him, and to be quickned and directed by him. See more of the Saints blessednesse, ver. 4.5. 15. For without are dogs and sorcerers] The reward of the wicked shall be ut∣ter darkenesse being shut out of this Heavenly City. They shall be without: be∣cause
within shall be nothing, but what is pure and holy, neither shall any thing that defileth enter into it. Ch. 21.27. Now what shal be without but utter darkenesse? where Sa∣tan, the Beast, False-prophet, Dogs, and Sorcerers, that is, all Reprobates shall bee tormented in the Lake of fire and brimstone. Of these wretches hee reckons up sixe sorts, under which all are comprehended. Dogs: thus he nameth unjust and filthy men, who with a dog-like madnesse tear the doctrine of the Gospel: therfore Christ calleth these enemies of the truth dogs and swine, Mat. 7.6. before whom hee forbids us to cast that which is holy. Of the rest (whose portion shall bee in the Lake of Fire) wee have treated on Chap. 21. ver. 8. He expresly puts lyars, both here and before, in the last place, understanding per∣jured, double-hearted, and deceitfull persons, mockers of religion, that we might understand, that this kinde of men is most hurtfull to the Church and Common∣wealth: because by adulterating and falsifying all Divine and Humane Truths, they with divelish craft overthrow, and teach others to weaken all the sinewes of Ecclesiasticall and Politicall society. Of this sortof men, the Jesuites are the most emminent at this day in Schooles and Churches: And the Machivellians in Courts, Polities, and Campes. For RIBERA doth rightly observe, that Christ in speciall mentioneth those vices, which should most reigne in Antichrists time. Now wee know that these evils are most rife in Popery. See Chap. 21.8. 16. I Jesus have sent my Angell] Least it should be uncertaine what person it was that said: Behold I come quickly: I am Alpha and Omega, he tels his name: I Jesus: and professeth himselfe to bee the Author of this Revelation, and the more to commend the dignity thereof to our care and studie, hee sheweth that for our sakes he imployed and sent his Angell to testifie the same unto us. Wher∣fore let it not be irksome reverently to read, continually to meditate, and care∣fully to observe the same with all readinesse of mind. Here therefore the Lord Jesus confirmeth what the Angell before said in ver. 6. The Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angell: as if he should say: It is so: I Iesus have sent my Angell: XLVI. Argument of Christs Deity. Eph. 1.21. Phil. 2.9. Hebr. 2.9. Mat. 18.10 Act. 12.15 Heb. 1.14. hereby professing himselfe to be the Lord God of the ho∣ly Prophets. What Hereticke dares gain-say this? He also makes himselfe Lord of the Angels, for saith he, I have sent my Angell, viz. as being my owne by sub∣jection He is Lord of the Angels as God: and as man he is lifted up above all pow∣er as Lord and head over all things. The Angels also are said to be ours, not by naturall subjection, but voluntary service, because they are sent by the Lord Je∣sus for our service and preservation. to testifie] That is, to reveal. Before ver. 6. and Chap. 1.1. he said  to shew, and  to signifie, in the same sense. Andreas refers this to the publishing of the Prophesie, that Iohn might not keep it secret, but make it knowne unto all. To you] This apostrophe is directed in the first place to the seven Angels of the se∣ven Churches, unto whom he before had sent seven Epistles: as hee sheweth by the Addition , To you who are in, or, over the Churches. But consequently also unto all the servants of Christ, who are set over: or are Members of the Churches, that is, unto all the Faithfull: for this Prophesie was not revealed for them only who then were the servants of Christ, but for us chief∣ly upon whom the ends of the world are come: when the greater part of the Oracles was to be fulfilled. 1. Cor. 10.11 First let us observe, that seeing the Prophese is revealed by the Lord Iesus, it was a great impiety for the Church of old to question the Trueth and Divine Authority thereof. Secondly, seeing the Lord Iesus sent his Angell: therefore he is Lord of the Angels and true God: because it is proper to God alone to have and send the Angels as his Ministers.
Thirdly, seeing the Lord Iesus vouchsafed to reveal this Prophesie not onely to those Seven Churches, but to all that should come after, therefore it belongs unto the profit and salvation of all of us, and all are seriously to meditate in the same. I am the root and the off-spring of David] These glorious Titles commend the majesty of the Author, and of the Prophesie, as also it confirmes our Faith. Above cha. 6, 5. How Christ is the root of David. Who is this Iesus? The root and off-spring of David. Before hee was called the root of David. He confirmeth that he is the Messias promised to come of the seed of David. For the root of David is the Son of David according to the flesh, Rom. 1.4. Andreas thinkes he is the root of David according to his Divinity: For the root beares the tree, but Christ, saith he, not as man, but as God upholdeth and saveth David: But without doubt it belongs to the flesh, which the Messias tooke of Marie the daughter of David. Its true the root beareth the tree: but this me∣taphor respects the originall. So that Christ is the root of David, sustaining David by his divinity: and sprouting from David, in his humanity. Off-spring] Greek  Genus or Familie of David, out of which arose Joseph and Mary, the Parents of our Lord Iesus Churist, Luk. 1.27. The bright and morning star] As the former Title confirmes the verity of Christs manhood: so this the majesty of his Deity. It signifies that most excellent light and glory, whereby the Lord Iesus doth excell all men and Angels, like as Lu∣cifer or the Morning-Star, excels all other Stars in brightnesse. In Num. 24.17. Balaam prophesieth that, a Star shall come out of Jacob. BRIGHT] Most glorious in himselfe: by his brightnes dispelling the dark∣nesse and ignorance of our hearts and minds. Morning] Because, saith Andreas, How Christ is called the morning-Starre. by his beames he not onely drives away the night or darknesse of this life, but also in the morning light of the common Resurrection, hee will exhibit himselfe to be seen of all the Saints. Or, because arising in our hearts, he dispels the blindnesse of our mind, as Lucifer exceeding other starres in clearnesse, and rising before the Sunne, (shewing that by and by it will be day) dispelleth the night-darknesse. So Peter calleth Christ the Day-starre arising in our hearts, 2. Pet. 1.19 when as hee enlightneth our hearts and mindes with the true knowledge and confidence of himselfe by the light of the divine Scriptures. Aristotle to prove that justifice is the chiefe of vertues, saith: : that is: Neither Hesperus, nor Lucifer (that is, the Evening or Morning Starre) is not so admirable: as knowing nothing more glorious whereunto to compare this ex∣cellent vertue. Now Hesperus and Lucifer is the same Star first appearing after Sun-setting: and first foretelling the rising of the Sunne in the Morning. What Aristotle calleth , Christ here calleth  from  the dawning or break of day: in the same sense. If then Aristotle doth rightly compare created righteousnesse unto the Mor∣ning Star: with more right doth the Increated Righteousnesses, viz. Christ the Son of God, call himselfe the Morning-Star. Hereby we understand the mea∣ning of Christ in Chap. 2.28: To him that overcommeth will I give the Morning-Star: for if the Morning-Star be Christ: the sense is: To him that overcommeth I will give my selfe, or, communicate my selfe with all my benefits unto him, viz. joy and glory, in part in this life, but perfectly in the life to come. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come] These kinde of abrupt sentences full of affection, serve to stir up like affections, desires, and wishes in us. Here the Lord Iesus commends unto us the studie of this Prophesie, by the example of the Spirit and of the Bride: They say, Come] that is, from this Prophesie they long for my comming, and that I fulfill the same. Therefore ye also that heare the Prophesie, ought to have the like desire. And the Spirit and the Bride] By the Spirit and Bride may be meant the spirituall
Bride, sanctified by the Spirit of God. By the Bride I understand the Church, especially the Triumphant. She desires me to come, that is, to fulfill the Pro∣phesie, and to return to judgement, that she might at length be glorified through a finall redemption: like as the Soules of the Martyrs under the Altar, did de∣sire the full deliverance of the Church from all the miseries of this life. Or we may understand the Spirit properly of the Holy Ghost, Metalepsis is a figure whereby a word is put from his proper sig∣nification. who above spake to the Churches in the Epistles of Christ: in which it is often repeated: Hee that hath eares, let him heare what the SPIRIT saith unto the Churches. In this sense the Spirit is said to wish the comming of Christ, by a Metalepsis: because it is the Spirit that makes the Bride to desire Christs comming: in which sense also it is said Rom. 8.26. that the Spirit maketh intercession for us: that is, stirreth us up to make our requests, and to cry Abba Father. Come] Namely to the full glorification of thy Bride. This is the reason of the wish: for the coming of the Lord shall be the full redemption of the Church: the which, seeing wee all doe expect, wee must also wish for the comming of the Lord: for as the Apostle intimates, it is a note of Gods children, to love his comming, 2. Tim. 4.8. And let him that heareth] This is the consequent of the former, as if he should say, If the Spirit and the Bride long for my comming, then also let him that hea∣reth the words of the Prophesie, say, COME: that is, ardently desire my com∣ming for his redemption: Thus hee would have us continually to pray: Let thy Kingdome come: by which we daily desire that the Lord Iesus by his comming would wholly destroy the Kingdome of Satan, and perfectly set up his owne in us, in eternall glory. And let him that is athirst come] He teacheth us what we ought to doe untill we obtaine our desire, by a most large promise comforting us against the temp∣tation of delay: Let him, saith he, that is athirst, that is, that desireth full redemp∣tion and glory through my comming, Come] To wit, unto me, or unto the stu∣die and meditation of this Prophesie. It is an Answer unto the Churches wish: as if he should say: ye desire that I should come to your deliverance: Yee there∣fore come unto me through Faith, What it is to come un∣to Christ. Mat. 11.28 Obedience, and true Sanctitie, being alwayes (as it were) girded with the same. For to come to Christ, is to receive his do∣ctrine, trust, obey, serve, and wholly to give ones selfe unto him. This is meant in the Gospell, where hee saith, Come unto mee all yee that are hea∣vy laden. AND VVHOSOEVER VVIL] According to the promise, Chap. 21.6. To him that is athirst I will give of the Fountaine of the water of life, freely. So here to them that come unto him, he promiseth the living water of the pure Chrystalline River of the Heavenly Ierusalem. This water is Christ himselfe, the Fountaine of Life: Or the Holy Ghost, filling the Saints with Heavenly consolation. This water is drawne or obtained by Faith and Prayer. Therefore he saith, Let him take] That is, by prayer beg, and by faith obtaine the same. It is not thrust into the hands of unwilling, slothfull, and drowsie persons: therefore hee saith, Whosoever will. Hee saith not that it is in the power of free will, but requires the will to receive it. The will is ours, but the will of receiving is not in us, it is the gift of grace: 1. Cor. 4.7. For what hast thou, that thou hast not received? Therefore the will and desire of grace is required to be in us, that wee might bee quickned with the water of life. Freely] The Fountaine of grace which is open to all that desire the same, is not to bee bought with the price of any thing, but is freely bestowed by the merit and efficacie of the Lord Iesus. Away therefore with the merits of Hypocrites. 18. For I testifie] These also are the words of the Lord Iesus, not Iohns, as appeares from ver. 20. Before he said: Blessed are they that keepe the words of this Prophesie: Now he threatens a terrible curse unto all such as presume any wayes
to adulterate this Prophesie. For he foresaw that some would despise, question, and falsifie the same by their Additions. Hee was not ignorant also that Anti∣christ with his false Prophets (Falsifiers of Holy Writ) would take liberty to fal∣sifie the Faith, yea usurpe to themselves absolute power over the very Scriptures of God. Therefore he thought it necessary to defend the Authority of the Re∣velation, and the whole Booke of Canonicall Scripture, by this threatning, as it were with a Seale, that it might bee preserved entire unto the end for the Chur∣ches, unto whose profit it was dedicated. For I testifie] The causall  For, seemes an over-plus to Ribera by a Grae∣cisme: but, as we shewed in the Analysis, it is a seventh Argument commending the worthinesse of this Prophesie, taken from the inviolable authority thereof. Andreas for  reads  and for  I also testifie (for so it is in the Text) simplie  I testifie. And so the Kings Copie hath it. But all other Copies have it, I also testifie: neither is it without ground: for the Lord Iesus assenteth to his Angell, whom he had sent , to testifie these things to his servants: as if he should say, My Angell hath testified unto you, and I also testifie with him. For properly Summarturesai signifies to affirme a thing by a religious testimony, or to urge it with serious contestation, and so oblidge the Hearers upon pain of vengeance to obey the same. But let us briefly consider to whom Christ doth testifie, what it is, and after what manner. Ʋnto every man that heareth the words] This Protestation belongs unto all that heare and read the same, not one excepted. And therefore neither Pope nor Councell have any right to adde, or take ought from the Scriptures, but with the hazard of their Salvation. If any man shall adde] The contestation consists of two heads: The first is: that this Prophesie may not be adulterated by any Addition. To adde, What it is to adde to this Pro∣phesie: is not so∣berly and according to the Analogy of Faith to interpret the meaning of the Pro∣phesie: but to mixe other things, besides what the Lord Iesus hath revealed by his Angell. He addeth, saith THOMAS, which adjoyneth a lye: for whatsoever is patched to the Scriptures of mens inventions, that it might be accounted as di∣vinely revealed, is a lie. Such are the Popes Traditions, which (seeing hee will make of like authority with the written word of God) he addeth unto the Scrip∣tures. Therefore they are lies. The other branch of the contestation is, What it is to take a∣way from this Pro∣phesie. that none may deprave this Prophe∣sie, by taking away from the words thereof. He not onely takes away, that de∣rogates from the divine authority of the Booke (which, as Christ foresaw, many would do) but he also that any wayes changeth, or maliciously perverteth, or contradicteth any thing here written. Of which offence such are not altoge∣ther free, who obstinately deny that the manifest events of the Types touching the fall of the great Starre from Heaven into the Earth, of the Beasts ascending out of the Sea, and of the worshipping of his Image, and Character, of the Romane Ba∣bylon, of the whore committing fornication with the kings of the earth, & the like, are not yet manifestly fulfilled in the Papacy. The summe of the contestation is, that the integrity, sincerity, and sacred Authority of this Prophesie bee faithfully preserved in the Churches, and that the contemners, falsifiers, and corrupters thereof be no way suffered, under paine of Anathema or curse, unto which, as it followeth, that man is liable that presumes to adde or take away ought there∣from: for he saith: Ʋnto him God shall adde the plagues] This is the reason of the contestation, the horrible curse of them that falsifie this Scripture by adding or detracting. For if Falsifiers of Coine are liable unto the civill curse of the Law: much more shall the Anathema of eternall damnation be inflicted upon the Cor∣rupters of the Scriptures, which are the word of God. To them that adde thereto, God will adde all the plagues of this Booke (to wit, the Seven last plagues) and cast them into the Lake of fire and brimstone, with the Dragon, the Beast, and the False-Prophet, Chap. 19.
19. And if any man shall take away] That the righteousnesse of Gods judge∣ments may appeare, he will punish the Corrupters of his word, according to the quality of the offence. To Impostors he will adde plagues. To them that take a∣way, God will take away their part out of the Booke of life, &c. Their judgement shall bee much alike. For as the former are threatned with plagues: so the latter shall be deprived of all good. His part] Not what he hath, but what he seemes to have. He speaketh of the part or portion of eternall life, which such shall have as are written in the Book of Life, that blessednesse (I say) and Heavenly joy which the Inhabitants of the Holy Citie shall be partakers of. And from the things which are written] To wit, which in the Epistles of this Prophesie (especially, Chap. 2. & 3.) are promised to them that overcome, and from the things which in this Book are spoken touching the glorious state of the Saints in Heaven, Chap. 7.9.20.21.22. Now they that shall be deprived of Heavenly blessings, must of necessity lie under eternall plagues and punish∣ment. For betwixt these, there is no medium. This place is remarkeable, against the Popish depravers of the Scriptures. For two things are evidently proved. First that the Holy Scripture is Authen∣tique in it selfe: and that it giveth testimony of its owne divine authority. For what is truely said of this Prophesie, is rightly by Expositers extended unto the whole Scripture. Hence ANDREAS: A fearfull curse, saith he, shall light on them, who are not afraid to adulterate divine Scripture. SECONDLY That the Holy Sriptures are so perfect in themselves, as that the Romanists are to bee held for most damned falsifiers, who deny that all Do∣ctrines of Faith and Salvation are contained therein, unlesse the traditions of Rome bee added. Lib. 4. de ver 80. dei. c. 10. Against this Bellarmine objecteth, that only the integrity of this Book is esta∣blished, but not the perfection of the whole Scripture. ANSWER: Yea both this Booke and all the rest of Holy Scripture. This appears: because this Booke is the last, and last written. Therefore this threat∣ning annexed is as the Seale of the whole Cannon, or of all Bookes of divine Scripture. For as God put too this Seal to the Bookes of Moses: being the first Cononicall Bookes: Deut. 4.2. & 12.32. Ye shall not adde unto the word which I command you, nei∣ther shall ye diminish ought from it: So to this last Booke he puts the same Seale: that nothing might be added, made equall or taken away from this, or any other part of Canonicall Scripture. Bellarmine objecteth to the contrary: that it is not said: which I have written: but, which I have commanded. But frivolously: for Exod. 24.12. God saith ex∣presly: Which I have written, that thou mayest teach them. And Hose. 8.12. I have written to him the great things of this Law. Adde to this the former reason, that all Interpreters do acknowledge this Anathema to be pronounced generally against all falsisiers of Scripture, Why the oracles of the Reve∣lation are most taken out of the old Canon. and that most justly. For the evident argument hereof is, that the greatest part of this Prophesie is as it were taken word for word out of the Old Canon, so as the Holy Ghost seemes purposely in every of the Visions to allude unto certaine Prophesies of the Old and New Testament. Now the reason hereof without Question was: First indeed, really to demon∣strate, that there was nothing wanting in the Old Testament unto perfection. Secondly that by this apparent imitation hee might shew, that in the writings of the Old Testament is contained the state and condition of the Church of the New Testament. Lastly he sheweth that the Revelation is as it were a recapi∣tulation of both the Testaments, and containeth the summe and agreement of all the Holy Scriptures. By the which againe it is plaine that this pre∣sent contestation or protestation belongeth unto the whole Body of Sa∣cred Writ. 20. He which testifieth these things, saith] Ribera will have these words to bee
Johns, because of the like sayings in his Gospell, Iohn 21.24. But the words following shew that they are spoken by the Lord Iesus: for he addeth: Behold I come quickly. Notwithstanding there is no great matter in it. Hee calleth himselfe  The Testifier, because he testified, that is, revea∣led, this Revelation unto John by his Angell. Hence Chap. 1.5. Iohn cal∣leth him, the Faithfull Witnesse. Surely I come quickly] He confirmeth what he had twice said: Behold I come quickly. The Greeke  And or also hath the force of an asseveration or oath (and is rightly rendred Surely) to take away all doubting: as if hee should say: I shall seeme to delay: but it shall be no delay. Mockers will think that I will never come; but I will come before they are aware thereof. Even so come Lord Jesus] These are the words of John applauding and suppli∣cating Christ to doe quickly what he promiseth. He wisheth therefore, that he may come quickly, not in his owne name onely, but he will have it to bee the common wish of all the godly: Come quickly Lord Jesus: And why should wee not wish for it? To the wicked the day of the Lord shall be terrible. But to us nothing can come more acceptable: because then our Redemption shall draw neer, and there shall be a perfect deliverance. Then all teares shall bee wiped away from our eyes: then we shall see him, as he is, and live with him for ever and ever. O COME LORD JESUS. FINIS.
A TABLE Of the principall matters and words contained in this COMMENTARY. ABaddon, an hebrew word 184. Abaddon is Antichrist ibid. Abuse of allegories cor∣rected 81. Admiration begate Antichristianisme 297. To Adde unto the prophesie what it is 595 Afflictions of the Godly and wicked how they differ 79. Afterward what it noteth 145. Aire the common receptacle of all living creatures 398. Aire how darkened 175. Alpha and Omega 184. Alcasar answered to his two-fold signes 28 His reasons touching Antichrist answered 286. His fable 432. Alcasar stoutly refutes Haereticks by heare∣say 287. his impudent fiction 481. Alexander III. trampled upon Fre∣drick I. 130. Allegorie of the Church, and Christs birth of the virgine marie. 256. Allusion to Ierusalem in Ezechiel. 561. Allusion unto the waters in Ezech. 574. Altar in heaven what it is 154. Alogians their opinion of the Revelation 47. Alphonsus opinion of the mortall wound of the Beast 296. Amazement of the adversaries of the Church 244. Amurath king of Turks 189. Amethist 566. Analogie betwixt the seven seales, trumpets and vials 498. Analogie of the visions ibid. Analogie between a milstone and Babylon 470. Anathemaes of the Nicean Counsel, and of the Council of Trent 351. The Anathema of the worshippers of the Beast 354. Anathema and Kanathema what they signifie 576. Anatolius a strong opposer of Paulus Sa∣mosatenus 74. Angels sometime denote Church-officers 30. Angels are Gods eyes 90. They are strong 98. Innumerable 104. Whither there be four primarie ones 92. Angels must not be worshiped 105. The Angel of the East is Christ 140. Who is the strong Angel 198. The Angel with the censer 153. Angels why joyned with Christ, and who 266. The Angels are Michaels messengers 266. Angels of the seven trumpets & vials 376. Angels of the waters 383. Angel comming down from heaven, who it is 453. The three Angels proclaiming Babylons ruine are not the same mentioned in the 14. Chapter 453. Angels are our fellow-servants 486. Angels how adjudged unto the prison of hel as soon as they fell 504. Angels preparation to declare the judge∣ments of God 371. The Angel on the earth and sea is Christ 203. Angels and Men are Gods servants 478. 479. Antichrists two horns like the lambes 100. He apishly imitates Christ ibid. Antichrist set on his throne in Boniface III 127 Antichrist horribly shakes Christendom by violence and fraud 137. Takes posses∣sion of the Churches of Christ 141. yet could not wholy suppress them 139. though he laboured to hold the windes from blow∣ing
ibid. Antichrists character why imprinted on his followers 142. 312. 313. Antichrist whither a Iew of the tribe of Dan 144. Antichrist opens the bottomlesse pit, and how 172. Antichrist who he is, controverted by us and the Papists 286. Antichrist a vain scare-crow 514. Antichrists kingdome cannot be straitned to four yeares 367. Antichrists rise 170. 289 Antichrist fitly figured out by a twofold Beast 304. And represented in the Revelation under divers formes 305 Antichrist how both the woman and the Beast 404. Antichrist how cast alive into the lake of fire 496. Antichrist did rise in the thousand yeeres of Satans binding 513. Antiochus a scourge of the Iewish Church, mystically figuring out Antichrist 298 Antipopes 295. The Apostles died all before Domitian, Iohn onelie excepted 38. Apostles and Prophets wrought miracles by the power of Christ, not by their own 50. Apostles called pillars of the Temple 72. Arguments for perseverance 61. Arians confuted 94. Aristotles commendation of justice 593. Armageddon the place of battle 397. Armies of heaven clothed in white, to denote their puritie and splendor 491. Arnulphus Aurelianus his speech of the Pope 318. what it signifies 75. Asia what part spoken of in the Revelat. 7. Augustine vindicated 356. Augustus Altar set up in the Capitolium 503. The Authours opinion about the silence in heaven for half an houre 152. His opinion of the third trumpet 162. His opinion touching the particle Aparti 357. His opinion of the wound of the Beast 293. His opinion of the foure Angels hindering the windes to blow 139. B. BAbylon in the Revelation, no city of Chaldea 343. Nor the world 344. But Rome 344. Not Heathenish but Popish Rome 345. Babylon in Caldea taken by Cyrus 392. Babylons ruine proclaimed 454. Her proud boasting 463. Her greatnesse 562. Babylon compared to a milstone 470. Balaam hired by Balack to curse Israel 44 drawes the Israelites to Idolatry ibid. Barbarous nations why called Angels 188 How the Beast warreth against the wit∣nesses 232. the Beast his warre 301. His two swords ibid. When the warre began 302. The four Beasts continually worship him that sits on the throne 93. The Beast rising out of the sea agreeth with the little horn in Daniel 285. The Beast overcomming the witnesses is Antichrist, how he shall overcome and kill them 231. 232 The Beast with seven heades denotes An∣tichrist 285. The Beasts attributes agreeing to Anti∣christ ibid. How the Beast ascended out of the sea 288. Wherein the Beast differs from the Dra∣gon 290. The Beast is the Romane Antichrist 297. is worshipped as God 298. hath universall power attributed to him by the inhabitants of the earth 302. The other Beast denotes Antichrist and his members 305. his rising out of the earth 306. The Beast apishlie imitates Christ 313. The Beast rising out of the sea is Anti∣christ 367. is the same with the beast rising out of the earth ibid. Why the Beasts explication is aenigmatical Chap 17. vers. 8. When the Beast ascended out of the Bottomlesse pit 417. The Beast Antichrist is the Eight king: how he came to it 428. 429. The Beast is going into destruction 430. The Beast is Antichrist 494. The Bellie of the Babylonish strumpet full of blood. 413. The beginning of the creation of God ambiguously rendred 75.
Benevenutus Rambaldus a worthy hi∣storian 128. Bernhardus Clarevallensis his invectives against the Pope and Clergie more then 464 years agoe 318. Beryl growing in the Indies 565. Bellarmin touching the libertie of the will either to admit or exclude God knock∣ing and perswading, refuted 81 &c. Bellarmins arguments answered 222. Bellarmins subtilties answered 321. Brightmans coniecture touching the time of the Turks power considered 188. His opinion of the flood of waters 278. His allegoriall exposition 541. Bishops why called stars and Angels 27. Bishops have no Apostolicall power 20. Bishops or teachers of Churches how they are said to be in the hand of Christ 31. Bishops must flee ambition and covetous∣nesse 33. many Bishops though in ap∣pearance pious, are meer hypocrites 55. The Bishops did augment the sicknesse and palenesse of the Church above measure 117. 118. Romane Bishops ever since Pope silvester have striven to Lord it over their fel∣lowes 126 127. Blasphemie what it is 290. Blasphemie of the Romane Beast 299. Blasphemie against Marie 300. Blasphemous verses of Carolus scribanius touching the milke of Marie and the blood of Christ 301. Whither the Black horse denotes hereticks 112. It denotes the Church made black with heresies ibid. The Black horse hath Christ with a bal∣lance on him ibid. The Blasphemous title of Pope Paulus V. doth expresselie contain the number of the Beast 297. 323. Blood in the moon whence 128. The Booke of Gods providence 60. and of vniversall Iudgement ibid. The Book containing the matters which Christ revealed unto Iohn touching the last times, is the Revelation it selfe 96. The open book is that which was shut before 199. The book eaten up by Iohn 207. what it meaneth ibid. The book of life 60 302. 544. Books how attributed to God in scripture 60. The books of the Ancients were rolled up 97. Bondmen and free men denote all adver∣saries of inferiour ranck 132. Boniface III. first established monarchi∣call tyrannie 118. being declared vni∣versall bishop by Phocas 127. 244. Boniface VIII. a loftie tyrant 129. The Bow of Christ is the Law and the Go∣spell 108. Brimstone and hell fire 352. Bullingers opinion of the flood 278. To Buy white raiment what it is 79. C. CAlamities why foretold 126. Calling of Evangelicall preachers 378. Candidati Romans so called and why 79. Carkeyses of the witnesses what they are and how they shall lie in the streets of Rome 233. Carkeyses of the witnesses unburied 240. The Campe of the saints is the Christian world 537. Catastrophe of the Churches calamities under Antichrist 106. The Cause of Gods connivence is both his benignitie leading the wicked to repen∣tance, as also his counsell for the comple∣ting of the number of Martyrs 121. 122 Catholick Character 312. Character of the Beast 315. 314. his two fold Character ibid. Charac∣ter and Charagma how they differ 312. The proper and common Character how they differ 315. Causes of Babylons ruine 455. Chaenix a measure containing a dayes pro∣vision for one man 114. Certaintie of the saintes salvation 527. Chalcedonie 564. Chalcolibanum or fine brasse 24. Chiliarchi, are captains of thousands 123. Chiliasts or millenaries their ancient opini∣on 524. the author of it Papias ibid. the refutation thereof 525, 531. The ground of their errour 515. their corrupting of the text ibid. The Chore or company of Patriarchs, Prophets, saints, Iudges and kings re∣presented by the four and twentie El∣ders 90. Chore of the 24 Elders 248. Christ why called Amen 75. Hath fu∣ture things revealed unto him as he is man 3.4. is Lord of the Angels 5. his dietie more expresselie testified by no
canonicall writer, then by the Evangelist Iohn 5. his three fold office and benefits 10.13. His comming why promised 15. He appeared in an humane shape in the middest of the seven candlesticks 22. He opens and no man shutteth 64. How he is like to the Son of man 23.24. How he attributes the simile of a thief unto himself 57. Is called a Lambe in respect of his humility and office 100. Is our fine linen and wedding robe 482. He is the faithfull witnesse and so called  10.11. Is the first begotten from the dead 11. and Prince of the kings of the earth 12. He cleanseth us from our sinnes two manner of wayes 13. His body doth not lie hid invisibly under the host 15. He is the onelie  or merchant offering unto us spirituall wares of salvation 78. His philanthropie 80. His righteousnesse is the white robe 79. How he suppeth with us 80. His proper titles 88. Is represented to Iohn under divers figures 88. By his spirituall scepter he forceth the adversaries unto obedience 103.104 He is the Lyon of the tribe of Iudah 109. Hath the seven spirits in his hands 54. Js author of the ministrie ibid. He attributes life to himself 26. Is divided by the Lutherans 44. How he shall deliver up the kingdome to the father, and reigne for ever 248. He is alpha and omega 587. The root of Da∣vid & the morning star 593. Is compa∣red to a traveller knocking at our dore 80. How he is heard and let in, with the benefit thereof ibid. He is the be∣ginning of the creation of God actively and passivelie 75. Why he would ra∣ther have men cold then Lukewarm 76. What is meant by the open booke in his hand 199. Christ and Antichrist have the key of the bottomlesse pit in different respects 172. 502. Christians miscalled by the Romanes 17. Church. Church discipline in its vigor in the primitive times 32. the Churches adversaries sometimes converted 67. Whether the Church may be removed 35. her abode uncertain 36. she was preserved in the Papacie 43. she sometimes lies hid in the world ibid. she must reprove notorious and scanda∣lous sectaries 44. The Church of the called and the Elect doth differ 55. The Church abounding in idlenesse and riot, heathenish and Iewish rites were brought in 76. The Churches conditi∣on in this world was alwayes red with persecution 111. She became black in the first 200 yeeres 112. And pale even to death 117. was preserved in the midst of the Papacie 139. Where she was before Luther 142. she could erre, for she needed measuring 213. Why she is re∣presented by the figure of a woman 257. her variable condition in this world 258. How she changed her sun∣like clothing into purple 259. Ʋani∣shing as the moon 265. The Church triumphant her song 268. How long the Church was in the wildernesse 276. Whether there were no Church vnder Antichrist 329. Her condition at first 358. Before Luther the Church was in Babylon 459. The Church is the bride of the Lamb and citie of God 560. Why Compared to Candlesticks 27. and sometime to a vineyard 363. Chrysolite 565. Chrysoprasus whence it takes its name ibid. Chrystal what it signifies 506. Cities of the nations what they are 400. the beloved city is the Church 537. Clemanges his speech of Rome 44. Clement VI. excommunicated Ludovick IV. 130. The Colour of the Beast and the woman is one 411. Purple colour proper to the Romane court ibid. Communion of the Saints in heaven with us on earth 122. Comfort of the faithfull under Antichrist 121. Of the Saints under the Altar 106. Of the professours and Martyrs 355. Conquerers are such as keep faith and a good conscience 52. Consent of Interpreters about the last judgement 358. Condition of the Godly under Antichrist 134. 135. Constant profession of the truth, the cause of Johns banishment 17. The Constestation or protestation in the last chapter of the Revelation belongs to the whole body of the Scripture 596.
Conversion of the Iewes described 67, con∣version of the adversaries is the worke of grace ibid. Conversion of many unto the faith 245. Conversion why com∣manded, and attributed to us 82. Council of constance caused wickleffe to be digged out of his graue and burnt 241. Condemned Iohn Husse and Irome of Prague to the fire 226. 241. For∣mer councils for the most part condem¦ned by the latter 273. Corporal resurrections in scripture 518. Corrupters of the trueth shalbe grievouslie punished 50. Court within to be cast forth 214. Coveteousnesse in bishops abominable, the root of all evill 33. Crowne. crowne of life 41. promised not of merit but grace 42. It signifies life and eternal glory 72. A greater degree shall be given to such as have con∣verted many 71. Crownes of gold why worne by the saints 90. Crown of life and righteousnesse ibid. Proposed un∣to all the faithfull 250. The crowne of Christ 108. Crowns of gold an ensigne of royall majesty 360. How far the crown may be taken from the elect and how it can not be taken 72. Cubit common and royall of what great∣nesse 562. Cup of Gods wrath 352. Cyprians excellent simile declaring the word of God to be the onely rule of faith 57. D. THe Darkning of the sun 127. Death compared in scripture to sleep 56. Christs death a full satisfactorie price for sin 103. Death of the mar∣tyrs is Christ victorie 108. The first death, why so called 519. 557. Death of the soule 519. The second death eternall 528. The dead shall all rise together 518. 519. To die in Christ 355. Dead faith uncapable to obtaine spirituall riches 77. Demonstration against Alcasars dream 481. The Description and nature of Locusts 175. Description of the new Ierusalem whither it agree to the church militant 549. The Desert or wildernesse is Rome and the Papacie 408. Description of the beast 290. denoteing the old Romane Empire 291. 292. Description of the heavenly Ierusalem 560. &c. Description of the last Iudgement 488. Description of Gods maiesty and glory on the throne 87. Determination whither repugnant to the will 446. Dignitie proceeds not alwayes from ver∣tue 59. Difficultie about the thousands years 506. Difference of a gemme and a pearl 566. Dionysius Alexandrinus refuted 18. Distribution of the second vision 84. The Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet au∣thours of the Ambassage of the unclean spirits 394. Drying up of Euphrates 390. diverse opinions about it 391. Dutie of the Church and her officers to no∣torious sectaries 44. E. EArth, Sea, trees what they signifie 139. Earth swallowing down the flood of the Dragon 279. Earth-quakes proper and figurative 126. 127. A great earth-quake at the ope∣ning of the sixt seal 244. an earth-quake shaking the papacie after the councill of constance 245. Easterne people girded up their long gar∣ments in travelling 24. Eberhardus Salisburgensis invectives a∣gainst the Pope 318. Effect of the word of God 207. Of the Gospel in the latter times 370. Egyptian Idolatry, darkenesse and bon∣dage 234. 235. The Elder comforting Iohn 99. The Emerauld a most pleasant gemme 87. 565. The End of Gods punishment 50. The Eight king not like unto the other 429. 430. Eniedinus the Samosatenian refuted 17. 21. 26, 27. 28. 39. 50. 51. 437. 587. Who shall Enter into the Caelestial city 571. Ephesus the head citie of Ionia 21. Epiphanius refutes the Alogians 47.
Epiphanius corrected touching Iohn 19. The Eternall Gospell cannot be suppressed 339. the Eternall Gospell of the Mon∣ster Cyrillus 340. Events contingent in themselves how chan∣ged 4. Event of the Gogish war 536, &c. The Evils accompaning this life shall be no more in the life to come 553. Euphrates a great river 187. The Eyes of IEHOƲAH signifie An∣gels 90. The eyes of the Lamb, his all seeing providence 00 Eye-salve what it is 9 Ezechiels Prophesie of the measuring of the Spirituall Temple 212. His and Iohns Prophesie of Gog and Magog 535. F. FAlse distinctions of worship 484. 485 The Fable of Enoch and Elias refuted 226. the Fable of Antichrists foure yeares reigne refuted 231. 240. Fable of Maries assumption 256. The False Prophet 394. He and the two horned Beasts are the same 495. Famine, thirst and heat what they note by a Synecdoche 149. Famine of Sama∣ria 114. Mysticall famine when pro∣claimed ibid. The Fathers why they termed not the Pope Antichrist 167. The Father how he judgeth no man 7. 8. The Feare and amazement of the Churches adversaries 244. The fearing of An∣tichrist hath troubled the whole world The First Vision not universall 361. 362. it belongs unto the last times ibid. Its scope and use of comfort ibid. Free-will not simply denied, but in respect of spirituall good 68. Diverse inter∣pretations of the same 444. 445. Figs signifie carnall Bishops 129. Figure of he city just four-square 562. Finall punishment of the wicked 131. Fine linnen how clothing both for the Bride and the Whore 482. how it is righte∣ousnesse ibid. Fire proceeding out of the mouth of the wit∣nesses 228. The fire on which the An∣gel had power 362. Fiery eyes signifie heroicall motions 24. Fire from heaven consuming Gog and Magog 539. First death 42. 519. Why so called ibid. First resurrection is not corporall but spi∣rituall 518. It is opposed unto the first death 519. Its profitablenesse and ne∣cessitie 526. Objections about the same cleared 518. 520. First trumpet answereth to the first seale 158. What is meant by the hayle fire and blood that fell at the sounding thereof ibid. First viall chieflie poured out upon Ger∣manie 380. Fight of the woman when it began and how long it dured 277. Floud of waters what it is 277. Foxe his opinion about it 278. Forme or shape of the beasts diverse, and why 92. Forgetfullnesse and memory how said to be in God 460. Foundation of the Church how but one, and twelve 561. 562. Fountaines what they denote in the Reve∣lation 163. the fountaines of Waters are to be reckoned among the chief works of God 342. The fountain of true joy is in the Lord 480. The Four Beasts whither they type out the four Evangelists 91. They represent the Apostolicall Church 92. Why they are full of eyes ibid. The Four and twenty Elders are the first Chore 89. The Four periods of the Church of the Go∣spel 365. The Four Angels at Euphrates 187. the four Angels at the four corners of the earth who they be 136. 137. The Four Acts of the second vision 84. The Fourty two moneths designe the time of Antichristian persecution 216. di∣verse opinions about them 217. 218. 219. 220. The Foure yeeres reigne of Antichrist re∣futed 231. Franciscus Petrarcha against the Romish Sea 235. 319. 320. The Full assurance of faith, and perseve∣rance proved against Popish Sophisters 46. 47. 71. 269. The Full sight of God and of Christ shall be at the last day 120.
G. GAbriel its signification 98. Gagnaeus refuted 20. 133. Garments not defiled, Metaphorically de∣note sincerity and purity of the body 58. The Gesture and habit of the Beast what it denotes 102. The Gesture and voice of mourners 465. Glory how ascribed to God 93. how gi∣ven to him 480. Glorification of the witnesses 243. Glory and honour of the nations 571. The Godhead of Christ demonstrated and proved against Hereticks 3. 4. 5. 12. 15. 16. 26. 27. 31. 37. 40. 42. 43. 47. 50. 54. 62. 64. 65. 75. 78. 80. 88. 99. 100. 102. 103. 104. 133. 149. 369. 437. 492. 493. 542. 543. 568. 577. 581. 586. 587. 592. GOD. His names are  9. His be∣nignity the cause of forbearance 121. God and Satan do the same thing after a diverse manner and end 41. He de∣testeth pollutions 50. Will have Chast and holy worshippers ibid. He is holy and loveth holynesse, he is true and loveth truth 64. How he reigneth and shall reigne 479. He never neglects the pray∣ers of his servants 121. How he wor∣keth in the hearts of men 444. He is not the authour of sin 446. 447. How he puts good and evill into the hearts of Kings ibid. and 448. His ordina∣tion is not that we should obtain life e∣ternall by the Merits of works 250. God alone is to be worshipped 342 God hath a people in Babylon 459. God forgets not the blasphemies of the wicked 121. Godfrey of Bullen Generall of the Holy warr 190. 537. Gog and Magog who with the Papists 533. 534. Their fiction refuted ibid. They are the four Angels of Euphrates 536. Gogish warre how occasioned and when it began 537. Gold tried in the fire what it signifies 78. The Golden censer what it noteth 154. it is cast into the earth 155. The Golden girdle what it noteth 371. The Gospel preached is the sword wound∣ing the beasts head 296. this sword ac∣cidentally takes away peace from the earth & raiseth cruell persecutions 111. The Gospel is the word of the Crosse 32. Good works how great soever, merit no re∣ward, because they are debts 59. They merit not life Eternall 545. Good men stand in need of often admoni∣shings 33. Gratianus a Popish parasite 52. The Great Dragon described 260. How he differs from the Beast ibid. Why he devoured not the Man-child 264. The Great city is Rome 233. 234. The Great day of wrath, is the last day 134. The Great number of sealed ones 142. the Great multitude represents the Church Triumphant 146. The Great Star falling from heaven whom it denoteth 170. Grecian Empire overthrown by the Turks 192. Green grasse, & trees what they signify 178 Gregorie II. bereaved the Emperor Leo of his revenewes 130. Gregorie VII. an exquisite instrument of Satan 532. He was the first Antichrist ibid. He affirmed that married Priests were Ni∣colaitans ibid. He deposed the Empe∣ror Henry IV. 532. 533. Gregorie the Great perceiving Antichrist to be at hand, pointed as with the finger at his successor Boniface the III. 318. The Greek reading vindicated from the insultation of Gagnaeus and Ribera 12. H. HArpers how they overcame the beast 366. whither they be martyrs or professors 367. Harpes of God are by an Heaisme put for Excellent harpes 368. Hailstones of a Talent waight 401. Happinesse of the Celestiall Citizens 135 577. To Have part in the first resurrection 526 Heads and hornes of the dragon whom they denote 260. 261. The Healing of the beasts wound 294. 296. The heaven rolled up is the Church apo∣stating 130.
Heaven departing is the closing of the scriptures in Poperie 130. Hereticks in several ages 112. 113. Hesperus and Lucifer, that is, the morn∣ing and the evening star, is one 593. Hieroms observation of the titles of the Revelation 3. His opinion of the seats of the four and twenty Elders 89. He approues not the Iesuiticall fiction 431 Hierom refuted ibid. Hieracites heresie 334. refuted ibid. Hierusalem is not the Great Citie 236. The Holy Citie troden down by the Gen∣tiles is the church 215. The Holy war was the occasion of the Gogish warre 537. Hoe his consequence against the Calvenists refuted 36. Homicide of the Papists 193. Hornes what they denote 100. Hornes of the Golden Altar 187. Hornes like the Lambs 307. The ten Hornes springing out of the seventh head 432. They denote Christian king∣doms 435. Hour of temptation 69. The profit and end of temptation 69. 70. How it stands with pietie and Charitie to stir up the saints to revenge 461. 462. Husse burnt at Constance 226. his pro∣phesie of Luther ibid. Humane traditions a burden imposed by Satan 51. How much is to attributed vnto the antiquitie of traditions 524. The Hyacinth 565. its colour 189. Hypocrisie what it is 55. Hypocrites deceive not God, but men ibid. Hypocrisie must be avoyded as a pest ibid. Hypocrites are mixt among the saints 71. are compared to lukewarme water 77. Many of the Clergie are Hypocrite ibid. They imagine that they are just and holy ibid. are very quick-sighted in outward things 78. They put not on Christ by baptisme and the supper ibid. Hydra Lernea a strange Monster 260. I. IAsper a precious stone 87. 564. Idoles described 193. Idolatrie of the Eastern-nations 192. Of the Papists 193. who in Idolatry ex∣ceed the Egyptians 234. why Idolatry is compared to wine 350. Iehovah the sacred name of God, distin∣guishing him from all false Gods 203. What it signifies 8. Iesuites affirme that Iohn did not evill in falling down before the Angel 484. 485. Iesuites bafling 420. They a∣gaine roll up the open book of the scrip∣ture 130. Iezabell a false prophetesse 48. Her doc∣trine 49. Ignatius his Epistle to the Philadelphians 62. Ilands denote peoples and nations 130 how they were moved out of their places ibid. Image of the beast 310. 311. hath life put into it by the dragon 312. Image of babylon 311. the beasts Image ex∣cels that of babylon 312. Images of Christ and the saintes are not to be set up in temple. 23. Impatience and desire of revenge how it can be in the souls of the saints in heaven 120. Impotencie of all creatures 99. Imprinting of the Charactar on the right hand 312. 313. Impure spirits 394. Incompassing what it signifies 537. The Infirmities of the saints Gods clemen∣cie passeth by 44. Incense what it is 155. The Inflicting of punishment on impostors belongs to God alone 50. The Individuall communion of the Saints with the Lamb 36. Infidels not written in the book of life 61. Infidels converted to the faith by the mer∣ciful grace of Christ 65. 66. The Inevitable purpose of divine omni∣potencie is to be opposed to the Romane power 464. Inhabitants of the earth in this book denote earthly minded men, hypocrites and Ido∣laters 271. 407. The heavenly In∣habitants are Angels 268, Inhabitation of Gods grace and glory 552 Innocent III. deposeth Otho IV. 130. Innocent IV. deprives Frederick of the Empire ibid. Inscriptions among the Romans what 73. Ioachimus Calaber calleth the Pope An∣tichrist 9. Ioels prophesie Chap. 2. vers. 28. expoun∣ded 126. Iohn calleth the son of God  5. 6.
Iohn banished in 14 yeer of Domitian 19. put into a caldron of boyling oyle ibid. He returnes from Patmos unto Ephesus under Nerva ibid. and ministred unto the Churches of Asia ibid. He seeth seven golden candlesticks 22. How he saw visions 86. He ascended into hea∣ven not by local motion, but mental illu∣mination ibid. why he wept 99. why he doth not expreslie name the pope or Antichrist 288. He was thrice ra∣vished in spirit 559. His fayling about worshiping of Angels 582. why he would have done it 484. It was no civil worship ibid. Whither he did wel in falling down before the Angel 486. Iohn wickleffe an excellent teacher in England, Protected by Iohn Earle of Leicestre 232. His doctrine a∣gainst Antichrist 338. He was the first Angel ibid. Irenaeus blameth the changers of the beasts three numeral letters  into  317. The Iron rod of the manchild 263. Ithacius bishop of Triers 129. Iudgement given to the sitters on the thrones 512. Judgement shal be according to our works 545. not according to faith and infide∣litie, with the reason thereof 586. Iulius II. a better soldiour then Priest 129. He tooke away the kingdome of Navarre from the great grand father of Henrie IV. 130. Justification by faith maintained 269 This doctrine may not be concealed be∣cause some doe abuse the same 584. How far it admits increase 585. It is distinct from sanctification ibid. The second Justification of the Papists can not be proved from the last Chapter of the Revelation ibid. K. KEyes are a Symbole of power 27 Of oeconomical power 63. The mini∣steriall power of the keyes committed un∣to the Apostles ibid. The Key of the bottomlesse pit is the Popes absolute usurped power 171. Kings of the earth why so called 12. how Kings are removed by Antichrist 130. Kings and great men 131. kings of the East whom they denote 392. opinions about the seven kings 420. 421. kings re∣ceive not their power from the beast but God 434. The kings of the earth and the ten kings are not the same 436. kings hatred of the whore 439. The kings whither ten by succession 440. How the kings accomplished the good pleasure of God in tearing the whores flesh and burning her with fire 449. How the kings of the earth shall bring their glory into the Coelestial Ierusalem 569. 570. The kings warre with the Lamb whither the same mentioned in Chap: 19. v. 18. 435. 436. They have one mind 435. L. LAdislaus why called Ʋarnensis 189. The Lake of fire and brimstone 556. 557. Lake of Gods wrath see Chapt. 14. verse. 16. The Lamb opens the booke 99. He is not to be looked on simplie as a Lamb: but respectively, as a Lamb slain for our sins and risen for our justification 100. The Lamb and Michael is one Christ 270. How the Lamb was slain from the foun∣dation of the world 303. The Lamb is Christ 328. Why he stood on the moun∣tain with the scope thereof, ibid. He was not wanting to the Church while he stood on the mountaine 129. the Lambs vic∣torie over the kings is both spirituall and civill 436. He is King of kings abso∣lutelie 437. The Lambs marriage 480 Laodicea what it signifieth 76. it is a citie of Caria, or as some affirm, of Lydia. The Laodicean church degenerated in Iohns time, but flourished againe in Euse∣bius time 74. The Last judgement figured out 359. 488. 540. 541. why it is so often ex∣hibited 542. The Last plagues 365. The Last vision a recapitulation of all the foregoing visions 501. It is Lawfull to sweare, but by God onely 203. Leaves of the tree of life what they are 576. Leo III. thrust the Greek Emperors out of the West 130. Libertines make sins indifferent 48. Their opinion about freewill 66. Li∣bertines
refuted 71. Life Eternall a reward not due unto us 250. Lingring torments by the Spirituall Lo∣custs 179. The Little season of Satans loosing how to be understood 505. Who Lived & reigned with Christ 514 Locusts Allegorically taken 175. Their devision ibid. Diverse opinions of them 176. Their application to Antichrists disciples ibid. and to the Pseudoclergie 177. The Locusts originall out of the smoak of the bottomlesse pit ibid. From whom they have their power 178. They are no hearb-eaters ibid. Locusts have a threefold ornament on their head 182 Their kings crown ibid. Their tailes 184. their Monarchicall politie ibid. The Lords day 20. The Lot of the Church in this life is chang∣able 5.8. but in God she hath assured help ibid. The Love of God is the fountain of Salva∣tion 13. Ludovicus his jest touching the lake of fire 557. Lukewarm Christians in these dayes 77. How such are said to be in Christs mouth ibid. Their vain boasting ibid. Luther the second Angel 343. Luxuriousnesse of Popish Rome 467. Lyras mysteries about the seats and Elders 90. His interpretation of the Red horse 110. M. MAgog the 2 son of Iaphet 533. 534. Mahumet an impostor, and a robber 171. Mahumetismes originall 186. His answer to the Saracens 186. Ma∣humet Emperor of the Turks vanquish∣ed Constantinople 190. How many Em∣pires and kingdoms he took from the Christians 191. The Majesty of the heavenly city 576. Man or Manna whence so called 45. the hidden Manna ibid. The Manner of judging among the An∣cients 46. Marcionites refuted 24. Martyrs in their troubles fled to Christ by prayer, not to any creature 133. their fu∣ture state in heaven 135. Martyrs de∣scribed 148. whence they have their white robes, and how they are made white 146. 148. their death is Christs victory 108. Maximilla a false prophetesse 49. The measuring of the Temple is the Chur∣ches reformation 211. The measuring rod or reed of the Church 212. Melito commended for sanctitie and Mar∣tyrdom 53. 54. Whether he were Bi∣shop of Sardis ibid. Merits of ours are nothing before God 33. Christ doth not establish the Merits of works 69. Merits of works refu∣ted 13. 59. 357. 384. 545. Metonymicall and Sacramentall phrases 24. 419. Michael is Christ 266. The exposition of the word Michael ibid. Miracles of Antichrist 308. How they differ from true Miracles 309. Anti∣christs miracles according to Jesuits ibid Mixture of Ecclesiasticall rites with Paga∣nisme & Judaisme when brought in 76 Monkes originall 117. Montanus blasphemously affirmed that he was the comforter 49. The Moon red with blood, what it signifies 128. It is the Church ibid. The Moon receives its light from the Sun ibid. The Moon under the feet of the woman 259 The Morning Star 52. 53. Moses his twofold song 368. The Mother of fornications who 41. Mountains removed 130. They denote Emperors and Christian kings ibid. The Mountain cast into the sea what it noteth 160. MYRIAS what 189. Mysteries of the faith whither four 92. The Mystery of the Angel with the Golden Censer expounded 154. Mysticall famine proclaimed 114. N. NAturall misery of all men 78. The Name of God written on the faithfull 73. The Name of the City of God ibid. The Name of Christ ibid. The Name of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost is seldom absolutely expres∣sed in the Revelation 8. The Names of the Elect written in the book of life shall never be blotted out 61. The new Name no man knoweth but he that hath it 46. The Name of the Generall how known unto no man 490. why he hath his name written on his thigh 492. The Names of the Apostles why written on the foun∣dations of the city 561. The Nations that were saved, how they are
both the city and the citizens 569. The nations possessing the inward court 215. New heaven and the new earth whither ta∣ken allegorically or properly 549. 550. The New Jerusalem how it descends from heaven 551. Its originall ibid. Etymo∣logie 560. walles and gates 561. foun∣dations ibid. foursquare figure 562. quantity ibid. it glitters with gold 563. the matter of the gates 566. court ibid. temple 567. light 568. citizens 569. her peace and tranquility 570. glory 571. pleasantnesse 574. puritie and majesty 576. her governour ibid. her felicity 577. The New opinion of some learned brethren touching the thousand yeers examined 510. 511. Nice taken by the Turks 192. Nicolaitans their doctrine 36. 44. What their heresie was according to Antichrists opinion 45. The Nicolaitans openly to∣lerated in the Church of Pergamus ibid. Number of the Beast what it is 315. The Numeral letters denoting Antichrist, whither Greek or Hebrew letters 317. O. OAthes how lawfull 203. Occasion of rejoyceing over Babylons destruction 475. Old and new Romes cruelty against the Godly 471. 472. The Old and new Gogish warre 536. One and the same thing why oftentimes re∣presented under diverse types 109. Open books denote judicial proces 544. O∣pinion of the Fathers about the said books ibid. Opening of the book what it signifies 98. Opening of the seales 106. Open door what it signifies 65. Christ Opening no man can shut 64. The Open door in heaven what it is 86. OPinions of the Fathers without scripture prove nothing 223. Opinion of the au∣thour touching the book that was closed or shut 96. 97. Opinions about the star fallen from heaven 168. 169. Opinions about the sea-beast 282. 283. Opinions about the book written within & without 95. 96. Opinions about the womans flight 275. Opinions touching the trum∣pet of the sixt Angel 185. Oppression of the Church under Anti∣christ 106. It came not all at once but by degrees 225. Oracles of the Revelation why for the most part taken out of the old testament 596. Apollos oracle to Augustus 503. Ora∣cles of the Devill wholy ceased at Christs suffering on the Crosse 502. 503. Order of existence betwixt the Father and the Son 7. Order of the tribes not observed 143. Ottoman the Turks first Emperor 186. The Out-spread firmament how created 130. Out of every tribe of Israel how to be un∣derstood 142. 143. P. PAngs of the Church in travell 259. The Pale horse diversly interpreted 116 It denoteth the Church being sick even to death toward Antichrists rising 117. The Papacy a filthy sinck of all manner of lies 361. Papacy established in the West and Mahumetisme in the East 124. 125. How Christ the Son of righteous∣nesse is darkned in the Papacy 127. The Papacy acknowledgeth not Christ for the onely Mediatour 128. The Pa∣pacy must be left & separated from 484 Papists by their Idolatry draw the armies of the Turks upon Christendome 194. the Papists fable of the two witnesses 221. refuted 222. their opinion of the 2660 dayes refuted 224. the true and safest opinion 225. the Papists crucifie Christ 320. their glosse refuted 356. Papists glory in their multitude, object∣ing to us the paucity of Orthodox Chri∣stians 58. Parabolicall declaration of the harvest 361 Parallel of the third and fourth Act 145. Pastors duty 56. They are spirituall Phy∣sicians ibid. Patmos where 18. 19. Paul hath set forth Antichrist in his colours 288. The feined Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans is Apocrypha 74. Peace what it is 7. The Pleasantnes of the caelestial city 574. The Pelagian Heresie 82. 83. Pergamus a city of Troas 22. A Periphrasis of Hell 495. Persecution, The first persecution of Chri∣stians under Tiberius & Nero 5. 19. the second under Domitian ibid. the nine persecutions under the Romane tyrants 110. A new persecution 272. by the ambition and riot of Bi∣shops 273. A new civill persecution
by Emperours 273. 274. Antichri∣stian persecution how long it dured 358. Perseverance commended unto us by a con∣solatory argument 61. Perseverance un∣der the Crosse, is to overcome 72. The Pharises being hypocrites were worse then if they had been blinde 70. Philadelphia a city of Mysia 22. 64. Phocas gave the key of the bottomlesse pit unto the Pope of Rome 171. A Piece of Ordnance of incredible big∣nesse 190. what kinde of garment it was 24. Polycarpus Iohns disciple 38. The Pope is Antichrist 63. 320. 346. He lifts up himself above Christ 63. Arrogates the title of Ʋniversall con∣trary to their own Canons ibid. He impudently assumes to himself what is proper to Christ 64. He deceitfully sel∣leth pardons and heaven for money 78. How he causeth fire to come down from heaven 310. Why he is not expresly named by the holy Ghost 321. He cau∣seth his God to be carried on a white horse 489. The Popes pride 63. He is author of most cruell warres a∣mong Christians 129. He not content with his spirituall lightnings, draws the temporall sword also against Kings and Emperors 128. His cruelty against the Martyrs 129. He vaunts him∣self to be Christs Vicar and Monarch of the Church on earth, and will be wor∣shipped as God 174. The Pope long since called Antichrist 318. 319. He is the Babylonish Strumpet 320. How he came to be the Eight King 428. He assumed the Augustall title of Ponti∣fex Maximus, Which of old was the title of heathenish Emperors 428. 429. He condemneth all for hereticks who oppose his tyrannie and Idolatry 129. Why he would never be present at the Eastern Councils, but by Legates 289. His Latine Church 317. Pope Silvester 163. Pope Zachary depo∣seth Childerick King of France 130. He condemnes married Bishops and Priests as Nicolaitans 45. Popish heathenisme 215. Popish excom∣munication is that evil ulcer 379. Di∣verse opinions about the same ibid. Po∣pish Rome is the woman sitting upon many waters 443. And the seat of Antichrist 444. Popish idolatry is fornication 456. The Powring of the first Viall on the earth 378. Of the second Viall 380. Di∣verse opinions about it 381. Of the third viall, and divers opinions about it 382. Of the fourth Viall 385. Of the fift Viall 388. Of the sixt Viall 390. Of the seventh Viall 398. Power received from the Dragon 298. Six effects of the Beasts power 308. 309. Preachers of Gods word how they inflict plagues 376. Praedestination must be taught though many abuse this doctrine 584 The Praerogative of being the first fruits to God, is an allusion unto the first fruits of the Law 336. Praetence of Antichristian tyranny is false 241. The vain pretence of Idolaters 242. Priesthood common to all the faithfull 14. Priscilla a false Prophetesse 49. Priscillian declared an heretick by the Pope 129. The Prison is put for all kinde of torments 40. Priviledges of Antichrists marked ones expressed in the Bull of Pope Martin V. 314. Promises how far they become debts 250. The Prophets and Apostles wrought not miracles by their own power 50. To Prophesie again 208. To Prophesie is to Preach Propheticall and Apostoli∣call Doctrine 224. A Prophesie of the future condition of the Godly under Antichrist 121. A pro∣phesie found in the house of the Gover∣nour Salezianus 440. The Prophesie why sealed 583. A Proverbiall description of the ungodly despairing 133. Punishments of the wicked 251. 252. Purgatory 357. Puritie of the Saints whence it cometh 90. Q. QVadratus a disciple of the Apostles 64. A Question concerning the order of the Re∣velation
365. Quintilla a false Prophetesse 49. R. REligious worship of Angels expresly condemned in Scripture 9. Religi∣ous worship unto the Creature simply denied 582. It being a most horri∣ble unpiety 486. The Reasons of the Angel against the wor∣ship of Angels, cannot be taken away by Idolaters 486. The Red horse is the Church of Mar∣tyrs 110. On whom Christ is said to ride 111. To Render the double to Antichrist, how it agrees with Equitie and Justice 461. 462. Remedie of pride 77. 78. Repentance described 34. 49. If true comes never to late 79. Why it is neces∣sary 387. Representation of the state of the Primi∣tive Church 106. Reprobates divided into Eight rancks 555. 556. The Rest of the dead who 517. The Rest of the womens seed who they are 279. Their Epithetes ibid. The Revealing of future things is proper to God alone 3. The Revelation. It treateth of future things 5. How Iohn received it ibid. It was written by the Evangelist John ibid. It is an holy canonicall book of di∣vine scripture 6. Containing excellent doctrines, precepts and promises of the Churches deliverance and of the marri∣age of the Lamb 6.7. It hath many phra∣ses proper to it self and excelling 8. Where John saw and wrote the same, how and on what day 18. 19. Whi∣ther the whole was revealed in one Lords day 20. Revenge in the Saints how it can stand with piety and charitie 461. 462. Reward due and not due 586. Reward of the just is blessednes, of the unjust exclu∣sion out of the heavenly city 591. 592. Reward in heaven or degrees of glory may be different, seeing there shall be degrees of punishment in hell 71. Re∣wards propounded unto them that over∣come 72. Of whom there are three rancks 249. Ribera taxed 14. 20. His opinion of the four Angels 137. His argument not solid 138. His litterall exposition can∣not stand ibid. His opinion of the An∣gel with the Censer 153. His reasons answered 154. His salving of Papall Rome 346. His eschappatories an∣swered ibid. His new fiction in the Popes behalf refuted 347. His rea∣sons touching Romes falling away exa∣mined 348. He commits crimen lae∣sae majestatis against the Pope ibid. Contradicts himself and actuseth the Pope of extreme negligence ibid. His fiction refuted 409. 410. 411, &c. His false opinion of the beast refuted 416. With the common opinion of ex∣positors about the same ibid. His quaere why evill spirits rather frequent the de∣serts, then populous places 455. The true cause thereof laid down by the Au∣thor ibid. Ribera refuted 514. He refuteth Bellarmins fiction 535. He confesseth the Pope shall be thrust out of Rome 441. A Ridiculous Etymologie of the word Apocalyps 3. The true Etymologie thereof ibid. Rivers and fountains are the breasts of the Sea 383. Romane Legions of how many soldiers they consisted 132. Romane Merchants buy and sell the souls of men 456. 457. Rome had no Epistle sent her from Christ, and why 22. She is the calamity and destruction of the Christian Church 215. Her relapse to Paganisme 347. She must be burnt not before but after Antichrists comming 441. Whether Antichrist shall be abolished at Romes burning ibid. The Ruine of Old and New Babylon set forth by the same type 470. Ruine of the tenth part of the great city 245. The Rule of Articles with the Greeks is not alwayes observed 100. 307. 406. 410. 437. The Rule of finall causes 448. Rupertus opinion of the four Angels 136. He by winds understandeth teachers of Christian belief 138. His opinion of the Angel with the Censer 153.
S. SAbinian a proud Bishop 127. Sackcloth of hair 127. Signifies Ro∣mane traditions 128. The Saints weaknesse at the beholding of the Divine Majestie 25. How farr the Saints may fall away, how not 34. The Saints shall with Christ judge the world 104. How they require ven∣geance on the wicked 120. They may not be called upon, neither do intercede for us 122. nor pray for the Church Militant 147. The Papists trans∣form them into tutelar Idols ibid. How the Saints have right to Christ 591. Saladin Emperor of Egypt 190. Saphyr a Gemme of India 564. Saracens invading the provinces of the Ro∣mane Empire 186. Sardica a city of Illyria 54. The Sardine its colour and vertue 87. 565. Sardonix 565. Satan His proper domicile 44. He dwel∣leth in the children of disobedience ibid. His casting down into the earth is mysti∣call 266. 267. His Epithetes ibid. His action against the Saints 269. Why he was bound 502. 503. How he must be let loose again 505. 531. His twofold attempt 531. The Scripture must be read of all 583. Its twofold effect 584. The Scri∣ptures are authentick and perfect 596. The Sea of Chrystall is the world 90. Di∣verse opinions about it 91. Why a third part of the sea was turned into blood 160. The Sea swalloweth up the great mountain 161. The Sea out of which the Beast ascended 288. The Sea of glasse is the world of wicked men 368. Why said to be of glasse ibid. The Sea into which the second viall was powred 381. The Sea renewed 551. The Sea-beast who it is according to Pa∣reus 287. Seales their twofold use 97. The generall signification of the seales 107. The Seal of the living God 140. imprinted on the Elect 141. 142. The Sealed ones distribution according to the severall tribes of Israel is not to be taken litterally 143. The Sealed ones who they were 329. diverse opinions about them 330 The Sealed in Chap. 7. and Chap. 14. compared together 331. The Second death 42. 528. The Second trumpet answereth to the red horse 160. How long the sixt trumpet was to sound 205. Securitie and fear in the Papacy 341. Seducement by signes 310. What it is to Seduce ibid. Separation from the Papacie commanded by God 459. Serpents have Venome in their head and tongue 191. The Seven Churches to whom John wrote 7. The Seven spirits who 9.54. The opi∣nions of Andreas, Lyranus, and Ribera about the same 9. Seven is a perfect number 10. The Seven stars what they note 25. the Seven soun∣ding Angels 152. 153. Seven put for an indefinite number 202. The Seven Mountains of Rome are the heades of of the Beast 420. 421. The Seventh ttumpet forerunner of the last judgement 247. The seventh trum∣pet what ibid. It puts an end to the Churches calamities 205. The Se∣venth viall answereth to the Seventh trumpet 398. The Seventh Angel 246. 247. The Sharp Sickle what it noteth 360. How it was thrust into the Earth by Christ 361. Shortly how to be expounded 4. The Short time of Antichrists reign how to be understood 121. 271. 272. The Sight of God is the Saints happinesse 251. A Signe what it is 364. Signes of assu∣red peace 570. Silence for an half houre in heaven what it denoteth, with diverse opinions about it 152. Sinnes reaching up to heaven 460. Romes sins do reach to heaven 461. Even small sins come to heaven, that is, unto Gods knowledge, which refuteth the di∣stinction of Veniall and Mortall sins 460. Sinners repenting in this life, have an as∣sured promise of pardon 50. The Sitter on the Red horse, and on the Black horse with his ballance, is Christ 111.
111. 113. the Sitter on the throne who he is described 87. Six distinct visions 84. the Sixt viall true∣ly interpreted 392. 393. Sixtus V. Endeavoured to thrust Charles IX. king of France, and Elisabeth queen of England out of their dominions 130. The Sixt vision unto what times it belongs 402. 403. Slaughter of Antichristians 245. Smyrna a city of Ionia 21. The Smoke out of the bottomles pit is Po∣pish Divinity, humane decrees 172. the Smoak of punishment 353. Whi∣ther there be Smoak in Hell ibid. the Smoak of prayers ibid. Smoak a Sym∣bole of Gods wrath 372. Socinus his blasphemous fiction 13. The Son of perdition destroyeth the earth 251. The Son of Man denoteth Christ 359. The Son shall deliver up the kingdome to the Father, how 578. Songs of the Revelation 369. The Sounding of the fourth Angel 164. Diverse opinions about it ibid. The Sounding of the second trumpet, how farre to be extended 161. The Souls of the Martyrs departed this life are with Christ 119. How John could see their Souls they being invisible 513. How they lived and reigned with Christ 515. Whither they reigned all together at one time ibid. They cease not to reigne after the thousand yeeres are ex∣pired 516. How the Souls do fall & rise again 520. The Soul of signes is the word 470. The Souls of the Saints de∣parted must not be worshipped 105. Spirituall fraternity betwixt Christs mem∣bers is the bond of love 18. Spirituall famine of Orthodox doctrine in the dayes of Constantius and other A∣rian Emperours 114. 115. Spirituall life of the Souls with Christ 514 515. The Spouse and Wife how differing 480. Ornaments of the Spouse 481. To Stand and not stand in judgement what it signifieth 134. To Stand be∣fore the throne 146. To stand before God 543. The Standing of the four Beasts what it denotes 92. Stars falling from heaven who they are, and when they fell 129. The Starres fal∣ling signifies Apostacie from the true faith 162. 261. Stars are teachers and Bishops of Churches 162. 170. why teachers are compared to Stars 25. The Strong wind blowing down the Figs is the Papall Authoritie 129. Structure of the old temple 213. The Subject of the Revelation 4. The Succession of the Romane Church 408. The Summe of the fourth vision 252. Its foure Acts 253. The Sunne (Christ) wholy darkned in the Papacie 173. Sun and heat diversly interpreted 385. 386. The Susian women were beastlie harlots 407. To Swear by the creature is a horrible im∣piety 204. The Sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ our Captain, with which he smi∣teth the wicked, is spirituall 491. The Synecdoche in the 1000. yeers of the Martyrs reigne 509. is proved 516. The Synod called Sardicensis took its name of Sardica, not of Sardis 54. The Symphonie of the heavenly inhabi∣tants is perpetuall 147. T. TAbernacle of God is the Church 299. To Take of from the prophesie what it is Tamherlan his huge armie 189. The Temple of God is the Church 212. The Ten kings are to be differenced from the seven former 432. Who the Ten kings are 433. Ten dayes what they signifie 41. The Third part of men slain by the Turks 191. The Third Act of the second vision hath two parts 124. The Third universall vision 150. in what it differs from the former ibid. Its be∣ginning and ending ibid. Third Act of the sixt vision 476. Third Angel 350. The Thousand yeers of Christs reigne and the Dragons binding are the same 531. these yeeres are not indefinitely to be understood 507. in histories and in the prophets they are never indefinitely taken ibid. wher they begin & end 508. 531. how they agree with the 42 months 509
they cannot be referred to the last times 510. Why they are defined 516. the condition of the godly during these 1000 years 511. What Satan is said to do at the end of these yeares 530. Threatnings of punishment in Scripture are to be taken with a condition of repen∣tance, either expresly or tacitely 36. What the Threatning of the Harlots children teacheth us 49. 50. Three a number of perfection 394. The Three dayes and an half what they sig∣nifie 241. The Three Legates, how they proceed out of the mouthes of three 394. Why they are said to be three impure spirits ibid. Who they are 395. Three books attributed to God in scripture 60. 96. The Threefold distinction of time what it noteth 276. Theodoretus his opinion of Gog and Magog 535. The Throne of Christ 83. The Throne of God denotes his dominion over all things 87. The white Throne of Christs glory 542. Thrones why set up 512. The Throne of the Beast is the Romane Sea, according to Lyra 388. Diverse opi∣nions about the same 389. Thyatira a citie of Lydia 22. Time, times and half a time what it signi∣fieth 276. The Time of Antichrists rising noted. 316. 317. 318. The Time of betroathing and marriage 480. Timothie no Bishop of Ephesus in Johns time 30. The Title of the Revelation answereth un∣to the titles of the ancient Prophets, and confirmeth the authority of the book 3. The Titles of the witnesses are not to be lit∣terally understood 226. Their contem∣ptible habit 227. Their dignity ibid. Their power to turn water into blood 230. Topaze a precious Gemme 565. Torments of Hell 353. To Tread under foot, signifies to destroy and wast in hostile manner 215. The Tree of life 37. It is in the middest of the street 575. and on either side ibid. It is one onely, viz. Christ ibid. What fruit it alwayes beareth ibid. Trees denote the Apostles and chief teachers 158. The Tribes of Israel not reckoned accord∣ing to their naturall order 143. The Tribe of Dan why lest out 144. Turkes cruelty 188. Their horses are ex∣cellent 189. With what forces the Turks Emperors commonly do ride a hunting ibid. Their successe in Grae∣cia, Thracia, Hungary 191. The Ve∣tians gave them a great overthrow 190. They notwithstanding took Cyprus from the Venetians ibid. The Two witnesses whither the two Testa∣ments 223. They are indefinitely ta∣ken 224. How they shall smite the earth 230. They lived not again Py∣thagorically 242. Ʋnder the two wit∣nesses and olive trees are comprehended Godly Princes 228. Two Eagles wings given to the woman 274. The Twofold garments of the Saints 60. Two rancks of such as shalbe judged 249 Tyrants can do no more then what is per∣mitted them 111. Why God suffers them ibid. V. VBiquitie of Christs flesh refuted 15.23. It is a burden not imposed by Christ 52. Vials by a double trope, are the prayers of the Saints 102. Vials in the Greeke whence derived 372. Victorie of the Saints fourfold 366. The Virginitie spoken of in Chap. 14. is not to be understood of carnall virginitie 334. Visions are threefold 19. Visions why so often iterated 364. Volumina  were bookes written within and without 97. Voyces and thunders what they note 156. Voyces of great rejoycing 247. The Voyce of Christ the revealer of the Re∣velation 86. Voyce of the Herauld touching the opening of the book 98. Vrbs and Civitas how they differ 560. Vse of examples in punishments 50. Vse of the rejoycing over Babylons ruine in the Thesis, and in the Hypothesis 475. The Vse of the Saints sealing 142.
W. WAlles called moenia a muniendo 561. The Walles of Romish Babylon 392. VValking in the middest of the Candle∣sticks, what 31. The Warre of Michael with the Dra∣gon 266. The Waters east out after the woman by the Dragon are Heresies 278. Waters signifie peoples 130. Waters of Eu∣phrates 392. The most deep Waters of the Romish Babylon 393. The Way to amend errours of Doctrine and corruption of manners 57. What things the Church may appoint 20. Which is, which was, and which is to come: expounded 8. VVhite raiment of fine linnen belonging to whom 58. What White robes Iohn in∣tendeth 79. How we are made White in the blood of the Lamb 148. VVhitenesse what it noteth 79. White∣nesse of the horse what it noteth 489. the VVhite horse whence it came forth 107. 108. It figureth out the first face and purity of the Primitive Church ibid. It hath Christ for his rider ibid. It was made black in the first 200. yeers 112. The White stone what it is 45. 46. Whither the Church built upon the Rock can be removed out of its place 35. Whither the Church may suffer for the sinne of her Governour ibid. VVho are blessed after death 355. Whoredome punished with filthy diseases 49. Whoredomes and luxuriousnesse of Popes 411. The Whore how she sitteth upon waters, the beast and upon peoples 438. The VVhore hated, forsaken, made naked, and burnt 439. VVho they were that lived and reigned with Christ 514. VVhy the 1260. yeeres are not reckoned from Constantines time 277. VVicked men abuse the long suffering and benignitie of God unto carnall securitie 49. VVindes withheld from blowing what it denoteth 139. The VVildernesse signifies Popish desola∣tion 275. VVings of the 4. beasts why full of eyes 93. VVings of the locusts 183. VVine and oyl what they signifie 115. The VVine of fornication 407. The VVoman clothed with the sun 256. A difficult question about it ibid. The Woman is a tipe of the Church in its beginning ibid. an Historicall compa∣ring of this type with Marie and Christ 256. 257. The VVoman sitting on the beast is Rome 409. This woman sitteth upon waters, upon the beast and upon the mountaines 420. The VVomen of Susia beastlie strumpets 407. VVonderful copulation of the woman and the beast 420. VVonders litterallie to be understood 125 and allegorically ibid. The diverse kinds of wonders as particular, universal Omi∣nous, &c. 126. VVonders in the aire, and in the earth 399. In the Sea and on men 401. The VVord of patience, is the Doctrine of the Gospell 69. VVormwood, not naturally, but theologi∣cally taken 163. The VVorship of the Heavenly inhabi∣tants what it is 478. VVorship due to God belongs not to Angels 486. VVorshippers in the temple who they are 213. A VVorthy observation of the Authour 276. All our VVorthinesse is from God 59. Y. YEares with a numerall Epithete are never indefinitely taken 507. Z. ZEale, Or to be Zealous, what it is 79. The end of the Table.
ERRATA. PAge 17. Line 3. blot out Onely. p. 21. l. 45. for perished read was reckoned a∣mong. p. 44. l. 23. for comparitively read comparatively. p 49. l. 38 for conse∣quence read consequent p. 56. l. 28. for  read . p. 59. l. 7. for  read . p. 67. l. 32. for which sheweth read He addeth. p. 62. l. 14. for more of this in its place read this conjecture we leave. p. 80. l. 4. for philantropie read philan∣thropie p. 87. l. 13. for manificent read Magnificent. Page 115. lines 20.21. Read, He is bidden not to hurt the wine and the oyl, That is, not to overthrow certain fundamentall heads of the faith, in which is founded the faith, hope and consolation of the Church, touching the person and office of Christ: makeing the sence thus: Howsoever Hereticks shall involve all things with their darknesse, and shall also draw the Orthodox teachers either by force or deceit on their side; yet they shall not be able to hurt the wine and oyl of the Ca∣tholick Faith, but there shall be some to maintain the same, that the whole be not obscured with Hereticall blacknesse. And such, &c. p. 122. l. 8. for His read Antichrist. p. 131. l. 31. After the words Diocletian persecution, adde, but (as throughout in the Scriptures) of the day of judgement. p. 285. l. 20. for war read And the holy war. p. 186. l. 40. for Cypresse read Cyprus. p. 189. l. 21. for Vailachia read Walachia. p. 145. l. 5. for behold read beheld. p. 194. l. 17. for Mutters read Muttering. p. 323. for  read  and adde in the line fol∣lowing under the Gr. 1. the figure 5 which will make just 665. p. 324. l. 10. IS is left out p. 360. l. 14. for judicary read judicatory. p. 363. l. 9. for apparations read apparitions. p. 476. in the margent, for Second vision, read Sixt vision. p. 490. l. 39. for despare read despaire p. 492. l. 48. for worship read worshipped. Number of Folioes mistaken. 17. for 19. 64. f. 62. 66. f. 68. 188. f. 196. 185. f. 285. 378. f. 379. After Page 408. 4 leaves and an half are amisse quoted. Pages twice quoted. 360. 361. 362. 363. These and other like defaults through the mistake of the Printer, the Courte∣ous Reader is intreated to correct. FINIS.
