R1813 12686509 65778
Ohel or Beth-shemesh. A Tabernacle for the Sun: OR IRENICVM EVANGELICVM. An IDEA of Church-Discipline, In the THEORICK and PRACTICK Parts; Which come forth first into the World as Bride∣groom and Bride, hand in hand; by whom you will have the totum essentiale of a true Gospel-Church state, accord∣ing to Christs Rules and Order, left us when he Ascended. In which you may finde the Hidden Mystery of whole Christ, in Head, Neck, and Body. Hidden in former Ages from the Sons of Men. Eph. 3.4, 5. Published for the benefit of all Gathered Churches, more especially in England, Ireland, and Scotland. By JOHN ROGERS An unfeined Friend and Servant of the Bridegrooms and Brides, and Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, late at Purleigh in Essex, now at Tho. Apostles, Lond. Declared for the most part in Christ-Church, Dublin in Ireland. Imprimatur Joseph Caryl. Psal. 19.4, 5. Their line  (or rule and structure) is gone out thorough all the earth; in them hath he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, &c.  or Heb. To the Sun in altissimo gradu. In that day I will raise up the Tabernacle of David that is faln, and build it as of old, Amos 9.11. LONDON: Printed for R. I. and G. and H. Eversden, to be sold at the Grey-Hound in Pauls Church-yard. 1653.
Channuccah. A TABERNACLE For the SVN. The first BOOK. CHAP. I. That there is a visible Discipline, or Politie of the Church under the Gospel, ordained by Christ; and what it is: and how it differs from carnal Policy. NOthing is more clear out of the word of God, then that there is a Gospel-Discipline,Wisdomes Politie, or Church-State for Saints of divine Insti∣tution, and by divine instruction; Prov. 1.3. To receive the instruction of (Christ) Wisdome, Justice, Judgement, and Equity; for Solomon (who was a type of Christ) teaches his Discipline in this
Book of Proverbs, which you have some call his Ethicks, as relating to morall Precepts; for Divinity is like some great Lady that is every day in a new dresse; and Morality like to a handmaid that waiteth on her;Sim. Christ [the typified Solomon] intends hereby to tell us of his Order,Divinity and Morality. and of the Discipline of Wisdomes house (viz. his Church) Prov. 8.1, 2, 3. and Chap. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. he begins with this exhortation, Prov. 1.8. My son hear the instruction (or Discipline, as many read it) of thy Father,Expos. viz. his spirituall documents, and teachings,From Faher and Mother. and forsake not the Law of thy Mother, that is, of the Church, Gal. 4.26. who bears, and brings forth chil∣dren to the Lord. So that it seems Christs Discipline (which is of the Father, and of the Mother) consists in the Spirit,Spirit and Truth. and in the truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. not onely inwardly, but it is also outwardly; as to outward Orders, Laws, and Ordinances of the Church. Thus the Lord opens the ear to Discipline,Expos. sayes Elihu to Job chap. 36.10. and commands them from iniquity; that is, sayes Calvin, he instructs them in his wayes,Gods design in setting up Gospel-Dis∣cipline. and teaches them to amend. This shews, that Gods designe in giving us so good a Gospel-Discipline, is, thereby to make us good and Gospel Disciples, both in knowledge and in practise, and is therefore of great con∣cernment to us in teaching us these three things,To make us Gospel Disci∣ples. 1 Subess; 2 Coesse; 3 Praeesse. First, to be obedient to his Laws, and Ordinances, ut dis∣cipuli,1 For order. living together in Order: Secondly, to love one another,2 For unty and all Saints living together in unity, ut socii, Psal. 133.1, 2.3 For edifica∣tion of one anoher. Thirdly, to instruct one another, and to strive together, to excell in exhorting, comforting, and teaching to the edifying of one another, 1 Cor. 14.12. ut Magi∣stri, as Masters of knowledge, Psal. 119.98, 99. and there∣fore it is, that there is so great a need, and notable a use of this good order, and Gospel-Discipline amongst us, which God hath of his goodnesse, and in his wisdome provided for us.Hereby ap∣pers Gods great love to us. So sayes old Bernard, super Cant. Serm. 23. What abundant cause have we to blesse the Lord (who was no wayes bound to us) that of his free love should let down a Discipline out of his owne bosome (as it was brought by Christ to us from the
Father for us to dwell in? because the School-men could say,Th. Aqu. 22. Q. 80.1.3. Expos. And his great care over us. Dis∣ciplina non debetur ex debito, quia inferiori non est aliquis obligatus, in quantum est inferior; Man is the inferiour, therefore it is man that is obliged to the Lord his Superiour, for ma∣king so much, and so excellent soul-provision (hence reli∣gio a religando) Ma. 24 45. , Who is a faithfull and wise servant,Expos. whom his Lord hath made ruler over his houshold, to give them meat in due season? So we see the Lord takes care for us, and makes provision for poor souls, for he hath appointed, (constituit being a compound word, is as much as to say, cum aliis statuit, whom the Lord hath appointed (joyntly with others) as an Overseer, (super fami∣litium suum,) over a remnant of his family. Now,The necessity of it is undeni∣able. woe bee to them that reject this Discipline of Gospel-institution, Psal. 50.16, 17. a meer Moralist will tell you there is a necessity of Discipline. (See but Tull▪ in's Offices lib. 8. & 9. de invent. ante finem libri) and a meer Formalist will tell you, that there is a necessity of Church-Discipline, which is a principle own'd by all for a truth (except Atheists) bee they no more then meer pretenders, or professours. As for this Church-Discipline we shall finde it in the word, and fetch it from the Fountaine freely flowing forth through many more Scriptures, then I shall mention both out of Old and New Testament. First, in the Old Testament, we finde many Prophesies,This Discipline is proved, 1 cut of Old Testament. and Promises filled with this, as Psal. 110.3. Thy people shall bee willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holinesse, which must bee meant of this visible Gospel-Church-state,Expos. wherein Saints (having communion with Christ, and one with ano∣ther) do worship the Lord, as appears Psa. 29.2.It is the beauty of holinesse. Worship the Lord in the beauty of holines; this is the Lords house, here is his worship due unto his name; out of this Sion goes forth the Law, and it is beautifull for scituation. So in Isa. 2.2, 3. It shall come to passe in the last dayes, that the mountaine of the Lords house shall bee established in the top,Expos. &c. which foresees the singular fellow∣ship of Saints in these last dayes wherein we live (large∣ly) exalting Gods owne way of worship, which he will bring forth with shoutings, and withall an attractivum bonum,
a winning excellency will shew it selfe to the ravishing of the Saints, and the re-edifying of their soules as (in statu quo prius) of old; so that the very out-casts of Israel shall (more fluminis) by a spirituall instinct, and from occult qualities flow freely (and be fully satisfied) unto it, yea up to it, which is a greater wonder. The glory of this latter house shall be abundantly greater then the former,The glory of the latter house greatest. which notwithstanding was filled with his glory. This house the Prophet also premonstrates in Ezek. 43.10, 11, 12. which looks to the Gospel-time and Temple. Secondly, in the New Testament, this truth triumphantly appears,Proved in New Testa∣ment by Christ for our Saviour testifies himself unto it, in Mat. 16.18, 19, and upon this rock will I build my Church (in the Heb.  but, is not a copulate) but Christ himselfe is this rocke that is pointed at for the Churches foundation,Expos. 1 Cor. 3.11. or else is will fall: And as the verb metaphorically concludes this Do∣ctrin of Church-Discipline (being taken from a building consisting of many particular parcels made up into one,It is a building fitly compact∣ed. . also of such a Society which are of neer relation and sweet consanguinity (spiritually taken) including the order of the house, which is thus built up an habitation to the Lord through the Spirit;It is not an (openly) mix∣d congregati∣on.) So also the person and tense doe signally declare, Christ is yet about this building (who alone is the Carpenters Sonne, the Son of Mary) as afterward we shall shew. For further proof, see Mat. 18.17, 18. the Church is not there ment a mixed company (sayes Cameron in loc.Expos.) nor a mixed worship,Ecclesiam esse miscllaneam falsum oft dicere Cam. in loc. quia confusis▪ cultibus confun∣ditur vrus Deus cum Idolis. Vrsin in secundo praecepto. Proved by the Apostles, and primitive Saints. saith Vrsin: but you have here commanded and commended unto you by Christ, the good Gospel-order and Discipline thereof. This the Apostles practised, Act. 2.42. and 46▪ 47. And in all the Epistles of Paul, it is apparent, Phil. 3.17. 1 Thess. 1.7. 2 Thess. 3.9. Cum multis aliis, &c. This the Apostle preached, Act. 8.12. instructing others in it, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 14.12. and commending others for it, 1 Cor. 11.2. Coloss. 2.5. 1 Thess. 1.6, 7. besides abundance of examples of all the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Phillippi, Macedonia, Antioch, Samaria, and the seven Churches of Asia▪ So that we are encompassed about with a broad cloud of wit∣nesses,Examples. and cannot but concurre with all in this received
Axiome, or undeniable truth, that there is a Gospel-Discipline for the Saints to submit unto, and to walk under, together in order and unity. This many call Ecclesiastick Politie, as Cartwright, Hooker,Christs Church Di∣scipline, or Politie, why, and how cal∣led so. with many others, because that so much skill and judgement is required for the ordering of the affaires of the true Church of Christ, which we are here to treat of, 1 Tim. 3.15. this same is by others called the Church visible consisting of beleevers in body together, and under outward formes, order, Coloss. 2.5. and government, and under the power of Christ (King, and Lawgiver) committed to him by his Father, Matth. 28.18. Joh. 5.22. Joh. 13.3. and delegated unto him,Visibly, and in∣visibly all one Church. and executed by him visibly and invisibly; invisibly by his Spirit and word within, which are as the Ruling Elders and Officers, Joh. 14.16, 17. Joh. 16.7, 8.Sim. But visibly by his Ordi∣nances, and Officers in the Church without, Ephes. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. yet none ought to be a visible Officer (no nor member) but such a one as is ruled, directed, enabled, and qualified by Christ, and his Spirit, ordering within in their hearts; So that the formall and spirituall, outward and inward, visible, and invisible make but one Church: But more of these things hereafter. Onely this at present, before I proceed,How it differs from carnall worldly Po∣lite. I must acquaint you that there is a most dimense difference between this Discipline and Politie in severall particulars, of which some I shall name, and so haste. First,1 One and the sme in all places. Politie of Nations (or rather Policy whereby states are ruled) is not one and the same in all places, but as Physicke is administred according to the constitution and complexion of the body; so is Policy, and not in all places alike, but ac∣cording to the constitution and complexion of the people,Sim. and place; one Nation is ruled this way, another that way, but Christs Discipline of his Church is one and the same in all places, to all people, 1 Cor. 7.17. Secondly, Politie also differs according to the times, but this Gospel-Church-state doth not,2 In all ages. Cuncta tempo∣rum cursu mu∣tantur. but is the same (by rule) in all ages, and at all times, be they what they will, Ephes. 3.21. and Ephes. 4.11, 12. Media cultus sunt immutabilia, till the
coming of Christ, 1 Tim. 6.13, 14. 1 Cor. 11.26. Isa. 9.6, 7. Thirdly, Politie alwayes drives on a Selfe-interest, and seekes no further;3. In the inte∣rest it drives. but this Discipline of Christ drives on an interest above selfe (which is, as having the Moone under her feet) and is not therefore of this world, Joh. 5.30. Joh. 7.16, 17, 18. Heb. 2.12. Fourthly, Politie is ordered by certaine outward Lawes, and rules left (as a Gnomon) or laid downe for the tranquillity of the State;4. In the Lawes outward, and inward. but this Church of Christ is govern'd by the Word without, and the Spirit within (as will appeare hereaf∣ter) in power; and hence it is that Directories are out of date,Directories or Cannons are of no use there∣in. the Cannons discharged and broken in peeces, and Plat∣formes of men no more minded then as they are the Word of God, and till further light be given from above, and till the Spirit lead us further into the truth. Fifthly, Politie, and the Kingdomes of the world have many Kings, Emperours, and Rulers; but the Church of Christ over all the world hath but one and the same head,5. In the King and Governor. Ephes 1.22. and Ephes. 4.15. and Ephes. 5.23. 1 Cor. 11.3. Coloss. 1.18. who is to rule them by Spirituall influences, and outward Ordinances. Sixthly, Politie requires outward obedience, and no more (be the heart never so bad) but this Church-way of Christ calls for spirituall worship,6. In obedi¦ence. Joh. 4.23, 24. and the heart, Psal. 27.8. Prov. 3.1. Psal. 66.18. Psal. 51.17. Acts 4.32. Act. 8.21. & Act. 11.23. Seventhly, In Politie men have power of pulling downe, or setting up new Lawes by the Supreame authority of that Na∣tion or State,7. In altering or adding to Lawes. and their Lawes and Acts (as those of the Parliament) are binding, and of force: But in this Church of Christ there is no setting up new, or pulling downe old and true; Christs Lawes and word must stand without adding, diminishing, or altering, Rev. 22.18. this Discipline is not a nose of wax,Whene came Pope, Prelates Hierarchy. nor (as honest Cartwright sayes) taken out of Can∣nons, Lawes, Decrees of men, Popes, Prelates, or the like; from which pit came all the Locusts, and Scorpions, the Ro∣mish Hierarchy, the Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and their Ser∣vants,
Surrogates, Officials, Commissaries, and the rest of that trash and rubbish. Eighthly, Polity hath no higher principle then reason,8. In principle▪ but this way of Christ is abundantly above, and yet in nothing against pure reason. Ninthly, Polity is a great Fautor, and abettor of Customes, of long continuance, whereby the people are embondaged;9. About cu∣stoms of long continuance. but this way of Christ is very much an enemy to all customes and traditions of men (that are not of the Word of God) though of ever so long continuance and use: Vide Vrsin de 2 praecepto. Tenthly, Polity hath Corporall punishments, and power against opposers, enemies, offenders, or the like,10. In power of making obedi∣ent, and pu∣nishing Offen∣ders. Et ists vi coercere, ac ferro punire potest; but the Church-power is from a∣bove, the weapons of her warfare are spirituall, Non ferro sed verbo, non vi & armis, sed vi & efficacia; she uses the two-edged-sword of the Spirit, and Word, against all her opposers and offenders, neither are men compelled (as by Politicall pow∣ers) to obey, but they are drawne of God, and the Spirit con∣straineth them, Job 32.18. 2 Cor. 5.14. Eleventhly, Polity is full of Tricks, Arts, Quilits, and Ae∣quivocations, and lies ready at the catch,11. In the nature of it. according to a Judges (or great mans) interpretation, or construction: but this Gospel-way is full of plainenesse, truth, and simplicity, 2 Cor. 1.12. and 2.17. and is not according to mans interpretation, but the spirits, Rom. 12.8. 1 Cor. 5.8. Rom. 16.19. Twelfthly, Polity consists most in the Forme, and lives most in the out-ward show, pomp, and appearance,12. In the pomp and beauty of it. but this way of Christ consists most of inward beauty, pomp, and excel∣lency, 2 Cor. 5.12. and 2 Cor. 10.7. Joh. 7.24. and lives most in the spirit, and least in the forme. Thirteenthly, In Polity is the greatest respect of persons, one higher then another, making some Slaves, and others Lords;13. In respecting▪ persons or opinions. but in this Church-state of Christ it is an intolerable Tyran∣ny, and hath not the least allowance, Mark 10.42, 43. lest thereby we should have mens persons or opinions in admiration, Jam. 2.1.3, 1 Pet. 5.3.
Fourteenthly, Polity preferres men according to their out∣ward parts,14. In respect of gifts and abi∣lities. fleshly habits, of learning, wit, or prudence; but Christs Church-state sets up Christ, and his Spirit for Officers in chiefe, and such who are ruled and filled with the Spirit of Christ under them, so that not men, but Christ rules; Judas that had not this Spirit proved a Traitor, so will others. Fifteenthly, Polity grows every day more and more rusty, and the longer it lives,15. In the Con∣sequence of it. the more it will be out of date, and loathed at last, and like a Potsheard be dashed a peeces; but this way of Christ growes every day more and more glorious, and will be the beauty of the whole earth; Piety shall stand, whilst Policy shall fall, and the Church of Christ, that little stone (cut without hands) shall crowd Policy out of doores, and fill the whole earth, Dan. 2.35. Rev. 11.15. Psal. 48.1, 2. Isa. 62.4.7. In all these respects and many more (might I not be too tedious) I might easily demonstrate to all men the vast disproportion between this Gospel-Church-state and Policy,It differs from Ecclesiasticall Polity in a sense. whither in Church (where it hath been set up instead of Piety) or State, so that I meane not in any such sense that there is an Ecclesiasticall Polity, but as I have hinted be∣fore, and in order to visibles. Now who hath been more politick and subtill then that Beast, that hath for so long usurped Christs Seat? and what a many Romish Ornaments (like unto the Aegyptian Jewels) doe many men and Ministers yet retaine?Who more Politick, then the Beast se∣ven-headed, most subtill-pated in his Ecclesiasticall Discipline. fitter for a Golden Calfe, (which is to be grownd to powder) then to adorne the Tem∣ple, or Tabernacles of God; O that they were sent away from whence they came! and that we would come in sincerity to the Lords worke before us! which is, the building of his house for his honour to dwell in. But thus I have proved that there is a Gospel, orderly Church Discipline, and how farre it differs from Policy, whether cal∣led Ecclesiasticall (as some make it to consist altogether in formes, and things carnall) or civill. Now the Lord lead us into his owne Spirituall Temple, and Gospel-Church-state by his owne light: for how sad a thing is it to see his flock so scattered among Wolves, and the Saints in a confused darke, corrupt, Disciplinary way of walking without
order, rule, and ordinances? which so many Soules doe sit moaning for, and in the want of them in this their Wilder∣nesse-estate, wherein they have been lost for many ages toge∣ther;Saints susp∣ring (yet aspi∣ring) in a strange Land. and whilst they are sighing and sobbing in a strange Land, they that have led them into this Babylonian Captivity, doe call upon them to sing the Songs of Sion; but alas, their Harps are hung up upon the willowes, and they as in a strange Land are silent, which is the next thing I come unto. or, . Gnaraphel. CHAP. II. We have had our abode a long time under Antichristian darknesse and Discipline, and the Church was driven by the Dragon, and drawne by the Beast into a Wilder∣ness for many hundred yeares, and ever since how mise∣rably Soules have been blinded by bottomlesse smoake in a Popish Hierarchy, and so have continued to these dayes. IN the next place we are to shew how for many Ages to∣gether we have fallen foulely short of this holy and whol∣some Discipline of Christs Church, and have been abomi∣nably cheated with the rotten figgs, and choaked with the thick Romish foggs, and filthy infectious mists of Popish inventions, so that thereby the Sunne and the Aire have been abundantly darkned. The (poore) Church,Revel. 9.2. Rev. 12.1. she was before cloathed with the Sunne, encompassed round with purity of Religion,Expos. with brightnesse of Discipline, and in the clear light of Christ,What a happy condition the Church was in in the Apostles dayes both for Doctrine and Discipline. and Scriptures which were her rich ornaments in the twelve Apostles dayes; yea and after that till Constantines time she wore this Crowne of the twelve Starres, those glistring lights. And not only were the Saints (such as then lived) above the
Moone, and all sublunary enjoyments, but they had this borrowed light of the Word, meanes, and ordinances, to guide them in their pathes, and to direct them in their Discipline and Church state;Mat 10.16, 17, 18. but alas! (as our Saviour foretold what would follow) it fell out afterward that the red Dragon raged and watched to persecute the Church) which was done very sorely in Domitians dayes (and in Nero's) at which time the Church was pure notwithstanding,Anno 110. vid. Euseb. lib. 3. chap. 29. 2 Cor. 11.2. and (as yet) pre∣sented for a chast Virgin to Christ, though tormented, because she would not be deflowred, and although then (the Apo∣stles being all dead) fierce wolves met together by Flockes, and false Teachers,The Dagon persecutes her. and Pseudo-Apostles rose up apace, to oppose openly true Doctrine and Discipline. Rev. 12.4. Anno 179. Anno 204. Anno 256.This continued under the Emperours, Verus, and Seve∣rus, and Valerianus; O then! how this red Dragon (this bloudy Abaddon followed the Church, foaming with flouds of indignation, and yet for all that, the poore, and (almost) breathlesse Saints had a little respite under Galienus, Anno 262. and till that time I finde the Church continued yet ve∣ry chast,Anno 162. Euseb. lib. 7, c. 17. Images and Idols. Cent. 2 cap. 7. Anno 267. but then, presently after began Images to be set up, and Monuments to be erected in Caesarea Philippi, and other places, and in Dionysius his dayes Bishop of Rome, Anno 267. the Church began abominably to be deflowred and defiled; so that the true Saints and Churches could not escape a most sad persecution under Dioclesian,Anno 306. Euseb. lib. 8. & 9. and most hot and heavie under Maximinus, that matchlesse Tyrant, till torments in his bowels moved his bowels (against his will) to mitigate the vio∣lence of the persecution; this continued to the time of Con∣stantine and Licinius;Rev. 12.3. and although the red Dragon could not have his wil (do what he could) with these his heads and hornes, with which he used to push at,She was brought into the Wilder∣nesse. When? and how? Pareus. in Apoc. 12. v. 6. By loosing her Discipline. and (if he could) to have pushed out the memory of the Saints, that the name of a Christian might not be left, yet the Church liv'd and thriv'd till she was in those dayes driven into the Wildernesse, which was worse then all the Persecutions of the Dragon before, and this was (not mulatione loci, sed amissione ornatus) by loosing her former light, life, liberty, excellency, purity, and loveli∣nesse; her bright Discipline for darknesse of devotion, and de∣votion
of darknesse; her truthes for traditions, and Doctrines of Christ for inventions of men, and all this by her pretended friends at home; for now the Dragon had dragg'd the third part of the Starres after him, viz. Meteors and wandring Starres,And how? made up of earthy matter, but not fixed in the Globe of Heaven, them he hath cast downe with his tayle, i. e. by his Ser∣pentine subtilties, insinuations, strength, policy, and poy∣sonous infections; Oh sad! what Superstitions, Idolary, and will-worship began in those dayes to be inthron'd, and owned, yea in such a manner as is to be lamented at this day! for then started up the solemne celebration, up∣setting, dedication,Euseb. l. 10. cap. 3. Socrates, lib. i. cap 6. and adoring of Houses of Bricke and Clay, Lime and Stone, and Consecrating such kinde of places for the Temples of the Lord, calling them Catholicke, and Christning them Churches;When mee∣ting-places were made Churches. When Cruci∣fixes, Reliques of Saints, &c. came up. yea then the superstitious Mother of Constantine (viz. Helena) went a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to finde out Reliques, and Monuments, and then began Crosses to be set up, and Consecrated, and Christ's Nailes and Reliques to be kept and ador'd, and Miracles (pretended to be) wrought by them, (as they that loved Superstition and Idolatry did (and doe) report to this day. Thus, and many other wayes,Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 1 cap. 9. c. 17. was (the poor woman) the Church, forced into a fruitlesse, comfortlesse, dangerous, barren Desart-like condition, whilst Monkes and Popish Priests sprung up apace,Monkes, Priests. and whilst the glistring glory of the former (true) Discipline, Doctrine, and Ordinances did dye apace, and began to lye buried, and unregarded in the dust. But, ah blessed Lord, how excellently doth her deliverance draw nigh! and that it is hard by will appeare in the fol∣lowing Chapters. In the meane time, let all discerning men judge (to whom I appeale) what a miserable state hath the poore Church (visible) been in (to this day) for many hun∣dred yeares? and how thicke and three-fold her miseries grew in upon her in the absence of that bright Discipline and Doctrine which she had in the Primitive times; and also by the pride and presence of a cunning (and curious) counterfeit thereof, which hath (crowded out the true, and) conti∣nued amongst us to this day? The proud Popish, and Pre∣latick
Discipline quickly grew drunke,Popish Disci∣pline. and was soone swal∣lowed up, and swimming in the bloud of the precious Saints. The Moone was indeed (then) turn'd to bloud (as well as the Sunne to darknesse) and most Romanizing outra∣gious Massacres of Saints,Swum in bloud and bloudy unsupportable Butch∣ies of Gods people were made, to maintaine the Doctrine and Discipline of those dayes, so that the Saints were ac∣counted as sheep for the Shambles, and were killed all the day long; yet a little respite was allowed them,There were hopes of the recovery of Gospel-Dici∣pline in King Henry 8. and in Edw. 6. and liberty given to them (through God's goodnesse) in King Henry the eights time, and then the true Discipline, which seem'd to lye for lost and dead a long time) which Christ hath left us in his Church, would faine have lived and breathed a little; and so in Edward the sixth's dayes, and viriditie, very great hopes there was of her recovery, and she began to wax warme, and to sneeze out some good signe towards it, but alas, they were soone lost againe; and how lamentably did she lye againe at the Graves brinke in cruell and accursed Queene Maries dayes,Litle hopes left againe in Q. Maries dayes. and then she was given over (indeed) even by her Phisitians for lost, and past recovery; untill it pleased the Lord to raise her up againe, and (almost) miracu∣lously in Queen Elizabeths dayes,Great hopes of her restaurati∣on were in Q. Elizabeths dayes. and then we did verily expect her full recovery and restauration, according to the Primitive patterne and practise; but well-a-day! how were we deceiv'd! for what by the () crafty cunning of the seducing Serpent which deceived Eve, and what by the insinuating subtilties of the Popish Prelates, and Mitre-mon∣gers in those dayes,Cant. 1.6. her Mothers Children were angry with her, and under pretence of Treasons, Rebellions, and robbing of the Magistrates of their right,But what hin∣dred it? and the like wrongfull accusations, those (her enemies) inveigh'd against this Di∣scipline of Christ's Institution, (accusing it to the Queen) they called it a Schisme, a Faction, Sedition, and Heresie, and with this they charged the true Children of the Church, and impeached the precious ones;Prelates falsly accused it to the Queen. as the Presidents did, that conspired against Daniel, Chap. 6. accusing him for the breach of the Kings command, because he kept his conscience, upright; and as the Adversaries that would have hindred
the building up of Gods house in Ezra's dayes chap. 4.13.16. they charged them for rebellious, and for such as would rob the Magistrate of his right and revenews; so did these in Q. Eliz. dayes, most cruelly doe the Accuser of the brethren's office against the Saints, branding and abusing them for se∣ditious factious persons, and charging them for Innovators, Here∣ticks, erroneous ones, calling them Puritans, Brownists, Donatists,They falsely accused and abused the Saints that cal∣led for Dis∣cipline. Anabaptists, Sectaries, and such like; saying, they would be the Destroyers of the Nation, and what not? so that by this meanes the Church did seem black and odious to the world, being Sun-burnt, and set to be the keeper of other (Anti∣christian) strange vineyards whiles her owne was neglected, Cant. 1.6. For it is in, and by the name of Christs own Church and Discipline, that such a Popish Hierarchy and Prelacy was canonized and consecrated, which carried a faire face, but a foule heart, and which was taken out of humane traditions, and inventions of the Papists coyne, and  Conclave and Canons, as will amply appeare by the beams of the Sun in this ensuing Tract. And certainly the Prelates and Papists did agree, and look very like one another in their Discpline, and in their opposing the Saints, and Christs true Church and Dis∣cipline. We might have said of them, as Aristotle once said of the Milesians, that the Milesians were not fools,Papists and Prelates alike in Discipline, and in oppo∣sing the truth. Prelates Mungrels. yet they did just the same things that fooles doe; so these Protestants and Prelates were not Papists, (no by no means) and yet they did just as Papists doe, but they were indeed Mungrels, and meer Hermaphrodites in Religion, Nec vere viros, nec vere, mulieres, sed vere Histriones, neither Papists, nor Protestants, but both, or neither, or either, or any thing for their owne ends.Sim. A Roman Cardinal caused his Painter to draw out K. Solomon halfe in heaven, and halfe in hell, for which he was justly to be blamed; but without any just blame might those Prelates be pictured out so, half way in heaven, for what they pretended, and for the good they did, but half in hel for what they intended, and for the evill they did in afflicting the Saints, ac∣cusing the brethren, persecuting the Church, and rendring the true Discipline of Gospel-fellowship odious, and despi∣cable to Magistrates, Ministers, people, and all.
But furthermore, the Antichristian Hierarchy and Discipline was so indulgently fostered up by Monarchy, that King James could make it a maxime (in which he proved a true Prophet) No Bishop,K. James, No Bishop, No King. Both alike have been from, and for the best, and shall be pu∣nished with the beast. no King; and it is clear to me out of ma∣ny Scriptures, Dan. 2.34, 35. Rev. 17.12. and 18.3. that they both live and dye together (like Hippocrates twins) receiving both alike, and at the same time power from, and punishment with the Beast. Wherefore let not the Prelates, nor Papists thinke to hold long in any place, for the day of the Lord his contro∣versie for Zion shall finde them out; neither need they to thinke their fall is by fortune, for it is appointed of old, and in these dayes wherein we are at suit with them; let them not wonder if they all lose the day of us (yea and the hot spirits, violent Presbyterians too (so called) who agree too much with Popery, and Prelacy as (appears Ch. 9. lib. 2. at large) and must meet with the like lamentable destiny and fate with you;Presbyterians too must lose their Discipline in these dayes. for (as M. Hooker sayes in his Preface before his Survey of Discipline.) There is no such thing as a Presbyteriall Church, i.e. a Church made up of the Elders of many Congregati∣ons Classic-wise to govern,Sim. &c. in the New Testament; where∣fore let them not wonder, if they also fall in the heat of this Suit) seeing the Law and the Testimony is for us this Terme∣time,Isa. 8.20. The Law is for us, the day will be ours. and therefore the Judge must be for us too, and the day will be ours in despight of all the world, because that yee have trusted to forged titles that will hold no water. The Camel seeking hornes,Sim. lost his ears, and so have these Disci∣plinarians, they will not heare what belongs to their peace. In this Summers day of the Lord Jesus, the Sun will shine hot, and scorch, yea mel (violento aestu) the waxen wings of all false-discipline,The heat of their Sun melt their waxen wings. and thereby throw down that Icarus-like loftinesse of High-Presbytery, Popery and Prelacy in all Nations, and then the whole bulke and massie body of Antichrist must beat his heels in the ayre, and be found in the deeps, and drowned in the Ocean of everlasting misery,Sim. Rev. 19.19. they are al∣ready under the burnings of that day in the torrid (horrid) Zone, and must shortly tumble into the tomb, where the worme dyeth not. This must bee for that they cannot bee converted into any other use for safety. As the black cloath
that will take no other Dye, but must hold so,Simile. and is most rotten, uselesse, and unserviceable for weare;Black Disci∣pline will not be better, but bitter till it tumble. but the whit: will take any other Dye, so indeed will our Discipline of Gospel-institution, which is in these latter dayes to bee restored into its Primitive purity, as white, precious, spiri∣tuall, Lilly-like, and lovely, this shall be capable of any Dye, or administration, and Dispensation to the end of the world, any Dye it will take whereinto it is dipp'd by the hand of the Lord; but the blacke, base, sooty, and darke Di∣scipline of Antichrist, shall be but as a rotten ragge, and good for nothing, being in nothing capable of these latter dayes dyes, which will be of divers sorts, from one to another, yeare after yeare, and the best at last. But furthermore, the Dragon (till these late dayes) hath made use of earthly pow∣ers to oppose the Saints (having no more place found for him in heaven) but now it is that we heare the loud Voyce in heaven, (viz. his Church) saying, Now is come salvation,Church Di∣scipline is best at last. strength, and the Kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ, for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down.Rev. 12.8.13. And now shall the earth (viz. earthly powers) help the Woman, and swallow up the Dragons indignation, though the remnant of her Seed must yet meet with Warres, Conflicts, and oppositions for a time. It remaines now, O England! Ireland! and Scotland,Exhortation to England, Ireland, and Scotland. that yee kisse the Sonne lest he be angry, and yee perish, Psal. 2.12. and that yee cast away your Popish and foppish trash and trumpe∣ries, and those wicked traditions, formes, and ordinances of men, which have made yee Captives, and for many hundred yeares have inbondaged, and endungeoned ye up in darknesse and deceit; for as we can cousen little ignorant Children, by giving them Counters, and taking away Gold, and those Counters too are only to quiet them;Sim. so how easily can Anti∣christ cheat you,We have been cheated in our Child-hood with Copper, and counterfeit Coyne. which he hath done in our ignorance and infancy, by giving us Copper for Gold, and counterfeit (Bra∣zen-fac'd) ordinances, and tooke away Christ's, telling us, that they were better which he gave us, and so quieting us for a long time; but now alasse! we are older, and we must be wiser, and not be so basely cheated out of our Ordinances, Orders, Doctrine, and Discipline, which Christ hath left us,
when he went from us, but let us hold our owne, and keep our Gold; and to encourage us, he hath promised us ere long to make another change in the Churches, and to give them gold for brasse, Isa. 60.17. the precious for the vile, &c. Where∣fore it is, O Friends, that this true Religion, Discipline, and Gospel-worship of Christ's owne Coyne, and Mint, ha∣ving his owne Image of his most precious Gold,But Christs true Discipline is offered in these dayes with the crown of twelve Starres, and cloathed with the Sunne, i. e. Christ, the Churches Light, and Lord. is offered you againe, and (once) againe; which hath often (before) been rigidly repulst, and put off with disdaine, and dire∣full reproach; yet notwithstanding it is presented to you the third time, and comes crowned with the twelve Starres, and cloathed with the Sunne, I meane with Christ the Super-inten∣dent, and sole Independent Lord, and Law-giver, yea and a∣lone Light-giver to the Church and Saints. This is especially the Honour and Ornament of this Discipline, or Gospel-Politie, viz. to be cloathed with light, having Christ alone the Lord. Indeed, hitherto hath many a sad soule sate and sigh'd, yea and the Church in the Wildernesse too bewayl'd with Mary, weeping, Joh. 20.13. Oh! They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Alexander used to say of his two Friends, viz. Craterus and Hephestion, that Hephestion loved Alexander, but Craterus lo∣ved the King, and yet the King and Alexander were both but one man; and so Certes I may say of some in these dayes, who professe to be Christ's friends,Sim. they all love him as Christ Jesus our Saviour, for his sweetnesse, and excellency, and lovelinesse, and love, which is better then wine, and for his use∣fulnesse, &c. but how few of them that love him as the King? to be commanded by him? that are obedient to his Lawes,Sim. and Ordinances? unlesse they be in the Congregatio∣nall orderly Courches, and there indeed Christ hath a few Friends, and tryed Subjects, but such Craterus's are rare too; wherefore let all the faithfull friends of Christ (of what judgement soever) that are under his Command and Lord∣ship, come and enter into these Gospel-wayes of Worship, into Christs order and path, ordinance, and Discipline (for the Lord of the Mannour, I meane the God of this world, will take up all wefts and straies that are out of this way,The Devil takes up straies
and empound them) wherefore for shame friends make haste! Hye out of Babylon, flye into Sion, into the Fellowship and Church-way of the Gospel, wherein Christ is King, and Lord; and where this Sunne is highest, brightest, and swif∣test in his ascendent motions, wherein Christ appeares in his richest perfection and fulnesse. For as Nature,Sim. who hath drawne with her Pencill a perfect Grasse-greene in the Emerald, (as Pliny sayes) a skie-colour in the Saphire, a fire colour in the Carbuncle, a sanguine in the Rubie, and a starry in the Diamond, hath also drawne all these together in one, viz. the Ophal: so hath Christ by his Spirit in his Church,Christ in the Churches their fulnesse. for there is one gift and grace in one Saint, another gift in another, and other graces in others, and blessings in the Gospell, and power in the Word, and sweetnesse in the Ordinances, and all in one, viz. the Church. Some excell in one thing, some in another, but the Church is the summary of all, all ex∣cellencies are there in one, viz. in one Christ, who is in every Church, the fulnesse and perfection of all; Christ (sayes Bernard, De advent. serm. 2.Sim.) is the Bee which flew into the City of Nazareth (which is interpreted Flower) and there he alighted on the sweetest flower of Virginity that ever the earth bore; and so doth Christ now in the Churches finde sweet flowers, who hath,There Law of Love. Et mel & aculeum (sayes Doctor Rawlinjon on's Mercy to a Beast, p. 13.) both Mercy and Judgement, yea he is both Love and Law in all his Chur∣ches, yea the Law of Love, and the Lord grant we may finde it so in these dayes. Heare, O Ireland! heare the Lord! run into his Courts,A word and a warning to Ireland. live in his Sanctuary! for in a special manner I speake to you from the Lord, for whose sake I dare not bury these truthes as dead, or in silence, which doe so much concerne you; and seeing I am now with you, I wish from my soule, that most of your Professors prove not Moone-sicke, I meane Luna∣ticks, that sometimes fall (or plunge) into the water, and sometimes into the fire,Sim. (of persecuting the Saints that wil not over head and eares with them in the waters,Of Persecu∣tors for forme, or judgement▪ yee know what I meane) for I shrewdly feare this; wherefore I say, forsake not Aegypt to fall into Babylon, nor Babylon to fall into the
forme againe, and to make a Church of forme meerly, and to drive in, or draw in poore hearts (through ignorance and folly) into a formall Discipline, by urging the forme, or tying others to such a judgement with you; for this is clear∣ly against God's designe, and Christs Gospel-Discipline, which is to be in the Spirit, and in truth: and therefore I have many precious and pregnant truthes to hand forth, and handle to you, as they are hearted in me from the Fathers bosome of light, in this ensuing Treatise, especially in Lib. 2. but in the meane time, make haste into Sion, into a pure, or∣derly, Gospel, Spirituall way of Worship, and the Lord be with you, and speed you. But if before I have done, some doe say, Why then we shall be persecuted by Presbyterians, or some (call'd) Independants, or the bitter ones of the Anabap∣tists, or the like, as well as by Malignants and open ene∣mies;Sim. I say, that they shall be but like Sampsons Foxes, who were themselves burnt amongst the Corne which they fired,Proph. but the Land brought Corne againe,Persecutors, Sampsons Foxes that burne up themselves, and benefit us. and the ground was made the better by it, and the fruitfullr, but the Foxes came up no more; so be yee sure, that such will by their persecu∣tions, burne up themselves, but better the true Churches; though it may be some members may suffer in the fire first; yet take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, saith the Lord, Cant. 1. he will not suffer them to escape scot-free, Phil. 1.28. for it is to them a token of perdition (sayes Paul) but to you of sal∣vation, the true Churches shall (maugre all their might and malice) appeare again, and triumph the more, and be yet the more glorious and fruitful, but these persecuting Foxes can never come up againe, but must lye buried in the field which they have fired, and so be the Authours of their owne end. Where∣fore feare not, my Friends, their frownes, nor crownes; but as Alexander was wont to say to his Souldiers when they were in danger,Christ in you, and with you. Sim. or went on any designe, Sed habebis Alexandrum; my brave Blades, you shall have Alexander with you;Feare not. so say I, you shall have Christ with you, in the midst of you, and engaged for you; feare not! and then you shall no more be termed desolate,Isa. 43.3. or forsaken, but be called the Lord's Hephzibah and Beulah; but thus for the second chapter.
Midbar. CHAP. III. That the Churches full deliverance drawes nigh, and is up∣on entrance, at first gradually, her Discipline shall be restored as at first. First proved by parallel from the Wildernesse, wherein she hath been long lost, as to true Discipline and Doctrine. TO proceed, the Call continues to hast us out of Baby∣lon. It is Historied of Darius's Generall, that when he had Orders from Darius (his King) to revenge the wrongs done him by the Athenians,Sim. that he commanded his Servants every day, at every dish of meat they brought in to the Table, to say, Sir, remember the Athenians. Now Christ hath sent to us, and calls upon us every foote, to Re∣member the ruine of Babylon, and the rising of Sion; for Ba∣bylon must fall, and Sion must fill, and grow up apace to perfection-ward; but although this is graduall at first, yet the restauration shall be universall at last. In the interim, we heare how long, and how lamentably the poore despised Church hath been in the Wildernesse,Proph. wo∣fully bewayling;Expos. but now followes what hopes we finde of her deliverance;When the Church was Promised to be delivered out of the Wilder∣nesse. now Mr. Brightman (the brightest man of his age, that I have met with) lends his Light to this Age, out of Revel. 12.14. where we read, the Church was to continue in the Wildernesse for a time, times, and halfe a time; besides the thousand two hundred and threescore dayes, in ver. 6. which is all one with that in Rev. 11.2. of forty and two months,The time. for at thirty dayes to the moneth, it comes to one thousand two hundred and sixty dayes,Iunius Parcus, in a. which if we account from Christ's time, was to begin one thousand sixe hundred
and ten dayes, (viz. three hundred and fifty, and one thou∣sand two hundred and sixty) and the thirty three yeares that Christ lived, makes it one thousand six hundred forty three,1643. The Authors judgement. about which time her Deliverance and Freedome came running in, and the Congregationall Churches got upon their feete, and began to looke forth as the morning, Cant. 6.10. though many black Clouds and Mists were cast upon them some ten yeares agoe, to grieve them, and to feare them with the threates of a foule day following, and to render them un∣lovely,Of her graduall deliverance. and unlikely to hold; so that for my owne part I am possess'd with this opinion, as to the yeare of her Deliverance, beginning (gradually) and as to us, about ten years agoe. But Master Brightmans judgement is,Expos. to have it begin one thou∣sand six hundred and fifty,Mr. Bright∣mans Judge∣ment, 1650. from that also of Dan. 12.7. it shall be for time, times, and halfe a time, with vers. 12. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to one thousand three hundred thirty five dayes, a day being often in Scripture for a yeare, as Numb. 14.34. Ezek. 4.5, 6. and a time he takes for an hundred yeares, and so times for two hundred, and halfe a time for halfe a hun∣dred, or fifty; that is, three hundred and fifty yeares, which with one thousand three hundred makes one thousand six hundred and fifty,One thousand six hundred and fifty, as to us in England, Ireland, and Scotland, begins her graduall recovery. in which yeare he fore-told the true Discipline of the Church should begin to be restored unto her primitive face and fairnesse; and how truly he hath fore-told this, let the times we live in testifie for him; for indeed the eminent passages, and evident appearances of Gods presence with us, and power for us, for the liberty and deliverance of true Discipline, will easily allow of his Exposition, as passing au∣thentick and Orthodox. But whereas it may be objected out of Dan. 12.12. thirty five remaine. I answer; 'Tis true indeed,The Authors judgement of her universall deliverance thirty five yeares hence to begin. and there is great need of thirty five yeares for warres and troubles against the Lambe and's followers; Christ and's Churches, whose Deliverance, and brightnesse of Disci∣pline is but by little and little, and ariseth gradually, and lives most gloriously in these parts of Europe for thirty and five yeares; and after that followes her full deliverance, and recovery out of the Wildernesse universally in all Nations; but for thirty five yeares she comes only gradually out of the Wil∣nesse,
leaning on her Beloved, but especially in these parts of the earth, where the worke is already begun, and mountaines made plaines, which shall within these thirty five yeares be all levell'd, and laid in the dust before Zerubbabel,Zach 4.6, 7. who hath (already) laid the foundation of (that worke) the Lords house, which his hands shall (after thirty five yeares) finish, when all the enemies of God and his Gospel, shall by his glori∣ous out-goings, and the brightnesse of his coming, be no∣thing'd into nothing. Thus you have his, and my (poore) judgement offered under correction. But I meet with two more computations of times, which are set for the Churches rising, and Christ's reigning,Two times more set for her delive∣rance. out of the same Chapter of Dan. 12.11. From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety dayes, ver. 12, 13.Expos. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to one thousand three hundred thirty five dayes; but goe thou thy way till the end be, for thou shalt rest, and stand in the lot at the end of the dayes. Some compute this from the time of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperour,Proph. converted to the Faith about the three hundred and twelfth yeare after Christ;From Con∣stantine. now the ten hot Persecutions (by the Dragon) as I told you in the chapter before) were ended, and the Church was now cloathed with enough of outward beauty; riches, greatnesse, and ornaments, were in abun∣dance, which bewitched many from the Truth, and which proved the most irresistible temptations that could be, to cor∣rupt Magistrates, Ministers, People, Ordinances, and all her worship (as I told you in the former Chapter) and to bewil∣dernesse her: then was there a voyce heard out of Heaven, to say, This day is poyson pour'd forth into the Church, and then in∣deed was the daily sacrifice taken away, (as some say) viz. the death of Christ (our only Sacrifice) became voyd, and nei∣ther regarded nor remembred; but the abomination, (viz. Superstition, Idolatry, Will-worship, &c.) that maketh desolate was set up. So we heare how the Church was in the Wildernesse as before, but now after these two notes of the time, viz. 1. Toe taking away the daily Sacrifice, and then 2. The set∣ting up the abomination that maketh desolate; it followes, there
shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety dayes, i. e. yeares (as we proved before) from Constantines time, to which adde the three hundred and twelve yeares from Christ's time to Constantine's, and then it amounts to one thousand six hun∣dred and two, and in this yeare came King Iames to the Crowne of England. But in vers. 12, 13. the blessednesse of all is to such as waite till one thousand three hundred thirty five dayes, that is, forty five dayes, i. e. yeares, longer then the former number (of one thousand two hundred and ninety) and then it seemes the reckoning reaches to one thousand six hundred forty seven,To begin at Anno 1647. for the time of the Churches blessednesse to begin more visibly then ever before; for then the abomination (of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Idolatry, and Formality) which hath made desolate, and brought the Church into the Wildernesse, is to be unsetled, sorely shaken, and broken downe, that the Kingdome of Christ, which shall never be shaken, may remaine, in Heb. 12.27, 28. that Christ's Church may be delivered, his Discipline restored, and his Kingdome exalted above all the moun∣taines of prey. The second time reckoned from Julian the Apostate.The second computation of time (out of the same Scrip∣ture) is taken from Julian the Apostate, in whose dayes the Temple (which he caused to be re-edified at Jerusalem, as all the Learned know) the Seate of the daily Sacrifice was rent up,Proph. and tore apeeces, even the earth, place, foundation, and all, by a most terrible Tempest from heaven; for that Julian the most malicious Apostate pretended Christ a false Prophet, and in contradiction to Christ's prediction in Matth. 24.2. hee would have had the Temple built up againe, but God would not suffer it: but now (as God would have it) the Prophecy was more fully fulfill'd hereby, for not one stone was left upon a∣nother, but foundation and all was turn'd, torne, and taken away, and Judaisme rent up by the very rootes. But this made a concave for the Conclave of Rome, that Antichrist might come in with his abomination, which maketh desolate, and this came to passe about Anno three hundred sixty two, and from thence,Anno 362. reckoning the one thousand two hundred and ninety, as in Dan. 12.11. the number comes out the last yeare, and this Deliverance is to begin by 1652.
for then is Christ to begin his glory,To begin An. 1652. and to reigne in the Temple, viz. his Churches, more eminently then ever be∣fore; and then the Gospel-Discipline is to begin to be restored, & the Abomination to be eradicated root and branch, and then Christ, and him crucified, must be set up for the daily Sa∣crifice. Then is the blessednesse to begin,Gradually to go on till 45. years longer. and gradually to goe on till one thousand three hundred and thirty dayes, i. e. for five and forty yeers longer (say some) these dayes will hold so, five and forty yeers; at the expiration of which (viz. five and forty yeers hence) the Kingdome of Christ shall bee glorious indeed, both by Jew and Gentile, Babylon shall bee fallen, Rome ruined, Rev. 14.8. Sion repaired, and Christs excellent Discipline and Ordinances fully restored, and the Church shall be againe cloathed with the Sun in greater glory then ever; but in the meane time there is a graduall restoration of Discipline, and reparation of Sion (as we said before) but then the New Jerusalem shall be more apparent and glori∣ous, as Rev. chap. 21. chap. 22.How Antichrist is to be de∣stroyed. In the meane time we must meet with troubles and warres without, yet in spirit we shall exult, and triumph within: which Spirit of Christ in his Saints and Churches, will be the fall of Babylon,Not by world∣ly weapons, and Anti∣christs ruine, who must be destroyed by the brightnesse of Christ's coming i. e. in a spiritual manner, and by spiritual meanes, not by Policies, or Powers, or Armies of men, or Wars, or the like,But by the spi∣rit, killed and▪ (though they may be preparatives thereto) Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord. By the Spirit of the Lord it is, that Antichrist must be killed. I remember Mr. Sterry, (in a Sermon of his before the Parliament Nov. 2. 1649. p. 12.) sayes the like of the fall of Antichrist, and of the Abominations (which we have mentioned) that it is a spirituall and extraordinary manner, miraculously by his Angels, Ministerially by his Saints,Tormentd. that they shall be tormented and put to death, Rev. 14.10. and 19,Our troubles begin to be o∣ver, An. 1656. 19. but yet our troubles will be over as to us (and I thinke shortly too) for An. 1656. (which is now neer us) the Flood came on all the world (and so I think the Fire wil) and when it had lasted forty days (so may the Fire be for forty years) till five and forty years hence (as we said before) then they were dryed up,Sim. and Noah
came forth out of the Arke and planted a vineyard,Yet forty yeers on the world, whiles we are safe in the Ark, viz. Chists Chur∣ches. and eat the fruits therof: and so for certaine, though the Churches may be (as the Arke) for forty yeers yet on the waters, yet then, I say, about forty yeers (or little more) hence, shall Christ come forth; out of his Arke (as I may say) I mean his Churches, and plant him one vineyard of all, and eat the fruits thereof, this will be the day of Christs reigne indeed; and then all shall bee peace, and quiet, and Christ, and his Saints shall be visibly to∣gether, dwelling in the New Jerusalem. I will not meddle with the manner of his Appearance,Forty yeers hence Christ comes to reign visibly. whether personall, as some affirme, or no, but this I am sure it shall be visible, and I know (with Job) that I shall see my Redeemer with my eyes, and after that, Christs next appearance is with his Saints to judge the world. But for the computation of the times, I have produced divers, and shall leave them to your light and judgement, to leave or take what best likes you; but with∣all,Then the uni∣versal Restitu∣tion 45. yeers hence at fur∣thest. note, how neer they all agree, and are one to another, and the furthest time set for our full happinesse, and for the universal restitution, is but forty five years hence: And let me tell you, that we live on the brinke of these times promised, yea they are upon us, the worke is begun, God is about it, The Church is coming out of the Wildernesse, and Babylon is falling, and Zion is rising and repairing, and Gospel-order, Ordinances, and Discipline (lost in the wildernesse) restoring as at first; al∣though this is at the first but gradually in these Nations, and so will continue till the times are a little higher; for which the Lord fit us, and all his Churches. Proph.In order to the fulfilling of these Prophesies of her full Re∣stauration,In order to this God is making Mountains plains. we had need to be wise in the worke (the strange worke) that God is at present upon; For the mightiest, the strongest, the highest, the visiblest, and barrennest (or bruitishest) Powers, Policies, Princes, Potentates, or Mo∣narchs on the earth (which are called the Mighty Moun∣tains that must be made plaine) that oppose Christs Reigne,Who are the Mountaines? Antichrists ruine,Isa. 41.15, 16.21.23. Hag. 2.6.21, 22 or Sions rising in these latter dayes, God is laying low in the dust, and most pitifully flinging them into the Pit from whence they came at first. This worke is also graduall for these few years▪ God goes forward within
these European Nations firstly;Expos. for these ten Toes of the Image mentioned in Dan. 2.32,Rev. 12.17, 18 Rev 18.. Pal. 83.11.12, 33. or ten Kings (of Europe) that war against the Lamb, with the Beast, Rev. 17. and 19. these that have given up their power to the Beast, must be broken, by him who is more excellent then all these Mountains of prey,Ths work is also graduall at first. Psal. 76.4. This little stone cut without hands, hath begun this worke in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and hath been a bur∣thensome stone to their enemies, and grown'd them to powder: yea this little stone hath fallen upon the late King, and his fa∣mily, and dashed this Toe to fitters, and so hee will all the nine Toes beside, till the Image tumble; so that as yet this worke is graduall, which will also be universall, and filling the whole earth,And will bee universal. Job 9.4, 5. Job 28.9. Isa. 10.32. in all Na∣tions ere long, for the Lord hath so ordained it, Dan. 8.19. Dan. 11.27.32. and Isa. 26.11, 12. Hab. 1.11, 12, 13. and Hab. 2, 3. and hath given Christ his Commission for it,Esa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4. Psal. 8.2. Zach. 12, 3, 6. Psal. 2.9. Matth. 28.19. Heb. 10.13. 1 Cor. 15.25. Rev. 6.1, 2. till all bee made his footstool, who then can hinder it? or say what dost thou? Job 9.12. Dan. 4.35. Isa. 14.6. Ezek. 38.20. for this end is Christ (that must Reigne) now marching in his might, with his sword girt about his thigh, neither Mountaines, nor Mole-hils that now stand in his way, shall be able to abide the heat of his coming, for he will be greatest, and Reign alone, Psal. 58.12. Rev. 11.17.18, 19. Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 16,Wo to the e∣nemies. 17. &c. who hath done much in order to this his Designe in these dayes, Ps. 50.2.3. Woe, woe! be then to every one whose heart is lifted up against Christ, or the Churches! for they must be all grownd to powder: And in that day (which is hard by) shall they say to the Rocks and Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the day of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15, 16. Isa. 34.2, 3. and Isa. 64.1, 2, 3. Ezek. 7.7. Psal. 68.1, 2. Psal. 132.8, 9, 13, &c. Wherefore have a care, Sirs, that Ye say not a confederacy with them that say a confederacy, Isa. 8, 9, 10, 12. Psal. 58.9. For the day of the Lord is as an oven to such, who as Briars and thorns are to be prepared for it, Mal. 4.1.2. whilst the very same day is as the Sun of righteousnesse to the Saints. Wherefore feare not,Ioy to Christs and the Chur∣ches friends. O ye Saints! be not afraid! for your Deliverance is at hand, which as it was foretold by many Prophets,Mat. 24. so in especiall
manner by him who is our onely Prophet, Luke 21.25, 26, 27,Expos. 28. and the Signes are already come (in part) for the Mountaines are removing,. the Pillars of the earth falling, the powers of the heavens shaking, yea mens hearts failing them for fear;. yet lift up your heads () like a bird that lifts up his beak every time he drinkes sweetnesses, as such who drinke in comforts and refreshings,Sim. and soope in solaces and refreshing streams, (Psal. 46.3, 4.) for now your redemption draw∣eth nigh.. Psal. 97.12.6. and 67.3, 4. Now may we see the Son of man coming in the clouds (viz. in many darke, dismall, and cloudy dispensations) which doe hide him from the world, and from the sight of his ene∣mies till hee come upon them as a theef in the Right, or a Noahs flood (ex insperato) unwatched for, and unwelcome to them) to their cost. But hark!-Hark!-now! The Trumpet of the Jubilee is blow∣ing! and the day of the Saints Deliverance and Discipline is proclaimed! The gates of salvation, shall be opened to every one that hath the word, Isa. 26.1, 2. and is a friend to the Kingdome, Isa. 9.7. Zion is building, Psal. 102.15, 16. and shall be beautiful to all people,Isa. 22.22, 23. Dan. 4.34. Psal. 48.2, 3, 4. Isa. 52.1.7. and the Saints are to be refreshed with full streams, and fat things, Isa. 33.21. Isa. 25.9. and 48.18. The Lord is at work hard in thse dayes.Thus, is the Lord at worke in our dayes (whilst we live in Tabernacles) to build us a Temple, and in order to the Churches happinesse, he hath promised to make the Wildernesse flou∣rish as the Rose, Isa. 35.1, 2, 3. for he will give the glory of Le∣banon (Chap. 5.) and Carmel, and of Sharon (in Chap. 6. & ch. 7.) to his Church (Calvin in loc.) in these latter dayes. The Scriptures are so full, the Promises so pregnant, the blessings so rich,The richest blessings reser∣ved for these dayes. Like a Kid in Hebr. Rakad. Rev. 18.4. that are reserved for these latter dayes for us, and our off-spring, that we may even leap for joy, Ps. 114.4. and with shoutings and songs, come singing to Sion, Isa. 35. ult. and run out of Babylon (which else is falling on our heads) Ah, how big-bellied the Prophesies are, which doe groan for our Deliverances, and for the Churches Discipline as of old, viz. in the Apostles dayes; this does lye to the occulous very obvious, for they are in travel to bring forth in our dayes (the birth will bee visible within very few years, by five or six) the begin∣ning
is now come, yea the set time to favour Sion is come, Psal. 102.13, 14. It is not very difficult to any (that discerne the times and seasons) to foretell the futurity of those rich and choisest bles∣sings (both for Church and State (as we say) that are laid up for these very latter dayes,How to Pro∣phesie as to foretell what is to come. and to foresee (for these years that are to come) the glorious light and liberty of the Saints, which they shall inherit (I mean never to lose more) though they be bought and brought in by the destruction of the first-born of Egypt. And this may be easie, out of the abundance of those Scriptures which tell of these dayes, and relate to these  last ages, by comparing what of them are fulfilled, and what of them are not fulfilled together, and then (like the Mathe∣maticall rule of Demonstration, which is made perfect (in aliquo tertio) by bringing them both up, to the things which are now in fulfilling before our eyes, and thereby they will wonderfully well demonstrate by undeniable rules and rea∣sons (out of the Scriptures) what things are to come to passe, and which first, and which are hard by, and upon us to bee performed. And besides this, my Experience tels mee how to prophesie by the Spirit of the Lord, when the Spirit brings me into a  fruitive discovery of the latter dayes, by leading me into the belly of the Prophesies and the Promises which are to come to passe, as if they were already present and come to passe; thus Heb. 11.13. The Saints received the promises afar off, and also when the latter dayes promises (which we expect) have hot and glowing influences upon my heart, that I feele (before∣hand) the heat of them, and of the day that is entring; I say, by both these together (for there is the Word and the Spirit agreeing in one) I am able to foretell, and testifie to the ap∣proach of Christ, and his promises. Besides, (as appears in the Epistle to the honourable Com∣missioners) by the movings and stirrings of the waters in the  bottome of our Well. And also by comparing of Providences and Prophesies toge∣ther, Gods Works, with Gods Words in these latter dayes, thereby we shall attaine to much light (I say, not infallible)
to foretell what is to come.Times of re∣stitution. All these Rules I fetch out of my own heart, and from mine owne experiences, which meet∣ing together, make me sure, That the times of restitution come tumbling in, and the refreshings for the Saints from the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19.21. For already things begin to have a new face,Spring time is entered. forme, and appearance, in order to the Primitive pu∣rity and practice. The Meadows (me thinks) begin to look green, the chirping of birds, and the Turtle-dove is heard in our land, the young Figs that are (but) green, and tender grapes give a good smell, and much sweetnesse, &c. Cant. 2.11, 12. So that I am perswaded, the Winter is over, and gone, though I deny not,Winter time is over. Yet storms. Vid▪ ch 9. lib. 2 but a storme or two, or a stinging tempest, and bluste∣ring blasts may now and then arise, with rage too, for an houre (as I offer proofe for in Ch. 9. lib. 2.) yet the Promise must be minded as concerning Saints, Isa. 51.1, 2, 3, 4. for whose sake, Sion is to be restored, and the Wildernesse to bee like an Eden, or Garden of the Lord, and joy, and gladnesse shall bee found in the midst of them. Exceeding great, and precious Pro∣mises are provided for us to be as cordials in the Wildernesse to comfort us,Most precious Cordials. and to keep us from fainting; and indeed, what wise men will be without some of these in their Ca∣binets to keep up their spirits with,Sim. especially against a time of trouble and temptation.To comfort us n the wilder∣nesse. And as (Chrysostome sayes) As no men were able to saile at Sea,Sim. were there not havens and harbours to cast Anchor at, in time of a storme; So (saith Smith on the Creed, p. 58.) the Saints condition would be unsupportable indeed,Promises to anchor at in God. had they not havens and helps in times of tempests. So certainly the tossed Arke, or Ship of the Church does in all ages, as storms arise, put in for harbour at the next Promise, and cast anchor in the next Prophesie, which is nighest accomplishment and performance. And in these dayes we may see fair land, even the Land of Canaan to cast Anchor at; I say, exceeding rich and precious promises, which flow with milke and honey hard by us, the promised Jerusalem, the rich and excellent Canaan, we are now come nigh unto; The good Lord helpe us to put in well for it (if it be his holy will) and that before a storme arise, and
hide it from us, or cause us to complaine or comply with a tack-about; wherefore, it will doe well, and be good wisdome, for the Churches (whom it most concerns) to cast in their Plummers, and to fathom the waters, which we are now in & n.A word to the Churches to fathom. And O blesse the Lord that we see Land! and are so nigh i! else we might sit, sorrow, and suspire, as all our Fathers did (in the Prelates dayes) when they were all in the deeps, and in dangers, and had not sight of the Land, as we now see it; but the Lord hath given us to see it, and hath before-hand shewne, us the Churches harbour,A good harbor which is to be in a rich and blessed soil, and the Lord lets us know this to warm Saints, and to warn sinners; For as (a very vile) Jezabel could not bee content to intend evill to the Prophet Elijah,Sim. but shee must before hand horribly thunder and threaten it out, 1 King. 19. much lesse will or can (a very good) God war, before hee warne his enemies; wherefore it is that he thunders it out, and threatens Christs and his Churches unexorable enemies in these dayes with unavoidable destruction. And above all, to raise and refresh our spirits (in spight of Sathan and his Surrogates) he gives us first a sight of this sweet and goodly land which he hath provided for us in these latter dayes, be∣fore he brings us into it to enjoy it, he cannot be content to promise and purpose to do us good (as Mr. Robinson sayes in's Essayes,Our harbour in these dayes. i. e gathered Churches. p. 16.) but he must make it known to's servants before hand. Thus the Lord hath shewn us our harbor in these dayes, viz. in gathered Churches, and hath given us to reckon not from what we have, but from what we hope. For as a man reckons his wealth not so much by his money in his house,Sim. as by his money in his bils and bonds; So doe we reckon in our Churches, our priviledges, riches, happinesse, not so much by what we now enjoy (as Gathered Churches, Members, Orders,How we rec∣kon one estate, and make our accounts. Or∣dinances, Gifts, Graces, Teachers, Pastors, Prophesies, and fat things) as by what we are to enjoy, which we are sure off, and have in Bils and bonds, i. e. in Scriptures, Prophesies, and speciall Promises which are sealed to us, and witnessed in us, by his Spirit, Eph. 4.30. Joh. 8.18. Joh. 3.32. 1 Joh. 1.5. which are as good to us as ready money, for the day of payment is now near us, and no one of these shall faile, Isa. 34.16. Heb. 10.23. for
he is faithfull that hath promised. Wherefore we are resolved to wait, and we will not give over till the day, and set time comes, Ps. 119.49, 50. But as the Souldier that held the ship by his teeth after his hands are cut off;Sim. so will we the Pro∣mises till they be performed to us, Gen. 15.14. Josh. 21.42. and therefore with confidence we wait, Hab. 2.3. for they cannot sail us, and we will be bold to say it, that if we be deceived, God hath deceived us: but God cannot deceive us: yet to deale in∣genuously, I deny not but the performance of these Pro∣mises, may be but graduall (as I declared before) at first, and to be clear, I shall produce some of the flowering Promises which are about fulfilling in these blessed dayes,The blossomes and flowery promises that are upon us. which are (even now) in approach, and under dispensation and dealing out to the Church, that hath been so long, and so lamentably in the Wil∣dernesse; and these we shall prove by parallel: First, from the VVildernesse; And secondly, from the Garden of the Lord. From the VVildernesse. 1 By parallel from the wil∣dernesse. Iob 12.24. Gen. 21.14.First, it is an untilled place, where wild nature is most seen most eminently, and evidently (if not wholly) and indeed which Art and Industry hath not amed: in Hebr. Midbar is as much as to say, without order, and in such a wildernesse was the Church for many years together,1 The Church discipline over grown with traditons and trumperies. wherein the (supereroga∣tory) bowes, and superfluous branches of that evill root of car∣nall concupiscence and corruption, did spread and sprout out with lawlesse lusts; her bottome of her (then) discipline was so abominably, and abundantly overgrowne, and growne over with thornes and thistles (fit for accursed ground) that a Saint could not walke with safety, so long as they were neither stubbed out,Vitiis & di∣vitiis. nor cut off: For the brambles of ambition and traditions grew thicke and thronging out at both ends, and abundance of briars and bushes at every step were ready to snatch at, and ensnare a poore Pilgrim-Saint or Professour. Oh the deplorable estate of the poor people of God then! in a place!Ezek. 36.9, 10. Nation! Church-state! so filled over, and over, with humane traditions and naturall inventions! with Will-wor∣ships!1 The promise is to till her as his hus∣bandry. Creature-institutions! and ordinances of men; with Monkery and Masse, and with a masse of Monkery, and with a world of trumpery and filthy trash! not fit for any,
but the feet of disdaine, and dogs to trample upon. But the blessed dayes (under promise, and in approach) are, that God will husband his people himselfe, and till them, as Hos. 10, 12. and break up the fallow ground, and Judah shall plow,Pareus in loc. and Jacob shall break his clods; the brambles and bushes, inventions and traditions shall be rent up by the roots, and what runs up by nature shall no more be suffered to cumber the ground,Ier. 4.3▪ 4. and the loose branches, and unserviceable bowes shall be lopped off. Idls shall be pulled downe, superstition subverted, An∣tichrist turned out of doors with his bag and baggage,Rev. 15.2. and then the Lord will raine righteousnesse upon his people. So in Ezek. 36.34, 35. The desolate land shall be tilled, and shall become like the Garden of Eden, fenced, and inclosed, and inhabited with holy flocks, and they shall know the Lord, and be, as Paul saies,Ezek 36.38. 1 Cor. 3.8, 9▪ Beza in loc. the Lords husbandry, ; the word signifies whatso∣ever appertaines unto a Husbandman: so they are, and are to be viz. Gods arable, Gods vineyard, Gods Garden,Expos. &c. i. e. the Lord will be as watchfull, laborious, solicitous, prudent, and pro∣vident day and night of his peoples welfairs,Sim. and for his peoples advantages, as an Husbandman is of his arable, vineyard or the like, he will walke about them, overlook them,The Churches are the Lord husbandry. and keep them day by day from danger and spoyl, and with his own hands, he will dresse them, and prune, and provide, and reap of what he sowes, so that in this sense, the Church shall no more be driven into such a Desart or Wildernesse againe; But▪ Secondly, a Wildernesse is a withered, dry,2 Wilderness a fruitlesse, barren place. empty and barren place, which brings forth no fruits, or but sowre at the best: there be no crops of Corne, nor grapes that grow there (of thorns or thistles) a dry desolate place, Zeph. 2.13▪ where the trees are burnt up, and the pastures most pitifully scorched up, and made scarce by the hottest beams. So a loud lamenta∣tion is made in Isa. 64.10. The holy Cities are a wildernesse,S hath Sion been. Zion is a wildernesse, Jerusalem a wildernesse; and thus hath the Lord laid his complaint against his people for their fruit∣lessenesse formerly; and what could he have said more grie∣vous or sad? But see! O what sweet dayes do enter in, and on us! Gods precious ones shall be abundantly (and now daily)
more blessed from above,But now shall, be blooming and branching, and fruit-bear∣ing, and flou∣rishing. to make us blossoming, bearing, and branching; yea his Saints shall so flourish, in Isa. 35.2. by seeing the glory of the Lord, and the excellency of their God. The Church is barren and fruitlesse, when ignorant and sight∣lesse of that fructifying presence which shall be in the midst of her,Amos 9.13, 14, 15. (and then, Florens florebit & exaltans exaltabit) so in Isa. 55.12, 13. All the trees of righteousnesse shall clap for joy, and instead of the thorne shall come up the firre-tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the mirtle-tree, (as in chap. 5.) and it shall be to the Lord for a name, and for an everlasting signe that shall not be cut off: Good shall be in the roome of the bad, and sweet of the sowre; Cedars for shrubs, serviceable, and seed-bearing-trees for barren brambles, and uselesse fruitlesse bushes; and then the barren and desolate shall bring forth more children then she which hath an husband, Gal. 4.27. These Promises are putting out, and springing forth their bud as the Garden,Cant. 4.12. Isa. 61.11. that causeth the things that are sowne to springe forth, even so the Lord our God will cause righteous∣nesse and praise to springe forth before all Nations,Sim. and in Zach. 9.17. Corne shall make the young-men cheerefull (and fruitfull to grow) and new wine the Maids; thus shall the wildernesse be like the fruitfull vallies full of Lillies, and of the loveliest Roses of Sharon and Carmel. Thirdly, a wildernesse without a way.Thirdly, a Wildernesse hath no ready roade, nor beaten path, nor noted marke, but a man may be soone lost, let him looke on this side, or that side, backward or forward, he knowes not what to doe, nor whither to goe, for he can get no Guide. Now in such a Wildernesse was the Church too, she was at a losse, and hath been above a thousand years, the Saints (poore Soules!The Church was so in it.) seeking up and downe, hither and thi∣ther, this way or that way, but yet in a Wildernesse; yea, ma∣ny Professors formerly have, as the Lord hath said, Jer. 14.10. They have loved to wander, and they have not refrained their feet, but have walked after the imaginations of their owne hearts,Ier. 9.13, 14. and after the Baalim which their Fathers have taught them. Oh! so! so were we lost most miserably in mens imaginations and de∣vices, and Doctrines, too too much, I say, to this day, for mat∣ter of true Doctrine, and true Discipline. Well, but what wil
the Lord now doe for her deliverance out of all these false wayes? and Wildernesse-worship?Joh 14. Cant. 8.5. why he will send his Spirit to be her guide into his holy truth, as he hath promised;Promise is to bring her into the way. The Lord will be her guide. and he himselfe, Isa. 58.10, 11. Will be her light in obscurity, and her noon-day in darkenesse; and will guide her continually, and satisfie her soule in drought, and make fat her bones, and make her like a watered garden, and springs of water never dry: and in Isa. 30.21▪ the Saints shall beare the word, saying, This is the way,Io. 4. walke in it; and then they will cast away all false wayes, and worships, &c. as a menstruous cloath, saying, get thee hence, as to an excrement,Expos. (the word signifies) Now the Father seekes for Spirituall worshippers,Isa. 30.22. to whom he will make out his minde in order to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Gospel,Spirituall wor∣shippers in Doctrine and Discipline, 2 Cor. 4.3 Most in the forme, least in the Spirit. which is hid to them that are lost, and such as are most in the wildernesse least see it, or seeke it; but now the way is disco∣vered to the Saints, who desire (of all others) to walk there∣in. For it is with a naturall man, as it is with every thing else that desires naturally to goe to its owne center or place, but regards not the way; as the stone that falls naturally,Sim. regards not which way, and the fire that ascends naturally, ascends any way, and so all men naturally doe;Sim. but God hath promi∣sed us his Spirit to lead us,The Spirit guides into the way. and his Grace to teach us the way wherein we must walke, which is one and the same for all Saints, though others regard it not. But, Fourthly, a Wildernesse is a most dangerous place,4. A Wildr∣nesse most dangerous. where a man is (almost) every moment like to be made a prey to the widest mouthes of the wildest, mercilesse, and bloudy Beasts, that seeke to satisfie their never-satisfied hungers,Psal. 55.23 Psal. 26.9. with such strangers. In such a condition hath the Church been,The Church in such danger. ready to be torne a peices (every day) by such unexorable enraged wild Beasts, and bloud-suckers, feeding upon the flesh of the Saints, such as have inhabited in the dennes of Darknesse, and cruelty, (the Villages of Kedar) they are called in Scripture-language barbarous, cruell, mercilesse, Beares, Lions, Tigers,Mat. 3.7 Psal. 104.21 Psal. 58.4 Mat. 1.16 Prov. 29.10 Psal. 11.2. Leo∣pards, Adders, Serpents, and what not, to delineate their dispo∣sitions against Gods people and innocent ones, their feet are swife to shed bloud, and they have hunted after the holy and up∣right ones, and have laine in secret to set upon them, see Psal.
74.19, 20. O deliver not thy turtle Dove unto the multitude of the wicked, for the darke places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty! O let not the oppressed returne with shame, let the poore and needy praise thy name, &c. The Church is this Turtle Dove, in daily danger of being destroyed,Expos. whilst she is in the Wildernesse, amongst the multitudes of mercilesse and matchlesse Beasts of prey,Prov. 12.10 whose mercies are cruelties; yea their tenderest gripes are terrible griefes unto the Saints, whilst such say in their hearts, ver. 11. Come, let us destroy them together; the Saints are such harmlesse Doves, weake, poore, timerous, and mourn∣full;How persecu∣ted up and downe. but innocent, loyall, chast, and faithfull to Christ their Mate; and poore soules, sadly opprest, and persecu∣ted up and downe, from Country to Country, by an accur∣sed crew of cruell Kites, &c. Birds and Beasts of prey have so hated, and hunted them up and downe, that they durst not appeare openly (till now of late) but lye lamenting in some by-holes and corners from the cruelties and crafts of those Cannibals;Promises of her deliverance. but the Promises which are pregnant, and big-bellied for deliverance in these dayes are many, and they are ready to be Midwived for the Churches freedome from this comfortlesse condition, as in Isa. 11.5.6, 7. for first, the loynes of Christ,Isa. 65.23 and his lovely Body the Church, shall be girded a∣bout by a girdle of righteousnesse and faithfulnesse, the Saints are an ingirded,Wild Beasts shall have no power to hurt us. and an inclosed company (as after will appeare:) then the Wolves, Leopards, Lions, Beares, Aspes, Cocka∣trices, &c. (though they be such) they shall have no power to hurt us, but shall be glad to lye as still as a stone, as in Exod. 15.16. So that we shall be safe out of the Wildernesse upon the Mount, Jer. 32.41.44. for the Lord will watch over us with his whole heart and soule, and we may build houses, and buy lands without danger; the Lord will be to us a wall of fire round about us,Wild Beasts afraid of the wall of fire. which the Wildernesse ones will be afraid to come nigh, Zach. 2.5.. There shall be no more a pricking brier to the house of Israel, nor a grieving thorne of all them that have hated us, Ezek. 28.24.26. with abundance of more proofes; but, Mat. 4.Fifthly, A Wildernesse is a place of greatest want, even of ne∣cessaries:5. Wilderness of want. there is no bread, unlesse made of Stones, nor Grapes, unlesse growing on Thistles; no Corne comes up among their
bushes and brambles; and Esa. 34.11. There be the stones of emptinesse; a man may eate his fingers that is lost in a Wilder∣nesse, unlesse he hath bread about him,Expos. (there is much want) and such a Wildernesse hath the Church been in also;The Church in such wofull wants of ne∣cessaries. where she hath wanted even necessaries for Soules, bread of life, and food convenient for her; for as in Amos 8.11, 12. They did wander from Sea to Sea, from North to East, to and fro, to seeke the Word of the Lord, and yet went without it;Expos. often finding (at best) but Cankers, trash and trumpery which grow upon e∣very wilde briar and bramble;Vers. 13. so that the very Virgins and young men have fainted for thirst; but blessed be the Lord, who hath laid it out otherwise in these dayes for his Saints. For as the sharp winter makes the Springe sweet,Sim. and the darke night the light lovely;O how sweet are the dayes that approach! so the times past doe help to set forth our happinesse in these times present, wherein we have plenty of Mannah falling downe from the windowes of heaven. How sweet doth Honey relish after Aloes and Gall? O how sweet is health after a sore sicknesse? wealth after poverty? pleasure after paine? and bread enough after infinite want? A great Courtier complaining to the Harbinger,Sim. for that he was laid in so homely and filthy a roome, was answered; O Sir, You will take delight in it when you are out of it! and so may we say to thinke of the Dungeon, and bondage, full of darknesse and filthiness, wherein we were barricadoed up in former yeares; and as Darius said of Puddle-water,Sim. when he was in great ex∣treamity of thirst, O sweet! so now may we that have been in a Wilderness say of the worst preaching (almost) and Ordinance we meet with, from the Gospel and the Spirit; O sweet! Ah, how did Hagar cry when her bottle was dry, that now she and her childe must dye in the Wildernesse?Sim. she wayles wonderfully (poore soule) till she saw a fountaine neare enough; and so did we, till the fountaine (which is now set open,) was found, out of whose fulness flowes streams, which make us glad, Psal. 46.4. and as the glory of God ap∣peared to Israel even when they wanted bread, Exod. 16.7. So (as Ainsworth sayes) is God with us, and hath appeared in the Assemblies of his Saints, when they were in the greatest wildernesse of want, wanting bread for their soules; but
since I say the Lord hath rained Mannah amongst us,Good store of Manna. even Angels food, and hath begun to feast us with fatnesse, and fill us with gladnesse; and in these last dayes he hath promised that the Saints shall be swallowed up,Isa. 11.9. Isa. 35.2 over head and eares in the knowledge of God, as deep as the bottome of the Sea under the waters, yea with the knowledge of the glory of God, Habac. 2.14. filled by knowing him, in the Hebr. and then shall Corne make the young men cheerfull, and new wine the maides, Zach. 9.17. for he hath promised to call for the Corne (which growes in no soyle but Heaven) and to increase it, Ezek. 36.29. and the fruits of every tree (of righteousnesse) shall be multiplied,Psal. 63.5. Isa. 25.6, 7 Psal. 65.4. and we shall be no more a reproach for famine a∣mong the Heathen. The Saints shall have bread enough and to spare,Saints shall have enough, and no more want. and shall be fed with fatnesse and marrow abundant∣ly; yea whilst others are ready to starve, they shall have e∣nough, and eate, Isa. 65.13, 14. yea, whilst others have their tongues cloven to the roofe of their mouthes, they shall drinke full draughts, and rejoyce whilst others shall be ashamed. 6. With wil∣dernesse crea∣tures and com∣panies.Sixthly, in a wildernesse a man must be a companion with wildernesse-Creatures, and companies of Wolves, Beares, Foxes, Serpents, &c. such a comfortlesse condition the Church was in even till now, among the multitude of such as the Beasts of Ephesus, wanting religion, yea and reason; Oh sad condition!Ezek. 22.26 2 Cor. 6, 16, 17 when as no difference was put between the cleane and uncleane, but beleevers with unbeleevers, light with darknesse, men with beasts, and brutish ones were unequally yoaked,So the Church was in the wil∣dernesse to this day. and are at this day in Parish-Congregations or Chur∣ches (so called) so that whereas formerly God might have said of the Churches that bore his Image, behold, they are as one of us;Sim. now the Beasts may say of Parish-Churches and constitutions which belong to the Beast; Behold they are as one of us. For as the Arke (at first) was carried on mens shoulders, but after that (in the corruption of times) it was carried on a Cart, and by Beasts, till they quite over-turned it; even so the Church-Discipline,Sim. that (at first) in Primitive times consisted of Saints, and which was bore up by Christ, and carried out by the Apostles, was afterwards corrup∣ted into a Discipline, carried out by the power of the Beast,
and bore up by Antichrist,And quite o∣verturned into a stie of Beasts. consisting of Beasts as well as men, I meane of visible brutish sinners, making the Church a Wildernesse for Wildernesse-Creatures, till they had quite o∣verturned the true Church, (as to appearance) and turned it into a stinking stall and stye. But now let us blesse our God,Precious pro∣mises of her deliverance. who hath brought us into the entrance of those blessed dayes promised in Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. An high way shall there be, and a way called the way of holinesse, the uncleane shall not passe over it, no Lion shall be there, nor ravenous beast shall goe up (for it is high) thereon, but the redeemed shall walke there, and the ransomed of the Lord, &c. And the vile and the precious shall be separate, for God is gathering up his jewels, Mal. 3.16,Ier. 15.19 17, 18. so that a difference shall be put between them that serve him, and them that serve him not, with many other Pro∣phesies to this purpose, which I passe by, having produced sufficient (I hope) to satisfie either the rationally religious, or the religiously rationall ones in this point, and of the Churches Wildernesse-state, and of her recovery, which is com∣ming apace upon us; although this I know, that there be more then many neither religious, nor rationall,How many be∣waile the fall of Babylon. that doe de∣plore the falling of Babylon, and men that mourne for Tam∣muz, who say as Agrippina Neroe's Mother did,Sim. when she was told by Astrologers that her sonne should be Emperour in∣deed,Sueton, in Ner. And would have the Strumpet rule though she ruine us. but he should slay her in the time of his Empire) well saith she, Occidat, modo imperet. So say many of the Beast, and of Babylon, let them reigne though they ruine, for they can∣not abide to heare of their fate. Some old Jades there be, that if they be put out of their shuffling pace they will doe just nothing, neither amble nor trot;Sim. so some old Soules there be that are but shufflers in Religion, and their duties very un∣evenly, brokenly, and imperfectly, unsetledly, and superstitiously performed; but take them off of their old pace,They will not be got out of the old pace. and custo∣mary courses, and think to put them into a well-ordered way and Discipline, they cannot endure to be so checked, but will either stand still, and leave off all, or else will goe on, and in againe, in their old wonted way, and confused order, with∣out rule or reason. Such as these are terribly prejudiciall a∣gainst the worke which our God is going on with, and in
that;Characters of Wildernesse-ones are: I shall shew you a little of their temper, that they may be knowne. As first, these Wildernesse-spirits have their dennes and habitations in the Wildernesse, but Strangers (I meane the Saints) thinke it strange to stay there,1 Their habi∣tation and▪ abode. though it be but a little, they cannot endure the thoughts of conti∣nuance in such a condition;No content to us. they take no joy, nor content, nor comfort as long as they are in such a Wildernesse-state, and Wildernesse-ones doe feed and fill themselves with what they finde growing in a Wildernesse,2 Their food is wild fuit. which others cannot doe, nor endure; So, O how greedily doe some men swallow down the Doctrines and devices of men! Ceremonies, and Superstiti∣ons!Enough to choake us. Traditions, with abundance of such old trumpery and trash, Jer. 14.9, 10. enough to choake us. Further, as for your Wildernesse-ones, they never complaine that they are lost in the Wildernesse,3 Never lost. for as long as they are there, they are ne∣ver out of the way, come what will; come this or that, this religion or that, this worship or that, so it be in the Wilder∣nesse, where they may run and range about at liberty, and as they list;We are soone lost, and sensi∣ble of it. whilst the Saints, (alas) are soone sensible that they are not in the way, but that they are out of the way, (Psal. 38.3.5.) they know not where; they call, and cry, and sadly complaine all the day long,Psal. 94 17 Psal. 55.22 Psal. 12.4 and goe about lamen∣ting for deliverance, and every step they take they tread with teares and sighs, Psal. 85.9. and full of cares, (Ephes. 5.15.) with teares and prayers, Hosea 14.8. Psal. 80.3.7.19. Jer. 17.14.16. &c. yea, and the rather, for that they see such com∣pany is not according to their principles, but that there is an apparent and vast difference between them and such wilde Beasts and bruits abroad. 4 They agree together to seize on a stranger to their wayes.Againe, the Wildernesse-ones will agree well enough a∣mong themselves, although they (all) set upon a poore Soule, a bewildernessed stranger, and will not agree with him, unlesse to ruine him. But lastly, this marke never misses, that the Wilderness-creatures are best content with darkness,5 Best pleased with darknesse. and doe most heartily affect, and welcome the night of dark∣ness, for then are they in their element, then they appeare most, and meet oftenest, and prog, and pry, and run, and rant about most busily for their prey, &c. as the text sayes; They love
darknesse, because their deeds are evill, Joh. 3.19. they hate light, and hide themselves from it;And hate the light. no wonder then they cannot abide the Gospel, and that the approaches of Christ perplex them, and the appearances of Christ torment them, who cry out, as Matth. 8. Why comest thou to torment us before the time? These hate the true Sonne, and all light that shines im∣mediately from him (unlesse it be the Moon, the light of nature, the Candle of the Lord) they will not allow of that light (the Sun) of the Lord, wherein he appears most excellently and eminent∣ly; nay the very Ordinances (that are most speciall, and refined) they are offended at, and under the notion of new light, they loudly exclaime against true light, and Ordinances, and explode all Gospel-doctrine and Discipline, the way and worship of Christ (as precisenesse, novelty, and what not?) for indeed they cannot endure an element so neare them wherein the Sunne moves, or whence he shines,But those that have a right to these latter daies promises, love, & rejoyce at the light. whilst the Saints (who have sat, sobb'd and suspir'd their hearts out (almost) in the former dayes of darknesse, whilst they were in the wildernesse, and durst not stirre for fear of stumbling in the darke) they are glad at the heart the Sunne is up, and that that light which hath been long sowne for the righteous, they are now about to reap off. But as to the vulgar people, the Apostle sayes for mee, in Gal. 3.1. O foolish people!Expos. who hath bewitched you from the truth? , what Basilisk hath look'd upon you? Cashaph. what hath cast a mist before your eyes, as if ye were bewitched? what makes you so grossely mistake? as to call good evill, and evill good? light darknesse, and darknesse light? Antichrist for Christ, and Christ for Antichrist? what makes yee thinke you see what you see not? and take the flames of fire,People are be∣witched: why, and how. (even of Hell) for the beams of the Sunne (even as your heaven?) and the true beams of the Sun, (the Ordinances, Doctrine, and Discipline of Christ) as flames of fire (your torment and hell.) O miserable wretches! what Sorceries and Witchcrafts hath the Devill used thus to delude you? who hath bewitched you, that you yet love the Wildernesse? Darknesse? Barrennesse? and Bruitishnesse? to be without Gospel-government, or Order? Many are so in love with the Beast, that no other company
can content them?Sim. And as Xerzes was so zealously affect∣ed to the Plane-tree,They give all up to Babel, till they them∣selves be made a Babel, or confusion. that he would needs adorne it with most precious Jewels, so are they with Babylon, that they give up all their Crowns, and Comforts, and Credit, and Riches, and Liberties, and all to adorne Babel. But are yet yee so foolish saith the Text, vers. 3. or mad? or wild wildernesse-headed? () have yee lost your wits? are yee so senselesse, to runne ruine-ward? to keep in Babylon? to wait for the plagues of Babylon, or to tarry in the wildernesse till the Sunne ap∣peares, and the Hunter pursues you into inevitable destiny? distraction, and destruction? The Lord give yee light in the love of his holy truth, to see at last, what belongs to your peace; but,But we are called our. blessed shal be God (and that for ever) who hath called his Saints with an holy calling, to separate from such wildernesse-creatures (as distinct from them &c.) and not to be reckoned among them, Numb. 23.9. and that they may become a curious Garden for the beloved to live in. A call from the Spirit, and the Bride to come.Wherefore to conclude, the Spirit and the Bride saith Come, and whosoever will, let him come! Oh obey the call of Christ, and come running, and rowling, Bowl-like, well by∣assed for Christ into his Churches (his Gardens inclosed) though it may be, yee may meet with many rubs and lets in the way: Neither let it be selfe-love that swayes you; for as there is a difference betwixt a childe and a horse in follow∣ing of a man,Sim. the childe follows his father for love, but the horse for hay,But not for self-ends· lay downe the hay or oats, and the horse stayes, but the childe goes (sayes Mr. Harris) So indeed is the Saints following of Christ into his Churches, and Hypocrites very different,Saints and hy∣pocrites diffe∣rent entrance into Church-fellowship. for the Saints follow, and obey him for love, but Hypocrites for the loaves. Wherefore, Take heed to thy foot when thou enterest in, and yet be incouraged all that can be into these Gardens, to get out of the wildernesse, and desolate place, and that without delay, con∣sidering the dayes we live in (for as Dr. Williams sayes in Elijahs-wish,Why make haste into Church-fel∣lowship. page 2.) It is reported of the Birds of Norway that they flye faster then the Fowles of any other Country, and that by an instinct which they have, whereby they know the dayes of that Climate to be very short,Sim. and not above
three houres long, and therefore they hasten with double flight and wings; So let it be reported of us in this Common-wealth,Haste! haste! haste! in Eng∣land, Ireland, and Scotland, more then all the world be∣side. that we of all other Nations in the World doe discerne the times and seasons, and to finde this day do be shortened for the Elects sake: And that now (as it is high time) wee make haste into the Lords house, and with double-winged faith and affections we enter into his Gardens. O let us not delay the time! Hag. 1.4. or delude our selves! but above all other, let us make haste! Many there bee who cry like nimble-tongued Tapsters, Anon, Anon, Sir;Sim. but (modò & modò non habet modum) make haste then! I have read that after the Grecians had won the City of Sardis, that Darius, or Zerzes (who were Kings of Persia) gave a charge that every day at Dinner one should speake aloud,Sim. Every day re∣member the Church in Wildernesse till she be re∣covered. and remember him that Sardis was taken and captivated, he intending not to be quiet till he had reco∣vered it: So should we every day remember the Church in the the wildernesse, resolving never to be quiet day nor night, with God, nor men, till she be recovered, and restored into the Gar∣den of the Lord. Pardes. CHAP. IV. The Church is to be called out of the Wildernesse into an Eden, or Garden enclosed, in what respects particular Churches are particular Gardens, and our duty to wait for this Restauration. WHat Fruits have wee had of all those things where∣of we are now (or at least shall be) ashamed? For unto such as are ashamed of their former abomination,Rom. 6.21. Ezek. 43.10, 11▪ doth the Lord bid us to shew the patterne of his house, which is to be
built up in these dayes, as wee shall shew hereafter. In the meane time, now the winter is past, our dayes of light will bee dayes of delight, and our wildernesse-sorrows altered season∣ably into Garden-solaces, and our humane traditions for hea∣venly truths,The happy change. our wildernesse-company, and mixed multitudes, for the society of the first-borne, God in Christ, Angels, and Saints; our darknesse for light,1 Ioh. 1.3. our deadnesse for life; from being wilde to bee wise, and our barrennesse for fruitfulnesse, our want for plenty, our dangers for safety, our coldnesse for zeale, our flesh for spirit, our creatures for Christ, our earth for heaven, &c. Now what shall we lose by such an exchange?Veniente per∣fecto evacuatur imperfectum. yee that are yet for the old Administrations, Will-worships, and ordinan∣ces of mens creation? whilst Ephraim (whose name notes fruitfulnesse) shall say,Col. 2.22, 23. What have I to doe any more with Idols? for why? I have heard the Lord, and observed the Lord; I am like a green Fir-tree,Hos. 14.8. from me is thy fruit found: Who is wise, and he shall understand these things &c? Christs Church is called the Garden of the Lord, an Eden, a Paradise,Christs Gar∣den, Isa. 51.3. Isa 35.2. Isa. 5.1. Mat. 21.23. Ier. 2.21. &c. In the places forenamed, and in Cant. 8.13. there Christ is said to dwell with the Saints (his brethren) and companions in a most eminent manner. But why is the Church called his Garden? First, because by Christ they are (as a Garden) taken out of the fields,1 Taken out and separate distinct from the commons. commons, or high-wayes abroad, and separate from them (as a peece of ground by its selfe) distinct and in∣dependent (with relation to the rest round about) So in Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the world, &c. Eph. 5.11. therefore have no fellowship with workers of darknesse, unfruitfull ones,Num. 23.9. . and those not fit for a Garden of Christ. Secondly, Saints are by him an enclosed people from them without,2 Inclosed in themselves. they are hedged in by Christs owne hands, Isa. 5.2. hee hath fenced it in, and gathered out the stones, &c. So in Mark. 12.1.  Matth. 21. hee hath round about it raised his hedge.Mat. 21.33. In the time of the Law the (then) hedge was full of sharp thorns,Expos. and now by a Gospel-fence (as we shall see afterward) wee are kept in,By Gospel-fences and hedges. and others out, that are not Christs Disciples; for by his own rules he hath paled his people into a communion of love,Vide Sibs in Cant 4.12. light, life, and liberty; and thus his Church is a
Garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. as a people by themselves,Expos. and sepa∣rate from them, that are without. Thirdly, He hath planted this his Garden (as he did Para∣dise, Gen. 28. with his owne hand,3 Christs own planting. and hath by his owne la∣bours and industry, ordered his Church, he casts out the stones,Vide lib. 2. ch. 9 he cuts up the brambles, he (who whipped out the buyers and sellers) sets and sowes with singular heed (to his Fathers will) what∣soever he sees for his Garden-use,Mat. 15.13. and every other plant he puls up by the roots. See it in Isa. 5.2. Matth. 4.33. he hath planted () with great pains; whatsoever is of his Garden, he will have his owne handy-worke in, that the beauty thereof may be the greater, &c. and above all the world beside.Expos. Fourthly, this is his Garden for fruitfulnesse which hee is the cause of;4 For fruit∣fulnesse. when a Gardiner sees one of his Grafts bud and beare, he is glad, and boasts of it;Sim. so is Christ to see any one to take well:Vide Paul Hobsons Garden inclosed. All trees in his Garden are for fruits. but yet in this Christ excels all other Gar∣diners (as Joh. 20.15.) that he sets no Tree but for Fruits; As Lucian fained, the gods sate in Parliament to choose their Trees, one chose the Oake for strength, another chose the Bay-tree for greennesse, another the Cedar for talnesse; but Minerva to the shame of all the rest,Sim. chose the Olive for fat∣nesse: So Christ to the shame of all others, chooseth Trees for fruitfulnesse, not for strength, talnesse, or the like, 1 Cor. 1.28. Not wise, not noble, &c. Christs Church is like Canaan,1 Cor. 1.28. Sim. a land full of Brooks, Springs, Deut. 8.7. Vines, Figs,Surpassing all others for magnitude, multitude, and plenitude. Spi∣ces, Apples, and all fruits that ripen by degrees, as the Sun growes hotter, they are to be the choisest, these Gardens are to surpasse all others without, both for abundance and the goodnesse of the fruits: As far exceeding such as the choy∣sest Orchard, or Garden-fruits excell common hedge-crabs, or high-way fruits; So sayes he, Matth. 5.27.2 Cor. 7.11. Eph. 3.19. What doe yee more then others? else it is a burning blushing shame to bee of the Garden, and yet to let others bring forth as good fruits,Cant. 4.13.14. thus sayes Paul, 1 Cor. 3.3. &c. Are yee yet carnall (as yee were before when yee were without) Doe yee yet walke as men?Expos. O fic! what not now to live at a higher and holier rate then others! when your heels ought to bee above their heads that are without. Such Garden-Saints by Christ are to become so
fruitfull above others,Cant. 4.12. by having from him fuller and freer influences then others. For he is the Fountaine of Gardens and streams from Lebanon. Thus saith he, I will cause them that come out of Jacob, to take root, Isa. 27.6. Israel shall blossome and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruits:Expos. So in Hos. 14.5, 6. I will bee as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon, i. e. in abundance of streams, and sweetest sap-roots to receive the soule of their soile, and the heart of their dewes, to reach out, and runne farre; for his branches shall spread,Expos. and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell as Le∣banon then. Thus they fructifie from Christ, as in Joh. 15.4, 5. Without him they can do nothing, and are but as withered bran∣ches, saplesse, and fruitlesse; wherefore blessed be they that blossome in the Spring (now) and are not nipped off againe by Borean blasts, but be well sett for growing and ripening; for in this Autumne-harvest (which is now nigh us) as the Sunne growes hot and high, they shall bee gathered (full ripe) into the Fathers floore or Garner:Sim. So be it. Fifthly, He hath them in his care constantly, as a man hath his Garden,5 The Lords speciall care. and that most of all, for that hee will not suffer Swine to set footing there (but keeps them without amongst their bruitish brood) So the Lord hath built a watch-tower to over-look all the Church; So Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keepe it,Mat. 21.33. and I will water it every moment, lest any should hurt it, I will keep it night and day; By day and by night upon all her glory I will be her defence,Expos. Isa. 4.5. Hee will not suffer one Saint to be hurt by the wilde Boars of the wood,Of least of his Garden plants. or the Foxes of the field, for he sets traps to take them, Cant. 2.15. Sixthly, such a society of Saints are his Garden-delights, his Darling-delights,6 His choysest delights are his Gardens. and he dearly loves to live and lodge there, Cant. 7.11, 12. to eat and drinke there, Cant. 5.1. of his plea∣santest fruits, and sweetest Spices, Cant. 4.16. of his beautifull beds, and to gather fair Lillies, Cant. 6.2. and there his presence is most eminent, excellent, free, and frequent in the midst of his companions, (viz. the Saints) Cant. 8.13. to the ravishing of their soules with his sweetest loves,2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 2.1. Cant. 7.12. there he loves to walke alife, Psal. 132.13, 14. and to shew to his Saints his
beauty, Isa. 33.17. Thus is the Church of Christ his choy∣sest Garden,Here is the Suns orbe to move in, and to give light to others. and therein especially is his presence most excel∣lent, as the proper sphere and orbe wherein the Sunne moves to give his light to the world. Wee know that nothing which is not what it is by nature, can longer be so then the cause continues, and the working of the cause which effects it to bee so, as water which is not by nature hot,Sim. will not bee hot longer then the fire makes it so, but little by little it returnes to its naturall coldnesse againe; so the ayre which is natu∣rally darke, is no longer lightsome then the Sunne makes it so, but the Sunne with-drawne,Sim. it will turne againe to darknesse; and indeed Christ (this Sunne) as long as hee shines wee are light, and shall be light, but no longer.How long we are light. Now he hath promised in speciall manner to be a light in the midst of us (his Churches) for there he delights most to bee: O that it may be said of all Churches now, as once Caesar Augustus said of Rome, That though he found them bricke, yet he left them Marble! So though Christ hath found us a wildernesse,Sim. yet hee hath made us an Eden! or Gardens-inclosed! fruitfull and faire! pleasant and profitable! to God and men! But thus you may see in all, and in more then all these respects, that the Lord is now raising up the Saints, and rearing up his Sion, as he hath promised;This blessing is begun in our dayes. This blessing is already begun, and in these dayes, Christ calls us aloud, as Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon (i. e. out of the Forrest in the North, 2 King. 14.9. Isa. 29.17. where wild beasts were;A loud call from Christ to come. so out of mixed congregations, and from wildernesse-companions, &c. O my Spouse come with me, looke from the top of Amana (i. e. interpreta∣tur urbulentus, that is, from all wicked and turbulent spirits,Expos. that oppose the truth, yea a mount of Tyrants, void of all goodnesse, and great Persecutors of Gods people looke from them all) and from the top of Shenir and Hermon (Shenir inter∣pretatur faetor) from the Lions dens from the mountains of Leopards.And separate▪ from them without. This is the call of Christ to us in these dayes, to have us looke, learne, and live beyond this wildernesse-condition, and all them without, that are enemies to the Gospel and Garden-way of Christs Worship; for now the Lord (in order to the restauration of Doctrine and Discipline) declares new things,
Isa. 42.9. before they spring forth, he tels us of them, Where∣fore sing a new Song.Expos. verse 11. Let the wildernesse rejoyce, and all the Villages of Kedar (Darknesse) Let the inhabitants of the Rocke (Christ) and all that dwell in the clefts of the Rocke) shout out from the tops of the Mountains.Cant. 2.14. Amen. The last dayes best dayes.Finde no fault with these dayes then! but wait! Isa. 25.9. for the wine will be best at last, and in the evening it shall bee light;Isa 64.4. Isa. 2.2. Zach. 14.7. Proph. Rev. 12.1. richest promises are reserved for us, therefore called the most precious, 2 Pet. 1.4. In these dayes shall the Branch of righteousnesse grow up, Jer. 33.14.15. and our blessed Ahashue∣rus shall take in Esther. The face of Church-discipline shall shine againe,Prophesies of the Churches restauration in these latter dayes. and the King shall delight in her beauty, Psal. 45.10, 11. Besides the abundance of Scripture-prophesies proo∣ving of this; I have seen many remarkable Prophesies of late, largely foretelling these glorious times. As of one Methodius in the yeare two hundred and fifty, in a Treatise de Novissi∣mis temporibus,Methodius. hee tells us how the Kingdome of Christ, in these last dayes shall be lifted up above all mountains; but first, hee sayes, That many mighty Ishmaelites must fall, and then shall follow peace and joy to the Saints. I have also met with Her∣mas whom wee read of Rom. 16.14. (and Jerome calls him Pauls disciple) in a book of his entituled,Hermes vision of the Chur∣ches restaura∣tion gradually 1 An old wo∣man in a chair. 2 An old wo∣man with the face of a young woman. 3 A young wo∣man with old womans hairs in Q Eliz. and to these dayes. 4 A fair Bride coming out to meet the Bridegroom; so she is now. Ecclesia, hee mentions a vision which he had given him of the Church from that time, to the last age, what severall conditions shee should be in: First, he saw her like an Old woman sitting in a chaire; The next alteration hee fore-saw in a second vision (hee sayes) of an Old woman, onely having the countenance and face of a Young woman; In the third, shee had the shape of a Young woman, but shee had the haires of an Old woman, and undecent▪ But in the fourth, which is reserved for us, and ready to be revealed these latter dayes, shee was lively resem∣bled in the forme of a Virgin, and in the beauty of a Bride comming forth out of her Bride-chamber in great glory, and setting forward to meet her beloved Bridegroome, as be∣ing already set out, and comming forward also in his great Majesty, might, and glory. Many more I might produce that Prophesie of these dayes, but doubtlesse the Scripture hath said enough (had
they said nothing) to satisfie our soules, and to set us for∣ward (afresh) in this latter-dayes-disposition,The latter dayes disposi∣tion is to wait, Isa. 25.9. Dan. 12.13. and grace of waiting, yea though the vision stay, yet to wait, because it is for an appointed time, Hab. 2.2. God doth alwayes, and in every age stirre up in his Saints this disposition of waiting suitable to the blessings hee hath to give out, and bestow upon the Saints. So in this age wait! in beleeving! and beleeve in waiting! for the time which they are to bee performed in,Micah. 7.7. Iam. 5.7. is hard upon us; Although alas! how most men live most by sence? what they see that they will beleeve, but nothing without they see some signes, (as to their sense and reason) of such dayes as are foretold of: hence is there so much crying out of Taxes, and complaining of troubles, and of the times in the very streets; tell them of blessed dayes, it is to no purpose, for they want faith to foresee them, and (poor creatures! they cannot see that the Lords time is,Few can get beyond sense. and his day comes, when they least looke for him, and before they be aware of it; even then when men thinke he hath forgot his promises, then is his time to come at the pinch, to blow at the last sparke, 2 Pet. 3.8, 9. as when Abrahams hand was ready up to cut Isaaks throat, at that moment of time,Sim. the Lord made him stay, and appeared to make good his promise, then (as that in Isaak all Nations should bee blessed &c.) yea then even then when Zion (even the Saints) may say the Lord hath forgotten me, Isa. 49.14. then, I say,God appears to perform his promise at the last pinch. the Lord appeares even in the Mount; when they are at the last, and at the very top, height, pinch, and point of all, then the Lord appeares! and then are they fittest for the enjoyments of those Promises.Psal. 3.1.12, 13.14. O how welcome will they then bee to them! Besides how many poore soules are lost in this, because they cannot see light through darknesse, good through evill,Prov. 22.18. Rom. 9.22.23. peace through warres, and blessings through combustions and confusions. Nor doe they understand how God doth infatuate the wisdome of the world,Gods strange wayes. by working out greatest mercies through contrariest meanes, and even then to be (most of all) making good of his Promises when he appeares (most of all) to work and walke in a point-blanke, quite contrary-way:He works by contraries. When hee pro∣mises happinesse, he sends us most unhappinesse; when most
truth is promised, he sends in most errours; when the King∣dome of Christ is to be most exalted,For his Chur∣ches. he lets most enemies, and oppositions to appeare against it; so in all other maine mercies, as when he promises most light, for the accomplish∣ing of the Promise, he lets in most darknesse, Zach. 14.7. So it may bee in a poore soule, when hee is about the ruine of a lust,For poor souls. he may suffer that lust the more to rage, and even then, when thou thinkest there is nothing more contrary to it, it is in order to doe it: Wherefore (my deare friends!) be∣leeve and waite in hope! even against hope! though in your sence, reason, or wisdome you should see but small ground for it;Beleeve and wait. yet (blessed be God!) there is abundance of sound ground for faith (safely) to foot it upon; but were it not so as to your sense,Rom. 4.18, 19. yet God hath laid the earth upon no∣thing,Sim. but the very ayre, and yet makes the weake ayre a foundation and ground strong enough to support and beare the whole universe and globe.When little grounds for faith and hope appears. And can hee not? nay will he not? raise up, and lay the foundation of our hopes and happinesse in weak means? in (the day of small things) poore and nothing beginnings? that appeare to men no more then ayre, and (it may bee) such as will vanish away? Nay in, and by contrary means that (in mens wisdome) will seem impossible to effect, or to be a good foundation for such a frabricke of hopes, or bee a suitable means for such a delight, as seemes to bee set in a Diameter thereto, and against the meanes; although the meanes may produce that day and discovery, yea and recovery of Zion which not onely seem contrary to that worke,Contrary means effect that work which will de∣stroy the means. but which (also) the worke is contrary unto, and will destroy. Wherefore when the Sonne of man comes shall he finde faith on the earth? to instance as clay and spittle (are contrary meanes) which opened the eyes of him that had faith? Finde but faith,Sim. and fire shall consume the waters (and all contrary quenching meanes) 1 King. 18.38. and the waters shall not bee able to hinder the flaming of the fire.Many acts of Providence like Hebrew must be read backward. So many Acts of Providence (like Hebrew characters) are to be read backward, or else they cannot be read aright: And so you may read many of Gods remarkable workes which he is about by contraries. As the Fly on the wheele,Sim. shee goes on; though the wheele
goes contrary; so doe Gods workes goe on,Sim. though the times and troubles, warres and oppositions seeme to goe contrary, wherefore by faith, let us firmly expect the irresistable reco∣very of the primitive purity, and piety in Doctrine and Disci∣pline; Doe Men or Devils what they can to hinder the brightnesse and beauty of Christs Churches in these latter dayes, yet they will but set up the signe of the Labour in vaine, to toule people in to them; For Christ shall reigne, though the Nations are angry at it, and wrath shall come upon his enemies; But the Temple of the Lord shall be set open for the Saints, and the Arke of his Testament shall be seen therein; yet I say not, but lightnings and thunders, earth-quakes, and great hailstones we may yet meet with, Rev. 11.17, 18, 19. But before I conclude this Chapter: Let all the Churches remember,A word to the Churches. that God will have his Gardens well-weeded, and his houses well swept, wherefore the Lord blesse you, as (the good old man) Jacob did tangendo manu approbationis, & osculando instinctu inspirationis, by his ap∣probation and inspiration. Erez. CHAP. V. Christs Garden, or Gospel-Church-State, which is to bee defended, is to bee defined; first from the materiall cause, or persons (who are visible Saints) that are fitly qualified for members. HAving (hitherto demonstrated) by some proofes, and sure Prophesies, the sad condition and wildernesse-estate of Christs-Church in the want of true Doctrine and Discipline to this day, and what in these dayes we are to ex∣pect of her recovery, and restitution, &c. It follows that wee
fetch out what hath lay so long hid (all the time of our Babylonian captivity) as the fire that was hid in an hollow place of old,2 Maccab. 1.20, 21.22. the Servants of God after they had their liberty given them to build up the Lords Temple, sent to fetch it from thence,We are to fetch out what hath been hid many hund∣reds of years. where it lay so long hid. (Even so are we sent at this day for this purpose, to bring forth what we can finde, though hid for so many hundred years) but in case we can∣not doe what we would, we will doe what we can in this case (as Neemias did) to gather what as yet lyes in the dust, and in darknesse, and so to endeavour to discover unto you (in what is discovered to us, and what I say we can) of Christs owne Discipline and Gospel-order, which ought to be in the Church of Christ.First we must gather the wood together. Wherefore first I shall begin to gather the wood together, or the matter that the Church is to be made up of, and after that (the water being sprinckled) I hope the Sunne (that hath been for so many Ages set, or hid in a Cloud) will so breake out, and brightly shine in, and upon us with his lustre and life, heate and light, as that we shall become a great fire kindled; so that all men may marvell at it,Latimer. and make much of this holy fire for future Ages, which shall never more be quite out,The Authors prayer is that like a light he may be spent to give others light. or extinguished. For as ho∣nest old Latimer said to Ridley, as they were going to suffer; Come Brother, this day we shall give a light, and warme all Eng∣land! so faine would I be one that might enlighten others, now I am litt by fire from heaven, and be as a Torch in the entry to such as are in the darke,Ainsw. in loc. 3.9. Et claritate & paritate, & hi∣laritate, the Lord grant it, in whose light as I see light, I shall shew it,Expos. and so I come to tell you what's the matter. What the Church is, viz. The typified Chariot of Sa∣lamon, how and why? It is a bed, a Throne a Pa∣lace, a Cham∣ber of pre∣sence, a secret Chamber. A Couch.To begin with the Materials, we lay downe this Position, that no persons are fit for such a purpose but visible Saints, or right matter to make up this typified Chariot of Salo∣mon but the wood of Lebanon, Cant. 3.9. this Chariot is his publick seat, where he is to be seen of all, in Hebrew Apirion, and in Greek Phoreion, a Throne say some, a Bed say others, a Palace say others, and a Chamber of presence say most; but that this Church is all these to Christ and his Saints say I, and so all; yea, and as (Sol. Jarchi sayes beside) the secret Chamber (here on this floore, and under this roofe) for the
Bride and Bridegroom to meet in, and to make much of each other in; but I had rather read and render it from the word, a place much like a Couch, carried about and abroad, being open above, exceeding faire, glorious, and richly beset with beauty within, and in the which Salomon sate with much ease, and in much honour and state, from whence he deli∣vered his Lawes for his Subjects; and thus Christ doth answer the Type to his Saints, whilst he sits in great grace and Ma∣jesty in this his Chariot, and in great glory and triumph he go∣verns, and gives out his Lawes to his Subjects. Now for the matter that this his Chariot is made up of,The matter of this Gospel-Chariot. it must be of Le∣banon, elect trees, Deut. 20.19. Ezek. 47.12. Isa. 60.13, 14. The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee,Expos. I meane such trees as are the tallest (heaven-ward) such Cedars as are the soundest,Psal. 1.3. & 52.8. & 92.12 Ier. 17.8. Such as are sound, faire, tall, fat, up∣right, strong, and well roo∣ted, are fit for Church-Fel∣lowship. and will not rot, such Cypresses as are the fairest, Eccles. 8.1. Psal. 119.80. 2 Tim. 1.7. Jer. 5.28. and such Olives as are the fattest, Psal. 52.8. & 128.3. and such trees as are the most upright, and the least crooked, or crabbed, the best and most beauteous ones, Psal. 7.10. Psal. 64.10. & 112.4. Cant. 1.4. Psal. 15.2. and for strength, such as nothing can overthrow, being well rooted and united, Psal. 73.2.6. Zach. 10.12. Isa. 8.8.10, 11. but which will stand steddy in all stormes, and against all plots and practises, and powers which no force can conquer, which no Age can decay, (but they are renewed like an Eagle) which no fire can burne up (but puri∣fie) which no wormes can eate, or enter into,Such are to be alwayes a sweet savour. but who are all wayes, and at all times, and in all places, a sweet savour, 2 Cor. 2.15. to them within, and to them without. These are the Saints indeed, and none but the visible Saints, and that are so judged upon pregnant proofes, and strong presump∣tions) are (De Jure) of right to be Members of this Church of Christ; hence are they called,Visible Saints only matter of the Church to be made up of. the Churches of Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. and Saints called, 2 Cor. 11. and sancti∣fied in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1, 2. otherwise the types of the Mysticall Temple, (viz. of the Body of Christ, the temple of his God-head to this day) Jo. 2.21. would not be answered, (which ought to be) by the typified,Types of it. 1 King. 6. for rough unhewen stones were not laid up into the building of the Old-Testa∣ment
Temple (till they first were fitted,Sim. polished, and prepa∣red for the builders use) much lesse may this Spirituall house of the Lord be built up of any other then holy and hewen,The Stones of the Temple hewen. 2 Chron. 23.19 None entrd into the Tem∣ple that were known unho∣ly, or unclean. All the utensils and materials holy. 2 Chro. cha. 4. & chap. 5. So now in the Gospel-temple. the liveliest and loveliest stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. besides, all that entered into the Temple of old were to be holy and cleane, and all the vessels within holy, 1 Chron. 22.19. and all the treasures dedicated unto God, 2 Chro. 5.1. &c. and all the ma∣terials were the most choyse and pure; so ought it to be in this Temple (for a greater then Salomons is here) and the glory of this house must be greater then the former; wherefore it must be made up of the most choyse and precious materials, and of such as are dedicated and given up unto the Lord by his Spirit, Ephes. 2.22. Moreover, (Mr: Cotton In his holi∣nesse of Church-Mem∣bers, read that Book, p. 88. The Porters that kept out the uncleane. Uncleane and uncircumcised ones doe pol∣lute the Tem∣ple of the Lord, And are not to be suffered. notes,) that the vigilant and laborious attendance of the Porters was typicall too, in 2 Chron. 23.19. who were to suffer none that were uncleane to enter into the Temple, which sayes he, does typifie the duty of the Church-Officers, to prevent and keep out (as much as they can) vicious, vile, knowne, un∣cleane persons from polluting the Temple of the Lord, which would be by their admittance into the midst of us, &c. yet if I may not be so strict and curious, I am content to say (this reaches to the thing now in hand) viz. That the Por∣ters (and the people by informing the Porters) are bound in duty to put by (as much as they may) persons sinfull, and uncircumcised, which were not to be suffered so as the true Israelites were, Ezek. 22.26. So in Ezek. 44 6, 7, &c. for a∣mongst other abominations is this brought in, that they suf∣fered such as were uncircumcised to be in his Sanctuary to pollute it, &c. but Object out of Jerem. 7.9. There were Adulterers, Theeves,Obj. and wicked ones, &c. Rutherford, Bailey.Answ. This is answered already by many eminent men, yet to adde a word,Answ. you see before in Ezek. 44. there were strangers that had crept in through the negligence,Expos. or crowded in through the ignorance of the Keepers,Cotton, Hooker, &c. but they are condemned, and highly complained of, as such who have prophaned the Sanctuary, and defiled his Ordinances, and despised his Lawes, and made his house a very denne of Theeves, whereupon the Lord threatens them, for that they would suffer such to burne In∣cense
amongst them; but (besides the abundance more of Scriptures which I might use to prove it) I shall produce undeniable reasons to ratifie this truth,Zach. 9.9. Rev. 15.3. Isa. 33.22. Iam. 4.12. that it may run in triumph, yea in whole bundles of them (that our Beloved may be to us a bundle of Myrrhe, to lodge all night betwixt our breasts;) and the first sort of reasons run from Christ our King, and the Lord our Law-giver. Reas. 1. Is taken out of Mat. 16.16, 17, 18. where Christ our Lord and Law-giver hath promised himselfe to be the Churches foundation for ever, and such as are built up by him,Reasons. Expos. and upon him (as all true Church-members must be,1 Christ is the Churches foundation, none are true Church-mem∣bers, but are built up by him, and on him. that would stand out, and out-stand all stormes) must be such Professors of this Christ as Peter here was, and that is by such a professi∣on as flesh and bloud revealed not, but his heavenly Father. Now none but Saints are such Professors (at least they must be Saints in appearance) who are able to hold forth the worke of the Fathers upon their soules, which consists not in bare words, or a verball acknowledging of Christ;What sort of Professors and Professions re∣quisite? Ans. affirm. Ans. negat. not meere verball. for words are but Cyphers, which signifie nothing without other Figures; And as it was said of Epicurus, that he had the habit of a Philosopher, but was none indeed; so many have the habits and words of Christians that are not so indeed; and the Church that is built upon the sand, may and must consist of such, Mat. 7.24, 25, 26, 27. But if the Grapes painted by Zeuxes allured the Birds to peck at them,Sim. would they not much more have flowen at them had they been true Grapes indeed?Many Profes∣sors not Chri∣stians. So if such as seeme to be Saints, and appeare visibly (as to our eye) godly, are so good,Sim. and attractive matter for the Church of Christ, much more then are reall Saints so. Obj.Reall Saints most attractive matter. The Apostles admitted all sorts of Professors, three thousand in one day. Ans. First, it is granted, that they were Professors then be∣fore they were admitted.Obj. Secondly, It does contradict the text,Answ. to say all sorts of Pro∣fessors; if yee meane thereby,Expos. all that professe Christ with their mouthes meerly, for the text tells us,What sort of Professors were taken in primi∣tive times. Acts 2.37. they were pricked in their hearts, and at the heart, for the word signi∣fies () a most sad and sore rent to the very soule, a punctuall wound in every part of their hearts, as if Daggers
were fastned at their depth in them,Sim. and this word will shew their compunction was sound,Not only pun∣cti & repuncti, but also com∣puncti, a sound worke. Wounded for sin, crying out fo Christ. , repenting, em∣bracing the Gospel gree∣dily. for it was not (as now it is with some, Acts 7.54.) to kick against Christ, but to cry out for Christ (him whom they had crucified, for which they were so wounded;) besides, they were sensible that they were undone without Christ, wherefore with wide mouthes say they to the Apostles, Oh, What shall we do? Besides, they repented, and heard, and obeyed, and gladly received the Gospel, ver. 41. yea with greedy stomacks, (though many now have hot Li∣vers, and cold Stomacks) and strong affections, yea and em∣braced it (and (as it were) kissed it, for so farre the word will have it) with affectionate acceptance (Gratis animis) and from their soules; yea and therein they continued stedfast, () i. e. strong in the faith,Strong in the faith. In midst of trials. without staggering, wavering, or shrinking from their Professions and practise; yea and in the midst of the greatest trials, troubles, persecuti∣ons, perplexities, they were yet most zealous and faithfull, by an impregnable assistance, and an invincible constancy. And are not these the chariest Characters of true conversion? Can yee so under-value this great worke of Gods Word? surely all sorts of Professors could not doe thus: so that I say, such were all Saints (in appearance) and such, and none but such are by Christ's Law allowable Members of Christ's Church, although that afterward some will appeare Hypocrites, who crept in, as Judas, Demas, Ananias and Saphira, with divers others. But, 2 Christ's countermand, Mat. 21.Secondly, The King of Saints hath given orders to attach such as have (unawares) got in, and have appeared ungodly, when he whipped out buyers and sellers; he signified thereby not only his Law against such as were not sound in holinesse,Expos. after their unsoundnesse appeared, but also to keep them without, that they might not enter in, now the Gospel-Temple was to be built; no mixt Congregations were to be continued, but Christ by his Scourge and Whip of Truth will have us to cast them, and to keep them out. Thus Christ commands, Matth. 7.6. not to throw Pearles to Swine,Christ's com∣mand. nor to give holy things to Dogges,Expos. &c. wicked ones are so called in sundry Scriptures, for Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogges, beware of evil-workers; so it is in Revel. 22.15. Blessed are they that may enter in, for without are
Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers and Idolaters, &c.Violent viola∣tions of Christs Law to take in any but Saints in appearance, and so far as we can judge of them. They that are knowne to be such, must be kept without, or else there will be a violent violation of Christs Law: Hence it is the Churches have rule to proceed with such prophane ones and sinners as have crept and crouded in, Matth. 18.17, 18. &c. Hence it is also the professing-friend (at the feast, Matth. 22.12. in Church-fellowship yet wanting the wedding garment, was cal∣led into question,Expos. but the Text sayes the servants went out to gather all.Object. Ans. It is true, All were said to be called by a publicke call, but before they entred in, their high-way-rags, their hedge-religion,Answ. All called by an outward converting cal and rayments, were to be laid aside, else the Lord would never have laid it in his dish, What dost thou here without it? nor would he have been put to a Non-plus, and not have had a word to say; nor should he have been for the want of that (had it not been necessary) cast out and punished,But they are not to enter in till fitted. but by all these (and abundance more I might produce) to prove this first reason. 2 Are bundled up together out of severall Propheticall Scriptures, for in Isa. 60.21. The people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the Land for ever, the branch of my planting,All the Pro∣phesies are ull to foretell, that the Church in the latter daies shall consist of Saints and such as so ap∣pear. the worke of my hands, that I may be glorified. So in Isa. 35.8, 9, 10. It shall be called the way of holinesse, no Lion shall be there, nor ra∣venous beast goe thereon (meaning unclean and openly knowne sinners) but the redeemed shall walke there: And the ransomed of the Lord shall returne, and come to Sion with songs, &c. So in Isa. 52.1. From henceforth shall come into thee no more the uncir∣cumcised and unclean. So in Zach. 14.21. In that day there shall bee no more the Canaanite in the Lords house. So in Joel. 3.17.Such are in the Lambs book of life. Yee shall know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion my holy Mountaine, then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers passe through her any more. So in Isa. 33.24. and in Rev. 21.27. In no wise shall enter into it any thing that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or that maketh a lye, but they which are written in the Lambs Book of life. It is not denied,Sim. but there is sin in a Church, but not a Church in sinne (as one may be said to have drinke in him, and yet not to be in drinke) I meane sinne so seen, and knowne, and yet allowed of, or (at least) not
duely proceeded against, by censure and reproof. Now in this sense nothing that defileth doth enter;Accounted necessary in the Law times, and the Bap∣tists time. the best Church may have spots on her, but not in her (i. e. tolerated as before) no not in her worst estate. Besides, in all that was before mentioned as in the Law-time typical (and so Prophetical) in the Baptists dayes,August. in Mat 3. Act. 19 4. there was even then an apparent repentance and visible pro∣fession accounted necessary before admission, as to baptisme. Mat. 3.6. Luke 3.3. how much more must this be so before admission into Gospel-fellowship for (as Aug. sayes in Tom. 4. de fide & operibus) the Pharises,The Baptist admitted not of scandalous, nor of bare professours. and Sadduces that came to his Baptisme, were forced to swallow a refusall, and a bitter reproofe to boot, Matth. 3.7. for a generation of vipers, he neither admitted of scandalous persons, nor must wee into Christs-Church, till there appeares a repentance, and reformation; But, 3 Runnes from that most familiar relation which is be∣tween Christ and his Church,Ierom 31, 32. God and his Saints in such a fel∣lowship.The sweet and unseparable relation that is betwixt God and his Saints, Christ and his Church, Christ our Husband. He is their Husband Eph. 5.23. Isa. 54.5. and married unto them, Jer. 3.14. Rev. 19.7. Hos. 2.19, 20. and they are presented unto him as a chaste Virgin to these Espousals. 2 Cor. 11.2. Now he is not thus related to prophane and scandalous persons (though the Ranters doe call him the friend of Publi∣cans and Sinners) such, with whom Christ hath so inseparable, and insuperable communion which are Saints called; and such must the Church consist of (i. e. of such, and onely such as far as may be judged) whose husband hee is: But some will object. Object.Say not the Scriptures otherwise; as that tares are amongst the wheat untill the harvest,Christ is Husband of mixed Congre∣gations too. Matth. 13.25.38, 39. and have you any Church in the Scripture all of Saints? not having one Judas, Ananias, Demas, Hymeneus, Philetus, nor Diotriphes, nor others? our owne experience is otherwise in all Chur∣ches, where there be good and bad, Lambs and Rams, wheat and chaffe, sound and unsound, and yet Christ is called their Husband. AnswFirst, for the Scripture alleadged, it is allowed of, if we give it its own weight,Expos. without any other grain, or the least addi∣tion to it; for see v. 38. the field in which they are, is the world, and so wee say to the end of the world, in the world will
grow good and bad together; but yet grant it (with most) to be meant the field of the Church visible (which is rather a Garden) yet this is not an Injunction, but rather a Prediction of what will bee, for without doubt,In the Church none members but such as ap∣peared fit, so in all ages, in the true Church of Christ▪ wicked men will bee in the Church in all ages; but that is not the point; for this it is that wee say, and say againe, that such as are knowne openly to be such sinners or hypocrites, are neither to bee taken in, nor tolerated in the Church of Christ, of which hee is the Husband. And although our present experiences (be∣sides the primitive and past) expresse much of this nature, viz. that naughty, corrupt, and sinfull men have been, and yet are in every Church; yet we will beleeve such were not openly knowne to be such, when they were admitted members of any true Church of Christ, whether past, present, or to come; yes say some. Judas was knowne by Christ to be an hypocrite,Object. when ad∣mitted.in Judas. 1 But he was not so knowne unto the Church,Answ. for all the rest of the Disciples did not so much as suspect him (Eccle∣sia nn judicat de occultis) therefore they could not take cogni∣zance thereof,1 Not known openly to the Church to be an hypocrite when admitted. for hee seemed a very holy Disciple to the rest. 2 The knowledge Christ had of him as one,2 Christ knew him so by an extraor∣dinary Spirit. (before hee appeared such a one) was extraordinary, but wee are speaking of an ordinary way of discovery, as when sin breaks out, and hypocrisie appears; Besides, 3 There was a speciall reason in it, that he was received,3 Great reason for Judas ad∣mission. viz. to answer the will of God given out in Psal. 41.8 &c. yet this is certaine, neither he nor any else appeared hypocrites or wicked ones openly, and so known to be, when admit∣ted either into that, or any other society of Saints; although there was, is, and will be in every particular Church of Christ some that ought not to be;Christs fel∣lowship is the patterne, yet  Judas was in it. For if this fellowship of which Christ himselfe was Pastor, and is for a Patterne, and had but twelve (a small number for the most are not alwaies the best) had a Judas; much more may others. Even as Davids house which is set for a Patterne for future ages,Sim. Zach. 12.10. was not without an Amnon, an Absolon, and others;2 King. 15.25.
even Gods owne Arke may nourish Monsters, as Noahs Arke did Cham;Sim. yea, and as some filthy Toad might bee found to lye under the stones of the Temple;Gods own Ark may have beasts and toads in it. so may some wicked dissembling Hypocrites (sayes Dr. Hall) and yet the Temple be the Lords for all that. Sim.Furthermore, the visible Church is called his Holy Temple 1 Cor. 3.16,2 Sam▪ 23.4, 5, 6. 17. which ought not to be defiled, 2 Cor. 6.16. and therefore is made up of living stones, 2 Pet. 2.5. that is, of visible Saints.2 Christs Church is Gods holy Temple. Also it is called the Lords house and habitation, Heb. 3.6. Eph. 2.22, 23. 1 Pet. 2.5. wherein he walks and lives, and takes his rest,3 It is the Lords house. which holinesse becomes, Psal. 93.5. for ever; therefore the holiest are the fittest matter. The Church is called his houshold, Eph. 2.19. Now if David could not endure a wicked person within his doors,4 His Houshold. Psal. 101.3, 4.5. Much lesse will the Lord allow it. But to bee briefe. 5 It is Christs Body.Lastly, the Church is Christs body, 1 Cor. 12.26, 27. and Christ is the head of every particular Church gathered, Col. 1.18. Eph. 5, 23. &c. Now such as are united to Jesus Christ by his Spirit,All these rela∣tions teach us what manner of persons Church-mem∣bers ought to be. 1 Joh. 1.3 7. and have speciall communion with him as their Head (as to receive vertue and vitality from him) are to be received as members of his Church, whereof hee is Head: And none else, but such as the Church is perswaded of (upon Testimony given in) to have such a relation to the Lord Christ, and whom in the charity of her judgement, and in the judgement of her charity, shee freely accepts of for such, and in whom they finde the graces of Christ,The Church must judge of them accord∣ing to ortho∣dox rules of charity. and the gifts of his Spirit in some measure, and from whom they have some answerable fruits, whereby they may be able to judge charitably: for to receive a member which hath not virtuall power,Vid. Hooker 1 lib. 2 ch. and operation from the Head, is against reason, yea and that reference and correspondence of members with the head. Object.But hence it is that many hypocrites are taken in, who seem to have high injoyments, and large gifts, to wit, Ranters and such like,Answ. &c. No! It is not hence, but thence (I meane by running from
these rules) that so many Hypocrites creep in,Jude v 4. as Gal. 2.4. for it is not enough to have heightened conceptions,Not gifts, or parts, to pray, preach, &c. that doe fit or qualifie us for Church mem∣bers. quicke appre∣hensions, admirable gifts, excellent parts, and thereby to plead union with Christ (our Head) from the influence of common graces, and injoyment of great gifts (as Ranters may have very ravishingly) to make a man fit for such fellowship of Saints; no not though he prayes, preaches, discourses, &c. like an Angel, if the Church conceive him not a Saint-called, by some evi∣dence given in, or other, whereby the Church doth judge (him in union with his Head (Christ) according to the In∣fluences of soule-sanctifying and soule-saving graces. Simon Magus,But union with Christ the Head by saving and sanctifying graces (so cal∣led.) I make no doubt but had many common-gifts and graces (which had a holy face) by which he passed by Philip and crept in: but yet had his hypocrisie appeared, and that they were but counterfeit Coin, I am confident Philip would have dealt with him home, and have given him his owne as well as afterward Peter did, Acts 8.20, 21, 22. And so (as Tertullian sayes) even Judas was honest and eminent at first to see to;Sim. so here be many Blazing-stars, and dangerous Comets which doe shine brightest as to sight (as Ranters, Hypocrites, &c.) but evermore portend and presage eminent and imminent evills to the Church they are in, unlesse much mercy prevent:Others are but blazing De∣ceivers, who must, and will fall of them∣selves. a many such meteors may seem fixed stars for some time, so long as they are aloof off, and high, and so cozen us, till they come to fall, and then wee finde they were but Deceivers, made of earthly, slimy, fleshly matter. Thus have I offered the third bundle of Reasons, and reach to the 4 Reason, which is taken from the ends, for the which  this Gospel-order and Church-fellowship is instituted,None but Saints can an∣swer the ends of the Institu∣tion of Gospel-Discipline. the which none but Saints (at least so visibly) are able to answer, which are of sundry sorts; some few of them I shall in∣stance in, but not insist on; for I feare I am too large, and then ten to one but some will say, my Pen is long-winged, and my preaching is long-winded, which is accounted an ill-favou∣red, and an impardonable fault (in Dublin) I am sure; but to be briefe.
1 The honour and glory of God, which none but Saints can. Others cannot.1 The maine end of this Gospel-Discipline is to set forth the honour and praises of God as a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Heb. 2.12. Ephes. 3.21. now none but visible Saints are fit to an∣swer such an end. Others indeed would be a chosen and pe∣culiar people to dishonour God, to rob him of his glory, to Crucifie Christ afresh, to bring a reproach upon the truth, and to scandalize the Gospel, but for nothing else in Christ's Church. 2 Another end of this Gospel-practise is to promote the true light,2. The promoti∣on of the true light & know∣ledge of God. and to let in more of that knowledge of Christ, which it is eternall life to know; now none but the Saints are said to reach this end, Ephes. 5.8. and in 1. Jo. 1.6, 7. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darknesse, we lye, and doe not the truth. But if we walke in the light, as he is the light, we have fellowship one with another.Others cannot answer this end. Now prophane ones, as Atheists, scandalous persons, and such like, are fit for the promotion of darknesse, and for the putting out of the true light, but are not at all fit for fellowship upon this ac∣count. 3. Edifying one another.A third thing to be shot at in Gospel-fellowship, is the mutu∣all edification of one another, and the building up of the body in Christ, 1 Thes. 5.11. Ephes. 4.29. 1 Cor. 14.26. now none but Saints doe hit this marke, for wicked ones would serve to pull downe and destroy,Others cannot. but not to build up in the most holy faith, Jude 20. 4. Saint-like love▪4 Furthermore, a maine thing we must not omit, is an open-hearted Saint-like love, by the same Spirit of love which Christ bare to us, Joh. 15.12. Ephes. 5.2. 1 Thes. 3.12. 1 Jo. 3.22. &c. now none but the Saints sit close to this duty,☞ (and they hardly too in these dayes) or that can live up to this end, for indeed sinners, so knowne, will serve for nothing more (and for little lsse) then to set at variance,Others cannot learne this lesson. make brea∣ches, and rend the body, being filled with unexorable (yea un∣exuperable) hatred, and malice against the Saints, by the same spirit which their Father the Devill was filled with against Christ. Many other ends might be mentioned, for the which Saints are enchurched together according to the Gospel which I shall shew herafter in the last Book; but neither to
those,Nor answer o∣ther ends of Church-fel∣lowship. nor these ends can any others but the Saints (at least so visibly) be said to live up. This is no worke for them (there∣fore) there is no way in Christs-Church for Drunkards, Swea∣rers, Sabbath-breakers, Blasphemers, Persecutors of Saints, Scof∣fers, or scandalous, or such as may cause a Curse to pursue us, and Gods wrath to be revealed against us, by the with-drawment of his presence from us; but for nothing more as I know of; thus by all these reasons I have (and by many more I might impregnably) proved, that only Saints visible (so judged of by suf∣ficient evidences given in to be such) are competent Members of a true Church of Christ,None but visi∣ble Saints su∣table matter. which (ought to be) a company of Saints called to be Christs Spouse, and Temple of the Lord. Obj.1 Cor. 1.2. Some may say with Master Rutherfurd (as Cotton and Hooker notes) but such termes are given to the Church of Christ as invisible.Object. Ans. 1. There is no such distinction in Scripture,Ans. but Christs Church is so called, whether visible or invisible.No Scripture distinction of visible and in∣visible, but all one Church, 1 Tim. 3.5.2. So Ainsworth a∣gainst Bernard, pg 174. and Robisos Justif▪ of separ. p▪ 112. 2 Paul stiles them such (as a visible body, if they will have it so) 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 6.16. 2 Cor. 11.2. saying, Yee are the temple of God, and what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? and I will walke in the midst of you; but who will be further informed in this subject may see Mr. Hooker's Sur∣vey, 1 Lib. 2 Chap. where they have the terme opened, the question stated, and the conclusion proved. Well, a word of use, which is; Vse 1. To reprove (whilst I prove) Parochiall Churches  Antichristian (which I shal shw in all the essentials of it) for in this first we finde how foulely they fall short of being fit matter; for the veriest ranting, revelling, and reviling Swines,Parish Chur∣ches, as Chur∣ches Antichri∣stian. that swill upon the earth, the most notorious Drunkards, and vicious wretches that are, are Members of such Churches, and so held (De jure) but this is from beneath of their Father (the Devill) and of his bottomlesse-pit-smoak, the constitution of which comes from the busie braines of men: for about Constantines time this corruption began to be great, and was brought on, as it was in Dionysius his dayes (before him) Bishop of Rome, who sent out his Edicts (not to emparadise, but to em∣parish the people) which I have spoke to in Chap. 2. and in
England, Honorius Canterburiensis was the first that I finde, pragmaticall to promote this confused, this corrupt, and Christ-crucifying, Christ-slighting, and Christ-destroying Church-state:When Parish-Churches be∣gan in Eng∣land. who desire to be more satisfied herein, may be pleased to peruse either Selden de Decimis, or Polydor. Virgil. lib. 4. c. 9. or else Mr. Hookers Polity, or Mr. Jacobs Attestation, or ho∣nest Paul Baines Diocesan Triall, or else Mr. Burtons Vindi∣cation of the Independant Churches, and they may receive it in full, and write it in folio. But a burning shame it is, so much of the Whores fore-head should be still in some men, as to maintaine them to be Churches (and to call them such) and Saint them to boot) but blessed be the Lord, that Christs Church of his owne institution can be built up amongst us here in Ireland, and that the Honourable Commissioners of Par∣liament are carefull to keep up Christs, and to keep downe Antichrists Institutions. Obj. Many Saints in our Parish.Object. But, say some, All are not such in our Parish as you speake of, viz. scandalous persons, but we have many precious Chri∣stians, and Saints. Answ.Ans. 1. Are there any Scandalous, and not Members of your Parish-Church? Do not your Minister give the Sacra∣ment, and both Seales to all? without putting difference between the holy and prophane? this is contrary to Christs rules and order, and most dangerous and detestable. Obj. Our Mi∣nister godly.Obj. But our Minister is an honest man, and does not so, but puts a difference? Answ.Ans. 2. Why does he not then call them that are godly out of that condition and Church-state, which he seemes to separate them from, in making the difference, which till then is but mocking God, and Christ, &c. 2 He gives (as some do) the Lords Supper as a right Or∣dinance, but in a wrong order; but to answer, Answ.2 Yet ye are not therefore a Church of Christs own order, because yee have some, many, though they should bee most, (which is scarce in any Parish) precious to God (which should consist of none else) for a little leven levens the whole lump; so doth not a little sweet meale sweeten the whole of our lump) and what taste hath a little spoonfull of
honey in a vessell of vinegar?Sim.) Nay were there as much honey as vinegar, yet the worst would taste most. Here I know, they would faine bring in the former objections, which are fruitlesse, and frustrate. In the best Churches have been as bad men,Object. as in Co∣rinth, &c.Answ. This before in page, 52. &c. but they were not known such, when they were taken in, nor were they tolerated when so knowne, for they must all be true Professours, and not pro∣phane ones, or such as have cut a Covenant with hell and death,Expos. as the word signifieth in Isa. 28.15. which is taken from a Simile of such as were wont of old to cut asunder the beasts they sacrificed: Sim. So doe Hypocrites and prophane ones their hearts, for they divide their hearts into two  and so sacrifice them in part to the service of sinne, Satan, and their owne lusts, Gen. 15.17. Jer. 34.18. These have cut a Covenant with hell and death, though sometimes they seem to cut a part for God, and to allow him, a (small) portion of their hearts. Most of our Parish are great Puritans, and old Pro∣fessours.Object. Yet it is not enough so to be,Answ. which was proved page 62. and which appears, 2 Tim. 3.5. although it is enough so to bee, for Parish-constitutions and National Churches,Sim. yet not for Gospel-ordered Congregationall-Churches: For although a mud∣wall may be made up of any thing,Churches as Christs Pallaces must be made of the best materials; seeing it consists of all kindes of stuffe and trash, though ere so mixed and base; yet Pallaces must be built up with better materials, and so must the true Churches of Christ, which are his Pal∣laces. But these come all to heare Gods word,Object. they keep his Sabbaths, and have Christs Ordinances dispenced amongst them, &c. What of all that? Christs Ordinances were amongst the Jewes, and they heard Christ, and his Disciples gladly;Answ. and so 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. Heathens, and unbeleevers, heare the word; Herod heard John gladly, and now in New-England,Hearing of the word without the Church. the Indians doe diligently heare the word, but alas! alas! it
is living the Word, and doing the Word, is requisite in every member of Christs-Church. But let us lay aside those, and all other objections, and all Parish-Churches too, and put on apace for Sion, let us face about, and bid faire for Church-communion according to Christs owne Discipline and Doctrine; for the which none are fit matter, and allowable, but living Saints (so in appearance as to us) and whom wee have no cleare cause otherwise to judge of; which brings me to the second Vse. Depart yee, Depart yee, saith the Lord, Esa. 52.11. for as Mr. Hooker concludes (in his Survey, lib. 1. chap. 2.) Parish Precincts give not a man right,Depart yee out of Babylo∣nian bondage, and Parochiall captivity. nor make him fit matter for the true Church of Christ; but this we shall presse by unanswerable argu∣ment afterwards: in the interim, this doth very much vindi∣cate the Churches that are Christs for matter from the wide-mouthed malice of wicked-mouthed men, though Hypocrites perhaps have crept in:A vindication of the Chur∣ches. for as the Giant in Gath, 2 Sam. 21.20. was a true man, though deformed with superfluous fingers and toes: And as Naaman was a true man, though a Leaper; so may the Church be a true Church that hath such as do deforme her in her,Sim. and such may bee in her that are not of her; but an Hypocrite is like a we in the body,Sim. which seemeth to be∣long to the whole, but indeed doth take away the credit, and steale away (as a thiefe) the comfort of the whole,Hypocrites in them, that are not of them. though it bee skinned over with the same outside, which the true members of the body have:Sim. So I say, Hypocrites, who pretend and appear outwardly, one with the Church as submissive, reverent, and worshippers of God as any, but within they are corrupt, hard, and swelling against the truth and Gospel;Sim. these doe more hurt then good, although as the Ivie about the Tree, which seem∣eth to imbrace it with much affection, whilst (indeed) it takes away and steales from it,Hypocrites hinder the Churches growth. and doth but starve it, and hinders its growth, so they doe seem to cling close to the Church as if they were of it, when indeed they are not, and doe wrong and rob from the Church, and are the greatest hindrances of the Churches growth that can bee:We in Dublin had this by wofull expe∣rience. Wee in Dublin have had this experience at a deare rate, by reason of some painted Pictures, who crept in, and indeed, Wolfe-like
(as it is well knowne) who looked towards heaven,Sim. and how∣led, but it was to eat the flesh of others,Some like wolves looked upward, when they howled for lambs to be their prey. and to make the brethren their prey, which some of us felt sorely, and found them Kite-like flying aloft, but yet looking low, and keeping their eye on some of the innocent ones for their prey, wherefore let the Churches be wary in their admission of members; for many times the emptiest vessells make the greatest noise, and sound most, and readiest, but it is because they are hollow hypocrites,Sim. & have their retrograde motions.They have re∣trograde mo∣tions. And so we may say we found them at Dublin, like those wandring stars, which (though they be carried about with the rest in the orbe,Sim. and so must be moved the same way with the rest, yet they) have their silent and secret motions whilst they creep back another con∣trary way, which is indeed their owne proper motion: And to warne the Churches they must know it, that we have found them that had such motions,Caution to the Churches have from our wo∣full experience and clandestine counsels and courses, untill their secret contrivings and conventiclings appeared openly, and broke out into an open inundation of mischiefes, malice and menacings, against the Church to de∣stroy her, and then like the Fecedula (that Pliny speakes of) they faced about, and fell off of a sudden, and changed their colour, forme, visage, and song,Sim. and all at once as ap∣peares in the second Booke, Chap. 5. I remember the Riddle, which was propounded to Athenaeus; How a man, and no man; with a stone, and no stone, could kill a Bird,A Riddle. and no Bird, upon a Tree, and no Tree: He resolved it thus, That the man was an Eunuch, the stone a Pumice, the Bird a Bat,Sim. and the Tree Fennel: But such as wee are speaking of,The Riddle opened in, and by hypocrites. and have met with, doe make a resolve to this Riddle, viz. seeming Saints, but yet no Saints, onely Eunuch-Christians at the best, having a zeale, but not true zeale, being Pumice-like, hollow,1 Eunuchs. empty, rough, and rash, and not according to true knowledge, their Profession being but a Bat-like professing,2 Pumices. mixed with carnality, and forbidden uncleannesse; and like Bats,3 Bats. neither birds nor beasts, but participant of both: Their faith and conscience being but a straw-like faith,4 Fennels. and Fennel-like con∣science, soone falling, and failing, and as deceitfull as a broken reed. But it may be like Dyars with Logwood, they
may set fair glosses,Sim. and varnishing appearances, pretences, and reports upon their sudden change,They had need to see on a good colour. and subtle colours (for'c) but if they doe, they cannot hold: For when a shower comes, their glosse will be gone, and they shall stand for a Sea-marke to all Saints, and Churches, like an Adverb (quasi) with the Verb cave to posterity;Sim. though as yet like de∣cayed Merchants they must (and doe) study tricks to keep up their credit of being honest and rich,And to study tricks to keep their credit. wealthy and wise; and the mre they decay, the more shew they will make of suffici∣ency and of all well on their side. I am sorry to say this, the Lord knows,Sim. but that I see them (of whom I speake) in profession like white-chapple, but in possession as foul, and corrupt as the common Sewer,Like a faire white house, within a house of Office. and unsavoury in the nostrils of all sort of men, so that they had need to weare Muske and Pomander enough to conceale their ill sent. The Lord lay it upon them for their good,Sim. that have given such (knowne) offence to the Saints of God. For as Josephs brethren held up their Brothers coat to Jacob, saying, see here! is not this thy Sons coat which is defiled with blood?Sim. So surely will Sathan take this advantage one day against them for their rigorous usages of some of the harmlesse ones to hurt them,A heavy acti∣on against them at the last day. and grinde them, when he shall say, See here these hypocrites! these Pro∣fessours! what have they done to thy Church? have they not wounded her? have they not broken her a peeces? have they not bruised her limbs? racked her members? and put her bones out of joynt? have they not betrayed their Brethren? threatned them? consulted against them? and sought out by false witnesses to ruine them? see here! are not these thy Sons garments?With a Judas kisse they be∣trayed us, and gave us up to the crosse. thy Childrens coat? yea, even Christs seamlesse coat that they have defiled? rent, and torne, and wronged? These kinde of Professours like Simon of Cyrene seemed for a time to carry the Crosse with us, but it proved to be for us: And (indeed) when it was set up, they were not nayled to it, but they nayled us unto it,Our experi∣ence (the mi∣stresse of fools) is to each other Churches. and (I am sure) I may say Christ (in his Church, and in their persecuting of the Saints) unto it; But I must spare them, though they spare none that are not of the same temper with them; yet this is to warne the Churches of such, yea and to vindicate the Churches from malicious
men and mindes,Hypocrites must be, that the sound may be manifested. whose mouthes are open at such advanta∣ges, and on such occasions; for 1 Joh. 2.19. They were not of us, and indeed, such Cyphers are of good use to us when they are in, for they make the true figures of more value and va∣lidity. But to proceed, wee see then who are most suitable matter,True matter must be of the Lords owne adding, and ordering; Hence in Act. 2.41▪ 5.14. this manner of being made a disciple, is ex∣pressed by the word  added to, or incorpora∣ted. and how much it concernes the Churches to be serious in their accepting and receiving members; for as it is Acts 2.47. The Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved; and onely such are allowable matter and lawfull members whom the Lord adds, that is to say (by way of Ordinance) none else, but such as (wee are perswaded) shall be saved, and whom the Lord hath received, Rom. 14.3. to whom the Lord hath given saving grace, and sound faith, and also unsained hearts to give themselves up to God in Gospel-fellowship that are to bee received (of right.) Such as are in a visible state of Salvation are to bee received into Christs visible Church; But Secondly, Hypocrites hold off!2 Hypocrites hold off. here is no room for your company! for as by the Law Swans are frbidden, who have white feathers, but blacke flesh; so are you by the Gospel, who seem to bee what you are not;Sim. The beautifullest feathers have not alwayes under them the sweetest flesh,For they are forbidden in Law and Go∣spel. no the finest out∣sides the fairest in. The Devill is blacke, but he can appeare the white Angel, or Angel of light: So can hypocrites, they are also forbidden in Levit. 11. where the Bats and Sea-Mewes are to bee accounted uncleane,Sim. Fit matter are sound and sincere. because they are Mon∣grels, and so are yee: How dare ye then to enter into such a temple as the Communion of Saints is? seeing none but up∣right soules, single-hearts, sincere Saints, and unfained Professors,Sim. The house is in the builders hands. are (of right) to be received. The Oake that is rotten at the heart, will never be good for the building, wherefore stand by! stand by! or you shall be thrown by! (untill you are better and fitter for the builders use.) The stones that are for the build∣ing must be picked out by Christ, the builders hand, although (perhaps) at present, they are in the heaps abroad, which are in preparation to the building, as Builders use to have, in one place heaps of Lime, in another place heaps of stone, in ano∣ther
rubbish,As yet in heaps in most places. rude (at present) and undigested materials, and a tumultuary noise of hammers and axes abroad, which are very busie to set up the fallen Tabernacles of David; but ere long every thing shall bee set in order,But must bee a fair structue. and a beautifull structure laid, whilst others (without) shall gather up the Chips,They without gather up the chps. which we leave behinde us to warm them with; but for this more in the next Chapter, yet in this, I must tell you that the stones which are appointed for this glorious Fabricke must (first) passe under the saw and hammer▪ For it is dangerous to put in a rotten,The matter before fitted, must be tryed by saw and hammer. unsound stone, which will quickly fall out▪ and make way for many others to follow, enfeebling thereby the whole Edifice, as in 1▪ Joh. 2.19, 20. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would (no doubt) have continued with us, but they went out, that it might be manifest they were not of us,Hypocrites will fall from the building ere long. As Dmas. i.e. us, what us? why us that have unction, and are sincere reall Saints; for yee have the unction from the holy One; Bu they were hypocrites, and there∣fore fell away, as Demas did, 2 Tim. 4.10. who was but a little before Pauls fellow-labourer, Phil. 1.19. as well as Marcus and Aristarchus,Judas. but he did discover himself after, and so did Judas, though a long time hee was well thought off amongst his brethren and fellow-disciples, insomuch as he was made the Deacon: So no doubt (Sirs) but your hypocrisie will bee as soon discovered if yee dare to enter with unsound,Their hypo∣crisie will soon appear to all. unsettled, and unsincere hearts, as others have been; for the weeds in the Gardens are sooner discovered, and rooted out againe then they are in the fields or common high wayes;Sim. but con∣sider then, O what a scandall you will bring upon the Gospel! (as they did at Dublin) when your wickednesse wil appear to all the world!To the scandal of the Gospel. O what reproaches to Religion! dishonours to Christ!Sim. discredit to the Gospel! and tramplings upon the the truth!Church-members mis∣carriags are mindd by all, and in every mouh will be laid in your dish at the last day! yee being the cause of it! For as it is with the Sunne, and Sarres, if a thousand starres be eclipsed, none takes notice of it, nor mindes it; but for the Sunne to be eclipsed it is sad, and so accounted, then every one talkes of it and looks at it: and so it is when Church-members do the deeds of darknes that (of al men) should be lights to others (as Christ sayes in Matth. 4.15.) a little
aberration makes every one to minde them, and mark them, and report of them abroad, when many a thousand of others (without) or of wicked ones may be guilty of the like, and not bee looked upon, (as Par. sayes on Rom. 11.New Ranters nought. Old Prote∣stants not enough. But aspiring growing Saints are sutable matter.) It is not a formall Religion, an old Profession, or a high conception, that either felicitates or facilitates your admission, but you must have truth in the inward parts, and have grace in your hearts, for yee may have it in your heads, and yet prove but a new Ranter, or an old Protestant at the most; None but the (indeed) holy must enter into these beauties of holinesse, the more holy we are, the more like our Head, and the fitter for Church-members, without which we shall not see the Lord, but wee shall (rather) pollute the Sanctuary of the Lord. Thus much for the matter, and the fifth Chapter. Pillegesh.  CHAP. VI. This GospelGarden, or Church-state of Christ's In∣stitution, and Order, is further defined from the (second essentiall) Formal cause, which is First, a visible Segregation; and Secondly, Aggregation. To the first, First, in this Chapter wherein it appears how all Saints are, and ought to be separates. THis Kingdome of Christ is not of the world▪ though in the world,Genus cum for∣mae constituit speciem. for the Saints embodied by Gospel-rules in unity (which makes the Forme of a true Church of Christ) must of necessity be first called out, before called in; out of the world before into the Kingdome of Christ, out of Babylon before into Sion; for it is an infallible rule, that a
visible separation from the world,The fome hath two parts. 1. Separation. 2. Conjuncti∣on: vide Mr. Owens Eshcoll, or rules to the Reader. and all false wayes, wor∣ships, &c. and a visible application to Christ Jesus, his wayes, worships, &c. is of absolute necessity in Church-union, and communion, wherein consists the full essence of the forme thereof. Wherefore to keep still to the comparison, this Gospel-fellowship is fitly called the Lords temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor 3.17. made up of living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. A Spirituall Temple, consisting of particular Saints, taken out of the multitudes without, here one, and there one, and united together into one body;2 Chron. ch▪ 2. ch▪ 3. and like as the stones and materials for Salomon's Temple, were picked out of the heaps, that lay abroad here and there,Sim. The first part of the forme, is their separati∣on from them without doors, viz. the multi∣tudes and heaps abroad. 1 Proved by Prophesies that Saints must be Sepa∣rates.  to make up one building, so are the Saints into one body. Now the first part of the forme to be considered is, viz. the calling, and culling out of the world, and from the heaps without those Saints which are select Members of Christs-Church, according to the order of the Gospel, which we shall prove also from Prophecie, pre∣cept, and practise. First, It is fore-told that such a separation must be, for even a Balaam was brought (against his will) to fore-see from the top of the rocks, and from the height of the hills, that Israel should be a people dwelling alone (separated from, and) not reckoned among the Nations, without, Numb. 23.9. So in Isa. 52 12. Awake, awake, put on thy strength O Zion! put on thy beautifull garments O holy City!Niphal. And st loose to bonds and bondages without. shake thy selfe from the dust! arise, and sit down O Jerusalem! loose thy selfe from the bonds of thy neck, O cap∣tive daughter of Zion. So in ver. 11. Depart yee, depart yee, go yee out from thence, touch yee no uncleane thing, goe yee out of the midst of her, &c. So Isa. 62.10. Goe thorow, goe thorow the Gates, prepare the way, cast up, cast up the high-way, and gather out the stones, &c. So is the precious to be taken from the vile, in Jer. 15.19▪ and the cleane from the uncleane,Precious sepa∣rate from the vile, cleane from the un∣cleane. the holy from the prophane, Ezek. 22.26. See Exod. 33.16, 17. For wherein shall it be known, that I and thy people have grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people from all people; and in the latter dayes especially,Expos. the Lord promises to make up his precious jewels, Mal. 3.17, 18. and to gather them up together, not only from the rosse, and out of the vile
rubbish, but also into one bundle by themselves; and then (sayes he) shall yee discover,Good from the bad. (and see an apparent and an undeni∣able difference) or discerne between the righteous and the wicked, him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Fur∣thermore, in Hosea 4.15. Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend; come not yee to Gilgal, nor goe yee up to Beth-a∣ven. So in ver. 17. Ephraim is ioyned to Idols; let him alone, their drink is sowre, &c. This kinde of with-drawing, and gathering from, is also mentioned in many other eminent Prophesies, as in Ezek. 28.24, 25, 26. There shall be no more a pricking brier to Israel, nor a grieving thorne of all that are round about them, that despised them; but when shall this be? see the next verse 25.As Israel was gathered out from others, as a people by themselves, so are the Saints now to be.) When I have gathered Israel out from the people among whom they are (yet) scattered, and shall be sanctified in them (in their Churches and Societies) in the sight of the Heathen (in the sight of all them without, called Heathens often, whilst the Saints under the Gospel are called, (and so in these Pro∣phesies) by the name of Israel, Jacob, Zion, Jerusalem, &c.) So Ezek. 34. the whole chapter, and in vers. 12, 13. I will seek out my flock, I will deliver my sheep out of all places, where they have been scattered in the dark and cloudy day,Delivered and brought out (by the Spirit of the Lord) I will bring them out from the (other) peoples, and gather them out from the Coun∣tries, and will feed them on the mountaines of Israel by the rivers, verse 16. And I will seek them that were lost, and I will judge be∣tween cattell and cattell, verse 17. and as for my flocke, verse 19. They eate that which is trodden with your feet, and they drinke that which is fouled with your feet, I, even I will judge,God will judge for our former injuries. And he wil save us for fu∣ture. vers. 20. be∣tween the fat cattell and the leane: And they, vers. 28. shall no more be a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts of the Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid, neither shall they beare the shame of the Heathen any more, vers. 29. So in Ezek. 36.24. For I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you out of all Countries,And separate us from them without. And gather us into our owne Land of Ca∣naan. and will bring you into your owne Land: then will I sprinckle cleane water upon you from all your filthi∣nesse, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. Also, Ezek. 37.21. Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the Heathen, and will gather them on every side, and bring them out into their owne Land, verse 27. My Tabernacle also shall be with them, yea,
I will be their God,And then be our God, and we his people. And his San∣ctuary shall then be in the midst of us. and they shall be my people. And verse 28. The Heathen shall know that I the Lord doe sanctifie Israel, when my Sanctuary shall be in the middest of them for evermore; but be∣fore the Lords Tabernacle (a Type of Gospel-order, and Church-state) and his Sanctuary be set up, in the midst of them, they are first, a people called out, and separate from them without, who are called Heathens abroad, as other Nations were in opposition to the Jewes; so is that in Micha 4.6, 7. In that day (saith the Lord) I will assemble her that halt∣eth,The Lord shall reigne over them especially that are thus gathered out. and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted. And the Lord shall reigne over them in Mount Zion, from hence-forth and for ever, over them that are thus gathered out. Hence also is that in Revel. 18.4. Come out of her my people, that yee be not partakers of her sinne, and that yee receive not of her plagues, &c. By all these Propheticall Scriptures (and by many more) this truth triumphs, and hath apparent testi∣mony for it, viz. That the Saints are a select number of Se∣parates from the world, and from all false wayes, worships, Doctrines, and Discipline whatsoever. Proved by po∣sitive precpts that Saints must be sepa∣rates. Wisdome calls for it.Secondly, Let us see what Precept there is for it; in the first place, he who is the wisdome of his Father, would have us to separate from the company of fooles, in Prov. 14.7. Prov. 9.6. Prov. 4.14. And in Ephes. 5.11.  Have no fellow∣ship (no commerce together, nor concurrent communica∣tion, or complyance to trade with) with the fruitlesse workes of darknesse;Expos. and in the Leviticall Law, Levit. 20.25, 26. a separation is required.Required in the Leviticall Law. So in 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. for what () fellowship, or communion, or what () sweet consent,Expos. or harmony, can light have with darknesse, or beleevers with unbeleevers? Saints with Sinners? or Gods Tem∣ple (whom yee are) with Idols?Separate saith the Lord. wherefore come out from the midst of them () that are such, and be yee sepa∣rate saith the Lord () i. e. separate apart from them, as such who are excellent, and elect organs (unto the Lord) and touch no uncleane thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you,And then I wil be a father to you. and yee shall be my Sonnes, and my Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. So 2 Tim. 3.5. such as have the forme (though large Professors,Expos. aged, and of long
standing) yet denying the power, from such turne away, , or Turne off, draw off, not onely to shun them that we may not shew them, or bee like them, but also so as to labour with them, and to win them into the sound and good old way of Christ, which is of longest standing (for truth is older then error.) So in Acts 2.39, 40. is there the like call, with the pro∣mise annexed, which is to as many as the Lord shall call (the word  signifies both advocate, avocare, and evocare,Expos. to▪ call out, and separate from) so that in verse 40 it follows, with many other words did he testifie and exhort, saying, Save your selves from (i. e. , doe yee set your selves free from, get a∣way, and forsake, or separate from) this untoward generation,Them without are a generati∣on of froward∣nesse and crossenesse. or this generation of frowardnesse () from their abominable aberrations, carnall customes, depraved man∣ners, and from the crookednesse of this generation of perverse people, which you are yet amongst. Make haste out, to save and separate your selves from them. Now wee finde it follows, those that believed, did so, and were a people separate from the rest,Beleevers did separate from such. Act. 19.9. by entring into fel∣lowship with the Saints. Verse 41, 42. and verse 47. it ap∣peares without the least exception; For they that were thus called out from them (without) continued stedfastly in the fellow∣ship, (and then were called the Church) in breaking of bread from house to house, praysing God, and having favour with all the people, that is, with them without; that they did separate from,Then caled a Church, and not before. so sweet, so good, and Gospel-like was their conversations, that they without could not condemn them, but commend them at least, if not be convinced by them, a 1 Pet. 2.12. and 1 Pet. 3.1. Mat. 5.16. But for further proof that Saints are to bee such Separates, see Rom. 1.6,Hence Ecclesia the Church is called. 7. 1 Cor. 1.2.9. where they are called,  from whence ecclesia comes) such are called out, and separate from the world, and false wayes. So ,1 Cor. 1.9. they are said to be called out into the fellow∣ship of Christ; so that first there is a calling out, a comming out, a separating from. Besides you see positive  precepts for it, Psal. 45.10, 11. Rev. 18.4. with many other places; but to the third sort of proofes. 3 By the practise of all the primitive Saints in Church-societies
in Christ's and his Apostles dayes,3 Proved by the practise of Christs Pro∣phets, Apostles and all Saints in Primitive times. Jeremy separa∣ted. Calvin in loc. and many yeares after; It appears the Saints were Separates (such as I speake of) wherefore wee know no cause either that we should complaine against it, or question it; Jeremy (although a Pro∣phet) yet he separates from Jerusalem, Jer. 37.12. Then Je∣remy went forth out of Jerusalem to goe unto the land of Benjamin, to separate himselfe from them in the middest of the people, for they would not obey the word of the Lord, and therefore the Lords wrath was now ready to be revealed against them, and Je∣remy would withdraw (seeing them so refractory) from them in their sight; so saies he in Jer. 9.2. Oh! O that I had in the wildernesse a lodging place of wayfaring men! that I might leave my people, and goe from them! for they be all Adulterers, an assem∣bly of treacherous men! But besides, we know the Jewes that were the people of God, in a peculiar manner, were first called out of Egypt, and so were separate from other Nations, and so looked upon as a people by themselves in Exod. 19.5. Deut▪ 7.6.Israel a sepa∣rate people. So is it said, Israel shall dwell alone, in Deut. 33 28, 29. and not be suffered to be mixed among them without, as in Num. 33.52. to the end. So Exod. 24.12.15. &c. and it was a judgement that Jerusalem should be mixed, Jer. 9.11. Now every Saint is a spiritual Jew,So every Saint is a spi∣rituall Jew. as appeares in Zach. 8.23. Rom. 2.28. or one inwardly, and Saints are his peculiar people, and chosen ones, 1 Pet. 2.9. the true children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. called out of Egypt the house of slavery into Zion, as dwelling alone from them that are without. Thus in Joh. 15.19. Yee are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you.So are the Dis∣ciples of Christ. As soon as the people of Israel passed out of Egypt, the Egyptians pursued them, upon hot spur, with Armies and hoasts of threatnings and injuries; even so deals the world with the Saints called out and separate from them,Sim. therefore no wonder wee must learne to take up the crosse, and follow him, before we can be Christs disciples; for Christ called them first out of the world,Who are therefore ha∣d. before he called them into the Church: And in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 19.7, 8, 9. &c. And in all the Epistles of the Apostles to the Churches, the Saints are saluted as Separates, or called out. Now is there not a cause?
1 For hath not the Lord laid it as a command upon Chri∣stians  so to doe?Chists com∣mands. how then dare we delight in a condition which he countermands? besides, Dear Sirs! what comfort can you have in Babylons streets? 2 If you are guilty of her sinnes,2 Those that partake of her sins, partake of her sorrows. yee are guilty of her sen∣tence, if that be true in Rev. 18.4. to partake of her courses is the way to partake of her curses: So not to separate from any sinfull unwarranted wayes of worship, or the like, is but to run the hazrd of her ruine, and neither to seeke pre∣servation from her wickednesse, nor protection from her woes. 3 Besides to have yet such fellowship with fools; society,3 It publishes disobedience not to be such, and a corrupt heart, plenis faucibus. or converse with unsavoury, carnall, or disorderly persons publishes a loud and lamentable spirit of disobedience, and proclaimes (exclaimingly) a corrupt heart, not halfe (enough) endeared to Jesus Christ; for Christ is for his Or∣dinances in his owne order, and doth delight in the purity of them who walks amongst the best mettals, in the middest of the seven golden Candlesticks, with the seven stars in his band, Rev. 2.1. the Saints separated are the golden Candlesticks Christ walkes so sweetly among, or in the midst of. How far reaches this Separation which you speake of?Quest. First, Negative. Not from our duties in our Callings, which none what ever ought to be without,Answ. or to neglect our worke, 1 Thess. 4.11. 2 Thess. 3.10,1 None ought to be without Callings. 11. (which some slothfull Ranters would have.) 2 Nor yet from the duties of our Relations,2 None must separate from their duties. whether as Hus∣band or Wife, Eph. 5.22.25. 1 Cor. 7 13. Parents and Children, Eph. 6 1.4. Col. 3.20, 21. Masters and servants, Eph. 6.5.6.9. Col. 3.22. Col. 4.1. or Rulers and Subjects, Rom. 13.1, 2, 3. Tit. 2.9.3.1. But to owne them in their respective relations for the Lords sake. 3 Nor yet so to separate from them without, as not to have civill converse with them, 1 Cor. 5.10. in buying, and selling, or such necessary trading;3 Nor to se∣parate from ci∣vill onverse. much lesse so as not to love them, and lay out to doe them good, and to seek their soules welfare, 1 Tim. 2.1. Gal. 6.10. to be at peace with them, Rom. 12.18. Heb. 12.14. and pious before them, 1 Pet. 2.12.
1 Pet. 3.1. Now in none of these sences are the Saints cal∣led Separates, although they (without) may be separates from the Saints (thus separating) in their affections; But Secondly, Affirmatively, 1 To separate from all sinfull wayes and worship,What it is to separate. &c. so as not to walke in them, or with them, after the manner of them that are without ChristsChurch, Eph. 4.17.1 From all false wayes and worship. 1 Thess. 1.9. Rom. 12.2. Hos. 14.8. Isa. 30.21, 22. &c. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. 2 Cor. 5.16. Gal. 2.14. Eph. 2.2. &c. 2 From fami∣liarity with the adversaries of the truth.2 It is, not to bee too familiar, pleasant, and delightfull with any that are at enmity and variance with the truth. A man may passe through Aethiopia unchanged, but he cannot dwel there but be discoloured; so there may be civil commerce (as we said before) with the wicked and yet Saints keep their in∣tegrity,Sim. Sim. but this cannot be, if we have too much familiarity with them (saies Hal.) Men are,Sim. as the Astronomers say of the star Mercury, good, or malignant, according to their conjunction with others; wherefore as Moses separated Israel from Corah, saying, Num. 16.26. Depart from the tents of those wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs; so must we separate from them that doe oppose Christs way,Have nothing to doe with them. or upbraid the Saints, and so as to discover themselves ill-affected to Christs Kingdome, or juris∣diction, and be so far from familiarizing with them, that we must bring them hither, saies Luke 19.27. and abhorre them, Psal. 26.5. Psal. 119.115. For this is the Lords Law, to bee at a distance from evill doers;Gods anger is against such as do keep com∣pany with them. so sayes▪ David, Psal. 139, 21, 22. so Eph. 5.3, 4.13. 1 Cor. 5.12. Matth. 4.49.50. Gods an∣ger is against them that doe but company with drunkards, &c. for they are a shame to their father Prov. 28 7. and themselves Prov. 29.3. A very Plutarch could laugh at such as would have been counted as wise as Plato, and yet in Alexanders company be drunke; and indeed Nebuchadnezars judgement is some mens joy, viz. to have fellowship with beasts; But wee must beware;Sim. for who can sleep with dogs and not bee full of fleas,Sim. and so with sinners in continuall communion, and not be full of sinne. 3 It is to avoid the vices of their best Orders, and Ordi∣nances,
and to have no fellowship therein,3 No fellow∣ship with them in their orders and or∣dinances out of Christs way. although they seem full of reason and Religion too, Col. 2.20, 21. Thus Rev. 18.4. Gal. 4 9. Away, away, with them now! that are but poore () beggerly at best, and no more able to support a soule, then one Begger is to relieve another; thus, saith Paul, Gal. 1.14. who was so hot?Expos. so high for the Jewes Re∣ligion as I? (sayes he) who traded so zealously in,As Paul se∣parated from Iewish Chur∣ches, Discipline orders and or∣dinances. and for our Fathers traditions? untill—what? untill verse 15.16. Christ was revealed in me (and so unvailed to me) and then I consulted no longer, that is () I asked no more counsell of, nor comfort from these frothy, fruitlesse things, whereof we are now ashamed) with flesh and blood;Vse. but I bid farewell (or fare-ill rather) to all those Trumperies and Traditions which I doted on before;Parishes have not this part of the Forme. Which is twi∣sted up of a threefold cord to draw us out of Parishes into Churches, and thus the Saints are the precisest Sepa∣ratists. By all which, as it plainly appeares, that Parishes want this part of Church-forme for the constituting of them true Churches, so also might I by what appears, presse the practi∣call part of this point, from the pregnancy of the proofes pro∣duced, being twisted together from the Prophesies, Precepts, and practise, into a threefold cord, not to be broken,All men are separates from Christ, or sepa∣rates for Chist and which is best? but (if the Lord will blesse you) of ability to bring you into Christs way of separation from Parishes and Traditions; For you that will not separate from such false wayes, worships, and the world, must bee separates from Christ, sayes Mr. Owen (my honoured friend) in his EshCol, or Cluster. But mee thinkes some will say? Sir! as you alwaies have been in all things (so in this) you are too strict and precise, for such Separates are Schismaticks,Object. and so many learned Ministers call them that leave off their comming to Church, and following our Ministers, &c. 1 Such Separates (as I have here given you an account of) are not Schismaticks, unlesse to Antichrist;  What Separa∣tists are Schis∣maticks, and what not. but on the contrary, such as doe not thus separate are Schismaticks to their owne soules. A causelesse separation from a true esta∣blished Church of Christ, walking according to Gospel-order (although it may be guilty of some sleight errours in
Extra-essentials and Circumstantials, or things of easie con∣cernment) is in Gospel-account a sad sinne,! 2 Tim. 4.16. Heb. 10.23.25.39. but a causelesse continuance in a false way, Antichristian worship,A sin not to se∣parate from false Antichri∣stian Church-States, And pa∣rishes, as Chur∣ches are such. and disorderly discipline, is no lesse (at least) as appeares before) being contrary to so much positive Precept: for such a separation from Parochiall constitutions (which I have proved to be at best but as civill, and at worst a Christ-wronging, Christ-rending, and Antichristian Church-state) and from such unwarrantable wayes of worship, and unruly Religion, is but to obey the Precept of not partaking in other mens sins. And thus the Saints are, and ought to be Sepa∣rates, and not Schismaticks; which Papists and Prelates have ever branded and stigmatized the deare Saints for, in their separatings from them: vide Zanche, on Hos. 2.8. and which Popish trick trades with many yet, who make merchandize of it. 2 Suppose learned men be of that minde; so were they learned that accounted Christ a Blasphemer,Learned men many times most enemies to Christ and his true Chur∣ches. and a fellow not fit to live, Joh. 9.29. and that branded the Saints for Sectaries, Acts 28.22. and seditious, Act. 24.5. and Hereticks Act. 24.14. and in every age have such been Christs enemies in the graine; and many for the tree of knowledge, lose the tree of Life, vide chap 9. lib. 2. are not the Jesuites learned too? and who do more mischief? For as Dr. Sutton said in's Sermon for Magistrates page 11. as the Ape that saw a Chesnut in the fire,Sim. and not knowing how to get it out, spied a Spaniel by the fire side, and snatched his foot to take out the Nut; even so does the Devill many times make use of learned ones, to fetch his food cut of the fire, though they scorch for it, whom he makes to serve him in it. 3 If they do leave off your Parish-Churches as Parish-Chur∣ches,Parish-Chur∣ches, no Chur∣ches. yet it hath been proved, and will be more abundantly, that they are no Churches, and therefore they ought to doe it, or they sinne in not doing it; and besides thereby they also wrong us, that say wee gather Churches out of Churches, for it is no such matter;Churches ga∣thered out of Churches▪ yet were it so, (as Mr. Burton tells Mr. Prin, page 27. of his Vindication) there is example for it, both by John Baptist, our Saviour Christ, and his Apostles,
Matth. 3.5.7. John 4.1.Parish churches are Sathans Synagogues. No Parish-rule conveyes a Church-right. Act. 2.40. who did (all of them) gather Christian Congregationall Churches out of the Jewish Nationall Church; and so it may be (yea and must bee) in these semblable times of Reformation; but wee say they are no Churches for matter and forme, and so shall prove them all along to bee but Synagogues of Sathan: And to say more (with Mr. Hooker) such are not of right matter (because Parishioners) for no civill rule can (properly) convey a Church-right to any man,Sim. Parishioners op∣posite to Chur∣ches. because they are (in specie) specifically distinct each from other, therefore cannot meet, no more then two direct Mathematicall lines (not in the least oblique but) that are distant and distinct from each other can meet, though drawne out ad infinitum. Besides most Parishioners oppose all that is in order to inchurch them, and (as Hart hath it in's Char. p. 15.Sim.) they converse with godly Gospel-Ministers about Religion, as if they were in Spaine; and a searching Ministry is as bad to them as the Spanish Inquisition; and all the questions we can ask them are suspected for Examinations, & they are afraid: of some secret that wil, be picked out of them, and that they shall be discovered; such a bondage are the poore blinde people under, and so kept by some (pretending) Ministers, whereby the blinde lead the blinde into the ditch. But wee have the word of God well preached,Object. and the Sa∣craments dispenced in our Parish-Churches. This was answered in the former Chapter, that the word preached makes not a true visible Church:Answ. for then might the Natives-Irish here be called, A true Church,Word preach∣ed is no inde∣lible, nor un∣deceivable note of a tru Church. and the Heathens in the East or West-Indies; but there must bee a yeelding due obedience thereunto, and a visible subjection to Jesus Christ, before they be fit for his Church. The reason is, because preaching the word is an adjunct separable, and not a note essential and inseparable: for certainly as sensitiva faculas is in a man, yet not the true note of a man,Sim. because it is but a common adjunct, and not proprium in quarto modo, as wee say: So preaching of the Gospel is in the Church,But a commen adjunct. but not the note of the Church (as all the Popish and Antichristian Antago∣nists would have it) because it is a common adjunct, and others have it also. But for the Sacraments, as I said before,
they must be administred in due order,Sacraments must be (of right) dispensed as Christs Ordinances in Christs order i. e. no where but in the true Church. and to due persons, and in a due way of worship and Discipline; otherwise, without doubt, Saints may and must remove and separate for Gods greater glory, and their better, and more spirituall edification, as Psal. 55.6. And I said, O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I flye away, and be at rest, I would hasten v. 8. my escape: Why so? would David separate so? what is the reason? see verse 11. Wickednesse is in the midst thereof, Deceit and guile depart not from her streets.Expos. Wherefore (dearest Friends) read with a re∣solution to submit, and that yee may no more be separates from Christ, nor Schismaticks to your owne poore soules, the Father of our Lord Jesus fill your hearts with that Spirit which writes these things unto you.A word to all friends to sub∣mit to Christ. Little Children! Fa∣thers! and young men looke about you! for wee live in these last dayes, wherein we expect most (Joel 2.) plentifull out∣powrings of that blessed Spirit,☞ which convinces the world of Truth, Righteousnesse, and Judgement, Joh. 16.8. ☞And to conclude, thinke it not enough to have outward Ordinances in Parish-Churches (though (God knows) they be but as Pharaohs lean kine eating up the Fat) as the preaching the word, the holy Sacraments, &c. why Sirs! to let them loose and run ranging about without bit or bridle, may be to your cost, and it may be they may dash your brains out at last; but it is Christ must curbe and correct,Sim. and direct them, that they may be administred in due order to you within his line and li∣mitation,Outward Or∣dinances out of Christs or∣der may do more hurt then good. and then they will be blessings. It is upon record of Austin, that he would not say his mother gave him milke, but God by his mother; so will God by these means and Ordi∣nances feed, and fatten your soules in Sion, and in his particular Churches,Sim. and Assemblies. But alas a day▪ how lamentably men live as to Christs order & Ordinances!Carnall reason keeps many off Church-fellowship. so they be but rich, and bear a religious outside, as K. John once said of a Buck when he had opened it, O it is fat, and yet it never heard Masse! So because many thrive,Sim. and live in credit, rich, and accounted religious that are not of the Churches, many make little of it; but I hope the Lord will convince them by his light. And so much for the first part of the Forme.
Zaba. Chap. 7.  or Aguddah. This shewes the second part of the second part of the Forme of Church-fellowship; First, that the Saints separate (as before) are to be knit, gathered, and united together into one Body. THe first part of the Forme is well proved, but it is like∣ly not so well approved,Secondly, 2. Part of the forme is after separation from the fals, & con∣junction in the true way. Forth with hast into the Churches. Else we shall be lost in the wildernesse. without the second doe se∣cond it, viz. That the Saints separated from the worlds false-wayes, and worships, and from all Parochiall Churches, unwarrantable Discipline and Directories, doe forth-with set upon Christs owne way and worship, Disci∣pline and Doctrine delivered to the Saints; for after they come out of Babylon, they must hast away into Zion, or else they will be lost in the Wildernesse. For what is the cause of so much complaint all men (with the Ministers) make up and downe? and deplorable out-cryes of many that are mixed? and loud lamentations are heard out of the Wilder∣nesse of many wooded, wilder'd, and wandring? and at a most miserable losse? And what is the reason of all this I pray?One reason many Profes∣sors formerly strict turne Fa∣milists, Seek∣ers, Ranters, and such like. that so many Professors that have been (abundantly) pre∣cise and strict in their practises, and curious in their conver∣sation, and such (free) frequenters of the meanes? daily and diligent followers of their Ministers, and so exceedingly holy in times past, have since their separating from Parishes and Popish Institutions, and Injunctions, forsaken all publicke Dis∣pensations, denied Ordinances, followed Familisme, and run on even to Rantisme.
In the An∣swer, godly eminent Mi∣nisters so ac∣counted, must be reproved in the Coun∣tries.And what is the reason of all this? Indeed I am ready now to reprove those Ministers (whom most imagine with∣out reproofe) though able and (otherwise) accounted (eminently) godly, yet too too slack and remisse in setting forward the building of the Lords house, that say, it is time e∣nough, and what needs such hast? whilst they (them∣selves) dwell in their seiled houses, the Lords lyes waste, and worne out of mind;Hag. 1.2.4. O sad! Consider your wayes, saith the Lord of Hoasts!The Lord ex∣postulates with them. How can yee be content to sit at ease? to hold good Livings? and to feed upon the fat of the flock? and yet so (easily) to neglect them, as to let them stray in the Wildernesse? Oh! are not such, (who make the sorest and saddest complaints of them they call Anabaptists, Seekers, Familists,Ministers most complaine, who are most the cause of their owne com∣plaines. Ranters, &c.) are not such very much the cause of their miscarriage? For seeing Saints must separate from such false wayes and worships, why doe they not lead them then into Christs owne wayes, and worship, according to Gospel-order, but suffer the poore soules (and out of honest zeale I am perswaded at first) to be lost, in strange, and straying, untrue, and untrodden paths. Truly, truly, in all my applications to some very learned, godly, and most emi∣nent Preachers, with all the pregnant and pressing Argu∣ments I could provide for this purpose, that I might prevaile with them for, and perswade them unto this work of the Lord as Fellow-labourers with me therein;What answers some of them have given the Author, when he hath pres∣sed upon them Gospel pra∣ctise. Why many Ministers are against Inde∣pendency, as they call it. I found their Answers they made me (me thoughts) ever to smell too much of the grease of great Livings, or else of man-pleasing, or else (and for the most part) of Tyth-oppressions; they may thank themselves that so many run into erroneous wayes. For besides, a Se∣gregation, a visible aggregation to the Lord Christ, in his wayes and worship (with the Saints separate, making up one body of Beleevers) i of an absolute, and undeniable necessity, and followes next; which I now come to. Such Saints as are separate from Parish-wayes, and Popish worships, &c. being ashamed of them, and of all the follies of those false Church-states, are forth-with to see the forme and fashion of the Lords house, and not before are they to enter in,Expos. Ezek. 43.10, 11. and this is the Lords Law, ver. 12. now
to such I shall shew the forme which followes,Whom the forme is to be showne to? What it is? 1. One Body. 2. One body Independent. for in the formation of this new Creation, Christian Beleevers are to be∣come first one body; secondly, a body Independent (as it is ter∣med by most) But to the first in this Chapter, viz. That Saints separate as before from the multitude, (as Acts 19.9. it is said,) when divers were hardned and beleeved not, but spake evill of the way before the multitude, that the Disciples separated; so I say, such Saints are to make up one body together (distinct from them without, and all others) and this is obvious to every eye, out of the abundance of Scriptures and texts. To begin with the Simile of a Body,1. Christ's Church is his Body, how, and why? All Members make up one, and but one body. for Saints enchurched are so called the Body of Christ, Rom. 14.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12. ver. 13.27. Ephes. 5.30.32. Col. 1.20, 21. though members in particular, 1 Cor. 12.14.20. now all the members are to make up one, and but one body; and so are the Saints (every member of Christ) 1 Cor. 6.15. to be united together into one body. Hence it is (as Mr. Bartlet observes in his Modell, cap. 6. (as I thinke) for I have not his Booke) that the blessed Spirit speakes so often of injoynting, and putting Saints into ioynt Gal. 6.1.2. If a Brother (a Member) be slipt out of ioynt,) or bee overtaken in a fault, (either before he was aware of it,Expos.) or else read it with the Septuagint,  although he be easily caught by a corruptiun,Sim. and taken (with too much delight) in the Action (for the Simile runs from the receiving and entertaining a friend with free affection,If one member be amisse it must be resto∣red into use and order a∣gaine, for the good of the whole body, which cannot misse that one member. and readinesse (in delight welcoming him, and with joy) al∣though he thus fall by a foul stumble, as I rather read it (from  Polye. Lyser. or  (now  minuit rem) for a fault, is a fall, yet yee which are Spirituall, restore such a one; that is, () set such a one in joynt againe, as Chirurgions deale with a broken bone, or one out of joynt, by handling the same sweetly, lovingly, tenderly, so that thereby it may become as sure in, as well-set and strong as ever it was;Sim. so is it here, put him into his proper place againe,That is, can∣didly with all sweetnesse of brotherly-like spirit, and christianity. by which the Church is compared to a Body, and a Brother to a Member. Thus also in Ephes. 4.11. Christ left here (behind) Pastors, and Teachers, and why? for the perfecting the Saints, ver. 12. the word is () for the well-ordering, (Tit. 1.5)
establishing and constituting of them according to order, in a symmetry and suitable proportion of place and power, Rom. 12.4. as is in a humane body.Every member is to be in an apt place, &c of the body. There is a comly, apt, commensu∣rate, and marvellous wise, and well appointed Location, for every member, joynt, artery, sinewes, and veines, and every one is to be content with his owne proper (and therefore the only profitable) place:Sim. 1 Cor. 12.21.22 and to be con∣tent therewith. now if any one be out of his place, the whole body is thereby put to paine; so that the Simile holds here al∣so; for this is the beauty and perfection of the body, when no member is amisse,Vide Zanch. de Eccles. &c. wherefore some read the text, Ephes. 4 12. for injoynting of the Saints, the worke of the Ministry, &c. but to the next Metaphor.2. Christ his Church is his building. Christ's Church is compared to a Building, so sayes he in Mat. 16.18. Vpon this rocke I will build my Church; to build, that is (in unum corpus congregare) to gather together many particular parcels,Expos. out of the heapes without,The forme of his building. What it is. and rightly to order and dispose of them into one structure; it is an apt and a convenient collection of the se∣verall and sundry essentiall parts which make up the Inte∣grum,Sim. or of the which the whole is built up. Now in this there must be a wise, a suitable, and proper ordering, and disposing of every particular of which the whole consists; so as that all may serve (as I said before of the Body) for the time,Rightly orde∣red to make all one. The Lords house fitly fra∣med together. use, and place most answerable thereunto, and fittest for the whole building. Thus the Saints are called the Lords house, Heb. 3.6. 1 Tim. 3.15. fitly framed together, Ephes. 2.21, 22. or compleatly, orderly, and in congruity () built up together,Expos. an habitation to the Lord through the Spirit. So, 1 Pet. 2.5. That is, the Saints are so knit,All one in a∣nother, and e∣very one on, and in Christ the foundati∣on. v. chap. 14. pinned, united, nailed, and glewed one to another, and all (every one) to the foundation Jesus Christ, Ephes. 2.19. 1 Cor. 3.11. that one would thinke they were no more many parcells, but all one substance, and out of one; and so as they will not be parted asunder (nor can they) with∣out the hazard of the whole. Thus when Saul assayed to joyne himselfe to the Disciples, Acts 9.26. is meant not on∣ly to injoynt, alluding to that above of body, but also () to adjoyne,Expos. cleave, and be glued unto them, relating to this Metaphor of the building, where many things are carved, (as
all things are cut) framed, and glewed together, which were (before) at a distance, and which then are not easily disjoyned, but are faster then ever before. But, 3. The Church of Christ is compared to a City,3. Christ's Church is a City compact. compacted toge∣ther, up to which the tribes of Israel goe, Psal. 122.3, 4. So Psal. 46.4. yea the holy City, Rev. 21.2. and thence the Saints are called Fellow-Citizens, in Ephes. 2.19. now as all the houses,Sim. streetes, trades, corporations, and societies, persons,All streets, houses, peo∣ples, &c. make but one City. Saints Citizens. and peoples (though many in particulars) yet make all but one City com∣pact: So is it in the Church of Christ; all Saints, Sexes, Chil∣dren, Fathers, and Young-men, Callings and conditions make up one Body, and are to make up but one holy City. Besides, there be sweet immunities, enfranchisements, promises,Sim. and Privi∣ledges, Lawes and Ordinances, which none have propriety unto,The immuni∣ties, Privi∣ledges, lawes of this City, which belong to the Free∣men thereof. None admit∣ted free-men of this City, but by the Ci∣tizens consent. or (halfe so much) profit from them, as the Saint-Citizens have (which shall be shewne if the Lord give leave hereafter) and none are admitted to be Free-men of such a City but by their consent, vote, and acceptance: and so much is made out in Zach. 2.11. Many shall be joyned to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people; joyned, that is, they shall mutually give up them∣selves to God, i. e. that is, with the concurrent knowledge and consent of each other, in the Hebr. vid. Buxtorf. so also is that in Jer. 50.5. Come let us joyne our selves to the Lord, &c. all this fairely delineates the Forme of Christs-Church-state,Expos. Buxtorph and Shindler. and Gos∣pel-Discipline. 4▪ Furthermore, his Church is called an Army with banners, Cant. 6.4.10. and why? but because all men, bands,4 This Church is his Army. All men, com∣panies, colours, Captaines, make up one Army. compa∣nies, regiments, colours, and Captaines are but to make up one Army; though there may be many men to one Com∣pany, and many Companies to one Regiment; so all the Saints are but to make up one Church and Body together, being uni∣ted to make up the forme; and then are they faire as the Moone, cleare as the Sunne, and not before. But besides, the Church is▪ 5 Compared to a Kingdome, Joh. 18.36. Heb. 12.28. &c. Ma. 21.43. to show, as all Families, Villages, Townes, Cities,5 Christ's Church is his Kingdome. Countries, Shires, doe make up but one Kingdome, and are all under one rule, law, and power; so all the Saints, together ga∣thered
and embodied,For all Cities, Shires, countries &c. make up but one King∣dome. doe make up one Church of Christ, or Kingdome of God, Luke 10.11. Matth. 13.19. The Church is, 6 Compared to Heaven also, Matth. 13.11.24.31.33.44, 45, 47.6 Christs Church called heaven. And why? Matth. 3.2. Matth. 11.11, 12. Now the Saints, which are to be high, above the earth, and the Throne of God, and filled with his glory, and decked up and enamelled with shining lights, Stars of grace, and spangles of glory most sweet and lovely;All Elements, Firmaments, Orbes, Stars, &c make but one heaven. the Sunne (Christ) moving in them, and (circu∣larly) round them, and such as are seene plainly to bee what they are by a kinde of Vbiquity, who ever they are in the Ho∣rizon, or this Hemisphere; I say, such Saints united together, in a body to make up one Church, are one Kingdome of Heaven, even as all the Firmaments,All Saints in one are so. Elements, Stars, Planets, and Con∣stellations together, &c. doe make up one visible Orbicular Heaven. Mr. Jacob in his Treatise sayes, A true Church is one Congregation:Mr Jacob. Mr. Ursin. so sayes Vrsin, and others. But thus much may serve to prove the Forme of Christs-Church, which is to bee all one, one body, one building, one City,Sim. one Army, one Kingdome, one Heaven: O how sweet is such a communion! this Forme is the (forma) beauty of all. As the sweet cluster of grapes, which gave taste of the Land of Canaan was bore betwixt two;Because they have All one Father. All one origi∣nall Law. All in one Co∣venant. All hewn from one Rock. All bear one Image. All lay in one womb. All of one Seed. All lead by one Spirit. All called into one hope. All one joy. All one glory. so in such commu∣nion, we may finde and feed upon the fruits of Canaan. But now to the Reasons. First, Why this is so requisite that Saints doe associate into one body of Beleevers, is gathered from the Onenesse of all Saints; For all have one Father, Mal. 2.10. Jo. 8.41. all, elect in one originall love, Eph. 2.5. All are in one Covenant, Hebr. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. All have one Christ and Mediator, 1 Tim. 2.5. and All hewn from one and the same Rocke, Isa. 51.1. All beare one Image, Rev. 15.1. Rev. 7.3. All lay in one wombe, and have the same mother, Gal. 4.26. All borne by the same seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 Joh. 3.9. All are lead by one Spirit, Rom. 8.14. Joh. 14.26. Eph. 4.4. 1 Cor. 14.12.26. All called into one hope, Eph. 4.4. All have of one joy, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. Phil. 4.4. Joh. 15.11. and 16.22. and All eye and enjoy one and the same glory, Eph. 3.21. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 10.31. 2 Tim. 4.8.
Hence it is that Christ praies so earnestly to his Father for this Onenesse to his Saints (in communion) in, and with him,Christ prayed for this one∣nesse. Joh. 17.11. both for them that were present, and to come, to the worlds end in verse 20, 21.Apostles tooke great paines to preach it. Hence it is the Apostles tooke so much paines in all places to preach up this Church-way for Saints, to live (as in one Family) together in unity, 1 Cor. 1.9, 10. &c. And otherwise they will much degenerate from the principles of Saints, Psal. 16.3. Besides,Unity and En∣tity conver∣tibles for that unity and entity are convertibles, and this is the meanes to keep up both, in the bond of peace, and love, and perfection, Col. 3.14. and Eph. 4.3▪ 4. Act. 4.32. But Secondly, Saints not separate from the multitude, lose much of their lustre, light, and glory; for the Forme makes  them faire as the Moon,The beauty and loveliness of Saints em∣bodyed. Cant. 6.10. but when the Saints are in one body, then their beauty dazles the eyes of others, as many beams of light together, gathered into one; or as many streams met into one, runne with force, and fiercely. David sayes, O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, &c. Psal. 84.1.Sim. So Christ, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my faire one,His Taber∣nacles amiable His Spouse fair and come away! So in verse 13. So Cant. 4.1. Behold thou art faire my love, behold thou art faire. So in verse 7. Thou art all faire my love, there is no spot in thee (but there may be on thee) So in verse 8. Christ calls her to separate from the mountaines of the Leopards, opened before in page 45 and then it followes, Thou hast ravished my heart my sister, my Spouse, thou hast ravished my heart: and how faire is thy love, &c. My garden enclosed, &c. So in Cant. 6.9. My deare! my undefiled is one (Saints so in one body united) and then follows, She is the onely one, shee is the choise one, the Daughters (Professours) saw her, and blessed her, and the Queens (Sarahs true Churches) and the Concubines (Hagars, false Churches) admired at her comelinesse and beauty, and prai∣sed her, saying, Who is this that looketh forth as the (Aurora,Such embded excel in beau∣ty. Informitas ma∣teriae duplex vel excludes formam vel for∣mositatem, Th. Aq. 1.66.1.. the Damaske red) morning? faire as the Moone? clear as the Sunne? terrible as an Army with banners? Saints then thus embodied, are embroidered with beauty; but if they be not, no wonder if the world (nay good men many times) will not owne them for excellent ones, which otherwise they shall, or be ashamed: for the Forme is (in a sense) the life and lovelinesse of every
thing?Sim. what were a man without his Forme? and if the Forme be misplaced that makes him a Monster.Without form deforme. What beauty doe yee behold in a Picture (though the colours be laid on) before the Forme be drawne? Suppose peeces of Timber should be carved curiously, and guilt gloriously, for the builders use, and also stones most artificially polished pain∣ted,Sim. cut, and carved; yet they lose their lovelinesse with lying among the multitudes and heaps abroad, and about; but when they come to be put up, & orderly to be placed in the building, there is a great deale of beauty in them, and pleasant grace from them.But in one bo∣dy their ex∣cellency ap∣pears. Thus will it bee, and is it with Saints builded up, and in body together according to Gospel-order, & quanto forma est nobilior, tanto magis dominatur materiae, say the School-men. Thirdly, Till thus in body they are but in confusion, and dis∣orders  among them without, and trod on by every foule, and fooles foot,In great confu∣sion, and dis∣order till then. and as much wronged, defaced, and defiled as may be; As polished stones, that lye among the filhy rubbish, so they wil aske much paines to picke and cleanse againe before they can be fitted for the Lords house;Sim. but when they are embodied to∣gether (as before) they are in their order, which others joy to behold, Col. 2.5. and so, as the members that are fitly placed in the body,But in body in order and pro∣per place. and properly employed, doe appeare alwayes orderly, decent, and comely to the whole body, and are helpfull one to another thereunto,Sim. Rom. 15.2. 1 Cor. 12.25. For as the Philosophers observe that there is a twofold motion in all naturall things, one whereby they move to preserve themselves, and the other to preserve the whole universe: So must all Church-members have their twofold motion,Sim. viz. 1. For themselves. 2. For the whole. Fourthly, Saints, unlesse thus in society, fall fearfully  short of doing their duties to one another in love, unity, peace, admonition,Till thus em∣bodied, they do not their duties one to another. Mr. Bartlet. The Author abused for him in Dublin. exhortation, tendernesse, patience, watching, participa∣ting, comforting, edifying, or brotherly reproving of one another. So if a Brother offend to tell it to the Church, and to strive to excell to the edifying of the Church, &c. Now how can these rules (requiring obedience) bee practised, but by such Saints as are embodied into a Church of Christ? but this Mr. Bartlet, I remember, in his Model mentions (a man I have made
much use of, and for whose sake I have sufficiently suffered from some in Dublin, (whom I feare) fuller of heat then of Heaven, having no more of his booke (which the Lord will one day witnesse (to their faces) then I beare in my breast, omnia mecum, &c.Sim. But to passe by such blowes and buffetings of Sathan. I say, the Saints so embodied, are best provided for their duties one to another: And as in a bundle of sticks one kindles another, so doe they. Comes fa∣cundus in via pro vehiculo est, and as one helpe another, so all together like Bees labour to bring in hony (all) into one hive. So every one hath the Spirit  1 Cor. 12.6. to bring into the stocke, or common banke, or to profit withall.Expos. O then how sweet are they to God and men? who are as so many flowers bound together in one nose-gay. But Fifthly, The sweet soule-ravishing and enamouring  issues, which are the infallible sequell of Saints so embodied:The soule-sweet issues of such a Gospel-order. Priviledges, Promises. The Lords delight there above all. O the excellent priviledges! Cant. 2, 3▪ 4, 5. Cant. 5.1. Cant. 6.2, 3. Cant. 7.10, 11, 12. Psal. 92.12, 13.14. their precious promises, Hos. 14.6. Isa. 59.22. the singular delights which the Lord takes amongst Saints so embodied! Rev. 2.1. Psal. 132.13, 14. Psal. 26.8. 2 Cor. 6.16.18. Cant. 8.13. above all others, Ps. 87.2. The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more then all the (other) dwellings of Jacob: More then all. Now such as are not in body together, are deprived of the life and excellency of these, as I shall shew hereafter (I hope) convince∣ingly, if the Lord please, but onely this I adde, That the spe∣ciall benefits which beleevers so embodied, doe enjoy, are laid like Tiles one over another, every day,Sim. till the whole roofe be covered, and the raine kept out. Sixtly, Which I would not omit (though I might more  fitly have found it before) is,The united strength of Saints in such Gospel society hereby the Saints are abundant∣ly better fortified both to defend, and (occasionally) to offend▪ for to instance against Enemies, they have an united force, and they need not to feare an Adversary, no not an Army if they be but in one, for they are indeed terrible (then) as an Army with Banners displayed, Drums beating, Trumpets blowing,Vis nita forti Guns playing and discharging, and all in good order, keeping Ranke and File. Why they need not to feare for their ene∣mies
then must fall before them,Such Saints are the surest, and the most suc∣cessefull Soul∣diers. in Joel 2.7.8.10. They shall run like mighty men, they shall climbe the wall like men of warre, and they shall march every one on his wayes, and they shall not breake their rankes, neither shall one thrust against another; the earth shall quake before them, the Heavens shall tremble, the Sunne and the Moone shall be darke, and the Starres shall with-draw their shining;A terrour to the world. thus are the Saints in their united strength a terrour to the world. Well might the Queene of Scots say, Shee fea∣red more the prayers of that one man John Knox, then shee did an Army of thirty thousand men. For when Gog and Magog doe gather together to battle, in Revel. 20.8, 9. as the sand of the Sea,Expos. they compasse the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City. But what successe have they? Why fire comes downe from God out of heaven and destroyes them,. Fire proceeds out of the mouthes of Churches to destroy Gog and Magog. or eates them up; that is, out of the Churches, according to Rev. 11.5. If any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouthes and devoureth him. If any man dare to wrong them () or to deale injuriously or unjustly with them, he must in this manner be killed. Now all the Saints (and so the Churches) are such wit∣nesses,Expos. and out of their mouthes, by their prayers, and pow∣erfull breathings,By the Spirit of the Lord. which will admit of no deniall, they can conquer and consume their greatest adversaries. Besides, the enemy hath not that like advantage against us, when we are linked,Sim. as when we are alone. As it is said, that Siculus (be∣ing on his Death-bed) bid his Sons bring a Quiver of Ar∣rowes,Unity uncon∣querable. Sed informitas infirmitas. and being brought, would have them breake them altogether in the Quiver, but they could not conquer them, though they all tried; then he bids them breake them asun∣der one by one,Sim. which was soone done. So (sayes he) my Sons, if yee'le breake asunder, yee'le be broken easily, and throwne aside; but if yee unite, none can conquer you; as long as yee live together in one, yee will be too hard for e∣very one.Sim. So also in a Faggot of Wood, there is no breaking the whole together; but to take out stick after stick, that wil make it easie to get the mastery of the whole. Saints united in one, too hard for the whole world.Thus the Saints united together into one, will be too hard for all the world, but otherwise the world will have the advantage, and they may be easily broken, and scattered about
with stormes; so when they carrie on Gods cause with one shoulder, and by one consent,Sim. according to Zeph. 3.9. it goes on in post, and against all oppositions. For as Mathemati∣cians say, the strait line is alwayes weakest, but the circle is the strongest, and holds; so the Saints in Fellowship are strongest, and hold best, because one is injoynted into ano∣ther;Their joynt powers, and joint prayers able to con∣qur heaven and earth. and thus the Saints ought unanimously and joyntly to contest together for the truth, Jude ver. 3. and joyntly to labour together in, and for the Gospel, 2 Cor. 6.1. and joyntly to put forth together, for the purity, priviledges, orders, and ordinances of Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.1. and joyntly to receive together re∣proaches and wrongs, Heb. 10.33. Gal. 6.2. 2 Cor. 12.26. 2 Tim. 1.16. and joyntly to refuse subjection to any persons, principles, or practises, contrary to the word of truth; and thus by their joynt powers, opposers will be repulsed to their shame, and losse;And joynt-praises fill hea∣ven and earth. and by their joynt-prayers heaven is taken by violence, and the Lord is overcome, Acts 12.5. by their joynt-praises, and shoutings of joy,Sim. the Heavens and Earth filled with ravishing melody and Musick, Rev 14.2.One member can act by his owne power, and by the (virtuall) power and in∣fluence of the whole body. Vse. Parishes no Churches of Christ in this point of forme. For we proved before with the Schoolmen, Ubi partes non habent rationem materiae, ibi to∣tum non habet rationem formae. So that they are neither matter nor forme▪ As the many beames of the Sunne contracted into a little Burning-glasse doe glow, and burne with abundance more light, life, and strength; so Saints united doe; Yea moreover, as one Member, or the Arme can act not only by its owne, but also by the strength of the whole body, to which it is united, (according to the bodies ability;) even so a Saint embodied may wrastle with God, and against a sinne, &c. by the strength of the whole, be∣sides his owne, as hereafter will appeare. But thus much for the reasons, though I might have added more. Vse. By all that hath been penned upon this point it ap∣peares plainly, that Parish-Churches have not the forme, nor the face of a true Church of Christ, according to Gospel-order; for they have none of this union, fellowship, or injoynting into one. The Devill hath set his black and fowle cloven-foot of di∣visions and dissensions in every Parish upon the earth; yet the God of this world, the Prince of Parishes hath blinded their eyes, and they will not beleeve, 2 Cor. 4.4. O what persecuti∣ons of the Saints, oppositions of Christs ordinances! Mena∣ces against his Ministers! what desperate Oathes! devillish
cursing!The Devils black cloven foote is set in the midst of them▪ all over England. Why Parishes so devoyd of matter & form, and so full of sinne? horrible lying! detestable libelling! monstrous ma∣lice! palpable cheating! and unsufferable slanders! yea and what not is in every Parish? and what is the reason? read what Christ saith, Joh. 8.23. Yee are from beneath, but I am (and my wayes are, and worship is) from above, yee are of this world, but I am not of this world. And as Rev. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, &c. out of the bottomlesse pit arose smoake, as the smoake of a great fur∣nace, the Sun and Ayre were darkned by reason of the smoake, and out of the smoake came Locusts, and unto them was given power as the Scorpions of the earth have power; and it was commanded them that they should not hurt any green thing (a Saint in his viridity full of sap, and in the spring) neither any tree (a flourishing Saint in his virility and well grown,Expos.) Psal. 1.3. Psal. 52.8. Psal. 92.12. Jer. 17.8. but only such men as have not the seale of God in their fore-heads. These Locusts of Hell, these Aegyp∣tian plagues (which have Scorpion-stings in their tayles, ver. 10. whilst the fairest out-side and faces of men,In Parishes what plagues arose from their constitu∣tion. The worse, wicked, ill-fa∣voured Kine eate up and destroy the o∣thers of the Neighbours that are bet∣ter. ver. 7. yet are ever running and ready for battle, ver. 7. ver. 9.) have seised upon the spirits of many men more ridged then religious, and they doe eate them up. See but what hot contentions, Suits at Law, Plots to doe mischiefe, desires to persecute the people of God, devices to make them odious among men, Jer. 18.18. and what not? came along with this Soule-comfortlesse, bottomlesse-pit smoake, when your Parishes were constitu∣ted? and tell me then, if Pharoahs leane ill-favoured Kine doe not eate up the fat! Gen. 41. and if the withered wild blasted eares doe not devoure the full and faire eares! See if (as yet) a∣mongst many the Magicians rods doe not turne Serpents, and seek to eate up Aarons, though Aarons shal devoure theirs ere long,Exod. 7.12. and errours and sins doe swallow up truths. and Truth shall triumph over errours, Christ over An∣tichrist, Faith over fallacies, maugre all their malicious & mis∣chievous dispositions and oppositions; and their water shal be turned into bloud speedily, and all their Fish shall dye, that swim now in their Elements,Proph. and croaking Froggs shall cry in every place,Aegyptian Plagues must come upon them▪ as in Isa. 10.24, 26. I meane them that give now and then a little leape (and that is all upward, and such (will) also dye, and then their dust shall be turned into Lice, and their pleasures to plagues; then boyles and blaines, their contagion and corruption
shall appeare to all, whilst the Lords owne Israel, and Saints shall be safe and free. This shall bee shortly: but in the in∣terim how Parishes swarme with Egyptian flyes, let wise men judge, whilst Serpents lye by the way-side,Although as yet ma∣ny like Dan do bite us behind▪ or backbite. Gen. 49.17. and bite us, or rather (backbite us) before we are aware, not openly (in our sight) but crookedly, and craftily, treacherously, and behinde us. Dublin hath the most of this Tribe of Dan that ever I met with. Moreover many an Adullamite, Gen. 38.20. might wee finde here in this City, for if their occupations were but printed upon their foreheads (as some of them have full foreheads) wee should heare and see their trading and delight is to serve an ill-master, and to runne upon ill arrands, to cog,Many an A∣dullamite we meet with in Parishes. to carry tales, to dissemble, lye, and flatter, and to have faire faces (as of men) but to sting as Serpents and Scorpions, being bound to hurt the Innocent, and harmelesse ones. But I say no more, only that such Parishes fal infinitly short of the true Forme of true Churches of Christ; and I can con∣fidently assert, such Synagogues, as I said, matter-lesse and form-lesse; or if some fit matter may bee found amongst them, yet they are but as the Philosophers say (of the earth,Parishes a Chaos. when it was a Chaos,Sim. and without forme) materia (prima) informis, sine formâ & normâ, the first matter, which is with∣out forme and order; and which is (semper passiva, sayes Tho. Aquin. 1.54.3.3.) to suffer another nature and work∣manship, Eph. 2.10. till then,Sim. wee may say of them as in Zeph. 2.15. How are they become a desolation,Materia infor∣mis. and a place for beasts to lye downe in? And why so? (as Mayer sayes) but because no difference is put betwixt the righteous and the wicked, therefore it follows, every one that passes by,Expos. shall hisse and wag his hand; and Zeph. 3.1. Woe to her that is filthy,Parishes are stalls for beasts to lye down in. &c. which is  or provoking and disobedient; such are your Parish-Churches? And they put mee in minde of that place in the hot sands of Africa,Sim. where wilde beasts of all sorts meet together to drinke, and there are the strangest monsters got; whence the Proverb is, Africa aliquid apportat novi. And so in Parish Churches, all sorts meet, and many monsters are made, by reason of such who are not fit for civill society,
much lesse for Saints. And a Heathen said, Qui aequo animo malis immiscetur, malus est; he must needs be bad that likes and al∣lows of such a mixture:Sim. And I might also mention the say∣ing of one, That as often as he had been among such men, hee re∣turned home lesse a man then he was before:Sim. Wherefore com∣mon rules of reason may dictate this doctrine to us.Parish-Chur∣ches have their fatall blow. The Lacedemonians would enquire of the carriage of their children, by the condition of their Play-fellowes; And as Socrates said to Alcibiades (the Parragon of beauty) I feare not thee,Ezek. 16.36, 37 Judg 9.15. The Bramble shall be burnt up in the day that burneth like an oven, Mal. 4.1. but thy companions; so may wee say to some honest men. And indeed it is a sad thing: for will the loyall wife still keep that company which her husband dislikes? sheep lose wool, that will keep in the wildernesse among the bushes; so doe men (be they ever so good) lose much that will con∣tinue in Parish-Churches,Sim. which are upon their destiny, being too old to live longer:Babylon fal∣ling. Thse that traded with her bewail her. for the Lord will discover their filthi∣nesse, their whoredomes, their Idolatries, and abominations, even unto their Lovers, and they shall loath them. But the Bramble of Rome, which hath brought so many unto obedi∣ence,Vse shall be burnt up, and a strong voyce shall say, Rev. 18.2. Babylon is fallen,A call into Zi∣on into the Churches of Christ. Out of Baby∣lon and Parish Churches. Christ bec∣kens to thee. is fallen, and is become an habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foule spirit, and a cage of every uncleane (and hatefull) bird: and verse 9.11.16.18. And then the Kings and people, and Merchants and Ship-masters that have traded with her from time to time, and have had of her com∣modities to carry to other Nations, and have brought away of her Trumperies and Traditions, will hwle and lament, and yet stand a far off for fear of her torments, verse 15. ☞Wherefore come out of her my people, Come out of her, and vers. 4. which is the last word I have to speak upon this part of the Forme,In his Taber∣nacles and Churches are beauty, power, his presence▪ safety, delive∣rance, pleasure and joyes, plenty, peace, blessednesse, & salvation, all powerfull mo∣tives. to intreat you all for the Lords sake, and for your soules sake, to separate from (as before) all Parochiall and Po∣pish worship, and wayes of Babylon, and come hither:—harke— how Christ beckens thee (poore soule!) into Zion to dwell with him there in his Discipline, and Tabernacles, Psal. 67.2. there is beauty, Isa. 52.1, 2. there is power, Isa. 40.29. there is his presence, Isa. 4.5. there is deliverance, Isa. 54.17. there is pleasure and joy, Psal. 46.3, 4. there is plenty, Isa. 25.6. and
peace, Isa. 48.18. and blessednesse, Psal. 56.4. and salvation,Great hurt to the godly to continue in Parish Chur∣ches. Isa. 46.13. What can yee aske for more? How can yee then acquiesce in such a carnall corrupt Church-state? ming∣led with more visibly ungodly, then visibly godly? If wee mingle bright and rusty mettal together, the rusty will not become bright, but the bright rusty; and thus a rusty companion (saith Seneca) rubbeth some of his rust upon a man that is honest, and faire-conditioned, civill, and well-given; but the ho∣nest man cannot make the other any better, or brighter.Sim. As a weake eye is not strengthned by looking on a strong eye, but on the contrary,Sim. a strong may water by looking on a watry eye; the sound man may lose his health by lying with the sicke; So I say, it is dangerous,Sim. and (doubtlesse) a provocation to the Lord, and a tempting him in the Wilder∣nesse,Sim. to continue yet in communion with such mixed mul∣titudes in Parish Churches, whereby wee grow worse and worse; As a good horse put into the Teame among a com∣pany of Jades, doth but learne to shuttle, and become heady and untoward;Sim. and so such as will have communion with the multitudes, learne many ill-favoured tricks, and are made the more obstinate and untoward;Happinesse of such that are in Christs Churches. but for shame let us haste in to the Lords Sanctuary, and enter into the communion of Saints. The least small coale raked up in ashes will live long, and so will the least Saint, and the least grace bee kept up, and nourished in the true Churches of Christ; which will bee (it is likely) extinguished, whilst they are out of them, and not wrapped up, and kept warme in them. Wherefore it will bee our continuall comfort to enter into such communion; for I can name some that have been in abundance of doubts, troubles, suspense and uncer∣tainty, till they were well informed and fully satisfied of this way by the word and spirit, and ever since their soules have been swallowed up in divine solace.Sim. As Archimedes that matchlesse Mathematician, after he had hammered his braines about a difficult conclusion, leaped, and danced, and cryed ,In Serm. 4. p. 38. I have found it, I have found it; (so as Mr. Hoskins hath it) the Saints cry out, We have found him, We have found him; Wee have found Christ in his Ordinances, Christ in his
Spirit, Christ in his graces, Christ in his Churches, Christ in his Doctrine, Christ in his Discipline; Wee have found him, Wee have found him (but yet nothing to what is to come.) Thus far for the seventh Chapter. CHAP. VIII.  Cisse. The third part of the second part of the Forme, viz. Saints separate, and gathered into one body as before, are a true Church of Christ for matter and forme; and every such particular Church hath as full compleat power as any, without the least subordination, power, or autho∣rity of any Church whatsoever. A description of the Church in her most conspicuous parts. Cant▪ 4.1, 2, 3, &c.THrough the grace of Christ (the Head and Husband of his Spouse his Church) we have handled the Faire Forme of the true Church of Christ, being very beauti∣full and faire, having Doves eyes (i. e. such as are the able dis∣cerning and directing members of the Church, faire, full, clear, as Num. 10.31. and chaste, and ever (as it were) glazed with teares) and having comely haire,Exposit. i. e. the ornament of her head (who is Christ) thus are all the Saints,1 Doves eyes. The most dis∣cerning mem∣bers that are light to the body. and sincere beleevers to their Lord Christ, an ornament (and a glory to him, Isa▪ 43.7.) such as hang (dependingly) upon him, their Head (not else, Col. 2.19.) being nourished by him, and growing from him, and very smooth, neat, not rough, rugged, &c. that appeare from Mount Gilead,2 Comely, haire, Saints That hang and live on Christ the Head. Mount Gilead. that is a pleasant and plenteous place, Jer. 22.6. and signifies a witnesse or testimony, and so I take it, for then Saints appear loveliest, liveliest, longest, smoo∣thest, and sweetest, from Mount Gilead, i. e. the Testimony of Christ, the witnesse of the Spirit, and the Word, and Scriptures
truth, and Ordinances which do beare the Testimony of Christ, when their soules are satisfied as in pleasant and plenteous places.3 Her Teeth are the Mini∣sters of the Gospel that chew, divide the word a∣right, or members qua∣lified with the gifts of pro∣phesie, and in∣terpretation. Even. Gilead is mine, Psal. 60.7. and Manasseh is mine, &c. Further∣more, her Teeth are like a flocke of sheep that are even shorne, which came up from the washing bearing Twins, &c. Cant. 4.2. Cant. 6.6. in the Chaldee it is, thy Priests and Levites. For Teeth are such as the Church eats with, chews, digests, and divides by, and receives for the use of the whole body; and I be∣leeve her Ministers must be such, who receive, eat, chew, feed, digest, and divide the word of God; and all that is hardest of digestion, for the the rest of the people and Saints service, to the capacities, and for the concoction of all the body. But they are even, i. e. not one longer, nor one shorter,They are not to be one lon∣ger, & one shor∣ter, one higher, and one lower, but all equall. Iam. 2.1, 2, 3. Very white and lovely. Mal. 3.3. Many Mini∣sters have been, and must be rubbed hard, before white. They are to be very fruitful. And very or∣derly. which would bee both uncomely and hurtfull, but they must bee all even, and equall, and Brethren, Matth. 20.25, 26, 27. not one higher, nor one lower then another, which would also be an hindrance to the bodies welfare, for then they would be wanting, or at least hin∣dring in the use of feeding and chewing for the Church. Away with Rabbies, for yee are all brethren, there is no superiority nor subordination to be suffered in Christs Church by way of Do∣minion, which is the point I am now upon; For they must bee all equall, and even-shorne, as come up from the washing, that is, white and lovely, comely, and cleane purged, and purified, and fairly washed (never more need then now that the Sons of Levi be purged with Fullers Sope) so that as some (already) have been rubbed hard, over and over, and are at last shorne, and come up out of the washing bearing Twins, being fruitfull, and bringing forth (as Ewes) though with hazard and hardship; and as Teeth even set in the gums doe give a good decorum,4 Her lips. Her excellent word and do∣ctrine. and both rankes in each jaw full and faire, are of excellent use, and exceeding comely, so ought they to bee in, and to the Church of Christ, that others beholding their good orders may rejoyce, Col. 2.5. of all men (also) they must not bee harren,For matter. but bearing-twins. Besides her lips are like a thred of Scarlet; Metonymically manifesting the excellency of the Doctrine of Christ, which comes from her lips unto others, Zeph. 3.9. which is described first, from the matter most excellent, first deeply dyed in the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17. Secondly, being most pure and
high-prized, Lev. 14.14. Thirdly, Lively and lovely, Cant. 5.16.  Joh. 17.3. and for the Temples use. Secondly, from the Forme like a thread that is well woven, strongly twisted, and finely, and freely spun out by the Spirit of God,2 For Forme well woven, twisted, &c. The Churches haire-lace to binde up the Haire (that we spoke of before) toge∣ther in one. 1 Cor. 2.4.12. being very fine, thin, subtle, pure, and of a most divine substance, and also (as the Churches haire-lace) being to binde up the people of God, to, and about their Head, viz. Jesus Christ: And her speech is comely, i. e. lovely, gracious, sweet, and desirable, as in Eccles. 12.9, 10, 11. Prov. 16.23, 24. therefore in Hebrew Navah, is, being very amiable; so are the Scriptures full of lovely mysteries, lively histories, triumphing truths, comforting counsels, and counselling comforts. Her temples are like a peece of Pomegrannet.5 Her speech sweet. The Temples are those between the eyes and ears, which the Chaldee calls the Kings Governours,6 Her Temples full. and Keepers of Israel; but I meane, such as are high in Christ their Head;Such are high in Christ the Head. Overseers, Elders. through which runne many vitall veynes, for, and into the body, and such ought all over-seeing, and directing, governing, and guiding-Elders, to bee like a peece of Pomegrannet (i. e. frustum, or fragmen) a crust, or fragment broken off, which is over-full and flowing over with juice, sirrup, and sweetnesse, &c. in the sight of all; and besides, this shews the benefit of this Church-Discipline, and more then (meer) Ecclesiasticall politie that I speake of,Full of sweet∣nesse, and sa∣vour. being abounding in jucie sirrups, and sweet savours to the mea∣nest and most despised Saint; for although there may bee an outward sharpnesse to the flesh, yet there is an unspeakable in∣ward sweetnesse, and spirituall solaces to the soule to bee had here, and to be got in this Government, as will appeare here∣after: but besides, like the Pomegrannet which is full of sweet seed, odoriferous graines, well united together, and gathered into one body, every one in order pointing up to the Crown; so is this Gospel-government full of sweet juyce,All pointing at the Crowne, and pressing after perfecti∣on in Christ. and sappy seeds (or Saints) well-coloured, and all in order pressing after the same perfection, and verticall point of glory, being gathered toge∣ther into one distinct body. But to delineate her beauty more at large. Her necke is like the Tower of David (sayes the Text) builded for an Amory,7 Her Necke. wherein hang the bucklers and shields of mighty men.Expos. The Neck is that part between the head and body, and
united to both, and is of necessity, through which passes, and repasses whatsoever is usefull for both to the nourishment of both, and each in, and by other. Now I am of opinion the Ordinances doe thus,The Ordinan∣ces which as means unite Christ and people, head and body to∣gether by the Spirit. and are (as the necke between the Head and body) between Christ and people to bring both into union, and into (unseparable) fellow∣ship, as Heb. 8.10. by the Spirit; so that both the head and body may be nourished through them, they as conveyances of the vitals to the Animals, and of the Animals to the vitals, that the one may be refreshed by the other, and all be by a mu∣tuall and redamanine love (which is the life of union) so that through this Necke the body is abundantly nourished by the vital spirits from the Head, I mean by the sanctifying and saving (so called) graces of the same Spirit in Christ our Head;Who be-hea the Church. The necke (in Heb. Thau∣vaar) those then that despise Christs Ordinances doe (as much as in them lyes) behead the Church of Christ; A cruell Act! Have a care! But then like the Tower (Migdall, great and strong) of David, Nehem 3.19.25.Expos. 2 Sam. 5.8, 9. an Armory (the word is Thalpiioh of Thalah to hang, and Piioh,An Armory for swords. The two edged sword of the Spirit in her Ordinances. The Souldier of Christ of any size or stature is fit∣ted in this Ar∣mory fr his warfare. 8 Her two breasts. For Ornament and for use▪ Old and New Testament. Julian the A∣postate called the Bible a Bawble. sharp two edged weapons) to hang swords in, the two edged sword of the Spirit hangs there often, and the soules bucklers and shields of De∣fence are (ordinarily) found in this Armory of the Churches, and Helmets, and Head-peeces, and Breast-plates, and what not, for every Souldier of Christs under his Banner, and Command; for the Church is to be in a bitter warfare continually; and let a Saint but come hither, bee he of what size soever, hee may bee armed out of this Armory of the Churches; yea the stoutest Champions that march against Christs enemies. Furthermore, for her two breasts, they are like two young Roes twins, which feed among the Lillies. Her Breasts are both an Ornament, as Ezek. 16.7. and for use necessary, Isa. 66.11. and indeed to take the two Testaments, so called, they are both an Ornament, and of necessary use to all the Churches of Christ, though some (for whom my heart akes) I feare runne the folly and madnesse of that malicious Apostate, who called the Bible a Bawble, but hee proved a Babel. The truth is, these Breasts swell with sweet milke, and consolations doe drop out againe even for the Babes (that are weake) Isa. 66.11.
1 Pet. 2.2. they are full in deed of what is absolutely che∣rishing to the Churches Children,These breasts be full of milke for babes. and therein are many preci∣ous promises, and sweet truths (easily) to be digested by such babes as doe eagerly hunger, call and cry for them, laying full hold on them, drawing and sucking much sweetnesse out of them, which are as Twins, being both borne of one, out of one spirit,The Authors judgement is, the Word and Spirit are the Churches two Breasts, which are alwayes so full and faire, and freshly flowing and feeding. and for one end, and from one God. 2 Tim. 3.16. but I had rather read them the Word and Spirit, fee∣ding among Lillies. For so are Saints white, pure, plea∣sant, lovely, living best in low vallies, and well moystned at their root, and such are fond (to sucke from them as be∣fore, and) to entertaine them; and as Moulin once said, that in the times of Persecutions, whilst they burnt us for reading of the Scriptures, we burnt to be reading of them. But thus I have (beyond my intention) examined this Epithalmion which is sung in specie,Moulin. and paints out (Propheti∣cally) the picture of a true Church called into Gospel government,The picture of the true Church. All faire. and that upon the breaking of the morning Sunne, and the day springing from on high, ver. 6. for then it followes, thou art all faire my Love. Now in this description her beauty being discovered so eminently, from her most visible Members, it needeth not to speake of more then such as are most conspicu∣ous to the eyes of all at this present.Second part of the Forme. Every Church is equally In∣dependent. But to proceed to the second part of this part of the Forme, which is; That every particular Church of Christ, gathered together into one Body, according to Gospel-order (as before) hath as free, as full, and as compleat a Church-power; and Authority, to order all affaires within her owne body, as any Church whatsoever, excluding all sorts of Superiority, that may be (possibly) claimed in point of Church-power; and that par in parem non habet imperium, equall Sisters have equall powers and priviledges, will be proved an undeniable truth. Proofes of par∣ticular Chur∣ches equall, and alike pow∣er in seven Churches of Asia.In the progresse of which I beleeve I shall (much) use Mr. Bartlets method (as my memory wil admit me (for I have no other Booke of his then my breast at present) see in Rev. chap. 2. & chap. 3. the seven Churches of Asia; and we finde a full and an alike power in every particular Church of Christ; therefore in chap. 2.2. to the Church of Ephesus, the Spirit
sayes, Thou canst not beare them which are evill,Expos. and thou hast tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and thou hast found them lyars, &c.To admit or keep out, exa∣mine or cast out, or the like. To this Church of Ephesus (sayes Perkins in loc.) God gave a full Juridicall power either to admit, or keep out, examine, or cast out; suspend, or what not? that was need∣full in any true Church of Christ. So in ver. 14. To the Church of Pergamus, I have a few things against thee, for suffering them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam. So in ver. 15. And that thou hast them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate; and thus in ver. 20. to the Church of Thyatira for suffering that woman Jezebell, which calleth her selfe a Prophetesse to teach, and seduce, &c. Now,Expos. why should God lay these sins to their charge? were it not in their power (within themselves) to reforme, and remedy? and how could they have power to take in some, or to cast out any; to excommunicate such sedu∣cers and sinners as these,Nor one Church bla∣med for ano∣ther, but every one for her owne sins, be∣ing absolutely Independent (as to others) and distinct. Independency Othodox in those dayes. Without any subordination. Proofes in the Apostles Epi∣stles to Chur∣ches, as di∣stinct Chur∣ches each from others. All alike one Head. All alike Queenes. All alike Sisters. were it not Gods last Will and Testa∣ment? and to cleare this further, yee may marke this, that Christ blames not any one Church for the sins suffered in ano∣ther, not the Church of Sardis, for the sins of Laodicea, nor of Laodicea for the sins of Pergamus, nor Pergamus for the sins of Thyatira, &c. but every one for their owne sinnes, because God gave each of them so plenary a power (and all alike) for suppressing sin, suspending persons, excluding offenders, and keeping of good and Gospel-order. And there is great reason for it, for without this authority no Church could continue a Church, and all the reasons alledged to the con∣trary are disallowed and invalid; which being so observe∣able in these seven Churches, it seemes evidently Independency was then Orthodox; that is, such a sort of Independent Di∣scipline as is here handled; to wit, that one Church hath no dependency upon another, but hath as absolute a power as any other whatsoever, without subjection, or subordination. Besides, in all the Epistles of the Apostles written to Chur∣ches; they write to Churches, as distinct Churches, without dependency upon any but Jesus Christ, their head, King, and Law-giver, Acts 15.22. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Cor. 14.33. Rom. 16.1. Col. 1.2. being all (equally) the Body of Christ, Col. 1.24. the Spouse of Christ, Ephes. 5.24, 25. all being (equally)
Queens,All alike Can∣dlesticks, and branches of the same Candle∣sticks, streams of the same Founaine, and beames of the same Sunne, and branches of the same Vine, all alike opening and shutting, ad∣mitting, exa∣mining, choo∣sing officers, administring censures, re∣admitting. Church-offi∣cers are but Servants. Doctor Whit∣aker. and Sarahs (as Mr. Cotton sayes) none Hagars or Concubines, Gal. 4.26.31. all being alike Sisters of one Mo∣ther, and none Servants, or Slaves, Cant. 8.8. all of them being Candlesticks of the same make and Metals, amongst whom Christ equally walketh, Revel. 1.12. Revel. 2.1. or alike branches of the same one Candlestick, and beames of the same Sunne, and streames of the same Fountaine, and branches of the same Vine, and so they are equall in all things, all having equall and like power of opening and shut∣ting, binding and loosing, Mat. 16.16. admitting of Members, Acts 9.26. Deut. 1.13. Acts 6.23. Acts 14.23. trying the suspected, Revel. 2.2. choosing their own Officers, Act. 1.15.26. and Deut. 1.13. Acts 6.2.3. Acts 14.23, &c. and of administring Censures, Mat. 18.17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. or re-admitting, or rather receiving, 2 Cor. 2.5.6. and in case the Elders be appointed by the Church to execute their Decree, yet it is (in ordine ad ecclesiam) with reference to the Body, the power being theirs; so as that eminent man Doctor Whitaker (De contig. quest. 5. pag. 178, &c.) af∣firmes, all Church-power principally to appertaine to the whole Body; and to her Officers, but accidentally, and as oc∣casion serves (as cum aliqua virtus duobus inest, uni essentialiter, alteri accidentaliter) by many faithfull arguments; and he instances in the heat in water,Sim. or iron, which is in the fire first, and essentially, and then comes into the water or iron, or the like.Doctor Fulk. Musculus, Calvin, Zanchy. And in Fulk, contr. Rhemist. in 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. we finde him full for this, Sect. 3. and he quotes Musculus, Calvin, Zanchy, and others to beare witnesse with him, that the whole power is the Churches, which she can give out, and take in, though she may (if need be) referre the exe∣cution of it to her Officers, they doing it faithfully, not in their owne power, and according to their owne wills, but hers.Pareus. Pareus I remember in the same place sayes plainely, that it is a currant peece of Popery,Popery to take away the pow∣er of the Church, and give it to Mi¦nisters or other Officers. to apply the power of the whole to one or other, as their owne; which is an old usurpa∣tion of the Popes, and therefore sayes he, 1 Cor. 5.4. with the power of our Lord Jesus, &c. power, which is , does there intend the execution of Church-power, as well as the
power and authority it selfe,Expos. which is absolutely the Chur∣ches, although Paul was the mouth of the Church to declare it; and sadly does he lament the Churches neglect of her Office in this kinde, fearing lest thereby she should be abu∣sed (as she hath been abundantly) and become a mixt com∣pany, which he complaines of highly.Dudley Fenner Thus Dudley Fenner in his Treatise De sacra Theologia (a pretty peice) lib. 7. sayes, &c. Thus that honest old Cartwright in his reply to Whitgift,Cartwright. pag. 184. sayes, Paul knew the rule of Christ well enough, in Mat. 18. when he commanded and communicated the po∣wer of excommunication, and Church-censures to the whole body, 1 Cor. 5.2. 2 Cor. 2. it being the Churches, and not in the Ministers or Officers power, which he proves out of Cyprian,Cyprian. &c. But I should not here needed to have heaped up such Te∣stimonies of great, grave and learned Writers, were it not to stop the mouths of that spirit of malice, and spight of men which belches out bug-beare words against the way of Christ and order of the Gospel, and who please to be confirmed in this point may peruse, Mr. Cottons Keyes, Mr. Bartlets Modell,Mr. Cot. Keyes. Bartlets Model. Hookers Survey And the Te∣stimony of learned fa∣mous men for many genera∣tions. Mr. Hookers Survey of Discipline, with many others that may carry more authority with them then I can, to convince o∣thers, by whom (through Gods grace) I received speciall satisfaction, who have gathered out the Testimony of the most learned, eminent, able, and famous men of many gene∣rations to bee of this judgement of Churches equality or ful∣nesse of power within their owne bodies; so that it is not a new, singular, and upstart opinion, as our Adversaries say. Besides, it is all the reason that can be, they be all alike,Reason. having all alike but one Head,Because all have alike one and the same Head. Col. 1.18. Eph. 5.23. as will appeare hereafter, and he being a Head (alike) unto all, and being alike unto every Church of Christ, King and Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. there being no other, all which might (methinks besides all the Prophesies, the Precepts, the Primitive Practises, and equall Priviledges of all Churches) bee enough to pull downe all topping power, to justle aside superiority, and that Popish usurpation of subordination, and throw it into the dust or
smoaking pit from whence it came; And call up for a Co∣ordinate and equall power to stand in the stead.The great dif∣ference be∣tween Presby∣terians and In∣dependents. But because this is the mainest Doctrine of difference, between the Presby∣terian Discipline, and ours, I speake the more amply upon it, and shall take my liberty in the ensuing Uses; but must say in the mean time that God abhors that haughtinesse and am∣bition of spirit, which mounts up like a Prelate, whether in one or other: And indeed it hath appeared in Popery, Episcopacy, Presbytery, and so will; that all Prelaticall Disci∣pline is condemned of old,Prelacy con∣demned, and ready to be turned off. and the higher it gets up the Ladder, the nigher it is to its end, and the likelier to bee turned off, and into the darke world. How many worthlesse men like Apes and Monkies will not bee quiet till they have got up to the top of the house,Sim. Sim. and when they are there, what doe they but make mowes,Prelaticke proud Pastors in Independent Churches as bad as any. and faces at Passengers, fling off the Tiles, and play such like ridiculous and mischievous feats? And indeed, I doe not know how to excuse them that are so covetous and ambitious to bee Pastors and Teachers in the Inde∣pendent Churches, and when they get in, they are like little Lords, and not as servants to all; and I sadly feare it, that more have sought for it then can performe it, or then know what a Cure belongs to it. How many have Caesars heart of pride (and may have his end) who said hee had rather bee first in the least Village, then second in the greatest: and how many like Psapon teach the Birds (that are at their beck) to call them (as they did him,☞ Magnus Deus) rather Gods then Men, and to have their persons in admiration, and to make them follow them,Much mischief done by such. as Dogs follow their Ma∣sters, for feare of being cast out of doores upon their anger. O sad! Sed altitudo non est valida, sayes Chrysost. 20. in Epist. ad Rom. This cannot last long. How many Townes, Houses, Cities have been burnt to ashes by such sooty exalted Chim∣nies?Sim. Cornw. Essayes. (wherein all the soot of the house may be found for the most part) who like Lords must over-looke all the rest? How many are they that like the Worm-wood stalke (and Starre) grow the bigger, the bitterer? I speake of such as would be highest, and be like a Counter, that (in ac∣count) lyes for a hundred at least,☞ when alas, we should
study to be lowest, as the best Corne in the Fanne,God abhors such spirits of pride. and the soundest lyes next the bosome, and in the bottome, but the Chaffe will be above; But the Lord abhorres them; and in the Law his Sacrifices were no Lions, but Lambs, not Eagles,Parishes no Churches in this part of the Forme. For they have dependency upon Diocesan, Nationall Churches. Zuing. Artic. 34. p. 254, 255. Keckerman. Artius's Problem. None but An∣tichrist so sawcy. Presbyterians too bold in this. Prelacy and Popery termi∣ni convertibiles. Presbyterians and all Prela∣tick ones keep up the Pope, vide ch. 8.9. l. 2. Papists have Rome the Mo∣ther Church to call others to account, and to whom o∣thers were to make their ap∣peale. Prelates and Bishops had their High Commission Courts of the same nature for the same ends. The violent ones of the Presbyterians too will have their Classes too of the same nature (though the name chan∣ged) and for the same end. but Doves, and in the Gospel, the first shall be last. I remem∣ber the Cynick coming into the Kings Chamber of presence glo∣riously hung, looking where to spit, at last spit in the Kings face, saying, It was fit he should spit in the foulest place; so will God one day spit on the face of Prided Pres∣bytery and Prelacy. Vse 1. But in the first place, it is plaine then that your Parishes are false-Churches in this part of the Forme; for their constitution consists in a dependency upon other Churches Cathedrall to them, and they are (by their Cannons and In∣stitutions) to be in subjection to an universall, visible, Natio∣nall, and Diocesan Church, which blunt Zuinglius calls devil∣lish, proud, and Popish arrogancy, for any to claime any right, rule, power, or superiority over any Church of Christ whatso∣ever. Thus Keckerman, and Aretius both cry out upon it, and the latter in his Problemes produces Christ's prohibition of upper or superiour power to his Disciples and Apostles, Mar. 10 86. Luke 22.25, &c. and sayes, none but Antichrist dares be so sawcy to usurpe it, it being the Throne which is set up for Christ's selfe in his Church. O then how dares the rigid Presbyterian be so red-hot for a Discipline! as dangerous and destructive to Gospel-order as the other! seeing Popery and Pre∣lacie are (termini convertibiles) so nearly related to each o∣ther, that if Prelacy thus live, the Pope cannot dye; and if nothing else, yet such kinds of Church-discipline would keep him up in his Chaire. For grant the Pope to be but (holy) Father, and Rome the holy Mother-Church, that may call her Daughter-Churches to account, and give them Orders, and Commands; and will not this Doctrine keep up the Pope? then let the wise judge; and the selfe-same spirit of Prelacy had the Bishops, to Lord it over their Brethren, and to Cano∣nize high Commission-Courts, thereby to call others to ac∣count, to lay their Commands and Lawes upon them, or else to punish them, being of the same nature (though the
name changed) with the Popes power. And now such a proud Prelacy would the bitter Presbyterians promote tooth and naile, by setting up Classes, that thither peoples might make their appeales, and from them receive rules and orders, or else plagues, punishments, fines, or imprisonments; and se∣verall sorts of Classes they would set up, that men might appeale from one, and apply to another, from the particu∣lar to the Provinciall, from the Provinciall to the Nationall Classes, which are (also) of the same nature with the o∣thers, though their name be changed. But all are an abo∣mination to the Lord, and what doe they but play petty Popes in their Convocations, Synods, Classes, &c. over Consciences by their tyrannies?All abominable in the sight of God. Antichrist thus exalts and boasts himselfe as God, 2 Thes. 2.4. to take authority, to rule, to governe, and have dominion over the Churches of Christ in his high and traiterous usurpation; wherefore I say againe, as long as this lives,Vide chap. 13. lib. 1. Popery cannot dye. But this is sufficiently con∣demned and disproved, by all the rules that relate to Gos∣pel-order in Gods Booke, being abundantly to be abominated by all Gospel-spirits;Mr. Burroughs. for as good Master Burroughs against Edwards his Gangrena saith (a little before he dyed) we are freed from Jewish Paedagogies, and Nationall Church-wayes, and there is no Nationall Church, Officers, Offices, wayes, and wor∣ships,Mr. Jacob. Cottons keyes. What a height ambition brought the Bishops unto▪ To be Civill Magistrates they becme uncivill Mini∣sters. Justices of Peace. Judges. Order of the Garter called grace honou∣rable Lords. as the Jewes had; neither is it enough to be Members of the Church, because borne of this, or that Nation. So Mr. Jacob in his reasons for Reformation, pag. 6.7. and Cottons Keyes, p. 31. makes it appeare to be altogether without a warrant from the Word. But to what a monstrous height doth Ambition bring men unto? shall we but see the eager∣nesse of Bishops? (before the Presbyterians (so called) though in a Scripture-sence we allow it) how (to be Civill Magistrates) they waxed wanton and uncivill Ministers? neg∣lecting their duties? and desirous of rule and power? to be Justices of Peace? to cast poore people into Prison, to put them into Pillories, and to kill them, to be Judges of Courts, to get the vaine Orders of the Garter, to be honoured by men, some of them titled most Honourable, Princely, and holy Grace, (when God knows they had only the name of it) and all of
them saluted for Lords,Barons. and would sit as Barons in Civill Courts, which they know is contrary to their own old Canons which they accounted more of then the Scriptures;Cannon 18, 19, 20. concil. Carthag. 3. but if it be unlawfull to alter, or change the bounds our Fathers have set, Prov. 22.28. I am sure it is, to alter the limits the Lord hath set them, and to serve the Tables of Devils. Now what can be clearer then the rule set in such a case,Against all Gospel▪ Christ would not suffer his Disciples to discourse of it. Mat. 20.26. Luk. 22.25. Marke 10.41. and how often Christ reproved, and re∣pressed the rising desires of the Disciples, in but asking after, and disputing about greatnesse, who shall be greatest? which he would not admit of by any meanes, it being after the manner of Gentiles? O then, how Christ detested (and I am sure yet does) this Lording dominion in himselfe,Chist the Di∣sciples Servant and Minister. or in his Saints? he himselfe being their Servant, and Minister, washed their feet; besides, the Apostle abhors it, in 2 Cor. 1. ult. and yet, O what a proud domineering spirit of Prelacy reig∣ned in these!Prelates in pomp. Euseb. Hist. lib. 7. Did not some Bishops goe with a great Guard in pomp to the Pulpit, with their Officers before them, and a great Mace carried in state, making Roome for my Lord to preach in his Rochet, and square Cap, leaning upon a Cushion of cloath of Gold? but their pride hath a fall: Ah!Their pride fallen. Another Pre∣latick spirit succeeded in the Presbyte∣rians. This appeared in their acts of Treason a∣gainst the State. Short lived too. Proverb. but had it not been happy if another Generation had not (next) succeeded in usurping such Lording power! I meane the Prelaticall Pres∣byterians. Those Olives, and Vines, and Fig-trees (before very fat, sweet, and fruitfull) have lost their lovelinesse, and former excellencies, and that meerly out of desire to Lord it too, as well as the Brambles did, Judg. 9.8, 9, 10, 11. although in a Classicall way (as they call it) but this being so neare a kinne unto the other, hath met with the like destiny and de∣struction, and that Discipline proved but short-lived, accor∣ding to the Proverbe of Fraud and Frost, &c. for it never thrived, and began to be too proud at the first, as soon as e∣ver it stepped into the Chaire. Besides, as their Lording Classes are not Classicall,Ruling Synods are unwarran∣table. or war∣rantable in the Word, neither are their Synods, or (com∣manding) Convocations, to order and make Directories for Christ's Churches, of Divine right, what assemblies are more mischievous (as they have been hitherto) to the Saints of
Christ?Most mischie∣vous they are so to Christ, (proprio corpore) in the flesh, and they are so to Christ in the Church (in corpore mystico.) Cruell to ten∣der consci∣ences. especially when they would exercise Lordship and Dominion, Soveraignty and authority over their Brethren, or over any Church of Christ as they have done? most cruelly confining men to their judgements against their consciences, or else crushing them for their consciences; much like the Bed in Isa. 28.20. which is shorter then a man can stretch himselfe on. Now if a man lye not even with them, and but ever so out∣reaches their reason, judgements, or opinions, he must (pre∣sently) be punished, and cut shorter; as the Giant, that in the High-way seized upon all Passengers, and carried them home to his Bed,Expos. and those that were not long enough to lye even with his owne length,Sim. and the length of his Bed, he by some most bitter and fatall engines or wracks, would rend them out, and draw so one joynt from another, that by most lamentable tortures he would teare them out to that length; but in case any were too long for his Bed, and his length, he would cut off their leggs till he had made them fit for his humour and fancy. But this is a most monstrous tyranny in men,To put them upon the wrack. to wrack and tor∣ture consciences, and say too it is for Christ's sake, either to rend or wracke them out, or else to command and cut them off; (if beyond them) to make them even with their owne length and height in their opinions and practises.) But these Mothers children that are angry with us, and would set us to keep strange Vineyards,Cant. 1.6. and these Brethren that have hated us, and cast us out for Christ his sake (as they say) and said, let the Lord be glorified, shall be ashamed when the Lord shall appeare to be our joy. See Isa. 66.5. for the Lord's designe in these dayes is to pull downe such as are incensed against the Saints,The Lord is a∣bout delive∣ring his Saints from such op∣pressours. Isa. 41.11. and thus saith the Lord, Ezek. 35.21, 22. Because yee have thrust them with side and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your hornes, till yee have scattered them abroad; therefore will I save my flocke, and they shall be no more a prey. So in Jer. 30.16. All that devoure them shall be devoured, and all thy adversaries shall be captives,Proph. and they that spoyled thee shall be made a spoile, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey; for I will restore health unto thee, and heale thee of thy wounds, because they called thee an out∣cast, saying, This is Zion whom no man seekes after, &c. For it must be, that every plant which the Father hath not
Mat. 15.13. Jo. 15.2. shall be rooted out () or pulled up by the roots) so shall Synods downe,Expos. Synods must down, that usurpe domi∣nion over con∣sciences. What assem∣blies are allow∣ed of, vid. ch. 9. lib. 2. Mr. Parker in's Eccles. Politie, lib. 3. cap. 12. &c. 22. Omne determi∣ntum habet causam efficien∣tm & omne efficiens habet determinatum. Mr. Burrough his heart di∣visions. for so much as they usurpe Dominion; but in some case (as we consider hereaf∣ter) that the Elders appointed by their Churches doe meet to∣gether, to conferre, to assist, and counsell (not to command) we can consent unto, and are confident that it is very war∣rantable by the Word; and Mr. Parker I remember in his Church-polity proves by many pregnant Arguments from un∣deniable Scriptures and Writers (Orthodox so called) and unanswerable reasons, how every Church hath an equall and absolute power without appealing; and that Synods, Courts, (or Commissionated Classes) have not the least power over any Church of Christ, to command or rule; only (at most) to admonish, counsell, and advise; and it is without a warrant, and but a barren branch, an ill plant, and beyond the bounds of Christ to exercise any such authority; we shal be more large in this afterwards; but yet see honest Mr. Bur∣roughs in his Heart-divisions, cap. 22. who cleares it up to any capacity under severall considerations, as that the extent of Ju∣ridicall power must be by institution as well as the power it selfe, and that all power receives its limits and extents (in Church or State Discipline) from the same Authority, whence it first had its originall institution; which is undeniable, undoub∣ted, and infallible truth. Now let our Brethren but show their Magna Charta, or proofe out of Gods Word, for that power they would usurpe over the Saints or Churches by Synods, or over any Church of Christ by any Classes what∣soever, and we will freely beare it; or else let none presume so to oppresse the Saints by Convocations, to command and controule any Church of Christ,No warrant out of the Word for them. or to wracke any conscien∣tious Christians, or to persecute them by reproaches, wrongs, punishments, or the like, as cannot crouch to their Crosse, or cruell Judgements, which is, to put a yoke upon their neckes, which neither we, nor our fathers were able to beare, Acts 15.10. Obj. Yea, we can quickly prove it by Scripture,Obj. but turne to Acts 15. and you shall finde that appeales were made to the Church of Jerusalem.
Answ.Answ. This is the Master-objection that can be brought a∣gainst this Doctrine of Gospel-order,Vide Hooker in's Survey. Cottons way for the Con∣gregation clea∣red, cum multis aliis. &c. which is so often and ablely answered (I thinke) by all that have penned on this subject, as that I need not to answer any thing unto it: yet seeing it is so propounded, I pray you marke in that Chap∣ter, Appeals are not made to the Church of Jerusalem, as if they had command over any Church to rule them, or set them a Directory of Church-government,Expos. how they should practise,No Appeals, to Ierusalem, for Canons or as having a supreme Power. &c. no, but onely to advise and counsell them as a Sister-Church, and as one of a sounder judgement, and of longer and riper, and safer experiences. Secondly, Besides, the application made to Jerusalem was not about Church-government; or for instructions from them on that account,2 It was not a∣bout Church-government, but to aske their advice & judgement of a matter in controversie. but it was about a difference, that arose among some who were set for Circumcision after the manner of Moses, whether that might be, or no? what they (who were of more established, and better-setled judgements) thought of that matter, which some held so needfull, verse 1, 2, 4, 5. Thirdly, It appears in verse 2. in that they determined, ,3 No necessity of sending, but it was thought fit to send to Ierusalem. that is, chose and approved of Paul and Barnabas upon that arrand, it was not (jure divin) of absolute necessity to appeale, or rather apply thither, nor yet did they doe it, as to an higher power (as was answered in the first) as if they had any Dominion over their faith, but only as helpers of their joy,4 Should it bee granted, ap∣peals were made thither. Yet where be Apostles now? or such to sit as are infallibly gifted, graced, and spirited. 2 Cor. 1. ult. Fourthly, But should we grant it (which wee will not as long as our Buckler holds whole) but should wee, they would bee but little the better for it; for consider who they were, were they not the Apostles? men? extraordina∣rily enabled? and can any (now) say so? and with such confidence? as verse 28. for it seemeth good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, &c. without high presumption? But, Fifthly, This helps not one jot the Presbyterian, or Pre∣lacy,5 The whole Chuch▪ bre∣thren, sisters, all joyned. nor adds an hairs breadth to their Discipline, or Doctrine: for wee finde in verse 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church to send, &c. the whole Church had the knowledge of it, and their voting in it; and the Apostles and
Elders did not answer on their owne heads,Not Apostles nor Elders, on their owne heads, as the Presbyterian would infer. This spoyles officers, and makes them to Lord i. but the Church consented to it, and concluded it; which is contrary to the Presbyterian judgement and practises, who will have the Elders alone to be a power and authority enough, without the rest of the Church, which is contrary to rule; besides the ill consequences of it, which I shall speake unto hereafter in the third Booke, and which is a giving of an absolute power to such (which makes them Lord it) who are to have but a derivative power, and are but servants at best. But thus that objection is (I hope) sufficiently answered. An∣other. Object. But is it so! hath no one Church,Object. power over another? why then? how can a Church bee reformed, that erres in doctrine or practise? Answ. There must be spirituall helps against spiritual evills,Answ. and the weapons of our warfare are not carnall;Spiritual re∣medies, to spi∣ritual evils. li. 1. Ch. 13. Ch. 2. Lib. 2. here is no need of the worlds powers, which I shall shew hereafter; but we must make use of Christs-rules, which are cleare in this case. Consider in an erring Church either a part or the whole is corrupt and adulterate, if onely a part, then the sound part must admonish, convince and reforme their erring brethren if they bee able;How to deal with an erring-Church. One Sister-Church may deal with ano∣ther Sister-Church, as one brother in a Church may deal with ano∣ther. Churches co∣ordinate. but in case they cannot doe it, then they may send for the assistance of a Sister-Church, as Antioch did, Act. 15.2. But if so bee it be the whole Church erres, then looke how an (equall) brother in one body is to deale with another, accord∣ing to the same rule of Matth. 18.15, 16, 17. and by propor∣tion is an equall Sister-Church to deale with another, for al∣though one Church is not subject, or subordinate unto another (neither is one brother to another) yet one Church is co-ordinate, and hath a like power with another (and so hath one Brother with another) so that as in brotherly-love and communion, one brother admonishes, reproves, exhorts, convinces another; and if there be no helpe for it, declares the brothers offence in publike, and may in time and order according to rule with∣draw from him, as in 2 Thess. 3.6. thus may, and must one Church (in sisterly love and communion) deale with another;And may ad∣monish, advice, Inquire. as to enquire into the nature of the errours or offence gi∣ven by an erring Church unto her, to know the Truth, Deut.
13, 14. and not to proceed upon bare reports,Examine. Exod. 23.1, 2. which yee shall not raise, or not receive; for it may be read both wayes;Expos. then may the Church send Letters or Messengers to that erring-Church to admonish, exhort, reprove, and convince, if she hears they have gained their Sister-Church;Exhort. but if shee refuses to be reformed, then that Church may take one or two Churches more to assist her.Convince. If the erring Church will not hear, then one or two Churches more joyn to∣gether to ad∣monish her. But if she resist admonition, and all means that bee used by prayers, fastings, intreatings, perswasions, reproofes, and all, then all the Churches about ap∣point to meet, and by the word of God reprove the errours, and if they finde her obstinate, then all other Churches are to withdraw from her, 2 Tim. 16, 17. Tit. 3.10, 11. and de∣clare against those errours, and no longer to hold them a Communion of Saints, but to take away all right-hands of fellowship untill their repentance appeare to the satisfaction of the aforesaid offended Churches,If nothing will prevail, then all Churches joyn together. and a visible reformation, and a publike renunciation of the aforesaid errours and sinnes. Now if they be conscientious and gracious, this punishment (for so it is called, 2 Cor. 2.6.) will pierce to the very hearts of them, and this will worke more upon them, upon their consciences, then all the prisons,To withdraw from her, and declare against and excommu∣nicate her. or punishments of the world. For if the decla∣ring against such a Church, the withdrawing of all others from her, their open protesting against her, and abhorrence of her detestable errours and sinnes, if they bee so, and the dis∣owning of her for a communion of Saints, and their continual∣ly appeales unto God against her,This will bee greater punish∣ment then pri∣sons to the conscientious among them. if these doe not deeply enter into her heart, and strike their consciences that are in her, and afflict their spirits, what will? For Joh. 5.22. All judgement is committed to the Sonne; and I am sure if Christs wayes, and the weapons of his make, cannot prevaile, then a formall juris∣diction, Courts and commands of mens make, will not. If Christs judg∣ment prevailes not with them, mens cannot. The best way to bring in an erring Church.But thus I have answered the objections of weight against this Point, which hath been abundantly proved and pressed: For (pares omnes inter se juris essent, sayes Whitaker) all Power is alike in all Churches, whether in Ephesus, Co∣rinth, Rome, Philippi, or the like; one not being one iota subject to another; Wherefore to the second Vse.
Vse 2. Then we see, such as are honoured (though some  thinke naucified) by the name of Independents, I meane the Members of the Congregationall Churches,Independents have the word for their war∣rant. and Presbyterie (which we hold with, although the Prelaticall be too presumptuous and usurping for us) I say, such are not without the Word for their warrant; nor are they without Christs rule for their refusing the commands of men, or their proud precepts, tend∣ing to embondage the Saints by their usurping power; One Church having as plenary power as any other.Independents long before now. Paul Baines, his Diocesan triall Pleads for In∣dependents. Doctor Sib's his breathing after God. Uses the word Independents also. Master Paul Baines (that precious holy man, and light of his age) in his Treatise printed, 1621. pag. 13. sayes plainly, We affirm it, that no such Head∣ship of, or in any Church, was ordained by Christ (our only Head over us) either actually or virtually, but that all Churches are equally INDEPENDENT (being his owne word) without any kinde of subjection one to any other. Sweet Sibbs in his brea∣thing, &c. pag. 94. speaking how amiable the Tabernacles were, applies them (as Types) to particular Churches of Christ, having equall beauty and glory (and the said Sibbs in his said Treatise, lib. 2. chap. 9. uses the very word also Independents. Robinson in his Reasons discussed, is large upon this point,Robinson. Bullinger. and Bullinger in the 5. Decad. Serm. 1. sayes it at large also, That the power of governing and ordering all affaires and Church-matters, belonging to the body is within the body, whither with relation to the calling, or chusing Church-Officers, Pastors, Teachers, Elders,All power is in the body. Dea∣cons, and Ministers, Act. 6. Act. 14. & 15. or for binding and loosing, and Censures, and Sacraments, examining of Doctrines, admitting of Members, and in all other Church-matters, and that they have besides, power to call Synods,Doctor Ames in's Medul. Theol. Power over any particular Church is u∣surped. Dr. Reynolds. Ainsworth. Willet's Sy∣nop. Cotton, Bartlet, Taylor. to consult upon weighty occasion. Ames in his Medul. Theol. lib. 1. chap. 37. sect. 6. sayes, All power of Discipline (De jure) according to Christ's Institution is the Churches in Common, and none ought to usurpe power over any such particular Church. A many more Wit∣nesses and eminent mens Certificates under their owne hands, (in their Writings) might be produced to prove these truthes; as Reynolds in his Conference with Hart; Ainsworth in his Guide to Zion; Willets Synopsis; Cottons Keyes; Bartlets Modell; Taylor on Titus; Cum multis aliis, &c. But by this you may see how unseemly it is for, and how little it doth become our
unbrotherly and unkind Kinsmen of the Presbyterians to be so bitter against us,As Prynne, Bastick, Baily, and Edwards, &c. as to say only a few simple upstart fanaticks, and giddy-headed illiterate fooles are of this opinion. Why pro∣duce your cause, bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob,In all Ages the most eminent men Indepen∣dents. Isa. 41.21. it is no upstart Novelty, but a truth of e∣quall standing with the Kingdome of Christ; and in all Ages the most eminent Lights were of this opinion, though they had not the like liberty to put it into practise. Besides, should we not be worse then mad men to expose our selves? poore Wives? with little Children? to the contempt of all? to be reproached by all? our persons to be hated of all? and to be abused in the open streets, our names to be all be spot∣ted with the foulest filth and dut which can bee cast upon them? our Families and Friends to the ill-will of all (almost) and we our selves continually to feed upon afflictions? and palpable injuries? whilst none dare, or doe appeare on our behalfe? this was, and yet is in many places in the Coun∣tries, where we are in daily dangers and troubles. Now I say, what a madnesse were it, we should enter into so strait a gate, and run into the rage of all (almost?) whether pro∣phane,☞ or Professors? were not the testimony of a good Conscience our continuall feast? and refreshing and rejoycing? if a meere head-strong will should hurry us on, to such a way of thornes and bryers.Our Consci∣ences carry us on. But beleeve it, and the Lord is our witnesse, it is our Consciences that carrie us on. Now Conscience (being a conjunct Science, and a knowing of the Act with the Rule) doth render us happy in this;What is Consci∣ence. That we most faithfully and unfeignedly seeke the satisfying our Souls in the revealed Wil, and declared minde of God to that which we know. But thus we must (and wil if the Lord please) walk according to our light, and as we are fully perswaded in our breasts, that we may have peace at home, though perils abroad, and warres without continually. See Rom. 14.5. Phil. 3.16. and let not the Saints be in the least discouraged at our sufferings, which are a token to us of Salvation, and that we are of God, in Phil. 1.27, 28, 29. For we shall come shining out of the fire, and in glistering glory, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. although indeed so subtill is he, that can transforme himselfe into an Angell of
Light, that Spirituall wickednesses are set up in holy places;Formall Pro∣fessours time-servers. wick∣ednesses that seeme Spirituall, and carry a face and forme of holinesse; For in every age have your formall Professours run posting to that Religion, and worship which hath been in most request, and highest esteem; and hence it is, whilst their Presbytery was best accepted of, most of your Prelaticall ones proved Presbyterians; and now Independency is in date, and hath the day of it, your Presbyterians turne Independents (omnia pro tempore & nihil pro veritate, saith one) or at least they gather together in the name of Independent Churches, and such as are so called,Many take up the name of Independents, and Indepen∣dent-Churches that are not so. who are commonly the cruellest Per∣secutors and Petty-Popes over the poore Saints, and over the Independents indeed, Veram Ecclesiam non sequens, sed persequens, these being (in their Judgements) as rigid, and inraged against the true Churches of Christ, as the Presbyterians or Prelates; And as one who hath the name of another great man, therfore hopes to be the heire, and have the day, is in hot pursuit for the estate, and will not compound for peace, unlesse upon some un∣equall termes, although hee hath no right thereunto; so they;Sim. and by their party they prevail, to justle aside the just and true Heire indeed, and to set him a begging for his livelyhood: And yet it is possible a true Church of Christ shall bee prose∣cuted under another name too, and that which is most odious, it may bee. But yet we will say as Isa. 63.16. Doubtlesse thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. Whilst our Cause is good, our confidence is great, our interest will hold, when others forged Titles will not be worth two pence; yet how impudent are some, that like Praxiteles,Our faith and fortitude. (who made the poore people worship his Strumpet instead of Venus, and under her name; so they) gull poore soules with a forme, appearance, and painted Picture. These worshippers of the Forme, are enemies to the Spirit and Power; but let us not feare their frownes, menaces, nor malice, but let us goe on,Sim. though the bawling Curs run railing after the gallopping Passenger, yet let us ride post, in a Victory of Patience, and in the Triumph of In∣nocency. And as Anaxarchus said to the Tyrant, Tundis vasculum Anaxarchi, sed non Anaxarchum; So they may
hurt us, but not hinder us; trouble us, but not triumph over us. CHAP. IX.  Zebi. A further Demonstration of the Discipline of the Church of Christ, objective, or upon the account of the Churches object, and what that is. WE have handled, through the grace and goodnesse of our God, the Forme (I hope) fully of Church-discipline and Gospel-fellowship, wherein I trust, the Lovers of the truth will not take mee to bee too tedious, although in the following-chapters, I wish I could promise to be compen∣dious, especially in this first Lib. seeing what is to come (as I take it) is lesse controversal;The beautifull object of Christs Church. I shall next insist upon the object of this Church-state, whereby it becomes so amiable unto the Saints, viz. the Presence of God, giving out of himselfe more in grace, and glory to such Saints then to any others, according to Psal. 87.23. which point lyes apparent, Psal. 84.1, 2, 7, 10, 11.What it is? Proved by Scriptures. So Psal. 63.1, 2. O God thou art my God, my soule thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, &c. to see thy power, and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary, verse 5. My soule shall be satisfied as with marrow,His power and glory there. &c. that is abundantly more then in other places, which thing is promised us, as in Exod. 20.24.His name and best blessings there. His presence by his Word and Spirit, there. In all places where I record my name, I will come and blesse, &c. i. e. I will come in a speciall manner, and blesse them with speciall blessings of grace; so is the type, Exod. 25.8. so in Isa. 4.5, 6. He is upon all the assemblies of Zion (not else∣where) a cloud and smoake by day, and a flame of fire by night, and upon all the glory a defence, &c. Isa. 25.6. there the Saints (in
the Lords house, this mountaine of holinesse) shall bee feasted with fat things, Psal. 36.8. and shall say as in verse 9.Fat things and feasts there. Lo this is our God we have waited for him, this is the Lord we have waited for him, we will rejoyce and be glad in his salvation, &c. that is, we have waited for these appearances, and this his presence in grace, and of glory, &c. Thus in Isa. 33.17. there thy eye shall see the King in his beauty (an amiable object indeed) and in verse 21. there the glorious Lord will be a place of broad Rivers and streams, &c. There is the loveliest, heart-ravishing,There is the King in his beauty. And place of broad rivers. Th most soul-ravishing ob∣ject there. Whte and rudy. To the end of the world. and soule-enamouring object that the Saint can set his organ or eye upon; here is the beloved, white, and ruddy, and more then all other beloveds, Cant. 5.10. &c besides this soule-enamouring pre∣sence is promised to the end of the world among Saints in such communion, Matth. 18.20. Joh. 14.22, 23, 26. Matth. 28.20. Joel 2.27. Zeph. 3.16.17. This lovely object (beyond all others) Saints embodied as before have had the happinesse to see and enjoy, or to have the fruitive discovery of, which all the true Churches of Christ have experienced to the purpose, and their profit in all ages, Act. 2.28. Act. 4.33. So 2 Cor 3.18. 2 Cor. 6.16. Yee are the Temple of the Lord, as God hath said,Saints and Churches in all ages have experienced this point. I will dwell in them, i. e.  I will (in the nighest communion of love and grace) be present; and so as he hath promised, yee who are his Temples have experienced, Eph. 2.19.20, 21. Hebr. 2.12. and in such societies the Saints have found him to delight to be, and to walke there, Rev. 2.1. 2 Cor. 6.6. Psal. 132.13, 14. and to take his repose, Psal. 72.2. and 26.8. and repast there, Cant. 1.7. and 6.2. and 4.16. and to impart his most intimate loves in the midst of them, as Cant. 7.12. &c. by all which, lies apparently before us the beauty of the object. Vse. On which account, how eagerly Saints should bee set upon such a worke will (obviously) appeare out of Psal. 84.1, 2. for if beauty, blessednesse, love, life, light, grace, glory,Vse. The object in∣vites and in∣cites us into the Churches. This made David even dote in love on them. or any good thing be object enough to win upon a people, all, and more then all, may be had here, in Psal. 27.4▪ One thing have I desired of the Lord, &c. what is that? that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of my life: why so? to behold the beauty of the Lord. O there! there is the excellency of the Lord! the lovelinesse of his countenance! the comelinesse of his favour! the
beauty of his face! above all places! in the midst of the assem∣blies of the Saints thus united into a body.And in these Assemblies of Sion God ap∣pears most glo∣rious and glad∣some. Parishes have not this object. Now Parishes have not this amiable and peculiar presence of the Lord, they want the beauty of this object, and this object of beauty abundantly; For but little of God is to bee seen in their constitutions and Churches. Now, where most of Gods presence of love, light, grace, and glory, &c. is promised, and ap∣pears, there is the Church of Christ; but that most of this sweet presence appears in, and is promised to the Saints associated as before, I refer you to the pregnant Scriptures produced for proofe. Wherefore deare friends! how forward would you bee for this Discipline,Forma formae. did you but discerne the excellency and beauty of these his amiable Tabernacles? This made that emi∣nent man Dr. Ames (Professour of Friezeland) leave all his honours, estate, esteem, &c. and all to become a member of such a Church at Rotterdam,Those that are not longing after these wayes of Sion, see not this object in them. Dr. Ames left his Professor∣ship of Friez∣land for Church fellow∣ship. Vid. Peters Re∣port of Eng. wars. choosing rather to sit on the Threshold in the Lords house, Psal. 84.10. then to enjoy all the world without it, and pleasures for a season, blessing God upon his death-bed, that he had lived so long as to be (first) of such a body of Christ before hee dyed, and when he was ready with good old Simeon to depart in peace; hee beseeched Mr. Peters, the (then) Pastor, and others, not to be discouraged or daunted, though they must suffer much, saying, If there were a visible way of worship in the world that God did owne, honour, and manifest his Excellencies, and himselfe in, that it was this of the Congregationall (now called Independent) Discipline. The ignorance of the object indeed makes men no more in love with it, then they are; ignoti nulla cupido; but if the beauty of it be but in the Frontispeece, then every eye is upon it.His dying words. O how does beauty shine in goodnesse? like the Sun in a cleare Skie? O glorious! It is a Tradition that Noah being in the Arke, and having closed up all the win∣dowes,Ignorance of the object hin∣ders the affe∣ction. had a most excellent Carbuncle, or precious stone, which gave them light all within. But it is a truth that Christ gives a most orient, radient lustre, light, and beauty to the object of every eye in the Churches of Christ:Sim. So that the beauty of his Tabernacles is most amiable, whilest beauty and naughtinesse blended together, doe shew like a
Leprosie, the whiter the fouler. But thus farre for the Object. CHAP. X.  or  Chhok. Every Church of Christ hath his Rule to bee ordered, fitted, formed, and squared by; and how all the mat∣ter must bee measured by Christ's Rule, and what that is? IN this beautifull building, wee have heard the matter, and the forme, and have found out the Churches fairnesse,Christs Rule to build the Church by. ob∣jective i. e. from the presence of God in the middest of her. But now it remaines that the rule bee brought out to square by. For is not this the Carpenters Sonne? the Sonne of Mary? or will this Carpenter? or rather the Builder of this Temple of the Lord, worke without his Rule? no surely; therefore, Rev. 11.1. There was given me a reed, and the Angel said,Proved neces∣sary, rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein, &c. This Reed is the Rule, whereby the Platforme of the Lords Temple is measured out, and laid before us; thus the valley of Succoth is measured out, Psal. 60.6. So is it in Ezek. 43.10.1 By Scipture. Let them measure the patterne of the Lords house. This worke will not bee well done without Rule, and that Rule must bee Christs too, which measures it out;Expos. as might appeare by other Scriptures, Isa. 11.1. Zach. 6.12.13. Matth. 16.16. So you may see in the Precept for it, Matth. 28.20. What I have commanded. Christs commands are our rules;2 By Precept. Christs Com∣mands and Rules. Wisdom (that is, Christ) calls. Prov. 7.1. Keep my words, and hear my Commandments: Keep them, that i, so as diligently to observe
them, as  tells us. So Prov. 8.1, 2. Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? she crieth at the gates▪ &c. So my beloved spake, and said, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away, Cant. 2.10. It is the voice of my beloved, vers. 8. So in Psal. 45.10.3. Proved by practise. . Besides, this hath been the practise of all true Churches, as in 1 Thes. 4.1, 2. We beseech you as ye have received of us, so walk. How? According to the Commandments we delivered to you, by the Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the will of God, &c. So 1 Cor. 11.2.Expos. I praise you, that you keep (or observe, remember, and obey) the Ordinances,The Apostle urges the Rule. Not as a head, but as a helper. , Doctrines, Traditions, Pre∣cepts, &c. as I have delivered them unto you. Now how was that? Paul did this not as a Head, or Law-giver, delivering his own Canons or Conclusions; for in Vers. 3. I would have you know Christ is the Head. Now Vers. 23. as I have received of the Lord, so delivered I them unto you; or, I have given them up unto you, () as appointed for that purpose. Now no others does Paul press upon them; for as in 1 Tim. 6.3, 4. If any man teach otherwise,Expos. and consent not to the wholesom words () (or words sound (sine vitio) and healthful for the soul, which are the words of Christ, &c.) withdraw from him, Vers. 5. Have nothing to do with such a one; and why? Reason 1. Is because it is not in the power, or policy of men, though they be never so wise,Mans unfit∣ness. Mad Church-work made by mens rules. learned, or lofty, to lay down precepts for the Saints practise; or to set the way to worship God in, and by; all this being beyond him, and too high for him. A Balaam could say, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, Numb. 22.18. Should the Lord have left this to the wills and wits of men, what a most miserable Church-work should we have had? For every man would have had his minde, and set  up his fancy. Gods strict command. Moses durst do nothing on hs own head. Nor David, nor Solomon.Reason 2. Wherefore, see how precisely it lies, in Exod. 25.40. That they look to it, that all be made according to the pattern shewed upon the Mount. So that Moses must do nothing on his own head, in the Government of the Church, or by his own private authority, about the Tabernacle, but as the Lord Com∣manded; Nor durst David, or Solomon do any thing in the Lords Temple,2 Chro. 8.14. 2 Kings 6.38. either in the building▪ or ordering, or officers, or
singers, &c. but all by direction from above, and according to the Laws of the Lord, who hath laid all, and lined all out by his own rules, and according to his own will, 2 Chron. 3.3. Much less durst any (whether Apostles,Nor Apostles, nor any, Without Christ's Rule. or others) have undertaken it without direction from the Lord, and Christ's line, and rule; this glorious building of the Gospel, so far exceeds the former. Reason 3. Wherefore the voice out of Heaven bid, hear him; For he hath brought down from his Fathers bosom the pattern  of this (new) Jerusalem;Christ's Com∣mission. which is coming down from God out of Heaven. Hence, Acts 3.22.Rev. 21.2, 3. Christ is called the Prophet like unto Moses,Expos. commissionated from the Lord to delineate unto us, and lay before us by plain and perfect rule, and line,To rule, order, and take the whole Govern∣ment. whatsoever appertains to the true discipline, and worship of God. So in Isai. 9.7. Of the increase of his Government shall be no end, to order it, and establish it, &c. Isai. 22.21. I will commit his Government into his hand, &c. And he shall reign in righte∣ousness, and rule in judgement, Isai. 32.1. So in Zach. 6.13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, and he shall sit and rule upon his Throne, &c. Hence saith Christ, Matth. 28.18. All () authoritative power is given me in Heaven and Earth. Go, therefore and teach them to observe all things that I have commanded you, and I will be with you to the end of the world. Wherefore God hath revealed his minde made forth by Christ in the Gospel, and that must be minded by all men, and Ministers, in this work; that all that be laid upon the building, be first ewn fit, ordered, squared,All the Churh matter, and the form, is to be fitted by his Rule. and qua∣lified, for this worship of Christ, (both matter and manner) by Christ his own rule. All other rules of the best, ablest, and wisest men will make but (mud-walls) mad work, unequal and uneven, being all too long, or too short, but Christs own. Vse 1. We finde by this, that Parishes are no Churches of  Christ's building;Parish-Chur∣ches never ac∣cording to Christ's Rule. Acts of the A∣postles, the Churches best Directory. never built according to Christs rule or di∣rectory, largely delivered in the Acts of the Apostles. For I have already proved, they are without warrant out of Gods Word, and that the Rule and Pattern of their Discipline is An∣tichristian, and drawn out of the whimsical doctrines, fanatick and fantastick Ordinances and Directories of mens brains. Wherefore come out, &c. For 2 John 9. whosoever abides not
in, but transgresses from the doctrine of Christ, hath not God, &c. Wherefore V. 10. receive him not into your house, nor bid him God speed; for whosoever biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Neither are ye to own, or say, God speed to Paro∣chial Constitutions, which are transgressions to the rules and laws of Christ, according to all the Scriptures I have produced, and hereafter shall. Vse 2. Let none say then, we walk without rule, seeing the pattern of our house is measured by this Reed,We walk by Rule. as hath been proved, and will be more. Vse 3. Let all Saints set themselves to observe Christs rule directly,Independent Churches ac∣cording to Christs Rule. without adding to it, or diminishing from it, Revel. 22.18, 19. so far as they see, even to a pin. For in this Moses was accounted faithful, Heb. 3.2. for that he had so exact a care according to the pattern in the building of the Tabernacle, Heb. 8.5. I remember sweet Sibbs,Dr. Sibbs. in his breathing after God, Pag. 91. speaking of Gods house, sayes, House is taken for the persons, orders, and enjoy∣ments in it, and government of it (all gods) which is all to be according to Christs rule.Neither must we make rules, nor slight Christs Rules. Let every Church of Christ keep close to the Revealed will. Far be it from the Saints to run the riot, with some refractory and unruly rugged ones; so as to slight Christs rules, and to account it a bondage to be mea∣sured thereby, and ordered thereafter; but I shall speak to them,Mr. Brightman. in the Third Book. Yet Brightman on Rev. 12.1. sayes, The Saints of Christ called into a Church,Expos. must, according to the Primitive pattern, be clothed with the Sun (Christ) crowned with the light of the Twelve Apostles (Twelve Sars) and having the Moon, i. e. the light borrowed from the Sun (Christ) to shine in her pathes; to direct her feet in her discipline,Then her paths shall glister and shine. and worship. It will never be well with the Church, until gathered and ordered according to Christs rule, and then her paths shall glister by the Beams of the Sun. Let us therefore be thus minded, &c. as the Apostle says, Phil. 2.15. and whereto we have attained, in Ver. 16. Walk by the same rule. The Lord Jesus Christ direct our way, 1 Thes. 3.11. And as many as walk according to his rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and all the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Amen.
Thus we hear how requisite Christ's Rule is: and indeed,In many ga∣thered Church∣es, Ordinances prisoners, as in Babylon. Trap. Exod. Unskilful builders nor yet so spirited for the work as they will be. till then as the House will be built but ill-favoredly, and un∣skilfully: So the Ordinances of Christ will be there, but as the Ark was among the Philistims, rather prisoners, then pri∣viledges (as Trap sayes;) And indeed, I do fear they are so amongst some of your Formal Church-fellowships gathered, and Houses built up by unskilful workmen; who were not so spirited for the work, as some will be shortly. But as the House, after it is built, stands firm without the builder, because he giveth the artificial order onely, and not the substantial being to the build∣ing; so indeed, such Churches,Sim. as are built by Gospel rule and order, will stand firm, though the Pastors,Sim. or such (whose Ministry was the means of making them so) be no longer about them: But the good order and rule of Christ will con∣tinue and keep them up; whilst such as go to gather a people, or to build without Christ's Rule, do but lay the brands to∣gether without tongs, and are sure to burn their own fingers at least, at last. CHAP. XI.  Ammi-Nadib. Every man or woman that enters into Church-fellowship, must have a full, free, and clear consent, and be through∣ly satisfied, having a voluntary submission to all the Ordinances, and Orders of Christ in that Church, where∣into he or she is entring. THus as we do absolutely disclaim such as fall short of,All that joyn in this way, must do it by free and un∣compelled consent. and such as run beyond Christ's Rule in this Church-state on all sides, and that do de novo take up any practise without precept from Christ: So also we must see by what means Saints so qualified as before, are to be embodied together,Lib. 2. c. 2.
which I shall more particularly pitch upon in Book 2. Chap. 2. But at present we shall prove, none, but such as are throughly satisfied of the way, and (as being convinced) can freely and voluntarily consent,1. Proved by Prophecies.  are to enter into it. For we shall finde the Prophecies clear in this, Psal. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power; so in Isai. 2.2, 3. they shall flow (i. e. freely, unconstrained, by an instinct, as the tydes do,Expos. and of their own accord) to the house of the Lord, and say,More fluminis. All flow freely. Come; which signifies a freeness thereunto without com∣pulsion. So Jer. 50.4, 5, &c. wherein their willingness shall appear; in that they go, weep, and run, and seek, and enquire, and ask for the ways of Zion,Jer. 31.33, &c. and say, Come let us joyn our selves in a perpetual Covenant,All mutually and concur∣rently give themselves up with one con∣sent. &c. By all which, it is clear all they do (in ordine ad communionem Evangel.) is done by a voluntary consent and concurrence. So Micah 4.12. so Zach. 2.11. so joyning themselves, is in the Hebrew, A mutually giving up themselves to∣gether with the knowledge and consent one of another; And thus in the third Chapter of Zephaniah verse nine,2. Proved by Precepts. They shall all call upon the Name of the Lord,Acts 11.23. . and shall serve him with one consent. Besides all these, Wisdom (Christ) calls for this in Prov. 23.26. My son give me thy heart: And thus it is intended in Barnabas's exhortation,Calls to come freely, That with purpose of heart, (that is, the decree of the will) they should cleave unto the Lord. In this sence is men∣tioned so many comings of poor souls unto Christ,Expos. and so many calls in Scriptures to come,Christ's call to come freely, and fervently. Chephetz in Hebrew. Vide Beza in loc. Et Hugo Groti∣us. Matth. 11.27. Joh. 6.35, 37. unto him; and in Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, take up the Cross, &c. , Is as much as to say, such as will come according to Christs call and command, must come freely, affectionately, and with fer∣vency of desire, (Importat simul affectionem, affectationem & ac∣ceptationem) therefore they must deny themselves,See Burroughs on the Excel∣lency of a gracious Spirit, p. 281. (, &c.) that is, Let him not have ends to come for, nor prin∣ciples to come from off his own; but let him have (as it were) no reason of his own, for, or from himself to induce him thereunto,3. Proved by continual Pra∣ctise of Christs Twelve Disci∣ples. which is an hard saying to some. For the word is an accurate compound, noting more then an ordinary or single self-denial, (Abnege, i. e. Omnino nege:) Now none others come to Christ to follow him, in fellowship with him,
according to his call and commands, but such as were freely carried forth, even from their own reasons (if need require) into a voluntary consent, and coming into union and communion with the Saints:And Churches in all ages. Proved by Types. None else fit for the setting up of Gods Sanctuary. Which also in all ages is proved by the Churches practise. Shall we look a little into the Typical Ta∣bernacles, and it is a truth therein; viz. All that then offered, were to be free, and to do it voluntarily, (i. e. not violently, or constrained thereunto) therefore Exod. 25.2. O! every man that giveth it willingly with his heart, ye shall take my offerings. And Vers. 8, 9. Let them make me a Sanctuary that I may dwell among them, according to all that I shewed after the pattern, &c. This is also a good Gospel-rule, and it is a moral, reasonable service I shall show; but so in Exod. 35.5.All were to be free and wil∣ling, else not to be accepted. Whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring his offering. Vers. 22. They came both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted, (none else came war∣rantably) and Vers. 29. The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the Lord, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing; which the Lord had commanded. And in 2 Chron. 29.5. Who then is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the Lord? Vers. 6, 7. They offered willingly for the service of the Lords house; but need I be so long? In Nehemiahs days, chap. 4.6. So built they the wall, &c. For the people had a minde to work; notwith∣standing the oppositions and great enemies, and discoura∣ging difficulties, were enough to daunt them. So (I say in all ages) Saints did freely and willingly (without the least compulsion) to unite and embody together,Saints in all ages such free-willers. and enter into fellowship; as it is said, Jo. 6.21. they willingly received him into the ship. So when Christ called his Disciples into this Church-state, they came willingly, and by a free-consent, Matth. 4.20, 22. presently, and without lingring, or delay,Expos. or asking counsel of their Father or Friends.In primitivo times so. So Matth. 19.27. so Gal. 1.15, 16. and such as were pricked at their hearts, with the word of grace, in Acts 2.37. did so in Vers. 41. gladly,  (i. e. willingly) receive the word, and being baptized, entered into fellowship. So in Acts 8. & 11. & 13. & 14, &c.Expos. And thus the Church of Corinth were gathered, and thus the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.3, 5. who were willing of themselves; and they did (sayes Paul) give up their selves to
the Lord, and then unto us by the will of God , that is freely, and cheerfully,Expos. and willingly. Thus the Church of Thessalonica were examples to all Be∣leevers in Macedonia and Achaia, for their readinesse and wil∣lingnesse;Examples. 1 Thess. 1.6, 7. wee might instance all along, and confirme this abundantly by examples and reasons, but that I shall bee too tedious; yet the truth is, should we not, with a free, and by a voluntary consent serve the Lord in this his worship, and enter into the beauties of holinesse; First, We should fall short of all Worshippers, even of false gods,Otherwise we were short of the very Heathens. and the very Heathens would rise up a∣gainst us: For nature it selfe teaches us to worship God willing∣ly, and the Scripture teaches us much more willingnesse in the true worship of the true God, Joh 4.23. Secondly, otherwise his Worship would bee as a bandage to us;Else in bond∣age. for when it is tedious to men, Mal. 3.14. then they are soon weary with well-doing. And besides, thirdly, they be Hypocrites, and will never  hold fast, but fall off fearfully, that enter not in freely and fully satisfied,Else soon fall off. 1 Joh. 2.9, 10. and perswaded in their owne soules by the Spirit of the Lord, Monendo, movendo, & re∣movendo, instructing, moving, and removing all the lets. Vse.Vse 1 Then the weapons of our warfare are not then () carnall,Parish Chur∣ches upheld by carnall wea∣pons. Whilst the Spirit, it is that convinces us of the truth, constrains us to the truth, and makes us worshippers in the truth. Compulsive powers doe more hurt then good. fleshly, worldly, or the like; Not by might, not by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord, Zach. 4.6. wherefore wee finde no need of compulsive Powers, whereby Parochiall constitutions were kept alive so long, viz. by Powers to compell men by stocks, prisons, fines, pillories, and punishments, and whether they will or no to make them keep their Parish-Churches, and Ecclesiasticall Canons, whilst alas! it is the Spi∣rit convinces us of the truth, Joh. 16.8.9. and constraines us to the truth, Job. 32.18. and makes men worshippers in the truth, Joh. 4.32. Vphold me with thy free Spirit, saith David, Psal. 51.12. and that the Spirit makes men free in the truth, and the truth in them, see Joh. 8.32, 33.36. 2 Cor. 3.17. It is not all the beating, or bruising, whipping, or punishing in the world, will perswade the conscience, convince the heart, or convert the sin∣ner.
Thus men may be made Hypocrites,And makes many hypo∣crites, but few true Proselites. and play the devils out of feare of torment, but not Saints or true worshippers till the Spirit makes them willing; therefore give to Caesar what is Caesars, and to Christ what is Christs.Cartwright. As honest old Cartwright said to Whitgift, You would bring in the Magistrates to breake and change the orders which Christ our King and Lawgiver hath left in his Church;Christs go∣vernment and civill Magi∣strates are di∣stinct in specie & geore. For as Christ came not to meddle with, or overthrow the Civill-government, neither must your Civill Magistrates or Civill Governours meddle with the matters or affaires of Christs Church, Christ alone being Lawgiver therein; so that such would alter and overthrow Church-order, and Go∣vernment: for which Christ will give them but little thanks at last,Psal▪ 2. Civill Rulers within civill Rules and Pre∣cincts. Rom. 13.1, 2. A Word and a warning to Rulers. K. Vzziah, And Perez-Vzziah. Not to meddle with the mat∣ters of Religi∣on. and will requite it to them by the overthrowing of theirs; and for this end the Rod is in his hand at this day. Now who knoweth not, that the office of the Magistrate consists in those things that belong to our life and goods, and is to bee kept within the compasse of a Civill jurisdiction: Hence it is that Azariah cast out Vzziah out of the holy place, and that because it was not proper for a Prince, but for the high-Priest, 2 Chron. 26.16. Lev. 13.46. Let Rulers in their relations, and Church-officers in theirs, bee found faithfull. Vzziahs pride is expresly noted, 2 Chro. 26.16. for usurping the Priest-hood in the Temple of God, but he escaped not scotfree, for he was suddenly smitten with the Leprosie, and laid out for an example to after ages. On the other side,Example. Christ would not meddle with civill Ma∣gistracy. our Saviour re∣fused to meddle with Civill Magistracy, or with matters of that kinde, a Kingdome being offered him, Jo. 6.8. hee could not accept of it, nor would he handle Civill-matters so much as to divide the heritage between the brethren, it being not his office, Luke 12. Now let none usurpe,The Spirituall and Eccles. is above the civil, which the civil power is to serve. but let the Civill keepe within his Civill-precinct, and the Spirituall within his com∣passe and sphere. And yet the Civill is to submit to the Spiri∣tuall (and in a spirituall sense the Ecclesiasticall) Discipline being above it. As Philip the Emperour, whom we read of in Euseb. 4. lib. Eccles. Hist. being commanded to abstaine from breaking of bread, and suspended untill his repentance were
seen (being guilty of some sins) willingly obeyed, and lay low before the Lord, and did not dare to partake of it, un∣till his sinnes were answered by sorrows sutably in the sight of all,☞ and till hee had both openly delivered his griefe, and evidently declared his faith before all. Besides Theodosius Emperour (in 5. lib. Eccles. Hist. of Euse∣bius) is eminent for his most ready and religious obedience to Ambrose his exhortations and reproofe,Theodosius an example. All to teach Magistrates to be under Christs Dis∣cipline, and not that Christ is under theirs. which brought him prostrate upon his knees, and flat upon his face before the Lord with teares, and prayers. I owne nothing of Super∣stition observed in those dayes, onely this is that I aime at, that all our Magistrates may know they are under Christs Discipline and Jurisdiction, and not Christ under theirs. Yet this may our Magistrates (whom we honour) ever know, that it is their duty and proper to them to make provision for the Church of Christ (principally) and to improve their Au∣thority for the preserving of Christs Kingdome and Gods Church and service:But what Ma∣gistrates and Rulers may do as to matters of Religion. And for this David, Solomon, Josiah, Ezekiah, and others of the Rulers of Israel were registred famous; Not that they are (in the least) to force mens consciences into a consent and compliance with their own wayes or worships, or to rack them into a Religion: God forbid! For Luke 9.5.4.55, 56. Christ came not to destroy mens lives,How far they may go. Vide ch. 13. Examples. Not to force consciences. but to save them. And wee must with all meeknesse instruct them that oppose, if peradventure (though it bee much in question) that God will give them re∣pentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and to be recovered out of the snares of the Devill, 2 Tim. 2.24, 25, 26. even as the word () is,Expos. the hottest adversaries of the truth; even such are deliberately to be dealt with,But with gentlenesse to win them in to the truth. and gently intreated, un∣lesse▪ the Laws should seize upon them on Civil accounts for transgressions, and as (Civil) disturbers of the peace, or the like; but I meet with a stop by some sturdy stickler for Coercive Power. Object.Object. Luke 14.23. The Lord sayes, Compell them to come in,Expos. that my house may be filled. Answ.Ans. Who doth the Lord speake to? They are the Lords servants who are commanded to it,1 Negatively . i. e. not Civill Magistrates, but the Messengers of the Gospel, sent out to gather Guests
into the Kings house; now this is not meant by prisons, pu∣nishments, or the like; But, 2 The word is, () i. e. shew them a necessity (vi & efficacia rationum,2 Ans▪ Affir∣matively shew them a ncssi∣ty of Christ and his Church-way. Grotius in loc.) of comming into my house. Win them with arguments, that as they that want bread see a ne∣cessity, or are compelled to go to Market, so may these. And thus is it, in Matth. 22.9. Bid them, that is, invite them () call them, with undeniable winning words, and with forcing arguments;Grotius. in which sense wee are to compell them as much as wee may, with the weapon of the word,Sim. and strength of truth. But before I finish this Chapter,True Magi∣strates in their respective pla∣ces much own∣ed and ho∣noured by all the Churches. Vide ch. 13. Adversaries of old accused us as enemies to the Magistrates Vid ch. 2. let not the Civill Magi∣strates imagine in the least, that this Discipline of the Church doth derogate a tittle from their just rights which is the false suggestion of our Adversaries of old against us, as Ezra 4.7, 8. and verse 16. they said to the King, if these men goe on, then thou wilt lose thy right and portion. Thus the Presidents conspired against Daniel, Dan. 6.6.7. and accused him for a Rebell, verse 12. But as wee have, wee shall and will (and dare not doe otherwise then) be subject unto them, even for con∣science sake, Rom. 13.1. But wee shall meet with more of this hereafter; In the meane time Saints are compelled. Secondly, By the sweet insinuations and powerfull per∣swasions of the Spirit of Christ; they are constrained into the  house of God,The Spirit compels us, and yet we are voluntiers. and they are voluntarily knit together into one; which Sibs sweetly shewes necessary, in his Treatise be∣fore named, page 91. Now when the Spirit prevailes, they are to enter into practise, and then they doe it with abun∣dance of sweetnesse, satisfaction, freenesse, and readinesse;Dr. Sibs. and this is requisite in all that would bee gathered ac∣cording to the Gospel: It is God which worketh in you both to will,God works in us the will first. Vide l. 2. c. 2. and to doe, Phil. 2.13. And hee perswades Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem, not otherwise forcing them; so that wee grant such a kinde of compulsive powers: But as all Con∣troversies are about meum and teum, even so it is as to this:Sim. And a little thing will make the Magistrate challenge it, because hee is (for the most part) inclined to it; A little clap with the hand sets on an eager Mastive, but the force of
staves cannot loosen him;Take heed of setting on Ma∣gistrates. wherefore I advise men to bee wise, how they set on Secular powers to interpose, or impse in matters of Religion, as to tender Consciences; some are busie herein,Sim. who are like the Bustard in a fallow field, that can∣not rise high, sine vi turbinis, without the Whirlewind of such a Tempest;Some busie to do it. (for so I account it will bee to the Church) and then like squibs in a throng, they flye out on all sides. But I hope our Magistrates will be more wise then to runne the hazard of so imminent wrath of God.Sim. For as I have read of the Tyrians in Alexanders time, when he had besieged them, that the iron they put into the Forge (for to use against the enemy) even whilst it was in the fire,It will run Ru∣lers the hazard of ruine. Vide ch. 13. was seen full of drops of blood (sayes Quintus Curtius) and so have been, and will be the weapons that are used against consciences. It is sad! when ungodly great ones must sit as Judges of the greatly godly ones. Many men are like the Lawyer that pleaded strongly for his Client,Sim. but before the day of hearing, hee was advanced to the Bech, and made the Judge; but then he adjudged it to the other side;Sim. saying before he was an Advocate, and pleaded for his Client, but now he was his Judge. Thus Polititians doe, who like Aalus have planted many herbs, to poyson (true spirituall) piety, but to practise policy; And like curious Cookes build up with their hands high,Sim. but with their teeth tear low. These like the Wolfe answer the Lambe, that pleaded her in∣nocency. It is true, thy cause is better then mine, but my teeth are harder then thine. But God is ingaged against such Powers, and Policies▪ vide chap. 13. Thus much for this Chapter.
CHAP. XII.  or  Halal and Hodh. The End of Saints so embodied together as before, being a true Church of Christ, for Matter and Forme, Ob∣ject, and Rule, as before, is the Glory of God, and to set forth his praises in Christ, and his Churches. THe rightest-line is the shortest;The finall cause the first in the eye▪ though the last in the act. I would have mine both short and right, wherefore I feare lest my too much haste make mee run awry. Every wise man proposes to himselfe an End in all things, and the more wise hee is in this point, the more hee imitates and resembles the Lord; hence said the Psalmist, Psal. 37.37. Marke the perfect and up right, for his end is peace. And verse 38. The end of the wicked is to be cut off, therefore marke him. The End is the first and princi∣pall thing to bee minded, and looked after; not so much the present motion, station, or action; as what the end of this,The End is first, and most minded. or that, will be, or what it is, is aimed at, and intended; For there is a Way that promises peace and prosperity to a man, and all wll, but the end is death, Prov. 16.25.And why? All thngs in the first and se∣cond Creation have one and the same Head. Col. 1.18.20. and one and the same end. So a thing may be but hastily begun, and the end of it be bitter, and not blessed, Prov. 20, 21. All things in the Creation, as well as in the Re-creation, have one and the same ultimate end, which all Saints should have in all their practices, purposes and pro∣posals to themselves. The end, though last in the execution, yet is first in the in∣tention (in omnibus agendis, &c.) and this is an undoubted
truth: Now (agere prudenter) to do wisely, is (adhibito certo fine) to have before us fixed an honorable end, and answerable to the business we are about. Now our end in all things must be the same with Gods end in all,The glory of God, the one and the same End of all. viz. The glory of God; no other end is honorable enough for us to aim at: Hence it is said, He created every one for his glory, Isa. 43.7. and in Prov. 16.4. The Lord made all for himself, yea, the wicked, &c. i. e. The final cause of the Creation was his praise and glory, so is it of his gubernation, our redemption, and salvation, and whatsoever we can say,Creation, Gu∣bernation, Re∣demption, Sal∣vation, and all hath one and the same End. hath all the same end, which we are to aim at; viz. The setting forth the praises of God. Hence in so many Psalmes, especially in Psalme one hun∣dred forty eight, David doth invoke all things, and all Crea∣tures in heaven and earth to praise the Lord, but above all he calls on the Saints, which is as much as to say, in especiall manner it must be their end in all, and by all, and to doe all to his praise and glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. so that Gods Angels, Saints, and all men, and all Creatures humane or heavenly, (as they are God's) all have the same end, and that end is the honour and glory of God.This End most of all moves Saints into Church-fel∣lowship. That this must be the End. 1. Proved by Prophecy. Now Saints have (most especially) this finall cause commanding them unto, and commending them into this Gospel-Church-state, this being their maine end, and mighty designe, to set forth the praise and glory of God. This truth triumphs in armour of proofe out of Prophecies, Precepts, and practises with others. For first, in Isa. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall come to Zion with songs, and ever∣lasting joy, Isa. 51.11. & ver. 3. joy and gladnesse shall be found therein, thankes-giving, and the voyce of melody, and they shall men∣tion the Lords loving kindnesses, and the praises of the Lord, &c. Isa. 63.7. thus in Cant. 8.2. the Church gives her Beloved to drinke of her spiced cup,Expos. The Churches spiced Cup. i. e. praise composed of the spices or gra∣ces of his owne Spirit; and here is also juyce of the Pomegra∣nats running out like little Rivers, most sweet and acceptable unto the Lord. So Cant. 7.12, 13. and Cant. 4.16. the end of her request is for the spices to flow out, and that the Belo∣ved may eate of his pleasant fruits. This promise is also in that Prophecie of Jeremy 15.19. to comfort the cast-downe Prophet in his affliction, the Lord promises, when the precious
are taken from the vile, they shall be as his mouth,Expos. i. e. filled with Hallelujahs of praises and honours, and glory unto God. So in Jer. 30.17, 19. This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after, shall set forth his praises, ver. 19. And out of them shall proceed thankesgiving, and the voyce of them that make merry; thus Zeph. 3.9.Expos. I will turne to the people a pure Language (a lip) and what then? they shall call upon the name of the Lord (often read they shall praise the Lord) with one consent. This is fore-told in many chapters of the Revelations, chap. 11.15.17. chap. 14.2.3. and in Revel. 21.11. This new Jerusalem which is (now) coming downe, hath the glory of God to fill her, and ver. 23, &c. you shall finde the Types both of the Arke, Tabernacle, and Tem∣ple to fore-tell this was to be the end of every Church under the Gospel,Types. in 2 Chron. 5.13, 14. wherein they had Musicke and Melodies, Trumpets and Singers,Musicks and singers. all as one shouting out one sound of praises and thankesgiving to the Lord, and then the house of the Lord was filled with his glory.For the filling his hous with praise and glo∣ry. Now much more is this new Jerusalem, and so are these Gospel-temples for the praises and glory of God; Praise waites for thee in Zion, Psal. 65.1. and to thee shall the vowes be performed, i. e. to thee in Zion, as if Zion only were for the same purpose;Expos. and in Psal. 67.2, 3. Let thy way be knowne upon earth,2. Precepts. and then fol∣lowes, Let the people praise thee, O God. So Psal. 70.4.Psal. 140.13. Let all those that seeke the Lord rejoyce, and be glad in thee, and let such as love thy salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. Thus is that in 2 Thes. 1.11, 12. We pray for you, that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and yee in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ;3. Proofs by practise of all Saints in fel∣lowship. by all which it appeares, Praises are expected, and required from all the Saints in Zion. So Hebr. 13.15. Let us offer praises continually, with all the cohabitants in the Gates of Zion, which hath been in all Ages, being it is for that purpose they are en∣churched, as in 1 Pet. 2.9. yee are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar (purchased) people; and why? for what end? That ye should shew forth the praises of him,Expos. who hath called you out of darkness, into his marvellous light, &c. So in Isai. 64.10, 11. Zion our holy and beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, &c. So Matth. 11, 25. Heb. 2.12. sayes Christ, I will
sing praise unto thee in the midst of the Church.Christ in the Churches sings praises. Eph. 3.21. Vnto him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen. So that by all these Scriptures, appears the final cause of Gods calling out of darkness into light, out of the world, into the Kingdom of Christ; out from them without, to Saints so embodied (as before) within. I say the supream and ultimate end, is to the setting forth of the praises and glory of God, as a peculiar people, in a peculiar manner. Although I deny not, but we are to aim at the edifying one another in Christ, furthering of one another in the things of salvation, watching over, comforting and counselling of, delighting and rejoycing in one another; and having fellowship with the Father and the Son,All other ends are subor∣dinate to this End, which is the supream. 1 Joh. 1.3. enjoying his presence there more especially, 1 Cor. 6.26. and provoking one another to love, and good lives, Heb. 10.24. 1 Cor. 1 9. Yet this of glorifying of God is the main, most, and moving end; and all other things we aim at, are but in subordination unto this (in ordine ad gloriam Dei,) and good reason for it, as will here∣after appear; for they have most cause for it, being the Re∣deemed () and openly and apparently the Ransomed ones,Isai. 51 9, 10. Psal. 49.15. The redeemed. as in Revel. 5.9. And they are most capable of it too, Psal. 33.1, 3. & 53.6. being they have most understanding, Psal. 47.7. and are most unfeigned without flatteries,Isai. 35.10. Most capable. Revel. 14.5. having no guile, or as the word  is, no Hypocrisie, falshood, (for mentiri is contra mentem ire)  no defect of that nature, Hebrew, Mum, Greek  is found in their mouths;No hypocrisie. but it is found so in the multitudes. Be∣sides,  because they are the Virgins that follow the Lamb, Rev. 14.4. Virgins have the finst and sweetest voices,Virgins. and tunes, and songs,Expos.( hid, and unknown to them, without, that are but men;Have sweetest voices, best songs. In fittest tunes. so Saints are hidden ones, or as in Hebrew Porah, the fruitfullest, and followers of Christ  into all conditi∣ons.) Now they know best the notes of high and low conditions, and dispensations; and they onely keep the tune best, accord∣ing  to the times they live in. Besides, they have grace in their hearts,They make melody with grace in their hearts. and have Christ dwelling in them richly and abun∣dantly, Col. 3.16. Now such in their praises to God (which is their hardest and highest duty of a Christian) do return of his
own fulness, (and commodities in kinde) grace for grace,Whilest mixed Congregations rob him of his praise and glo∣ry. Joh. 1.16. and glorifie God, Psal. 50.23. Whilst mixt Congregations (abundantly) abase God, and rob him of his honor; and in their best services and sacrifices, bringing him rather the rat∣lings (or what they can spare) then the fatlings of their lives every day; or the calves of their lips, lives, and loves. Vse 1. It appears then by the bright beams of our Sun which shines in the Scripture-Elements in this Hemisphere of his Church here below;Parish Chur∣ches fail in the Final Cause. That Parishes in this point are far from true Churches; They fall short of the final cause, not considering what conduces most to Gods glory;Their End is to good peny∣worths, to have their tithes at an easie rate, and to make their own end▪ but what is most for their advantage and gain (this is the godliness of most Parochially opinionated;) In your Parishes prophane ones all sorts of sinners, swearers, drunkards, whoremasters, &c. are all suffered, as of their Churches (which ought not to keep in, or (if they creep in) ought to be cast out of Christs-Church, wherein God is most to be glorified. I say in such a Church as consists of Saints separated as before, and that will not (willingly or knowingly) admit of, or keep in carnal, and openly sinful men, &c. Or thus, The Members of Christs Church are the fittest to set forth the praises of God; but the Members of that Church, which consists of Saints separated and qualified (as before) are the fittest to set forth his praises: Ergo, &c.Parishes ex∣communicated if ever they were Churches. Parishes are excommunicated for such a rabble∣rout, as have, and yet do rob God of his due honor, and praise, and glory. But, Use 2. Better is the End of a thing, then the beginning, Eccl. 7.8.A word to Saints in fel∣lowship. Make Gods honor and glo∣ry all in your End, and your End in All. Wherefore come forth ye that fear the Lord from those Dungeons of darkness, those Babylons of unbelievers, and lewd livers, and Synagogues of Satan; what is the fruit of those things whereof we are now ashamed? And dearest hearts! whom I bear in my bosom, before my Father! are any of you fond of Zion? see that your End be good, and then that the means be conducing and answerable thereunto. The End, though first and principal in your intention, yet is the last and ultimate in the execution; yea, this End, viz. the glory and praise of God, is to be the Alpha and Omega, the first and last of all, or else our best will be but (frustra
agere) bad in our building. Wherefore Friend consider, what is it we promise or propose to our selves? sayes our Sa∣viour Christ, Luke 14.28, 30, &c. Which of you, intending to build a Tower,Expos. sits not down first to count the cost? If he can finish it? Least he be mocked, and it be said, he began to build, but could not finish it.An ordinary Rule of wis∣dom to weigh the End. Vide cap. 5· This is but ordinary wisdom to weigh the End first; and whither you can accomplish it, or not; or are fit to go through stitch with it, or not; or else, what a scandal will you bring to the Gospel? and dishonor to him whose name you profess? Consider the End of your conversation,Expos. Heb. 13.7. that is, Look wishfully upon it, () consider, what is the end of your ways, walk∣ing, &c. is all for Gods honor and glory. 2. This must be the principal End of your entring into the Church of Christ, to honor him, with the same honor, wherewith the Son honored the Father,Joh. 8. and you shall receive the end of your faith, viz. salvation, 1 Pet. 1.9. Sing praises.To conclude, Sing praises! sing praises! like the Nigh∣tingale,Sim. who spends whole nights (in her kinde) to sing forth the praises of God,All for Gods glory. as if the day were too short; every Man must be a Preacher, every Creature a Text, every Oc∣casion a Doctrine, every Blessing a Reason, every Providence a Proof, every Thanksgiving an Use, Men and Angels the Auditors, and the whole Sermon is Gods honor and glory. And yet how many like unwise Archers shoot,Some minde it not. and know not at what mark: And others, vile wretches! praise with their mouths;Sim. but they are like Samsons honey out of the mouth of a Beast;Sim. or like the Quarester that sung Gloria Patri in the Church, and Carmina Bccho in the Tavern; others there be that would blazon our Christs Arms,Some unfit to do it. (He∣rald like) but it must be their own device. But the best flower in these Gardens enclosed to make God a Garland with, is the Coronation flower,Some desire it. to lay all our crown and glory at his feet. When Thales had learnt Mandrita the Philosopher an admirable invention of the motion of the Heavens, Oh Sir, sayes Mandrita, how shall I requite you? No way, sayes Thales Milesius,All are to give God the glory of all. but by acknowledging, you learnt it of me. So the Lord requires of us, to give him the glory of
all; we learn in his Churches, by his Spirit, of the motions of the Heavens. CHAP. XIII.  Alluph . Of the true Church rightly defined; that Christ alone is the Master, Builder, Ruler, Repairer, Head of Gold, Lord, Law-giver, without any other Partner, Para∣mount, Competitor, or Corrival whatsoever. THen the Reed, which hath measured both the true and false Church state, presents unto us as vaste a dispro∣portion and difference, in all particulars (essential) as is possible, between Parishes and true Churches.Proved from the essential, material, for∣mal, objective▪ organical and final causes; and so defined. The definiti∣on of Christs Church. For from the Essential, Material, Formal, Objective, Organical, and Final causes; we finde the Church of Christ lies thus de∣fined, from the false Antichristian Church (which also we shall define by the rule of contraries) The true Church of Christ then is▪ 1. A society of Believers sanctified in Christ Jesus; 2. Se∣parate from the world, false-ways, and worships, united toge∣ther into one Body, Independent; or having a plenary power within its self, without the least subordination, to any but Christ; 3. having the special presence of God, in the midst of her; 4. and being gathered and ordered by Christs rule alone; 5. all her Members freely, and voluntarily, embodying with∣out the least compulsion (having communion with the Father and the Son,) 6. all seeking the same End, viz. The honor and glory of God in his worship. Herein, though at length, yet in strength, have we as full
a definition of Christs Church as I can collect, and it is a com∣pendium of what I have hitherto delivered in these Leaves: Now on the other side. The definition of Anrichrists Church.An Antichristian Church is a mixed number of the multitudes of the world, not allowing the difference between the holy and prophane, being subordinate to a Prelatick power, without the most spirituall presence of God; being gathered and ordered by the Rules and Di∣rectories of men,Arrogans sibi titulum Eccle∣siae; at eam non sequens sed per∣sequens. Christ alone Head and Law-giver. Proved and maintained by Civill and Coercive powers, not seeking the setting forth the praises of God as a peculiar people, with one consent. Now as Antichrist hath his Throne therein, and sits and swayes, as Lord and Lawgiver; so in the Assembly of Saints Christ hath set his Throne, and he alone is Lord, Head, and Law-giver of his Church, which is the point I am now upon: And all this (and more then this) I shall prove too by Prophesies,1 By Prophe∣sies.  Precepts, and Practises in all Churches. To be∣gin with Isa. 9.6. And the government shall be upon his shoulders, his name shall be called Wounderfull, Counsellour, the mighty God, &c. Verse 7. Of the encrease of Government shall be no end, he shall sit upon his Throne, and Kingdome to order it, and to establish it, &c. Isa. 22.21, 22. I will commit thy Government into his hand, and he shall be a Father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the Key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulders,What the Key is that is laid on his shoulder. so hee shall open, and none shall shut, and he shut, and none open. The Key to let into the Kingdome of Christ is the Spirit, Rev. 3.7, 8. and where the Spirit is,Expos. there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3.16.18. and the Sonne makes free indeed,The Spirit is to let us in. Joh. 8. from hence it is, Saints are all let into one body, by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 11.13. and through the Spirit are become an habitation to the Lord,Expos. Eph. 2.22. so the Keyes mentioned in Matth. 16▪ 19. to open and shut are de∣clared,This Key o∣pens and shuts, binds & looses. Joh. 20.22. to be the Holy Ghost, and thereupon whose sinnes they remit (or the Church forgives) are forgiven, but whom yee doe not, are not; that is, by the Holy Ghost, being the Key; the meaning is, during the direction of the Spirit, yee (the Church) have the Key to open and shut; binde and loose, which is laid upon the shoulder of Christ, and acted by his Authority; For he is the Ruler and Instituter thereof. Hence also in Zach. 6.12.13. And hee shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall beare the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne, &c.
None but Christ hath this Commission from the Father to rule here,2 Precepts. All power gi∣ven him and all judgement committed to him. Ioh. 5.21. Matth. 11.27. Matth. 28.18. all () authori∣tative power is his. Hence it is we are called continually up∣on in order to positive Precept, to submit to his Scepter, ac∣knowledge his Sovereignty, and Zach. 9.9. Cant. chap. 3.11. Psal. 2.12. and royall Prerogative, 1 Tim. 6.15. James 2.1. and onely Headship, Col. 1.1.18. and 2.19. Eph. 1.22. and 5.23. which hath been the zeale of true Churches against all Opposers. As the Apostles said,3 Practise proves this. Acts 5.29.31. to the Priests and others, that commanded them to preach no more Christ, We ought to obey God rather then men, who hath exalted Christ to be a Prince and Saviour; and we are his witnesses. But this will appear by and by: In the interim,Reason. It is in all reason (as well as in Religion) that Christ alone rule as Head, and Law-giver,Because none but Christ could institute, therefore none else can order it. Why none but Christ could under∣tke it. seeing none but Christ was able to institute this Gospel-Church-state; therefore none but hee, is to order it; both which appears in the proofes above. Now there is not a Man alive, neither Moses, David, nor Slomon, had understanding enough, to undertake such a taske; no nor Christ himselfe, as man meerly in abstracto, no nor all the An∣gels in heaven, onely the Sonne of God, that fetched it from the Fathers bosome.1 Because he hath his spirit above measure. First, This typified Salomon his own self (as I may say) with his own hands) Cant. 3.9. as with his own head, builds this Chariot of Lebanon, for were it left to mens wisdome or wills, what a Chi∣maera, or Monster, must of necessity be set up in the sight of all.2 Man would make all Idols. And torment such as did not bow down to them. Secondly, And surely every man would abuse and beat his Brother, and bring him into the hottest furnace, that did not fall downe to his Image, and bow down to that Babel which is in his breast. Thirdly,3 Man not∣able to remove the Rubbish. A hard work▪ and why? Besides ability would bee deficient in the best of men about such a worke; so much rubbish is to be removed, that men might breake their backs, but doe no good of it; for as in a house fallen to the ground, before the foundation of it (though it be good) be found out for another super∣structure, or to build upon it a new,Sim. the old heaps and con∣fusions that hinder the comming at the foundation to build upon, must bee removed, and carried out of the way, which
will cost continuall labours, and perplexable paines too; and the longer these heaps have lay, the more setled, and the grea∣ter the toyl, and the time will be to bring them off Now there is no building untill this, for then the foundation, and the building will be dis-united,☞ and the building being laid upon the rubbish cannot continue, without Christ carry away the ruines and rubbish (which have lay so long for above a thou∣sand yeers) of this fallen Church-estate of Christ (I meane so to men) we must say as Nehem. 4.10. We are not able to build. O what abundance of false conceptions! sinister thoughts! harsh censures! resolute carriages! carnall reasons! and what loud and large  2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and corrupt imaginations!Much to bee done before men be built clear upon (Christ) the Foundation. in most men must be removed, before they can be built cleare upon (Christ) the Foundation! Now it is not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord; unlesse the Lord build the house, they labour but in vaine that would build it, Psal. 127.1.2. None but Christ by his Spirit can remove these ruinous Masses & strong holds of carnal reasonings,Expos. Zach. 4 6. None but Christ can re∣move ths grosse rub∣bish. Chist is Lord and Master-Builder, how? and corrupt resolutions against his Church-way, which is according to the order and Discipline of the Gospel: whence it is (as before) I am free to affirme, that none else is fit to rule, rectifie, and order in his Church, hee being Lord and Master, and onely Head thereof; he is owned as the Master, Joh. 13.13, 14. Ephes. 4.4, 5, 6. Matth. 10.24. Mat. 23.18. For 1 We have all but one MasterFirst, Masters may, and must have the commands of, or rather over their servants, and will not suffer them to bee their owne Masters; or to Lord it over others, or to have more Masters in his service. Thus the Saints have but one Lord, Eph. 4.4, 5. that is, Jesus Christ, who can command them (as having the Royall Prerogative) and they owe him all equall obedience in their places, and to their powers. Secondly, Masters set servants their work, and appoint them their places,2 This Master hath set us our work both what▪ and where. so doth Christ our Master tels us where wee must worke, Mat. 21.28. and what work we must do, Mark 13.34. for though wee have all but one calling, Eph. 4.4. and are called all into one hope, yet some walk, and worke in one place of the vineyard, and some in another, as he hath appointed, and according to the gift and graces of Christ, Rom. 12.6, 7. Eph. 4.7. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.11.
Thirdly, Masters make provision for their servants,3 This Master makes us all good provision for our selves, and our ser∣vice. to give them good rayment, tools to worke with, and all things con∣venient for them; thus Christ makes provision for his servants, Isa. 65.13, 14. Psal. 132.15. hee gives them their daily bread, Joh. 6.48.50. Spiritual food, and Spirituall drinke, 1 Cor. 10.4. Water of life, Joh. 4.14. Fatlings, Mat. 22. yea and feasts them with fat things, Isa. 25.9. and Wines fresh, Cant. 2.4.6. Prov. 31 6. and well refined; hee cloaths them with finest robes, and richest fashions, Isa. 61 10. Mat. 22.12. and finds instruments and tools fit for the worke hee sets them about in his building, especially Faith, without which they can doe nothing to hold, Cant. 3.7, 8. 2 Cor. 10.4. and his rule which they worke by is his Word. Fourthly, As a Master,4 This Master paies us ho∣nestly, and wel and before∣hand. Christ payes his servants honestly to a penny, Mat. 20.9. Luke 10.7. Christ will not keep backe the least reward, crowne, honour, or glory from them when they have done their work, yea, hee alwayes gives them some before-hand too, out of his Treasury and fulnesse, Joh. 1.14. &c. Fifthly, As a Master, hee hath the honour,5 This Master hath the ho∣nour, and name of all the work. name and credit of their worke, all runnes in his name, and for his ho∣nour, Mal. 1.6. Joh. 5.23. Joh. 12.26. as a Master-builder, that receives the money for all, that is wrought, though by his servants labours also, so ought we to ascribe all to Christ in praises and graces, prizing him in all things, and for all things that his servants do. Sixthly, As a Master, hee walkes round his servants, and is a wall about them, to keep them, and defend them,6 This Master defends his servants from such as would hurt them or hinder the work. from those that would offend them, and wrong them; and hee keeps them off them that would hinder them in the doing the worke of the Lord which is in building, Zach. 6.4. Psal. 121.5. Isa. 27.3. Cant. 2.15. hee will suffer none to doe them the least wrong, Ps. 105.14. lest his worke should lye still, or be done negligently, Jer. 48.Lastly, this Masters word is of focce to make us worke against all gainsayers▪ Seventhly, and lastly, As a Master, one word from his mouth is of more force then all the Masters in heaven and earth be∣sides, therefore Christs servants would know his minde, and doe not minde what others (as reason, world, carnall wisdome,
parts, or policy of men (which are strangers to the Saints) do say, 1 Cor. 7.23. Matth. 25.9. Col. 2.20, 21. Whither shall we go from thee? saith Peter, Joh. 6.68. we would hear thee, and not to listen to the Laws and Commandments of men, Hosea 5.11. Isai. 29.13. or any other in thy work, worship, and service. Thus we see him the Master of the work, and why he is so; wherefore his order and direction must be taken,So that his or∣der and dire∣ction must be served. and onely his, Isa. 61.8. If we would have the building stand, and the work according to his will. But Objection. Pauls says, 1 Cor. 3 10. as a Wise master-builder,Obj. I have laid the foundation. Answ.Answ. Negat. Paul sayes not, I am the Master of this build∣ing laid; but Affirmat: saith, as a Master-builder doth, so have I done;Expos. Paul calls not himself the Master-builder, but as a Master-builder. 1. In laying the foundation, well, and deep. 2. In that the foundation laid, is of sound substance. 3. In laying the foundation first of all, and from thence building upon. Ranters flie a∣loft first into the air, and are without foundation. 4. Having skill, sound judgement, and experience. so that he draws onely a simile from the Master-builder,Sim. and calls not himself the Master-builder; but as a Wise master-builder doth; 1. with much pains (and re∣movals of much dung, dross, filth, and rubbish, to make way) lay the foundation, well, deep, and sure, before he builds; so have I done: And as he will be sure, the foundation be of sound substance that will not rot, decay, sink, or endanger the building that is upon it; so am I sure: And as he that is a wise builder begins at the foundation, and so from thence builds upwards, and onward; and doth not begin at a wall, or window, or side, or top; so sayes Paul, I build from (Christ) the foundation, upward, and onward, which, first, I have laid () or put into your hearts, the (prima initia fidei) fun∣damentals of truth, for others to have after to build upon; So that I began (saith he) at the foundation, not at the roof, as now many ranting Ministers do; and so do what they can, in their high and lofty strains of building; they must build down∣ward, unless they could lay a foundation in the air; which some fancy (foolishly) to themselves. And then fourthly, As a wise Master-builder, that is, one of much (if not most) experience and judgement, and of abilities; so, saith he, I do not onely lay down directions, (as I have received from Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23.) and reasons, demonstrations, and rules for others; but improve also all my experiences, skill, and labor also, and
take pains my self; with tears and prayers, day and night;And taking pains himself too, to build up. I lay out my strength with sweat, and swink; by practise, as well as by preaching to build you up, in the ways of godliness, and truth. And lastly, I am as a Master-builder,5. An Over∣seer over the rest. an Overseer of the Churches of Christ, that they be in order, and be built up ac∣cording to the Rules of Christ, and that they mend what is a∣miss, as a steward in trust for that end, and purpose, 1 Cor. 4.1. Whence you see in what sense Paul is said to be as a wise Master-builder, in and about the house of God:Christ onely the Master of the building. But none un∣less Christ Jesus can be said to be the Master of the building; and we are his Servants, as I said before: wherefore Rom. 14.18. he that in these things serveth Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men. Next, Christ is Lord, Acts. 2. Christ is not onely the Master-builder,Christ the Lord over all. but the Lord over his Church and people; which is much more, Acts 2.36. Eph. 4.5. Col. 3.24. 1 Cor. 2.8. & 6.14. I shall tell you, first, how he is Lord; and then secondly,1. How he is Lord; or by what means. what manner of Lord he is? and then thirdly, what we should be under him in that relation? 1. He is Lord by power; Lordship is properly jus in rebus,1. By power. Th. Aquin. 1.33.7.. & personis; a right in things and persons: Now this right is by power, principally; which (potestas est fundamentum relationis Dominii) is the fundamental of Dominion or Rule, in Psal. 66.7. and that Christ hath this power, appears, Matth. 28.18. Joh. 17.2. & 5.22. 2. He is the Lord by purchase,2. By Purchase▪ His deeds do shew it written with his blood, sealed by his Spirit, &c. and hath bought us at a dear rate indeed, see it Acts 20.28. we were sold (before) un∣der sin. Rom. 7.20. and are now bought again; so that Christ hath the deeds to shew; drawn up and written, and sealed with his own blood, (whilst the old was cancelled, Col. 2.14.) and his Lordship is good by Law▪ Rom. 14.9. 3. He is Lord by conquest too,3. By Conquest. We are his prize-goods. Heb. 2.9, 10, 14. he hath won us out of our enemies hands, Joh. 16.30. Revel. 17.14. from world, sin, death, law, hell, devil; all of us are his prize goods, by the best, and justest martial law; for he hath led captivity captive, Eph. 4.8. and we are freed. 4▪ He is Lord by gift, Psal. 2.8. Joh. 17.2, 6, 7, 8, 9.4. By gift, and inheritance. Thus hath
his Father made him Heir, and given him possession of all in Heaven and Earth. This gift as from God, is a gift that takes in the bounty, bonity, justice, and mercy of God; manifested in giving us to Christ, as his rightful possession. 5. He is Lord too by election and choice, Psa. 78.70. Isa. 22.20, 21, &c. with reference to God;5. By free choice. the anointed and chosen one above all,1. So God hath chosen him the Lord. Hag. 2.23. Matth. 12.18. Luke 23.35. 1 Pet. 2.4. So in Christ he hath chosen us to Christ, Eph. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.9. And he is chosen with reference to us too, Isai. 26.13. Cant. 5.10, 16. John 20.13, 28. so Matth. 22.44.2. We have chosen him our Lord. My Lord! which particu∣lar appropriation implies the choice which is made of Christ for their Lord; so do all the Saints, as Col. 2.6, 7. receive Christ for their Lord;Expos. i. e. A ruling Christ, as well as a Saving Christ, Jesus the Lord,Christ to rule as well as Christ to save. What it is to choose him. Aliquid ex par∣te cognitivae virtutis, & ali∣quid ex parte ap∣potitivae. 2 Cor. 4.5. Now election is the proper act of free-will, whereby we would chuse one above all others, Cant. 6.3. to which there must be a concurrence of knowledge, and desire; by the first, we judge him to be fit, preferred above all, and in himself to excel all; and by the latter, we are made to long after him above all; and to choose him before all, both these are expressed by Paul, Phil. 3.8. saying, Jesus my Lord; though we grant that the principal point of this choice lies in the appetite and thirsting faculty of the soul:Expos. But all these ways Christ is Lord.2. Christ is the Lord, but what manner of Lord. 2. In what manner is Christ called Lord? what kinde of Lord is he? First, He is an Independent Lord; for he depends upon none,  but all depend on him, Psal▪ 89.27. Dan. 2.21. He is Lord Pa∣ramount over all,He is an Inde∣pendent Lord. and above all, Phil. 2 9. Eph. 4.6. 2. A Spiritual Lord.Secondly, He is a Spiriual Lord, reigns within as well as without, in the hearts and consciences of men, 1 Cor. 12.3. 2 Cor. 3.17. Matth. 22.43. 3. A most ex∣cellent Lord.Thirdly, He is a most excellent Lord; excelling all in their own excellencies of wisdom, power, prowess, prudence, valor, vir∣tue, beauty, righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Heb. 1.8. And in whatso∣ever a Lord should have, or be. Psal 148.13. 4. An universal Lord, and yet peculiar.Fourthly, He is an universal Lord over all the world, Dan. 7.14. Matth. 21.3. living and dead, Rom. 14.9. Over all his Church, Eph. 4 5. And yet a peculiar Lord to every Church and Soul, as appears before by choice.
Fifthly, He is an alone Lord,5. A sole Lord and Soveraign▪ Mat. 23 8.10. Psal. 148.13. Isa. 63.3. and Isa. 2.11.17. without any other Vice-Roy or Lord-deputy, and he will not allow any to usurpe his place, or power; or to arrogate this over any of his Saints in his Church,Lord Chief Justice in his Churches. Mat. 23.10. James 3.4. for hee alone is Lord Chiefe-Justice, Joh. 5.27. and his Lordship is Royall-Prerogative, for brethren are all equall; it is the evill servant that lords it over his fellow,Christs war∣rants with a Habeas Corpus. and beats him, and takes hold on his throat, but Christ will issue out his warrants against him with a Habeas Cor∣pus, &c. Sixthly, Hee is an Eternall Lord,6 The Ever∣lasting Lord. All troubles and alterations ratifie him. and cannot be displaced or degraded, Isa. 9.7. Heb. 12.27. yea all changes, alterations, and downfals of other Lords doe rather ratifie and set him up surer, then damnifie or weaken his Dominion, hee shall reigne for ever. And thus wee see what manner of Lord hee is. Vse 1 Well then, if this Lord be thus Lord, Then let us see the Churches and Saints happinesse, they have not many,Saints happi∣ness in the Lordship of Christ. We have but one Lord, and one Law. Happy are his subjects and servants. Whilst oth are most un∣happy. but one onely Lord; so all Saints are fellowsubjects to this one Lord: Had wee many Lords▪ wee could not misse many miseries, and slaveries, for divers Lords have divers Laws, and divers Lusts, divers Minds, divers Wils, and divers Ends; and all would breed divisions, and distraction, and destruction, but this one Lord hath but one Law, which is a Law of love, the new Command (as wee shall shew in the third Lib.) which breeds, peace, joy, grace, and union. O happy are the servants of this typified Solomon; 1 King. 10.8. 2 Chron. 9.7. who are at peace in liberty and joy; whilst all others (poor soules!) have hard Lords to serve in a most miserable Babylonish bond∣age, and Antichristian slavery.2. Saints sin∣gular honor to have him their Lord. Vse 2 The honour of the Saints and glory of the Church is, Eph. 5.27. to have Christ their Lord and Ruler;What honor is? More then a praise and a glory, and yet Christ is all these to his Churches▪ if it were an honour to be servants to Solomon, 1 King. 10. then a greater then Solomon is here. See Isa. 43.4. Acts 13▪40. John 5.44. they have their honour from above, which is (ad se ab aliis) more then a praise (which consists in words) yea, more then a Glory (which consists in the good opinion of them) and yet Christs is a praise and a glory to them, but he is more; and yet
hee is our honour Joh. 12.26. and advances us, and all his Saints and servants to the dignity of Kings, and Princes, and Crowns,No want of preferment to them that are in Christs cause. Glory, Rev. 1.6. hee cannot want preferment that serves in Christs-Court and Kingdome, 2 Pet. 1.17. Whilst it is most ignoble, and basely dishonourable to serve the Beast. Thirdly, By this Lordship of Christ, Saints are let out (at large) in their duties to God and men (so far are they from being embondaged,3 Saints liber∣ty, and duties under Christ as Lord. that) they are loose and at Liberty within the Kingdome of Christ (but not beyond those bounds) hereby what a bond of unity is this? (as appeares, Eph 4.3.5.) to make the Saints one (though they be of severall measures,How much this makes for unity in all Christian du∣ties. statures, judgements, heights, enjoyments, &c. yet) when they remember they have all but one Lord, equally, and the same: How doth this whet their zeal? and strengthen their hands and hearts for the truth? when they come to contest together, Jude 3. and against opposers to be unanimous?One to ano∣ther to coun∣sell, com∣fort, encou∣rage, vindicate. Phil. 1.27. considering they all serve one Lord and Master; what delight will they have in one another? how they will encourage one another to be faith∣full? and industrious in serving of their Lord? how ready will they be to vindicate one another? and honestly and justly to take one anothers part against Opposers?Reprove ad∣monish, in∣vite, and per∣swade. This advanta∣ges us much against sin. remembring they bee all fellow-servants; how earnestly will they set up∣on a fellow-servant with arguments and reasons? Scripture-proofes? and reproofes? and in the power of the Spirit speak home to such, as are ready to be lead away with lusts? and enter into the service of other Lords? whether of Pope, Prelate,Expos. Councels, Classs, or whatsoever, that would rob Christ of his right? yea how seriously and assiduously do they demonstrate to others (that are not yet in this service) he singu∣lar soule-advantages which are to be had hereby?The soules Soliloquy un∣der the sence of Christ Scep∣ter. yea what a Bar is this to bolt sinne and Sathan out of doors (as Hos. 14.8.) when wee consider who it is we serve, and whom we are un∣der? then say wee, what have wee to doe with Idols! lust? pride? drunkennesse? malice? vanities? traditions? or any such trumperies? For hath not the Lord (or Ruler) forbid us these? are we not under his command: Come, Lord Jesus doe thy office! other Lords would faine rule and ride over
us, but come! thou King! Away Sathan! avaunt, thou vile lust! downe with these proud Lording Prelates, for I am under Christ! I am in his Church and Kingdome; I am under grace! and redeemed by the blood of Christ from all false wayes! worships and vaine conversation? Therefore I will obey him, and hearken to him what hee saith, who is the (alone) Lord of his Church and people, and who is the best, truest,3 Christ, and none else the Head of his Church (which is more then Master o Lord.) and most absolute Independent. He hath the most reason to rule me, and therefore it must needs follow, that I have most reason to obey him, Vbi est propria & specialis ratio Dominii, ibi est propria & specialis ratio servitutis. Lastly, Christ is the (alone) Head of his Church and people, without any other,1 Why the head. Col. 1.18. and 2.19. Eph. 1.22. and 4.15. and 5.23. neither is any joyned as Partner with him in this  worke of ruling or medling with the order of his owne, A whole Christ, Head & Body united. Who Head? Who Necke? Who Body? Al together make up Christ compleat. A mystery to most. The work of former ages. To know him in part, viz. as Head. Of this age to know the Body his Church. Of the next to know whole Christ. Vide ch. 3. or his Fathers Kingdome. But first why he is called the head, and the Church his body. First, Because the Head and Body (being united together by the necke) make up the whole person, so that Christ as the Head makes not up the whole Christ; but he as Head, his Ordi∣nances and spirituall administrations as the Necke, and his Church and Saints embodyed together as before, and united to the Head by the necke, as his Body; all these together make up a whole Christ, which is yet (doubtlesse) a great mystery, and few there be that finde it out, Epes. 5.32. The worke of former ages (since the Mystery of iniquity began to cover the earth, and be in the full) hath been to know Christ in part, viz. Christ as the Head, which hath lay long obscure, and is not yet re∣vealed to many (even of the) religious, and learned men; much more obscure and undiscovered is this whole Christ, the Head and Body, who will ere long appeare as himselfe in the riches of his glory, and brightnesse of his Gospel, and the Saints shall know him compleatly, as Head, Necke, and Body, by one Spirit: And not covet to know him in part, as Head, or as Body (viz. his Churches) the worke of this age, but altoge∣ther.Is taken from the similitude of the Head of a humane body. Secondly, The Church of Christ is called the Body of Christ, by similitude taken from the natural body of man, which according to
the diversity of members hath diversity of actions in Rom. 12. and 1 Cor. 12. So is Christ called (as hee is in himselfe with∣out the Saints) the Head of his Church by similitude taken from the Head of a man, in which wee have severall considerations set before us; As, 1 In order the head is highest, yet but a member.First, In ordine. The Head is the highest, and the primest part of the Body, and yet for the use of the body is but a mem∣ber, though most eminent, and above all the rest. Hence is it that every Principium, or beginning, is called the Head of a thing, as Ezek. 16.25. Isa. 18.4. and 51.20. Thus Christ is (secun∣dum propinquitatem ad Deum) exalted above all others, and is the Well-head to supply others with the streams of Life, and with the flowings of grace,Head and bro∣ther. Rom. 8.29. he is become the Head of the corner, the top of all, Coloss. 1.18. and yet (though the Head of his Church) for the use and advantage of the body, hee is, I say, but a member and a brother, Heb. 2.12. though the first-borne, highest, and above all. 2 The head in excellency and perfection.Secondly, In perfectione. The Head is the seat of the senses, the beauty of the body, the grace of the man, and the most ho∣nourable of all, Isa. 9.8. Christ is such a Head (quantum ad pleni∣tudinem omnium gratiarum) in whom all fulnesse dwels, as Col. 1.18. and 2.9. he is the Head of the Body the Church,Expos. vers. 19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulnesse dwell, () So Joh. 1.14. Col. 2.9.The fulnesse, honour, grace, glory, of his body. Christ alone the head of gold. Christ is the seat of all excellencies and senses of the body, viz. his Church, hee is (as the Head) the honour, and grace of his Body, as a Husband is the glory and grace of his Wife, Ephes. 5.23. He is the King in his beauty, Isa. 33. the beauty of his Body, their crowne and glory; therefore this Head is of Gold Cant. 5.11. yea (in Heb. Cethem) of the finest, and fairest gold. There may bee other Heads, brazen-heads, but none of gold, but Christ in whom all ami∣ablenesse and perfection dwels. 3 In the ver∣tues and influ∣ences of the head.3. In virtute. The head hath an influence upon the whole body; every Member is beholding to the head; for our sence, motion, life, and influences, are all from the vital spirits, and powers seated in the head;A headlesse body is light∣lesse, lifelesse, and senselesse. and from thence are com∣municated to the body. For were the body headless, it would be senceless, motionless, and lifeless; such a head is Christ
(virtute influendi, vel intrinseco influxu) to the Church (his Body) and to every Saint his Member; whom he feedeth with divine influences and spiritual incomes (those very vital spirits) which are seated in Christ are communicated to the Saints. Rom. 8.11. For of his fulness. Joh 1.16. We receive;All our vital Spirits from our Head Christ. and the whole body is filled by him, as Eph. 1.23. Whereby we become spiritually sensible, moving, and living. And without him for our head, we have not this life, sence, or motion; so that the Church is maintained and preserved by sweet influences and virtues from Christ her head; and so is every Saint and Member. It is this head that giveth grace,This Head gi∣veth all grace, life, motion, judgement, wisdom, &c. life, strength, light, righteousness, love, wisdom, judge∣ment, divine reason, and understanding, and whatsoever is in the head; we receive all from him, and without him can do nothing, Joh. 15.5, 7. 4. In gubernatione. The head is the governor of the body,4 Head in Go∣vernment. and Governors are commonly called the head of the people, Josh. 11.10. Judg. 11.8. Deut. 28.13. Psal. 18.43. So Saul was called the head of Israel, 1 Sam. 15.17. And thus is Christ the head of his Church, Col. 2.10.Gubernare est movere aliquos in debitum finem· To rule and govern her, Isa. 9.7. & 22.21, 22. A Governor is one that orders, acts, and moves those whom he governs into their proper use, and end: Thus doth Christ govern his Church, and every particular Member, making them act to the end, and in that use they are appointed for; as Rom. 12.5, 6. 1 Cor. 12.11, 12, 18. And as it pleaseth him,Sim. the Marriner that is Master and Head of the Ship steers and rules it to what Haven, and in what rode he pleaseth; For in this Head,Vid Zuinglium, Artic. 2. de Ec∣cles. Et Bullinger. Decad. 5. Serm. 2. de unitate ecclesiae. wisdom is seated, which is (cognoscitiva & directiva) execu∣ted both by a knowing and directing property, and ability, whereunto the Members are become subject. 5. In sympathia. The head hath a fellow-feeling with the rest of the Members of the Body,5. In Sympa∣thy with the least, and low∣est member of the body. and is a fellow-sufferer with them in their afflictions: If the finger but ake, and the toe be but trod on, the head is sensible of it, sadded for it, feels it, complains of it, and looks after it; such an Head is Christ; and to hurt the least of his little ones, the meanest member, is to hurt him, and to make him complain; to
slight, and slander, cast off, or contemn them, is to do so to him, Luk. 10.16. Matth. 25.45. For, as much as ye did not help the least of these, you did not help me (saith he) and for as much as you persecute these, you persecute me, Acts 9.4, 5. Christ takes all to himself, and is partner with the least of the Saints in all their sufferings, Isa. 63.9. There∣fore said Gadius Martyr, Abate nothing of my torments, for it will be to my loss▪Gadius Martyr. Our eyes, ears, tongue, all in our Head Christ. go on! Christ is my partner, &c. Our eyes are in this head, he hath ears to hear for us, and tongue to speak for us, (he is our advocate with the Father, &c.) 6. In sanitate. The head being well and sound, the body is safe,6. In health, and sanity. and out of danger, as long as the head is above wa∣ter, the body cannot be drowned; as long as the head is well setled,When head is well, all is out of danger; but when the head is ill, all is ill, and out of order. the body is so too. But if the head be lost, the body is lost; if the head be unsetled, disturbed or distracted, no wonder the body is so too; and every Member acts distractedly and disorderly, and runs at random; for the Governor is not at home, when reason is exiled: Hence men become mad, and unsound, and unsetled; (insania dicitur per corruptionem sanitatis.) Christ the head is in good health (though many Members may be sick and weak) and so long the body will live,Many turn mad, and why? Zuing. Artic. 11. de Christo capite. and without danger; we are safe in Christ, and sound in him our head: Hence he is, Cant. 5.11. the head of gold, (in Hebrew, Paz,) i. e. solid gold: Saints have a solid head;Expos. but the reason why many run a madding after monstrous errors, traditions, unsound opinions, and fopperies is,Expos. Col. 2.19. () i. e. not holding Christ fast, and keeping him close with all their strength.Capitis est in∣columitatem dare corpori, &c. Bull. de civit. eccles. Decad. 5. Serm. 2. For it signifies, a strong and stedfast retention and apprehension of Christ, against all opposers whatsoever, their loosing or laying aside, this head, and living in, taking from, and acting by an unsound Head, a toxicated brain, a Creature-principle and ruler. (Hosea 5.21. Ephraim was broken) I say, this is the reason many are lost, that do they know not what, and worship they know not whom; and go they know not whither, but run into all manner of madness: This the Saints do not, that hold fast Christ, their Head.
7. Lastly, As hairs grow upon, and from,7. Saints as hairs, grow and hang on Christ their head. and in the head, and are nourished by, and hang upon the head, and are an ornament to the head; even so are the Saints, (as the hair) and Christ as the head, Cant. 4.1. & 5.11. By much more I might amplifie it; and I shall now apply it. First, Learn the unlimited and everlasting advantage the  Church and Saints have from Christ their head;Saints priviledg that Christ is their head. A little help to which lesson hath been already offered to you, and laid before you: How from Christ (as he is head) she de∣rives all her excellencies and enjoyments, which I shall not insist on now; but, Secondly, The Church and Saints have but one head: Now by Church, I mean all Saints,The Church hath but one head. What I mean by Church? Viz. All Saints in all ages, un∣der all forms. under all Forms and Ad∣ministrations whatsoever, past, present, or to come (which are all but one body) Eph. 4.4. Rom. 12.45. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Therefore must have all but one head; that body which hath more heads then one, is a Monster; nothing is clearer in Scripture, then to prohibite the plural, 1 Pet. 5.3. and to preach up the singular, Psal. 45.11. Eph. 1.22. and single head, viz. Jesus Christ, Eph. 5.23. Col. 1.18, &c.Sim. How dare men make choice of any other head? or (which is to set up, the Creature in the room of Christ?Brazen-hearted and faced men that set up the head of brass for the head of gold: And so iron-hearted to tender Saints, that set up the iron head.) A head of brass, in stead of the head of gold? Have not these men hearts of brass, and foreheads of brass? They will needs have men to play the part of Lords over Gods heritage, to lay down Directories and Rules of their own make, and Cannons (very dangerous, charged full, and rammed home and hard, to the very mouth) of their own constitutions, and in their own construction. How loth are Lord-like Mi∣nisters, Magistrates, (or Prelatick tempers) to admit Christ, the absolute Lord,Christ is, and shall be the a∣lone Judge (do men what they can) in matters of Religion. and Soveraign (without any Vice-Roy) in matters of Religion? who is so, (and will and shall be so, whether they will, or no) by decree from above, Psal. 26.7. passed in the councel of Heaven, for all eternity, Dan. 4.34▪ 35. Isai. 9.6, 7. This lesson hath been above a thousand years in learning;A lesson long a learning, and yet not learnt. and yet how many are marvellously (and I fear, I may say willfully) ignorant of it; always learning, 2 Tim. 3.7, 8. yet
never learn it,They resist Christ, and this stone will crush them. in the sound knowledge of the truth; but as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist Jesus Christ; as if he took too much upon him (but they shall know they take too much upon them▪) It goes to their gall to get this by heart, that Christ is head, yea, and onely head, without any other primary, or secundary Vicar, or Vice-Roy. In this particular you may obviously eye and spie out a dif∣ference betwixt Christs Church and Antichrists,A difference betwixt true and false Chur∣ches in this. who stand out at a distance in this: For First, Antichrists hath men to be their Governors, and are led by the laws of men, but Christ is the Head, Ruler, and alone Leader of his Church, by his Word and Spirit. Secondly, The false Church hath its government on the Creatures shoulders; as on Pope, Archbishops, Prelates, Classes, or Synods, &c. But the true; onely on Christ, Isa. 9. Zach. 9.12. To bear up this Ark, and others are for∣bid. Thirdly, The false Antichristian brazen-faced Church hath even a head of brass;The false hah the Head of brass. The properties of the Head of brass, different from the Head of gold. but the true hath onely a head of gold, Cant. 5.11. And First, This head of brass brings into his false Church-state by force and fraud (non verbo sed ferro,) but this head of gold wins into his, by his Word and Spirit, in love and sweetness, making them a willing people in the day of his power. 1. The Head of brass com∣pels by force.Secondly, This head of brass brings in iron signs, and fatal instruments to keep men under him; and seeks secular power,2. The Head of brass seeks se∣cular powers to stand by his side, and to sup∣port him. Mark 7.7. Isai. 29.13. to keep up, hoise up, and authorise his beaten and iron precepts, and commands; but the head of gold by his own golden authority prevails, without asking leave of any other Civil or Ecclesiastical powers whatsoever. Thirdly, This head of brass is of a mixt principle, Jer. 6.28. and is best pleased, with a mixt company: Hence are so many godless, hardned sinners, subjects in his dominion; but the head of gold is of such a principle,3. The Head of brass is made of mixed princi∣ples. that none will serve him, nor will he that any should worship him; but the precious separate from the vile, the pure from impure, and visibly unholy, Jer. 15.19. Isa. 60.21.
Fourthly, This head of brass (which is black within,4. The Head of Brass ap∣proves of the outside appea∣rance, as suffi∣cient to be a member with him. though it shines without) accepts of a meer outside ap∣pearance, and verbal confession of Christ; let him be as black as Hell within, so his words be good, and he look like Heaven without, it is enough to answer his principle. But this head of gold (who is better within, then without) would have all his like himself; all glorious within, Psal. 45. as the curtains of Solomon, Cant. 1.5. being born of God; for what is of flesh is flesh, and what is of Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3. Fifthly,5. His Officers and Members are all of the same mettal with himself. This head of brass hath members and officers of mettal like himself; and of no better principle, if so good, (for some are iron and clay) who act according to their own natural principles, or points, &c. But the head of gold hath members and officers qualified with his own Spirit, and ex∣cellencies, and filled with his own fulness, Eph. 1.23. and par∣taking of his own divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Christ and his Spirit are the Officers in Christs Church, and none other, any further then Christ and his Spirit dwells in them, and acts them; so that then it is not they, but Christ rules, or∣ders, directs, disposes, or dispenses, &c. Sixthly, This head of brass hath an ill-savor,6. The Head of Brass hath, and giveth an ill savor. Joel 2.20. and all his doctrines, traditions, and discipline, sent strongly of himself; so that whosoever handles them, their hands will smell of the brazen head; therefore beware of their leaven, &c. But this head of gold, and all his ordinances, doctrines, laws, and discipline, are of a most sweet and preti∣ous savor, Cant. 1.3. 2 Cor. 2.14▪ 15. Eph. 5.2, &c. As oyntment poured out. Seventhly, This head of brass,7. Head of Brass looks bravely and brightly, before a better comes, whereby many souls have been deceived. seen and observed by him∣self, makes a rich, rare, and amiable show to most men; but when he comes to be compared to the head of gold, he falls, and then looks like himself, viz. dull, dead, black, earthly, filthy, and unfit for to be a head (or foot) in Christs Church. Thus in these days, his doctrine, and devices, traditions, and trumperies, being brought into the light, and com∣pared with the truth, can no longer triumph, but must fall
before this head of gold; who excels him as far, as light darkness, good evil, and as Heaven excels Earth; although before this he fetcht in many to him, from far, and sat in glory and majesty, exalting himself above all that is called God, 2 Thes. 2.4. But now he is to be destroyed by the bright appearance of this head of gold, 2 Thes. 2.8. that is, he is to be rendred useless and uneffectual, as before in the Septuag. ,Expos. and he shall weaken him, or break his strength, or glory, he shall lessen his lustre, and make him forlorn, and loose his pride: No∣thinging him by his spiritual appearance, and in the bright∣ness of his presence. 8. It is but mans creature, and must um∣ble.Eighthly, This head of brass is the work of mens hands, and but of mans Creation, and must be broken to shatters, Psal. 29. this Image must fall, Dan. 2.32. But for the head of gold, the headship of Christ, the gates of hell shall not pre∣vail against him,Expos. , the powers of hell, the policies of hell,Matth. 16.18. the very strength and force of hell, shall be set against him, but to no purpose; for of his government there shall be no end. Thus I have cursorily set before you a vast difference be∣tween a false and true Church-state, from the Heads; the one being of mans make, and the other of Gods appoint∣ment, Psal. 2.6. All things are to be put under Christs feet, and this head of gold shall wear a crown of gold,Christs Head∣ship will hold for ever. for ever and ever, Heb. 2.7, 8. Therefore it is that Kings, Crowns, King∣doms, Councels, Classes, and Synods, National Churches and States are shaken, and shall be shaken, that the Kingship of Christ, which shall never be shaken, Heb. 12.27, 28. may remain for ever. Thus you see how false Church-states are but the habita∣tions of Antichrist, built up by men; but the true ones are built up by Christ, Zach. 6.12. and the habitation for his presence and honor to dwell in, Eph. 2.22. 2 Cor. 6.16. Wherefore Friends! beware! beware of brazen faces! that have the face to cry up that Head, which you have heard of! These are those that consult to cast Christ down from his excellency, and delight in lies, Psal. 62.4. Such brazen heads
fall (by thousands) short (yea, by millions of myriades) of the orders, excellencies, perfections, plenitudes, virtue of in∣fluence, Government, Sympathy, health, and soundness of this true Head of the Church. viz. The head of gold. But now,Quest. who be such heads of brass?Who be the Heads of Brass? First is, that head of brass, the brazen-faced Pope (al∣ways brought up in Brazen-Nose Colledge) he was the first,Answ. that had the face to prefer himself general-master of the Church; Lord, Head, and Law-giver.The first Head of Brass is the Pope, who calls himself, Christ his Vicar. There was no such thing from the beginning, but by little and little, and as am∣bition, and base thirst of ruling began to rage, the care of Christs Church began to asswage; and then, we shall finde, first began to be given to one man the name of Bishop, (a name common to all Ministers of Christ,The History how Bishops, Popes, Pre∣lates, Metro∣politans, &c. entred in at first. Acts 20.28.) who was chose by the rest of the Ministers and Elders to be (as it were) Consul in a Senate, or as a speaker in the house, and which was to be for the time being and present, upon ur∣gent occasions, to sit as Chair-man: And though he had (the honor) the name, yet no more authority, nor voice, nor determination then any other; he had no negative power or voice, which all lordly spirits pretend unto. The next step after this, was, by reason of the paucity and poorness of Mi∣nisters and Overseers; and by reason of the rigor of hot persecutions, the Church was neglected, and Bishops (so cal∣led) or Ministers grew most ignorant, and very few to be ound fit for Church-affairs as Overseers; and of those very few, most of them unlearned, and very blinde and dumb, and so idle, that they regarded not the Church, and let things go how they would. Then began the care of one Church to be given up to one more then to any other, and then did one take the most charge of Church-orders, Ordi∣nances, and Discipline,☜ which occasioned him to hoise up his ambitious sails to be filled with honor. And so it began to be a perpetual and continual course and office, which was onely for a time at first (and that upon necessity too▪ in times of persecution) conferred upon one and so all began to be guided and governed by one, mans authority; and no more by joynt consent, concurrence and votes, &c. of the whole
Church and Brethren, as was wont to be before, Acts 15.22, 23. And after all this the veil of ignorance grew thicker, and darkness, yea, gross darkness over-spread the whole Canopy; so that scarce an able understanding, discerning Minister, or sit Overseer, was in a whole City, Town, or Province, to be had or heard of; and yet fearful Tyranny, and troubles the Saints (poor, scattred, scorned, dispersed, and despised peo∣ple) were then under.How Bishops came in with their Dio∣cesses. Whereupon all the Churches that were in one whole Province, were (by those times) brought under the subjection of one man; and so called his Diocess; and that man the Bishop of that Diocess, and then he shook off the care and charge of one particular Congregation or Parish-Church,Ever since Lords Spiritual and Temporal. pretending the over-sight of many; So that ever since the office of a Bishop hath been by such, left; and their ambition hath been great, to be great, and to get honors. Thus it came to pass the Authority of the whole Church, and power by Christ committed to the whole body, was u∣surped by one man; who sat as a god in the Temple of God, ruling and reigning as he list (until of late in England these lords were laid in the dust, which is eminently ominous to the Popes.Their ambition like a Bladder.) But ambition still growing bigger and bigger (as a bladder which the devil had the blowing up of) being filled with sulpherous breath and bottomless pit-smoak;Sim. these Bishops climbed yet higher,From Bishops to Archbishops, Primates. To Quadrum∣virats, or Pa∣triarks, and to Popes. 2 Thes. 2.4. Antichrist. till there came to be Archbishops and Metropolitans, and Primates to rule whole National Churches, in the whole Nation. After this the whole world, or the Church (as they called it) all over the world in all Nations and Kingdoms on the Earth, must be governed by a Quadrumvirat, i. e. Four Patriarks, who had the charge of all the world; but yet not being high enough, up gets the Pope by those stairs,Vide Cart∣wrights Eccles. Discipline. Antichrist be∣gins to fall the same way he began to rise. and saucily leaps upon Gods throne; And so this Brazen-head, or Brazen-faced Antichrist proud∣ly came to sit in the Temple of the Lord, as 2 Thes. 2.4. Here you have a true history of his rise, I doubt not but ere long you shall have as true a history of his ruine. He is already be∣gun to fall (here) as he began to rise by Bishops, Archbishops,
Primates, &c.☜ And this is an honest Narration of the Church-confusion in times of persecution, and of the crowd∣ing out of all other Church-officers and offices (as I shall shew if the Lord please in the third Book) and of the stating and starting up of Pope and Prelate, upon Gods throne. I shall refer you to 182. page of Cartwrights Eccles. Discipline, Printed Anno 74. wherein you have the Story at large. But after the Pope who called himself Christs Vicar, ever since to this hour: after, I say, him, who taught the poor people Psapho-like, to cry him up for a great god, follows, Secondly, Next a General Councel or Synod,2. Head of Brass, a Coun∣cel, as Christs Vicar. who usurps the power and authority of Christ, and his Church; they set down Laws, and laying injunctions upon the Saints, they bid and forbid, command, and countermand as they pleased; to make themselves Judges and Commanders over consciences; and to determine, approve, and appoint what (as they ac∣counted) was truth, and what was not. Thirdly, But this head of brass became also too hard a Task-master, and kept the people of God in grievous bondage.3. Archbishop next head of Brass. Then after that, starts up the Arch-Bishop, and he Lords it over the Bishop, the Bishop over the Deane, the Dean over the Arch∣deacon, the Archdeacon over the Parish-Minister, and the Parish-Minister over the people,Bulling. de unit. Eccles. Serm. 2. and what a slavery were poore soules in then? The Prelate sate then in his magnificentiall robes in pompe, like a little God, and petty-Pope) in his High-commission-Court; but as Hierom sayes,☜ in Tit. & in Epist▪ ad Evagium. Non divina authoritate unum aliquem Pres∣byteriis esse Praelatum, qui dicatur Episcopus,Not warranted in the Word. &c. sed humana con∣suetudine; and this is not by divine right, or authority, but ha∣ving a custom up; they cannot, or they will not let it goe downe, but it grows higher and higher, whereby the order and authority of Christ is cast by, and their Lord-like, and their tyrannical Ruledome set up, and so it is they came to reigne. This, sayes Bullinger, Blessed Jerome speaks,☜ not of the Roman Hierarchy, as of every Bishop, or any one whatsoever he bee, that will take to himself power over any Church of Christ,All in primi∣tive equal in honor, dignity, &c. or that does domineer over any Congregation; for (ab antiquo) a Minister and a Bishop, a Preacher, and a Prelate (so called) had
one and the same honour, dignity, power, and authority, yet next to this proud Prelate. 4 Head of Brasse an As∣sembly of Divines or Sy∣nod.Up starts an Assembly of Divines (as a Councell did next the Pope) to be Christs Vicar too, and he is another head of brasse, as bold as the former petty-Pope to impose Lawes, and penalties: these have usurped power over Christs Church too, they deliver their dogmata, and breath out their senses and sentences with wild-fires about their eares, that swallow not their Judgements and Lawes by whole sale, and in the lump. Such Synods who have challenged to themselves a potestatem ju∣ridicam) a Juridicall power over the Saints, as to inflict punish∣ments, to binde up consciences to their Cannons, Directories, or Conclusions,☞ and by a Legislative Lordlinesse have laid down the Orders and Lawes under penalties and paines; so that they have been too brazen-faced and bold. There is no precept for Sy∣nods, said Dr. Whittaker; but for this I shall refer the Reader to Mr. Hookers Survey of Church Discipline upon this subject, as also to the third book of his Treatise,Chap. 9. and to Lib. 2. wherein I hope, all objections I meet with, that pretend the necessity of this (usurped) power, are answered; but, Another brazen-head that takes the same course in usurping Lordship,5 Head of Brasse succeeds in Presbytery Classes, that are ruling. They breath by the Popes soule. is the Ruling-Classes: O! what a Platonian Metempsuchosis we meet with? these all breath by the Popes soule! O mystery! Mystery! Mystery! of Iniquity! under a new name, this is but the old head of brasse! only furbished up in a better forme for ap∣pearance! It was the Assemblies vote (very like, and good reason for it) That it is lawfull and agreeable to Gods word, that there bee a subordination of Congregational Classical Provincial, and National Assemblies for the government of the Church, &c. but how prove they that? from Mat. 18. Goe tell the Church, &c. very well proved: then the Church is meant the Classes (this is a Doctrine for Asses) and is indeed agreeable to the Scottish word of God,Mr. Dell in's way of Peace, p. 32, 33.34. Mat. 18. Go tel the Church, i e the whole Elders, bre∣thren, and all. but not to our word of God. This is proved, (saith Mr Dell) as the Pope would prove himselfe to be above the Emperour out of Gen. 1. God made two great lights, the Sunne to rule the day, and the Moon the night; the Sunne is above the Moone (sayes he) therefore the Pope is above the Emperour; so doe the Assem∣bly prove subordination (very well for an Assembly) but wee
may say as Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God!Vide Cottons Keyes p 46. &c. Philips Ans. to Lamb, p. 150. Vide Damports reply to Paget p. 227, 228, 229.230, &c. Burroughs his heart-divisions cap. 22. p. 157. other Lords have had dominion over us, but (now) by thee onely will wee make mention of thy name. What is this National Assembly? but Arch∣bishops multiplied? what is their Provincial, but Bishops mul∣tiplied? their Classical, but so many Deans? or Deans mul∣tiplied? their Congregational, but Prelaticall Ministers multi∣plied? and is not this of Brazen-head-Colledge? and beat out upon the Popes Anvil? Well, I might shew what un∣savoury fruits there are that grow upon this Bramble of Rome, and what corrupt poysonous Cankers are plucked from it; but for that I refer to the third Book of this Treatise, onely I must say that such Plants as these (which are not of the Fathers planting) must be rooted up, Matth. 15.13. and shall con∣clude with honest Bullinger,Unsavoury fruits thereof. De unitate Eccles. Decad. 5. Serm. 2. Firmissime inhaeremus sacro-sancto Evangelio, & indubitatae Apo∣stolorum doctrinae, quae tollit omnem primatus superbiam, fideléque no∣bis ministerium, & ministerii aequalitatem humilitatemque commen∣dat, &c. Let us keep close to the word of Christ, and the undoubted doctrine of the Apostles, which doth cast downe this doctrine,☜ and suppresses this pride and Prelacy, pressing humility, and equality without subordination, or superiority;These Idols must down, though never so bold and brazen faced as yet. A word more to the Magi∣strates. They must not Head it over the Church. Regnum Dei non est regnum in quo gladiis & fustibus res agae∣tur Marlorat. Expos. Eccles. in Luke 9.55. De Oecumen. Pontif. Cham. but that hath been offered before in Chapter 8. I doubt not but the irrevocable, and ir∣recoverable downfall of these brazen-faced Idols, is hard by, let us wait but a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and then as, Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to doe any more with Idols? I have heard the Lord, and observed him, &c. i. e. him, who is the Head of gold. But before I finish this Chapter, let us be content with this Head, viz. Christ alone, and be very cautious of medling with secular powers (who have their secular ends) in Church-matters; for though all Popish and Prelatical discipline calls for the sword of the Civill Magistrate to support them; yet this doth not, only for the sword of the Spirit; for the weapons of our warfare are not carnall. There is no need of forcing power, as appears in Chapter 11. for Christ bids his Disciples, Goe, and teach, but never to offer violence; so sayes Chamier, Ea est Ecclesiae natura, ut nusquam magis requiratur persuasio interna; nam ad fidem nemo po∣test cogi invitus, &c.) That the Church of Christ is of such a con∣stitution
as necessarily requires inward perswasions and workings upon the spirits of such, as enter, or are in. No man can bee (well) against his will forced to the faith,None ought to be forced to the faith. for God wil bee worshipped with the whole heart or will; and hypocrisie (which Coercive powers drive into) is detestable and odious with God: wherefore in the order and government of the Church, this ought to bee the bent and scope, viz. to win into the Church by spirituall perswasions;Vide chap. . l. 2 and those that are so called, are to bee so kept in, and continued, i. e. not by violence but as voluntary. No such thing as Secular Magistrate to make men bee of any Religion, or to compell any to the faith; that was of force, or in date three hundred years after Christ.Not in date 300 years after Christ. In opere Articu∣latorum Art. 36. Deodate in loc. And it was such a thing, saith Zuinglius as Christ alwayes set far from him, at a di∣stance, as if it did not appertaine to him, nor his Kingdome to meddle with, viz. with the worlds jurisdiction, or power, as Luke 12.13, 14. Who made me a Judge, or divider over you? who?Expos. not the world; therefore he would not intermeddle (though sought unto) with secular Government (which hath ever secular ends;Diodate in loc. Piety must not dance after the pipe of policy. Trap. in Mat. 21.7. for then Religion must dance attendance to policy, and what is that (saith one) but to set the Asse upon Christ, not Christ upon the Asse. This worldly policy (saith Luther) would ruine Religion; yet Christ is made a Judge,☞ Jo. 5.22. but his Judicatory power is not of the world, nor as the worlds;Christ is a Iudge, but in what Court of Iudicature? Secular pow∣ers in, and over the Churches, or in matters of Religion, are tyranny, and why? Constantines's Letter. and by this he would teach us not to intro∣duce Powers so improper to the nature of the Church into the Church, which must needs act, and be executed in tyranny then, because they are quite out of their owne Orbe, and then they are Phaeton-like, destructive: For the Church is called not of the world, though in the world. In Constantines time (when the Church it is said was lulled in his lap) whilst the worldly powers were the Churches servants and friends; yet Constantine would not come in as a civill Ma∣gistrate to compell any man, but absolutely forbids it in his Letter to his subjects in the East: Let no man (sayes he) bee grievous one to another, but what every man thinks to bee best, and most the minde of God, that let him doe, but be sure they live holy, and walke as children of light, without malicing or menacing one ano∣ther; and he concludes thus; For there is a great diversity between
voluntary and forced Religion; but this will lie before us in the Second Book. Onely this note, that this head of Iron got in by the Apostacy, and ever since the Churches (so called) or rather the Popes and Prelates have had a dependency upon worldly powers, whereby they have been,☜ and shall be both undone to∣gether, and their fall shall be great, Rev. 19.18, 19. which the great hand of God hath already given earnest of (as is season∣ably observed in my Lord Cromwels Letter from Dunbar, pag. 11.) and sayes he,Cromwels Letter. It is worthy consideration of all those Mini∣sters that do take into their hands, the instruments of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, medling with worldly policies and mixtures of earthly powers, to set up that which they call the Kingdom of Christ, which is (indeed) neither it, nor if it were, would such means be found effectual for that end; and they neglect, and trust not to the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, &c.After Constan∣tine, Magi∣strates meddled not with mat∣ters of Re∣ligion. Ambrose. Valentinian the Emperor. But be∣sides these Letters, we shall finde after Constantines time too, That Civil Magistrates (as such) had no right of Vmpirage (as Master John Goodwin sayes in his sixteenth Quaere) in matters of Christian Religion, which appears Proof-sure, in Ambrose his thirteenth Epistle to the Emperor Valentinian, who saith, When did you hear, most clement and kinde Empe∣ror, that Laicks (Laicos judicasse in causa fidei?) were Judges in matters of Religio? or ever censure in matters of faith, &c. So that it seems (then) they were accounted very incom∣petent Judges. And why not now? Unless that new in∣vented inference be of force sufficient to carry away the bell, that follows,Expos. Object. Job, saith in Chap. 31.26, 27.Answ. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, o the Moon walking in Brightness;To the Ob∣jection in tra∣vel to bring forth at White-hal. Feb. 22. 1652. And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand: This also were an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, &c. Hence say some, Job teaches, the Judges of the Earth are to meddle in such matters. Answ. I shall easily demonstrate,1. This Scripture teaches no∣thing of earthly powers or Magistrates. that this Text teaches us not a tittle of Civil Magistrates Power; and then secondly, That it treats not of their Power in Matters of Faith. 1. And first, We shall finde, both by the Text it self, and by the words going before, and following after, that Job
speaks of God, the great Judge; (or if you will have the Hebraism, Judges, and Judge of Judges) and not of earth∣ly Judges; Reason 1. Because the Hebrew is too pondrous for earth∣ly powers,The Text in the original will not bear it. and the word  is of great weight; and so Shaphat is as much as to say, One judging and doing right in all causes, which earthly Judges and Powers cannot do: viz. In such cases as are the Ablative to them, being out of their orbe, beyond their sphere, and too high for the princi∣ples of secular powers. Reason 2. But for more satisfactions sake, see verse 2, 3. Is not destruction to the wicked,The context foregoing and following, will not bear it. and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Doth not God see my ways? and count all my steps? &c. So come to verse 14. If I have done thus, and thus, sayes he, What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when God visiteth, what shall I answer? So in verse 23. For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by rea∣son of his highness, I could not endure. So he comes to the Text, If I have been so covetous to make gold my God, verse 24.Expos. (If I have been so Idolatrous as to worship the Sun, or the Moon, verse 26. If I have been a Hypocrite, or if my heart hath run a whoring from God, and hath secretly sinned, being inticed thereunto by idolatry, or the like; and my mouth, and my hand hath consented, and agreed together; contrary to my open and apparent Profession; as those that of old kissed their Idols, 1 King. 19.18. Hos. 13.2. or else reached out their complementing hands to the Idols of the Sun or Moon,☞ and then put their hands to their mouth in sign of honor and homage. But if I have done so, will not God judge it? Or were it not an offence for God to judge? Heinous and abominable, and against a high God. And for this kinde of Exposition,Diodate, Cal∣vin. Arias Monta∣nus. vide Diodate, Calvin, Arias Mon∣tanus, with many others: Besides, see the following verses, verse 35. O that one (the Judge) would hear me! Behold, my desire is that the Almighty would answer me, verse 37. I would declare to him my ways; and as a Prince (not as a pri∣soner) would I go near him. All these Scriptures are of
force and power to prevail with my reason, and to arrest my understanding, that this Judge must needs be meant the just God, the Almighty One; and not at all touching or teaching the power of earthly Magistrates. 2. For that the earthly Judges of the East-Countreys in Jobs days, were Idolaters, and Sun-gazers,2. Magistrates were the Ido∣laters. and Moon-worship∣pers; and how then could Idolatry be punished by such Judges? 3. The Word is to be read thus,3. The grounds of their pre∣tended Infe∣rence, and new raised Argu∣ments, are of Humane in∣vention. This were an iniquity con∣demned, or adjudged, (iniquitas judicata, sayes Arias Montanus) or damnable (sayes Calvin) or one of the greatest size (iniquitas maxima, sayes Carthusianus in loc.) or the like; but I meet with no Expositors (but t'other day at White-hal) that assert this Text to give Magistrates power in Matters of Religion, which is altogether against the Text, Context, and the truth it self; besides, the original will not allow it; for to be punished by, is not to be found there, but is added by our Translators, and is a bit of their own brains. On which, all the Inferences, and Arguments that are built, must needs fall; for this their foundation is of sand. But should we play with them, and ply them a little for recreations sake (as a man does with the fish that he hath struck, and is sure of) we might argue with them, Ex concessis, and then say: 4. Suppose it were so,4. Should we grant this Text did touch Magistrates, yet it could not be for Matters of Faith, but for Matters of Fact. yet this were not to make them Judges of Religion, in matters of Faith; but onely as their object in matters of fact; for if my words and actions, mouth and hand, verse 27. have agreed together in Idolatry, &c. Then the Judge takes notice of it; so in verse 11. the brain is to be punished by the Judges: But I offer this onely for sports sake; for I adhere to the Answers before, as most authentick, viz. That Job intended not earthly powers, or Judges here be∣low. But I have met with some more Objections and Questi∣ons of late, by a Letter sent me, from a pious and an un∣derstanding Gentlewoman, Mistress Venn, which I answered: Some of which are as follow, I shall pick out the power∣fullest. Quest. 1. Whether Magistrates being set for punishment of  evil-doers, as well as for the praise of them that do well, ought
not to punish men for Heresies and Blasphemies? as well as for swearing, drunkenness, &c. They may as far as they break the Ci∣vil Laws.Affirmatively, Within their own jurisdiction which is Civil, they may take cognisance of all sins whatsoever; so far, as they be uncivil, and break their Civil Laws; provided, that  those Civil Laws contradict not Christs: So give unto Caesar what is Caesars.They judge of practises, but not of consci∣ences. Burtons Vindi∣cation. Answer to Prynnes 12. In∣errog. p. 70. And may take cognisance of Blasphemers, Hereticks, &c. as well as of Swearers, and Drunkards▪ for their acti∣ons. 2. We must (as Master Burton sayes) put a difference be∣tween consciences and practises; God alone is the Lord and Judge of the conscience; but man of mans practises, and acti∣ons, whether good or evil: So Rom. 13.3, 4. If you do that which is evil, be afraid. So that it is for deeds or actions, that are evil, he is to punish. Actions are the object of Civil powers to coun∣tenance or correct, as there is cause; not consciences, judge∣ments, opinions, thoughts: So that as they punish swearers, drun∣kards, whore-masters, &c. for their evil actions, and not for their thoughts, opinions, or the like; so they are not to meddle with Schismaticks, Hereticks, Blasphemers, or the like, for their judgements, thoughts, or opinions, until they produce practises, and bring forth such actions, as are the adaequate object of Civil Magistracy, and then they may and must; but to a second  sort of Answer. They may not usurpe Christs power to kill errors with the sword, which ought to be destroyed by the Word. Vide Vrsin. de secundo Prae∣cepto, p. 737. de Potestate Magistratus. Examples of Luthers con∣quest over errors. Of Zuinglius, respons. in libel. Strothionis, Tom. 2. fol. 302.Negatively, Magistrates may not usurpe the power of Christ and his Church, to suppress sin, error, or blasphemies, by the sword, (being no more then opinions, and before they break out into evil prctises,) seeing Christ hath commanded they should be destroyed by the Word and Spirit (which convinces of sin,) &c. Joh. 16.8. Thus Luther in his Epistle to them at Erphard, sayes, Consider with what sword I have conquered sin, and overcome their errors, and subdued policy: I have never touch∣ed them with a finger, but Christ hath destroyed them all by the Spirit of his mouth. i. e. The Word of his Gospel. And this is the onely instrument of conquering, converting, and convin∣cing. Thus saith Zuinglius, Haec unica eaque sola via est, &c. This is the onely way to subdue errors; the Word will conquer, when nothing else can; we suffer all the writings from Papists, to be freely and openly read, and read again: For the sword of the Spirit shall slay all the evils that are taught in them. Now judge (sayes he)
whose cause is most suspicious and surreptitious; ours, who would have even the adversaries doctrines published in our Churches,Errours all to be suppressed by the word, not by the sword. that we may overthrow them by the word? or yours, who reproach our doctrine before the simple people as hereticall, yet by your good will, neither suffering them to read it, nor understand it, nor yet so much as offering to overthrow it by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. Thus we see how secular powers are excluded from medling with matters that are spirituall or mentall,☜ and that the Word and Spirit are the Instruments appointed by God for the overthrow of errours,Vide ch. 2. lib. 2. and suppressing of heresies and blas∣phemies. Object. We finde the Reformers of the Church in the Old Testament that looked after the worship of God,Obj. that they used their materiall sword and Civill powers (as Kings and Rulers) to cut off the Idolatrous Priests, 2 King. 16▪ 5.20. and false Prophets, &c. Ans. 1 Such as were types of Christ, (both King, Priest, and Prophet) did many things by extraordinary warrants, and  many things they did in the letter,1. Extraordi∣nary and ty∣picall. which were to figurate the administrations of the Spirit, which were to answer thereto, as Num. 9.13. and 5.2. Levit. 10.2. Exod. 32.24.27.2 Priests and Prophets did civill offices then. But these were in extraordinary cases, such were the extraor∣dinary persons of Eliah, Samuel, David, Daniel, &c. who ex∣ercised both offices, and as I may say both swords,But the case is not the same with us now. but this was extraordinary, and for extraordinary ends; Now, Secondly, Loe! we may prove Priests and Prophets did execute in Civill offices too, as Phineas in putting to death Zimri and Cosby, Num. 25.7, 8. Psal. 106.30. but (our case being not the same) proves no more that Civill Magistracy belongs to Ecclesiasticall men, so called;3 There ever was a specifi∣cal distinction betwixt Church and State, Ma∣gistracy and Ministry, mat∣ters Civil, and matters of Re∣ligion. then that Ecclesiastical power and offices belong to Civil Magistrates (as such) But besides Thirdly, It lyes evidently before us in the Old Testament, that Ecclesiasticall Powers (so called) were ever distinguished from Magistraticall; For the Priests and Levites had their distinct proper acts and places, both in respect of order and jurisdi∣ction; so had Moses and Aaron, one having charge of the State, the other of the Church,Moses and Aa∣on. and not the one confounded
with the other,Uzziah the first Civill Magi∣strate that durst meddle with matters beyond a Ci∣vill orb. or confined by the other; Yea the stood at such a distance that as none of the Priesthood could meddle with State-matters, or take that government upon him; so none of the Royall-stocke, or blood, could meddle with the Priesthood: Nor durst any (as I know of by ordinary warrant) untill King Vzziah, puffed up with conceit and pride, 2 Chron. 26.16. but he escaped not scot-free,☞ and it hangs up∣on record as a scare-crow to cautionate others of his temper;Aristobulus. nei∣ther doe we read of any Priest (unlesse by extraordinary war∣rant,Proved in the New Testa∣ment. Christ the High-priest e∣ver kept his orbe. as is said before) that durst meddle with Civill-matters, till Aristobulus most rashly, after their returne from Babylon joyn∣ed and jumbled the Kingdome and Priesthood, Mitre, and Crowne together, so sayes Euseb. 8. lib. of his Preparation to the Gospel: And the New Testament, and Gospel, are as cleare against it as can be; Christ (the High-priest) ever kept with∣in his compasse, refused to meddle with Caesars matters, as to divide the heritage, Luke 12. yea and to be a King, Jo. 6.15. be∣ing a thing Civil, and out of his sphere, and so he forbids his Apostles over and over, medling with such matters, Mat. 20.26. and Mark. 10.42. Luke 22.25. he tels them, that though it befitted Kings Courts, and Gentiles, yet not them, they be∣ing called into other and better offices, and distinct from them: the Apostles themselves disclaime it also,So the Apostles 2 Cor. 1. ult. yea, they refused to meddle any longer with the charge of the Poore, seeing there was no such necessity of it, but bid them choose Deacons: Act. 6. Much lesse would they meddle with matters meerly civill and worldly, to take them off their Ministry and duty, 1 Tim. 2.4. 1 Cor. 24.25.26. Rom. 12.3. and yet ah! how! how ambitious have many been in all ages? not con∣tent with their calling, but still aspiring? and usurping? I find Mr. Cartwright in his Eccles. Discipline p. 80. speaking of the pride and ambition of Bishops complaining much of their meddling with Civill matters, which (sayes hee) is contrary to their owne Cannons,The History. How Bishops grew big and ambitious, and became tem∣poral Lords at first. and to the old Cannons called the Apostles Cannons in 80. and 82. p. and contr. Concil. Carthag. 3. Cannon 18, 19, 20. and which (sayes he) is most bitterly inveighed against by the An∣cient Fathers; but this came in at first, he tels us, thus. When things were in controversie, and estates lay at variance between par∣ties,
there were not those hot and eager suits at Law then (nor that fatting or feeding of English locusts (I meane Law∣yers) as now is) those things that were in controversie were wont (by consent mutually from both parties) to be given up to a Bishop, or Bishops, trusting to their consciences,First by in∣trusting them with lands in controversie. and looking upon them as more then other men for piety and conscience; for they conceived this the best means and issue to end all controversies,Bishops lands belongeth to the poor by right. and so came in Lands called Bishops-lands in part. Since which Kings and Princes partly out of good minds, and out of earnest desires to adorne them, and the Church (though they were not wary e∣nough in what they did) and partly because they were them∣selves so continued in wars abroad,Then by the favour of Kings and Princes. which required their own persons, therefore they (in their owne absence, and by reason of such like hindrances) gave authority to Bishops to correct such with Civil censures, mulcts, and punishments as disturbed,They had Ci∣vil powers lent them to punish offenders. And then soon becomes Trea∣surers and Lord Keepers, Jud∣ges, &c. or troubled the Church; which in little time they tooke so much likeing unto, and were so ambitious of, that no ho∣nourable office in Civil-state, but they got into their hands by book or crook; becomming Lords, Treasurers, Keepers, Chiefe-Justices, and of the Privy-Councel, and upper house of Parlia∣ment, and what not? who desire a fuller account hereof, may finde it in Dr. Willets Synopsis 5. Gen. Controv. 9.3. p 278. How at first, the Priviledges and immunities were inlarged by the munificnce of civill powers, and Princes, and with divine au∣thority, and so Marsilius Patavinus asserts it (ex gratuita,Their priviled∣ges from Civill powers. &c.) Praefat in Concil. Senonens. And that the revenues and lands of Bishopricks were (some of them) given by devout and religious persons, Princes, &c. Cod. lib. 8. tit. 54. l. 54. Justinian. And their titles of honour, being created Barons, and made Lords of the Parliament house here in England, were bestowed upon them by the bounty of Kings about foure hundred and twenty yeares agone.Bishops-lands. Cod. lib. 2▪ tit. 7. leg. 14. but never by the word and warrant of God,Barons, Lord. that they got these Civil honours, places, and imployments. But wee shall finde many Lawes that were made to invest them into honour and pomp. As Cod▪ lib. 1. tit. 6. leg. 28. Anthemius made this Law, that if a stranger dyed, and left no Executor, the Bishop of the place should bee his Executor: So Cod. lib. 6. tit. 54 leg. 10. if a
stranger dyed intestate, his goods should bee delivered to the Bishop: And abundance more of such like Lawes; so that at length what places of honour were in state, but they got either gratis?And so things Civil & Eccles. viz. Christs and Caesars, came to be mixed together. or by begging? or one way or other? till they had mingled Church and Commonwealth? Kings and Bishops? Christs and Caesars? Civil and Ecclesiastical matters so together, that they made a meer gallomaufrey of Religion, and of the Lawes of Christ? But is there now a Reformation amongst us? or doe not our Ministers most unworthily imitate them in their ambition? and boldnesse? whose deserved fall lyes before our eyes for our caution, and whose Lordlinesse is laid in the dust?State-Mini∣sters too much alike them. Oh! I do fear lest this notorious fault should appeare as full and foule upon States-Ministers (I mean such Ministers of the Gospel as have very painfully and profitably preached Christ to the people formerly, till they come to be preferred by the States) and then not onely their Doctrine, but their lives are of another stile, i. e. more State-like, lofty, and high-strained;Corrupted with honours, and then they consent to the joyning of Ci∣vil and Eccles. Christs and Caesars toge∣ther. Many hun∣dreds bewaile it. for then they are medling with State-affairs, and nib∣ling upon State-honours, and so come at length to be corrupted by greater honours, favours, preferments, and places, and turned into meer complements. Methinks the late Prelates, with their precipitant and sudden fall may be set up as a good Sea-mark lest they be swallowed up in such sands. I know this very thing lyes a heavy burthen upon the spirits of hundreds (very godly) in this Commonwealth; and it is their continuall complaint with griefe and groans (as I have heard with my eares) that such Ministers are more like Magistrates, viz. lofty, proud, and stately; and that such Pastors creep apace to be Masters of Colledges, Heads of Vniversities and States-chaplaines, or else get to bee Committee-men, into offices or Armies, or some thing or other that may make them stately,That they turn great men, in Civill, Secular, or Martial affairs. and lord it over others being imployed in secular or Martial affaires. And though the intents of our States and Grandees (for whom wee can never bee thankfull enough) bee very godly herein; yet the Lord make our Governours so wise and vigilant in all those honours or preferments they set upon the heads of such as are Gospel-ministers, as that thereby they doe not corrupt them, and wrong the Church, and lull her asleep (as wee heare
she hath been in Constantine's lap) least more mischief follow it, then ever went before by the Dragons rage in former ages,These are sad and sel∣dom failing Omens of the Chuches dan∣ger, which is more now, then it was in the Dragon  days, o forme times of per∣secution, vide chap. 2. Such complain of others u∣surping their office and pla∣ces, and yet they usurpe others offices and places, and turn Poli∣ticians. O the shame of this age! as Chap. 2. Which we are somewhat jealous of, having such clouds (as we have) hanging over us, and (seldom failing) Omens right before us; and the universal and univocal com∣plaints of Gods people, pursuing and following of us. But we hope our wise God, will give those Ministers an effectual warning-peece, before the decree come forth. I much wonder why such men so much complain of others for usur∣pers; for if a poor Tradesman, an honest Soldier, a gifted Brother, or any other of Civil or Martial employment, do get but up into their Pulpits, they cry out upon them; that they should be suffered; and yet they themselves cannot keep within compass, but soon grow hungry of secular employment, and seek high-places, Military or Civil, and think it no usurpation at all; although that a Civilian may be more able for a Preacher, and better qualified, and not step so much aside (for ought I know) as the Preacher does to be a Civilian, or Politician, and to meddle with State-affairs, which makes him so stately. O this! This is the most grand scandal of this age! That our eminentest Ministers in account, are such as meddle with such matters, and study Politicks ding-dong; when one up∣braided▪ Lysander the Lacedemonian Captain, for doing many things by fraud and policy: O Sir, sayes he, smilingly,Sim. when a man cannot obtain his ends with the Lyons-skin, he must put on the Foxes-skin. So say many Ministers by their practises,☜ though they preach in Lambs-skins, yet they put them off, when they come out of their Pulpits; and instead of the Brest-plate, (the Pectorale or chosen Hammischpat.) they wear the Head-piece all the week long, to work out their own ends;Sphinx an em∣blem of Policy. and herein they are, at least, Masters of Art, if not Doctors, &c. It was accounted by the wisdom of the Antients, very apt and apposit, that Augustus Caesar bare a Sphinx in his signet; for he was famous for policy, and unriddled many a new Aenigma, with dexterity and promptness to promote his own ends; and so do these, in stead of a Daniels spirit to expound the Visions and Dreams of these days: For as the Poets fain, that Sphinx
was a monster multi-forme; having the face and voice of a fair Virgin, but the wings of a Bird, and the talents of a Grif∣fin; he lived in a mountain neer Thebes, he was full of riddles, and he used to surprize, and set upon poor Passengers of a sudden, and so destroy them that could not finde out his Aenigmaes. And indeed Policy is such a Sphinx, a very Monster, having infinite variety;A description of Politicians. and its maiden-face flatters many, and learns your Politicians to cog, and complement; but the wings are the Arts and Sciences; which such have commenced masters of, which carry them acutely and accurately from one to an∣other. But the Griffin griping-talents are Axioms and Argu∣ments which fetch in their Atalanta-like Golden-balls, pleasures, and profits; though they step aside for them to fetch them in, as Atalanta did, (Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile tollit.) But such Apples of honors, and pleasures, may make them lose themselves, and their race. These Politicians live loftily on the Mountains, and almost scorn to look below them; they are full of riddles hard to be expounded, whereby many a poor, plain, simple, inno∣cent soul is surprized of a sudden, and made a prey; but here is our comfort, our Oedipus is on his way, who will finde out the folly and fraud of the Politicians of the times;☞ and most of all, of State-Ministers; and then Policy shall be discovered, and destroyed, as Sphinx was; whose body was laid on an Ass, and led in triumph: For indeed, there is nothing so acute, nimble, Aenigmatical, or abstruse, but shall be easily unriddled then to the lowest and slowest capacity.Christs ap∣pearance will ruine policy, and Politicians. Christs com∣ing will put a period to this Tyrant, and set at liberty many a poor, plain, harmless one from the Griffin-gripes of Policy and Politicians. Wherefore if they reckon aright, they will finde their time to reign is short; although many a time Policy reckoning without Piety,Sim. reckons without his host, and is like to pay for it at last; for their Callender lies: But the Scripture which is ours,Expos. tells us the truth, Isai. 27.1. That in that day the Lord will punish Leviathan with his sore, and great, and strong sword, &c. (viz. Policy) that piercing Serpent, that crooked Serpent, &c.
Wo be then to this Leviathan  Hebrew, yea, the subtile Serpent, as Ezek. 29.3. and devilish Dragon , Christ shall be too strong for him, and shall finde him out in all his crooked windings and turnings, insinuations and subtilties; and shall punish him to the purpose ere long; and break and crush his very head and skull, where all his cunning and craft lies. Wherefore down with these Idols of Brass and Iron (if not of Iron and Clay) I mean those Heads and Powers who have usurped the power and place of Christ, viz. The Head of Gold, Psal. 83.11, 12, 13. Make their Nobles like Oreb, and Zeeb;Expos. yea, all their Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna: i. e.Proph. Like those Kings and Princes of the Midianites (a great army) whom Gideon slew, Judg. 7.25. and 8.12. That is by weak means,Threats of Rulers ruine, and of loosing their heads. viz. As by three hundred men he routed and destroyed all their hoast, and then cut off the heads of the Kings and Prin∣ces: So Lord (sayes David) who prayes, Let these Princes, No∣bles, Rulers, be like them! And he prophecies, That they shall be like them; and why so? See verse 12. they said, Let us take the houses of God to be our possession. O sad! this is their sacriledge! to rob God of his right, and to take it to themselves;When and why? and so it is to take possession of his Churches, Church-Powers, and Priviledges, and to make them their's; as if they (who are Civil Magistrates) must meddle with matters of Religion, and judge of matters of Faith, and make Gods houses their right, and their possession, by Nomothetick Politicks. O the ominous! imminent danger of such a State! and of such Princes! and Powers! For see the next verse, O my God! make them like a wheel! or else, as it is in the Hebrew,When they are in most danger.  set them as a round rolling Globe, or Wheel, ready to run, run, run, run, till they have run themselves all to pieces: So that it seems Magistrates are never in more danger of a de∣sperate downfal, and of running (as if they were mad) to ruine, then when they take the houses of God, viz. The Orders, Ordinances, Laws, and affairs of Gods house to be their's in
possession, and their's in right, to rule, rectifie, judge, and order by their Nomothetick Power, and Policy: For then they are set as a round wheel, ready to rowl and run, (more with might, then with right) when the least touch of a finger,☞ or an Ar∣gument, puts them upon a running motion (as to meddle with matters of Religion.) O then, it is a mercy if they meet with any rub in the way, to impede their precipitancy, or to hinder their rash running;For Civil pow∣ers to meddle with matters of Religion, as Judges, is sa∣criledge. for that is very seldom that such (who act out of their orbe) are recovered, and their career ruine-ward be stopped; for being set as a wheel (as it appears they are, when they meddle with Gods Government in matters of Religion, and take his houses into their possession, by going be∣yond their bounds of Civil Magistracy, which is a crying sa∣criledge; I say then as a wheel) they are set to run down, down, downward, (and can hardly be staid) till they be all broken a pieces. The Authors Prayer to keep the Parlia∣ment, from an Abimelechian fate and de∣stiny.Which the Lord prevent in much mercy our States from being so set, or (if they are) from being moved by any of the State-Ministers to run so; which will be sad (if they do) to this Common-wealth, which hitherto the supream power, and over-ruling God hath graciously kept; and kept also our Rulers from meddling with that stone which hath grownd the late King, and his family, with other Princes and Nobles to powder, before their eyes; and so he will them, if they be not wiser then others were, that fell before them. For doubtless, such are under an Abimilechean fate and destiny, I mean, the unavoidable fall of a milstone of wrath upon their heads, which will (at least) break their brain-pans a pieces, and distract them. For if it be unlawful to remove the bounds set by their fathers (as it is Prov. 22.28.) it is much more unlawful to alter the bounds which the Lord hath set. Rom. 13.7. And so give to Caesar, what is Caesars, and to Christ, what is Christs. For as we shewed before, in chap. 11. The Lord hath made a most clear distinction, and distance between matters Civil, and mat∣ters of Religion; and hath required nothing of Civil Magi∣strates, as incumbent to them in their Civil orbs, but Civil matters. Grant that they be zealous; yet they may do more hurt then good, with a Jehu-like spirit: What think you
of Vzzah? did he not mean well? (poor man!Uzzah struck dead for med∣dling out of his Orb, and with the Ark-mat∣ters.) 1 Chron. 13.9. when he ran to save the Ark (in a time of danger too, and of seeming, Vers. 20. necessity too) when the Oxen stumbled, and it had like to faln in the way from Kiriath-Jearim to Jerusalem; yet because he meddled with what he had nothing to do, but went out of his own place to inter∣meddle with the matters of the Ark, God gave all Israel a sore check for it (as Jeremy Dyke sayes) and destroyed Vzzah. And truly, I am of opinion,Magistrates must not med∣dle with mat∣ters of Religi∣on, were Reli∣gion in danger. Perez-Uzzah, why so called. That if Magistrates will med∣dle with matters of Religion, were Religion in never so much danger (by the stumbling of such as carry it;) yea, I am con∣fident, it will be a heavy blow, and an uncomfortable day to England; it may cost us in England a check, and them their neck; and Perez-Vzzah will appear afresh, for following Magistrates to make mention of, and to take warning by. And sure I am, till each keeps his orb, and acts in his own proper place, I mean, the Magistrate to meddle with Civil mat∣ters, and no more (being all that he is intrusted with, both by God and the Nation, as to the office of a Magistrate, Rom. 13.1, 2.) And the Minister to keep in his sphere, as to meddle with Ecclesiastical and Spiritual matters, or matters of Religion (being all that he is intrusted with, Heb. 5.1. & 13.17.) and not at all to study tricks, politicks, or to meddle with Civil affairs:☜ But these being Magistrates or Ministers for Souls, and those Magistrates or Ministers for Bodies; I say, till this order, and each orb be observed, we must be far from a good Reformation, and look (in stead thereof) for a la∣mentable check. And doubtless, the Heads of Brass and Iron will yet be kept up Idols in the Temple, in stead of Christ, the Head of Gold. Wherefore, once more, I must beseech the Magistrate,Nor Ministers meddle with matters of State. (as not to meddle with matters of Religion so) not to let Mi∣nisters meddle with matters of State, and to study Politicians: For as Azariah the High Priest (as we told you in Chap. 11.) cast out Vzziah, who was lifted to his destruction, 2 Chron. 26.16, 17, 18. out of the Holy Place,Vzziah. as the Law command∣ed; so ought Magistrates to keep, and cast us out of their
places,Luther. which belong not to us; as Luther writes, Epist. tom. 7. fol. 209. to the Dukes of Saxony, viz. Frederick and John. I would not (says he) that the Office of Preaching be de∣nied any, but that they have free Liberty; yet if they trans∣gress Gospel-bounds, and will be seditious and fierce, &c. then it is your Lordships duty to suppress, and banish them, saying, We will freely grant you, to fight with the Word against all false Doctrines; but we will restrain your hands and spirits from those things, that belong to our Magistracy and Civil Power, &c. Either of these, I say, out of their orbs and places, are of a Phaeton-spirit,☞ obnoxious to all, and in such disorders, as will set all on fire again; Therefore such are said in Scrip∣tures, to be lifted up to their own destruction, 2 Chro. 26.16. For such pride is never without a fall. And till this be, both Magistracy and Ministry must needs lie under much con∣tempt; both which, in the restitution of times, will be glorious at first. A word to both.Wherefore, as Bishops had not best to storm, that they are thrown down from their Lordships, Judgeships, Justices of Peace, or the like; neither let our Stately-Ministers be offended for calling them to, and keeping them in the work of the Ministry of Christ, whereinto they are called; nor yet our honorable Rulers, whose honor is to rule well within their sphere, and not to meddle with matters of Faith (which is an edge tool that will cut their fingers,) for, Extorquere timidis commutationem possunt, sed fidem inspirare non possunt, Ambr. epist. 13. it is out of their orb. Quest.Quest. But may not Magistrates suppress Errors? &c. Answ.Answ. Evil doings and practises, (as you heard before) they may and must; but they are not competent Judges of controversal points,Not Judges of Opinions or Doctrines. Vide Burroughs. opinions, and doctrines: And thus, that eminent servant of Christ, Mr. Burroughs in his Vindication against Edwards, answereth this Question: he sayes, That where the hainousness of the matter, and turbulency of the carriage manifests stubbornness, &c. These hainous actions and turbulent carriages, do come within their cognizance; but they are not the fit Judges of controversies in Religion, or matters
of faith: But why (sayes hee) for this should there be such a stirre and out-cry against that which is called the Independent way? as if there must needs bee a confusion of all things, if liberty in it bee but granted. The Lord judge between us in this thing, &c. But as it is an intollerable wrong done to the truth, Christ, and his Churches to grade and grace Ministers with such a Power (as we said before) which is most properly the States; so is it no lesse lamentable; an injury done to Jesus Christ, his Church and truth, to gratifie Magistrates with such a Power,It is the Chur∣ches power, or Christs in his Churches; why Magistrates not Iudges of do∣ctrines, &c. Magistratus non est Dominus, nec author legis. Noyes Temple. which is most properly the Churches, as to suppress sinne, errours in opi∣nions, and judgements, which is to bee by the word of Christ: He is no Judge of Doctrine, to pronounce which is true, and which is not, which shall stand, and which shall not; because as Mr. Dell sayes, he is as liable to erre as any man, Acts 14▪ 14. vid. Owens Essay for Church government, p. 72. Secondly, Because he wil do all he can (dentibus & unguibus, as wee may say, to uphold his owne opinion and religion (though never so false) and to sentence others (though ever so true) as if they were false, heresies, blasphemies, and the like,2 They would set up their own opinion, and sentence others. as appears, Acts 24.14. So did the Jewes, Acts 28.22. and the Scribes, and Pharisees sentence Christ and Christianity, and all but their owne. Thirdly,3 And main∣taine Idols & crucifie truth. Every Magistrate would make it his office to maintaine his owne Idol, and what a world of false gods, and false worships would be set up, and worshipped then, and in most places true Religion put into the Rack. Object.Obj. But they must have the advice of the Assembly of Divines, or able Ministers. Answ. 1. Then Magistrates must act upon an implicite  faith, to see with their eyes, and beleeve as they beleeve.Not on the ad∣vice of the As∣sembly of Mi∣nisters Secondly, Then Magistrates were but the Ministers or Assemblies executioners (a flat peece of Popery) methinks Pilate stands for a Sea-mark before such, to the end of the world,2 Pilate is a warning-piece. who did but execute the Priests sentence upon Christ in cruci∣fying him.3 This would hinder Mini∣sters in their work of ruining errors by the word. 3 This would take Ministers off the right means of ruining errour, i. e. by the word of Christ; and this would make them idle, and neglect their duties in doing that by the word that
such Magistrates would doe (though they ought not to do) by the sword; but Fourthly, Why Magistrates (as Magistrates) are not to suppresse errours &c. is because Christ and his Apostles after him never medled (as we heard before) with secular powers to suppresse blasphemies,4 Because Christ would never use them to suppresse errors. &c. neither was this Doctrine main∣tained or entertained as usefull in Christs Church for three hundred yeers after Christ. 5 But Christ hath left other Laws in force to do it with∣out them.Fifthly, Because Christ hath left other Lawes to suppresse Errours, Heresies, Blasphemies, as appears in 1 Tim. 1.20. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, &c. Cum multis aliis &c. and by those Lawes left us upon record in Primitive times were errours depressed and punished. Query, Whether a Member cast out of a Church-society, comes not under secular Cognizance for punishment. Answ. Affirm. So far as Christians, whether in, or out of Church-fellowship are of the world,Ans. they are under worldly govern∣ment and powers,1 Affirm. So far as they are of the world they are under their powers. but no further; For worldly government reaches not out of the world; but Saints as Saints, yea as members of the Church visible, are called out of the world; and Christs Church, though in the world, yet they are not of the world, Church-government is over men, as Members of the Church,Antichrist ar∣rogates both Powers, viz. Civil and Ec∣cles. Vide Synop 7. Gen. Con. q▪ 2 & p. 1277. and Civill government is over them as members of the State or Nation or Commonwealth: The first is Christs; the second Caesars. It is Antichrist arrogates both, and casts a Christian (under the notion of a Hereticke) erroneous person, or the like) out of one hand into the other. We grant that a member (whether in the society or out, for it is all one for that) for as much as he is a member of the Nation, must needs come under Civill Cognizance; but, Negat. A Church cannot deliver up any to secular powers for punishment.Secondly, Negative, I can finde no warrant in the word for any Church of Christ to deliver up any (be he never so bad) to secular powers for punishment: for either he must bee delivered up before, or after he is cast out, if before, then he is yet un∣der the government of the Church, and if after, then the Church hath nothing to do with him, being without her Lines. I doe not finde this to be in practise in primitive times, till Popery was pretty ripe, and then under pretence of Hereticks the dear Saints suffered death presently and frequently.
Secondly, But if Magistrates doe take Cognizance of Blas∣phemers, Hereticks, &c. let them take heed, they out-run not Gods rule in inflicting mulcts and punishments (though it be for actions;) I say, that they goe not too far, Luke 9.55, 56.None to bee put to death for misbelee∣ving, or not beleeving. Witnesse John Husse. See Fox 1. part p. 804. Mr. Hooper. I see not how they can sentence to death any for mis-beleeving, or not beleeving our points of Religion, though they be the (fun∣damental as we say) principles of our Christian faith. O what an errour is this) sayes John Husse to his Adversaries) to deliver poore people up to secular powers to put to death, &c! O cruell ac∣cursed invention! Mr. Hooper also in a letter of his out of prison to a precious friend, Anno one thousand five hundred fifty five tels him how thi tyranny, extremity, and force, hath been the onely argument (which, sayes he, you must grant) to maintaine the Pope: And what they cannot doe by the convincing word, they will endeavour to doe by delive∣ring us up to worldly compulsive powers to be tormented. This was also good Bradfords sense,Mr. Bradford. as he sayes to the then Lord Chancellor, I have been (said he) now a yeare, and almost three quarters in a stinking prison, and yet of all this time, you never questioned me for my opinions, before this time or for any thing else, when I might have freely spoke my conscience without peril; but now!☜ now, that you have a Law to hang and put men, to death, if a man an∣swer freely, and not to your minds, so now you come to ask me this que∣stion! (about Christ really present in the Sacrament) Ah! my Lord! my Lord! Christ used not this way to bring men to the faith. Bernardus writ to this purpose an Epistle to the Pope Eu∣genius, who condemned many,Bernard. and delivered them up to secu∣lar Powers to be put to death, sayes he, Apostolos (lego) stetisse judicandos, sedisse judicantes non lego, hoc erit, illud fuit. I read that the Apostles stood to be judged, but I never read, that they sate as Judges to sentence any.Saints shall judge their now judges, They shall bee adjudged he∣reticks, who have judged them heretick Mrs. Askew. But this shall be (for the Saints shall judge the world) and judge their Judges that now deliver them up to bee murdered and massacred. This wee shall finde long agone the Saints were well acquainted with. A good woman, Mistress Askew, Martyr in King Henry the eighths dayes, said to Wrisley (the Lord Chancellor) I have searched the Scriptures all over, but I cannot finde that ever Christ, or any of
his Apostles put any to death though Hereticks, or delivered them up to any others to put them to death. Marlin. vid. Bartlet.Marlinus that eminent French-Bishop upon this very ac∣count withdrew communion from his fellow-brethren Bishops, and would have nothing to doe with them,☞ because they consented, and gave way to Maximus the Emperour to cut off by the sentence of death the Priscilianists (as known Hereticks as ever lived) yet said he, wee have no power to put them to death,No power to put to death the vilest Hereticks that ever lived. nor to deliver them up to the Emperour. Christ was put to death, but put none to death (though Hereticks) neither hath hee given power to any to doe it, but hath denyed it, Luke 9.56. Nay I will fetch a Gray-Friar that was Philips Confessor, Alphonaeus by name, in his Sermon before Philip and Q. Mary,Alphoneus. February the tenth, one thousand five hundred fifty and five; hee bitterly cryes out of those bloody Bishops for burning men, saying plainly, That they learned it not in Scrip∣ture to burne any for his conscience, but the contrary, viz. that such a one should live, and be converted, and many things to the same purport. And deare Lord! shall we then be of a more rigid judgement? against one another! against tender consci∣ences! against erroneous persons, then the Friar? It is very remarkable how Edward the sixth declined this devillish doctrine; Mr. Cranmer had never more to doe in all his life then to perswade, and beg of him, but his hand to be set to the Warrant for delivering up Joan Butcher to the Magistrates power to burne her:K. Edw. 6▪ that young Saint. All his great Councels, with their Argu∣ments could not prevaile with that Christian-hearted young King to set his hand to it: sayes he, what? Will you have mee to send her soule quick to Hell? you say her errour will damne her; should I then be so cruel to send her presently to the devill in this errour?More need that they live to repent, then send their souls post to Hell, if they be in the way· O no! let her live to repent! it may be to the saving of her soule, to give her longer life and liberty to repent (which the murthering of her will not doe) I hold it more holy (sayes he) that she should live to be converted, &c. that this sweet bird chirps; and this young man manifested his dislike of such secular powers, and punish∣ments for errors (though grievous) but O! how few such Saint-like Caesars are to be found now! I might heap up ma∣ny eminent testimonies, yea (I thinke) fetched from all
ages against this bloody tenet and opinion of giving up Here∣ticks, or any other erroneous persons into the hands of Magi∣strates to punish them:Eminent Mar∣tyrs breath'd out flames against this Antichri∣stian bloody tenet. Latimer. Ridley. Many blessed Martyrs have breathed out flames against this Antichristian custom, which have lent us light into it, to this age. I have read (I do well remember) when a flaming faggot was brought to Ridley his feet, to set all the rest on fire, Ha! sayes Mr. Latimer to his Brother Rid∣ley, Come be of good comfort Brother! play the man! We shall this day light such a candle in England, as I trust shall never be put out! I hope so too; for sure I am, by that light we may see, that putting to death is none of Christs Ordinance; and that fire and faggots are no good Reformers. Were a man a Turk, Saracen, Jew, Heretick, or what you will?Turks, Sara∣cens, Jews, not to be punished for their Reli∣gion. Much less dare a Church de∣liver them up to be punished by secular Powers. Antichrists weapons whilst he lives quietly, and peaceably in the State; I know not who, nor why he can be put to death; besides, he is verily perswaded he believes aright, and enough; much less, can I see how a Church dare (warrantably) to deliver up any one to secular powers (purposely) to be punished by them. This hath been Antichrists advantage to this day, and the wea∣pons of his warfare in all ages. But (blessed be God) it is clear to thousands now, (as the Sun that shines,) that spiritual evils must have spiritual remedies, answerable to the nature of these evils, 2 Cor. 10.4▪ 5. And that the cutting off of mens heads, is no proper remedy of cutting off mens Errors;☜ but of cutting off men in their Errors:Must not be ours. Let all means (spi∣ritual) be used for the recovery of such whose diseases are spiritual and mental, 2 Tim. 2.25. For we must not sweep up Christs house with Antichrists broom; nor fight with his hands Christs battles, nor with his weapons our war∣fare. Quaere. What must Magistrates do then?Quaere. Answ. All they can,Answ. to encourage and countenance the ser∣vants and service of Christ, by giving them liberty,Magistrates may and must▪ do all th can to countenance the ways of God, and Churches of Christ. though ever so few, or contemptible; declaring against all known▪ and apparent gross Errors, and Heresies; so as that they do not allow of them, or the like: For what Bilson sayes, serves us, Commissio est à Christo, permissio à Magistratu. Christ commands, and Caesar demands; Christ gives the Law, and
Magistrates the Liberty: But let not Magistrates take too much liberty (as is said before;Zuinglius, Art. 35.) Christ allows of, and ap∣proves of Magistrates Government, Magistrates must al∣low and approve of Christs. Christ hath commanded theirs, and obedience to them, they must command Christs, and obe∣dience to him: And as the Saints for Gods sake, Rom. 13.1. Gal. 4.14. are obedient to them (for sancti non subjiciunt se homini propter hominem,As Servants, not as Iudges, or Lawgivers. sed propter Deum;) so they for Gods sake are to be obedient to Christ, and servants to his Church, his Saints, and people of God. Let them make much of the Ministers of Christ, neither to corrupt them with honos, nor to honor them in their corrup∣tions:Magistrates cannot hinder Ministers of Christ, in their offices of preaching, &c. No Minister of Christ can be sequestred ab officio, onely a beneficio. Constantine mingled not Civil and Ec∣clesiasticals. As Ministers cannot make Magistrates, neither can Ma∣gistrates make Ministers; and as Ministers of Christ cannot hinder Ministers of State (or Magistrates) in doing their offi∣ces for Bodies, and in Civil affairs; neither can Ministers of State hinder the Ministers of Christ, in doing their offices for souls, and in spiritual affairs. Wherefore (as I said before) each must remember his place, as Constantine could say (Vos est is in Ecclesia, sed ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus) to a Bishop or Mi∣nister in those days; ye are Overseers and Officers in the Church (within) and I am an Overseer and Officer out of the Church (without;) Constantine kept his course some time, very well, within his own jurisdiction; without mingling or mangling Ecclesiastical affairs with Civil, or Civil with Ecclesiastical; so must every Magistrate be sure to do: For it is Gods design, to destroy those powers and policies that hinder Christs reign in his Zion, and Church, as the alone Head and Lord.None must go∣vern in he Kingdom of the Son, but such as shall govern in the Kingdom of the Father; but Magistrates as such, must not rule in the Fathers King∣dom; Ergo, &c. Christs Kingdom (of the Son) and the King∣dom of glory (the Fathers) are both alike; who rules in one, rules in the other; who are admitted into one, are admitted into the other; whom the one receives, the other receives, and none else: But the Kingdom of the Father, receives not Magistrates, as Civil Magistrates, to rule, and govern, or punish there (i. e. In Heaven to come,) therefore not here, in the Kingdom of the Son. And he that dares usurpe this power of Christ (the alone Head and Lord) takes too much up∣on him, and as Chrysostom sayes, Non est tributum Caesaris,
sed servitium diaboli, &c. It is not his due, but the devils work; And it will cause his unevitable downfal and confusi∣on, as it did the Devils. Trap observes there, on Matth. 22.21. the Greek Article , is doubled and repeated for this purpose, That our double and special care must be to give God his due▪ Rom. 13.7.☜ Oh! O that we did give the Lord his due! then should we not plead so for Caesars Chair in Christs Church; that he should sit there with the heel of his cruelty, to kick the Saints brains out; and to crush them headlong, that stoop not to his form. In a word, Christ sits not on Caesars throne, neither shall he (who hath too long) sit upon Christs throne. For though other Lords have had dominion over us, and have usurped Headships (which are Brass and Iron,Brazen and Iron Heads no more; but Gold for Brass, and Silver for Iron. Jer. 6.28.) yet the Lord will give gold for brass, and silver for iron, Isai. 60.17. This Head of Gold, and his Gospel, which is better then the silver seven times purified. And if the very Philo∣sophers, (Aristotle, Plato, and others, vid. Cartwrights Ec∣clesiastical Discipline of the Authority of the Church) if they could see and say that Estate is best,Expos. and those Citizens happi∣est, that had God to be their King and Monarch, and his Laws and Decrees to submit unto: Sure I am, the Church is never so happy, holy, and heavenly, as when Christ alone sits upon his throne, in the midst of them, and governs them by his Word and Spirit, see Cap. 2. & 9. of Lib. 2. And sure, this is the great work that our God is bringing about; who is coming to reign for ever and ever. In the mean time,Own no Head but Christ, the Head of Gold. let us own nei∣ther the Brazen, nor the Iron Heads, for our Head; (I mean, neither Spiritual nor Temporal, Ecclesiastical nor Civil powers, so called!) O none but Christ! the Head of Gold; our Master! Lord! Head! and Law-giver! without any other Partner or Paramount whatsoever, as hath been at large proved! Wherefore to conclude; All others are beheaded! having lost their long usurped ruledom, and jurisdiction!John Hus Con∣stant. Concil. And with John Hus; We say, Christus sine talibus capitibus monstrosis, melius ecclesiam suam regulavit, Act. 27. Object. Christ a∣lone is Head, and governs his own Church (influendo & in∣fundendo)
without such prodigious helps, or monstrous heads, as Antichrist would crowd in.Gregory the first to John of Con∣stantinople Pa∣triark. Thus said Gregory the first, Lib 6. Epist. 24. in his Letter to John Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, Quid tu Christo universalis ecclesiae capiti, &c. What will you answer at the last day to Christ? the sole U∣niversal Head of his Church, and people? that thou darest to arrogate that title? which is Antichristian for thee so to do? Hold fast the head, saith the Apostle, Col. 2.19. from which all the body, by joynts and bands, having nourishment, ministred and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God. Therefore be sure you hold your Head; For first, it sup∣plieth the members with all necessaries;Expos. The necessity of this Head. Vid. Ca. 9. l. 2. Hold him fast. Secondly, It knits every member to its self, and one to another; and thirdly, It increaseth every one with a spiritual increase: Now Christ in his The anthropie, is this Head, which we must fetch our life, sense, and motion from, by Nerves, Veins, and Arteries. Christiani Christo capiti adhaerent, & ab eo percipiunt, & hau∣riunt vitam spiritualem, &c. No Member of his, but hath much moisture, nourishment, and spiritual growth. And every Member is moved with their Head, unless some Palsie-Members (so Palsie-Christians) that move not as the Head (Christ) directs.Sim. When Cyneas the Ambassador of Pyrrhus, after his return from Rome, was asked by his Master, What he thought of the City and State, answered; O Sir! It is Respublica Regum, a Commonwealth of Kings, and a State of Statesmen: And so is the Church, wherein Christ is King and Head; O happiness of such a Church! For if he be in us Head, he is heart, hand, and all. For quickning of us,☞ he is our Anima, the life and soul of the Church, and of every Member; as he resolves us he is Voluntas, as he maketh us think he is Animus, as he gives us to know he is our Intellectus, as he deliberates us he is Mens, as he keeps our remembrance he is Memoria, as he gives us to judge he is our Ratio, as he moves our desires he is Affectus, as he breaths us and inspires us he is our Spiritus, and as he enables us to apprehend he is our Sensus; So that Christ our Head, is our Heart, and all. VVherefore let us hold him fast for our Head,
and heare of no other, no Brazen-face, no Iron-pate, no O monstrum horrendum! informe, ingens! cui lumen ademptum! Christ willed, when he saw Caesars stamp on the coyne,Sim. to give Caesar his due; so when wee see Christs stampe on his Saints, Ordinances, Worships, Churches, wee must give Christ his due there, which is to be the alone Head and Law-giver amongst them. But thus far for this Chapter. CHAP. XIV.  or   Tsur. That Christ is the onely Rocke, and sure Foundation for his Church to be built upon: All other Founda∣tions being false, sandy, and such as will fail. A House without a foundation cannot stand; and to have an unsound, sandy foundation, is little better then none at all,Christ the foundation. if not sometimes worse, as being more deceitfull and dangerous; Great is the fall of such an house, Luke 6.49. Matth. 7.27.Vide Dr. Mayo in loc. But this spirituall house hath a sure foundation (if it be of Christs building) which Christ hath laid with his owne hands, as Zach. 4.9. Isa. 14.32. other places are founded by the arme of flesh, but this by the Power and Spirit of the Lord.Expos. Palestina must fall, but Zion, i. e. (sayes Sasbout) the spirituall Zion (meant Christs Church under the Gospel) shall never fall: for the Lord hath founded it upon a Rocke too,Mat. 16.18. Christ the Rock. so Mat. 7.25. Mat. 6.18. Luke 6.48. and this Rocke is Christ, as 1 Cor. 10.4. 2 Sam. 23.3. so that Christ is also the foundation of the Church, which
the Church is built upon, Eph. 2.20. 1 Cor. 3.14. Christ is not the Head of that Church whereof he is not the foundation,Christ the Head, the Buil∣der, and yet the Founda∣tion, how? sayes Cotton: Christ is King, Priest, Prophet, Head, Master, Lord, and Lawgiver, Advocate, Husband, Brother, Builder; and yet the Foundation of his Church, what is hee not unto his people? in any condition? he is man, and Minister to himselfe as God: so that as he may be both the Prophet, and the Word; the Ad∣vocate, and yet the Argument; the Law-giver, and yet the Law; the Master,Vide Wilsons▪ Cases, Aenigma 99. and yet the member; the Priest, and yet the sacri∣fice; even so may he be, by the same rule and order, the Foun∣der, and yet the foundation: For as he preaches himselfe, and this testimony was true; as he pleads himselfe, and this argu∣ment is full;Christ is the Rock for foun∣dation, how? as he gives out himself, and this Law is life; as hee offers himselfe, and this Sacrifice is precious, and effectuall; Even so he layes himselfe low to be our Foundation, that wee might bee fitly built upon him, and this Foundation will never faile; for he is a Rockie foundation. First, Because the Rock is a sure and firme foundation, which will not sinke nor shrinke (per saxum foederis firmitatem notabant antiqui:1 The Rock is firm, and wil never fail us. Venning) but soft, or sandy stones, will give way, and endanger the whole structure: Now God in Christ is a sure and most firme foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. 2 Tim. 2.19. which cannot faile us▪ our Salvation lyes upon him, he cannot de∣ceive us: The Church is like Mount Sion which abides for ever,☞ and is immoveable, because founded upon the Rocke of ages: Si nos ruemus, ruet Christus una, said that loud-tongued and liveli-spirited Luther:Luther. If we fall, Christ shall fall too, and (malo cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare) I had rather (sayes ano∣ther) ruine with Christ, then run with Caesar; I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar: such can never fall, 1 Pet. 2.6. as long as Christ the foundation stands. 2 Christ the Rock is high whence we look round us. Without lets.Secondly, A Rocke is high, whence we have pleasant pro∣spects, and see far round the Horizon and Hemisphere, whence wee look with delight, and have the least hindrances, Num. 23.9. Christ is such a high Rocke, Psal. 61.2. and the Saints foundation lyes in him, who is higher then all Rocks and moun∣taines, Psal. 87.1. or places, Isa. 57.15. Psal. 91.14. From this high Rock (i. e. Christ) the Saints see far, and faire, and have
most eminent discoveries, and the sweetest Survey of Heaven, and happinesse, all other things being below them: And they have the least hindrance in their prospects either up or downe, or round about, being filled with loveliest, liveliest, richest, highest, and heavenliest soul-ravishing Discoveries. Thirdly, A Rocke is a place of refuge,3 Christ the Rock is the place of refuge the Castle of defence im∣pregnable, &c. of great strength and security, thither people run for refuge and safety, Isa. 2.21. 1 Sam. 13.6. and 23.25. a Castle in a Rocke is accounted impregnable, and cannon proof. Such a Rocke is Christ to the Church and his Saints, Deut. 32.31. Psal. 18.2. Psal. 31.2. a strong Rocke and Castle of defence; Hence it is Saints are so safe in Christ, that they cannot bee stormed, or taken: Saints are secure in him; when all Devils in hell let flye upon them; For as Tertullian sayes,Tertullian de Patientis. the desperatest Bullets and Darts that men or Devils can shoo, at this impregnable and impenetrable Rocke, are either returned with a powder, or bounded backe up∣on the heads of them that shot them, or else are fallen down,Expos. dead and blunted, without any more mischiefe. The Gates of Hell shall not prevaile against them; that is,Ferus. Cameron in Mat. 16. neither the power nor policy of Hell combined together; no not though the Devill doth by himselfe or others plot with his seven-heads, or push with his ten-hornes; neither can all the fraudulent plots, practises, malices, machinations, policies, powers, or engines that Earth or Hell can bring forth,Against all Powers and Policies what∣sover. bee enough to ruine the Church, who is seated sure and safe upon a Rocke that is higher and mightier then they. It is true, they may batter, but can∣not conquer▪ they may reach to her heel, (and peradven∣ture bruise her heele) but they cannot reach to the Head, but they will break themselves a peeces: They cannot make a breach in true Religion, or a battery in this Rocke;The Church fears no Can∣nons, nor Or∣dinances. no though the Devill should discharge the Popes Can∣nons, or the greatest Ordinances hee hath at them: say they were as big as those two cast by Alphonsus the Duke of Ferrara, the one of which he called the Earthquake,☜ Nor can she be ruine hat is founded on the Rock. the other the Grandiabolo, or the Great-devill, neither Earth, nor Hell, the Earthquake, nor the greatest Devils can remove the Church founded upon this Rocke; they may shake her, but not shame her; disturb her, but not destroy her,☜ who may challenge
the Venetian Motto, Nec fluctu nec flatu movetur, as Mat. 7.25. and Psal. 62.2.☞ Hee onely is my rocke, and my SALVATION, he is my DEFENCE, I shall not be greatly moved; so vers. 6, 7. But to make haste. 4 Chist the Rock keeps alwayes the same in place and power.Fourthly, A Rocke keeps his place; removes not, and thus doth Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; hee alters not, nor removes from being the foundation of his peoples principles, graces, happinesse, joyes, enjoyments, and all; he is ever in this place, and therefore he is in Zion a sure foundation, Isa. 28.26. and cannot bee removed. Hebr. 12.28. immobile saxum. 5 The Rocke is lasting for ever.Fifthly, A Rocke is very lasting, an Heiroglyphick of per∣manency, durability, and perpetuity; so is Christ, who can never decay, or decrease, but of the increase of his Government, and peace there shall be no end, Isa. 9.7. 6 The Rock yeelds severall benefits.Sixthly, A Rocke yeelds severall and singular Benefits, it is a shade from the scorching heat, and keeps from being Sun-burnt;Keeps from being Sun-burnt. Jewels come from the Rock so doth Christ, Isa. 32.2. and he keeps from being sin-burnt, and hell-burnt, and from the wrath of God; a Rocke affords precious stones, and Jewels, such a Rocke is Christ, who is the Mine and Treasury of all precious things hid in him, Col. 3.2. and fetched from him, Prov. 8.10, 11.18. Rev. 3.17.18. Rev. 5.12. Prov. 3.15. the Rock yeelds honey,Yeelds honey. so doth Christ, Deut. 32.13. Psal. 81.16. his words are drops of honey, Psal. 19.10. and his lips and doctrine drop sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.13. The Rocke yeelds oyle,Yeelds oyle. Deut. 32.13. Job. 29.6. and so Christ doth the unction from on High, the oyle of grace, 1 Jo. 2 20. and Rev. 3.17 the Rock,Yeelds whole∣some sallets. affords wholesome hearbs and sallets, so doth Christ, whose cheeks are as a bed of spices, Cant. 5.13. be∣sides from the Rock flowes the most rich, pure, pleasant, sweet Christall streams, Deut. 8.15. Job. 28.10. so the most springs and best streams of water of life flow from Christ the Rocke,And the best springs and streams. whereby his Church is refreshed, as 1 Cor. 10.4. Psal. 46.4. Isa. 33.21. Joh. 4.13, 14. Joh. 7.38.7 Rock is so hard that it will cost much paines before a foundation in it. Seventhly, A Rocke is so hard, that a Foundation in it will cost much sweat and labour, and continuall paines, &c. so much meanes must be used, and much paines must be taken, and much care, and continuall vigilancy must bee had to bee
well-bottomed upon Jesus Christ,Expos. Phil. 2.12. therefore saith Peter, 2 Epist. 1.10.  i. e. endeavour sedulously, and study it diligently, and if so yee do; yee shall not fall: there∣fore learne (saith Solomon) Prov. 30.26. of the Conies (poore little things) yet they with labour worke out holes and burrowes in the roots of the Rocks;Expos. by this we are to learne diligence and bee sure to get in force enough, and to dig deep into this Rocke, which is Christ. Eighthly, A Rocke, if it proves a stumbling stone,8· A Rock is most dange∣rous to such as through heed∣lesseness or hautiness stumble at it, and on it. is most dangerous of all to bruise and breake thee, and batter thee a peeces; so is Christ to such as by their carelessenesse or selfe-conceit doe fall at him, and on him, O! hee is to them a (rough) Rocke of offence! 1 Pet. 2.8. Rom. 9.32. that will not obey him, and yeeld to him, but that stumble at him, and reject him; they that fall upon this stone! are bruised and broken; and those that this stone falls upon, are grown'd to powder, Luke 20.18. Thus is Christ the Rocke, and this Rocke the Foundation of the Church, and this,Austin in Mat. 16. saith Augustine upon Mat. 16. Christ meant, when he said, Vpon this Rocke I will build my Church; Tu quidem Petrus es, cognominatus a me qui sum petra, atque super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam.) And thus saith Peter Martyr in 1 Epist. ad Cor. 3.11. CHRIST is said to be the FOVNDATION of this heavenly FABRICKE of his Church,Peter Martyr. because it hath its BEGINNING from ABOVE, and this FOVNDATION hath the TITLE of a ROCKE, because CHRIST is the SVREST FOVNDATION (& Christus in summo loco situs est, &c.) and he is the highest. But the Reasons why the Church hath Christ to be her Rocke, and why this Rocke for her Foundation, are divers; I shall trouble you with but one or two; as first is for safeties sake. First, For safeties sake, the Church must meet with multi∣tude  of tempests and stormes, winds, and waves,For safeties sake in the midst of her manifold troubles. Mat. 7.25. whence Bolton calls her the Tossed-ship, she meets with a con∣tinuall succession of miseries, and molestations, one on the necke of another, like Jobs Messengers, and as Clouds rack, Eccl. 12.2. Fluctus fluctum trudit,  The skies are overcast; sometimes they fall in lesser and lighter crosses,
as the smaller raine, but sometimes in sharpe stinging and piercing Calamities, like stormes of haile, the raine falls, the floods arise, the winds blow, the waves beat, and all to try the building, which like Noahs-Arke is pitched within, and without,Omnis Christia∣nus Crucianus. and holds out, being upon a sure foundation, and cannot faile utterly, though she may be battered, and will be tryed day by day, and that to the purpose, therefore shee had need to be founded upon the Rocke. We must sit downe and consider, and cast up what it will cost us to be Christians, how much we must suffer; and then be sure that wee bee up∣on a good foundation that will not sinke under us,☞ nor shrinke away from us, for we shall have many trials. Secondly, Why the Church is built upon this Rocke is for orders sake,2 For orders sake, i. e. to be∣gin at Christ this Foundati∣on first, and so to build upward and onward. 1 We must be in Christ, and then get into his Chur∣ches. Many gather∣ed Churches in danger of falling that are not built on the Foundati∣on (Christ) first. that whosoever will venture to build, may begin at this foundation first, 1 Cor. 3.10. and bee sure he goe wisely to worke (as I said before in the last Chapter) so also, that whosoever will enter into this house of the Lord, may first get up the Rocke (which will be with much difficulty to flesh and blood) and from thence to goe into the house (Gods Church) built upon the Rocke: many have been wrong that thought first to get into the Church, and then into Christ, no! no! but they must bee first in Christ, and have a right to Christ, and communion and closenesse with Christ, and from thence en∣ter into communion with Saints, &c. 1 Jo. 1.3. Eph. 2.2.20. First on the foundation Jesus Christ, and then verse 22. into the building: where this order is omitted, and not minded, they build but upon a false foundation, and will ne∣ver stand the sturdy storms: And truly I am possessed with some jealousie that most of our gathered Churches (or rather members in them) are built amisse, and are to be amended in  this point of order, or else they will not stand. For Reasons sake i e to support the rest. Fundamentum est primum su¦stentare, & connectere, Tho. Aquin. 22. Q. 4.7.4.Thirdly, It is for Reasons sake to keep up the building; to support the body which the foundation is to doe: Therefore is Christ the foundation to be first laid, and all the superstructure to be built upon him, who beares up all by his power, Heb. 1.3. for the which no other FOVNDATION could be laid to build upon, 1 Cor. 3.11.12. in whom (in which foundation) all the building (for every bit and parcel must have a dependance upon
him, and an abiding in him,Expos. as being fastned and nailed to him) all being fitly ordered together doe joyntly (and unanimously) grow (higher and higher) and are more and more built up in Christ still) a holy Temple to the Lord, Eph. 2.20, 21, 22. through his Spirit. But, First, Wee must bee sure then, wee have a foundation, and that that be laid first to be built upon,1 Be sure of the Foundati∣on. all wise builders do thus, and in Heb. 11.10. Abraham (the representative of B∣leevers) is said to look for a City which hath foundations, i. e. in op∣position to the Tents he set up to live in,2 That that be laid first. Pareus in loc. (being but a passen∣ger) which were without foundations laid, and could easily bee pulled down, and laid in the dust; I dare be bold to say it, that some of our gathered Churches (built in a trice) are but such Tents without foundations, which will (as soon,Expos. What gathered Churches will fal of a sudden. and in a trice) bee pulled downe and laid in the dust: but let us look for, and verily expect with confidence (as the word  there signi∣fies) a City i. e. a house, a Church, a new Jerusalem, whose builder and maker is God, which hath Christ for the foundation; these Temples, Tabernacles, buildings will abide,And what ga∣thered Chur∣ches will ou∣stand all storms, and abide ever. but no others: for Prov. 10.25. they are on an everlasting foundation, and cannot fall; This is the thing wee must looke for, and then build; first, make sure of a sound foundation therefore, Isa. 44.28. say to Jerusalem, thou shalt be built, there is nothing mentioned yet of a foundation till the next words, and say, O Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid!How to build. or let it be laid before you begin to build the Temple of the Lord. The Temple was a type, & in the type the foundation was first to be laid;Diodate in loc. The typified must answer the Type in laying the fundation first. the typified must answer the typifying herein, as appeares in Zach. 4 9. Zerubbabels owne hands that have laid the foundation of this house shall finish it; but first, he layes the foundation of the house thus Hag. 2.18. Consider even from the day that the foundation is laid: Consider it (as if before that it were not worth consider∣ing) as if without that, little heed were to bee given to it,Expos. (for it could not stand unlesse upon that,Else they are not to be re∣gardd or worth conside∣ring. and after that the foundation is once laid, and the principles setled, then we must set forward (and not before) and build on with care and conside∣ration, heed and diligence; And from that very day the Lord will blesse you. vers. 19. From thence you shall grow up into a high and
holy building; and go on considerately, Quantum ad actum intellectus, & quantum ad veritatem intuentis, both in your understandings, and judgements, which otherwise (i. e. with∣out a foundation first laid) you cannot do; but must deviate from those rules of reason, and right judgement, whereby you become considerate; and your prudence is ordered and regulated, even from that day the Foundation is laid. Con∣sider, but Use 2. Be sure that we have a good foundation (for it is not enough to have a foundation,Be sure the foundation be a sound one. which every man fancies to himself) but that it be a sound and sure oe, and that which will hold: One that builds upon a rotten, reeling, sandy, and unfit foundation,Sim. is found a fool; and so Christ calls him, Matth. 7.26.And not a sn∣dy one. Dixon in Mat. 7.26. For he shall finde his fairest ground-work will deceive him; his building soon will lie in the dust, and not endure the trial, but will down like a Spiders web. All such fools (or unwise builders) fail in the main point, in that neces∣sary one thing, and do but build upon the sand; wherefore his building soon sinks,How the wise builders house differs from the fools. shatters a pieces, and tumbles down. The wise mans and fools house differ in the subterstructure and superstructure both. 1. In the sub∣terstructure or foundation.First, In the foundation; the wisemans lies deep, little seen, and he is sure it is sound (as the heart of Oak) and will never rot; but the fools foundation is shallow, lies open, and is much seen; and is soon removed, and razed, and it is so un∣sound, that it sinks under the building, and layes all in the dust. Secondly, In the building too they differ, for the fools lies loosly,2. In the super∣structure, or building. and is not well fastned, neither to the foundation, nor one to another, and may easily slip one from another, and all fall beside to the ground; which ground-work is but as a stake stuck in the ground, and so may easily be pulled up; and truly, I say this for fear many Churches, (as they now are) prove but such buildings, because some so easily slip aside the foundation (pretended) which is a sad thing,True Churches knit fast to the foundation, and one another, as if they were all but one. and they are too loose, and not well united to one another, nor fastned one in another; but the Wise mans is as a City compacted, knit fast to the foundation, and pinned in (as one with) the Rock:
From whence they cannot be razed, raised, or removed; and like an intire stone (as is it said of Solomons Temple) are the whole building one. So much sweetness, evenness, and union, is amongst them; yea, in the midst of shakings and oppositi∣ons: That as none of the building can be separate from the Rock, viz. The foundation wherein, and whereon they are laid; so not one (by the violentest temptations that can befal them) can be parted from another; but all are one in Christ, and one another. For he that is joyned to the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Now the very reason why many fair buildings (so in appearance) must be laid in the dust again, is,Other reasons why many gathered Churches, (foolish build∣ings) will sud∣denly fall, and so must. Peter Martyr. because they have been built upon false foundations, of mens Creati∣on; as their Rules, Canons, Commandments of men, Directo∣ries, or outward forms of holiness, and wisdom, or some thing or other which is sandy, and which will fail them, and prove infirm and ruinous (as Peter Martyr, 1 Cor. 3.11. sayes,) and which will make their buildings to fall upon their Heads. For every plant which my Father hath not planted, shall be pull∣ed up by the roots, saith Christ, i. e. Their foundation, and all shall be discovered to be nought; and so in Ezek 13.14. I will break down the wall (the work) that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and will bring it down to the ground.Expos. Hab. 3.13. Rotten founda∣tions shall be discovered. Why so? Mark! That the foundation thereof (that rotten, ruinous foundation) may be discovered, and it shall fall: None shall be able to save it; for the Lord will have the naughty, deceit∣ful foundations, discovered, and laid open to our children after us, that they may not build upon such rotten stuff. And therefore it is (I say) such buildings must fall, that their foundations may be discovered, (It shall fall, saith the Lord, none shall be able to keep it up, it shall fall;) and then others will beware upon what grounds and foundation they build upon hereafter: False Prophets are builders too, and will be as busie as may be; but mark the metaphor, It is with un∣tempered morter, which will tumble in the time of a storm;☜ Members of such Churches are in great danger in a storm time. it cannot stand, but will fall on a sudden: Then they that under such buildings are in danger for want of safety, or shelter; and are in as eminent imminent danger, as the
Twenty seven thousand of Benhadads men were in Aphek, in 1 Kings 20.30. O! O then be sure of a sound foundation! Such a one as will not sink, rot, fail, fall, and then it must be a Rock. VVhere∣fore beware of such buildings as are made up of mens sandy and untempered stuff; for they will fall on your heads, and do a deal of mischief. But the Word and Spirit must have the working of this house upon Christ the foundation; that is strong, defenceable, and sure of standing: Therefore, Use 3. Be sure Christ be that Rock, upon which you are founded Isai. 28.16. who is called the Stone of probation,Be sure Christ be your foun∣dation. the stone of foundation. 1. The foundation of Solomons Temple (as I said before) being a type of this foundation,1. 1 King. 5.16. Who are fit to lay the foun∣dation, and who not. we shall finde was to be laid by those, whom the Lord had endued with most skill, the chiefest and ablest of the laborers in that building; and none are fit for this work, viz. To lay the foundation principles, and to fit out Christ to the capacity of the building in hand; but such as are very wise, experienced, and filled with the Holy Ghost. Others, that are raw and unexperienced, and not en∣dued with divine skill and understanding for this work (which will require the most accurate regard and judgement) do but do what must be undone again, and bring much discredit upon the work. Therefore, as Solomon sent to Hiram, 2 Chron. 2. and about, for able men; so must we seek hard, and send up to Heaven, for the Holy Ghost to fall upon some, who may be fitted for it.Another rea∣son, why many gathered Churches will down again. This is another reason to me, (full of perswasion and power) that many of our seeming orderly gathered Churches that yet are, must be rifled, and ript up to lay the foundation (though it may be good) yet more orderly, and regularly; and with more heavenly skill, and wisdom, then as yet it is laid: But, 2. In the next place, the foundation of the Temple was also the choisest matter,2. The most pre∣cious matter must be for the foundation. as being of most precious and permanent substance, costly and curious stone, 1 Kings 5.17, and 7.10. Christ is the most pretious tryed stone, Isa. 28.16. & 8.14. Cut out without hands, and elect for that use, 1 Pet. 2.6. Most costly, chary, and continuing for ever: Thus in Rev. 21.
19. the foundations of the New Jerusalem we finde garnished with all manner of pretious stones; indeed all excellencies, yea all manner of excellencies are in Christ, the foundation of eve∣ry particular Church. 3. Furthermore, when the foundation of the Temple was laid; there were the largest and liveliest testimonies of joy,3. The greatest joy at the lay∣ing the Foun∣dation. that could be exprest, Ezra 3.10, 11, 12. So is it to be at the laying of this foundation, (which is Christ) to build upon; it is to be done with shouting, crying, Grace, grace unto it, Zach 4.6. or as it is in Hebrew,Expos.  with wide ac∣clamations and cryes of rejoycing and gladness▪ O (shall they say) the grace! the wonderful grace of God in Christ! And mark this, That till the foundation be laid, there is no such loud shoutings out, grace, grace.☜ The whole strength and stress of the building, lies in the foundation, so does ours in Christ; who is also our City of Refuge. Now let this stone which most builders have refused, and which others have rejected, become the Head of our Corner. Amen. Use 4. The last use then that I would make (now) of this, is to inform us of these two necessary things, in imbodying to∣gether. First, to be well grounded; secondly,Informs, 1. Necessiy of being well-grounded. 2 Of being well united. Without both these, the build∣ing falls. to be well uni∣ted; without both these, better never to have been a build∣ing; for the fall will be great. This is exceedingly requisite, and of all places, I should pitch upon Dublin (at present) to press this; for sure I am, we have great need of laying a sure foundation. First, That ye be well grounded and founded upon the Rock; how requisit it is; you have heard before; onely this I adde,1. If Christ this Rock be your foundati∣on, you will stand till the coming of Christ. That such a building will never fall, but last ever, and is of perpetual use for the Saints to dwell in, till the full appearance, or coming of Christ, without alteration or cessation. This Church-state upon this foundation ceases not; I say not, but the superstructure may sometimes want mending, ordering, and repairing, but the essentials of it shall remain for ever, Dan. 7.14. Luke 1.33. Isa. 9.7, 8. & 59.20, 21. Eph. 3.21. Till it be grown up into a perfect stature in Christ, Eph. 4.11, 12. and then it shall be translated into a state trium∣phant,
1 Cor. 15.24, 25. Therefore Paul charges Timothy to a special care of those Ordinances which are to continue till the coming of our Lord Jesus,Media cultus sunt immutabi∣lia. Junius. 1 Tim. 6.13, 14. So see 1 Cor. 11▪26. Christ hath promised his presence and personal assist∣ance, to the end of the world, Matth. 28.20. Now Saints that are built up together upon this foundation, cannot fall; nei∣ther shall the gates of hll at any time, in any age, be able to prevail against them, Matth. 16.18. Here is no room left, for that erronious opinion of Mr. Prynne; now for such States-Politicians that would make Christs worship like the wea∣ther-cock,Politicians and States, sins herein. to serve every wind; or his building but a Crane to serve the Ste,Sim. and to turn as they list; and Religion like a nose of wax,Sim. to stand which way they will; and to be al∣tered, and formed into what fashion they think fittest for the State; and most suitable to the Civil Government and Laws of that Common-wealth. But let that policy, power, and those persons expect the rigor of his rod of Iron, which is already reached out, against such Politicians of our times; who like the King of Navar (to Beza) profess not to stir a foot further for Religion,Politicians Profession of Religion. then it promotes policy, and agrees with his interest. Let such call to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, and hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. The great day of his wrath is come.Seekers sins herein. Revel. 6.16, 17. Neither in the next place, can we read less then an apparent repugnancy to sound truth, and to this sure foundation in that lean opinion of the Cessation of Ordinances, which some hold at this day, contrary to Eph. 3.21. 1 Cor. 11.26. 1 Tim. 6.13, 14. Where∣fore they forsake publick assemblies, Heb. 10.23, 24. Duties, Ordinances;Expos. and will neither build, nor be built up; pre∣tending the day is not come,Gualther in loc. as Hag. 1▪2, 4. and it is time enough; wherein (as one notes) there is a double sin. First, Their negligence, and pretending it not to be the Lords time to cover their sin; and secondly, their rashness in charging others that are about the work;☞ and in the building of Gods house, as if they made too much haste, and might better let it alone, because the time is not yet come, &c. So that they would have all lie in their ruines, till the Restitution of Mi∣racles, as was in the Apostles days, and then to do it by an
Apostolick-power and authority, and not till then:They wait for miracles. But O! what an error is here! Have they any warrant in the Word for this? Is not this an argument of a sensual? carnal? low spirit? that must be confirmed by miracles, Job. 20.29. and of want of faith? Heb. 11.7. Besides, are not miracles fallible? Nay, are they not notes of deceivers, and false Christs in these latter days? Matth. 24.24. And doth not Christ call them evil and adulterous, that do seek for such signs? Matth. 12.38, 39. before they will believe, that they must go about this building. In a word (I think) they are under a world of temptations, and very unsound (if not sinfully sensual) that are of that judge∣ment, though (I will judge no person,And run a de∣sperate hazard. but the sin) for in forsaking Ordinances, Assemblies, Christian-duties, &c. They run a desperate hazard, Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. which, some say, is the Prodromus, or Harbinger of that pardonless, pitiless sin of the Holy Ghost, Vers. 26, 27, 28, 29. and of ruine, V. 39. But this I have offered on the first part of this use, to show a necessity of being well-grounded upon this Rock, Christ; and Secondly, To be well-united in, and to this Rock Christ,2 Part of the Use. by communion, as 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the communion of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord:Union necessa∣ry. In his twelfth Chapter of Communion of Saints. This is the voice of all the Oracles (sayes Mr. Ainsworth) to raise men in∣to communion with Christ the Rock, and then with one another, 1 John 1.3, 7. Hence it is, that there be such variety of similitudes to re∣semble this communion, and to illustrate it;Sim. as Christ the Head, we the Members; and all by due joynts, arteries,Col. 1.18. & 2.19. 1 Cor. 12.12. Gal. 2.20. Rom. 8.32. and sinews, united to the Head; receiving life, motion, and govern∣ment, in all actions and affairs from the Head; and yet by the same arteries, sinews, joynts, and spirits united one to another: so Christ is the Vine, we the branches, i. e. One with the vine,Sim. the stock, the root, all participating of the same juice, fatness,Iohn 15.14. Rom. 11.17. sap, sweetness, and yet one branch deriving from another, re∣freshed by another, growing to another, and one with another: So Christ is the foundation, we are the building, Eph. 2.21. 1 Cor. 3.9. all fastned, knit, and united to the foundation, Christ; al∣though one may differ from another, in form, shape, order, place,
&c. And although some be of a courser, and some of a finer substance and appearance in this building;Churches and Saints under different forms, yet are all to be one with Christ and with one another. although some be greater, and some lesser; some in one fashion, and some in another; yet all alike do depend upon, and are set upon Christ, the foundation; all are rooted in him, Col. 2.7. Eph. 3.17. grounded and built upon him; and pinned, fastned, and uni∣ted to him; and yet are so to one another (in faith and love;) as if they could not live or stand, one without the other; for they be many in particulars; and some are under one form, and some under another; yet all are coupled together, tacked, and nailed together; so that they grow together up unto an holy temple in the Lord. Now if we lie loosely, (and not firmly fastned, as I said be∣fore) we shall slip aside, and fall out, 1 Joh. 2.19, 20. and thereby bring danger to the whole building.In unity not in uniformity, or all of one judg∣ment. Ainsw. cap. 16. Communion of Saints. All members even of the most discrepant opinions and judgements, and under the most different forms, are use∣ful and neces∣sary. Anther reason why many of our gathered Churches must fall, viz. Their standing by an uniformity. Unispirituality amongst all. i. e. Having one spirit though many opinions. This communion makes us in unity, without which is neither comfort, nor con∣tinuance in a Church-state; neither am I of opinion with some, that they must be all of one judgement, and under one form, and of one opinion, in one body or society, &c. that hold toge∣ther in love and faith. For I finde no building, no body, no Church that ever was, or will be, without different forms, opini∣ons, appearances, &c. according to the nature of the Members and Matter they are made up of. There be many Members (and particular parcels of several shape and use) and yet by the wis∣dom of God, all are so well-united and set together; that there appears so admirable a decorum, so goodly a frame, and lovely a proportion and symmetry of the whole; I say, of the whole, that not the least Member (though the most differing from o∣thers in form or fashion) could be spared; for the Lord hath use of all his people (under what dispensation soever) to build up his house withal, as I shall (if the Lord please) shew in the second Book. Wherefore I am perswaded, those Churches that consist so much in, and subsist so much of, and upon an uniformity, will fall; for they are not of Gods build∣ing; but those the Lord builds (as before) though many Members be in them that differ in opinions, forms, or the like; yet all shall be very useful and necessary in the place the Lord hath put them in, by his holy Spirit, and shall be so far from
making fractions, or divisions, that they shall promote the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, being all are borne up by one foundation, upon whom all are built, one as well as another, and that foundation which is the strength of the building) is as able and fit to keep up one as another (so fastened in him) bee hee of what judgement soever,Those Chur∣ches whose unity is in the Spirit will stand, and are the Lords buildings. and under what shape soever hee ap∣peares to others (so he be but good matter.) Now those Chur∣ches are of the Lords building (doubtlesse) that doe agree in Spirit, though differ in forme, and though they have in them of sundry Nations, natures, languages, judgements, or opini∣ons, yet are all one in Christ the foundation, and are firmly cemented, and united one to another in Christ by his own, and the same spirit, which enlivens, enlightens, quickens, comprehends, acts, inables, moves, and governs all, though under diversity of gifts and administrations: And these are they that shall stand by his wisdome, though not in the wisdome of flesh and blood, or of the world. Well in a word, Sion thus governed, thus grounded, and thus united as before, must be the delight of the whole earth, beautifull for scituation, not onely in a faire air, lovely climate,All laid on one foundation which is Christ. and good land, but lying on a fair, full, and sure foundation, which shall never bee removed, but which he will establish for ever, Psal. 48.2.8. SELAH. Wherefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, let your hands be strong, ye that heare in the day the foundation of the Lords house is laid (Christ being for that purpose preached) that the Temple might be built. For the building is all in vaine, that is not laid upon this Foundation. And to conclude; The Lord make our Builders wise in laying the Foundation first; I feare, too many (and I desire to deale home with my owne naughty,A word to Builders. deceitfull heart herein) that have sought more their owne fame, then others felicity, more to glorifie themselves then God in gathering the godly into Fellowships, and so they have gotten a good many,Churches must not bee called by our names. and those great ones too, and made themselves some body; then they Christen their Churches into their owne names. The Lord shame us for it, whom he findes guilty! Constantine the Great called Trajane (who was a Great Builder) the wal-flower, for that his name was engraven on so many walls. So indeed
are many mens names most shamefully (if not impudently) in∣graven on your Churches. This was not in Primitive times, we never read of any Churches called by mens names then; as St. Pauls Church,Eagle-Saints are setled in the Rock. or Peters Church, but all called the Churches of Christ; for they were built upon him for a founda∣tion, upon this Rocke which Eagles flye up to; but the Ostridges have their nests in Sand. So that all true Churches and Saints have one, and the same substantiall Foundation. For as Rhetoricke is said to be a Fist extended and displayed in∣to an open hand,Sim. but Logick a hand contracted into a close Fist; So the Church is dilated into many Congregations, but every good Christian is the Church contracted, and condensed into one Bosome, being alike built upon the Rockie Foundation which will never faile. CHAP. XV.  Ahezachecha. That all the children of Sion called home, are bound to make haste, and to enter into this Way of Christ among his Companions in the Gardens. THe next newes is, that wisdome stands in the streets and calls to all, yea the simple, and poore, to eat of her bread, and drinke of her wine, to forsake the foolish, and to goe in the way of understanding,Prov. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. she cries at the gates, at the en∣try of the City, at the coming in at the doores, Prov. 8.1, 2, 3. yea shee hath sent out her Maidens (the Ministers) to cry aloud (by preaching her doctrine) Prov. 9.4. and her Discipline,Wisdoms care of us, and call to us. Prov. 9.1. For wisdome hath laid the foundation, and hewed out her pillars, as you have heard before; what follows?
why hearken unto me, O yee children! blessed are they that keep in my wayes, blessed is the man that heareth mee,Prov 9.32, 34. watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.Expos. The gates of Zion are the particular Churches of Christ, into which Christ calls all that have communion with him; Arise! and come away,Cant. 2. which (as Ainsworth sayes) Beleevers are bound to doe, and must labour forthwith, to enter in, and being come in to abide there,In his commu∣nion of Saints. First proved by Prophesie. and to contend together for the faith, Phil. 1.27. which was once DELIVERED to the Saints; For this is foretold in Isa. 2.3. and he will teach us his wayes (the very next step is this) and we will walke in his pathes; as soone as ever we know the way of Christ, the Lawes, Ordinances, Institutions, and Discipline of Christ, wee must make no de∣lay at all, but put into practise, and enter into his way. It ar∣gues carnality to procrastinate, and put off Christ, and to delay our comming at the call of Christ, when wee have clearly and distinctly heard it, Luke 14.18. and al∣wayes observe that it is something or other of the world, that is the let; but as Micah 4.2. sayes, and Jer. 50.4. They shall go and seek the Lord, and aske the way to Zion, saying, Come,2 Proved by Precept. and let us joyne our selves to the Lord in a perpetuall Covenant. (Iunt, non subsistent ad vocationem Christi, non moras trahent,Oecolampad. Oecolamp. in loc. So Psal, 110.3. besides the Precepts, Psal. 45.11. Mat. 28.20. and loud calls a before,Threatnings. the many menaces used in the Scriptures against Rebels, and such disobedient subjects, doe sufficiently testifie to this truth, Psal. 2.12. Luke 19.23.3 Proved by Practise. 1. Cor. 16.22. and the practises of the Saints in primitive times, yea though times of hottest persecutions and fiery trials; yet their (then) ready obedience to this order of Christ, doth very much manifest the reality of this assertion, viz. that Saints are bound by vertue of positive Precepts to joyn toge∣ther somewhere in a Gospel-way and order, as hath been before handled, Act. 2.41, 42. 1 Thes. 1, 4▪ 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 8.11.22. 2 Cor. 8.5 Cum multis aliis. Now is there not reason enough for it? For, First, What other visible way for Beleevers to walke in to∣gether, and to worship in,The onely vi∣sible way that Christ hath left for Saints. hath Christ brought out of his Fa∣thers bosome? and left behinde him? when he ascended on high? till his second coming? but this? see Eph. 4.11, 12.
2 It is disobedi∣ence to live in Babylon.Secondly, What an apparent peece of disobedience and contempt of Christs Call and Command is this, to live in Ba∣bylon streets? or as Lot in Sodome? notwithstanding the An∣gel of the Sunne is sent to cry aloud in our eares to come away into Sion, and to make a habitation for the Lord to live in, Isa. 52.11. Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Eph. 2.21.28. yea and the Spirit is to be our conduct, Jo. 16.13. and 14.26. and knocks at our doors, and tarries to know if we are ready, and to put us in minde of making haste, by many motions and instigations,And such are resisters of the holy Ghost. and instincts: O then! how roughly doe they resist the Holy Ghost! and quench the motion of the Spirit! that stirs in them! and strives with them! Act. 7.51. 1 Thess. 5.19. which is a sinne of the saddest consequence, (if after they are convinced,) Mat. 12.31. Marke 3.28, 29. Heb. 10.26.27. agnitam veritatem flagitiose insectari. So Saul, Julian,Trap in loc. Latomus of Loraine, and many others sinned the sinne of death! that is, they madly and maliciously resisted the truth, despised, and despited the wayes of Christ, notwith∣standing their consciences checks, and the Spirits motions, and so did Stephen Gardiner,Melancthon Fox Act. and Mon. Fol. one thousand nine hundred and five,Chron p. 5. and divers others. O sad! sad sinne! to sinne against the office, and opera∣tions of the good Spirit of grace!A sad sin. which is more then to speake against his person in ignorance, for so did the Sabel∣lian, Eunomian, and Macedonian hereticks, who yet found mercy. Wherefore have a care how yee dare to live in the loathsome Babylonish wayes of confusion, after yee are called out thence, and convinced by the Spirit (since) of the gates of Sion! whilst the Spirit moves in you, to make haste in∣to Church-fellowship, he is doing his office in you, look you to  yours. The sad con∣sequences which follow the neglect of entring.Consider the abundance of ill consequences which must unavoydably follow this disobedience to Christ, or this neglect, or omission of these wayes of holinesse or Gospel-fellowship; for 1 A great wrong to the worship and service of GodFirst, The worship of God, or service to Christ Jesus (which should be our joy and meat and drinke) suffers by it, which is more acceptably and orderly performed with joynt con∣sent,
and in communion of Saints, Rom. 15.16▪ 1 Cor. 1.9, 10. Zeph. 3.9. the Lambe is said to solemnize publick service up∣on Mount Sion with a hundred forty and foure thousand Saints, there their voice is like the voice of many waters, and mighty thunders, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. in the songs of praises, and in their prayers; but for this I refer to Ainsworths Communion, Chap. 16. Secondly, without this, the Saints must needs fall short of that duty of edifying one another,2 A great let to their duties. and of building up one another in the most holy faith, but then they grow, Jer. 23.3, 4. Ezek. 34.14.16. and walke in light, Isa. 60.3. 1 Jo. 1.17. and love, Eph. 5.2. 1 Thess. 4.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. and unity of the Spirit, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 13.11. Eph. 4.3. instructing and provoking one another to holinesse, and good works, Mal. 3.16, Jude 20. 1 Thess. 5.11. Heb. 10.24. therefore are they implanted together to flourish in the Lords Courts, and to bring forth fruits, Psal. 92.13, 14. which will not faile, for the waters run out of the San∣ctuary, Ezek. 47.1. Thirdly, otherwise they have not that mutuall aid and assistance for the counsel and comfort of one another,3 Hinders mutuall assi∣stance. which they ought to have, Rom. 12.3. 1 Cor. 12.22.26. Fourthly, nor is there that unanimous compliance,4 Hinders op∣position of enemies by an united strength as one Arme and Army. or united force made against the opposers of the truth as is required, Phil. 1.27. Jude 3 Gal. 5.1. 1 Cor. 7 23. Can. 6.4. til they be in communion, as an Army with Banners, and then they are terrible to their enemies being all under one Captaine, Heb. 2.10. (grant there be di∣vers colours) having all the same word, Jer. 31.33. marching all in order and ranke, Col. 2.5. making all one arme, and strength against the same enemies,Joel. 2.7. and joyntly vindicating the truth, joyntly praying, and then out of their mouths comes fire to destroy their Adversaries, Rom. 11.5. joyntly suffering for the truth, 1 Cor. 11.26. Rom. 12.8. joyntly refusing traditions, trumperies, and whatsoever is contrary to Christs word, joyntly disputing for,5 Else there is not such a sympathy as ought to be in bearing, for∣bearing, &c. and maintaining of their Liberties and Priviledges, Gal. 5.1. Fifthly, without this Fellowship together, there is not that fellow-feeling, or Saintly sympathy as ought to be, 1 Cor. 12.25.26. Rom. 12.16. nor is there that bearing one anothers
burthens, Gal. 6.2. Heb. 13.3. nor forbearing one with an∣others weaknesses, as Eph. 4.32. Col. 3▪ 12, 13. in bowels of love, pity, patience, and without censures, Rom. 14.13. Rom. 13.1, 2, &c. Sixthly, besides they are exceeding deficient in many other Christian duties,6 They faile in many other Christian du∣ties required of them a Church mem∣bers. who are not in Gospel-fellowship; for how can they Prophesie in the Church? 1 Cor. 14. or tell the Church? as Mat. 18.17. if they are not members of a Church? or obey them that are Elders, Heb. 13.17. or vigilantly watch over one an∣others conversation? and admonish, or reprove orderly? Mat. 18.15. 1 Thess. 5.14. and 4.18. 2 Thess. 3.15. Rom. 15.14. &c. But for this I refer to Mr. Bartlets Model; But to the Fourth Reason or Argument, which is taken from the special priviledges which are proper to them that are in the way of Christ above all others,There be spe∣ciall priviled∣ges of Saints in fellowship above all others. which are abundance: As first, among them Christ doth most manifest his presence, Psal. 36.2. in a more then ordinary measure, the glory of God is seen in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. Christ takes most de∣light in the midst of them to walke there,1 Christs pre∣sence is pro∣mised most to them. Rev. 1.12, 13. and 2, 1. in his rich robes of righteousnesse to cloath or cover with, the meanest (Saints or) member of his body, i. e. with a garment downe to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle, for himselfe as High-priest and his Saints as Priests. The names of Temples, house, Kingdome, Tabernacle, yea and golden Candlesticks are given to Beleevers in Church-fellowship, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Eph. 2.22. Heb. 3.6. Rev. 21.3. for this very reason,There is the King and Kingdome in his beauty. not onely because he walks in them, but there he lodges Psal. 132.13, 14. lives, and rests in a most remarkable man∣ner, there the Kingdome and King is seen in his beauty, Isa. 33.17. And for this I referre to the object of the Church in Chap▪ 9. Secondly, In this Way of Christ, the Saints have most sin∣gular refreshments,2 Saints have highest enjoy∣ments▪ and best refresh∣ments there. Jo. 18.20. Act. 3.1. Act. 13.5. Luke 4.15. Act. 14.44. and the sweetest and highest enjoyments of love, and grace, and powrings of the unction from on high upon them; we shall finde how Christ (yea and his Apostles after him) did daily visit the Synagogues and publick Assem∣blies, and amongst them he uttered so many gracious words, and wrought so many mighty miracles; and why so? if not to
foreshew by this, how he would regard the Church-assemblies of his people, and be their Prophet, to declare excellent truths, and to open the Fathers bosome to them above all; for there hee feeds, Cant. 1.7. and 6.2▪ 3. and eats pleasant fruits, i. e. of his owne planting, Cant. 4.16. there the Lord is a place of broad rivers, Isa. 33.21. and Christ is there,Expos. Christ is a Fountain in the midst of his Gardens. and to them streams from Lebanon, and a Fountaine in the middest of them, Cant. 4.12. as in Florence and Naples, where they have the most excellent Gardens, they have in the midst a most excellent Spring,Sim. a Fountaine from which with an Engine they can sprout out water, and streams round about the Garden, so al∣luding to this,More then in all the world besides. is Christ in the midst of such a Church-fellow∣ship, as we have spoken of, a Fountaine and streams i. e. they are refreshed with streams (in a more eminent manner) then all in the world besides; For the common-fields, flowers, and trees without,Wherein the Churches have the happinesse of all others. have the benefit of the clouds and ordinaryraine and showers, but the particular Churches of Christ, his bed of spices, Cant. 6.2. are more watered then all others; for besides the outward meanes of grace, and preaching, praying, expound∣ing, and ordinary publick showers or refreshments,☜ they have a fountaine within that is never dry, of purer and more Chrystall showers that cannot be taken away from them; the Word and Spirit are (as it were) entailed to them in a most spirituall man∣ner above all, Exod. 20.24. Isa. 4.5.6. Isa. 25.6, 7, 8.Others are watered from the ordinary clouds with∣out, but these are from the fountain with∣in. Psal. 132.13, 14, 15, Isa. 56.7. Isa. 59.21. and are (as it were) seated there to sanctifie, season, counsell, quicken, comfort, encourage, and assist them in Church-fellowship above any other. So that when there is a drought without, and the Clouds are steril, and the earth barren, yet there is (even there) within a foun∣taine and streams for the Gardens.When clouds are barren the fountain is ful. So that though Ministers i. e. Clouds may be empty, yet the Fountaine, i. e. Christ cannot. Thus Saints in fellowship are fed with fat things Isa. 25.6, 7. with flaggons and apples, Cant. 2.5. and full refreshments, and that above all other the dwellings of Jacob, and they bring forth fruits (even) in old age, Psal. 92.13, 14.3 Christ is most free to impart his best bosome-loves to such. Thirdly, Christ is more free with them then with any others, as a Husband with his Wife to impart his most in∣timate bosome-loves and secrets, Cant. 7.12. 2 Cor. 11.2. and
to let out his very heart-loves into his wives arms and bo∣some, Isa. 62.4, 5▪ and Isa. 61.10. Psal. 36.8. 4 They are most under his care and pro∣tection, and on his account.Fourthly, Such (of all) are under his protection and banner of love, Cant. 2.4. Isa. 4.5, 6. Joel 2.32. Isa. 54.17 and in the midst of them is salvation placed, Isa. 46.13. Zach. 2.5. And in a word they have a heaven upon earth, Rev. 12.1.12. O! it is good being here! For these and many more the like Reasons hath this Gospel-order of Beleevers in fellowship been alwayes praised, prized, and indefatigably sought for,For these rea∣sons Saints in Primitive times (even) longed after Church fel∣lowship. and accounted of, even as of necessity, for beleevers in all ages: For the Lord though hee loves all his Saints, Deut. 33 3. yet he loves the gates of Zion more then all other the dwellings of Jacob, Psal. 87.2. and so much the Saints have loved these Courts of the Lord, that they have accounted a day better there, then a thousand else∣where, Psal. 84.10. the Apostles longed after it, and to see the brethren in it,Apostles long∣ed after it. Rom. 1.11.12. 1 Thes. 2.17. yea and esteemed them the Crown of their joy, 1 Thes. 2.19.20. yea, Christ him∣selfe (as man) exceedingly desired it, and sought comfort by his Disciples prayers,Christ himself desired it. Mat. 26.40.43. Luke 22.46. and he ex∣ceedingly longed after a most speciall communion with them in fellowship with him, before hee parted from them, and was taken away to suffer. See Luke 22.15. with desire I have desired to eat with you before I suffer;Expos. as if he should say, I have most strong affections hereto, for thereby I shall be abundantly stengthned and refreshed as well as you,We do but as Christ, his A∣postles and primitive Saints did in entring into Church-fellowship. &c. O then! how dare any, that follow the Lambe, delay entring into these wayes of ho∣linesse, and love! did not Christ, his Apostles, and primitive Saints goe before us into this Church-fellowship, and Gospel-order? what hinders us? nay what is the reason wee doe not run into them? for what a world of proofs, precepts, promises, practises, reasons, arguments, motives, and priviledges, are there to provoke us?Vse. were they but duely weighed? who durst either deny,To put for∣ward apace for Zion, and in order thereto get into the Gates. or delay comming or joyning? The Lord added to the Church from day to day such as should be saved, Act. 2.47. where∣fore make this use! put forward apace for the wayes of Sion with the will! wherein you must have (in your hearts) in∣clinations, resolutions for, and choosings of these Tabernacles
above all other wayes; if once you get into these Gates of Sion, you will quickly be in Sion. But some may say, Object. But learned, able schollars,Object. and godly judicious men doe both print and preach against this way; the Answer is easie. Answ. First, In all ages, both learned and godly have been  opposers of Christ and his Church;Learned and godly (in ap∣pearance, the strictest Pro∣fessors) in eve∣ry Age, Christs and his Chur∣ches greatest enemies. so were the Scribes and Pha∣risees, the most learned and (in appearance) the most godly of the age; and so, Act. 13.50. were those that raised () a running and a most rigid persecution-against Paul and Bar∣nabas, and expelled them out of their coasts; but this should ne∣ver the more hinder us. Secondly, Though they be learned and godly, yet they bee but men, therefore subject to mistakes; for judicium fit,2 They are but men, and subject to errors. secun∣dum vim intellectualis luminis, they preach, and print, but ac∣cording to their apprehension; But, Thirdly, All are not learned, nor godly, that the world judges to be so; they have a form of godlinesse,3 Many coun∣ted learned & godly that are not truly so. Who are  learned. denying the power there∣of, 2 Tim. 3. and so they may have the letter of Learning, but not the life of it, whole Libraries in their heads, but not a Catechisme, nor Principle in their hearts, Isa. 29.11. Isa. 50.4. I mean of the true Divinity which the Father learnes us, Joh. 6.45. by his Spirit, 1 Joh. 2.20.77. this none but the Redeemed have, Rev. 14.3. and in this the Spirit is our Tutor, and teaches us out of the Lambs booke, Rev. 5.5, 6. such have indeed the highest skill of Tongues, and are most admirably conver∣sant with the originall language of the Spirit, here lyes the difference; but for these, their Learning comes from the heart, Prov. 16.23. whilst the others comes but from the head: But, Fourthly, They know but in part,4 Men know but in part. they will know more then now they doe. Fifthly, Doe not learned, able, and godly of all sorts print,5 earned and godly of all sorts for this way. preach, and pray this way of Christ? by unanswerable argu∣ments against all opposers whatsoever? and answer the argu∣ments, and objections of the Adversaries?6 Their oppo∣sition makes for it. Sixtly, This opposition of theirs is necessary for the evincing of the truth, and makes more for it, then against it, Act. 28.22. Act. 24.5.14.
Object.Object. But when people enter into this way, they run into errors presently. Answ. First, Some it may bee that enter, doe run into errour,1 This is not the cause of it. but this their uniting with the Saints in Gospel-order, is not the cause of it; nay, Secondly, There is no stricter enemy to error, that can bee, then this order of Christ,2 It is a great enemy to error. which will not allow of the least ap∣pearance, much lesse growth of error, or sinne, Rom. 16.17, 18. 1 Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. 2 Tim. 2.16, 17. Act. 20.29.31. Rev. 2.14.16. 2 Jo. 10. though such as are conscientious have (and are to have) their liberty in things indifferent, Rom. 14.1, 2, 5. 3 The not en∣tring into this way, makes men run into wayes of error.Thirdly, Nay, to say the truth, the neglect and omission of this duty to enter into fellowship according to Gospel-order, makes so much disorder, and so many runne into wayes of error, as hath been hinted before in Chap. 7. but grant it, to argue ex concessis, then we say, 4 Errors are necessary.Fourthly, Errors are usefull, as well as truth, and it is expe∣dient they should be 1 Cor. 11.19. In Pope Clements the fifths time, Frederick King of Sicily made this his master-objection against the Church, viz. the errours and evill-orders (which in∣deed he might well doe) but he was answered, and soon satis∣fied with this Scripture,Truth and error must be both toge∣ther. That offences must come, and that there must be heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may bee manifest; by Arnoldus de nova villa. This is much for the glory of truth too,☞ and therefore in Isa. 60.1, 2. a glorious light, and yet a grosse darknesse are both foretold for one time together; should wee halfe so much prize the light, and presse for it, had we never a night? nor darknesse? but both together doth well, and wisdome hath so ordained it. I have heard of a Ruler who gave liberty to his subjects for certain dayes to do any manner of evill or mischiefe, and they should not bee questioned for any wickednesse done in those dayes; no, though they murdered, or did villany in the highest nature; But this was in policy to indear government unto them, and by giving his people a taste what it was to bee without it, to make them the more prize it. Object.Obj. We are well enough as long as salvation may be had here in Parishes, what need we enter into any other way?
Answ. 1. Yet ye are not well enough; for ye live in dis∣obedience, and in danger of Babylons plagues,Not enough to be in Parishes, though salva∣tion could be had there. and in contempt of Christs commands, which shall not go unpunished, Heb. 10.20. And therefore, if you love your own souls, there is great need of getting into the gates of Sion. 2. VVhat a carnal, low, degenerate, base Spirit hast thou,2. This argues a base carnal spirit. to be as well content with Egypt, as with Canaan? and with the Onions and Leeks, as well as if ye had the Milk and Honey?To be content with the Oni∣ons and Leeks of Egypt. Thou doest fall foully short of the true Spirit of Christ in a Saint; which is ever going forward, and cannot be content with the husks, no nor crums, as long as there is bread enough in our Fathers house. Besides, how unkindly doest thou deal with Dear Christ? who took care for thee?☜ and brought this way from Heaven out of his Fathers heart for thee? and wilt thou now slight both him, and it? But, 3. It is a question,3. Thou ar (else) a hinde∣rer of thine own comfort and salvation. whether thy salvation may be had here in these Parochial ways and Discipline, as long as thou art perswaded, and convinced by Gods Word thou art in a false-way; but how ever, I tell thee from the Lord, thou art an enemy to thy poor soul, and as much as (almost) may be an hinderer of thy own salvation.And why? Quia quoscun{que} deus eligit ad finem; eos eli∣git ad media. Ursin. de Ec∣cles. For thou dost rob thy soul of the rich benefit of being watched over, admonished, counsell∣ed, comforted, and maist lie in some sin (which thou seest not, and others might see) which may be thy ruine; thou art subject to wandrings now, and may be, runnest in a full career without stop or stay, warning or check; besides, you have not here without in your Parishes the benefit of many ordi∣nances, as exercising of gifts, prophesying one by one, and frequent communication and conference in the things of God. Mal. 3.16. And such-like pretious benefits as are in this Church-way to be had at large for your edification.4. If thou con∣tinuest obsti∣nate, it may be just with God, to give thee up to the hardness and deceitful∣ness of thine own heart. 4. And lastly, it is just with the Lord, to leave thee to thy lusts, to swear in his wrath, thou shalt never enter into his rest; never to make one motion more at thy soul, by his spirit, to enter into this way; or once to encline thine heart thereunto; If now, now I say, after so many clear calls, thou doest resist the Holy Ghost. Wherefore as Heb. 3, 10, 11, 12, 13. harden not
your hearts (,Expos. which comes of the word  to dry up, or wither) do not snib or nip off those buds, or blast those blooms which are in you, and like to set so fair for fruit; nor by the hardness of your hearts, and unkindness, and cruelties, to the conceptions of Christ within you, do not dry up those sweet sappy motions, which are made in your heart by his spirit; if you do, you will prove but a barren branch, a withered sear stick, to be cut up for the fire, John 15.16. Heb. 6.8. they are nigh the curse that do so, in the deceitfulness of sin,Wherefore take heed, how you reject it. i. e. ( ex à privat. & ) drawn out of the way of Christ, by some fallacy or other; who ever refuseth this way of Christ, runs a desperater hazard, then he is aware off; wherefore then let him take heed! take heed! And let Ministers (so called) look about them too! and beware!Ministers must have a care too. A great change nigh! Their warning peece, the last year. A mortal blow to Morter-Churches. for a greater alteration is yet to come! and to befal them! then ever hath been before! O then! Sirs! that they would be busie about the Lords house! and no longer delay it! or do it by halves! Numb. 14.24. or by haltings! be∣tween too! Do they yet know what was the meaning of the last lightning? and thunder the last year? which grew so angry at their Morter-Churches and Parish-Temples? what houses were burnt or beaten down to the ground, but those Churches? and on that day of worship too? and in several Counties too? and which is not without a Mystery? but it shall be plain, and made an History ere long; in the interim, it were well, that Ministers and all would take warning and sin no more, (by dishonoring God in idolizing forms! and humane inventions! or in worshipping of Christ in Anti-christian ways! and traditions!) least a worse thing happen unto them. Was there ever any that hardned his heart against the Lord, and prospered at last? Job 9.4. Obj.But some it may be will say, Sir, You forget your self (and so I would) whilest you urge so much your Form of Discipline! For we look for Zion more spiritually! and for spiritual wor∣shippers! We urge Faith more then Form.Answ. 1. It is not so much the Form, as the Faith, that I would urge; I mean obedience to Christs positive commands
(as I told you before) although some soar too high into the air, that account the Practical Part of Worship a meer Form. 2. I urge it not so much to be Church-members as Christs-members; but first to have fellowship with the Son▪2. To be Christs-mem∣bers, more then Church-mem∣bers. and then with the Saints (as I said before;) but I say, both these are enjoyned, to be enjoyed: Yet I say further, whilest in the Form, out of the Form; and whilest under it, yet above it; and so are all Saints in the Church, spiritual worshippers of God, John 4.23. yea, in spirit and in truth together;And in the Churches to be spiritual wor∣shippers. Wherefore let none be so censorious, as to say, We are all for the form of Discipline, when indeed, we are least for it, and would have all our Brethren to live above it in their Spirits with God, and with Christ; in the Temple, and the Light of the New Jerusalem. We live in them, as Abraham lived in Tents, and David in Tabernacles. 3. We also look for Sion more spiritually!3. We look for Zion, and must first pass through the Gates. but this is in order thereunto: Before we can get into the City (which is all glorious within,) we must pass through the gates, as ap∣pears, Psal. 87.2, 3. His foundation is in the holy mountains. The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more then all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God!Expos. There is, first, the foundation laid by the Lord himself; and then secondly, the particular Churches, or the gates of Zion, which the Lord so loves, . And then thirdly, the City its self which is so glorious. But I say, before we can come into the City, we must enter through the gates; which are these Churches gathered:Particular Churches are the Gates of Sion. So that this is in the way to that City, where Salvation is placed, Isa. 46.13. This is the way to Zion, as Jer. 50.5. They shall ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward, saying, Come let us joyn our selves together, &c. We must ask first the way,Expos. (i. e. the Churches▪) and when we are in the way, then for Zi∣on. And thus the Saints come to Sion, Jer. 3.14. Isa. 51.11. & 35.10. i. e. By this way, and through these gates; we must first live in Tents, and then in the City, Heb. 11.9.10.
First, in Tabernacles, then in the Temple; and that those that would live in Sion in her glory,☞ and full effusion of the Spirit, must be in the Churches, in order thereunto; which appears plainly in Chap. 9. lib. 2. For the Lord will be known in her Gates, Towers, and Palaces, Psal. 48.3. & 44.12. Quaere.Quaere. How we should groundedly know we are fitted for this Communion of Saints in Church-society, as hath been pressed? Answ. 1. There must be clear satisfaction to your judge∣ment,Clearly satisfi∣ed in it. and full perswasion in your brest, Rom. 14. the whole Chapter, especially Vers. 1, 2, 4, 14. Acts 2. & 19. & 8. Saints ever first believed, and were fully perswaded, and then they entered. 2. Freely wil∣ling and longing.2. You must be exceedingly longing and desirous after it; and then make ready for it; be freely willing to it, by the Spirit of Christ in you, Psal. 110.3. Jer. 50.4, 5. For all in Christs Kingdom are voluntiers, 1 Thes. 1.6, 7. Acts 4.32. 2 Cor. 8.3, 5. 3. Ready to take up any Cross to follow Christ.3. Such are made free to follow Christ any where soever, Revel. 14.4. And as they come at his call, Mark 1.18. so they are prepared to leave all, and to take up the cross, Mat. 19.27. accounting before hand, what it will cost them; so that they pass not a pin for storms and afflictions, which they expect before hand; as 1 Thes. 3.3. Phil. 1.27, 28. but they will hold out to the end. 4. You have a sweet and true object.4. What is the object ye look on in these overtures of your affections? It is the King in his beauty. O the sweet! Soul-ravishing presence of God in Christ! in grace! and glory! This makes these Tabernacles so amiable! his goodness in these gardens is so desireable, Psa. 87.2, 3. Isa. 33.17. Psa 27.4. Act. 2.28. Ps. 84.1, 2, 7, 10. & 63.1, 2. 2 Cor. 3.18. & 6.16. 5. You have first fellowship with the Fa∣ther, and his Son, and then with his Saints. Else it is un∣sound.5. Have ye a clear discovery of your fellowship with the Father, and his Son? Then ye may from the same princi∣ple, and by the same spirit, have fellowship with the Saints; 1 John 1.7. but be sure ye begin in Christ first, or else the foundation is not laid; else ye will fall out and down in the dust, 1 John 2.19. ye cannot continue else; and then will your ending be worse then your beginning.
6. What is your end? is it that as the chosen ones,6. Your End is to set forth▪ Gods praise, and to glorifie God. and those bought by Christs blood, you may set forth the praises of him that called you out of darkness into light? 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Thes. 1.11, 12. and is it nothing else but in subordination to this? why then these are good grounds. But many there be that have base, by, sinister ends,Many creep and crowd in for by, base, selfish Ends. In Dublin. for which they creep into this Church-way; who are (or will be ere long) a scandal to the Gospel, and do bring a scorn upon the truth. O! how often hath it been said in Dublin (and that by such, whose sincerity is without exception) with bleeding hearts! Look yee! there is one that could not tell how to live, but hath lost his trade, and for some place is got in to be a member of such a Church; and he is now preferred, and made a Gentle∣man, &c. Nay, some have been so bold as to boast of it, (a∣mong themselves) as if nothing else byassed them into these ways, but politick ends! O sad!The mischief that such mem∣bers do. such as these do bring the ways of holiness into contempt! they grieve many that are in! and keep out many that are not in! they raise fractions within, factions without; they open the wide mouthes of the enemies to blaspheme; and they side for lucres sake, or lusts sake with the great, rather then with the good. Ah! alas! and indeed, though upon the naked knees of our souls, we cannot be thankful enough for the liberty the truth hath,☜ and that holiness and Religion is so much advanced;Never more Hypocrites, then now; and why? Yet I do verily believe, never more Hypocrites then now, who (be∣cause they know none but honest men must be preferred into places or offices) do dissemble with God and men; get into Church-fellowships (the name of a Church-member making them of note) and exercise their gifts,Their chara∣cter and con∣ditions. and get up into Pul∣pits (which God forbid, but they should orderly) and change their words, ways, and works, but not their hearts, Gen. 4.3. Hosea 7.16. These are lights before men, but darkness before God, Matth. 6.2, 5, 16. Isa. 58.2. and though these do not the evil which they love, (in their hearts, if they durst do it,☜ or could not be seen by men) yet they will do the good, which they love not, to be seen by men, Numb. 14.2. & 4.40. O these! these are the scandal of this age! this Land! this
Reformation! and of the Church of Christ! whererefo be∣ware ye be not byassed by such sinister,And their End. carnal, fleshly ends! for the Hypocrites hope will come to nothing, Job 8.13. Their flower will fade, and their joy is but for a moment, Job 20.5. When Religion is much in fashion,☞ it is much a fancy, and then most men will swim with the stream. Thus have I roughly offered a few directions, and have lent my hand, by a few helps to such as do seek the way to Si∣on! but least they leap before they look, they will do well to weigh them in the ballance of the sanctuary; and because many Church-fellowships in my judgement (given me by the Word and Spirit) are in a doubtful state at present; and which (I think) must be purged with the Refiners fire, and Fullers soap:What Church-fellowship is best for sincere hearted and tender Saints to get into. I do therefore beseech you seriously to seek such a society as hath, 1. The sweetest harmony, and most love, and to all a∣like. 2. Which hath Christian liberty, and no one is robbed by the Rulers, of his or her right. 3. Where they live more in the Spirit, then on the Forms. 4. Where holiness is highest, and appears in most power. 5. Where every Saint may walk according to his light (so he be holy, humble, &c.) though he differ in some things from others. 6. Where you see most self-denial, humility of minde, and ready serving one another. 7. Where you see most order and Gospel-decency. 8. Where appears most sympathy, and bowels of love, and pity. 9. VVhere their unity consists, not in the unity of the fom, but in the unity of the Spirit. 10. VVhere you finde most readiness to meet together, to instruct, counsel, comfort, and build up one another in the most holy Faith; and where there is not honor given, or taken, Joh. 5.44. after the manner of men, or a having mens persons in admiration. Many such things I might offer now, but I shall take more
liberty hereafter; onely these things in brief I lay before you, till the next Books. And this I do the rather,Experience hath put the Author upon this Subject. being in∣duced thereunto by abundance of experience afforded me (through Gods goodness) from variety of observations, which I have taken of many gathered Churches in England and Ireland, as they now stand. The Lord open your eyes to see, and your ears to hear, and lead you by his light, and Spirit of truth, into his holy tabernacles, Psal. 43.3. Thus far for the first Part of this Platform, wherein you have the totum essentiale of a true Church of Christ, from The Efficient Causes. The Material Causes. The Formal Causes. The Objective Causes. The Instrumental Causes. The And Final Causes. All this is to shew what is requisit before embodying; but the next part relates, to what is to be done in▪ and the last, to what is to be done after embodying together. The End of the First Book.
Challah. The Heavenly Nymph: OR THE BRIDE. Rising up to Perfection, and preparing for the coming of her Bridegroom: Being the Second Book of Church-Discipline. Wherein appears the BRIDES beauty in her Members, and Complexions, her submission and obedience to Christ, her Modesty and her Chastity, her Humility, and her Loves, with other Graces and Ornaments that appertain to her. AS ALSO The BRIDEGROOMS great love to her (more then to all other the dwellings of Jacob, Psal. 87.2.) his care of her, his special Pre∣sence, and abode with her, his Royal maintenance to her, and pro∣visions for her according to his owne fulnesse, and the riches of his Grace that filleth all in all, Eph. 1.23. Or you have (in this Book) a sight of the Moon shining (though under Clouds and thick darknesse) as she receives her light and life from the Sun (in the former Book.) Or Christ (her Head) coming in glory, being big-bellied with the precious Promises and Prophesies, and Types, never before so opened, and which are tra∣velling to be delivered in these latter dayes, wherein the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as of seven dayes, &c. Isa. 30.26. By JOHN ROGERS, A friend of the Bridegrooms, and of the Brides. Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Now at Thomas Apostles Lond. But communicated at Brides in Dublin in Ireland. Psal. 45.11. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. Isa. 62.5. As the Bridegroom rejoyceth over the Bride, so shall the Lord over thee. Rev. 21.2. The holy City, the new Jerusalem prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband. Zach. 14.20, 21. Holinesse to the Lord; and every pot in Jerusalem shall be holinesse to the Lord, and no more Canaanite shall be in the house of the Lord in that day. Zeph 3.20. I will make you a name, and praise among all peoples of the earth. Rev. 19.5, 6, 7. Be glad O all Saints, for the mariage of the Lamb is come, the Bride hath made her self ready, . Ier. 30.17. This is Sion which none (to speak on) seek after. Rev. 22 17. But the Spirit and the Bride saith Come. LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson. 1653.
To all Christian Readers of all Judgements, a word or two first. Christian Reader, IF thou beest so, thou wilt not wonder, that I say unto thee, The Day is coming when Kiriath-Sepher shall be smitten,Iosh. 15.15. whose name signifies the City of Books, and our City and Country are full these times, which by the next Age will be all out of date, and lye moulding like old Almanacks in corners;Sim. for then the Lamb shall be our Light, and the Lord our Temple. And as Solon said of Laws, sayes he, We have many good LAWS made indeed, but alas! there wants ONE yet; and what is that? Why a LAW to put all the rest in EXECUTION;The Lambs book will be ere long abroad. so we have many good Books abroad, but give way to one more I pray, for there wants one more, and that is the Book which will put us upon the practise of all the rest; I mean the Lambs Book written within and with∣out, Rev. 5.2, 3. and Ezek. 2.9. this is ere long to come abroad, though I feare it will finde but few Readers. In the mean time, the Presse sayes to the Pulpit, as Esaiah said to Jacob, Plurima habeo, sint tua tibi, Gen. 32.4. I have enough my brother, Gen. 33.9. keep what thou hast to thy selfe. And amongst the multitude it comes to my turne to bring in () but I hardly know whom to invite,In the mean time what is presented in this book. for although I may find a few guests (these stomack-full times) that may come to feed, yet I know that most will but sit to looke on. And indeed, I have not pro∣vided for the proud, or Prelatick Palat; neither puffe-paste,Sim. nor kick-shawes; But as Aeschilus the Poet said of his Tragedies, that they were but small dishes of great Homers supper; so I
say, I here present you a poore Dish or two from the Lamb, who will sup with you in this the Kings house and Palace, wherein you shall finde the feast of fat things, flaggons of Wine, and the Apples of the Tree of life, yea spiced Cups, and green Sallets, and sweet flowers to boot, gathered out of Spring-garden: and because some men must have their dishes set out with flourishes, they shall finde the attestation of the most eminent and orthodox Writers in all Ages to this Treatises truth: And to satisfie all senses; the Bridegroom hath provided the best soul-ravishing Musick,Math. 22.3. I mean the melody of the Spirit; for his guests that come at his call to this marriage-house and Feast, for all things are ready, the fatlings and oxen are killed, Come! But I know the wantonnesse of the times make many look for pretty knacks now,☞ as the last courses; but soft there; Those Spaniards are wisest who will have the best at last, and your toyes at first. It is true, the Books of these few years coming, are like to be the last course; but let me tell you they must bee the best,Divers sorts of Readers. most solid, sweet, spiritual Dishes that have not been yet brought in. 1 To feed their fancies.Some there be that will read good Books and Authors, but as the Butter-flye that sucks flowers, onely to paint her wings with; so to feed their fancies, opinions, and judgements with, but not like the Bee to fetch out the hony of them. Others there be that are worse, and would sucke out poyson, to satisfie the lusts of their hearts; these may hap be taken too, as those in the act of Adultery; for if one reads two are catched. 2 To feed their lusts.Others there be that come out of Criticisme too, and to shew the ambo-dexterity of their captiosities, I should say capacities, little to their credit do they buffet words with blows, and pick holes in cyphers to satisfie the curiositie of their quick-silvered Genius. 3 To carp like Criticks.Alexander, when one did present him with his dexterity in finding fault with, and vilipending of others, and in extolling his owne Arts and Activities, desired to see what he could doe; so his choice art appearing (to be so poor) as onely to cast a Pease through the eye of a Needle a little bigger:Sim. Well, sayes Alexander,☞ Give, Give him a bushel of pease for his pains to maintain his sport with. And though Alexander was very free in giving gifts, and rewards, he thought a bushel of pease re∣ward
enough to keep up his curiosity, So I say, to recompence such Readers if they come hither, I have a whole bushel full for them to keep up their trade. Other Readers we have who minde more the mark then the mettal, and more minde who writes, then what is written;4 Others mind more the man then the thing. the name carries it upon the wings of credit, whereby many are bribed to buy and sell their time, their judgement, and the truth at the Authors rate: The rich Citizens are their best Readers, for they will pay most for it. And many,☜ I was saying orthod — but I mean Organ-players will play no longer then such blow the bellows, and fill the pipes; for their fame makes things furthest off, look fairest, best and greatest. But although I make account to meet with many of the third sort of Readers,Sim. who have said before-hand they will salute this Book with Argos-eyes, and with a Zoilus his zeal,☜ yet they are accounted as Crates the Theban was called, the Door-opener, for that he would rush into every mans company to hear what they said, and to gain-say it at a venture; and so do these sometimes;What Rea∣ders have pro∣mised me. they reprehend what they understand not; and sometimes they ail because they (thinke they) understand what (indeed) they un∣derstand not,Sim. and like Dogs they choose to pisse in the fairest places; and all times with naked natural, reason they read; Like the Smith that smoaks for it,☜ for that he takes a red-hot iron glowing out of the fire with his bare hands so I warrant them they burne their fingers (at least) for it, and will be branded. It is this bids them to eat of the forbidden fruit; and makes them Owl-like frowne at the face of the Sun.Sim. Those that make reason their guide,That read with carnal reason. do but set a mad unruly horse to be formost in the Team. Wherefore as Abraham when he went up to the sacrifice of his Son, he left his servants and his Asse below; so though our natural Reason, and humane Arts may serve for below,Sim. yet they must bee left behinde if wee will come up to the top of this Mount; for our Reason without the Grace,☜ and the Spirit that leads up, is but like Sampson without his Guide when his eyes were out,Sim. for without the direction of his Guide he could not finde the Pillars of the house; Nor shall you finde the Pillars of the Lords house without the guidance of his gracious Spirit.Such will be lost in this house.
Thus Reader thou art invited to come and welcome, be of what judgement thou wilt, it is all one for that, for thou art bidden to the Feast, thou art guided in hither by grace. Where∣fore come hither heartily, yea as into a Wardrobe, not to finde an Inventory of new things, for that is too troublesome; but to find out what is fit for thy weare, use, and application. In the last Book I was much engaged upon the Power of Ci∣vil and Ecclesiastical; but in this I shall bee most in the power of the Church and Spirit; the Spirit and the Bride. The Spirit in the Churches; which will be abundantly powred forth in these latter dayes, Vide chap. 9. As to Civil Magistrates, I have done my duty in shewing their duties, and dare not like some, Mermaid-like, sing them into the Sea.To Civill Corrupt Law∣yers. But I feare I may be answered as Antigonus an∣swered one that presented him a Book concerning Justice: Thou art a Fool (sayes he) to present me a Book of Justice, when thou seest me making wars with other Cities and Countries.☞ Little lesse said one of the corrupt Lawyers (viz. Mr Maynard) o me last March before the Lords Commissioners of the Seale in the Parliament Chamber at the Temple, whilst he was plead∣ing the Law for a Delinquent (Malignant) Patron (over and over,Corrupt Law∣yers. an open notorious Enemy and Cavalier against God and State) yet having compounded he must have the power to present a man of a wicked malignant spirit (none else) and knowne for swearing,Wicked men present cor∣rupt Ministers to livings. company-keeping and other vices, and hee must force such a one upon the poore people (that never heard him so muh as preach) to the joy of all the malignant, godlesse wretches in the Country all about, and to the griefe of all the godly, who cry and complaine of this detestable unsufferable in∣justice and foule-oppression,Horrible soul-tyanny, sin, and impiety, which cryes for ven∣geance. Mr. Colem. Mr. M. M. R. Mr. Birk. all eminent Mi∣nisters thus abused. which will never leave crying for vengeance till it come with a powder upon the heads of some; O! that godly, eminent holy men, whom all the Country would petition, and beg for; the very faithful, useful Ministers of Jesus Christ, must be justled out from a godly people, and a Church-communion too, and that by Church-enemies, Christs enemies and State-enemies, and all this is known most notori∣ously; yea that Soules must be thus made sale of, and slaves of, to serve mens lusts; and all this too by bribes, extortion, oppressi∣on,
injustice, and thorough friends made by money or gifts! O let the righteous God come downe and judge! The whole world that hears of it abhors it. And with tears and prayers, some are crying aloud to the Lord of this lamentable Reformation in the want of the Laws Regulation: The very justice of the Law as it now stands is most monstrous injustice, and sends many a precious soule and family a begging, against all honesty and Christianity;Lawyers live by sin. for the wicked Lawyers (who live no other way but by sin; and one may in the sight of God be as lawfully tolerated to live in drunkennesse, swearing, whoredome, and to get money by it, and to make a trade of it; as to live by, take money for, and make a trade of lying, oppressing the Fatherlesse, and widows, cheating of the Nation, eating up the bread of the poor, yea the poor as bread, turning out godly, putting in ungodly and wicked debauched Whoremongers, Adulterers, Drunkards, or the like in their room) I say these ungodly ones (for I cannot see how they can be other) Christ himselfe deprecates and accuses, as a crew from hell that live by sin; Wo to you Lawyers, Luke 11.46, 47. for these are the enemies of Christ,Cursed of Christ. Their God is Terminus. and have another God, as the Romans had, which they called Terminus. But for the incredible wickednesse of those of that Profession, their guiltinesse of all manner of sinnes which the Nation lyes under, as Blood, Theft, Oppression, Injustice, Contentions, Hatred, Cozenage, and Fraud, Rebellion, Lying, Perjury, and what not? and for the injustice and tyranny of the Law as it now stands without regulation or reformation, to the utter undoing of thou∣sands that are aged, godly and deserving Families, with many a sad and lamentable history thereof, and for the late excessive exorbitances of their injustice and oppression, scarce paralleld in any of the former ages; I doubt not but an accurate account will be given thereof to all the world in a book compiled for that purpose. But in the mean time, this Mr. M. one of the cast out members of the house (I hear) pleading for this cause of the Dvill (for I dare call it no other) much offended me, insomuch that I was urged in conscience to say before the Lords Com∣missioners: Sir, the Acts of the Apostles had been your best Statute-book in this businesse about souls: You use not Gods word: but before I could goe further, he punched mee aside,
with some abusive fowl-mouthed language (as I hope ere long to declare to the world) saying,They mock at the word. What do yee tell us of the word, we have the Law? &c. So the Lawyers pushed me aside. But what a sad thing is this? that such Laws? and such Laywers should bee suffered? and how can a good reformation be laid upon so base a foundation?Lawyers hin∣der Reforma∣tion. They are the Lawyers all this while that have hindered the Reformation, and so they will, as long as they have such influence upon the Parliament. In reforming of the Commonwealth, I wish our Governours would beware of leaning to Policie too much; for hitherto like Jewellers when they see a spot or spek or cloud in the Jewel, which cannot be grownd out without sensible abatement of the stone,Sim. Why the Law is not regula∣ted all this while. they will not meddle with it: neither will our Governors as yet meddle with the regulation of the Law (it seems) because there must (then) be abundance of the corrupt, cloudy, spotty, oppressive part of it be quite taken away and grownd to powder then; but I hope ere long that policie will be out of power and prevalency. I remember I have read Caligula, upon the suit and out-cry of the people, desired the Law might be set up that all might know it, and not be ensnared by it; but he had so well learned the art of Policie,Never the bet∣ter for being Englished. that he caused it to be written in so small a hand that none could read it, or was the better for the setting of it open: I will not apply it; onely this, what are wee the better for the Englishing the Law? are not the Lawyers as compleat Knaves in plaine English as they are in their other language? which (like themselves) is so full of Solecismes and Apo∣copies; so that as long as this lasts, the pleas which some make for Religion and the Gospel,Sim. serve onely as Hacknies for their Lusts to ride and spur on in their way: Nor yet is it that we would deal with the Law as the man in the Fable was dealt with, by his two wives, the old which he had married plucked out all his black-hairs out of his head (the evidence of his youth) and his young wife (that he married after) plucked out all his gray-hairs,What we would have of the Law, and what not? that no standards of Antiquity might re∣maine, so that betwixt both, they left him bald; I say we would not, that there should be no antiquity of the Law to remaine (as some Levellers it may be would) nor would we that there should
be no Novelty of the Law (as the wicked Lawyers it may be would:) But we say, and affirm it in the sight of God and men, That the Law must be purged to the purpose,Laws, Lawy∣ers, purged. and the Lawyers too; and a great deal of the old (tyranny) must out, and much of new must be added for the liberties f Saints and Subjects: For the best of the Civil Forms are attended with abundance of corrupt (yet close) Interests, that must down, down, to the ground. For that Form and Custom is got up in the room of Reason and Right.Custom and Form is in the room of Rea∣son and Right. And this is the ground of our Controversie, with the Law and Lawyers, (as they now are) and God himself must be on our side: For Laws were made by men, and are themselves to be condemned so far, as they fall short of pure and restored Reason; I mean the Reason of the age wherein we live, which is by de∣grees restored to perfection. Now as Reason is purer in this age,As Reason is better, Law must be better. then in the last, so the Laws must be; and so they must be purer in the next age, then in this. But many of our Laws are nothing else, but the results of the humors, designs, and corruptions of men, to establish themselves, and their mightinesses; so I ac∣count corrupt Presentations in the hands of wicked enemies to Christ, and the Gospel; and so Fealties, Homages, Oaths, &c. with a hundred other things that I could name. And Law in this sence, is nothing else but Will,Many of our Laws are but Mns Lusts, Wils, Humors, to make them∣selves great. Arbitrary Lust, Power, Custom, Pride, and is as corrupt, as those that made them. But the day of the Lord, will deliver us! But so may the Lawyers say, Did the poor man say to the Pirate, when he seized upon him and his ship, and was plundring of it; O! sayes the poor man! at the last day ye will not know how to answer this:Sim. Sayest thou so! sayes the Pirate? Nay, if I shall stay so long be∣fore I answer it, as to the last day, I care not; but now you shall go with me this day. So the Brazen-headed oppressing Lawyers, it is like will say; Nay, if we shall stay till that day, it is well enough; and so I have been answered. Say ye so? Will not the Rocks and Moun∣tains stand still yet? Though ye should say, fall on us? O fear∣ful! desperate boldness! but know this day is hard by, even at your doors; and what will ye do now? Now the Lord is com∣ing to judge the Earth? now those whom you have judged and
oppressed,The day is hard by, when Laws and Iudges shall be resto∣red as at fist. i. e. according to Conscience, Reason, and Equity. shall be your judges? For then (that is shortly) shall be the Resurrection of Principles and Power, Equity and Consci∣ence, Reason and Right; which is now gradually rising and standing upon their feet. All Laws were made according to the light of the Reason that the men then had that made them: Now as men grow up in purified and inlightned Reason in every age, the Law is to be mended, refined, and purified accordingly: So that the weak and imperfect Reason of former ages, hath lest much to be added to, and to be mended in the Law, by the purer and perfected Reason of after ages. But for want of this regulating and mending the Law, Lust hath succeeded Reason, and hath been (by fair glosses and counterfeits of Reason) en∣throned in the room of it.But as yet Rea∣son is turned out of the room and Lust set up for Law. And Lust, Custom, Will, Might, and Form, hath as yet the day of Reason, and turns it out of doors, and condemns it for an Offender, a Law-breaker, and a Traytor; as to instance, Let a Minister be in a living, and preach there three quarters of a year, and then another be put in a week or two before the Harvest; he that comes for that week or two, shall have all the Means (by the abomination of the Law;Instance.) and he that preached there, all before, must have nothing, sayes the Law; and so said the foresaid Lawyers, before the Lords Com∣missioners; though Conscience cries out upon it, and Reason con∣demns it, and Equity would not suffer it; yet against Equity, Reason, Justice, Conscience and all; Lust and Will, Custom and Form▪ will have it so, and condemns Reason, Conscience, and all for Traytors, and Disobedient, and Rebellious; When in very deed, it is the Law as it stands, that is an unconscionable oppressing, humorous, self-corrupted Form and Custom, that is to be condemned, as being against clear Right, Equity, Light, Justice, Reason, and Understanding. Now when this Principle comes to be restored, and true Reason and Equity to be the Law; as I doubt not, but it will be within forty five years; then wo be to the Lawyers,Ere long wo to the Lawyers, and why? and to all such Persons and Personal Interests! the Form tumbles! Custom falls! Wills of men shall no longer be a Law! nor shall the Law be as Lawyers say it then! But I will avouch it,The greatest Traytors, and Oppressors in he world. that the Lawyers, Judges, and such as are so strict to the Form, Lust, and Letter of the Law, shall be found the great∣est Traytors, Oppressors, Prevaricators, Rebels, and Opposers
of true Justice, Equity, Reason, and Conscience; yea, to God,The greatest Traytors and Oppressors in the World. A word and a warning to cut Governos a∣bout this. Isai. 2.9. and the States that are in the World. In the mean time, O that our Governors would make hast to reform, according to their Light! and the Reason of this Age! If they will not, the just Judge of all the Earth! who is gone forth against all Nations for their unjust Laws and oppres∣sions! I say this great God will come of a sudden, and regulate both the Law, and them too! The Paracelsian that promises to restore nature and health, to a corrupt body, doth soonest sub∣vert and overthrow both health, body, and all together. So will our Governors, if they think to reform, before they have well purged over and over the Law, and Lawyers:☜ Till then neither Reason nor Religion can have orbe-room enough. I hope none will think me their enemie, for telling the truth; and speaking my Conscience. It is to set light upon a hill, let none be offended;Let none be offended with me. but if they be, I pass not a pin. For as Theodorus of Cyrene answered Lysimachus, when he threatned to crucifie him, O Sir! said he, Let your Courtiers and Favorites fear that! for I had as lieve rot in the air, as on the Earth: I could (I hope) willingly save men an inquisition after me in such a case, and say to them, I come of my own accord, Here I am! What will ye? for I re∣member the Duke of Burgundy▪Sim. who was sirnamed Carolus Audax, was son to that Duke who was sirnamed Bonus; for Conscience and Confidence, are near a kin: Wherefore of whom should I be afraid? Psal. 27.1, 2. for the Lord is my light, and my salvation, &c. I must be as ready to write, print, preach, and pray against the sins of great men, as of the meanest, and I will make no more on it, though I suffer for it: Or though they deal with this, as the old Senate did,Sim. that burned up Nu∣ma his Books, for mentioning the secrets of their Religion. I have heard, that if the Crocodiles,☜ which besiege the banks of Nilus, and way-lay the Travellers into Egypt,Sim. were but pricked with the quill of the Bird, Ibis,The way to disable Law∣yers from hurt∣ing us. they will be so weak and stupi∣fied therewith, that they will not be able to stir, or hurt any more. O that this course were taken with our English Crocodiles!
Those wicked Lawyers that way-lay, oppress, tear, and torment so many persons and families of this Nation: Did every one arm himself with a quill; and make it a good pen, with a hard nib,☞ and write but as long as that would last, what they know of them; i. e. and touch them therewith but to the quick, (as well as they were able) I am certain, we should finde them stupified, and stingless, and unable to way-lay us, hurt us, and oppress us, as they do. But I shall say no more of them here, ex∣pecting a more perfect Character of them ere long in a Book by it self. The next thing Reader, that this Treatise most of all in∣tends,The Author looks for An∣tagonists. is the Description of the Church; wherein I expect An∣tagonists, tag and rag, of the ridged ones of all judgements, especially of the Presbyterians and Anabaptists; but I hope to be armed for them with the armor of light. The frothy agitati∣ons of some unquiet heads and busie brains, may cast away cost, and twist straws; I mean, their labor may be worth a pound, but their matter or stuffe not worth a penny. But before hand, I shall pray them to forbear passion, and the pride of a Prelate; For a foolish sentence dropped upon Paper,But prayes them not to rail, but reason. will set pride and folly upon a Hill. Memnon, the General of Darius his Army, hearing a mer∣cenary Soldier,Sim. with vile language revile Alexander, and exclaim against him; he struck him with a Lance, saying, He hired him to fight against him, not to rail upon him. Clamors against a very Enemy, requires rather reproof then praise; and I think there was no man much commended (but much condemn∣ed) that poor empty, wide-mouthed Libeller of Garlick-hithe, for his Pamphlet he put out lately,As the Libeller that put out the Tast of Doctrine at Tho. Apostles. whereby he hath brought himself into the report and reproof of all that hear his name, which may be eminently up, and famous ere long in London, as it is in Cheshire, and other places: I had, I confess, a full Character of him (indeed) by Master Manwaring (one that knew him well in Cheshire) at my Lord Bradshawes Table late∣ly, whilest Sir William Brereton, with an eminent Minister
(that knows him highly too) was by; and gave so good account of him, That I cannot but wonder how he could end in one lying (impudent) Pamphlet; and like a Squib (too dry, it seems) flash all out at once. But if he, or any other, will leave railing and fall to writing, what tends to edification, I shall be for him, and heartily embrace both it and them, so far, as I finde a Christian Spirit with them. And indeed, as the Athenians dashed out of their Calender a day in May (when Neptune and Minerva were at oddes, and in a bitter fray:) So from my heart I wish all our bitter frayes may be ended, and their dayes blotted out. And O! that the Lord would pour out his Spirit, ac∣cording to his promise in these latter dayes, upon all flesh; which will make us all one in love, and holiness, and power of godliness,One Spirit will make us all one. and equal worship. To conclude, Christian Reader,A word more to the Reader, to instruct him. if thou comest to drink of the pure streams, sweep away the froth (for that is mine) with thy hand of faith; and take up of what is spiritual and pretious (for that is the Lords) and make not too much stir, least you raise the mud; for that will make it worst of all.Sim. C. Lucillius. The Authors wishes for un∣learnd and learned Rea∣ders, and why? Caius Lucil∣lius, a Learned man, was wont to say, That he wished the things that he had written, might neither be read of the (altogether) unlearned; nor yet of the highly Learned: For, that the one would understand nothing; and the others would understand more then himself. But I wish the quite contrary, for that the unlearned might learn something of me; and the more learn∣ed might teach something to me: So that I hope this will stir up some to read, and some to write;Not larned ones are best Readers. 2 Chro. 12.10. which will be the worse for the Worms, and may hap to keep their Libraries from being eat up. But I wish they be the Learned of the Father, for such learning is the Golden Shield which defends the truth. But when Golden Shields were gone, Rehoboam was fain to do the deed with Brazen Shields. So I know where this true Learning, is wanting some Wilde Heads will supply the room with rage, boldness, and impudence. I shall keep thee no longer, good Reader, in the outward Court, or
Common Chamber; but I pray thee go further, and enter into his Chamber of Presence; where put up one Petition for him, who desires to live and die the Lords, And yours, And all in Christ, and nothing in himself, But JOHN ROGERS. From my Study, at Thomas Apostles, 1. Moneth. 25. 1653.
An Epistle to the Parish of Purleigh in ESSEX, nigh Malden; wherein the Author was setled Minister; till of late. Dear Friends. I Call you dear, not onely that I found you at a dear rate, but I am forced to leave you so; yet some of you are very dear to me, and in my heart, and whom I can freely bear in my bosom to the Father. But because the Death, or departure of a Minister from his people should be his last Sermon; I must therefore say in general to you this, That my greatest grief for most of you, is, That like the Cypresse, the more you were watered, the more you withered. Would it not grieve you, Husbandmen, to see your good seed every year to be lost, and to lie and rot under huge, hard clods? and never to bring forth fruits, or to come up? So how can it but be my com∣plaints
before my Lord and Master, when I give up my accounts, Heb. 13.17. and say Lord, I have preached! prayed! catechized! expounded! conferred for above this five years at Purleigh to such a people, and they have not beleeved nor obeyed thy word: but many of them are as ignorant, arrogant, bitter, prophane still, ungodly, and opposers of Christ and his Gospel still, as ever. O sad! what comfort can I have of this? Is not the thriving of the flocke the glory of the Shepherd? and their losse his griefe? Blessed bee God whom I serve! that some of you are my joy and my crowne, which I shall wear with me to heaven, Phil. 4.1. But yet the most of you (with much griefe of heart, I must say it) have rejected the Gospel, and the tenders of love, and the warme bowels and eeking blood of Jesus Christ; and oh! heavy, shal I say, the Day of your salvation! O deare souls! precious hearts, for whom I weep in secret! what will yee doe in the day of the Lord! where will you hide your selves from the wrath of the Lamb! O, O! how is it, that you bring forth nothing but briars and thorns! what? are yee accursed ground? Heb. 6.7, 10.28. Hos. 6.5. Matth. 12.41. Ier. 11.6. Ezek. 34.13.33. &c. Let me aske you, Is it not lamentable to see a poor father wringing his hands, and weeping over a stubborn childe, wishing he had never been borne! saying, I have tryed him so many weeks, and months, and yeers, and yet he is worse and worse, would you not pity the poor man? and say of this stub∣borne wretch, Well, you have a good father, God will never blesse you, you cannot thrive, you will come to nothing. Oh! so is it grievous to my heart! as it was to Ieremiah, and Elijah, to complaine to God of the stubbornnesse of the people: Ah! it is too notoriously
knowne that I have taken much pains to little purpose amongst you: And yet, O! what plottings! and conspiracies there were against me? what lies and libels were invented? what scandals raised? what scoffes and scornes I continually met with? what huge taxes and troubles you cast upon me? what backbitings and railings every day? what variety of designes were hatched in the midst of you to afflict me? yea, with plotted and premeditated malice & menacings to undo me? what work you made to render me contemptible to all the Country? before Magistrates, Ministers, people, & all? yea the children and servants set upon mee to abuse me? yea to stone me? yea to swear to take away my life from me? all which forced me to bee much absent from you. And oh friends! do ye think, God will not visit you for these things? have yee not suffered your servants and children to laugh and sport in the publick places openly in the sight of all the people, whilst the word hath been preaching? and when I have mildly reproved them to make mowes and mocks at me in the open Church? yea to lay dog-whips, and what not on the Pulpit cushion when I was to preach? What kinde of injury and abuses have you not returned to me, for all my love and pains, and care, and continual prayers for you? hath there one poor soule of us in Church-communion escap'd your malice and menacing? and your diligence to raise ill-reports, and to cause wrongs to befall them? have yee not vowed not to leave us, til you had rooted all of us from you, and not left a Round-head or Independent to dwell nigh you? have yee not consulted with all the Malignants about, how to bring to passe these designs? yet in the midst of all these troubles, and every day new trials and
wrongs from some or other of you? yet the Lord will one day witnesse what a care I had of you, when I could not be with you, or durst not; how I provided for you, and how ye were the travel, as well as the trouble of my soul. Yet when you had not worried mee away with all this, how often did many of you designe to starve me from you? And though like a Bird kept in a Cage without meat, yet I must doe my duty, and sing, though the thorne were ever at my breast. Still I followed you with love, patience, pity to your poor mi∣serable soules (O that yee knew it!) and with sweat and swinke praying, preaching, and expounding, in season and out of season. But as I have heard of the Seminary (in Lancashire riding disguised) that lost his glove, one that found it rode gallopping after him to restore it; but the Semi∣nary fearing he was a Pursevant, put spurs to horse, and flew from him as fast as he could, and for fear he should be overtaken, hee makes his horse take a hedge, and suddenly skipping over, fell full into a desperate deep pit, wherein he was drowned presently; O! so Sirs! the faster I have followed you to doe good, to recover you, to help to save you, why alas! the faster you fled away into sinne, after sinne, rejecting all offers and opportunities (almost) refusing to come to hear the word on the week-day, and many of you not coming a∣bove once on the Lords-day! Oh, alas! for the Lords sake! hear! make not such post-haste in sin to the ruine of your soule, body, and all! but O remember! the Pit is but on the other side, yee may soon be in it; but have a care lest you perish! Have I not spent out my owne bowels, and like a candle consumed my selfe (even out) to give you light! have I thought my life
too deare for your souls! O no! but you would not regard it! some pretended I was young, to keep them off! but alas! this was but a colour! did not young Solomon give good counsel? young Daniel discerne much? young Joseph fill the Granary with plenty? and excell all the Grandees and Gravities in Pharoahs Court, for wisdome and judgement? Did not young Christ put the Doctors to silence? and young Timothy preach the Gospel powerfully and profitably? But indeed, the maine offence (you know) was my zeal for God; for silence is the basest tenure a Minister can hold his living by; I could not be silent, but tell Israel of his sins, and Jacob of his transgressions. Though many feed their Ministers as the Theef doth his Dog, porrigit panem, ut sileat, he gives him bread to be quiet, and not to bark,Sim. lest he discover him; but the truth is, benevolence could not tongue-tye the truth, and 'twill bee sad for you to have a Minister who can suffer you, and see you live in sinne, and yet let you alone; the City is in danger when the Alarm-bell is tyed up, and so is the Parish. I have read of a Law made in a certain Town that none should bring a Rumor of the enemies coming upon pain of death,Sim. & this was because they had before some false Alarms; but alas! at last the enemy came sud∣denly and destroyed them all; so that it was a Proverb, Here stands a Town destroyed by silence. God grant it be not true of Purleigh,☜ for the want of a carefull and faithfull Minister! neither could I please your itching humors, as to give you the Sacraments in the condition you are in, or the like, which others (may hap) will doe with∣out fear or wit, warrant, or order:Sim. For as a Painter of old being asked, who taught him his Art; answered, The people, for that he was forced to study how to
please their fancies: So may some Ministers say. But this I can say from my soule, that I sought all meanes to make you sure of Christ.Sim. And as the Angel stir∣red the waters of the Pool,oh. 5. but thrust no man in, because it was a worke to bee performed by themselves; so I have stirred, but ah! alas, how few of you have stepped in! onely a few of the poorer sort; As when an Angler laies in,Sim. he hath many small ones (and that was my hap) but few great ones that were struck, ut puncti & compuncti, Act. 2.37. Yet this is my comfort, I have not lost all my labour, and my reward is with my God: As an Ad∣vocate that hath his reward,Sim. let the cause goe how it will:Sim. And though Flowers grew, though none ga∣thered them, and Springs run, though none dranke them; yet there may come a sore drought when you will wish for those well-heads that were opened to you but you regarded not.☞ The good Lord lay this in mercy upon your spirits. And now let me leave one word with you, never to be forgot, viz. to prize the Gospel, which is Gods book of Canticles, and begins and ends with love (as I have formerly laid it before you in the Exposition of Canticles) it begins with a Kisse,☞ and ends with Spices. The manna comes downe in the dews of the Gospel. Prize Gospel-Discipline, and Doctrine! and to enjoy▪ Christ in both,☞ is like to the Sun, which not onely de∣lights us with contemplation,Sim. but warms, and enlivens us by his Application. Wherefore beware the world steals not away your hearts;☞ the Bird that is limed is held fast, and so art thou! O then have a care! I have read that when Honorius was told that Rome was lost; he cryed out, Ah! Alas! thinking it had been a Hen that he called by that name;Honorius. but when he heard
it was his Imperial City of Rome, that was lost and sacked by Alaricus the Goth, his spirits were revi∣ved again that his losse was no worse: so O! how few of you are halfe so much troubled to hear you have lost your souls, as to heare you have lost your Cattle! corne! money, or such like things as belong to the world! And without the Lord awaken you, yee are undone! Julius Caesar had a paper given him of the Conspirators that were ready to murther him; but alas!Julius Caesar. not minding the paper,Sim. but regarding other things of lesse concern∣ment, he lost his life for it! And so will you, unlesse yee arise! and repent! O heare the voice! with Jerome! saying, Arise yee dead, and come to judgement!Jerom. Arise yee dead, and come to judgement! Arise yee dead, and come to judgement! O be warned! lest the many warnings (which yee have had by me and others) be at last regarded!☜ And all of them knit together like the many beams of the Sunne in a burning-glasse, may (I hope) serve to kindle a fire and flame in your hearts after I am gone from you,Sim. and to be no more seen among you! Heare the Watch-man! hark! hee gives you warning Sirs! by the word of God, (as  not ) beware of an invasion! Sathan is mustering up against your soules! the enemy is nigh! that will destroy you! Up, up! make haste! Arme, Arme, Arme! but if you will not, yet I shall have comfort, Isa. 49.5. and yee shall know (to your cost) that there was a Prophet sent to warne you, whom yee have despised, Ezek. 33.33. Jer. 28.9. Gods vengeance sleeps not,Sim. but like a pragmatical Promoter is searching your houses for ill gotten goods,☜ i.e. gotten by theft, robbing God of his time, and honour, when you should be at Church hearing the word, you
were in the fields telling your Cattel, counting your estate,☞ laying up for many years with the Fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.19, 20. Now the searcher is coming who will apprehend yee all for fellons, and so bring ye before the great Judge; and what follows but the sentence? Demosthenes.Demosthenes was asked the first, the second, and the third time what were▪ the parts of Oratory; who an∣swered,Sim. Every time Pronunciatio, Pronunciatio, Pro∣nunciatio; and so should I say, the next part is the Pro∣nunciation of the sentence. O what will yee doe in that day? Isa. 10.3. whither will yee flye? O I feare it! though you will not see it! for as Caesar said of the Scythians,Caesar. difficilius est invenire quam interficere; so I thinke may be said of your sinnes (Sirs) which you will not see,Sim. but ye shall see, and be ashamed, Isa. 26. yet I say I feare it, that many of you, are as men that goe to a Lottery with heads ful of hopes, but returne with hearts full of blanks;Sim. and the greatest blanke of all will bee this, that the world hath so filled your hearts that Christ could finde no room;☞ like the Reubenites, Num. 32.4, 5. you are content to stay on this side Iordan,Sim. because it is a place fit for Cattel: And like Spiders,Gaddites. O what pains ye take! how yee toyle! even to eviscerate your selves, and spend your own bowels with working! and what comes on't? Hah! onely a web to catch a flye in, and which the least besome from above will sweep downe into the dust in one night, Luke 12.20. O! it is this that made them in Luke 14.18, 19. with one consent to reject the offers of grace,☞ and the Call!Sim. And it is this worldlinesse that makes you like Tumblers stand upon your heads, and kick at heaven with your heels. It is this that made you to persecute the Saints, and to expell us your coasts. O take heed!
God hath planted his Artillery against you, and with∣out a parley, if you make not your peace with God, and forsake the world to follow Christ! from the Lord I am to tell you it, that God is ingaged against you with his armies of judgements, Matth. 22.7. and there is no hopes of you. And the world like a bullet shot from a peece of Ordnance, whilst it runs up and down,Sim. and danceth (you think before you) on the ground shall deceive you; (for you shall be like the ignorant souldiers) that thinkes to take it up with your hands,☜ but it dasheth out your brains, which example shall warn others, and make them wiser that succeed you, by seeing the Lords vengeance on you. Thus having stood Sentinel all this while among you, though I must be justled aside now from you;Sim. I have given you WARNING, and so will leave you: You shall finde the world a Book full of false prints (as by men) but at the End of all,Sim. thousands of Errata's shall appear to your shame: And being thus to part,☜ I shall say (with Synesius) I carry nothing from Purleigh (of ΠΥP & ΛAOΣ fire, and people) but bonam conscientiam & malam valetudinem, a good conscience,The Authors leave of Pur∣leigh, and he may say of England. an ill constituti∣on, and an empty purse (being denied by you the bread I have earn'd with sweating brows) yet the Lord shew you mercy, and melt your hearts; and if it be his will give you the breast, and not the breach;His Prayer, the blessing and not the blow, and spare the Rod for those few sakes; that like children long for full breasts of milk among you. Wherefore flye Sirs!And Counsel, flye from the Common-Law which will condemn you! to that Chancery-Court (the Communion of Saints) where Christ sits as Judge to relieve you;And Promise. and there I will promise to meet you by faith, and to plead for you by prayer, though I never
see you more face to face, unlesse you meet me at home in our Fathers house.☞ And so farewel! Dear hearts! farewel! — Finally, my brethren, farewel, be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you all, 2 Cor. 13.11. Amen. Thus prayes Your affectionate Friend, and late your Minister in the hot bowels of love to you, yet ready to serve the meanest and worst of you, in the work of my Master Jesus Christ. In, and for whom, I am JOHN ROGERS. From my Study at Thomas Apostles Lond. March. 25. 1653.
A TABERNACLE For the SVN. The Second BOOK. CHAP. 1.  Hhacham. That the persons, entring into Church-society must consider what they do first, and be sure they be upon good grounds, being throughly satisfied, and fully perswaded that the way they are entring into, is the very way of Christ, appointed for Beleevers to walk in. WEE are come now to the very Gates of Wisdome,The gates of Wisdome. Prov. 9.3, 4. to the Towers and Palaces of Sion, where the Lord is known to be her refuge, Psal. 48.3. But before we enter in, take some Istructions; Be more ready to hear (saith the Preacher) then to offer the sacrifice of fools,Eccles. 5.1. Expos. for they consider not  to hear (auribus coris & corporis) with head and heart-ears,
for these Lessons are to bee let in by both ears, and concerne both the outward man (for fear of judgement,Consideration in some must be serious in the first place· 1 Cor. 11.29.) and the inward man (for feare of damnation, Mark. 16.16. and Rom. 14.23. &c. which is better then to offer the sacrifice of fools, i. e. Such as are rash and preposterous, and run post into Gods house without remembring,Psal. 50.17, 18. Prov. 15.8. or seriously resolving in their mindes what they are doing, whither they are going; why, these content themselves with the outside forme, and would be one amongst others, though without sound faith, or saving grace. Such are the fools which we are fore-warned of in this Text; for it is not enough for Pastor or Elder to try us, but we must try our selves:Sim. Wherefore keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. that is, keep a watch over it, as a prisoner who must not stir without his Keeper;A strict self-examination. that is, observe diligently whither thou art now going, consider seriously that thou mayst go in safely, and enter in rightly, and reverently, and orderly,Expos. with humility and holinesse, in devotion and full perswasion of heart;Such as come rashly in, do but run them∣selves upon a Rock. Hence it is in Psal. 45.10. the very first instructions to the daughters of Sion are, to hearken and consider i. e. in Heb. prudently to attend, and skilfully or knowingly to minde. Thus Psal. 48.13. Consider her Palaces. The want of a solid, and a serious consideration makes many runne into these assemblies of Sion,This conside∣ration is of ne∣cessity. and Church-wayes, they know not how, nor for what; whereby abundance of trouble is brought upon them, and upon the Church that so receives them. I have considered my wayes, Psal. 119.59. (sayes David) and I will consider thy testimonies, Psal. 119.95. which is of such use and necessity, that without it nothing is rightly ordered. The Ma∣riner considers his course by his Compasse;Sim. and the Pilgrim puts on his Considering-cap continually in his journey whether or no he be in the right way; Stat & cogitat ipse secum utram debeat eligere,Sim. nec prius adoriendum iter quam animo definierit, & pleniore mentis intentione deciderit; And hee will resolve which is best before he foot it:Because of the variety of wayes men have to wor∣ship God in. Cooper. And must not wee consider what is before us? beware of the sands! if wee would have a good haven! Doth it not much concerne us to consider our way! when it lyes doubtfull between the Presbyterian and Independent (so cal∣led) Non omni via dirigit ad Hierusalem illam quae in Clis est,
(sayes Cooper on Psal. 119.) Now if a Christian bee carelesse, and consider not the way he goes to walke in, as he may rashly runne in a false way, and thinke hee is right; so hee may wrongly runne into a right way,Expos. and be in doubt whether he be in the Lords way or no: Now to doubt is dangerous, as wee shall shew by and by. The Apostle Act. 17.23. tells the Athenians that they were too superstitious () and full of false religions (like worshippers of Demon-gods, for so the word will have it) and why so? whom ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. Yee worship an unknowne God, although hee bee the true God, yet in ignorance to you; for yee know not whom, nor what, nor inded how to worship him whom I declare unto you: wherefore it is yee fall into false wayes and Worships. And so it is with a people that worship the Lord in a way of wor∣ship, that for all that they know may be false as wel as true;Ignorance is mother of mis∣chiefs, and false worships. Negat quod non notat. Tertul. lib. de Mono∣gamia. Deut. 11.16. Ier. 17.21. & Mark. 13.9. there∣fore it concerns them to consider the way first, Take heed to your selves said Moses to Israel, and the same saith Jeremy to Judah, and Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 6.1. & 16.6. and 24.4 that no man deceive you; and Paul sayes so to Timothy 1 Tim. 4.16. and Peter to all 2 Pet. 1.19. ye will doe well to take heed, take ye heed, watch and pray, Mar. 13.33. what is more pressed in Scripture? and Paul in 1 Cor. 3.10. sayes, The foundation is laid, but let every man take heed how he buildeth thereon () that is (adjicere oculos animi) let him see with a serious and discerning eye, what hee doth, not with a light, slight, perfunctory glance,Expos. but with an intent and attentive observation of what hee is about. The want of this made so many dolefull complaints and sad invectives against Israel, as Isa. 1.3. The Oxe knoweth his owner,Sad complaints of such as con∣sider nor first. and the Asse his Masters crib; he saith not,Expos. the Dog knows his Master, &c. hee is more wity, but the dull block-headed Oxe, the stupid sloathfull Asse, they know what is good for them,Mayor in loc. and will not eat any thing, but consider first what is before them; yet Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. They are said to be more brutish and foolish, and void of under∣standing, because they did not consider what was before them,☜ whether it was good for them, or no; but that would swallow downe any unwholesome trash or trumpery, superstition or Ido∣latry,
and so like as one who hath surfeited with unwholesome food and trash,What it is. Consideratio importat actum intellectus seu veritatem rei intuentis, &c. What is re∣quired in con∣sideration. A sound judge∣ment. breakes out into scabs, botches and boiles. So Israel broke out into rebellion, and sinfull stinking soares, verse 6. This same consideration so pressed, imports, and takes up the truth of the intuitive part, and property of the soule, and requires a clear understanding to be actuated and put forth with a sound and authentick judgement. Whence it is, that the defect of a faithfull and regular judgement, oftentimes arises from rashnesse and precipitancy, and inconsideration; whilst a man omits those things which produce a right and sound judge∣ment; wherefore a serious consideration is a most necessary in∣junction laid upon all that are entring into the Lords house; for otherwise how can they be fully satisfied, and safely perswaded of the verity and vertue of this way of worship! the Queen of Sheba was fully satisfied of Solomons building,. King. 10. Expos. and of the truth of the report that ran abroad of him, & of the Temple; when she saw him, and his house, and the order thereof, and then no more spirit was left in her; in the least to doubt or question the truth. And so it will bee with us;Four things in general to be seriously con∣sidered. therefore with a serious eye let us observe what wee are about, and not leap before we look. In this point of considera∣tion for satisfactions sake, these four ensuing things will occur in order. First, you must eye the essentiall parts of this Church or build∣ing of the Lord,1 Eye all the essentials. whether it be of God, or no; for if it bee, it will stand, Act. 5.39. else it shall bee rooted up, Matth. 15.13. and fall, Psal. 127.1. Now for this I refer to the former Book; But Secondly, consider how all these parts agree in one to make up one compact building,2 How all do agree in one, in quantum est una. in unity, and order! being aptly dispo∣sed according to the word of God, and rule, which Christ hath left us behinde him. The third consideration arises from the excellent vertue, and efficacious faculty and ability (ad operandum & ad causandum) which this Church-way of Christ hath in her,3 How this way builds us up in Christ, secundum quod iest vitus. as to build us up in grace and holinesse! to strengthen us in the faith, to establish us in the truth, to edifie, exhort, instruct, and provoke to love! and good works! to exercise gifts and graces! and to bring forth fruits in due season.
4. Consider this Gospel-order and Church-state,4. And how this Church-state doth nou∣rish and che∣rish all the fruits i brings forth. (secundum habitudinem, quam habet ad causata) according to the sweet care, habitude, and disposition it hath to those gracious, holy effects, which are produced by it, as to faith, love, holiness, gifts, graces, and the like. O how tender is she of them! the Hen hath not so much care to hatch up her chickens! nor the fond Mother to nurse up her darling babe!Sim. but this way of Christ hath as much (yea, more) to nourish! cherish!☜ and perfect up Faith! Love! Peace! Purity! Humility! Holiness! and such like fruits as are brought forth hereby in abundant measure, both for quantity and quality!Be fully per∣swaded. Now for your satis∣faction, let your eye, I say, be set seriously on these things, and be fully perswaded (saith the Apostle) Rom. 14.5. in your own mindes; and so let every man be,Expos. for in Vers. 23. he that  doubteth is damned; a smart Aphorism,Because it is very dangerous to doubt. which is here rendred for a reason of the necessity of being fully perswaded in your own hearts, That you are in the way of Christ:In your own minde i. e. not by other mens opinions, &c. In your own minde, not by anothers mans opinion, be he ever so able, learned, wise, godly, yet man is but man; therefore be thou careful (Christian!) for thy self! look to thy own conscience! and let other men alone, to walk according to their light! other mens opinions, or conceits, or doings, are not to be thy rule; but let every one understand what he doth, whether he go∣eth, and be fully perswaded, or have his heart filled with per∣swasions, that he is according to the Word of God in () the way! For he that doubteth (i. e. dijudicare) that is,What it is to doubt. (alter∣nantibus sententiis secum disceptare) is double-minded, Jam. 1.8.  hath a heart, and a heart, halts between two opinions, as to be now for the Presbyterians, another time for the Inde∣pendents: Now of this minde and resolves this, then of that minde and inclines to that. Such a one is unstable in all his ways () i. e. in the Septuagint stands but upon one leg, a little thing will throw him down; and that is another reason, to ratifie this truth, viz.Else thou wilt be mistaken. That you must be fully perswaded and satisfied in thy heart, that thou art in the right way; else thou wilt never stand long; but the least wind of doctrine will throw thee down in the dust, and thy fall will bring a foul scandal upon the truth, and raise the dust! But he that doubteth
() he still puts a difference, and is at variance with himself; and knows not fully, freely, certainly, or absolutely what to do;Budaeus. Danger of doubting, and the evil of it. but (as Budaeus saith) is at no certainty with himself, whose understanding is confounded, and judgement is divided into divers parts; as when one of two or three ways knows not which to take, is damned () is condemned of his conscience, and adjudged guilty of sin: The reason of this is taken (saith Par) from the procreant cause of godly acti∣ons and motions (as they are holy,Par. and of God) which is Faith. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin; this is the confirmation of the former Aphorism and Maxim. And from another Maxim or general Rule which is yet an undeniable truth;The sin of doubting. and which makes me up a third Reason in order; for to doubt a thing, and yet to do it, is a great sin, and against the first Table; it takes away faith, for how can one believe he pleases God, or God accepts of him, that doubts whether he does or no that which pleases him, and is his will. By faith is here meant a full perswasion,☞ a sweet plerophory, which makes the way sweet that we are in, and the work sweet that we are about; when we know, and are perswaded of the law∣fulness of it; and that it is the Lords, and according to his minde and will. Furthermore, Thou wilt never be able to contend for the truth,Such as doubt, soon yield up the buckle, and are taken pri∣soners. lustily and lively, Jude 3. yea, against all opposers, to thy very heart-blood, Heb. 12.3, 4. & 10.32, 33. No, nor be so much as able to maintain the truth by the Word! or to defend it by arguments out of Scriptures! that art not convinced of it, by the Word and Spirit, and perswaded in thy very heart, that thou art in the right, yea, though all the world, yea, the Angels of Heaven, should say against it; be fully perswaded, your good meanings and mindes will not serve turn, nor yet the gray, Colliar-like, implicite faith of Papists (which believe as the Church believe, they say.) And this is the most you have from your Irish Catholicks at this hour; and yet ask them what the Church believes,☞ why they will say, as we believe; and what do ye believe? why, as the Church believes; and that is,Implicite faith not enough. they know not what: But such a simplex conversio is all we can get from most of them, talk a day together with
them. But a Christian must be able to maintain his doctrine, and to warrant his opinion and judgement, whether in doctrine, or discipline, by the Word, Isa. 8▪ 20. Or else, saith the Pro∣phet, there is no light in them; That is, else they want under∣standing, which ought to be rightly informed and inlightned as a beginning imperant (saith Par, upon Rom. 14.) and they want the will too, well sanctified,Par. and made pliant as a beginning obsequent and ecequent, and then ere you are aware, your soul will be set on the chariots of Amminadib (as we may show in the next Chapter.Cant. 6.12.) For conscience carries thee out sweetly, and with a sure testimony within thee, (that white stone;) when by good arguments out of the Word, thou art assured, That thou art in the Lords way of worship;Who are best Champions for Christ. when thou canst comfortably and cordially say, as Rom. 14.14. I know and am perswaded by the Lord Jesus. Not I think, or it is very likely, but I am sure upon certain and infallible Scriptures; and I do stedfastly believe it in my heart. O then! thou wilt prove a stout Champion for the truth in∣deed! and darest stand for it! when thou knowest thou art right: Thou knowest it first; for thy faith and perswasion is in a sense (subjective) seated in thy knowledge and understanding,Proprium princi∣pium actus sit in intellectu sicut in subjecto. How to attain true perswasi∣on. 1. Perswasion must be by the word of Christ. 2 Pet. 1.19. . as in the subject; thy opinion or perswasion is according to thy apprehension and understanding; wherefore in order to your full perswasion of, and satisfaction in this way of Christ, or Gospel-fellowship; you shall do well 1. To examine your knowledge of the Scriptures concern∣ing this way, 2 Pet. 1.19. have ye searched the Scriptures? and do you finde them to bear a clear testimony to this truth? doth the Word (in your judgement and understanding) warrant, and witness to this way of worship, as the way of Christ? And to this Gospel-fellowship, as the Gospel order? then you will well do to walk in it; fear not yet discouragements or troubles, you must meet with in it, let them not daunt yee; do you your duty, and let God alone to defend ye, and to do ye your good. When our Saviour bad Peter, with the rest, throw their nets in for a draught of fish; why they had many discouragements; for all night long they had thrown in, and lost their labors; Nevertheless, at thy word (saith Peter) I will let down the net: So
should we say, though our friends will be offended, our per∣sons hated, our names traduced, our injuries great, our enemies many, and multitudes of discouragements; that we must be sure (and look for it aforehand, though the skies are very calm at this present) that we shall meet with; yet for all that, At thy Word, O Lord, we will enter into this way; so we have but Christs word and warrant for it, we may be confident and couragious, and fully satisfied: But to further this direction, those that would enter into this way, must 1. Learn the order of the Gospel, as given at first.1. Be well instructed and informed of the order of the Gospel in primitive times; what manner of fellowship they finde the Word to hold forth in the Apostles days, and some hundred yeers after them; that is, before the Church was deflowred and defiled with humane inventions, dregs, and de∣vices; whilest the pattern was in the Mount; and the insti∣tution of Christ was the onely Canon-law and liberty. As the Apostle would, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. bring them to consider the first institution, so doth Christ about divorcement, bring them to the beginning and first institution; and that divorces were not lawful, Christ proves that they were not so from the first,The promises of the Restitu∣tution of times are to a state as at first. Matth. 19.4 7, 8. So in great and rich promises, the Lord is pleased to foretel the restauration of his people, as at first, Jer. 33.7, 11. so Acts 3.19, 21. To teach us what we are to look for, that is, things as at first; holiness▪ fellowship, do∣ctrine, discipline, as at first; and we should ask after, Jer▪ 6.16. The good old way,And why? (quam primum, & verum, & optimum) that is, the true way; for truth is older then error; and error is nothing but the excrement and corruption of truth. The Primitive practise and order of Christs Church, is to be st before us for our satisfaction; because it is as a pattern to all succeeding ages. 2. See how far we are in our present condi∣tion, from the order as at first. Barlet.2. Be also well informed of the order and practise of our Churches now in these days: Sit down (sayes Mr. Bartlet) and compare our present stations with the first order of the Gospel; and see wherein we fall short, and blush, and be a∣shamed, Ezek. 43.11, 12. and then come out of Babylon: But for this, I refer the Reader to the former Book.
Thirdly Then when ye have found out (in your judge∣ments and beleefe) a Church-society in Gospel-order,Get into that Church that is according to your light, and according to the word, nighest Gospel-rule, and pri∣mitive practise and are fully perswaded of it, and doe finde it in your heart that you are prepared and ordered for it; doe not delay entring into it, but be sure first, it be into such a society, and Church-communion of Saints as you see (and that upon Scripture grounds) you judge to come up nighest to Rule, and closest to the Primitive patterne and practise, which yee shall do well very diligently to look out for. And fourthly, observe the motions of the spheres, and all the particular becks of providence how things joyne together,4 Observe the concurrent mo∣tions of Pro∣vidence. Dr. ibs. and so fittly concur for your admittance into this Church-way: for as holy Sibs saith, fitting occasions, and suiting of things well together doe intimate Gods will, and Gods time. And in∣deed all Providences have their language to Gods people,Sim. and they minde their Call cleare, when Providence makes the way for them. For indeed Gods Providence runs along like wa∣ters in a Brook, where every little peble hath a language in it, therefore wee shall doe well to understand them; For as wrong reading spoyles the sense, so will the not reading of Gods Providences to a full period and stop. But thus far for the first Direction. Secondly, Be sure ye have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. neither in your selfe, i. e. your own wit, parts, gifts,Second Dire∣ction. Have no confidence in the flesh. or the like, thereupon to run (rashly) into this way (rather upon a presumption out of pride, vain-glory, selfe-love, or curiosity) then upon well-grounded perswasion; nor yet have any dependance upon any others whosoever they bee; for then the Lord will reject both you and your carnall confidences, Jer. 2.37. Thirdly, Be not byassed one way or other,Third Directi∣on. Be im∣partial, and un∣byassed as to opinions. as by imagina∣tions taken from your owne senses (which are very shallow and unsound) for by such spirits (full of spight) came Christs way to be evill spoken of in Act. 28.22. and so 2 Cor. 10.5. Sathan hath strong-holds in such mens hearts, to keep out Christ and Gospel;Ierem. 4.14. wherefore let your judgement master your affections (lest false conclusions bee ushered in by carnall reason, fancy and conceit:Rom. 1.21.) For the wisdome which is from above is without partiality, Jam. 3.17▪ that is,
or mis-judging i. e. either out of love to one way, or out of prejudice (being prepossessed with hard conceits and opinions) of any other way. We wrong a man much by prejudice, when we take up prejudicate opinions of him without grounds; & so suffer our conceits of him to be envenomed against him by un∣just suspicions,Sim. Prejudice does much wrong whereby we deprive our selves of the good which we might have by him. So the Pharisees were set against Christ, and the Jewes against the Gospel; yea this prejudice made Nathaniels question in Joh. 1.46. Canany good come out of Nazareth?☞ wherefore bee impartial, without any conceit or deceit, when thou searchest the Scriptures, hearest the word, enquirest out for the Truth; O then! then! let the Lord cast the scales; and this is the way to be sweetly satisfied in your own breasts, and to have a heart full of perswasion according to the word of God. When yee have attained to this sweet and swelling Plero∣phory, yee may, yea must move accordingly, and that upon a certainty;After perswa∣sion, follows an assurance. which certitude or assurance (being the highest part of your perswasion) that yee are in Christs way, is to bee con∣sidered. Certainty, or Assurance whence it is, and how.First (Ex causa certitudinis) from the verity of the word, and certainty of the divine truths, which do so perswade and assure you; and thus yee conclude, seeing the word of Christ is sure and true, &c. the perswasion which it begets must bee so too, and sound. 1 Ex causa certitudinis.And then (Ex parte subjecti) from your own capacities and qualifications, according to your knowledge and judgements; thnce yee gather up this conclusion,2 Ex parte subjecti. that yee are the persons called into this way of Christ by his Word and Spirit, and that ye stand in great need of this way, and that for divers reasons, being fully perswaded of it, that yee are appointed and prepared for it, and it for you; hence arises a full perswasion to enter into it,The conclusi∣ons which arise. and a clear satisfaction about it, which is given by the Word and Spirit, and which is so necessary for all that would enter into it, and continue in it, and have the comforts of it, that they should not dare to venture or enter one foot without it. For what is not of faith is sinne. Now as it will doe well that every one of us bee fully perswaded that it is the very visible
way of worship that Jesus Christ hath brought out of his Fa∣thers bosome (the Tabernacles that came downe from above) and when he ascended on high,Bring them to the Trial. Eph. 4.10, 11, 12. that he left behinde him for all beleevers to dwell and be perfected in; so also will it be necessary for every one to bring his perswasion to the triall and touchstone that they may be sure, else (as Dike saith upon Faith,) you may be left in the lurch, gulled and cheated in this point too: for in 1 King. 22.20, 21, 22. you read of a lying false spirit that perswades and prevails. Now as Clement (lib. 5. Recognitionum) sayes,False perswa∣sion most dan∣gerous. What is more obnoxious and hurtfull to the Church of Christ, then for a man who beleeves he knows what he knows not, and sees what he sees not, to maintaine that a thing is what it is not? (being but to him what he imagines) tooth and nail he strikes at truth for falsehood, and falsehood for truth. Like a drunken fellow that thinks himselfe sober, he doth all things, goes all wayes like a Drunkard, and yet is perswaded he doth, and goes as well as any sober man whatsoever, and would have all others to thinke so too;Sim. and yet perhaps his giddy braines and fancies, make him beleeve that it is others that stagger, who goe stedfastly, and that he goes steadily whilst he staggers; such whimsical perswasions are of dangerous consequence. It concerns us then to know whence our full perswasion arises,How to know true perswa∣sions. and whither it reaches, or what it brings forth. But to the first: First,1 True per∣swasions pro∣ved and ap∣proved from the word and Spirit. A true and full perswasion flows from the word of Christ without, Thess. 2.13. as we have said before, and the Spirit of Christ within us, Joh. 16.8. Joh. 14.16. 1 Job. 2.20.27. 1 Joh. 5.6. these have convinced our judgements, inlightened our understandings, conformed our wills, and perswaded our hearts, with undeniable arguments and proofs. Secondly, If it be true,2 Waits for fit time. it waits upon the Lord with pati∣ence for his concurring Providences, and for the accomplishing his promises, as David did for his Kingdome, Abraham for his Son, Israel for Canaan; runs not rashly, without feare or wit, as we use to say, before God; He that beleeves, makes not haste; Isa. 28. not too much haste, or more haste then good speed; but he waits to go along with God, with his presence, by his Providence (as is said before) into this way of Gospel-fellowship.
3 Meets with trials, yet gets the better.Thirdly, It will meet with many trials and assaults, but yet will get the better, and abide firme. So Act. 19.23. What a stir there was about the way of the Gospel (, contra viam Domini) or as some read it, against the Gospel-way, this way of the Lord which Paul preached at Ephesus,Sim. and yet it gained the ground; So 2 Cor. 7.5. they have no rest, but threats and fears, and troubles, and oppositions; yet this faith and full perswasion stayes the soul, quiets, and satisfies the spirits, establishes the heart, 2 Chron. 20.20. ie staies the inward man in much peace and assurance in the midst of multitudes of troubles and trials. As the ship that lyes at anchor, though something tossed with wind and weather, and with the swelling threatning Surges of the Sea, rising thick one on another, and boysterous beating about the ship, yet remains safe, unmoved, being firme, and fastened, and cannot bee carried away; So art thou able to undergo all oppositions, threats, swelling, surging waves, or the like, if thou rest resol∣ved, established and fully perswaded by the word of God, so that stil thou wilt stand by faith, and grow stronger and stronger, as the house of David did, 2 Sam. 3.1. in the midst of his dangerous conflicts, and trucelesse troubles with the house of Saul: and as Israel, the more afflicted, the more multiplied, Exod. 1. for true faith will have the conquest and triumph at last, 1 Joh. 5.4. 1 Pet. 5.8. Heb. 11.33, 34. Eph. 6.16. Fourthly, A true and full perswasion in the way of Christ makes thee most ready to run into it (but orderly) and very obsequious,4 True per∣swasion makes obedient. Gal. 5.6. Heb. 11.8. Rom. 16.26. O then! how readily desirous, and thankfully observant art thou to do the will of God, to please him in his way of worship! and to be obedi∣ent to his command of coming out of (Babel) confusion into Zion! 5 It shews emptinesse in all other waies and worships.Fifthly, A true and full perswasion of the way of Christ makes thee see an emptinesse, and a worthlesnesse in all other wayes, and an excellency and usefulnsse of this way (which is Christs) that all others fall short of. Thus David seeing an amiable∣nesse in the Lords Tabernacles above all others, had rather be there one day, then a thousand in any other tents, Psal. 84.1, 2.10. and saith Psal. 86.8. There is none like thee; No wayes like thy wayes, &c.
Sixthly, A true, full perswasion, makes thee exceedingly fond, of, and longing, and labouring after these wayes of Sion!6 It makes thee long after them. O! how dost thou thirst to be in them, Psal. 84, 2. Psal, 63.1.2. and enjoy the benefit of them! Psal. 42.2. Cant. 8.1. Cant. 7.10, 11. Rev. 22.20. and though he that beleeves, makes not haste, as before, yet in this sense he hath fullest perswasions, and most faith makes most haste of all; and cannot but make haste (but regularly.) Seventhly, True and full perswasion makes thee very confi∣dent (but with a holy confidence) and bold (but with an humble boldnesse) having the testimony of a good conscience to bear thee out against all adversaries or oppositions whatsoever,7 Makes thee bold with hu∣mility. there∣fore in Heb. 10.22. Heb. 4.16. Eph. 3.12. It is not a sawcy, im∣pudent boldnesse, which strangers that intrude may have (and carry a boldnesse,Sim. whilst their hearts tell them they goe beyond good manners) but this is a sweet, humble, and friendly familiar boldnesse upon invitation, and calls from Christ, grounded upon Gods free love warranted by the word (not swelling at all with selfe-confidence or conceit, but alleadging meerly love and grace from above; such a confidence in Christ makes them humbly bold, and ready to approach his Court and Sanctuary (audaces sunt promptiores.) Eighthly, This full perswasion puts thee upon others to perswade them (by the Word and Spirit) that they may also participate with thee in this Church-way, Cant. 6.1. Mal. 3.16.8 Puts thee upon inviting others, saying, come let us go up, and joyn. Eph. 4.29. Col. 4.5, 6. Heb. 3.13. Thus Andrew called Peter in, and Philip Nathaniel, and Paul young Timothy and Titus, and many others. We cannot be idle to others, then especially those whom we love, those we would faine get in, Prov. 11.30. By these few notes from the true rise and effects of the true and sound perswasion, ye may examine before yee enter. I have been the longer on this Point, because many people run hudling on headlong in, and they scarce know how,The sad con∣sequences of doubtings, and of not be∣ing fully per∣swaded. nor care how, so they get in, but this may be had for a lamentation: And poor souls! what comfort can they finde in this way, without faith, who stagger through unbeleef, and cannot tell (being full of doubts) whether they are right or no! alas
for them! the Ordinances are nothing (to speak of) sweet to them, whilst they think to do this, or to bee in this way, which it may be (they think) pleases God, and it may be it displeased him;Drives them into despair, and errors. and this drives them often-times into despaire, and alwayes into error. This makes so many run into strange opinions and errors that run so rashly into this way of fellowship, which is the Churches Threnodia and deep sorrow at this day: O then! that men would be more care∣full!Sim. for as the Sun (saies Erasm. Roterod. in Simil.) the more directly he bears upon us with his beams, the lesse shadow he makes, but the more obliquely, the greater. So a wise man that understands himselfe, and is informed, and fully per∣swaded by the divine light of the word, the beams of Christ, the Son of righteousnesse;☞ the more this Sonne hath shined upon him, and he is satisfied with the truth, the lesse fancy, imagination, or foolish opinions he hath, and the lesse he runs into errours, but the more obliquely he enters into the Lords way, and the lesse he is by this divine light (from above) informed and fully▪ per∣swaded, the more he runs into errours, and the longer shadows he makes. But to conclude, I beseech ye beware! O beware! how yee enter into this way of worship!They meet with a cuse, let serious and due conside∣ration be had that yee come in due order, otherwise yee will meet with a breach instead of a blessing, 1 Chron. 15.23. and this Church-state instead of Peniel may be called Perez-uzza,And are not welcome, but provoke the Lord. or Perez-nephesh, i. e. the breach of thy soule; so see Mat 22.12, 13. what befel the friend that came in, and not in a right order. Besides the Lord doth not make them welcome, Mal. 1.10. for they are a provocation to him in Numb. 14.11. Psal. 78.21, 22. and the Ordinances of Christ are not so effectual to them, Heb. 4.12, 13. this want of faith, and full perswasion that they are in the Lords way,Hinder the energy of Ordi¦nanes, and ob∣scure the ex∣cellency of the way. in Christs Gospel Church-state, doing the Lords will, doth enervate, enfeeble, and deforce the efficacie and excellency, vertue and operation and spirituall advantages which beleevers finde in it, As thou hast believed so be it, Matth. 8.13. and chap. 9.29. See Mark. 6.5, 6. one such a doubting member, doth much mischiefe in a Church, and is a great hindrance to it.
But, dear friends, if ye have faith, and doubt not, Mat. 21.21. and are but fully perswaded in your souls, that this is the way of Christ you are entring into, then welcome, expect great blessings and mighty works, and energy in the midst of you, Eph. 1.19. CHAP. II.  Nahar Sahhish. Those that are thus satisfied, and fully perswaded, as before, must by a voluntary consent unite, and knit together in one body. THis comes in order next, of which in the former Booke, Chap. 11. and 13. you may read at large: but let this be brought into the ballance of the Sanctuary too; and let every soule see to it,Expos. how he enters into this way of Fellow∣ship,The Lord draws with his arms, the Spi∣rit his right hand, and word his left. that it be by a voluntary and freemotion without a coaction. No earthly power can compell a man into this Church of Christ; for the Father must draw him, Joh. 6.44. that is, with his spiritual armes, the Word and the Spirit, which are the Lords hands, and his two armes reached out all the day long, Rom. 10.21. None are to bee constrained into this communion, un∣lesse it be by the Word and the Spirit; thus the Lord is said to adde to the Church, Act. 2.47. and by his power makes them a willing people, Psal. 100.3. and so Cant. 6.12. when the will is set upon the Chariots, or wheels, a man must needs run, Cant. 1.3. hence a man is often-times said to be according to his will (a volunteer or not) which is as the great Wheele, that sets all others a going. Now it should necessarily follow, that such as are fully perswaded, as before, must become voluntary, and freely assent
to what they are so perswaded of, persuasio importat assensum in∣tellectus ad id quod creditur, before they enter into it, or act in it,Men must come in vo∣luntarily. Proved▪ by se∣veral conside∣rations, as which we offer proof for under several considerations, whence the reasons are raised to ratifie this truth. As First (A principio agente) from the principle that moves them and makes them a willing people, which is either (in se, or ex∣tra se) a natural principle which produces natural effects, and natural actions,1 From the powerfull principles which carries them extra se. and natural motions, from natural reasons for natural ends; or else a principle above nature, that is a principle of grace, which produces acts of grace flowing from divine reason for divine ends: and such a kind of voluntarinesse I speak of here, as from such a principle which carries the soule on through a thousand difficulties and dangers; though it cost never so much, though flesh and blood, and world and de∣vils be all against it,Vide Feners Alarm. yet he will do it, because hee is carried on by an high and holier, and more God-like principle and power; thus the Spirit is said to be willing, Mat. 26.41.  or free with alacrity and readinesse to run, Psal. 119.32. Gal. 5.7. thus Luke 15.18. I will arise, and I will goe to my Father; I will, come what will come; come death, come life; come temptations, come troubles, come all that can come, yet, I will home to my fathers house, there is bread enough, and I will no longer be starved with husks, among a swinish multitude; no, but I will arise, and runne into the Lords house; thus to will () is present with me, sayes Paul, that is, Chapter 2. an efficacious will,Rom. 7. which takes in both the principle, and the act. O then! the heart is hurried away indeed upon the Chariots of a most noble people, Cant. 6.11. with strong and lusty flaming affections and desires! I will goe in the Lords way, I will get out of this bondage! this Babylon! this Cage of un∣clean birds! I will not have the Cage-door shut! I will be set at liberty! though the flesh be never so violent, though my friends nothing but frown on me, though all the devils of Hell rage, yet I will be gone for Zion, and get into those as∣semblies, &c. This may serve for a reason, why this voluntary consent is so  requisite, viz. because it is a living principle which produces such gracious effects: And this is the act of a perfect heart,
1 Chron. 28.9. Serve him with a perfect heart and willing minde,Because this principle is absolutely ne∣cessary in all that would be Church mem∣bers, which makes them willing. they come otherwise without hearts, Psal. 119.145. dead to duty, and heavily forward; but when men are made willing, as before, they have a principle of agency, and need no con∣straint at all, 1 Pet. 5.2. not by constraint, but willingly. O then, a man is in motion indeed, and will doe the will of God, and go into the way of God! though no body else of his friends, or family will do it, nay though he be hated of all his neigh∣bours, and acquaintance for it, and have no thanks at all among men by it,Expos. but hee being carried on by a divine principle (extra se) considers not what he suffers, as what hee seeks, which is abundantly above himselfe, therefore. Secondly, Consider that (omne agens seu motum agat movea∣tur propter finem,Second consi∣deration▪ From the end which suit▪ with the principles. every man who is moved (as before) by the above-said principle in the day of his power whereby hee is be∣come a cordial Volunteer) I say that every such a willing man proposes to himself some end that suits his principle, a divine end for his divine principle, but a carnal principle seeks a carnal end; for alwayes observe the end, to which the principle carries, is evermore of the same make and nature, with the principle, be it good or bad, spiritual or carnal;Voluntas su natura vult fi∣nem. if the principle by which he is moved be above himselfe, then the end for which he is moved, is above himselfe; see but in a stone which you throw up to hit such a mark with, the up-motion of the stone is by a power which is not in it,Sim. it flyes upward by a principle (extra se) and a power seated in the man that throwes it, and therefore the up-mark of the upward motion is the end (extra se) which is appointed by him that throws it, and according to that principle that appoints it; but in the falling downe of the said stone again, this downward motion is by a principle of its own (in se) and seeks its owne Center, viz. the earth, which is the end answerable to the principle. Now I say, it is not enough for a man to move, but to move to some end. (Non solum ut moveantur, sed ut moveantur in fi∣nem) What is the end of those things whereof ye are now ashamed,1 Pet. 4.17. Heb. 6 8. Phl. 3.19. saith the Apostle, Rom. 6.21. the end of those things is death, but the end of holinesse is everlasting life. Destructive principles have destructive ends, but saving principles saving ends; where∣fore
the Apostle would have us look to the end.Requiritur cognitio finis aliqualis, the end must be known. We have used to say, every one knows his beginning, but not his end. Yet in this sense, I say, men may know their end if they know their principles. And now I am upon it, I must presse the knowledge of the end,Sim. at well as the motion to the end, lest ye bring but the sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 1. a wise man sets the end of his motion or action ever before him, both before hee begins, and when he hath begun, and as he is proceeding. Every one who is wise in Christ (and would fain be in the wayes of Christ) who is carried to Zion-ward by such a prin∣ciple as before, hath a certain knowledge of the end which hee purposes, promises, and proposes to himself, and he hath not onely his principles to move,In alio a quo ei imprimitur principium suae motionis i finem. but to move for that end proposed; as if it be for the honour and glory of God, to set forth his praises, as a peculiar one called thereto, 1 Pet. 2.9. But he that hath no knowledge of the end, though he hath in him a principle of motion or action, yet the principle, which moves or acts him for such or such an end, is not in him, but in another, (as was shewn before in the simile of the stone) by whom hee is said to be moved for such an end. Now I say, a Saint who is moved by the Spirit, hath spiri∣tuall ends, and by a principle from above hath ends from above, glorious, divine ends above himselfe; but a natural principle hath natural ends; and so such as are carried on into these assemblies of Sion by carnal principles, come alwayes in for carnal ends. Now this is another reason why such as would be Church-members must be volunteers,Because a vo∣lunteer hath the end for which he moves before him. and carried on by divine principles into these divine wayes, that is to say, for divine ends. Now when a man knows the end to be according to his desire, and suitable to the principle by which he moves to that special end, then hee is become in a special manner voluntary in his mo∣tions, and into means conducing to that end; and to say something more,Res quae est ra∣tio finis & ratio finis. Second consi∣deration is from the rule of the will. he sets before him, not onely what is the end, but also why it is the end that he seeks after, and centers to∣ward;  is my Motto. And consider Thirdly (Regula voluntatis) the Rule, according to which the will is moved, and the heart is carried and continued:
for every (principium ad cerum finem) principle putting forth to some end,Sim. hath some kinde of order or other in his motion to that end; now (debitus ordo ad finem secundum aliquam regulam mensuratur) the will without a Rule,Which is two∣fold. is like an unbroken colt without a curbe, kicking and flinging, and running any way at randome, without order or equity. In all things which are done by the will, there should be a Rule, and this Rule is either humane reason, which is homogenean, and most nigh the will and mind of man (this is regula proxima, say the Schoolmen) or else it is divine Reason, the Wisdome and Word of God, the eternal Law of God, which is the supreme, and primary rule of the will (Regula suprema) which some call Heterogenean to it.The Rule which certi∣fies, is divine Reason. Now such men as move obliquely, and crossely to this Rule, walk disorderly and sinfully, and from such withdraw thy self (ab hac rectitudine obliquatur) as 2 Thess. 3.6, 7.11. for every good action and motion agrees with the Law of God, the commands of Christ, which are their Rule; Now as many as walke according to this rule, peace be on them, Gal. 6.16. and let us all walke by the same rule, Phil. 3.15, 16.Expos. By this Divine reason and rule are the wils of all that are made willing to be ordered, and fitted and directed into this way. Thus Christ sits and rules (by his Law) upon his Throne in the Temple, Zach. 6.13. Mat. 2.6. Now this serves for another Reason why we should volun∣tarily come in, because those have this rule to order their steps, and direct them into these wayes of holinesse.Volunteers have this. Now the order according to the Rule of Christ, viz. the word of God, whereby the will is brought into obedience, is, First, By inclining the will to the wayes of God;Rules to order their will how. so Psal. 119.112. then you have a good minde to them, as suiting your condition, and the need you have of them; for, Omnis in∣clinatio is ad conveniens.Expos. Secondly, The Intentions and Purposes of the will follow, which you read of Heb. 4.12.  the intents of the heart, which word takes in both the cause, and the effect:Propositum est actus volunta∣tis deliberata, &c. 1 The cause, that is, the faculty of conceiving: And 2 The effect, that is the things conceived, viz. the purposes and inten∣tions. Thus Daniel purposed in his heart, Dan. 1.8. and Paul purposed in the Spirit, Act. 19.21. Rom. 1.13. this is the act
of a deliberate will spontaneously, and freely carried out (after inclination) into resolution and determination. This made Paul determine to know nothing save Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. so eager he was after Christ alone, nothing else would serve his turne, but all else is as drosse and dirt to him; be∣cause the intentions of his will, heart and all, were after Christ. Thirdly, Then the will comes to turn aside from all other vain and false wayes, Psal. 119.113. Psal. 119.101. And Fourthly, To make absolute choise of the way of God above all,☞ Psal. 119.30. so Isa. 56.4. this election is the proper effect of a free-will, or will set at liberty, whereby a man picks and culs out one way (that is the way of God) to walke in (aliis recusatis) letting all others alone. Now to this free election or choise which the will makes, two things concur. Two Things must be,1 Knowledge (ex parte cognitivae virtutis, &c.) whereby a man must discerne a difference between that way which his will most affects,1 Knowledge. inclines to, resolves upon, and makes choise of, and other wayes; and must know wherein this way that he chooses to walke in excels all others, and is to be preferred and chosen. 2▪ Desire.2 Desire (ex parte appetitivae) whereby is requisite that he be of a sound judgement, and so as that he doth most ardently de∣sire to walk in that way which he judges by the word of God to be the way of God; thus Psal. 119.173. and this sets the soul a longing and desiring, Psal. 119.5.174. and Psal. 62.2. Fifthly, and lastly, then the will comes to challenge, and the heart to appropriate an interest in the way of God, 1 Pet. 1.7. O this is the way for me to walke in, and here is my Beloved to be found! Cant. 5.16. O then the soule clings close to Christ in this way! as Hezekiah did cleave unto the Lord, 2 King. 18.6. And as Ruth did cleave unto her mother, Ruth 1.14. that is whilst Orpah left her,☞ and went from her; Ruth would not leave her. Verse. 16. Intreat me not to doe it, saith shee, for where thou goest, I will goe, and where thou livest, I will live, and where thou dyest, I will dye; and thy God shall be my God, and thy people, my people, nothing shall hinder it. Oh! so to cleave close to Christ whilst others (Orpah's) fall from him! and
to continue in his way, and worship when others contemne it, and fall away from it! this is a signe his way is indeared to you indeed, and that you prize him, and his way indeed, to make his God your God, and to make his people yours, his wayes yours, to live where he lives, &c! O when no discourage∣ment can daunt ye, or drive you to decline the truth, or way of Christ! no not all the world that can stir you thence, this is sweet indeed; then you say with David, I have stuck to thy testimonies, Psal. 119.31. O then! then! how precious are all the Promises, Providences, Ordinances, Priviledges which you enjoy, by vertue of a right, and propriety you have to them! And thus the will is ordered by the Rule, and carried on by divine reason into the Temple of the Lord to worship there. Now every voluntary action or motion is good or bad, according to the recourse that it hath to this order taken from Divine reason. Fourthly, Furthermore, let us set before us the (objectum voluntatis) object of will, so fitted, as before,Fourth consi∣deration is, From the ob∣ject of the will which is good. which is (bonum apprehensum) something that is desirable (at least so appre∣hended to bee) which moves the will and affection (bonum om∣nia appetunt) say the Philosophers, Tho. Aq. Ethic. lib. 1. Tom. 5.) some good or other that is conceived to be proper and convenient to the Principle which moves the Will, every man desires, and looks upon, and makes his object in his voluntary motions into the house of the Lord. Who will shew us any good? Psal. 4.6. is every ones question; therefore what is good in the understanding (nonex veritate rei) is said to be the proper object of the will. A moral prin∣ciple looks on a moral good; a natural on a natural good;Good differs how? a civil on a civil good, a spiritual on a spiritual good; we doe not say things right or wrong true or false, for they are as they are in the mind (objecta intellectus) but things apprehended good in agreement with the moving principle, Mat. 7.11. in that verse, there is a different good according to the principle that moves them,Expos. either natural or spiritual: And hence it is that the appetitive faculties of the soule, or the longing affections are distinguished according to the apprehensive faculties of the soule; for the more thou apprehendest this way to bee for thy good,☜ or this
thing to be for thy good, the more thou desirest it, and willest it with longings;Nam appetibile non movet appe∣titum nisi in quantum est ap∣prehensum. but the lesse thou seest it to be for thy good, the lesse are thy affections towards it; for though a thing bee most excellently good and desirable, yet it moves the affections and will no further, then it is apprehended so to be. Prov. 19.8. He that keepeth understanding shall finde good. David doth most earnestly desire to dwell with the Lord, and to draw nigh to him, because he apprehended it to be good for him so to do, Psal. 73.28 So it is good for us to be here, Mat. 17.4. therefore Lord let us build Tabernacles. Now this is another Reason, why men should come volun∣tary into Church fellowship, because of the good, the universal  good, the spiritual good, and heavenly advantages to bee had hereby,Because of the good in this way of Christ. and such as are suitable to the principles by which we are to be made a willing people. What makes men so desirous of eating? but the meat that is (or is to be) and so is in their apprehension) set before them to be good? what makes men run in a race, as if they were mad, but the rewards which they set before them?Sim. And why doe the Apostles so presse the practise of Christs commands, but because of the good which is set before us? Tit. 3.8. Heb. 13.9. Now if (bonum universale, which is originale) an universal good (i. e. a good for all times, in all conditions,The universal good (that is God) moves the will most. in all places, upon all occasions, &c.) if such a good be thy object, and draws thee as the Loadstone, doubtlesse God alone is this good, Mat. 19 16.17. and then he alone (his love which is better then wine, his presence which is better then life) can fill thy Will, and sufficiently move it, as the only able and effectual object. No one good like unto this can move the will, and make thee a compleat and thorough Volun∣teer; when Moses prayed to see his glory, Exod. 33.18. he said Verse 19. and I will make all my good to passe before thee. But consider, Fifh conside∣ration from the operation of the will.Fifthly, The operation of the will, (which is velle bonum) what is it else but a strong and undeniable inclination, and re∣solution of the person willing into the thing willed, or into the object of the will? Now from this sweet working of the will into the thing  willed, or into God, this universal good, another Reason
might bee taken to confirme this truth, That those who would enter into Christs Church-way must come by a volun∣tary consent,Because such labour most sweetly for the good. being earnestly carried out into God this uni∣versal good, which is that they run for. Hence saith Aug. de dono persever. C. 13. Nos volumus, sed Deus operatur in nobis & velle,Austin. nos operamur, sed Deus operatur in nobis, & operari, &c. We will indeed,God is in us the principle, to us the object, and the end of all. but it is God that works in us that will also, both to will and to do, saith the Apostle; we worke, but it is God who worketh in us that working of good also. He is in us the principle, to us the object, and for us the end of all, Eph. 4.6. Consider, Sixhly, The Instruments which propound and offer this object to the will,Sixth conside∣ration from the instrumen∣tall causes of this voluntari∣nesse. and the means by which the man is per∣swaded, and prevailed with to be free and spontaneous, and vo∣luntary to enter into this way of Christ, or Gospel-order, which are the Word and the Spirit. First, The outward instrument is his Word, this is the Sword of Christs Kingdome to conquer with,1 The word Christs sword and Scepter. and his Scepter to govern by. So Act. 2.41. All that were received into the Church, gladly received the word, as Ainsworth observes,  that is, willingly,Expos. and voluntarily without any compulsion  they imbraced it (cum approbationes) with welcome,Ainsworth. joyfully with hearty entertainment, as to the dearest friend, or best guest that could come; now such as received the Gospel so, were made members of the Church▪ The Church did all according to Christs word, and Gospel, whether in binding or loosing, taking in, or casting out, still the Statute-book, Christs Word and Gospel was by them in all. So that nothing was to bee done by the Decrees, Lawes, or Canons of men, or by their Votes and Or∣ders in Classical, Provincial, or National Assemblies; no, no such thing was heard of; nor yet were any cuffed in, or sta∣ved in by Magistrates powers.Mr. Dell. I am of Mr. Dels judgement in His way of peace, Psal. 63.64. &c. who sayes, Who so ever af∣firms that the Lawes, Decrees, or Canons of men, Rabbies, Bishops, Assemblies, or Councels, are fitter and better to order the Church by,Luther. then the pure and naked word of the Gospel by the ministration of the Spirit, speaks in my judgement very blasphemously. Luther sayes (in Epist. ad Carolum Ducem Subaudiae Tom 7▪ fo▪ 483.) Christiani eo verbo & non alio regi debent, quo Christiani (i. e. liberi a peccatis)
fiunt,Without addi∣tion of Doctors Fathers, Coun∣cels. (sine additionibus conciliorum Doctorum Patrum, &c. that all Christians are to be ordered by the Word of God, the Gospel of Christ, whereby they became Christians (that is, set at liberty from sin) and this without the addition of Councels, Doctors, Fathers, or the like; for what is it to governe and guide Christians by their Councels, Decrees, or Words, which they may keep, and yet neither become Christians, nor continue such: Nay, many times they cease to be such by those means;☞ and wee lose the truth for their Traditions, the Scriptures for their Scribbles; the Bible for their Babel; yea Christ for the creatures images, which the intellect hath taken up; and the doctrines of Christ, for the Devices, Decrees, and Ordinances of men. Moreover for such as are not yet called; suppose they bee not Christians, they are not to be tampered with, or restrained by the ordinances, or traditions of men, but to be let alone, as Paul saith, Col. 2.20.22. Neither is the Magistrate to meddle with them by his Se∣cular powers,And without the iron wea∣pons of Secular powers. Luther. so as to force them into the house of God; none can be compelled by iron weapons to joyne to a Church of Christ against their wills (as hath been largely handled in the former leaves, Chap. 11. and 13. which I shall adde now little to but this) because (as Luther sayes in the fore-cited Epistle) Christians are all to be so spontaneously, onely as they are perswaded by the Word of Christ, convinced, and lead by the Spirit of God, Joh. 16.8. Rom. 8. So are they by the same means to bee brought in members of the Church of Christ, Quae ergo insania est spontanee bonos urgere legibus malorum? and yet there be some rough spirits abroad that spit nothing but fire and blood, and speake of nothing but imprisonments and punishments for such as are not yet convinced, inlightned, or come up to their opinion. Some imagine men must be brought in by the Magstrates sword, and that the Gospel is to be pro∣moted and propagated by weapons,What Magi∣strates may do? and what not. blows, and cuffes. It is true as Mr. Hooker in the third part of Church-discipline, chap. 1. asserts, That the Civil power may (as a thing Civil) require them to come under the tenders, and call of Christ (which is vox significativa) but cannot compel their consciences; and that Power is very uncivil that intermeddles with Church-matters,
but Magistrates must leave the Church to follow the rule of Christ, in receiving such as have gladly received the Word; and whom the Lord hath by his Word and Spirit perswaded, and prevailed with; and so, whom the Lord addes unto the Church, and not whom men, Magistrates, or any other (by any indirect means soever) shall adde. It is known to many in Dublin, that I durst not but bear testimony to this truth,Dublin. though (to no little persecution of my self and others, in name and persons, as is well known to the Church-gathered, with whom I walked for the time I was there; who have also had their share of sufferings by some,Without any other indirect means. and also have added their testimony to mine.) I say, although the reproof reach∣ed great persons that invited many in by indirect means (more proper for Seducers, then Saints) whether by promising ex∣pressions of preferment, or by commanding words, to such as they had power over, which were under their commands; or by going to houses to make proselytes by their power, or the like; if their purposes might be good, yet the effects were very bad, I am sure;Hypocrites by that means in abundance. for hereby many Hypocrites crept in amongst us, being byassed with by-ends; and who after∣wards proved incendiaries, and so disturbers of our peace; they should have let the Lord alone to bring into his Church, whom he pleased; and the word alone to have per∣swaded them by the Spirit; and not have sought the inlarge∣ment of the Church, to get up to great numbers,And such are all, but the Word and Spi∣rit. (which men eye too much) by any other means then the Word and Spirit. When great men are Members of a Church,Caution. that Church must have the greater care of receiving, least any should en∣ter or crowd in more out of love to,☜ or fear of those great ones▪ or out of any ends of getting a benefit, by having great men their Brethren, or the like. I say, more then out of love to the Lords Courts, and Assemblies, as being in∣lightned by the Word, and enlivened by the Spirit, and fully perswaded in their own hearts, that they must enter into these ways, as the ways of holiness; which the Lord hath left here for believers to walk in together; wherefore our experiences produce this Caution to others; for want of which, we have
sufficiently suffered to give others warning. It was Boniface the third (that I first read of) that used his Volumus, Man∣damus, Statuimus, &c. as the means of bringing in Mem∣bers;The Power of the Word. and ever since hath the Church wanted peace, and been persecuted, by such commanding powers; for till Anti∣christs time we finde none Members of Christs Church, but such as were made willing by the word and power of Christ. Christs words are works (when his Word and Spirit go toge∣ther) Psal. 33.9. He spake, and it was done. (In verbo Christi factiva est ratio.) He said, Let there be light, and it was light; he said to the Damsel, Tabitha cumi, and she arose; he bid Lazarus come forth,The Word is the arm that gathers into the Fold, and makes men un willingly. and he did so, John 11. there is so much vertue in his voice, (verbum Christi est expressivum & operativum) that it is called the power of God, Rom. 1.10. And the arm of the Lord, Isa. 53.1. To save, assist, deliver, draw out, and to gather into his fold: This arm does all this, and is the only outward instrument, whereby Christ does draw them in; and then they run after him, Cant. 1.3. and leave Father, Friends, and all, to follow him, and his com∣mands, or call; they stand not disputing it, but immediately obey his call, Matth▪ 4.20, 22. and come away. 2. The Spirit makes willing the inferior in∣strument.Secondly, The inward working Instrument, is the Spirit of Christ, whose work is to convince us of the truth, John 16.8. and to lead us into the truth, Joh. 16.13. & 14.17, 26. or guide us; that is, not to drag us, whether we will or no: But it implies a willingness in us,Expos. being informed by the Word, that this is the way, and that we must walk in it; that we must follow the Spirit as a guide, a skilful guide, a counselling guide, a comforting guide; that will go before us, and make way for us.☞ And if we be in suspence, and hang off, why then it is his work to convince us, , as it were, by undeniable Arguments, and Reasons; and so, as that we shall not have a word to say, but that we shall heartily and willingly yeeld to his motions and perswasions,Christs Spirit known. and finde him both a protection and direction. Quest.Quest. How shall I know I have Christs Spirit? Answ.Answ. By his efficacy and power in doing his office: A painted fire will not warm,Sim. nor a painted Sun give light; now
by their effectual operations you know which is the true fire, and the true Sun. Besides, the true Sun will discover false painted suns, and  the true fire will burn up the false; so will the true Spirit of Christ, discover, judge, and condemn all other false spirits; But Quest. How doth this Spirit of Christ convince and bring in, and then keep in the way?How he con∣vinces it Answ. 1. Mouendo, by inlightning our intellect,1. By inlight∣ning. informing our mindes with his counsel and admonitions; he leads us with open eyes, Psal. 32.8. And the wisemans eyes are in his head (Christ;) This is the first work of the Spirits illumina∣tion, Eph. 1.18. He makes us to see an amiableness in the Lords Tabernacles, above all other tents. Thus our under∣standing is filled with light, Col. 1.9. So, as that we see the object which moves the will and affections (that we spake before of) to be the (attractivum bonum) the best good; and then 2. Movendo, the Spirit inclines our hearts,2. By in live∣ning. moves our wills, and makes us resolved in this way of Christ; before the Spirit took us up, as upon Mount Pisgah; that is, by divine contemplation to behold Canaan: But now he makes us willing to enter into the way, with all our hearts full of wishes and desires, which makes us swift in motions. 3. Removendo. This Spirit removes the remora's,3. By prepa∣ring the way, and making paths strait. answers all objections, takes away all impediments, and puts us on through all difficulties whatsoever; though Satan like a roaring Lyon robbed of her whelps, rage at us, and assault us with his rough Claws, and sharpe temptations; though the flesh flie upon us, with full-mouth and foul-mouthed language and invectives; Though the world frown on us, and threaten never to look well upon us, and friends forsake us, neighbors estranged to us, acquaintance persecute us, and all threaten to begger us; yet, I say, the Spirit makes us to triumph over all; and carries us through all, as more then Conquerors, and thus Cant. 5.6, 7, 8. The Spouse through inward tempta∣tions, Vers. 6. When Christ had (in her eye) left her, for∣saken her, nor regarding her prayers, or tears, and outward
troubles, Vers. 7. Yea, when the watchmen (that should have been her friends) frowned on her;The Spirit car∣ries thorough all calamities clearly. yea, smote her, till they fetched blood from her, and the keepers of the wall abused her, and took away her vail, and tore it in peeces, on pur∣pose, to put her to open shame; and to show her nakedness, before all in the streets to hoot at, after her, and to hurt her, and to make the world believe, she was an Harlot, and not a true Spouse of Christ; yet for all this, (that Ministers and Magistrates were both against her,) yet, I say, the Spirit carries her on. And thus the Psalmist sayes, Psal. 44.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. yet 17, 18.Expos. Thou makest us a by-word, a re∣proach, a derision, a spoil to them that hate us; as the appointed for slaughter, and broken in the place of Dragons; and con∣fusion is ever before us; and for all this, Vers. 17, 18, 20. Yet, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsly with thee; nor is our heart turned back from thee; nor do we decline thy way; no, not yet; and why? But because the Spirit of the Lord carried them through all, thick and thin, as we use to say; and so it is here, the Spirit removes all thy rubbidge-corrup∣tion that would hinder thee, and throws down to the ground every strong hold, or imagination thou hast against this way, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Which before he admonished thee of, and mo∣tioned thee to; and 4▪ By ratifying.4. This Spirit confirms thee in it, as well as conforms thee to it; and therefore he is called the witness in thee, 1 John 5 10.In the way of Christ, the spirit witnesses. On his own knowledge, as a witness in a Court. If any false witness do arise, and rail at this way of Christ, (as the theif on the Cross did revile Christ.) If thou meetest with any arguments from flesh and blood against it, that would fain weaken thy faith and foundation; why yet the Spirit bears testimony within, and that upon his own know∣ledge, that thou art in the right way, Joh. 16.13. And this witness within,Sim. and the word without, do both agree in their testimony.Expos. Yea furthermore, the Spirit is called a seal, Eph. 4.30.The Spirit seals. And set me as a seal upon thy heart, Cant. 8.6. That is, that I may be not onely near to thee, but on thy heart, even in thee, as thine own spirit: A seal is more then a wit∣ness; for it carries the witness with it, and is not onely a witnessing to us, but a work upon us, and in us, carrying the
image of him that sealeth us, sayes Sibs in his Fountain Sealed.An image of God confirms. Sibs. Now a Seal serves to confirm, and thus doth the Spirit seal instruction to us, Job 33.16. that is, confirms us in what the Word instructs and declares. Besides,Distinguish es betwixt true and false. Dr. Sibs Foun∣tain sealed. this Seal is for distin∣ctions sake (as Dr. Sibs saith) to distinguish which is the Lords way and worship, from all others of mens making, 1 Tim. 2. The Lord knoweth who are his, and who are not his. This distinguishes the precious from the vile Jer. 15.19. And by this seal the Lord knows his, and the Saints know which is the Lords; For the seal sets the Lords image on his way and wor∣ship. Moreover, a seal signifies a propriety and right to a thing, as Merchants use to seal their wares,Sets a proprie∣ty. that others may not claim a right to them. So Psal. 4.3. Know, that the Lord hath set apart the righteous for himself.Sim. He hath set his mark on them, in the Hebrew,Expos. it is the Lord hath culled out and severed in a most excellent manner (i. e. by his Spirit) the righteous; that is in Hebrew, Chasid, the holy One,Thus God seals▪ Acts 13.35. full of holiness, goodness, piety, grace, to himself. And as the gracious man, so the gracious way of Christ, he hath set apart for himself, i. e. as his way, and his right. Thus every Saint sets his seal to,And every Saint seals by the same Spirit. in John 3.33. who being convinced by the Spirit, as before, and now confirmed by this testimony within him (which holds against all opposers) he gives his testimonial to the truth, Deut. 32.4. and bears witness to the way of Christ, Joh. 15.26, 27. and sets to his seal, and sub∣scribes to it, and chuses it to walk▪ to live and die in. So that they are Christs witnesses, and do bear his testimony with the Spirit, as well as by the Spirit, Acts 5.32. It is the Spirit which assures them, as well as perswades them; whereby the will is set upon the wheel; so after the Saints believed, they were sealed, sayes the Apostle. 5. This Spirit then rests on thee,5. By resting on thee in the way. and on that way thus wit∣nessed and sealed to; as the Dove did upon the Ark; yea, as the Spirit did rest and abide upon Christ, John 1.32. where∣by he was known; so hereby (by the same Spirits resting on us) we are known, and the way, and worship, and Church of Christ, is known to be from above. So 1 Pet. 4.14. Happy are ye, for the Spirit of the Lord, and of glory, rests upon you.
And Paul saith, The power of Christ rests upon him, 2 Cor. 12.9. The Word is,Sim. , that is, as the Dove which wandred about,This Dove rests in the Ark, no where else. and not found rest, nor where to set the sole of his foot: In this world iniquity doth abound, and the waters are up, and the floods are so high, that the Dove, i. e. the Spirit comes again weary and spent, into the Ark, and from thence is sent out: So that this Spirit found Christ such an Ark and rested there;The Church is the Ark. and findes the Church such an Ark, and rests there, (yea, a Saint in a sence, such an Ark, and rests there;) And from thence, he is sent out (by Messengers, means of Grace, &c.) abroad and about the world, to finde footing among them without; but often∣times he returns with this tale, That the waters are too high yet. But here the Spirit rests, and by this the Church is known to be Christs.The Spirit is but one in all. We are all baptized by one Spirit, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.13. Into one Body, and made to drink in∣to one Spirit. So Eph. 4.4. We are one Body, and have one Spi∣rit;Sim. that is, As one Soul in the Body, quickens, moves, go∣verns, comprehends all, and every Member, so doth one Spirit in the Church every Member, Eye, Ear, Hand, Head, Foot▪ &c. It is one and the same Soul, that acts in every one, and all the Members, though in a different way; as the Eye to see with, Ear to hear with, Hand to work with, Foot to walk with, tongue to speak with, Head to plot with, &c. And so many several ways the Soul works, and yet is but one and the same;☞ so the Spirit works in divers ways, and sundry man∣ners, 1 Cor. 12.4. in several Members; some to prophecy, some to teach, some to exhort, some to oversee, some to di∣rect and rule, some to distribute, &c. Rom. 12.4, 6, 7, 8. some to one thing, some to another; and yet it is but one and the same Spirit. This one and the same Spirit rests upon every Member, and we must by this one Spirit be brought into this Body of Christ,The difference betwixt Hypo∣crites and true Church-Mem∣bers, in the vo∣luntary moti∣ons into this Church-state. which is his Church. Thus I have done with the inward instrument of working in us, and winning upon us, to enter into Church-fellowship. Now in this, there is an apparent difference between Hypo∣crites, and true Saints, entring into this way: A true Saint is made willing and spontaneous by a principle within; but a
Hypocrite, or any other man, is moved as the Automata are moved, or things of artificial motion, as Clocks, Jacks, or the like engines of ingenuity: It is some weight without that poyseth them, and puts them upon motion;Sim. so some∣thing or other that is without, swayeth, and worketh, and weigheth upon the hearts of Hypocrites, to make them willing (as we said before concerning Dublin) and not an inward principle. But thus we have done with the instrumental or organical  causes of carrying the will on in the way of Christ;The Spirit is Gods other arm. which is matter for a Reason of the necessity of a voluntary cause▪ that is, because the Word and Spirit are the two arms which the Lord hath appointed to pull them out of Babylon with, and into Sion; and no other instruments or means must do it, un∣til these hands of Jesus Christ do lead them out of their carnal, corrupt, or Antichristian condition,Till then on men come be∣fore called. they have no call to come; and when they are thus called, and convinced as before, they come running by a voluntary instinct, and con∣sent, flowing up (more fluminis, as the tide by a natural in∣stinct, and not by compulsion) into the mountain, where the Lords house is on the top of all mountains, Isai. 2. But con∣sider 7. Lastly, That because the will of man is inclined, and  carried on into the way of Christ (as we said before) (ab in∣teriori principio) by an inward instinct and principle,Violence is repugnant to voluntariness. and all kinde of coaction, or violent compulsion comes from without, (ab exteriori principio) therefore it is a high absurdity, a groundless and irregular opinion, and positively repugnant even to the principles of one spiritualized, and made willing by the power of Christ, to call for compulsive powers, to pro∣mote the ways of Christ, or to bring in any man that way, seeing (violentia directe opponitur voluntario, & violentia causat involuntarium) he must be a voluntier. And this will serve as the seventh Reason, to ratifie this truth, That men must not be compelled, but come in voluntarily; for violence is inconsistent with the will. Thus under several considerations hath this point been offered for a voluntariness, to be wrought in us by the power
of Christ, before we venture or enter into his Church-way. Now a man may be said to be voluntary two ways;How volunta∣rily. directly or indirectly. 1. Directly. Then the will is the agent of his willingliness, (having an inward principle,1. Directe.) even as the fire (having the principle of heat) is the agent of heat in the water.Sim. But such a one as is 2. Indirecte.2. Indirectly voluntary, is made so by some outward means, promises, or threatnings; hopes or fears, or the like; and such a one will be a dangerous, doubting, and disturbing Member. But such men and women as are directly voluntary, by the means I have mentioned in this Chapter, may come with welcome: For they are called and invited, and if there be first a willing minde (saith the Apostle) you are accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12.Virtus no lenti∣um nulla est, Trap in loc. For Christ will enjoy (sayes one) his Spouses love and person by a willing contract, and not by a ravishment; He is none of them, he will have the heart, to consent with all the heart. O then! let us say with the Apostle, The love of Christ constraineth us; and with Job 32.18. The Spirit con∣straineth us. These are the best and sweetest compulsive powers. But thus for this Chapter.
CHAP. III.  Sagad Dur. or Pagad Dur. After this full perswasion and voluntary motion, and concurrence, comes in the communion of Saints, by an orderly uniting and embodying together in a solemne order, suitable to the solemnity of the Ordinance, and that in some publike place. MAny there be that in the time of the Churches tran∣quillity will intrude,Many Intru∣ders. and pretend willingnesse with the Lords people to goe about the Lords work, and build; especially when earthly powers and Rulers look kindly upon us, and allow us our liberty to go and build, and when they as Patrons, and protecting Fathers, prove favourers and abetters of what we are about. But let us have a care! and say with Zerubbabel, and the rest of the Fathers of Israel, Ezra 4.2, 3.Caution. It is not for you and us (joyntly) to build an house unto our God, you have nothing to doe with us, but we our selves together will build it, unto the Lord God of Israel. Remember that wee are a people that must be separate, the cleane from the uncleane, the holy from the prophane, and by one free consent (being fully convinced) concurre together in this worke of the Lord without the unclean hands or help of them without, who are adversaries to Sion. Now because our Ruler is the God of order,Order in the Church. 1 Cor. 14.33. and not of confusion, he would have all things done in decency, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.  that is (compositis mori∣bus) fitly for use and ornament to the Church,Expos. which is a rule (saies one) of great request and inquest,Trap in lo. both for real and
ritual decency which is to be observed,Ordinationes in ecclesia fa∣ciendae. and is of much con∣cernment. And for this Colosse was so largely commended, Col. 2.5. and Christ himselfe (our sweet Master) intimates so much in setting downe the people on the grasse,. Matth. 14.18. and 15. and feeding them, ranke by ranke (as it were) as they sat. So his Churches are called beds of spices, Cant. 6.2. that is, as beds and borders orderly set out, to sew us what delight he hath to live in an orderly and well set out society. Order is Gods Ordinance; Now to make up this order, some things are extra-essential,Ordo formae, Et materiae. and left to liberty according to what is requisite to the constitution and condition of the Church; and other things are essential, and positively relate as well to the being, as well-being of the Church (ita ordo dicitur respectu prin∣cipii) and may by no means be omitted; but of this latter we have been large before;Ritual order and decency. and for the former, respecting ritual decency and order, we must grant that men must not be tyed to such things as of necessity, but they are left free, whether to ob∣serve them, or change them, as often as there is cause for the use and excellency of the Church. I could not omit to premise thus much before I proceed, and shall say with Luther, What if any one Church will not imi∣tate another in things indifferent and doubtfull, outward and cir∣cumstantial,Left to liberty ritual and formal? Yet what need is there of com∣pulsion by Powers, Decrees, of Councels, or the like; which are pre∣sently converted into snares and laws; and as he saith to the Church at Wittembergs (about the form of celebrating the Supper) in quibus omnibus cavendum,Luther. ne legem ex libertate faciamus, &c. Be sure that our liberty be not made a Law by men, and a snare to souls; such a warning I will give the Reader ere I go on, that he confine not his light, opinion, judgement, or perswasion to mine here (or any other mans) in those things which are left to liberty; I am not about establishing a set Form of Discipline, or ma∣king a Directory as necessary for others to walke by, or to en∣snare any soules,☞ or trouble any consciences, but to set before you (as is given me from above, and that by measure) the pattern of Gods house;Caution. and as for this Form of embodying together by a solemn order,This is no s form. which I am now treating of in this Chapter (as we have promised else where) you have our experiences
of it, and proofs for it, and may follow it, if you please (it be∣ing in our judgement the most orderly, and heavenly manner we have met with, and most Scriptural and consonant to rule both of Reason and Religion.) Now premising thus much, and promising this more, that I shall heartily imbrace, and willingly give way to the unction from on high in better teach∣ings about this order, and be ready to receive from any, whatsoever shall be offered as more useful and profitable in this forme of uniting; I shall proceed. In order to a communion of Saints in a Gospel-Church-state,1 Christians meet together often fist, and why? those who are godly, do often meet together; as in Mal. 3.16.17. when all that feared the Lord, and thought on his name (and his worship) conferred often together; and this is a duty deeply in∣cumbent to the Saints to do so first of all, and to speak often together, to pray together, to make mention of the Lord, with savoury speeches tending to edification, Eph. 4.29. and 5.3, 4. Heb. 3.13. Jude 20. Act. 18.23. and this as often as there is an opportunity; and then you shall finde,To prepare for the work. Mal. 3.17. after this the Lord promises to set upon gathering his people; then, saith the Lord will I make up my  peculium,Expos. my jewels picked out, and binde them up together: And this day wherein I will doe this, shall be a day of distinction and sepa∣ration betwixt the precious and the vile, the sheep and the goats; the righteous and the wicked, and then Verse 18. shall ye discerne between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not. Now I say, in order to this, the people of God must first meet, and that often together, to try, and have knowledge, and experience of one another, to inquire after one another, and all together, by their joynt prayers, and offerings to contribute their best to∣wards the building up of this Tabernacle. Then let all vaine communication be kept out, Eph. 5.4. and let your words bee savoury and seasoned with that salt of the word (that hath not lost its savour) and be ready to answer any objection, or question that shall be made, Col. 4.6. exhorting and provoking one another to duty, Heb. 3.13. and 10.24, 25. and declaring to one another their clear satisfaction and full perswasion of the way of Christ, and their manifesting of longing fond affecti∣ons for these Courts of the Lord, and to be in his amiable Ta∣bernacles,
Psal. 84.1, 2. saying one to another, Come, let us goe up to this mountaine of the Lord, the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes, Isa. 2.2, 3. and asking the way to Zion with your faces thitherward,Saints not ty∣ed to one Church. saying, Come, and let us joyne our selves unto the Lord, &c. Now this is preparatory to the worke of embodying which follows, and yet these godly are left to liberty to joyne in what society seems best to them, and are not tyed to one place, therefore did the Apostles gather people together in several Cities where they dwelt, and so established many Churches in one County, (as the seven Churches in the lesser Asia, Rev. 1.4.10.) the Churches of Galatia, Syria, and Cilicia, 1 Cor. 16.1. Act. 15.41. Corinth, and yet Cenchrea, Rom. 16.1. (in the Suburbs of Corinth) that the Saints might enter where was most con∣venient. After this, Those that are clearly convinced of the order, and well satisfied with the worke it selfe,And secondly, o give up their names together. and one with ano∣ther (as before) being affectionately desirous to walke toge∣ther in this way, and having agreed it▪ Amos 3.3. they doe write and give up their names together for that purpose which they propose (as being the best way to intimate their desires, and seeming most to be in practise in former times, Act. 1.15. Nehem. 7.5.38. which thing they doe to one whom they appoint to receive them,3 Keep dayes of humiliation & prayer. and to call them, as occasion serves. In the mean time they most unanimously desire, and ap∣point a solemne day of humiliation (or more) to bee set apart,Which ha∣bent quatuor. 1 Invocationem Dei. 2 Commemora∣tionem beneficii Dei. 3 Petitionem 4 Et obsra∣tionem. All which must be 1 In elevatione mentis ad Deum &— 2 Fiducia im∣petrandi. and to seek the Lords presence, and his promises of direction and guidance in so great a duty, which else they dare not under∣take, Isa. 58.11. Jo. 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.13. on which day they lye low before the Lord, and licke the dust, Nehem. 1.11. and Nehem. 9.1, 2. 2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. Act. 14.23. this they doe by themselves separate from others, Nehem. 9.2. and it is usually a most humbling heart-breaking day, whilst they come before the Lord with feare and trembling, won∣dring at his love to pitch upon them for so great a mercy, to pick them out and leave so many behinde, to visit them with light, and refreshings from on high, Act. 3. Oh! how doth a thousand of these considerations melt them before the Lord!
and yet make them with teares to lay hold on all the pro∣mises made to them in this case, and pressing him with Moses, Exod. 33.15.16. to be with them, and to goe before them in this work, for wherein say they shall it be knowne that we and thy (despised) people have found grace in thy sight; is it not in that thou art with us, and goest with us, and guidest us? By this, shall we (Lord) and thy people be separated and knowe from all the other people (without) that are round about us: Therefore say they▪ For Zions sake we will not hold our peace, nor give thee rest, till thy righteousnesse goe before us as brightnesse, and salvation be in the midst of us as a lamp that burneth, Isa. 62.1.7. and till thou hast made us a praise in the earth, and we be called the holy people, the redeemed of the Lord, Hephzibah, and Beulah, Verse 4. and 12. We will not goe up (say they to the Lord) without thy presence with us; if thy presence go not with us, carry us not up hence, &c. This, or these dayes thus holily, solemnly, and spiritually spent, the people look like the new mown grasse (or tender springs) that hath the Sun shining upon it after a showre. O then, what a humble holy frme of spirit may wee finde amongst them! what Angel-like looks? sweet words, Christian car∣riages are there then? O how they blesse the Lord with much alacrity and life for the returns made upon their spirits! that the Lord is with them, and will guide them by his owne presence, and they give in an account to one another (before they part) of their confidence and comforts which they finde within, being fully perswaded the Lord will be with them, and calling for the time to be appointed when they shall make a Church-body and unite; having nothing to obstruct,And unity. but the worke of the Lord lying plaine before them, they set apart the day for that duty, and (if any be nigh) they send and seek out for the assistance of some other Church, as it were to joyne with them, and bear testimony to them upon that day; and at the parting at the end of the day and duty, will give to them the right hand of fellowship as a Symbole of love, and of approbation (as Pareus hath it in the Margin, lib. 2. p. 161. In∣timae conjunctionis symbolum, non authoritatis) of friendship and familiarity, not of Lordship and authority. But as Beza sayes, Porrexerunt manum, quod symbolum esset nostrae in Evangelii doctrinâ
summae consensionis; So sayes Paul, Gal. 2. when James and Cephas, and John perceived the grace that was given me, they gave unto mee and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, (vide Expositors and Septuagint in Gal. 2.) so that it will bee very comely, and an argument of their love, and good-liking, but it is not necessary; wherefore to proceed. 4 The day they are embo∣dyed.The day appointed being brought in now as upon the shoulders of the Saints to be united together, I meane by the daily prayers and preparations for this great and weighty worke; they judge it (for the reasons which follow) to bee most expedient, and more to the honour of Jesus Christ, and more to the con∣vincing of them without, on this day (however) to appear in publike (unlesse there be persecution) I meane in such a place where any that will may come to hear,They appear in publike. and carry away what they can. This day is begun and kept on for some houres with the prayers of the faithful, as Act. 8.15. as John and Peter began it in Samaria; and for the same effect, viz. that the Holy Ghost might fall upon them this day,Powerful in prayer. and rest on them. They pray not in a sleight, overly formal way, but with an holy vio∣lence, to beset, and to take heaven by force, and bounce hard, with the greatest might for the greatest mercy, and with an united lively power for the large pourings out of the unction from on high upon them,Nehem. 9.1, 2. Act. 1.14. even untill the room, or house is ready to shake again. But after this; there is some preparatory Sermon, or speech made (by one that is able, and appointed thereto) full of exhortation, as Act. 11.23. Barnabas bid them with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, and as in Nehem. 8 1. &c. the book of the Law was brought out and read in a most religious manner to all that could hear, both men and women, and all the peoples ears were attentive. V. 2, 3. which Ezra opened in a Pulpit of wood where he stood for that purpose, v. 4.5. And then blessed the Lord, and all the people, said, Amen, Amen, lifting up their hands. Verse 6. and besides Ezra,Exhortations. Joshua also, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, and others, &c. Vers. 7.8. read in the book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand. So I say, it is fit that the book of Christs Law be at that time read openly, unto which he who preaches and exhorts, is prin∣cipally appointed in a Pulpit of wood in the publike place, or else∣where,
which is as convenient for all peoples, men and women,Order of Christ opned and proved. that will come of all sorts to hear: For then the rules that the Church is gathered by, the grounds upon which they embody together, and the Gospel-order and fellowship of Saints ac∣cording to Christs Law, are all laid open, proved and pressed, that it may appeare to all that heare and understand that they doe nothing without the Law of Christ, to which the peoples ears will be very attentive (as we have experienced in some places already) and such as have before (through ignorance of this Gospel-order) been enemies to it, and inveighed against it, and now came but to laugh at it, and to carry tales, and make scoffes, were (upon such a day) convinced by it, and inclined to it, enquired after it, being as it were dazled and amazed at the beauty of it, when it came to bee opened out of the Word, and to appear armed with argument of proof out of the Lawes of Jesus Christ; and then they cryed, Amen, Amen, unto it, (probatum est.) But now after this is declared to all, what they doe, and why they do this which they are about to doe, their Rules, Rea∣sons, Grounds, Scriptres,Account of faith made. and Proofs being produced and drawn up, as it were, into a compendium; but so as that the  doe lye obvious,Experiences of the work of grace. and as much as may be beyond ob∣jection: Then the next thing that followes, is the Confession of Faith, begun by him who is appointed thereunto as the ablest to lead the way hitherto; this brother besides gives an account of the worke of grace upon his heart, holding out at least some of his Experiences (and such as are most usefull for such an Auditory) 1 Pet. 3.15. with sweetnesse and humi∣lity of spirit, so as thereby others may judge him laid upon the Foundation, and be in a regenerate state, and changed from darknesse into light, from death to life, from a state of nature into a state of grace, and to have indeed fellowship with the Father and the Sonne, 1 Joh. 1.7. But I purpose to insist upon these particulars more at large in the Chapters that follow.A declaration of full stis∣faction from Gods word. But after this Brother hath delivered himselfe at large (having the more liberty, because he leads, as it were, others, and declared his clear satisfaction and undoubted perswasion to walk in the way whereinto hee is now entring, as the very way of
Christ appointed for beleevers to worship God in, & as the will of God,By the ablest in pblick. wherein he is confident upon a Scripture and Spiritual account that he pleases God: Then follows some others of the ablest of the Brethren, (for herein care must bee had in publike, lest the weaknesse of a Brother give advantage to them without, to harden their hearts against the truth, and lest thereby Christ should suffer in his honour, and the Church in her happinesse) I say, such Brethren as are ablest to speake, are appointed for that one day, being so publike: And these, as Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, &c. read in the Scriptures the Law of Christ distinctly; I mean, they lay down the Scrip∣tures and grounds of their satisfaction and full perswasion to enter into this way (as that which Jesus Christ our Law-giver hath laid out) and they declare their sense and judge∣ments, and then proceed as the former Brother did in rendring a reason of that lively hope which is in them, by Confession of faith, Experiences of the worke of Grace, and the like, declaring their cleaving to the Lord in this way with full purpose of heart. Thus as many as are appointed, and thought fit for that day, doe goe on one by one in order as they are set out, and pos∣sibly on this day but few (as eight, or ten, or more, or lesse) may be appointed, and in the number for the first; because the worke is this day the most difficult, the most publike, and must be most especially regarded, and wisely and watch∣fully carried on. In his commu¦nion of Saints▪ Chap. 17. Few at fist▪ & those that are without ex∣ception, & fittest and ablest. Dan. 2.Besides (as Ainsworth sayes) the Church is small at first, a little graine of mustard-seed, which is the least of all seeds, Mat. 13.32. and as Israel once was the fewest of all peoples, Deut. 77. Christ began but with two at first, and God hath pro∣mised to take them, but one of a City and two of a Tribe, Jer. 3.14. and these are the poore, despised, contemptible ones of the world too for the most part, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. and it shal be said of Sion, Psal. 87.5, 6. This, or that man was born there, so that not numbers are to bee expected (or indeed to be desired) at first,A Covenant. but rather to be a little stone cut without hands, and growing greater, and greater, and so a little one shal become a thousand. After they be gone thus far, some will have a formal Covenant in wri∣ting brought forth for these to subscribe, and so all others as
they enter;Register. but a Covenant they have taken, and engagement made before, which may be will appear sufficient when wee come in the following Chapters to speake of the Cove∣nant. But after all this is done,Prayer. their names are taken to∣gether into the Register,And Resoluti∣on. Nehem. 7.5. Act. 1.15. upon Record (against whom no exceptions could be made as before) and these doe by prayer together give themselves up unto God, and one to another willingly, 2 Cor. 8.5. to worship the Lord, and to walke together with him as a Church, and to serve him in all his will revealed to them, as such whom the Father hath picked out for that purpose, Jo. 4 23. 1 Pet. 2, 9. and to bee helpfull to one another in particular, and to the whole body in general, according to their duties mentioned in the Statute-book of Christ, which is alwayes to lye open before their eyes. And to conclude this busie day, they poure out prayers and praises in such a measure▪ that as it was said of Israel, in Ezra 3.13. when the Foundation of the Temple was laid, that they could not discerne the noise of the shout of joy, from the noise of weeping, both were so great: So here it may bee said,And Praises. the Saints are so filled with praises, and with prayers, that the noise of the one can hardly be discerned from the noise of the other. And as upon the reading of the Law in Nehem. 13.13. separation was presently practised from the mixed multitude, so that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude; so these are now a people no more to be reckoned among the Nations without, but such as are separated from the mixed multitude. As for other Brethren, and the Sisters which are to bee ad∣mitted, they doe make their Confession of Faith, and (as wee have heard before) declare their full satisfaction,The Church admits when she is alone. and clear the worke of God upon their hearts by his Spirit in private (I meane) when these people thus enchurchedtogether are alone by themselves, separate from the mixed multitude) being now a Church in visible order. And their admission is most pro∣per so, because the world should take no notice of their weaknesse in utterance or expression, or the like, whereby to upbraid them, and the truth. But this I purpose to speak to afterward; in the mean time, I, and hundreds of the godly with me must needs be much offended at the practise of some
that run preposterously into a way of fellowship without any rule laid downe,How rashly some embody. or any Law of Christ read and opened, upon which they embody together, clearing nothing of the way first,Sad sign of a breach. to give satisfaction to such as sit in darknesse to it▪ but with∣out any day of humiliation, or due preparation for this weighty worke, without any solemne prayers, (and serious self-exami∣nations) on a sudden,Expos. in an hours warning or two, and in some place or other too that is unknowne to any but themselves, they write down their names together,The most so∣lemne Oder must accom∣pany the most solemne Ordi∣nance. choose officers, and all at once, and so in an houre or two's time, make up a Body, and call themselves a Church, and then all that will be joyned, must bee joyned to them that are thus jumbled together in darknesse, and in a most undecent and undue order; but let them remember that in 1 Chron. 15.23.Sim. The Lord made a breach upon them, for that they sought him not after the due order; as Dike saith, The failing in a prescribed formality (which some would think nothing,Dike. and that God regards not) causes a breach upon them, instead of a blessing; so precisely strict is God to require the most solemne order too in the most solemne Ordinances, and so quick-sighted a Judge he is in small prevarications in such cases. For as to goe and fetch the Arke, and to enquire of God at it, was an Ordinance of God, but to neglect the solemnity of carrying it, and to carry it in a Cart hurrying, and not on their shoulders, and to neglect to sanctifie themselves for that service, but to runne to it hand over head, was not Gods order: So also this Church-gathering, or uniting together into a Gospel Church-state is an undeniable and so∣lemne Ordinance of God, and Law of Christ; but to doe it without any seriousnesse, solemnity, or the like, hurrying, and rushing into it without due regard and heed, and neglecting prayers, fastings, holy conferences, and preparatory means ap∣pointed to season us, and sanctifie us, and qualifie us for this great duty, is doubtlesse a great offence to God, and I am sure none of his order. And what must we then expect? beleeve it, a sore blow; The Lord smote them; it proved a sad day to them at last: and if this severity was but for failing in outward or∣der, in carrying the Arke on a Cart▪ O! then sure it will be a sad day to such as fail in that inward and spiritual order, with, and
in which this great duty is to be performed, God will bee sought in a good order, as well as in a good Ordinance, or else he will deny his blessing. But I shall performe my promise,Why the first day in pub∣like solemnity. and so conclude this Chapter: there is a great deale of reason and order in it, to have the first solemne day when we are to embody and unite, per∣formed in publike, in the times of the Churches peace and safety, and that those who are judged (indeed) able to speak (without discredit to the Gospel, or the Church) should make their speeches also in publick, in the bearing of all that will. First, Experience hath given it in as a great means to con∣vince men of the way, such as upon that day have stepped out  of their shops,It is more to conviction. Vide chap. 6. p. 98. &c. and spared an houre or two out of meer novelty; why these have heard the way so laid open before them out of Scriptures (and so proved and pressed from precepts and practise, that they have gone away with another spirit, and if not altogether, yet with Agrippa almost perswaded. now they have not such an opportunity when you doe clandestinely and closely embody together:Christ did so Christ went often into the Synagogues to convince the Jewes, and to reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, he was sure to finde them there, and he would lose no opportunity: So he disputed with the Doctors in the Temple, and put them to silence, for he would goe to them where hee knew they would bee, seeing they would not come to him. Thus Act. 18.28. this is the emi∣nent character of Apollos that he mightily convinced the Jewes, and that publickly, shewing by Scriptures,Expos. &c.  hee confuted them over and over, and quite non-plussed them, and for the greater honour to the truth and himselfe (as a ser∣vant to the truth) hee did this publickly, saith the Text () that is▪ in the company of multitudes of them, in the midst of great Congregations he convinced them; and the Lord is said openly in a great publike appearance that he shall come to convince all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard speeches, which he shall doe with a vengeance;Jude v.15. and that will be more then if it were done in a corner, viz. to do it openly. So certainly this is a fit opportunity to bee in
publike for this purpose, and to cast the net in where the most Fish meet together. Secondly, This would stop the wide mouths of many, and prevent the scandals which are raised by reason of secret and  close embodying together; many (and such as are godly too) be ready to censure such practises,It would pre∣vent many scandals. as if they were ashamed to bee seen, as Joh. 3.19. This is their condemnation, they loved darknesse rather then light, because their deeds were evill. Popish Religion was laid in darknesse,Rx Plat. and lives in it, unlesse it be under bastard lights, as candles, and such as are of mens make. Tene∣brines Papistae male sibi conscii,Expos. aeternum atri & tetri, &c. and so doth all the false. Truth is hurt, and cannot helpe her selfe, when she is kept a close prisoner and immured up; and when shee is not let out to speake for her selfe, men are apt to take for truth what is spoken against her; therefore it is that Peter cals so upon us, 1 Pet. 2.12. to have us come abroad, and be seen among men, that by our good workes, we might stop their mouths that speake against us as evill doers. This would remove many scan∣dals which men raise, as if we were of a false faith, and all erroneous persons, and a company of Hypocrites, and Pharisees, and the like: would we but appear in publike upon that day of embodying, whereby all men may hear our Creed, and the Evi∣dences of Gods gracious works upon our hearts, and some signs of our onenesse with Christ; and then the world will beleeve, Joh. 17.21.23. Thirdly, It is much for the credit of the Gospel, and for the praise of Zion, that her beauty appears in publike, and her ami∣able beams shine abroad.For the honour of the way. Beauty loves to be seen; the Sunne hath the more honour and praise, and esteem, by how much the more he shines abroad,Sim. and about; and the Church is (in these dayes) to look forth as the morning,Expos. Cant. 6.10. bright, beauteous, lightsome, and welcome (after the darke night of Antichristian ignorance, and error, which we have been so long under.) Now shee is to arise in publike, and to be seen by all, and in an ascending light from year to year; from one admini∣stration to another, till it be perfect day, Prov. 4.18. and high∣noon, Cant. 1.7. and every yeere there shall be more light then in the former, Eph. 3.3, 4. Veniente perfecto evacuatur imper∣fectum)
for it is not an evening, but a morning light, Isa. 58.8. and then follows, Faire as the Moon, in Heb. Lebanah,☜ shining bright, to shew when she appears thus in publike (as the morning) she appears in pulchritude, to the admiration of all others (as in Verse 9. before.) Thus Ezek. 16.14. Thy renowne went forth among the heathen for thy beauty, &c. Clear as the Sunne,Much honour is had by pub∣lick embody∣ing. Act. 2.24. and ter∣rible as an Army with Banners, i. e. then, when shee appears and looks forth in publike abroad, as the morning; O what a terror is shee to all the enemies of truth! when they see Saints in a good array, ranke, and order, to march together in one body, all armed with the Armor of God,Expos. and under one Captaine of their salvation, against one and the same enemy. This is the benefit of appearing in publike, and it addes much to the name of Christ, and to the glory of the Church. See but Act. 5.13. when the Saints came forth into a publike place, viz. Solomons Porch; O what honour they had by it! in that little time, saith the Text, The people magnified them  and honoured them, and the way which they were in. Doubt∣lesse might Christians in primitive times have had their liberty,☜ they would alwayes have been in publike. Fourthly, It answers the Rule most, to appear in publike upon that day, and in that duty;Most conso∣nant to Christs Law. It is most coming up to Christs Commands, see Mat. 10.27. What I tell you (whether concerning Doctrine or Discipline) speake abroad in the open light, preach it on the house-tops, that is, in the most patent and publike places;Expos. teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, Matth. 28.20. thus Wisdome sends forth her Maidens to cry and call in the open streets, and in the most publike places of the City where is greatest resort, Prov. 9.3. and Christ tells his Disciples in Mark 4.22. there was not any thing kept in secret, but that it should come abroad. Fifthly, This publike appearance would be most answer  able to Christs practise;And to Christs practise. yea and his Apostles and Saints too in the primitive times (though then dangerous;) see what Christ saith, Joh. 18.20. I spake openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogues and in the Temple, whither the Jews alwayes resort, and in secret have I said nothing. So Act. 20.20. I kept backe no∣thing, saith Paul, that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you,
and taught you publikely. Thus the Church of Ephesus was brought out into publike too sometimes. Sixtly, This publike practise, and uniting together, is more an∣swerable to the worke it selfe (being a worke of light) and there∣fore it ought to bee done in light,To the way it self. and openly, for veritas ab∣scondi erubescit, Joh. 3.21. He that doth truth, cometh into the light, that his deeds may be manifest, that they are wrought of God (saith Christ, who is Light.) that is, all as from God, and for God; such are neither ashamed of their principle,Sim. nor of their end, & quoad fontem & quoad finem, saith Aug. in loc. The ho∣nest Tradesman is content his Wares should be carried to the street-door from the dim shop-board. It is for Heresie to hide it selfe, saies Hall; And for Antichristianisme, and false Wares to loath the light, they are Bats and Owles that love not to be seen. But let us walk as children of light, Eph. 5.8.11. It is said of John Frith Martyr, that when the Arch∣bishops man would have let him gone away, and escaped; saith he,Frith. In Fox Act. and Mon. fol. 1927. no; If you goe to Croyden, and tell the Bishop that you have lost Frith, I will follow as fast as ever I can, and tell him, I have found Frith again, and would deliver my self into his hands; for what do ye think, that I am afraid to declare my opinion before the Bishops in a manifest truth, or to come into publike? no!— Seventhly, I shall adde one reason more to this, and that is the Incouragements which others would hereby have to joyn in that fellowship;To stir up o∣thers into the way. for the publike appearance of the Christians in Solomons Porch, Act. 5.12. was very attractive as in V. 14. Be∣leevers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women. So that the Church lost nothing, but got much by it, whilst Clandestine embodying discourages many, &c. It must needs be so, that when people come to see such an amiablenesse and excellency in this way of Christ above all other wayes, and how the Beloved is in this Church-state the best of all beloveds, carrying away the Banner from ten thou∣sands, and that his presence is most familiarly and ravishingly in these Gardens enclosed (and this appeares to be promised and proved out of Scriptures;) I say it must needs bee, that their bowels will earne after these wayes, and to live in these Gar∣dens,
when they know what the way is (as when the Daugh∣ters of Sion did ask first (of Christ) what is he? Cant. 5.9.Expos. And then (when they heard how he excelled) the next question is, Cant. 6.1. O, where is he? whether is be gone? &c.) So when they hear what this way is, the next question will be, O, where is it? how shall we get in? tell us, that we may seek him with thee; that we may partake of these priviledges with you: And they shall say, We will go with you, for we have heard, that God is with you, Zach. 8.23. Many Reasons more I might adde hereto,But see Hookers Survey of Church Dis∣cipline, 3. part. ch. 1. Appear the in publike. and produce more Scriptures to confirm and strengthen this Exhortation of appearing in publick upon that day especially, (sed sat sapien∣ti.) In a word, If you do these things, shew thy self to the world, John 7.3. Let all men see and observe how sweetly your practise agrees with Christs Precept, and this way with his Word; till which time, men surmize much evil of you and your opinion, and think you are without warrant, and walk by fancy, not by faith. As if a man,Sim. who never saw any dance in his life, should see a company in a field (whilest he is afar off) and before he can hear any musick) he thinks them mad, wonders what they mean to skip about so; but when he is come nigh, and hears the melody of the musick,Sim. and observes their dancing, and how they agree, both in time and order, with the tune of the musicks, he then admires on the other side; changes his former thoughts and judgement of them, and now is much taken and delighted with them, and marks with much affection the agreement of the foot to the tune, and could attempt to enter in, and be one amongst them, were he but fit for it; and yet he can hardly forbear. So it is, that the vulgar and ordinary sort of people (such as are most strangers to this way of the Gospel) may think you mad, and wonder what you mean,Many wonder at this way of the Gospel, till they know it. to separate from their Parish wayes, to joyn in fellowship in this orderly way; till they come to see how it doth agree with the Word and Spirit;☜ and then they cannot but with much content observe the Order, and minde the Word, and this way together, to agree most sweetly; and then they wish to be in the number of them whose practise appears so home to the precepts and practise of
Christ, and Saints in primitive times. And that this sweet order and agreement might be the more observed and asserted, I do heartily wish, for the honor of him, whom I serve, that there may be no more Chamber-embodyings, but openly to all, for the conviction of many, especially now in the time of the Churches tranquillity and liberty. And let this be done by them in due order and solemnity,Dublins expe∣rience teaches most of these things menti∣oned. answerable to the weight of the Ordinance; and then they shall grow up in all things in Jesus Christ their head, from whom the whole body fitly joyned toge∣ther, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, shall make in∣crease of the Body, Eph. 4.15, 16. And in whom all the building fitly framed together, shall grow up an holy Temple in the Lord, Eph. 2.21. CHAP. IV.  Beith. The Church thus constituted, takes in Members, and of their Admission, upon clear Testimony; and without dipping, or tying to Forms or Judgements. THe Church thus orderly gathered and united together, do receive in Members, as Acts 2.41. & 5.13. & 9.26. Now in their Admission, we must consider, First, the Power that takes them in; and then secondly, the Persons that are taken in. First, The power is the Churches, not the Elders or Officers, as some would assert;1. The power is in the Body o admit Mem∣bers. to which I cannot assent, because that the Keyes were given to the Church, and left with them, Mat. 16.19. John 20.23. And whom ye receive, shall be received; whom ye loose (or give liberty to) shall be loosed; and whom ye re∣strain,
shall be restrained: The words are read in the plural number, in John 20. and in Matth. 16. spoken to Peter, as the Representative of the rest of the Disciples, and in the room of the whole Church,Expos. as appears from Vers. 15. and 20. where he speaks to all;Proved▪ and we finde the Church ever took this Power in the places before mentioned. So Acts 9.26, &c. and in Revel. 2.2. saith the Lord to the Church of Ephesus,Expos. Thou try∣est (or examinest) them which say, they are Apostles, and are not, and hast found them liers. Now as Perkins upon the place sayes,Mr. Perkins▪ Christ gave every one of the seven Churches (and so Ephesus as well as any other) power and authority, to take in, or keep out, or cast out obstinate sinners from partaking with them in their spiritual and special priviledges, else he would not have com∣mended them for executing this Power. Doctor Ames in his Medul. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 37. sect. 6. saith,Dr. Ames. Potestas (quoad jus) pertinet ad ecclesiam illam in communi, pertinet enim ad illos ejicere, & pertinet ad illos admittere, &c. The power by right is the Churches in common, for it belongs to them to cast out, and to admit Members, &c. this is most certain.Mr. Fenner. And Mr. Dudly Fenner de Sacr. Theol. l. 7. p. 277, 278. affirms, for affairs that concern the whole body, and matters of publick moment, that they are to be done in the Assembly, by the authority of the whole Church; and if the people have any thing to offer, or any thing to object, or exhort, or counsel, they have their liberty; and after that, the matters are to be determined, when they have been heard to speak all they can, and have given their con∣sent. Now I say, Officers have not the power to admit or exclude,It is nor in the, Elders to ad∣mit. (Clave non errante,) for as Acts 15.22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, &c. The whole Church had the knowledge of it, the voting in it, and consenting to it; the Elders neither had, nor have any absolute power in themselves, and therefore can do nothing on their own heads, that concerns the whole, as hath been spoken in Cap. 8. of the first Book, and is like to be at large discussed in the third Book. The Church hath the power and authority positively seated in her; (ui in∣est virtus & authoritas essentialiter & necessario,) which she may execute by her self (which is always best and safest) or by her
servants that derive it from her. (Quibus inest contingenter, & accidentaliter & minus principaliter, sayes Dr. Whitaker de Cavil. q. 5. p. 178, 179.) Now if by her servants, as from her;Who are ser∣vants. A warning. then let the Church be sure to set orders and limits for her officers, in the execution of their derived or borrowed power; that they may know they are but servants, and not masters, and are to be ordered by the Church, not to order the Church. For all are yours, saith the Apostle to the Church of Corinth,1 Cor. 3. all, whether Paul, Apollo's, or Cephas, all yours to serve you. Now in this sence, we consent to a derivative power in Officers (if need be) to prepare matters for the Churches judgement; and they may make way ready for the admission of Members, as by inquiring into their lives, questioning with the persons, propounding them to the Church, and the like; but neither by taking any in, nor putting any by, nor the like; for that Power is absolutely in the Body to admit, and judge fit: Thus Vix plebi per∣suadeo, ut ta∣les patiantur admitti. So E∣pist. 11. Cae∣teros cumigenti populi suffragio recipimus. And cannot admit any. Cyprian Epistolarum, lib. 1. epist. 3. And I am much mistaken, if Master Hooker grants not as much in his Survey of Church-Discipline, Part. 3. chap. 1. but whether he does or no, that is all one to me; the thing is proved. 2. The persons admitted, Men or Women.2. The Persons to be admitted, or taken in, are chiefly to lie under consideration, which are men or women. Wherein (as Mr. Hooker hath it) two things are to be attended. 1. What is to be done before. 2. What in their admis∣sion. 1. What must be done before they be admit∣ted.First, What is to be done before. The person (or persons) that does earnestly desire to be admitted, makes his desire known to the Elder, or some Officer or Brother, who ac∣quaints the Church therewith;Their names to be taken. then order is given to take his name into the first Record, among those that have been propounded for admission; and the person is desired to come on another day: In the mean time the Church gives order to some Officers or others,Strict enquiry made of them. to inquire strictly, and to inform the Church carefully and honestly of the persons life, the up∣rightness of his conversation; his carriage to them without, and to them within, at home and abroad; and what report
he hath among those that fear the Lord: As also to deal with the said person at some time, by conference and questions, and to gather what he can of his knowledge and acquaintance in the things of God. For the hottest Presbyterians, Mr. Ruther∣ford himself admits of this, That they ought to be neither scandalous nor ignorant; wherefore a searching enquiry must be made of them. Now, I confess, I cannot finde this work (with the New England Brethren) to be onely the Elders,By such, whom the Church appoints ther∣unto. and those that do it, to entrench upon the place of the El∣ders; but such as the Church appoints thereunto, have a sufficient call, and do but their duty therein. Now the day appointed being come, and nothing appears scandalous, or sufficient (to the Church) to keep him off any longer (after this sufficient time of information) he is then called in to be admitted. But some may say, before I step further; stay Sir. Quest. What is it you count sufficient to keep one off? Answ. This hath been at large discussed in the former Book, Chapter 5. But in a word,What is e∣nough to keep him off of ad∣mission. If he lives in any known sin, either in commissions of evil, or omissions of his known duty, and makes this his practise: Why, he professes himself (sayes Mr. Hooker) thereby, not free to submit to the Laws of Christ, nor fit to be his subject,Mr. Hooker. nor to enjoy the pri∣viledges of his Kingdom; not obeying the Authority of his Scepter. Nay, by such a sinful life (in case he had crept into the Church) he did enough to be cast out again. Secondly, what is to be done now in admitting them?2. What is done when they are to be admitted. The Church appoints whom to speak, (who is usually the Pastor) as the mouth of the Church; and this the rather to restrin the wantonness and pride (as Mr. Hooker hath it) of some mens spirits, which are ready to impede the progress, and pro∣fit of Gods ordinance in admitting Members, by asking many nice, indirect, and unprofitable questions, or the like: Now for orders sake, and the peace of the Church, when they have appointed whom to speak for the Church; the person (formerly propounded, enquired of, and now to be admit∣ted) is called in: His name is called, and prayer made for
direction from above,He is called in∣to the Church. that they might have a discerning spirit in this great work, to put the Lords difference, between holy and unholy,Prayer first made. sheep and goats; and remembring promises made, as in such cases: This done, the person to be admitted doth express his earnest desire of entring; and so is to be received upon a threefold Testimony,Their testi∣mony three∣fold Negative and Affir∣mative. The first is, When he is propounded, and no body can object against the person propounded;1. Negatively. When none  object. which is desired of any that can, and upon what grounds. For Acts 9.26. though Paul assayed to joyn himself to the Church, yet so long as the Disciples were afraid of him, and did question him, and were in doubt of him, he was not received. Wherefore he is pro∣pounded to them all, to know who can object any thing; as Mr. Dudley Fenner said before.Fenner. But further, 2. Affirmative. First, from o∣thers.2. Another testimony of him, is from others; who can give him a testimony upon their own knowledge; and for how long? if there be any Church-member (whose testimony is most valid) can so do, it will do well), as Rom. 16.1. Col. 4.12, 13. whose testimonies are many times writ down, and up∣on record, for future use, if need be. Or else, such as testifie from the mouths of others; as those that the Church sent out to enquire of him, giving in their best information, and experience of the person; and this faithfully, and especially touching his unblameableness in conversation, as much as may be. But, Affirmative. Secondly, from himself. 1 Pet. 3.3.3. For a further and fuller, and most satisfactory testimony; that comes from within; the person to be admitted, being desired for the Churches satisfaction, to make an account of his faith, and of the work of grace upon his heart, he does so,Experiences. (as we have said before, and shall show in the next Chap∣ters what manner of confessions are made, or experiences pro∣duced.) But now, if enough be not spoken to the satisfaction of all, he that hath any doubts, doth ask some question for his satisfaction; and none can deny that liberty: Now this testimony is for the most part, most sweet and useful indeed, and deserves to be registred. Some of the most special that
I have met with, and written down, I shall instance in, in the Chapters following; and often times from a gracious heart, they come undeniably before they have done: Although we grant that some are very imperfect in utterance,If wek in ut∣terance, what then? and can∣not express themselves so well as others, that it may be are (most) gracious, precious Christians. Then one of these ways we take; either to get what we can from them,Ask them que∣stons, easie, and according to the ability of the person▪ by asking them some easie questions, and that discreetly too; and yet such as are useful for that season, and so receiving such broken and imperfect answers as they give; though they be but words dropping sweetness, and savoring of grace, yet put together, may make weight, and will signifie some∣thing well-spelled. I remember once in Dublin, a sister (propounded to be ad∣mitted, as before) was thus quaeried with, by the Churches appointment, and answering at first very fearfully, and un∣certainly; so that some were unsatisfied, and desired that she might be past by for this present, till the next meeting,Leeson of Dublin admitted. (not daring to put her by, because she was an approved godly Christian in life.) But when she heard this, she burst out into tears bitterly, before the Church, and amongst many other words, which argued a broken heart, Sir, saith she,Her broken (yet broken∣hearted) speech. to me then present, it was but the last Lords day, saith she, you, preaching over the water, said, Christ called us freely, without any such qualifications first; and that he said, Joh. 6. that those that come to him, he would in no wise put by, and upon these promises I am come; the Word hath called me, and Christ hath called me, and bid me come, and I must come, without any worthiness in my self; and shall I now be put by? —With that (poor heart!) her passage was stopt with tears for a while, which drew tears from the tender hearts of di∣vers in the Church, who observed a great deal of grace, thorough these weeping words; and yet her bold challenge of the promise, and of an interest in the Church (Christs Body) upon as free account (without any formal qualifications) as she had an interest in Christ the Head, having the like call, &c. (though there might be a mistake in such an apprehen∣sion,) for qualifications are requisite in this external union
that are not in the internal, we must take Christ on his terms, and the Church on hers; yet (I say) as when the Sun shines through a watry cloud,Sim. so she appeared gracious and amiable in the eye of the Church, and upon debate, her love, faith, zeal, obedience, and grace, appearing to the satisfaction of all, this tender soul was received. Mr. Wil. Fenner.I remember Master Fenner in his Sermon called Christs Alarum to sinners, mentions a story of Demosthenes, That when a man came and told him how a Neighbor had abused him, and beaten him, uttering it coldly and carelesly, and spoke it, as if he dreamed; Demosthenes answered the man, That he could not believe it.☞ No! saith the man! in a pas∣sion! do you not! why he took me thus, and held me here, and struck me thus and thus! (the man acting it now zeal∣ously, &c.) And do ye not (saith he) call this beating? will you not believe it? yes, saith Demosthenes, now I believe thee; for now thou speakest, as if it were so indeed. So many will hardly believe any to be a Christian, but such as can word it well, and speak, and act zealously; but let them take heed of grieving tender hearts, in expecting too much from them,Take heed none be put by for a form. Mr. Dell. after the formal way of speaking, least they should send any away, that keep not touch to their fancy and form. For as Dell saith, and it is true; It is a most pestilent doctrine to make things necessary that are not so; for God regards not the form, time, or circumstances of such things (as to him) but they are left to us to be used according to the wisdom and discretion of the Church, without tyes upon the spirits of any. It is not the form, but the faith, nor the appearance, but the power of godliness, which we are to eye and own, and which God does eye and own. In the mean time, seeing the Church, whilst she is with men, and dwells with flesh and blood, must use some external rites (which are not absolutely necessary, by which the Church is nothing sanctified nor satisfied) and things meerly of outward order and decency.In outward forms and rites Caution. Yet let her be sure to observe these rules. Rules.1. To order none of them, as of necessity, or as if they were  enough to take in, or keep out any; and 2. Let all be done in the wisdom of grace, and by the dis∣cretion and direction of the Spirit; and
Thirdly, To do all for peace and pieties sake, for order and edification. And Fourthly, Let all be done in deep love, and with sweetnesse of spirit in meeknesse and humility, without rashnesse or  roughnesse. These things observed, such a forme as wee before spake of, will not keep a good Christian out of the Church, who is more to eye the substance then the circumstance. But of this more hereafter. Secondly, Or if any is to be admitted that is very un∣able to speake in publike (I mean) in the Church,2 Such as are weak are sent to for their inward testi∣mony. as some Maids, and others that are bashful, (or the like.) Then the Church chooses out some whom she sees fit, against the next Assembly to take in private the account of Faith, the evidences of Gods worke of grace upon his or her heart, which they either take in writing, and bring in into the Church, or else (which is most approved) when that person is to be admitted,So was it at Dublin when Mrs. Amee Avery was ad∣mitted. they doe declare by word of mouth, whilst some easie questions are (notwithstanding) asked of him (or her) for the Chur∣ches satisfaction, and for the confirmation of what was before delivered in private to the brethren; and then declaring his (or her) clear satisfaction in, and full perswasion of this way of Christ, the party withdraws untill it be debated; and when all con∣sent to his admittance, and all objections and scruples are answer∣ed, and every one declares his consent to accept of him into fellowship with them by some token or other; the person is cal∣led in againe,Receive the right hand of fellowship. and the Pastor (most ordinarily) or whom the Church appoints in his absence to receive him with the right hand of fellowship in the name of the whole Church, using a short Exhor∣tation, and requiring some resolution (which is often done by a formal Covenant) from him to cleave close unto the Lord in this way, and to his utmost power to walk as becometh his calling, & the Faith which he professes in all the Rules of the Gospel, and under all the Lawes of Jesus Christ, which are, or shall bee manifested unto him; After admission,End with prayer for them, and praises. as they end with prayer and praise, so the persons or person now (newly) admit∣ted, must be mentioned, especially to the Lord. If any before I goe further, should aske me, why wee are so strict to have a threefold testimony for all we admit; it is to
keep out scandalous and ignorant persons (as much as we can) which makes us so strict;Why so strict to have a threefold testi∣mony. Mr. Rutherf. and yet we are very tender (as I told you before) of tying any to a forme, or of putting any by that we can judge truly godly. Mr. Rutherford in his Right of Presby∣teries, Lib. 2. pag. 296. requires, Profession to be of that nature, that it may notifie to the Church that there is (indeed) saving faith in the soules of such as professe, and that they be invisible Saints who desire to joyne themselves members to a visible Church. There∣fore it is, the Church is bound to have her eyes in her head, and in an orderly way (as Mr. Hooker saith) to informe her selfe (as fully as she can) of the fitnesse of them that she takes in,Mr. Hooker. lest she break the Laws of Christ, and bring a scandal upon the order of the Gospel. Obj. In receiving women you will have them (that are able to doe it) to make their account of Faith, and give out some experience of saving grace on their souls, and so to speak in the Church; which the Apostle forbids, 1 Cor. 14. Answ. Though we shall speak to that more hereafter, yet at present I answer onely thus;Women may, and must speak in the Church. That women are forbid to speak by way of Teaching, or Ruling in the Church, but they are not forbid to speak, when it is in obedience, and sub∣jection to the Church (for this suits with their sexes) as in this case to give account of faith, or the like, to answer to any questions that the Church asks, or the like; But I shall an∣swer to this at large afterward, because it is so much op∣posed. Quest. What if wee bee to receive a member of another Church?Members of other Churches taken in, and how. Answ. First, He must make it appeare that he is so, and then Secondly, That hee hath liberty from them to joyn with you, and is free from any Church-censure, and so Thirdly, He must have the Testimony of a Church of Christ, which will be sufficient to recommend him, unlesse there be any suspicion of the person; and then for the Churches satis∣faction, several questions may bee propounded: but be sure he hath a recommendation from the Church, or at least some Church-members, or other, as can upon their owne knowledge
testifie for him so; 2 Cor. 8.18. The brother whose praise is through all the Churches, and so Rom. 16.1. Col. 4.13. Eph. 6.21. The Disciples were very cautious of Paul, and would not ad∣mit him, Act. 19.27. till Barnabas did bear a testimony to him,☜ which is very large, and so exiled the jealousies and fears that they before had of him. Thus the Church is to seek such sa∣tisfaction as suits with the rule of Christ, of all that are ad∣mitted;Church must take full satis∣faction. and must require (therefore) some report of the worke of God in them, and of the frame of their Spirits twards him, as hath been said before; unlesse they bee members of other Churches, recommended by a full, and satisfactory testimony from a true Church of Christ. But before I conclude this Chapter, there bee one or two grand Objections to an∣swer. Object. First, But you take in members such as you judge godly, without baptizing them, which the Apostles never did in primitive times, but first baptised, then ad∣mitted. Answ. First, Those that were baptized, as Act. 2.41. and 8.12. &c. before admitted, were such as never were before baptised;No baptising again. but those members which we admit, have been baptized al∣ready, which is but once to be administred, and never to bee repeated; because of the stability of the Covenant of grace, and his gifts and calling are without repentance, and there is but one Faith, one Baptisme, Eph. 4. and by this, configuramur morti Christi, now Christ dyed but once, and this is our initiation too. Now I say, such have been baptized already, and they must not be baptized againe. And for this,Euseb. Perkins. August. see Euseb. Eccl. Hist. Lib. 7. cap. 8. Perkin. 1. Vol. p. 75. cap. 34. August. lib. 3. cap. 2. contra Petil. Secondly,Object. But in Act. 19.4, 5. we hear of some Disciples baptized again.Expos. Answ. First, Because they were before washed indeed, but  not baptized, but onely to Johns washing, Vers. 3. that is, first in Johns name, which was not Christs institution, and therefore none of his; Hence it is in Vers. 5. they were baptized now in the name of Jesus Christ; but those members wee admit, have been baptized in the name of Jesus Christ; and then,
Secondly, The Holy Ghost had not yet fallen on them in  Vers. 2. We have not so much as heard whether there bee any Holy Ghost;The baptisme of Christ that he looks on, is with the holy Ghost. much lesse enjoyed it, and therefore they were baptized now in Christs name for to receive the Spirit. Vers. 5, 6. or the inward baptisme, with the outward; but now we admit no members, but such as we verily beleeve, and judge to have been baptized into Christ, and so indeed dead and buried with him in baptisme, and such as have the inward baptisme of fire, and the Holy Ghost, which is the substance and thing signified. Thirdly, This baptisme, or washing of John, was to fore-run Christ. Vers. 4. That they should beleeve on him which should come after him. But the baptisme that Christ hath instituted is, to be∣leeve Christ is already come,Baptisme of John, and Christ, differs. dead, and buried, rose, and ascend∣ed, and therefore of another nature: for John, who baptised Christ, was baptised by Christ, and with Christs baptisme; the fore-running administration was (as Johns) passed away, in the Apostles daies, which when the Disciples heard and under∣stood, they were baptised with Christs Ordinance. Vers. 5. Object. 3. But we doe not account that baptisme, which you were baptised with any thing, and therefore we intend not a baptising againe (for that we abhor, say some godly people) but we beleeve that baptisme (you so call) to be none, and therefore would have you baptised, before admitted▪ Answ. Baptisme is Baptisme (though corruptly admini∣stred;Our baptisme before, was true baptisme, true ordnance, if not true order. and should we grant you a graine too much, yet too little to make you weight, that we when Infants were undue subjects, yet) the want of due order makes not the Ordinance no Ordinance, no more then the preaching the Word to such as doe not hear, or understand it, makes the Word to bee no Word. If they had the essentials of baptisme they had enough, and need not, nay must not (de nov) take it up againe. The substance will stand without the circumstance or ceremo∣ny.For matter and form. Now who can deny but the godly have had the essentials of Baptisme, viz. matter and forme (materia vel est remota, vel proxima) the matter is the water (generally) but the washing (especially.) The forme (without speaking de modo) is the baptising them in, or into the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
of the Holy Ghost. Now the godly have had this matter and this forme in their baptisme; therefore were baptized. But still you say, you were not fit subjects; what then? is there∣fore the Ordinance no Ordinance?Sim. Suppose my glove were put upon a childs hand, would it therefore follow that it is no glove, because it is not the childs glove, and fits not the childs hand; nay surely, so long as there is the matter and the forme of the glove it is a glove; but Object. Fourthly, You were not dipped in the water, which is the right baptizing. Answ. First, It is true, the word () doth signifie to dip; we say with Beza out of Matth. 3.13. to dip,Dipped how? Not dived nor drowned under water. not to dive over head and ears; but to dip, as in Num. 19.18. Ruth 2.14. 1 Sam. 14.27. Deut. 33.24. non per modum immersionis sed effusionis; that is not to drowne, throw downe, dive all over, keep under water, but onely to dip; And Secondly, The word signifies to wash also, and so is used in Scripture, Luke 11.38. the very word there wash is  baptize or dip; Now Thirdly,Sprinkled and washed same with dip∣ped. Washing is the maine thing meant by the insti∣tution of this Ordinance of baptisme of water, ad corporis blutionem non modo per immersionem verum etiam per asper∣sionem vel effusionem aquae. Thus Heb. 10.22. Let us draw neer to God with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled (i. e. with the inward thing signified viz. the blood of Saints) and our bodies washed (i. e. with the outward thing signifying) with pure water, there you have it expressely in the terms of sprinkling and washing; as also in Ezek. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you. So the Apostle points at this, 1 Pet. 3.21. and as Mr. Hooker observes in 2 Chap. 3. Part of Church Discipline, God is said to save us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is said to be powred out upon us, Eph. 5.26. Tit. 3.5, 6. following the resemblance of water powred out in the washing of baptisme which brings me to the fourth thing. Fourthly, Consider, how we are baptized by the Holy Ghost; so are we to be (ad proportionem & similitudinem)
by the water, Act. 1.5. but we are not dived or drowned (as yet) into the Holy Ghost;The Holy Ghost is powr∣ed on us, and falls on us as yet, not we in∣to it. but onely the Spirit is powred up∣on us (as yet) guttatim as it were) Act. 2.33. and 11.15 it falls on us, we fall not into it, although it is . Now we are baptized by the Spirit, when that is applied to us first, and administred upon us. So that baptisme may be by sprinkling, or powring water on; and di∣ving or plunging over head and ears in baptisme is not neces∣sary; and being a forme, one is of as much force and as signi∣ficant as the other, and all is left to liberty. For the casting water on the body resembles the nature of burial (as sense will suggest in casting the mold and dust upon the dead) as well the diving of the body into the water resembles the casting of the body into the dust,That which is most signifi∣cant is best. and so the powring on of water, the powring on of the Spirit, or the sprinkling of it, the sprinkling of Christs blood to wash, &c. so that this is left to liberty to doe that which is most orderly, useful, and significant, whether to sprinkle, powre on, dip or dive; and indeed (I dare not deny my judgement to reach thus far for dipping above the other formes of sprinkling or powring, that were it as orderly in our Church, and used, and no offence to weake souls; I should sooner be induced to dip one that was never before baptised, then to sprinkle one; for to me it would be more significant, and full, and pregnant with former practises; but all is one, and signifies the same thing, and is of the same use; what need we jangle about Colours? Fifthly, But you were baptised by a corrupt, and unlaw∣full administrator before? Ans.Answ. Suppose that should be granted also (which we may choose whether we wil or no;Sim. for I am perswaded, many godly were baptised by such as were orderly sent forth) but I say grant this, yet his corrupt hand, or foule fingers, doth not null the Ordinance, and make it no baptisme, a jewell, though in a foule sinke, (an unfit place for it) yet is as much a jewell (in its self) as if it were in a silver Cabinet; Baptismus datus a meliori, non est melior, quia efficaciam ex merito & spiritu Christi, non alterius.
Secondly,The latter baptisme dis∣pensed disor∣derly, and without an ad∣ministrator lawfully called and sent out. Let such dear Friends whom I highly prize and have in my heart (and yet (as yet) cannot be of that judge∣ment with them, till a positive warrant for it in the word) I say, let them but consider, this latter baptisme of theirs will be found guilty on the same grounds, they charge ours, viz. unlawfully administred, or by an unlawfull administrator, or one not lawfully called to it. Some doe it as if they had ex∣traordinary warrant for it (whilst extraordinary officers had their Call and Commission immediately from heaven, which they cannot prove; but we can prove they are ceased.) Others doe it upon their own private motion, and meer supposition that any gifted brother, or ordinary disciple, that by his gifts and instruction hath won any to this opinion, hee may baptize him, and so make him sure; but if so, why did Christ ordain officers, and set them in his Church for this purpose, and no man, saith the Apostle, taketh this honour to himselfe, but he that is called of God. Indeed,Anabaptists in Dublin, not like the Christians. I did much wonder at the boldnesse of one in Dublin to doe this, and yet knowne to be a man of a most dissolute carriage and conversation, for cursing, and swear∣ing, and blaspheming, (saying, A pox upon all Ordinances, and Formes, and he would downe with them, and the Devil take prayers) in such desperate wayes as would make an honest mans heart ake; and a man of a most malicious spirit, studying to doe mischiefe, as indeed most of that judgement there are, to all, that are not over head and ears in with them in their opinion: thereby they bring a very great scandal up∣on the Gospel,Far differing from them in London. and hereby they make many enemies to the way they are in, as if it could not bee of God; but these things are their shame, the Lord humble them for it, for in these things they exceed all others of that practise that ever I met with; whilst many of that judgement here in London, & other places, may be set for eminent examples (both to them at Dublin, and us here) of sweetnesse, patience, humility, obe∣dience, self-denial, and love, even to all Saints; and indeed such in whom my soule much rejoyces, and hath been much refreshed; but I do not finde what lawfull call they have, that do administer this Ordinance of Baptisme (anew) to
any. And it is not the purse of a True-man in the hands of a Thiefe, that makes the Thiefe a True-man. But The inward Baptisme (the efficacy of the outward) should satisfie us.In the last place, to bring up the Reare, and so all judge∣ments into one (that is in the Spirit.) Sure none can deny but those truly spirituallized in Christ Jesus, have the efficacy of baptisme, though they were baptised in their in∣fancy, which is a Spiritu sancto; the inward worke with the outward washing, the inward grace and baptisme of the Spirit within,  Rom. 3.6. an insition or incorporation into Christ himselfe. Now what can we desire but this in any member, that is to be admitted; so that grant there were many failings in the outward ad∣ministration, as long as we see so good successe, and such a blessing with it (though much might be omitted in the out∣ward order of it, which might make us judge (therefore) the Ordinance the lesse useful, and more uneffectual) but I say, as long as we finde the fruit and effect of baptisme to fol∣low this Ordinance in a lively manner upon their soules, we are satisfied. This covers all former failings, and the outward is swallowed up in the inward, which is that, that we account qualifies them, and us▪ and fits them and all, for orderly ad∣mission; and not the outward dipping, which many make, and call▪ their fundamental Ordinance, without which (they say) they must have no communion with us, though wee bee ever so holy or godly.Dipping is not the fundamen∣tal ordinance of Church-fellowship, though initia∣ting. Oh, I fear! such set up the Forme too much, and make as meer an Idol of that, as others doe (or did) of Infant-baptisme by attributing to that very empty signe (nothing in its selfe, Circumcision is nothing, nor un∣circumcision, but a new creature in Christ, Gal. 5.) what is only to be attributed to Christs baptisme of the Spirit, and to his power (and powring out) from on high. And lest I should be thought to censure too severely, I shall insert a Letter which was sent to some members of the Church at Dublin (with whom I walked there;) to some few members that those of Waterford held private correspondence with, on purpose to break us, which they both threatned (by the Captaine that brought it) and endeavoured by in∣struments, which they had a worke on purpose in private
places with those members to whom they writ this Letter, which was indeed of dangerous consequence, and did much mischief in the body, and made a sore rent at first from us by some, whose judgement were blinded, though (blessed be our God that keeps us night and day) the little Foxes were catched, and could not root us up, and all the effect was to draw that party from us (a great mercy to us) who were so rigid in judgement against us, who did lamentably raile upon us, and cruelly afflict and wrong us, that would not run rashly with them into that way: But as Paul said of Jannes and Jambres, their madnesse is made to appear to all.
A Letter from Waterford. The Church of Christ in Waterford, walking in the faith and order of the Go∣spel, do wish all grace and peace to the Saints in Dublin. Beloved Friends, WE hearing that there were many of you that do not onely beleeve, but have pro∣fessedly put on the Lord Jesus Christ by * Baptisme, did think it our duty in the bowels of love to enquire of your estate; and we hear that you doe not walke up orderly together, but are joyned in fellow∣ship with such as do fundamen∣tally differ in judgement and practise; to wit, such as agree not with you about the true state of a visible Church, nor the fun∣damental Ordinances thereof. Now the Prophet saith, Can two walk together except they are agreed? but that we may ma∣nifest to you, beloved, that wee have a ground and occasion of griefe, and offence at your so
walking, as we shall make appeare from cleare sight of Scripture. Consider the Commission in that of Mat. 28.19.20.* where Christ layeth down an order that is bind∣ing, which is this, That they should teach all Nations baptising them, teaching them to observe whatsoever he had commanded them, (ye see here is an orderly way com∣mended to teach to the Nations;) secondly, to baptise such as are taught; and thirdly, to teach such as are baptised, to observe what∣soever Christ had commanded; that is, as we understand, all the Laws of Gods house, the baptised person is to submit unto, and by the Ministers taught the obser∣vation of, and this Order is bind∣ing. And secondly, It appears the Apostles did so understand the Commission, because they taught and practised this Order, and this onely, to wit, first preached to conversion, then baptised. Thirdly, put them in the practi∣cal observation of what Christ had commanded in, and to his Church. Againe, else the Ordinance of the Supper would be prophaned, if that should bee received before that fundamental Ordinance, by which we put on Christ, and are ingrafted into Christ, and planted into his death. Now we say, this is a prophanation of
Gods Ordinances, the Jewes might as well hve admitted such uncircumcised persons to eat of the Passeover; but the very end of Church-fellowship is the observation of all Christs commands, as the Commission holds forth; but this your practise, crosseth in that you agree to walk with such as have not, nor practise the Ordinance of dipping Be∣leevers, and by your communion with them in Church-admini∣strations, you are made guilty of their sin of disobedience, you willingly having communion with them in Church-admini∣nistrations; for Beloved, you may upon the same principal admit, into fellowship one that will not receive the Lords Supper, but pleads want of satisfaction of that to be his duty; another that will not owne the Ordinance of preaching, but conferre onely (as some such we know) and others that will not give almes, or contri∣bute to the necessity of the Saints; and thus in a word (upon the same ground) that you admit one that walks in disobedience to the Ordinance of baptisme, whe∣ther through ignorance or error, you may admit all manner of dis∣obedience into your Society up∣on the same ground, which is a total destroying, the end of Church-fellowship, which is to
bring up every member to a vi∣sible subjection to all the Lawes of Christ their King, or else cast them out of that Society as old leaven. Besides, as we must not allow in our selves any known sinne unre∣pented of; so must wee not allow it in any in the fellowship; but when wee shall begin and consti∣tute a Church-fellowship to walke in sin, and disobedience, this is a horrible impiety. Besides in the fifth place, there cannot be a true visible Church union without baptisme, as appears Eph. 4. *and beginning where the Apostle pressing union brings all these things essentials that must be agreed in, to make a people one, and that he takes for granted the Ephesians did agree in the same, which as he saith, There is one hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God, and Father of all. Now observe a true Church must of necessity agree in owning one and the same Lord; secondly, one and the same Spirit, one and the same Baptisme, one and the same Faith, without which they cannot walk together in the Lord. Againe, many of these unbaptised persons doe justifie that Idol of childrens baptisme, and consequently the Church and Ministery from whence they had it: And you having communion
with them, judge what you do, bring your selves into communion with, by entertaining persons into communion with you that are unbaptised. Thus beseeching you to beware of by-pathes, that our Lord and his Ministers have left no foot∣steps for; but rather beloved, meet together, and lead one example of sweet communion distinct, using all means to convent such as have any fear of God, that they may come into you, through the door, and not at the window, as Christ saith in another case. And thus leaving you to God, and the word of his grace, that is able to build you up, we remain in the name, and in the behalfe of the Church, Yours in the Lord, Tho. Patient. Wil. Burgis. Ed. Hutchinson. Ed. Marshal. Rich. Sutton. James Standish. Swads. Tho. Brenton. Peter Row. Wil. Leigh. Geo. Cawdron. Rich. Ladbrooke. Edw. Roberts. Dated at Waterford, Janu. 14. 1651.
This Letter was brought by Capt. Vernon, and A.G.A. to some seven or eight of their judgement, whom they withdrew from the Church into private meetings on the Lords dayes; especially, where they with them that were sent from Mr. Patience, clandestinely consulted how to carry on their designe against us. These, and none else, are their Saints. BEleevers *, and such baptised ones, i. e. Anabaptists, they put together, as if none were beleevers but Anabaptists. Some of that judgement that were in fellowship with us, they write unto as to Beleevers, and exclude others that differed from them in that point of Rebaptisme. Be∣sides, they account them disorderly walkers, that have so much as Christian com∣munion with us, unlesse we would be dipped. They say without this, wee fundamentally differ from the true state of a visible Church: Let discerning men judge then the founda∣tion, and dangerous scituation of such For∣malists Fellowships I who (by their owne confession) have laid their foundation in the Water, and on the Sand, not on Christ the Rocke of ages, that is Christ himselfe laid in the Spirit, &c. Vide cap. 14. lib. 1. In this sense they ought to read that Scripture which they mention with too much
wrong to it, as they use to doe (qui Scriptu∣ris auferunt, non afferunt) it is Amos 3.3. Can two walke together, unlesse they be agreed? The Prophet means not, Can two walke to∣gether, unlesse washed together, or unlesse in one Forme, judgement, opinion or pra∣ctise: for as Arias Montanus observes, this was their sin for which he threatens them in v. 2, 4▪ 5. viz. for their great agreement in false Formes, to adore Images, and make them Idols; herein they were very harmonious and unanimous, to their cost and calamity, sayes Theodoret. But the Prophet means, they must be one in the Spirit, Eph. 4, 3, 4. Even as Two Travel∣lors who have one and the same end of their journey (vid. Diodate) minde one and the same home, heaven, happinesse; therefore the word is pariter; Can they walke alike, without they be of one spirit; thus sayes honest Calvin too, Est igitur arca∣na ita consensio Spiritus sancti: and to apply this to the forme or judgement, as that there must be an agreement in dipping, else none in beleeving; or that there must be agree∣ment in the outward, else none in the in∣ward, is to make Faith a forme, Religion a fancy, & to take a meer outside appearance and opinion, for the inward power and life of godlinesse; which is an agreement in Idolatry, but not in the true worship of God, Spirit, and Truth, so that these Gentle∣men mistake the Prophet, and compel a con∣struction, as it is coyned in their own brains. * The Commission is next; let us see what they would force from those words in Matth. 28.19, 20. All power is given me, &c. Goe therefore teach all Nations, and baptise
them, &c. This hath been their hold for many yeers, out of which they have been hunted by hundreds of orthodox able Writers which save me a labour; but onely this I say, 1 The Praeface, viz. v. 18. (All power is given me () that is jus agend) tells us, that this Commission is to bee executed by Christs power, i. e. by the Spirit, vide Pareus in loc. so that some affirm, this was the baptisme of the Spirit which Christ speaks of her 1 Cor. 12.13. which the Aostles (as Apostles) had commission in to bap∣tise,  &c. into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which Water-baptisme could not doe. Orig. An. 200. in Rom. but how ever it was to be executed by Christs Spirit. 2 The command is, Teach them,  make them my schol∣lars; now little ones, as well as great ones; Infants, as well as growne ones may be his schollars in his school to learne: for a little childe that knowes not a letter in the book is a schollar as well as others that do; so not onely the lowest boughes, but the uppermost and least twigs partake of the nature of the root. But, What do they infer? 1 That none must be ad∣mitted, but such as are baptized; we say so too, but we deny they must be rebaptized. And whereas they instance in the Apostles practise, they would doe well to cleare up the difference of old, betwixt adulti and catechumeni, for qui bene distinguit bene docet, otherwise they will but lead about the blinde, and leave them in the ditch, in darknesse.
2 They say this is that fundamental Ordi∣nance by which we put on Christ. Ans. To call the watry part of baptisme, viz. in abstracto, I say the element, the funda∣mental Ordinance; by which wee put on Christ, and are ingrafted into Christ, and planted into his death, &c. is to make no lesse, (if not more) then an Idol of it; and so it is to attribute to Dipping what is onely attributed to Christ himselfe: for what is Idolatry, but exhibere cultum Dei & honorem Christi creaturae, Th. Aq. 22. q. 94.10. to give the worship and service of God, the glory and honour of Christ to a con∣temptible poore creature? Is not this to say, Lo here is Christ! but beleeve them not. O sad! sad sinne of this age! that Professors should fall down so to this Image, which they imagine must doe all for them, with∣out which no salvation. Were ever the Pon∣tificians or Prelates▪ more uncharitably rigid for it, to Idolize it on Infants, then they are to Idolize it on grown ones; that then presently they are accounted Saints, Beleevers, Christians, ingrafted into Christ &c. as if Dipping did all; Alas a day! what could the Pool of Bethesda doe? till the Spirit moved the waters, there was no healing! O this soule-dangerous and dreadfull glorifying the forme! Idolatry is gravissimum peccatorum, say the School∣men, and makes the shortest cut to confu∣sion! The Lord help poor Ireland! still the land of Idols and Ire. 3 They say the Jewes might as well have admitted uncircumcised ones, as they u, to have communion with them! O charity! where art thou? that thou shouldest live!
longest, and strongest of all? O unchristian! and uncomfortable tenet! For 1 Their non-communion with such was by the command of God; but yours is not with us. 2 Jewish Church was national, ours not. 3 Jewish worship was in the forme, but ours in Spirit and Truth. 4 Jewish eating the Passeover was typical. 5 Circumcised ones after the flesh was enough with Jewes, but it is not with us. 6 We have been baptized (as you put it in the room of circumcision) and more answerably unto it then you. 7 The case being altered as it is now; we finde that Jews and Gentiles, circumci∣sed and uncircumcised, had sweet communion together, Act. 15.5. Gal. 2.3.7▪ 12. 1 Cor. 12.13. in severall Churches; so that the outward forme was left to liberty, Rom. 14.2.5. as a thing of nothing, Gal. 6.15. as it is nw to be. 8 Their end and their beginning, they make one, viz. Dipping, i. e. their all in all; and indeed very indiscreetly and disor∣derly they lay that downe for the end, which is the Rule by which they are brought into fellowship; so that it is like enough Logicke is the language of the Beast to them, that know not how to de∣fine Church fellowship. Lastly, Because I want room to write more: They conclude, that because of their great disobedience in joyning with us, they must make amends by casting all of us that would not be dipped out of Church-fellowship for old leaven; and accordingly, the mem∣bers of them sent from Mr. Patient, with those of them that walked with us, consulted often together, conspired and plotted, and laid snares in de∣signes
to break us in peeces; but when that would not be, they bruited abroad scurrilous and scandalous reports of many of us, to represent us wicked and unworthy to the world and others; after that they thought to have excommunicated us for old leaven, but the Lord would not suffer it; so that their plots and designs brought forth nothing but wind, which became a blast to themselves at last. But whereas they say they may as well admit all manner of wicked men, as one that wil not be dipped; do but observe their spirit in deifying Dipping, and in vilifying the Spirit, that without this (though we be under Spirit-baptisme) we must not have so much mercy shewn to us, as to partake of Church-Priviledges, is this doctrine of Christ? or the Devil? but I pray mark their ground, for you may (say they) as well admit one that will not partake of the Lords Supper, &c. Ans. Suppose one should be admitted that were unsatisfied therein, were that a sinne? But Secondly, we deny this their haire-brained assertion, for that there is positive command for the Lords Supper, Preaching, Almes, &c. and so there is not for Dipping, but all the Scripture is against Re-baptising, as being but the Idol of the Braine, and a brat that must be dashed a peeces, Psal. 137.9. * The next thing to this Commission, with their several forced, and un∣worthy Inferences; In the fifth place, they would faine insinuate a necessity of Dipping out of Ephes. 4.4, 5. Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; he saith not, the union of the Forme, but of the Spirit, which is preserved not by outward formes, but by inward principles. Then follows, Verse 4.5. One Faith, one Bapisme; &c. all these must be to make up the Vnity of the Spirit; and it is true that they all must owne one and the same Baptisme; but what is that, I pray? not dipping; but Christs Baptisme, Matth. 3.11. We are all, mark, all (Jewes and Gentiles) before and since the Law; before, and since Christ; all Saints of all ages; members of one Body; viz. the Church of Christ mystical; and all this by one Baptisme, 1 Cor. 12, 13. For by one Spirit we are All baptised into one Body. Now this cannot be (as by this Letter they would faine have us beleeve) by water; for so all Saints, in all Ages were not so baptized into one Body, or Church; for before the Law this was not the fundamental point, which these men say we must hold; so that they peel but the barke of the tree, and the Goars may doe so; but we feed upon the sap and substance. This is a principle of spiri∣tuall union, viz. the baptisme of the Spirit, which all Saints of all judgements must, doe, and have enjoyed; for the life remains, though the Letter alters, as the soule doth, though the body be altered; variante materia, yet forma
manet eadem. But let these uncharitable Formalists, and unkinde unchristian friends know, that by this Letter, and their suitable practises, seeming to answer most cruell and unchristian principles, that they have frighted many of their wel-wishers from them: for Fishes will not be catched in a bloody net, though some Commanders or great ones amongst them, may drive many times some silly little ones in: And indeed I fear that Religion, which lyes so much in the Form, or outside, will doe but little service in the day of the Lord, to shelter us from heat and storme; yea I fear, that the life and kernel of it is already perished, when ear-wigs and vermine have eaten so into it, and can finde a hole (through the outside of it) to go in, and out as they list. You know what I mean, and be PATIENT. In this Letter you find (Reader) how Dipping, called their fundamental Ordinance, without which they were to have no communion with us, but either to draw us thereto, or else to cast us out for old leaven, and be distinct from us. Now it appears not to me to be a fundamental Ordinance, on which (as on a foundation) should lye the Church; no, though it bee taken in their owne sense, for the true and right administration; but rather it is an initiating Ordinance, or entry, through which we enter into the Church; so that there is a great difference between a foundation, and an entry, or doore. And for their calling us persons unbaptised,What is a fun∣damental Or∣dinance? Robinson Justif. pag. 230. sayes it is an error which some hold, that Baptisme con¦stitutes the vi∣sible Church. and threatning them that have any communion with us, as guilty of the sinne of disobedience: We have proved that we have passed through the water, and the fire, and the Lord hath been with us, and his Spirit rests upon us. We have been under the element of water, and the baptisme of the Spirit; and if these satisfie not, wee are to seek in a new way, which they make their Foundation (but it is of water, and will not hold long) whilst Christ is our Foundation, who is a Rocke and standeth sure. Expos.As for the particulars in that Letter, they are easily an∣swered,Baptisme of the Spirit by which we enter into Christs body. and have been often, over and over. The Baptisme therein mentioned out of Eph. 4. which the Apostle indeed makes an argument of union, is the one baptisme of the Spirit, not the sign (so often altered) but the substance, by which all beleevers in all ages, under all forms and dispensations are, (and ever were) all baptised into one body, both before Christ,
and since, 1 Cor. 12.13. this is Christs baptisme, Mat. 3.11. Now the unity of the Spirit consists not in uniformity,In baptismat flaminis non fluminis. in that outward forme and element: (for men may, and do differ for all that:) but in the baptisme of the Spirit, which the Apostle plainly speaks of; it is an unanimity, not an uniformity, as we shall find out hereafter; wherfore let all wise, sober, spiritual discern∣ing Christians, yea even of that judgement (which are without exception many of them) but tell me. First,1 They at∣tribute too much to the Element. Doe not these lay too much upon the Letter to call it a Fundamental Ordinance, without which they are to have no communion with us, but to cast us out for old leaven; and which in the very element they lay downe to be a putting on of Christ, an ingrafting into Christ, a planting into his death, &c. Now let any judge if this be not an Idolizing of a Forme (which they cry downe so much in others) is not this a worshipping of the Element? to attribute so much to it, as is true in no baptisme, but of the Spirit? Surely this must bee grownd to powder. But Secondly, Ought we to be so severely sentenced,2 These are too censorious▪ as to bee cast out for Dung, old Leaven, and uncircumcised ones, because we could not (nor can we) find a word to warrant our consci∣ences in the practise of this, which is their opinion? Oh! uni∣formity enforced (sayes one) is the very break-neck of peace, and love! we durst not have dealt so with them, it is point-blank against our principles and practises. Thirdly, Ought any sober sound Christians to have sent any such Letters to make a breach in a Church, and by secret and under-working instruments to doe the more mischiefe, without any discourse,Unchristian and unchari∣table to Chri in seeking to break his Church. or knowledge of us (as from our selves) that were not of that opinion? and onely for one Form? wherein neither the unity of the Spirit, nor our communion with Christ Jesus can consist; this I am sure was none of Christs doctrine, nor device to sow such seeds of Divisions. But I shall leave them to the Lord▪ who loves not confusion, nor (I am sure) can allow of such unchristian practises, like carnal men to watch for our mischiefe, and to lye in wait for our bltings, and to render us odious to all, as persons fit for excommunication, and onely because wee could not turne
againe to that low and beggarly element (I mean so to us now, that are in, and under the unction from on high.) For Act. 11 15. when they were under the Holy Ghost which had fallen upon them, then came to minde in Verse 16. John baptised with water indeed; but ye shall be baptised with the Holy Ghost, that is far beyond the other of water. And should wee be so foolish () or mad? Gal. 3.3. having begun, and thus far gone on in the Spirit, to thinke, or seek to be perfect by the flesh! no! God forbid! therefore our sufferings are sweet! even as drops of Christ blood! and draughts out of Christs cup for our consciences sake!The element to us is (as it were) passed away. Well, I could wish them to be more mode∣rate, lest haply they be found fighters against God, Act. 5.39. that have been too rough to the poore harmlesse Saints at Dublin on this account: And let them do all in peace and by love, as becometh Christians, and not by plottings, power, force, or censures, as the carnal Churches of Antichrist to this day; and let them not busie themselves too much about empty things, so as to presse and promote traditions, for truths, the letter for the Spirit, the creature in the room of Christ, and husks and sha∣dows that are past away (as to us) or to passe away, in the room of righteousnesse, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. That although we differ in judgement, yet wee may be all of one Body,Christians of all judgements should be one in spirit. one Spirit, one hope of our calling; having one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all, above all, through all, and in us all; it is this that keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. This leads me to the next Chapter.
CHAP. V.  Regneh. In admitting, none that are godly, are to be put by, though of different opinions; but all Believers are to be received, yea, of all judgements. WE have heard how the Word warrants all that are godly, that are fully satisfied of the way; and excludes all the wicked and scandalous in toto & tanto, that are not called of God, but none else.All Saints of all judgements to be admitted. The weakest Believer that belongs to Christ, is to be received, Rom. 14.1. And our present assertion is this, That none who appear truly godly, are to be put by; (meerly for their opinion and judge∣ment;) we are not in admitting of members so much to minde their judgements and apprehensions, as their lives and conversations, viz. That they be holy and gracious; and that they be sound in the faith; that is, for fundamentals and essentials; such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. Rom. 1.7. Phil. 1.1▪ 7. Col. 3.12. and 1 Thes. 5.27. , the word doth not say, such sanctified ones that are o your judgement and form. For we shall prove by Scriptures and Reasons, That those (godly) though under different forms, and of different opinions, are to be received, and taken in; and that it is our sin to shut them ou. This appears by Scriptures, Precepts, and Precedents. First, this is commanded and commended to us, That every man walk as he is fully perswaded in his minde,1. Proved by rules of Christ. Rom. 14.5. Now mark the meaning of that Text, (for indeed the whole Chapter treats on this subject,) there arose some dif∣ferences about opinions, but the Apostle presses and preaches
this,Expos. That diversity of opinions, for things indifferent or doubtful,Rom 14. ex∣pounded. ought not to make diversity in affections, or a breach in charity or unity among Brethren, when they do it out of conscience. Now that I may unlock the meaning of the words, I must orderly proceed in the Chapter, which is very pregnant in proofs for this purpose, (and wherein you will have the point stated, proved, and ratified by abundance of Reasons. To the first Verse,Vers. 1. Him that is weak in the faith, receive, () assume to you, admit of, and make one with you, affectu charitatis,All believers admitted. and put him into your bosoms, &c.) In the time of the Jews dispersed, most of the Churches consisted of Jews and Gentiles together; and so did this Church of Rome. Now the Jews would not be brought off from the observation of Ceremonies, and Levitical Laws, wherein they had been brought up,☞ even from their cradles; looking upon them as ordinances of God; and therefore, although they entertained the Gospel, yet out of conscience, they held difference of days, and of meats; as necessary to be observed. Now the Gentiles were not for such Jewish observations, be∣ing perswaded of our Christian Liberty, purchased by the blood of Christ, from such ceremonies and trifles; and therefore they rejected them: And thence there arose hot contests and dissentions in the Church, almost irreconcileable; and as the Gentile thought the Jew profuse and superstitious; so the Jew thought the Gentile prophane and sacrilegious. Now in comes Paul to appease these differences, and to compose these commotions; he brings in his bucket (as Par sayes) to quench the flame,Par. and undertakes as an umpire, to determine these differences,Though out of conscience, they differ in judgement, opinions, and practises, about things indiffe∣rent. which arose about things in∣different: Wherefore he layes down rules in these his Hie∣raticks. It is a general precept, and an undeniable duty, to receive such as are weak in the faith, () although so weak (as one that is sick) and scarce able to stand on his legs; yea, such babes in Christ as cannot brook strong meats, that have sick and queasie stomacks, such receive with open arms; take them in unto you, and joyn them with you, and
entertain them as friends, and dear brethren; but not to doubtful disputations (, &c.) not into ambigui∣ty, to quarrel or contend with him, and his opinions, though differing from yours, thereby to make him stagger, Rom. 4.20. Nor yet to judge him for his opinions, as Augustine sayes; nor to fill his head with intricate things, or curiosi∣ties, Rom. 14.1, 2. Gal. 6.1. 1 Thes. 5.14. But as in Vers. 2. One believes he may eat all things, and another, who is weak,Vers. 2, 3. eats (onely) herbs: Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not; nor him which eateth not, judge him which eat∣eth. Now, though there was this great difference of opinion, here is a direction to their duty, one to another; that is,Expos. to preserve peace and love; and that this make no difference or distance, in affection or reception: Let not the strong, de∣spise the weak (.) i. e. To look on him as nothing, nullius praetii; or set him at naught,Ab  & . as not fit for your com∣pany: For the word is so, as to villifie, or nullifie a man. Now take heed here! for difference of opinions and practises in things indifferent, ought to be no demur or hinderance to the admission, or reception of any; neither ought there to be therefore the least battery, or breach to love and charity: But now to the question. Quest. What are things indifferent which we may differ upon, and yet be all of one Body and Church?Qaest. Answ. Such things as are of a middle size and nature, and not absolute (Quod,Answ. id quod est per essentiam suam rela∣tum posterius est absoluto,Things ndf∣ferent▪ what?) for absolutum est prius relativo secundum esse, & posterius relativo secundum dici;) nor yet necessary, these are called indifferent. First, We say a thing is indifferent, when it is not abso∣lute; but yet in some degree good, but not so good, but it may be mended; and yet not so bad, but it might be worse: Such a thing, we say, is indifferent good. So a man (though he be not absolutely in health) nor yet very ill, but might be better, and might be worse;) such a one, we say, is pretty, or indifferent well: But I speak not in this species.
2. Things indifferent.Secondly, Some things may be done, which are not ne∣cessary; such things are necessary which are commanded: But somethings are commanded to be done, and some∣things are forbidden to be done. Now such things are in∣different, which are neither commanded nor forbidden; and those things are doubtful,Things doubt∣ful. which are not expressed at all in the Word, but left darkly, or which meet with seem∣ing contradictions therein: Now for the first sort of doubt∣ful things, and things indifferent, they are called by the An∣tient, things in our power, and left to liberty, , as lying either obscure and uncommanded, or in the midst, between commanded and forbidden. In Pauls time when he writ this Epistle, these trifling observations of dayes and meats, were mentioned as left indifferent, to be used or not used; as they conceived it tended most to the honor and praise of God, (which was the very end of their enchurch∣ing▪) we finde Paul circumcised, made vows, purified him∣self, and yet writes against them, as Gal. 4.10. Why so? why before Christs death,Indifferent, not indifferent. these Ceremonies were not then indifferent, but necessary, as commanded of God; but after Christs death (till the Gospel entered,) for a while after they were used (though but for a little time) as indifferent, Quia Christi adventu lex ceremonialis obligare desiit. Now such Ceremonies remained amongst the Jews,Paraeus. as yet (saith Parae∣us upon the place) in use; because Christian liberty was not openly up, and risen in their room: Now with Christs death and resurrection they lost their life,When Cere∣monies, and such like in∣different things died, and gave up the ghost, and were buri∣ed. and gave up the ghost, Col. 2.14, 15. Quasi animam exhalarunt, and breath∣ed out their last; but as yet, they lay a while unburied and above ground, which ought to have a religious and so∣lemn sepulchre, and which they had soon after in that so∣lemn Church Assembly, Acts 15. Where, all such legal ritu∣al observations were seriously and solemnly laid in their grave; as being now (but dead Corps, and ready to stink and corrupt) and too heavy to be longer borne above ground; but before this their burial, they were used as indifferent. This Augustine declares in his 19. Ep. ad Hieron. as Paraeus observes,Augustine. Sim. by an elegant similitude. A mans friend dies, he
doth not so soon as breath is out of his body, whilest his body is yet warm, take him by the heels and drag him to the grave; but he keeps him a while, (whilest he is yet sweet) and wraps him up with fair cloaths, and so with honor, in due time, accompanies him to his grave; and thereby he avoides scandal, suspition, and contention, which else might arise; by giving sufficient content to all, even to his best friends and mourners for him. So it is here, these Ceremonies were alive till Christ; they died with Christ: Now the Apostles did not presently drag them to the dunghil, and cast them out (ut faetida cadavera) whilest they were yet warm; no! but to avoid all scandal and doubt of their death; they shew (in the Acts) that they were dead, and to be buried, which was done in a decent, honorable maner, as Acts 15.10, 24. whilst they themselves accompanied them to the very grave. Now that is the rea∣son, (that Paul in this Chapter) for so long a time did al∣low liberty to them as things indifferent; but after they were buried, their indifferency ceased, and now they were absolutely forbidden: Before their burial (saith one) they were mortuae, dead; but now after their burial,☜ they are mortiferae, deadly and dangerous: And now after this,Dangerous to meddle wirh them now, after they are buri∣ed. if a man raises them up again, and rakes them out of the grave, and digs them up again, he endangers a many (by their unwholsom stench,) Et non esset pius funeris deductor, sed im∣pius sepulturae violator. Hence you read the reason of Pauls writing to the Church of Galatia, Coloss, and others, against them now; and after this burial of them, he would not circumcise Titus, (though he did Timothy before) but preaches their funeral Sermon, and sayes, it is dangerous to keep them a∣bove ground any longer, Col. 2.20, 21. and Gal. 5.2, 4. tells them then, Christ would profit them nothing; and it would be to deny the effect of Christs death. We shall finde Paul opposed Peter, and that openly, Gal. 2.11. to his face, for urging these Ceremonies, and pressing the Gentiles to Ju∣daize. But here in this Chapter the Apostle forbids the Gentiles
to judge the Jews for their liberty in these things which might be used,Adiphora con∣siderantur vel in e. or not used (as yet) being things indifferent and left free which the Greeks call Adiaphora, which things are to be considered either as they are in themselves, and so they are said (quoad substantiam operis) to have an indifferency of doing,Vel ratione principii sui. or omitting (as we said before;) or else as they are in the intention of that principle by which they are done, or o∣mitted; and in that sense no action is said to bee indifferent (taken with its circumstances) but it is said to bee good or evill (Prout ex mala vel bona intentione procedit) for as much as it flowes from a principle intending good or evill hereby.All this ratifies the point. But thus I have done with the direction and rules, and have opened the name and nature of things indifferent, and do now reach the reasons which the Apostle renders to ratifie his and, my assertion, of accepting and receiving such as differ in judgement from us in things indifferent. And first, The first Reason, for God hath received him, therefore you are to receive him,God hath re∣ceived such. and lovingly to take him in, for God hath received him () that is (ut suus) as his owne, a mem∣ber of Christ, to grace, an adopted one, into his owne fa∣mily;Expos. how then darest thou deny him, or despise him, or not admit of him, or the like? for thus runs the Argument, whom God hath received into his Family, you ought not to despise or put by, but him that eateth (that is,☞ is of this opinion) and him that eateth not (that is, is of that opinion) God hath re∣ceived, therefore you ought not to put him by (that is, be he of this opinion,Argument or of that opinion) but to receive him, and ad∣mit of him, as one that belongs to the Lord. This Reason runs a pari statu utriusque partis coram Deo, from the common benefit of adoption which them of both opinions do equally partake of, and as if he should say, Such outward things as these, do neither justifie, nor unjustifie, commend, nor dis∣commend before God; they neither help to, nor hinder from the Kingdome of God, therefore they should neither helpe nor hinder any in the Church of God here below; For such whom the Father receives, the Son receives; and who are admitted in heaven, should be admitted in the earth; but all Saints of all opinions are admitted in heaven, and re∣ceived
of God, ergo, &c. God regards here (sayes one) no more the manner, time, or such like circumstances, then hee does the manner, time, or such like circumstances of eating, drinking, marrying, &c. being left to wisdome, and discretion for order, peace, and unities sake without ties. Now if thou seest one enlightened, and livened by the Spirit of God, thou seest enough, sayes Calvin in loc.Calvin. Satis testimonii habes &c. where∣fore despise not, contemn not, refuse not, condemne not, one whom God hath received. The second Reason or Argument is taken (a jure gentium) from common right or equity, which is,Expos. that every man hath the rule and ordering of his owne family, and none ought to be so polypragmatical, as to meddle with other mens servants,Verse 4. They may see they are the Lords nighest family servants, for all they differ in opinion. Who art thou that judgest another mans servant? here is an objurgatory Apostrophe. Who art thou? how darest thou do it? why, for he is the Lords own servant whom thou thus puttest by (for all his opi∣nion as before) the word is not  a hired servant, or a day-labourer, but  a houshold servant, one of the Lords owne Family, who alwayes is waiting upon the Lord his Ma∣ster in such services as are nearest his person, and in his presence. This makes the Apostle (then whom none was more full of the bowels of love, pitifull or tender) yet this makes him question with much indignation and heat, how you dare to deny them admission, who are the Lords servants, and that of his owne houshold, and the nighest to him in his Family; Besides the Argument, see the Amplification in verse 4. which shewes that thou art not to judge harshly of him, for he standeth or falleth to his owne Master; that is, whether he doth well or ill, pleases or displeases, it belongs to the Master (Stare vel e∣dere, est recte vel secus agere) therefore prevent not the Lord judgement, who himselfe will take account of his servants, and that strictly, Mat. 18.23. Mat. 25.19. Reason 3. For God is able to make him stand, Vers. 4. This  Argument is taken a spe profectus from the possibility,God will esta∣blish them as well as the strongest to hold out. and probability of their establishment in the faith, he shall stand, for God is able to make him; but if you say it is an unsound con∣clusion or an absurd collection to argue a posse ad esse (as the Pa∣pists doe in Transubstantiation) we answer, True, if we bee
not certaine of Gods will withall; but his will, with his power appears here, for God hath received him. Now if such a one be weake, and of a differing opinion from you, the Lord hath promised grace to him, whereby he shall stand, as well as you, and as firme in the true faith, and as fast in the truth, and by his power be preserved from falling, therefore receive such, for the Lord will engage, for him, as Hezekiah said, Lord undertake for me! Reason 4. In Vers. 5. Let every man be fully perswaded in his  own minde; this argument is gotten from the qualification of a member,Christian li∣berty in things doubtful and indifferent. and the nature of his qualification, which is the plerophory and full perswasion spoken of in Chap. 2. of this Book. One man (sayes the Apostle) is of this minde, and esteems this, and another man is of that minde, and esteeme that most; this is the case. Now the remedy is, Let every one walke, as he thinks best (reject neither) but he must be sure it be with a full perswasion in his owne minde, that he be full and clear in his owne sense and opinion; Quisquis suo sensu abundet: Not so to abound in ones owne sense, to give way to an unlimited liberty, but to a Christian-liberty limited by the Lawes of Christ, to be fully perswaded that it is on good grounds, and by good arguments flowing from the Word and Spirit together, Mark. 12.24.27. Joh. 16.8. 1 Thess. 2.13. and as Rom. 14.14. Isa. 8.20.Sim. A horse in a pasture hath liberty to run at ran∣dome, range, and friske, but not when his Rider is upon his backe,☞ but then he is checked, and curbed, and kept in; so must our apprehensions and perswasions, therefore let every one look to his owne conscience, and not look what others hold or doe, but that what he holds he well grounded and warrant∣able in the word which the Scripture mentions in matters of faith, though not alwayes in matters of fact; who hath this plerophory and clear perswasion is to be received, whether his opinion be thus or thus in things indifferent. Saints of all judgements answer the one and the same end of Church fellowship.Reason 5. Vers. 6.7. He that regardeth this, regardeth it to the Lord, and he that regards it not, regards it not to the Lord, &c. This argu∣ment runs ab intentione generale fidelium, or a bono fine utriusque partis, from the unity and brevity of the end, which the Saints of all opinions aime at, and which is one and the same, for all
aime at the honour and glory of God. Those of this opinion, and those of that have the same end, viz. to glorifie God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Col. 3.17. to give God praise, 1 Pet. 2.9. the summe of this then is to cease despising, denying, or rejecting such as aime at the same end with you, viz. the praise and glory of God, therefore receive them, though of a differing opinion from you. The Apostle hath it thus, Those that do all to the glory of God are to be received of you, but those of this opinion, and those of that opinion aime all at the glory and praise of God, ergo, &c. and this he proves; 1 Ab adjuncto in Vers. 6. 2. He proves it, V. 7. a toto ad partes thus, who wholy lives,Argument and dyes to the Lord, doth eat, or not eat; do, or not do this, or that thing; use or not use this or that Christian liberty to the Lord; and ab illatis. V. 8. whether we live or dye, we are the Lords. Et a relatis we are the Lords servants, having necessary relation to him,They serv one Lord. wee are under his subjection and tuition; and by all this hee teaches us to receive them, as such who are the Lords, in the Lords service, and aiming at his honour and glory, being perswaded from the word, their opinion is to his praise; and then as one sayes,☜ it is better to follow an erring conscience when it can∣not be (yet better) informed and corrected, then to doe against conscience; so that though they are such as cannot in conscience come up to, or unto our opinions in things indifferent,☜ yet we must not dare to put them by, or (therefore) to deny them. Reason 6. Vers. 10. Why dost thou judge thy brother, &c. This argument is taken ( ad utramque partem) from the rela∣tion the one stands in unto the other; Art thou strong?6 Such b then alike. the weak one is thy brother, &c. And so on the other side, though not by naturall generation, yet by supernatural regeneration: Have we not all one Father? Mal. 2.10. all alike borne of God?☜ all a∣like beloved of God in one Christ Jesus? God is to Saints (of all opinions) one Father? without respect of persons or opinions? Now the true Church of Christ is a Kingdome of brethren; and it is an ill part for brethren to contend, despise, reject, or shut doors against one another. It was ABRAHAMS argument to Lot for peace, and our Spiritual JOSEPH, bids us not to fall out by the way, which yet we doe, and that for trifles too;
This is the new Commandement to love all Saints, Eph. 1.15. Joh. 13.35. and 15.12.17. 1 Joh. 4.21. not all Saints of such or such a judgement,All are one, ho? but all Saints; being all one in the original love of God, all one in Christ, all one in the Covenant of grace, all one in one and the same Spirit, having all one and the same priviledges, joy and glory, therefore we should bee all one in our love and acceptance, knowing no distinction, but Saintship as Tichborn well notes, on Job. 13.35. Now it is our living too much in the flesh and forme (as wee shall shew by and by) which makes us mind so much such men,☞ as are of our judgement above others, and to put a difference! This will be cause of pale countenance one day, that we should so fall out by the way, whilst we are all going home to the same Fathers house; O then! why do we fall out! are we not brethren? a brother must be received and welcomely admitted! censure him not, though he be not of thy judgement, for he hath as much right to the Ordinances of the Church, and to be a member of the Church of Christ, to suck of the same full breasts and priviledges (having the same Father and Mother, and elder-brother) as thou hast. Reason 7. Vers. 10. &c. We shall all stand before the judge∣ment  seat of Christ. This argument is drawn (a proprio jure Chri∣sti) from the day of judgement,Day of judge∣ment. being amplified from the person judging (who is Christ, Ast. 17.31. whose authority and right it is to judge, Joh. 5.22) and by the persons judged. ALL: the manner of their appearance (shall stand) whilst the Judge himselfe sits. The argument runs thus: They that shall stand before Christs judgement seat to be judged them∣selves, ought not as judges of their brethren to put any by (for their opinions) or to condemne them; you shall all stand before Christs TRIBVNAL to be judged your selves (all of you strong and weak;☞ Some usurp Christs throne and how?) or else (a jure Christi) he proves they usurp Christs place, whose sole right it is to judge them for what they hold out of conscience (as Pareus rather thinks the Apostle here intends) and that they shall stand before Christ for this sawcinesse and pride over their brethren,Pareus. which is easie to draw up into argument, mood and figure. The judgement seat by a figure (per metonymiam signi) and per metaphoram a ju∣diciis
civilibus, is taken for the judgements which passe from the Judge sitting in his Court.☜ Now the consideration of this should induce us to our duty to our brethren (that differ from us) for we shal stand together before Christ at one and the same Bar, 2 Cor. 5.10.11. and shall the prisoner, that shall stand at the Bar for his life as guilty of a world of errors,☜ leap up in∣to Christs (the Judges) seat? to condemne his brother? as for an error? and to keep him out of Christs Church? Oh! how will Diotrephes tremble at this his arrogance! pride! and impudence, then! that he durst shut the Church-door against his brethren? as 3 Joh. 9. For as Anselme in loc. sayes, Qui judicat fratrem tantum crimen elevationis incurrit, ut Christi Tribunal sibi videatur assumere, & ejus judicium praevenire; he pre-possesses Christs seat,Anselme. and prevents Christs judgement, wherefore judge nothing before the time, 1 Cor. 4.5. this he makes a seventh Argument against this judge∣like power in receiving. Reason 8. Vers. 13. This runs (a scandalo dato) from  the offence given thereby, that is by censuring, condemning,Much scandal arises else. or forbidding such Saints communion with you, who differ from you in opinion; this will be but a putting of a stumbling block in his way. Vers. 13. To hinder, and hurt him. () As a stone which is laid for a poor weake feeble man to fall on; or at least to dash his foot against:Offence what? for in regard of his weaknesse he wil easily stumble, if not fall (.) There is an offence given by obstructing, or censuring,Sim. or judg∣ing of a (different) brother, but it is got up to a scandal (scan∣dalum gravius est offendiculo) when you do deny, put by,☜ and not receive such a brother. Now what is a scandal? Tertullian sayes de vel andis virginibus,Scandal wht? it is an example (non bonae rei, sed malae, edificans ad delictum) not of a good thing, but of an evill thing, which emboldens and heightens, and builds up into an open, (undeniable) sinne. At first it may bee but doubtfull whether it bee well or ill;How this is a sandal. Vide Pareus & Par in loc. but at last it lyes open to be a sinne; so is this your rejecting of the brethren, and not admitting them into the Church, because not of your judgement and opinion. The word  (clau∣dico) from the Etymology taken, signifies to make lame, and
limp, and halt like a Cripple, by causing some great fall, from whence I accept of it,Aquin. 22 43.1. Jerom in 15. Mat. and shall arrest with the Schoolmen this definition for mine (scandalum proprie est dictum vel factum minus rectum praebens aliis occasionem ruinae)▪ It is a word and worke not well performed, but producing and af∣fording occasion of falling to others.1 To brethren so dspised. That occasins them to fal off. So is this a scandal to keep out my brother, and not to receive him as before, which may hinder and hurt him ever after, and occasion his falling. And although scandal is taken in general (pro aliquo impedimento) for any offence, and hinderance, or obx in the way that obstructs, bolts, or bars (as) out of doors,Sim. or hinders, yet in special I find this is the offence which gives a (differing) brother any occasion to fall away (whether such a brother does so or no) and this is a sinne so much forbidden in Scripture.☞ Hence the Grammarians say, that scandalum is as the bridge in the trap, which when the Mouse once treads on, o touches, she is taken sure; and so is it to give a scandal to a brother (that is not of your opinion) it is to lay a trap in the way to take him,Sim. and destroy him. Hence it is dangerous to despise (such differing) brethren, and not to receive them; for first, it is a scandal to them (sayes the Apostle) it discourages, discomforts, discon∣tents them,1 This mak bre∣thren fall someims fwy, Ranters and erroneous. and occasions oftentimes them to fall, at least to limp▪ and halt, and grow worse and worse; and this I ac∣count one reason of so many Ranters and erronious ones now adayes, 1 Cor. 8.13. 1 Cor. 10. O sad! as we shall shew by and by, that some Church-fellowships are so fleshed and fat, that they will not abate an ace of their forme for a brothers sake,☞ neither to bear with him in their formal kinde of Co∣venanting! subscribing! confessing! nor any thing else which is left (by Christ, doe what they can) to Christian liberty! But (scandalum) offence is either (activum dantis,What kinde of scandal. vel passi∣vum sumentis) active, and so it is given, or passive, and ta∣ken. That which is given (I speak of)▪ is active and prag∣matical to offend; and thus in urging, pressing, shewing in∣discreetly, rashly, and unseasonably the practise of your opinion upon others, as urging the use of outward things left to liberty and indifferent. O! take heed of any of Christs
little ones Mat. 18.6. Now the Apostle presses this argu∣ment taken (a scandalo) many wayes! for first, I say it is an offence to this brother whom thou receivest not; and it is an occasion to his fall, therefore receive him.1 Scandal with reference to brethren. For it is a greater sinne, and a greater punishment remaines for such which cause others to offend and fall, then for such who do so offend and fall.☜ So the Serpent was punished more then Eve, and Eve more then Adam, and Jezebel more then Ahab. (Peccare non tantum in se perditionis ha∣bet quantum quod reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur, Chrysost. Hom. 25 in Epist. ad Rom. Secondly, It is a scandal with reference to Christ.☜ Vers. 15. for whom Christ dyed; O! what will the world say! what?2 A scandal with reference to Christ. are these Christs Disciples, that gurn, bite at, abuse, despise, refuse, and condemne one another thus! is this all their charity of weake ones to shut them out of doors! and besides, how dare you to offend one of them for whom Christ dyed? doe ye thinke they are of so little worth for whom Christ dyed? that you will not receive them?3 Scandal with reference to brethren, and the Go∣spel way its slfe. what do you make of his blood? what a scandal is this? Further, the Apostle, to enforce this, findes out this scan∣dal to reach to Profession, Religion, the truth and Gospel its selfe. In Vers. 16. Let not your good be evil spoken of▪ or your Gospel liberty, and way of Christ be defamed, nor truth tradu∣ced, nor Doctrine, nor Discipline, nor the Kingdome of grace,Olevian. (as Olevian sayes) be blasphemed! () or evill spoken of, 1 Tim. 6.1. 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Cor. 29.30.Ambros. in loc. Vide Burtons Vindication p 44. Prin. 12.9. of 12 serious Questions. How eagerly did Mr. Prin, Bastwick and others take advantage to write and print all they could against this Gospel of Christ, for that the niceties and curiosities of some Church societies did ex∣clude, others (that were not of their judgement) though truly godly and holy! Therefore for the Gospels sake receive them, and have special regard (for by not admitting such, and judging hardly of them) you will open the mouths of Gods enemies against the truth, and give them advantages against the way,Bernard. whereby with Bernard in Serm. Ezek. 38.17. the Church sustaines great damage, even by her own Children. Reason 9. Runs from Vers. 14, 15, &c. I am perswaded
by the Lord Jesus Christ, nothing is unclean of it self, but to him that esteemeth it so,All indifferent things lawful in themselves. &c. from this Concession (that nothing of its selfe is unclean) comes out a correction. Vers. 15. Therefore condemn not thy brother for eating, because it is an erronious conscience that makes a thing unlawful: For all actions receive their qualifications according to the will of the Agents, and the will acts according to the object, a thing apprehended by reason; If thou judgest by thy light that to doe this is sinne, and yet thy will carries thee to it; why then it is unlawfull indeed, and thou sinnest to doe it; but if thou judgest it no sinne, it is lawfull according to thy light and conscience to bee (by will) carried thereto;What is sin in indifferent things. therefore let thy light be Gods light, grounded on the word, and then be perswaded. It is miserable to doubt in things commanded,What is mi∣serable. and to be commanded in things doubtful and indifferent, (praejudicium non est judicium sed vitium.) Things indifferent are lawful to him that esteems them so, and unlawfull to him that esteems,. Beza. and is perswaded they are unlawfull; see Chap. 1. therefore let not one censure, condemne, cast by, or grieve the other, but receive each other in charity, and bowels of love, and each walk according to his judgement and perswasion, ch. 1. Reason 10. Vers. 17. For the Kingdome of God is not meat  and drinke, but righteousnesse, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. This Argument is taken (a natura rerum mediarum) from the nature of things indifferent,Kingdome of God consists not in outward things. and drawne up from the definition of the Kingdome of God; from the Thesis and Antithesis take this argument, in forme thus; for those things the Kingdome of God consists not of, we ought not so to contend; but meats & drinks, outward formes and Covenants,But in things necessary. &c. the Kingdome of God con∣sists not of, &c. ergo, &c. contend not so for such indifferent things, as to judge, or not to admit, and receive a brother. The Kingdome of God consists not of things doubtful or indifferent, but absolute and necessary, Luke 17.20, 21. 1 Cor. 8.8. there∣fore none are to be shut or kept out of this Kingdome,The Kingdom for their judgement in things doubtful or indifferent.1 Of glory. This Kingdome (sumitur pro regno gloriae) sometimes is taken for that of Glory, the Fathers,2 Of grace. which is to come (ubi Deus erit omnia in omnibus) and by some (pro regno gratiae) (and so here) for the Church of Christ, the Kingdome of the Son, the state of grace here; but take which
you will, they are both of one kind, of one make, have one and the same matter, forme, and end;Both of one kinde. and neither of them consists in outward forms, or is in meat and drink, or the like, but both of them consist in righteousnes, peace & joy in the Holy Ghost, that is, the substantialia regni are one & the same; and such members as are fit for one, are fit for the other. These are Characters of such Citizens as are fit, whose Christianity, Religion, Profession, enchurch∣ment, &c. lyes not in meat and drinke, that is, in the outward formes, letters, and things left to liberty, whether to do, or not doe; but in righteousnesse inherent and infused,☜ and also ex∣pressive and declared in faith and holinesse, and in their duties of obedience, and in peace, which follows justification, and unity one with another, which is unity of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost being the procreant cause of this peace and love, and joy, which issues and runs out of such a righte∣ousnesse and peace before spoken of: now those things are necessa∣ry, which the Kingdome of God consists of. Oh then! that differences should arise about such things as the Kingdome of God consists not of! but can as well bee without!Sad diffeen∣ces about things unne∣cessary. as about Covenants! Confessions! and Subscriptions! and such things that are indifferent! or that are doubtful! as the subjects of baptisme, and whether dipped, or sprinkled, or such like, being left without positive warrant in the word. Oh then! learne, learne, to put a difference where the Lord puts a difference, as between things spiritual and things carnal!For want of putting a right difference things of a middle nature, and things necessary, which the Kingdome of God, the Church of Christ cannot be without! And let us make no difference where the Lord would have none. Reason 11, from Vers. 18. For he that in these things serves  Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men.All Saints Christs ser∣vants. The Argument is thus: He that is the servant of Christ; is to be received, but he that is righteous, and beleeves, and obeyes the Gospel (whe∣ther he eats, or eats not, notwithstanding these formes) is the servant of Christ, therefore to be received. Thus the argument is a genere: but from the effects, 1 Gods acceptation; 2 Mans approbation. He that is acceptable to God, is to be received: but he that serves Christ, beleeves in Christ, and obeyes the Gospel, in righteousnesse, peace, and joy of the
Ghost, though he be not of your opinion in things indifferent & doubtful, yet is acceptable to God, therefore to be received. Further thus from the other effect, Hee that is , a tryed Professor, and a currant approved Christian amongst men,Pareus. is to be received; but he that serves Christ (as before) in righteousnesse,Calvin. peace and joy of the Holy Ghost, though he be not of your judgement, yet is a tryed approved Christian amongst men, ergo; loquitur de hominibus recte judicantibus, saith Pareus in loc. & Calvin. But now! see! O, what arguments the Apostle brings to clear this point; yea with what big-bellied arguments (one in the belly of another) he urges them to receive Saints differ∣ing from them in judgement! being holy and peaceable, ac∣cepted of God, approved of men, Prov. 3.1, 2, 3. Act. 10.35. 1 Pet. 3.13. the Kingdome of God is not in words, but in power,Nazianzen. , said Nazianzen. Reason 12. from Vers. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and wherewith to edifie one another.  This reason lets out two arguments to receive (differing) bre∣thren;Else disorders and strife in the Church, the body no rightly built up, it is for Churches peace. as First, What agrees with the true peace and order of the Church is to be performed, but to receive such brethren as be∣fore, agrees with the true peace and order of Christs Church. This Peace is either Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical (so called) this latter (if true) is taken out of the former, and is content with the substance to finde faith, love, grace, holinesse in brethren, though they differ in forme,Not as the world hath peace. (and for this, see Dels way of peace, about pag. 120, 121. &c.) therefore Christ hath left his peace, (his) in the Church, but not as the world gives it, Joh. 16. the world can have no peace but with men of the same minde and judgement;And for her order. but Christs peace, and Christs love is to all Saints alike, without respect of persons or opinions. This bond of peace and union is spiritual,As a Family. Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. and so is this order in sym∣metry with the Rules of Christ, which (hath been proved) do require all Saints to bee admitted and received. Hence the Church is called the Lords house and family, which consists of old and young, great and small, high and low, &c: yet the difference of sexes, relations, sizes, statures, ages, estates, make
it neverthelee in order and peace, a family or house; So it is called his building, in which it is necessary there should bee matter to make it up of different forme and hew; and though there may be much difference amongst them that are the building, yet being orderly and fitly disposed,A building. it hinders not the welfare of that building at all; therefore the Church is also cal∣led a Kingdome and Corporation, a City compact, &c. in Scriptures; and all to shew,A Kingdome. City. that although there bee such as do differ, as it were, in Trades, Callings, complexions, places, im∣ployments, professions, ages, statures, yet being all subject to one Law and Law-giver, there is never the lesse peace and order:Psal. 122. So a body, 1 Cor. 12 for although the members differ much, one bigger or lesser, and some gifted more then others,Body. and more usefull then others, or more faire and formal in appearance then others, yet all serve to make one body; and this diffe∣rence is necessary thereunto, to make up a more orderly body. For as the unity, peace, welfare,Difference ne∣cessary. and order of the body stands wel with a distinction, and difference of members,☜ which doth not hinder, but help the unity, and order, and welfare of the body (and is better then if all the body were an eye to see, or an ear to hear, &c.) so doth the diversity of Church-members, with di∣versity of gifts, and graces, Rom. 13.6. help much to the order and edifying of the Church▪ which is his second Argument. That which is for the Churches edification ought to be per∣formed: but to admit Saints of all opinions (differing onely in things indifferent) as before, is for the Churches edification, Eph. 4.29. 1 Thess. 5.11. as the least member is usefull to the body, and the meanest matter in the building usefull to the building▪ Now falsely constituted Churches that are of Antichrist (indeed) cannot stand without uniformity, but Christs-can, and be edified as a growing Temple, Eph. 2.21. Reason 13. from Vers. 20, 21. Though all things are (in them∣selves) pure, (yet) it is evill for that man which eats with offence. It is not good to eat, nor drinke,Things of a middle nature must be let a∣lone, rather then offend a brother. nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbles, &c. So in 1 Cor. 6.12. and 10.23. all things are lawfull that are not expedient; by these the Apostle would teach us to abstaine from things (that in themselves are good, pure, clean, lawful) that are indifferent, for a brothers sake,
1 Cor. 8.13. the Apostle tells us thus much; as first, That all things of a middle nature may be waved (as Covenants,☞ subscriptions, &c. Formes, and false Circumstances) Secondly, ra∣ther then cause a body to fall or stumble as before, they must be waved, and not be urged, which is the scope and drift of this Chapter, and of the eighth Chapter, and tenth Chapter of 1 Cor. Now it is the Church that hath power to deter∣mine the use of indifferent rites by the Word and Law of Christ, for the maintaining of good order and spiritual peace, and unity.Christian li∣berty to be kept. Now Christian liberty consists as well in abstaining from, as in using of those things indifferent. Wee may use our Christian liberty (sayes Par) before them which know it; but before them which know it not,Par. and are offended at it, out knowledge is sufficient, and our use is forbidden; there∣fore wisdome and discretion is earnestly to bee sought for from above, that you may know when, where, and how to use your liberty, to call for, or not to call for; use, or not use things indifferent; for when liberty (as Greg. Mag. Moral. 28. marks) Indiscrete tenetur,Gregor. amittitur, cum discrete intermittitur, plus tenetur) is unwisely held, it is oftentimes lost, it is no longer a liberty, but oftentimes when it is wisely and prudentially intermitted, it is made the more a Christian liberty; now the excellency of it,☞ is the use, or not use of it. The actions of Gospel-discipline, are such as are essential, as piety and power of Sanctity and Profession, or else such as are ordinate (& media) or helps appointed for the orderly performance of such a Worship and Discipline; so are all Ordinances, means of grace, and ad∣ministrations; now in these are the  and the  to be considered, the things that are to bee done, and the manner of their doing;☞ the first, are instituted of God, and revealed in his word;Abstain from pressing things indifferent. but the second sort concerning the manner of per∣forming them, as time, place, gesture, and such like circumstan∣ces, are left to liberty, as is best for the order, use and unity of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.40. 1 Cor. 11.24. Now those brethren that doe differ from you in things left to liberty, that have not po∣sit ve precept; the Apostle sayes, you must admit and receive, and raher abstaine from those things then (as to him) then ren∣der offence, or cause him to stumble; for though thou be∣vest
this or that may be, yet have thy faith to thy self. Vers. 22. and not for another. Thus you have the scope of the whole Chapter to ratifie this undeniable assertion laid downe at first,Proved further by Prophesie. for receiving of such as are weake, though differing in opinion; and this point lyes cleare in many other Scriptures besides,Expos. both Prophesies and Precepts, and practise of primitive Churches. You have it prphesied in Micah 4.5. This Chapter begins with the promised happinesse, and eminency of the Church of Christ foretold these latter dayes, and amongst other things,Iew and Gen∣tile, bond and free. this is one Promise made, foretelling her eminency thereby, and her exceeding glory above the glory of former ages; for that all Nations shall come, that is not meant (sayes Gualter) All of all Nations, but many peoples of many languages, under many wayes, formes,Gualther. orders, and dispensations, shall come in to the Church of Christ, Jew and Gentile, bond and free, of all sorts, and opinions,One body all. that are the Lords, under the reigne of Christ shall come in; though Jew and Gentile are at as much variance and distance for their different judgements one from another as may bee, yet they must be one in one. For there is but one Body of all beleevers (of all judgements) Eph. 4 4, 5, 6. in all ages,Such as halt between two made one. under all forms of all degrees and measures, of light and life, Eph. 2.15. Col. 3.15. having all the same faith (for quality) in the same Christ, and all live on Christ by faith (not by forme.) Thus all (of us) will walke every one in the name of his God, and we will walke (also) in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever; Every one according to his light and measure obeying God constantly, and then saith the Lord, I will assemble her that halteth between God and Baal, 1 King. 18 (two opinions;) and make even her a remnant, and a Congregation, over whom I will reigne in Zion. Besides, Ezek. 36.37, 38. you have the richest blessings reserved for the last dayes,One flock all. when Paradise shal be re∣stored, and the Church shall become the Lords Eden,Expos. in vers. 35. I will increase them, saith the Lord, with men like a flocke; how is that? i. e. thus, in a flocke (alluding to a shepherds flocke) there be old and young, Lambs and Ews, Isa. 40.11. of seve∣ral sorts, sizes, colours, complexions; yet all make but one flocke, and it is not the difference of the fleece, of the colour,
or outward appearance, or tone, or bleat, or going, or weaknesse, or leannesse, or raggednesse, that makes it none of the flocke, so long as it is a sheep still; as long as none of these diffe∣rences are such as make it no sheep.That serve one God. So the Church of Christ shall consist of Saints (though they differ in opinions, so long as those opinions cannot make them no Saints) that are un∣der variety of dispensations,Expos. administrations, forms, opinions, and severall measures of grace and spirit; And yet the Lords flocke, a holy flocke. Verse 38. all having one Master-Shepherd, serving one and the same God,Expos. as Zeph. 3.9. I will turne the peoples of all Nations to a pure language, i. e. of the Spirit, and then all (under all formes, orders, languages whatsoever, all) shall serve the Lord with one consent, all shall agree in one, and consent in that to serve the Lord, and to draw together with one shoulder;Sim. as the simile runs, from a yoake of Oxen drawing to∣gether; yea the Leopard, and the Kid, the Lion and the Lamb shall lye down together. See this also foretold by Zach. 2.11. Many Nations shall be joyned together,Expos. and Zach. 8.23. of all languages, shall take hold of him that is a Jew,God is haste∣ning to bring AL into ONE. saying, We will goe with you, for we have heard that God is with you: that is, Men enlightned that have found the Lord (as in verses before) and are united to him, they shall now enter into the Church of Christ, where the Lord is with them.Precepts. Though they be of all Languages, Nations, habits, forms, and appearances, so they be but holy, and seekers and servants of the Lord as before,Expos. they must be received, though there be as large a difference (in things outward and formal) as between other Nations, and the Jews, yet they must be all one, and brought into one body. God will ga∣ther all his people into one, and every year he is hastning this designe, to bring all into one. But for further proofes, see Phil. 3.15, 16. If any be of ano∣ther minde) what then? not put him by, no but walk with him; for God shall in time reveal it to him; Neverthelesse where∣unto we have already attained (and are all of one minde and judgement) let us (all) walke (together, as Phil. 1.27. and Phil. 2.1, 2.) by the same rule (of Christ) let us minde the same things (that is, of God, the honour and glory of God, the worship and service of God) thus much, to me, lyes under the Commission
Christ gave in Mat.. 28. Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you,  to keep them charily,Expos. whatsoever commanded and commended to them in Discipline and Doctrine;Christ would have have his babes tenderly taken in. now this was one in Mat. 19.14. to admit even of Infants in Christ, of such who are as weake, simple, innocent, and as unable, as little ones to speak or expresse themselves, &c. yet such are to be by Christs Disciples (Christs-Church) received, and admitted as well as others that are of a more manly, growne, and strong stature in Christ; for of such as these little ones (as well as of strong ones) consists the Kingdome of heaven. Moreover, we might muster many Authors together to beare testimony to this truth;Practise of primitive Church. but besides what was said be∣fore, we shall finde the examples of all Churches in primitive times to take in all Saints, though of different opinions (if holy, and beleevers) in Corinth, Rome, Galatia, Antioch,In Apostles dayes. &c. where were Jews, and Gentiles, circumcised and uncircum∣cised, and such as did exceedingly differ in opinions; thus Rom. 14. Gal. 2.11. and 5.1. and Act. 15.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 12, 13. for by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body,After them in vol. 1. pag 72. Anno 157. Polycarpus Ancetus. whether Jews or Gentiles, bond, or free; so after the Apostles dayes, as appears by Ecclesiastical Writers, all that were godly in Christ Jesus without respect of persons or opinions were received, their faith in Christ and love to all Saints was looked upon as necessary and enough (as Mr. Fox observes) till the hot contest between the Asians and the Romans about the observation of dayes,Fox. An. 157. and then in Antoninus Pius's reigne was Polycarpus faine to goe to Rome to Anicetus (then Bishop of Rome) and though they two differed in opinion,Church ad∣mitted Saints of different opinions, and of different observations 157. and after. Irenaeus. Victor Bishop of Rome. yet were they one in most sweet, kinde, and Christian communion, and both avoided the breach of unity or peace, sayes Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 23, & Socrat. Schol. Hist. Ec. 5. cap. 21.) and as Irenaeus writes to Victor (as we shall heare by and by) the Church before this time received such as were of contrary opinions, and held contrary observations, and yet notwithstanding held fast the bond of love and unity. (Vide Par on Rom. 14 v. 6.) Afterwards in Comodus's dayes the poore Saints had a little breathing time, and respite from persecutions to take aire a little, and then arose (as is usual in the times of the Churches
peace and liberty) a loud difference amongst brethren about the observation of Easter day, and such trifling ceremonies, some (and those of the Western parts) as Mr. Del takes it in's way of peace,Til an. 200▪ in Victor's dyes, Bishop of Rome, he went about to cast out, and not take in them that if∣fered in opini∣on. pag. 116, 117.) pretended the tradition of Paul and Pter to observe it on one day (although indeed they had it from Hermes and Pius) and the Easterne Churches pretended the tradition of John to observe it another day: and about these trifles they had hot word-wars and skirmishes in discourses; but yet love continued, and unity and order in the Church, till Victor's time, a fiery (brand, or) Bishop of Rome; and hee rose high, and as hot as a Toast, to excommunicate all that were not of his judgement for Easter-day, after the (pretended) tradition of Paul.Which Irenaeus writes against in a letter to him. And the Asian Churches not yeelding to his opinion, he would cast out, and take none in, but those that did just jump with him in his opinion; hereupon those of his opinion went to him, and of the other, to the Churches of Asia. Now the difference growing great, even to the breach of unity,Uniformity began an. 200. Thn Saints judged Schis∣maticks, and Hereticks, and to be excom∣municated▪ that differed in opinion. Euseb. l. . c. 26. order, and all, and that about trifles, things not necessary; Irenaeus writes to Victor Bishop of Rome roundly, and tells him it was not so before: for among former Christians, & in the Churches then, they were all at peace, and in love amongst themselves, although there were variety of opinions, and observations, and till this time Christian liberty continued in use, and it remained fresh to use or not use things indifferent; but now began uniformity to be of force and in fashion, and to be all of one opinion a thing necessary, (and not before) and such as differed to be judgd Schisma∣ticks, Hereticks, and the like. And now all alike have been in a flame, and the Saints of Asia (that could not be induced to them, or seduced by them of Rome) were to be cast out, and ex∣communicated by Victor; but then the word was brought forth to decide the difference: and those spiritual weapons▪ to win the Conquest Irenaeus uses (as before) and sayes thus further to Victor in his letter.Not so till Victors time proved by Ire∣naeus. The variance and difference about cere∣monies is not now new, nor strange in the Church of Christ, both about Easter day, and Fast dayes; and yet for all this diversity, they were in unity among themselves, which he proves, and brings abundance of examples for it, and instances in Telesphorus,
Pius, Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and others, who neither tyed themselves nor others to an uniformity,1 Wht is not command∣ed, is left to the liberty, and light of Saints. or to be of their judge∣ment or opinion, but all were left to Christian freedome. And as Socrates lib. 5. cap. 19. sayes of the several sorts of fasting then used in several Churches, because none can bring any commande∣ment written of this matter,☜ it is plaine (sayes he) it is left free to every mans minde and will, and none to be compelled by fear or necessity to doe this or that. Thus we see in those dayes the Saints that differed in judgement and opinion were beloved, and received, and accepted as Saints, without respect to their opinions, till Victor's time, when Antichrist began to get a head, and to assinuate secular powers, &c. And ever since, O what sad differences have arose! (by the Devils subtilties,Ever since An∣tichrist climbed up to this, what diffe∣rence are there and breach of opinion, is breach of af∣fection. and Jesuitical sophistries) and what ranke seeds of division have been sowne to set Christians together by the ears, and that about nothing! empty sha∣dows, and puff-paste appearances! and all hereby to vilifie the Church of Christ, and true Saints, as if such could not bee Christs Disciples who differ so, seeing they should all love one another, Joh. 13. and not fall out, and jar as they doe. Doe not the enemies of the Gospel to this day, Papists, and others make sport of this, and make it an argument against us that wee are not Christs? O what a may-game they made (and doe yet) at the hot contestations between Calvin, and Luther in Germany? and betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists? what fearful, detestable, unchristian combats are there yet? how unkind and cruelly hateful are the one to the other, and all about opinions? And in our dayes what a bone is cast in to make a quarrel between the Presbyterians and Independents? Independents and Anabaptists, &c? Now that which is worst, is, that they differ in affections as much (yea more) then in opi∣nions (which is a most miserable thing amongst them that are indeed godly) now this was not so from the first; for as we have heard before; so Augustine and Hierom differed in opi∣nion, but yet loved one another heartily,All should love. and did not at all disturb the Church thereby, but had high esteem one of ano∣ther for all that, as Peter had of Paul (who differed from him, and preached openly against him, Gal. 2.11.) yet, sayes
he, Our beloved brother Paul, 2 Pet. 3.15. And I remember, when the Donatists did urge Cyprian's opinion for rebapti∣zing,Aug. Vincentio Contra Donat. & Rogat de vi Corig. Epist. 48. O, sayes Augustine for him, Hunc quasi nevum candidissi∣im pectoris cooperuit ubere charitatis, but he hath covered this faulty opinion of his most faire and candid breast, with the full bigs of charity;A good lesson for Anabaptists especially them in Dub∣lin, & Waterford. for he did hold fast to his brethren that differed from him, in all love and sweetnesse, and would not rend away from the Church, but maintained the unity of the Church (which was not of his minde) and kept continually the bond of peace! Oh! O then, that all brethren of all opinions would learne this lesson, and we should be glad to have communion with such kinde of Anabaptists! Donatists! Cypria∣nsts! or what opinion soever, so holy! But thus I have proved it to be the practise of primitive times to admit dif∣fering brethren, till Antichrist began to start up. And Melancthon sayes,Melancthon. Ali Saints, though diffe∣ring in opini∣on must be one in heart and love. Bucer. (as Dell observes, pag. 120. in's way of peace) seeing we agree together in the chiefe Articles of faith, and Christian doctrine, wee must embrace each other (as bre∣thren) in unity and Christian love, order, and peace; and let not the difference of rites, or variety of Ceremonies, or diffe∣rence of opinions, dis-joyne our mindes and hearts from one ano∣ther; no, nor yet the difference of Ecclesiastical government (sayes Bucer) make us differ from one another: have we not all one Father? for shame let us love and live together as Saints. Besides all this Artillery to defend this truth, viz. That all Saints might be admitted, I might fortifie it further by other Reasons, which I shall omit them now (having been alreardy at large) unlesse taken in two or three considera∣tions;1 Consid. Saints children of light. As Expos.First, that all Saints are Sons and Daughters of light, and therefore have liberty to lay by what is dark to them; for as Psal. 39. ult. in the Lords light they see light, not in mans light; they cannot see with other mens eyes. Therefore they have a liberty of rejecting, or refusing whatsoever they find not agree∣able to the revealed minde of Christ; And whatsoever is asked of them, or accepted from them (as matter of faith) and they are required to obey, or yeeld submission to, they must, and will have Gods word to give it them, & the Gospel of Christ to
hold it out to them, or else they returne a blanke to it, or a negative answer, 1 Thess. 5.22. Col. 2.20, 21, 22▪ 1 Joh. 4.1, 2. Act. 17.11. Gal. 5.1. and will have none of it, that hath none of Christs Commands for it: wherefore it is with them as it was with the Beraeans; they search the Scriptures whether they can finde such things so or no. Children of day, they see where they goe; but them of darknesse doe not, Act. 17.23. 1 Joh. 2.11. they goe they know not whither,☜ but at a venture doe as others doe; whilst the Saints of God walk wa∣rily, wisely, knowingly, &c. yea and armed with light too, Rom. 13.12. being round about swallowed up (as it were) in a clear truth, which they are able to defend and maintaine, ha∣ving put on the armor of light  instruments, weapons of light too for defenc. The word of God which conquers them they use to conquer others with,In armour of light to defend truth. and in such cases as these are, (as to the Doctrine and Discipline of Christ) the Saints had need to be clear; for they shall meet with many adversaries, oppositions, enemies, hot, strong, sturdy, and lusty, and that will with full blows, and violent buffets, and argu∣ments use all means to assault, wound, and knock them down;☜ therefore, I say, they had need to have the armour of light on, against the time they are to meet their storming, angry, raging adversaries, else they will soon yeeld and faint; there∣fore it is that nothing should be urged upon them which is darke to them. For as darknesse is caused by the absence of the Sun, so is darknesse in the minde, and upon mens spirits,Sim. when they finde not Christs (the Sunnes) light to shine in their hearts, and to give them the knowledge; and when they finde not in the Gospel, that forme, opinion, or practise, which o∣thers urge to them, and would presse upon them,When they are in the dark. then they are in the darke, which ought not to bee thrust upon any Saint, or Brother, that is to be received. For first, wherein they are in the darke, they are disconso∣late; whilst those that live in the light walk in the day,1 Disconsolat. and doe what is cleare to them out of the word of God, and doe it chearfully, freely, comfortably, and indeed confidently. And the conscience is cleared, and rejoyces in such practises as are ap∣proved by day-light, and are cleared in the understanding, and proved by the word of Christ. And
2 They can∣not see.Secondly, darknesse hinders sight, tenebrae a tenend; and tenebra est visus impeditiva; and so doe such opinions and practises which are pressed upon us without the word of Christ (without the light) and not in the beams of the Sunne; those brethren cannot see other things (often-times) that are swallowed up in them. Who are more blinded (as to the most spiritual objects and discoveries) then your greatest formalists? that are most hot, high, stirring, pressing their owne formes, opinions, judgements, especially in things doubtful, and indifferent (and such things as are left indiffe∣rent (and such things as are left in the darke without the word;) O! how bitterly are they besotted & incensed against the more subtle! oriental! spiritual! and most splendent truths! (color omnibus unus) thus were the Pharisees, and so Isa. 29.10. and Joh. 9.39. 3 They can∣not walk in it well.Thirdly, they know not how to walke when they are in the dark (est gressus prohibitiva) nor whether they are right or no; And Fourthly, they walke in feare (for so much as they are in the darke,4 They are in fear of it. est timoris incussiva) and so they cannot but bee faint and fearfull of that opinion, practise, or forme, which they finde not in the word of God; And 5 Liable to fall from it, or else to fall in it which is worse.Fifthly, (est casus inductiva) it is dangerous, and they are liable to fall then when they are forced or induced to do that which they see not warranted in the word, but left in the dark too: and who then would (as was said before) give a brother such occasion to stumble and fall? 6 Makes them too bold and fiery.Sixthly (est verecundi diminutiva) this night-opinion, or practise, or forme (whatsoever it be) which any are brought into, makes them (many times) too immodest tooth and naile (unguibus & dentibus) to fight for, and act for what the word warrants not.Sim. As the night that makes night-walkers too bold in immodest formes, and appearances and practises sutable thereto.As at this day we finde a∣mong Presby∣terians, and o∣thers, &c. So, O sad! some of your formalists you will finde have the Whores forehead! harlots-dresse, and are too bold! (as blind Bayard) and confident for such formes! opinions! practises! and wayes, which have none of Gods word to give life or light to them! and yet
how hot are some for Antichristian orders, and customes, which (were the light up, and did the Sunne shine in their Horizon) they would even blush to owne, and be ashamed to shew their heads for.The golden rule conscience Now all these (and many more) inconveniencies would be unavoidable consequences of such practises, as to presse our opinions or judgements upon any of the Saints, and upon such conditions to admit of them into Communion, which God forbid should be in our thoughts hereafter; For let us doe as we would be done by, and let every one walke (that is a childe of Light) in the light and liberty of his owne conscience; for better it is to follow even an erring conscience, when it cannot bee informed and cor∣rected, then to doe against conscience. But thus for the first Consideration. Secondly, Consider what is the glory and beauty of Sion, (which shall be shortly) the joy of the whole earth?2 Consider. The beauty of Zion i all in one. is it not variety in unity? and into unity? The Church mili∣tant is the image or figure of the Church triumphant, and all her Ordinances, Orders, Forms of Discipline and Doctrine are no more, (nor lesse) then a shadow of what is to come in the Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. wherefore the word Jerusalem in the Heb. is of the duall number,The Church here looks like her above. Amama in Co∣rnide. to teach us (as the Cabalists confesse) there is an heavenly, as well as earthly Jerusalem and the taking away of the letter jod out of Jrushalaim 2 Sam. 5 13. teaches the earthly Jerusalem is but the shadow, and the shadow vanishes away into the substance, which is that, that is above.Here a shadow of what is to come here fter. Thus the Apostle in∣timates in Col. 2.17. speaking before of many Ordinances of Circumcision, Baptisme, Sabbath-dayes, &c. which are all (sayes he) but a shadow of things to come. Like as you shall see the image of the Sun in a plash of water,Sim. where it looks like the Sun, full of light, and very lively, as if the Sun were seated there.Expos. So Cant. 6.9. the Church here is said to bee the onely one,So are all Or∣dinances. the choice one of her mother (i. e. the Jerusa∣lem above) that is, she looks so like her Mother, as the very picture of her.Baptisme. So her Ordinances are but shadows of what is to come.Word Baptisme whereby they are washed here (and in primitive times the Catechumeni and Adulti were wont
as soon as they were washd,Singing. to be clad with white robes) it is but a shadow of what is to come, Rev. 7.9.14. when the Saints shall be clad with white robes, washed in the blood of the Lamb. The word here enunciative, is but a shadow of what is to come (the body is Christ,Sabbath. saith the Apostle) he is the word essential, Jo. 1.1. the singing of Psalms Hymns, and spiritual Songs is but a shadow of that Hallelujah which i to come,Christ is the substance or body of all. which we shall all sing with one voice before the Throne and Lamb for ever, Rev. 1.9.1. and again Vers. 3. and again Vers. 4. and again Vers. 6. as never satisfied,How a shadow here. and yet ever satisfied with singing it (Victoria Hallelujatica.) The Sabbath here is but a shadow of that which is to come. Christ is the body and substance of them all,What a sha∣dow is. he shall be the Temple of the New Jerusalem, that is, he shall be in the room, and stead of all Ordinances, Sacrifices, Worships, and services, viz. Christ, the substance of all. All the shadows are empty things, though caused by the substance in the light, yet the shadows are va∣riable (as the Sun turns) in evry age,☞ and shall grow lesse and lesse, shorter and shorter, as the Sun grows higher and higher, till they be swallwed up in the substance, and are no more (as shadows) seen. In the interim where the shadow ends, the substance begin.☞ The shadow is the darke, or imperfect re∣presentation of the person, and hath some similitude thereof. The Church here is a representation, or similitude of that to come; that here is more in variety, that to come more in unity; for in that to come, Saints of all judgements, under all formes, in all ages, are members of one Church; and the more the Church here (now) looks like her that is to come, the greater is her beauty and glory; and the more her va∣riety is swallowed up in unity; the more she looks like the Jerusalem which is above,Variety in uni∣ty. for all shall be one Rev. 7. from 1. to 10. of all Nations, kindreds, peoples, tongues, which no man could number; this is the work, the strange worke that God goes on so fast with, especially in these last Ages, and in these Nations, as Eph. 1.10. To gather together into one, all things both which are in heaven & which are on earth,God is haste∣ning it. even in Christ (the substance) () to recapitulate, and bring up to one head, to collect (as in multiplication) all into one summe; All things
in one, all Saints, all Ordinances, all opinions, all forms,Expos. all excellencie, to gather all into one. To reduce all to one head. For this Christ prayed so, Joh. 17.20, 2. that all Saints (in all ages, of all opinions whatsoever) that beleeved,All Saint in all ages of all opinions, one: Christ prayed for it. It will be the Churches glo∣ry in every age more and more. or should (for time to come) beleeve in him, might be all one, and then their glory would be great, Jo. 17.22. and they would be made the more perfect. Verse 23. O! we shall see every day more and more (as the gathered Churches are more & more refined and spiritualized) that they wil lesse presse the form, or pray for the opinions of such as are to be received and admitted, but wil make it enough to know that they are beleevers in the Lord Jesus and therefore ought to be one with them, be their opinions different from them in things doubtful and indifferent; and this Doctrine shall shortly be imbra∣ced without scruple or question; and then the Church shall be more glorious and beauteous in the sight of all.And her beau∣ty. As the bams of the Sun which are here below are many, & various, and spread divers wayes,Sim. yet the higher and nigher to the Sun, they are the more united, and the more they are united in one, the more splendent, and glorious they are;Nigher Christ, the more all is one, and her perfection. So the Church growing upward to her full stature in Christ, the nigher she is (to this Sun) the more her multiplicity of forms, opinions, Saints, and all are made one in Christ, and the more glorious they must needs be; and besides the more sweet & per∣fect they are too; as variety and discord in musicke,Sim. make the sweetest concord, and most orderly and perfect period; but thus far for the second Consideration.3 Consider. the rule of ad∣mission, is pru∣dent and cha∣ritable. Vide Noyes Temple p 63. The third Consideration is from the rule of admission, which is a rule of Prudence, and Charity which are not membra dividentia) any degree of true faith in Christ is enough to take them in, upon Rom. 14.1. where we finde an absolute probability of a person converted by the power of grace, and called from darknsse to light,Where there is the least de∣gree of true grace and faith in Christ. there wee are to take satisfaction, without a curious scrutiny (which some make) into their judgement in matters indifferent. Mr. Calvin in Epist. Rom. 14.4. sayes, Semper bene spre∣mus de eo in quo cernimus aliquid Dei, &c.Calvin. Let us alwayes thinke and hope well of that brother in whom we see the east tokens of grace, or any thing of God dwelling in him; t
is a great fault amongst many to exact an excellent height of grace, judgement, or the like; and to look for a Paul, or an Abraham presently; O no! for God accepteth and re∣ceiveth the least grace and growth in truth: And so must wee even him that is weake in the faith, Rom. 14.1. Now that rule which exacts other things, and requires more then is necessary, even to the weakest in the faith, excludes many times such as God includes, and hath (himselfe) received and accepted of; wherefore we must have great care of grieving any of the Saints, or putting any by for their opinions in things doubtful or indifferent; for to deny a truth (even a very truth) in things of a middle size, and left indifferent, does breed but a tolerable errour at the most;☞ but to do it in points posi∣tively commanded and necessary (I confesse) is an intolerable error at the least; for stiffely to stand to an error in points necessary and fundamental, makes a man a Hereticke at the least, whilest the other can make him but a Schismaticke at the most. But thus for the third Consideration; some more I might have added,Dangerous to oppose Saints of Christ. Oftentimes comes to fight against God. With a false zeal. but I hope I have said enough to wise men, and to all the true Churches of Christ in the world, to ratifie the truth asserted of brethren (dissenting in things indifferent.) Besides what Gamaliel said to the Councel, Act. 5.38, 39. Refraine from these men, let them alone, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. Mr. John Goodwin hereon affirmes, it is wisdome not to oppresse any in Gods wayes, of Gods servants, and to attempt any thing against a way, which for all that we know is the way of God,Goodwin. may be found but a fond engagement, and a fighting even against God himselfe; so it is to shut out any for an opinion (he holds) which is left doubtful or indifferent in the Scripture, a great imprudence, if not impudence: And a zeale without knowledge, Rom. 10.2. Eccles 7.18. which is full of selfe-conceit. Now the Rule is a sound knowledge out of Gods word of the thing for which we are zealous, that it is right,And with a rash judge∣ment. and required in Gods word and Gospel, Gal. 4.18. and let it be (ad aequale) according to our knowledge, Duo sunt (sayes Anselme out of Augustin. Serm. 202. de temp.) in quibus temerarium judicium cavere debemus,Anselme. cum incertum est quo animo quicquam factum est, vel cum incertum est qualis futurus sit qui
nunc vel bonus vel malus apparet. Rash judgement of any bro∣ther we must beware of in two things: First, when we know not with what a mind the thing is done; And then secondly, when we know not what the man may be that thus appeares good (at present) or bad to us; O then,☜ therefore take heed how we judge, condemne, or keep out any beleever, be he of what opinion soever! But so far for Explication: To be briefe in Application. Vse 1 Reproof: Are not they too to blame then, that stand too stifly upon Circumstances? and trifles? and forms? and  such things as are left to liberty,Reproves such as put a neces∣sary use of such forms as are le indiffe∣rent. and yet to impose a necessity upon them, is not this pestilent? and unsufferable? And yet, Oh how many unskilful builders in this age, that urge (and that strongly) an Vniformity, Vniformity! as the Bishops cryed out for a Conformity, without which (and they say true) their Churches cannot stand. O sad! how this mystery of iniquity works yet! when the Churches order, peace, and happinesse consists in unity of the Spirit, and not in the unity of the Forme, as of a Prelatical, Presbyterian forme,☜ or Prelatick Independent Forme, or Anabaptistical Forme; O no! but in unanimity, not in uniformity! For all outward Formes (be they what they will, as Mr. Warr sayes, (in his Dispute betwixt Form and Power, a pretty Tract,Form childish things. 1 Cor. 13. Must all passe away. pag. 33.) are part of those childish things which are to be done away, as Paul sayes; hence it is that even as childhood is done away, and ceases in a more excellent growth and glory, viz. in the state of man-hood and perfection; so shall all Formes of Discipline whatsoever; Wherefore it is wrong done to the Church of Christ to keep up a Frme to hurt, or hinder our growth, or offend any of the Saints, or (as a dead Carcasse) when it stinks, not to suffer, it to be buried; so I say, to keep up any Forme as an engine of cruelty or persecution, or to make variance betwixt brethren. For who is so ready to crucifie Christ, as the Pharisee, or man of forme? who is so contentious, and quarrelsome at the ap∣proaches and appearances of Christ (in Spirit?Man of fome most enemy  Christ.) who is so cap∣tious at the truth shining in splendent spirituality? who is so ready to betray them? who sits so much at Councel against them? and all, lest if Christ (in the Spirit) should bee be∣leeved, their (Mosaical, Levitical) rites, and forms would fall
apace,Church of forme the Ae∣gypt in which Chist is cru∣cifid. and be of small repute, and not be received. So that, that Church-society, whose peace, love, order, and unity lyes al∣together in the Forme, I may safely say, is such a spiritual Aegypt as we read of in Rev. 11 8. which is full of dead carcasses, and where Christ is crucified (at this day.) For as Aegypt (which typified darknesse so) it is a place of darknesse,Expos. How it is an Aegyp. and at least a vaile to keep poor creatures under ignorance, and to hinder them, and hide from them the excellencies and discoveries of Christ in the Spirit. In this Aegypt are many Magicians and wise men, who imitate Moses and Aaron, and they take counsel against the servants of God,They deale subtilly against the Sains. the spiritualized ones, and Saints of Christ, saying, Let us deal wisely with them, Exod. 1.10. lest they multiply and be more then we, &c. or let us deal subtlely against them,Stephen. as Stephen sayes, the Greek renders it to keep them under us.By policy So that they work against us more by policie, then by piety. As by putting strange names on the truth, to make it odious, as the Pharisees did on Christ in the flesh; sometimes calling him Samaritan, sometimes Wine-bibber and Glutton, sometimes one that works by Beelzebub,To make Christ in the spirit odious, and would keep him up onely in the for and let∣tr. and Devil, some∣times the friend of sinners, &c. all this to render him odious, that they might have the more suffrage to make him suffer as a blasphemer and malefactor, and none to pity him; so subtilly do they disguise the true Gospel of Christ, the wayes of Christ, and spirituall truths, with new and strange names, calling them Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, &c. and what not? And why? but that they may the more unanimously, and with the freer consent of the poore ignorant people (who know not what they do) crucifie Christ in the Spirit: such subtilties are in such societies, as we finde amongst the Presbyterians, and others counted Independents too, at this day. O how con∣fidently they accuse,☞ condemne, and crucifie the Lord, and spit on his face! and lash him with their tongues in those truths, that they with wide-mouthed malice naucifie and scurri∣lize, and speake so unmercifully against! Besides, O, what severe Task-masters,Hard Task-ma∣sters. are in this Aegypt! how the Ministers of it put poore men upon works, lay burthens on their con∣sciences, compell them to their opinions, and set them upon doing day and night, and presse them to it on paine of death, hell and all! but alas a day! poore Saints, they have not
where withall (in themselves) to doe any thing!☜ but to build a Pithom and Rameses, Treasure-Cities▪ for Pharaoh the God of this world, to garrison against the appearances of Jesus Christ! Furthermore they in this Aegypt would confine Saints (Israel) to their land; to worship there, and to serve there,Will not let Israel goe out from them. and then they could be content; if we would but keep within the bounds of Aegypt, and not goe from our own Parishes, Classes, Teachers, or the like! And moreover, O what a trouble to them it is to see Gods Israel doth encrease and multiply, doe what they can,And are troub∣led that Israel multiples, and are afraid of it. and how are they afraid! such a Church, I say, is but a Spiritual Aegypt, whose streets are full of dead carcasses! corrupt unsavoury, stinking, dead, uselesse, life-lesse and abominable Formes, which are not fit to be above ground in any place,☜ but where our Lord is crucified. Now, I say, O, it is sad! where we yet meet with such hard Taskmasters, as would keep us in perpetual bondage, under their Formes, and Ordinances, and impose things upon us which wee are not able to beare.All forms must dye. Seeing all Administrations and Formes must runne their race and fall: And we finde not that a Forme was created for a standing rule, but a temporary helpe to serve a turne, for an age, or so, wherein it is once usefull (and then veniente perfecto,Sim. evacuatur imperfectum.) For as every man will dye in time, when his radical moisture is spent, and yet he may be said to dye before his time, being anticipated in his course by intem∣perance, or miscarriage and mischance, and the like;Uuntimely death of forms when they are made Idols, is a warning to the formal▪ Anabaptists. so every Forme will fall in time, and naturally expire; and yet (as we say) may be cut off in the midst, and the fall of it hastened by the intemperance and miscarriages of such fondlings, as abuse it, and adore it: As the Brazen-serpent▪ was suddenly knocked downe when people began to give honour to it, and to Idolize it; for God is jealous of his honour, and rather then his glory shall be given to the Form, he will break it in peeces like a Potters vessel, and grinde it to powder to bee no more seen, nor set up againe (as he did the golden Calfe.☜) wherefore how dare wee doat upon any Form which must and shall passe away! wee read that Austin,Austin. An. 598. asked Gregory, how it came to passe there should be so many forms,
and such diversity of customes and ceremonies in severall Churches and Countries, seeing there was but one Faith all this while? why saith he, that you may choose out of all the best, and picked out things, out of all the Churches about here and there, whether in Rome, France, or else where, they being left to take which you best like, and approve of in conscience to practise, as most usefull and orderly. So that we are not to be tyed up to any one Forme,Christ in the form of his flesh, and in the form of his Church∣way, run paral∣lel, how. Christ crucifi∣ed, glorified▪ living, dying, in flesh and spirit. Christ risen▪ nor to have our consciences bound up to things left to liberty. Now methinks the Church of Christ (which is his body too, and flesh (as I may say) now in his Saints, doth appear much parallel with Christs fleshly appearance upon earth; For Christ in his flesh (when he was here) and Christ in his Church (now here) to my judgement, are said both to be his body in a parallel Forme; For in this Church-forme every member, or Christian brother therein is (as it were) an em∣blem (representing Christ) in one stage or other of his life; some live in a crucified Christ, some in an exalted and glorified Jesus; some live in his life, some in his death; some are debased and abused; some are honoured and owned; some live in Christ after the flesh and forme, others live in Christ after the Spirit, and power. And in this forme or appearance (as it were in his flesh) Christ does and suffers, lives, and dyes, descends, and ascends into a higher glory, and the highest pitch of a Chri∣stian's life is Christ risen and sitting,☞ at the right hand of God. In this forme hee silences the Doctors, whips out buyers and sellers too out of the Temple (turnes out mixed multitudes) teaches in the Synagogues (or Parishes) yea and works mi∣racles, and yet for all that the Pharisees (of the Synagogues) do slander him, and seek to crucifie him, as we said before; so that in a Forme he is capable of suffering too, espe∣cially when his people are inslaved by an inforced uniformity, for which Antichrist makes use of Secular powers. But God hath in all ages powred his Vnction (the Spirit) upon some of his choisest servants to oppose Vniformity enforced;Gerson. and John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris a hundred years before Luthers time, layes about him hard, to beat down this Antichristian doctrine of Vniformity, or tying all to a Forme. For in his
Sermon before the King of France (pro pace & unione Graecorum) in his seventh Consideration, he sayes, Men ought not to be bound up to beleeve and hold one and the same manner of Government in things that doe not immediately concerne the truth of faith, and the Gospel of Christ; (and saith) he,Forms are not to be enforced, but left to li∣berty. were this well observed it would be the principal key to open a door of peace and love, and union among all dif∣ferent brethren, and Churches, and now between the Greeks and La∣tines who differ in many actions and forms, and rites, and rules. As for BAPTISME, the Latines say, I baptise thee; but the Greeks say, Let us this servant be baptized, &c. So for the SVPPER, the Latines will have leavened bread, the Greeks unleavened bread; but sayes he, Let every Province, and Church be at liber∣ty about in his owne sense, and use his owne order and forme. Our Fathers before the Flood lived and worshipped in one Form; after the Flood in another, before the Law in one, and under it in another, and after it, under the Baptist in another, un∣der the ministration of Christ in the flesh in another, under the Gospel in another;☜ under the dispensations of the Spirit another way, &c. as Heb. 1, 1, 2. divers wayes, and in sundry manners. Now all such Formes (as Gerson speaks of, and of such I speak) why they are left free to use or not use (as there is need of them) without tyes; wherefore no Forme should be so ur∣ged or pressed upon any brother or Saint, as to despise, judge, cast him out, or keep him off if he come not up to it, and under it (which is a yoke to him who is not free;) Now, wee must willingly lay them aside, rather then lay them on any as a burthen; for even Gods owne Ceremonies, Eph. 2.15. and Commandements were laid aside, and put by to make peace and unity, that there might not be any difference among brothers; no not between Jew and Gentile (so far off) but that they might be one.Gods forms laid aside for peace and union, much more must ours. Much more must all our Formes (for of such I speake all this while, let none mistake me) they must much rather be throwne aside, then thrust on any Saint whatsoever. Fa∣mous is the answer of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to Lucius K. of Brittain (as Hollinshed in his Description of Brittaine, chap. 7 Anno 187. historifies) when the Gospel began to be preached freely, and Brittaine received the faith, and without any
impeachment,☞ impediment, or Ceremonies at all; yet King Lucius sends to Eleutherius for some model, or forme of Church-government, who had this answer. That Christ hath left suffici∣ent order in the Scriptures for the government of his Church: you require, saith he, Our Forms and Laws; but our Laws are faulty, Gds Laws are never so, take the Scriptures, and look you out a government there, and follow that. So that this was rare, even from a Bishop of Rome himselfe (being the fourteenth after Platina's Arithmeticke) but it seems in those dayes they were more modest then they were afterwards, when they haled in, and hoised up humane inventions, and would make men submit to them, or else censure them; yea I may say, then they are in these dayes, that doe even grate their teeth, and hate at their heart, such tender conscientious Saints as doe but doubt or question their injunctions and Precepts;Like Turks, when forms must not be questioned. and surely this were fitter for the Turkes, for it is among them, that a man must not question (no not on pain of death, and damnation) their general received Religion and Ceremonies, whereby they enjoy a (pace pudendo) peace which we may be ashamed of; but this it is, among men of form, they are afraid lest their Idols should be loathed when they are knowne.Many Profes∣sors Idolaters. There is a great deal of Idolatry yet in England; as when your Formalists set up any forme, or thing, in the room of God, which is not God;Perkins. that is done, sayes Mr. Perkins upon Gal. 5. three wayes: 1 When the God-head is ascribed to a meer creature, as it was said of Herod, The voice of God, and not of man. 2 When the property of the God-head is ascribed to the creature, or thing, or forme, Act. 12.22. And thirdly, when the heart and affections are given up to  the creature, Col. 3.5. or Forms, when they make Idols of them.Act. 12.22. Forms Idols. An Idol is taken two wayes: 1 A thing devised, a fiction, a humane forme or inven∣tion. 2 When we conceive of a Forme otherwise then it is; Thus many have their Idols up, in this age, which God will downe with to the dust in the next: Though they say, Oh, they are holy, spiritual! as Col. 2.20, 21, 22. what dif∣ference
is between the Papists worshipping God in images, and the Presbyters, and some others in their formes? which they adore so, and set up in the room of Christ, and his Spirit; is not this Idolatry? When Phaedra lay with Hippolytus,Sim. she protested that she embraced Theseus in him,Featly Serm. p. 491. whom hee so neerly resembled; but yet this freed her not from being an Adulteresse: so Papists say, they worship not the Image, but the person in it, not the Crucifix but Christ: so say others, we doe not so adore the circumstance, but the substance, the forme, but the thing; but alas! this does little quit them from the guilt of spiritual Adultery, viz. Idolatry. O then! they are in a high blame, and Articles of high Treason might bee compiled against them▪ that thus stiffely stand up for Vniformity of ne∣cessity; and such doe but let their nayles grow long to scratch the truth with. In every Forme there is weaknesse,Sim. and in some degree or other a tincture of the flesh,The occasion of Form selfe Divi∣sion, &c. For the occasion of them is our darknesse, weaknesse, and imperfection. Now it is Gods designe to purge all forms from their dregs and filthinesse, for they are full; wherefore let not them under one forme judge or condemne them that are under another; for the wisdome which is contained in every one of these administrations is justified onely by her own children, and the refiners fire shall (shortly) have about with them all, and burne up all: in the mean time urge your forms upon none, for all must cease in time, though use∣ful for the time. Vse. Exhort to two things. First, we must not cast off the present use of Forms (whilst they are in date) though wee  must not Idolize them, adore them, urge,1 Not altoge∣ther to despise or throw by forms, for they are useful. and force them on others. For as lace sets out the Garment, so do some Formes, Ceremonies, Orders, &c. adorne, and not obscure (if they be not abused, if they be not laid on too thick and many) the substance of Gods service. Now, I say, we must not in stead of paring the nailes (which indeed ought to be) be too covetous at first, and cut the fingers of the Church, or make her hands bleed; no, not although her nailes were too long, too strong, too ugly, blacke, and uncomely, Let all things be done in decency, and in order.
Secondly, All Saints we must receive and love, Eph. 1.15. that are in the faith with us Eph. 4.5. for all Saints be∣fore,2 To receive all Saints that are in the same faith. under, and since the Law, Abraham, Moses, David, Apostles, Saints in all ages under all Formes, and Opi∣nions, and Measures (though never so much different) to this houre; yea and all that were, are, and are to come, live in one and the same (mystery of) faith, in one and the same Christ apprehended by faith; For as the Branches of the Vine though some are higher,Sim. and some lower, some bigger, and some lesser, &c. yet they all alike possesse of the same life, though some come one yeare, some another, yet they all (equally) live the life of the Vine, the little twig that came out but this yeare as well as the greatest Branch that came out many yeares agone, all live the same life of the Vine; so in faith there is unity and equality all (in all ages, of all opinions, and under all Formes yet, all) live the same life of Christ. Now let us not stand at a distance about trifles, as upon shadowes, whilest wee live all in one Faith, one Christ; Wee know the lower the Sunne is, the longer the shadow is, but the higher it is, the shadow is the shorter: So it is here, the more wee have of (Christ) the Sunne, and the substance, the lesse wee see or minde the shadow, or the Circumsance. And it is because men have the Sunne be∣hinde them, but let us keep the Sunne before us (with our faces toward▪ and full eyes on Jesus Christ) and then wee shall keepe the shadow behinde us, and walk as Children of light indeed. O then, deare friends! doe not stand so much upon a Circumstance,Sim. in receiving in the Brethren! for beleeve it,Why men and Churches are so formal. they are Carnal Churches of men (more then of Christ) that doe so much trouble themselves, and stumble others about outward things. Hence it is that all must doe as they would have them to a tittle, or else they, shal presently be posted up for Hereticks or erroneous persons at the least; and many times men are crosse, and love to be singular, and to oppose others in their practise and opinions, though without any grounds
at all. As it is related of certaine Islanders neer China, who will salute by putting off their shooes, because they of China doe it by putting off their hats; so some out of crossenesse to others (that they love not) will differ from them, though they runne into grosse errours and great absurdities thereby, which are more ridiculous then religious. But let us not looke for shadowes in the room of the Sunne, or empty formes for the righteousnesse, peace,Sim. and joy in the Holy Ghost. Such as are sound in the faith wee must admit, for the worship of the Temple must be measured. Hence it is that the Church must bee satisfied that they are Beleevers, and in the true faith of our Lord Jesus, whereof every member whom they admit, doe give in some evidences, or make some account, or other; whereby the Church rests satisfied.All that are found in faith must be ad∣mitted, for all their judge∣ments in things indifferent. Thus wee did in Dublin, the Confessions of faith (so called) made by some, lying much of this Forme which fol∣lowes, and is the same for matter and substance made by all.
An Account of Faith, as it was made and given in by word of Mouth, on the Eighth day of the Eighth Moneth, 1651. In a Publick Meeting-place at Dublin, upon his entrance into Church-fellowship there, By J. R. &c. I Acknowledge and profess from my very heart, before the Lord, and you all here present, That I do believe there is but one God; who is omnipotent, omniscient, omni-pre∣sent,1 Cor. 8.5, 6. Joh 8 17, 18, 19. 1 Iohn 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Matth. 28.19, 20. and an infinite and all-glorious Being; and distinguished into three subsistences, or (if that word offend) I will say into three personal proprieties and relations, according to his se∣veral operations and administrations; namely, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The Father is of himself; the Son proceedeth from the Father; and the Spirit from them both. And although the Saints cannot take hold of God,Rom 1.19, 20. as God in∣comprehensible, and inapprehensible; yet they know him as a Father, as a Son, as a Spirit, dwelling in them; and so far as his several attributes makes him known to them. 1 The Father. Isa. 40.28. & 43.15. 1 Peter 4.19 Rom 3.14. 2 Chro. 20 6. Psalm 66.7.First, Concerning the first Person (so called) of the Tri∣nity, or God the Father; that he is the great Creator and Governor of all things in Heaven and Earth; eternally distinct (as in himself) from all Creatures (as Creatures) in his ab∣solute Being, and absolute Well-Being. And that this God shall judge the World. But, Secondly, Concerning the second in the Trinity, the Son, Jesus Christ,2 The Son. Acts 10.42, 43. Isaiah 45.21, 22 1 Iohn 5 29. Isaiah 9.6, 7. 1 Tim. 2.5. 1 Iohn 4.2, 3. 2 Iohn 7. of whom Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles wrote; and in whom all the Scriptures are, and shall be fulfilled: I believe him, as he is both God and Man, making a compleat Mediator; and as God equal to the Father, as Man of the tribe of Judah, the line of David, the seed of Abraham, and born of Mary, &c. And as both the onely Mediator between God and Man; And he was from everlasting (and yet) as
Man from the Womb, he was separated, called, appointed, and anointed most fully with all gifts and graces,Hs Offices. 1 Prophet. Mich 5.4. Malachi 3.1. Deut. 18.15. Acts 3.22, 2. Isaiah 54.13. 2 Priest. Hebr. 9.12, 14. & 10.3, 10. Ephes. 5.2. 1 Peter 1.24. Iohn 10.15. Col. 2.14, 15. Isaiah 53.12. Heb. 12.24. 3 King. First, n gene∣ral. Mtth. 28.18. Psalm 2.6. Psalm 45.6. Hb. 8.8. Isaiah 9.6, 7. Rev. 2.26, 27. Secondly, In particular. Matth. 2.2. Luke 1.33, 74, 75. Luke 19.27. Phil. 2.9. Haggai 2.7. Heb. 12.27, 28. Isaiah 45.22. Micah 4.2, &c. necessary for all mankinde. Concerning his Offices, That he is King, Priest, and Pro∣phet, First, As the Prophet, he hath revealed his Fathers whole will, so far as is necessary to Salvation in his Word and Ordinances, and speaks it to his Church and Saints, by his Word and Spirit. Secondly, As Priest being consecrated for us▪ he hath appeared to put away sin, and hath offered himself the sacri∣fice for the sins of the people, once for all; laying down his life for his sheep, and he hath absolutely abolished all legal and Ceremonial rites and shadows, and is now entred into the Holy of Holies, and sits at the right hand of glory, making intercession for us. Thirdly, As King; in general all power is given him in Heaven and Earth, and he doth exercise his power, over men and Angels, good and bad, for the safety of his Saints, and destruction of his enemies, till he hath made them all his foot-stool. In particular, that Christ is King over his Church, and shall reign on Earth spiritually, in the hearts of his Saints; and by his Word and Spirit, he gathers all his peoples together from Idolatry, Superstition, Darkness, &c. into his own Spiritual way of worship and holiness; and brings them to the Father, and by his Spirit he makes them a peculiar people, a royal Priesthood, a holy generation, and instructs and governs them by his Laws, prepared for his Church, and people. Thirdly, Concerning the Spirit (the third of the Trinity) that he is sent by the Father and the Son to make application of the whole work of Redemption,3 The Spirit. Iohn 16.13, 14. Eph. 1.13, 14. & 4.30. Zach. 9.11. Malachi 3.1. Heb. 10.29. & 13.20. & 8▪ 6.8, 9. to those whom the Father hath given to the Son, by his decree; and whom the Son hath brought to the Father, by his blood, according to the everlast∣ing Covenant, made between the Father, and the Son; which the Spirit carries on to us, as the Covenant of Free-grace, for our Salvation; By the operation of this holy Spirit in me.
This Grace was begun first by and through the Law which awakned me so,Iohn 16.8, 9. Rom 8.2. Rom. 4.8. as that I saw I was lost, and undone for ever; and then by the Gospel, whereby Christ was revealed to me (and in me by his Spirit,) and his righteousness cleared up mine (But of this hereafter.) Iohn 15.26.This Spirit applyed Christ Jesus, (as far as I knew him) manifested to, and in me; by which, I was brought at length to close with Christ; and that so unfainedly, that I resolved to loose all before Christ.) So such are, First, by Christs righ∣teousness justified; Secondly, by his Spirit adopted sons; Thirdly,Rm. 8.16▪ & 1.4. by his Grace sanctified and really changed to the piety and purity of Gods holy Image (gradually;) and Fourthly, Glorified and changed from misery to happiness; which begins in the inward sence of Gods soul-melting love to them in Christ; from whence, is the hope of glory, and assurance of salvation,Gal. 5.22, 23. 1 John 5.7. joy, peace, and happiness within, &c. Fifthly, Concerning the Scriptures in Old and New Testa∣ment,5 Scriptures. Psalm 147.19, 20. Iohn 5 39. 2 Cor. 1.13. Acts 26.22. 2 Tim. 3.16 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Gal. 6.16. they are the Word of God, as they were writ and in∣dited by the holy Spirit; and that they are the standing rule left us, both for our knowledge and practise, doctrine, and Discipline, here below. Sixthly, I believe, that by the first Adams disobedience we all fell, and that we are all by nature the children of wrath, dead in sins and trespasses; and that those who live and dye in their sins,6 Man. Eph. 2.1, 3. Iohn 3.3, 4. Acts 17.30, 31. Rom. 8.13. cannot be saved, nor any without regeneration or new birth. Seventhly, Concerning the Church of Christ, I know it is but one Body, Universal, and Catholick, and that is of all Saints,7 The Church. Eph. 4.4. Invisble and Universal. 1 Cor. 12.27, 28 past, present, and to come, invisible and visible, yea, spiritual and formal: But this I also believe, that God hath left a rule in his Word for Particular Congregational Churches here upon Earth, as the visible, to make up his one intire and universal Body. 8 Churches visible and con∣gregational. 1 Cor. 12.20. Col.  19.Eighthly, Now concerning Christs particular Churches, I believe as I have preached and proved such a Church to be a Fellowship called out of the world, and united to Christ, As Members to the head, and all one with another; according
to the Word, for the worship of God,Eph 2.21, 22. Matth. 28.20. Eph 4.29. 1 Thes. 5.11. Iohn 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 19. Revel. 18.4. Psal 110.3. Isai. 2 2, 4. 2 Cor. 8.5. Acts 11.23. Mal. 3.16. Iude 20. Hb 10.24, 25. Acts 6 3. & 14.23. Exo. 20.24. 1 Kings 9.3. Isaiah .5, 6. & 25.6, 7, 8. Psal 132.13, 14, 15. Revel. 2.1. 2 Co. 6.8. Cant. 4.16. & 6.2, 3. & 7.12. Isai. 33.17, 20. Psal. 122.3. and the edification one of another; and that such must be separate from false ways, worships, Antichristian superstitions, observancies, &c. and willingly joyn in Christian Communion, and Co∣venant, or resolution of cleaving close to the Lord in this his way, with purpose of heart, and by free confession of their Faith, and subjection to the Gospel; and therein espe∣cially, I believe, That the Ordinances of Christ are to be free∣ly and frequently dispenced; as preaching, praying, pro∣phecying one by one, Singing of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiri∣tual Songs, Sacraments, Censures, Offices, and Officers, and often and ordinary exercising of gifts. And that there is a chusing of, and setting apart Officers by the whole Body, and that none doth orderly do the office of a Minister among them, but such; and besides (to omit many other things) and bring all up in this rear, I do really be∣lieve, that such orderly Churches, have priviledges royal, oracles, and seals, and precious promises of Gods love▪ presence, and protection, in a special mnner, more then all the world besides: And although particular Churches be distinct and Independent Bodies, even as Cities compact. Temples, Houses, &c. yet all Churches must walk by the same rule, and have counsel and comfort, and help from one another, when need requires; as being all Members of one Body, of which Christ is the Head. And to conclude, I am fully perswaded in my very soul, that at the day of judgement, when the dead shall arise,Iohn 5.28. 1 Cor. 15.19. Acts 17 30, 31. 2 Tim. 2.18. Heb. 12.23. that I shall arise also, and shall rejoyce in Jesus Christ my Saviour and reign with him for ever, and sing Hallelujah for all Eter∣nity, in the Congregation of the first-born; where the Spirits of just men are made perfect. And this is my Faith, fetched from my vry heart, and pre∣sented in the hearing of a heart-searching God, and all of you here present. Thus after satisfaction is given to the Church of their sound faith, I finde no other thing necessary for this fifth Chapter; wherein I have been prolix, but I hope profitably.
CHAP. VI.  Chasid. Every oe to be ADMITTED, gives out some EXPE∣RMENTAL Eviences of the work of GRACE upon his SOUL (for the Church to judge of) whereby he (or she) is convinced that he is regenerate, and received of God, which is proved and approved by about forty examples of worth. Grace in a convert disco∣vered two wayes.IT is said of Christ Mark. 7.24. That he could not be hid, nei∣ther can grace, nor the Spirit of Christ; which is known (vel per revelationem, vel per operationem) either First, by Revela∣tion, as when God reveals it to a poor soule (under extraor∣dinary sad temptations, and soule-miseries) by extraordinary wayes,1 More extra∣ordinary. many times in dreams, and visions, and voices, &c. (all which you shall finde instanced by and by) this way to some he takes,2 More ordi∣nary. to comfort them, and recover them, and to acquaint them as he did Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. that his grace was sufficient for them. Or else secondly, by the operation of the Spirit (& per aliqua signa) in the wonder-working, and changing effects of grace; for then thou hatest those lusts that hinder thee of Christ, and then thou longest vehemently after Christ, and lovest the meanes of grace, and livest in the workes of grace, and findest a great change in thy judge∣ment,☞ will, and affections now, and canst look up chear∣fully as to thy Father now (being delivered from the bond∣age of feare) and canst come with an humble boldnesse by the Spirit of adoption, and say, Father, I want a new Coat (I must have one, viz. Christs garment) and I must have a
new Booke, viz. the Book of life, &c.) and thou canst finde a power in thee (more then before) for to resist sinne and temptation, and a readinesse to obey, Act. 2.41. and do any thing for God, out of fondnes and sincerity of love to him;Of both those wayes excel∣lent examples follow. yea thou contemnest worldly things, and thinkest them below thee; and eatest hidden manna, Rev. 2.17. and hast the white stone, and the new name which none knows but he that receives; the sweetnesse of which thou tastest, and canst tell it by ex∣perience, which is by no others to be known. And such kinde of experiences I could produce abundance, and intended it, but that I am this very week prevented by a little piece, tituled, Spiritual experiences of sundry Beleevers, recommended by Mr. Powel; yet how ever I shall instance in some of both these sorts of Experiences in such as are the most remarkable and picked out, as they were given in at Dublin by such as were admitted; the rather for that I finde not the like of some of them ever put forth for publick advantage;☜ and I beleeve they are some of the flowers of the Spring in these dayes. But before this, we must prove this practise warantable out of the word of God;Experiences prove prin∣ciples. for I would not willingly offer any thing, but what is Gods owne, and in Gods order. Now to a poore soule, all such things as are in the soule, are made known by experiences; experience, we say, proves prin∣ciples. A mans principles are known and experienced by his actions, as we know how the will stands, by what it wills (Homo pr actus experitur principia intrinseca.Proved by) But to the thing it will appear by the word, that the Saints are to hold out their experiences to others, yea in the open Congregations,Precepts. and then we shall shew you the reasons, and so to the examples, to the proofes first, by precept and practise; by precept, as Matth. 8.4. when Christ had cleansed the Leper, he bid him oe, and shew it for a testimony; and Matth. 28.7 the Angels bid Mary Magdalen goe quickly and tell the Disciples, that Christ (whom yee seeke) is risen, Go tell them it; and Verse 10. Christ meeting with the Maries, renews the precept, Goe tell them (my brethren, for all that I am risen, yet they are my bre∣thren) Goe tell them, &c. for now yee know it, and have
seen me,Jews practse now. and can assuredly say that I am risen. Joel 1.3 Tell your children, and let their children tell your children, and their children another generation; And this is observed among the Jewes at this day out of Deut. 6.7. and to adde more so∣lemnity to the commemoration of Gods Law,Vide the Hist. of Iews by Leo Modena ch. p. 2. and their delive∣rance from Aegypt, &c. they write it downe in a peece of Parchment, and then rowling it up, superscribe it  shaddai and fastened it to the wall, or the post of the doore, the right hand of the entrance; and as often as thy goe in and out, they touch it, and kisse it with great affection and devotion. This also lyes commanded, Psal. 34.8. Come taste and see that the Lord is good, and 1 Thess. 5.11. Comfort your selves together, and edifie one another, even as alo ye doe. This is excellent to edifi∣cation and consolation, to tell what God hath done for thy soul! for hereby many receive benefit, and may meet with the like; and other comforts, who have met with the like. 2 Proved by Practie in primitive timesBesides, there be abundance of Scriptures to prove the practise of this, as in Psal. 26.6, 7. I will tell of all thy wondrous works; yea Psal. 66.19. Come and heare (sayes he) all yee that feare the Lord, and I will declare what he hath done for my soule; for Verse 19. Verily God hath heard me, and hath not turned away his mercy from me; So that it is no new thing to tell our experiences in publicke to the whole Church,Expos. and in the society of Saints. I wish it were more in practise; for the rich discoveries of grace in Christ, and many wonderfull various wayes of Gods working in these dayes in his Saints would thereby be laid open.Expos. But see further, Psal. 18 30. The way of God is perfect (sayes David) God is a rocke, faithfull, &c. How knowest thou this, David? O sayes he, I have tried it, the word of the Lord is tryed; I can tell it by experience, and I know that he is a buckler to all that trust in him. And David, Psal. 51. pro∣mises,Expos. that as soon as his broken bones were healed, and the joy of his salvation was restored to him, Verse 12.13. that he would presently preach it, and teach even sinners Gods wayes, to give them warning of uncleannesse, sinne, &c. and to tell them what it is to lye in hell,Expos. horror, to have a wounded spirit, an accusing conscience, and the judgements of an angry frowning God. Thus also 2 Cor. 5.11. Wee knowing the terror of the Lord,
(that is, by terrible things which would make a man tremble, and his heart ake) we perswade men () we tell them the condition we were in, and now how wee are out, on pur∣pose to perswade them to beleeve in God, and to get out of their carnal condition;Expos. for presidents sometimes doe prevaile before precepts; so that this is no novelty to declare the con∣dition which we have been in, and are in; Taste and see, the mercy, grace, and love of God in Christ in the Gospel, by pardon, peace, reconciliation, assurance, or whatsoever is to be tasted, as Dr. Ames observes on 1 Pet. 2.3. if so be ye have tasted how gra∣cious the Lord is () not onely taken grace (for so many do) but tasted grace (per metonymiam effecti) and found experimentally feelingly, feedingly how it tastes: O then,Dr. Ames. you will say, O it is good! O this is sweet! and say to others, Come and taste! The Israelites, when they had tasted the manna, they called it Angels food, but before they sleighted it, What is this? Thus Psal. 119.103. but why should we taste it, and tell it to others? There be divers Reasons, both with re∣ference to God, the Church, and those Saints themselves that doe enjoy them, why they should declare them to the Church. First, It is a bearing the best (outward) testimony to God and his Attributes that can be,It is muh for Gods glory. Sibs his Mariage feast pag. 103. when we can say by experience that God is gracious, loving, slow to anger, ready to forgive, that he is true and faithful, for we have tryed him, and therefore know it, Psal. 18.30. But on the other side, it is the want of this that makes us call his care, and his truth, and his mercy and love so often into question, especially in times of trials, (as Sibbs sayes in his soule-conflicts, chap. 18.) in Joh. 15.27. and ye shall beare witnesse (sayes Christ) because ye have been wt to mee from the beginning () ye shall witnesse upon your owne knowledge (the word is) not from hear-say,Expos▪ but have-say, from your own experiences, yee shall testifie even before the Judge in the eye, and ears of all the people, that I am full of grace, light, life, and salvation. You shall know it by experience, and witnesse to his truth, faithfulnesse, righteousnesse, justice, mercy, &c. And though a thousand should deny it, a child of God that can say by experience, that God is a good
God,☞ the word is a true word, his love is a most soul-ravishing, and never-ending love, and the like; and his hand helped me, his blood cleansed, cured, comforted me, his owne good will restored me; Oh, such a one opens the mouths of many to praise the Lord! Psal. 35.18.27. and to beleeve in the Lord, Joh. 17.21.23. Jo. 11.48. Act. 3.9. Luke 18.43. Secondly, It is needful for the Churches benefit too, to set upon this duty to declare experiences of Gods worke on the soule,It is much for the Churches advantage. and that for these several Reasons which follow, As 1 To know (so far as may be judged by the effects) who are the Elect of God.1 In judging of such as ae Gods. 1 Thess. 1.4. beloved of God (that is by the judgement of charity, not of infallibility) for none can say for certainty thou art a Saint, or elect, but so far as we judge and beleeve in Vers 5. the proof of Election lyes in Vocation,☞ and ye know what manner of men we were, sayes he; so that the Church was endued with a spirit of discerning, 1 Cor. 12.10. Now such as the Church beleeves to be called of God, she be∣leeves to be of the election of grace,Election is a mystery. Rom. 11.5. and such she must admit. Now to make Election sure (as 2 Pet. 1.10.) and cleare, we must make our Vocation sure, and Calling clear, 2 Tim. 1.9. where it is called a Holy calling, that is from sin, to grace, Tit. 2.11, 12. from darknesse to light, 1 Pet. 2.9. from former sins,Sim. and lusts, to holy life, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. and by this our election is knowne. To open which note, know that Election it selfe is secret and mysterious, as it lyes in the decree, it is from all Eternity. Now poor man must needs bee lost, to look what was done from all Eternity, in the secret conclave, and councell of Heaven; a Being that is spanned by time cannot reach to it; his Decrees are kept close under locke and key (till it is time to open them;Sim.) wherefore I finde it not praise-worthy in them that so distract themselves, and others by their curious disquisitions, and nice disputations in this point. For our way to have the fruit of it, is not to dig deep, and to search to the root, but to reach to the boughs and bran∣ches thereof.☞ Sim. So look out, and take hold on the Holy calling; For the head of Nilus cannot be found out,Made known by Vocation. but the many sweet issues and Springs of that (hidden) head are found out,
and known: So though the Head is secret, and kept hid, yet the Springs break out, in our vocations, and holy obedience and conversation (as Adams on Peter P. 210. hath it) for a River may runne a great while,Adams. and a great way under ground, but in time, and in some place it breaks out,Sim. and runs openly: So the Decree may bee hid and secret for a while, but the streams break out in Vocations, which is the way from Predestination to Glorification, Rom. 8.30. This cuts off that absurd, sottish,☜ and soule-overwhelming opinion of many poor wretches, who say, if I am decreed to bee saved,Obj. then I may live as I list, for I am sure I shall be saved if it be decreed; but if it be decreed I shall be damned, why I shall bee damned doe what I can, and my best way is to live in pleasure, loving and serving my selfe here,Answ. for I am sure all my care cannot alter Gods counsel. Oh, alas! how subtil is the Devil! but does the Word say thus? no! but the Word sayes, If God have decreed thy salvation as elect, why then thou shalt walke in the way of salvation, and then thou art decreed to be called (as well as saved) from sin to grace, to a holy life, from all uncleannesse, 1 Thess. 4.7. to sanctification. Origen makes mention of one sicke, who was perswaded by a friend not to send for a Physitian; for saith he,Origen. if it be appointed you shall dye, the Physitian cannot helpe you; if it be appointed you shall live, you doe not need him, but shall live without him; Nay, Sir, (answered hee) but if I be appointed to live, I will use the means (which are also appointed thereunto) for such an appointment to take effect. Now I say there is a strict,Election from eternity. Vocation in time. Salvation in the Dee be∣fore sanctifi∣cation, but in the execution of the decree, sanctification is before salva∣tion. Dr. Twisse. and inseparable connexion be∣twixt Election and Vocation, and Vocation is a comment upon Election. The letter (sayes Culverwel in his White-stone) was dated from Eternity, but the Superscription was writ in time, viz. Vocation, now though the Letter be writ first, yet the Superscription is read first, and then the other is unsealed and read, the  that was in Election, well becomes (saith he)  in Vocation. Doctor Twisse on the point of Predestination, telling us how God is not guided by second causes, in any of his Decrees, and how nothing in us was the cause of his Decree concern∣ing
us, be it what it will; yet sayes he in the execution of his Decree (which is in time) there is another order; for to in∣stance in the Decree it selfe, from Eternity, glory is first, Sal∣vation is first ordained, which produces grace and sanctifica∣tion; but in the execution of the Decree (in tempore) grace is be∣fore glory, and sanctification before salvation, as was said before of the Letter, the Superscription is first read though last writ. Wherefore I say (for to this end I speake it) that it is al∣together irregular and anomalous,☞ and out of our order, for any to pry, and pore, and peek first out for Election, and that would first look into the Decree. How the Church is to jude of  Elect.Now would the Church know (so far as they are able in charity, for they cannot on certainty) and wouldst thou know whether thou art an elect received of God, decreed to be sa∣ved; it is not to search the records in heaven first, but the records in thy heart first (for what is bound on earth, is bound in heaven; and loosed on earth, is loosed in heaven) how is it with thy heart?Sim. art thou called yet? changed yet? art thou holy? hast thou left off thy ill courses, companies, conditions, &c. for where there is fire, there is heat; and where there is true vocation, there is (inseparably) sanctification, and holy life; would we know if the Sun shine, why we shall not need to climbe up into the clouds,Sim. to clamber to the skies; no! but look upon the beams shining on the earth. That Astrologer, sayes one, was sufficiently laughed at, that looking so in∣tensely upon the Stars, and staring with so much amazement at their twinkling,Sim. tumbled (unawares) over head and eares into the water; whereas, had it pleased him to have looked lower in the water, he might have seen them lively represented in that Christal glasse; so many doe but undo themselves, and are over head and ears,☞ that look so high at first, as to search the secret will, which they shall easily see in sanctification, and regeneration revealed. And as a Father that resolves one son shal be his heir, which shal be he (amongst many) he saith not, (but keeps that secret) yet so far reveals his minde,☞ that it shall be he that observes him in obedience to his commands;Sim▪ so God, though he hath kept secret who they be that shall bee saved, and whom he hath elected (he locks this up in his own
bosome) yet he hath revealed it thus far, that such shall bee holy, obedient to his Gospel, beleeve in Christ Jesus; these effects, Election brings forth, and we are not able to judge of the cause, but by the effects.And judges of the cause by the effects and means. The order of telling expe∣riences. So that when poore soules powre out their experiences, and tell the means, and shew the effects of their Call; we cannot but (in the judgement of charity) beleeve the cause of this their Call, their faith, their holinesse, is the Decree of Election, Eph. 2.10. 2 Pet. 2.8, 9, 10. and that they shall attaine to the end, viz. Salvation. Now I say, in the powring out Experiences they acquaint the Church with the means, and the effects. And you will finde both these in the examples that follow, where they tell their preparation and qualification. In their preparation, 1 When they came to be taken off of sin, selfe, world, lusts, or the like, some at one houre,1 Preparation. some at ano∣ther, some in the night; some in the day, some at home,1 When, the time? some abroad; some when younger; some when older (but that is most seldome.) And secondly, how? some more violently,2 How▪ the means? the Lord came in the thunders, stormes, fire on Mount Sinai, and in fright∣full flashes of lightning, like a Ghost, a Destroyer, a judge, in flaming vengeance,To bring them down into hell. roaring like a Lion robbed of whelps to many; In afflictions, crosses, losses, dangers, frights, threatnings of Law, terrors of Hell, and the damned roaring in their ears, & in such dispensations as cut to the heart, pierced to the quicke, sharp, and fetched blood from the soule, wounded the conscience,Mr Rogers. Mr. Fenner. with a thousand stabs, as Act. 2.37. such Sermons Mr. Rogers of Dedham, Fenner preached, &c. But secondly, others more gently were won in by love, cheries, promises, warme tenders of the blood of Christ, lively openings of a crucified Christ, which melt their soules, and make their hearts bleed, and mourne to look up unto him, whom they have pierced, by such Sermons as Sibbs, Crispe, &c. preached. Thus they were brought low, wounded in spirit, broken in heart,To bring  down into ▪ Dr. Sibs. Dr. Crspe. and with fresh bleeding wounds weep (though some more, some lesse) for a Christ their Lord, but they know not where he is laid, Joh. 20.15. and know not where to look for him, but sometimes are afraid, and flye off, and on, and up and down,
and here and there, under a thousand temptations, being in a (holy preparing) desperation, and utterly undone in their own sight and sense, till by some Ordinance, Promise or other; Providence or other; the Lord ministers comfort, and by his secret Spirit whispers pardon, and peace, and joy abundantly, and brings them to Jesus.And to raise them up into heavenly pla∣ces in Christ Jesus. O then they say with Mary, Rabboni! My Lord, have I found thee! Oh what sweet claspings! and clo∣sings, and ravishing embracings! and kisses of love, and ban∣quets, and flaggons! are betwixt Christ and such soules then!—none can expresse it!Sim. O but it is best knowne by enjoying! It is said in Samuel f many multitudes in Sauls Army,But fw so. 1 King. 31. that onely a few bankrupt undone beggars came to David in the Cave of Auam; and indeed, it is true here, none but a few undone soules▪ poore beggars, that have spent all, lost all, wounded Cripples, broken-hearted Publicans▪ troubled Hanna's weeping, sobbing, sighing (and yet seeking) Maries, and sin-feeling soules that come to Christ; and that are cast in upon him through meer misery and want, and thus prepared for him▪ are received of him,☞ Joh. 6.37. Mat. 12.20. Mark. 5.26. and none can bee put by▪2 Qualifica. By the altera∣tion that is in them▪ and such like effects. that thus come. The second is Qualification; In their Experiences, you shall heare how they are changed; O! what a great alteration there is now in them! all old things are passed away, and all things become new!Expos. O what trouble! and signal change they then finde! a new nature! a new heart! new affections! new objects! new smi∣lings, and flowings of light, and love! Oh then they could bee content to dye for God! to lay downe their lives for Christ! yea if it were to be cast to Hell,2 Cor. 1.. so they have but Christ in their armes! their sweet Jesus in their hearts! yea if they thought that hee would not save them, yet they will love him! and serve him! and doe any thing for his sake! and though he slay them, yet they can finde in their hearts to trust in him! and now they forsake all evill wayes, and prize the word (as a hungry man does food) & feed on the Ordinances heartily; and are frequent in prayer and duty, and are able to comfort others in the like case that they have been in; and do all they can to call home others, and to get them into Christ; they are loath to eat their sweet morsels alone, and this makes
them so ambitious of the fellowship of the Saints; all which will appeare in the ensuing Examples; so that it is for this Reson also to satisfie the Church, that they give out their experiences of their Call to Christ. But I shall be briefer. Secondly, by this they are a warning piece shot off in the eares of others, to keep them off from coming into such  sinfull practises, purposes, and perswasions as they were in;To give others warning. Tho. Goodwin so it is in 2 Cor. 5.11. If the rich man (as Thomas Goodwin hath it in his Childe of Light walking in darknesse, pag. 113.) the rich Glutton had gotten but a little while backe againe from hell; O what stories would hee have told his brethren, to have scared them, and frighted them from sin here! heare the like of such, I say, of such as have descended hell! and seen the wonders of God in the deep! O now they are ashore, and lye at anchor, or are safe (through mercy) at harbour in Christ! hark! now they can tell you of the rocks and sands,☜ the sad shelves and storms, the roaring, threatning, surging, waves, and gaping gulfes that they have met with, and been in, and under. And all sinners that live in the like concupiscence, passions, lusts, cove∣tousnesse, pleasures, and the like, must look for the same, and without mercy too; if this be not a Sea-mark for them, seeing they are escaped, and (as it were) rose out of their graves, and returned out of the deep dungeons, and black abyssnesse of endlesse wrath to give them warning, I say, if this will not doe, and they will not beleeve them, then they shal find experience the Mistris of fools. Piscatorictus sapit.Else others shall finde these stories true. The Fisher-man made haste to thrust his hand into his net to take out a Fish, but was instead of a Fish bit with a Scorpion; this made him ever after wiser, and then he had learned to looke before he leaped: So many unwise men are made wise (it may be too late) by too lamentable experience;Sim. and as Robinson (I remember) sayes in his Essayes, page 198.☜ Some who will not beleeve sinne hath so sad a sequel as it hath, till they know it by experience, are like that Physitian Tertullian speakes of, Herophilus by name, who bloodily butchered six hundred men, that he might search into their bodies, and know their natures,Robinson. destroying them to know them,Sim. and murthering man to finde out the na∣ture of man. O monstrous wickednesse!Tertullia▪ but oh more wick∣ed
Monsters! that are so mercilesse to their owne soules! I say it of such, who will not learne the nature of sinne so as to avoid it, till fatally destroyed by it, and then they will learne by experience indeed (wofull experience) when others warning will doe no good, no not though the dead doe (as it were) rise again to give them warning;☞ neither will they re∣gard the rough checks of their consciences within them, but will stil go on; they are like the Flye, which though it hath scorched its back, and burnt its wings in buzzing about the (candle) flame,Sim. againe and againe, yet it will venture againe, and still to it,Till buied in the flame, some will take no warning. till it be burnt downe, and buried in the flame: I say, so many mad men, who will take no warning till they be burnt, and burning and buried alive in the flames of hell!— O sad, when Examples, and such as these too, told by experience, in∣struct not! God teacheth as well by them as by Precepts (saith Mr. Rogers on the good Samaritan,Mat. 5.12. Mr. Nehemiah Rogers (my ho∣noured father) in his Parables Ardeus. page 222.) And the two senses of learning, viz. seeing and hearing have both enough to doe to instruct them by such experienced examples, as are now before them (Et scripta sunt exempla piorum ad cautelam posteriorum, AR∣DEVS;) wherefore that is the second Reason to warn others. Thirdly, to teach us to suspend our censures, and to forbear prejudicate opinions,To learn o∣thers to for∣bear censuring such. or harsh judgement of such as suspire (and perhaps long too) and aspire under lamentable soule-travel, and heart-pangs! and agony! and afflictions! and temptations! all which Christ suffered, to succour them that are under them! Heb. 2.18. Luke 4 13. Mat. 4.3.11. after which the Angels came and ministred to him. Verse 11. But in the mean time whilst poor soules are set on the racke, and roar under tor∣ments, though they cry out, Oh! they are damned! undone! forsaken of God!☞ &c. yet condemne them not, for even then, they may be the dear children of God, and passe a false sentence upon themselves for some time! so long as they lye under despaire, and in the sense of their own ruinous condition, till they see a repaire in Christ! O how they cry out, O wretched man that I am!Sr. Fran. Spira. Rom. 7.24. & Act. 2.37. & 2 Cor. 12. and as David roared out in his troubles, and said, This is my death, Psal. 77.11. Sir Francis Spira thus des∣paired, but doubtlesse dyed with an interest in Christ. So do in these dayes many, and so you may finde it in that little
Treatise of Experiences before-named, and in these that follow; and yet they were raised out of the fire refined, and out of horrour the more holy; For before we reap in joy, we must sow in tears, Ps. 126.5.6. and for one seed, or tear, we shall reap a whole sheaf of joy, and their joy shall be like the joy in harvest, Isa. 9.3. and as men rejoyce when they divide the spoyle; that is, before they arrive at it, there is a time of great trouble; a seed time before the harvest, a fighting-time before the spoyle.Expos. In the seed-time there is rending and plowing! and trampling and harrowing of the poore earth;Sim. and when all this is done (to look on) you would thinke it a dirty, blacke, barren, piece of ground, for you see no fruits at all upon it. Oh! so it is with the Saints! they have a seed-time, such time as they are rent, and ripped, and torne (as it were) in peeces, and beat! and bruised, and trampled on! and harrowed with sharp cutting goads! and daggers! Act. 2.37. prickt in their hearts,  stabb'd as't were with a world of troubles, wounds, temptations,Saints have a seed-time, and then a harvest. & piercings to the quick; now alas! to look upon them then, to heare how they complaine of themselves then, and of their condition, as if in despaire then,Expos. &c. you would thinke them without hopes in a very sad case, dead, barren, and unprofitable;☜ but alas, the seed is in the ground, and lyes hid (under clods) now, but come afterward in the harvest time, and see then; Oh how white their fields are! what big-bellied crops they then bring forth, Joh. 4.35, 36. what abundance of smiling fruits! flowing and blossoming! grow then upon them! happy are those that reap from them? Surely you will say, here is an alteration indeed, even to admiration! what?☜ is it possible that this can be that same black barren ground, that seemed so rent, torne, uselesse, and disorderly, it is scarce to be beleeved, that it can be the same, when you see such a change. So that before their joy be as the joy in harvest (for others to reap of them too, and get by their Experiences, &c.) they must meet with a Seed-time. And so with a fighting-time too, a time of great troubles, dangers, desperate conflicts against sin, and Sathan, gi∣ving no quarter, but kill or be killed, crying, Arme, Arme;A fighting time, then a conquest. fight for thy life, strike with all thy strength against thy lusts, against their lives with the two-edged sword; O spare none!
none! rout them all! ransacke the Camp! pursue them hard! beat them out of the field! and keep thy ground &c. now it will cost many a blw, a wound, a hazard, a desperate engage∣ment, on all sides before the Saints can come to joy, as those that divide the spoyle;Sim. neither can they come off with∣out wounds;A time of tra∣vel, and then a birth of joy. &c. but then their sorrow () as of a woman in travel, that is full of pangs, &c.) shall be turned into joy, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22. O sweet change! but before this joy, Christ him∣selfe tels them of sorrows, yea of such, as their soules shall bee in travel with bitter, great, sharp pangs (Medea was wont to say, she had rather a thousand times bee slaine in battel,☞ then bring forth one child (mallem peire quam parere) but all tends to the birth of joy (sed finis edulcat media, sayes Keckerman.) Now whilst poor soules are in their pangs; it is neither piety nor charity to censure them;Keckerman. for in so doing, as Asaph sayes, Psal▪ 73.13, 14. you will condemne the generation of the just, and will but gratifie the Devil, to scandalize the wayes of grace in those strict passages which are through the strait-gate; All this will appeare by observing the Saints in their Experiences,☞ whereby as thou mayest learn the way to live in Christ, so thou mayest to avoid the censures of such as psse that way; which is (at first) so full of Difficulties, and dangers, and gulfes, and shelves, and as we say, By weeping-crosse. Fourthly, By their Experiences you will learne how va∣rious God is in his wayes and workings,4 To teach others how variously God works. as Heb. 1.1, 2.  in divers wayes, and sundry manners; for some men he comes to in one way, to some in another; to some as a Lamb, to some as a Lion; to some as a whirlewind, to others as a Noah's-flood,Expos. to others as a flash of light∣ning, to others as a Thiefe in the night; to some by sick∣nesse, to others by crosses and losses, to others by Sermons, &c. he leaves some a while in darknesse where they see no light, Isa. 50.10, 11. in distresses of conscience, and their soules on the rack, where they see no way for deliverance, and others are in dull,Vide Goodwins Child of Light Chap. 12. duskish, imperfect light, whilst their Sunne is in the eclipse; yet some againe he sweetly shines upon even in the morning at their first conversion and Call; and yet their Sunne may be soon over-shadowed; and some that have lesse grace, and
have lived basely, it may be they have (especially at death) splendent, and most radiant shinings, and goe into Christs King∣dome with full sailes, swelling desires, and have abundant en∣trance, whilst others,Means to con∣vert one, not the means to convert ano∣ther. that have walked more strictly with God, and who (you would thinke) should enter more Champion-like, triumphingly and glorious, are fraught with fears, and doubts, and have their Sunne set in a cloud. Now God workes diversly, according to the divers complexions, conditions, constitutions, dispositions, or the like, that he hath to worke upon; because spiritual comforts doe not tend simply ad esse, but bene esse, to the well-being, as well as to the being of a Christian. Now by these Experiences of Saints you wil learn that God hath divers wayes, and divers times, and divers mans to worke with; and some that seem very contemptible too: so that if he doe not worke on thee or thine, one way, hee may another; he knows what means is proper; for that which will helpe this man (may be a wrong means) and it may be will not help that man, or another. Fifthly, Experiences declared do oblige others, and allure them exceedingly to relye upon God, and to beleeve in him, Jo. 11.48. Act. 3.9. &c. For as David sayes in Psal. 22 1, 2.Experiences teach others to trust in God in times of troubles. I cry, I roar, night and day for deliverance; but what argu∣ment doth he make use of? why verse 4▪ 5. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou didst deliver them, they cryed unto thee and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.Expos. Therefore deliver me too, for I trust in thee, Verse 11. so that the experiences which others have had of Gods gracious dealings with them, and deliverances of them, doe encourage David to cast his care upon the Lord too, for the like delive∣rances out of his troubles. So in Psal. 31.24. Be of good cour∣age, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, even as he hath strengthned mine heart, and heard my voice and cryes, as in the verses before; so hee will yours! O all ye Saints!Expos. Thus you shall see in Joh. 4.28, 29. the woman of Samaria ran into the City,Thus Samari∣tan brought in. and told her experiences of the Messiah come, how he told her all things, &c. and loe! how this weake means worked upon a many, and effected a great matter, in verse 39. for the Text sayes, That many of the Samaritans be∣beleeved
on him, because of the sayings of the (poor) woman, though many more in Verse 41. because of his owne word; but I pray marke, what a profitable means the poor womans experiences told were to win them, and to worke upon them to come to Christ;Thus was Junius conver∣ted. and then in Verse 40. they besought Christ to tarry with them: And thus Junius professeth that the very first thing that turned him from Atheisme, and made him beleeve in God, was a Conference with a poore Country-man of his, not far from Florence; and it is obser∣ved in the blackest times of Popery (by Fox Act. &. Mon. fol. 750.767.) when good books and good Preachers were (rarae aves in terris) as rare as Black-swans (almost) yet then did one holy man resort to another,And othes in time of Po∣pery. And in these dayes. and one good neighbour conferring with another, and declaring their experiences to another, did convert him, and by this means the hearts of many were turned to the Lord, and had light in those darke dayes; and I dare boldly say by this means more then a few are convinced,☞ if not converted in these dayes, and some that have said it to me often, have been exceedingly wrought upon by hearing the experiences of others; some informed, others confirmed others confuted by those means, which are of much use; I wish they were as much in use, whereby others might be encouraged to trust in God by hearing what he hath done for our soules. The Church is hereby strengthened in the Experiences of her members, as Act. 4.23. when Peter and John had reported their usage, &c. the Church united the more strongly together, and gathered up all their strength together, Vers. 24.29, 31, 32. against their foes, and for God. The experience of Gods hand and judgement upon Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.11. strucke fear upon all the Church,In Dublin Church expe∣rience, Of prayer an∣swered in a miraculous mercy. and as many others as heard it, that they might beware (cavebis si pavebis.) It is well knowne in Dublin the very first day after embodying, being the thirteenth of the eighth month one thousand six hundred fifty one, the Church met together, and was ratified by a remarkable mercy, and pledge given in; for one of the Brethren (viz. Captain Lieutenant Johnson) his wife was in labour, (which did occasion his absence from us:) she had
been in labour two dayes, and two nights (as I take it, for it is upon record in the Register-booke) and had two Midwives, her danger was great, her paines violent, her death (in the ac∣count of all present) imminent, the Midwives gave her over, friends, husband, all gave her over for a dead woman, that either she, the child, or both, must (unavoidably) perish: and now they had (as it were) no hopes, what does he (her hus∣band) whilst she was on the racke (as it were) roaring, but (finding his owne prayers uneffectual) runnes to the Church (knowing where they were met together) in great haste, as fast as hee could hie, (as we use to say) being much distracted, and disturbed, tells us his wives condition (al∣most past hopes in all appearance) and begs the earnest pray∣ers of the Church at this instant season,☜ that God would bee seen, which the Church did (indeed) I am perswaded with a most hearty, heavenly, united strength; And by a holy violence did prevaile, for her life, and her little one, and begged both alive out of Gods hands to the admiration of all: for that very time to a minute as well as we might guesse, and as we were informed by this brother himself, and others) at that very instant time whilst the Church was so earnest and in∣cessant, she was safely and easily delivered (even to the won∣der of all with her) and soon after well recovered, with her child, and both grew strong again apace, and are well (I hope) both at this hour; This was such an apparent return of prayer, and so seasonable a first-fruits, and pledge of Gods owning us and answering us; that we could not omit, but did as a Church returne thanks and praises for this seasonable experience, whereby the Church was abundantly confirmed in her faith, for future. And to trouble you but with one testimony further, it is not unknowne, what advantage the Devil made of those Divisions which did arise in this Church afterward, by some who threw oyle into the flames (as we heard before in the fourth Chapter) and would but fan downe the fire, to make it mount the higher, untill they had effected (what they sought for) a breach in the Church; after which, wee that held together in order being wounded, and the body being
in paine with the rude rent of seven or eight members from us,Church ex∣perience of prayers an∣swered in ano∣ther parallel mercy upon the Author. the Church was forced to flye to the Physitian to bee healed, and a day of Humiliation being appointed, whilest she was yet bleeding in her green and fresh wounds, our good God who hath promised to hear their cry and to save them, Psal. 145.18, 19. gave them another, and new pledge of his owning of them, and presence with them, which was very pa∣rallel with the former and (as much as to say) hee was with them yet, which hath been an experience full of vertue and force to this day, and the which I hope, I shall never be un∣mindful of, or unthankful for; for it pleased God to visit me with a sore distemper, and such a one as did suborne many doubts concerning me all the night before (this day of humiliation which the Church appointed, being in the last month of the last yeare but one, one thousand six hun∣dred fifty one) I lay in a lamentable affliction, kept up with a vehement vomiting, which continued the next day all the fore-noon I (keeping my bed) vomited four or five times, or oftner in an houre, lying in a most high (pestilential as was thought) and raging Feaver. I sent to the Church for pray∣ers, who were consulting whom to choos amongst them as a convenient keeper for me (many imagining that it might be the Plague, or that it would prove the spotted Feaver at least, being taken in that manner that others were taken of these diseases) much means was used to stay the vomiting and nothing would doe, which at last turned to another colour as green as grasse, and came from the very heart (as I thought) I sent my man (afternoon) to the Apothecaries for more things to stay the vomiting, whilst he was gone, I was thinking the Church was wrestling for me, wherefore with much adoe, up I rise, and got into my Study to prayer also, being perswaded I should joyne with them, and the inter∣cessions of Christ the High-Priest also together, and that we should prevaile:☞ when Loe! what the Lord did to bee admired for ever by the sons of men,Faith in prayer forces out a quick answer. presently the vomit was stayed, I know not how, and I restored (excepting a light gid∣dinesse in my head) to such an admirable condition of health, and so sudden (and which continued all my time in Ireland)
so that I could not but with wonder & amazement fall flat on my face to power out praises, the whilst I was stirred up by an irresistible instinct to shew my self to the Church, as Matth. 8.4. to shew that their prayers were answered;☜ when my man returned he wondred to see me walking about the room with my cloak on ready to go out, and tell the Church. Hee and others that came in apace to see me (that feared the Pe∣stilence, or such distemper was upon me) wondred and asked me how I did? I told them well, at which they wondred more, not thinking it possible; but rather that I knew not what I said, and telling them I was going forth, though they thought me more mad then wise, yet away I went to the Church who were yet praying, and that hard (blessed be the Lord that heard them and drew out their hearts) on my behalfe. My comming amongst them, to tell the mercies of God, was much like Peter in Act. 12. verse 16. at which they were astonished; but as he Verse 17. Verse 13, 14, 16. So I did declare unto them how the Lord had brought me out (of pri∣son) my bed, my sicknesse: so that this renewed pledge to us,A renewed pledge when most need. did throw us altogether upon praises and thankful re∣turnes, being so sweet and seasonable an experience that I hope it will never be forgot; whereby the Church (as it now is) was exceedingly satisfied and ratified to this day that God was with us (yet) of a truth as much as before; from which day (as well as ever before) I dare (assuredly) say the name of this Church may be, The Lord is there, Ezek. 48.35. as Mat 28.20. These things I have added to this fifth Reason whereby we were abundantly obliged for future to trust in the Lord,☜ so that experiences declared, do much advantage others to relye upon him, and to beleeve in him, Ps. 37 40. and to plead with him the experience that others have had of him at such a time, in such a need, and extremity of trouble and sicknesse. And as waters run strongest in narrowest passages, so doth Gods Power and Providences appear most and grea∣test in greatest straits.Sim. But thus for the second sort of Reasons. Reason 3. Relates to themselves that doe declare their
experiences; for it is not enough to heare them, but to have them, as it is Joh. 4.42. First, Hereby they try their owne satisfaction, examine their assurance and plerophory,1 They bring their assurance to light. 1 Pet. 5.16. by bringing all to light, as the honest Draper doth his cloath, to give any leave to ob∣ject what they can against the goodnesse of it; so Hall sayes in his Contemp. 4. part. P. 120. Now a man that owes twenty shillings may as wel pay in silver as in gold, and have as good a discharge given him; but if he paies it in gold, then it is discharged in one piece without telling, or further trouble; but if in silver,Sim. then it is in many pieces, and requires the pains to tell it over before he be sure that it be right; so is it here, the Saints have assurance of all discharged and payed, and themselves set at large, the Creditor reconciled, the Law at an end, &c. and all this by the immediate testimony of the Spirit, which is with more speed and lesse trouble, as Eph. 4.30. or else by the markes, and effects in many peeces, which will aske much paines to examine and tell over; And thus in the experiences by several peeces of good coine (stamped with Gods image) you have their assurance or pleonasmes of joy and love, and light and all brought out; so that they being openly attested and approved, the Saints are thereby often advantaged for future attempts, and troubles and suits in Law;Caution. so that there is great reason the Assurance be brought out to light; yet we must beware that mens applauding or approving of us,Quest. or our assurance deceive us not; wherefore let us a little call to account,How to know it? how a Saint knows that his assu∣rance is real & substantial, and not shadowy, counterfeit & false? To answer this, we have Twin-testimonies and Single-testimonies to know it by;Answ. the Twin-born testimonies are surest (& omni exceptione majores) and such are infallible,) (but the others are not so) these are of two sorts; The Spirit with our spirits bearing witnesse, Rom. 8.16.  co-witnesses,1 By the Twin-testimo∣nies. so Rom. 9.1. so sayes Paul, My conscience bearing witnesse by the Holy Ghost, both goe together (as honest Sibs hath it) like a paire of Indentures,Surest with sealing of the Spirit. p. 170. one answers another: and that the Holy Spirits witnesse, is a clear testi∣mony, see 1 Joh. 3.24. he assures the soule by powerful appli∣cation
(as Culverwel in his White stone well observes) for the Father chuseth us, and hath decreed it;Expos. the Sonne executeth it to the full, and the Spirit applies it,☜ and witnesses our interest in it, and sets strong and vigorous apprehensions of love and mercy upon our heart, they be sweet and secret () soule-whisperings, and spirit-breathing, by which the soul and spirit converses together (secret ) and have silent enter∣course one with another,1 Spirit with our spirits. which is not an enthusiastical fancy or illusion, but a reall truth which every Saint hath a taste of, being inspirations; then the Spirit assures, (or cleares) by a pleasant irradiation or brightnesse, beaming upon the soule, whereby he sees the assurance reall and genuine; see 1 Cor. 2, 12. We have received the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely given us of God. So Verse 9.10. by this Divine light, what a glorious glosse, a rich orjency,☜ a lively lustre, and an excelling Exposition is upon thy assurance; so that although from the flesh thou doubtest, from the Spirit thou seest, and art assured: For, seeing is beleeving, as we say; and you know this witnesse from a fancy to be true, by its own convincing nature and efficacy, as you know light by light; and so you know the Word by the Word, and are able to judge all other words false, and all other lights painted,How to be sure of it that it is a true spirit. and all other Suns shadows; So you know the Spirit by the Spirit, Joh. 16.8. by its owne conviction which it carries with it (as true fire carries its owne evidences to declare that it is fire, but false fire painted does not doe so.A Ranter what?) The light of a Ranting presumptuous Spirit is but like a blazing Comet; presaging his preposterous spirit, or preparing a venemous malign,☜ and pe∣stilential influence, and portending his ruine;A Hypocrite. and the light of an Hypocrite, is but a transcient coruscation and flash for a sud∣den, and is put ou▪ but the Spirit displayes himselfe to the soul, and gives a glistering manifestation of his presence in that heart, of his motion in that horoscope and horison, and by his owne beams (as the Sun) is to be seen, and paraphrased up∣on himself, and witnesses to himself, that he is there; so that (as one sayes) a man may sooner take the glo-worm for the Sunne, then an experienced Saint can take a false light (and delusion) for the light of the Spirit. And who would
be further satisfied,Sibs. may see Sibs his Fountain sealed, Page 169.170. &c. The other Twin-testimony is taken from the Word and the Spirit, the Law, and the Testimony together, Isa. 8.20. Deut. 1.18. Mat. 22.29. the Scripture and the power of God,2 Twin-testi∣mony is the word & spirit. which are to goe both together to give assurance, else yee erre () yea cause others to erre too,Expos. as the word signifies, the Scriptures were endited by the Spirit, therefore the Spirit and they must agree; now mark then what your joyes, raptures, comforts, graces, peace, hopes, evidences are? bring them to the Word; doe they agree with the Scriptures? these are the undeniable Testimonies which never faile, and are ever joynt-witnesses to make thy assurance the clearer: But before I come to the Single-Testimonies (which are the lesse certaine and safe) some object: Obj.I have not the Twin-Testimonies as I know of, but onely the Testimony of my own spirit, and conscience. Answ.If thou findest not (as yet) the testimony of the Spirit (saies Mr. Perkins) yet the other testimony viz. sanctification of the heart will suffice to assure us;A single testi∣mony for in true fire there will bee heat (though thou seest no flame) or seest it not;Sim. Is enough. yet this is not such a plerophory or swelling pleonasme of joy and peace, which others have that have the Double-testimony; for cer∣tainty is not in puncto, but hath a latitude, per magis & minus, a man may be certaine by an assurance and Deed of an estate, but yet he may be more certaine of that estate,Sim. which he is (now already) certaine of; so though one testimony is enough for assurance, yet a Double-testimony is not more then enough, but makes the assurance more illustrious; of two Christians who are assured of salvation,☞ one may have a clearer, and conse∣quently a comfortabler assurance then the other, for one may have a double-testimony, and the other but a single; nay the same Saint at some time may have a double-testimony, and at another time but a single one. Oh alas! I have had not long since a large Testimony! but now I am without light and finde none,Obj. neither the testimony of Gods Spirit, nor yet of my own, but all clouds, eclipses, blacknesse, &c.
First, There is a way left open yet for thee;Answ. O have re∣course to thy former experiences! evidence, assurance!When thou art without a witnesse, what to do▪ didst thou ever enjoy a sweet serenity of spirit, a calmnesse in con∣science, on good grounds? did the Spirit once bear witnesse with thy spirit? then run to former assurance and evi∣dences for comfort; so did that good man, David,Expos. Psal. 51.12. O restore to me the joy of salvation!Three conside∣rations. Vide Saltmarsh his Free-grace. p. 80. O that it were with mee as it hath been! Oh that my candle were light again! but this is the spring within that cannot be dryed up, viz. it was thus with me once; And then consider, 1 Gods love is everlasting, his mercies sure for ever; he is still the same, his Covenant cannot be broken, 2 Sam. 23.5. Ezek. 16.60, 61. Psal. 89.31.33. hee changes not, though thou changest, and art not sensible at all times of it. 2 All the Father loves he loves in his Sonne (Christ;) now his Son alwaies pleaseth him, is ever alike beloved of him, so that nothing can separate us from his love, Rom. 8. because it is in Christ Jesus, he loves us, and not for any thing in our selves. And 3 Consider (poor souls) If God love us lesse or more, as we are lesse or more sinfull in our selves, then he should love as man; but his wayes are not as our wayes,3 Considerat. to assure poor souls in Christ. nor thoughts as our thoughts, for all his love to us is in Christ, who is an un∣changeable object, therefore Rom. 8.1.33, 34, 35, 38. 2 Tim. 2.19. O then did he ever but once smile on thee, embrace thee, em∣bsome thee; and wilt thou now feare, and doubt! O no! rest satisfied in his unchangeablenesse, dear heart, and thou shalt finde the least drop of true grace shal never be exhausted, nor the least dram of true joy be dryed up, or annihilated; And as it is in a Court, the seale is as true a seale, and as good a sufficient evi∣dence in Law, though the print be defaced, diminished, and not so apparent, as a stamp that is most faire, fresh, and full,☜ and not defaced at all;Sim. So shalt thou finde it in the Court of Heaven, that the dimnesse of the seale, or thy sight, though thou thinkest the Markes are all worne out, the faire image and print (which formerly thou sawest) so much defaced, though thy faith cannot finde out that apparent stampe (that thou once sawest) in thy heart, yet all this mars not thine evidence, or assurance in heaven; this defaced seale shall
goe current there, and a little imperfect seale is as good to thy assurance as a greater in heaven, and gives as good an assurance of heaven as a fairer and fuller: why so? for it was once, as good as any; and that in the Records and Books of hea∣ven: therefore look to the initials of grace. But further, ☞Secondly, Is it so as thou sayest, art thou all in the clouds,  darknesse? &c. well then, if reflex acts of assurance (such as we spake of before) be wanting,2 When you want reflex acts, run into direct acts, with a resolute recumbency upon God. make them up in multiplying, direct and resolute acts; now! where wants evidence, make it up in adherence. Now graspe a promise with both hands, and say, Psal. 23.4. though I walke through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear none evill; O roule thy selfe resolutely upon free grace, and love, and resolve there to lye, live and dye! though he slay me,Expos. yet I will trust in him, and Isa. 50.10. When thou seest no ligh,Psal. 37.19. 1 Joh. 3.10. Rom. 10.11. yet stay upon your God. Thus the Spouse came out of the wildernesse, Cant. 8.5. leaning (i. e. laying all her weight, care, body, soule, burthen, all) upon her beloved. O so! with a sweet recumbency cast thy selfe upon God, and see how that will worke! Like men ready to be drowned, who will lay hold fast,Sim. for fear the waves should throw them off; and he that beleeves shall never be ashamed.Single testi∣monies. What assu∣rance is. But thus for the Double-testimonies; the Single are such as follow in the effects and marks, which may be testimonies to others, as well as to our selves, of our assurance; but such are not alwayes certaine, yet such as the Church judges upon in Charity, those marks they hold out in their experiences; for assurance is a reflecting act of the soule, by which a Saint sees clearly he is in the state of grace, and heir of glory, Vita est in se reflectio, said Seneca; so the Prodigal came to himselfe, and 1 King. 8.47. we see that we are sure, 1 Jo. 2.3.  and we know that wee know him.Their experi∣ences tell how much they differ now from what they were be¦fore their Assurance. Thus much we expresse in our experiences of his love shed abroad in our hearts; so that assurance is more then perswasion, it is the top-branch and flourishing triumph of faith. Now do but minde these men, how much they differ from what they were be∣fore their assurance of Gods favour and love: before, whilst they were doubting, they did but stagger at best, if not tumble; and now being assured, they stand fast; before they did but
smoake, now they flame; before full of faintings, palenesse, and shiverings, now full of faith, of ruddy complexions, lively and vigorous; before but tossed about, but now at anchor; be∣fore afraid to lift up their quivering hands, and trembling eyes, but now boldly wrastling with Omnipotency its selfe; before durst not draw nigh the Lord, but now durst run into his armes, and leap into his lap; before came but behinde to touch the hem of his garment (Scriptures and Ordinances;) but now, O they can look him on the face! and flye into his bosome with embraces! before they durst not touch a promise, and scarcely cast an eye upon a promise, but now they co∣vetously claim all, graspe greedily, and appropriate for their own all; before their performances were green and unfit, but now mellowed with the hot Sun-beams, and are sweet mature fruits. O how they can snap asunder now those arrows that before made them bleed at the heart! now they can quench those fiery darts that formerly wounded them so deep: and whereas before they were under bondage, and went a begging, now they have an assurance they are free, and can command, Command ye me, saith the Lord in Isay; O blessed people! what a change is here! from Mount Sinai to Mount of Olives that drops fatness, where Christ is found transfigured,☜ Matth. 17. Now by their experiences you shall heare how they attained to this top of the Mount, and have many remarkable Marks and evidences; and yet so, as they will neither themselves (nor would they have you) to confide in those testimonies as infallible (for Hypocrites may goe far in these latter, but not in the former.) It is not their new change from sinne to grace, from uncleanness to holiness, from creature to Christ,Single Te∣stimonies, not ever certain. from con∣flicts to peace, from darkness to light, from bondage to liberty, from Sinai to Sion, from carnal-courses companions, &c. to spiri∣tual, that causes their assurance, but their assurance rather cau∣ses these, and makes this glorious change, and these happy flow∣ings of joy and peace. It is dangerous to place assurance in mortification of sinne, and dying to our former lusts, or in vivi∣fication, and living a new, another life; such as are legally enlightned may lay hold on Promises, claspe about Christ; cry out, away with their lusts; meet with some soul-meltings in
praying, preaching, reading, or the like; and long after the Ordinances, and taste a sweetness in them, and what not? and yet be under darkness, doubts, fears, &c. for there is something within that fetters and manacles them, till they are under the ministration of the Gospel; for as we know green wood with fire in it besets the room with smoake,Sim. and fills all; and so some poor hearts, whose principles are yet too sensual, and full of (our) sap which may have many sparkes of the Law, and Curses for sinne kindled in them, but they will be fuller of smoak then of light, till the Spirit comes. And yet such smoaking-flax is not to be quenched,Times of assu∣rance. but blown up: Wherefore, I say, this makes not assurance, they are all in the darke, and smoake yet; yet we cannot deny but that the times of Assurance, are times of great change and alteration, the prison-doors are set open, the iron-bolts knocked off, the captives at liberty; yea they are sealing, and setling times ad corroborandum Titulum, they are times of the soules victory and triumph over lusts, Rev. 2.17. and with the Virgin-company of following the Lamb whi∣ther soever he goeth; they are times of trampling on all things below, and keeping the moon under foot, yea they are watching and working, and warning, and arming times too, and times of breathing after full possession,Experiences of Saints are de∣monstrations of their assu∣rance to others. &c. and all this (and more too) will appeare in the experiences of Saints: O what stories can they tell! even a new Canticles! what Jubiles! love songs! and soule-raptures doe they meet with! then is Aurora gaudii, growing more and more to a perfect day! Now so far as we can judge of it by the rule of charity;☞ we have matter enough afforded us, in the historical and demonstrable part of their experiences. It is well noted by one (Donn. fol. 658.Dr. Don.) of the Evangelist John (who was wrapt up so much into the Divinity of Christ of all other) that he does ordinarily double that asseve∣ration so often in Christs mouth, viz. Amen, Amen, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, &c. whilst the other Evangelists mention it but Verily, I say unto you, &c. so is it that the more we are beloved of God, and the nearer we are come to Christ (to ly in his bosome) and the more we are swallowed up in his Divinity, the further we are from single assertions of truth; and the more wee meet with, and manifest to others double testimonies of Gods
love, and our assurance,Sim. which like some precious mineral-waters, will not onely mundifie the ulcers, but comfort the sores, cool the heat, supple the wounds, stop the infection from going further, and by degrees will heal all. Now the fuller we are of the love of Christ, and the more we are in his Di∣vinity, the more assuredly wee assert it, and confidently wee ver it, even as it were by double testimonies,Full assurance affords full ex∣periences even (as it were) with double Testimonies and are nothing ashamed to shew our assurance, as much as we can expresse it by our experiences. But thus for this first Reason, wherein I have been the lon∣ger, because the Point is so usefull, and excellent to all Saints of all judgements; but I shall be now shorter. To the second Reason. Secondly, True experiences (puffe not up, as Col. 3.18. &c.) but teach humility, and self-denial, for then they know man  hath nothing to boast of:True experi∣ences keep humble. for this end had Paul experience of Sathans buffets, of thornes in the flesh of great afflictions, of vio∣lent temptations, and strong corruptions of smart blows from the Devils fingers, and such as came so thicke that hee could hardly take breath, lest he should have been exalted and puffed up in 2 Cor. 12.17. for then we are most fit for use, when we are most humble, and kept low. And it is observed that the very Turkes at this day doe pretend the pride of the Hunga∣rians, and of the Epirots or Albanians to make them unfit for Slaves, wherefore when they take them,Sim. they torment them to death most cruelly of all others:Vide Hist. of Standerbeg lib. 2. So doubtlesse their de∣struction is most desperate, and the Devill takes a great ad∣vantage to put to death such without pity that are in his hands, who are exalted by their experiences; and Diotrephes-like,☜ loving a preheminence,Hypocrites puffed up by them. seek with a corrupt desire to be some body in the eyes and opinions of others. Without infinite mercy, and deli∣verance this will ruine us; and thus the hearts of many Hy∣pocrites and Professors are puffed up, and swell out with con∣ceits that they excell others. Such the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 4.18, 19. and Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you, who is vainly puffed by his fleshly minde () that is, let him not Lord it, and brave it, as great Boasters doe,Expos. or as such Lords that scorn others should come neare them; for such a one is vainly puffed up (temere turgens, ) blowne up like a
bladder with a breath, or some windy, empty, and unusefull humour, and dangerous or destructive tumour; of such take heed: In a dish, or a spoon, the inside and useful side (sayes Staughton in his Right Plea, 8. Serm. p. 81.) is hollow, but the out-side is swelling out, and convex, but it is the inside that is hollow,Sim. which holds, and is of use; so it is an humble low spirit,Dr. Staughton. and self-denying, and a nothing-seeing Saint (I mean no∣thing in himselfe) that is so useful, and holds so much of the liquours of life, and of what is good, whilest a Hypocrite puffed up with a proud heart, & self-conceited swelling spirit, is but like the convex superficies,Saints hum∣bled. and holds nothing. Now you shall finde that it is the lowest vallies that are fullest and fattest, and the sweetest streams glide through them. Such sweet souls, humble Saints, sayes Bernard, are like the violets which grow low and hang their heads downward, but are full of excellency and vertue. The grass on the house-top,Sim. and the fine July-flower on the wall will soon lose their lustre, and wither away, but the violets, and other flowers that grow lower and nearer the ground,Sim. hold longer and livelier, and smell sweeter, and so doe such as are humbled by the Lords hand, 1 Pet. 5.6. Now it is a signe their experiences are right, when they keep them humble, Rom. 12.3. and the more weighty and full of worth they are,Sim. the lower they will lay them that have them; For as in a paire of scales the most light (and worthlesse) peeces of gold rise the highest, but the weightiest bear most downward; so is it here, the richest in grace,Truest expe∣riences lay us the lowest. and that have the best experiences of Gods love are the lowest and the least in their owne eyes; The best balme sinkes to the bottome, and the best corn keeps in the bot∣tome of the fan.Sim. O weigh things in the scales! the greater they are, the lower they sinke! and so it is with the Saints (sayes Don. Serm. p. 44.) the greater they are in the sight of others, and the more excellent in their esteem, the lower they sinke in themselves,Sim. and are in their owne eyes. Sim.Now (I say) the more experienced Saints are, the more humble and broken; for although a whole garment is more handsome to men then a rent one,☞ yet a broken heart is more pleasing to God then a whole one; We are wont to slash and cut our apparrel in pride,Sim. but happy if wee had hearts were so cut
and rent in humility and repentance (sayes Adams on Peter) A roab artificially mangled and divided, and then richly tyed,Adams. Souls slashed for sin, low, & humble. and united together with silke, silver, and gold, or the like, Cant. 1.11. appears the more glorious; and so is it with a soul that hath been slashed, and nobly (as it were) cut in peeces, but now united, and made up againe with rich grace, and love, and peace, &c. O how lovely is an experienced soul in the sight of God! and is reserved as a choise one for the Wardrope of heaven!And souls ex∣alted in Christ are the more low, and no∣thing in their own eyes. yea such as have been (as it were in the third heavens, are hereby humbled; For the higher the tide, the lower the ebhe. See but Paul, who was more exalted? 2 Cor. 12.5. who had higher experiences? And yet who was more humble in his own eyes? he accounts himselfe nothing,Expos. 2 Cor. 12.11. what Paul? that preached Christ so powerfully? that writ so fully?Examples. that disputed so manfully? that converted so plentifully? and yet sayes he in 1 Cor. 9.16. I have nothing to boast of. No, why Paul was the Zealot of the Apostles, and in nothing be∣hinde the chiefest of the Apostles; why Paul the stout Cham∣pion of truth, he was full of revelations, manifestations, and my∣steries, Col. 1.26, 27. Eph. 3.3, 4. &c. carried up to the third heavens, caught up into Paradise, when he heard () unspeakable words, and had glorious visions, and yet (sayes he) I have nothing to boast of, but of my infirmities, 2 Cor. 12.1, 4. I will not glory of self. Vers. 5 and Verse 9. I will ra¦ther glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. I will rather tell of them, and declare my infirmities, and how for all them, the power of Christ rests on me. So hee saith Phil. 3.13. he forgets all that is behind. See this soul-humbled Apostle, he passed through many perils, troubles,2 Cor. 11.23.25, 26, 27. with∣out, within, day and night, by sea and land, was stoned, suffered shipwrack, beaten with rods, in continual labour, and lassitude, weariness, & watchings hunger and thirsts, cold and nakedness, and in prisons often, & more then all others, and all for the truth, and yet he forgets all; why he fought beasts of Ephesus, conquered the Athenians, non-pluss'd the Stoicks, planted many Churches, and what not? yet forgets all. Good man, full of grace, full of experience, full of revelations, and yet humble, and so much nothing in his account that he forgets all; and as if (of all men living) he had the least to be accounted of, he knows of
nothing, unlesse his infirmities to boast of. Blessed Saints! that are swallowed up in such an annihilation and Enochian life, Gen. 5.24. when self is turned out of doors, and Christ all in all, and the love of God alone looked upon; when a man reflects not on himselfe (as Giles Randal sayes in his Bright Star, chap. 14.) but all on God in free-grace. What hast thou then, O man, to boast of! that is thine! thus, I say true ex∣periences make us more selfe-contemners;Randal. and it is a signe of a height of grace, and of one exalted to degrees of the love of God, to be of an humble, meeke, self-denying spirit; for as Hezekiahs signe was the Sunne's going back so many degrees (viz. 10.) in the Dial; so a Saints going backe (or from him∣selfe in selfe-denial and humility so many degrees, and growing still humbler, is a signe of his advancement and assurance in Christ (another selfe) in whom hee goes as many degrees forward.☞ For as it is said of Tygranes, whilst at the feet of Pompey he threw downe first his Crownes,Sim. and then himselfe, he did thereby so much affect this great Com∣mander, that he (with his owne hand) put the Diadem up∣on his head againe, and raised him up from the ground, and set him downe by him in a Chaire of State, as his deare friend and companion; and so deals the Lord with such low, selfe-denying Saints; for though by stooping low they lose of their bodily height, yet by humility and such self-denial they lose nothing of their spiritual. You may see Re. 11.16. how the Elders there rose up off their seats, and fell flat upon their faces before the Lamb, that is in humility and self-denial, which is more for their honor (as well as for Christs) then if they had sat still;Sim. Expos. True experi∣ences more de∣clared the more humble us, and lessen us & lower us in our own eyes. for Moses had more honour by his veyl, then by his face. The Scriptures are very full of this; we find, Mat. 25.37. the righteous there had learned it, and so have all the Saints, as you see by their experiences, that they have nothing to boast of (of themselves) but of the Lord, and his love, all the day long) Psal. 44.8. Rom. 2.17. and the more they tell  of him, they are humbled before him. Experiences teach best.Thirdly, Why we should declare them, because by them we are best taught the worth and excellency of the love of God in Christ, as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon, It was
true, all the report that she heard of him, 1 King. 10.6.7. Howbeit she beleeved not the words till she came, and saw with her eyes what she heard with her ears; and then she said, Behold the halfe was not told me.☜ Now behold a greater then Solomon is here; and such as have left all to follow him, and are gone out of their owne Country, Psal. 45.11 (by self-denial) to prove this spiritual Solomon, with questi∣ons, petitions, cases, &c. hard to be answered, and have re∣ceived satisfaction from him, must needs say, Although they have heard much of Christ by his Ministers, Servants, Scriptures, Ordinances, of his worth and excellency above all, and more then they have beleeved; yet now they have ex∣perienced him, they beleeve more then they have heard, and the halfe (of his worth, wisdome, beauty, fulnesse, &c.) cannot be told, no not by the very Angels of heaven. O then! they see it a happinesse to bee his servants!As p. 8 to dwell in his house! to sit at his table! to enjoy his presence indeed!☜ when once they have had experience of him, and of the fulnesse of his grace! As in some precious stone, or Pearle is some occult qualities, and excellencies which make it of more worth, and none can tell it, but those that finde it by wearing it;Sim. so in Christ this precious pearle, there be many hidden vertues, and properties and excellencies, that men and Angels cannot ex∣press, that the world knows not of, that neither word nor letter nor language is able to utter, and they are best knowne by enjoying him: those that have experience of the worth of Christ, can say it is not possible for all the ablest Ministers alive to set forth halfe so much of Christs excellency,☜ and worth, as their soules finde by experience. And, as I remember, I have read of Dyonisius a Stoick, who wrote a book that paine was nothing but a fancy, and an ima∣gination; but falling fearfully ill of the stone (not long after) and feeling the torture of it, then he roars out; Oh! all that he had written was false! all was false! for now he found paine more then a fancy; and so surely experience teaches ingenuously and truly. And such as know Christ, and the love of God by experience, can say, their former con∣ceptions, and apprehensions of him as an asteer Master
to please, exacting duties, and a severe Judge, hasty to con∣demn,Saints by ex∣periences know more then men or Angels can tell them of Gods love. and that he damns thousands, &c. I say, they will say these were all false and foul conceptions and aspersions, and that God is gracious, merciful, ready to forgive, slow to wrath, passing by iniquity, transgression and sins, &c. that his bowels are open to embrace and receive (even the worst of) sinners of whom we are chief; and that all the Ministers, Ordi∣nances, Books, Scriptures, that ever were or will be, cannot tell, or utter half of his love, grace, pity, and good will in Christ, &c. but onely the back-parts of his glory, not the face or fore-side. Now as a Physitian findes those secrets (and oftentimes excellent things) by his practise and experience which hee could never attain unto by all his reading or search,Sim. or study out of books, or out of others mouth; so I say, many sweet Chri∣stians by experience finde and feed on that sweetnesse and ex∣cellency of the love of God in Christ,☞ which the greatest Rabbies or learnedst alive cannot acquire or attaine by reading books, Scriptures or the like, so that experience teaches more, and better then all. A blinde man, though from his birth, he hath heard the Theory of the Sunne read to him, yet he can never conceive of halfe of its glory and beauty, or take the hundreth part of that sweet delight in it which they doe that see it;Sim. nor can any thing we heare of Christ, worke halfe so much as what we have of him and of the promises, &c. And one that hath tasted honey, and fed on it, knowes better the sweetnesse of it, then one that ne∣ver tasted it, but onely can tell it is sweet by reading (not by eating;) and so (I say) such precious soules must needs better know the sweetnesse of free-grace, the worth of Gods love, the excellency of a warme Christ in their soules, and the use of his most precious blood, brought hot to their hearts, then such as never enjoyed him, nor tasted how gracious the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2.3. notwithstanding they may have read much, many Books, all the Scriptures, and heard the most preci∣ous Ministers that are, or ever were (though Apostles) every day; for they cannot teach so much in a yeare of sweet Jesus, as spiritual experience will in a day; nay an houre sometimes to some Saints; But so much for the third Reason.
Fourthly, Experiences embolden them that have them (and  others too) and strengthen them for the future,Experiences make more bold for future. as the Experi∣ence which David had of deliverance from, and destroying of the Lyon, and the Bear, he makes a running and round argu∣ment against the uncircumcised Philistim,Expos. 1 Sam. 17.36. and when Saul questioned him in Verse 23. for his audacity and presumption (expecting it to be no work for him) telling him he was but a boy, and came but now from keeping sheep,Example. not having any experience of warfare as yet, and that this great Goliah was a stout Champion, and valiant Souldier from his youth; Ah, but sayes David, for all that,David there∣fore declared his experience I shall tell thee my experience which makes me so confident and couragious at this time;Sim it is but tother day since I killed a Lion and a Beare, and saved but a poor Lamb by it;More bold a∣gainst enemies and in future troubles and trials. and shall I not finde now as full a power, as fresh an experience, and kill this proud Philocompos of Gath; goe to, fear not, I shall save now more then a Lamb (even Israel) from this Lyon this day, for the Lord will deliver him to me. Now it is true, a fresh-water Souldier (as Dr. Tailor sayes,Dr. Taylor. Ps. 32. p. 67.) is afraid of a Gun, looks aside the danger, and the noise is a terror to him, he fears it will cost him his life; alas poor heart! but now an experienced Souldier fears no colors, looks full face on danger, frights his foes with frown, and every perillous opposition, and hostile blow, beats but an alarm to his undaunted courage and valour; such Souldiers are all experien∣ced Christians;More bold with God too. neither was David such a fresh-water soul∣dier, but hee could gather courage upon his former experi∣ences; and as they are thus emboldened against their adver∣saries, and for future troubles, and temptations,Sim. so are they by their experiences the more emboldened to deal with God; Like to the experience that a poor-man hath had of some special friend of his, who helped him at such a time, in such a strait, when else he had beene utterly undone, the remem∣brance of this revives him much, gives him good hopes, and great confidence, and boldnesse to come to him again (yet with an humble boldnesse) and hee assures himselfe hee shall finde him the same still. Certes, so it is with us that have found and felt the bounty of Gods love,
and grace; O we grow the bolder (and yet the humbler) and dare confidently beleeve hee will not (nay that he cannot) faile us at another time, when we need him (cum lateres du∣plicantur!) See the Psalmists courage and confidence, Psal. 23.1. I shall not want! why? what makes him so confident? See Vers. 2.3. He is my shepherd, he makes me lye downe in green pastures, he leads me, he restores my soul, &c. I have had all experiences, thus he hath done,Example. and thus he yet doth for me; therefore Verse 4. I will not feare, no! not though I goe thorough the very shadow, nay the very valley (from whence all might thinke I should never more ascend, and never more be seen) of the shadow of death,Expos. yet I fear not. So Psal. 27.1. whom should I fear?☞ Why the Lord is my light, and my strength, and my salvation; of whom (or of what) should I be afraid? as some men say, Why such a great man or Lord is my friend, what care I? I feare not. So say the Saints, this emboldens us, why the Lord is our Friend, and a tried Friend too, that never failed us, what need we fear then?Sim. Oh! these experiences are singular good helps to us against future troubles! and temptations! in what kinde soever they are to come! we need not care as long as we have so sure a Friend (the Lord) to come to! so that troubles and temptations cannot soon captivate such soules. For as the breathed Deer are not so quickly caught as others; neither are the breathed hearts that have been long hunted with the blood∣hounds of Hell,Sim. and dogg'd by the black-mouthed Cerberusses of their own lusts; these experienced Christians are not so soon catched as others, or entangled with the subtle gins of Sathan laid under the loveliest Roses of the worlds pleasures or treasures, but they run the faster, and flye the swifter, and the safer from them all. Fifthly, Spiritual Experiences declared out of the  heart, Mat. 12.35. are like a store-house opened, whence a man fetcheth forth things,They are as a store-house to give out new and old. (for use and need) both new and old, Mat. 13 52. () extrudit copiose & alacriter, hee throws them out tumbling (saies the Text) without spare (non libro sed labro) So Can. 7.13▪Expos. So the Spouse hath such a store-house,Sim. or experiences laid up for afterward, new and old, which I have laid up (sayes he) even Mandrakes in Heb▪ Dudaim, not
from Dodim loves, (pma mandragorae sunt blandimenta amoris) in the Belgick, called Doelappelen, they are very sweet, lovely,1 To give out. Expos. and pleasant to refresh the weary and languishing faint spirits;Experiences Mandrakes. so are the choisest experiences. And as they were dedicated to Lo∣vers, so are these to Christ and his Church, such an antipathy have Toads, Snakes, and such like venemous creatures to the Mandrake, that they will not come near them, but they drive all such serpentine poysonous creatures away from them.☜ (Vide Lemnius de Mandragor) so do these experiences of Saints, which sinners cannot abide, but are driven away by them, as having an antipathy to them: besides as they be ex∣ceeding Physical, and for singular use to the sickest Patients (being odoriferous and somniferous) and so certainly are all faire, full, fresh-gathered experiences to sick souls, like Man∣drake-apples of love, (and at our gates all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up) that is at home: but be∣fore this, the Mandrakes were abroad in publike and private, far, and near; at home, and abroad, the Saints are full of sweet, precious, odoriferous, soul-refreshing experiences,2 To lay up. new and old, i. e. of all sorts, sizes, seasons,Sim. day and night in an abundant mea∣sure to be bestowed and communicated, and with which they welcome Christ (their beloved) to; therefore they must be declared, and brought forth, yea and laid up too for future time of need;Sim. there will be need of them when thou art a Patient, Psal 63.7. Hee that shoots his arrows at a But or Mark, puts them up again into his quiver for another,☜ and ano∣ther, and another shoot yet; so the people of God, though they give out their experiences to others, yet they gather them up again, they lose them not, but lay them up for future use, and ad∣vantage; and such especially as have been successeful, and are sweet, and they will not, they cannot forget them. Thus Christ recruits the memories and mindes of his Disciples, When I sent ye out without scrip, or shoe, or mony in your purse, &c. Lacked ye any thing? and they said, No! (O then treasure up for after∣wards) and so in Matth. 16.9, 10. Do ye not remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?Expos. nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Why then reason ye thus? (or do ye so dialogize) have yee
not laid up these experiences! to furnish you for future? for a time of need? in adversity and want? wherefore the Saints should lay up this Ammunition, and provision for a Siege-time, seeing the enemy is making ready every day against us;☞ there∣fore learn of the Ant (sayes Solomon) who hath a Store-house in the Summer to lay up for the Winter, and then you will not be surprised by any sudden incursion or abruption of any raging storm or lust whatsoever. Sixthly, True experiences put the soul upon longing for  more, and looking out for, and lingring after further manifesta∣tions of his presence and love,They set the soul to long for more of Christ. which is better then wine Psal. 4.7. and 42.1, 2, 3. and 63.1, 2. and 84.12. Psal. 119.174. Cant. 1.3. Cant. 5.4. Cum multis aliis. When the child hath once tasted of the breast, then it cryes, and nothing but the breast can content it, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. when the Israelites had once tasted of the Mannah, then they longed after it, and then they cryed for more and more of it; which till they tasted of, they wondred at, and desired it not (ignoti nulla cupido) but said What is this? as Mark. 1.27. the Jews said, What thing is this? What new doctrine?☞ Why? for they never yet tasted it; and so Act. 17.19. they thinke it cannot be good, and therefore doe not yet desire it till they taste it;Sim. and then, O how they prize the Ordinances! Ministers, means, administrations, and manifestations of the love of God! The horse that hath fed on Provender will look and neigh, and with a wanton laughing eye turne about, and about, and long for it, whilst the Jade that eats no oats, but feeds onely on hay in the racke, requires no more; so such Saints as have fed upon the bread of life, and tasted of the lve of God, in Christ, cannot but look after it, and long for it,Many content with Parish-Ministers pro∣visions. and stir about and about, till they enjoy more of it, whilst such as never tasted it, but onely heard of it, are content with their common fare, of hearing and formal worship∣ping according to what is before them in the racke, and what the Parish Ministers appoint them,☞ and that is all; when alas! experienced Saints long for lustier food, and pro∣vision. A man (it may be) that should newly come out some deep dark Dungeon,Sim. who never before saw the Sunne (no
ever so much as heard of it) when he sees the Sim go down, set, and gone, is in a great perplexity, and peradventure thinks it is quite lost; but experience now teaches others otherwise, and that it will the next day arise again, and give us fresh light;☜ therefore they are content to wait for it, and they wish it with expectation: and so doe all experienced Saints, with assu∣red confidence call for more of Christ, and more of grace; and of the love of God, which they have experienced, and they wish for more, with expectation of more, as John that look∣ed still for more visions and revelations; yet the Saints prize them (at their hearts) that they have already. So the Spouse, Cant. 3.2. loses him, but Verse 4. findes him again, and then she holds him, and would not let him go. Seventhly, Experiences declared, doe oblige them (that have them) more in obedience to God; for by them thou  knowest, thou obeyest a dear, a gracious God indeed,They yeeld further obedi∣ence to God. and a Father. Now you shall a finde a child, if a stranger bid him do this, or that, he will not obey him; but if a Father bids him, then he obeys and runs strait: so dost thou willingly (and runing readily) obey the Lord, when thou knowest by experience hee is thy Father, and lookest not on him as a stranger; and then thy obedience is full of life and spirit indeed, as Joh. 4.24. for thou canst not be dull in his service that art full of experience, be∣cause thou art then full of love and life,And fill them with life, spirit, and love. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Joh: 5.3. Exod. 21.5. Take a glasse and knock it with thy finger, if it sound dull, surely thou wilt say there is some flaw in it; so a dull obedience is but cracked;Sim. but a filial obedience which flows from love, is shril, sounds well, and is full of spirit and life,☜ Phil. 1.11. it is not  2 Cor. 9.7. but  Col. 3.23. Rom. 6.17. Now their experiences prompt them up to it, Psal. 40.8. and are directory as well as consolatory in a time of darknesse and trouble, even in the shadow of death, as well as in a time of light and peace to serve the Lord,Sim. so Phil. 2.8. even with a Daniel in the Den, as well as with a David on the Throne. See a man that is used to walk in the night, as well as in the day, fears no more one, then the other; and as some man can better finde the way in the darke, to which he hath been used, and which he knows (by often going it)
then another that never went it, (it may be) can do by the best instructions can be given him by others; so such as have experiences have the best instructions, and directions in their obedience, and are better, and more orderly walkers in the dark, then others in the day; in trouble, then others in peace; in afflictions, then others in joyes; in any manner of adversity, then others in any manner of prosperity; and they will keep within their bounds in obedience, which others cannot; and therefore are in greater danger then experi∣enced Christians. As the Dear that is leapt over the Pale, and is gotten out of the Park,Sim. is in greater danger then the rest, and every dog is at his heels. Such as have most expe∣rience of the love of God, seek themselves least; and there∣fore are the best in obedience to God. But we see as the Hunter that crosseth the high-way, and keeps it not, is but following his own game all this while;Sim. for the way is not there: So the Hypocrite crosseth the high-way (that you read off, Isai. 40.3.) and runs out of Gods road, whilest the seeks his own game, and serves himself more then God. But the Saints of God are guided by the Spirit of God, and have the Pillar of fire (by night to direct them) as well as a cloud by day: And whither it be night or day, adversity or prospe∣rity,Donn. still they can see to follow Christ; and as Donn sayes (in his Serm. in fol. p. 139.) You shall see a man that is reading in the Evening;Sim. he hath read a pretty while before, all in one and the same Book, and on the same Subject; now night comes in, twilight is on, he can hardly see a Letter. Yet let him alone, he will see to read longer in that Book, and on that Subject, which he hath been on all the while, then if he took a new book, or new subject to read on. So we that have been all the day-long doing Gods service, and in the Sun-shine of peace, and prosperity about our duties, and obe∣dience: We, I say, shall the better do them (that have been used to them, and experienced in them.) Now darkness sur∣prises us, and adversity comes upon us; and in a time of darkness,In a time of darkness as well as in a time of light. when we see no light; yet we shall obey the Lord, and hear his voice (having continual experiences) to direct us. Isai. 50.10, 11. And yet we shall walk (though in darkness,
without the immediate light of Gods love,☜ and countenance seen; yea, without the former evidences, and comfort of graces, in a stormy night, without light or star, Acts 27.20. But to be in doubt, what will become of us;Expos. and to be stumbling at all our comforts, and to be filled with great fears and terrors;) yet, I say, we shall continue walking and ser∣ving God, hearing and obeying his voice; which is an argu∣ment of a stout experienced Christian indeed; Experiences conducing very much hereto. But thus for this, and all the Reasons, which I shall gather to ratifie this undeniable Truth. We have sufficiently (I suppose) proved the assertion of the use of Experiences declared in the Church, being much for the honor and glory of God, the advantage of the Church,☜ and themselves, that make them. Now we all concur▪ Schoolmen, Ministers and all, That where there is true grace, experienced Saints know it sweeter then the drops from the honey comb; and qui accipit gratiam,Vide Tho. A∣quin. 1.2. q. 112.5. o. per quandam experien∣tiam dulcedinis novit se illam habere, quam non experitur ille qui non accipit; as we have amply before mentioned: Such men must needs know the love of God is sweet, who have tasted and digested it. They can comfortably use Laban's words in Gen. 30.27. I have learned by experience, that the Lord hath blessed me. Jehovah hath raised me,Expos. and increa∣sed me, I have experience of it by comparing my former condition with my present. So the Saints do tell by experi∣ence, how Jehovah hath helped them, and blessed them, even with spiritual blessings in heavenly places. Some of which (though not so perfectly as they were delivered, yet) as well as I can collect them out of the Notes which I took of them from their own mouths, when they were admitted in∣to the Church, I shall present, as a sweet posie of some of the chiefest flowers that I have met with this spring-time in the Garden of the Lord! the Church of Christ!☜ which is growing apace up to an Eden; from flowers to fruits; from Plants to Trees of Righteousness, planted by Rivers of Water.
Examples of Experiences, OR Discourses and Discoveries of the dead hearing the voice of the Son of God, and now living: As they were delivered in Dublin by divers Members admitted into the Church; Being a clear account (to the judgement of charity) of the work of Grace upon their hearts; in divers ways and sundry manners converted; some extraordinarily, and some ordinarily. When? where? and how? with the effects. But before I begin, I shall premise this, for the godly Readers sake, that I must contract much their experiences as they were taken, least they be too voluminous: And al∣though in the choicest and most extraordinary ones, I shall gather the stalk longer, least I hurt the beauty and hide the excellency of those flowers; yet without hurt to the rest, in those which are ordinary, I shall be very short, being pre∣vented by others (in that little Treatise of Experiences new∣ly put out.) I shall gather out the flowers onely, and give you the sum of what they said, and so tie them up together for a conclusion of the whole matter. The most of these are mens, and some womens, and a very great many more I might adde to them, which I have met with in England, Essex, and London, and in Ireland, and at Chester, Holly-Head in Wales, and in my travels; but that, I say, I am (I hope) seasonably (though unexpectedly) prevented; although many more do lie prepared by me. But to the business, as coming last from Dublin to declare some of those precious ones (and which are the greatest trea∣sure) that I brought with me from thence:Encouraging others over in to Ireland. The savor of which (I hope) will be attractive, and encourage others over into Ireland, where the Lord hath his Garden enclosed, and full of Spices,Cant. 7. ult. with the Mandrakes laid up for the Be∣loved against his coming; which is looked for every day there, as well as here; and there the ride saith, O! come Lord Jesus! come quickly!
The Testimony of Tho. Huggins, Preacher of the Gospel, given in, at the publick place, Octob. 8. 1651. of Brides in Dublin. IT is my joy to see willingness in Gods people to walk toge∣ther in fellowship with the Father and the Son; and such I desire to have fellowship with, where Christ (the King) in his beauty appears most: I do acknowledge (as you have heard) that account of faith before made by our Brother R. and do experimentally know; and therefore must acknowledge that glorious Being of one God in his three distinct relations, of Father and Creator, Son and Redeemer, and Spirit, and Sanctifier; and I finde in me by his Spirit, and the several operations of this his Agent, these things. I believe the Scriptures, Old and New Testament, to be the very minde of God; and do heartily desire my soul may be turned into the nature of those truths therein declared; but to that which is expected from me most, I come, viz. to my conversation. I was but yong when I began to be warmed, yea, within,In a formal righteousness from his youth. be∣ing under a zealous Ministry, and much put upon duty, I did use to read the Scriptures every night, and to repeat Sermons often, and so spent the first scene of my youth, till I came to be sent by my friends to London, and there I lived for a year or two; but in that time, as often as I saw any Minister, I could not but weep, and always wished that I might be one, to be able to preach too. After this, I was sent to one of the Vniversities there, but being wilde with youthful company, I was soon after sent hither to this Col∣ledge of Dublin, where I am well known, and here I con∣tinued till the Rebellion brake out; at which time, I left it, and went for England into the North-parts, and about Liverpool, where I preached, (till now I returned hither.) But all this while I was but formal, and as the yong-man that said, he had kept all these from his youth: So was I from my youth religious, well-given, loving the means, following of them, and seeking to serve God. But alas! yet all this while was I in darkness, and did not know it;Called first, when and where? but after∣wards, I saw that I was blinde, and but carnal: For about
the year,1645. called thence on the Mountains. 1645. I began to be in great doubts and troubles, and very much clouded in my spirit, and was exceedingly bound and tyed up for a time, under the sence of my formal holiness, and sins, till the Lord was pleased to give me light. Once as I was walking all alone (sadly) upon the Mountains, he immediately powred his Spirit upon me, and satisfied my soul in Jesus Christ,2. How? Extraordinarily and ravishing∣ly and filled my heart with heavenly joy, and peace; and with most ravishing contemplations, which continued without a cloud for six weeks together, which gave me full assurance of Gods love;. Effects of this cal. and ever since I have lived in the righteousness of the Lord Jesus, though I have met with many clouds and storms since, yet such as have passed away, and cannot hinder me, as long as Christ (mine) is above them. Being thus translated from the form into the power, I do heartily propose my self to be one with the mem∣bers of Christ in his Church: And although before I was not free in England, or elsewhere to joyn thus, it being so in controversie and disputable; yet now I am fully satisfied, and do see God building up his Jerusalem apace, and am confident of what he is doing to Nations; yea, I joy to see that you all seek to unite by one Spirit, and all to be one in Spirit, if not all in one Form, and so do I, not doubting but this Ministration will be most to edification. A further Testimony added to the truth, by the experience  declared (in the same place, at the same time) by John By∣water, Preacher of the Word. BRethren, I do declare here this day the desire of my heart, which is to have fellowship with such a society as are built up by the Spirit; to be one with all those that are one with Jesus Christ the Head; knowing this, That all rudimentary and elementary things, do but point at a higher glory. As for my Faith,Called, 1. When. 2. How. I acknowledge God one, not three, but as you have heard before, &c. As for my life, I shall in short say thus▪ When I was a little one,In horror of Hell for an oath, wept, de∣livered out of it. going to School, God began with me; for once I swore one Oath (as I was playing with my School-fellows) but I was presently struck with horror for it, and sence of it, as if I were to go to Hell for it presently;
in which horror, and great trouble, I left my School-fellows playing, but I could no longer, being in this misery for that sin, but away I went into the Church-Porch (not far off) and there I sat alone, and wept bitterly to my self for some time; but at length growing in some hopes (I know not how) of pardon, I began to grow chearful, and fearless,And cast in∣to it again worse then be∣fore. until a little while after that, I went to see some malefactors suffer; and after I came home, this sight ran so much in my minde, and was for a long time set so before my eyes, That my sins, and the horrors of Hell came afresh upon me again; so that I was exceedingly cast down, and cryed out, O what shall I do! how shall I be saved! which I had often in my mouth, and in the hearing of my friends:Delivered out of it upon su∣rer terms then before. in which condition, I could take no comfort from them, till the Lord himself brought me out of it, and gave me to be given up to Jesus Christ, by the life of Faith which I now live; not∣withstanding. I was under several temptations, and often∣times very thick, but even then I resolved, if that I were flung into Hell, yet it should be holding on Christ;3. Effect of it. Hs resolutin after it. for I will not let him go now, and here I hold through mercy, ever since. So that I take Christ for my King, Priest, Prophet,☜ and do believe him to be a Propitiation for my sins. And I believe, that he will restore to us a pure language, and that we shall all worship him in one Spirit, and with one consent: And my desire is to walk with you thus, in union and love, and by one and the same Spirit. Another Testimony or Report made of the work of grace upon his heart, (at the same time, in the same place) by John Hewson Colonel, and Governor of Dublin. HAving an opportunity to speak something to you, I shall do it without many words—. Time was, that I was in a state of disobedience as to God, a childe of wrath, and lived in a wicked and profane family in London;Called, 1. When and where? 2. How? By the Word. 3. Effects of it. but yet I went often to hear a good man in London preach, by which means I was brought to see sin, and shown within me, that I wanted Christ; which when I saw, I began to desire him, and to long after him, and still frequented the means, and
by the use of the means, I was drawn nigher to himself; but ever since I finde I have a corrupt heart, and have much ado to keep it in; therefore God brings me under many troubles and temptations, more then many others. And I (though I am in places of power, yet I) account them no∣thing, seeing an emptiness in all things, and a fulness in none but in Christ. I confess, I was sometime for the Pres∣byterians,From Presby∣tery to Inde∣pendency. and very rigid and bitter against all others of the Independents, till the Lord did shew me the Parish-Church was no true Church, being a mixed Congregation; and I was ignorant of this way which they call Independent. But now I am clearly convinced of it, and satisfied in this society, and for matter of Faith, I concur with the Brother that before spake, and finde what he said to be true in me, and do desire communion with you, as you have with Christ Jesus. The Testimonial of Raphael Swinfield, or his experience, as was taken out of his own mouth in Dublin, in another publick place called Michaels. I Do declare here what God hath done for me. First, in my youth, my Father, (being a godly man) brought up his children very religiously; but for my part, although I were well brought up (and instructed,) yet I was very disobe∣dient,Disobedience to parents. being yong and head-strong, and hearkned not to my fa∣thers advice, (which I had often, but regarded it not) which grieved me greatly afterward; for I could not endure to be curbed or kept in; but at length, because of his continual (and yet justly) reproving me for my ill courses, and ill com∣pany which I kept, I resolved I would stay at home no lon∣ger, but I would be gone into the Low-Countreys, and we were put out to Sea, but by contrary Winds and Seas were driven back again: But I could not see this, but still held on my purpose, and having an opportunity, I got away for all that into England;Went from them into Eng∣land. and I was in England a while, where my friends set upon me, and perswaded me to turn home again, telling me many things to move me; but whilest I had my abode with my friends there for some time, I began to be
acquainted with some things; for there I heard good men,1. When and where he was called. 2. How? and Ministers often, and there I was made to see my sin, and wicked disobedience, by one Master Evans; and I was thereupon sadly affected, and disconsolate, and could have no quiet nor rest: In this time my Father hearing of me,1. By the Word preach∣ed. where I was (not knowing before what was become of me, but that I might be dead or drowned) now writ a Letter to me,2. By a Letter writ; by both which, cast low into tor∣ments. wherein I was admonished to beware of such as run headlong to perdition, with many other good advices; and he seemed (as Iacob) joyed to hear that his son was yet alive, &c. All which things struck me heavily to the heart,3. Effects. Delivered out. Cast in again. Delivered out again on better terms. and so I lay long, under the fearful sentence of my sin and dis∣obedience, and could not take any comfort, or content. I prayed, fasted, heard the Word, went to Ordinances, yet had no satisfaction at all. And thus I continued till my heart was ready to burst a peeces;Yet in fears till a Dream ex∣traordinary. and then I began to make it known to my friends, how I was afflicted, who did a little comfort me, but this lasted but a little while; for I soon fell again into my old malady and grief as before, being sadly diseased; and so as I could finde no comfort at all, by any means, until that place in Isa. 50.10. came into me, How he that sitteth in darkness, and seeth no light, should trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God: which did much fasten upon me, and me upon God; where∣by I had abundance of comfort, but yet never free from many temptations, and fears, and doubts; and such sometimes as made me I could not tell what to say; until once, that I had a sweet dream,☜ which hath done my soul good to this day; and in my dream I was told, that Gods love was free in Christ Jesus, I need not fear, for his grace was granted in Christ, and he puts none by that comes.4. Effects. This proved to me a sure comfort in Christ, that I was one of them that could not be put by, but reived to mercy to this day; but after∣ward I went into New-England, and had much comfort from them, and their Ministers, and was affected with their way; but by reason I could not (before) bring my Wife and Family over thither with me, I came home again hither to my Wife and Family, whom I found (I thank
God) all well and living; and ever since I have been here, but walking alone, and very desolate for want of such a society as this; and I shall now much rejoyce, if I may be one with you in this onenesse of love and spirit,☞ which (I perceive) you are in. Experience of Francis Bishop. MY earnest desire is that I may be worthy to have fellowship with you in Christ; as for my Experiences, they are ma∣ny more then I can tell you in a long time. My first main worke upon my spirit, was suddenly, and it was upon an Alarme gi∣ven whilst I was in the Troop,Called sud∣denly 1 When? 2 How? which took such successe, that I lay all under an apprehension of Gods wrath upon me, and was much cast down; so that though I prayed, and prayed, yet I could not look up, and had no confidence, but confusion was before my face.Cast down deep into hell Presently after I came to Town here, and was impeached upon an Article of War, for to lose my life, and I was imprisoned for the breach of it; by all which I was in the apprehension of Hell about me,Raised in an extraordinary vision. and could doe nothing but weep and moan, and pray, sometimes, and I counted my life as lost, and yet was more troubled under the wrath of God, then the wrath of man; but it pleased God to give me great comfort,☞ even whilst I was thus in despaire, and moan∣ing (one night) in my bed of a sudden, the room was all alight, and I saw my selfe as in a lightning,Cast down again. and being terrified, I looked till I saw it written in these words, Thy sinnes are par∣doned, and thy life is bid with Christ in God; this comforted me much in that extraordinary trouble and despair which I was in;Condemned to be shot to death. but yet for want of faith, this comfort did not continue with me, for I thought after that, that I saw God with a wrathful countenance, and I could not dare to look upon him, and the next news that I heard was, that▪ I was condemned to be shot to death; O then! I cannot expres the terrours that I was in! my woful misery was such, that neither the reading of the Scriptures, nor prayers, nor the promises would do me any good; for I could not beleeve I had a right to them, I could not lay hold on them, and in this woful misery I lay a condemned man both in soule and body; and so lay lamenting. When I turn∣ed
open the Bible in Joel 2.13. and saw it thus written, Turn to the Lord YOUR GOD, for your God is gracious,Raised up out of wrath again by an ordinary means, viz. the Scriptures, as the urest comfort to him. &c. merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repenteth him of the evill; with that, pondering a while upon it, said I, and is he such a God? well then, he is my God, and with that I gave my selfe up into his hands to doe what he would with me, yet he should be my God, and so I resolved, and was setled, and satisfied; but after this, I was set free out of prison; and though I thought this had been enough, yet for all this, I found much opposition (afterwards) in me against God, which I did not thinke could have been; but I was grievously wounded for it, and could have no quiet,3 Effects. but went to Mr. W. about it, and he told me I had fallen from my first works, I must repent, which rent my heart, and I had no rest; I returned from him, and applied to prayer, and kept that course con∣tinually to pray, and by little and little,And by pray∣er his faith. I was recovered out of that condition; and I praise God, since I have seen him smile, and looke kindly on me, and know that he loves mee, and I am sure of my pardon in Jesus Christ, on whose merits I relye, in whose righteousnesse I rest, and by his grace I am now set free to serve him. Experience in Mihil, made out by John Jecock Captain. I Can say something, and shall give out some account of Gods working upon me at the first, when I was in a wretched state,Called, but he refused. and without God in the world. Once as I was walking alone by my selfe, God did call to me,☜ and began to open and reveal himselfe to me, but my heart was hardened,Conscience afflicted. and I refusing mercy at that time, the Law laid hold upon me very fiercely, and I was so terrified in my spirit, and my conscience did so re∣prove me, that I was afraid even of every bush and tree that I met with in the darke; still I could have no rest, nor quiet,Helped by prayer extra∣ordnarily by a shining light. Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects. having refused mercy when it was lovingly tendered to me, which I thought was so great a sin, that it could not be forgiven me, but yet I continued praying alwaies almost, and heard the means; and one time being in this affliction hard praying, and with fervency of spirit seeking God, there came and shone such light round about me, and in such a way that I could not hold, but my
heart was full; and all admiring, I most wondered how the Lord should set his love so on me, on such a one as I; after this, I was full of refreshment, and have been by faith wonder∣fully carried out, and I can see God doing great things in mee and for me. Truly at sometimes I have had some sweet re∣freshments after troubles since; and I find some enlightments in me oftentimes, but nothing to the first, which was so sweet that it was extreme glorious. After that I was made ever more cautious of company, and conversation, and ever since that sweet manifestation of love, as often as I offended God, though but a little,☞ it strucke home to my heart, and I was very sensible of it ever since, and very carefull in my walk∣ings. Experience of John Cooper. I Have longed to enter into this fellowship, ever since January 4. last,Prayes for clear perswa∣sion. being the Lords day in the night time after prayers; and many troubles I had, earnestly praying to be confirmed in faith, and fully perswaded for some way or other to walk in, which the Lord was best pleased with; and (after prayer) I slept, and so continued in one sleep untill about five a clock in the morning, having had this Dream that I now give in: for I presently upon my waking made hast to write it down, lest I should have forgotten it again, or any thing of it; and this is that which I writ down,Confirmed by a Dream. as I remembred it, that I present to you under my own hand. The Dream of John Cooper the 4. of Jan. 1651. as it was given in under his own hand, WHich was this. I thought I was in the company of Mr. Rogers, Col. Hewson, and my Lord of Clogher, and that we were all going together upon a fine green way; and did all travel together a long time, and then I thought Mr. Rogers turned backe to us, and said; Brethren, you may see, what a great comfort it is to walke in the pathes of Righteousness; For, for all wee have travelled so long, yet we are not any thing a weary, &c. And Brethren be assured, that I will lead you to a place of great joy and comfort before it be long, if you will but follow mee.
So then (me thought) we went a little further, and we came to a very large and spacious place; wherein there was a great gate▪ and there Mr. Rogers made a prayer: and as soon as he had concluded; the Gate was opened, and we entred therein; and then me thought wee went into a great Garden, and there was a very large paire of stairs, where we went up, and there I saw mee thought a great many of dead peoples bones, which appeared to Mr. Rogers in full and perfect shape as ever any were, as I conceive, for at those bones he made a stand, and said unto us all, Look brethren, and take good notice of the handy work of our great God; for here you may see that they are in as perfect shapes as they were in the lower world. So then (me thought) we went up a little further, and there Mr. Rogers made another stand, and said, unto us, Brethren, Now shall I see whether you be strong in faith, or not. So then (mee thought) wee came to a place where we must needs goe over, and it was in the likenesse of a small Pike laid over a deep pit, and then mee thought Mr. Rogers said, Come Brethren, our journey is in vain without wee goe over this Pike, for they that will see the Habitation of the Lord, must goe through many dangers, and I will by the grace of God be your Leader; And so then (me thought) he went over with as much safety and ease, as if he had gone on the earth. The next that went over the Pike aforesaid, was Col. Hewson, and he went with as much ease also, and after my Lord of Clogher; The next it came to my turne, which I seeing so great a downfall, and the Pike did so bend and shake that I could not set one foot over it, was afraid; so then me thought Mr. Rogers cryed out, and said, O friend, friend! you have walked in the pathes of unrighteousnesse! So then (me thought) he made a prayer to Almighty God, that he would admit me to goe over: And so then (me thought) he bowed three or four times, and cryed out with a loud voyce, and said, O thou great God, how much I am bound unto thee for all thy loves and ma∣nifestations towards me! So then (me thought) he took me by the hand and bid me, Come over, and not to fear; and then I walked over with as much safety as the rest; so then (me thought) we went a little further, and we came to a very faire Room, and there was not any in it as I could see, but
Mr. Rogers, and Col. Hewson, and the Lord of Cloghr: They saw, and spake with God (as I conceived) for after they had done speaking, they gave many bows and thanks; and then (me thought) Mr. Rogers said, Come, we will sing prayses unto the Lord for all his Promises, and great Gifts to us. And then (me thought) wee began to sing, and I heard a multitude of voyces with rare Musicke, and I could not see any,☞ but our selves; so when Mr. Rogers had done giving God his glory in singing of praises; he did rise up, and saluted us, and said; well, Brethren, I have but a short time to stay here with you; and for the Time I have been amongst you, I have endeavoured to bring you the Right way to worship God. And for the time I doe stay with you, I shall (by the helpe of the Lord) make knowne unto you Greater things then I have done yet; So I desire you to follow my counsel, and it shall bee for your owne profits; and so I waked, or else I might have knowne more. — After this his Dream, he was much confirmed in this way wherein we walked, and the effects of it were of such in∣fluence, that he said he could not rest, nor be satisfied untill he had shewed it to the Church, and proposed himselfe to walke with them; at the time he was admitted, he said more (though not much) that he was called home to God, taken off of sinne, and the lusts of the world; and that he had found in him a great change, though he were not able to ex∣presse himselfe in words, and was now desirous to please God, to walke in his way, longing after Christ, and communion with his people, being long before wrought upon by the word preached, and prayer, and that now hee had given himselfe up to God, with such like expressions comming very brokenly from him in much appearance of humility and holinesse. A fuller Testimony as it was taken from Elizabeth Avery, out of her own mouth, and declared by her self to the whole  Church. IN this society I see much of God, and have a great desire to be one with you. From my childhood I have lived un∣der
good education; my Father was a godly man.Mr. Parker was her Father, that able Divine that writ De Eccles. Polit. so largely; but she married Master Avery a Commissary in Ireland. Called legally. 1. When. 2. How? 3. Effects. I was al∣ways tender and consciencious, but my conversion was won∣derful. On one Sabbath-day I was playing, but I was soon and soundly checked for it in my spirit; and went home, but I was a great while troubled, and lay under bondage all along: And I was much distracted and confused for sin a long time, till about sixteen years of age; and then I began to be very strict, and so retired in my life, that many won∣dered at it: I had an entire love to the preaching of the Gos∣pel; O how I longed after it! but alas! we had then no good Preaching-Ministery to be had or heard about us! and yet my heart longed a long time after it, till I came to be married. But alas! I was yet under the Law, and Works,Yet under the Law. Till called out of Egypt into light by Free-grace. until God called me out of Egypt; and I could not tell how I was once wrapt up in a light, and hearing something spo∣ken of Free-grace, then I melted. Yet for all these, I had great afflictions, and amongst others, by the loss of my chil∣dren, Gods rod was laid heavy upon me, insomuch, That he struck three of them together; and one childe above all,Yet in great afflictions. a most sweet childe, and one, that I least thought of them all would have died, was very ill; and we were talking (I, my Husband, and some Friends,) together of comfortable things, and amongst others of David, when he said of his childe (dead) I shall go to it, it shall not return to me. Ay sayes one, that is to the grave; which word wounded me; and I went into the Garden to wail and moan my self; but soon after, my Husband came and told me my childe was dying; at which I was left in an horror, as if I were in Hell, none could comfort me, nothing could satisfie me, no Friends,Even in Hell. nothing; then it was sad indeed to me, a Hell indeed. I sent for the Doctor and others, but to no purpose. Yet after this the Lord wrought on me much; and one,Deliverance by ordinary means. Effects of it. a Minister of Christ, that had power from God to do me good, gave me much satisfaction by a Letter of his: And after that, me thoughts, I was content to part with all, and to let all go; then God tryed me, and took away another childe from me, and I could bear it very well, and was not troubled, but rather did rejoyce within me to be thus tryed. No cross,
nor loss could trouble me then,Nothing could trouble her. and I continued in this strength (I praise God) pretty long. But after this I was like to have died, and then, to adde to my great sorrow, the good Minister that did me so much good,Began to dis∣pair again, but soon quieted. left the place, and went away, and my friends slighted me, and one thing added to another, made me begin to despair again; but then I know not how God quieted me again, which I won∣dered at, and was much comforted, and confident, that God would do me good, and I hoped and looked for it: And the very next morning as I was at prayer,Called Evan∣gelically. Extraordinarily In a trance. God wonderfully ap∣peared; and then was it, that Christ was manifested to my spirit, and I was as in a trance for a while, but after I awak∣ed full of joy;And confirmed by ordinarie means, te Word. and yet for all this, I was somewhat under bondage (me thoughts,) but the Word and Means of Grace did confirm me, and comfort me. In the times of the Wars in England, I was brought out of Egypt into the Wilderness. O! I was much refreshed by the Lord two or three years, and was much contented,In times of wars, full of joyes, and peace, and in∣ward teachings. and had his teachings within me, yea, and (many times) without his outward instruments; for I had his Spirit, his voice speaking within me, and God alone was with me, and no strange god. But when the wars began to cease, my greatest trouble, and that at which I took offence was, That we were so without the means, and with∣out able Ministers; for now I could not be satisfied, but even doted on them,This forgot, and doting on outward means altogether, and on mens per∣sons. and could not wait with patience; for I had forgot now how God had taught me within before, and without them. Yet I followed and hunted after my lovers, having mens persons in admiration; and thus God suffered me for a while to go on after them. A while after this, Colonel Lambert desired me to go to Oxford, and when I was to go, I made ready my self, packt up my cloaths and all, and rid away; most, with desire for communion with godly people there, for (as yet) I could see no further—▪ I heard their disputes between Master Kiffith and others, very hot,A stronger temptation to dny Ordi∣nances, and the use of the means. but saw nothing of God there, and was troubled at it, and could not after that hear him or others; but I went into a Garden alone my self mourning, and sat so a while under a Wall, and by and by came three men to me
(passing that way) and wondered to see me so; they asked me many questions—. But a little after I recovered my self out of that passion, and went and told Colonel Lambert how it was with me; but he told me, I should not onely be taken off of Ordinances, but off of believing too,☜ within a while; at which I was troubled, and went away unsatisfied I was troubled to hear any Preach, and being once got to go to the publick place,Tormented at them. I was so tormented that I could not bear it; for I could not joyn with them, nor hear, nor pray, nor had no rest, no comfort, nor ease, nor could I eat or drink, but went (as I was wont) to bewail in a Garden, where I was moaning, when there came one unto me, and presently told me, That I was under the opening of the fifth seal, and very near the sixth, in the condition which I was in, and should be in. — Being thus afflicted, I desired to go home again from Ox∣ford, and writ to my Husbad, but the Letter was burnt;— but I was in such a condition to see Gods wrath in every thing against me, as is not to be expressed; I was left in all kindes of troubles (as it were) at once;What was her comfort, and her Heaven in this Hell? but here was all the comfort that was left me, and it was my Heaven in my Hell, that God would be glorified by my destruction: And so long I found some ease, and content (me thought,☜) and it did joy me at my heart to think,A high pitch. Effects of Christs call, a true and strong love. That all things should go well with the Saints, and they should be happy; though I had no share with them, yet these things did me good. And indeed, I dare boldly say when my faith was gone, and hope gone, and all gone, and flew from me, and could not be seen in me that I had any; yet love remained, and might be seen,1 Cor. 13.13. and was not gone; noe,☜ though I were to be cast presently in∣to Hell▪ yet I could love God, and was glad he was to be glorified, though I were to be ruined; and so I was glad at the welfare of Gods people. Thus I was three quarters of a year, and did not now care for my self, what became of me,Not caring for self, but for God and his people. for the reasons I said be∣fore; but it appeared my deliverance was near at hand, though (as yet) I had no assurance of salvation; yet at last I was car∣ried out with a great confidence, that light was near at hand,
And yet I met with terrible shakings for all that, which lit altogether upon the flesh, for the spirit was free: So that some three years agone,How delivered. God came in upon my spirit, and gave me full assurance, and I heard a voice say—, And sor∣row thou shalt see no more.Extraordinari∣ly by a voice twice. Then I writ down what God had done for me, and writ about to my friends; but yet I was struck in the flesh again,☜ which I wonder at; and then I heard the voice again say, It was sin that was suffering in me, and the flesh as the punishment of sin;Effects of it. and so I found it was, for the destruction of the flesh; and ever after that I found Christ in me,Extraordinari∣ly called. ruling and reigning, and taking all power to himself, and he hath caught the man-childe up to God, which I brought forth. i. e. The flesh, (by his incarnation) and I have found in me (and do yet) his judgement-seat st, to judge and sentence sin, and lust, and corruption, and his throne is there for himself to sit, and to rule by his own Laws: And thus it continues with me at this day, and the Lord leads  me on, higher and higher in himself; and for that I see so much of him here in the midst of this Church,Her Husband a Captain. This Gentle∣woman decla∣red to several Church-Mem∣bers, that be∣fore the Author came over, she had in a dream one night of her troubles, a vision of him so plainly, that after he was in Dublin, the first Serm. he prea∣ched, she told her friends this was the man that God had declared to her in a vision, should comfort her soul. I desire to be one also with you. Another Testimony or Experience made by Elizabeth Chambers, in the Church aforesaid, when she was ad∣mitted. I Have often prayed for communion with Gods people, which I hope to enjoy as his answer—. When the Rebellion brake out here in Ireland, I went over with my Husband into England, and at Bristol there were a poor despised people that met together, and had some communion, but they were made a meer off-scorn, and disdained by all almost; but I desired to know them more; and the more I heard them reproached, and abused, and called Hypocrites, and holy Brethren, or Sisters, in mockery or the like, the more I rejoyced, and desired to be one with them; and I reproved their enemies for reproach∣ing them; for that (by that) it appeared the more to me, That they belonged to the Lord, and I wished I might be one with them: But being afterwards to return hither, when I was come over, I went to hear at Katherines Church (so
called) in Dublin; but I could not well hear the Minister, and when I did, he railed so bitterly against the godly peo∣ple, that I could not edifie any thing by him; but I heard Mr. Brisco, and was much moved by him;Called Assu∣rance. 1. When, where. 2. How? but yet I was with∣out assurance, and had no full and clear satisfaction all this while; until the Lord, who heareth prayers, sent over Mr. Rogers from the Councel of State to us, who on the first sub∣ject that he was cast upon to Preach out of Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, that I might Preach him among the Heathen, I conferred no longer with flesh and blood. He did show, that unless Christ were revealed in us, he was vailed to us; and the ablest Preachers speak from inward reveal∣ings, Christ revealed in them. And in the handling of this, he shewed, that unless Christ be in us, no Salvation to us, 2 Cor. 13.5. Now after I had heard him on this, I was much cast down,In great trou∣bles and tra∣vels of soul. for I could not finde Christ, but corruptions and sins in me; and being removed from my former bottom, I was much troubled, and could not finde any thing in me to build my comfort upon; but lay lamenting, and afflicted day and night. My Friends were much troubled to see me, and questioned much with me; but yet being cast down, and undone thus, upon the first sight and Sermon of this man, I sighed and prayed, and sighed and pray∣ed, and went to bed with my heart full, and head full, and eyes full, and ell afflicted; at length I slept and dreamed,A Dream. That un∣less Christ were in me, I were damned, a reprobate, undone, and lost for ever. When I awaked, my heart aked, ready to break,3 The effects of it. I rose up, and wept sore, and with sighs and tears I took the Bible, and looked out for Christ there; and looked out and turned to the proofs that Master Rogers mentioned, and examined them;A good exam∣ple to women. and then I examined my own heart, and searched; but all this while I was at a loss, and lamenting, I told a Gentlewoman my condition, and she did what she could to comfort me,☜ but to no purpose. The next day I hasted away to hear him again, and there I found comfort, for he was now upon certain signs whereby we might (likely) judge of Christ within, revealed in us, and know it; and also to others, he gave and urged the ten∣der of Gospel-promises, upon their willingness to accept of, and re∣ceive in Christ, as Isa. 55.1. and John 7.37. Revel. 22.17.
John 6.37. and 16.20. and Matth. 12.20. Isa. 44.3. Psal. 145.19. and Prov. 13.12, 19. and Matth. 28.5. Fear not, for you seek Jesus; with some other places. And moreover, he proved to us, That some had Christ (within) when they think they have him not; but therefore do pass a false sentence upon themselves,Fully satisfied, that she had found Christ. and seek him without; as the Canaanitess, and the Spouse, in Cant. 3.3. and Mary Magdalen, &c. By all which, I was much raised up, and went home with joy, and was sure that I had found Christ now; for my heart was changed, and satisfied, (as it were) full of light, and joy, and I saw clearly, that I had Christ;3. The effects of it. and all my motions, desires and heart, went out after him, and him alone. After this, my sister had the sickness, and yet I was not afraid, but lived on God,To do others good. and fed on Christ, as all my comfort: And I saw all was empty and nothing, and not worth loving without him; and I often spoke to my sister of Christ within; and did often pray by her, and was (through grace) made an Instrument to do her great good; I being always with her, and seeing her a dying woman. Yea, the more the Lord hath taken away from me, as my Husband, Father, Friends, Sister, Children, and all;Christ is her all now. the more have I made Christ in me, in the room and stead of all these to me. And I let God alone to do what he will with me,☞ and I applied that place to Abraham, Gen. 17. Fear not, for I am God all-sufficient, &c. And so I rested on God, and the life I now live, is by faith in the Son of God; who gave himself for me, and died for my sins, and rose again for my justi∣fication. Experience of Henry Johnson, which is taken imperfectly and very short. I Have met with many great mercies, when I was in the West-Indies, there we wanted the means, and had no good Ministers; but after that with conference that I had with a good man, I began to know something of God, for till then I was in great ignorance: Afterward I came to London, and there in∣deed I heard many good men, and had much means, yet but a little assurance; and so I held in a formal-way of working and wor∣shipping; until a time, when I was surprised with fears, I had a
a vision, and an appearance (as it were) round about me,A Vision ex∣traodinary, and a voice. and full of glory, which I cannot express; but a voice said, You shall see it; at which I was afraid, and after all this, I thought I was but a Formalist, and no better then an Hypocrite, and could not have rest or comfort, but went about, and desired prayers to be put up for me, and durst not go to hear; until it pleased God to bring into my heart, Isa. 50.10. Heb. 10.20. & 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee▪Confirmed by ordinary means. Effects. And such places which did abundantly comfort me, and satisfie me, and so I could come with boldness in Jesus Christ; and then durst go to hear, and have been setled on Christ ever since, and have used the means of Grace and Ordinances, with great affection to Jesus Christ. Experience of Edward Wayman. I Am not able to express what I have found of Gods goodness to me. My first call was upon a dream,Converted by a Dream of a Black Dog. which I had of a great black terrible dog, which seized upon me, and took hold on my ear fast, which I thought was the Devil; at which, I waked with screeks and cries, and such frights, as for three weeks I thought I should have gone distracted; for I found this was sent to raise me out of my sins, which were after set so before me,Effects of it. so that I was a long time afflicted; and so, as I could scarce walk about the streets for feebleness: But it pleased God to com∣fort me since by Mr. Fowler, and some others; and in private meetings, and in prayers; So that I am sure I am pardoned in Christ, and that God hath accepted of him, as an offering for me. I was zealous before for Forms, but now I desire to be built up by the Spirit, and to live by the Spirit, in Christ, whom I make my all: And for that end, I desire to joyn with you, as you do with the Father and the Son. Experience given in by Humphry Mills. MY Father was a Gentleman of a fair estate, had many children, eleven Sons of us, he was High-Sheriff; and when he died, we were all the Family of us broken in con∣fusion, and dispersed: Two of us were brought up within five miles of Glocester in England, but I was placed in London
an Apprentice after; and by this means, my sorrow and troubles be∣gan to be great; first out of consideration of this change and it continued so a while, till I was about the seventeenth year of my age, and then my sorrow was turned into another kinde of sorrow and trouble for sin: I was for three years together wounded for sins, and under a sense of my corruptions, which were many; and I followed Sermons, pursuing the means, and was constant in duties,A formal righ∣teousnesse. and doing; looking for Heaven that way: And then I was so precise for outward formalities, That I censured all to be reprobates,☞ that wore their hair any thing long, and not short above their ears; or that wore great Ruffs,Very precise. and Gorgets, or Fashions, and Follies: But yet I was distracted in my mind, wounded in conscience, and wept often and bitterly, and prayed earnestly; but yet had no comfort, till I heard that sweet Saint (now in Heaven) Doctor Sibbs; by whose means,Trouble in mind. and Ministry, I was brought to peace and joy in my spirit. His sweet soul-melting Gospel-Sermons won my heart, and refreshed me much; for by him I saw and had much of God; and was confident in Christ, and could over-look the World; and then I did not care for it, and was not afraid of afflictions;Till Dr. Sibs did comfort him. Called by the Gospel 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects. and yet sometimes I was under a spirit of bond∣age again unto fear: But nevertheless, my heart held firm, and resolved, and my desires all Heaven-ward. I heard Funeral Sermons much, but Doctor Sibbs most, by whom I was most effectually wrought upon, and satisfied with comforts. After this I married a precious Christian full of Christ, and a great comfort to me. My Trade was in Whole-sale, and since those times, I have lost in England and Ireland, Four∣teen hundred pounds. I did not think to have lived here, when I came over first, and brought wares; but I found God to deal very graciously with me. And being much refreshed by your Meetings and Members, I desire to be one with you in Christ.
Experience of Ruth Emerson as it came out of her own mouth in the  Church at Dublin. THe Lord hath exercised me much, and to passe by all outward troubles which have been very many, I shall declare what the Lord did for me when I was young. I was called out once to hear one some four miles off, where I lived, who was counted a very good man, and I went (with others) to hear him, not knowing well what I went about, but I got leave to goe, and he was on that subject▪ Thy testimonies are sure, holinesse be∣commeth thy house for ever.Called by the word. 1 When, where. 2 How. The Minister preached exceeding well, and I began to be affected therewith; and after that my mind ran much on what he said, and I was carried much after the Word, and went often five miles off to hear Mr. Archer, whom I followed, by whom I came to see that I was lost, and left by Adam in a woful condition, yet still I heard him one Ser∣mon after another, but was all this while in great woe and misery, and so continued a long time under the sense of my undone condition, and damnation,3 Effects. untill Mr. Archer perceiving my con∣dition, offered me Christ freely, onely upon thirstiness and weariness, which he proved was as much as was required on our part to come to Christ upon, and to tender him as he did; I made many objections (which would be long to tell now) but he answered them all out of the Word so fully that I could not tell what to say more, but was so wrapped in, that I could not but resign my self up to this Saviour Jesus Christ, and that I would rowl my soul upon him, and leave my selfe so with him.Temptations manifold. Yet afterwards not finding my selfe so gifted and graced, nor having so much of Gods Spirit, as I saw others had, I was in great doubt for a while of my estate, and was much troubled againe, especially when I thought I heard how the damned roared in hell, and blasphemed God to his face; O this!—this cut me to the very heart!Sense of hell. to think I should be one of those that should blaspheme God,☜ this wounded me more then hell! But after this, hearing the Word constantly,Deliverance. Christ was offered to me time after time, till I was fully called to Christ, and to hang upon him as I do at this day, with confidence and assurance of grace and mercy. And seeing God hath done thus
for me, and hath given me this beginning to let me see his everlasting love; now surely I will relye upon him, though I be in darkness and see no light.Resoluion Yet I confesse I walk not ac∣cording to the mercies received, but I find back-slidings; yet I remember Gods everlasting love in Christ Jesus, and whom he loves, he loves to the end; wherefore I relye on him, and know that by his grace I shall stand; and do much desire to walk with you, that I may be watched over by you. Experience of Anne Hewson, wife to Col. Hewson, as it was ta∣ken  in the Church. Called by the love of God▪ 1 When where. 2 How. 3 Effects. I Lived in London, and was a frequent lover of good men, and especially of one Mr.Culverwel, a very able godly Minister, and I received much comfort by him, he preached the love of God so sweetly that my heart melted to hear him, and hereby he first shewed me my miserable condition in shewing what the love of God had done for me; and after I saw my misery in my selfe, I came to see no happiness but in Christ alone; and I was very much troubled, because for a long time I could finde nothing, but the legal worke upon my spirit, and I feared that the worke was not yet perfect, therefore I followed and heard the most searching Ministers I could; and was still tormented in my minde; but Mr. Culverwel (poor man) did still doe all hee could to comfort me,☞ and to incourage me, and told me that God would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flax, and that I was in the way to have Christ a full satis∣faction, and bid me be of good comfort, but I continued in these troubles and temptations as if Sathan had been let loose upon me, yet this did something comfort me, that other of Gods people were in the like condition with me; but yet I was thus till I met with Mr. Bolton, by whom I had much comfort, and by other means together I became fully satisfied and assured of Gods love to me in Christ. Experience of Dorothy Emett. MR. Owen was the first man by whose means, and Ministry I became sensible of my condition,Called by Mr. Owen. I was much cast down,
and could have no rest within me, and so I continued till his going away from us,Effects. A voice in her sleep satisfied. and at his going he bid me beleeve in Christ, and be fervent in prayer; but I said, how should I do to beleeve? I lay a long time in this trouble of minde, untill in my sleep one night came to me a voyce, (I thought) that said, I am the Fountain of living water: and when I awaked, I was much refreshed, for I had great thirstings after Christ, and yet I was under some doubts, untill I heard one at Cork-house upon that subject, Rom. 8. The Spirit witnesseth with our spirits, that we are the sons of God. So that God satisfied me very much, and I have had ever since a full assurance of Gods love to me in Christ. Experience of Anne Bishop. I Have tasted much of God upon my spirit; the first Sermon that I heard here so wrought upon me, that for a year or two,Called per∣plexed. 1 When wrought upon. 2 How by Christ freely offered. 3 Effects. I was much tormented, and could have no comfort at all, or confidence to take Christ when he was offered; for I had this objection continually, that I was not fit to receive Christ, but after∣ward bearing Christ freely offered without any fitnesse or qua∣lification in us before-hand, without any such conditions of worthinesse, but with hungrings and thirstings, and that hee must be taken thus barely (as it were) as from us, and willingly so as to part with Father, and Mother, and all for him. I was at last wrought upon to take him on these termes,Temptations. and yet I had abundance of temptations, and trials both inward and outward (which I hope to have time to tell hereafter) but I durst not do any duty, nor so much as pray before any, apprehending that I was an hypocrite,☜ and once I sate down in great perplexi∣ties, when it pleased God to come upon my spirit, and to re∣veal to me that I must beleeve in him, and cast my self upon him, yet I was troubled, and bid the Lord do what he would with me, so I might but have him.Assurance in Christ. All this was before he made himselfe so known to me as he did afterwards; for he made me first to see my selfe nothing, and although before I rested on my workes and duties, and so I did long, yet now I could finde no rest there, but thought all my former hopes were gone, and Christ to be lost, and I was destitute and comfortlesse; but since, I have found Christ to be mine, and that I am his, and the Lord
hath appeared to be my righteousnesse, and hath fully satisfied me, so that I live barely upon him. Experience of Tabitha Kelsall. I Was determined once to have life by my owne actings, and thus I was a long time in England,1 Formal for doings. I was of Paul Hobsons society, and ere long all the Ordinances grew dead unto me,2 Denying Ordinances and duties. and I knew not what to do; I lay long under a sad condition, and so as I could not read, nor pray, nor hear, but found all unprofitable to me; many wayes did God shake me sore▪Temptations till the word was opened. and I lay under many trials and shakings long till the Lord came in by himselfe, and setled that in my minde, which is in Heb. 12.26. Yet once more I will shake not the earth onely, but also heaven, that those things which cannot be shaken may remaine: For the Lord by his voice did thus comfort me, that although heaven as wel as earth, inward, and outward man, my spirit as well my flesh, and all my works, and righteousnesses were shaken, yet it was to make way for what could never be shaken, and yet after this I was lifted up to much by knowledge, and withdrew from Ordinances, but seeing how some that did so, and denied Ordinances; did live disorderly, and walke wickedly, I was much troubled at it,Shee saw o∣ther Ranters live wickedly. Called in gain by the word, & made a Cove∣nant with the Lord. and yet left in the Wildernesse a long time after untill God did discover by his word to me, and declare clearly that I must not withdraw from the Ordinances, nor deny communion with his people, and then I made a Covenant with the Lord, that I would not, and that I would part with all for one smile, and was glad at my heart that I was received again, and brought under the means of grace, and Ordinances of Christ Jesus. Experience of Andr. Manwaring, Major. An ill liver.I Was brought up well, by Parents accounted Puritans, till about sixteen years of age, after that I was Appren∣tice in London, but ill company drew me away, and I took but ill courses untill the three and twentieth, or four and twentieth year of my age;In dangers. then I came into Ireland in the beginning of the Rebellion in the North of Ireland, I passed through great dangers, and many deaths, (as I may say) for there
my Father was killed, my Wife was wounded, and I my selfe with much danger escaped from the bloody Rebels; after that at Tredah-fight I was, when it was delivered, and being laid in the field among the dead, with fifteen wounds, I was given up for one of the dead; but after that recovering,Even death. I went into Engl. and then returned into Ireland again; at which time I began to looke about me to follow the Word, to hear good men, being sensible of my sinnes! and former forgetfulnesse of God, and goodnesse. I heard one Mr. Owen here, who did me much good, and made me to see my misery in the want of Christ, and so I continued, till Mr. Rogers was sent over to us, by whom I have received great comforts and assurance of Christ,Called, 1 When. 2 How. Confirmed. 3 Effects. and now I doe verily beleeve I have fellowship with the Father, and his Sonne Jesus Christ, and finde a great change in me, and I abhor ill company and courses, and desire to walke in all well-pleasing to God; and though I meet with temptations and hin∣drances, yet I blesse God he carries me on in goodnesse, and I can now pray, and that by the Spirit, and I love the Word and Ordinances, and do earnestly long to have fellowship with the people of God, to watch over me; for I am yet weake. Blessed be God for his free grace in Christ Jesus before I had any knowledge in Christ, the Lord spoke to me by the means of an honest man about thirteen years agoe,Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects. who worked much upon me. I heard Sermons, and followed Ministers much after that; I was wont to hear in London Mr. Cradock, and Mr. Simpson; Mr. Cradock wrought much upon me, being upon that say∣ing in Isa. Woe is me, I am an unclean creature, &c. And truly I could finde it in me, as if he had spoken to me onely; what he said, so that I was thereby wrought upon: I was much af∣flicted for a time, and gave my selfe much to prayer, and did love the truth, and all the Saints, and so I continue now, and I have found, and doe yet those things true in me, which were spoken by Mr. Rogers of that onenesse of love and unity of the Spirit, which ought to be among all Saints, which hath much wrought upon me, and affected me; I have seen my (sad) condition by nature, and now I shall see it in grace: and now O! how I love the wayes of God, and holinesse, and duties! and means of grace! which before I did not, but such
things of God, as before I loathed, I now love, and long after Jesus Christ alone. Experience of Edward Hoar Captain. A legall righteousnesse.I Shall declare something of God upon my spirit. It is some twelve years since (before which I understood not the happinesse of enjoying Christ, that I began to say, What shall I doe to be saved? I followed the Ministers, frequented the means, and did too much depend upon my doings, and rest on works; and what I heard from the Ministers, I tooke for granted truths,☞ because they said so, without searching or examining the Scriptures, and the minde of God. I tryed the Scriptures by men, not men by the Scriptures; but at last, I saw them to be subject to errors as well (or worse) as others, and then I saw that humane Learning could not get be∣yond humane: And what Peter said in 2 Pet. 3 16. Which they that are unlearned wrest, (as they doe also the other) Scriptures to their own destruction; could not be meant of hu∣mane Learning, Peter himselfe not being so, but of Spiritual. So that ever since I could not looke on men as infallible, and thence forward I beleeved not things to be so, because they said so,Assurance. but because God sayd so, and his Word. But now I live in Christ, and I can positively say, I have faith, and am sure in Christ to be saved, and looke upon none else; and I was darknesse, yet now I am light in the Lord. And so I pro∣pose my selfe to you, I had opportunity in other places before now to have been of a society; but I was not free in my spirit for that I found them to live too much in formes, and not in the Spirit; but hearing of so much love and freedome of the Spirit in this Society, I desire to be one with you in the Lord, and one with another. Experience of John Spilman Captaine. A despiser of Ministers for long preach∣ing.BEing a member of the Church at Yarmouth in England, of which Mr. Bridges is Pastor, I have given there an account of my faith and life, onely shall say thus much more, that once in a carnall condition as I was, I did slight the Ministers of Christ,☞ especially your long Preachers, and could not abide
that any should preach long; but at last I was catched by one, and hee was on Heb. 8.8.10. the new Covenant made in Christ, which was applied to me very home, and touched me to the heart, and made me to inquire into my condition,Called, 1 When, whee. 2 How. hear∣ing the danger of being out of that Covenant, as it was to bee out of Noah's Arke, and I asked my heart about it, whither I belonged to it or no! but (alas) I lay long in great afflicti∣on, and had no satisfaction, nor assurance, so that I knew not what to doe, being under many temptations, sometimes I would heare, and sometimes affected the Ordinances, and sometimes not, and so I continued a while, untill those promises comforted me much in Hosea 14 4. I will heal their back-slidings and love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from him. And Heb. 8.12.Confirmed. For I will be mercifull to their un∣righteousnesse, and their sinnes and iniquities will I remember no more. And that in Rom. 5.6. In due time Christ dyed for the ungodly. And verse 8. While we were yet sinners. And some other places besides; but yet I questioned whether he dyed for me or no, and that was answered, yes, for me; for I was one of the number of sinners, and ungodly that needed Christ, but being in fears, I went to Mr. Bridges, told him how I was, and indeed he satisfied me very much for the time; but I fell into great trouble after all this, and had a sentence of death within me, and thought I was damned, and utterly lost for all this, still wanting faith, and looking upon my owne actings and graces, till the Lord laid these sayings of Paul to Corinth home close to my heart, Covet the best things, and I tell you yet a more excellent way,Assurance by Christ. and I thought there was yet a better way, but I was a great while troubled,☜ for I was well enough untill I had some sweet enjoyments of Jesus Christ, and then I discovered the most excellent way,Effects. which is Christ and nothing but Christ, and then I grew confident, and full of courage and assurance, and loved Christ, in all, and all that was Christs, and Christ more then all.
Experience of William Walker. I Have much reason to know a great worke of God upon my heart in delivering me wonderfully, from se∣verall destroying sinnes, which once I thought leight; but so great that I can scarce utter them; I was very extravagant, even here in Ireland, but was brought very low in body and minde together, and then was sensible of disobeying my Pa∣rents from what the Word sayes of men, they shall be lovers of themselves,Called, 1 When, where. heady, and disobeying parents, which cast me down, afflicted my conscience, and troubled me so, that I cannot utter it; and I lay thus a long time till I heard once Christ freely offered, even to the worst of sinners, and then I began to looke up a little, with hopes of comfort, and applied these offers to me as needing him, and so I began to be satisfied with peace, and rest, and I followed the Word▪ and rejoyced in it, and loved the godly to have company with them,2 How. and yet for all this I was under much temptation,3. Effects. and too much I was given to drinking, till Mr. Strong told me, Brother, I hear strange things of you, that you are given to drinking, &c. which so smit me, with the abuses I received abroad by the prophane sort, who said, (O this is one of Fowlers followers) that I was wounded in my spirit a long time, that I should bring such a scandal upon the Gospel, and a blemish: For two months I was tormented in my minde till the Lord recovered me, and gave me resolution and power against the sin, which hath been ever since, I ac∣knowledge this great mercy to me, and doe live upon Christ the true Messias, whom I beleeve to have dyed for my sinnes, and will save my soul.
Experience of Lawrence Swinfield. I Have been a Travellur for some yeares, and wandred  about in far Countries beyond Seas till I came backe a∣gaine into England, and all this while in my natural con∣dition, and so I continued a great while, but I came hither in a sad condition, and very comfortlesse, and could not tell what to doe, but to fall to prayer, and I did that often,In his naturall condition long and found (I thanke God) much refreshment from that meanes but nothing to satisfie my minde, for I have been much troubled in conscience, and could not take comfort untill the Lord was pleased to give in some promises to feed upon,Troubled in conscience. as Matth. 11.28, 29, 30. where he promised to ease the heavy, op∣pressed, and to make his yoke easie and light, and then I began to long for a Reformation, and to desire to be under his yoke,How releeved. which was before (I thought) a burthen to me, and so Esa. 55.1. Come buy without price, and without money;Effects. and so I came as freely as I was called, and was presently confirmed by the Spirit of God perswading me to give my selfe up into Gods hands upon these his owne termes, and so I did to this day, and many other sweet promises I had, whereby I had a great deale of peace and comfort; and can confidently say, the Lord is my God, and I have ever since found in me a very great change from what I was before. As to instance in anger, I am now so free from that Passion, that I thinke,☜ none can anger me; and so for many other things,☜ and I have a great delight in the Word and Ordinances, and have received a great deal of comfort, and been much confirmed by Mr. Rogers,Confirmed and assured. and some others, and I know now that my Redeemer lives.
Experience of John Chamberlain. I Beleeve, as you heard before, in one God, manifested by three Relations, and I beleeve this Church-way is Christs, and the very minde of God, and that the Premises made to the Assemblies of Sion, are yours being thus separate from them wihout. But to tell you my life, it hath been very evill;From the un∣godly. In a carnall state. but now the Spirit of God testifies in mee that I am his. About fourteen years agone, I was a grievous Wretch, and was cast out of doors for my disobedience. But after∣ward being bound an Apprentice, the example of my Fellow-Prentice (who was well-given) wrought much upon mee; and hee seemed to mee to doe all for Heaven, and to minde Heaven altogether,Wrought upon by a good ex∣ample. which began to incline mee much that way too, and one time I went to him, and desired him to own me, and to let me be with him, and partake, but hee told mee hee must not cast bread to Dogs, which troubled mee much; but then I remembred to say, But I may have the crummes, and thence forward was hee willing to helpe mee all he could; so I went with him often, and by my selfe to heare good men, and the word preached, but I was yet puffed up with Spirituall pride, and did back∣slide from my promises,Yet proud. and the profession which I made; wee were after that about such a way of walking together as this is; but wee were not so strict, and carefull of ad∣mitting;Sinful and scourged by sin in again. so I was admitted without any great Examination or Triall; but by reason of a Contract with a Woman which I could not owne, I was much troubled, and brake out into sinne, and God would have one sinne a scourge to another sinne, to fetch me home againe, which hee did to the purpose; and I was after much trouble in minde restored againe to the favour of God.Strong tempta∣tions. Since that, being a Souldier, I was thereby brought under many Temptations to sin, especially that vile lust
of Drunkennesse, which too much pursued mee, and so strongly, that sometimes I was ready to yeeld, at other times ready to make away my selfe, which I oftentimes was tempted to doe,Delivered and satisfied. and sometimes I was ready to wish all manner of curses upon mee for that sinne; yet so I continued till the Lord at last came and delivered mee out of these snares, and filled my heart with his promises and presence, and assured me of love in Christ; and now I long to enjoy more of him, and therefore desire to seek him with you in this fellowship. Experience of Adrian Strong. In short thus: FOr my life, I was two and twenty yeares a childe of wrath, and then by the word preached,Called in when he was temp∣ted. and read out of good Books and the Bible, I was brought in to God: for my precisenesse and walking in the wayes of God, I have been imprisoned twice. Sometimes I have had mony before these troubles, and then my heart was set too much on it; but afterwards I was taken off of all, and then I began to leave swearing, and drinking, &c. which I did too much incline to. And ever since as afflictons have growne greater on mee, grace hath growne greater in mee. I was travelling into England; but now I blesse God for this mercy ordained for his Saints, that I can have so sweet fellowship with them here in Dublin.
Experience of Hugh Leeson. I Have something to say, and I desire, that the grace of God may appear more in me every day. I am convinced of this way of Christ, for believers to walk in; and I have nothing to plead but my own unworthiness, yet fully assured in Christ, I am emboldned to bring my desires here like smoaking flax. I cannot deny, but my life hath been very bad,A great sinner. and I have been exceedingly given to ill company and courses, and can complain (and do) of what I have been more then others, viz. A great sinner, till grace was given me, and mercy shown to me, and Christ manifested in me by his Spirit;First wrought upon by his wife. 1. When, where. 2. How? which was begun at first by my Wife, a Wid∣dows daughter in this Town, a godly Christian, and whom God made the first Instrument of my good; by her often reading of the Scriptures to me, and giving me good councels and admonitions, and by the Spirits working within me, with it: And yet I did even hate the Saints, and forbid many of them coming to my house, and was yet under many tempta∣tions, I must needs say; but I am now made sure of Christ, convinced by the Word,Confirmed. and much comforted and established since Mr. Rogers came hither;3. Effect. and do now long after no∣thing so much as Jesus Christ, and do desire earnestly to be in one with his people, and pray them all to pray for me, that I may stand by faith established in the truth. Experience of Frances Curtis. I Cannot but condemn my self before I speak, I am so unworthy of this mercy. I have lived wantonly in my youth, forgetting God, doing no good, but all evil, till Gods hand was heavy upon me for about eleven years; and when in my outward state I began to mend,Called by af∣flictions, out∣ward and in∣ward. still in my in∣ward I was much troubled, and wished that God had taken me away by my former afflictions; these inward were so great, and a troubled spirit, who can bear? But afterward I was much comforted again.
In these wars I was stripped by the Rebels (being abroad) and came home so, thorough sad tempests, and since have gone thorough great troubles, and very many. A while af∣ter, I heard my Husband was killed by the Rebels, which I feared was by my sins, and so my troubles were renewed; and then the enemies came upon us, the Cannon-bullets flew over my head; and in few days I was turned out of doors, with my childe in my arms. I cannot express what God hath done for me, in saving my life, and my Husbands, in hearing my prayers and tears; and now in satisfying my soul with himself.Satisfied. Assured. Effects. I have received much sweet satisfaction by Mr. R. and have now the testimony within me of Gods love to me, which makes me so unfainedly to love him, and his ways, and desire to be a member with his people, in his Church. Experience of Mary Turrant. I Lived till my Twenty third year, and knew not God; but after that, I came to religious people, and received some good, and soon after was brought to the sight of my self, and then I despaired of mercy;Dispaired. and thought I was damned, and none of Gods, a great while, but was at last comforted by good Ministers, and the Word of God;Recovered by the Word. but I was in such a place and condition, that for seven years, I do not know, that I  so much as a Religious man. My chil∣dren were murthered by the Rebels, and I lost my Husband by the sickness, and yet the Lord hath spared me in mine old age; and now I see why? That I may enjoy this great mercy, which I never looked for,Effects. to comfort me in my old age. I have received great comforts indeed by Master Rogers and I must needs say, That I serve my God with a chearful heart, &c.
Experience of Elizabeth Marrow. I Have heard at Cork-house, from the Governor, and of∣ten from Mr. Brisco, at— precious truths, and have been much affected with them, and told my Husband, that I have heard of Christ. But after that the sickness came into my house, which drew me much to God, Doctor Sibbils did me much good,Called, 1 When. 2 How. 3 Effects. speaking of every one that had a darling sin, which they loved: By which I was put upon the in∣quiry and search, and was so troubled and afflicted in my minde for a time,Confirmed and assured. until it pleased God to satisfie within, by his holy Spirit, and to reveal to me, That he was my Father; of which I have a full assurance, and the witness is within me.
30. Experience of Rebecca Rich. I Was wont (by Gods providence) to hear Mr. Cradock by whose Ministry the Lord wrought much upon me,Captain Rich's wife. Called, 1 When, where. 2. How. Lived much on formes. 3. Effects. and I thought I was the person that he particularly spoke to; and I lay long afflicted under the sense of my naturall condi∣tion, and under the burthen of a wounded spirit, and after that whilest I lived nigh London, I lived much upon a forme, till God was pleased to come in by his Spirit, and then all was nothing; but Christ was all, and the best of all, and ever since I have received Christ, I have loved his wayes, and desired the society of his society.Confirmed by that ordinance of prophecying I was much comforted and confirmed even the last night in Michaels publique place, by that Or∣dinance of prophecying one by one, which the Church kept so sweetly, and I was very much convinced of your walking together in love and unity of spirit. 31. Experience of Mary Burrill. I Have been infinitely troubled by my marriage to my second husband, and have been afflicted in Conscience about it much, til the Lord gave me comfort within that my sins were forgiven mee. I was as prone to sin as any, until my God wrought very much by the means of my constant hearing M. R. ever since his coming over to us,Called, 1. When. 2. How. God hath made him the chief Instrument of doing my soule good, for which I thank my God through Jesus Christ.Confirmed in Dreams. I have had in my dreams two terrible conflicts with Satan, by all which I have been much assured of Gods love, for that I alwayes had the better, the victory.3. Effects. O I love the Saints of God! his Word! and all his wayes! and I rest on Christ Jesus alone! and on nothing of self! and I doe desire your prayers to God for me to grow in grace, &c. 32. Experience of Mary Barker. I Have great experiences of God, though at present I am not able to expresse them. I have been much afflicted for many years together in my relations,1. When brought in, by afflictions. which for my sins have been taken from me; but the Lord who hath laid his hand heavy upon me, hath made me very sensible of my sins,
and I have long layn under the burthen of them;2 How con∣firmed. but the evidence of my pardon is, that the Lord hath removed the bur∣then,3. Effects. and brought in the roome his grace, and given me a heart to him-ward, and I have received much benefit by preaching, and praying, and reading in private and publique, and by the preaching of Mr. Rogers, I have received infinite good, and found great comforts by his showing how we might know Christ is in us of a truth; and by prayer which the Lord brought me earnestly into; the Lord made those means so usefull to me, that I am much satisfied in the love of God to me, in Christ in me, who is all in all, and I doe rest alone on Jesus Christ, for pardon and Salvation by his bloud. 33. Experience of Margaret Fanshaw. I Was a long time under trouble and temptation; being per∣swaded to hear none a great while,Rejected the means. because I could not tell they were Christs Ministers, a twelve moneth agone we came over hither, and yet I heard none a while, after a while I heard a little boy,Called home, 1. when? where? 2. How? and then I heard Mr. Fowler, but yet I received but little benefit by any untill Mr. R. came over, and after I had heard him four or five Sermons, I began to see my sin, negligence, &c. which lay a heavy burthen upon me,3. Effects. and Oh! I am yet grieved much that I denyed the meanes so; and since by Mr. R. I have beene comforted with the offers of Christ, and all the promises in him, whom I have heartily accepted, and am now perswaded by Gods Spirit, I shall never run into those sins again, but I find his Spirit putting me forward to hear and to follow the means now, with all greedinesse and love to God and all his ways. 34. Experience of Ann Hanly. I Have alwayes had a great desire to walk with God, but was very ignorant, and in the dark, till I heard Mr. Ro∣gers, by whom I have had conviction of my ignorance and sin in neglecting the means,Called, convin∣ced, 1. When, 2. How trou∣bled. and Christ offered by the means; I have seen my sins and been much troubled, and have earn∣estly sought pardon, and I am by the Spirit of Christ confi∣dent of it, and I trust in Christ that I shall be established, and do beleive it;Satisfied. 3. Effects. and I doe finde dayly a great change in me, and
now I long to hear of Christ, and I love the Word and Or∣dinances of Christ,Assurance. Resolution. and am sure that Christ hath paid the ran∣some for my sins, and I am resolved in the power of the Lord to walk in his his wayes, and to doe his will. 35. Experience of Sarah Barn-well. IT hath pleased God to exercise me with much afflictions, and his love was all which drew me to himself, and no∣thing else;1. Under the Law. but first I lay long under a legall sorrow and grief for sin, and I was then put upon works and duties hard for heaven, but I saw I could not get it that way;Working. and in this great Plague-time in this City I was carried further, from the notion to the Power, and to spirituall holinesse, and higher into Christ, yet I used the means much, as praying, preach∣ing, reading, meditating, &c. and by the Word I was struck home, when Mr. Dunstable teached on the sad condition of some (even Professors) that were in Hell howling! Oh!☜ this sad doctrine struck deep to the heart! and I lay long woun∣ded in my spirit upon it. But it hath pleased God to work upon me in divers wayes;2. Under the Gospel. and by his Spirit he hath set me free from this bondage; which mercy I obtained first from the consideration of Gods great love in Christ, and hereby I was brought to this assurance which I have.Assurance. 36. Experience of Jeremy Heyward. THE Lord hath opened my eyes to see sin, and showne me my self, and I lay under his wrath half a year, and so long as I sought to make out my own righteousnesse,Under sense of sin. I lay thus; and yet this while, I followed the meanes, heard the Word, and I saw at length nothing but Christ would serve me, and till then I could have no comfort, where∣fore one first day of the week, I fell to prayer, I prayed thrice, and at the third time I heard him say, Loe!By prayer and the voice of God, Confirmed in Christ. Effects. my grace is sufficient for thee; whereby I was much satisfied ere since, rowling my self on Christ, and living in him alone; and I finde so great a change, that I can say, whereas I was blinde, now I am sure I see.
37. Experience of John Megson. I Have often been in danger, yea of losing my life, and then have desired to live, and to amend; in many great afflictions I have been in; in my youth time I was very ignrant, but now I am earnest for more light, that I may be in the wayes of God. That Scripture of Christ, in Revel. 3.20. Standing at the doore and knocking,Called, 1. When. 2. How. 3. Effects. did work upon me, and then I understood Christ must come in, and all evill be put out, and then I did desire Christ, and seek out after him, and so I doe yet; and shall doe; though I dare not pre∣sume of any thing of my owne, but all on Christ, and there∣fore I desire to be of this Church, for God shall adde such as shall be saved. 38. Experience of Ann Megson. I Have been long time troubled in minde, but yet I dare not despair; for, Come unto me and I will ease you, saith the Lord. The Lord did let me be long where there was but small goodnesse to be learnt: But at London-stone I heard a good man out of Isay 53.6. like sheep we have gone astray, and he showed how the Shepheard had a Dog, when any run out of the flock to fetch him in again,Called, 1. when, where. 2. How. and so the Lord did by his Word fetch in us that went astray; and thus the Lord wrought upon me, and made me see my sins, and my self, and I was long afflicted,Temptations. and I thought if I were the Lords I should not be in this trouble; but then I remembred that Daniel was in the Den,3. Effects. and Jeremy, and Hezekiah were afflicted, and these were the Lords, and that the Lord deli∣vered them; and so that he would me in due time: and I bless God, he did deliver me out of them all. O that he would give me the heart to praise him!☞ I was lewd, but now am chan∣ged by his grace and goodnesse; and I love the Lord, and I wish there were such an heart in me that I may ever live for his honor and glory. I doe long after Jesus Christ, and love to be here in the wayes of Christ; and I praise my God that he hath brought us so much out of darknesse as now to see his wayes.
Many more experiences I might insert, but being of the same nature with these I have omitted them; and shall keep them by me for another occasion; There were others in Dub∣lin that did declare many excellent passages of Gods work∣ings in them and upon them, as Captain Jones (since Ma∣jor) whose being imperfect I purposely let alone, lest he should take offence, and William Holme, Giles Mee, Ran∣dall Lester, William Fanshaw, Elizabeth Holm, Anne Bell, Joice Latherd, Elinor Meeke, Robert Barnwell, Elizabeth Gardner, Robert Glover, with many others. And I doe earnestly desire pardon where offence is thought to be given, especi∣ally of such dear friends, whose testimonies I have brought into publique view,☜ to bear witnesse to the world of the workings of Gods Spirit in these dayes: to the facilitating of which I doe (to all the world) call God (who is righteous) to bear me witnesse herein; That, 1. In the first place, I have aimed (herein) at the honor and glory of God, in the setting out his rich love to the lost sons of men, and declaring the variety of his dispensations in grace, and the sundry wayes of working, both ordinarily and extra∣ordinarily (yea in these days) to the fulfilling of his pro∣mises made us. 2. I have dealt faithfully with all, as I finde them in my Notes, as near as I can to a tittle, taken out of their owne mouths, without respect of persons; excepting some of the most ordinary sort, which I have taken summarily, as I promi∣sed at the first. 3. I think I have done my duty herein, and wish it might incite others to doe thus, viz. to gather out the flowers of their garden, to present to the Saints in other places; and though some appear in their weaknesse as wel as in strength, this doth the more magnifie free grace, and all those variety of notes concur to make up the tune of the song of the Lamb,☜ that one song of Moses and of the Lamb: So that the variety of the flowers, and of the colors, and of the natures, and of the forma∣lities of them, gathered together into one, give a glorious lustre, and like the Rain-bow of many colours, signifie fair weather for Ireland.Sim. Fair weather for Ireland. And I am in good hopes no good man can
have the heart to blame me for my good will and worke; be∣fore any take offence, let him seriously ponder upon it, and summon his heart in sincerity, and say, For what am I an∣gry? if the proud flesh and puff-past-heart say, O sad! I am seen in my nakednesse! and known in my weaknesse! Art thou says, the Spirit? and 'tis fit thou shouldst, that it may be known who cloathed thee, and that thou mayest have nothing to boast of; And was not Christ so too for your sins? besides sayes the Apostle, my strength was made perfect in weaknesse; 2 Cor. 12.9. most gladly therefore will I glory in my infirmities; and vers. 10. when I am weak, then am I strong. God hath a way of himself, as Nazianzen sayes, to make himself the more admired,God is seen most in our weaknesse. Nazianzen. Luther. , and he doth most of his workes as Luther said, in mediis contrariis, by contrary meanes in contrary wayes, which makes him the more glorious. Be not then offended at your weaknesse;Sim. for the waters had better run though muddily and thick,☞ then not at all; and so you in your infirmities and weaknesses better be seen to run into the Ocean of love, then to lye still, or stand like a stinking poole. Neither be a∣shamed (in what the Lord is honoured) to be seen in your weaknesses,Sim. for the roomes of the house that are greater, lighter, larger, colder, &c. have the same foundation with the other, and thus saith the Lord, Joel 3.10. Let the weak say I am strong;Exposition. strong in the Lord: But lest any should cry Crucifie, and should follow me with the louds of the red Dragons hu∣mors, let such spirits know what they doe before they spit fire at me, or throw wild fire about my ears, or plant their Morter pieces against me.Two things requisite before censure. Two things are requisite to a right grounded knowledge, viz. the apprehension first, and then the judgement. Now doe but read these lines by the same spirit they were writ, and dextrously discern the purpose of the Spirit speaking hereby, and I will abide your worst who ere you be:☞ but I confesse first to judge (as the fashion is) and then to apprehend, is irregular and unsound. For if your understanding deal amisse, your judgement will I am sure, and so the sentence will be false and full of sin; and so already by righteous ones I have been judged. But I fairly leave you, yet not the thing that I treat upon, for I shall speak more
fully to it hereafter, onely offer two or three experiences more in the mean time, which are full variety in unity. 39. Another testimony to the Truth or further Experi∣ence of John Rogers Preacher of the Gospel, and given in to two Churches in Eng∣land and Ireland. TO give a formall account from year to year of my life, would make me too tedious, to you and my self; and I fear somewhat offensive to such as are to follow, though I may safely say in every year since I can remember, I have been inriched with so many and such remarkable experiences; as might make some of you rather admire then belieeve: but I hope we shall have opportunities hereafter to open our selves in this kinde one to another; In the mean time to tell you some few for the present, I shall cite some of the most remark∣able passages which (to my present remembrance) I have met with in former years to this day, to doe their duty and homage before you. And first when I was a School-boy at Malden in Essex, I began to be rowsed up by two men, viz. Mr. Fenner, and Mr. Marshall.1. Call to awa∣ken him by the Word. The first of these about the tenth year of mine age, as I take it, (for what I was before I know not, a meer—I know not what) although I was kept continually in good order, as to read every day, and be Catechised and the like:) yet then hearing Mr. Wil∣liam Fenner full of zeal, stirring about, and thundring and beating the Pulpit; I was amazed, and thought he was mad; I wondred what he meant▪☜ and whilest I was gazing upon him, I was struck; and saw it was we that were mad which made him so; O sayes he! you knotty! rugged! proud piece of flesh! you stony, rocky, flinty, hard heart! what wilt thou doe when thou art roaring in Hell amongst the damned! &c. this made me at first amazed, which run often in my mind after,Scared at the thoughts of Hell. and I began now to be troubled, being scared and frighted, and out of fear of Hell, I fell to duties, hear Sermons, read the Scriptures, (though I knew not what I read, but only thought the bare reading was enough) morning and evening, and learn'd to pray (at first out of Books,Very formal and strict in it▪ and all the Graces (so called) that I could get) and besides Family prayers, I
was afraid every night lest the Devill shoud carry me away to Hell, if I did not first to my self (whilest my brother my Bed-fellow was fast asleep) say my prayers, and my Our Father, and I believe in God, &c. and the ten Commandements, and my little Catechism (Dr. Hall's) which I had learnt, and this I did every night duely before I durst sleep; and I made as much of them as of a charm to keep me well that night; which else I conceited the Devils would tear me a pieces; and yet sometimes (when I was sleepy) to make the more hast I should say some of them at least (to be in a forward∣nesse) in the Chimney corner whilest I was unbuttoning me,Right forma∣lity. or untying my hose or the like, preparing to goe to bed, thinking all was well enough so 'twas but done▪ onely sometimes (though I was unwilling to it, yet) out of fear (I remember) of the Devill, or some mischief, being ready to fancy any thing to be the Devil, I should say my Prayers, or Commandements,Under great bondage of works. or Catechism, or all twice over, suspecting I▪ said them not well enough before, but often too fast hurrying over before, and skipping somewhat; and sometimes if I said some things confusedly and too hastily, I would recover them again, or else remember them when I had done al, to say them again better; but thus, as the Apostle sayes, when I was a child, I did childish things, and I thought this was very well, and very oftentimes would I be talking with some boy or other, getting him from all the rest to walk with mee, and I would tell him of Hell and sin, and such like things, for it ran alwayes in my mind, and I lived under a despe∣rate fear; but for all this, Mr. Marshall a while after in the same Pulpit took me napping; whilest I was I know not how bewitched to nod,2. Call to awaken by the Word. and began to sleep, but his powerfull voice thundring against such as are drouzy, and sleep, and slumber away their salvation, was at that time pickt out for mee, and very prevalent, I started up with an aking heart, and was frighted at his words, (which he yet pur∣sued) and wounded me to the heart when he told us, how that when time was lost we could not call it again, and he knew no other way for us, but now to double our diligence and re∣deem the time we have lost, by making more hast, taking more care, and pains, or else we should be lost for ever. O! I was
sufficiently wounded, and fell a weeping; I could not hold, and after Sermon I went home (where I boarded) and sate alone! crying and complaining that I had lost my time; and at that time I took up a purpose never to sleep at Church more, and made a covenant with it; which I think (to this day) I observed ever since;How to keep from sleeping in the Church. and when I began (as at first I was often tempted) to be drowsie, I would alwaies stand and hold on nothing, and cast my eyes about to open them more. But after this I was not content with my former customary duties; for now I must double them and do more then be∣fore; wherefore I resolved to write down (as well as I could) every Sermon I heard, and to get them by heart,More formall. and to say every night one Sermon, and to learn (out of a book, for I knew no better yet) another prayer for morning, and another for night, and sometimes for noon too, especially on the Lords daies, so that my task was now doubled.How to help the memory to bear away Sermons. So I began to write down the Sermons, (which for a time was very little, having no skill to write fast nor orderly) but I ever observed the Doctrine, and would write down the Reasons and the heads of the Vses; and when I came at home, I would get it by heart at noon, that which I heard in the fore-noon, and at night that which I heard in the after-noon: and this course which I took made me more ready (at night when my Father repeated the Sermons, or the Landlord where I boarded, for they both did it, being very godly) this made me readier to answer when we were asked what we could remember, or what the Doctrine, or Reason,Custome every night. or Vse was, then any other; and this course I took customarily for nine or ten years together (long after I came from Cambridge) every night to repeat Sermons to my self alone, or rather to say them by heart (as duly as I went to bed) the Lords-day night that Sermon which I heard in the forenoon;1. Day. 2. Day. 3. Day. 4. Day. 5. Day. the Munday night (so called) that which I heard on the last Lords day in the afternoon, the Tuesday night, Wednesday night, Thursday night, alwaies left to say by heart, Sermons I heard a month, 2. months, 12. months, and so (as I encreased in years) for 2, or 3, or 4, 5, or 10. years before; and I would usually get up the oldest, and of longest standing; and
such as I had almost forgot, or not lately recovered my memory with, so that by this means I could remember many Sermons, and such as were long agone preached, perfectly: Now on Friday nights I repeated as I did on the Lords day nights al∣waies:6. Day. 7. Day. and on Saturday nights and Munday nights alwaies alike. But you must observe, if Sermons fell out in the week daies, as on fasts or otherwise, then I was wont to pick out Tuesday nights, Wednesday or Thursday nights, and so kept on the order, and was fit for fresh Sermons on the Lords day; and the Lord lead me on into this orderly way, I know not how, by himself without any creatures direction on the earth; so much did I plot out for salvation by such means as these, and to redeem my time. Yet you must know, having so much to do every night, I sometimes began (to my self whilst I ste in the Chimney corner) before supper, and usu∣ally left nothing but my Sermon to repeat for my bed, and my prayers by my bed-side morning and evening; but this I must say,How to keep Sermons ma∣ny years. from this form I learnt much of God and goodnesse; for what I did at first for fear of hell, I did at last out of love to heaven, and of late to God and Christ as if it were with∣out heaven;☞ and hereby I was not only able to tell many mens Sermons together, and it may be ten years after they were preached; but also able (though chiefly by higher means, as I may shew afterward) to preach at 18 or 19 years of age; as I did in Huntington-shire (if not sooner) to the amazement of many, but to the table talk of more. Well, thus you hear how formall I was, and yet as I may say, I was but feared (not loved) into this strictnesse of religion; and I remember then, I should have been glad if any occa∣sion hapned that there were no Sermons on the Lords daies, or if I heard them not (which I dare not but do notwithstan∣ding if I were well) for it was more ease to me (I thought, or else the Devill in me) to repeat the old,☞ then to get in nw. But not long after this, that I had heard Mr. Marshall as before, I was further awakened by my Nhemiah Ro∣gers that writ on the Para∣bles. Father (after∣ward) who preaching upon the good Samaritan, and shewing his compassion to wounded ones,3. Call to awa∣ken by the Word. yet in reproof to sinners, shew how they were more guilty then the hard
hearted Jewes, that crucified Christ afresh now, and have no compassion on him, now he is in glory, but spit on him, and made him suffer, and how his bloud would rise against them: and if Abels a meer mans did so, much more his; and if David prayed from bloud-guiltinesse, how much more from this guiltinesse of the precious bloud of Christ, &c. which he preached and pressed so powerfully, that I was thrown into a trembling, as lying under the guilt of Christs bloud, and was long perplexed about it: but after all this there is ano∣ther remarkable passage that I must never forget, which I met with, or rather met with me to the purpose; about 1637. (as I take it) at Messing in Essex, I was playing with children (my fittest companions then) and running round about the house we lived in, (through two or three little gates) in sport and idlenesse, as I was running with the rest, (I know not how, nor upon what occasion) I threw out vain words, and crying, O Lord! (which we were not suffered to do) my heart was suddenly smitten upon it, and I was suddenly set a running as if I had been possessed,4. Call to awa∣ken, was by a strange Vision. (by I know not what power or spirit) not having any strength to stay my self (were it upon my life); untill I was (headlong) carried through a little gate-way, where (as plainly to my thinking and in my appearance, as ever I saw any thing by the Sun-shine) there was set a naked sword, glistering with a fearfull edge (I thought) and which took up the whole space of the gate from one post to another, with a broad blade most keen and cruell; at which sad sight so fraught with frights, I gastly screeched,A warning to such as take Gods Name in vain. and yet had not the least power to stay, or stop my precipitant course; but I was quickly carryed quite unto it, so as that the edge of the cruell blade meeting with my body, it seemed to me impossible I should escape death: and I made no other ac∣count but to be quite cut off and parted asunder;☜ but after∣ward being hurried through, with that headlong and furious force, I had strength to stay a little beyond it, and to perpend the perplexible perill which I was in; I stood as one amazed, or rather as one that knew not whether he were alive or dead; I knew not how to beleeve my self
lesse then a dead man, and afterward at least mortally and deadly wounded, if not desperately and deplorably eut in twain: Oh! how I stood trembling and tumbling in my thoughts, untill the vitall bloud (which was fled for the hearts defence) began to disperse again, and to go quietly to their own homes; and then I looked about, and turned me to the gate-way, but the appearance was pass'd away, the sword gone and vanisht, whilest I was left (alone, the rest running away) in a labyrinth of fears without any wound without, but deeply and wofully wounded within; and never sihence (to the praise of Gods grace) as I know of, have I had such extravagant preposterous expressions passed from me. But, Good God! What was thy will herein! Thou who art not tyed to means or order, best orderest and disposest of all things, for thine owne design and glory! and so this was I am sure, but what it was I know not; yet it left a lasting impression upon me, and the scar is yet to be seen in my heart, though the wound be healed. But, alas! How long and lamentable I lay afflicted and in conti∣nuall fears after this!☞ Every thunder and lightning, I look'd upon as my fate, and sent for me; and then would I fall to my Prayers,Formall and Phrisaicall duties still. and saying my Creed and Commandements, and to my Sermons as fast as might be, that I might be found wel-doing at least; if not as a charme to de∣fend me, or a challenge to God by virtue of them to keep and blesse me: this I remember was my great comfort to consider, some did not do thus, but altogether slghted holinesse, duties, and did live wickedly, and carnally in drunkennesse, disobedience, Sabbath-breaking, and severall sins every day, which I was so farre from grief at,☞ and weeping over, that I (in my heart) rejoyced in it, that I was in more hopes then they, and (as I fancyed my self) better then they, and should receive more favour. But all this while like an Israelite in Egypt, I work'd for life, and my services were my Saviours; and I would to my brothers, sisters, and School-fellowes and companions to take occasion to talk of heaven and hell, and what a hard thing it was to be saved. For some time after this is Malden where I was boarded, and
put to the Free-school, I had a certain dream (which by the consequence proved a praevision of what is now come to passe) it was on a night about the time when the Spa∣niards and Hollanders had a scuffling and a kinde of Nauma∣machy upon the Downes;A praevision in a dream at Maiden in Es∣sex. for then some talking of that fight, fill'd me full of fears, and in the night my dream was; that fire rain'd (as I may say) or rather powred down round about; and looking where I was, (I thought it to be without the Coach-yard gate of my Fathers house, and I was frighted to see nothing but fire, looking upward and round about, praying for deliverance, none came nigh me round about by a good space, but flaming else (I thought) in all places, and I could see none exempted; wherefore being afflicted for my Father and our family, I fell on my knees for them, and I thought I continued so, long ere I could be heard, but was at last bid to arise, and look, and then I thought the fire fell not so fast on my Fathers house as it did before, but by little and little abated till I awaked. Now although this dream had seised much upon my spirits, yet I made no other account of it then of a fancy, till five or six years after in the Isle of Ely meeting with Dr. Drai∣ton D. D. he declared to me, for severall reasons,Interpreted by Dr. Draiton. that this must be more then a meer dream, as working of fancy, and that something was to come which I should finde this to predemonstrate, instancing in some of the like kinde which himself, his wife, and others had met with as warnings and predictions; and therefore he wished me in no case to slight or contemn it; for that he was confident it did shew some fiery and angry dispensation upon all our family and my father, and the rest should lye under some trouble by the times or otherwise; and my self should be set free, and at this liberty to pray for them, and that by degrees they should be recovered and brought out, and the fire abate: which interpretation (more fully by farre from his own mouth) is for the most part verified at this day.Came to passe. But all this while I was labouring for life, exceedingly formall, and I did much covet to know the things of God, and therefore wished oft I were but a Minister! such a one as Mr. Fenner is, or Mr. Mar∣shall,
or Mr. Hooker,Resting in do∣ings. or my Father, or some other (that was eminent) that I might attain to their knowledge, and then (I thought) I should do abundance more for God, (as if God were beholding to me for my obedience) and I would then (I thought) be sure to get salvation, (as if I could then easily do it).☞ Thus a poor creature, I continued for severall years together, (and if you knew but half what I have met with in that time, you would say I was a poor creature indeed as any alive) for I kept to my self many fast-daies (and would eat nothing) heard, read, sang Psalmes, meditated, used Soliloquies, and prayed many times a day,Despaired. 5 Knock awa∣kened by the Word. and what not? and yet at last despaired even to the depth: what by often thoughts of hell, reading Drexellius upon eternity, and then thinking of endlesse, easlesse, and remedilesse torments; and what by frequent frights as before, and what by my Father, once preaching on the fool in the Gospel, Luk. 10.20. Thou fool, this night will I take away thy soul, then whose shall those things be that thou hast pro∣vided? Whence he handled a point of the folly of men to lay up here, and forget heaven; and shewing that heaven came not with ease on a down bed, but many shall strive hard to enter and shall not be able; and that except you exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20. you shall in no case enter into the kingdome of heaven. What with these and other things, I was almost in the bottomelesse abysmes of torments: I took the Bible to look these Scrip∣tures, read them over and over and over again, but the more I read the more I roar'd in the black gulf of despair, where I was cast so deep as (to me and others) I seemed sometimes past all recovery▪ I prayed, fasted, mourn'd, got into corners, yea many times (being I was ashamed to make my case known, I have ran into barnes, stables, house-of office, any where (pretending as if I had businesse) on purpose to pray, sigh, weep, knocking my breast, curse that ever I was born; wishing I were a stone, any thing but what I was, for fear of hell and the devils; whom I thought I saw every foot,Fearfull affli∣ctions and fears. in severall ugly shapes and frmes (according to my fancies) and sometimes with great rolling flaming
eyes (like sawcers) having sparkling fire-brands in the one of their hands,☜ and with the other reaching at me to tear me away to torments! O the leaps that I have made! the frights that I have had! the fears that I was in! which con∣tinued off and on to the beginning of these times! Besides great outward afflictions which I met with, were of much force to bring me into this condition, being often (and doubtlesse I might deserve it too too much) beaten, bruised, turn'd out of doors, whirl'd and kickt about, hardly and unkindly used; at which times I should sometimes be tempted to murther my self,Temptations. sometimes think I could not belong to God, for then he could not endure to see me thus used and afflicted, and yet I flie to him, and pray, and pray, and pray, but as good speak to a post, for I am not relieved: sometimes I should read, and weep, and as my usuall manner was in the time of my great despair, fall flat (all along) with my face on the ground, and cry, and call, and sigh, and weep, and call for help, but the Lords time was not yet come to answer; and I was wont to weep half the night together, if not all sometimes, and to water my bed with my tears, for fear of hell and the devill, and therefore for sins or rebellious disobedience; and ever slept with my hands clasped close together in a praying posture, that if I did die, or that the Devils did prey upon me, they might finde me in a praying posture sleeping as well as waking; I never durst go to sleep otherwise (to my knowledge) for five or six years together. But the greatest blow I had was from the sentence of the aforesaid Scripture in Mat. 5.20.The greatest blow. Surely (thought I) I but strive against the stream, and seek out im∣possibilities, if I must exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees. For I had often read of their strictnesse in their Houses, and Synedriums, and Schools, that the ordina∣ry of them repaired at least three times a day to their devo∣tion, viz. in the morning at Sun-rising, till about the fourth hour of the day, (called Shwith) and in the afternoon (Minchah) about the ninth hour, and in the evening (Ar∣bith) and so in a manner all day long in devotion. Besides their laudatory prayers, and thanks not only for all the
mercies they receive, but upon every extraordinary accident and in every action they do, a prayer for every time they eat, they will not drink without a prayer; a prayer for every good smell, a prayer when they wash, yea when they evacuate, a prayer upon every new thing they have, and what not? insomuch that some say at least 108. Benedi∣ctions a day (Meah Beracoth) as Leo Modena the Venetian Rabbine writes; and we have read how strict they are on their Sabbaths, and will not gather wood, kill a flie or flea, dresse any victuals, make a fire, write, cancell, or quench a fire, or carry any thing, or use any hammer, nor eat any thing dressed upon that day, nor any fruits gathered, nor wear any thing on that day but even necessary apparell, nor speak of worldly matters, as buying, selling, giving, or taking, nor make any bargains, nor so much as touch any thing, a weight, or burthen, or tool, or instrument, nor handle any money; nay on the Friday before evening comes, all worldly things are laid aside and the Sabbath began, &c.) Now these considerations and such like made me think it in vain to seek to be saved; and it was but to beat the winde, or build in the air; for if the Scriptures were true it could not be, for I could not tell how to excell their righ∣teousnesse.☞ Hereupon I despaired deeply indeed, it being so deliberately;Deep despair strong tempt∣ing. and the results of serious debates; so much the worse, lying under the severest sense and sentence of that Scripture; I could take no comfort, but accounted God most cruell to exact impossibilities of men, (as such a righteousnesse) and to let so many be damned (as I thought) because they could not excell their righteousnesse! O these hard thoughts I had of God! At length I was tempted not to pray, read, hear, or do any duties at all: for I thought it not possible after all to be saved; and so I was somtimes tempted to deny all: sometimes I was also tempted to think there was no God, but all things come by nature; and to challenge God, if there were a God, to require a sign and seek a proof: but in a word, to such a height I was grown up unto, that I did not on∣ly despair, but began to be distracted, and out of my wits (as we use to say) I thought trees sometimes good Angels,Despair.
sometimes bad, and look'd upon bushes as the den of Devils: I should sit up whole nights, sometimes in a little Turret (we had in an Orchard) from the house, studying, singing, whist∣ling, hooping, or drawing figures, or one thing or other, or else be walking in the fields, woods, or some other places, talking to my self, speaking to trees as to men, or as to Angels, or God; and thinking the least whistling of the winde, or chirping of a bird, or lowing of a beast to be some answer sent to me, as I would fancy it; but as these distracted di∣stempers grew higher, I could not avoid the forcible tempta∣tions of a furious Devill, making me sometimes whet a knife, sometimes take a billet, sometimes one thing, sometimes ano∣ther to murther my self, and sometimes others, and sometimes all; for I would have had all to have gone my way (me thought) many waies I tryed, but was alwaies prevented, till at last I was taken and bound hand and foot, and held (or tyed) fast in a bed till the raging fits were over; and then when I was spent and patient, if let go, yet without a watchfull eye, though it may be I said nothing, yet the first thing I went about, it may be, would be to seek a knife, or to get to the window to cast my self down headlong: but I have been strangely and (almost) miraculously kept (which would be too long to tell) even in the very act and instant of time when a few minutes longer had been too late to save my life.Miraculously saved from self murther, I should not be so long in this History, but that I dare hide nothing wherein God hath appeared my God for his own glory in what I am now by grace. And therefore as things eminent are brought to memory, I am bold to de∣clare them, for the magnifying of his alone love, and the riches of his grace in Christ Jesus. I dare boldly say, few that saw me in those head-long distempers, did think me at the best, fit for any place but Bedlam; and that I should ever be restored to what I am, which was also as strangely.Inward me∣lancholy and despairs: For as the distracted fits did much abate me, they did turn more to in∣ward malady and melancholy; my continuall cry being, I am damned, I am damned, I am sure I can't be saved! it is impossible! Oh! Hell! Hell! fire about me! the Devils are at me! and
I thought I heard the damned roaring and raving,A word to the wicked. and saw them (as 'twere) roasting, and their frisking and frying in everlasting torments. My minde and all was taken up with their howlings and screechings.☞ This sad condition day and night lasted upon me, untill I was perswaded that there was a God! and that this God was righteous, and that he would hear prayers if I continued but knocking with importu∣nity and gave not over, seeing the unjust Judge that we read of in Scriptures, was prevailed with by the widowes importunities: then I resolved with my self (and gathered together here and there those scatter'd reliques of reason which were let me) that I would continue prayer, and so I did (though by fits I was froward, and mute, and wilde, and I know not how) yet off and on 5 daies together scarce eating a bit of bread in all that time; and was after that in another form and frame of spirit (though by fits full of distraction and desperate thoughts) yet more serious, and set to weigh things as in a ballance, and to expostulate with the Lord, and to pray by fits most furiously, and now and then tears began again (which were all dryed up before) to trickle and come tumbling down my face like swollen drops of bloud, and I continued thus three or four daies till one afternoon com∣ing into a chamber (my heart being as big as it could hold) I threw my self flat on my face (as I used to do) knocking the boards and calling and crying to the Lord for deliverance, and using such exorcising expressions as might discover me in despair; and starting up, I walked a turn or two, saying, Is there not a God? is he gracious! are the Scriptures false! canst thou take delight to see a poor soul thus set on the rack! sighing and roaring in torment! rise up and appear for thy self thou great God! shew thy self gracious in one act of mercy! maugre all the Devils in hell! and with knocking my breast and tearing my hair, I threw my self upon the bed, whilest my eyes were glazed with tears!Restored ex∣traordinarily by a dream. and there I lay, in a sudden sleep which seised upon me, and I dreamed of the same Scripture (the letter which killed me) and yet of Christ (the Spirit which quickned me) and that his righteousnesse (by faith made mine) did excell the righteousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees: and except I (in and by the righteousnesse of Christ made mine) did excell the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, I could not be saved; that is, not without the righteousnesse of Christ. When I awaked, I was so much changed that I was amazed at my self, at the suddennesse of it;Evangelicall. for I dream't I was comforted, and my heart filled with joy, and when I awaked it was so indeed; I started up, and rebuked my self, saying, Why, I am not damned! what's the matter? am I so filled with a fancy? with a sudden hope of I know not what,Confirmed and seconded by prayer and the Word. nor whence? at which time I fell to pray, and whilst I was praying, I said, Lord is this true? say! is it true! if it be so, let it be shewn me that it is so: So I was perswaded that the righteousnesse of Christ was mine,Rom. 10.3. Tit. 3.7. Rom. 8.4. Isay 53.11. Phil. 3.9. Gal. 2.16. for that this garment was provided only for one so naked and torn out of all as I was; which weighing I took the Scriptures, and found these divine infusions, and immediate resolutions given in me, agreeing with the same will of God given out there, and then I be∣gan to breath upon't, and to pant a little; and by degrees to revive and look upward with some hope;And got into an assurance of salvation, and how. till the Lord satisfied me by pouring it upon me, and writing it within me, that I (in Christs righteousnesse my only justification) did exceed theirs! And thus I had the first assurance of salvation;☜ for that very same Scripture that before condemn'd me, did now justifie me, that is in Christ. And after that I began plainly to see my self (and by my self others) why I despaired, and was so long and so lamentably lost,Why so many despair of hea∣ven. that it was because I sought in a wrong place for justification, and therefore a wrong way for salvation,Sim. as if one of you should dig in your yard for a mine of gold, no wonder that you lose your labour at last, after sweat, tears, prayers, cares, pains, fears and all; seeing that you look in a wrong place. Thus it was with me all the while I was looking, and poaring, and paining my self for a righteousnesse of my own, and to seek in my self to excell the Scribes and Pharisees; alas! I was lost, undone, and could not finde it! nor see any door of hope set open for my soul, till Christ in's righteousnesse was revealed in me! and then I knew him a Saviour to me. Well, with this joy I continued to this hour! holding and keeping ground against all temptations,
which are infinite, that I have met with ever since; and such as you have scarce heard of, of late. For after I had so∣lemnized and celebrated my new life, (and being begun anew in anothers righteousnesse, and in another self) by sing∣ing of Psalmes (and then I began Hymns and spirituall songs to my self) and continuall open-hearted returnes of praises;☞ whilest the Angels rejoyced with me. Yet Satan (my conti∣nuall and never ceasing enemy) now began to muster up afresh more troubles against me, and to follow me with an hoast of afflictions and temptations, as Pharaoh followed Israel with a purpose to destroy him; when once out of his territories: and see how a bird that is escaped out of the hand is hunted up and down by the boyes,Sim. the doors are shut, the win∣dowes and holes stopp'd to hinder her escape; and see how they hunt her, throw their hats at her, scare her up and down till they think to tire her, and make her fall into their fingers again:Satans fresh bouts. So did Satan set upon me (I may say) a thousand waies by himself and his agents, to hunt me up and down, and to tire me out, and to make me (if he could) fall into his fingers again, but that my God whom I un∣feignedly serve from my soul, did deliver me, does deliver me, and I trust will deliver me,1 Cor. 1. as the Apostle saies. For though the Devill did use many snares, and beset me so about (as you will hear) that it seemed scarce possible I should escape, yet the Lord set me at liberty from the snares of the Fowler, though sometimes so subtilly layed, that I could not discern them; and what he could not do by his fair insinuations and subtleties, and inward motions and temptations; he tryed to do by violence, in tormenting me and making me the most object of affliction and misery all about;Greater affli∣ctions. for to proceed, my friends became mine enemies, and my precisenesse was an eye-sore to many, near relations cast me off, and I was lookt upon as disobedient for keeping company with such as were godly Puritans, and accounted then Round-heads, and for praying and holding communion with them (though comman∣ded to the contrary) at length I found so little love, and so much malice from some, that I was turned out of doors, and forced (as men say to seek my fortune) to flie with my
own feathers, with three shillings six pence, or thereabouts (as I take it) to travell up and down in strange countries, and that in the coldest winter time of the year, in snowie wea∣ther, (up to the knees very often) and whilest the very isicles hung on my hair or cheeks,☜ a conflux of tears that came hot would thaw them, which fell abundantly from me in the open fields, and high-waies, where none but God took no∣tice of them. Yet I did often beg at poor cottages, (or so) but to come in to warm me, or dry me, or for a draught of small beer, or so; which would make some poor souls fall a weeping to see me. But after many dangers and trou∣bles I footed it as farre as Cambridge, where I sought from Colledge to Colledge to be but a sizer or poor Scholar, my little stock of money being all gone, and the Servitors of Kings-Colledge (of which I was one before) being dis∣missed, but I could have no place, and I had no money, and I wanted bread, and that so long that all others failed to do any thing for me, insomuch as I was forced for life to try all things, and eat leather, and drink water, and eat old quils and pens (where I could pick them up out of the dust or dunghils) roasted in a few coals (which were left in the Chamber where I was) and I assayed sometimes to eat grasse, and did it: yea,Almost starved at Cambridge. I grew to that height of pe∣nury and famine, that I sometimes tryed to eat my own fin∣gers, biting them till I could endure it no longer; then tearing my hair, and crying, I had recourse to prayer, where∣by the passion (it may be) would away for the present, but this continued so long,Temptations strong. that I met with temptations in this wildernesse to turn stones into bread, and the Devill did often tempt me to study Necromancy & Nigromancy, and to make use of Magick, and to make a league with him, and that nen I should never want, but shew me (as 'twere upon the pinnacle) the glory of the world (so represented to me in my, fancy) bid∣ding me but obey him (that is,The Devill tempts to yeeld to him. fall down and worship him) and I should have both my bags of money by me, & be honoured of all men, and own'd by all my friends, and go home with great riches, and in great respect. But God would not suffer me to hearken to him, but to tell him, thou art a lyar
from the beginning! away thou malicious accuser of the brethren, tempt me not,Is repulsed. for thou didst do thus to Christ, but he overcame thee, and so I trust I shall by his power; and then I prayed, and read the Scriptures, and writ holy meditations, and Soul-soliloquies on the 88 Psalme, all in verse very patheticall and sutable to my condition, and I began Dives and Lazarus here, and Lazarus and Dives hereafter: two books (which I soon af∣ter concluded) using in it English, Latine, Italian, French, being very tragicall,☞ and all in verse very sutable to my condition under severall temptations; all which I had thoughts (with some others which I have by me) to have printed for publique profit, but wanted a purse: so that in stead of Magicall and Astrologicall studies, I bent my minde to holy meditations, soul comforting, Angelical and Evangelical con∣templations: yet I continued under strong temptations, but to the praise of God, I speak it, I think never was I more a growing Christian, then after Satan had these repulses; but yet I must not omit to tell you,The Devill tempts another way. that I had one other tem∣ptation first; which was almost irrecoverable, but that I was prevented extraordinarily even as I was upon the ex∣ecution thereof. For finding my self almost starved and pined to death, my strength almost gone, my eyes sunk deep in my head, and wearing deaths colours, I was almost at my wit end: I confesse when I felt a passion come, or fit come upon me, I would fall to prayer, reading, or something or other, whereby sometimes they were put by, and I had much comfort, but I could not alwaies avoid them by this: for now one temptation got ground of me, and came on audaciously, and grew strongly upon me, so that I could not escape it,☞ but it followed me; I took up the skin of my wasted hand and armes with a resolution to tear it off for hunger, but in vain, the Devill had so besotted me, that I could see no waies to evade death, for I had been be∣holding to all the Scholars I could finde any courtesie in,A most strong temptation. to bring me scraps, or skins of salt-fish, or something or other in their handkerchiefs or pockets, which kept me alive a while, till at last they were all weary, and I wasted almost to death, and ashamed to beg openly about; and I was blin∣ded
as to any way that I could finde to recover out of this condition. Wherefore, after violent and never-ceasing tem∣ptations, I drew my knife, whetted it sharp,To murther himself pre∣pared. opened my doublet and shirt, and in the midst of the room where I was alone, kneel'd down to prayer, to surrender my soul up into the hands of God; my knife lying by me prepared, and I prepared for the act, when behold a door which I thought was bolted all the night before, was but shut to, which a Scholar opens, and with the screeking of it made me start up, and throw my knife into the chimney in hast (as ashamed of what I was doing) and in comes the Scholar to tell me of a place in Huntington-shire to teach Gentlemens children at my Lord Brudenels house,But strangely prevented. and how one of our Colledge was sent to, but refused it; by which means I was recover'd out of that eminent danger, and after the Scholar was gone, did exceedingly reprove and check my self, for suffering this temptation to grow so upon me, for want of faith, and was much afflicted at it, and the more for that this mercy came in so upon it: O! that I could not wait upon God! but being now night, I went (as I use to do) supperlesse to bed,Much afflcted for his sin and yeelding to Sa∣tan. (after duty) but my heart melting into abundance of tears, first for the sin that I was about, that I could not beleeve, and resist the Devill (as I had done in Gods strength before) and then for the love of God, and his care appearing for me, even at that instant too, when I took no care of my self at all,Evangelicall. but had devoted my self to death, and that now he should not only deliver me, but send me newes full of hopes! O how these things did break my heart! and work upon me most part of the night! untill with an heart full, and head full, and eyes full and all! I was fal'n into a deep sleep, and visited with an extraordinary token from on high both in dream and vision, which hath been since accomplished (as I take it) and the last in Ireland the last year. The Dream was this▪☜ that I was walking home to my Fathers house, with a staffe in my hand, and fearing lest I should be out of the way,Comforted and confirmed in Dream and Vision extra∣ordinarily. I looked for the path, which at first I could scarce discerne was a path, and began to look about, and to question it, till by and by I perceived some footsteps of some that had gone
that way, with that I went forward, and the further I went, the plainer I perceived it to be the path, and that I was in the way (and I could see no other) at which I rejoyced, and went on confidently as if I fear'd no evill, nor enemy; till I came to a fine glorious beautifull house and building on the left hand of me, out of which came forth a beam which rea∣ched a little crosse the way I was to go in, so that I being at a little stand at first, yet would not stoop under this beam, but stept aside and so pass'd away, laying my hand on it as I step'd by the side of it, but the house (I thought) was all in a flame of a sudden, so that being something troubled thereat, I passed on in the way, wondring in my self what this should be, till I was overtaken by some rude vio∣lent malicious men that laid to my charge the setting this house on fire, and would not hear me speak, but were harshly haling me away to prison,☞ with which being sufficiently frighted and all my flesh set a trembling, I awaked, and was offended with my self,The Dream reiterated. for being troubled at a dream, a foo∣lish fancy, so I laid me (it being yet dark) and fell asleep again, and was cast into the same dream again, word for word; and at my right hand I thought there was a grave ancient man full of white hairs (like wooll) a long white beard,The Dream interpreted in the sleep. who stood by me, and bid me chear up, fear not! for the Lord hath sent me to comfort thee, and to tell thee that he hath chosen thee to preach his word and Gospell of Christ, which is the staffe that thou hast in thy hand, and which staffe, (that is,How first cal∣led to the Mi∣nistry in his sleep. the word of God) thou shalt walk home with to thy Fathers house, i. e. Heaven, where is fulnesse of joy. But after a time thou wilt be troubled with the different opinions, and waies of men, and seem at first to be at a losse, but the Lord will be thy guide,☞ go on, and as thou goest forward, the way of the Lord will lye clearer and clearer before your eyes; but the footsteps are the examples of the Saints that have gone before you, which will be a great help unto you; and you shall walk chearfully on in the way which is clear to you (then the which you shall see no other) but yet you must meet the fair house on the left hand,Propheticall. i. e. the glory and great ones of the world, who make a great and fair shew to
men (as built high) but they must fall,☜ and are but on the left hand of you, whilest you will despise them, preach against them,Partly perfor∣med of late in Ireland, as it is well known. and turn your eye; looking forward to go on in the way of God (and turn not about) but the beam that comes out of this great house (which makes so much shew) is meant the powers and opinions of such, which (whilest somewhat crosse to the way) you step aside and will not stoop under, they are set on fire, and enflamed of a sudden; but be not trou∣bled, go forward, although they will send after you, say∣ing you have brought this fire upon them, and they will falsly accuse you, and seek to hale you away to prison for this fact. At which I awaked again, this being morning about day-break, I wondred with my self what this meant,But I beleeve not wholly. I thought it surely more then ordinary, and being filled with confidence and comfort, I rose up and writ it down presently, And away I went that day towards Didington in Huntington-shire, where the Lord Brudenell once lived (but was then se∣questred) and one that the Committee put in, had Gentlemens children to board with him, whom I (afterward) taught. But after all these deliverances,From that time how he grew fit for the Mi∣nistry. I did multiply abundantly in gifts and graces, either to pray, expound, read, sing Hymns and spirituall Songs, with the Spirit and with un∣derstanding, as Israel in Exod. 1. the more he was afflicted the more multiplyed; so blessed be the Lord, I was the more filled with the Spirit, endued with strength and grace, refreshed with peace and joy, the more I had so suffered. So that all my troubles were but a Josephs step (through grace) to higher enjoy∣ments;2. Call to the Ministry. and finding the Lord so abundantly to endue me from above, and to qualifie me for the call, which I had before in the night (for the ministry which then I little meant, or imagin'd could be, it being often resolved against before by my Fa∣ther, and my books ordered to be packed up) but finding things following so fairly to concurre, I was much confirmed in it, that the Lord had design'd me thereunto. In Huntington-shire teaching school first at Brudenel's house, and afterwards the Free-school of St. Neotts, I began with the boyes ever in prayer first,His order when he taught Schoole. at 7. & 1. and ended with prayers at 11. & 5. on the Saturdaies in the afternoon, I catechised them, and expoun∣ded
their Catechismes by the Scriptures, and expounded Scrip∣tures, and so singing a Psalm, with prayer we concluded. At this time I came to be convinced of the Parliaments pro∣ceedings and cause, to be more regular and in order to the great work that God hath to doe in Nations then the Kings, by comparing them together, and bringing them to the Word;☞ and then I saw clearly (by the Word) that God would doe what he hath to be done, by them and for them, and for the Common-wealth; it was not long after this that I was by a godly people in Tseland earnestly importuned,3. Call to preach. and at last prevailed with to preach the Gospel; and I was soon known in the Countrey, and after sent for into Essex, where I setled (passing twice through the Assemblie on Examination and ap∣probation).4. Call. So although ever since I have met with many sorts of afflictions and oppositions,Vide Epistle to Purleigh before the 2. Lib. lies, slanders, threatnings, libels, vows and endeavours to take away my life, yet many have added testimony to the Word I have delivered in all places (the Lord be praised) to the great refreshing of my soule, and towards the making up of my joy when I shall give an account (to their comfort) at the great day. And since that I have been sent forth, as a Pastor and publique Teacher by the Church, and I know my Ministeriall commission and authority to be from the Lord;☞ and notwithstanding the divers temptations that I meet with yet, finding my heart full of corruption, and my life a continuall warfare of flesh against spirit, yet I blesse God who hath delivered me, (in diverse wayes which I have not yet declared) from the fraudulent gins and snares of the De∣vill, and who hath called me out of darknesse into light, that his power is stronger in me, then any that hath been a∣gainst me; and I am the better provided against Satan, for that I live now by faith in the Son of God, above the letter in the life, above the form in the power, above self in an higher self, altogether where I have my abode; so that I am not I, but by the grace of God it is that I am what I am, as the Apostle said Why weep ye for me? for I am ready not onely to be bound but to dye: so I say ,Act. 21. I have provision within me, seeing Christ is in me the hope of glory. I am assured of Salvation in Christ Jesus my head,Assurance. my Lord, my elder brother, and the first fruits
of all them that rise again.3. Effects. And although I meet with daily troubles at home and abroad, within and without, yet am I all the way ascending heaven (though descending hell) the same way with Christ; who hath (through the vail) consecrated a new and living way for me into the Holy of Holies. I can com∣fortably drink after Christ out of his own cup;☜ and in eat∣ing his meat and drinking his drink, take gall and vinegar, as wel as wine and honey. I prefer Christ before Salvation, and had (if I know my heart) yet not I, (but my spirituall self) had rather goe to Hell with Christ in my armes (if 'twere pos∣sible) then to heaven without him; accounting the enjoyment of him to be the enjoyment of all the excellencies and happinesse in heaven and earth, Super omnia Christum; I am very confident Christ can't be perfect without me, nor I without him, but that I shall appear perfect (for all Eternity) in Christs righteous∣nesse, and am pardoned by his death, purged by his bloud, sanctified by his Spirit, and saved by his power, and this I am as sure of to be glorified as he is glorified, and shall see him as he is. I could say much more, and have many more experiences; but I fear I offend others, I shall cut off in an Apocope, but pray, pray for me, that Gods power may appear more in my weaknesse, and whilest I live and breath (I hope and resolve) it shall be with him and for him, as well as by him, dum sur sum dum sur sine Spi ro Spe ro and that I shall not desire to live one minute longer then to his honour and glory, and for his service, which the Lord make me fit for and faithfull in, and prepare me for that glory which is to be revealed. But these things I have spoken in the fear of God, wherein you hear what I was, what I am, and what I shall be; I know no more yet to trouble you with, but according to the ac∣creasings of the holy one in me, and effusions of the unctions upon me, I shall speak more hereafter for your advantage, I were a wicked wretch should I smother any of the appear∣ances of God which I meet with.
40. An eminent Experience, or relation of John Osborne member of the Church at Purleigh, of the which Mr. R. was Pastor: as was taken out of the Church Re∣gister word for word. JOhn Osborne, a poore labouring man, was admitted a Mem∣ber of this Church, April, 16. 1650. his visible carriage in word and deed seeming holy, and his outward conversation such, as he was well approved of (after his confession of Christ,After he was admitted he was much afflicted in his conscience. and resolution to cleave close to the Lord in this way) nemine contradicente; but it seemes this man was much un∣sound, and not yet fit matter within (whatsoever he seemed without) and it being best known to God and himself, Gods designe was to work out the discovery of him out of him∣self, he began to manifest much grief and gall within him by his outward colour and complexion, but kept it close to all the Church, that his ill life was the cause of his ill looks; yet he followed the means,Yet carried the fairest side outward. frequented the Communion, used the Ordinances at home and abroad, in publique and private, so that nothing could be gathered (in the Churches appre∣hension) but godlinesse in him; He would presse an exact walking, Gospell duties; and in discourse cast in his mite of knowledge and measure of light: So that some tooke much content in him, much comfort of him, but for all this his hea∣vy countenance did discover that there was somewhat in him lay undiscovered, and not yet brought to light. But Gods time was near to doe his Church good, and to give them some reall testimony and tasts of the first fruit of his love to∣wards them by making him known to them, whom they thought they knew) but indeed did not know; for what God saw in him that was naught, was not visible to the Church, but what was visible was good, but that which was invisible to us was the rottennesse and unsound part of the man. But mark how God met with him, who upon the 28. day of Or the se∣cond moneth▪ i. e. Ziu. April, 1650. was after Sermons (being the Lords day) struck by a sudden distemper, which in the night pro∣duced
dangerous fits which continued at times for two or three dayes: the Pastor of the Church J. R. he did visit him,Gods time to discover him. but at that time being Wednesday, May 1. following he dis∣covered no discomfort, discontent or burthen within him at all; but he had good expressions and motions, yet was once or twice in his fits very fearfully; but after he was recovered the Pastor with prayers for him, and directions given him departed home. The next day being the Lecture day after Sermon was ended, it was moved in the Church to contribute unto him, who did it freely and largely, and that very night the Pastor J. R. was sent for again to him,The Churches prayers for him; but first the Church made prayers for him: And it is observable, that this Osborne being in very strange fits (as ever were seen) like one possessed he groveling and foaming; and his hands, feet, eyes, mouth, were most gastlike drawn out into a Convulsion-manner, but much worse; at that very hower, that the Church made prayers for him, and not ceasing till God were prevailed with,Answered. those strange kinde of fits and distempers left him (to the amazement of all that knew it, so that after that not one fit more had he, though they continued upon him so thick, and for so long a time before, that no Doctor could help him, but all gave him over for a dead man with∣out recovery. But this was not all yet, that God intended to doe for his people; this man was not discovered to the Church to be what he was all this while; And though the Lord heard the Churches prayers to recover this man out of this condition; yet the Lord cast him into another condition for the Churches good. But by this time was the messenger come for the Pastor (it being above a mile distant) to come quickly to the said Osborne; Thither he hasted,Taken in ano∣ther manner. and carri∣ed with him the Churches contribution: when he came into the house, the people within told him how suddenly those strange fits left him; and now how he was altered, and taken in another course, crying out to speak with the said Pastor, who went in where this Osborne lay in another posture (then formerly) upon his bed,Howles and roares he is damn'd. and seeing the Pastor begins to howle and roar; crying out, O I'me damn'd! I'me damn'd! I goe to hell! I goe to hell! (repeating every sentence he said I
think at least a dozen times, with a most deplorable voice) O I am rotten! I am rotten! at the heart! Oh the heart! with aboundance of such bitter language; the Pastor wondred; began to say one thing and another; to apply for one aile, and for another; but all in vain, for the more he sought to help he seemed to hurt, and the more he sought to cure he seemed to kill, and the more to fret the disease. The Pa∣stor retiring himselfe for a time into the next roome as desi∣rous to seek to God and to bewail the mans woefull misery, was there told by one or two, that the same Osborne has formerly been suspected for adultery lying with one Right's wife hard by,Reported to be guilty of sin with one Right's wife before he en∣tred into Church-felow∣ship long. and for some other misdemeanors, which were never before known or imagined to be in the man (by any of the Church as I know of, or that any of the Church did speak of.) Well the Pastor returning thanks to the parties that acquainted him with this, went out into the yard and then earnestly sought the Lord, that this mans af∣flction might be usefull to the Church, and that by his own mouth, that might be discovered within him, which none could see, and few suspect by his outward deportment and profession;The Pastors prayer about him. and if he were so wicked, and that such sinnes and basenesse were in him, that it might be manifested open∣ly to the terror of the wicked, that as at the judgement of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.11. fear might come upon all the Church and those that hear these things. With his heart ful of such hot desires; the Pastor returned in to the man (much relying on God) and as soon as ever the said Osborne saw him, he cryed out alowd, Oh I'me damn'd! I'me damn'd! I'me rotten, I'me rotten,This Osborne discovereth out of his own mouth. 'Ime rotten! The Pastor asked him why, and like a floud his voice violently bursting forth, for lying with such a wo∣man, naming her openly to all commers, and continuing this his unsavory speech so long and in so much despair that the Pastor was constrained to leave him so; he being unca∣pable of making use of what so ere was said to him,A warning to Hypocrites. though ere so urgently; so that the said J. R. the Pastor hasted home (being now dark night) hoping to doe him more good by dealing with God for him, then by any further dealing with him; being much afflicted for the great sinfulnesse of the man;
and for that those without would take all he said up in the worst sense, and with the most malicious construction they could; so reporting it about the Countrey as it might reflect much upon the Church; and that to the publique reproach of profes∣sion and the Gospel practise;☜ which (afterwards as wee shall hear) through the great grace of our God, (who turns light out of darknesse, and good out of evi) made mightily for the Churches advantage and comfort. The next day the Pastor praising the Lord▪ for this large discovery made of the mans sinfulnesse and unsoundnesse (who was condemned out of his owne mouth) in his private study strongly sets upon God, and by a holy violence beseecht, and begged of him hard that hee would scourge him here severely, by some visible signe, and that to the purpose, for others to take warning by,The Pastors prayer again. and for the further manifestation of such as were unsound and rotten in the Church, and for the fuller strengthening and establish∣ment of his sincere and pretious ons in the Faith, and that his soul might be saved at the last day. Thus continuing his undeniable requests for the space of two dayes all this while, newes was brought that Osborne was now drawing on,This Osborne dying, draw∣ing on. in his last sweat, and senselesse and knowing no body, but speech lesse, and upon giving up the ghost, onely now and then he raged, and flung about; But every one had given him up for a dead man and without remedy▪ (in their eyes). After this the said Pastor did set afresh upon the Lord, and lay hard that it might be enough, what was done, and to with∣draw his anger (if he pleased to be prevailed with through Christ) and now to spare him, and try him a little longer,Pastors prayer again for him. if he did heartily repent what was past; and resolve against temptations in time to come; and to walke up more closely to the rules of the Gospel, upon his promise so to doe, that he would try him now, and be pleased to be pacified and shew him love, &c. The Pastor continued praying for him,In private and publique. the space of a day or two more, and this not onely in private, but publiquely in whole body and society (May 7.) it being a day of speciall Communion; On which day one member of the Fellowship being sent to see him; he was asleep fast, so as he was not seen to rest for a long time before, being ty∣red
under so many torments as he was in; and so 'twas hard to say whether he were dead or alive, thus he slept a long time. At last when he awakd, both himself and others by him being wonderfully amazed at so sudden a change as he seem'd to be in; for as others knew not well, whether he were dead or alive, and all concluded hee was drawing on untill this sleep, so himself (as he affirmed to the Church after) wondred he was alive,This Osborne thought he had been in Hell. and altogether thought that he had been dead and cast into Hell; and was there enduring the torments for his sinnes, not imagining himself upon the earth, for these four or five dayes (ere since the Pastor J.R. last left him in a despairing condition) not capable of comfort∣ing being senselesse. But suddenly, hee awaking, and wondring at himself, he starts up off of his bed, and by all means would be going to the Pastors house,He awaked with strange words and reports. and to the Church; and told the people that now he was beholding to his Master (for so he called the Pastor) indeed; and for that his Master had done wonderful things for him; and the Com∣pany asking why? Oh! he answered that his Master had prayed to God for him; and the Church had prayed for him. And that God had stayed his hand now, and had forgiven him his sins past (he was sure) upon his promise to amend, and that his Master tooke a great deal of pains with God, and would not be quiet till the Lord had commanded the Serpents that had tormented him for his sinnes to fly back for a time, &c. with a great deal of such like language, which yet the more amazed them, they thinking him half frantick to talk so; and looking on him as a man drawing on;☞ but as on the morn∣ing or last night, and not like to live; and yet he would needs be gone to the Pastor to tell him, what God had done for him,He rises. and had already got on his cloathes, and got out of doores; but being very weake and ready to reele downe in the way about a field off, his wife and neighbours running after him much against his own minde got him in again. But his wife and neighbours perceived him another manner of man, then what he was before; by his good motions, prayers, discour∣ses and desires heavenward; it being a great delight to him to acquaint them with his experiences of God under this sharp
dispensation. After a day or two he feeling strength,He comes to the Church. would not be stayed from coming to the Pastor, and it fell out to be upon a day when the Church gathered together to break bread; but the Pastor coming to him called him aside,The Pastor deals wiih him. and in a roome by themselves, he set very severely and plainly up∣on the man in many particulars; and especially for his pre∣sumption to enter into this way being such unsound and unfit matter, and therefore that he could not long have continued, with so fair an outside, but the inside rottennesse would at length have broken out, and he be cast from the rest of the building,A plain warn∣ing piece to wicked church-members. as 2 Tim. 3.5. 1 Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13. Tit. 3.10. Matth. 18.18, 19, &c. 1 Tim. 1.20, &c. For though he had done contrary to the rules we must doe according to them. Withall, dealing with him upon such Scriptures, as Jer. 7.9, 10. Psal. 50.16, 17, &c. Isai. 35.8, 9, 10. questioning and expostulating with him upon them, and those Ezek. 44.7, 8. Jo. 4.23. and many others, and charg∣ing it home upon him, the wrong that he had done to Christ and his Church by opening the mouthes of her malitious adver∣saries, to speak against Christs way,For the scandal he brought up∣on the Gospel to Churches. the worst words in their hearts; to vilifie and slander his Saints, to deride Religion, to wax proud against profession, and grievously to offend those weak in the Faith, & yet though he had mocked men he could not mock God; but now that the Lord had opened his inside to us, that we might see what a Traitor he was to the Truth, what a hypocrite to God, and what not?☜ As the Pastor was opening him to himself yet more; this Osborne told him that the Lord had pardoned him, upon his promise to amend, and the prayer of his Church for Christs sake,He said he was sure his sins were pardoned. and that he saw his par∣don writ before him and his sinnes blotted out, &c. The Pastor urging it upon him, how he knew he was pardoned, and what he meant by seeing sinnes blotted out, who then be∣gan to tell the whole story of his agony, and torments, and de∣liverance; which being long the Pastor desired him to cut off, and to acquaint the whole Body with them after the last Ser∣mon, before they dispersed to their severall homes; Because that as there was visible offence given to Christ and his Church, so there must be visible repentance and apparent evidences of his
conversion, &c. So the Pastor parted with him, the Church could not admit of him into Communion, but hee must hold off, till he could give satisfaction, onely he had liberty in the converting Ordinances; and to converse with any of the Society or the like; In the Evening about five or six a clock the said Osborne was called into the Society to answer to such things, as were laid to his charge; and first the Pastor earnestly seeking God that nothing might be done,Prayer in the Church. or con∣cluded on but what should be agreeable to the minde of Jesus Christ, and the rules of the Gospel; and to stablish all that are present in the faith, and that they might be the more strengthened, by what did, or should of Gods power appeare to have been upon this man, to punish him, and of his love to deliver him, and that this Church might not be de∣ceived, through the subtilty of Satan, as to believe a lye, or to give no credit to the Truth, but to make them discerning in his wayes, and to eye him in all his goings, &c. After the Pastor had prayed,This Osborne declares in the open Church his sins for∣given with great humility and yet confi∣dence. and the Church joined with him very de∣voutly, the charges being uttered against this Osborne; still hee continued his former story how God had forgiven him, and he had seen his sins blotted out, and how the Serpents were suffered to feed on him for his sins. So urging on him what he meant, by these things, and straitly requiring him not to believe a delusion; No! he said he was sure! the Lord did not delude him! and thus he began! After the fits left me (sayes he) I sent for my Master (i. e. the Pastor) because I was to dye (as I thought). Then (this being on May 2. the Lecture day at night) when he despaired (so that the Pastor was there) I thought that I had dyed, and was gone into Hell for my sinnes,The strange story of it. where God stretcht out his rod, and then came out a huge great Serpent, which God bid to goe and torment me, and presently out of the belly of the great Serpent came out seven Serpents more; so many Serpents for so many sinnes; and they all together seised upon mee, and stung and gnawed me, and eat off all my flesh below, and my thighes, and gnawed all clean to the very bone; A sad example for hypocrites that creep in. and I heard my Master pray, and say, Lord punish him! till he amend! Let him be punished, for a time! and still these
Serpents continued on mee,It is the more strange, for that this Osborne told all the Pa∣stor prayed privately, which none e∣ver heard but God. and tormented me more and more for a long time (as wee conceived for the space of two dayes or thereabouts by the Pastors words, who acknowledged to the Church that there might be some likelyhood in what Osborne said, because that he did indeed pray for two dayes or thereabouts, in his study privately, that the Lord would punish him severely in the flesh, that his Spirit might be saved, in the Day of the Lord, which the Church never knew, till he told them. Moreover the said Osbornes tongue was bit quite through,☜ and a peece of his lip pulled off; which hindred his speaking so as he could scarce be understood, and being asked how it came he said he knew not, unlesse the Serpents had bit it, which hee thought because he knew nothing, but that he was in Hell not so much as imagining that hee was alive upon the Earth. But his wife said,☜ that once leaping up as in an infi∣nite torment he bit his tongue quite through and through;O sad example for sinners then; a severe warning to them▪ and on another time he run a pin quite through his lip, and rung of a peece on it, this being all in the time of these two dayes; But to proceede to his story. For these questions were asked at the Conclusion) After these Serpents had fed upon my flesh (sayes he) for so long a time I saw a Rowle as of Parchment lying before me, and upon it God had written,A sight of a Rowle. that he would take Justice, and my Master writ that hee would have mercy upon me, and the Lord writ again that he would take vengeance; and my Master writ again,The clear an∣swer of pray∣ers. Lord let it be enough; if he repents let it be enough now, &c. and I heard (sayes he) the words as they were writing (then the Pastor so said to the Church that it was so, after a day or two, that he indeed desired the Lord to let it be enough; if he did repent, and unfeignedly promised amendment, and that he would remove his hand; and this he did both in publique upon the Lords dey, and in his owne study he thus prayed; not knowing all this while, but that Osborne was as he left him on Thursday night, and in despair; And as men reported him to be drawing on.) So my Master would not leave the Lord (says he) till the Lord said well, he would try me;The Serpents went away, and the Lord par∣doned him. and so the Rowle vanished away, and flew upward, and God commanded the Serpents to withdraw, so the little
Serpents went into the great Serpents belly; And by little and little (sayes he) the great Serpent did goe back and back till at last he went away downe, (as might bee at my Beds feet) which I was mightily joyed at, because I thought that he would have tormented me so for ever,☞ not know∣ing but that I was in Hell. After that I heard the Church plainly to pray for me, and I beheld the Lord (not as before in his anger,Smiles on him. Sets joies be∣fore him. but) smiling upon me (as it were) and there were before mee all the joyes that could be desired and Rivers ran before me as Crystall full of gold, so as I had liberty to have taken what I would;A Paradise. thinking I saw a Paradise. Thus I continued till I awaked,☞ when I wondered where I was, and could scarce think I was alive, not knowing so much; and he found his heart filled with gladnesse; and (hee said) he fain would have come to the Pastors house, but neighbours restrained him. But now being night the Church-Society must disperse, wherefore not being satisfied with such extraordinary things, as he spake of, he was held off Communion for a time (being necessary that the Church should see a visible change in him; by whom were such visible offences given.) I shall not tye this story to your Faith any further,A word to the Reader. then as hee related it himself to the Society, it is indeed wonderfull, by God's wayes are wondrous these dayes: This man cannot read a letter. However the result of all this made much for the Churches good, and to the strengthening and establishing of others, and to the searching and examining of all; which we looked upon as a speciall note of Gods approbation of us, and love to us, who are from the rootes of the heart given up freely and sincerely to be his servants. And I shall only adde this more thereto, that I have taken this story verbatim out of the Church Booke, which registers up such eminent passages at Purleigh in Essex. I shall tire the Reader with no more experiences; These ex∣amples are sufficient, and some of them are very eminent: We are sweetly led by the hand (manuducimur) to drinke of these Brookes before we passe. Some are deep but most shallow,
and all clear as Crystall streams, unlesse at such times, when Satan (by temptations) put in his cloven-foot. Those which are the most extraordinary of them are uttered in Dream,☜ Trance, Voice, or Vision, and Vision is taken two wayes,Vision is twofold. ei∣ther first actually, by the senses of the body, and so in some visible bodily shape; or else 2. potentially thus, that although the soul (ut forma) is joined to the body, yet (ut materia) above the body; And yet it uses not any bodily senses for such a ser∣vice, but sequesters all externals, and the outward senses are (as 'twere) dead, or asleep, not at all intervening to interrupt the soule; but when the soule is soared up in any high exi∣gency, or excellency to see great things; or is intent upon any rich discoveries, as by Visions, Revelations, or the like; all the bodily senses lye (as 'twere) in a trance, and all exterior mo∣tions are quieted and quash'd, and flesh is silent, whilest the Lord appeares out of his holy habitation, Zach. 2. ult. and some such speciall and spirirituall fruits, I have presented the Saints with, from secundum naturam to supra naturam, whilest some of them were (as in an Externination to selfe) transpor∣ted from darknesse into his most marvailous light, by some extra∣ordinary medium, and prevalent inspirations and visions, or the like; which were taken up and arrested by the intelle∣ctuall and cognoscitive faculties of their soules. And indeed dear friends! the redoubled experiences which my soule hath had of a sweet Father, (who was found of me sometimes when I gave over seeking him, as in some measure lies manifest in my testimony) these facilitate my language, and felicitate my lines to breath out somewhat for others;These experi∣ences imper∣fect to what are to come. of those involving rapsodicall visions, and Love-discoveries; And indeed! many matchlesse manifestations I have taken from others (in o∣ther parts where I have travell'd) so alike and akin to these (but many more Sun-like and excellent) that I cannot o∣mit to tell you, that you have heard but stutterings and stammerings to what are to come,☜ and have seen but a jelly and imperfect embryon to that degree and measure which the Saints shall shortly meet with; which will afford us matter of wordlesse worth, and too high too for any language to de∣lineate. But in the meane time I have presented these to
all precious saints,The psie what flowers are in it. as a fresh posie gathered for that purpose; wherein they may have variety of colours, and conditions, and all sweet and lovely, and they may finde in this posie, the Rose of Sharon, the pure Lilly of the Valleys, the sweet Vi∣olets of humility, Tyme, and Winter-savory, with a great deale of Hearts-ease, all tyed up together with a thread of Scarlet, Cant 4.3.Tyed up. But many experiences of inferior glory, and lower appearance, I have purposely omitted, yet I must tell you in these their Dreams, voices, and cries, they were not to be observed in themselves as in the effects the effects of them. ☞As for those which are the ordinary ones of them, which are call'd home by such means as, preaching, praying, reading, writings, or such like; In and by them, if you observe, you shall find a Call twofold, Legal and Evangelical: as to instance in Elizabeth Averies,Call twofold. &c. And note further, those who are first called by the Word,An derly call. and preaching, are then 2. confirmed by the Scriptures and promises; and 3. assured by the presence of Christ revealed in them; instance in John Spilman, Lawrence Swinfield, &c. and many times your most ordinary are most infallible and certain.☞ But these are the present observations, be∣sides this; That every Church of Christ which is full of experi∣ence,Happinesse of Churches en∣riched with ex∣periences. must needs be ful of Faith, & have provision laid up for ma∣ny years, wch being so advantagious as hath bin said, should ex∣ceedingly oblige others to bring forth out of their treasures, new and old; & I would have every Church appoint the Pastor, or some others to take up all the experiences which the mem∣bers declare, and to bring the best & choicest of them into pub∣lique light,☞ Oh how beautifull would they be abroad! and how sensibly and forcibly should we perceive the unparalleld appear∣ances of Gods love and light as they shine more and more to∣wards the perfect day!Good work for good Pa∣stors of Chur∣ches. and oh how obvious to every eye would the work which God is about be in this age! and then we should see how far these experiences surpasse the former, or the Saints in former ages; and how far our childrens will be before us.☞ And indeed it is a burning shame they should lye buried alive, and not be brought into the light, which are given in to all the Churches in this age, that are of excellency or use, but now at last I will wipe my pen and sit down.
CHAP. VII.  Berith. That Church-Covenant may be, but not that it must be, as that wherein the Formality of the Church consists. THere is a threefold consideration (saies Bernard) which is to go before every work,Bernard lib. 4. de consider. cap. 51. and which a wise man makes his main (primum an liceat; deinde an deceat: postremo an ex∣pediat) to consider whether it be lawfull, comely, and expedi∣ent; for all things are lawfull, but all things are not expedient, saies the Apostle. Now in Christian discipline that does appear to be undecent which is undutifull; and uncomely, which is unlawfull and against command; and so also that which is not lawfull nor comely, must needs be unexpedient and un∣profitable. Wherefore let us finde this Church-covenant (which we are now come to) a thing lawfull, decent, and ex∣pedient, and it may passe, or else it must be put to a stand and examined; And sometimes (upon examination) though it be found lawfull in it self, yet being unusefull, and unex∣pedient for some other reasons which are weighty, (and import the bene esse,When Church-covenant is in∣different and must not be urged. or wel-being and priviledges of the Church) therefore it must be put upon the file (for the present however) and not urged as of absolute necessity to any but left as indifferent. Now of such things we have trea∣ted at large in chap. 5. yet this I shall further adde, that those things which are neither praecepta nec prohibita,☜ com∣manded nor counter-manded by Scripture, yet may be,Things indif∣ferent and doubtfull dan∣gerous. and in some cases they must be opposed by our preaching; especially when pernicious errours do attend their pra∣ctise;
as to instance, when they are cryed up (if not as me∣ritorious yet) as (Deoplacentia) things not only pleasing,1. When ac∣counted so pleasing to God as if he were dis∣pleased with∣out them. but as if without them the worship of God were displeasing to him; so that men paint over their traditions by inventions, with such varnish to take others: Et homines fascinati his ritibus, and then some men are ready to run mad for them. Thus they run over head and ears into the water after the Ana∣baptisticall errour; as Melanchthon takes notice in his Common places,Melanchton. De ceremoniis humanis. So did the Israelites after the golden calf, and so did the Marcionites, Manichees, and Dona∣tists of old. And so the Presbyterians and rigid Disciplina∣rians now that do tye men to any empty form. And further, 2. When things indifferent are cryed up for (necessaria Ecclesiae) and dignified with the title of things necessary;2 When they are cryed up as necessary. and then those that desert those ceremoniall rites or indifferent things, they do presently damn for the members of Antichrist, of an Harlot, as seditious, erroneous, or enemies to Christ, and these men make Religion odious, the Gospell contempti∣ble; the Church a meer externall policy; whence it is, that so much discord arises about outward rites and orders.☞ Thus do all rigid Disciplinarians, who cry up the Form more then the Power. 3. When men are made the more blinde and bad by them.3. When this opinion of things doubtfull and indifferent, does darken the mind, and makes man more blind, and brings forth () a foolish, froward, rash violent, hasty zeal; as it did in the Pharisees for Mosaicall rites; and as it does in those rigid sort of Anabaptists (I say not all) that at this day contend with so much fire for their form, and that with violent invectives (their loudest arguments) against all that differ from them,Anabaptist. they hate, threaten, malice, rail at with the worst-words in their bellies the precious ones of God; and are of a persecuting-spirit (as all formalists are) I speak of such as I have met with, whose fire cant't be quenched without water,Rivers of wa∣ter. without much, if not whole rivers of water: whilest the true servants of God, and all true worshippers, doe wor∣ship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4. 4. When they cause conten∣tion, and trou∣bles.4. When hot discords, doubts, differences, malice, madnesse, spight, hatred, and anger or the like, arises from things doubt∣full,
and indifferent, they are to be laid aside, and left as things dangerous. And thus ought the Presbyterians,☜ Indepen∣dents, Anabaptists, and all to agree in one;How all, i. e. Presbyt. Indep. Anabapt. may be reconciled, in chap. 5. to cast away what∣soever causes contention, and is left in the word, without ab∣solute command or counter-mand; As the formall Covenant, bapti∣zing infants, rebaptizing, or the like, seeing that as once we have said before, even ordinances commanded, for quietnesse sake,☜ and to make a onenesse and peace betwixt Jew and Gen∣tile (at a greater distance then any of these now are) were taken away by Christ, that they might be all one in Christ,Love is posi∣tive in which things usefull and indifferent should be laid aside. Gal. 3.28. See Eph. 2.15, 16. and this ought to be, rather then the want of love, peace, and unity should be among the Saints. They must deny all indifferent and doubtfull ordinan∣ces when they grow dangerous, and cause discord. O that men were wise and would learn this! for loves-sake which is the greatest Commandement of all other! 5. When the Hypocriticall defenders of such Formes,5. When cryed up above posi∣tive com∣mands. do cry them up for greater excellencies, and more usefull then positive duties, then they are dangerous indeed. So do the Presbyte∣rians that cry up a Prelacy, and call for Classes, rather then they will deny their high-spirited opinion for peace and love with their brethren.☜ So do these Independents that do rather presse their formall explicite Covenants as necessary to the constitution of the Churches, then lay them aside for love and union-sake; and rather then thereby any difference or discord should arise. And so do those blazing Meteor-like Comets (for I fear they are so in Ireland) those unchristian, rough,To some of the Anabaptists in Ireland, i. e▪ the most rigid. threatning Anabaptists (for I speak of them) that rather then lay aside their form, they will see all the diffe∣ring Saints in the world ruin'd, and help to torment and persecute them themselves, and lay more weight upon their doubtfull ordinance, then they do upon the undeniable,☜ an absolute ordinance of love, (and preferre them before theirs) which is that greatest and newest Commandement of Christ; Oh! it is sad to say it, but alas! we se it. For it is the love of the form, not the love of the Father which is in them, 1. Joh. 2.9.11. 1 Joh. 4.7, 8, 20. Where these errors accompany things doubtfull or indifferent
were they lawfull (in themselves) yet they are unexpedient,Yet in best Churches there is a due use of things indiffe∣rent. and unprofitable by reason of the evill effects; for such at∣tendants are not to be allowed or approved of. Yet we deny not a due use of things indifferent even in the best Churches; in ecclesiis emendatis as Melanchthon hath it therefore, 1 Cor. 14.40. , for the order and use of the Church to the edification of it,Melanch. as in vers. 5.12. But yet so,Expos. as to avoid giving of offence, or occasions of conten∣tion by imposing a necessity of them, or a righteousnesse in them.The Doctrines of Devils when. For in such a case the spirit speaketh expresly cal∣ling them, 1 Tim. 4.1. The doctrines of Devils. So saith Christ, In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, the Commandements of men, Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Col, 2.20, 21. Gal. 5.1, 2. These things are true when men make such things absolutely necessary to the breach of all brother-hood, peace, unity, order, and love, which are left doubtfull or indiffe∣rent in Scripture: and I dare boldly say, this is the main cause of our most contentions;☞ O! that men would be more milde,Church-Cove∣nt idolized. &c. and say in such cases! Too many Church-mem∣bers there be that make a meer Idoll of their Church-cove∣nant, and (I think they do little lesse that make it the Formall cause of a visible Church, (which we have handled in another order the first Book ch. 6. & 7.) seeing it is left among things doubtful and indifferent, to be used or not used for peace, and love, and orders-sake. Melanchthon I remember memtions a story of one Spiridon a Bishop, who having a friend upon a fast day, (now called a fish-day it may be) to visit him,Spiridon a Bi∣shop. he bids his servants bring in meat, and some flesh being provided, was brought; but his guest startled at it; Oh, saies he, non vescor his bodie, sum enim Christianus! I am a Christian, therefore I eat none of this to day; Nay but saith Spiridon, eat of this to day because thou art a Christian, for every creature of God is good taken with thankfulnesse; and speaking in this manner to the man, he was much convinced of his errour, and fell to the meat, learning thus much by this example, that the worship and service of God is more excellent then so, and consists not in meats or drinks, or differencing things in∣different,☞ and with hearty thankfulnesse he embraced his
Christian liberty: and so I say, to such a one as saies, Oh! the Church-covenant! O I am for it! I think it necessary, for I am a Christian! yea, a Church-member! and art thou so? say I, why therefore because thou art a Church member and a Christian, impose no necessity of it,A word to Church-mem∣bers. for the worship of God is more excellent then so, it consists not in such formes; but in righteousnesse, peace,Covenant of grace gives right to be Church mem∣bers. and joy in the Holy Ghost (as hath been said in chap. 5, of this book) and it is not this makes thee a Church-member or a Christian: But thou art within the Covenant of grace made and confirmed in the Gospell and written by the warm bloud of Christ, and sealed by his Spirit; then thou art received of God,Other Cove∣nants left to li∣berty. and hast a right (as much as any hath) to be received a member of the visible Church, 2 Sam. 23.5, 6. And as for formall,Sim. explicite Covenants they are like your riders knot fast and loose, saies Mr. Vines in his Sermon before the House,Church Cove∣nant not ne∣cessary, why? Octob. 22. 1644. p. 15. or else like Shibboleth meerly to distinguish (for prudence sake) between person and person, people and people; so that, I say, not but a Church-covenant may in some cases be usefull,Reas. but it is not of absolute necessity; for these reasons,2. No pre∣ceps. 1. There is no precept for it. 2. And further we shall finde that Christians fell into such fellowship together (as we here treat of) without it, or any such form in primitive times,2. No practise for it. Act▪ 19.9. we can finde no footing for it in all the Churches Directory, viz. the Acts of the Apostles. And further, Saints are of one and the same houshold in the unity of the spirit, not of the form (as we said chap. 5.6.) Ephes. 2.21. & 4.4, 5. the Church was represented (saies Mr. Noyes in his Temple mea∣sured) by your 12 cakes on the table in the Temple,Noyes Temp. 3. Saints one in the Spirit. pag. 9. called the Bread of faces, because all the Saints sit together though of different formes) by one spirit face to face, feeding on spiritual refreshments in the Temple of God So that the excesse of complements,Explicite cove∣nant may be where it causes no trouble, but must not be where it cau∣ses trouble. formalities and punctualities must be avoided and evaded as unsutable to the simplicity, and spiri∣tuality of the Gospel, Temple, and Worship. Wherefore I finde it evident, that explicite covenanting (pro modo & forma) is no necessary formality, but may be used where it causes no contention or disorder; and yet as men make it, it may be a
dispensation too compulsory and violent in respect of Gods free-grace, and the covenant that he hath made: For the Ordinances of the Covenant of grace are sutable to the grace of the Covenant But, Furthermore, all the members of the Church are enga∣ged  without such a kinde of covenanting and confederating to∣gether;All Church members are as much inga∣ged without such covenan∣ting. that is, by the same word and Spirit, by which they are bid and brought in, they are bound in the waies of Christ; and in the communion of love, peace and holinsse. There is an obligation that lies upon every Saint, of ano∣ther nature, more noble, loving, and lasting, which will not like a riders knot be fast and loose▪ but bindes them to love and obedience, without fetters or halters: and this I account the brotherly covenant, Amos 1.9. not only made in prudence as was between Solomon and Hiram,What cove∣nant is necessa∣ry▪ but in wisdome, Act. 11.23. which is the deed and decree of heart () not of hand; and this is the bond of brotherhood, as the Hebr. hath it,Expos. which bond of peace consists in the unity of the spi∣rit, not of the forme, (as hath been fairly offered before) and this is by another spirit (as it is recorded of Caleb) after God, Numb. 14.24. and not after man; for that the set form which is after man makes many divisions,☞ dangerous sepa∣rations, and sad discords even among true brethren, and then it is farre from uniting or true order; and ought to be abhorr'd. But lest some lofty brethren look angry at this assertion,P. 16. ch. 4. vide the Narrative of Churches in New-England by W. R. and language, and should fill my ears with clamours by reason of concurrent contra-position of many eminent Ministers and others of this Nation, and of New-England of the congregationall way; I will but lead them to the Apology of New-England for the Covenant p. 32. & 44. wherein they acknowledge an agreement or consent of Saints together; or of this or that Christian to walk in Church-fellowship with this or that society;Vide Mr. Ho∣kers Survey, part. 1 chap. 4. Explicite Co∣venants how and when usefull. and that this is sufficient and equivalent with the others. So saith Mr. Peters in his Discourse of Covenant, p. 21, 22, 23. & T.G. I.G. But yet we grant, that if this implicite Covenantings should produce such ill consequences, as of contentions, discords, disorders, &c. which the explicite Covenant would re∣medy
and appease; that then there may be such a Covenant writ in the Church book, and handed by the Church members, for so long as good use, peace, and order are brought forth by it; but yet with this Caution, that it be allowed only as a thing prudentiall, for a time,Caution. (whilest the use or end is good of it) and not as a thing necessary for all time, or as without alteration or cessation; for then you should say,When it is to be cast away with abhor∣rence. And when to be taken in. ie upon it, we will have none of it; when it begins to assault and intrench upon Christian liberty. Now in this sense, and in such cases a Church-covenant is lawfull, decent, and expedient; and in such an exigency and emergency of time, this was put in execution by the Church at Dublin, as a medium (in prudence) to compose diffnces,So in Dublin. and it proved very effectual (blessed be God) to end the former, and to prevent future disturbances, but it was not to be urged upon any one contrary to Christian liberty. And thus farre we can freely concurre with Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Ainsworth and all other eminent ones, that are so hot for an explicite covenanting, though the implicite by your own confession carries the formalem rationem of the other which they so urge; both being but adjuncts.Formes of Church-cove∣nant. The forms of such Covenants are shorter or longer, as the occa∣sion requires; I shall insert one or two for examples-sake. 1. The Covenant of the English Church at Roterdam, when Mr. H. P. was chosen Pastour. WEE whose names are hereunder written, having found by sad experience how uncomfortable it is  to walk in an unsetled and disorder'd condition, &c. 1. We do renue our covenant in Baptisme and avouch God to be our God. 2. We resolve to cleave to the true and pure worship of  God, opposing to our power all false waies. 3. We will not allow our selves in any known sin, bu will renounce it so soon as Gods word does manifest it so to be, the Lord lending us power.
We resolve to carry our selves in our places of govern∣ment and obedience, with all good conscience, knowing we must give an account to God. Wee will labour for all further growth in grace, by hearing, reading, praying, meditation, and all other wayes we can. We mean not to over-burthen our hearts with earthly cares, which are the bane of all holy duties, the breach of the Sabbath, and the other Commandements. Wee will willingly and meekly submit to Chri∣stian Discipline without murmuring, and shall labour so to continue, and will endeavour to be more forward, zealous, loving, faithfull, and wise in admonishing o∣thers. Wee will labour by all our abilities for the further∣ance of the Gospel as occasion shall be offered to us. We promise to have our children, servants, and all  our charge taught the wayes of God. We will strive to give no offence to our brethren by  censuring them rashly by suspicions, evill speakings, or any other way. Lastly, We doe protest not onely against open and  scandalous sins, as drunkennesse, swearing, &c. but al∣so against evill company, and all appearance of evill to the utmost of our power. Per me F. H. I might make mention of others, some of them very short and generall; but others fuller and more particular. But I shall trouble thee (Reader) but with one more, which as thou heardst before was made use of, as a remedy to end some disorders and disturbances, and subscribed by all that were free thereto upon occasion of differences arising; to which this (much) related.
II. The Covenant of the Church in Dublin collected out of the word of Christ according to the Order of the Gospel. WEE whose Names are hereunder written do free∣ly give up our hands and hearts to God the Father and his Son Christ Jesus, our onely Lord and Law-giver; and doe unanimously ingage in the fear of the Lord eve∣ry one of us, to our utmost powers, through the gracious assistance of Gods holy Spirit, That wee will walk together in one body with one minde, in all sweetnesse of Spirit, and Saint-like love each to o∣ther, (as the Disciples of Jesus Christ) and all to the Church. Joh. 15.12. & 13.34. Rom. 13.8. Ephes. 5.2. 1 Thes. 3.12. 1 Joh. 4.21, &c. Jointly to contend and strive together in all good and  lawfull wayes, both by doing and by suffering for the purity of the Gospell, the Truth of Christ, his Ordinances and Or∣ders, the honour and liberty, and priviledges of the Church against all opposers, Jude 3. Gal. 5.1.13. &c. With all care and conscience to study and labour to keepe up the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, both in the  Church in generall, and in particular, between one another, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 1.10. Ephes. 4.3. 2 Cor. 13.11, &c. Carefully to avoid all causes and causers of Divisions (as much as in us lies) and to shun Seducers, false-Teachers of  errors or Heresies, Rom. 16.17, 18. 1 Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. Tit. 9.3. v. g. 10. 2 Joh. 10. Rev. 2.14.18. Partaking and fellow-feeling to our power with one ano∣ther, in every condition, bearing each other burdens, Gal. 6.2. Heb. 13.3. 1 Cor. 12.25. 2 Tim. 1.16. &c. To forbear and bear with one another weaknesses, and  infirmities, in much pity, tendernesse, meeknesse and pati∣ence, not ripping up the weaknesse of any one to any o∣ther, without our Church; nor yet to any within, un∣lesse according to Christs rule and Gospel-order, endea∣vouring all we may for the glory of the Gospel and the
credit of his Church to hide and cover one anothers slippings and failings. Ephes. 4.32. Rom. 14.13. Rom. 15.1. Col. 3.12, 13. 1 Cor. 13.4.7 &c. And that we will (as the Lord our God shall enable  us) to our utmost, cleave close one to another, and every one to the Lord, and chearfully undergoe the condition and lot the Lord shall lay upon (this) his Church, whether in perseeution or in prosperity, without any wilfull drawing back or falling away from the fellowship or Faith which wee professe together, Heb. 10.24, 25, 26, &c. to the end, 2 Tim. 4.10.16. If any one Brother or Sister be afflicted, &c. fellow-feelingly to be afflicted with that Brother or Sister; and in all Christian wayes we can, to counsell, comfort or assist, and to pray hard for such a Member, 1 Cor. 12.26. 2 Thes. 3.2. Rom. 12.15. Act. 12.15. Freely to contribute and communicate of things tem∣porall and spirituall according to our abilities out of our aboundance both to particular members in want, and also into the Publique-Treasury or Chuch-stock, 1 Joh. 3.17, 18. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. 2 Cor. 9.5, 6, 7. Rom. 12.13. 1 Tim. 6.17. &c. Vigilantly to watch over each others conversation, so as to counsell, comfort or correct according to Christs rules in such cases; provoking one another to love and good workes, with brotherly bowels and affections, 1 Thes. 5.4.14. Heb. 3.12, 13. Heb. 10.24. Heb. 12.13, 15, 17. Rom. 15.14. Carefully walking together in all holinesse, godlinesse and humility of minde, (to our uttermost) every day and often, and orderly meeting together to the edifying of the body, for the glory of the Gospell, credit of the Church, convincing of our adversaries, and them that are without, Mat. 5.16.20. Mal. 3.16, 17. 2 Tim. 2.19. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 3.12. Heb. 12.14. Praying continually for the prosperity of this Church; for Gods presence in it, and protection of it, against all the gates of Hell, Phil. 1.4, 5. Rom. 1.9. Ephes. 6.18. Col. 4.12. Psal. 122.6. Isa. 62.6, 7. &c.
And lastly, because differences have formerly arose about a Pastor, we doe freely declare to embrace and owne our brother—for our Pastor, according to the order of the Gospel; to submit with all ready obedi∣ence in the Lord to Christs Ordinances dispensed by him, Ephes. 4.11. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Heb. 13.7.17. 2 Thes. 3.14. to pray for assistance from the Lord in the administration to him committed, Ephes. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.3. 2 Thes. 3.1, 2. and to esteem of him as the Lord requires, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Thes. 5.12, 13. 1 Tim. 5.17. and to adhere and cleave to him in the Lord, 2 Tim. 4.6. 2 Tim. 1.16.18. &c. All which we doe in the sincerity of our soules declare, promise, purpose and engage to, as our God shall enable us by his own gracious Spirit. Per me W. H. Such like are the formes of the Church-Covenant, which are according to the rules of prudence and piety to be al∣tered, taken up or laid aside for love, peace and orders sake, and are all (alwayes) left to Christian liberty; For the ne∣cessary combination, consolation, and confederation of Saints together is spirituall; but the indifferent is this.Lib. de praecept. & dispens. in principip. Bernard tels us, de triplici necessario, of three wayes, that a thing is necessary, and this formall Covenanting is none of them I am sure (necessarium aut stabile, aut inviolabile,Threefold ne∣cessary. aut incommu∣tabile, viz. that which is stable and standeth sure,1. Stabile. and though the formall Covenant will not appeare necessary in this; yet for this one reason, the spirituall obligation is necessary, for that is the bond of perfection, Col. 3.14. as well as the bond of Peace, Ephes. 4.3. And 2. that which is inviolable, and cannot be broken is necessary,2. Inviolabite. which is this spirituall engagement, not the decree of the hand, but of the heart, whilest the formall Covenant is oft broken to pieces, and to powder: But 3. the necessary is unchangeable with∣out alteration or cessation;3. Incommu∣tabile. so is not the formall kinde of Co∣venant. Wherefore I cannot account so of the Church-covenant,☜ as that it must be to make up the true form of the Church, as a thing essentiall and constitutive to it; and of
the true Church (as most doe affirm) or as if without this there could be no true Church, but all harlots. Oh fearfull doating upon the form!Answ. com. p 78. Spirituall ties and Covenant hold firm. For, as one says, It is not possible that these things which are knit together by out∣ward bands and sinews should hold longer then their bands hold: But spirituall bands are everlasting, and the two staves, viz. Beauty and Bands, are the unity of the Spi∣rit in the band of Peace; and both hold together, and both broke together by unbelief, as appeares Zach. 11. Wherefore I am much affected with that prophesie, in Ezek. 20.38. to confirm this Covenant, and spirituall Ob∣ligation, which lies upon us as a stable, inviolable and unchangeable tye upon our spirits, where the Lord promises to make his people passe under the rod, and then to bring them into the band of the Covenant;Expos. Polanus. that is, saith Polanus in loc. the Lord will bring the godly under affliction, and whip them into obedience as they are bound;Calvin. But sayes Calvin thus, the rod is meant a shepheards crooke, by which the Lord gathers in the strayers to keep them within the fold, and not suffering his to Apostatize or fall away; where∣fore this cannot be meant the formall covenant; but I had rather read it with the vulgar, that the Lord will subject them to his Scepter, i. e. to be swayed and ruled by himself, the word  signifies a Scepter: I will cause them by my Word and Spirit to come under my Rod, (that is, my Scepter) to rule them; and then it followes, I will (i. e. by the same power and Spirit) bring them into the band of the Covenant, that is, by this means I shall oblige them to mee, to keep Cove∣nant with me, or to cleave close to the Lord, as Act. 11.23. Wherefore to conclude, in what Congregation so ever thou art, Reader, thu wilt doe well enough who art united to Christ the Head;☞ for the Spirit of Christ obliges thee then; which obligation is absolutely necessary, and must be; and the other kinde of Covenant,What may be. Bernard. if need be, may be; but in congregatione bene vivis si vivis ordinabiliter, sociabiliter & hu∣militer (saith Bernard,☞ Serm. 1 de Apost. Pet. & Paulo) thou  wilt doe well to walk, 1. orderly, avoiding sin and scan∣dall,What must be. and all appearances of evill, and holily as one
called 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 Thes. 4.7. from all manner of sin to all manner of holy conversation; and 2. sociably, or in Saint-like fellowship, in love, peace, and good will to all  the brethren, in watching over them, comforting, coun∣selling and assisting of them, all that thou can'st in love; and 3. walk humbly, look not on others at a distance, be not puff'd up with conceit; keep continually low before  the Lord; for he measures the valleys, and gathers the violets that hang their heads continually by self-deniall; O learne hard, to be nothing in thine own eyes! The humble he will teach in his wayes, Psal. 25.☜ The first of these ne∣lates to thy self, (tibi) the second to thy brother, (proximo) and the third to thy God (Deo) who accepts of all. But thus for this Chapter. CHAP. VIII.  Pupilla. That in the Church all the Members, even Sisters as well as Brothers, have a right to all Church-af∣fairs; and may not onely implicitely but explicitely vote and offer or object, &c. THE Furies and Harpies are flowne up very high up∣on this point, and most men doe arrogate a Sove∣raignty to themselves which I see no warrant for. The difference that is to be made is already proved to be be∣tween the precious, and the vile, the clean and unclean; and not to be a difference of Sexes, ages, or relations. Now because there be too bitter contentions about this, (which
was one thing that help'd to set at a distance the two societies in Dublin, by such as would rob sisters of their just rights and priviledges) we shall prove their liberty, and leave others to practise accordingly. Proofes for this may be taken from Prophecy, Precept, and Practise, and which we shall ratifie by firm reasons out of the Word of God, and answering objections, shall leave all to stand or fall accor∣ding to their foundation and bottome. But, Proved 1 by Prophecy.The Prophet Joel, chap. 2.29. tels us of the liberty of Saints in the last dayes; for where the Spirit is, there is liberty;Expos. and this Spirit is promised to be powred-out; i. e. most plentifully and largely in the latter dayes;Luther. and as Lu∣ther sayes in these last dayes of the world; although this was began in the Apostles time, Act. 2.15. faciendum ini∣tium sed non est satis,Paraeus. sayes Paraeus, it is now to be further and fuller performed and is expected to be powr'd out, ex abun∣danti, but onely with this difference, that it was then vi∣sible, but it will be (and is much already) invisibly; then ex∣traordinarily, and now more ordinarily powred out; and not dropped but powred, . Vpon whom? 1. Generally, upon all Flesh, non stillare sed plena copia fundere, let out with a full stream and running force, far surpassing former ages, that is the 2. circumstance sayes Calvin,Calvin. Paraeus in loc. and it is to be considered, Sine discrimine populorum, sexus, aut aetatis, so Esa. 66.18. Which 2. more particularly and expresly he explaines and confirms; upon the Servants, and upon the hand-maides, for  signifies for certain, & accipitur confirmative, that these lat∣ter dayes promises, as Isa. 2.2.3. Jer. 50.4. &c. doe most expressely and particularly relate to the weakest and con∣temptiblest sort of people in the Kingdome of Christ,The weakest sort and sex he will exalt most. young men and women, and it may be some aged men too, but as Paul sayes, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. Not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty are called, but God hath chosen the weak ones, and the despised ones, and the poore mean base ones to confound the wise, that no flesh might boast in his sight. But by these (and other) Prophecies it will appear God had care of the weakest contemptible vessels, viz. women, that he would
exalt them, and powre out his Spirit much upon them. As (Mayer sayes) that they as well as men (even both sexes) young men and women might manifestly appeare to defend the Truth, vindicate their liberty,Dr. Mayer gives the Rea∣son. prove their right to the Ordinances of Christ, either by speaking, pleading, prophecying, or the like, and declaring their visions of truth. Besides, the precept which I finde for it, is full enough, Mat. 18.17. Goe tell the Church, i. e. the whole Church,2. By precept to whom power is given to consult and conclude, matters which relate to the whole, not one member, age,Expos. or sex excepted; but women that are members as well as men, must equally know it,Fenner. and (consensu omnium) (sayes Fenner) conclude about it being to be by the concurrence of the whole. But say the Pontificians, tell the Church, that is, the Pope and his Cardinals, (the representative); sayes Lyra,Who is the Church. tell the Prelate (the representative); sayes Chrysostome, tell the Rulers (the Representative);1. Negative. say the Calvinists tell the Synod (the Representative); and Maldonat says the Judges: So say the Presbyterians tell the Classes (the Representative); or the Pres∣bytery (for so they call them) and some Independents say, tell the Brethren; but we say the whole body consisting of men and women. For the word is not  a Councel,2. Affirmative or Synod, or some chose to consult and sitting for that pur∣pose; but  a people called together into one body, being separate from the world and all false wayes and wor∣ships for the Lords use, and service;☜ which word charges the whole body with this duty, and that without difference of persons, sexes, ages, or abilities, but all together, and thus sayes Mr. Cartwright in his 1. Reply to Whitaker, p. 184.Cartwright. So in Act. 6.2, 3. the whole Church taken collectively (without any exception of any for sex or degrees) they are all required to cull and call out,Expos. looke out and choose it Deacons; that is, that every member might have his or her liberty; and give his or her consent thereto, seeing i concern'd every member.3. By practise. Furthermore you finde this in practise in primitive times, wherein the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles are full, in Act. 24.23. the whole Church (collectively) chose them Elders () by the lift∣ng
up their hands, so 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. the whole Church as concern'd so concur'd in that businesse, and Paul 2 Cor. 2.6. to 10. writes to the whole Church, for their consent and concur∣rence in remitting and readmitting of love, So that in those generall termes you find no excptin to one off or exclude sisters concurrence,Sisters must cocur as members of the body. and complyance with the Brethren, whe∣ther it be by voice or lifting up of hands, or the like, whe∣ther as we say explicitely or implicitely; and more expressely, you shall see in Act. 1.14. These brethren all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication,Sisters did join in choosing an Apostle. with the women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his Brethren, and then Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples (the number of whose names were 120) now you have it in totidem verbis that the sisters as well as brethren had a right and (accordingly) did take it in the choise even of another Apostle,Expos. and in ver. 23. they appointed (even those 120 Disciples men and women) two &c. yea furthermore in Phil. 4.3. saith the Apostle,Sisters were even labourers with Pal. I entreat thee help those women that labour'd with me in the Go∣spel, with Clement also and with other my fellow-labourers whose names are in the book of life:Theodor. in loc. Magna libertas, & maxima laus muli∣erum, sayes one, for the word  (and so ) is read actively,Expos. wherein they were admired and much com∣mended; and yet men now think much to allow them that common liberty (in Christs Kingdome, which is the liberty of the Subject) to vote or object, or aske, or answer, or say, or consent,Their com∣mon liberty. as need requires, which liberty they are (as I may say, as they are member of the Church) born to, and cannot (by right) be deprived off: which I shall prove further from the testimony of others, eminent men; yea out of their own mouthes, and by the right of reason and equity, and then an∣swer objections. Mr. Dudley Venner, de Sacr. Theolog. lib. 7. p. 278, 279. hath much to this purpose,Proved by learned wri∣ters. Fener. that in all mat∣ters maximi momenti, of generall concernment, as in censures, vo∣ting, choosing of Officers, taking in, casting out, or in what things so ever concern the whole, why they are to bee done in the whole Assembly, or Church meeting, by the au∣thority of the whole Church, without any one debarred of their liberty; and if there be any one (sayes hee) that
have any thing to offer or to object; that hee (or shee) have liberty to bring it in, and so after that, matters to be concluded by all. So Dr. Ames,Ames. against whom can bee no exception for piety or learning, in his Medull. Theolog. lib. 1. ch. 37. Sect. 6. saith Potestas hujus disciplinae, quoad jus ipsum, pertinet ad ecclesiam illam in Communi, &c. The right power of discipline appertains to the Church in common, e∣very member hath a right to vote, offer, object, to take in, or cast out or such like; for it belongs to the whole body in generall, & ad illos pertinet ejicere, ad quos pertinet primo admittere, which every brother and sister hath equally a right to and a liberty to doe.Rutherford right of Presb. So Mr. Rutherford him∣self in lib. 1. p. 49. produces Beza, Calvin, Bucer, Bullinger, Melanchthon, Bucan, Paraeus, Rivetus, Sibrandus, unius, Trel∣catius, Cyprian, Jerome, Augustin, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chry∣sostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, who all require that Church affaires be executed plebe consentiente, by the consent of all, i. e. every one without respect of persons. So Dr. Whitaker, de con∣cil. q. 5. p. 179. & de Pontif. Rom 9.9.1. c. 1. Sect 1. and in severall others, sayes enough to confirm us,Whittaker▪ duobus lco. both of Churches and Members, that omnes pares inter se juris essent, they were all equall among themselves in primitive times, without respect of persons, Jam. 2.1.Dr. Sibs an In∣dependent, and so Paul Baynes uses the same word Indepen∣dent in his Di∣ocesan tryall, p. 13. printed 16.1. So Dr. Sibs in his Breathing after God pag. 94. compares the particular visible Churches to Gods abernacle in Davids time, every of which particular Church he cals a severall Church Independent, And as for the Church of England, it's called (sayes he) a particular Church from other Nations, because it is under a Government Civill, which is not dependent on any other forain Prince, and in every one of these particular Churches, the members are without superiority, all ma∣king one brotherhood, for par in parem non habet imperium. So sayes Mr. Jacob in his attestation,Jacob. (and proves it by many others most eminent in Primitive times and Ancient Writers) who sayes that all affaires of government or order which concerne the whole are to be by the unani∣mous vote and consent of the whole; read the Magdebur∣genses in 2. Cent. chap. 7. de Conjoiatione Eccl siarum. Si quis,
(say they) probatos authores hujus Seculi perspiciat,Magdeburgen∣ses very clear in it. &c. If a man but search the Authentick Authors of this age; he shall see the form of government was like a Democracy; For every single Church had equall power of Docendi, administrandi, excommunicandi, eligendi, vocandi, ordinandi, &c. And every member hath a suffrage or voice.Cyprian. So Cyprian Epistolarum. epist. 11. lib. 3. epist. 3. lib. 1. speaks of it fully, and see Cottons Way of congregationall Churches cleared Part. 1. Sect. 2.Cotton's An∣swer to Baily and Rutherford. So that women are included in the whole. And many others, had I time to search, I should soon finde to bear witnesse with me, of womens (as well as mens) right to vote, offer, object, concurre in and consent to all things that con∣cern the benefit of the whole body. But more particu∣larly I shall take in Dr. Willets judgement,Dr. Willet's Synops. and then prove it by what our dissenting brethren have granted to us of it: Willet in his Synopsis Papismi 12. Gen. Contract. Q. 4. p. 572. lends us light enough to end this trifling controversie, for he tels us of a Heathen Priests son converted by a woman,Women prea∣ched. and the Iberi converted by the preaching of a woman, and of their ordinary duty to teach privately (and some of them extraordinarily called to preach in publick) and yet we allow them not their common liberty as members.☞ Moreover he tels us of a Canon in the Councel of Carthage, 4. can. 99.Councell of Carthage. That a woman though never so holy, and learned, was not to preach in publique (in private as much as she would) nor to baptize, Can. 100. but never that a woman was forbid to vote, or aske, or object or offer any thing which concerned the whole body, for that it is a priviledge which every one (woman as well as man) hath a right to as a Church-member, and this must not be denyed any, nor can it be for the Churches benefit so to do; and that for such reasons as will follow. So Tertullian tels us,Tertullian. that in his time it was not permitted to a woman to teach in the African Church, nor to baptize; but he does not deny the liberty which women had in Church-matters, to vote, dissent, or consent according to the liberty of the members of the subjects of Christ. But let us hear what our brethren say, they allow them liberty to
speak in some cases in the Church; as to give answer to a question when the Church requires it; to render a reason of their faith and hope,Prov'd out of their own mouths. to give in a testimony of repentance upon their return from a fault or the like. And Mr. Hooker him∣self in's Survey of Discipline, part. 3. ch. 1. p 6. saies they may so speak as suits with their Sexes, that is, saies he,Mr. Hooker of New Eng. when their speeches argue subjection. Why, so then! we seek no more then this; now their offering or objecting, or asking of the Church, or voting with the Church does evidently argue subjection, and suits very well with their sexes, and with their liberty as members, which they must not be robbed of. And Mr. Ainsworth in's Communion of Saints,Mr. Ainsworth. ch. 18. is exceeding clear in it, and commends it, and confirms it from the Churches in the Apostles daies, who (he saies) had the like right and liberty, for all the whole multitude of beleevers were both beholders and actors in the com∣mon affairs; as at the choise of officers,☜ Act. 1.15 & 16.23. & 6.2.34▪ & 14.23. at deciding of Controversies, Act. 15.24.6.7.12.22, 23. & 21.22. 1 Cor. 6.2. at casting out offenders, Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.13. at the choise and appointment of men to carry the benevolence of the Church to the needy brethren, 2 Cor. 8.19. 1 Cor. 16.3. These and the like priviledges (saies he) in the practise of the Gospell are permitted to all the Saints in all Churches, which they must use in all sobriety, order, and peace, Rom. 12.3.16. 1 Cor. 14.33, 40. So that all the members have a like priviledge in common and publick affairs; and women may as much (de jure) vote, speak, and offer their judgements in such cases as men; being alike and equall members with them. For all that, Antichrist would bring a difference,This was ever an Antichristi∣an Plot. out of his seminary of discord, as he did formerly (and which too far takes place yet) between the Clergy and Laity (so called) as if one were the more holy then the other;1 Pet. 2.9. and therefore must be distin∣guished by garbes▪ gowns, caps, colours, carriages,☜ or some∣thing or other distinguished from the other; who ought to be all one in Christ, without such distinction. But we come now to the Reasons and Arguments which con∣firm this practise and confute the contrary. And,The Reasons.
1. Votes con∣cern all, ergo all must vote.1. Is taken (a toto ad partes) Thus, that which concerns the whole, is (by all the rule of reason) to be done by the whole, or that which concerns all (brothers and sisters) rea∣son requires should be done (or ordered) by all (brothers and sisters)▪ but to choose this or that officer, to vote this or that thing, to cast out this or that offender, to take in this or that member, concerns all (sisters as well as bro∣thers) ergo. So saith Whit. de concil. p. 44. Quod omnes attingit, ab omnibus approbari debet,Dr. Writ. &c. and ejusdem est recipere, rejicere, saies Hook. part. 1. cap. 11.☞ The power which is in every bro∣ther and sister, or Church-member combined together, in one, Is potestas Judicantis. Is potestas Donantis. 1. The power to judge is in the whole, and concernes the whole, as to admit, cast out, &c. 1 Cor. 5.12. the whole Church is bid to cast out () which carries a causall power with it. 2. To give, elect is also the whole's, (as the Corporation hath power to choose a Mayor) and every member that is free in the Society hath a right to give his or her vote thereto. Thus the whole hath the power , Mat. 18.15. , 1 Cor. 5.12. and every single part must be subject to the whole, and serviceable also, for the use and advantage of the whole. Salus populi suprema lex, which is the highest law to look to, and after; i. e. the preservation and welfare of the whole; and this lies in every brother and sister to be active in. For as in a ship that is ready to sink, every one seeks the safety of the ship (i. e. of the whole) and then they are all safe; else none (saies Bolton in's Tossed ship) so it is in the Church. But to the next Argument: 2. (A fortiore) If it be lawfull for women to have any office in the Church (which implies a power and authority) then it is (much more) lawfull for women to vote, wish, or offer any thing to the Church (which implies subjection and obedience):Some women officers. but it is lawfull for women to have office in the
Church. See 1 Tim. 5.9. There were women that were cho∣sen to look after the poor, sick, lame, strangers, &c. and so Phoebe a Deaconesse, Rom. 16.1. and so Phil. 4.3. some women that laboured with Paul in the Gospell, and Philips four Daughters were Prophetesses: Now doubtlesse, and by an undeniable consequence, it followes, that women must have the common liberty of members to vote or the like in the Church. 3. (Ab aequali libertate omnium in uno) Severall arguments run from the equall liberty of all members purchased by Christ.3. Women have equall li∣berty with men in and by Christ. And to follow Melanchthon de libertate Christiana in's Com∣mon places, I could argue thus, Quos filius liberavit, vere liberi sunt, sed, &c. Those whom the Son hath made free, are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. but all the Saints of Christ (without difference of Sexes; sisters as well as brothers) are made free by Christ, Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ. I pray mark, the Apostle puts you in minde of their equall liberty in Christ, and therefore,Expos. that they should not contend or differ, in saying this is a Jew or Gentile, this is a servant or a woman, why ye are all one body, have all one head, and are all one (without any such difference) in Christ); in Christ there is no such thing as subjection one to another, all equall,Perkins. (so saith Perkins in loc.) all sorts of beleevers are un∣der a civill or spirituall rule: in the civill there are such differences of Fathers, children, Masters, servants, Magistrates, subjects, men and women; but in the spirituall rule, and go∣vernment of Christ in his Church and Saints all are one,☜ with∣out respect of persons; no difference should arise amongst them. There is no such thing as Jew, i. e. as opposed to Gentile: nor as Presbyterian, i. e. as opposed to Independent:☜ nor Independent, i. e. as opposed to Anabaptist: nor as a Servant, i. e. as opposed to the Free: nor as rich, i. e. as opposed to poor: nor as the learned, i. e. as opposed to the unlearned in tongues and arts: nor as a man or brother, i. e. as opposed to a woman or sister;How all diffe∣rences are re∣conciled in one. for they are all one in Christ's account, in Christ's Kingdome, without any such respect of persons, opinions, sexes, or ages; and have all one and
the same liberty in and by Christ. Thus Gualther gives out, and bitterly complains of such as are enemies to Christ and his Church,Gualther. in loc. that make differences about persons, opinions, sexes, or the like, and that would rob any one of their liberty bought them by Christ. Now Christian liberty hath these two parts, viz. Deliverance from, and freedome to; deliverance from the curse, power, and punishment of the Law,How women attained this liberty, yet subject. and from the observations of traditions, Col. 2.20. which women have equall benefit of, with men. And so in freedome to the worship and service of God, the ordinances of Christ, the kingdome of Christ, grace and glory; which also apper∣tains to women as well as men, being restored by Christ to that equall liberty (in the things of God, and in the Church of Christ) with men, which they lost by the fall; and they are now again to become meet and mutual helps: for all are one in Christ, sayes the text. Now though there is a civill subjection to men in their oeconomicall relations as we said before, that there is not any servile subjection due to them, whereby poor souls are inslaved and kept under in bondage from doing their duty to God, or taking their Christian liberty in the things of God.Bernard. Bernard in lib. de gratia & lib. arbit. tels us of a threefold liberty, i. e. of nature, grace and glory, and every woman (as well as man) is made happy by it, ever since Christ turn'd Eva to Ave, they have been restored into spirituall liberty and Christi∣an equality in the Church:☞ and the Apostle, Jam. 2.1. in his Catholick Epistle (so call'd) saies it agrees not with the profession to make difference of persons in the Church of Christ, therefore my brethen have not the faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons: not only in not preferring the rich before the poor, but not the strong before the weak, (nor the men before the women) and is not this partiality so to do? (saies he) vers. 4. or have ye not made a difference, where Christ hath made none? Now the force of the argument is full for us. For where there ought to be no respect of persons, there ought to be no difference betwixt men and women,☞ (for the generall includes the particular) but in the Church of Christ there ought to be no respect of persons.
Ergo, women (as members) must have equall liberty with men. Besides, 4. Arguments may be taken from the alike priviledges in the Church of Christ: as the donation of the spirit;4. Equall privi∣ledges in Christian li∣berty. one and the same on all alike; (though not in like measure) the promises made without distinction of sexes or persons, the ordinances dispensed, and price of Christian liberty (i. e. the bloud of Christ) payed for all alike, with∣out distinction of sexes. And also acquired by the same means to the one that it is to the other, that is quoad meritum, & quoad Spiritum Christi: by the merit and by the Spirit of Christ. Now out of this matter may many arguments be formed; and besides that Gods love to his elect ones, his originall love is without any such difference and respect, it is all alike, and gives all alike liberty, and all whom he receives alike, we should receive alike into the Church of Christ, Rom. 14.3. 5. Argument may run thus,5. Power. that there is no power that any can have from heaven ordinarily, but by some clear transaction between God and themselves, but there is no clear transaction between God and the brethren alone, but primarily between God and the Church (i. e. the whole collectively taken, consisting of women as well as men) Ergo. So the covenant, promises, priviledges, &c. are not to them alone, but to the whole Church. 6. Taken (ab intentione omnium) from their unanimous and samenesse in their embodying together,6. The inten∣tion, one and the same. intending one and the same thing. Yet two things are said to be ne∣cessary in the intention (res & causa, quid & propter quid) the thing it self that is intended,Bernard. Serm. 1 parvorum. which is to be the honour and glory of God, and for which it is intended, which is to edifie the Church. Now both these are alike intended by women as well as men, and therefore ought to have the like liberty (as members) allowed to execute their inten∣tions, for which they are so admitted.☜ 7. Reason runs from their excellencies and abilities of some women surpassing men for piety and judgement;7. Women have excelled men. and therefore ought to have equal liberty, wth them in Church-affairs;
the argument is free, the proofe's clear; for pru∣dent Abigail excell'd her husband; for knowledge, Priscilla Apollos (though a Preacher); For faith, the Canaa∣nitesse, of whom Christ said, I have not seen so great faith no not in Israel.Joh. 20. For affection and zeal, the Queen of the South shall rise up against the men of this generation, Luk. 11.31.M. Magd. the first Preacher of Christ risen. And Mary Magdalen, for piety and spirit, outran, and outreached all the twelve Disciples in her diligence to seek out Christ: to whom Christ first discovered him∣self after his resurrection, and bid her declare it to his Disci∣ples; she was the first Preacher of Christs resurrection. So we read how Iael excel'd in courage,Judg. 4. Deborah in thankful∣nesse,2 Tim. 1.8. Lois and Eunice in faith and obedience: Lydia in en∣tertaining the Word, Act. 16.14. The Shunamite in faith and zeal, and understanding, excel'd her husband, 2 King. 4.8, 9.22.30. So the Samaritanesse the rest of the Citi∣zens, Joh. 4.4. And we read of some women exhorted to win in their husbands to the truth, 1 Pet. 3.2. Yea and Manoahs wife, Judg. 13.22, 23. you shall find of a soun∣der judgement and faith then her husband. So that all these examples prove the reason which requires their just liberty in the Church of Christ. I remember I have read in Jerom's daies of many holy women that exceeded others in learning and abilities,☞ and in the studying of the Scriptures, and they had their Commentaries upon them of their own making; Furthermore, the Kingdome of heaven is compared to a woman, and Christs Church is called his wife and spouse.Mat. 13. Rev. 19. Cant. 2. And as Mary said it, in the behalf of other good women, He that is mighty hath mag∣nified me,☞ and therefore they are not to be so rejected of men who are so highly received and honoured of God. But to the 8. Reason, which is taken from their strong affection to the truth,8. And are strong in affe∣ction. when once they be in the way of Christ; and for the most part they are exceeding men therein. Hence it is that Satan so often makes the first triall of women for his turn and service,☞ seeing where they take, their affections are strongest (for the most part) and he sped
so well at first, that he can't forget it;Et muliebrem sexum non mi∣nus esse doci∣lem ad disci∣plinas omnem{que} virtutem Pro∣bat Campofulg. so he found out a Dalilah for Sampson, a Jezebel for Ahab, Pharaohs daugh∣ter for Solomon, &c. For where they are bad, they are ex∣treme bad; but where they are good, they are exceeding good, and most fondly affected with the things of God: thus Act. 13.50. you read of the devout women, or as the word will have it (,Sim. &c.) earnestly or eagerly religious and resolved. For as the gold which is of the purest sub∣stance soonest receives the form, and much sooner then the sturdy steel, or hard iron which is of a grosse and mas∣sie metall (saies Cawdrey);Caudrey. So are women more readily wrought upon, and sooner perswaded and formed into the truth then men,Women soo∣ne wrought upon and mst docible. who are for the most part like stur∣dy steel and iron, hard to work upon. And as gold (so women (many times take the fairest stamp and fullest im∣pression: but I passe by this; yet before I conclude, I must speak a word or two both to men and women. Let not men despise them then in the Church of Christ (as the wea∣kest vessels) nor wrong them of their liberty of voting or speaking in common affairs, (yet with subjection, civility,Vses. and in order) to prevent disorders and rudenesse;1. To men. we were wont in Dublin to call over their names one by one,Dublin. as well as mens:Object. I know the ordinary objection is objected out of 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted unto them to speak▪ So 1 Tim. 2.12. Ans. 1. Grant it in that sense the Apostle spake it, which  he declares all along the chapter, both before in vers. 1. 2, 3, 22, 24, 31, 32. and after in vers. 37, 39. which is,Expos. that they keep from publick preaching, or prophesying,How women must not speak▪ or teaching as Officers or Ministers do; or the like, &c. which all Expositors grant that I have met with. Now we plead not for this; but for the common ordinary liberty due to them as members of the Church, viz. to speak, ob∣ject, offer, or vote with the rest, which this Scripture (nor no other as I know of) doth in the least hinder,2. In the con∣dition that the Church was then in bt no standing Rule. but ra∣ther help, being rightly considered. For, 2. He saith it is not permitted () by reason of the disorders and differences that then were in the Church▪
it was thought inconvenient to allow womens liberty to preach publiquely, whereby they brought but confusion into the Church, as appears in the antecedent and subse∣quent words, vers. 33. and vers. 40. so that the ill conse∣quence was the cause of this rule of prudence, not any positive command of Gods, but he spake as in 1 Cor. 7.6. And it is a queston whether it be a standing precept. So that from this very Scripture (besides a hundred others) I do verily beleeve that handmaids shall prophecy,☞ and have more publick liberty then now they have; but however this does nothing at all disallow or deny them their common, private, proper liberty as members of Christs body; equally with men; I say as members (though not as officers) and so subjective to the whole. 2. A word to women that they be not too full of words, hold fast their liber∣ty.2. To women, I wish ye be not too forward, and yet not too backward, but hold fast your liberty, in Gal. 5.1. which the Apostle speaks as well to the sisters as the brethren; Christ hath made ye free, male and female, ye are all one in Christ; and ought to be so in the Church; wherefore, stand fast, (saies he) that is, keep your ground which Christ hath won and got for you; maintain your right, defend your liber∣ty, even to the life, lose it not, but be couragous, and keep it. And yet be cautious too,2. With Cauti∣on. (festina lente) not too fast, but first, be swift to hear, slow to speak, Jam. 1.19. unlesse occasion re∣quires you; your silence may sometimes be the best advo∣cate of your orderly liberty▪☞ and the sweetest evidence of your prudence and modesty, (as one saies, Silentium saepissime ad∣dit foeminis gratiam et decus,Sophoc. in Ajace. maxime apud viros, cum de rebus seriis agitur) and yet ye ought not by your silence to betray your liberty,Caution. trouble your consciences, lose your priviledges and rights; or see the truth taken away or suffer before your eyes;Sim. but I say, be not too hasty nor too high; for as the note that comes too nigh the margent, is in danger to run into the text the next impression, so spirits that run too high at first, may soon fall into disorder, and irregularity. It is said,Dr. Featly Serm. p. 205. when Cyrus was young, his Grandfather made Sacas his overseer, to order him both in his diet, time, and recrea∣tions; but when he came to riper years, he became a Sa∣cas
to himself, and took not so much liberty as he had leave to do, and as was allowed him by his governour Sacas. And so indeed that may be lawfull to you,☜ that is not (as yet) expedient for you; and rather then run into disorder and confusion, hold your liberty a little in suspense, and wave it on some occasions wherein you lawfully may, but lose it not for all the world which Christ payed so great a price for, and prepare for fairer gales. As the Miller does,Sim. for though he cannot command the winde, yet he will spread his sailes out, and open them in a readinesse, when he is in hopes of its coming; and so do you, and when the winde blowes (which begins) your liberty with full sailes, shall bring forth abundantly to serve all the countrey round. In the mean time, make much of the ordinances, prize your (hitherto) liberty, and practise accordingly. And in a word, I say to all,3. To all Those whom God hath joyned to∣gether, let no man put asunder.
CHAP. IX.  This last Chapter shewes what Church this Treatise mentions; and clears it from all others; and shewes wherein the Presbyterians and we disagree, and wherein they and the Papists agree in most of the essentiall differences between them and us, for Discipline, Doctrine, and Practise; and proves this Gospell-Church-State, the great promise and thing typified in the last daies, and the Paradise on earth to be restored. I Had thoughts now to have rested me for a while, but I am jogg'd up again by the jarring noises which many make about the name of a Church; I must now arise and wet my pen a little more, before I conclude this Treatise, or take my rest. You have had the essentialia laid before you, and in this first and second part have had the totum homo∣geneum of a true Church, both what is to be done before, and what in and upon embodying together; but what is to be done after, followes after in the third Part (which I promise next, if the Lord give me leave) wherein you shall have (I hope so) the totum organicum of a true Church of Christ. But before that will be ready, I must meet with some rough Opinionists who will bid me stand; or at least with such who have the hands of Esau, though the voice of Jacob, and so the principles and practises of the Pope, though the pre∣tences and protestations of a Presbyter, that will not let me passe thus, without a full discharge, and a violent volley upon
me made up of wilde fire, and not with the fire from above; but I must force my way in the name and strength of the Lord, and I shall lay before them, before I leave them, the rotten foundation they are built upon, which (without mercy) may be their ruine; and whose cause and quarrell it is they are engaged in,A Wrd to Presbyterians. and whose design they carry on against the Saints and servants of the most High; And the Lord give them grace to consider and separate from it; for else I dare confidently affirm they will be found figh∣ters against God, Act. 5. I shall first offer yu what we mean  by the Church of Christ; where this discipline and order is set, which we have handled; and shall endeavour to take off all doubts and distractions which may else arise about the word,Church, for that (Ecclesia est quid dam ) various Controversies have shot out from the word and name, as well as the thing and nature of a true Church. Formerly between the Pontifitians and Protestants, and of late between the Presbyterians and Independents, as will ea∣sily appear upon perusall of Mr. Rutherford's Right of Presbyteries, Mr. Bailies Disswasive, Mr. Prinns 12 Questions, and Independency examined, &c. Mr. Ball's late Treatise, Vin∣diciae Clavium, Mr. Hudson's Church Catholick visible, cum mul∣tis aliis, &c. I take the name of Church two waies, either strictly,Taken two waies. or at large, (proxime & proprie, aut remote & late); at large, or more remotely and improperly, it is to be considered either in respect to, and with distinction from Infidels and Pagans;1. At large two waies. or else collectively in respect of Christians amongst themselves: in the first respect as opposed to Turks, and Pay∣nims, all that make mention of Christ are called Churches, and all that professe his name, of what judgement soever, or conversation soever: whether Papists, or Protestants, or Luthe∣rans, or Calvinists, or Brownists, or Donatists, or Arrians, or any. But in the second respect of Christians (so called) or rather all that professe the name of Christ, though  differing and dissenting among themselves; And they are said to be the Church (though late accepta est) who make the most and best profession of Christ, and are under
the outward ministration of his Word and Gospel. So are Pro∣testants (in respect of Papists);So Presbyteri∣ans are Chur∣ches. and in this sense the Calvinists are before the Lutherans, and so far the Presbyterians may passe for current; and Parochial constitutions are in a remote (and very improper sense) called Churches.Parishes. But the Church taken in her own native true sense,2. Taken strictly. and strictly, consists onely of Saints, such as are elected to eternal life, and all are in Christ their Head. vide Aug. in Psal. 92. Cyprian, lib. 1. Ep. 8. Hieron. de unit. Eccles. Epiphanius, and thus she is said to bee either Catholick or Vniversal; or else Congregational or par∣ticular,Two ways too. in the first sense, as Catholick the Church is so called ratione 1. locorum, 2. temporum, 3. hominum, in respect of time, place, and people, being not confin'd to any time,1. The Church Catholick. or age, or place, or Nation, or people; but taking in all the elect people of God, in all the whole Vniverse, past, present, and to come, Jews and Gentiles, under the Law, before the Law, and since, yea in heaven and earth, those which are ascended,Vide Zanch. de Eccles. And Bulling. Decad. 5. Ser. 1. And Vrsin. Revel. 7.8, 10, 11. and which are yet unborn, Rev. 6.11. invisible and visible, triumphant and militant, all make up but one Catholick body of Christ the head, Ephes. 4.4, 5. But now in the other respect, as a particular and con∣gregational Church, which comes before the Catholick and Vniversal Church (so far as it is visible and militant) it is confined to some certain place and number of people orderly gathered together by the Word and Spirit of Christ;2. Church Congregati∣onall. ha∣ving Christ alone for their Head (certo numero, certoque loco Ecclesia particularis definita est).Bullinger. And this is the Church which I have spoken of, and in opposition to all Syna∣gogues, Synedriums, Parishes, Conventicles, Classes or the like, as you shall hear more of it by and by. But sometimes such Congregationall Churches as these,Catholick. are called Catholck too, because of their Faith, and by the figure Senecdoche, yea and as often as Catholick is taken for Orthodox. So did Theodosius in his dayes, (says Sozomen, lib. 7. c. 4) command the Church to be called Catholick,Perkins Pro∣blemes. that he was a member of. Every such particular and Congregational Church is a member
of the Catholick or Vniversal (as all the learned say); and every visible is a part (that is not yet ascended) of the in∣visible,Is member of the Catholick or Universal. whatsoever John writ in Rev. 1.4. to the seven par∣ticular Congregational Churches, he writ to them as to the true members of the Catholick or Church-Vniversal, sayes Mr. Perkins. For the Catholick Church, and the Congrega∣tional, onely differ as the totum integrale, & essentiale, that is, the Church Catholick or Vniversal arises out of the Congre∣gational and particular Churches, and is made up of particu∣lar Churches, the Integrum, or whole, intire is made up of the members thereof, that are the essentials of the whole. For every person and Congregation of Christ (sayes Mr. Hooker, in his answer to Mr. Rutherford) are the members of the Church Catholick, and therefore must contain in them the essential causes of the Catholick or the (totum) whole, which is made up of them, as parts, for the Logician does allow it,The Congre∣gational Chur∣ches are all the Essential parts of the totu integrale. and men of reason cannot deny it, but that Integrum est to∣tum cui pares sunt essentiales, that which is Intirely whole is made up of such parts as give an Essential being to the whole; without which the whole cannot be so intire. So the Churches Congregational and particular which make up the Catholick (as membra integri) must needs have the (materi∣alia & formalia principia Ecclesiae Catholicae, or toti integri Vni∣versi,) matter and form which make up the Church Catholick, which none can deny (and then I say, I cannot see how your Presbyterian Churches as Churches (who fal in form if not in matter,Presbyterian Churches as Churches not true members of the Church Catholick. as is prov'd in the first part) may bee said to bee members (as partes essentiales & membra simila∣ria) to make up this totum integrale, or Church Catholick.) Now the Congregationall Churches consisting of true mat∣ter and form (separate and distinct from the Nations abroad and multitudes about) as hath been proved;Congregati∣onal Churches as Churches are constitutive and Causall to the whole. are members causall and parts essentiall (of the samenesse and nature of the whole) which give in (every one) there substantiall share to make up the intirenesse of the whole, or the Church Catho∣lick, (quae habet rationem integri est membrum, sayes Ames Me∣dul. Theol. lib. 1. c. 32.) But furthermore it must needs fol∣low that the Congregationall Churches must cause the Catho∣lick
or Vnversal, and not the Vniversal or Catholick cause the Congregational; the Catholick arises out of the Congrega∣tionall,☞ but not the Congregationall out of the Catholick, because they give a being to the Catholick; and in order of nature the members must be before the whole, because I say they contain the causes which make up the whole. For Integrum est totum cui partes sunt essentiales, non totum essentiale in partibus, and these causes or causall parts are also (by Tilnus de Eccles.) call'd partes Integrantes Ecclesiae Catho∣licae,Tilenus. having in them those things which give Integrity or Intirenesse to the whole,Sim. viz matter and form, as every piece of money hath the matter and form to make up the whole sum: and an Army is made up of many Regiments of the same kinde and principles with the whole. This is proved by Mr. Hooker in his Survey of Discipline against Mr. Hudson a Presbyterian; who holds (with the rest of that judgement) that Popish tenet,Mr. Hudson. that the Catholick is before the Congregational:Mr. Hockers answer. A Diocesan or Provincial. primum in suo genere, that Pontifitians and Jesuites have bootelessely wrastled for a long time; but I leave him & them of that judgment to Mr. Hookers answer; only I affirm by all this, that there can be no such thing as National Churches, Diocesan or Provincial; And must we say more to satisfie curiosity?Church is a to∣tum integrum. then this (the totum is Integrum) the whole Church Catholick is intirely to be taken distinct by it self, though made up of the Congregational members. As a mans body that is made up of eye, eare, mouth, hands, feet, and so of all the members from head to foot; yet the body is not said to be all eye;Sim. or all eare; or all hands, &c. but a body intire made up of all these. So a man is made up of soul and body, yet he cannot be said to be all soul, or all body, but an Integrum made up of both. So is the Church Vniversall made up of the particulars, yet cannot be said to be all this particular, or that par∣ticular; all of them before the Law, or under it, or all of Gospellers, or all Independent (so called) or Anabap∣tistical,Every member is a particular Church, is a totum too; but not Integrum. or the like. No! But one made up of all. And yet I must say that every member of this whole, (as every member of our body) is a whole in it selfe, and limited at
the joint, and so can't usurp anothers place; every Congre∣gregational Church is a whole Church, and intire in it selfe; and one member is distinguished from another by limits set; so that although we say (with Ames in's Med. lib. 1. c. 32) particulares Congregationes sunt partes similares Ecclesiae Catho∣licae,Ames. that particular Churches are essentiall parts to make up the whole Intire, and have of that in them which will make up the whole, and yet we say,So particular Churches ue Churches. such particular Churches are in themselves whole and intire from all others▪ having matter and form, and power and priviledges, the Keyes and Ordinances within themselves intirely and distinctly from any others. But thus far for the name and nature of the Church which is here handled, and handed forth. The next thing that I offer (before I conclude) is the  near alliance and agreement (which is obvious to every discerning eye) between the Presbyterians and Papists in their Discipline and order. But before I goe further,A humble Presbytery we close with; I give this caution, that when I speak of the Presbytery, I be under∣stood of it, as it now stands with them of that judgement, and not as it stands in the Word of God; for in this later sense we allow of Presbytery, and say it is in the Congrega∣tional way, according to the Word of God: This gives no allowance of that Lordly high Prelatical Presbytery that the Presbyterians now tug for tooth and nail;But not with a Lordly proud Prelaticall Presbytery. and which we speak of; and if they should enjoy it, what a goodly bit those biters would have of it, I leave it to themselves to be their own Judges; Will they promise but impartially and pen∣sively to contemplate what familiar acquaintance and friendship their Discipline and the Popes have one with another; and without anger (for loves sake) let them weigh wisely how close they set their feet together, and embrace each other (and I wish I might say it was onely through mistake) How near they are akin, or How like they look, the Daughter resembling the Mother; I shall rough-draw before your eyes, though in dead colours (at the first) Yet so far as will sufficiently deliueate a near re∣semblance between them in as many parts as I can,. at this instantanous present time, place before you, as the head,How it agres with Popery.
body, eyes, mouth, hands and feet, yea and spirit of this Image which must fall. But let not men be angry with me, or  boil out into a foame against me,Dr. Homes. for as Dr. Homes says, I do but , Gal. 2.14. walk with my right foot in the way of the Gospel, and the Lord now knows it is love to the Truth as it is in Jesus, brings me to this businesse with a spirit, in the which I hope I shall appear more zealous then Zoilus, and rather an Irenaeus then Cassander, and when I meet a Critick, I hope to prove a Christian, and part in peace; but however if I must pledge Christ out of his own cup (for this his owne cause) if I know my heart I am content though they give me gall and vinegar, for I had rather suffer then sin; and so I set forward— and out of their own books shall shew you how they agree; for I cannot but bear testimony with pretious Mr. Hooker,Survey of Dis∣cipline, part 1. ch. 15. The Presbyte∣rians need Po∣pery to prop them. who is of the same minde with me, and manifests it to the world; his words are, In my retired meditations I could not but observe a secret kinde of divine dspensation, that the Presbyterian way must need the help of Popery, not onely as a pillar, by which it must be under propped, but as a foundation or head-corner stone, upon which their whole building must rest and be erected; thus saith this worthy Champion but a little before his death; So that I shall neither be the first nor the last, that on good grounds doe affirm their Presbytery and Popery to live one in the other, and that the Presbyterian way is maintained and kept by Popish points and principles;☞ and keeps up Popery alive in England, which cannot dye as long as that lives, the which I shall easily demonstrate in their congruity together, whilest they dispute for the same things, hold the same points, professe the same principles, (I say not all) and are so a like in practises; but to instance in particu∣lars. I. The Pontificians and Papists affirm the Church to be (aliam principalem,1. Vide Kerkerm. de Eccles. they agree in their account of Church in the generall. aliam minus principalem) principal, and lesse principal; The Church principally they call the Councel of Cardinals, and Bishops, together: but the lesse Principal they say is the Body of the People, or Congregation of the rest together that are ga∣thered under the Roman See, and acknowledge the Pope of
for their head. Thus sayes Bellarmin. 1. lib. de Ecclesia. The Presbyterians professe this, (with the Papists) both in their judgements and practises, that the Synod, or National, Pro∣vinciall particular Classes, is more then the (Church, viz.) the body of all the brethren and sisters; For they take up∣on them (as the Church-Principal) to set laws and to lay down rules and orders; and to make Directories, and the like for the Congregations, and Churches to be under; and they take upon them power of commanding, compelling, condemning, punishing, or the like, as the Church-Princi∣pall, (yet pretend themselves the Church Representative, and therefore they are called the Presbyterian Church, because made up of Presbyters and Elders as a Representative Body,) thus they say they are the Church primarily; and not the whole Body of Beleevers together, but they in a Classis, Synod, Councell of Ministers,So Hudson, de Eccles. Catho∣lica, &c. and such like are the first Sub∣ject of the Keyes; to open and shut, binde or loose, command or countermand, vide Rutherford right of Presbytery, lib. 2. p. 9, 10. to 14. which is all one with the Papists, and the same thing: So in this sense is it,We dissent. that Mr. Hudson sets the Catholick first, and then the Congregationall; But 2. The Papists affirm that the Catholick Church is and hath been alwayes visible (which is a generall Controversie be∣tween them and us, as appears in Willets Synopsis Papismi,2. Presbyte∣rians and Pa∣pists agree in their way of Church Ca∣tholick to be visible. Q▪ 2. of the Church) they mean not any particular Con∣gregational Church, but that the Vniversal Catholick Church is visible. Rhem. Annot. Mat. 25. Sect. 3. Bellarmin. lib. 3. cap. 12. ret. 7. Calvisius cap. de fide, &c Symbol. Artic. 18. The Presbyterians say the same, whither they all agree therein or no, I cannot say, but Mr. Rutherford for them,Mr. Rutherford▪ lib. 2. of his Right of Presbytery, & p. 291. & p. 293. & p. 304. & p. 311. cals the whole Catholick Church, visible, over over and over, and so p. 418. with divers others, so Mr. Hudson concerning the Essence and Vnity of the Catholick Church, affirmes that the Catholick Church is visible,Mr. Hudson says so far for them. which he urges by severall arguments, and Mr. Hooker an∣swers him, most of them being the same which the Je∣suites and Papists have formerly had full answer to by
our judicious and learned Protestant Divines,They have the same argu∣ments with the Jesuites. as to instance in that argument of Mr. Hudson; If particular Churches bee visible, then the Catholick Church is visible, But particular Chur∣ches are, &c. the very same argument in Bellarm. cap. 12. is answered by Dr. Willet, & in Boner. p. 1691. & Marci Antonii object. 6. answered by Martyr Smith, and this same argument Duraeus urged, which Dr. Whit. lib. 3. de Eccl. p. 110. answers and so Sadeel answers Turrian; and all our Protestant men tell them the ill consequence, yea absurdity of this argu∣ment, for that the particular members may be (asecta∣biles) visible, but not the whole, i e. as the totum aggregatum; besides for that the Catholick comprehends,We disagree from both. all the Saints of all ages that ever were, are, and will be; that are in heaven, and that are not yet born; and can these be all visible here? Particular Churches are visible, Ergo, the Catholick; for shame my Masters better arguments saith Dr. Willet and Smith.Presbyterians hold what Mar∣tyrs witnessed against with their bloud. Glover martyr. The Controversie in this, is the same between the Presbyterians and us, that ever it was between the Papists and Protestants. For we with all (that were and are accounted) Orthodox and sound, doe affirm the Church Catholick to be invisible, not to be beheld but by the eyes of Faith, Heb. 12.18, 23, 24. 1 King. 19.20. So says Mr. Glo∣ver martyr instancing in Eliahs dayes.Bishop Farrar. Fox, p. 1554. & 1712. and B. Farrar, which truth they sealed with their bloud, and such another witnesse was Mr. Philpot who affirmed the Church to be visible and invisible,Philpot. Bradfard ar∣gues it▪ but the Vniversal Catholick Church to be invisible. Fox, p. 1824. col. 2. Mr. Bradford rea∣sons it, Fox. p. 1613. col. 2. as Eve was of the same substance Adam was of, so is the Church of the same substance with Chris. i. e flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, Ephes. 5.30. So therefore as Christ was known in the world, so is the Church (by faith), for Christ was not seen by the world, nor known by any external pomp, but by the Word of God, and Spirit of God: so the Church, Ecclesia Catholica non potest a quopiam impio,Dr. Whitaker. imo, ne a quopiam pio videri, Whitak. de Eccles. q. 2. c. 2. p. 57.Perkins. How many hundred might I bring of this minde that are eminent of all ages. Mr. Perkins on Gal. 4.25. proves from that verse,ulling. that the Church Ca∣tholick
is invisible. So Bullinger de Eccles. 5. Cath. Decad. 5. Serm 1. cum multis aliis, and so say we against the Presbyterians. 3. The Papists assert a twofold Head or Ruler of the Church, viz. principale & ministeriale,3. Papists and Presbyterians agree in their account of the Head of the Church, vide Keckerman. de capite Ecclesiae. the principall and supreme Head, they say is Christ; but the ministerial and subordinate head they account the Pope, (as Christ's vicar, &c.) So the Presbyterians have taken up the same distinction, which was first of all coined in the Popes Conclave at Rome, see Rhe∣mist. 1. Eccles. 22. vide Bartlet, chap. 1. p. 21. they doe not deny but Christ is the Supreme Head over all; but they would make us believe, (about which I have had a share in the scuffle) that there is a secundary or subordinary head (under Christ) over the Church; which they account the Ministery and Classes. Herein they agree, but we agree with neither of them, being both fictious and fallacious phantasmes, and the spawn of mens brain;We disagree from both. Bullinger. but we affirm with all the eminent Protestants against the Papists and Je∣suites, that there is no such distinction in Scripture (& doctores non sunt ductores) aut imperatores, sayes Bull. de Eccles. D. 5. Serm. 1. p. 354. Sed Pastores Ecclesiae,1. Grosse errors of theirs of the head. &c. and we say there is but one Head of the Church, and that Head is Christ. First, that there is but one Head, appears, Ephes. 1.22. Col. 1.18. & 2.19. Isa. 9.6, 7. Hos. 1.11.1. But one head. Caput Ecclesiae tantum unum esse, necesse est, it is a rule in Divinity, for two heads to one body would make the body a monster, and hinder the function and action,Vide Keckerm. or due execution of the members, yea though one head were placed under another; Etiam si unum caput non juxta aliud,Sim. sed sub alio collocetur. Keckerm. lib. 3. de capite. Eccles. yea the body would be so much the more prodigious and monstrous to have two heads, and one placed under another, now that Church is a monster that hath more then one Head, which is elegantly expressed, Eph. 4.16.Paul Baines on Coloss. 2.19. Thus holy Paul Baines saith on Col. 2.19. who did ever hear of any secondary or ministerial head on a natural body without deformity? now it is a natural body to which Christ compares his Church and himselfe as Head.Zanchy. So Zanchy on Hos. 1.11. sayes God's Israel, i. e. his Church, hath but one Head, yea in Concil. Aquisgranens. lib. 2. c. 9. Ecclesiam cum capite
suo Christo unam constet esse personam, the Church and Christ the Head thereof make but one Person,☞ so doe not the Pope and Church, the Prelate and Church, the Presbyter and Church. Ergo; thus we affirm on Ephes. 4.5, 6. and but one head of the Church. And then 2. that Christ alone is that Head (without any other) Ephes 5.23. Col. 2.10.19. Jam. 4.12. Isa. 22.21, 22, 23. Zach. 6▪ 12, 13. and the Scriptures deny all Headship to any others,2. In that Christ alone is that Head. 1 Pet. 5.3. Psalm. 45.11. Mark. 10.42. Luk. 22.25. and the Apostles disclaimed it (as is proved in the 1. lib.) 2 Cor. 1. ult. and the Scripture never speaks of heads in the plural number,A second gross errors of theirs of the Head. but onely of one, that is Christ, who hath absolute command and authority over the  Church, vide Zanch. de Eccles. cap. For to be an head ar∣gueth a preheminence, sayes John Patriarch of Antioch in appen. concil. but no man hath any preheminence over the Church, nor Servant over his Mistresse; therefore none but Christ can be head as having the preheminence,Sim. and as the head is higher then the body, Col. 1.16. And besides none is appointed for it but Christ, Matth. 28.18. Joh. 5.22. Heb. 2.7, 8. nor can any other doe the duty of an Head but Christ, who a∣lone  is qualified for it, as having the Spirit above measure, Joh. 3.34. and as being the fulnesse of the God head bodily, Col. 2.9. Joh. 1.16. The Head of the Church ought to bee High Priest, King, and so Prophet, and anointed of God, and ap∣pointed by God, Psal. 45.6, 7. Heb. 1.8, 9. Now none but Christ is so; And the Head is that which gives vertue and power to all the members; which none but Christ can doe,  none else can give grace, or powre out the Spirit and put spirituall life into a man or woman;Perkins. so that Mr. Perkins sayes in his Exposition of the Creed, speaking of the Church, that there is no such thing as a Ministerial Head, or a De∣puty under Christ to Lord over the Church, but that it is a Satanical forgerie knocked out on the Devils Anvil;He can have no Vicar. for the Headship of Christ is of that nature and quality that it can admit of no Deputy or Viceroy; seeing he must give commanding and quickning power. And besides oportet caput nosse sua membra, & ab iis agnosci, a very novice and Student in Divinity, knowes that the head must know the members,
and the members the head; now none but Christ can tell all the true members of the Body, as Perkins sayes on Jude, v. 1. such as is alwayes present with them, as the Head is with the members, which none else can be; for Christ as Media∣tor, God and man, the Fulnesse of all power, spirit, grace, and goodnesse, is present and gives influence to his whole body,Presbyterians third error of theirs of the Head. whether above or below, and lives with all his body in all places, which he could not doe were hee not both God and man; though Mr. Hudson with some of the Presbyte∣rians run a ground grievously when they rashly assert Christ head as man, pag. 23. of his Book, which is abo∣minable, Papisticall, and an unsufferable error, and against this see Whitak. de Pont. Rom. 1.9. c. 3. arg. 3. and Beza in his Confessions, ch. 5. Antic 5. So Bullinger, de Vnit. Eccles. Dec. 5. Serm. 2. Christo caput est non quia homo, sed quia deus & homo, where they prove this headship to be too much for any man, and therefore Christ alone to be duely and truely qualified for it, as God and man,Christ cannot be Head but as God and Man. who is with all his mem∣bers every where, alias enim caput non esset, otherwise hee could not be head of them. And besides the head is ex  quo totum corpus Ecclesiae compactum & connexum per omnem jun∣cturam, &c. is Christ because of him every member hath life, influence, dependence, and they are all by the seve∣ral joints (viz. the Ordinances and laws of Christ) fitly set and compacted together,Zanch. de cap. Eccles. Ephes. 4.16. & 2.21. and from him as the sole Head fitly joined together, 1 Joh. 1.3, 7. Who maketh increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love; and none but Christ can doe thus. And furthermore the  Head of the Church, debet esse perpetuum,Vide Kerkerm. ought to be for ever, both in this life and in the life to come; now none but Christ is so, Dan. 4.34, 35. Isa. 9.6, 7. Thus and in ma∣ny other respects I might show how Christ alone is head of his Church; as their light, life, wisdome, safety,☜ &c. but this point hath been aboundantly handled before, lib. 1. ch. 13. onely I adde this further, that all famous emi∣nent men in all ages,This Head witnessed by the bloud of Martyrs. whether Fathers (so called) or others are of our side; And the eminent Martyrs dyed with this truth in their mouths, see honest John Husse, Atic. 20.
and Mr. Hooper, in his Examination. 3 Fox, p. 1507. and Mr. Rogers,Mr. Rogers. Mr. Hooper. that eminent Proto-Martyr, saith Christ is one∣ly Head, p. 1486. who doth all in us all, which is the true property of the Head, and which is a thing none else can doe, no not all the Bishops, &c. so say we not all the Classes or Presbyters alive, therefore down with this Popery.4. Presbyteri▪ and Papists a∣gree in the matter of a Church. And 4. they agree in what they make the matter of Christs Church, Materia est Suprema, & Subjecta; Suprema, that is the Head, therein we have shown the agreement, but subjecta materia is the matter we mean here, and are the mem∣bers of the Church; And in this the Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another. The Papists say all be∣long to the Church that make a profession of Christ, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 7. Rhemist. annot. in Joh. 15 Sect. 1. this is a generall controversie between Papists and Protestants, and so it is between Presbyterians and us,Rutherford, Bayly, Answered by Cotton, Hooker. as appears by Mr. Ru∣therford, and Mr. Bayly, &c. see ch. 5. lib. 1. Mr. Rutherford and Bayly answered by Mr. Cotton, in his Holinesse of Church-members, and Mr. Rutherford answered by Mr. Hooker in his Survey, lib. 1. c. 2. whilest Mr. Rutherford sayes, the repro∣bates and wicked are not simply forbidden, but they may be members of the Church, lib. 1. p. 116. & lib. 2. p. 25. he sayes that bare profession makes him a member of the Church, so that the Papists and they agree, and the very same argu∣ments which the Papists bring as you may see in Synopsis Papismi, 1. Q. & Bellarm. c. 7. lib. 3. &c. the same the Pres∣byterians bring of the first generall controversie, as you may see in Mr. Rutherford, lib. 2. pag. 240.251. and Mr. Bay∣ley above mentioned, which I have answered in ch. 5. lib. 1. and so Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Cotton hath at large, and they have saved me the more labour.We disagree from them both But we disagree from them in that we affirm true members of the Church are onely such as are visible Saints, i. e. that appear to us so to bee, which is sufficiently proved in this Treatise, both in the 1 & 2 booke. Illa columba, unica, pudica, casta, sponsa, non intelligitur nisi bonis, justis, sanctis, sayes Augustin, The Dove, &c. i. e. the Spouse, the Church is understood of those that are faithfull righteous, and holy, therefore it is not true
to say wicked ones,This fit matter witnessed too by the bloud of the Martyrs. &c. so they have but a profession are true members of the Church. This is witnessed by the bloud of martyrs too; for one of the Articles against John Husse, when he was condemned in the Councel of Con∣stance was this assertion of his, that the Church are the num∣ber of the faithfull, and none else are true members, Fox 610. Artic. 8. So Richard Feurus, a French Martyr, affirmed that the Congregation of Christ consisted in Saints called,John Husse▪ R. Feurus. Ridley. Latimer. and such as seem to be elected ones, Fox, p. 912. col. 1. For this truth, eminent Ridly and Latimer, laid their lives at stake, (as well as for other things) Fox, 1562. col. whilest they affirmed the Church of Christ to be made up of living stones, such as are so inward and in heart, and not that it is enough to be so in name and profession, Repons. ad Artic. Antonii, 7. Wherefore knock down this Popish tenet too, which is guilty of the precious bloud of blessed Martyrs. But 5. Papists and Presbyterians are too much akin too against the true form of the Church of Christ;5. They agree in abusing us for separating from Anti∣christ. yea both parts of the Form, viz. segregation and aggregation, as is ch. 6. lib. 1. or calling out and then in, out of Babylon in∣to Zion. I. Out of Babylon,Expos. Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 18. ; separate, (as such who are select) and depart out of the midst of them, Act. 19.8, 9. For this the Papists account Protestants to be Hereticks and Schis∣maticks, Bellarm: de Eccles. cap. 9. & 10. lib. 4. saying, they are fallen away from the Church, So doe the Presbyterians succeed them in the same language and invective against us; saying that we are Schismaticks, Hereticks,Prins 12. que∣stion. 7. quest. and 11. quest. Separa∣tists, and the like, and that wee have fallen from the Church, meaning a declining from their Antichristian discipline and orders; and saying, that we separate from the true Church of England, &c. now this is ex falso sup∣posito, false, for they cannot prove,☜ (nor any alive) a Na∣tional Church of Gospel institution; and till that be done we dare boldly recriminate, and can easily demonstrate them to be but in Babylon; but whereas they object our ga∣thering
Churches, is not out of Infidels, but of men alrea∣dy converted, and so it is without warrant or example of the Word, and is a gathering Churches out of Churches: Grant it were so,Vide Mr. Bur∣tons vindicati∣on, pag. 27. did not John Baptist, Christ himself, yea and after him his Apostles? did not all of them goe about and gather Christian Churches out of the Jewish Church? particular Churches out of Nationall;☞ and may we not call out of Babylon? and gather out from Antichristian Churches then? Yes, doubtlesse, without the guilt of Schism, Heresie, or the like; unlesse it be from the sentence of such as Tertullus, who was the Jews Advocate against Paul, Act. 25.5. and charged him for a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, &c. yea a heretick, vers. 14. &c. and so doe the Presbyterians (we thank them) deal with us, and so do their advocates and Atturneys.☞ But we shall answer them as the Potestants did the Papists, vide Zanchy in Hosea, 2.8, 9.We disagree from both with the Prote∣stants. Zanchy. Nos rediimus ad priorem maritum, desertis fornicatoribus, i. e. idolis, & deserta etiam lena, i. e. Ecclesia eorum, &c. This is a commendable, and a commanded separation, to goe out of false ways and worship, and to return to our first husband again, to doe the duty of a good wife, to leave that lust∣full Bawd and beast, with all her Idol-worship and hu∣mane invention, and to disclaim those Popish Babyloni∣an garments, and golden wedges, which false worship∣pers serve for (panis & vinum, lana & linum,) the tithes, and fatlings of the flocks: and now to return and cleave close to our first husband,☞ viz. Christ, as the Churches found him to be to them in primitive times (at first) that so we may finde him in love and presence with us; Oh this is a sweet and happy separation! so shall blessings be upon their heads, Deut. 33.16. else judgements, Hosea, 7.8. But for the second part, Zanch. 1. lib. 1. ch 40. Keckerm. de Eccles.2. In, into Zion, a visible aggregation or gathering together into one Body, which makes up the Form, as ch. 7. lib. 1. Forma Ecclesiae est unio, this onenesse is twofold, 1. of the members with the head,Sim. ☞ and 2. one with another; As the Commonwealth is formed from the peace and tranquil∣lity which the Subjects have by union with the Govern∣nours,
and then by their union one with another. The union of the members with (the Head) Christ is 1 Joh. 1.3.7. a communion with Christ,Saints onenesse with Christ their head threefold. whereby every member receives influence and virtue from Christ (the head) Heb. 2.17. This union is threefold, either of his substance, or office, or influence. 1. The Saints (his members) are in union with Christ their Head in substance, in himself:1. Union with the substance. Ex convenientia essen¦tiae, & identitate carnis Christi cum nostra, &c. whence all communion flowes between Christ and them; therefore it is necessary this Head be both God and man, and it behoved him to be like unto us, Heb. 2. for all our comforts come from him as God, through him as man.Against that wicked Aria∣nisme of John Bidle. 2. Furthermore, the members (Saints) have union with Christ their Head in his offices of King,2. Union with him in his offices. Priest and Pro∣phet, (quadam ) whence they are all called Kings, and called Priests, and called Prophets, by participation of these threefold gifts of Christ,All Saints are 1. Priests. or of Christ in these three∣fold offices▪ and also by a certain semblance and analogy, for they as Priests offer themselves to God, Rom. 12.1. as living sacrifices, mortifying and slaying the flesh, binding it to the Altar, and offering the calves of their lips, and the like, 1 Pet. 2.9. all this by virtue from Christ;2. Prophets. and so they are Prophets, to teach, instruct, comfort, confesse Christ before the world, and the like; being enabled by union with the Head Christ,Vrsin. thus saith Vrsin in's Catech. Q. 32. & 3. As Kings, they rule over their lusts,3. Kings. and reign over their own flesh, and by faith overcome the world, Joh. 16.33. 1 Joh. 5.4 and all this by virtue of Union with Christ their Head, Mat. 19.18. 1 Cor. 6.2. But then, 3. The members have union with Christ their Head in his virtues and excellencies,3 Union with him in his ex∣cellencies. and spirituall properties of righteousnesse and holinesse, light and love, and whatso∣ever is excellent in life or grace, Joh. 15.5.7. And in all these are the Saints (the members) in Union with Christ (their Head); which Union can't be in false Churches, that have other lords to reign over them,Which can't be in false Churches. or between the members of such heads of brasse or iron, as the Papists
and Presbyterians strike out for together; but they both fall short of, and fall out with us for, this form. Onenesse one with another from Christ the Head.2. Union of members one with another, (which depends upon the union of the members with the Head Christ) as be∣fore. Now this Union consists not then in the Form, or out¦ward ceremonies or rites, but in the Spirit (quo cum capite & inter se membra omnia uniuntur) now although they are not all one in some forms, yet being all one in spirit, every member by one and the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, &c. distributes and dispences according to his divers gifts (suavissima Symme∣tria) in a most sweet and orderly symmetry and decorum, to serve the head, to serve one another, and to serve the whole. Now although we grant that the Presbyterians have a form (yet not this form of the Church) and so have the Papists, Bellarm. cap. 9. a form like this, but (simile non est idem) not the same.Sim. For as a dead carkasse that wears the garment of a living man is not a living man, though he look never so like him: so the false Church though they are in union and love, and linck'd together, and ever so alike the form of a true Church of Christ; yet they are not the true Churches. It is one mark which the Papist makes of his Romish Harlot,Difference be∣twixt form of false and true Churches. for the true Spouse, viz. their unity; vide Synop∣sis Papismi 2. Controv. Q. 3. Now know that their forme consists in uniformity, but ours in unanimity; so the Presby∣terians in their unity of the forme, but we say it is to be in the unity of the Spirit.Martyrs a∣gainst form of Presbyter. and Papists. For as Mr. Bradford said (Fox p. 1622. col. 1.) the Idolatrous Israelites were one in their sinfull way, and might have pretended to uniformity, were that the argument of a true Church or worship. (See Latimer epist. ad Dr. Bainton.Our form is in the unity of the Spirit.) So Roger Holland: Fox 200. col. 2. What is the unity of the Antichristian Church but ido∣latry?Bradford. suspicion? tradition? commandments of men? and to persecute the poor people of God, that can't in con∣science be one with them?Holland. And to this we subscribe, and shall say with Helvetia Harm. sect. 10. p. 306 chap. 17. the Church is a company of faithfull,Helvetia. gathered out of the world, separated from false worships, and in communion together,Bohemia. by one spirit. And Bohemia, ch. 8. Harm. 316.
that whosoever hath not the Spirit of faith and true love, is but a dead member,Auspurg. and with Auspurg. Harm. sect. 10. p. 320. that saies true unity is not to agree on traditions or such do∣ctrines; but all to agree in the doctrine of the Gospell and truths of Christ. Add Helvetia chap. 27. p. 499. that the Church is one, and the members all one, and agree in one, though there be diversity of rites, and thereupon they may differ,☜ yet they are one in faith, and in the Spirit. O that all our Churches would minde this more, and the Antichristian form (of fleshly and outward rites and formes) lesse. 6. Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another in the Foundation which they lay for the Lords house,6. In the foun∣dation of the Church. being both sandy; for see the Papists they will have Peter the Foundation of the Church, and so the Pope as his Succes∣sor: but since this hath been (to use Mr. Hookers own words) hissed out of doors, and cast to the dunghill, arises another Doctrine, which is it that the Presbyterians hold, viz. that the profession (as Mr. Hudson hath it) of Christ is the foundation, or confession of faith, as many of them have disputed it with me, & vide Trap in Mat. 16.18. But we differing from both, deny the Doctrines of both,Trap. Mat. 16. we disagree from both. and do with the Apostle disclaim all other foundations (whither persons or confessions) but Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. which is a rock and will hold; chap. 4. lib. 1. and so we answer with the Protestants against the Papists in Synopsis Papismi 2. con∣trov. Q. 1.Ch. 14▪ lib. 1. 7. Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another, in laying their foundation by persecution,7. Presb. and Papists agree in laying and carrying on their Church-forms by per∣secuting such as differ. both with carrying on their discipline, and branding such as differ from them for Hereticks, Schismaticks, factious and seditious spi∣rits, persons not fit to live, and of late, some three years since, would needs have a Petition (the Presbyterians were so bitter) against al that would not be Presbyterians, i. e. really or dissemblingly so) that they might have no in∣dulgence (which is their own language); so that the Presbyterian would hear of no other thing, but tyranny and cruelty to the Independent, or indifferent brother (non se∣quens ecclesiam sed persequens) Now we declare against them
both,We declare against both. whilest we affirm the Word and Spirit the weapons of our warfare (in chap. 2. of this Book) and say (meerly for judgement) no man must be so persecuted, Tit. 3.10. 2 Tim. 2.25.26. but with all gentlenesse and meeknesse instruct pposers, if God peradventure will give them repentance to ac∣knowledge the truth. Wherefore the Lord will powre his viall on that bloudy Antichristian spirit of persecution and Popery, yet among us! 8. They agree in the subject of the Keyes.8. The Presbyterians and Papists agree about the subject of the keys, i. e. power of opening and shutting, Mat. 16.18, 20. which power the Papists say is the Prelates, Rhemist. 1 Cor. 5. sect. 2. Bellarm. lib. 1. de clericis, cap. 7. and as the Jesuites apply it to their Clergy, whence they have their name Cler∣gie, or Key-bearers. So the Presbyterians do to their Classes; see but Mr. Rutherfords ninth Argument for a Presbyteiall Church,Rutherford. taken out of Mat. 16. That is the Church (saith he) to whom the keyes are given, but the keyes were given only to a classicall Church there. And furthermore, lib. 2. p. 9. he saith, the keyes were given to Peter, as representing the Church-guides, viz. officers Ministers, as the first subject of the keyes, which is the same in nature with the Iesuites and Papists, & not a pin to choose between them. Of this judge∣ment, Vindiciae clavium proves the Presbyterians too. So the Jus divinum regim. eccles. p. 108, 109.We differ from both. But we differing from both do affirm the Church of Christ, the congregation of beleevers to be the first subject of the keyes,Mr. Parker. The Parisian Schoole. Cotton. Aug. which Mr. Par∣ker, and the Parisian Schoole grants, which Cotton in his keyes, p. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. sufficiently proves: so Philips answer to Lamb, p. 150. and Augustine on Mat. 16. saies Pe∣ter received the keyes not in his own name, but in the Churches, and Christ gave the Churches the keyes as the first subject,☞ so the Church in Peter received the keyes, for all the Church is built on a rock,Tract. in Jo∣han. 124. Fulke. Brute. ejusdem est instituere & destituere. So saith Fulk on 1 Cor. 5. sect. 3. against the Rhemists. So saies Walter Brute who lived in Richard the second's daies out of Joh. 20.2. argues thus (in Fox, p. 492.) To whom the Holy Ghost is given, to them is given the keyes, or power of binding and losing; but to the whole Church of beleevers is
the Holy Ghost given. So saith the Bohemians Confess. Harm Sect. 10. p. 335. c. 14. which power is committed to the Church of Christ.Bohemians. Wherefore throw down this Popery (for shame sirs) which makes Prelates or Classes the first subject of the keyes. 9. The Presbyterians agree with the Papists about Assem∣blies and Synods or the like; severall waies,9. They agree▪ in the Coun∣cels, in all which we dissent from them both. 1. Concerning the necessity of them;1 As necessary. Vide Mr. Ru∣theford. Mr. Prins, Mr. Bai∣lie's Disswa∣sion. 12. Q. and Independnts examined. We disagree. Whittak. the Papists say there is a necessity of them, and they can't be without councels. Bellarm. de concil. lib. 1. cap▪ 11. the Presbyterians also plead for a necessity of Synods, and assemblies, out of Act. 15. Whilest we assert no necessity, but an usefulnesse of them; orderly called together, having a consultative power, and being a wholesome means to prevent evils, and provide good for the Church, as the Protesants answered the Papists; so Whittaker de Concil. p. 23. saies they are not necessary. 2. Concerning the calling;2. They agree in their call. We dissent from them and others in the formale. the Papists will have them called by the Pope, Bellarm. lib. 1. de concil. cap 12. Pres∣byterians by the Civill powers, Princes and Magistrates; but we dissent from both of them (and others too) when we assert it to be properly the Churches power to call and con∣vent Synods or Assemblies, as Dell saith in's Way of peace, p. 77. The world can't call Councels of the Church, no more then the Church can call the Councels of the world being distnt from each; but all the Churches, Synods, or Assemblies must have their power and authority from the Church; who hath power to call out, and to call in, at their occasion: but of this in the next Book which is to come of the totum orga∣nicum. 3. Concerning the persons,3. They both agree in the persons tha gives the ma∣teriale. the Councell or Synod must con∣sist of; the Papists say, the Prelates only must have the deciding and determinating voice; although they grant others, Priests and learned ones may discusse and consult. So Eckius loc. de concil. Bellarm. de concil. lib. 1. cap. 14. The Presbyterians also say the Clergie have the right of deciding and determining; and that the Synod consists of such persons as are sent for and appointed or nominated by the
supreme Magistrate,Vide Ruther∣ford and Mr. Hookers answer  Synod in's Survey p. 4. ch. 3. We dissent. but we dissent from both in this, for that we affirm with Parker de polit. eccles lib. 3. c 8. the persons that are fitted for the work are to be appointed, nominated, and impowered by the Church without the Popish distinction of Laity and Clergie, (for that in Act. 15. it consisted of bre∣thren as well as elders, (so Mr. Dell in's Way of peace, p. 82, 84. declares at large) and that they be chosen out of the Churches,☞ and not out of the world or parishes; and that without respect of persons,Parker. Mr. Dell. every brother (as well Lay-men (so called) as Clergie) must have a like liberty to conferre, consult, and to conclude, (aequali auxilio & consilio) In this we agree with the Protestants against the Papists (Synop. Papism. 3. contr. Q. 3.) who say our opinion is grounded upon truth and Scripture, in that we say not only Bishops but Pastors, not only them but Lay-men ought to have concluding voices in Councell; and that rather the discussing pertai∣neth to the learned Divines, and the concluding to the whole, Tit. 3.13. So Zenas the Lawyer was in Fellow-commission with Apollos the Preacher. Act. 15.22. And Augustine saith,Austin. that seeing the judiciall power of the keyes is commit∣ted to the whole Church, therefore all sorts ought to be entertained in Councels.Nilus. Thus Nilus, lib. 2. de primat. saies, for the Greek Churches, (speaking of their Acts and Councels) :Gr. Church. Former as∣semblies Anti∣christian and lawfull. they made a common inquiry for the consent of all sorts in matters common and belonging to all. But I purpose to speak fully to this in the next Book, wherein we shall (I doubt not but) demonstrate easily to all men; that our Assemblies, and Synods hitherto have done more hurt then good; and have usurped their authority, which have been called by Pope, or Civill powers, and acted for them, and have consisted altogether of Clergie, setting rules, lawes, and directions for the Church,Nazianzen. &c. We may affirm with honest, Nazianzen that he never saw good end of such Councels; and that he resolved never to came at them more. 4. They agree in the authority of them. For the Papists say,4. Agree in the authority of Synods. that Councels may determine by their own absolute authority; and have a decretall power, Bell. lib. 2. de con∣cil.
cap. 12. which all men are bound up unto. And the Presbyterians say, that Synods have a protestatem juridicam to decree, determine, give their sense or sentence, which is binding. And Mr. Rutherford p. 210, 212. argues for it hotly, that the Assemblies decrees lay a tye and bond upon the Churches, p. 212. and his arguments from that Assembly in Act. 15. are the same which that Jesuite Belarmine brings, de concil. 118. and are answered by the Protestant Divines long since; and of late by Mr. Hooker in's Survey,We dissent from both. part. 4. ch. 1. and by Mr. Cotton, Mr. Bartlet ch. 2. with many others. And eminent Whittaker de concil. p. 19. tels us plainly that they have no power of framing rules, orders, or articles to binde the conscience: whilest we say the Apo∣stles themselves did not determine any thing with∣out the Word of God; for James alledged Scripture; and all that any Synods can do is by the Word of God to set down and dogmatize their judgements;Vide Hooker on Synods. but they have no power at all to impose Canons or conclusions upon the Churches. For as honest old Latimer answered Bishop White (Fox p. 1762.) they were not to judge as they thought in themselves, but secundum legem dei, as it was in the Word,Latimer. And this the Protestants bear witnesse against the Jesuites and Papists, Synops. papis. 3. Contr. Q. 7. as we do against the Presbyterians.Dr. Willet. But besides all this wherein they agree; I might insist on more particulars (but that I should be too large) under this 9th head; wherein they are too nigh one another;5. They agree. as in that they have (they say) power infligendi censuras,We dissent. of condem∣ning, punishing, censuring, or the like, which we deny even from the Presbyterians own grant, viz. that the power of a Synod is accumulative, but not privative, now it would be privative to take this power from the Church; as to excommunicate, censure, or the like. Sed judcium concili∣orum est suasionis non coactionis.☜ Besides they are too like one another, in urging all to beleve, and by a blinde obedience to submit to the Decrees of Synods,They agree. (as if they were  the infallible breathings of the spirit) as most certain and sound: to which Whittaker answered, de
concil. p 262, 263. and saies the very ultimate determina∣tion and judgement of a Synod may be false p. 231. and that those decees or determinations of theirs may and must be questioned p. 283. again;We dissent. and examined by the Word as the  did Act 17.11. Search the Scriptures whether those thngs were so or no,Whittaker. that the Apostles said: and we say with that poto-martyr of Mary's daies, Mr Rogers, in Fox p. 1487. who affirm'd that a poor simple Lay-man, (call him Cobler,☞ Tinker, or what you will) that brings the Word of God with him,Rogers Proto-martyr. Luthr. is more to be credited, and obeyed then the whole Councell gathered together and determining on their own beads▪ whose Canons Luther cals but hay and stuble, whch is to be burnt up. ut to the last considera∣tion (as concerning discipline) wherein they agree and are one, (to mention no more now.) 10. They agree in giving too much power to officers and Ministers.10. About officers, Ministers or the like; as the Papists give the right and power of judgement to the Pope and Pre∣lates, Bellarm. cap. 19. de concil. so the Presbyterians to the Officers and Ministers, Rutherford, p. 201. but although the Clegie men have usurped it to themselves solely and alone for many years together;We dissent. and assumed the right and power of judging, whether judging of Doctrines, persons, opi∣nions, or the like▪ excluding ordinary Christians, so that they could confidently declare against others, and pro∣nounce others Hereticks, Sectaries, or the like; but none them, though they were so; yet we say, that this power is given to the Church, to take heed of false Prophets, so Mat. 10.7. 1 Cor. 14. to try doctrines and persons, Rev. 2.2. and to judge as Mr. Dell in's Way of peace hath it clearly,Mr. Dell. p. 85, 86. and that the Church hath power to judge of her Ministers, not the Ministers of the Church. Where∣ore with unfeigned ejaculations for the fall of this Babylon, and the overthrow of these Popish tenets, I leave them to agre together (if they will not be wise and face about to Zion,☞ and joyn together against the beast and the whore, and trample under these Babylonish garments (whereby such Citizens are eminently and evidently known) but I must tell them, that partaking of her sins, they will partake of
her plagues; without a comming out from her, i. e. her false waies, worship, and discipline,Rev. 18. whilest the Lord will give his Zion-citizens victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark▪ and over the number of his name;Rev. 15.2, 3. holding the harps of God in their hands, singing the song of Moses and the Lamb. but thus much for their alikenesse in discipline.They agree al∣so in Do∣ctrine. They agree also in doctrine in many points, which I cannot orderly or properly in this place present to view; only in some few for our purpose, with relation to ordinances and duties, that I shall offer to any serious eye. As, 1. Concerning the Scriptures, the Papists to keep off people from readng them,1. About the Scriptures. find fault continually with the vulgar translation: Rhem. praefat. sect. 6. and they say the Church by her authority makes them authentick, so Echius enchirid. loc. de authorit. eccles. Pigghius lib. 1. de Hie∣rarch. Stapleton, lib. 9. doc. princip. cap. 1. So Canus, Bellar∣mine, &c. and they affirm the Scriptures to be most hard, difficult and obscure, Bell. de verbo dei lib. 3. c. 1. So saith Petrus a Soto, and Lindanus; and further they affirm the Scriptures in their true sense are, as they are expounded by Fathers, Prelates, Councels, and so to be beleeved; and that we must have recourse to them for answer and satisfaction, Rhem. praef. sect. 18. Bell. l. 3. de. scrip. cap. 3. and they say Scriptures are not absolutely necessary. So Petrus a Soto, & Tilmam. de verbo dei. error. 17. Bell. de verbo dei lib. 4. cap. 4. arg. 1. but besides them other things (as traditions) are necessary. Bell. cap. 3, 4. So Andradius ex Til∣mam. de verb. error.The manifold Popish sooty errors raised againe by Prelates and Presbyterians. 2. Now under this Doctrine of theirs are severall grosse errors, which our Protestant Divines of old, yea in all ages some or other have impugned and ingaged against most of these errors, if not all, impli∣citely and obscurely, if not plainly and clearly; are come up again under another cloak. And not only the Prelates of late, but some of the Presbyterians (even now) are too rigid and resolute to keep off poor people from the Scriptures; fearing thereby that they would soon excell their teachers, and take their Pulpits from them. For how fearfull a thing it is to them of that judge∣ment,
to see such in Pulpits as have not had hands laid upon them, is obvious to every eye, O how they screeh out for fear! See this in that frothy namelesse Pamphlet of a lying Libeller (and scandalous Philo-compos, that is much cryed up by that party for his voluble tongue) It is entituled, a Tast of the Doctrine of the newly erected exercise at Tho. Apo∣stles, in page 2. he saies, your setting up men of private places and particular callings, whose education and want of intention to the work of the Ministry, must needs bespeak want of qualifica∣tion, whilest they unacquainted with the originall of the Scriptures (which are emphaticall) must needs see dark & obscure places, but by the light of our translation, which is but a dim and thick medium, &c. Their frequent manner is to fright people from the Scriptures by telling them they want the originall, and so stave them with this Popish trick. Others of them have affirmed that their Classes, Synods, or such like should de∣liver the authentick sense of the Scriptures, and adde their authority thereto, in which others should rest sa∣tisfied; and they would have all to beleeve the Scriptures according to the interpretation of those whom they ac∣count orthodox, Fathers, Commentators, or the like (and not others) and look out for no further. About which I have been in the lists with many, and that it is not sim∣ply necessary to read them, hear them, know them, or the like, so they do but hear and beleeve what the Mi∣nisters tell them, what need they more? and that other things besides what are in the Scriptures are necessary; and pretending the difficulty and danger of medling with hard places of Scriptures, they telling them they are ob∣scure and not to be ventured on, as the Revelation and the like, keep off many poor souls, who stand (in ignorance) at a distance from them, and as Exod. 20.18. the people remo∣ved from the mount,We dissent from them both. and stood afarre off, being afraid: so doe they that are so terrified by these thundrings that they  hear. But we do dissent from them both, in these things; whilest we assent to the Protestants of old, that the vulgar translation of Scriptures is necessary, and sufficient (in mat∣ters of faith) for knowledge,Lambert. which Lambert argues for (Fox.
p. 1116. col. 1.) and Chrysostome,Chrysme. Hierome. Methdius. Nelphilas Theodoret. for when he cals all peo∣ple to study the Scriptures in their own language, Homil. 9. epist. ad Coloss. and therefore he himself translated the Bible into the Armenian tongue. Hierome into the Dalmatick. Methodius into the Sclavonian, Nelphilas into the Gothick: yea saies Theodoret Serm. 5. de Graecor. affect. for this end were Conversi erant libri Hebraici in omnes linguas, were the Hebrew turn'd into all languages, that every one might search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.9. though they understand not the originall. We also say, we beleeve not Scriptures au∣thentick, because men, Councels, Synods tell us so, but be∣cause  the Spirit tels us so; and 'tis the Spirit must adde his authority to the Scriptures, and tell us they be true, and in∣terpret them to us, and lead us into the genuine sense and sound truthes of them, without which all the Exposition of Fathers or writers in the world should not satisfie us; And  we say further that we should sin against our consciences,☜ to sit down content with the Exposition of others (coun∣ted ever so orthodox) without seeking further and fuller. For the way of the righteous shineth more and more to the per∣fect day, Prov. 4.18. Et veniente perfecto evacuatur imperfectum, 1 Cor. 13.10. Now every man is bound to beleeve the Scriptures (as Fulk saith 2 Gal. 6 and Whit. Quest. 3. cap. 1. de Scripturis) without the approbation of the Church,Mr. Tulk. Whittaker. Synod, or Councell to declare them; neither do we be∣leeve them because men say it is so, but because the Spirit saith it is so, who is the judge and witnesse; 1 Joh. 5.7. to testifie of Christ, Joh. 15.16. to reveal the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12. Esay 1.7. to teach the faithfull, Joh. 19.26. I remember Dr. Whit. hath an argument for this,The Spirit of God is the only Ortho∣dox Exposi∣tor. thus, That only hath the power to give the sense of the Scriptures which doth beget in us faith; but the Spirit only by the Scriptures is able to beget in us faith, Rom. 10.17. Ergo, the Spirit of God is to be our interpreter of the Scriptures: wherefore if Pope, Prelates, Synods, Classes, Father, Presbyter, or any other give us the sense of Scripture, and that thence our faith ariseth of the Scrip∣ture understood;Arguments. why then our faith must needs be built
upon that Popes, Prelates, Synods, Classes, Fathers, or Presbyters sense. And another argument the Protestants fetch against the Papists, which serves us, is, that the Scrip∣tures cannot be interpreted but by the same Spirit where∣with they were written, 1 Cor. 2.11. For who knoweth the minde of God save the Spirit of God? And 1 Joh. 2.27. You have the anointing, and you need not that any man teach you, &c. because as Augustine saith, Magister est omnium qui habitat in nobis omnibus, &c. We are all fellow-scholars (saies he) we are not your teacher,Austi. but he is teacher and master of us all who dwelleth in us all, &c. We further affirm with the former Protestants, that the  Scriptures are necessary to be known by all the people of God; the reading, hearing, and understanding of them begetting faith; and that it is not enough to hear the Minister preach, for the Bereans searched the Scriptures, Act. 17.11. Joh. 5.39. 2 Tim. 3.15.17. Whereas some say, it is enough to have what the Minister or Presbyter gives; it puts me in minde of Mr. Bradford's answer to one Wil∣lerton (Fox 1612.) who told him that people ought to learn at the Priests hands,Bradford ☞ Aye! (saith he) why then (saith he) you will learn the people to preferre a Barabbas before Christ, and to crucifie Christ, for so the people learn'd it of the Priests. Moreover we declare that all things necessary to the esse & bene esse of a soul, are expressed in the Scriptures, or included in them, and concluded out of them; whe∣ther concerning faith or life; and that nothing absolutely necessary is to be found besides the Scriptures, Joh. 20.31. 2. Tim. 3 16. whether for teaching, improving, correcting, or instructing. So that we overthrow the necessity of all traditions, rites, forms, or the like here, whether prae∣ter or contra Scriptura. For as Augustin hath it, qui praeter∣greditur fidei regulam,Austin Witnessed by the bloud of Martyrs. Dr. Taylor. Bradford. Hawkes. (i. e. Scripturam) non incedit in via, sed recedit a via, He that goeth beside the Scriptures, goes not in but from the way: this truth hath been attested and sealed to by the bloud of many Martyrs, Dr. Taylor, Fox. p. 1522. col. 2. Holy Bradford, 1626. col. 1. and that valiant soul∣dier of Christ, and stout Champion Mr. Hawkes Mar∣tyr,
p. 1586. col. 2. saith, Is not the Scripture sufficient for my salvation? yea, saies one of Bonners Chaplains, but not for your instruction. Ah! saith he, then God send me the salvation and you the instruction.Caution. Now let us not be mista∣ken, though we say all necessary is in the Scriptures, yet we deny not but there may be some use (for orders sake) of rites and formes; but not to be forced, knowing no∣thing necessary to salvation that is not in the Scripture, Deut. 12.32. Rev. 22.18. Mat. 15.3. Act. 20.27. & 26.22. seeing the Scriptures are the rule and measure of faith, they must not come short of the measured, (viz. faith) for all things necessary to faith must needs be contained therein. But,☜ Lastly, the Scriptures are not so obscure, and dark, or  undiscoverable as they would insinuate and urge upon poor people. For as Prosper saith, Parvuli, magni, fortes,Prosper. in∣firmi, habent in Scripturis unde alantur & satientur, No age so young, no wit so small, which Scripture doth not fit, There's milk for babes, and yet withall, there's meat for stronger wit. So Prov. 9.35. yea the Revelation, chap. 5.5. is a Book opened,Austin. and as Augustine hath it De doctrin. Christian. lib. 2. c. 9. In iis quae aperte in Scripturis posita sunt, inveniuntur ea omnia quae fidem continent mores{que} vivendi: in plain and easie places of Scripture, all things necessary to faith and manners are manifest.Councell of Tolet. Nay the Councell of Toletan. 5. c. 16. decreed the Apocalypse to be preached by every Minister from Easter to Whit-suntide; so that they strictly enjoyning it, accoun∣ted not this book of Revelation, it seems, so hard as men would perswade us to in our daies; whereby they for∣bear to read, preach, or expound it; but if it be hid,The Book of Revel. sent to the Church. it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. It is sent especially to the Churches, and is to be taken and opened by them. But thus far for the first generall Doctrine,☜ wherein Papists and Presbyterians are too near one another;
and we are farre off from both, even out of the sight almost. 2. They agree about Bap∣tisme of chl∣dren.2. They are something alike in their Doctrine about Baptisme both with relation to the Ordinance, the subjects, forms, and effects of it. As first in imposing an absolute ne∣cessity upon it. Papists say, it is simply necessary to salvation, Concil. Trident. sess 7 can 7. Bell. lib. 6. de Baptism. cap. 4. such a necessity (or nigh unto it) do those hold who baptize the babes of all sorts put upon it; and the very argument of the Rhemists, on Joh. 3.5. and the Jesuites, Bell. ibid. have they often urged to me, viz. Vnlesse a man be born of water, and the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdome of God. And I have heard some of them severely inveigh against such as neglected to bring their children, and to baptize them by such a time for fear a childe should die unbaptized, and the Parents for their neglect be under the judgements and wrath of God. But we differ from them whilest we decline that necessity of Baptisme to Children;We dissent. and whilest we affirm with such as were ever held orthodox in judgement amongst men, (vide Synops. 12. contro. q. 3.) that the Children of the faithfull that are holy, are holy before they are baptized, 1 Cor. 7.14. And this truth is attested by Richard Woodman,Martyr Wood∣man. a holy Martyr, Fox p. 1994. who saith, I read in Scripture, he that beleeveth not shall be condemn'd, but no Scipture saith, he which is not baptized shall be damned, neither dare I say so for all the goods under heaven In the Greek Church Nazianzen saies (in sanctum laacrum) their usuall time of Baptisme were but in feast of Pasch. and Pentecost,Nazianzen. which would not have been so seldome, if the want of Baptisme had been so dange∣rous to Infants. We deny not the ordinance, but that there is much Popery peeached up, and pleaded for, and practised in their ordinance of sprinkling Infants, all discerning men see and are ashamed of, and cry out upon it as unsufferable and too impudent, and as having too much of the whores forehead in it. Furthermore, although the veriest Jesuite do grant the positive necessity of baptizing babes to be grounded upon tradition,Bell. de baptism. lib. 1. cap. 3. and not upon Scripture, Bell. lib. 4. de Ver. and so to baptize them at a Font in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: yet how many imitate them therein?
and how hot the Presbyterians are for this positive necessity and order? it is obvious to every eye. As for the forme, whether in the Name of Jesus Christ? or of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? this hath been a doubt of long standing, and this did cause Novatus to disowne the Church of Car∣thage, for that this form of Father, Son, and holy Ghost,Novatus. Cyprian. and necessary baptizing of Infants were brought in; and he and Cyprian were at great oddes about this order, Anno. 240. whilest Novatus very earnestly pleads for it, as the practise of Christ's Churches in primitive times, and all along the Apostles daies to that hour, viz. To baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus, the Head of his Church. After that in Anno 400. was great contention about it, but I leave this to further light and li∣berty, only affirm with all the Protestants who are enga∣ged against the Papists about the form (Synops. 12. Controv. Q. 3.) that the name is taken for the virtue, power, and autho∣rity, Act. 3. and so doubtlesse the Apostles baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, and healed in his name, and preached in his name only. Beda, Act. 10.Beda. Jussit eos in nomine Jesu Christi baptizari. But I know no necessity of a Font, nor of sprinkling, more then of dipping; nor any positive necessity of baptizing Infants, (who are soonest drowned) but that these be left to light and liberty of conscience, as things left either doubtfull or indifferent in Scripture (without positive precept) and I am perswaded for that purpose, that every one may do as he is fully perswaded. As for Infants the Papists make it a ground of their Baptisme,They agree. Rutherford lib. 2. p. 262. that they have the habit of faith in themselves, and so partly by their own faith, and partly by the faith of others, they are to be baptized, Bellarm. lib. 1. de baptis. cap. 11. So say our Ministers, they have the habit of faith, though not the act; and by the faith of the Parents with that, they are to be brought to baptisme:We dissent. but we say with the Protestants against the Papists, that Infants have not true justifying faith (which is alwaies actuall, Gal. 5 6.) in themselves, nor yet are profited by the faith of others, for Scripture saith, Rom. 1.17. The just shall live by faith, i. e. his own particular faith; and beleeve and be baptized: not, let others be∣leeve for you, for then it were as well that others were
baptized for you: but this will be enter'd at large (I hope in the next part, 3. lib. of the body organicall) Tertulian speaking of Infants,Lib. de Baptis∣m. saies, Fiant Christiani, cum Christum nsse potuerint: Let them be made Christans (and baptized into the faith) when they be able to know Christ, (Et per fidem est cognitio Christi) and that is by faith. Wherefore we say that children as children have no right to Baptisme, and then secondly, that parents () as parents can't give them a right thereto; and seeing Baptisme is the ordinance of ini∣tiation, or entrance into the Church of Christ, it is wonderfull to see how sudden some are to null the very nature of that ordinance. But lastly, they and the Papists are too nigh one another in the effects which they say such a Baptisme produces in children. The Papists affirm that Baptisme takes away originall sin, in Concil. Trident. Sess. 5. Decret. de origin. Peccat. and in Infants newly baptized there is no mortall sin; Rhemists 1 Joh. 1. Sect. 5. So have some Ministers hotly pursued this benefit of baptisme: viz. that baptisme wipes away sins going before:We dissent. whilest we dissent, and deny this Jesuiticall doctrine, applying this to be the effect of Christ's baptisme▪ (which none but Christ himself can baptize with) Joh. 1.33. Mt. 3.11. viz. the holy Ghost, in a spirituall washing our hearts and consciences with the warm bloud of Christ, whereof baptisme is a sign (if not a seal) and in this we have declared our judgement before to be different from the Anabaptists, that attribute so much to the form and element as makes it an Idoll. But to conclude this,☞ it is in baptisme as it was in the pool of Bethsaida,Sim. if the Spirit move on the face of the waters, there is a healng, else none. 3. There is too much alliance between them in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper,3. They agree too much in the Eucharist. (so called) I shall instance briefly (for I have been too long in this chapter) in some few particulars. The Papists make it no more then a pre∣servative against sin, Bel. lib. 4. de Sacra: cap: 17. and would have confession and absolution of sinnes to qualifie for this or∣dinance, Concil. Trident. Sess. Can. 11. and that none are pre∣pared but such as are absolved, and then that all may
come; but that they must be sure to come fasting to it, and eat nothing before all, that day, Concil. Constant. Sess. 13. Bell. lib. 3. de Eucharist. cap. 22. ratian. 4. and then they would have every Communicant highly adore (even cultu latreiae) and worship the Host, &c. who doth not,Bell. ibid. is to be accur∣sed, Trident. Concil. Sess. 13. can. 6. And they say even repro∣bates that receive the Sacrament, receive the very body and bloud of Christ, Rhem. 1 Cor. 11. Sect. 16. Now although our Ministers (I speak of the violentest Presbyterians) do not altogether agree with them in these particulars, yet they are not far from them.How they agree. 1. For preparation how ear∣nestly doe they presse men to Confession of sins, sorrowes, legall repentance and the like, and bid the people to pre∣pare themselves?We dissent. whilest we say the preparations of the heart are of the Lord, Prov. 10.1. Psal. 10.17. Et opera sunt secundum principium a quo sunt; and they are good as they are of grace; our preparation is to be from Christ in us our wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification; we hold with the Or∣thodox Protestants against the Hetero-dox Papists, Opinionists and Jesuites, that we must have a lively faith who come to this Ordinance, but it is to be the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. and that we must have true Evan∣gelical repentance, (which is for sin as sin) but this must be in Christ Jesus; repent in Christ, believe in Christ, for Acts 5.31, 32. Christ was exalted to give repentance for remission of sins. So that there is no preparation or qualification by any act of our own, but all by Christ in us, and grace teaching us to deny all ungodlinesse and wordly lusts, Titus 2.12, 14. For as Mr. Rogers sayes in his right way to be saved, pag. 54. many mistake and are deceived, whilest they dote for a faith,Mr. Rogers. and a repentance of their own make, and look for something to ground on in themselves; they are like one that does not set a young tree,Sim. but lets it lye on the ground till he see what 'twill bear, and then hee'l put it in; so is it with such as would see their works and their fruits first, and then would to the Ordinances and to Christ; No! get into Christ, &c. and then see what fruits, and what works. This ordinance is a soveraign remedy for a troubled consci∣ence, therefore be sure of faith, 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5.
for according to your faith so be it: and this also Protestants (in Synopsis) affirm to be sufficient.So Damascene lib. 4. c. 14. . But further whereas they make this ordinance of great use, to strengthen their faith, and preserve them against sin and temptations, it is true; and yet we goe further, and affirm it more, viz. to give nourishment and growth to Christians too, to increase in faith, love, and grace, and is therefore to be often; as one of the standing dishes in the Church to be often renewed; as a daily dyet, Acts 2.42, 46. therefore are there such ele∣ments, as signifie to refresh, cherish, quicken, strengthen, su∣staine, and nourish, and satisfie, Joh. 4.14. & 7.37. How many (in the next place) put themselves and others upon fasting that day before they receive,2. We dissent. and still re∣tain this Popish invention, which we account a meere foppery; for any man may eat if he will before, as ap∣pears, 1 Cor. 11.34. if any be hungry let him eat at home; and besides we know Christ and his Disciples partaked of this Ordinance together presently after they had eaten at sup∣per. But whereas the Presbyterians take all to it, that have those legal qualifications before hinted,3. We dissent from Presby∣terians disor∣derly giving the Sacrament. we cannot but declare against it as disorderly and unwarrantable, as we have proved in the first book before, and we wonder in what one Scripture they can finde that ever any out of Church-fellowship did take it or durst give it, grant they were ever so holy Christians and Disciples,☞ yet they were not to sit down at this Table, till in Gospel-fellowship together, and in Christs Church-way: For Christ had 70 Disciples, as professors of Christ, and Preachers too, Luke 10.1. besides his twelve, yet none but his twelve in fellowship with him, distinct from the world and in commu∣nion together by themselves that sat down with him at this Ordinance, and read Acts 2.42. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 11.18, 23, 24, &c. or any other Scripture about it, and you shall finde that never any had it but the Churches, thus in fellowship; and that it was left by Christ in the Church, for the Church, and for none else that are without, as I not long since proved out of Luke 14.23. where we finde the Lords commission to his servants is to call and bring the hungry,Expos. needy, lame, blinde, poore, into his house, (his Church,
Ephes. 2. ult.) where the feast is, viz. Christ, &c. dished out in his Ordinances in special manner, and there the bread, verse 15. is, viz. this Ordinance of the Lords Supper; so that we have no order to carry it out of the house to them without, (for then none as in verse 18, 19, 20. would have excused, but any covetous, voluptuous, carnal, drun∣kard, epicure, sinner will be glad of it so) but our or∣der is to call them first into the house, and bring into the Church, and then give them these Ordinances, which are confirming, Matth. 6.7. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Jer. 15.19. Ezek. 22.26. which twenty and twenty Scriptures more doe prove; this is a truth, maugre that malicious and spurious frog-like froth, which appears in the Pam∣phlet entituled, a Tast of the Doctrine of Thomas Apostles: against this infallible truth which will live when that lies (where it best agrees) in dung; penned by a furious-pa∣ted Jesuitick Presbyter: (if not worse) hard by, and wel known for scandall and malignancy which hath outed him elsewhere;C. of Garlick-hithe, Lond. but I wish that he or any of his adhe∣rents would bring their works to light as we doe, else we must condemne them, John 3.19, 20. as say they are de∣ceivers and false-teachers; For they do what, they have neither precept nor practise for, nor one Scripture to warrant; and I instance in this, of their giving the Lords Supper contrary to all rule, and Religion, yea reason it self; And we say that they are none of the Lords Ministers in that point that dare doe it. But furthermore, what a deal of folly do some of them learn the people? to adore, (and I think I may say Idolize) the form, to fall down before it and to keep devoutly on their knees, and to sit, or kneel, or stand a distance from it, whilest they alone are at the table, unlesse they have others to wait on them. From all which we dissent, whilest we assert the people should sit up close to the table about, and about; and draw nigh with hearts fixed,4. Dissent. Psalm 57, 7. upon the Lord by faith; as much as may be in the manner of a feast, and as much as may be without outward veneration or ado∣ration as to the form, but by faith full of inward; For Christ's body visibly present among the brethren, his Disciples, was
not, nor was it to be worshipped; so now there is no necessi∣ty of it, nay there is a necessity of none of it, because it is not of faith, (as the Protestants answer to the Papists, 13 Con∣trov. Q. 9) Now what is not of faith is sin, Rom. 14.23. and faith comes by hearing the Word; but no where in the Word are ye taught to doe this, but to sit about it, and to re∣ceive (by faith) orderly and holily;Rom. 10.17. So that were it no offence to the Church, or to any of the conscientious bre∣thren; one might as lawfully receive it with their hat on as off,☞ so he be a worshipper in spirit and truth, John 4.23, 24. but we shall handle these (if God see it good) in the next book. Again, some of them have avouched every one to have had Christ that had this Sacrament, and have drunk and eat their own damnation: which is too Po∣pish,5. We dissent. for the Protestants protested against it, Synops: 13. Cont: Q. 10. so doe we, and say that unworthy receivers have made themselves guilty of judgement () thereby; but they did not partake of Christ, for then they eat and drink Salvation;Bradford. for as holy Bradford answered Harpsfield, Fox 1615. Christs body is no dead carkasse, but he that re∣ceiveth it receiveth the Spirit, and that is not without grace.6. Dissent. Moreover we differ from them in that we accor∣ding to the pattern,Vide Hokers Survey, part. 3. ch. 2. Matth: 26.26, 27. & Luke 22. set us, doe seek a distinct blessing to the distinct parts of the Ordi∣nance, first to the head, according to the first institution; Christ tooke the bread and blessed it, (distinctly) and then after that was done and delivered, after the same manner Christ tooke the cup and blessed it, i. e. distinctly, not both to∣gether, as the Papists now do (and then give one for both); and the first the Presbyterians and other Ministers do; which we account an error in them, that should be refor∣med, and we differ from them in their cutting the bread, and so in distributing it, which destroyes the nature of an ordi∣nance of breaking bread, Acts 2.42, 46. Acts▪ 20.7. as it is properly called in Scripture;7 We dissent. Many igno∣rant of the or∣dinance of breaking bread. seeing they who will have some of their humane inventions in it, and will be med∣ling (though not mending) doe slice or cut it ready to be given about; but this ordinance (of mans make and mixture) I confesse the poore people have had, and been
gull'd with for many a year, whilest they are kept and continued in ignorance (as to the Ordinance of Christ) to the Ordinance of breaking bread, and scoffe at it, not knowing what it is: Thus the poore people (as long as they are without) are caged up under Antichristian dark∣nesse and discipline. 4. The Presbyterians and Papists agree much about their Doctrine of works, which I shall instance in some particulars;1. In the ne∣cessity of works to salvation they agree in discourse late∣ly with one Crafton, that preacher at Garlick hithe, (a violent Co∣met) with some others. As first, of the necessity of good workes: The Papists say, that good workes are necessary to Salvation, not onely necessitate prae∣sentiae, but efficientiae, as efficient causes together with faith, of our salvation. Bellarm: lib: 6. de justificat: cap: 7. The Presbyterians (I mean the rigid amongst them) have affirmed, and yet doe the like necessity of good workes, to qualifie us and prepare us for Christ, viz: repentance, tears, confession of sins, &c. But we dissent from both, and say with Mr. Rogers, in his Right way to be saved, pag: 54. there be no works of ours which prepare us for Christ;We differ. Mr. Rogers. and such as look for something to ground on in them∣selves, mistake grossely and are lost; Like one that does not set the young tree, but lets it lye on the ground till he sees what fruits twill bear (as we said before) O no! but let it first be rooted and grounded and then you shall see what fruits; so must you be grounded in Christ,Sim. and then bring forth fruits and workes from Christ: then your repentance is in Christ, Acts 5.31, 32. your faith in Christ, Col: 2.20. which is the work of God, John 6. Fac Christi opera, &c. sayes Bernard in Paschal: Serm: 2.Bernard. Doe Christ's workes; good workes we grant, but not as our owne, but as Christs, for as Augustine on John 15.5. sayes,Augustin. sive pa¦rum, sive mullum, sine illo fieri non potest, in Tract:☜ 82. nothing little or much can be done without Christ,Mr. Bolton for Phil: 2.13. & 4.13. he worketh in you both to will and to doe: Est deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo: and I can doe all things through Christ that strengtheneth me, sayes the Apostle; and in this sense is that negative assertion of Dr. Twisse's, quod homo ni∣hil boni facit nisi deus in illo efficiat ut faciat: Therefore we must not be puzzled and perplexed about works (de nostro) of our owne to fit us for Christ; for whilest men
think they must doe something themselves, or else they cannot be justified, and doe nothing for it, or in it, but onely believe, and whilest they think God cannot but approve of their workes and accept of their services, they run a great hazare with the Papists, 1 Sam. 16.7. Psal. 62 9. and are with perplexible anxiety of spirit spying out for good works of their own make, whilest the Apostle sayes, Ephes: 2.10. we are all his workmanship in Christ Jesus, and tels us plainly our new works arise from this new creation, for that no flesh might boast in his sight; seeing Christ is not ours, (therefore salva∣tion is not ours) by any act of ours but of God in us, and of grace teaching us, Tim. 2.12, 13. within; hence is vocation, 2 Tim. 1 9. Sanctification, 2 Thes. 2.13. faith, love, repentance, Rom. 2.4 every good woorke, Ezek. 36.27. and everlasting life, Rom. 6.23. all given by grace▪ Therefore no good works of ours qualifie us for any of these,Mr. Perkins. thus sayes Mr. Perkins, upon Galat. pag. 159. the Gospel offers and gives life freely without any condition of workes, and requires nothing but receiving. Object. Yes on condition of faith. Answ. Faith (saith he) is menti∣oned in the manner of a condition, but it is of free grace and the meer gift of God, as well as life eternall. So that Faith brings forth workes, but not workes faith; for good workes (sayes one) followes Christ in us by faith, as the fruits of the tree follow the growing and grounding of it:Sim. a wo∣man first is marryed then conceives, then brings forth, or else the children are illegitimate;Sim. and so are those works illegitimate, which flow not from the conjunction and con∣ception of Christ in the heart:☞ but if they be before, wee may blush at the sight of them, and be ashamed of them, and cannot boast of any credit or comfort of them; Opera sunt se∣cundum principium a quo sunt; and till Christ be in us, we say our best works are but dead workes, two wayes, 1. effectivè, as sin, 2. privativè, without grace or the Spirit of Gods working. But furthermore, in the formal cause of justification, the Papists affirm an inherent righteousnesse in us,2. In the for∣mall cause of justification they agree. to make com∣pleat the formality of justification, Trident. concil. sess. 6. Can. 11. Rhemist. Rom. 2. Sect. 4. Bel. lib. 2. de justif cap. 3. ma∣ny Clergy men (unguibus & dentibus) doe cry up an inhe∣rent righteousnesse too to make up compleat justification,
which we deny and abhor,We dissent. allowing the alone righteousnesse of Christ to justifie us before God, and fully able to doe it without any addition of ours, or any inherent qualification, as to that See Rom. 8.2. Rom. 4.56. Rom. 5.24. 2 Cor. 5.21· Phil. 3.9. for Christ's righteousnesse alone hath fulfilled the Law, which is ours by imputation for our justification, Rom. 8.4. be∣ing absolutely justified, & by that Christ's righteousnesse alone; as our good workes doe not justifie us any thing,Vide Craock on Gospel-ho∣linesse, on Rom. 8.4. Serm. 1. cal'd Mount Sion. so our evill workes doe not unjustifie us; and so it is the weakest Saint is as absolutely righteous in the sight of God, and as ful∣ly justified (in the righteousnesse of another) as the strongest. And as most of the eminent Presbyterians are (now come in to be) one with us in this point, so some of the Popish spe∣ciall Champions upon a parley have laid down their arms, and doe join issue with us herein, as Pighius de fide & justifi. Cont 2. p. 45. who grants that we have no other righteousnesse to rest upon then that which (Christus imputat nobis sine operi∣bus nostris) Christ imputes to us without works,☜ so Vatablus in Psalm. 18.23. and the Author of Antididg. Coloniens. as Bell. confesses, &c. besides aboundance of famous writers, which prove it at large.In what sense inherent righ∣teousnesse in us. Now lest I should be miscon∣strued by Criticks, know that we affirm an inherent righ∣teousnesse wrought by the Spirit in all such as are justified by faith in Christ; but we say that it is rather a sanctification; or the fruit and effect of justification,Beza annot. Rom. 5.17. & Rom. 8.13. then any wayes to be accounted of in justification; which altogether con∣sists in the righteousnesse of Christ which is ours by imputation. And to make this more distinct and clear,Imputative righteousnesse how taken. the imputative righteousnesse of Christ is taken into three parts, for be∣sides his essential righteousnesse or personal, which we account not communicable to us;☜ yet there is first an habitual righte∣ousnesse of Christ in our hearts, and 2. his actual righteousnesse in doing the Law, and 3. his passive in suffering the punish∣ment, all which three are imputed to us; But, 3. As the Jesuites and Papists of old (to instance in Bellar. lib. 5. de Justif c. 5. initio) were not ashamed to slander Pro∣testants of old for enemies to the Law;3. They agree in slandring Saints, as cal∣ling them An∣tinomians. as that Moses with with his Decalogue they should say belonged not to them, and that they pleaded for Christian liberty from obedi∣ence
and subjection to the Law: So now the red-hot spiri∣ted men and Ministers of our age, the rigid Presbyters pur∣sue the same invectives against us, and in their Pulpits and Pamphlets exclaim against us for Antinomians, and would explode out the sweet doctrine of free grace as tending to libertinism,☞ and that we are against the Law, and enemies to Moses, therefore Antinomians, &c. In which they with the Papists of old will be found to fight sometimes with their owne shadows of their own make, and at other times with God against grace. With their own shade, whilest our God will witnesse for us (when they shall be ashamed) Isa. 66.5. that we deny not the Law, but that Christ came to fulfill it, Matth. 5.17. for us, and in us, and we in Christ doe it and not deny it.Mr. Bolton. Lex jubet, gra∣tia juvat. How we are under the Law, (i· e. of life. Mr. Bolton speaks for us in his Bounds of true Christan freedome, pag. 74. when he sayes, wee are freed from the Law, (the letter that killeth) as given by Moses, and are tyed to the Law (of life that quickneth) as given by Christ, and from Christs hands, &c. we are free from Antinomianism then, unlesse Dr. Preston were one, who affirmed that the Law cannot con∣vert (on's New Covenant,Dr. Preston on new Cove∣nant. p. 347.) and saies he, should I preach to you the ten Commandements again and again, it would be long enough ere you could keep them, therefore Gal. 3.2. It is not by them, that thou wilt come to be a new creature, but by the Co∣venant of grace, Heb. 8.14. that New Covenant made in Christ, that I must preach to sinners: So that those enemies that fight against this doctrine of free grace will be found figh∣ters against God, and Christ, and the sweetest and safest do∣ctrine of Salvation:Dr. Sibs. so sayes Dr. Sibs in his Excellency of the Gospel above the Law,☞ pag. 241. wherefore let us vindicate this doctrine sayes he, and not fear the reproaches of men:Mr. Gataker. and to impose a period to this, hear what Mr. Ga∣taker sayes in his Book called Gods Eye, &c. to the Reader, pag. 10. Note, sayes he, that men of learning and sound judgement, doe not cry out O Antinomianism! upon the Doctrine of free grace, but doe acknowledge it. Though many do as the proud Pharisees, cry out away with him, he's a friend to Publicans and sinners,4. Agree too much about the end of serving God. and he sayes that Harlots and Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdome of God before them. 4. The Papists affirm and therefore preach and presse
workes, duties, &c. for fear of hell, and for hope of hea∣ven, Rhemist. on Heb. 11.26. and on p. 4. Sect. 6. so many poore purblind Ministers would put the people on du∣ties madly without fear or wit, so they be doing;☜ and urge these on the paines of Hell, for fear of damnation; roar∣ing out with fire and lightning about their eares to fright them and scare them, and there to leave them! O! this is sad!Sim. For suppose a man in the Thames were almost drowned, and having his head yet above water, but ready to sink, cryed out for help, if a man that might help him with an Oar, or so, should brain him, and roughly knock him down, and drown him quite, would we not say that this were accursed cruelty? and I pray what doe they lesse, that can cay little else but Hell and damnation to such as are afflicted? despairing, sinking, &c. but to brain them quite? We finde David to destroy the Amalekite, in 2 Sam. 1. that slew Saul,Sim. though Saul was in danger of his life, and little hopes of his escape, and his enemies were upon him, and required the man to kill him, and was in deadly anguish; yet David did give order to one of his young men to kill him, and why? but because the Amalekite should not have kil'd him right out, though hee was wounded, and in danger, and not like to escape, yet hee should have done his devoire, and best to have comforted Saul, and to have encouraged and recovered him, and to have bound up his wounds, and blowne up his hopes, and have helped him what he could; So ought Ministers with poor wounded souls though sadly afflicted, and have little hopes of their recovery; yet must they use the meanes to binde up the broken, to pour in wine and Oile into the wounds; comfort them with the promises on the account of free grace, to apply Scriptures to hold out Jesus of Nazareth, even a crucified blessed Christ to their soules; and not to make so quick a dispatch of them as to throw them quite into the gulfe of despair; and if they should reco∣ver them by that meanes onely.We differ. Why what would this doe but to make them serve God for fear of Hell and dam∣nation, meerly? and what doth this but make men Hypocrites? Now we grant a filial fear, Prov. 3.7. but this is a servile
and slavish feare of Hell and damnation,Augustin. and Augustine on Pal. 127. sayes, it differs from true fear, as the adulterous wife does from the chast, they both fear their husbands (sed casta ti∣met ne vir discedat, sed adultera ne veniat) but the chast wife is afraid lest her husband should depart;How and to whom hell preached. but the adulteresse is afraid lest he should come, &c. Yea moreover we grant the terror of the Law to be usefull to uncalled hard-hearted insolent sinners; but not to tender broken hearted sinners, wounded spirits,☞ or the like: but the promises and com∣forts are for them; and not to bring them to serve God, or the like, for fear of Hell; for as Origen sayes on Matt. tract. 33. Matth. 25.24. I knew thou wast an hard man, and therefore I was afraid.Origen. This fear is not good, nor de∣livers us from punishment,Tindall. so said Mr. Tyndall Martyr, Fox, pag. 1253. The people of Christ do willingly hear and fol∣low him, not for fear of the Law, but they are led by love and allured by liberty of grace, &c. Neither is it out of love to heaven, (as some Ministers presse workes popishly) for we ought principally to eye the glory of God above our own salvation,☞ 1 Pet. 2.9. for as Mr. Tyndall sayes p. 1255. they that for fear of hell,Sim. or joyes of Heaven, doe a duty, or work, doe a constrained service, as hired men, or waged servants, which God will not have us doe but as chil∣dren. 5. Agree about the merit of their works in something.Lastly, The Papists affirme a twofold merit of workes, 1. meritum de congruo,  meritum de condigno; 1. of congruity, 2. of condignity and desert, Rhenist. Rom. 2. Sect. 3. the first kinde of merit most Ministers assert, viz. those that call for prepara∣tive workes before justification and qualifying workes for Christ;☞ This was coined in the Popes onclave, as that it doth agree with his justice and truth to give reward to such workes.We differ. From which wee dissent, but with this Proviso, that we doe not dis-own a gracious congruity, though we doe a meritorious congruity, we grant that in respect of such and such promises which God hath freely made us in Christ,☞ that say it agrees with his Word, &c. to doe thus and thus, as to pardon the penitent: answer such as ask and seek; satisfie such as hunger and thirst; but then this congruity is grounded on free grace, and Gods love, and not
(at all) on our workes; for all is of free grace, and nothing of merit. The Papists finding works too light in the ballance, wil have our Ladies beads put into their St. Michaels scoals to make weight;Sim. and in parallel to this how many Mini∣sters that must have teares, and call for them as duely as the Papists doe for beads, to help good deeds to weigh down? But alas! all workes, beads, and tears weigh too light, and are little worth till Christ comes, and faith be put in for allowance; Christ in us will soon turn the scale for us:☜ For he is the weight of glory. We say,Sim. the eye must have the faculty of seeing before it can see; and so the ear of hearing before it can hear; So we first have infused habits before we exercise the operation of them, and as the wheel doth not run round that it may be made round; neither are we first to act whereby we may be fitted and formed,☜ but first formed and fashioned by the Spirit of Christ whereby we act and do good workes, which then are opera congrua indeed.We assert good works. And in this sense we assert the singular use of good workes, to evidence what is within us, and which way the winde lies as by a weather-cock; and although we cannot see the winde, yet we can see the sailes of a ship that are filled with the winde, and so our workes that are filled with the Spirit of Christ. But this shall serve for the fourth general Contro∣versie between the Papists and Protestants of old, and the Presbyterians, (I mean the violentest of them) and us now: And to say no more of this then what Mr. Perkins says on Rev. 2.24. that Jezebel and her followers in every age have and doe highly esteem of their own doctrines for deep,Mr. Perkins. and opinions for Orthodox, and cry them up for learned, profound, and Divine, and onely Authentick,Expos. thereby to bring misprision and contempt upon the Truth, as a thing simple, foolish, and base. So did the Pharisees and Rab∣bies in Christ's dayes, to make the poore fishermen and Carpen∣ters sons odious. And so the Jesuites and Cardinals in the Pro∣testants time; so Prelates and Doctors in Puritans times; Bi∣shops, and great Scholars of the Episcopalians in the short life of Presbyterianisme;☜ hot spirited and hair-brain'd Sophi∣sters and Presbyterians in the time of Independency, &c. but saith the Lord, I have known the deepnesse of Satan, that subtill
sophister against the truth, to make it odious in all ages. 5. They agree in giving power to Ma∣gistrates.Lastly, I might shew how Papists and Presbyterians agree in giving power to Magistrates as civill Magistrates, over the Church as the Church; and to constitute Synods, make lawes for the Church, punish offenders, murther Hereticks, &c. from all which we differ and have declared it at large, lib. 1. ch. 11. ch. 13 lib. 2. ch. 2. But lastly, The Presbyterians and Papists are too nigh one another in practise too, as well as in doctrine and disci∣pline, which I shall instance in some few particulars; for I have not undertaken a tract to shew their agreement;☞ but on∣ly a testimony or two to prove the truth of it, how near the daughter looks like the mother under discipline, doctrine and practise, for truths sake instancing in some few things, though I might produce many for one, yet a few are enough for proof. And now for their practise, first as to their Ministers. 3. They agree in practise.1. Concerning their Ordination, what it is. 2. By whom it is. 3. In what order it is. 1. In their ac∣count and or∣dination of Ministers.1. For ordination what it is; the Papists call it a Sacrament, Trident. concil. sess. 23. Bell. cap. 8. lib. de sacram. ordinis, can. 3. The Presbyerians call it a solemn inauguration of a person into the Ministeriall or sacred function (as they call it) by imposition of hands. From both we dissent, and assert Ordination to be a solemn setting apart of a brother chosen by the Church, and approv'd of as fitly qualified for this or that office, where∣into he is now set apart by prayer. The Papists make imposi∣tion of hards the materiall part of ordination, and to be essentiall, Petrus a Soto lect. 5. de ordin.We differ. They agree imposition of hands. So Hosius confess. Polonic. c. 50. So Bell. cap. 9. So the Presbyterians tooth and nail cry up a ne∣cessity of imposition of hands; as if no ordination without it, Rutherf. ch. 17. ch. 18. and the Libeller (before mentioned that writ the Tast of Tho. Apostles Doctrine) cals the denying of imposition of hands the denying of ordination, in p. 3.; where∣as Mr. Crafton that preaches on Garlik-hithe hath most falsly affirmed that I deliver'd ordination not worth disputing or time to speak of,Lond. (as in the Pamphlet) it was proved to his face a forgery of his own busie brain,☞ and that imposition of hands (which some called manumission) was the word which I I said I would not meddle with as essentiall to ordination, as
not worth disputing about or spending time upon, being a ceremony, but not necessary; for I sufficiently proved or∣dination that day (as ere long will appear to the world) viz. a setting a part such as were duly qualified (which I pro∣ved at large) into an office of Gospel-institution, Eph. 4.11. having the Churches election, approbation, prayers, and ac∣ceptation, Act. 14.23. Act. 6.3. Gal. 4.14. 1 Thess. 5.12, 13. which Mr. Crafton could not deny before many witnesses, notwithstanding his satanicall accusation, not beseeming any Minister of this town (as I know of) that is look'd up∣on; only himself who is (to the grief of many godly men and Ministers) known too well (for one of his profession, and to the scandall of the Ministery) for his hot furious per∣secuting spirit, and most unchristian, uncivill practises and malignancy in many places, as at New-castle, in Cheshire, and at Renbury, being by the truly godly look'd upon (as he is at this day) to be a crafty one, and a violent enemy both to Church and State:☜ but the Lord hath and yet will rebuke his spirit, I hope, for good at the great day, for truly I pity him, and more such as are seduced and deluded by him, against the truth. But before many I offered him the chal∣lenge, yea the advantage of stating the question himself (to prove imposition of hands no materiall or essentiall part of ordi∣nation, which he Popishly asserts, but with words, not with arguments: and further, I offer'd him fairly to prove (and yet do it) that his ordination which he makes to lye in the laying on of hands is Antichristian and successive from the Pope, which I entreat him to accept of, or else to lay down his boasting and belching out this against the truth and the friends of it. For we affirm imposition of hands to signifie nothing as to the essence of ordination, for though it may be used, yet it is but a ceremony, not as essentiall that it must be used.We dissent. So the Protestants (accounted orthodox) have unani∣mously declared against the Papists, Synops. 16. controv. q. 2. and Dr. Cartwright in's Ecclesiasticall polity, declares plainly,Laying on of hands is a needlesse cere∣mony. that by laying on of hands in primitive times they did use to present the person so set apart to God, for his gifts and graces to qualifie them for their offices, and that this was their generall end.Hooker. Whence Mr. Hooker in's Survey of Disci∣pline,
part. . ch. 2. argues thence, that imposition of hands can∣not be said to be a specficating act, as to give one the essenti∣als of an officer. Thus eminent Bucer▪ de Gubern. Eccls. p. 337. saies, Manus impositio quid est, nisi oratio uper hominem? What is this laying on of hands,Bucer. So Aug. de Bap. lib. 3 c. 16. but a praying oe the person to be set apart? We read, Act. 6. &c. that ater they had prayed they laid their hands on them, not before they prayed, nor in the time of prayer,☞ as the Presbyterians do, but after; and it was used (some say) rather in way of blessing of them, (as Christ blessed the little children by laying on his hands, and so the sick) then in a way of setting them apart to an office. Chrysostome on 1 Tim▪ 3. cals it plainly ferme nihil, a nothing. And saies Aug. lib. 5. c. 16.Chrysost. Ordinare, quid est aliud nisi orare? to ordain,Austin. what is it but set apart by prayer? Hear but the Confession of Bohemia, ch. 14. Harm. sect. 11. p. 356. They may use some seemly and indifferent ceremonies, which are no waies necessary;☞ such as to lay on hands, to reach out the right hand () or else they omit them, say they. The like we have in the confession of Wittenbeg, Herm. sec. 17. art. 35. who say imposition of hands is but an indiffernt ceremony and not alwaies necessary. For there is no precept for it and the practise of it was extraordinary and significant; yet not alwaies used; Christ used it not when he sent forth his Disciples to preach;☞ nor gave it in commission to his Apostles, nor have they enjoyned it to be a practise for suc∣ceeding ages. And Matthias was chosen in Judas's room without it. But to conclude, Polanus, Tilenus, Calvin him∣self with many others say it is not necessary, but a ceremony. 2. By whom ordination is to be dispensed. The Papists say by their Bishops,2. Who have the power of Ordination. or else that they are not ordained, Bell. de sacram: ordinis, cap. 11. So said our Episcopalians, the power of ordaining is alone in the Bishops (who were rather aposcopi quam episcopi) but that Controversie is ended as to the hand of a Bishop to set apart;This is against the Councell of Carthage, Can. 22. for (as Cartwright saies) in primitive times there was more then one to set apart, Act. 13.1, 3. Act. 6.6. the Prophets and Teachers set apart Paul and Barnabas at Antioch. O the abominable blasphemies! and wicked fogeries of Bishops in laying on hands! and saying, receive the holy Ghost! But now the Presbyterians differ as
to that whilest they give this power to a classes or compa∣ny together in form of a Presbyterie:Wherein they agree, we dif∣fer. yet in this they agree with Popery, and Episcopacy to seat it in a Prelacy, and primarily to settle it in a Classis: which we deny, for if the Classis be Ecclesia orta,☜ then the primary and first power must needs be in Ecclesia unde Classis est orta. We affirm, that first of all Christ had the sole power of ordaining in himself,The primary power is in the Church. Cotton. since that he hath left this power in the Church his Spouse, and there it is seated: And as Mr. Cotton notes in's Way of congregationall Churches cleared, part. 1. p. 96. sect. 2. that in the second century of years the government of the Church was administer'd not in a Classicall but in a Congre∣gationall way, and so in the first century; witnesse the Magde∣burgenses, cent. 2. ch. 7. de consociatione ecclesiarum.1, & 2. Cent. Si quis pro∣batos authores hujus seculi perspiciat, videbit formam gubernationis propemodum  similem fuisse; administrando sacra∣menta, pure verbum dei docendo, excommunicando Haereticos, Mi∣nistros eligendo, vocando, ordi nando & justissimas ob causas iterum deponendo, Conventus & Synodus congregando, &c. If a man (say they) do but search the authentick authors of this age, he shall easily see the form of Church-government to be almost like a Democracy; in the pure preaching the Gospell, administring the Ordinances, excommunicating offenders, in choosing, calling, and ordaining Ministers,When Inde∣pendency got in. and upon good grounds in deposing of them, and calling Synods, &c. So that in those ages the power was in the Church; yea in the third Century of years, Cent. 3. cap. 7 to use the words of the Centurists,3. Cent. we shall finde (almost) the like form of go∣vernment although somewhat corrupt by ambition, which brought in Antichrist. For we shall finde Novatus ex∣comunicate by a councell at Rome under Cornelius. And Sa∣mosatenus was thrown out by a Councell at Antioch.When Presby∣tery came in. So that in those daies though corruption got in, in a kind of Aristo∣cracy like the Presbyterian way,When Episco∣pacy. and after that a kind of Monar∣chy by the Popish and Episcopall way: but even in those days some were orderly, and some Churches kept their power,☜ liberty and priviledges; so that then was the power of Ordina∣tion in the Church.Cyprian. Cyprian tels us Epistolarum lib. 1. that then Bishops and Church officers were not chosen by a Consistory of
Bishops or Pastors amongst themselves (as is now in Classes) but as they received it from the Apostles, so they held it for the orderly celebration of Ordination; the Bishop or Pastor is chosen in the presence of the people, as was in the Ordination of our fellow Minister Sabinus,How Ministers were Ordained of old. his office was put upon him by the suffrage of the whole Brotherhood and by the judgement of other Pastors present; so in Epist. 4. the people fearing God and obedient to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ have the power of choosing worthy Ministers, and of refusing the unworthy: so in Epist. 3. he saies with much adoe vix plebi persuadeo, immo extorqueo, ut tales patiantur admitti, &c. do I persuade the people, yea and pull it from them that they would admit such, &c. by which he shewes the peoples concurrence; but in lib. 3. Epist. 11. Caeteri cum ingenti populi suffragio recipimus; yea (saies he) in Epist. 16. Ad plebem examinabuntur singula, praesentibus & judicantibus vobis: to the people all things shall be examined before you, you being present and judging. Yea nihil statui (saies he) sine confilio vestro, and sine consensu plebis: Therefore this is no novelty to assert the power to lie in the body,Melanchthon. by which she ordaines her own Ministers; yea, saies Me∣lanchthon there is a necessity of it,Yet servants may execute this power to her. necesse est Ecclesiam retinere jus vocandi, eligendi & ordinandi Ministros, that the Church re∣tain her right of calling, choosing and ordaining her own Mini∣sters; this right is given to the Church, and no power can take it away from the Church (saies he:) yet we grant that the officers of the Church, may execute the Churches power here∣in as servants. 3. They agree in the order of Ordination.To the Third, In what order is ordination. Papists say first ordain him, then let him be called, then chosen, Bellar. ds Sac. ordin. Disputabimus primo de ordinatione, tum de vocatione postremo de electione: the Presbyterians say little better, Mr. Rutherford for the Presbyterians Chap. 15. p. 265. soberly asserts Ordina∣tion before Election; p. 267. A. B. sayes he, is first Called and Ordained a Pastor by Christ and by the laying on the hands of the Elders,☞ before the People can elect him for their Pastor; so that they agree.We dissent. Dr. Ames. But from them both we dissent, and say with Dr. Ames in's Anti Bellar. Tom. 2. lib. 3. De Ordinat. that we place the Cart before Horses, non Ordine sed confuse disputantus Ordinationem praeponere Vocationi & Electioni, &c. and they do
very indirectly and disorderly to set Ordination before Vocation and Election, which none judicious (sayes Hooker in's Survey,Our order in Ordination of officers. P. 2. ch. 2.) doe; nor any of the reformed Churches main∣tain, for it is too Popish; wherefore for shame friends away with it, fie on it! We affirme first, a necessity of Vocation, or a Call, which we account upon 2 parts, viz. Election, and then Ordination; (all which I hope to handle at large in the 3. Lib. that is to come) this Election is when the Church hath had triall of one, and approves of him, and chooses him out to bear such an Office as being fit for it, which is accompanied with examination and triall, (as I said before) 1 Tim. 3.10. 1 Tim. 5.6. therefore the Church is to choose, Act. 6. Act. 1.23. Act. 14.23. not Pope, Prelate, Classes, &c. who is fittest for her to be Ordained. Now the Election of the Brethren gives the person, jus ad rem, right to the Office, and Ordination (as before) jus in re right in it. Oh that this order were observed! it would be a singular means to fill the Church and Nation, with able qualified Gospel Ministers;A speciall means to pro∣pagate the Gospell, and to fill the Church and Common∣wealth with all able godly Ministers. (and to crowd out the scandalous) if none else (as it ought to be) were Ordained but such as appertained to the Churches of Christ, and those too approved of in the Churches as godly, and ably gifted; this would tend much to the propagation of the Gospel (and this will be and must be ere long) and then none can be Ministers but must at least be fit to be members of Christs Church: besides there would be no begging Ministers then roving about for bread. Oh!☜ that the Parlia∣ment would more owne the Churches as the best nurseries of able Ministers and Schooles of the Prophets, and suffer no Ordination out of the Churches of Christ, but look on it as Antichristian abroad. I speak not in contempt of Vniversities (for they are exceedingly usefull, as I shall shew, and I hope to satisfie any rationall man in the next Book) but that all who are Ordained Ministers, may first be found fit to be members of a Church of Christ; and then to be orderly Chose and Ordained within the Church: this would be a blossoming blessing indeed! which shall be in due time however. But before I finish this I affirme, that as Popish Ordination, (or Ordination Popishly dispensed) does not give the essentiall to the outward call of a Minister; so the Presbyterian Ordination (which I now dis∣owne
before God and men,Presbyterian Ministers have not the true essentials to the call of Mi∣nisters of Christ by their Ordination. as being in the steps of Popery and successively from it, though I was once through dim-sightednesse under it in the very first Classes that ere was in England, (if I mistake not) and tould'd into it; (yet I say) it is Antichristi∣an, and disorderly, as preceding the Election of the people of God, and not giving the essentials to the call of a true Minister of Christ, which as it must be by, so in a Church of Christ, Act. 6.3, 5. Act. 14.23. according to institution. But the Election and Call of a people rightly in order according to Christ's rule, gives the essentials to an Officer or Minister of Christ, and leaves the impression of a true outward call upon him; which we hope to have full proof for in the next Book, of the Body organicall; in the mean time who will may have much satisfaction at present by Mr. Hooker in's Survey of Discipline, part 2. ch. 2. p. 66. but thus far for the first point, wherein they agree in practise. They agree, 2. About di∣stinction.2. Presbyterians and Papists are too alike in practise too, about Distinction and Differences which they make: as, 1. Cleargy and Laity.1. The Papists make great distinction betwixt the Clergy and Laity (as they call them;) Clergy (which is meant the Lords heritage) they account the spirituality, or Black Garbe; and the Laity the Laymen, whom they will not have to meddle in Church matters at all, Bellar. de clericis lib. 1. c. 1. Rhemens. 1 Pet. 2.3.They agree. So the Prelates and Episcopalians kept up the distinction: and some of the Presbyterians do at this day; and many of them keep up a distinction between themselves as Ministers and the other people, excluding others from par∣taking of their priviledges, and would have no other dare to touch their sacred function, or enter their pulpits upon pain of an Anathema;We differ. but putting a difference between them∣selves and others as men more holy for their functions sake. But we deny that distinction as Popish, and as the seminary of a Masse of mischief, discords and decisions; we allow no such distinction nor difference of persons, 1 Pet. 2.9. Jam. 2.1. but as an Alderman or Common-counsell-man differs from the other Citi∣zens only in his office,Sim. which they have not of themselves nei∣ther,Sim. but only of the Cities choyce: and as the Speaker of the House of Parliament differs from other members only in his place. This assertion the bloud of Martyrs witnesses unto,
as Walter Brute Fox p. 496. col. 2. who said Christ in the Gos∣pell used not the name Sacerdos but Presbyter,Martyrs Brute. that there might be no difference between Ministers and the people,☜ unlesse it be to exceed them in knowledge and holy life, so said John Lambert,Lambert. Fox p. 1113. and to this the Writers of those called Reformed Churches agree,Synops. 5. Controv. Q 1. averring (in lib. 1. de miss. privat. abrogand. p. 1.) that there should be no difference of persons amongst true Christians, as some to be called the Clergy (or spirituality and inheritance of the Lord) others the Laity, &c. And Calvin sayes, Haec appellatio aut ex errore,Calvin. aut prava affectione nata, &c. Instit. lib. 4. c. 4. sect. 3. 2. Papists make distinction of their Priests by Garbes, Gowns,2. In distincti∣on of Gar∣ments. Caps, Garments visibly from others; as if more holy then o∣thers, and require it by canon and injunction, Bellarm. c. 11. Rhemist. 1 Tim. 3. Sect. 7. So did the Prelates, and so do many Ministers now think it needfull to have distinguishing garments and Garbes from other people;☜ which we think a supersti∣tious foppery and pride, which the Martyrs witnesse with us, and for us, accounting this a ridiculous custome,We differ. to wear di∣stinguishing robes to be known by; and Dr. Taylor (Fox p. 1324.) when the Bishop came to degrade him,Martyrs Dr. Taylor. did disdaine to put on the Popish garments calling them apish toyes and trumperies, fit for boyes to laugh at:Ridley. So Bishop Ridley (Fox 1767.) called their distinguishing vestures foolish and abomi∣nable, and too fond for a play:☜ Cranmer. So said Bishop Cranmer (Fox 1883.) whilst Bonner was busie in degrading him, Ha! (sayes he) all this needed not, for I had done with this geare long agoe. I mention these to shew you their minds, that Ministers might go comely as Christians, but not with superfluous niceties in Clothes, or Colours, Gowns or Gar∣ments, to distinguish them from others; these being base and foolish; but this will be more manifest in the third Book that followes under the head of Vniversities and their Ante∣christian orders, distinctions and degrees,☜ which are not yet reformed. And 3. Papists give some of their Clergy principality and power over others of them,3. They agree in giving some Ministers superiority. We differ. Bellarm lib. 1. de clericis c. 13.14. so do the Presbyterians in their Classes, which we have ex∣ploded our discipline and order as detestable, and as being diame∣trically
opposite to Christ's rules and order left in his Church and to's Disciples, Luke 22.25. Marke 10. 1 Pet. 5.3. See lib. 1. ch. 11. & 13. But we affirme all one, brethren, without any superiority or uppernesse amongst the Pastors, no more then there is among the Churches; and besides what hath been aboundantly produced to prove this both in the 1. and 2. Books before; we shall finde antiquity doth disowne such a superi∣ority as is pleaded for, in Concil. Carthag. 4. Can. 34. Episcopus in quolibet lco sedens, stare Presbyterum non patiatur. A Bishop was not to suffer a Church officer to stand before him, for intra domum collegm Presbyterorum se esse cognoscat, let him know that he is in Gods house but a fellow and brother, distinct 95. c. 9. and not a Lord or Ruler;☞ some there be qui de episcopatu intumescunt, who do swell with pride, and are big because they are Pastors and Overseers, as if they had not a Ministeriall but an Imperiall office, &c. O abominabe! 3. Agree about Tithes.3. Presbyters and Papists are too alike in their practise too about Tithes Papists say the payment of Tithes is a naturall du∣ty and of absolute necessity to maintain the Priests, Rhem. Annot. Heb. 7. Sect. 4. and do not our Ministers, and most of the Presbyterians professe so much? How the noyse of putting down Tithes frights them!☞ they can't endure to hear of any other maintenance; this makes them assert the Orthodox Ministry will down if Tithes down.We dissent. But we dissent and doe (at a great distance) disowne this necessity which they put upon Tithes, and protest against them as Popish in their pra∣ctise herein, (as in the 3. Book may be mentioned at large, when we come to speak of Pastors maintenance) but for pre∣sent to clear this we affirme with the Protestants (against the Papists) that the Law of paying Tithes to the Levites was in part judiciall,Synops. 5. Cont. Q. 6. in part ceremoniall, and in some sense might be said to be morall (though in that very hardly.) First, judiciall in this,1▪ Tithes juda∣icall. that forasmuch as the Levites (though the 13. tribe) were not much lesse in common account then the tenth part, (I say not in number of persons, for the Levites made but 22000 Num. 3. and the rest of the tribes were 603550. Num. 1.) but as a tribe they were accounted as the tenth part, and therefore it was thought fit that the tenth part of the brethrens goods should be allotted them, which
being a Judaicall and politick Law of that Country cannot tie us,They are left to liberty of civill Powers. but is left to the libety and discretion of our Governors, as a thing civill and politick: But 2. Tithes and tenthes were cere∣moniall as due to the Priests and Levites for their service at the Altar: Therefore not to be enjoyned, but rather abolished,2. They were ceremoniall. especially when they are a burthen to the people, and abused by the Ministers. So that in neither of these respects can Tithes be challenged as due, or imposed as necessary.3. Maintenance is morall, and must be. But 3. the morall part of them is the equity of the Law, viz. for the maintenance of the Levites; so also there is to be sufficient maintenance and provision to be made for Gospell Ministers (as was before for the Levites) and this is perpetuall,☜ and by divine right, 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. 1 Cor. 9.7, 9, 10, 13, 14, &c. Mat. 10.9, 10. Gal. 6 6, 7. Now we affirme with the reformed Churches (so call'd) and Protestants of old against the Papists, these three things. 1. That the Parliament (or any other supreme power over a Nation) may lawfully throw down Tithes,The Parlia∣ment may take Tithes away, yea, and must do it. without dishonour to God or hurt to his Church; nay with much honour to God, and advantage to his Church, (though disadvantagi∣ous to tithe-servers, and time-servers, and preaching men-plea∣sers, the thoughts of this being ready to break their hearts, which fail them for fear) but to speak and spare not; not only they may do it, but they must do it, when they finde Tithes abused, to maintaine impiety and impudence, idolatry and superstition in parochiall preachers; which evill thing would be suppressed by paying salaries or stipends to the able and godly, and none else. To clear this,☜ it appeares plain∣ly that it hath ever been lawfull and in practise in primitive ages, for the Prince or Supreme power of the Nation to take a∣way such lands, goods, estates or allowance as have main∣tained superstition and iniquity,Poofes. which the said Prince or Power hath converted to a better and fitter use; see Constantines decree God. lib. 1. tit. 14. leg. 1. & 3. and so Theodos. So in Augustines time the Christian Emperors took away many lands and dis∣possessed the Donatists. And Aug. renders this reason for it Tractat. in Joan. 6. because it is by the law of a Prince, King, or Power of the Nation, that Ministers are maintained by this or that maintenance, in this or that way, with these or those
lands, et secundum jus ipsius possides terram, and according to this law, or the Nations law do you take maintenance, and enjoy your possessions. Wherefore the State does great ser∣vice for God to alter the Ministers maintenance, if Tithes do keep up a carnall▪☞ covetous Ministry, and maintain pride, idlenesse, riot or excesse, let them then fall for shame, and the Depen∣dents with them; for so the Idle Preists will be spoyled; but then be sure they be for better use and ends disposed of, as belonging to the State; though maintenance belongs to the Church.Caution. Yet this withall, I do not defend such as are so earnest to tumble down Tithes for their own ends and pri∣vate gaines.☞ 2. Parliament must allow a competency for a Gospell Ministry in en of Tithes.2. We affirme a competent maintenance, and comfortable allowance to all able Gospell Ministers who live soberly and godly, to be of divine institution. Therefore great care must be had that poor men the Ministers be not as much troubled, disturbed, disquieted in their spirits, and forced to suites or wranglings for their Salaries or Stipends, as they have been for their tithes, rates or former maintenance, but speciall care should be had in erecting their Stipends, that the Ministers may be wholly given to their Ministry, 1 Tim. 4.15. and that they may receive them without troubles. 3. In such a way as the people consent to.3. In as voluntary a way as may be (which we assert most sutable to Gospell order:) our Saviour warrants his Disciples (as Mr. Owen saies in's Eshol.) to take and eat of those things that were had by their consent to whom they preached the Gospell, Luke 10.8. so that the people ought to be free in the manner of payment or allowance.In Austins time no Tithes pay∣ed as now. In Augustines time vide in Psal. 146. there was no generall law or custome in the Church (or nation as now is) to pay Tithes. For saies he, Decimas vis? &c. will you pay Tithes? the Pharisees did so; sed tu vix millesimam das, but you scarce give the thousandth part: Tamen non reprehendo, vel hoc fac, sic sitio, ut ad istas micas gaudeo, here's a good man indeed; where is such a Minister as saies with him,☞ yet for all that I finde no fault, do so still, for I so thirst after your welfare that I refuse not your very Crums. We see then in those dayes there was no forcing to pay Tithes, for he was content with the very crums, the ten hundredth part. So in Concil. Aurelianens. cap. 17. Sicut in arbitrio dantis est ut tribu∣eret
quod voluerit, &c. the words are,☜ as it is the will of the giver to give what he pleaseth, so if he finde him stubborn and obstinate, and froward which receiveth it, it is in his power to revoke the gift, &c. So that the word of God hath laid no necessity upon Tithes, this lay apparent before the Councell, for otherwise they would not have permitted such liberty, and have made the maintenance free and voluntary.☜ Thus the Bohemians have long since professed their opinion (artic. 15.) say they, the Priests preach and say,Exhort. Bohem. art. 15. that men are bound to pay them their Tithes; wherein they say falsly, for they cannot prove by the new Testament, that our Lord Christ did command it, and his Disciples warned no man to do so, neither did they themselves receive them. So among the Muscovites, the Ministers are maintained by certain free contributions, and certain houses are assigned to them, and they have no law for Tithes, nor maintenance quo∣ad determinationem quantitatis in respect of how much:☜ The Lateran Concell was the first that confirmed them. Anno. 1215. but thus far for Tithes till the next Book. 4. Papists and Presbyters agree much in their Names of dayes, (which seemes nothing,4. They agree in their names of dayes, months, &c. but is (indeed) very unsavory and unchristian) as to name dayes after the Heathenish Idolaters and custome, from the seven Planets the seven dayes, Sunday from the Sun, Munday from the Moon,Synops. &c. Rhemist. Annot. Apoc. 1. Sect. 6. But we think (with the Protestants against the Papists in Contro. 9. Q. 8.) this ought to be reformed,We dissent. and these dayes are better and more Scripturally (as in Mr. Jesses Scripture Almanack) termed, the first day, the second, or third, &c. as the Jewes called their dayes from the Sabbath. So other things and names must be reformed; as of our months, for March is called from Mars, June from Juno, July from Julius, August from Augustus, January from Janus, &c. So also the names of Christmas, Michaelmas, Candlemas, &c. must be altered; and all such names and things as sprung from Popery  Paganisme:Fulke. so said Fulke against the Rhem. and Hierom. in lib. de veste sacerdotal. in Job. Arcturum & Orionem, &c.Hierom. God forbid, saies he, that these names should be any longer in Chri∣stians mens mouthes, Absit ut de ore Christiano sonet, &c.☜ O then that we would reforme! Let young students beware of Hea∣thenish names and books, (but for this in the next under the head of Vniversities) and let us learn our children in the lan∣guage
of Christ and his word, and no longer in the lan∣guage of the Dragon or the Beast. I commend such as are to learn this to Mr. Jesse's Scripture Almanack.4. They agree. 4. Their practise is much alike about the publick meeting-houses, called both by the Papists and Presb. Churches. Fro, 1.That in the Churches God is most to be met with.1. As the Papists and Jesuites do eagerly maintain (these meeting houses) their Churches to be more holy then any other places, Bell. lib. 3. cap. 4. de Sanctis. So do most Ministers (so cal'd) and Presbyterians at this day hold what they can neither prove, nor dare (to them that discerne) openly own, viz. a specialty in their Churches, as if holier then other places, or at least as if God were more present and to be found there; and therefore for a world will not allow of house preaching or the like.We differ. From which we dissent, whilest we affirme their Churches no better then then the streets or barnes in themselves, and so say all the (Orthodox) Protestants against the Papists in Dr. Willet's Synopsis contro. 9. Q. 6. answering all the Jewish objections which the Papists produce for proofe,Dr. Willet. as that Solomons Temple was so &c.Proofes. But our Saviour saith under the Gospell, there is no such difference of places to worship in, Joh. 4.21. The hour cometh when ye shall neither in this mountaine, nor in Jerusalem worship my Father; but v. 24 in spirit and in trith: Therefore his worship is not now tied or limited to places or Churches (so cal'd).☞ As for Solomons Temple, it was a type of Christ's body, viz. his Church and Temple more holy then all the World beside, Saints being the living stones thereof 1 Pet. 2.5. A Jew, saies Origen in Mtt. tract. 35. Nihil dubitat de hujusmodi,Origen. &c. does not doubt of this, that one place is more holy then another, but for one that is departed from Jewish fables to Christ's doctrine to say so, is strange. Besides, if the presence of God makes holy; then marke the promise (which is not to the place but to the people) Mat. 18.20.☞ Wheresoever it be that two or three are gathered together in my name, I am in th middest of them. If example would adde anything, we have all the pri∣mitive practise for us, both of Christ praying and preaching on the mount, and the Apostles in any place, in all places, from house to house. Now although we deny not, but that a convenient use may be made of those Churches, yet there is not a necessary use of them as to the places holier then
any others, or that God is more present there.Origen. For as Origen hath it, Locum sanctum in corde requiro positum, &c. I seek a holy place not in the house but in the heart: My son give me thy heart. Et non pute∣mus structuram lapidum, &c. Orig. Hom. 5. in Lev. Let us not then think (saies he) that the building of dead senslesse stones is the holy place. Mr. Tindall hath seal'd to this truth with his bloud, Fox p. 125. That Christ hath taken away the difference of places,Witnessed by Martyrs. Tindall. and will be worshipped in every place, neither is there in his kingdome on place holy and another unholy, but all places are indifferent; neither canst thou more heartily and better beleeve, trust, & love God in the Temple, at the Altar, in the Church yard &c. saies he, then in the barn, kitchen,☜ vineyard, bed, &c. And to be short, the Martyrs of Christ have honoued & worshipped him in prisons and dark dungeons. Thus he: And so we. 2. The Papists appointed these Churches to be dedicated to Saints,2. Too nigh one another a∣bout Churches as dedicated to Saints. and Bell. c. 4. brings an argument to urge Temples to be built to Saints. Now although the Priests and Presbyters can't for shame own these Popish decrees; yet what do they lesse then approve of their Churches so consecrated and dedicated? as to S. Ma∣ry, S. John, S. James, S. Thomas Apostles, &c when they professe them theirs, and call them by their names as Sainted, and undetake them as such:We differ. From which we dissent and do declare our dissa∣tisfaction with Parish-Churches as such, we disown the titles, and them as Temples and Churches, and we abhor them as consecrated or dedicated as before, and affirm further that many Ministers ap∣probations of those Churches, and appropriation of them to them∣selves, as theirs is not far from that manifest impiety and idolatry which appear'd at their first consecration and Christning (if I may so say) of them, and does lead people into too much Popery and foppery about them. It were to be wished that their names were left, and lost and buryed never more to rise among Christians, and that those places also were detested as to the use and end, for which, and name to which they were consecrated. When super∣stition began to grow big, this idolizing of places burgeon'd out also, though more anciently they were wont to devote them to Christ, as Constantine did his Temple at Jerusalem to the Saviour of the world; but afterwards they dedicated them to Saints,Euseb. Lib. 4. devit. Constant. Lambert. which saies holy Lambert Martyr, Fox 1108 the very Angels themselves would not that we should dedicate to the honour of them. And for this take the confession of Wittenb. Harm. sect 2. p. 46. who say,
neither do we consecrate Churches or Temples to any Saints or Martyrs seeing not they, but their God is our God. It will do wel (because ma∣ny are and will be taught by the precepts of men, which is a sad passage, Hos. 5.11.) therefore it would do well that our States would declare against those Churches as no Churches, that they might never be eyed or owned more then any other places, fur∣ther then for conveniencie's sake: so that as hot violent Ministers might not approve, so not appropriate them as they do. But that they might be left to the liberty of the godly people, that when the Minister of the parish preaches not, any other godly Minister or brother might preach there, as having liberty and allowance as well as the other. For indeed some proud slf-conceited, hot spirited Presbyterians I know, (that account these Churches their own inheritance) will keep (or solely command) the keyes and suffer none to preach but themselves or of their own feather,☞ gang, and fancy with them; and on the week-daies keep the door so close that a mouse may hardly get in,Presbyterians  truth out of doos. for fear of too much preaching, which they account dan∣gerous, unlesse on their Rounds on Sunday: So that they hreaten to arrest such as dare preach in their Pulpits or Chur∣ches (as they say) without their consent. Oh sad! such doings we have in Countreys yet! and are forced to preach under hedges or on mountains (which I have done my self when we have not had a twig to shelter us from the rain) But woe be to them;Gospel-propa∣gation by this means. for they have taken away the key of knowledge, and have not entred in themselves, and them that were entring in they have hindred, Luk. 11.52. I hope in time, this will be reformed too, which though it seem a trifle, yet will signifie much whilest people have a Popish fancy of finding God there more then in other houses,Churches how to be dedicated to Saints. & that the word preached there is better then in private poor souls they can seek no further. But if these places must be dedicated to Saints,☞ let them be dedicated to the use of Saints living,6. Agree a∣gainst us. They alike do take advanta∣ges at our rnts, differen∣ces, schismes, &c. and for the Churches (that are so indeed) to meet together. Now to the last thing I shal name (though I might many) more. Lastly, The practise of Presbyterians is too alike the Papists, in their accurate Srutiny which they have of us, to observe what differences they can finde amongst us, to make their advantage and out cry against us: this is an old popish trick, Bell. lib. 4. eccles. cap. 9. Do way-bible, p. 50. of the Jesuites inventions, which
as the Papists had to render the Protestants odious; so the rigid brethren the Presbyterians do all they can to make us a re∣proach, and by publishing our weaknesses which they get up from the differences and divisions that are among the Saints, & Churches. So Edwards Gangrena: Baily in's Dissuasive: Dr. Bast∣wick in's Rout: Mr. Prin in 12 Queries, Cummultis allis, &c. But we with the good old Protestants and Martyrs must ac∣knowledge too many differences among us, and that about forms too; but we say that unity is no infallible note or neces∣sary mark of the Church of Christ; for as Mr. Bradford said,Bradford. Fox 1622. the Idolatrous Israelites then might have produced and pre∣tended this argument for them. And then, 2. There may be unity where is not uniformity; and where be differences about some outward rites, yet all may agree in the thing and the end, Old Latimer (Fox 1750.) proves and alledges Hierome,Latimer in epist. ad D. Bayn∣ton. whose Translation of the Bible caused dissensions in a Christian congregation, yet saies Hie∣rome, Ego in tali opere nec eorum invidentiam pertimesco, nec scripturae veritatem posentibus denegabo.Hierome. In such a work as this is, I will neither much fear this envie or fury, nor yet will I imprison the truth of the Scriptures, or withhold it from them that do earnestly desire it. But as Bell. did not blush to say in lib. 4 de eccles. cap. 10. that an hundred se∣verall sects were sprung up among Protestants, but that they (of the Roman Church) were one: so say our hot An∣tagonists the same thing for the same end against us; saies Mr. Baily in's Disswasive from the errors of the times. In the third shamefull absurdity (as he saies) is found in our way of Independency; that there be multitudes of errors, dis∣sensions, and such like things and persons; whose Bellar∣mine-like language is arrested and brought to a triall by Mr. Cotton in's answer to him, Part. 1. p. 82. where Mr. Cot∣ton proves,Cotton. such reports of the way rather to justifie then condemn it: But with all the Protestants against this charge of the Papists, we affirm as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear that thee be divisions among ye, and I beleeve it. For it is necessary that there should be also Heresies among you; that they which are approved may be made manifest. It is a sign we are in the true way, when the Devill does take on so, and
storm, and studies all he can to set us together by the ears, & so to break us, who united are terrible as an army with ban∣ners. This makes an argument for us and not against us. We say as Augustine once to the Pagans:Austin. Non proferant nobis quasi concordiam suam, &c. Let them not lay before us with boasting their concord and agreement, nor st in our teeth (or fling on our faces) the foul discords and dissensions of Christians; for Satan assaults not them as e doth us, for quid ibi lucri est, quia litigant, vel dam∣ni si non litigant? What doth the Devill get by it if they do disagree?☞ or lose by it if they do agree? but by sowing discords among true Christians he helps to hinder the truth, raise ill reports upon the good land, break professors a pieces, make way for persecutions, and draw off people from the practise of Gospel-order, and from obedience to Christs Lawes. This is the Devils cunning to cause conten∣tions, and throw fire brands about our ears, on purpose to puzzle others and to fright them from the true way into his snares:Sim. as a Fowler that hath laid nets, lets those birds or prey alone that go on of their own accord towards his gins and snares; but such as are going from them and in the way to escape, he meets and frights and scares to make them turn back, and drive them another way. But furthermore, though we have too too many divisions and differences amongst us (God knowes, which is our daily grief) yet they are not so many nor dangerous as the bitter brethren would have all beleeve by looking into their multiplying glasses: but those few that are, are not about points of faith, but for the most part formes which are by some too hotly and hastily pressed and pursued. Yet as Helvetia saies, Ch. 17. harm. sect. 10. p. 310. We can't deny but the Churches plan∣ted by the Apostles were true Churches, and God was in them and with them, yet there were great strifes and dissensions in them. Exhortation to unity to all the Chur∣ches.Lastly, Let all the Saints and Churches take warning, there be such as watch for their haltings; and will have at them when they finde them in fractions, for then they think they can deal with them! O would to God we were more one! in one! This unity is the form and face of Christs Church; and when the face hath flawes and scratches, what a blemish is it to the whole body? In what this unity consists I hope
to handle in the next Book, and to lay before you divers rules of walking all as one in the fellowship of the Gospell: Et veritate & varietate. But for the present, I present you with Eph. 4 3, 4, 5. Endeavouring to keep unity. Churches united (like a Faggot) cannot be easily broken. And the usefulness of this appears in the severall denominations of the true Church, as his sheepfold, which is one, of which Christ alone is Pastor, Ioh. 10. his vineyard one, Mat. 20. though many vines in it: and one mother, Gal. 4.26. whence many children are brought forth, and are legitimate when they come from the Churches conjunction with Christ, and the word; that incor∣ruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. begets to the faith being preached and propagated. So in Cant. 6.8, 9. though there be threescore Queens or particular Churches that are Christs (the Kings) wives who are taken into fellowship with their royall husband by solemn stipulation,Expos. and with consent of all friends on both sides, Hos. 2.18. and such as do bring dowries of praises to Christ their husband,Note. 1 Pet. 2.9. yea and such have the keys given them to open and to shut, and to order in the government of the family,☜ whilest Christ (their royall husband) is about more publick affairs now in the world, in heaven and earth: and such Queens too as bring forth their children true heirs to the Crown, Kings and Princes, Rev. 1.6. yet there be more, viz fourscore Concubines, or false Churches; that have not such intimate fellowship with Christ, but only the name without Wedlock or espousals to Christ; so are all Popish, Pre∣laticall, Parochiall, Presbyteriall, (as now they are) nationall and mee nominall Churches, though they have the ordinary ordinances, yet few of them have a dowry of praises for Christ, all of whom are (to speak truth) without the keyes, and cannot order in the affairs of Christs family, and their children though born to gifts, parts, or the like, yet very rarely have to do with the inheritance; Besides these, those that reject Christ, and too too coily cast him off, and will not marry him, or espouse him, of the vulgar sort, they are without number, exceeding many, Et nullius numeri, of no account, not worth numbring; yet of the worst Churches there are most, of the best fewest; and for all this, saies Christ, My Dove, my un∣defiled is but one, that is all at unity, and one, 2 Cor. 1.12. and
his house is one, 1 Pet. 2. though there be many stones, wals, chambers,How al Chur∣ches differing in forms, are to be one, vide chap. 5. and parts, and (differing in form) yet all make but one house: all these things instruct us to unity; But what kinde of unity is this? and wherein does it consist? mark, it is the unity of the Spirit, wherein all Churches may bear, for this is not kept and preserved by forms and or∣ders, as other false Churches have, & the Kingdomes of the world are; no! but by intrinsicall life and spirit, and inward principles, not by being together, in one body, Churches, City, or society; but by being of one spirit, and of one spirituall body, which is Christs. The heads are these which are offered for unity by the Apostle. First, there is but one body, i. e. not naturall, nor politicall, but spirituall, viz. the Church compared to a naturall body, Rom. 12.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12.12. which takes in the Saints of all ages under all forms, and statures; seeing none could be left out to compleat the body, but that there is need of Saints under lower as well as under higher forms to make up the body.Unity urged. Whence unity is urged,1. Because all one body. for that there is need of all to make up the body, viz. of the weak as well as the strong, of the lower as well as the higher, 1 Cor. 12.18, 20, 23. 2. Vnity is pressed here, for that this onenesse of body flowes from the onenesse of the Head which in corpore primas tenet,2. One Head which is first in ordine. &c. (saies Bullinger de unit. eccles Dec. 5. Serm. 2. is the first of the body; and is first, and then the body, (of right), for members do not unite first, and then choose a Head (saies Mr. Dell in's way of peace, p. 20.21. &c.) but first they are (if true Churches) united to Christ their head,Dell. by faith, (Uniuntur primo capiti Christo per fidem) & ipsum caput conjungitur membris per gratiam & spiri∣tum,Bullinger. Bull. in loc. ibid.) and then one to another by love. Therefore all that have but one Head, viz. Christ, I say all Independents, Anabaptists, or whoever they be, should be one. 3. Vnity is urged in this word one body, because unity of body stands well with variety of forms,3. Unity can stand well with variety. distinction of parts and dif∣ferences of members, 1 Cor. 12.23. which do not hinder but help to make up the body, by a sweet symmetry & harmony, Rom. 12.6. Licet sint membra plurima, omnium tamen est inter ipsa con∣snsio pulcherrim, &c. Bull. because what one member can't doe another can for the use and service of the Head. 4. Unity is equality.4. Vnity is called for; for that in one body there is an equa∣lity
of members all alike, making up one body: Not one more then another; omnes authoritate & dignitate pares sunt, (saies Zanchy de unit. eccles cap. 3.) etsi alter altero sit ditir, &c.Zanchy. So are all Churches equall in dignity and authority though some may be richer, or bigger then others (as was prov'd,  lib. 8.) 5 Vnity is urged,5. Each con∣tented with their place. for that as each member is contented with its own place and office in the body, so ought each particular society to be, 1 Cor. 12.18. 6. Vnity is called for,6. Sympathy. from the sympathy and fellow-feeling which one member hath with another in the body, 1 Cor. 12.26. and all for and with the whole: mourning with them that mourn, and rejoycing with them tha rejoyce (Congruunt & con∣spirant inter somnia, condolent sibiiicem, juvant se mutuo.) Ergo, afflict not one another. 7 Vnity is urged from the Law of love, (and therefore of peace) that is among the members;7. By the strings of love which one is drawn by to another. one member doth not force another, or compell another, nor doth one member, beat, bite, quarrel, or fight with another; neither doth one Church with another that is one in the spirit. And then, Lastly, Vnity is urged for, that every member,8 Unity is urg'd from the duty of one to another and to the whole. is to serve another, and to serve all (and not himself only (the eye is to see (not for its self only) but for the hand, and for the foot, and for the whole, &c. so the ear to hear, &c. and in serving the whole serves its self. Thus it is among particular Churches, there is no one meerly to serve himself, but one lives to serve another, and then all, therefore the Apostle so ear∣nestly presses unity, for that they are one body, and are to serve one another; and all the body of Christ. Let no Church break this bond of love and peace then, seeing all make but one body. The 2. Head is one Spirit. Hence unity is urged, for that as one soul, 1. quickens, comprehends▪ moves, governs,Unity urged. 1. That one spirits acts all and acts every member of the body, eye, hand, foot, &c. (sicut per eandem animam multa membra unita sunt, &c. Zanch. de eccles. c. 3.) So one spirit all the members; and every particular Church that makes up the body; one Spirit quickens moves▪ governs the Independent as well as the baptized ones, &c. Ergo unity.2. One spirit unites all things under different forms. 2. For that as one soul vi∣vificates and unites many and divers kindes of members, so one and the same spirit puts life into Churches under diversity and differency of forms and appearances, and administrations. One and the same Spirit of Christ, unites those in earth, and those in
heaven,☞ those in the east, and those in the west: and though about severall works, yet all by one and the same Spirit, Rom. 12.6.7. Hos. 10.11. This then is an argument for unity. And, 3. Lastly,3. Acts seve∣rally in all and yet but one and the same. as one and the same soul acts severally in every member; and so as if every member had a soul to give it life, &c. yet 'tis but one and the same soul in all: So the Spirit is upon, and in every particular Church of Christ, as if every Church had the spirit solely in, and to her self; the 7. Spirits, Rev. 5.6. for the 7. Churches of Asia, and yet all but one and the same spirit, though living in every one. This should engage every particular Church to unity in the spirit, not in the form: that unifor∣mity will never hold nor abide the day of his coming, Mal. 3.2. 't's diversity of spirits that breaks the peace,What breaks the peace of the Church and what not. Zanchy. not the diversity of formes: for as Zanchy observes, Non externarum ceremoniarum diversitas, impedit veram & essentialem unitatem ecclesiae: it is not the difference of outward rites and forms, that hinders the Churches unity, for God hath left them to liberty, for every Church to use, or not use, as it is most for order and edifica∣tion, as to time, place, number, manner of meeting, reading, sing∣ing, praying, administring Sacraments and such like: In Au∣gustines time some broke bread every day, some each of the day,Differing in circumstances in Austin's time. some thrice a week, some twice, some every first day, some of the first day; that as to time. Then as to place, some∣times in private, sometimes in publick places, sometimes from house to house, yea as to number in Augustines time, they broke bread sometimes twice a day, morning and evening, sometimes once only. See Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 118. ad Januar. As to the manner, sometimes without prayer, sometimes with prayer, sometimes with many prayers.Buccer. For this vide ch. 5. lib. 2. at large. Bucer contra Latomum, 133. So there were many ceremonies and much difference about bap∣tisme, about prayers, about Ministers and their ordination, &c. and yet was there unit as veritate, (saies Aug. Tom. 2. epist. 86. ad Casulanum) though ceremoniarum varietate: unity in verity, though in variety of formes and ceremonies; yet true unity stood well with the differences and varieties of formes, &c. because it was in the Spirit, Psal. 45.13. the Church was all glorious within, though without her outward cloathing was wrought with varie∣ty and diversity of needle-work.
Thirdly, One Faith, in all, therefore Vnity is urged,3 Vnity urg'd for all that are in one faith. seeing all Saints in all ages Moses, David, Daniel, Apostles, and we now, and all that were, are, and are to come, under all forms, live in one and the same mystery, and truth of Faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. apprehending the same Christ, applying the same Salvati∣on: so are all the Churches Independent, Baptized &c. in one Faith, though not in one Forme: they live not by forme, whe∣ther you call it a Conformity with the Prelates, or Vniformity with the Rhemists, or either with the Presbyterians,☜ or neither with us; but they live by faith. Not on this or that forme or worship, so, as to think our selves therefore good, and others e∣vill, this is contrary to our life of faith, which is all on Christ. This onenesse of faith (est una & eadem totius Ecclesiae. Zanch.) which is one and the same in every particular Church,Zanh. and throughout the whole,☜ agrees very well with the diversity of gifts, parts, formes, &c. so in and through all one and the same Christ be apprehended, Therefore Vnity may well stand with it in all the Churches. Fourthly, he calls for Vnity from all that are called into one hope of their calling:4. Vnity▪ because all alike in hope. all that are called by the inward and effectu∣all voice of God into one and the same hope. All hope for the same thing, none for better or greater then another. Unit as consist it in hoc, quod una eadem{que} sit omnibus spes, una eadem{que} omnibus, proposita haeraditas coelestis. Zanch. For 1. Cor. 1.9.Zanch. God is faithfull by whom ye were (all alike) called into the fellow∣ship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord. All the Churches doe a like expect the appearances of Christ; the day of his comming the effusion of his spirit, the restauration of Zion the reigne of Christ, and the inheritance of the Saints. Ergo, Vnity:☜ for it is for such as differ in their hopes to differ in their love and waies. Fifthly, One Lord: no more Lords but Jesus Christ, nor no other Lawgiver, in and to all the Churches;5 Because but one Lord therfore all should come under one Lord. For 'tis divers Lords and masters that make divers Lawes, and minds, and wills and ends. Hence a rise divisions indeed: but one Lord, and one Law, one master, and one mind should be in all the Churches. Besides he is Lord to all alike, as much to one, as to another. Ergo, Vnity Sixthly, One Baptisme: with which all Churches are Bap∣tized,
1. Cor. 12.13.6. One Baptisme, idest, of the spirit. For by one spirit wee are all baptized into one body. This is not the signe which hath beene often altered▪ but the substance which will never be altered: not the powring on of water, but the powring on of the Holy Ghost in gifts and graces; which is in all Christs Churches; and the Baptisme of Christ indeed. All that are thus Baptized with the spirit, are Ba∣ptized into Vnity,☞ into one Body: wherefore the Welsh Curat (with his Welsh Crue) would doe well to learne better Eng∣lish (seeing he would insinuate that he is a Welshman of Cardiff,The Welsh Curate his Rantisme in his Booke so stiled. yet is the Apostle of the English, as he saith, as Paul a Jew of Tarsus was, yet the Apostle of the Gentiles) then to asperse and despise those Churches of Christ that are under the admini∣stration and baptisme of the spirit. He professes openly and in Print proclaims himselfe to have Pauls spirit, (he might have sayd Sauls spirit) not to build up,☞ but to destroy (so I thought) the Churches. For many of them are (indeed) such seducing dangerous spirits which cause division, (which I confesse I feare are many of them crept into some Churches.) Now as fie with fire, and water with water agrees well enough, so will all the Saints,Sim. till there come in an Antipathy of spirit amongst them; and as fire with water cannot agree together, but make a ge nyse, quarrell and fight together, and oppose one another vio∣lently, with thundring threatnings till one destroy another, un∣lesse one be thrown from the other. So is it with such contrary spirits as are crept into the Churches, till they be out againe; fire with fire agrees, because being of one and the same principle and spirit, it addes to and edifies one another; so the Saints with Saints &c. but water and fire cannot, because the water is of another principle and spirit, and seeks to destroy the fire; so it seems the Ranters spirits are Christ-Crucifying and Church de∣stroying spirits (by their owne confessions) and in Antipathy to the Churches and Saints in fellowship,Caution to the Churches, of that Church-destroying spirits: for so they say of themselves. that seek to build up and edifie one another, and all in Christ: but when this spirit comes, the Welsh Curate tells us, 'twill doe all that may be to destroy us. O that the Churches would then have a care in the admis∣sion! Of such! who (as in Rev. 2.2.) say they are Apostles, but are not! (for they are Apostats)▪ And the Church of Ephesus was highly commended for their strict triall of them, and for
finding them liars, seducers, and false Teachers; so let us doe, and let us all march on to the Land of Promise, under one and the same hope of our calling whereunto we are called, and as bapti∣zed by one spirit into one body. Seventhly, Vnity is urged among all the Churches,7 Vnity, for that all have one God and Father alike of all. for that they have one God and Father of all. One Father without re∣spect of one more then another, God and Father to all alike, all alike deare to him, 2. Cor. 6.17.18. who delights in all alike, and walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, without respect more to one then to another, as that one is better me∣tall then another; seeing all are alike borne of God, and all alike in one Covenant, and in one Jesus Christ, Mediator and Head of the Covenant; therefore he calls for Vnity, for that we are all a Kingdome of Brethren, Mal. 2.10. one God and Father of us all. 2. Above all! We are not one above another;Above all. but one ae∣quall with another: but only our God and Father in Christ is above us all, Mat. 23.8.9. we are all his children, and all alike live in his Will; he alone commands, and blesseth us all alike, therefore we should be all in unity, Psal. 133.1. O sweet for Brethren to live together in unity! 3. Through all. All alike professe him, possesse of his nature,Through all. and he, through all the Churches, and Ordinances appeares a∣broad too, Isay 2.3. Micah 4.2. Ergo unity amongst all. 4. And in you all. He dwels in all the Churches () 2. Cor. 6.16. Jo. 14.23. his presence is in this body of Christ mysticall, as it was,In all. it was in Christs body when cloath∣ed with flesh, Col. 2.9.10. Eph. 3.17.19. the same for qua∣lity though not (yet) for equality. Ergo, unity amongst all. These are the bonds of unity,The Churches it in unity, is a great adantage to Sa∣than. to tye all the Churches toge∣ther in one; Sathan hath no better sport then to see them spit fire at one another, and is never in more hopes then then. When Cyrus came neare Babylon with his mighty Army, and found the River about it,Sim. over which he was to march with his huge Hoste impassable and unpossible (it being so deep) to transport his Army that way, he was at a losse,Vt impret Divi∣dt▪ is his  till he thought of a likely way, which he as suddenly set upon; he caused it to be divided many wayes, into many Channels, and severall Currents, wher∣by
the main River sunk, and so on a sudden, and with great facility he got over the River with his Army and tooke the Ci∣ty with ease. Thus Sathan doth when he hath any designe a∣gainst the Saints & Churches; he sets them into Divisions many wayes. Therefore my Councell, as from the Lord, is to love one another, as Christs Disciples, & be stedfast in one spirit, Phil. 1.27.28. and then be in nothing terrified by your adversaries:In unity, the grea∣test terrou that can be to Christs enemies. All the powers of Hell cannot hurt thee then. It was the Coun∣cell Severus gave to his Souldiers, in vobis pacem & caeters dis∣picite: be one among your selves, and a Fig for your Enemies; so ye will then be terrible to all Christs Enemies in the world, for they shall know, that out of Sion shall the destroyer come, and they shall finde Jerusalem a burdensome stone.Sim. Vis unita fortior, as Mathematitians say of figures, the strait figure or line is weakest, but the circle is strongest of all others and the best, and usefullest, because one part hath fellowship with another, and meets another, and holds up one another; so should Churches help to hold up one another; and as one line runs in∣to another, so should they, and such are strongest and best that are so united; the Lord delights in them most too: O my Dove! my undefiled is one! this unity delights his heart. People seem much to eye the Churches now; now they appear in publick, and preposterous spirits are ready to judge the last news of the Fleet beaten, and the Foraigne Nations, preparing and threat∣ning, to be prodigious signes, presaging ruine to the Churches. which puts me in minde of Cicero's Oration, and answer to the Southsaiers, who upon newes of Earthquakes, and such terri∣ble signes foretold great calamities ready to come upon the State, (as our star gazers, and sign-observers do now but saies the Orator,☞ fear not; for the Gods will easily be reconciled to us, if we be but reconciled one to another: so I say to such, our God will easily be at peace with us, so we be but at peace one with another; and then let them (all the world if they will) associate themselves together, and they shall be broken a pieces: yea, in or∣der to their breaking a pieces they must associate themselves to∣gether, Isai. 8.9▪ and Gog and Magog from all parts of the world, must be gathered together in battell, in number like the sand of the sea▪ and besiedge the Saints, and circumviron the be∣loved City of God; but fire shall come from God (the spirit of
God) out of Heaven (the Churches and Saints) and shall de∣voure them and eat them up; as in Rev. 20.8.9. Out of their mouths shall come fire and devoure their enemies, Rev. 11.5. and whosoever hurts them must in this manner be killed;No feares if we want not in Vnity so that there is no fear of all the foes in the world, though they be as many as the sand of the sea. But if any thing hurt us, it will be want of Love; if any thing will nothing us, it will be want of unity. Vnities severed make no number, Letters divided make no syllable, syllables divided make no word,Sim. words divided make no speech, members divided make no body, stones divided make no wall; so that without unity, all stands for nothing,☜ as a Cy∣pher. I feare nothing so much as want of unity and love among Churches and Members: for as Shepheards observe,Sim. when sheep fall a butting one another, a storme is nigh; so may the Pastors, that Christians contending, and butting one against a∣nother, and Churches justling one against another presages a sad day, without mercy prevent; wherefore to ease my heart, and unburthen my spirit, I am heartily possessed with three things that will produce unity indeed. Which I shall hint to the Churches, and so wipe my pen.Three things ex∣pected.  an houre of Triall short, but shape to the Chur∣ches. 1. A short but sharp time to try the Churches, that those that are approved may remaine; which day shall be short for the Elects sake, and is called but three dayes and a halfe, Rev. 11 9 though in former years, the time of persecution was long and hotter,☜ for now their bodies shall be above ground all this time of persecution in the sight of all Peoples, and Nations, till the spirit of life enter in afresh,1 Proph. and in a fuller measure then ever before, and the witnesses stand upon their feet again, v. 11. Then woe, woe be to the Nations to the purpose: And this time will be so short that it is called the houre of temptation, Rev. 3.10. and the hour of Judgement, Rev 14.7. and for a little moment his indignation, Isa. 26.20. 1. Pet. 4.17 and then wil the Lord are to punish the inhabitants of the earth: they must be∣gin at Gods house, 1 Pet. 4 17. but end in & with the world. Then sinners in Sion shalbe afraid, Isa. 33 14 & terror & trembling shal surpriz the Hypocrites that are in the Churches; for they shall not be able to abide his comming like a refiners fire, Mal. 3.2 3. nor can they indure to dwel with those devouring fires, & everlast∣ing
burnings, which the upright in heart shall live in. Yet this triall will be well for the faithfull ones, for though two parts will be found drosse and left behinde in the houre of triall, yet a third part shall remaine and be purified, and shall call upon the Name of the Lord, and he will heare them and will say, this is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God, Zach. 13.8.9. this houre will scatter Shepheards as well as sheep, or Pastors as well as People.The Churches more one then ever. But then shall the Churches be more in unity then ever, and like gold run melting together out of the refiners fire: for as a flock of sheep are loose about,Sim. and scattered, and every one for himselfe feeding, and divided one from another, till comes a dog amongst them, and then they run together and keep close one to another: and so are the Churches too much at a distance one from another, and each one minding her selfe too much and her companions too little, and too much divided, and (doubtless) wilbe till this time of triall comes, and makes them keep together and closer in love and unity; so in the Prelates times,☞ Oh what a sweet unity! love! and harmony was among the Puritans! and Professors! when they were under perse∣cution! how they priz'd one another! and so it will be again and much more. Secondly, This Vnity of the Churches will be honoured from Heaven with a large effusion and powring out of the spirit upon them;2. Proph. The spirit poured out upon all. for in that day they shall know the Lord to be their God, and as one people they shall acknowledge and never be asha∣med, and then shall it come to passe, that he wil powr out of his spirit upon all, Joel 2.27.28. And by this they will bee yet more one then ever before,Then unity most of all. as appears Act. 2.17. and 4.31.32. when those that were filled with the holy Ghost, were of one heart and one mind, and of one soule, neither sayd any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, and then great Grace was upon them all.Expos. Great grace then indeed! Having favour with all people, Act. 2.47. This blessed day is hard by us; when Jerusalem shall be a praise in the whole Earth, round about us; but we must be purged first. In Ezek. 37.7. as the bones there came together by the shaking,Sim. bone to bone, so will the Churches by the shaking before mentioned, in the time of triall, cling and come up closer together then ever before, Church to Church,
and all as one. Though they were before (as the bones) scat∣tered, so in their affections, and far asunder, they shall bee sha∣ked together, beleeve it; and then they shall receive life, and breath from God more then ever before, v. 9.10.☜ Yea they shall not only be shaked together, but tied together with si∣newes and cords and lawes of Love that shall never break: and this is to be before the full winde from all 4. parts blow upon them and fill them with breath and life;When? So I am assured from the Lord, and the Churches shall find it, that they must be uni∣ted together with strong ties and lawes of Love, even with the liveliest sinews and strength of affections, before they shall enjoy that great and notable effusion of the spirit (which is the winde that blowes where it lists) in such a measure as from all parts, in all gifts, graces,☜ and admirable administrations as from all quarters, to enliven them, and multiply them; for in that day they will be as an exceeding great army, Eze. 37.10. Lastly,3. Proph. consider the great and notable day of the Lord is then (the next) that comes upon us,3. The great day the Lord the nigh∣er it is, the more Churches will be united in every yeare Ioel 2.31. and Zion shall be glorious. In the mean time as the lines of a circumference, the nigher they come to the center, the more they are united, and the nigher they are one to another. So for certain, Sirs, the nigher we are to that time, the more we are united, and the nigher we are one to another; So that we shall see every yeare the Churches more and more united and that in the spirit, untill the dispensation of the fulnesse of times, when all things shall be in one. Ephes. 110. The Lord hasten these happy daies: I was pressed in my spi∣rit to acquaint the Churches thus much, and to call upon them to unity, that the enemies might not have such advantages a∣gainst us, as they doe take for our defect in this duty;☜ and that our unity consist not in formes but in the spirit; as for practi∣call rules heerto, I shall refer the Reader to the following book. But thus I have shewn wherein the Presbyterians and Papists agree and are alike in Discipline, Doctrine, Ordinances, and Practises. In Discipline, for the Church Catholike, Head of the Church, matter of it, force of it, foundation of it, and in lay∣ing their foundation, and about the Keyes, and Synods, and in Officers, to all which we have declared our dissent and abhor∣rance,
and so for Doctrine, and Practises in all, in neere fifty particulars, wherein I have clearly instanced; the Lord make his people in England wise enough to avoyd such Popish tenets and doctrines, and give our Brethren that power and will to cry Down with Antichrist, Down with Babylon, as we do that hear the voice; lest pertaking of her sins they pertake of her plagues, Rev 18.4. And let them not think me their enemy for telling them the Truth. Gal. 4.16. But to the 3. Consid. The 3 Consideration (to come to a Conclusion) is, that the Gospel Order in the Congregationall Church-way (which wee have treated of) restored to its primitive purity and beauty,This Gospel way is. is one of the great promises of these latter dayes; and the spirituall glory of it sparkles in sight of the saints, out of many promises, prophesies, and varietie of the richest types; and is to stand appa∣rently distinct by its selfe, from all other orders, wayes, worships, or Churches whatsoever, as the visible Kingdome of Jesus Christ, for his subjects to walk in. 1. The great pro∣mise of these later dayes.That it is one of the great promises to bee accomplished in these latter dayes, appears, Isa. 2.2.3. Micah. 4.1. Isa. 35.1. 8 9.10. Isa. 30.21. Psal. 110.3. Ps. 46.2.3.4.5. and 48. P. 3. Malach. 3.17.18. Isa. 51.3.4. Dan. 2.32.33.34. Act. 3.21. Dan. 8.3. The higher is last; the best wine at last, and the glory of the latter house shall be greater then the former. Hag. 2.6.7.9.21.22.23. For further Explication (though I have beene full in former Chapters, yet to conclude this) I shall name these 6. speciall Heads which ensue, to prove this Generall Asserti∣ons without exception. 1. Christ shal reign over all in these latter dayes.The Prophesies and mproises are full for Christs reigne, as Head and alone Ruler in his Church, especially and most visibly in these latter dayes. He alone shall reign over them in Zion and for ever. Micah 2 17. Psal. 99.1.2. Isai 9.2.7. and 22.23. Psa. 2.6. And is set up King in Sion. He will be greatest in Zion· Rev. 2.26. Yea and rule the nations to, Rev. 11.15.17.18. Zach. 14.9. Therefore all power is given him in heaven and earth, Church and State,☞ Mat. 28.18. to rule all, as being more ex∣cellent then the mountains of prey, Ps. 76.4. till all be under him, 1. Cor. 15.25. Thus he ides in our dayes conquering, and to conquer. But to speak to his Headship; In his Zion, his most
speciall habitation and Kingdome. Hee is the alone Head,Especially as Head in his Church or Churches. of whom all members aptly joyned, receive life and growth. And this he is to us, as he is one with the Father, Jo. 17.21. From whom we have life and grace. In especiall maner hee is to bee manifested such a Head in these dayes of restauration, Hosea 1.11. the children of Judah and Israel (though they differ as to form, as Independents and Anabaptists &c.) shall be gathered to¦gether, and appoint to themselves one Head,Expos. and come up out of the Land, for great shall be the day of Jezreel. So the Churches of Christ shall be all one, as we said before in Vnity, under one Head, viz. Jesus Christ. For although the Churches have stood off hitherto one from another, as the 10. Tribes did from Iudah, and so wee divided into two parts, as Independents and Anaba∣ptists, God hath promised to unite them, under one Head, (when as circumcision and uncircumcision shall be nothing, but a new creature) though for a time by reason of our too much Idol-worship, God suffered them to divide, 1. King. 11.33. Yet God hath promised the elect of them shall be all one under one Head▪☜ i. e. Christ whom they shall appoint, choose, proclaime, cry up with one suffrage;Christ a King, how and to whom. he saith not a King for so he shall bee to the Nations, and rule them with a rod of iron, but a Head, & so he shall be to the Churches, to testifie the firme, sweet and inse∣parable union they have with Christ, as a Head to give vitall spi¦rits power, nourishment, ife, wisedome, influence,And a Head, how. and all to them, as the members; i. e. a more admirable, usefull happifying excellent union, beyond comparison, then can be betweene a King and people. And then they shall come up out of the Land, the Churches shall arise out of that of Babylon which held them ca∣ptive; out of those forms which made them differ, and from those Idols that caused their divisions, then shal they come out of that Land that they were in bondage in, and bee no more intan∣gled with those yokes. Gal. 5.1. and all this in the spirit, as Zanchy observes on Hosea because great shall bee the day of Jezreel. That is seminis Dei, of the holy seed, the elect of God,Zanch. that is, of Christ▪ as Psal. 118.24. the great and glorious day of Christs reigne, and great shall be the day of his Churches; i. e. the saints thus congregated, that have (as before is declared) suffe∣red affliction (for a short time) in the valley Jezrel, v. 4. wher∣fore
in a word:Expos. Exhort all the Churches (as Hosea 2.1.) say to your brethren Ammi, and to your sisters Ruhamah, say one to another Ammi my people.A word to the Churches. The Lord saith Ye are my people, the people that all these things concern, and this great day wil come upon. O preach this doctrine! and say to them, Yee are my bre∣thren and sisters: O that we would begin this! to stir up one a∣nother, and to provoke one another to love and good workes, Heb. 10.24.25. and so much the more the nigher this day is, yea to call abroad to such of Israel and Judah that are not yet ga∣thered with you under this one Head, that they may make haste to come up out of the land, wherein they are captive to the King of Babylon, the Beast! saying to them without, there is mercy, and they may be received;☞ for though by nature they are Lo∣ruchamah, and aliens to the Common-wealth of Israel, without grace, without God, without mercy, or love; yet by grace they are Ruhamah, i. e. a people that have found mercy, and hope, and may be received as we, for his bowels are not shut, but means are offered.2. The preci∣ous Saints, the matter of these latter dayes. Secondly, the Prophesies and promises premonstrate the most precious matter which the Church shall be made up of in these last ages, as jewels, Mal. 3.17.  his peculium, or pick'd out ones, in that day: So Esa. 54 11, 12. Behold, I will lay thy stones with Saphires and fair colours,Expos. upon Christ as the Foun∣dation of his Church, (which is already laid, and from this very day of the laying (Christ to be our) Foundation,Proph. God stands engaged to bless us: Haggai 2.18, 19. From this day will I bless you, saith the Lord, your Churches shall be blessed, upon this foundation shall be laid up the most excellent stones, living stones, yea the liveliest, 1 Pet. 2.5. having the fairest ap∣pearance, and the fullest vertue and efficacy. The Jaspers, viz. are those that are heav'nly minded,Jaspers who? meant by the excellentest Skie-colour'd ones that are, those whose conversations are in heaven, and contemplations about heaven. The windows, viz. those that give light, or rather, through whom light (as they receive from the Sun) comes to others, are to be of Agates, or rather as some read it,Agates who? of Chrystals excelling all in purity and sanctity, having of that pure river, cleare as Chrystal in Rev. 22.1. yea and the gates by whom they enter into the
Churches, are to be as Carbuncles, Trem. saith red stones,Tremel. Car∣buncles being of a red colour like fire: the word  signifies fiery, burning, as well as red,Carbuncles who? and seems to carry out the excel∣lency of those that do receive others (as gates to let in) into the Church, viz. being full of the Word and Spirit, like fire in the bones, by the searching Doctrine of the Word they make trial of those that would enter, Rev. 2.2. as fire purges and tries, and proves, so do they, being most excellent in divine and spi∣ritual knowledge; yea,Most precious Stones. all the borders of precious pleasant stones; all this showes the excellency of the Church, for mat∣ter, which is fore-told by this Prophet, especially relating to these latter dayes, all the stones (of which this building con¦sists) even from the Foundation to the topstone, yea and to the very borders, are to be of the most precious stones, the precious from the vile, Ier. 15. not good and bad together, or precious and common together, as have been hitherto, but all of precious stones, (at least so in appearance) as Chrystals, Agates, Saphires, Carbuncles, and such like holy and excellent Saints,☜ shining severall wayes for singular uses, with gifts and graces, and what is spoken before figuratively follows plainly : They shall be all taught of God, i. e. by the Vnction from on high, 1 Jo. 2.20.27. and built up in righteousnesse, i. e. in grace, spirit, power▪ &c. Such transcendent matter to make up the Church in the latter daies, lies evident for an undeniable truth, in Rev. 21.17. 18.19.20. and the foundations of the wall of this City were gar∣nished with all manner of precious stones &c. but that this is spo∣ken of the Church here,Expos. appears in Rev. 21.2. call'd New Je∣rusalem comming down to dwell amongst men: not that Jerusa¦lem above, Gal. 4.26. as Paul speaks of it; but the Taberna∣cles (i. e. every particular Church) of God with men,☜ to whom the Lords presence is sweetly promised, v. 3. and all former afflictions and persecutions are to be removed, v. 4 and times of restitution for new things to be restored, v. 5. Now let the Churches that live in the dayes when the seven Vials full of the seven last plagues are to be powr'd out, know;A word to the Churches. that the parti∣cular description of their glory and excellency is obvious, and view-able, for though before (till those days) they wilbe but as poore tabernacles with men; yet then they (in unity as before)
shall be the Great City▪ having the glory of God, v. 10.11. and light, like a stone most precious, , i. e. Luminosum Corpus, lumen ex se diffundens: i. e. the presence of God most gloriously in her, viz. such a presence, and such a light shall the Churches then be filled with, as will give and communicate light to others round about; In this sence shall the glory of the latter house be greater then of the former, for that in the former the presence of the Lord was manifested, more according to Gods old way of appearing in the Tabernacle or Temple; that is the Temple was then filled with smoak,When they shall excell. as Rev. 15.8. his presence, & power▪ & glory, &c. appear'd in smoake, and were discernable so far as might be in smoake;☞ but then (it is ere long) there shall be another manner of manifestation of God in the Churches more glorious, and excelling in power and presence, life and light, then ever be∣fore▪ viz. by filling the Churches with a bodily light, such a substantiall manifestation of himselfe, as shall give light to o∣thers, and no more in smoake, darke veiles, and formes, (which hurt the best sight most) as before, but in pure light, cleare and light discoveries of himselfe by his spirit, filling the Churches therewith. And further, a further and more speciall description of thir happinesse from the excellency of the maner which he sheweth to be all precious, v. 18 all the City of pure gold, which fires or flames of persecution can't consume, but make more illu∣strious and pure, and will never weare away, but will be perpe∣tuall for substance;☜ yea the very outsides, and lowest matter most precious, and like precious stones. Here are twelve named in number alluding to Exod. 28.15. the 12. Gems set on the breast plate, for the High Priests ornament. Hebr. Coshen, a∣greeing with Casha; for the Saints are so to Christ the High-Priest and in his breasts; and will be abundantly unto his praise: As an Oracle silent, yet seeing Chazah. And there were to be foure rowes, foure-square, doubtlesse to signifie a comming in from East,☞ West, North, and South, but what kind of matter shall make up the Church, may something appeare from the se∣verall significations and natures of the stones; as first the Jasper, of the Hebr. Jashpeh, growing in Scythia and Persia, they be of severall sundry colours, but the best is the azure-green▪ or airy green,1. Who are Jaspers. which hath a heav'nly brightnesse, (which Pliny
cals, Aerizusa) of admirable beauty, sparkled with many blood colour'd drops, and it is of incomparable use, and hath va∣riety of good in it; hung about the necke, it easeth pains, in the inwards, & comforts them saies Galen, staies the violent current of bloud out of the nose, and mulierum menses prohibet; for it hath an astringent faculty: And some say it availes much against libidine and the luxurious lusts of the flesh. Such excellent mat∣ter must Christ's Church, the new Jerusalem in these latter days be begun with; And we find the former ended with it,In what pro∣perties they xcell. Exod. 28.20. and indeed we must begin where the former ended, and so go on to exceed; such are Jaspers then, that are (as we said before) most heav'nly minded, & enlightned, sprinkled with the bloud of the Lamb, and of incomparable use, being full of di∣vine (though it may be occult) qualities, of a strict conversa∣tion, and having an astringent power to take people off of lux¦urious, libidinous, wicked lives, and from making provision for the flesh to satisfie the lusts therof. Secondly, The Saphire which is the Hebrew name, but in Chaldee is Shabzz, is very pleasant in the eye,2. Who are Saphies. which the Medes most account of; it is hard and durable, and delights and chears the whole man. It is good against choler, melan∣choly, and the stings of Scorpions, saith Albertus Magnus. It expels Poyson, and cures some pestilent diseases; such are Sa∣phirs then, (and shall make excellent matter for the Church) who are precious in the eyes of all who have sweet, humble,In what pro∣perties they excell. selfe denying, amiable cariages (which were to bee wished were more among all Church-members now) as they had in primitive times Act. 2.47. to be praysed and highly accounted of, of all; such doe refresh and delight the souls of others, they are durable too, and will never fal away from the Church, or forsake the truth, nor be frighted away from profession but en∣dure fiery trials; such are very vigilant over their own Choler, and doe much curbe and cast by their passion, and they serve the Lord merrily with gladnesse of heart, and rejoyce in the Lord alwayes, and are very usefull against many reigning, raging pe∣stilentiall distempers, and venemous lusts to suppresse them, al∣lay the rage, comfort the heart, and cure the disease. Such as these are in the second place very precious matter: and further
as some say, the Saphire will keep a man more chast, by abating the boyling and burning heat of the flesh, and that it is good to clear the eye-sight, to restrain sweat; and so (doubtlesse) such Saints are signified heereby that doe keep their hearts and affe∣ctions most pure to Christ,☞ & most chast and alone to the Lord, without running a whoring (as too many doe) to covetousnes, the world, flesh, pleasure, or the like, that will not suffer their hearts to be taken up with any thing but Christ; and therefore they curb and cool the heat of carnall concupiscence by the ver∣tue and divine power which is in them. And thereby these have the quicker and clearer sight and faculties of understanding, and do much help others in their sight, especially such as have their eyes oppressed with ill humours; and they much restraine sweat and labours after things that will not profit them, and thereby do keep their souls and bodies in the better temper, and grow the stronger and heartier after things above; these are precious matter. 3. Who are the Chalcedonie's In what po∣perties they excell.Thirdly, A Chalcedonie, which is in Hebr. Nophe, a sort of Carbuncle, as Pliny saies, lib. 37. chap. 7. it is plaine sim∣ple stone in appearance, yet it hath a fiery brightnesse, and grows in the Northern parts, and is found about the Straits of the sea of Chalcedon. Some say it is denominated from the Hebrew Cadcod, as is before mentioned in Isay. 54.12. On this stone was Judahs name engraven, of whose Tribe came Christ. Heb. 7.14. And this stone is of singular use against foolish phantasms and flying illusions, and doth very much strengthen the consti∣tution of the body (vide Zanch. de Ter. meteoris lib. 3.12.Zanch.) The mystery of this is of such Saints that are precious within, though simple and plain and of no account without, and that promise but little by outward appearance, and yet are full of fire, and of the Holy Ghost,In what pro∣perties they excell. (of the Tribe of Ju∣dah) deeply engraven in them, and on them, as Ignatius was said to have the very Letters JESUS written on his heart; such are found in the faith,Ignatius. and found in judgement, and of great use, and able to suppresse the phantasticall flying conceits of unfound empty professors, pretenders, and busie brains; as in every age many will bee about to spread their sprights, and whine out their whimsies and delusions; and such precious matter will bee of much use to strengthen whereto they be∣long.
Fourthly, the Emerauld, Smaragd. or in Hebr. Bareketh,4. Who are the Emeralds. of Barak, which is Lightning, Ezek. 1.13. is of a most pleasant, lovely, lively fresh green colour; on this stone Levi was ingra: ved: it grows in Scithia; it is a very soft stone, and soon broke, and is not to be forced: It is said of a certain King of Hunga∣ria, that once when he lay with his Wife, having this stone on his finger, it flew in three pieces, which may easily be by over∣heating it; therefore but few weare them: It is a great enemy to Bacchus and Venus, and cures many Diseases, helps the Memory, and is good for the sight, and much expels dreams and fancies from men when they would sleep; and certainly such Emeralds are those Saints that lively represent the Green Spring, that is come;In what pro∣perties they excell. the flowering and blossoming dayes that doe come, that are fat and green Olives in the house of the Lord, ye green figs that gives a good smell, and such as are Priests and Levites in Christ, that are very tender-hearted; a little passion, or pride, or carnall heat, of flesh, &c. makes them humble and soone breaks their hearts; they can't endure sin, no not appea∣rances of evill, or the least occasions to sin;☜ though there be but few of them, they comfort many a soul, cure many a disease, help many a bad memory, enlighten many a dark understanding, and do much enable against doating dreams, and foolish fan∣cies that have no good bottomes. These are excellent matter indeed, but they will not endure to be forc'd, but easily yield, and are willing in the day of his power. Fifthly, the Sardonix: the word seems to bee made up out of the Sardine and Onix stone, named in Hebr. Jahalom,5. Who are the Sardonyx. (says Ainsworth) of smiting; for it is a very hard stone, and will bear banging blowes: it is (as Pliny notes lib. 37. c. 6.) of a fleshly ruddy colour,Ainsw. to be found among the Indians and Ara∣bians, and is excellent to make one modest; and may mean such sort of Saints as are found and will suffer all sorts,☜ yea the vio∣lenest knocks, strokes, stripes and calamities for Christs sake, the Churches and Gospels sake, and yet will hold out and no∣thing fear at all, and yet such as are innocent as Doves, very modest men, full of humanity and curtesie to all, stoutly dispo∣sed and very gratious.
6. Who are the Sardius.Sixthly, the Sardius, called in Hebr. Odem, of Adam, red. For it is a Bloud coloured stone; the Chaldee calls it Samkan, and Thargum▪ Jerusalemi, Samketha, it is found among the Sar∣dians, whence it hath it's name: it is of excellent use to cheare up the heart, and as Paraeus further notes, to drive away fears, to cause boldnesse,Paraeus. to stay the issue of bloud, to put an edge upon the ingenuity &c. It hath an attractive power over wood, and drawes it to it selfe, as the Loadstone drawes iron, and it is ex∣cellent to receive a Seale or Image, neither is it dull'd by the often using it: such precious matter are meant by this, who are of the second Adam, the image of him who is of the heaven heavenly,In what pro∣perties they excell. 1. Cor. 15. wash'd with his bloud, and so presented to the Church; such can comfort poor soules as they have been comforted, 2. Cor. l. 4. and then cheer drooping hearts by de∣claring their own experiences: these Christians (and precious stones) will not suffer feares to possesse them, but by faith are above feares, full of fortitude and courage for Christ and the truth, and evermore emboldning others to stand to it, to fight a good fight of faith,☞ being clothed with the whole armour of God, and to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, put∣ting an edge upon them to act and stir for the truth, and never to be idle; yea such as are attractive to draw the wood of Le∣banon,☞ the Cedars of the Forrest, and fit matter for the builders use into fellowship with them; and such as have the image of God, the likenesse of Christ admirably on them, and the plaine seale of the spirit in them▪ and such as are never weary with well doing, nor dull'd with using, these are precious ones indeed that shall bee found (ere long in more plenty) fit matter for the Church; although as yet but few of them are gathered, for they are somewhat obscure in outward appearance. Seventhly, the Chrysolite, which in Hebr. is Tharshish, the name of the Sea in Psa. 48.8. for it hath the name of a golden stone,7. Who are Chrysolites. and is called in Chaldee Crum-jamma, of the Seaole, be∣cause that the glorious splendor of it is most splendent, shining golden sea green; it growes among the Indians and Arabians, and fetched out of black earth oftentimes. It is of excellent use to refrain from Venery and lust, and layd under the tongue it doth admirably abate the thirsts of feavrs, or violent desires,
and it shines loveliest early, horâ matutinâ, by morning light; such precious souls shalbe found out too, that shalbe filled with the knowledge of the Lord, which is to be as a mighty floud; and as the Sea covers the Earth, (Sea-green) i. e. having their colour and properties from this Sea and these waters. Such as were fetched from the Blacks, of darknesse into light; out of the black Earth of the first man, by the power of God,In what pro∣perties they excell. (although they will with the Chrysolite retaine some signes of that place from whence they are fetch'd, by som black spots which wil ap∣pear viz. in their infirmities) they are great enemies to the lusts of the flesh, & to carnall concupiscence, having in them a restrin∣gent faculty to curb and keep back themselves from running out; and they find a vertue in them, that allayes all passionate and excessive thirstings after the world, or things below; and are means to coole this in others that have violent Feavorish humours, and call and cry for those things to satisfie them and to quench their thirst, which will but increase their thirst; but these Saints have vertue from Christ (the Sun that shines on them and makes them precious) that they shall never thirst (so) more, Jo. 4.14. and these precious ones will seek the Lord early, as Mary Magdalen did early seek Christ, Jo. 20.1. ev'n while it was yet dark; they will lose no opportunity, but take it betimes, and they shine best earliest. Such are the precious mat∣ter promised to make up the Church in these last ages. Eighthly, Beryll, in Hebr. Shoham, in Gr. Beryll,8. Who are the Berylls. the Chal∣dee is Burla; Pliny saies it is an Indian-stone, but Dionysius that it is found in Babylon also, of a watrish, sky-colour, for the most part, and somewhat dull to look on (although they be of divers sorts, and they having divers colours.) This is also of exceeding good Use, against the humours of the Eyes, and to suppresse sighes, and to help the ill liver,In what pro∣perties they excell. and (set to the Sun) to kindle a fire, &c. Such Saints are precious matter indeed who excell in these properties, that are not onely sky-colour'd, and heavenly, but (watrish) humble and lowly, and willing to be of no account for Christs sake; they are little or nothing in ap∣pearance, but full of vigour and vertue to comfort souls, to sup∣presse sighes, and cause sorrows to fly away, to help their sight, to remove humourish obstructions, and to work upon ill livers,
and to restore them to soundnesse; and having the power of Christ, the influences of this sun of righteousnesse with them, they wonderfully inflame souls, and kindle a fire in their hearts to embrace and embosome the things of God, to long after com∣munion with Christ, to bee in love with him and his wayes, and to set souls a burning after grace and glory; such as these are indeed precious matter. 9. Who are the Topaz.Ninethly, a Topaz, of the Gr. Topazion, in Hebr. Pitdah, whereunto pad or Topaz is taken, found among the Aethi∣opians, Job. 21.19. Pliny sayes it growes among the Troglo∣dites, as Dionysius sayes it is an Indian Gemme, in Chaldee Jar∣kam and Jarkatha, that is green; it is of a rich golden green co∣lour, it is of excellent use against the Emrods, it affords (some∣times) a milky liquor, cures a wound, helps the Lunatick, and keeps much from mutability. Surely such Saints are precious matter, and usefull Gemmes, that the latter dayes shall finde out,In what pro∣perties they excell. for curing of many sharp humorsome diseases, that would obstruct the passages of the excrements, which would be to the hurt of the body, such as would hinder the casting out of tradi∣tions,☞ and excrementall doctrines which will hurt the Church: Such Saints shall say, as Isay 30.22. Get thee hence: Oh fie u∣pon't! out with them (as the word bears it) as with excre∣ments. Such Saints shall afford sweet milky consolations for Babes, out of their bellies shall flow Rivers of water of life, they shall be weak to the weak, as well as strong to the strong; they shall bind up many a wounded and broken Reed, and poure Wine and Oyle into the sad gashes of wounded spirits, applying seasonable promises and Balsomes, yea the lunatick ones, that fall sometimes into the waters (of drunkennesse and iniquity) wherein without mercy they will be drowned, and sometimes into the fire (of their lusts, fitting them for the flames of Hell, if they be not help'd by grace:) Such as these may be means of recovering, and of confirming many in the Faith, and kee∣ping them from changing with every wind of Doctrine; and they do themselves, and endeavour to make others hold fast their profession, and that without wavering. Oh these wilbe precious matter too! Tenthly, A Chrysoprasus, in Hebr. Shebo, in Gr. Achate, in
Eng. Agate, the name signifies a golden green,10. Who are the Chrysopra∣sus. and indeed the best of them are green sparkling with golden guttulis; it is of excellent use to revive the spirits, to help the Eye-sight too, and to shine most excellently in darknesse: Oh!In what pro∣perties they excell. such Saints will be precious matter indeed! that shine best and most in afflicti∣ons! troubles! nights! in a time of darkness! when they see no light! these will be strong in faith, and are best in worst times, and therefore must needs revive the spirits of others, and quicken them, which be of great use to helpe the weak-sigh∣ted▪ Eleventhly, the Hyacinth, or Jacinth, in Hebr. Leshem; it is but little, but excellent, of a bright purple colour,11. Who are the Hyacinths, or Jacinths. or some∣what violet-like, found among the Indians, and Aethiopians, (and so is the following:) this is of admirable vertue to pre∣serve from the blast of lightnings, the danger of Plagues and Pestilence in corrupt and infected ayres; and as Albertus testi∣fies, it causes sweet rest and sleep, defends the animall spirits, and makes men rich: Oh the unspeakable excellent use of the precious gems the Saints of the last dayes!In what pro∣perties they excell. such Saints are surely meant here, as are violet-like, humble, with their heads low, but hearts high; sweet and savory, the first flowers (as it were) of the time, the witnesses of the Churches spring, and of the Sunnes approach; these will be able by the divine vertue in them▪ to keep themselves and others too from hurt by tempests stormes or flashing persecutions or troubles; yea, from the con∣tagion of sin, and pestilentiall diseases, and corruptions which reigne in others, and make them rage; these keep up their spi∣rits for God and the Truth, and doe defend the life of God in them from all that would offend those vitall and soul-spirits; yea such will be a means to make themselves and others to rest in Christ (their beloved,) and to finde their bed green too, yea such do make soules (their own and others) Rich in Grace, and to abound in wealth, and to fetch in apace of those Treasures of Wisedome and Knowledge, which are layd up in Iesus Christ for the Saints. Twelfthly, An Amethysh, in Hebr. Achlama, is a Stone to be found among the Indians, Arabians, Armenians,12. Who are Amethists. Gala∣tians, Aegyptians, &c. this is of a ruddy colour▪ and is of ex∣cellent
use to cause and keep temperance, to restrain all excesse and drunkennesse, it takes away from night-feares, and pro∣vokes sweet rest:In what pro∣perties they excell. So the Saints in these latter dayes that excel in these vertues, are meant to be the Mystery of this Precious stone, such as are exceeding temperate, and cause others so to be, that will not abide excesse, and they are not afraid of evill tidings, Ps. 112.7. nor of terrours by night, nor of those terrours which attend times of darknesse and afflictions, they live above all fears and fancies, by an Heroick faith, being resolved, come life, come death, nothing shall separate them; And they provoke to that sweet soule-rest, and holy recumbency of Spirit which they have in Christ. These are the Precious stones, the excellent Church-matter promised in these dayes to come: And these being un∣der a promise, O what happy dayes are comming! great shall be the day of Jezreel indeed; blessed daies then are approching for the Churches: O let us wait for them! and begin them, by bringing forth the properties of these Precious stones, which are a mystery of the excellency of Church-members, and mat∣ter,A mystery of the excellency of Church-members in the later daies. consisting of excellent gems and jewels, which shall be ga∣ther'd up in these latter dayes from all parts of the world; East, West, North, and South; Jewes▪ and Gentiles, Indians, Ara∣bians, Medes, Persians, Scythians, Sardians, as well as English, French, Spaniards, Italians, &c. These Precious stones, viz. such Saints are exceeding rare,Precious stones Gathe∣red out of all parts of the world. as yet; but ere long the appea∣rances of Christ will be higher, and the shining approaches of this Sunne will be hotter, and the Gospel shall go further, ev'n beyond Seas to find them out, and to gather them up. And after the houres of triall (which shall come upon the Churches of Europe) will the Spirit be pour'd out amply,Proph. for such an ample employment, viz. to gather Jewels and Precious stones for Church-matter in all parts of the World;☞ As the excellency of the matter,Variety in their excellen∣cy. so the variety of that excellency is also under pro∣mise, as appears by the various properties of the Precious stones; and certainly Zion will be a beautifull scituation, and the joy of the whole Earth: And who will not in those dayes desire to have a right in them? and highly prize them that are members of the Churches (which make up this great and holy City the Jerusalem,) as Precious stones, though now they are contem∣ned
and cursed by many, and thought fit for the most furious and spurious foote of disdaine to trample upon. Oh alas! be they poore to look upon? plaine simple, in appearance (many of them,) yet their worth is not known to men as yet; but dogs do rent them, and swine would trample them into the mire.☜ But then, when the seven Vials are poured out;When high-priz'd. they shall be no more reviled, or vilipended, there shall be no more death, or sorrow, or trouble, or paine upon the Churches, but they of a little one shall become a thousand: and as Isay 60.5.6. and Isay 49.18.19. their destroyers, and those that made them wast must be gone packing, v. 7. and then saith the Lord, lift up your eyes round about and behold; all these gather themselves together, and come to thee (to be joyn'd) and he sayes, they shall be orna∣ments to the Church,Prop. and all her waste desolate places shall be re-edified, and yet too little to hold such a company of Zion-Citizens, and Inhabitants, insomuch as the Church shall say, the place is too strait, give me roome; make way yee Kings,☜ Nobles, Nations, I must have more, and more roome every year, till this (now) very little stone grow greater and greater, till it fill the whole earth; looke for this hastily, and be assured the Jewes will be admirable ornaments,When Jewes expected to be most precious Church matter and excellent Church matter by 1666. and many before; but of all the Tribes the Church must have matter, as appears by the twelve stones which had the names of the twelve Tribes engraven;☜ though some apply them particularly one by one to the twelve Apostles: Oh! that in the mean time,A word to Churches and members. every Church and every member would make one or other of these Precious stones! and let them but study by the properties and excellencies of ev'ry stone, how far the following Ages will exceed ours, and Saints exceed us, and Churches exceed ours,☜ who shall be more (and more to be accounted of) for their inward excellencies, spirituall and di∣vine vertues, with varieties of them, then they shall be for their outward appearances, or professions or formes, &c. But thus for the matter fore-told, which I chose to demonstrate from the signification of these Precious stones, that I might not labour in vaine. Thirdly, The Prophecyes and Promises to be made good in the latter dayes, are very full for the forme of the Church, which
we have sufficiently proved in many Chapters before,3. The forme of the Church promised in these last days. and which appears, Ezek. 37.19.21.22. Zeph. 3.9. so in Hosea 1.13. Isaiah 35.8.9. 2 Cor. 6.17.18. and in a word, all Chur∣ches shall admit her mmbers one way; therefore all the Gates (through which men enter into this City) are Pearles,☞ all the Gates of one Pearle; i. e. Christ, the Pearle of price, in and by whom alone shall be entrance into all Churches and Palla∣ces of Sion.How all enter in. Rev. 21.21. and no other way, Act. 4.12. but something to this afterwards; only this, know that his fanne is in his hand now, Mat. 3.12. to make separation betweene Wheat and Chaffe, Saints and Hypocrites, to the purpose ere long. 4. The end of it largely pro∣mised.Fourthly, the finall cause of the Church is also promised in the latter dayes, at large; what this finall cause is, we have showne in 1 lib. which some make two-fold, (so Zanch. lib. 4. cap. 10. S. 39.) 1. the glory of Christ to be thereby known,Zanch. as Jo. 17.10.Two-fold. I am glorified in them, saith Christ: now this is foretold, Mat. 16.26. Act. 3.13. with 21. Mat. 24.30. Rev. 5.12. thou art worthy of all glory. 2. the latitude of Gods love even to East, West, North, and South, (as before Jer. 31.3.) to gather the Elect from all corners of the Earth, Mat. 24.31. Oh how this doth commend his love! Rev. 5.8. Ezek. 16.6. Hosea 14.4. Rev. 1.5. Jer. 31.3. But in a word, the general end promised and prophesied in the latter days, is to set forth his glory and praise, as Ephes. 2.21. so is it in Isay 65.17. as if he should say (saies Brightman,) I will make to me a new people,Brightman. in whose Assemblies I will be praised, and glorified, so is it in Ier. 31.7. Rev. 21.11. Isay 66.18. to Isay 49.3. in whom (in whose Churches of Israel) I will be glorified, Isay 43. 21. so 1 Pet. 1.7. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 15.2.3. this is especially a worke that will lye upon the latter dayes,☞ let the Churches look after it. But the finall cause with reference to us, is that God may dwell with us, 2 cor 6.16. Rev. 21.3. let the Chur∣ches make these their end. 5. Spiritual u∣nity, and order of Churches promised in last daies.Fifthly, the Vnity and Order of the Churches, is prophesi∣ed and promised two, to be excellent and spirituall in the latter dayes, Jer. 24.7. Isay 54.13. Isay 56.6.7.8. Isay 60.21. worshipping him in spirit, and in truth, Jo. 4.23.24.25. Eph.
2.19.22. and 1 Pet. 2.5. then shall there be gold for brasse, sil∣ver for iron, brasse for wood, &c. Isay 60.17. spirit for forme, truth for tradition, life for letter, power for appearance, both in unity and order, 1 cor. 13.9. and that which is more perfect shall do away that which is more imperfect; but I have spoke to this also at large before: I shall conclude with Christs pray∣er, John 17.21.22. which as appears in v. 20. does include us in these dayes as much concerned;Expos. that the Saints (and Chur∣ches) may all be one, as the Father is in Christ,Christs prayer and Christ in the Father,; that is spiritually, and in power, mystery, and in truth: And for that end (sayes Christ) the glory which thou hast given me, I have given them: (those Saints & Churches that I pray for) what glory is that see v. 5. i. e. with thine own selfe, (not with the worlds earthly pomp, jollities, or terrene enjoyments, but with thine owne presence and divine being) this glory (saith Christ) that thou hast given me, I have given them; that is, of this divine phesence, power, grace, and being, communicated to them by the holy spirit; why so? that they may be one (there is unity and order meant spiritually) as we are one: one with us, one one with another, by one and the same spirit: this will be especially in these latter dayes, because, Sixthly,6. The Spirit poured out on the Churches and Saints, in a larger mea∣sure. the Promises and Prophesies are very pregnant and big-belly'd for the breaking out of his spirit upon his Saints, and Churches in these latter dayes, Ioel 2. so Isay 59.20. the Redee∣mer shall come to Zion, and then v. 21. my spirit shall be upon thee, and my words which I put in thy mouth shall never depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor of thy seeds seed, saith the Lord from henceforth and for ever, Isay, 11.9. Hbak. 2.14. Zach. 12.18. Thus if we seriously perpend and weigh with the word of God these six Heads,By six Heads appeare the Gospel-Ordr in Churches. is a great pro∣mise. it will lye obvious to our understand∣ing, that the Church of Christ restored into Gospel-Primi∣tive purity, is the great promise of these later dayes, as appears also in severall Prophesies, wherein the Lord hath promised the repaire of Sion, and to build up the desolate and waste places, and Ierusalem that is broken down, and such like Scriptures, Ps. 102.15.16. that concern us in these latter dayes, so is it in Ier. 31.4. I will build thee up again, O Virgin of Israel!
(ye that are holy and pure sanctified in Christ Iesus! this Pro∣mise is made to you,) so in Ier. 33.7. I will build them as at first,Expos. saith the Lord; in order to this work, is all the noise in the world; for all the obstructions must be removed, and the old must passe away, as in the 2 Pet. 3.10. with a great noise; see in Zach. 4.6.7. where the Prophesie (which is for our dayes, and from hence forward) promises the removall of all lets to this work of the Lord; though they be mountains that hinder, yet he'le make them all plains: And also the Lord promises the progresse of his House and Temple,The foundati∣on of all this is layd. (viz. in these later dayes) which he hath put into the hands of Christ (the typified Ze∣rubbabel) v. 9. (who hath (already, even in our dayes) layd the foundation of it) untill he hath finished it. So that in or∣der to this Church-worke, and building up of Sion, it will easi∣ly appeare, that Gods designe in these latter daies, is to throw downe mountains, viz. the mightiest powers, Princes, Armies, Monarchies, or Kingdomes that oppose the Kingdome of Christ and hinder this work of the Lord in Zerubbabel's hands, Job 9.45. Job 28.9. Isay, 10.32.33 Isay 14 4.5.9.10. & 41.15.16. & 24.19.21.23. Hag. 2.6.7.21.22.23. he will throw them all into the dust that dare to appeare against Sion, or the King of Sion, Psal. 2.9. wo be to all the Powers! Princes! Nations, on the Earth! that take part with the Dragon! or the Beast! or Turk, or Pope! Rev. 19.19. God will make all these mounts (be they never so great) plaines, by scattring them as dust, Isay 41.16. Dan. 2.35. scourging them, Isay 10.24.25.26. with fu∣rious blows, Ezek. 25.16.17. by stilling them, Exod. 15.16. Isay 11.6. Ps. 8.2. by ruining them, Jer. 49.38. & 51.20 to the 27. Hag. 2.22. or else by converting of them,Comfort to us our day is com∣ming. Psal. 102.13.15. Isay 49.11.12. & 60.3.4. Rev. 21.24. O then let us not be afraid! Luke 21.25.27.28. but lift up our heads for our day is nigh!☞ Psal. 46.2.3.4. but let all that would have Zion re∣paired, rejoyce that the Mountains God is making Plaines, the great work then of his Church is hard by: for the head-stone, (i. e. the first Plantation stone, according to the Primitive patterne, and practise, which Christ himselfe, and after him his Apostles brought forth) is already in some measure (blessed be the Lord) brought forth with shoutings, crying grace, grace,
unto it: wherefore let us blesse God for that voyce of Rev. 19.17.18. which we have heard in our Land, and thinke it not strange the world is an uproare, for all this must be to make for Zion, to make for the Gospel-order in Church-state,☜ before the Apostolicall primitive Church and order can be restored, which is now hard by us:Et redir in princi∣pium. and then the Churches shall flourish and rejoyce, Isay 35.10. Joel 3.16.17. and remaine, Heb. 12.27.28. Zach. 14.11. and their name shalbe the Lord is there; where∣fore read in the Book of God when all this shalbe, Isay 34.16. The next part of this Consid. is that the glory of the Gospel Church is promised by many excellent Types & ful Figures, as the wise know the Old Test. testifies,2. The Types promise, the fall of false worship, and he glorious rising of the true Gospell spirituall wor∣ship. and not only the glory of Christs Church, but the shame, confusion, and downfal or Anti∣christs Church in these latter dayes, is by Types layd before us. I might instance for the fall of false Churches, under the Type of Aegypt, Ezek. 31.18. Rev. 11.8. that kept Gods people in bondage, and therefore must be plagued again and again, Isay 10.26. after the manner of Aegypt and of Sodom too, Rev. 11.8. whence the Lot's are cal'd out (even into a little Zoar or handfull at first) that they may be burnt up with brimstone,☜ Rev. 19.20. in the furious anger of the Lord, Psal. 83.11.14 Isay 34.2.3. for their spirituall Whoredomes and Adulteries:Antichrist y∣fied by Ae∣gypt. So also of Babylon, whence all that can heare are called (in our dayes, for the voyce is now) Rev. 18.4. to make haste out, for Judgements are comming upon her; the mother of Harlots, Rev. 17.5. yea of a sudden, in one houre, Rev. 18.8.9.10. within these three years the smoake of her burning will begin to appeare, and smell in the nostrils of the Churches,Expos. ☜ and soon after Anno 1655. All that see it shall stand as far from her as they can, for feare of her torments,Sodome. Rev. 18.10. though thou∣sands that see it not will fall into it, and feele it to their cost▪☜ yet all the Saints, Apostles, Churches, Prophets shall rejoyce,Babylon. for that Babylon shall be throwne downe with a mighty violence, never to rise more, Rev. 18.20.21. but to speak no more to this; in a word, he shall come to his end, and none shall help him, Dan. 11.45. and that this his ruine is nigh, appears in the 44. verse;Expos. because the tidings which he heares does already trouble him, as the Expositors upon this place have foretold it,Pro▪ to be fatally
ominous, and to foretell his eminent fall. 1. For the signs are the falling away from him,Antiochus E∣piphanes, a fi∣gure of the Pope. (which will be more apparent within these three yeares) as the Iewes did from Antiochus Epiphanes (a picture of the Pope.) 2. His feare at the tydings of rumours abroad, Dan. 11.44.  the Iesuits, Cardinals, Pope, yea, Rome it selfe trembles to heare of England,☞ and at the troubles that are arising in all Europe. 3. His passionate desire to do mischiefe, and to Romanize as of old,Polanus. Brightman. were he able: all these fore-run his ruine; as Pola∣nus, Brightman, with many others noted; now they tremble already, as Antiochus (the Type) did a little before his end, which End was with the plagues and judgements of God; and after which neither he nor his Kingdome, nor any of his posterity and temper did ever more rise,☞ but were extinct for ever; and so will it be with the Pope, Rome, and all that take part with the beast, Rev. 19.20. Types of the Churches Pa∣laces of Sion; Tabernacles.But to the Types that foretell the glory of Christs Church, whieh are many, and of long standing; I might instance in the hill of Sion; in Davids Tabernacles, as they were Gods habitacles, which were to be made after Gods appointment, Exod. 25.9. and all that was brought to make them was to be Free-gift, v. 2. and there was to be the Mercy-seat, Arke, and Testimony, v. 21. and the Table with Shew-bread, v. 30. none were to become there that were uncleane, lest they defiled the Tabernacle, but if they did, they were to be cast out, Numb. 19.13. and the Tabernacle and all therein was annoynted, Lev. 8. and all loop'd and tach'd together; that break one, break all; and the Lords presence was in one Tabernacle as well as in the other, 1 Chron. 17.5. and Feasts of Tabernacles were kept, Deut. 16.13. and the Tabernacle the Lord kept, and encamped about, and fill'd it with his glory, Exodus 40.34. now that these Tabernacles doe by Types foretell the felicity of Christs Churches,Particular Churches. i. e. the particular Churches in these last days, wil easi∣ly appeare, Rev. 21.3. the Tabernacle of God is with us, and Ps. 43.3. O let thy light lead me, & thy truth bring me into thy holy hill, and to thy Tabernacles! so Psal. 46.4. there is a River, and there be streames which make glad the Tabernacles of the most
high. (i. e. the particular Churches:Dr. Sibs.) so sayes Doctor Sibs on Psa. 84.1. O how amiable are thy Tabernacles! These in these latter dayes are to be built according to the primitive pattern; all that are taken in, are to be Free-will Offrings too, in the day of his power, Psa. 110.3. In these Churches are the Seat of mercy to be found in especiall manner, and the Ark, viz. Christ,☜ (out of whom no salvation) and the Testimony within the Ark, (i. e. the secret of his Tabernacle, Psal. 275.) viz. the spirit, which is the witnesse; so the Tabernacle of witnesse is the Ta∣bernacle of the spirit, Exod. 31, 21. Numb. 17.7.8. and there are the speciall Ordinances in order fixed, and left; there is the Lords Table, and breaking of bread, and prayers especially and orderly in the Churches, Act. 2.42. not out of them; None that are wicked, dead in sin, unclean Carkasses, or defiled persons are to enter in, Psal. 15.1. and to abide there,, but to be kept out and cast out, 1 Cor. 5.4. These Churches of Saints and all in them must receive the annoynting,☜ 1 John 2.20.27. in a large measure ere long, and all be link'd together in love, and loop'd in one; so as that to hurt one, will be to hurt all, &c. The pre∣sence of the most high must be in one Church as well as in a∣nother, to preserve them all, to protect them all, to fill all with his glory, Rev. 21.11. and to feed all with fat things, Corne, and Wine, and Oyle, the feast of Tabernacles, Isay 25. Zach. 14.16. Skenopegia, of which the world shall not so much as taste of, Isay 65.13. this is promised by the Type, and much more. I might mention Jerusalem the holy City set as a Type, Rev. 21. as it stood high upon hills,Jerusalem a Type. was the vision of peace and safe∣ty, the habitation of Kings, the place of the Temple, and wor∣ship of God; the City Compact, and the glory of the Earth. So wil the Church (which the congregational ones make up as membra causalia) be upon the top of all mountains, above all in these latter dayes, Isay 2.2.3. and be the only place of sweet Peace and sure safety for poore soules, for Salvation shall be Walls and Bulworkes, and Zach. 2.5. they shall not feare the Judgements that will be round about them. So shall the Churches be the Pallaces of Christ, the habitations of the King of Sion, Psal. 48.3 Joel 3.17. in them the Lord will be wor∣shipped
above all,The Sun (Christ) must rule the Dy (that comes) though the Moon hath ru∣led the Night (till now) Solomons Temple a type of the whole Church when all Taberna∣cles shall bee joyn'd. and he will be there a Temple and Light himselfe, Rev. 21.22.23. and they shall be all united as a City Compact, and be the glory and praise of the whole Earth, Isay 62.7. & 60.18. Zeph. 3.19.20. I might also instance in the Temple of Solomon as a Type of the Church universall, not par∣ticular, (for I have handled that before) but universall in three things. 1. In the holy of holies. 2. The holy place. 3. The Porch. 1. The holy of holies, as a Figure of the triumphant part of the Church. The 2. a Figure of the militant part of the Church as it is visible here, consisting of such as are indeed holy, and sanctified in Christ Jesus. And 3. the Porch (which as yet I account no part of the holy Temple) for all to enter, viz. mixt Congregations; where all may heare, till they be called into the holy place. This Porch hath mixt company in it, good and bad, Saints and Hypocrites, till they come to be call'd into the holy house, and then they are separated. In our dayes, we are but in Ta∣bernacles▪ as we sayd before, but the Temple is a building, So∣lomons dayes are comming; in the meane time matter must befetch'd from far (as we shew in the Precious stones before) as Solomon sent far about to find matter in all Countries for this building;☞ And at the last all our Tabernacles or particular Con∣gregationall Churches shall be turned into this one Temple, there shall be no more particular Churches as now, but all shall be one Temple to the Lord; all, all Saints, Churches, past, present, and to come, Jews and Gentiles, gathered from farre, East, West, North, and South, all shall make one Sheep-fold. But before I conclude, I shall bring in one Type more for all, that is a fulfilling in our dayes,Vid. 5. Zanch. lib. 1. de Hom. creatione, v. 15. and so will untill our compleat restauration, and it is of Eden or Paradise; and that it is a Type will appeare. Isay 51.3. so Ezek. 31.16.18. Ezek. 36.35.6. he will make her like Eden.Pradise and Eden excellent full types of the Church of Christ in these last dayes. So it appeares in Rev. 21. and 22.1.2. where there is also the Promise of the clear Rivers, and the Tree of life againe. So the Lord hath promised to make his Church a Paradise, that is in Hebr. Pardse, an Orchard or Garden full of trees of Righteousnesse, Cant. 4.12.13. Eccles. 2.5. a water'd Garden, as Isay 58.11. &c. See to this, in Ch. 3. of 1. lib. the promise is too to make her an Eden. Gr. of Hedo∣ne,
, pleasure, where the Saints shall be fill'd with joyes, Isay 35. ult. &c. But let us heare in what particulars the Type tells us of the spirituall happinesse and glory of Christ and his Churches in these latter dayes. See Gen. 2 8.9.10. to 18. first,The Churches ypified. from the Description of the Garden it selfe. 2 Of Man plac'd therein. First, the Garden, v. 8. is sayd to be of the Lords own planting,The Garden was Gods own plantation. (& plantavit (aut plantaverat) Jehova Elohim hortum aboriente) so shall these Churches (or Gardens inclosed, Cant. 4 12.) in these latter dayes, wherein you have these five particulars. 1. That the Lord himselfe hath provided and prepared this place;The excellen∣cy of it, beig his work. the word  plantavit implies the excellency of the place above all others, which the Lord himselfe by his own hands (as it were,) and with speciall wisdome, power, and industry had made, for in Gen. 1.12. the earth is said to bring forth other fruits, herbs, trees, &c. But Paradise the Lord made, i. e. to shew how far it excell'd all other places of the Earth, so in Gen. 1.27. is God said to take Councell as it were & to create man; whilest for other things he said let them be, & they were so, i. e. to shew that Man was the excellency of all his worke and Creation. So will God himself plant his Chur∣ches, as in Isay 5.2. he fenced it, and gathered out the stones, and planted it, &c. so Mat. 21 33 he planted the Vineyard, hedg'd it about, dig'd the Wine-presse, built the towre: So he pomi∣ses in these dayes; as Ezek. 36.34 35. the desolate Land shall be tilled, and shall become as Eden, the Garden of the Lord; for know, v. 36. it is I the Lord that will build the ruined, and plant the desolate; I have spoken it, and I will do it, saith the Lord.☜ All this is to shew the Excellency of his Church in the latter dayes, which shall be of his planting, above all others of mens plant∣ting, when we shall be the Lords own Husbandry, 1 cor. 3.9. and workmanship in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.10. 2. It is not called a House or Pallace; but a Garden,  hortus,2. His prote∣ction of them. which comes of  a word which signifies to protect and keep; that is a place which the Lord in especiall manner hedges to keep out beasts, and such as would hurt it. Now, this is a latter dayes promise, and tends much to the happiness of the Churches, tha the Lord will protect them, Isay 27.3. Zach. 2.5.
Jer. 32.40.41. Ezek. 28.26. Isay 35.8.9. that they shall be for ever in one, Joel 3.17.20. and no strangers shalbe there; so that Mr. Erberies spirit, & the Ranters spight to the Churches must, and live and die in their own breasts.☞ 3. The name of them which takes in of all languages.3. The name of this Garden is Paradise, so it is in Hebrew, so in the septuagint, , so sayes Zanchy, it is in the Persian language one and the same, and in the Germane Lut∣garten, and in the Latine call'd Paradisum, and in severall o∣ther languages one and the same,Zanch. viz. a most pleasant place,  in voluptate; and to me it signifies much, that so many languages have one and the same name; for surely the latter dayes promise must reach to all Nations,☞ and this Para∣dise shall take in of all languages and tongues, Zach. 8.22.23. Many peoples, and strong Nations in that day shall seek the Lord in Jerusalem, (i. e. his Churches) and in those dayes it shall come to passe, that men out of all languages of the Nations, shall take hold of him, that is a (spirituall) Jew; saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you: so Rev. 7.4. four Angels at the foure corners of the Earth stood there in their Offices, whilest another Angell was sent to seal (in the sealing day of the spirit) some of all the tribes, Rev. 21.24. and Na∣tions shall bring their glory to Zion, and shall walke in the light thereof, or in the light of the Lambe, who is the light thereof. It is certaine, that as the name takes in of all languages, so the thing will,☞ and Jewes and Gentiles, and Hebrews, and Grecians, Italians, and French, and Latines, and Germanes, and all must be brought in to the Church of Christ, or this earthly Paradise restor'd in these latter dayes, according to Promise & Prophesie. 4. From the Seat of it; the Questionists have been very busie to know wheeabouts in the world this Eden was;4. The Seat of them in all the World where the Ri∣vers run. some say in Mesopotamia, a part of Syria, others about Babylon, (vid. Plin. lib. 8..17.) others in one part of Syria, and o∣thers in another: others in the upper part of Chaldea; others take in Syria, Arabia and Mesopotamia; others take in Ar∣menia, Assyria, and all Aegypt: others say, it was in the tor∣rid Zone under the Aequinoctiall line, and others make it to comprehend the whole world;Pareus. but as Paraeus observes, these discrepant opinions, and perplexable differences arise from the
ignorance of the Rivers, the Head and Branches of Euphrates; so among the Fathers and Schoole-men, and Academians, with Ministers, and many others, are there different mindes and judgements of the Seat and place of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. but what need such Contstations? Praestat enim dubitare de occultis quam litigare de incertis: but this is certaine, that where ever the new River, the typified Euphrates runs, in Rev. 22.1.2. I meane the spirit of God (according to the flowings of these dayes) comes; a City shall be found,☜ whose builder and maker is God: there shall be the streets as well as the streams of the New Jerusalem: and this spirit will be poured out on all flesh; I mean on all Nations, and they shall come from far: So that it is mens ignorance of this River (that is cleare as Chry∣stall) that makes them question where Paradise will be found in the world (I say not of the world;) therefore let none say, lo here, or lo there; but when the spirit is pour'd out, they'le know and understand. 5. Eastward.  the word  is properly from before, which is here in Text, Eastward, or from the East,5. The East of them, . Sui∣das. ab Oriente, and in the Septuagint, , which is very considerable; for Eden was Orientall, or Eastern, sayes Lactant. lib. 2. Paradise was then a part of the East:Lactantius. So is the latter dayes Paradise to be; but by the East I intend Christ,☜ for where the Sun rises, there we say is the East, and where it goes down, there we say is the West or Occidentall, both East & West, Orien∣tall, and Occidentall, so call'd from the rising and the setting of the Sun; for there is not really a place or point of Earth at the bottome of the Horison, or Hemisphere, as far as you can see Eastward, that is the East; no, for when you are there, you are as farre off as before, and so you may goe round the world and never come at it, but where the Sun rises I ac∣count the East.The later days promise in the East, whence the Sun shall rise to all the world. Jo. 1.1.2. Now the Paradise promis'd, viz. the Chur∣ches are to be all East-ward, Zion-ward, Christ-ward; yea all ab Oriente, from Christ; yea , all in Christ, the East, from whence the Sun rises, the Gospel-light burgeons and breaks out in golden brightnesse, and light must go forth (as from you the Churches) in the sight of others, and gild the Ayre all about, and shine abroad to the world.☜ Thus the
Churches in the latter dayes, being all from Christ the East, all in Christ the East, all for Christ the East, are the Paradise in the East, and are of Christ as the first of all, whence the Sun of righteousnesse shall arise and shine to all the World. Thus far for the thing in generall, now to the speciall Priviledges that appertain to this Paradise, which are under these two Heads. 1. From the Trees. 2. The Rivers. First, in that Paradise was full of Trees, it did signifie the Saints,2. The mem∣bers and ordi∣nances typified by trees of Pa¦radise. and Members, and Ordinances of the Churches of Christ in the latter dayes, which lies to me open out of Isay. 61.3. That they (in Zion the Churches) may be called trees of righ∣teousnesse, the planting of the Lord. So in Cant. 2.3. As the Apple tree among the trees of the Forrest, so is my beloved (Crist) among the Sons (of God, the Saints in fellowship.) So Ezek. 47.7.12. So Rev. 7.1. and 8.7. with Rev. 9.4. So Matt. 3.10. and 7.17. and 12.33. So in Psal. 92.12.13. Those trees that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish, and Psal. 52.8. I am a green Olive-tree in the house of the Lord, and in Psal. 13. Trees planted by rivers of water bringing forth fruits in due season.Odinances & Church mem∣bers trees how Many other Scriptures prove this, besides the ensuing Parallels, but to the Particulars. 1. That as every Tree in Paradise, so shall every Member and Ordinance of the Church be grounded and rooted in Jesus Christ,1. Rooted. Ephes. 3.17.18. Col. 2.6. Job. 8.17. and folded into and wrapped about Jesus Christ. 2. of the Lords making.2. Every Tree in Paradise was of the Lords making, so should every Ordinance, and so should every Member of a Church of Christ, being created a new thereto, as the Lords Workmanship in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.10. 3. The Trees in Paradise the Lord caused to grow, v. 9 Gen. 2. So the Lord by his Grace and giving of spirituall Sap,3. The Lord causes them to grow and flourish. and Life to the Members of the Churches makes them growing Christians, spreading and flourishing Members of, and Orna∣ments to his Garden inclosed, 2 Pet. 3.18. and 2.2. Job. 8.16.17. Psal. 80.9.10. and this is an especiall promise of ours for the Churches in Hosea 14.5.6.☞ I (sayes the Lord) I (by my Doct∣rine dropping as the rain, Deut. 32.2. and by my spirit as the neather Springs and Streams from Lebanon, Cant. 4.13.) I will
be as the dew unto Israell, and he shall grow as the Lilly,☜ and cast forth his roots, (thick and threefold) as Lebanon, his branches shall spread. 4. Most fruitfull trees of all the earth besides;4. They are to bee the most fruitful of all the Earth. and this is expected of the Churches; and their members to bring forth fruits; not common fruits, but Garden fruits; not ordinary Garden fruits neither, but Eden Garden fruits, i. e. the fruits of the Lords own planting, grafting, growing, the choysest fruits, Jehovahs fruits of the spirit, spirituall faith, spirituall love, spi∣rituall holinesse, spirituall obedience, spirituall knowledge, spirituall prayers, preachings, &c. all of the spirits putting forth, and blooming, and setting▪ increasing, and ripening,☜ Jer. 17.8. then they'le bring forth in a time of drought, when all other trees are withered and burnt up, as Rev. 8.7. and when the third part of the trees must be burnt up: And why? because they are so well rooted; and the Lord causes them to grow. Prov. 12.12. these bring forth the fruits of holinesse and righteousnesse which are in Christ, Phil. 1.11. so that ye shall know them by their fruits; for, 5. They are pleasant for sight. Gen. 2.9. so must the Saints and all Church-members, ev'n to the world,5. Lovely to the sight. and in the eies of them without, and shine as lights,Colloquia & congregationes gratiam spirent. Bernard de Ecc. cap. 412. and by their conversations attract them, Acts 2.47. Zeph. 3.20. I will make you a name and praise among all people of the Earth: this will be, as I have said before, when the Saints shall be a sweet savour to all, 2 cor. 2.14 15. and amiable in the eyes of all. 6. And their fruits good for food, Gen. 2.9.6. Excellent to feed upon. So will it be a∣gain, they shall feed the strong and the weake, with such fruits of love, faith, holinesse, obedience, graces, gifts, prayers, pro∣phesies, interpretations, and exhortations, and such like, day by day, as shal administer grace to the hearers, Ephes. 4.29▪ Col. 4.6. and be full of refreshings, and juice, and sap, and sweetnesse; yea, (as Apples) both meat and drinke to many poor hungry soules: O sweet dayes! when these fruits shall be ripe,For all sorts and Senses. and gathered, and given out in due season. So that it appears the Lord hath promised us in these restitution of times the most precious fruits of imparadised Saints; suaves ad visum & ad vescendum: so excellent, as shall satisfie all the senses, delight∣full
to heare of, sweet to smell of, most admirable to feele of, most pleasant to the sight, and exceedingly sweet, savory, and soule-satisfying to the taste. Lord hasten these happy dayes▪ Then the day of Jezreel will be great indeed, thn the Churches shall be Paradise,☞ when their members bring forth, such dain∣ty and diversity of fruits, and that for all sorts of people; that such as will not taste them, may touch them; or such as will not touch them;☞ may scent them; or such as will not scent, resent, nor smell, (the Spices they bring forth, Cant. 4 16.) may see them amiable in their eyes; as such as will not see them, may (and so they shall) heare of them. O precious! precious days! Come running Lord! like the Roe! 7. All sorts of trees that the Lord makes fruitfull must grow there.7. In Gen. 2.9. the Lord made every sort of good trees to grow in Paradise, and so will he in these latter dayes; for there shall not be a confining of a Garden, or Church to one sort of trees onely, and no more, unlesse here and there one by chance; so to one sort of Judgements▪ or Opinions, or People; O no! but of every sort of trees and fruits, of Persons, Professions, and Opinions that the Lord makes to grow, and to bring forth, shall be in Paradise: Oh then will there be a glorious day for Sion indeed! and Eden shall be the Garden of the Lord; and the Saints shall feed upon all those sorts of fruits judgements, gifts, graces, or whatever they be. 8. The re of life in the midst of them.8. The tree of life shall stand in the midst of other trees▪ Gen. 2.9. as also the tree of knowledge, in every Church or Garden of the Lord. The tree of life may be understood two wayes: 1. as living, and then,Tree of life two wayes. 2. as life giving; and in this sence I take it,  for that it was to give life; but what kinde of life? I conceive that in Gen. it may bee life to the body, as our food does by maintaining the natuall heat, radicall moysture, and ani∣mall spirits, &c. but I thinke it most of all intends some quick∣ning power, and vital strength (if I may so say) which was given by this fruit to the Eater,☞ (above all other) that he could not be sicke, nor wax o, nor weake, nor infirme, nor dye; but should live in perpetuall health and strength, and vigor of spri∣rit. But however, as that tree of life stood in the midst of the rest,  and was more worth then all the rest▪ Cant. 2.3. So
does Christ in the midst of his Saints; in the midst (Rev. 1.13. and 2.1.) of the seven golden Candlesticks, in the midst of his Brethren, Hebr. 2.12. his fellow trees, in the midst of the Bre∣thren, in the midst of the Church will I give praises, sayes Christ, so is his Promise to be in the midst of them Mat. 18.20. so Psal. 46 5. Hosea 11.9. Joel 2.27. So Zeph. 3.5.15▪ the King of Is∣rael in the midst of thee. So hath the Lord promised us in Zach. 2 5. he will be our glory in the midst of us: and so v. 10.11. sing, rejoyce, O daughters of Sion (every particular Church and Assembly of Sion) for lo! I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee; and many Nations shalbe joyn'd to the Lord in that day and shall be my (joyn'd or gather'd) people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee: Oh this is a singular happinesse!☜ for then one member, and one Church, and one tree, and one Ordinance will be as neare to him as another, and receive from him as well as another, and all alike will fetch power and glory, and grace, and spirit, and light, and life, and whatsoever else is communicable from him. Some there be that make this tree a Symbole, and the two trees, the two Sacraments;Diodate. so far I agree with them, as to say,The two Sa∣craments within the Church kept these speciall Ordinances are in the midst of the Churches, and must not be dispensed without neither Baptisme, nor the Lords Supper, (so call'd) of breaking bread, and they break the Command that dare to give them, or receive them without, for they are to be in the midst of the Churches, and will be so ere long, and kept there by the flaming sword, from the sons of Adam,And not to be carried out. that run greedily (according to the Serpents insinuations, 2 Cor. 11.3.) to eat of the forbidden fruits. But this tree of life which shal stand in the midst of the gatherd Churches in the restored Paradise, is meant Christ,☜ and so hee shall stand, as Rev. 22.2. and in the midst of the street of the holy City, (every Church that helps to make up the great City) the tree of life which bare twelve manner of fruits, &c. Christ will be in the midst not onely to give fruits (both meat and drinke) for other trees (the Saints and members) will doe so too; but he is there living and giving life, 1 Cor. 15.45. a quickening,☜ i. e. life-giving spirit, having twelve manner of fruits for twelve months, of divers sorts, for all sorts and conditions of souls, and for as often as you will have of him; and those that eat of him
shall never dye, Jo. 6.50. but grow livelier, and lustier, and stronger, and healthfullier every day: So that Christ hath pro∣mised to be a tree of life in the midst of the Churches to make them up an earthly Paradise, which else cant be. 9. Other trees, and this tree of life were much alike, for e∣very tree hath the same wood  lignum,9. The tree of life, and other trees alike. and this foretels me how much the Saints (the true Members of the Churches) shall look like Christ, and bring forth fruits like Saints, and walk as he walked,☞ 1 John 4.17. And represent him as pertaking of divine and humane nature, and being filled with the same spirit, and we know when he shall appear we shall appear like him, 1 Jo. 3.2. The second speciall priviledges of Paradise, were in the Ri∣ver which watered the Garden; and that this was also very significant,3. The Spirit and Word ty∣pified by Ri∣vers & streams as to these latter dayes, will easily appear by the spirit which is promised to the Saints and Churches in these latter dayes, as a River, and the Graces as Streams, and the Or∣dinances as Brooks &c. Isay. 30.25. Isay. 33.21. Isay. 32.2. and Isay. 41.18. I will open rivers in high places, and in the dry land springs of water, and Isay. 43.19.20. Behold I will do a new thing, and ye shall know it, I will even make a Way in the Wil∣dernesse and Rivers in the Desart: I will give Rivers in the Desart to give drink to my people, my chosen: So Ezek 34.13.14. I will feed you upon the Mountains of Israel by the Rivers, in fat pastures: So Psal. 46.4. There is a River the streams whereof make glad the City of God: So Psal. 65.9. Thou en∣richest it with the River of God which is full of water, Psal. 1.3. and besides many other Scriptures that in Rev. 22.1. He shew∣ed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Christall, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, i. e. the spirit pow∣red cut in the latter dayes flowing from the Father and the Son: but to some Particulars: 1. Whence and whither the River flowed: and 2. for what end? See v. 10. A River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it parted into four Heads.1. From whence the Rivers came aborigine, viz. from the East. 1. The River ran out of Eden; Eden that lay in the East; so that River ran from the East; , the word is a currere perpetuo cursu, the River ran continually. Some say the Foun∣tain
was in the midst of Paradise, but the Text sayes, non Fon∣tem sed Fluvium, it came out of Eden from the East; the East we sayd before was Christ, and from him out of God, this River (of the spirit) continually runs, Rev. 22 1. and shall flow ere long with mighty streams in midst of the streets or Churches.☜ The East was sayd to have two parts (as Zanchy notes) the first is clear in the Scriptures which we read much off, as of Arabia, Babylonica, Persiae, Chaldea, &c. in this part was Mesopotamia, and the Garden of Paradise; but se∣condly the other part of the East lay obscure, and hidden to us, unknown and unshown in the Scriptures;Two parts of the East. and from that part some say the River ran; whether it be so or no in the Letter, yet this is certain that so much of the Will of God in Christ as is revealed, declares to us Eden, (the Garden of the Lord) the Churches of Christ in the latter dayes, will be large, and the Scriptures speak much of it, and show it clearly;1. Knowne. 2. Hidden, but only the River runs from it. but that part of the Will of God which is secret and in mystery; hidden and obscure this River runs from also, into the Chur∣ches;☜ by which River the secret and hidden mysteries may and must be found out, and that which is not yet discovered of God and Christ must be revealed, and the whole Book of Re∣velation; and whatsoever is as yet sealed up must be layd o∣pen, and made common to the Churches. This River it ran into Paradise, partly by secret, close occult conveyances, and partly by open ordinary courses and flowings (sayes Pliny lib. 5. c. 24.) So does the spirit, and so it will come flowing into the Churches to water them, & fill them as Waters fill the Sea, Isay. 11. partly by Meanes, Ordinances, Promises, Providences, and such ordinary Passages and Currents of the spirit; and partly by secret wayes, under ground, mysterious occult con∣veyances; but what with one way, and what with another, the Gardens of the Lord the Churches will be well refreshed and filled with this River which arises out of the East:☜ And to finish this Particular, this River ran (as with one stream) into the Garden, but from thence divided severall wayes a∣broad; so will the spirit as with one mighty rushing Sea into the Churches; and from them be divided about, and spread a∣broad. But,
2. For Chur∣ches, to what end?Secondly, for what end? to water the Garden: So the Churches will be abundantly more fructifying and fresh, when this spirit is poured out, than now they are, Cant. 4.15. And they shall be like a watered Garden,☞ whose waters faile not, Isay. 58.11. they can't faile, Heb. 2.14. they are already green and growing, and shall no more be like a parched Wildernesse. Thirdly, a word more about the Division of this River, v. 10.3. The River divided into foure heads. From thence it parted into four Heads. From thence, inde, Hebr. , de ibi; it is a question among some, where this Division is made; whether before it came into the Garden, and after it went out, or in Paradise; now it appears to me, although it came into the Garden, uno influxo, as by one stream, yet it went out by four, in v. 10.11.12 13. &c. So that the Division was within the Garden,Diodate. and by this Division eve∣ry part of the Garden was watered: So the spirit though it is one and the same (as from Christ) yet in the Church it flows severall wayes,Habes Paradi sum conclusū & Paradisum e mssum. Beru. de Serm. Cant. 35. in severall Gifts, Graces, and Administrations, 1 Cor. 12.4. So that every part of the Church may be watered, and every one have according to his measure, some more, and some lesse: And from the Church it flows abroad to the World; and this foretels us the spirit shall come flowing in such an am∣ple manner into the Churches in these last dayes,To take in many Nations. and that it shall flow from them and out of them, run out to others several wayes in severall streams; yea four Heads into the four Parts of the World, East, West, North and South; and as the foure Heads encompassed and took in many Lands v. 11.12.13.14. as Arabia, Syria, Chaldea (Chus) Aethiopia, Aegypt, &c. So shall the spirit that goes out of the Churches (in that Great Day of the flowing of it in,☞ and pouring of it on them) I say, that spirit shall go out of the Churches, round about severall wayes, into all Parts of the World to fetch in, and to compasse about, and to gather up of many Nations, and Tongues; and Languages,☞ and Lands, to the Lord, and his Christ, who is the East. Yea, and many pretious stones and gold of Havilah shall be fetched in too,Where Gods great worke first begins. as in the pou∣ring out of the spirit. as fit matter for the Lords house, in those his latter Golden Dayes: So that the great and glorious Work that God hath to do by his spirit, in these dayes, is in the Churches, and then by the Churches abroad many wayes in the world;
but thus far for the second speciall Priviledges of the Churches (typified by Paradise) in the Rivers that shall run in the midst of their streets, and run from them to others: See Zach. 14.8. And in that day shall living water go out of Jerusalem, the halfe of them one way, and the halfe another, &c. Now we come to the last Description of the Type,The last disco∣very of the Type. which is so full for these latter dayes, and which relates so eminently and evidently to the Churches; and that is in ver. 15.16.17. The Lord God tooke the Man and put him into the Garden, &c. 1. The Man, to shew that it was no place for Beasts;1. No place for Beasts. the Lord hath promised no ravenous beasts shall enter into this earthly Paradise, that is to come in these last Ages, Isay. 35 9.10. 2. The Lord tooke him (& tulit Jehovah Elohim) to shew that he came not thither by nature, and was not born to it,2. It is not for meer naturall men. or created in it, but translated into it, by the spirit of the Lord; the Lord put him in; so none are to be in the Churches, as Members that be in their meer naturall Condition; or as if born to it, or born in it; O no! only such as are brought in by Grace,For none but whom the Lord addes & brings in. whom the Lord hath brought in and fitted for Church-Communion, by his spirit, that must be Members; such as the Lord adds, and he adds none but such as shall be saved, Acts 2.47. Too too many naturall carnall men have crept into the Churches, and have added themselves; or else others have added them; but the Lord will out them, and rout them ere long;These Chur∣ches must be purged. he hath not added them: And therefore the fiery tryall will purge them off, and over with a powder; And that Day will burn up the third part of the trees, Rev. 8.7. with Zach. 13.9. and after that,☜ there shall be no more the Cananite in the Lords house, Zach. 14.21. 3. The Paradise was of use in mans innocency, as an Aca∣demy,3. Of the grea∣test Use, as U∣niversities for others to resort unto, and to learn in, and to goe from to teach others. or the Vniversity (sayes Pareus) to which men from all Parts might resort to praise the Lord, and to learn of him, and to behold his most excellent workes, and to feed of the best fruits; And from thence others might be sent abroad (as the Rivers went) to give knowledge to the people; and of such excellent use will the Churches of Christ be in these latter dayes; for all sorts of Saints to resort to them; to praise the Lord in them;
to be instructed by him; to be acquainted with his most graci∣ous workings in us, and for us, and to feed upon the best privi∣ledges, and choisest fruits of restored Paradise, and to be sent out thence to go abroad all along with the Rivers,☞ I mean with the rich measures of the spirit, to teach the World; & to instruct them without, that are ignorant of the truth & mysteries of the Gospel, as they are revealed to the Saints in fellowship. Such Chur¦ches wil prove the usefullest Vniversities in the World to stock and store,Universities; of what sort in the latter days. the Nation with able Spiritual Teachers; and such as shall speake the things they heare and see, being all taught of the Lord by the Anointing from on high so to doe; and this is promised at large in these latter Dayes. Jerem. 32.40. Isay. 46.13. and 54.13.14. For his Law shall go forth from Zion, Isay. 22. Micha. 4.8. 4. God would not have man (no not in his innocency) to live (no not in Paradise) without Law;4. Such as are placed in this restored Para∣dise, are under the strictest Lawes of the spirit. but he kept him un∣der strict Law, v. 16. the Lord God commanded the man (prae∣cepto singulari obstrinxit, the Hebrew notes the Word  with the Proposition or Particle  to signifie more then (simply) to command, viz. to command with an Interdiction and Prohibition as follows in v. 17. thus is the Word  va∣jesau read in Scripture, and this is very significant; for God doth not promise us a lawlesse liberty, or licentious dayes in these latter dayes; but that we shall be under his Lawes and Ordi∣nances, which he hath appoynted in the Church: The Saints shall be exact walkers up to the rule of perfect righteousnesse in Christ Jesus;The Law in love. not destroying but fulfilling the Law, and that in Love which is the bond of perfection, only this obedience shal be more in and by the spirit of the Lord, John 4.25.24. But God is very exact (as appears by the strictnesse of the wod) to have his Saints, the Churches and Members thereof subject to his Laws (even in Paradise) even in the best reformed & re∣stored dayes, Heb. 8.10. Ezek. 43.11. and 44.5.24. Yea, the Royal Law, James 2.8 And Law of truth, Mal. 2.6. Yea, the Law to go forth out of Zion to others,The Churches have their law from the Lord Mich. 4.2. And seale the Law among my Disciples, Isay. 8.16. So that God especially looks for it from them, for they have more reason to live under the Order and Law of God then any others;Ohers from the Churches. for they are to be
Examples to others as lights on a hill, and as the Salt to season others that are without; They have it first that are in Churches (most excellently as from the Lord) and others as from them; Micah 4.2. Adam had the Law first in Paradise as from the Lord (most excellently of all) and Eve afterwards as from him:☜ Besides the Majesty & Authority of God is promised (hereby) especially in the Churches; as Paul said 1 Cor. 11.23 For I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto you, &c. so it shalbe especially in the last days, as Micah 5.4. He (Christ) shall stand and feed (and rule) in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God, and they (the Churches) shall abide:We have first Life and then Law, first a Principle, and then a Precept For now (after this) shall he (Christ) be great un∣to the end of the Earth: But yet marke this, that the Man was first made, and then commanded; he had first a Principle, and then a Precept; the first is to the adesse, and then the other to the bene esse: So that to the singular Comfort of Saints, and all Church Members, here is much promised; that he will first create, and then command;☜ that he will first give them a pow∣er to do it, and then give them a Precept to do it; And then they shall be upon the Chariots of Aminadab. First, he'l write his Law in them, and then receive his Law of them (i. e. that which is written in them) in these latter days; so that the Chur∣ches & Saints shal not be, yea cānot be without Law, nor with∣out liberty, nor without the perfect Law of liberty, Jam. 1.25. 5. Man, though in Paradise must not be idle,5. Those ther∣in are never to be idle, but eve∣ry day dressing and keeping it. therefore v. 15. God put him in to dresse it and to keep it, viz. it, Garden; for the word is hortus, which is  of the Feminine Gender, with this  affixed, and it is not without signification to all the Churches and Saints; for as Zanchy sayes, Paradisu illa, typus fuit Ecclesiae, ergo, qui in Ecclesiam positi sunt,Zanch. discat se non esse hîc positos ut otiosi vivant, sed ut pro suâ quis{que} virili, co∣lat Ecclesiam, cam{que} custodiat & Paradise was a Type of the Church, and it concerns every Member of the Church, to re∣member he must not be idle; but up and about, to work in the Vineyard, to dresse and keep it; for the manifestation of the spi∣rit is given to every one to profit withall, 1 Cor. 12.7. To doe something or other to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14.12. Rom. 14.19. to instruct, exhort, build up, and dresse it, Ephes. 4.29. 1 Thes. 5.11. Jude 20. Heb. 10.24.25. Yea, and to keep
it too, from the Foxes of the Field, and the Wild Bores of the Wood; yea, to keep out all Beasts and such as would hurt this Paradise, and to keep in good Orders, the Fences and Hedges, the Lawes and Liberties of the Church, Jude 3. Gal. 5.1. Heb. 12.3.4. Ephes. 4.3.4. Phil. 2.1.2.3. 1 Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11. This Care lies upon all the Churches and Members thereof; the Lord make them good Husband-men, carefull, and watchfull, and painfull as he hath promised for the benefit of the Church, and the good keeping of this (Typified) Paradise, as Hosea 10.11.12. Obj. But Labour and Worke was (poena peccati) a Curse, Gen. 3.17. and a Bondage. Ans. Not every Labour and Worke, but anxious, vexati∣ous,What labours are accursed, what not. grievous pains and labours; but not to labour in Para∣dise, in the Lords Garden or Vineyard; to such as the Lord hath set therein, his Yoke is easie; and his Service is sweet to them, Prov. 3.17. The Wayes of wisdome are pleasantnesse to their Souls; they delight to be doing for the Lord, for Christ, for the edifying of his Church, Psal. 1.2. and 16.3. and 40.8. Psal. 119.16.24.35.47.70.77.174. Duties are a Delight, and Ordinances a Delight to them, Cant. 2.3. Isay. 58.13.14. 6. Man though in Paradise, yet upon open Breach of Gods Law he was cast out and excommunicated,6 Such as are sinners, though in the Church, must be cast out. Gen. 3.23.24. Ther∣fore the Lord sent him out from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground, from whence he was taken, and he drove out the man, or expelled, cast, and shut him out; which is  a hard word, and a clear Excommunication; whilst the former word he sent out, , is but a kind of command to him to pack a∣way; but now he's thrust out and banish'd Paradise; for in∣deed his offence was the greater, that it was in Paradise after he was so blessed, and had tasted the fruits of it, &c. So must Offenders (though Members of the Church,☞ 1 Cor. 5.45.) be dealt with, & their sins are of the greater aggravation, by how much the longer they have been Members, and by how much the more they have tasted of the Fruits, and found of the Bene∣fits of being inclosed, and in the Garden of the Lord, viz. Church-fellowship; wherefore let Members beware of the forbidden Fruits; and they may live (diu & die) long and
happily in the Churches of Christ in these last dayes. 7. Man in Paradise might eat of every tree,7. Such as are therein may eat freely, yea must of every tree. v. 16. of every tree of the Garden thou mayest freely eat, that is of the Fruit of every Tree, , ex quavis arbore (except as v. 17. of the tree of knowledge) thou must eat freely, is an excellent Hebra∣isme, , eat and eat again, yea comedendo comedes, you may eat by eating; there be some that say under these words lye a Command upon the Man, , that he must eat of the Fruits of every Tree, without making difference of clean and unclean, &c. This shows the great advantage and privi∣ledges of Saints and Members of the Churches in these last dayes; they feed upon the Fruits of every Tree in the Garden (not out of the Garden) of every Ordinance, of every Admi∣nistration, of every Gift, Grace, of every Saint or Member; not putting of Differences, making Distinctions, or having of the Faith with respect of Persons or Opinions, Micah 4.5. And they shall sit every one under his own Vine,☜ and they shall walke e∣very one in the name of his God, &c. Yea then as every Tree shall be fruitfull, Col. 1.10. Hosea 14.8. So every Saint and Member must eat of the Fruits of all, out of all, i. e. that grows out of every one; yea of the least, lowest, darkest (and most undershadow) and meanest Member or Brother of the Church; for every one shall bring in of his Fruits (and none be hindred) and every ones Fruits shall be in due season,Ripe fruits▪ Ps. 1.2.3. and none before the time, Mal. 3.11. but all ripened by the Sun; and then every one will be desirous of them, Micah 7.1. My soul desired the ripe fruits, sayes the Prophet himselfe. 8. Man in Paradise was forbidden the Tree of Knowledge,8. Such forbid the Tree of Knowledge before the tree of Life. v. 17. But of the tree of Knowledge thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely dye; which words are full in Hebr. you shall not eat of it, that is, not eat out of it, , as if the Lord should () poynt out with his finger the Tree he forbad; if thou eatest thereof thou shalt not faile to dye; thou shalt surely dye, which is in He∣braisme too , moriendo merierie, , thou shalt dye with dying, thou shalt dye the death; that is necessarily, and unavoydably, and most miserably, thou shalt know 'tis a fearfull thing to sin in Paradise (so in Church-Fel∣lowship)
therefore the command is interdicting, and prohibi∣ting the tree of Knowledg. So are the Saints & Members in the Churches, forbid the tree of Knowledge, that is humane Wisdom, carnal Reason and Policy, affectation of Word, Gifts, habituall Parts of Learning; subtile Sophistry, and all such forbidden fruits (in Paradise,☞ so) in the Churches, Col. 2.8. That none spoyle you through Philosophy, Arts and Sciences, nor corrupt you with humane Wisdome, 1 Cor. 1.20.21. 2 Cor. 1.12. which Aegypt and Babylon did, and yet do abound in; but the Lord hath promised to destroy and bring this Wisdome to nought,☞ Isay. 29 14. And that the deafe shall hear, and the blind see, Isay. 29.18. The things and visions of the booke which the learned can't read, in v. 11. Because 'tis sealed to him; but the spirit of the Lord shall reveale them to Babes; And those that see not shall see, whilst those that see shall be made blind: Therefore let the Saints take heed of that Tree whose Fruits (if they live upon them, and prefer them (for so Man did) will be accursed to them, Jer. 17.5.6. For cursed is the man that makes flesh his arm,Expos. whose heart departeth from the Lord; for he shall be like the heath in the desart, and not see when good commeth: This is a Curse indeed, as full as the Fig-tree had, and this dreadfull Curse is full of wrath for, and to them that prefer and feed (altogether) on humane Parts, habitual Gifts, Wisdome, Learn∣ing, or the like; for by these the Old Man (who must fall) gets to be enthroned, and Christ and Truth justled out of doors; not that we deny an use (yea and sometimes a great use too) that may be made of Parts, Learning, humane Knowledge, ha∣bituall Gifts, &c. For if there were no use at all to be made of them,An use of hu¦mane Wis∣dome, Learn∣ing, and know∣ledge in the Churches. then they were not to be there; then this Tree of Knowledge should not have been set in Paradise at all, much lesse in the midst of the Garden; but this we say, that though they may be suffered, yea seen, heard, handled; yet they must not be eaten, fed on before the Tree of Life, to live on, or to be nourished by them: O no! but feed on the Tree of Life! Eate down the Fruits of the spirit! the Graces! Learning! Wisdome of the spirit! to live on! to be quickned, nouri∣shed!But not to be preferred first. comforted by, and to have them consubstantiated into you! So that the other fruits are not first to be feed on! but to be looked on! and to be used as Servants to the Tree of
Life, and by the bye! therefore woe be to them! that prefer the tree of knowledge before the tree of life! it is that which is here forbid, and is accursed with a most dreadfull sentence and doome upon it! and they fall fowlest and most irrecoverably,☜ that fall by eating the fruits of the tree of knowledge! viz. selfe-wisdome and parts, &c!☜ in preferring of these (by Sathan's subtill insinuations) before the tree of life! Let all Churches and Members look to it then! For they are under a desperate curse that do so! and when they do Julian like Apostatize, they are the most hurtfull! unholy! violent! and unexecra∣ble Enemies to Christ and his Gospel. 9. The Serpent got even into Paradise it's selfe,9. The Ser∣pent got in and tempted by the fruits of the tree of know∣ledge. and present∣ly pitcht upon the tree of knowledge, to tempt the Woman (and so the man) with the fruits of that tree, and the Woman seeing 'twas to be desired to make one wise, Gen. 3.16. Sayes the Text, took it, &c. So Sathan, that subtill Serpent, creeps into the best Churches at some hole or other, and appears in their Con¦gregations, as Job 1.6. (where God sees him when men can't) and so even in Judas in Christs little fellowship he crowded in, and so in Jude 4 Gal. 2.4. and when they are at the best and bu∣sist duties, he'l be sure to tēpt them, & that subtilly with won∣derous art and cunning winding himselfe into the heart of one or other, to tempt them to forbidden fruits; and he usually gets up into the tree of knowledge, i. e. by carnall reason, humane wis∣dome, &c. to do it. He oftentimes presents the fairest side of the fairest fruits of this Tree to tempt poor souls with: And he sets upon the weakest vessels to seduce them with a supposition of Gifts, Parts, humane Wisdome, Learning, and the like; that these will make them wise and as Gods, &c. O sad! miserable sad souls!☜ that are so deceived by the fair shows of Gifts, as to prefer them before graces: Wherefore let all Members and Churches be warned hereby;He tempts the weakest with Gifts, Parts, &c. For Sathan is got in to tempt some of the weakest of them: Therefore sayd Paul to the Church of Co∣rinth. 2 Epist. 11.3. I fear least by any means as the Serpent be∣guiled Eve through his subtlety, so your mindes should be corrup∣ted (by his cunning Acts ) from the (plain) simplicity that is in Christ; Wherefore let us all beware! and believe graces more then gifts; the tree of life is better for food then
the tree of knowledge; the spirit is better then the flesh; and Christ to be preferred before the Creature, or creature-parts and appearances: And know that none are wise but the Saints; the Churches and Saints are able to out-see all the Vniversities of the Earth,Churches be∣yond Universi¦ties. in altissimis causis rerum. Christ is their Wisdome, 1 Cor. 1.30. Et dignoscitiva & directiva in him they are wise, 1 Cor. 4.10. and learned; the learned of God are brought up in the Universities of Christ,Saints are the most and best learned ones. the Schooles of the Prophets in∣deed excelling all in Knowledge, Phil. 3.8. Jo. 7.3. and learning as the taught of God, Isay. 29.11. and Isay. 50.4. John 6 45. Rev. 14 3. Rev. 5.5.6. and excelling all in the truest, purest, ful∣lest, sweetest, and profitablest originall tongues and languages, Dan. 1.17. Jo. 7.15. Viz. the language of Canaan, the tongue of the spirit, the purest originall; Wherefore let not Sathan deceive us with his fair sides of Gifts and Parts, so as to make us eat of them,☞ and chuse them before the tree of life: And yet God forbid but that we should have gifts, and parts, and learning, and languages, in the Churches too, for the service of the Church, and to be under the spirit; so that there is great rea∣son that the tree of Knowledge should stand there, though the Serpent do make it his Den, and Tree of Temptation. 10. It was the sixth day that man was put into Paradise by God;10. Man put in on the sixth day. and now a day is as a thousand years, so that we live in the sixth day since the Creation; and now God is restoring Pa∣radise apace, and he hath gathered some Churches, his Garden is enclosed, and he hath caused trees to grow there, and the Ri∣ver to run there; now it remaines, that he by his own spirit do put man in, we live in this day wherein he will do it, as E∣zek. 36.33.35.36.37. Jer. 32.37.By the Lords own hand. And I will gather them, and I will bring them againe into this place, Micah 7.9. He will bring me forth to light, and I shall behold his righteousnesse. Zach. 8.8. I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and they shall be my People, and I will be their God in truth and righteousnesse: the Lord undertakes it himselfe, by his owne hand to put men into his Churches, and to bring in the sons of strangers, and the outcasts of Israel, Isay 56.6.7.8. and he will plant them, Jerem 32.40.41. and bring all the good that he hath promised in his word upon them, Jer. 32.42. and cause them to walk
by Rivers of waters, Jerem 31.9. Ezek. 34.13. &c. 11. But to conclude the Type,11. Gods spe∣ciall presence there. Paradise is the place where∣in God did most familiarly appeare, and acquaint himselfe to Man, and manifest his love and glory. Three wayes we read of by which God spake to men, by dreams, by visions, or else face to face; and in this manner, whereby his Love, and wher∣in his Glory did most appeare, viz. face to face did the Lord ma∣nifest himselfe in Paradise,Justin, Irenaeus, Terullian, Eu∣sebius, Ambrose, & alii in lec. although his face was seen but as in a Glasse. 2 Cor. 3.18. under the similitude of an Angel, or some other bodily appearance. This signifies the singular ap∣pearances and presence of God, which the Churches shall en∣joy above all the world besides, in these last dayes; his pre∣sence is especially promised to appeare, and his Love, and Glo∣ry to be manifested in the Churches.  &c. Such a speciall manifestation as is mentioned in John 14.21. which is promi∣sed in these last dayes shall be , by the brightnesse of his glory, Heb. 1.2.3. Jo. 2.11. Eph. 3.3.4. so is it in Psal. 102.16. when the Lord shall build up Zion, then he shall appeare in his glory. So Habak 2.14. Then shall they bee filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord. So Zach. 2.5. Rev. 21.11.23. The glory of God shall lighten the New Jerusa∣lem, viz. the glorious presence of God in it. Then the Saints in the Churches shall have the most familiar presence of God, discourses with him, discoveries of him walking in the Garden, as Cant. 8.13. and Cant. 7.11. So Cant. 6.2. my beloved is gone down into his Garden, to the beds of spices, (particular Churches) to feed in the Gardens, to gather lillies. There is Christ most and best to be found. So Cant. 4.16. and 5.1. &c. Psal. 63.2. and Psal. 27.4. yea the Angel of his presence shall be there, Isay 63.9. and the name of them from that day, shall be Jeho∣vah Shammah, the Lord is there Ezek. 48.35. Thus we have done with these Types that foretell the hap∣py state of Saints in Gospel-fellowship, and the Glory of the Churches of Christ in these latter dayes, sparkling through ma∣ny
more Types then I have mention'd, but these are sufficient for present proofe, though every day will bring forth more, and more excellent matter of praises and rejoycings; whilst the Church comes out of the Wildernesse leaning on her beloved, persumed with mirrh and frankinsence▪ and the Saints shal have beauty for ashes, and be called trees of righteousnesse, the Lords own planting, that he might be glorified, Isay 61.3. But lastly, that the Churches of Christ are to stand apparant∣ly distinct from all others;3. The Chur∣ches of Christ distinct from all o∣thers. we have already prov'd it, Chap. 6. lib. 1. &c. besides severall Prophesies and Types we might bring forth, but that 'tis time to conclude and rest me, as Numb. 239. Lo they shall not be reckoned among the Nations, and Rev. 18.4. Johu 15.19. Hosea 4.15. and 14 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? yea so, as an apparent difference shall bee known and own'd betwixt them and others, Mal. 3.16.17. Jer. 15.16. for the Lord hath made the difference as from the first, s Gen. 1.4. God saw the light was good, and therefore divided the light from darknesse, to be distinct.  in the Sept. ,And shal be so apparently to al. i. e. by an apparent difference to bee knowne by all; and so will he make the Churches of Light distinct from them of dark∣nesse, so as it appeares in the Chaldee Paraphrase and tongue:  and so in the Samaritan tongue, that God made a manifest and bounded separation between them. And this distinct separation, or division of Gods make, must stand. It is then no new thing to be distinct from Parishes, and all false Antichristian Churches, wherein there is a mix∣ture, 2 Cor. 6.1415. and is not so distinct a separation as is and ought to be in all true Churches from false wayes and wor∣ships. We find this too typified by Israel separated from all others Numb. 16.9. and they were not to joyn in Religion and worship with the other Nations, 1 King. 11.3. Joshua 2.3. Exod 23.16. Deut. 10.8. and 32.8. but separated from the mixed multitude, Nehem. 13.3. Ezra 10.16. yea in Deut. 23.1, 2.3. &c. you will read who might, and who might not enter into the Church;Expos. which much concerns us now v. 1.
not such as cannot retaine the seed of the word, as it is in Heb. Shophcah, which sheds and loses that precious seed; how can they beget others to the faith that lose the seed?Not Enemies. Who? such are not to be received into the Congregation of the Lord: O precious promises! which will produce and procreate a most excellent distinction in the latter dayes! when the Lord shall adde to his Churches such as have a fulnesse of his seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 Io. 3.9. remaining in them; and then as v. 2.Nor Bastard▪ Who? Bastards shal not be re∣ceiv'd, i. e. Hebr. Mamzer, one that is of an Whore, viz. the Whore in Rev. 17.5. the fruit of uncleannesse. Too too many of them, it is to be feared enter in as yet, that have relation to the Whore, and that don't heartily hate her and all her trum∣peries and toyes; but then it shall be, that none but those that hate the Whore. and that shall labour to lay her open to all the World, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17. And such as shall be glad of the day, wherein they may dash her little ones a∣gainst the stones, Psal 137.8.9. and may serve Babylon as she hath served Sion, that shall enter indeed,☜ in that day (and not the bastards that are born of the Whore;) But such as have gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and his marks, and over the number of his name, Rev. 15.2. Then will be the great and apparent distinction indeed. Yea then v. 3.Nor Ammon nor Moab shal enter in. The Ammonite and Moabite must not enter in, &c. yet the Edomites shall, v 7. being turned Proselites, and received into the faith; by Idu∣mea or Edom, I would understand the red people (as the Word signifies) and as it relates to the latter dayes; I do believe it may take in the bloody Jewes, who have so ong lay under the guilt,But the Edo∣mits shall, or the Jews. who will e're the third generation enter apace into the Churches, in the mean time; Remember O Lord these children of Edom (the Jewes) in the day of Jerusalem (the gathered Churches, in the day of Jezreel) who sayd (and so they shal say as zealously as any of Babylon) rase it, rase it, even the founda∣tion thereof: O Daughters of Babylon, who ought to be destroy∣ed! happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us, Psal. 137.7.8. In that day every eye shall see, and every ear shal heare that srael is a people distinct from all others,☜ and so made by the instinct of the spirit, which leads them out of Babylon in∣to Zion, and into all truths. To conclude, all the Prophesies
Promises, Precepts, Practises of Primitive Saints, Preachings, and Epistles, and Acts of the Apostles (which is our Directory) yea all the Types and Titles of the Church,Exhort. as Mount Zion▪ Jerusalem, Temple, Tabernacle, spirituall house, peculiar people, royal Priesthood,To strive a¦gainst Natio¦nall and paro¦chiall Church∣ and why? City, Spouse, Vineyard, Paradise and Garden of the Lord, and golden Candlesticks, and Kingdome of Heaven, and all other titles that belong to her, do call aloud in our ears to come in unto her, and out of false adulterine wayes of wor∣ship. Wherefore Hosea 2.1.2.3.4. Say to the brethren, come my people, and to the Sisters (we will joyn with you) arise, sing, for there is mercy offered us: Wherefore let us all plead; Plead with your mother, plead, for she is not my wife, neither n I her husband (saith the Lord) Wherefore let her put away her whoredomes out of her face,Expos. and her adulteries out of her brest: Plead,Zanch. strive against her. Litigate. Et rixamini. Zanc. in loc. viz. your mother, the Nationall Church (so called) and her children. v. 4. viz. parochiall Synagogues, which are full of whoredomes and adulteries, and are not the Lords Churches, or his Spouse, but Adulteresses and (as Churches) the Daughters of the Whore, the Quean, the soul strumpet, who shall be burnt up: Therefore awake,A word to En¦gland, Ireland, and Scotland about Naio¦nll and Pro∣chiall Church∣es. O ye people of England! Ireland! and Scot∣land! and plead and expostulate in good earnest with them! For their Whoredomes are in their faces, and their adulteries in their breasts; in their face, that is their externall worship and ordinan∣ces, and discipline; And in their breasts, that is in their hearts. For Parish-Church Members are ful of whoredoms, uncleaness, idolatry, superstitions, and adulteries in their hearts: They, love the Whore in their hearts. Yea furthermore most impu∣dently and imprudently (like the most brazen faced Whores) they will commit sin,The standing impudence of Prsh Church Members! incest, adultery in open sight, and without blushing for shame call for their Lovers in the open congrega∣tions, and will have their Sacraments, their Services, their Idols, and wil-worship in their Synagogues; yea and they have their Priests too, to preach up and paint out their idolatry (as Whores are painted) & to give them the Sacraments in their sins.☞ O sad dayes I like Sodomes! but the Lord will judge her! I remem∣ber Mr. Cawdrey in's storehouse and similles,Cawdrey, p. 83. sayes to this, that his high felony,Sim. as 'tis for a subject to counterfeit his Kings Let∣ters
or Seales; so for men to make new Lawes and Orders, and not to take Christ's; but to alter the word,About the Sa∣craments. to counterfeit the Sacraments, and most impudently with the Whores forehead to maintain traditions, Customes (though of long standing) which are not Christ's, but Anti-Christ's, and to administer the Sacrament and Seales otherwise then the Lord hath appoin∣ted, and then Christ hath instituted in his Gospel,They are guil∣ty of Treason, Felony, and Whoredome. yea and to aggravate their wickednesse too, to do it in the Kings (Christs) name too; and to pretend his Commission (which they have counterfeited and invented) is horrible felony, and high treason, and renders such as so receive them from their Ministers, an Harlot of Anti-Christ. What can the Parish Ministers and Presbyterians then say for themselvs?☜ or any that receive from them? Seeing it is Felony, Treason, and Harlotry. Her Whoredomes and adulteries are so open, as makes a modest man to blush and detest her; whilst other lewd ones and her Lovers (that seem yet to carry a fair face) do defend and professe her to be honest and honorable: Aye,☜ 'tis for their credit so to do who trade with her, as long as they can keep it, which will not be long now. For the Lord sayes, v. 3. Let her put away thse her (stinking) whoredomes, lest I strip her naked, and set her  in the day that she was born, &c. The Lord hath promised to strip these strumpit-Churches, and Temples of Dagon; The whore and her children, the Daughters of Babylon, viz. Na∣tionall and Parish-Churches as naked as they were the first day they were born;☜ they shall be as poore and miserable as ever they were; yea as in the time of their nativity, how is that? Why thus. First,How the Lord will strip them naked. They shall be quite stripp'd of cloaths for covering and ornaments, and not have so much as men of gifts, (i. e. Learning that is graced) or abilities of the spirit that shall plead for them, but all against them,1. Take away all their Orna∣ments, and leave them na∣ked. even those that are as yet the Whores Lovers, and commit adultery with her, they shall loath her when they see her lwdnesse and nakednesse; so that she shall be stripp'd of all, and bee as naked as ever she was borne. 2. When these Parishes and Sinagogues,2. Show them in their blood and fth. and false Churches were borne as they were naked, so they were besmear'd in bloud,
begun in bloud, and born in bloud; so the Lord will shew their abominable filthinesse in the very eyes and sight of all her Lo∣vers, v. 10. and lay her crimes and iniquities, and contamination open to all the world. 3. When they were born at first, why alas! they were poor feeble hings,3. In their im∣becillity. and not able to help themselves; and so it shall bee in these latter, dayes, none shall bee able to deliver them, Hoseae 2.10. or keep them up, Dan. 11. ult. 4. When borne at first they arose with a cry; they made the poore Saints to cry,4. With a loud cry. and to suffer death and martyrdome; but they shall be stripp'd into that condition,☞ that they shall fall with a cry, Rev. 6.16. Rev. 18.11.18. Isay 15.5.8. Jer. 48.5.20, and howling. 5. Little.5. When borne at first but little, and so shall they be crow∣ded out and be no more; as the Kingdome of Christ, and true Churches grow greater and greater. 6. In utter darknesse.6. When borne at first they were without knowledge, in darkenesse (in themselves) and could not see, and thus shall they be spoyled and stripp'd again, and thrown down into darknesse, never more to rise: as Mat. 8.12. The Children of the King∣dom shalbe cast out into utter darknes: So the children of the na∣tionall Churches, viz. Parish Churches. Thus, Hos. 2.4. I will not have mercy on her Children, for they are Children of Whoredome, i. e.Parish Chur∣ches, the Chil∣dren of the Whore shall fall without mercy. Corrupt, superstitious, and Adulterated (even in sight of all Saints) like Rome the mother, whence they came, as wee proved fully in the first Book: They are not ligitimate Chil∣dren, borne of God, but of base bloud, adulterine seed, whorish Romish principles▪ wherefore I will have no mercy on them, saith the Lord, but they must fall with Babylon that belong to Ba∣bylon, unlesse they put away their Whoredomes, Superstitions, & unlawfull Worships, & no longer, like impudent Strumpets, to paint themselves over with Spanish, yea Romish Paintings, and alluring outsides:☞ Away with those black patches  and al∣luring arguments used to get people in to those Idol Worships! of their Sacraments! Burials! Baptizings! or the like (as they are their inventions,) that are unwarrantable, and declared Whoredomes, and Adulteries in the Word of God! which the Lord will judge with fire from heaven!
In the mean time, the day of putting a difference is upon us, happy are they that see it and do it: It is as yet in our Nation as it was in Athens, there were two sorts of Congregations, viz. Ecclesia & Agorae, Churches and mixt Congregations;Churches and Parishes differ much, Flaccus, Illiricus, vide Bernardus Cant. & Beda Serm. 14. in the Churches none but such as appeared Saints had commu∣nion and entrance; but the other Congregations (sayes Flaccus Illiricus) were made up of any consisting of a confused and pro∣miscuous multitude, which made a meer Politicall meeting. And such are your Parishes and nationall Churches, which are far from being Churches (as is proved in all the Essentials that ap∣pertain thereto lib. 1.) thus Churches differd from Synagogues as they do from Parishes, vide Vrsin, de Eccles. 1. Quest. Pa∣rishes (at the best) are but like the great Chamber,Sim. whereinto all may come and walk that will; but the Churches of Christ are his Chambers of presence, the King is there,But out of the Churches are great things to be done these latter dayes. his Councell there, and thence will come forth his great Acts and Laws, and Declarations to all the World. And although the Ship is tossed, and the Disciples that want faith cry out for feare, let the storms rise higher, as long as Christ is imbarqued with us in the same Seas, and in the same stormes. Wherefore as Cae∣sar said to the trembling Marriner, Confide nauta,Sim. Caesarem vebis: feare not, (honest friend!) for ye carry Caesar! So I say to the Churches, and to all the Members, friends! feare not! for the Lord is with you, you carry Christ; it is he that is in you,☜ and holds the stern for you; Fear not! only be carefull of some corrupt boards and members of your Churches who will flye in a storm, and so the ship may spring a leake,A good cauti∣on. ☜ and thereby let in too much of the raging Sea; but bee so much the carefuller to stop the leaks, and every day to be pumping out the corrupt black and stinking waters which get in, and goe on with the fairest gales and wind of the spirit; and as the waters abute, so the Ark, i. e. the Church (long and broad, and made of many pieces of Wood that will never rot, which) shal rest on Mount Ararat, Gen. 7.6.7. till the waters be all dried up,☜ and the Sea be no more, Rev. 21.1.2. And thus I have done with this Chapter, and this second Booke, wherein you have had the totum homogeneum of the true Church of Christ, according to the Gospel institution, and true
Primitive practise and Christian constitution. We have heard what is to be done before and what in an orderly knitting and imbodying together. The next Booke, (the third) if the Lord will give incouragement, will be very large and profita∣ble, to shew what is to be done after this orderly imbodying Wherin the Church will be considered, as the totum organicum in all her Officers, and Offices, and Orders, and Ordinances, (some of which we want in these days & means maintenances, and even round about her very borders.Sim. For as the Body is blind that wants Eyes to see, and deaf that wants Ears to hear, and lame that wants Feet to walk, and Hands to act, &c. but yet it is a Body: so the Church is a Church that wants Or∣gans and Officers, but not so perfect and intire without a Pastor, as a Mouth;☞ & Tongue i. e. Teachers; & Overseers, as Eyes; El∣ders, as Eares; Deacons, as Hands to distribute to the poor and needy, &c. Messengers, as Feet; and such like instruments as these.A Church is not so intire without Offi∣cers and Or∣gans. But yet much care must be had in choosing, and cal∣ling, and confirming them in their services and places to exe∣cute as by Authority, and vertue and the whole, from, and for the wlole: but of that hereafter, and Thus far for the Essentiali Ecclesiae. I purpose now to lay by my pen for a little while, till I walke about Sion, and have gone round about her (even her borders) and told the Towers thereof,Psal. 48.12.13. and mark'd well her Bulworks, and considered her Pala∣ces,The Authours resolve to go the rounds, and to make a fur∣ther and fuller search of Sion. (as they are now, and as they have been of old, and as they will be in these later days) & then I will (God willing) arise again, in the Name of Jehovah Elohim, to tell (what I have marked and met with in my rounds) to the generation that is to come: Sic nunquam metuant Res Magn oblivia magni Temporis, &c. . Fiat Finiat. .
THE FIRST TABLE, Of the Eminent (Orthodox) Writers, Councels, and Martyrs, in all ages, that have bore testimony to the truths asserted in this Tract, and that are Quoted in the Tract, 1. Lib. A A Insworths Communion. Ainsw. against Bernard. Alphoneus. Ambrose's Epist's. Ames Medull. Theol. Aquinas. Aretius. Arias Montanus. Askew, (Martyr.) Augustinus. B BAines's Diocesan Triall. Baines on Colloss. Bartlers Modell. Benson on Hosea. Bernard in Cant. Bernard to Pope Eugenius. Beza. Bilson, (Martyr.) Bolton. Brightman. Bradford, (Martyr.) Burton's Vindication. Bullinger. Burrough's Heart Divisions. Burrough's against Edwards. Burrough's excellency of a gra∣cious spirit. Buxtorph. C CAlvin. Cameron. Cartwright on Eccles. Policy. Cartwrights Reply to Whitgift Chrysostome. Chamier. Cotton's Koyes. Cotton's holinesse of Church-Members. Cyprian. D DAmport, or Davenport. Dell's Way of Peace. Dike. Diodate. Dixon. E ERasmus. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. Euseb's Prepar. to the Gospel.
F FEnner. Ferus. Fox's Martyrs. Fulke against Rhemists, &c. G GOodwin, I. and T. Gregory Epist. Grotius. Gualther. H HAll. Hart's Char. Harris. Hermes. Hierome. Hooker's Policy. Hooker's Survey of Discipline. Hobson. Hooper, (Martyr.) Husse, (Martyr.) I IAcob's Attestation. Iarchi Sol. Ierome in Hierome. Irenaeus. Iunius. Iustinian. K KEckerman Theol. L LUTher Epist. M MArlinus Epist. Marlorat. Peter.Martyr. Marsilinus Patavinus. Mayer. Melanchton. Montanus. Methodius. Moulin. Musculus. N NOyes Temple. O OEcolampad. Owen's Essay. Owen's Eshcol. P PAreus. Parker. Paul Baines. Paul Hobson. Patavinus. Par. Peter Martyr. Peters. Phillips Answer to Lamb. Perkins. Polidore Virgil. R RAwlinson. Robinson's Reasons discussed. Robinson's Essayes. Rutherford. S SAltmarsh. Sasbont. Selden de decimis. Smith on the Creed. Sheindler.
Sibbs. T TAylor. Taylor, (Martyr.) Tertullian. Tilenus. Trap. V VEnning. Ursin. W WHittaker, Willets Synopss. Wilson's Cases. Willim's Elijah's Wish. Z ZAnch. de Eccles. Zanch. in Hosea. Zuinglius. Finis 1. Libri. The first Table, 2. Libri. ADams on Pet. Ainsworth Communion of Saints. Ames Medul. Theol. Ambrose in Rom. Ambrose in Gen. Ames on Peter. Ames de Anti Bellarm. Anselme. Apology of N. Eng. men. Aquinas. Ardeus. Augustin in Ioan. Augustin in Rom. Augustin Epist. 19. ad Hier. Augustin in Psal. Aurelians. Concil. Auspurge. B BAines in Col. Ball. Bartlet's Modell. Bayly. Beda. Bernard in Paschal. Bernard in Cant. Bernard in Ezek. Bernard de Consid. cum multis aliis. Beza in Mat. Beza in Rom. Beza's Confessions. Beza's Annotations. Bohemia Confess. Bolton's Bounds. Bolton's toss'd ship. Bradford (Martyr.) Brightman. Brute, (Martyr.) Bucan. Bucer de Gubern. Eccles. inter alia. Bullinger de Eccles. inter alia. Budaeus. C CAlvin in Rom. Calvins Instit. inter alia. Cartwrights Eccles. Discip. Cartwrights against Whitgift. Cawdrey's Sim. Centurists. Clement.
Chrysostome Hom. in Rom. in∣ter alia. Cooper. Concil. Carthag. Concil▪ Aurelians. Concil. Tolet. Cottons Keyes. Cradock's Gospel-holinesse, and Mount-Sion. Culverwells White-stone. Cyprian Epist. Cyprian. inter alia. D DAmascene. Dell's Way of Peace, Dike on Sacrament. Diodate. Dr. Donn. E NENgland's Apologie. Epiphanius in Haeres. Euseb. in Gen. Euseb. Eccles Hist. F FArrar, (Martyr.) Featly. Fenner de Sac. Thol. Fenners Alarum. Feurus, (French Martyr.) Flaccus Illiricus. Fox Martyrs. Fulke against Rhemists. G GAtaker. Glover, (Martyr.) Goodwin, I. and T. Gregory Magn. Gualther. H HAymo. Hawkes, (Martyr.) Hierome de Unit. Eccles. inter alia. Helvetia. Confess. Dr. Homes. Hooker's Survey of Discipline. Hooker against Hudson. Hooper, (Martyr.) Holland (Martyr.) Hudson. Jo. Husse (Martyr.) I IEssey, alias Jacie. Irenaeus in Gen. inter alia. Junius. Justin. K KEckerman. Theol. L LAmbert, (Martyr.) Latimer, (Martyr.) Luther in Joel. Epist's; inter a∣lia. M MAgdeburgenses. Mayer. Melanchton Com. Loc. inter a∣lia. N NAzianzen. Nilus de Primat. Nelphilas. Noyes Temple. Novatus.
O OLevian in Rom. Origen in Mat. inter alia. Owen's Eshcol. P PAnormitane, a Romano Law∣yer. Par. Paraeus in Gen. Joel. Rom. inter alia. Parisian Schoole. Papismi Synopsis. Perkins Problem, Cases of Con∣science. Perkins in Gal. Rev. inter alia. Peters Discourse of Covenant. Philpot, (Martyr.) Pliny. Polanus in Ezek. Dan. &c. Preston on N. Covenant. Prinn's Quaries, &c. Prosper. R RAndall's Star leading to Christ. Ridley, (Martyr.) Rivetus. Robinson Justif. Robinsons Essayes. Rogers on good Samaritane Para∣ble. Rogers's Right Way to be saved. Rogers (Proto-Martyr.) Rutherford. S SAdeele. Saltmarsh's Flowing of Christs bloud. Sibb's Marriage Feast. Sibb's Soule-Conflicts. Sibb's Founta ne sealed. Sibb's Excellency of Gospel a∣bove Law. Sibrandus. Dr. Peter Smith. Robert Smith (Martyr.) Socrates Eccles. Hist. Soomen. P. Sterry. Dr. Stroughton's Right Plea. Synopsis Papismi. T Dr. TAyler in Psalm. Taylor, (Martyr.) Tertullian de velandis virgini∣bus, inter alia. Theodoret in Epist. inter alia. Tichbourn on Io. 13. Tilenus. Tindal (Martyr.) Trap in Evang. Trelcatius. Dr. Troisse. V VIndiciae Clavium. Vines Serm. before Parl. October 22. 1644. Ursinus Chatechis. inter alia.
W WArr's Dispute 'twixt Form and Power. Whittaker de Eccles. Concil. & Pontif. inter alia. Willet. Wilsons Cases. Wittemberg. Confes. Woodman (Martyr) Z ZAnchy de Eccles. de Hom. creat. in Gen. Hos. &c. Finis 1. Tabuli. THE SECOND TABLE. Of those Choise Scriptures which are Expounded rescu∣ed and defended from the Adversaries in this Treatise. GENESIS. Chap. Vers. Pag. 2 8.9 to 18. 529 530 &c. ch. 9 l. 2 EXODUS. Ch. Vers. Pag. 20 24 116 ch. 9. l. 1 23 1.2 112 ch. 8. l. 1 25 40 120 ch. 10. l. 1 1. KINGS. Ch. Vers. Pag. 10 6.7 383 ch. 6. l. 2 10 9.10 242 ch. 1. l. 2 1. CHRON. Chap. Vers. Pag. 13 9 173 ch. 13. l. 1 15 23 280 ch. 3. l. 2 JOB. Chap. Vers. Pag. 31 14.24 26 27 161. 162. ch. 13. l. 1 36 10 1 ch. 1. l. 1 PSALMS. 4 v. 3. p. 267 ch. 2. l. 2 18 30. 356 ch. 6. l. 2 22 1.2.4 5. 367 ch. 6. l. 2 26 6.7. 356 ch. 6. l. 2
27 4 334 ch. 5 l. 2 36 9. 17 ch 9 l. 1. 44 10 11.14 17.18 &c. 266 ch. 2. l 2 45 10. 240 ch. 1 l. 2 51 12 13. 356 375. ch 6 l. 2 55 6 8.11. 80 ch 6. l. 1 60 6. 119. ch 10. l. 1 63 1 2. 116 ch 9 l. 1 65 1. 133 ch. 12 l 1 66 19 356 ch 6. l. 2 74 19.20. 34 35 ch. 3. l. 1 83 11.12 13 171 ch. 13 l. 1 84 10 118 ch. 9. l. 1 87 2.3.4 209 ch 15. l. 1 110 3 3 ch. 1 & 124 ch. 11. l. 1 114 4 26 ch 3. l. 1 126 5.6 365 ch. 6 l. 2 127 1.2 140 ch 13 l. 1 PROVERBS. Ch. Vers. Pag. 1 8 1 ch 1. l. 1. 7 1 119 120 c 9 l. 1 9 1.2.3 4 32.34 &c. 198 199 c. 15. l. 1 ECCLES. Ch. Vers. Pag. 5 1 239 ch. 1. l. 2 7 18 340 ch. 5. l. 2 CANT. Ch. Vers. Pag. 2 11 12. 28 ch. 3 l. 1 3 9 50 ch. 5. l▪ 1 4 1 2 3.4 &c. 96. ch. 8. l 1 & 43 ch 4 l 1   8 44 ch. 4. l. 1 5 9 &c. 285 ch 3 l. 2   11 150 ch. 13. l. 1 6 1 285 ch 3. l 2   9 337 ch. 5 l. 2   10 282 ch. 3. l. 2   12 253 ch 2 l. 2 8 2 132 ch. 12. l 1   6 266 ch 2 l. 2   5 376 ch 6. l. 2 ISAIAH. Ch. Vers. Pag. 1 3 241 ch. 1. l. 2 2 2.3 4 ch. 1 l. 1. 5 2 43 ch. 4. l. 1 14 32 183 ch. 14. l. 1 22 21, 22 138 ch. 13. l. 1 27 6 44 ch. 4. l. 1 28 15 63 ch. 5. l. 1 30 21, 22 33 ch. 3 l. 1 33 17, 20 117 ch. 9 l. 1 108 ch. 8. l. 1   21 203 ch 15. l. 1 34 11 35 ch. 3. l. 1 40 11.38 329 ch. 5. l. 2
42 11 46 ch. 4 l. 1 51 311 132 ch 12. l▪ 1 54 11.12.14 510 ch. 9. l. 2 60 5.6 521 ch 9. l. 2   13, 14 51 ch 5. l 1   17 181 ch. 13. l. 1 JEREMY. Ch. Vers. Pag. 7 9 52 ch. 5. l. 1 15 19 132, 133 ch. 12 l 1 30 17, 19 133 ch. 12 l. 1 33 7 524 ch. 9 l. 2 50 5 84 ch. 7 l. 1 209 ch. 15 l. 1 124 ch. 11 l. 1 EZEKIEL Ch. Vers. Pag. 13 14 191 ch 14 l. 1 20 38 562 ch. 7 l. 2 36 37, 38 29 ch. 5 l. 2 37 7 506 ch. 9 l. 2 43 10, 11 82 ch. 7 119 ch. 10 l. 1 44 6, 7 52 ch 5 l. 1 DANIEL. Ch. Vers. Pag. 2 32 154 ch. 13 l. 1 11 44, 45 525, 526 ch. 9 l. 2 12 11, 12, 13 21 ch. 3 l. 1 HOSEA. Ch. Vers. Pag. 1 11 509 ch 9 l. 2 2 1 510 ch. 9 l. 2 14 5, 6 44 ch. 4 l. 1   8 146 ch. 13 l. 1 JOEL. Ch. Vers. Pag. 2 29 464 ch. 8 l. 2 AMOS. Ch. Vers. Pag. 3 2▪ 3, 4 303 ch. 4 l. 2 8 11, 12 35 ch. 3 l. 1 MICAH. Ch. Vers. Pag. 4 2 199 ch. 15 l. 1 4 5 329 ch. 5 l. 2 ZEPHANY. Ch. Vers. Pag. 3 9 133 ch. 12 l. 1 330 ch. 5 l. 2. HAGGAI. Ch. Vers. Pag. 1 2.4 194 ch. 14 l. 1 2 18 189 ch. 14 l. 1
ZACHARY. Ch. Vers. Pag. 2 11. 124. ch. 11. l. 1 330 ch. 5. l. 2. 4 6. 193. ch. 14. l. 1 524. ch. 9. l. 2 6 13. 257. ch. 2. l. 2 8 23. 330. ch. 5. l. 2 MALACH. Ch. Vers. Pag. 3 16.17. 70. ch. 6. l. 1. 273. ch. 3. l. 2 MATHEW. Ch. Vers. Pag. 4 33. 43. ch. 4. l. 1.   20.22. 125. ch. 11. l. 1 7 11.12. 259. ch. 2. l. 2   26.27. 183. ch. 14. l. 1 190.   6. 54. ch. 5. l. 1 10 27. 283. ch. 3. l. 2. 16 15.20. 287. ch. 4. l. 2. 13 38.39. 56. ch. 5. l. 1. 15 13. 109. ch. 8. l. 1 16 16. 53. ch. 5. l. 1 16 18.19. p. 4. ch. 1. lib. 1 p. 4. ch. 7. lib. 1 138. ch. 13 lib. 1 284. ch. 14 lib. 1 18 17.18. p. 4. ch. 1. l. 1 & 465. ch. 8. l. 2 21 33 42. ch. 4. l. 1 22 9 129. ch. 11. l. 1   12. 55. ch. 5. l. 1.   21. 181. ch. 13. l. 1   29. 374. ch. 6. l. 2. 24 45. 3. ch. 1. l. 1 25 37. 382. ch. 6. l. 2 28 18. 121. ch. 10. l. 1   19.20. 303. ch. 5. l. 2 331. MARK. Ch. Vers. Pag. 12 1. 42. ch. 4. l. 1 LUKE. Ch. Vers. Pag. 9 4.5.6. 128. ch. 11. l. 1   55.56. 159. ch. 13. l. 1   23. 124. ch. 11. l. 1 12 13.14. 160. ch. 13. l. 1 14 23. &c. 128.129. ch. 11. l. 1   28.29. 136. ch. 12. l. 1 21 25.26. 26. ch. 3. l. 1. 22 15. 204. ch. 15. l. 1 JOHN. Ch. Vers. Pag. 3 19. 282 ch. 3. l. 2 4 28.29. 367 ch. 6. l. 2 6 37 362 ch. 6. l. 2   44 253 ch. 2. l. 2 14 17.26 264 ch. 2. l. 2 15 2 109 ch. 8. l. 1   45 44 ch. 4. l. 1   27 357 ch. 6. l▪ 2
JOHN. Chap. Verse. Pag. 16 13 264. ch. 2. l. 2. 17 21.22. 523. ch. 9. l. 2. ACTS. Chap. Vers. Pag. 1 14 566. ch. 8. l. 2 2 37 53. ch. 5. l. 1 125. ch. 11. l. 1 365. ch. 6. l. 2   41.47. 67. ch. 5. l. 1 261. ch. 2. l. 2   39. &c. 72 ch. 6. l. 1 3 22. 121. ch. 10. l. 1 5 13. 283. ch. 3. l. 2   38.39. 340. ch. 5. l. 2 6 2.3. 465. ch. 8. l. 2 9 26. 84. ch. 7 l. 1 11 23. 124. ch. 11. l. 1 456. ch. 7. l. 2 14 23. 456. ch. 8. l. 2 15 12.3. &c. 22. 109 110. &c. ch. 8. l. 1 17 23. 241▪ ch. 1. l. 2 18 28. 281. ch. 3. l. 2 ROMANS. Chap. Vers. Pag. 8 16. 372. ch. 6. l. 2 9 1. ibid. 14 5.6. 243. ch. 1. l. 2. 14 1.2.3.5.6 7 10.13.16.18 19 20.21 &c 329.330. &c ch. 5. l. 2. 1. CORINTH. Chap. Vers. Pag. 3 3. 43. ch. 4. l. 1   8. 31. ch. 3. l. 1   10. 142. ch. 13. l. 1 11 2.23. 120 ch. 10. l. 1 12 6. 89. ch. 7. l. 1   13. 307. ch. 4. l. 2 14 1.2.3.31.32.34.35. 37.39. 475. ch. 8. l. 2   33.40 271. ch. 3. l. 2 2. CORINTH. Ch. Vers. Pag. 5 11. 356. ch. 6. l. 2 6 16.17. 72. ch. 6. l. 1 117. ch. 9. l. 1 403. ch. 9 l. 2 8 35. 125. ch. 11. l. 1 10 45. 140. ch. 13. l. 1 12 9. 268. ch. 2. l. 2 12 5.11. 381. ch 6. l. 2. GALAT. Ch. Vers. Pag. 3 1 39. ch. 3. l. 1   28. 471. ch. 8. l 2 4 6 337. ch. 5. l. 2   9 77. ch 6. l▪ 1 6 1.2. 83. ch. 8. l. 1.
EPHESIANS. Chap. vers. pag. 1. 10. 338, 339 c. 5. l. 5 2. 21, 22. 84. ch. 7. l. 1 189. c. 14. l. 1 3. 17. 196. ch. 14. l. 1 4. 4, 5. 307, 308. c. 4. l. 2 5. 11. 42. ch. 4. l. 1 72. ch. 6. l. 1 PHILIPPIANS. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 12. 187. ch. 14. l. 1 3. 15, 16. 330. ch. 5. l. 2 4. 3. 566. ch. 8. l. 2 COLOSSIANS. Chap. vers. pag. 1. 18. 148. ch. 13. l. 1 2. 6, 7. 144. ch. 13. l. 1     196. ch. 14. l. 1   9, 19. 148. c. 13. l. 1. 150. c. 13. l. 1. 182. c. 13. l. 1.   17. 337. ch. 5. l. 2   18. 317. ch. 6. l. 2 2 THESS. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 8. 154. ch. 13. l. 1 1 TIMOTHY. Chap. vers. pag. 6. 3, 4, 5. 120. ch. 10. l. 1 2 TIMOTHY. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 24, 25. 128. ch. 11. l. 1 3. 3. 72. ch. 6. l. 1 HEBREWS. Chap. vers. pag. 1. 1, 2. 366. ch. 6. l. 2 3. 10, 11, 13. 207.208. ch. 15. l. 1. 4. 12. 257. ch. 2. l. 2 6. 8. 208. ch. 15. l. 1 11. 10. 189. ch. 14. l. 1 13. 7. 136. ch. 12. l. 1 1 PETER. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 3. 357. ch. 6. l. 2   9. 133. ch. 12. l. 1 4 14. 267. ch. 2. l. 5. 2. 255. ch. 2. l. 2 2 PETER. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 10. 187. ch. 14. l. 1 APOC. or REV. Chap. vers. pag. 2. 2, 14, 15, 20. 101. c. 8. l. 1 207. c. 4. l. 2 5. 9. 134. ch. 12. l. 1 11. 5. 90. ch. 7. l. 1   6. 19. ch. 3. l. 1   8. 342. ch. 5. l. 2   16. 382. ch. 6. l. 2 12. 1, 2, 14, &c. 9. ch. 2. l. 1 14. 4. 134. ch. 12. l. 1 18. 4, 8, 9, 10. 525. ch. 9. l. 2 20. 8, 9. 90. ch. 7. l. 1. 21. 17, 18, 19, 20. 511. ch. 9. l. 2.
The third Table: Fully and Alphabetically declaring the chief things handled in the whole Treatise. p. is for page, c. for chap. and l. for lib. A. ABimelechian destiny nigh them that usurp Christs Seat, pag. 172. chap. 13. lib. 1 Ablest, Embody first, and in pub∣lick, p. 278. c. 3. l. 2 Account of faith at Dublin, p. 350 c. 5▪ l. 2 Accusations against Saints and Gospel-discipline, p. 13 c. 2. l. 1 Acts of the Apostles▪ Churches Di∣rectory, p. 123. c. 10. l. 1 Acts of Providence oft read (He∣brew-like) backward, p. 47. c. 4. lib. 1. & epist. p. 6 Acts of the soul, reflex and direct, p. 376, 377. c. 6. l. 2 Adjunct to a true Church, is the word preached, and no more, p. 79. c. 6. l. 1 Admission of Members, of whom, by whom, how and when, p. 288, 289 c. 4. l 2 Admission of the least and lowest Saints, p. 339, 340, 348. c. 5. l. 2 Admission of all opinions that dif∣fer in things doubtfull and indif∣ferent, p. 311, 312. c. 5. l. 2 Advantage to Churches by expe∣riences of Saints, p. 358 c. 6. l. 2 Advowsons and presentations wick∣ed, and how, p. 7. & 29. of Epist. Adullamites are many, p. 93. c. 7 l. 1 Aegypt, Churches of Form, how? p. 342. c. 5▪ l. 2 Aegypt a type of Antichrist, p. 525. c. 9. l. 2 Aegyptian plagues on Parish Chur∣ches, p. 92, 93. c. 7. l. 1 Aegyptian Task-masters, who now? p. 342 c. 5. l. 2 Aegle-Saints nested in the Rock, p. 198. c. 14. l. 1 Affections held with difference of opinions at first, p. 333. c. 5. l. 2 Affections of women above mens, p. 474.475. c. 8. l. 2 Afflictions, converting Ordinan∣ces, p. 403, 413. c. 6. l. 2 Afflictions of (spirituall) Israelites under hard task-masters, how? p. 342. c. 5. l. 2 Afflictions on the Author great, p. 432. c. 6. l. 2 Agates (precious stones) who? p. 510. c. 9. l. 2 Age; in the last was to know Christ the Head, in this Christs body, but in the next, both, viz. whole Christ, p. 147. c. 13. l. 1 All ages Eminent Independents, p. 114▪ c. 8. l. 1
All Languages and nations must make up one Church ere long, p. 530. c. 9. l. 2 Ambition, what it brought the Bi∣shops to, p. 106, 156. c. 8, 13. l. 1 All of different opinions, &c. one, p. 329. c. 5. l. 2 All in one, the beauty of Sion, p. 337. c. 5. l. 2 Amethysts (precious stones) who? p. 519, 520. c. 9. l. 2 Ames left his Professorship for Church-fellowship, p. 118. c. 9. l. 1 Amiable Tabernacles are the con¦gregational Churches, p. 87. c. 7. l. 1 Anabaptists in Ireland too bitter, unsound in judgement, wresters of the Scriptures, uncharitable and censorious. A lesson for them, p. 299, 302, 305, 307, 309, c. 4. l. 2. p. 453. c. 7. l. 2. p. 334. c. 5. l. 2 Angels can't teach so well as expe∣riences do, p. 384. c. 6. l. 2 Anger of God against such as com∣pany with Christ's enemies, p. 76. c. 6. l. 1 Antichrist destroyed and tormen∣ted, how? p. 23 c. 3. l 1. Antichrists sawcinesse, whether in Episc. Presbyt. or Indep. to usurp Christ's power, p. 105. c. 8. l. 1 Antichrist fals the same way he rose, p. 156. c. 13. l. 1 Antichrist arrogates both powers, viz. Eccles. and Civill, p. 176. c. 13. l. 1 Antichrist the first that made diffe∣rence of opinions, difference of affections, p. 333 c. 5. l. 2 Antichrist typified by Aegypt, So∣dom, Babylon, &c. p. 525. c. 9. l. 2 Antichrist, how he resembles, or ra∣ther dissembles Christ. p. 25. epist. Antichristian-Chur. parish-Chur∣ches, p. 61. c. 5. l. 1 Antichristian-Churches we must separate from, pag. 78. ch. 6. lib▪ 1 Antichristian to rob Sisters Right, p. 469. c. 8. l. 2 Antiochus Epiph. a figure of the Pope, p 526. c. 9. l. 2 Antiquity for the Independents, p. 60. epist. in Apostles-daies Church-discipline was glorious, and how? p. 910. c. 2. l. 1 Apostles not Heads, but Helpers, p. 120. c. 10. l. 1. p. 107. c. 8. l. 1 Appeals never any to Jerusalem about Church government, p. 110. c. 8. l. 1 Appearance of Christ the ruine of Policy. p. 170. c. 13. l. 1 Archbishops (third) Head of Brasse, p 156, 157. c. 13. l. 1 Arke on the waters yet for forty years, p. 24. c. 3. l. 1 Arke overturned by Beasts carrying it, p. 36. c. 3 l. 1 Arke on which the Spirit rests, p. 268. c. 2 l. 2 Armes which the Lord draws with, are Spirit (his right hand) and Word (his left) p. 253. c. 2. l. 2 Army of Christ, who? p. 85 c. 7. l. 1 Armour of light for Saints of all judgements and opinions. p. 335. c. 5. l. 2 Armoury for swords for Saints, p. 99. c. 8 l. 1 Assembly of Divines a (fourth) Head of Brasse, p. 158. c. 13. l. 1 Assemblies of Ministers must down: which are allowable, and which not, p. 109. c. 8. l. 1 in Assemblies of Sion, God is glo∣rious, p. 118. c 9. l. 1 Assurance requisite before entrance, p. 248. c. 1. l. 2 Assurance brought to light, and how to know it, p. 372, & 451. of exper. c. 6. l. 2 Authors judgement of the Restau∣ration:
1 Gradually now; 2 U∣niversally to come, p 20. c. 3. l. 1 Author prays he may be as a light to give others light, though he be spent for't, p. 50. c. 5. l. 1 Author abused at Dublin for Mr. Bartlet, p. 88. c. 7. l. 1 Author's warning to the Parlia∣ment, p. 172. c. 13. l. 2 Author expects a world of Antago∣nists, but he cals for reasons, not railings, p. 226. epist. l. 2 E. A very, her Experience, p. 402, 403. c. 6. l. 2 Author's Experience, p. 419, 420, &c. ibid. Author's assurance how attain'd, p. 431, 438. ibid. Authors call to the Ministry how, p. 436, 437. ibid. And his order in teaching School p. 438. ibid. Author's Resolution and Motto, p. 3. His suffrings in Essex, p. 231, 232. epist. l. 1 B. BAbes have full breast, pag. 100. chap. 8. lib. 1. Babes of Christ tenderly received, p. 331. c. 5. l. 2 Babylon a type of Antichrist, p. 525. c. 9. l. 2 Babel hath the hearts of millions, p. 40. c. 3. l. 1 Babylons fall bewailed by many, p. 37. c. 3. l. 1 Babylon in Parish Churches, p. 64. c 5. l. 1 Babylon falling and all that traded with her, p. 94. c. 7.1 the Baptist put by scandalous, p. 56. c. 5 l. 1 Baptisme, how Presbyt. and Papists agree in it, p. 466. c. 9. l. 2 Baptizing again, unlawful, pag. 295. chap. 4. lib. 2 Baptisme of Christ, is with holy Ghost, p. 296, and how it differs from John's, p. 300. c. 4. l. 2 our Baptisme true for matter and form, p. 296. ibid. Baptisme which signifies most is best, p. 298. ibid. Baptisme of Anabaptists unlawfull, and why, p. 299. ibid. Baptisme constitutes not a true Church, p. 308. ibid. Bare profession not enough for Church fellowship, p. 56. c. 5. l. 1 Barren Clouds who and when? p. 203. c. 15.1 M. Barkers Experience, p. 413. c. 6. l. 2 S. Barnwel's Experience, p. 415. c. 6. l. 2 Bastards, who? p. 549. c. 9. l. 2 Beast (seven-headed) politick in all ages, p. 10. c. 1. l. 1 Beasts made their Stie of the Church, p. 36, 37. c. 3. l. 1 Beasts carried the Arke till they overturn'd it, p. 36. c. 3. l. 1 Beasts meet together in Parish Churches, p. 93. c. 7. l. 1 Bed of Christ, where? p. 50. c. 5. l. 1 Beleevers bound to walk together in Christs way of Church-fel∣lowship, p 198. c. 15. l. 1 Benefits in Churches, p. 201, 202, 203, 204. c. 15. l. 1 Beleevers of all sorts to be received, p. 312. c. 5. l. 2 Beauties of holinesse p. 3. c. 1. l. 1. & p. 69. c. 5. l. 1 Beauty of Saints embodied, p. 87. c. 7. l. 1 Beautifull object of the Churches is attractive, p. 177. c. 9. 1 Beauty of Gospel-fellowship ap∣pears in publick embody∣ing,
p. 282. c. 3. l. 2 Beauty of Sion is all in one, p. 337, 338. c. 5. l. 2 Beryls (precious stones) who? p. 517. c. 9. l. 2 Bishops how they got to be so big as Lords, Judges, Barons, &c. p. 106 107, c. 8. l. 1. p. 166. c. 13. l. 1 Bishops with their Diocesses, how they got in; and how Heads of brasse. p. 156. c. 13. l. 1 Bishops Lands belong to the poor, p. 167. c. 13. l. 1 F. and A. Bishop's Experience, p. 398. c. 6. l. 2 Blossomes of these daies, and Blessings promised us, p. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, &c. c. 3. l. 1 Blow to Parish-Churches fatall, p. 94. c. 7. l. 1 Body of Christ, his Church, p. 83 ibid. Body together consults in Church-affairs, p. 110. c. 8. l. 1 Bondage of works, p. 420. c. 6. l. 2 Book of the lamb, ere long out, p. 217. epist. l. 2 Bosome-love to Church of Saints, p. 103. ibid. Breach upon some Churches, p. 280 c. 3. l. 2 Brazen fac'd men set up Brazen head, p. 151. c. 13. l. 1 Brazen head compels by force, is a mixt metall, best in outside, hath an ill savour, and is, mans creature, &c. p. 152, 153, 154, 155. c. 13. l. 1 2 Breasts of the Churches, p. 99. c. 8 l. 1 Bride cals to her friends, p. 40. c. 3 l. 1 Bride coming forth in these daies, p. 46, c. 4. l. 1 Building of Christ, is his Church, p. 4. c. 1. l. 1 Builders are yet unskilfull, and not such spirited Aholiabs as will be, p. 123. c. 10. l. 1 Builders wise who and how, p. 142 c. 13. l. 1 Build first in Christ, then into Churches p. 188. c. 14. l. 1 Builders foolish how they differ from the wise, p. 190. c. 14. l. 1 Builders most of them reject the right stone, p. 193. ibid. Builders warn'd of Christning Churches into their own names, p. 197. ibid. Buriall of all ceremonies when? and how? p. 313, 314, c. 5. l. 2 M. Burrels Experience, p. 413. c. 6 l. 2. J. Bywater Preacher his Exper. p. 394. c. 6. l. 2 C. CAll into Christs Gardens these daies, pag. 45. chap. 4. lib. 1 Call to convert all, p. 55. c. 5. l. 1 Called number the Church, p. 73. c. 6 l. 1 Call of Christ makes us volunteers, p. 124. c. 11. l. 1 Call, when, and how; extraordinary and ordinary, legall and evange∣licall p. 394, 403, 406, &c. c. 6. l. 2 a Call most orderly when, p. 450. ib. a Call to the Ministry how, p. 436, 437. c. 6 l. 2. Callings to be followed, p. 75. c. 6. l. 1 Canons (though ere so charg'd) the Church fears not, p. 185. c. 14 l. 1 Care God hath to provide a Go∣spelDiscipline, p. 3. c 1. l. 1 Care of Christ, greatest to his Churches, p. 204. c. 15▪ l. 1. & 44 4.1 Captivity of Babylon in Parish Churches, bondage, pag. 64▪ c. 5. l. 1
Carnall Reason keeps off of Church-fellowship, pag. 80. ch. 6 lib. 1 Castle of defence Christ to's Chur∣ches, p. 185. c. 14. l. 1 Cause judged by the Effects, p. 361 c. 6. l. 2 Catholick Church what, p. 480. c. 9. l. 2 Caution to the Churches of the Church-destroying ranting spirit which is abroad, p. 553. c. 9 l. 2 & p. 502. ibi . Censuring taken off, how? p. 364. c. 6 l. 2 Censurers admonish'd first, p. 418 c. 6. l. 2 Ceremonies dead when, and how? p. 314. c. 5. l. 2 Chalcedonies (precious stones) who? p. 514. c. 9. l. 2 E. Chambers her Experience, p. 406, 407. c. 6 l. 2 I. Chamberlains Experience, p. Exp. 6. l. 2 Champions for Christ who best, p. 245. c. 1. l. 2 Change for the Churches, p. 42. c. 4 l. 1 Character of Wildernesse-ones, p. 38. c 3. l. 1 Character of Hypocrites that crowd into Churches, p. 211. c. 15.1 Chariot of Sol. typified, p. 50. c. 5 l. 1 Charity a standing rule, p. 58. c. 5 l. 1 Cherubims the Saints how? p. 47 epist. l. 1 Children not necessary to be bap∣tized, p 466. c. 9. 2 Christ the Churches fulnesse, p. 17 c. 2. l. 1 Christ's reign 40 years hence, p. 24 c. 3. l. 1 Christ's own planting, who? p 43 c. 4. l. 1 Christ commands Saints to enter, p. 54. c. 5. l. 1. and to separate from them without, p. 75. c. 6. l. 1 & 94. c 7. l. 1 Christ's Rule for building Chur∣ches, p. 120, 121. c. 10. l. 1 Christ alone institutes, instructs, builds and orders his Chur∣ches, p. 139. c. 13. l. 1 Christ alone Lord, how and why? p. 143, 144. c. 13. l. 1 Christ a most absolute Independent p 147. c. 13. l. 1 Christ and Church (Head and Bo∣dy) make up a whole Christ, p. 147. c. 13. l. 1 Christlesse Church is a headlesse bo∣dy, p. 148. c▪ 13. l. 1 Christ Head, and yet Member, p. 148. c. 13. l. 1 Christ Head, is highest ore Chur∣ches, p. 148. c. 13. l. 1 Christ Head is excellency of gives vertue to governs all in sympathy wth Churches p. 149. ibi Christ our Head, hath our eyes, ears, tongue, all, p. 150. c. 13. l. 1 Christ alone lawfull Judge in Reli∣gion, p. 151. c. 13. l. 1 Christ, Head, Builder, and yet Foundation, p. 184. c. 14. l. 1 Christ alwaies the same to Saints and Churches, p▪ 186. c. 14. l. 1 in Christ first, and then get into Churches, p. 188. c. 14.1 Christ the Fountain of Gardens, p. 203. c. 15. l. 1 Christs-memb. more then Church-members. p. 209. c. 15. l. 1 Christ in's fleshly-form and Church-form alike, p. 244. c. 5 l. 2 Christ crucified in spirituall Ae∣gypt, where? p. 342. ibid. in Christ the nigher, the more all in one, p. 339. ibid. Christ found after lost, how? p. 407 408. c. 6. l. 2 Christ Head in Churches, King in Nations, p. 509. c. 9 l. 2
Christian Liberty in opinions, p. 318, 328. c. 5. l. 2 Chrysolites (precious stones) who? p. 516. c. 9. l. 2 Chrysoprasus's who and how? p. 519. c, 9. l. 2 Church in wildernesse, when and how? p. 10. c. 2. l. 1 Church how out of the Wildernesse into Gardens, p. 42. c. 4. l. 1 Churches most fruitfull Gardens, p. 43. c. 4. l. 1. p. 204 c. l. 2 Churches must be well weeded, and many pluckt up by the roots, p. 49. c. 4. l. 1 Church is Christs Bed, Throne, Palace, Couch, Chamber of presence, p. 50. c. 5. l. 1 Church Christs Body and Building, p. 83, 84. c. 7. l. 1 Church Christs City compact, p. 85 c. 7. l. 1 Church Christs Army, Kingdome, Heaven, p. 85, 86. c. 7. l. 1 Churches all equall Independent, p. 100, 101. c. 8. l. 1 Church (wholly of Brothers and Sisters,) all to conclude on Church-matters, p. 110. c. 8 l. 1 Church if whole erres, what to do? p. 111, 112. ibid. Churches joyn together to reco∣ver an erroneous Sister-Church, ibid. Churches object what, p. 116. c. 9 l. 1 Churches Rule for the building, p. 120. 121. c. 10. l. 1 Churches end ever one, p. 131. c. 12 l. 1 Churches Head, Christ alone, p. 137▪ 140, 151, c. 13. l. 1 Churches true and false differ about the Head, p. 152. c. 13 l. 1 Churches can't deliver up to secu∣lar powers, p. 176, 177. c. 13. l. 1 Churches built on Christ the Rock, p. 193. c. 14. l. 1 Churches enjoy more then all the world from Christ, p. 203. c. 15. l. 1 Churches greatest enemies to er∣rors, ibid. Churches to be members of; which are the best, p. 212. c. 15. l. 2 Church-members must be brought in by the Word and Spirit, p. 263 c. 2. l. 2 Church (here) a picture of her above, p. 337, 337. c. 5. l. 2 Churches of form, Spirituall Ae∣gypt, p. 342. c. 5. l 2 Churches formal, and why? p. 348 c. 5. l. 2 Churchmembers warn'd, p. 445. c. 6 l. 2 Church who? and who not? p 465. c. 8. l. 2. and taken divers waies, p. 479▪ 480. c. 9. l. 2 Church-covenant necessary, p. 455 c. 7. l. 2 Churches in Unity a terror to ene∣mies, p. 504. c. 9. l. 2 Churches when they shall excell, p. 52. c.2 l.2 Churches exhorted to live above form, p. 46. epist. l. 1 Churches in the last day, and in the east, i. e. Christ, and from thence the Sun rises, p. 531. c. 9. l. 2 Churches and Parishes how they differ p. 553. c 9. l. 2 Citizens of Sion how many pri∣viledges▪ p. 85. c 7. l. 1 Civill. converse to be kept up, c. 6. l. 1 Civill Rulers are uncivill beyond civill rules, p. 127. c. 11. l. 1
Civill and Ecclesiasticall, Caesars and Christs, how they came to be jumbled together, pag. 168 chap. 13. lib. 1 Civill powers commit sacriledge and when? p. 172. ibid. Classes none in Scripture, p. 61 epist. l. 1 Classes, High-Commission-Courts, and Popes-Mother-Church of Cardinals; are all of the same nature, and for the same ends, p. 105, 106. c. 8. l. 1 Classes are the (fift) Head of Brasse, and the unsavory fruits of them, p. 158, 159. c. 13. l. 1 Colledges and Committees too full of stately Ministers, p. 168, 169. c. 13. l. 1 Compulsive powers doe more hurt then good, p. 126. c. 11. l. 1 Comforts to all Churches to come, p. 524. c. 9. l. 2 Coming of Christ but a tale to ma∣ny, p. 18. epist. l. 1 Common-wealth when flourishing, p. 6. ibid. Comfort and salvation hindred by disobedience to Christs cals, p. 207. c. 15. l. 2 Confidence in the flesh to be cast off, p. 247. c. 1. l. 2 a Confession of Faith, p. 350. c. 5 l. 2 Congregationall Churches are the right Presbytery, p. 313. c. 8 l. 2 Congregationall Churches some will fall, and some stand the trials that are coming, p. 189, 191, 192. c. 14. l. 1 a Congregationall Church, what, and how it gives beeing to the Catholick, p. 481. c. 9. l. 2 Conscience▪ what it is, p. 114 c. 8. lib. 1 Conscience not to be compel'd, p. 128. c. 11. l. 1. & p. 262. c. 2. l. 1 Consciences have liberty in opini∣ons, pag. 312. chap. 5. l. 2 Consciences Golden Rule, p. 337 c. 5. l. 2 Conquest follows fighting, p. 365 c. 6. l. 2 Consequences of doubtings, p. 251 c. 1. l. 2 Consequences sad, upon the wil∣full neglect of entring into Churches, when Christ cals. p. 200 c. 15. l. 2 Consideration must be serious, p. 240. c. 1. l. 2 Consideration in four things be∣fore entrance, p. 242. c. 1. l. 2 Constitution of Parish Churches open'd a box of plagues ever since, p. 92. c. 7. l. 1 Contrary means bring forth Gods ends, p. 47. c▪ 4. l. 1 Covenant one to all Saints, p. 86 c. 7. l. 1 Convert discovered two waies, p. 354 c. 6. l. 2 Converting means by experiences, p. 367, 368. ibid. J. Coopers experience, p. 400, 401 ibid. Covenant in the Church, indiffe∣rent, p. 451. c. 7. l. 2 Covenant, what kinde is necessary, p. 456. c. 7. 2 Councell of Lateran the first since Christ that ratified tithes and Presentations, p. 28. ep. l. 1 Councels the (second) Head of Brass, p. 157. c. 13. l. 1 Criticks many promised to be Rea∣ders of this Book, p. 218. ep. l. 1 F. Curtis Experience, p. 10, 11. exper. c. 6. l. 2.
D Danger to Churches past ere long p.34 c.3 l.1 Dangerous Rock (Christ is) to some. p.187 c.13 l.1 Daniels, who are 35 Ep. Dangerous to raise up Ceremonies again, and why? p.315 c.5 l.2 Danger of Church-Covenant, when? p.452 c.7 l.2 Davids, who are such? 34 35 Ep. 1 David's dayes now, how? 26 Epist. 1 Dark things must not be urged on the Saints p.335, 336, c.5 l.2 Day of Judgement, then Saints of all Judgements all alike, p.338 c.5 l.2 Day of Embodying together, how? p.276, 277, c.3 l.2 Death to be inflicted on none for not beleeving or misbeleeving p.177 c.13 l.1 Decency and order in all Churches p.272 c.3 l.2 Declaration of all that enter into Church-fellowship p.237 c.3 l.2 Definition of Christs and Anti∣christs Church p.137, 138, c.13 l.1 Delight the Lord takes in his Chur∣ches p.44 c.4 l.1 Deliverance of the Church out of the wildernesse is as yet gradual, but will be universal 19, 10, 21, 3 1 Dependency upon Diocesan, and National Churches Antichristian p.105 c.8 l.1 Description of the best Church-fellowships p.212 c.15 l.1 Description of the visible members of the Church 96, 97, 98 8 1 Despair the effect of doubtings p.252 c.1 l.2 Despair the Author was in, and how? p.427, 428, c.6 l.2 Despair what is the cause of it p.431 c.6 l.2 Despair causes howling and raring in hell p.441 c.6 l.2 Different opinions in things indif∣ferent are all to bee received p.311, 312 c.5 l.2 Difference of opinions may, and must be p.234, 327 c.5 l.2 Differences about things unneces∣sary, is lamentable p.325 c.5 l.2 Difference in light not in love in primitive times p.333 c.5 l.2 Differences how all may be recon∣ciled p.471 c.8 l.2 Dipping lawfull, but not Diving p.297 c.4 l.2 Dipping is no fundamental Or∣dinance p.300, 308, 305 c.4 l.2 Discipline of the Gospel God hath designed, and why? and how it differs from carnal and Eccle∣siastical Polity p.2, 3, &c. c.1 l.1 Discipline in Apostles dayes glo∣rious p.10 c.2 l.1 Discipline best at last p.16 c.2 l.1 Disciples of Christ Separates p.74 c.6 l.1 Directories and Canons uselesse p.7 c.1 l.1 Disobedience of some that will no come, when convinced, amounst to a resisting the Holy Ghost p.200 c.1 l.1 Disobedience to parents grievou p.296 c.6 l.2 Disorder of Saints till embodyed p.88 c.6 l.1 Distinction, as of Clergy, and Laity Presbytery and Prelacy p.487 c.9 l.2 Distance to the first Institutions, search p.246 c.1 l.2 Divinity in a new dresse every day p.1 c.1 l.1 Divisions in the Churches give Sathan, and his Surrogates great advantage p.503 c.9 l.2
Doctors, Fathers, Councels, &c. use∣lesse p.264 c.2 l.2 Doctrines of Devils, what? and when? p.454 c.7 l.2 Doctrine of Papists and Presby∣tery alike, wherein? p.473 c.9 l.2 Doubtings hinder the effects of Church-fellowship p.252 c.1 l.2 Doubting dangerous and what it is to doubts it soon makes us give up Buckler p.243, 244 c.1 l.2 Doubtfull things, what are so p.313, 314 c.5 l.2 Doves eyes of the Churches p.96 c.8 l.1 Dove that rests on the Ark, what? p.268 c.2 l.2 Dreams may be of use to confirm p.413 c.6 l.2 Dream the Author had confirmed by the word p.430, 431, 436 c.6 l.2 Dreames extraordinary and use∣full to convert sometimes 397, 400, 430, 436 6 2 In Dublin Churches, Hypocrites many p.64, 65, 66, c.5 l.1 Dublin Church experiences, and examples of many p.368 369 c.6 l.2 Dublin Church-Covenant p.450 c.7 l.2 Duties must be kept to Callings and Relations p.75 c.6 l.1 Duties of Christians not done till embodied p.88 61, 202 c.15 l.1 Duties formally and Pharisaically p.424 c.6 l.2 E Eat of every typified tree of Pa∣radise p.543 c.9 l.2 East where the Sun rises who, and where p.551, 537 c.9 l.2 East, where (typified) Paradise shall be p.531, c.9 l.2 Eden a most excellent type of the Church p.528 c.9 l.2 Ecclesiastical Politie differs from Gospel p.6, 7, 8 c.1 l.1 Ecclesiastical and Civill how they came jumbled together p.168 c.13 l.1 Edification one end of Church-Discipline c.2 l.1 p.60 Edomites shall enter into the Chur∣ches p.549 c.9 l.2 Effects discover the cause p.361 c.6 l.2 Effects of some dreams are great p.409 c.6 l.2 Elders have but a derivative power and are to be servants, not Lords p.110 c.8 l.1 Elders have not the power of ad∣mitting p.287, 288, c.4 l.2 Electing requires two things p.258 c.2 l.2 Election is a mystery, and from Eternity, but vocation is in time p.358, 359 c.6 l.2 Elements of Baptisme how passed away p.310 c.4 l.2 Embodyed Saints excell, and wherein p.87 c.7 l.1 Embodying follows due prepara∣tion p.273, 274 c.3 l.2 Embody how? and when? p.276, 277 c.3 l.2 Embodying rashly (as some have done) fatall and evill, but in publick is best p.280, 281 c.3 l.2 R. Emersons Experience p.411 c.6 l.2 D. Emts Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Emeralds who, and how they ex∣cel p.515 c.9 l.2 Emptinesse in all other wayes, p.250 c.1 l.2 Ends of Church-Fellowship, none but Saints can answer p.59 c.5 l.1 End of all Churches one and the
same p.131, 132 c.12 l.1 End of Parishes is for their owne Ends p.135 c.12 l.1 Ends are base which bring many into the Churches, as Hypocrites p.211, 212 c.9 l.2 End how Presbyters and Papists a∣gree in it p.476 c.9 l.2 End, suts with the Principle p.255, c.2 l.2 End of Church fellowship answer∣ed by all Saints though differing in opinions p.318, 319 c.5 l.2 Enemies of Christ ground to powder p.25 c.3 l.1 Enemy to Errors, are the true Churches p.206 c.15 l.2 Enemies to Spirit, men of forme p.341 c.5 l.2 Energy of Church fellowship how hindred p.252 c.1 l.2 Enemies afraid of Churches in unity p.504 c.9 l.2 Entrance of Saints and Hypocrites different p.40 c.3 l.1 Entity and Unity convertibles p.87 c.7 l.1 Entrance into Churches, what to do first p.239, 240 c.1 l.2 Epistle to Purleigh in Essex 229 Equality of all Ministers p.97 c.8 l.1 Equality of all Churches p.110 c.8 l.1 Erring Church how reformed p.111 112 c.8 l.1 Errors to be killed by the word (not the sword) p.164, 175 c.13 l.1 Errors may, and must be in the Churches p.206 c.15 l.1 Erros the Excrements of older truths how? 25 Ep. 1 Essentials of Church-fellowship, must bee knowne before wee enter p.242 c.1 l.2 Essentials of the universal Church p.481 c.9 l.2 Examples of Gospel-Churches p.5 c.1 l.1 Examination of self when? p.240 c.1 l.2 Examples worke much p.8 c.6 l.2 An Example for all sinners p.447 c.6 l.2 Excellency of Saints in one body p.88 c.7 l.1 Excellency of Churches is (Christ) the Head p.148 c.13 l.1 Excellency of Women above Men p.473, 473 c.8 l.2 Excellency of such Church mem∣bers as are promised in these latter dayes p.520, 529, 530 c.9 l.2 Excellent ones who? 23 Ep. Excommunication begun in Para∣dise p.542 c.9 l.2 Execution of Gods eternall Decree in what order p.359 c.6 l.2 Experience proves Principles p.355 c.6 l.2 Experiences to bee declared, and why? p.356, 357 c.6 l.2 Experiences declared in what order p.361 c.6 l.2 Experiences of some, warn others p.363 c.6 l.2 Experiences take men off of censures p.364 c.6 l.2 Experiences shew Gds various working p.366 c.6 l.2 Experiences teach to trust in God and are means of conversion; teach, us best of all, bring our Assurance to light, &c. p.367, 383, 384 c.6 l.2 Experience humbles us p.379 c.6 l.2 Experiences shew sweetly what wee are, from what wee were p.376, 377 c.6 l.2 Experiences to come are the choy∣sest p.449, 450 c.6 l.2 Explicite covenanting may be; but how? p.455 7 c.2 l.2 Eucharist, how Papists and Pres∣byters agree in it p.468 c.9 l.2
F Fact (not Faith) Magistrates Judges of p.164 c.13 l.2 Faire without, and not within, Hy∣pocrites p.66 c.5 l.1 Fair all over, the Church of Christ p.100 c.8 l.1 Faith never forced three hundred years after Christ p.160 c.13 l.1 Faith more urged then Forme p.208 c.15 l.1 Faith in prayer forces out a quick answer p.370 c.6 l.2 In the Faith all are to be received p.348 c.5 l.2 Fall suddenly to some Churches p.188, 189, 191 c.14 l.1 False perswasions dangerous, and how to know them p.249 c.1 l.2 False friends flatter most 2 Epist. Familiarity with Christs enemies declined p.76 c.6 l.1 M. Fanshaws Experience p.414 c.6 l.2 Fatal blow to Parish Churches when? p.94 c.7 l.1 Father one to all Saints p.86 c.7 l.1 Feat of hell makes hypocrites serve God p.477 c.9 l.2 Felony to give and receive Sacra∣ments as most do in Parish Chur∣ches p.551 c.9 l.2 Fellowship Christ was Pastor of, our paterne p.57 c.5 l.1 Fellowship with men, not out of Christs way p.77 c.6 l.1 Few at first embody, and who they be? p.278 c.3 l.2 Fghters against God wh? p.340 c.5 l.2 Fighting-time for all, before the conquest p.365 c.6 l.2 Finall cause, first in eye, last in act p.131 c.12 l.1 Finall cause of Churches promised what? p.522 c.9 l.2 Fire goes out of the mouths of Saints and Churches to devoue all their Adversaries p.90 c.7 l.1 Firme foundation of all true Chur∣ches p.184 c.14 l.1 First into Christ, and then into Churches p.188 c.14 l.1 Fittest to lay a Churches foundati∣on, who? p.192 c.14 l.1 Fit for Church-fellowship who? p.210 c.15 l.1 Flowers tyed up in a Nosegay, and presented to the Saints, what they are? p.450 c.6 l.2 Forcing powers must bee p.126, 127, 128 c.11 l.1 Folks run mad, and why? p.150 c.13 l.1 Foolish buildings will soon fall, and why? and so will many in our dayes p.191 c.13 l.1 The Form of the Church, and how promised? p.70, 61 522 c.9 l.2 Form wanting makes deform p.88 c.7 l.1 Form of the Church is (partly) In∣dependent p.100 c.8 l.1 The Forme by Christs Rule mea∣sured p.121 c.10 l.1 Forme of Embadying, not set, but fit p.272, 273 c.3 l.2 Forms must put none by Admission p.292 c.4 l.2 Forms childish things, but how? p.341 c.5 l.2 Forms Idolized soone tumble p.343 c.5 l.2 Form of Christ in the flesh, and Churches parallel p.344 c.5 l.2 Formes not to be forced, but left to liberty p.345 c.5 l.2 Forms of Gods owne ordaining laid aside for peace-sake, much more ours p.345 c.5 l.2 Formes how occasioned? and how useful? 345 5
Formes of Church covenant p.457, 459 c.7 l.2 Formal Professours Time-servers p.115 c.8 l.1 Formalists most furious against the Spirit p.305, 308, 309 c.42 52 Formality delineated p.420 c.6 l.2 Formal Righteousnesse p.393 408 410 c.6 l.2 Foundation of the Church, is Christ alone p.53, 183, 51 c.13 l.1 Foundation is first of all laid in sound buildings 189, 524, 14 19 2 Foundations are rotten which many have built, and which will bee suddenly discovered p.191 c.13 l.1 Foundation of some Anabaptists is as weake as water, that making an Idol of it p.301, 302, 305 c.4 l.2 Fountaine in the midst of the Gar∣dens is Christ p.203 c.15 l. Free-willers all Saints, but how? p.125 c.11 l.1 Fruitfulnesse of the Churches above All 32 43 3 4 1 Fruits of the Trees of (typified) Pa∣radise p.53 c.9 l.2 Fulnesse of all the Body is Christ the head p.148 c.13 l.1 G. Gardens of Christ his Churches p.42, 43 c.4 l.1 Gates of Sion are the Congregatio∣nal Chuches, and the way into Sion. p.204, 209 c.15 l.1 Gathered out is before Gathered in p.71 c.6 l.1 Gathered Churches many must fill, p.188, 189 c.14 l.1 Gifts, Parts, &c. qualifie not for Church-fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Glory of the latter house Greatest p.4 c.1 l.1 Glory of God the end of Church-fellowship p.132 c.12 l.1 Glory of the Churches is All in One p.339 c.5 l.2 Glory of God much by Experiences, &c. p.357 c.6 l.2 God is the universal Good 260 2 1 God (in us) the Principle (to us) the Object, and (with us) the End p.261 c.2 l.1 God and Saints seale by the same Spirit p.227 c.2 l.2 God receives Saints of all judgements p.316 c.5 l.1 Gods great designe is All into One p.330 c.5 l.2 A Gd-like Principle moves the Saints p.254 c.2 l.1 Godly wrong their souls to abide in Parish Churches p.95 c.6 l.1 Golden Rule of Conscience p.337 c.5 l.2 Good must separate from the Bad p.71 c.6 l.1 Good (in this Church-state) the Wils object p.259 c.2 l.2 Gospel-Discipline proved from Po∣lity p.3 5 c.1 l.1 Gospel-Hedges and Fences p.42 c.4 l.1 Gospel-Order in the Institution to be knowne p.246 c.1 l.2 Gospel way of worship is the great promise p.508 c.9 l.2 Gospel full of blessings to all 33 Epist. A Gospell call p.410 c.6 l.2 Gvernours in Kingdomes of Saints, and of Families alike p.180 c.13 l.1 Governours of the Nation warned of Lawyers 225 Ep. 2 Government of Christ, and civill Magistrates distinct p.127 c.11 l.1
Graces saving and sanctifying to fit for Church-fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Grace in a convert taken two wayes p.355 c.6 l.2 Gradual recovery of the Church (now) p.20 c.3 l.1 Grounds of true perswasion is Gods word p.245 c.1 l.2 H. Hair of the Church p.96 c.8 l.1 Hairs grown on the Head, so Saints on Christ p.151 c.13 l.1 Halcyon dayes 32 Epist. A Hanly's Experience p.414 c.6 l.2 Happinesse and Honour to have Chist our Lord p.145 c.13 l.1 Happinesse of Saints in Christ's Churches p.95 c.5 l.1 Harbour in these daies in Gathered Churches p.29 c.3 l.1 Hard to have Foundation in the Rock (Christ) p.186 c.13 l.1 Haste! Haste! Haste! words to Eng∣land, Ireland, and Scotland p.40, 41 c.3 l.1 Haste to embody, must be with good speed p.280 c.3 l.2 As Head is, members must bee p.69 c.5 l.1 Head (Christ) to all Churches alike p.103 c.8 l.1 Head and Body (united) make up whole Christ p.17 c.13 l.1 Head is the highest over the body, and the Excellency of the Body, and gives influence to all the Body, and governs the Body, and sympathizes with it; so Christ p.37, 148, 149 c.13 l.1 Head and Member both, is Christ p.148 c.13 l.1 Headlesse body is a lifelesse body p.148 c.13 l.1 In our Head (Christ) our Eyes, Ears, Tongue, all should bee p.150 c.13 l.1 Head well, All is well p.150 c.13 l.1 Head of Gold (Christ) how hee differs from Heads of Brasse 151 148 153 181 13 1 Harvest follows the seed time of sor∣row p.365 c.6 l.2 Heathens are Volunteers to their gods p.126 c.11 l.1 Heaven in the Churches of Christ p.86 c.7 l.1 Heaven in hell what? p.405 c.6 l.2 Hell was Christs, and is our way to heaven p.361 c.6 l.2 Hell how one may be in it, & how out again 394, 447, 448, 398, 403 &c 6 2 Colonel & A. Hewsons Experiences p.395 412 c.6 l.2 Hermes visions of the Churches in these dayes p.46 c.4 l.1 J. Heywards Experience p.415 c.6 l.2 Hereticks (as such) not to bee put to death p.177, 178 c.13 l.1 Hereticks have put to death Saints for Hereticks p.177 c.13 l.1 Hidden number who they be 14 Ep. Hierusalem vide Jerusalem. E. Hoar's Experience p.4 c.6 l.2 Hold fast the Head (Christ) p.182 c.13 l.1 Hollanders how to be dealt with now 12, 13 Ep. 1 Holy Ghost must fall upon men be∣fore they bee fitted to build the Lords house p.192 c.13 l.1 Hopes of Churches Recovery how lost again p.12 c.2 l.1 Honour and praise of God the End of Church-fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 House of God fitly framed how? and who? p.84 c.7 l.1 Howing under sense of damnation p.441 c.6 l.2 T. Huggins Experience p.393, c.6 l.2 Humility taught by experience p.379, 380 c.6 l.2 Husband of the Churches is
Christ p.56 c.5 l.1 Husbandry of the Lord, his Churches p.31 c.3 l.1 Hyacinths or Jacinths, who? p.519 c.9 l.2 Hypocrites (so known) kept out p.57 c.5 l.1 Hypocrites not of, though in Churches p.64 ibid. Hypocrites hinder the Churches growth, and will all be discovered ere long 65 67 ibid. Hypocrites soon made by compulsive powers 127 11 1, 263 2 2 Hypocrites character and conditions p.211 c.15 l.1 Hypocrie, what he is p.373 c.6 l.2 Hypocrites puff'd up by experiences p.379 ibid. Hypocrites warning-peice indeed p.442 443, &c. ibid. I. Jspers (precious stones) who? p.510 512 c.9 l.2 Idleness not allowed in Paradise p.541 ibid. Idols of brass must down presently p.159 c.13 l.1 Idolizing water-baptism, which was before by Papists, Prelates; and is now by Anabaptists p.303 305 c.4 l.2 Idols made of forms, hast their fall p.343 c.5 l.2 Idols of forms several ways p.345 ib. Idolatry in many professors p.346 ib. Idolizing a Church-Covenanting p.454 c.7 l.2 Jew, every spiritual Saint p.74 c.6 l.1 Jew and Gentile all one in Christ p.392 c.5 l.2 J. Jecocks Experience p.399 c.6 l.2 Jerusalem a type of the Church p.527 c.9 l.2 Jews when precious Church-matter p.54 ibid. Ignorance of Churches object hinders affection to them p.118 c.9 l.9 Ignorance is the mother of false wor∣ship p.241 c.1 l.2 Implicite faith not enough p.244 ibid. Impartiality as to opinion necessary p.247 ibid. Impudent whoredoms of Parish Churches, Minister, and People p.550 551 c.92 Independent Church, every Church of Christ p.100 c.8 l.1 Independency Prelatick, as bad as any p.105 ibid. Independents of long standing p.113 ib. Independents walk by Rule, i. e. the Word 122 10 1, 113 8 1 Independents many called so that are not so, but are persecutors of true Independents p.115 ibid. The Independent Lord is Christ a∣lone 144▪ 13 1▪ Indifferent things what are, and what not p.313 c.5 l.2 Indifferent things all lawful in them∣selves p.324 ibid. Indifferent dangerous▪ when and how p.451 c.7 l.2 Inclosed number of Saints make Churches p.42 c.4 l.1 Infant Baptism idolized, how p.300 c.4 l.2 Infant Baptism true, for matter and form p.299 ibid. Ingagement for and against Churches, how? in Epistle to Churches. Injoyments highest to Saints in fel∣lowship p.202 c.13 l.1 Inlv'ning and inlightning the spirits work p.265 c.2 l.2 Inquiry of members to be admitted strict p.288 289 c.4 l.2 Interest of Gospel polity differs from interest of carnal polity p.7 c.1 l.1 Integrum, what it is p.482 c.9 l.2 Interests National and Antichristian
fall backward 5 Ep. Intire Church every particular Church p.483 c.9 l.2 Intruders into Churches, are many p.271 c.3 l.2 Inward truth must be in Church-members p.69 c.5 l.1 Inward melancholly p.429 c.6 l.2 Inward Baptism qualifies for Churches p.300 c.4 l.2 Joynt-powers, joynt-prayers, and joynt-praises of Saints embodied, fill Heaven and Earth p.90 91 c.7 l.1 Joy at laying the foundation great p.193 c.14 l.1 Joy, if true, follows sorrow p.365 366 c.6 l.2 H. Johnsons Experience p.408 c.6 l.2 Ioy to Christs Churches in his day which is nigh p.25 c.3 l.1 Ireland warned of persecutors for forms p.17 c.2 l.1 Ireland calls and incourages Ministers 28. Epist. Iron-hearted men set up the head of Iron p.151 c.13 l.1 Israel a separate people p.71 c.6 l.1 Israel afflicted by Egyptians, how now p.342 c.5 l.2 Ireland springing with variety of flowers p.417 c.6 l.2 Judas in every Church, he went out after the op at Dublin p.66 c.5 l.1 Iubilee hard by p.26 c.3 l.1 Iudge of Religion, Christ alone in Commission p.151 c.13 l.1 Iudges of Doctrine of Faith, not Ma∣gistrates, and why 173 175 ibid. Iudges shall be judged by Saints p.177 ibid. Iudgement must be sound p.242 c.1 l.2 Indicature in what Christ is Iudge p.160 c.13 l.1 Iudgements or opinions in things in∣different of all sorts to be received p.312 c.5 l.2 Iudgement of the Church is charita∣ble upon the declaring of Experi∣encies p.358 360 c.6 l.2 Justification, how Presbyters and Pa∣pists agree in it p.474 c.9 l.2 K. Key of Christs shoulders, what it is? p.138 c.13 l.1 Keyes, who pretend to them, 58 Ep. T. Kelsals Experience, second Experi∣ence 6 2 King, and King alone, Christ 19 20 21 22 23 Epist. King in his Beauty, most in Churches p.117 c.9 l.1 King the first, a Tyrant 22 Epist. Kings never more in England 23 Ep. Kingdom of Christ p.85 c.7 l.1 Kingdom of God consists not in out∣ward things p.324 c.5 l.2 Kingdoms of God of several kindes p.325 ibid. Knowledge of Christ spiritual, is one end of Church fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 L. Lambs Book of life p.55 c.5 l.1 Lambs Book will be out ere long 217 Epist. Last days, best days p.26 31, 46 c.4 l.1 Latter days Churches filled with glo∣ry p.537 538 539 c.9 l.2 Law-giver, Christ alone p.144 145 c.13 l.1 Lawyers corrupt and live by sin 220 221 Epist. Lawyers mock at the word, and hin∣der Reformation 222 Epist. Lawyers ere long will appear the greatest Oppressors, Tyrants, and Traytors that are 224 225 Epist. Laws of the Nation, not regulated, and why 222 Epist.
Laws and Lawyers must be purged from lusts 223 Epist. Laws of Christ in paradise p.540 c.9 l.2 Law to go forth from Churches to the World p.541 ibid. Learned men so called, most enemies to Christ p.78 61, 205 c.15 l.1 Learned in all Ages for the Indepen∣dent Church way p.205 ibid. Learned, who are truly so p.205 ibid. Least garden plants Gods greatest care p.44 c.4 l.1 H. Lecsons Experience, 10 Exp. 6 2 Legal Righteousness, 4. Exp. ib. Lessons for Anabaptists in Ireland p.334 335 c.5 l.2 A letter from Waterford answered p.302 303 304 c.4 l.2 Levitical law required separation p.72 c.6 l.1 Liberty of sisters in Churches p.466 471 472 c.8 l.2 Liberty of Saints in things indifferent 318 5 2, 328 ib. 333 ib. Life is first, before law p.541 c.9 l.2 Light and increase of knowledge, one end of Church-fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 Light shining gloriously p.400 c.6 l.2 Light goes forth from Churches round about p.531 c.9 l.2 Lips of the Church, what p.97 c.8 l.2 Lord, Christ alone, by power, purchase, conquest, gift, and choice, Indepen∣dent, spiritual, universal, sole-sove∣raign, Lord cheif Justice, most Ex∣cellency and Everlasting 78 6 1 143 144 13 1 Love original to all Saints a like p.86 c.6 l.1 Love of God in Christ, ground of comfort p.375 c.6 l.2 Love of God taught by experiences p.383 ibid. Love of God calls home p.412 ibid. Love of Heaven, and yet but Hypo∣crites p.477 c.9 l.2 Love to God out-lives all Graces p.405 c.6 l.2 Love to all Saints, one end of Church-fellowship p.60 c.5 l.1 Love to all Saints that differ in opini∣ons p.333 c.5 l.2 Love and sweetness to restore a faln Member p.83 c.7 l.1 Love is absolute, for which all indiffe∣rent things must be laid aside p.453 c.7 l.2 Lust is set up in the room of Law 223 224 Epist. M. Mad folks in Churches, and why? p.150 c.13 l.1 Maidens of wisdom now calling in the streets p.198 199 c.15 l.1 Mary Magdalen the first preacher of Christ risen p.474 c.8 l.2 Magistrates, what they must do, and what they must not do in matters of Religion 262 2 2, 179 185 127 128 13 11, 164 13 1 Magistrates must not head it over Churches and Saints p.159 ibid. Magistrates Tyrants, when they do so, and sacrilegious 160 172 ib. Magistrates meddle not with faith, but with fact p.163 ibid. Magistrates struck with judgements that meddle beyond the orb God hath set them in 166 173 ibid. Magistrates when in, most danger p.171 ibid. Magistrates are servants to, not Judges of, no Law-givers to Christ, Chur∣ches, or Saints 179 180 ib. Magistrates in their places owned and honored, by the Churches p.129 c.11 l.1 Magistracy and Ministry ever distinct p.15 c.13 l.1 Magistrate, what he may do about
Ministers 11 Epist. Magistrates must do all they can by their powers, and persons to coun∣tenance the Churches 13 Epist. 26 ibid. Magistrates must study Scriptures p.36 ibid. Magistrates, Presbyter, and Papists a∣gree about them p.480 c.9 l.2 Maintenance to Ministers is moral, but the manner of it is civil, and left to liberty p.489 ib. Man not able to undertake Church-Government p.139 c.13 l.1 Mans rule too long, or too short p.121 c.10 l.1 Man of form most enemy to Christ p.341 c.5 l.2 Many fall to Rantism, &c. and why p.322 ib. Many Members polute the Lords san∣ctuary p.69 c.5 l.1 Mana must fall a pace in these days p.35 c.3 l.1 A. Manwarings Experience, 2, 3 Exp. 6 2 E. Marrows Experience p.424 ib. Martyrs in the flames have witnessed against putting to death any for Er∣rors of Heresies p.179 c.13 l.1 Master-builder Christ alone, and how 140 141 ib Matter of the Church, visible Saints p.51 52 c.5 l.1 Fit matter is of the Lords own adding 67 68 ib. Materials for Christs Churches must be the best p.63 ib. Fit matter is ryed by the Hammer and Saw p.68 ib. Matter, and form of the Church, fitted by Christs rule p.121 c.10 l.1 Matter of Churches in these last days p.510 512 c.9 l.2 Matter for foundation is the most pretious p.192 c.14 l.1 Means to make us voluntary, what and how p.264 265 c.2 l.2 Means to convert by Experiences p.367 368 c.6 l.2 Means to convert one, converts not another p.367 ib. Measure for the Temple is Christs rule p.121 c.10 l.1 Meeting places made Churches, when p.11 c.2 l.1 Meeting oft together before embody∣ing p.273 274 c.3 l.2 Meeting places called Churches, Pres∣byters and Papists agree in them p.492 c.9 l.2 I. and A. Megsons Experience p.416 c.6 l.2 Members of Church-fellowship, who fit p.56 57 c.5 l.1 All members make up but one body p.8 c.7 l. A member amiss, how to be restored ibid. Members of foolish buildings in dan∣ger of falling the next storme p.191 c.14 l.1 Members, many come before called, who p.269 c.2 l.2 Members of other Churches, how re∣ceived p.294 295 c.4 l.2 Members causal and constitutive to the whole Church universal, are the Congregational p.481 c.9 l.2 Memory for Sermons how helped p.421 c.6 l.2 Merit of works, de congruo p.477 478 c.9 l.2 Middle things must not be urged p.327 c.5 l.2 H. Mills his Experience p.409 c.6 l.2 Ministers, and the most eminent, guilty of those Errors they most complain of 82 7 Ministers of the Gospel, Teeth of the Church p.97 c.8 l.1
Ministers of State succeed Lord Bi∣shops in their actions and stations, which is bewailed p.168 c.13 l.1 Ministers must not meddle with state matters p.173 ib. Ministers, why against Independency p.82 c.7 l.1 Ministers turned politicians fall into great places, Colledges, Commit∣tees, &c. which is very fatal and o∣minous p.168 169 c.13 l.1 Ministers cannot be sequestred ab offi∣cio p.180 ib. Ministers all over the Nation warned p.208 c.15 l.1 Ministery, the Author called to it, and how p.436 437 c.6 l.2 Ministers for long preaching despised, and what followed it 4, 5 Experi∣ences ibid. Ministers must have maintenance 27 28 Epist. Ministers who are made the people 233 234 Ministry, when most corrupt 7 8 Epist. Ministers much encouraged in Ireland 28 Epist. Miscarriages of Church-members ey∣ed by all p.68 c.5 l.1 Mischief to Churches by proud pre∣latick lording Pastors, and by ruling Synods and Classes p.104 108 c.8 l.1 Mixed congregations, not Gospel Church states p.5 c.1 l.1 Mitre-mongers and Prelates, ever op∣posers of the true Churches p.12 c.2 l.1 Mixed congregations, Christ not the husband of p.56 c.5 l.1 Monks and priests, when they arose p.11 c.2 l.1 Morality is Divinities hand-maid p.1 c.1 l.1 Mortal blow to morter Churches last year p.208 c.15 l.1 Motion, life, action, all from (Christ) the Head p.149 c.13 l.1 Motions of Hypocrites, and true Church-members differ p.268 c.2 l.2 Mountains made plains, who and how p.24 c.3 l.1 Mystery of whole Christ, i. . Head and Body p.147 c.13 l.1 N. Nakedness that parish Churches will be stript into p.551 c.9 l.2 Names of such as would imbody given up, and how p.274 c.3 l.2 Names of Heathenish and popish, presbyters and papists, agree in p.491 c.9 l.2 National Ministry and Churches, how routed 28 Ep. Nations of all sorts to make up one Church p.538 c.9 l.2 National Churches, what they are, and how to fall 550 551 552 ib. Nature of things doubtful and indif∣ferent p.314 315 316 c.5 l.2 Necessity of Gospel polity p.3 c.1 l.1 Neck of the Church, what it is p.98 99 c.8 l.1 Necessity is shown by the Spirit, and the word p.129 c.11 l.1 Necessity of Churches wel grounded and well-united p.193 c.14 l.1 Necessity of serious consideration, and self-examination of all that would be Church-members p.240 c.1 l.2 Necessity of a free principle in all Church-members p.255 c.2 l.2 A necessity put upon indifferent forms is pestilent p.341 c.5 l.2 Necessary is threefold p.461 c.7 l.2 Nobility, who be the best 21 22 Ep. Norman yoke most heavy 6 Ep. Novelty in presbyterians 60 Ep.
O. Objections for Parish-Churches an∣swered p.61 c.5 l.1 Object of true Churches, what it is p.116 117 c.9 l.1 Object of the will, what it is p.259 260 c.2 l.2 Obstinacy to Christs call out of Ba∣bylon is dangerous p.207 c.15 l.1 Occasion of form p.347 c.5 l.1 Officers of the Church have a deriva∣tive power p.288 c.4 l.2 Officers to the church, how women have been p.470 c.8 l.2 Officers of the church, make the body more entire p.554 c.9 l.2 Officers of the church, must be kept under as servants p.110 111 c.8 l.1 Offences what, and how offer'd p.321 c.5 l.2 Occasions of Brethrens fall into er∣rors p.322 ib. Old formal Protestantism is not e∣nough for church-fellowship p.69 c.5 l.1 One in another, and every one (of members) in Christ 4 7 1 Oneness of all, Christ paid and prayed for 86 87 ib. Oneness of all Saints p.319 320 c.5 l.2 One of all, is Gods great work p.330 c.5 l.2 Oneness of Churches, when more then ever p.506 c.9 l.2 Onions and Looks for Parish-mem∣bers p.207 c.15 l.1 Opinions out of Magistrates powers p.174 c.13 l.1 Opinions ought not to byass us p.247 c.1 l.2 Operation of the will carries into the object p.260 c.2 l.2 Opinions in things doubtful and in∣different, may and must be divers p.312 314 c.5 l.2 Opinions different, allowed with love two hundred years after Christ p.332 ib. J. Osborn, a strange relation of him 440, 441, &c. 6 2 Opposition against the Churches make for them p.205 206 c.15 l.1 Order requires Gospel-Discipline p.2 c.1 l.1 Order in building Gods house p.84 c.7 l.1 Order of Church-fellowships best, that begin first with Christ the foun∣dation 18 13 1 Order of the Gospel, as at first must be known p.246 c.1 l.2 Order in the true Church, is Gods Ordinance p.271 271 c.3 l.2 Order of the true Church, agrees best with different opinions p.326 c.5 l.2 Order of telling Experiences p.361 c.6 l.2 Order of the Gospel, a great latter days promise p.508 c.9 l.2 Orders and Ordinances out of Christs way, to be waved p.77 c.6 l.1 Ordinances of Christ, dispenced in order of Christ p.80 ib. Ordinances neck, Christ head, Saints bodie of the Church p.99 c.8 l.1 Ordinances prisoners in some Chur∣ches p.123 c.10 l.1 Ordinances energy obstructed by doubtings p.252 c.1 l.2 Ordinances here, a shadow of them to come p.337 c.5 l.2 Ordinances and Members, Trees of Paradise p.532 c.9 l.2 Ordinances of breaking Bread, many ignorant of 472 473 ib. Ordinance of prophecying one by one, means of converting and con∣firming p.412 c.6 l.2 Ordination of Ministers, Papists, and Presbyterians, agree in p.482 483 c.9 l.2 Original love to all Saints a like p.86 c.7 l.1
Originall of Scriptures is the Spirit p.463 c.9 l.2 Orthodox Expositor of Scripture who only ibid Others stirred up into church-fellow∣ship by publick imbodying p.284 c.3 l.2 Outward things make not the king¦dom of heaven p.324 c.5 l.2 Order in ordination of Ministers, which is right p.485 c.9 l.2 P Palaces of Christ, true Churches p.50, 63 c.5 l.1 Papists and Prelates too alike in Dis∣cipline and practice p.13 c.2 l.1 Papists, Prelates, and Presbyterians would have all their high courts o∣ver the Churches p.105 c.8 l.1 Parish churches antichristian p.61 78 c.5 l.1 Parish churches when they began first p.62 ibid. Parish churches Satans Synagogues p.79 c.6 l.1 Parish churches no churches 77, 78 6 1 neither matter nor form 91, 92 ib. Parish churches plagues from th first p.92 ibid. Parish churches confused chaoses p.93 ib. Parish churches want the form of In∣dependency p.105 c.8 l.1 Parish churches sties for beasts p.93 c.7 l.1 Parish churches in nothing accord to Christs rule p.121 c.19 l.1 Parish churches uphold by carnal po∣wers p.126 c.11 l.1 Parish churches fail in the final cause p.135 c.12 l.1 Parishioners opposite to Churches, p.79 c.6 l.1 Parish Churches get out of, and why? p.207, 208 c.15 l.1 Parishes, and Churches how they dif∣fer p.553 c.9 l.2 Parish Churches stript naked as at first how p.552, 553 c.9 l.2 Paradise a type of the Church in the last dayes p.528, 529 c.9 l.2 Paradise restor'd in the latter dayes in Trees, Rivers, and all 530, 531.9 2 Paradise in these dayes entring where it shall be p.530 c.9 l.2 Parallel of Churches taken from Gar∣dens. p.42 c.4 l.1 Parallel fetcht from the Wilder∣nesse p.30 c.3 l.1 Parallel of Christ in the forme of his flesh, and forme of his Church-way, p.244 c.5 l.2 Parliament warned p.172 c.13 l.1 Partakers of Babylons sins, partakers her sorrowes p.75 c.6 l.1 Pastors Lord like, most mischeivous p.104 c.8 l.1 Pastors should gather Churches Expe∣riences p.150, 151 c.6 l.2 Patrons (so called) their fearfull sins 29 Epist. Paul a great Separatist p.77 c.6 l.1 Peace of the Church agrees with dif∣ferent opinions p.326 c.5 l.2 For Peace sake Gods own forms (much more ours) must bee laid aside p.345 c.5 l.4 People bewitch'd in these daies p.39 c.3 l.1 People not profiting under the mini∣stry, great heart-sores to faithfull Ministers 330, 331, Epist. Performance of Promises at last pinch 47. 4 1 Perfection of all in one, is Christ p.339 c.5 l.2 Persons entring into Churches, what to do first p.239 240 c.1 l.2 Persecutors Sampsons Foxes that un up themselves p.18 c.2 l.1 Perswasion, how to attain it p.245 c.1 l.2 Perswasion (which all must have that would enter into Churches) how to know true from false 249. ib.
Piety must not dance after policy p.160 c.13 l.1 Plantation of Christs own hands i. e. his Churches p.43 c.4 l.1 Pledges given in at Dublin Church, p.371 c.6 l.2 Policy, carnall, and Gospel policy bow they differ p.6, 7, 8 c.1 l.1 Policy must serve piety, not piety po∣licy p.160 c.13 l.1 Policy what it is p.169 ib. Policy ruin'd by Christs coming p.170 ib The polick Beast st in the temple 8 11 Politicians described p.170 c.13 l.1 Politicians Religion p.194 c.14 l.1 Pope, Prelats, Primates, &c. whence they came p.10 c.1 l.1 Popery to take away Church-power & give it to Clergy or Classes p.102 c.8 l.1 Pope is the head of brasse, and how he came in p.155 c.13 l.1 Popish Discipline swam in blood p.12 c.2 l.1 Porters appointed to keep out the un∣clean p.52 c.5 l.1 A posie presented to the Saints and Churches p.450 c.6 l.2 Power in all Churches equal p.101 c.8 l.1 Power of men over any Church of Christ is usurped p.113 ib. Power to admit Members is the bo∣dies p.286 c.4 l.2 Power civill subservient to Christ and his Saints p.127, 128 c.11 l.1 Powring out of the Spirit hard by us p.506 c.9 l.2 Practise of primitive Saints, Prophets Apostles, &c. was to separate from the mixed multitudes p.74 c.6 l.1 Power and prayers of churches p.91 c.7 l.1 A praevision p.425 c.6 l.2 Praises to God a peculiar end of Church-fellowship p.133 c.12 l.1 Praise is publick of the Church imbo∣died p.279 c.3 l.2, Prayer must be much before imbody∣ing p.275, 276 ib. Prayer eminently answered, p.368, 369, 370 c.6 l.2 Prayer converting and confirming 415 ibid. 399 3 2 Preaching, a call thereto p.437, 438 c.6 l.2 Precepts for Separation p.72 c.6 l.1 Precious separate from the vile p.70 ib. Precious stones gathered in latter daies p.519, 520 c.9 l.2 Prelates ever opposers of the Church of Christ p.12 c.2 l.1 Prelacy and popery, Terani Converti∣biles p.105 c.8 l.1 Prelacy ready to be turned off the Ladder p.104 ibid. Prelacy and Papacy live and dye to∣gether p.14 c.2 l.1 Prelates in pomp p.107 c.8 l.1 Preparation before imbodying p.273 c.3 l.2 Presbyterian way fals with Prelacy p.14 c.2 l.1 Presbyterians too bold Usurpers of Christs power p.105 c.8 l.1 Presbyterians and Independents grea∣test difference p.104 ibid. From Presbytery to Independency p.396 c.6 l.2 To Presbyterians a word in love p.479 c.9 l.2 Presbyterians how Churches, and how not p.480 ib. Presbyterian Churches (as such) not true Members of the church of Christ Catholick. p.481 ib. Presbyterians whom we own and ho∣nour p.483 ibid. And whom we dare not close with 57 Epist. Some Presbyterians and Papists look too alike in the Head, Body, Eies, Mouth, Hands, and Feet, yea, and whole effigies of their church p.484 c.9 l.2
Presbyterians monopolize the Chur∣ches, so called p.494 ibid. Presbyterians designe against the Au∣thor and Book 55 Epist. Presbyterian way novelty, and Hetero∣doxie 60 Epist. Presbytery Congregationall is the right p.113 c.8 l.1 Presence of God is speciall in Chur∣ches p.547 c.9 l.2 Presence of God in Churches is the a∣daequat object p.116 c.9 l.1 Presence of Christ sweetest in Chur∣ches 45 4 1 202 15 1 Pride in Pastors God abhors (of all mens) 109 8 Primitive times Saints were all volun∣teers p.124 c.11 l.1 In primitive times Ministers (people and all) equal in honor and dig∣nity without Prelacy p.151 c.13 l.1 In Primitive times Saints longed for church-fellowship p.204 c.14 l.1 In Primitive times no respect of opi∣nions p.331, 333 c.5 l.2 In Primitive times Saints told their Experiences p.356 c.6 l.2 In Primitive times Sisters had their liberty, as church-members, in church matters p.465, 466 c.8 l.2 Principle of a Saint is above self, and God like p.254 c.2 l.2 Propagation of the Gospel how p.485 c.9 l.2 Priviledges of Saints imbodyed 89 7 1 202 15 1 Professors who fit for church-fellow∣ship p.35 c.5 l.1 Many Professors not Christians, ib Professors who are best, and tryed, p.326 c.5 l.2 Professors in primitive times p.53, 54 c.5 l.2 Professors fall to Familism, Rantism, &c. why? p.81, 82 c.7 l.1 Promises performed by contrary means p.47 c.4 l.1 Promises to anchor at in a storme p.28 c.3 l.1 Promise of Gold for Brasse, Silver, for Iron p.181 c.13 l.1 Promises of restitution of times to be eyed. 246▪ 1 2 Proofs of Sisters right in▪ Churches, p.467, 468, 469 c.8 l.2 How to prophesie, or fore-tell things to come 27 3 1 Prophesies of these last daies ready to be delivered p.30 c.3 l.1 p.46 c.4 l.1 Prophesies of Hermes and Methodius p.46 47 c.4 l.1 Prophesies of three things that will suddenly fall upon the Churches p.505, 506, 507 c.9 l.2 Prophecying one by one a special ordi∣nance p.412 c.6 l.2 Proud prelatick Pastors in Indepen∣dent Churches as bad as any p.104 c.8 l.1 Providence is to be observed p.247 c.1 l.2 Publicke imbodying convinces the world of the way, prevents scandal, agrees with Christs practice, and precepts, and the way it self, &c. p.281, 282, 283 c.3 l.1 Publick meeting places how they should be dedicated to Saints (living) p.494 c.9 l.2 Q Qualifications in Church-Members must be known as to satisfaction be∣fore they enter p.248 c.1 l.2 Qualification a second part of Expe∣rience p.262 c.6 l.2 Questioning of Forms p.346 c.5 l.2 Questions ased in admitting of weak lambes of Christ must be according∣ly p.291 c.4 l.2
R. Ranters must not be received into Church fellowship p.69 c.5 l.1 Ranters, why many are so p.322 c.5 l.2 Ranter, what he is p.373 c.6 l.2 A Ranter recalled 2 Exper. 6 2 Ranters spirits Church-destroying spirits p.502 c.7 l.2 Rash judgement fights against God, and wht it is? p.340 c.5 l.2 Ranters blazing-starts, ever poend∣ing evill p.59 c.5 l.1 Rash Embodying will soon bee bro∣ken p.280 c.3 l.2 Readers of divers sorts 218 Epist Readers what sort the Authour wishes for 227 Epist. Reason keeps many out of Church-fellowship p.80 c.5 l.1 Reasons why Primitive Saints longed after Church-fellowship p.204 c.15 l.1 Reason that is carnall must be laid aside 219 Epist Readers what sort have promised 219 Epist. Reason as it growes must mend the Laws 223, 224 Epist. 2 Reason (divine) the Rule of Saints Will p.257 c.2 l.2 Rebaptizing is unlawfull p.295, 296, c.4 l.2 Redeemed are the readiest to praise God p.134 c.12 l.1 Refuge of the Churches of Christ p.185 c.14 l.1 Refuge for England where? 13, 14 Ep. Registers in the Church p.279 c.3 l.2 Reigne of Christ visible ere long p.24 c.3 l.1 Relation betwixt God and his Saints, Christ and his Churches, is inse∣parable p.56 c.5 l.1 Reign of Christ over all Churches as Head, and Nations as King p.508 c.9 l.2 Religion is out of the Civill or be p.127, c.11 p.173 c.13 l.1 Restauration promised p.27, 28, 29 31 Restitution of times to be inquired into p.246 c.1 l.2 Revelations of Iohn must be search∣ed by all in these times p.465 c.9 l.2 Remedies to spiritual evils, are spi∣ritual p.111 c.8 l.2 Remembrance every day of the Church in the Wildernesse p.41 c.3 l.1 Retrograde motions of Hypocrites p.65 c.5 l.1 A Riddle for Hypocrites unfolded p.65 c.5 l.1 Right hand of Fellowship 275, 3 2 293 4 2 Rituall order in true Churches p.272 c.3 l.2 Rites or Forms not to be urged, so as to put any by admission p.292 c.4 l.2 R. Riches Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Rivers of Paradise what? running from the East, and why? p.536, 537, 538 c.9 l.2 Righteousnesse inherent and impu∣tative p.475 c.9 l.2 Rock (Christ) the Churches Foun∣dation p.184 c.14 l.1 J. Rogers Experience p.412 c.6 l.2 Rotterdam Church-Covenant p.457 c.7 l.2 Rubbish abundance to be removed, and by whom p.139, 140 c.13 l.1 Ruine cannot be when the Rock is the Foundation p.185 c.14 l.1 Ruine of the late Civill Powers what? 13 Epist. Ruling Synods and Classes unlaw∣full p.107, 108 c.8 l.1 Rules to prophesie of things to come p.27, 28 c.3 l.1 Rule Christs Church is built up by p.119 c.10 l.1
Rules of men make mad Church∣work p.120 c.10 l.1 A Rule for the Will which is two-fold p.257, 258 c.2 l.2 Rule of admission of Members p.339 c.5 l.2 To Rulers of Civil affairs a wod and a warning p.127 c.11 l.1 Rulers run the hazard of ruine when Phacton like they thinke to rule the Sun, in medling with matters of Religion 130, 11 1 171 13 1 Rulers of Parliament warned p.171, 172 c.13 l.1 Ruler of Nations goes out of the Churches 38 Epist. S. Sacraments no where but in true Churches 6 1 Sacraments p.535 c.9 l.2 Sacraments disorderly given by Presbyterians 470 9 Sacriledge for Magistrates to meddle with matters of Religion as Judges 172, 13 1 Safety of Churches in all troubles as p.187 c.14 l.1 Saints shall have enough, and to spare ere long p.36 c.3 l.1 Saints separate from other p.42 c.4 l.1 Saints in Churches should surpasse all p.43 c.4 l.1 Saints live above sense p.47 c.4 l.1 Saints sound, upright, &c. are fittest matter p.51 c.5 l.1 Saints of sweet savour, and for such to be members of the Churches is a latter dayes promise p.51 55 c.5 l.1 Saints, best answer the Ends of Church-fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Saints all hewn from one Rock, of one seed, in one womb, bearing one image, lead by one Spirit, cal∣led into one hope, having one joy and glory p.86 c.7 l.1 Saints united, too hard for all the world p.90 c.7 l.1 Saints happinesse, and honour in Christ their Lord, and cannot want preferment p.145, 146 c.13 l.1 Saints Priviledges, in Christ the Head, and as his Hairs, they grow from him p.151 c.13 l.1 Saints in all ages under all Formes make all but one Church p.151 c.13 l.1 Saints are best taught by Experien∣ces p.384 c.6 l.2 Saints shall judge their Judges p.177 c.13 l.1 Saints of old longed for Church-fellowship, and why? p.204 c.15 l.1 Saints directed to the best Church fellowship p.212 c.15 l.1 Saints that would enter, must con∣sider; and what else p.231, 242 c.1 l.2 Saints of all judgements to bee re∣ceived p.311 c.5 l.2 Saints not tyed to any one Church, p.274 c.3 l.2 Saints the same in Faith, though not in Form p.348 c.5 l.2 Saints of old told their Experiences p.356 c.6 l.2 Saints called Antinomins, and why? p.475 476 c.6 l.2 Saints glorious Cherubims how 14 47 Epist. Salvation before Sanctification in the Decree, but sanctification be¦fore salvation in the execution of it p.359 c.6 l.2 Samaritans brought in by the Ex∣perience of a woman declared p.367, 368 c.6 l.2 Sandy foundations will faile many Churches that are built on them p.190 c.14 l.1 Sanctuary of the Lord filled with Volunteers p.125 c.11 l.1
Saphires (precious stones) who they be? p.513 c.9 l.2 Sardiuss's (precious stones) who? p.516 c.9 l.2 Sardonix's (precious stones) who? p.515 c.9 l.2 Sathan renews Temptations every foot p.432 c.6 l.1 Sathans syngogues in Parish Churches p.79 c.6 l.1 Saving sanctifying graces fit us for Church-fellowship p.59 c.5 l.1 Saul is slaine, Davids dayes entred, and Solomons entring very speedi∣ly 26 Epist. Scandal upon Churches and Saints▪ whence vid. Epist to Churches, and p.321 c.5 l.2 Scandal to Christ, Saints, and Go¦spel, to put any by for their bare opinions in things indifferent p.321, 322 c.5 l.2 Scandal of this age, and of the Go∣spel is so many Hypocrites in Chuches p.68 c.5 l.1 Scripture-comforts are sure, and will last p.309 c.6 l.2 Scriptues how Presbyterian & Pa∣pists agree in them p.461, 402 c.9 l.2 Seal of the Spirit, what it is p.266 c.2 l.2 Sealing of the Spirit how? p.372, 373 c.6 l.2 Secular powers in matters of faith are tyranny and persecution p.160 c.13 l.1 Seed time a sad-time before Harvest p.365 c.6 l.2 Seekers sins. p.194 c.14 l.2 Selfe-examination of all that comes into Church-fellowship p.240 c.1 l.2 Selfe-murther the Author sayed from p.429, 435 c.6 l.2 Separation from them without Christ calls for p.45 c.4 l.1 Separation a part of Church-form p.70 c.6 l.1 Separation what it is? p.75, 76 c.6 l.1 Separates from Parish-Churches no Schismaticks, but who are so? and who are not? p.77, 78 c.6 l.1 Sense makes us look and live so low as not to see things that are com∣ming p.47 c.4 l.1 Sequestration of Ministers of Christ cannot be from their preaching by any man p.180 c.13 l.1 Sermons how to bee remembred p.421 c.6 l.2 Serpent tempts with the tree of knowledge p.545 c.9 l.2 Servants of Christ (the Master∣builder) who? p.141 c.13 l.1 Servants of the Churche, officers p.288 c.4 l.2 Servants of God differ in opinions, and yet the Lords p.317 c.5 l.2 Set forme in Churches must not be p.272 c.3 l.2 Shield to Saints who are to be 27 Ep. Shadow, what it is, and what are so? p.338 c.5 l.2 Sin in things indifferent p.324 c.5 l.2 Sisters (as well as Brethren) have their Right as Church-members to vote, &c. p.463, 464 c.8 l.2 Sisters joyned in choosing an Apostle p.466 c.8 l.2 Sixth day (now) man put into Para∣dise p.446 c.9 l.2 Sodome a type of Antichrist p.525 c.9 l.2 Slanders the Author suffers 43 Epist. Sleeping at Church how to avoid it p.521 c.6 l.2 Solemne Order must accompany solemne Ordinances p.280 c.3 l.2 Solemnity of Embodying is in pub∣lick p.281 c.3 l.2 Soules flashed for sin, exalted in Christ p.381 c.6 l.2 Souldiers of Christ are best in the
Churches p.90 c.7 l.1 J. Spilmans Experience 4 Expe. 6 2 Speech of Christ what? p.98 c.8 l.1 Spirit, and Truth inwardly and out∣wardly God to bee worshipped in p.1 c.1 l.1 Spirit least, when Form most p.33 c.3 l.1 Spirit calls to come away p.40 c.3 l.1 Spiritual means against spiritual evils p.111 c.8 l.1 Spirit qualifies us by convincing and making us voluntary p.126 c.11 l.1 Spirit is the Key that opens, and none shuts p.138 c.13 l.1 Spirit agreeing with our spirits, how p.373 c.6 l.2 Spirit is the sweetest compulsive power p.129 c.11 21 Spirited for the worke of the Tem∣ple little yet, to what will be ere long p.123 c.10 l.1 Spiritual Ahiabs, & none else, should goe about to say the true Founda∣tion of the Church p.192 c.14 l.1 Spiritual worshippers in the Chur∣ches p.209 c.15 l.1 Spirit and Word are the Lords Arms be draws with p.253 c.2 l.2 Spirit of Christ the interior work∣ing Instrument p.264 c.2 l.2 Spirit is Gods strongest and right Arme p.269 c.2 l.2 Spirit how it is knowne, and how it convinces p.264, 265 c.2 l.2 Spirit how one in all p.268 c.2 l.2 True Spirit how known p.373 c.6 l.2 Spirit carries through thicke and thin p.266 c.2 l.2 Spirit powred out, hard by us p.506 523 c.9 l.2 Spirits powring out where it will bee first p.538 c.9 l.2 Spirit is the onely orthodox Expo∣sitor p.463 c.9 l.2 Spiritual Covenants are best, and binde mst p.462 c.7 l.2 Spiritual Egypt▪ many Churches, how, and why? p.342 c.5 l.2 Spirit-Baptisme a principle of union p.307 c.4 l.2 Spirit-Baptisme by which we enter Christs Body p.308 c.4 l.2 Spouse of Christ faire p.87 c.7 l.1 Spring time is entred for the Chur∣ches p.28 c.3 l.1 Sprinkling, and washing, all one with dipping p.497 c.4 l.2 Strength of Saints embodyed, in∣vincible p.89, 90 c.7 l.1 Storme which the Author was in 48 Epist. A. Strongs Experience 9 Exp. 6 2 Storms the Churches must meet with yet p.28 c.3 l.1 Subjects to Christ the Lord and Lawgiver p.143, 144 c.13 l.1 Substance of all shadows, is Christ, p.338 c.5 l.2 Sun must rule the day that is coming 528 92 37 Epist. L. Swinfields Experience 396, 397, and 4 Exp. 6 2 Sword of Christ that slayes sinne and errors, is the word of Christ p.261 c.2 l.2 Sympathy with the least member of Christ the Head p.149 c.13 l.1 Synods ruling unwarrantable 107 8 1 497 9 2 T. Tabernacles, i. e. Churches, their be∣nefits p.94 c.7 l.1 Tabernacles of David types of Con∣gregational Churches p.526 c.9 l.2 Task masters of Egypt, who, and where now p.343 c.5 l.2 Teachings are best by best Experi∣ences p.382, 383 c.6 l.2
Teeth of the Church, who p.97 c.8 l.1 Temples of the Church, who p.98 ib. Temple stones hewn and fitted, &c. p.52 c.5 l.1 Temple of Solomon, a Type of New Jerusalem p.528 c.9 l.2 Temptations are strong, and many; after Calls p.416 c.6 l.2 Temptations incredible, the Author met with 427 428 ib. Temptations are divers ways 433 434 1 Exper. ib. Temptations, to deny Ordinances 404 2 Exp. ib. Terminus, the Lawyers God 221 Epist. Terror to all the world, Churches united p.90 c.7 l.1 Tenderness, in admitting Members p.291 c.4 l.2 Testimony, threefold of all admitted 290 294 ib. Things indifferent and doubtful, what are so p.313 314 c.5 l.2 Things of a middle size left to liberty p.327 ib. Thoughts of Hell, scaring at first p.419 c.6 l.2 Twin-Testimonies give assurance p.372 ib. Single testimony, how enough, and how uncertain 374 377 ib. Throne of Christ usurped by some p.320 c.5 l.2 Times of restitution tumbling in a pace p.28 c.3 l.1 In times of popery, Experiences were told to convert p.368 c.6 l.2 Times of assurance p.378 ib. Time of tryal, sharp to the Churches, is coming p.505 c.9 l.2 Topaz's (precious stones) who they be p.518 ib. A Trance 404 62 Travel in souls before birth of joy p.366 ib. Trees of Christs own planting, fruit∣ful p.43 c.4 l.1 Trees of typified paradise, who and what p.532 533 c.9 l.2 Tree of Life, who it is p.534 ib. Troubles in minde and conscience 410 7 Exp. 6 2 In troubles experiences, are cordials p.367 ib. Truths occasion errors, but how 25 Epist. Trust in God, is helped by experi∣ences p.367 c.6 l.2 Turks (and fit for none else) that will not have their forms questioned p.346 c.5 l.2 M. Turrents Experience, 11 Exp. 6 2 Types of Church-matter p.51 52 c.5 l.1 Types which foretel the ruine of false Churches, and the rising of the true Churches p.525 526 527 c.9 l.2 Tyranny and persecution to have se∣cular powers over us in matters of faith p.160 c.13 l.1 Tithes a heavy yoke 6 Epist. Tithes when, and how confirmed to Ministers 28 Epist. 491 9 2 Tithes, how Presbyterians and Papists agree in them p.488 ib. Tithes how judaical, how ceremonial, how moral, and how that mainte∣nance must be altered, when they keep up sin and superstition, &c. 489▪ 490 ib. V. Variety in unity is most beauteous p.337 338 c.5 l.2 Variety of Gods workings appear by the Experiences of Saints p.366 c.6 l.2 Violation of Christs Laws to take in∣to Churches any but visible Saints p.55 c.5 l.1 Vindication of Congregational-Churches
for matter p.64 ib. Violence and voluntariness repugnant p.269 c.2 l.2 Visions of various conditions of the Churches in all ages, and how in these days, by Hermes p.46 c.4 l.1 Visible and invisible, no Scripture di∣stinction p.61 c.5 l.1 A vision 423 425 398 409 6 2 Vision, what it is, and twofold p.449 ib. Vital spirits, all from Christ the Head p.149 c.13 l.1 Unfitness of men for Church work p.120 c.10 l.1 Uncircumcised and circumcised all one in Christ p.306 c.4 l.2 Unholy, unclean ones, not to enter the Temple p.52 c.5 l.1 Uniformity when it began to be forced p.332 c.5 l.2 Union of Saints unconquerable p.90 c.7 l.1 Union with Christ the Head, qualifies for communion with Saints in Churches p.59 c.5 l.1 Union of all Saints and Churches necessary p.195 196 c.14 l.1 For unions sake, all that makes differ∣ence laid aside ibid. Unity and entity convertibles p.87 c.7 l.1 Unity, where is not uniformity p.16 c.14 l.1 Unity urged amongst all Churches, and why p.501 c.9 l.2 Unity with variety agrees very well p.498 ib. Unity of Churches, when it will be most p.506 ib. Unispirituality keeps up the Churches p.196 c.14 l.1 Universal deliverance of the Church, when p.20 21 25 c.3 l.1 Universities of what sort at the last days p.540 c.9 l.2 Unnecessary things make most diffe∣rence p.325 c.5 l.2 Unsavory fruits of the Head of Brass p.159 c.13 l.1 Unskilful builders abundance, as yet p.12 c.10 l.1 Vocation layes open election p.358 c.6 l.2 Vocation legal and evangelical 403 404, &c. ib. Vocation in time, election eternal p.359 ib. Voluntary submission to the ways of Christ p.123 124 c.11 l.2 Voluntiers, and none else in Christs Churches p.253 254 c.2 l.2 How we are voluntiers, different from false members p.270 ib. A voice of God 1. Exper. 406 409 415 ib. Votes in Church concern all alike, viz. Sisters as well as Brothers p.470 c.8 l.2 Use of forms may be p.34 c.5 l.2 Usurpation of Christs power p.105 c.8 l.1 Usurpation of Christs throne p.320 c.5 l.2 Usurpers both Ministers, and Magi∣strates, and how p.169 c.13 l.1 W. Wants none to the Churches ere long p.35 c.3 l.1 Waiting is a special latter days dispo∣sition p.47 c.4 l.1 Warning to Hypocrites p.67 c.5 l.1 Warning piece to Ministers, last year p.208 c.15 l.1 Warning to formal Anabaptists, that idolize dipping p.343 c.5 l.2 Warning to some, by experiences of others p.363 c.6 l.2 Warning to them that take Gods name in vain 423 ib▪ W. Walkers experience, 6 Exp. ib. A special warning to Purleigh in Es∣sex
237 Epist. E. Waymans Experience p.409 ib. Water-baptism, how passed away as to us p.310 c.4 l.2 Way of the Churches in latter dayes best discovered p.33 c.3 l.1 Watch and pray for the promises p.47 c.4 l.1 Ways God works in strange, and by contraries p.47 c.4 l.1 Way of Gospel-fellowship, Christ left behinde for Saints to follow him in p.199 200 c.14 l.1 The way much honored by publick embodying p.282 c.3 l.2 Weak Lambs how to be taken in p.293 c.4 l.2 Weakness, God most and best seen in p.418 c.6 l.2 Weakest sex, most exalted p.464 c.8 l.2 Weather for Ireland promises fair p.417 c.6 l.2 Well-grounded, and well-united, ne∣cessary for Churches p.193 c.14 l.1 Westminster Assembly of Divines a∣bominable 57 58 Epist. Wicked patrons. In Epist. to L. Gen. and Com. A wife wrought upon her husband, 10 Exp. 6 2 Wilderness the Church was in 10 30 31 1 3 1 Wilderness-creatures no more our companions p.36 c.3 l.1 Wilde Beasts shall not hurt us ere long p.34 ib. Wilderness-ones characterized p.38 ib. Willing to enter into Churches, not forced p.125 126 c.11 l.1 Will hath a principle p.254 c.2 l.2 Will must first be wrought upon by the spirit p.129 c.11 l.1 Will hath an end, and what it is p.255 c.2 l.2 Will hath a rule, and what it is 256 257 ib. Will hath an object, and what it is 258 259 ib. Will hath its operation into the thing willed p.260 ib. Wisdoms polity p.1 c.1 l.1 Wisdom weighs the end first p.136 c.12 l.1 Wisdom hath sent out to all p.198 c.15 l.1 Witness of the Spirit on his own knowledge p.266 c.2 l.2 Witness what it is p.353 354 c.6 l.2 Witness, if without it, what we must do p.375 ib. Wives and children of faithful Mini∣sters must be provided for, after the death of those Ministers 30 Epist. Winter-time is nigh over to all the Churches p.28 c.3 l.1 Whores children, Parish Churches, and how p.552 553 c.9 l.2 Wolves look upward when they howl for prey p.65 c.5 l.1 Women may, and must speak in the Churches subjective p.294 c.4 l.2 Womens right in Churches proved p.464 465 466 c.8 l.2 Women have a good example p.407 c.6 l.2 Women have preached p.468 474 c.8 l.2 Women how, and why they have e∣qual liberty with men as Church-members 472 473 ib. Women excelling men p.473 474 c.8 l.2 Women, how and when they are not to speak 475 476 ib. A word to the three Nations p.15 c.2 l.1 A word to the Churches p.29 49 3 c.4 l.1 A word to all to come into Christ p.80 c.6 l.1 A word to Saints to begin their Hal∣lelujah apace p.135 136 c.12 l.1 A word to Magistrates p.19 c.13 l.1 A word both to Magistrates, and Mi∣nisters p.174 ib. A word to the builders of these days p.197 c.14 l.1
A word to the Anabaptists in Dublin and Waterford· p.334 c.5 l.2 A word to the wicked indeed p.430 c.6 l.2 A word more to Church-members p.455 c.7 l.2 A word to women p.476 c.8 l.2 A word more to the Churches p.510 511 521 c.9 l.2 Word preached, makes not Churches p.63 c.5 l.1 Word preached, is not the indelible note of a true Church p.79 c.6 l.1 Word of God must be the ground of our perswasion p.45 c.1 l.2 Word of God, the instrumental cause of the will p.261 c.2 l.2 Word converting, and confirming 404 414 11 Exp. 6 2 Word awakens 397 411 419 420 422 426 ib. Word and Spirit twin testimonies p.374 ib. Work of Churches too hard for men p.139 c.13 l.1 Work of Ministers and Saints, is by the Word to ruine errors p.175 ib. Work of God in these days, is to bring all into one. p.330 c.5 l.2 Workings under the Law, heavy p.415 c.6 l.2 Works, how Presbyterians and Papists agree in them p.473 477 478 c.9 l.2 Worship of God is in Spirit and Truth p.1 c.1 l.1 Work that God is about in these days p.24 25 26 c.3 l.1 The world will finde Churches too hard for them p.90 c.7 l.1 World much convinced by publick imbodying p.281 c.2 l.2 Worships that are false, we must sepa∣rate from p.76 c.6 l.1 Y. Forty years hence of Christs coming to reign p.24 c.3 l.1 Ynough and to spare, we shall have ere long p.36 c.3 l.1 Yron heads p.160 c.13 l.1 Yron vide Iron Z. Zeal, that is false, fights against God in his Saints and Churches p.340 c.5 l.2 One word for the Printer. Honest friends! FRown not! for who shall throw the first stone? you or I? You that are without faults, finde faults, but make not faults; I fear we shall meet with more Errata's at the end of our lives, then at the end of these lines, though here be many, and more then my leasure can enter together into the list; but being they are baggage, it shall cost the less care; onely this, I believe that the miscarriages of the Press, and mens pra∣ctises (with some mens malicious misconstructions) will have alike look and language, and may express. Light a Lie, Truth, Ruth, Mystery, Mysty, &c. For, for the most part their fault is to diminish and detract. But it may be, some men will read with a Ro∣mish gloss or glance (as the Prelate or Presbyteer) and then I look, they that will (wil∣lingly) read as in Luk. 15 8. for domum everrit▪ domum everit; for when they should sweep the house, they would pull it down: So that instead of meding worth
I must look for some to be rending words till they make them worse then they are, & it (may be) as bad as themselves a last. But to thee Honest Reader! I wish with all my heart that I had more leasure to direct, and you lift and light to correct. I hope wee shall meet with some candid Christians, and honest men, who will amend in the life what is amisse in the leafe; and with some patient well-minded Readers who will turn the other side to make it true sence for the Printers sake, and sentence for the Publishers sake; Passe by the Typographick errors, for his sake, and the Hypographick errors for mine; For I could not follow the Presse, and the Presse would not follow me. And to be ingenuous, I shall finde out some faults for you; many from you; but most in you, that are ever and most finding fault. Errata's in the Epistles. PAge 17. read  fourth month p. 30. line 27. r. deeply incumbent upon Magistrates, p. 26. l. 1. r. Christ's p. 29. l. 29. r. you know what I, p. 37. l. 18. margin r. redire i principium, p. 55. in margin against l. 6. obliterate the p 70. l 9. in margin r. the way to make it, p. 64. l 19 r. him in, i. e. in one, p. 63 l. 37. r Churches, p. 73. l. 37. r. do save. p. 79. in verses l. ult. r. . In the Book, p 5. l. 27 r. Policie, p. 4 in margent against l. 16. r. loose, and l 24▪ r. because that they. p. 15. l. 32. r. cheat us, p. 16. l. 1. r. Discipline, p. 17. l. 15 r. viz. in the Church, p. 23. l. 7. r. and five and thirty dayes, l. 29. r. that it is in. p. 30. l. 3. r. that holds, p. 34. in margent against, 17. and 18. l. r. Form, are least in Spirit, p. 39. l 6. r. Sun, p. 46. l. 21. r. Hermes, p 50. l. 37. r. others, and obliterare all, p. 54. l. 14. r.  p. 56. in margent under object, r. is nt, p. 63. l 7. r. p 59. and in p. 65. against l. 16 margent. r. Churches, which they have, in p. 66. l. 14. r. sorts, p 67. l. 28. r. they, obliterate ye, p. 69. l. 9. r. new Ranters or old Protestants, p. 72. l. 23. r , p. 109. l. 1. r. , l. 23. r. undeniable. p 86 in margent against l. 25. r. love p 96. l. 1. Contents r. The second part of the scond, &c l. ast Contents r. any Church, p. 139. l. 24. r. and oblit. as, and in marg against l. 30. r. not able, p. 141. l. 36 mar. r. force, p. 152. r. ron sides, p. 217. l. 20. r. Esau, p 320. l. 3. r. that, p. 253. l. 14. r. Sun, p. 255. l. 13. oblit. seu before motum, and put in seu before mvetur, l. 33. r. men▪ p 261. l. 21. r. approbatione, p. 264. l. 31. r. . marg. l. 24 r. Interior, p. 268. l. 3. r. found no rest, p. 304. l. 11. r. here, p. 305. l. ult. r. thou before that, p. 308. l. 12 r. is called, p. 301. l. 4 r. judgements, p 316. l. 30. r. they, p. 320. l. 12. r. be the cause of a pale, p. 328 l. 3. r subscriptions p. 334. l. 32. r. Psal. 36.9. p. 336. l. 1. r. a tenondo, p. 358. l. 14. r. they, p. 319. l. 9 r. a poor wretch, who sayes, p 418. l. 38. r unrighteous ones, p. 419 l 2. r. full of variety, p. 739. marg r. dum sursum sursim, p. 453. l. 22. r. those, p. 457. l. 19. r. by ther, p. 465. l. ult. but one, r. Act 4. p. 466 l. 4 r. re-admitting of one, l. 5 r. to hold off, p. 482. l. 8. r. Intigrale, marg against l. 20. r. no Diocesan, 467 marg. against l. 20. r. duobus locis, p. 469. l 33. oblit. the, p, 470. l. 16. r. 1 Cor. 5.13. p. 40. l. 7. r. and as are, p. 507. line 37. read Forms of it, page 511. l. 35. oblit. to be, p. 519 l 26. r. an Amethyst, p. 523. l. 17. r. presence, p. 531. l. 5. r. autem, p. 464. l. 31. r. Scriptures, p. 468. l. 1. r. to be baptised, p. 472. l. 9. his ha l. 25. r. bread, p. 478. l. 34. r. grant it, p. 484. l. 37 r that they, 480. l. 1. r. about Civil powers, p 442. l 5. r For &c. Other faults I beleeve there be that have given me the slip, but I am not at leasur  pursue them.
