r808a 99833689 38167
A Relation of Several Signal VICTORIES And other Considerable Enterprizes, Lately Obtain'd by Their Majesties Forces, over the REBELS in IRELAND. PARTICULARLY, I. The Siege and Taking the Famous Fort of Scronalard, by B. General Churchil. II. The Taking the Fort at Ross, by Captain Carrol. III. The Defeating 21 Troops of Irish Horse, and 7 or Draggons, near Tralee. III. The Actions of Collonel Fitz Gerald, and Captain Edgworth, in gaining a considerable Pass, and Routing a Party of Irish, Commanded by Gibny. 21. Jan. 1691/0 Being the substance of the last Intilligence, Printed at Dublin, the 13th. Instant, With Allowance. WE have Advice from Cork, That the Forces under the Command of Major General Tettan, that lately made a Descent into Kerry, are most of them come back into their Winter Quarters. They Marcht from Cork on the 28th. of the last, and on the 29th. at Macromoo were joyn'd by Brigadier Churchil, Sir David Collier, Collonel Coy, and Coll. Matthows, and the next day marcht forwards through the Countrey, which they found all burnt. On New-Years-Day they attackt a Forti∣fication of the Enemies, at a place called Scronolard, which was intended to hinder their passage that way; they took it with great ease in two hours, though the Enemy were two months in raising it, with the labour of five hundred Men constantly employ'd: Marching thence towards Brewsterfield, they discover∣ed some of the Enemies Scouts, whereupon seventy of Collonel Eppinger's Dragoons, and Coll. Coy's Horse, having the Advance-Guard, came near a party of the Enemy of a 160 Horse, who (notwithstanding they were twice the number) would not endure a Charge, but run away with all in imaginable speed, upon small light Horses, most of them without Shoes. Amongst these that made this haste, we hear was the Lord Coursey and Slane, and Collonel Nicholas Brown, whom they call Lord Kinmare: By this time all the Countrey round was in flame, and being at some distance from Killarny, our Forces made all the haste thither they could, to save it, but yet there were a∣bout twenty Cabbins before we could get thither burnt by two Troopers that stay'd behind the rest, which we kill'd, and so sav'd the rest of the Town, and Brewster's Forge also. Our Forces then moved towards Ross, the scituation whereof we found very strong, and tolerably well fortify'd, having a Gar∣rison of about six hundred men in it, Commanded by Collonel Mac. Carty that wants a Thumb; in it were the Lords Coursey, and Slane, and Collonel Brown, who not willing to venture themselves there, got fresh Horses, and scowr'd towards Lymerick as fast as they could. This place not being to be fore't at pre∣sent, we attackt a Rock near it, which the Enemy had fortify'd, with fisty Danes, Commanded by Cap. Buenbury, and fisty Kinsailers, Commanded by Cap.Corroll. The Service was very smart, both our Lead∣ing Officers being hurt, Captain Buenburg with a Granade, and Captain Carroll shot through the Legg: We lost 6 private Men, and had fifteen wounded. There were in this fortification of the Enemy seven∣ty seven, of which fourteen swimm'd to another Rock, five were taken Prisoners, and the rest kill'd; of those fourteen that swimm'd, most of them dy'd before Morning, and the rest were kill'd by our Musqueteers. From thence our Horse Marched towards Tralee, which the Enemy (being twenty one Troops of Dragoons, and seven Troops of Horse, Commanded by Collonel Sheldon) deserted, not hav∣ing time to Burn it, and made all the haste they could to get to Limerick, if possible, with design, as we are informed, if they could not force their way through. Lieutenant-General Ginkell's Troops, to kill-all their Horses, and Transport themselves by Boats over the Shannon. Some Deserters from Tyconnel's Regiment inform us of the General Consternation the Enemy were in on this occasion. Of late, we were very much Allarm'd by a num∣ber of the Rapparees, and some of the Enemies Forces gathered together in the Island of Allen in the Coun-of Kildere; But Collonel Foulks, and Collonel Piper, who were commanded thither with a Party of the Army, joyned some of the Militia of the City of Dublin, and the Militia of the County of Kildare, whereof Contain Fitz-Gerald is Governour, and was in the Action soon dispersed them, having hunted them from Boggs to Woods, like Wolves & Foxes, but could seldom overtake any of them; those they met with, viz. One Captain Gibny, a Captain amongst the Rap∣parees, and some others, the Killed, and fore't the rest out of those Fastnesses: The long and dark Nights at this time, gave them an opportunity of running away; but such effectual care is taken, by Destroying the seattering Cabbins were they were Sheltred, and Garrisoning other places in the Boggs, that it will now be possessed by a better sort of Inhabitants: Both the Soldiers of the Army, and the Militia that we Detacht for this Service, behaved themselves with great Zeal and forwardness, to the general satisfaction of the Officers. Besides those killed, there were about Fisteen taken Prisoners; some were used in this Service for Guides, and the rest will soon be disposed of. Our Forces being Posted at Lanesborough (as you had an Accôunt in the laft Intelligence) continued at the Foot of the Bridge without any Action, within half Pistol Shot of the Enemy. But on Monday the Fifth Instant, Early in the Morning they were Al∣larum'd on this Occasion. Captain Edgworth, being Posted with one Hundred Men at the Entrance of the Pass, was Attaqu't by a Party of the Enemy, to the Number of near a Thousand. The Lord Viscount Lis∣burn, who Commanded in Chief at Lisborough, being sent to in Order to a Reinforcement, drew out a small party of this Garrison, and Marcht them about two Miles towards the Captains Relief, where they met an Express which gave an Account, that the Ene∣my were beaten back, the Officer that led them with several of the Souldiers being Killed, without the loss of one Man of ours, and three only wounded. LONDON, Printed for W. Bonney. 1691.
