S2232 11907144 50738
A SEASONABLE MEMENTO Both to King and People Upon this CRITICAL JUNCTURE OF AFFAIRES. Nullo modo eis Artibus placatur Divina Majestas, quibus Humana Dignitas inquinatur. Aug. de Civ. Dei. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.
A SEASONABLE Memento, &c. IT is grown into a Custom (I know) to smooth the way for the Grosse of the Subject in Agitation, by some preliminary Apology or Complement to the Courteous Reader; but yet, for reasons best known to my self, I shall at this time pass over the Ceremonious Flourish of an Introduction, and without Welt or Guard (as they say) fall up∣on my Province, which is to make out, That neither upon pretext of Religion, Personal Vices, Excesses in Government, or any other Colour whatsoever, the Subjects of the Crown of England may withdraw their Obedience, or make Hostile Resistance to King Charles our present Sovereign; being by right of Inheritance just∣ly possess'd of the Crown; his Title no way depending either upon his Divine or Moral Virtues; and the said Subjects having receiv'd him, and acknowledged him for their Only Supreme Governour, done him Homage, and sworn to him Faith and Allegeance, Abso∣lutely and without Condition. AS for other Princes and Potentates, whether Elective King∣doms, or such as (at the Erection of them) were received by the First King upon Express Covenant, and only with a Conditional O∣bedience; (as is pretended by those of Aragon, and Others;) of These I shall not here discourse. Neither shall I speak of those
Kings and Princes who acknowledge (in Spiritual Matters) a Su∣periour Jurisdiction in the Pope over them; who further stickleth (by necessary Relation and Dependency of the Temporal upon the Spiritual) to have also a Temporal Power over them, in ordine ad Spiritualia; And hath often put this his Claim in Practice, by ac∣companying his Spiritual Censure of Excommunication, with the Sentence of discharging Subjects of their Obedience to their Princes, and so consequently of Deposing them. Herewith I shall not med∣dle; None of These Cases being applicable to This in question of King Charles, who is no Elective King, but holdeth his Crown by an Unquestionable Title of Succession, deriv'd to him by Descent from his Ancestours, for the space of more than Six hundred years: Neither was there ever any Pact or Condition with Him, or any of his Progenitours, of Forfeiture; (which in This Case neither was, nor ever can be justly pretended.) True it is, that his Ancestours and Himself have been pleased to limit and restrain their Legal Right by many Concessions and Laws, in some Cases; as the making of Laws without Consent of Peers and People, the Levying of Mo∣ney, &c. which he cannot Violate without great Injustice, as shall be after shown: But no such Pact or Covenant can be produced, whereby, upon Breach, he Forfeiteth his Sovereignty, or maketh it Justifiable for his Subjects to take up Arms against, or to inflict Punishments upon his Person, either by Dethroning, Death, or Im∣prisonment. THE Case likewise of Roman Catholick Princes no way concer∣neth Him, who acknowledgeth not in a Pope any such Superiour Authority: So that whatsoever Pretences may be in some Cases, concerning such Princes as I have above specifyed; (wherein I shall not presume to deliver my Opinion) yet in the Present Case of Our King, there can be no colourable Pretence of taking Arms against Him, or of Deposing Him; which I understand to be (in effect) when he is divested of his Just Regal Power; Or of the Imprisoning of his Person, which I understand to be not only when he is actually in Bonds, or lockt up in a Room; but also when the Liberty of Going, and the Freedom of Speaking is restrained, to such Places, or Persons, as Others shall please; and he remain under a Guard, not of his Own chusing, but im∣pos'd upon him by Others.
IT must be acknowledged, that the Kings of England derive their Title and Right from William the Norman; who, although he came in by Conquest, yet his Successours (considering that a Right Acquir'd by Force, may likewise be Recover'd by Force, by those upon whom the forcible Intrusion was made) were pleased, by way of Pact and Stipulation, to limit and qualify that (Imperium Absolutum) Absolute Dominion which is acquired by Conquest: And the People of England thereupon did submit themselves to his Government; and thereby was Constituted Imperium Legitimum, a Just and Rightfull Sovereignty; the Kings remaining with Su∣preme Power, and the People with Common Right; whereby they were freed from the Servitude of Conquest, and remain'd under a Free Subjection; whereunto they had by their voluntary Consent submitted themselves. THE Kings likewise did recede from Absolute and Arbitrary Power, and remain'd with Supreme, but not with Absolute Empire. BY Free Subjection, I understand when a People live under Laws to which they have given a Free Consent, and not under the Meer will of the Prince; and that they retain such a Propriety in that which is their Own, that without Their Assent, or Legal For∣feiture, it cannot be taken from them: And this is a true diffe∣rence betwixt a Free Subject, and a Slave or Servant. Quicquid ac∣quirit Servus, acquirit Domino; Liber, quod acquirit, acquirit Sibi; Whatsoever a Slave gets, he gets for his Master; but what a Free∣man gets, is for Himself. And so although the Dominion of All belongs solely to the Prince, yet Propriety refers to Every man; Dominium Totius apud Caesarem, Proprietas apud Singulos. THE Difference that I understand betwixt a Supreme, and an Absolute Empire, is, That in Absolute Empire the Rule of the Peoples Obedience is onely the Sovereigns Will. So it is in Turky, Muscovy, and all such Princes as retein Entire the Right of Con∣quest; and was in some sort under the Roman Emperours after the Lex Regia was establish'd by the Peoples Consent; whereby they transferr'd their Entire Right unto Him. Supreme Empire I understand to be, when a King has a Supre∣macy and Sovereignty over all, but his Absolute Power is limited and restrein'd by reciprocal Pacts, Laws, and Stipulations betwixt
Prince and People; which is the Case of the Crown of England: and to these Pacts the King and People are equally bound before God and man; and the King is as much bound to Justice, to the Protection of his Subjects, and to the Observance of the Laws, (not onely out of Religion, but even of Morall Honesty also) as the Sub∣ject is to Obedience. And he is not onely accountable to God, but even his People have certain Just and Legal wayes to seek Redress, wherein he shall do Wrong; notwithstanding that Axiome of our Common Law, That the King can do no Wrong; which is false in many senses, and may very well be call'd Fictio Juris, a kind of Metaphysicall Fiction: Le Roy ne fait Tort, being onely to be under∣stood in the ordinary Course of Justice; which the King admini∣string by his Ministers, and not in Person, it is They that are the Wrong-doers, and not the King; and the Subject, against Them, is to seek his Remedy. For Kings may do Wrong, and be as wicked as Other men, commit Murther, and wrongfully take away Other mens Estates; which no Fiction of the Law can make not to be Wrong; although his Person be exempt from Punishment. And that Abstract Consideration of the King, for his just Power and Office, as it hath often, Heretofore, been ill us'd in way of Osten∣tation; so, in our Late Troubles, there was as ill use made of it, on the Other hand; when the taking up Arms and the Fighting against him, was pretended not to be against the KING, but onely a∣gainst CHARLES STƲART. But (to speak in plain In∣telligible Terms) a King both may do Wrong, and the People may seek their Redress, in such sort as the Law of the Land allowes. And the difference betwixt King and Peoples Failing in their Reciprocall Duties, is not but that they do wrong alike, offend God alike, and are both of them liable to be question'd, according to the Extent of the Law, by both their Consents establish'd. The Subjects transgressing the Law, shall be punish'd according to the quality and measure of the Offence: Felony, by the Loss of their Goods and Chattles, and by a Milder Death; Treason by a more Severe Death, and Confiscation both of Goods and Inheritance. But hereof they must be Convict, per Pares, by People of their own Condition, and adjudg'd by a Superiour Jurisdiction; which can be deriv'd Onely and Singly from the King. So that the King, not having his Peer, nor any of his Own Condition, can∣not have a Legal Tryall; and having no Jurisdiction Superiour to
Himself, cannot be Adjudg'd or Sentenc'd by any: for neither the Extent of the Law, nor any Condition of the Pacts, or Stipula∣tion, do reach to the Punishing of the Person of the King, or the Forfeiture of his Dominion over us. Certain it is that (in Civill things) Tryalls may be, (and often are) brought against the King; and Kings do give way that the Judges be sworn to do Equall Justice betwixt Them and their Subjects: and in points of Oppressi∣on and wrong, we may Remonstrate our Grievances, and challenge Redress by our Petitions; which, if they be not condescended un∣to, we may insist upon them as our Right, and claim them as a Due, and not as of Grace: But yet we must do it by way of Peti∣tion, as being a Dutifull Form of Subjects bringing their Plea a∣gainst the King; for in other sort He ought not to be Impleaded. Be∣side these Petitions of Right, we may also Remonstrate, enter our Protestations, and take all those Courses which the Laws allow. Neither ought the King to take Offence at these Legall Contestations with him; because, by his Assent unto the Laws, he hath Assen∣ted unto Them: Nay he ought, in Them, to do us Right; being oblig'd thereunto by the Law of God, by his Oath, and by Mo∣rall Honesty and Justice. But yet if he fail in all these Duties, Our Jurisdiction reacheth not to his Personall Punishment. There∣in he is Sub Nullo nisi sub Deo, under none but God; and the Law stops There, and tells us, Satis sufficit ei ad paenam, quod De∣um habet Ʋltorem, that it will be a sufficient punishment to him that he hath God for an Avenger. Yet are we not altogether left without Remedy; for Kings although they be God's Vice-gerents, yet they cannot work as God does, saying Fiat, and it was done; Kings must work by Mediate Instruments; and if they command Illegal Things, the Executioners of them are Responsible, and must make satisfaction to the Parties injur'd. And therefore the King ought not Immediately to Imprison, nor in Person to Execute any thing; because that in case of Wrong-doing, the Subject would then be destitute of all means of Redress, in regard the King's Person is not to be Impleaded by Law. I know the usual Objections, In case Kings will do that which they ought not to do, and will, by their own immediate Warrants Commit, and be the Personall Actours of the Injuries, or not suffer the Executioners of their Illegal Commands to be Legally proceded against; shall the Sub∣ject be left wholly without Remedy, and debarr'd the Benefit of that
Right of Nature, in-bred in all Creatures, of self Preservation? Yes; we must be contented with that Condition wherein God hath placed us; and wherein, by our Own Consents, and Stipulations of Subjection, We have placed our selves; and may onely right our selves by those means which, by the Laws, (whereunto we have given our Consent) are permitted unto us: Neither is our Native Liberty hereby ravish'd from us; but as we have parted with it by our own Voluntary agreement, so neither can we resume it, but by those wayes which we have reserv'd in the Stipulations of our Submission. And beside that herein there is no Injury, for that Volenti non fit Injuria; it would be more Hurtfull to Mankind, if it were Otherwise: for there is a necessity that in all sorts of Governments, as well as in Monarchy, there should be an Impuni∣ty, and Power, somewhere, of not being question'd; otherwise all would be hurl'd into Anarchy and Confusion; Neither could there be any finall Determination of Controversies, if there were not a Derniere Ressort, and Last Appeal, wherein we are bound to Ac∣quiesce. Now this Power must be trusted in some hand, and That must of necessity be, where the Sovereign Power remaineth; other∣wise, there must be supposed a Superiour Power to that Sovereign Power, and so in Infinitum, untill we come to some such Power as hath nothing above it; and then That must be entrusted, and be submitted to, without being accountable to Any but to God; because on Earth there can be to it no Superiour Jurisdiction. And this Power is in the King of England in all things, such onely excepted, wherein Himself or his Ancestours have, by Laws and Stipulations, limi∣ted their Absolute Power; as was said before. And This we are by the Law of God, and of the Land, bound to Obey, and not to make any Resistance, but what the Law alloweth us: We must, in the Rest, have recourse unto God, if our Princes be Wicked; neither may we Mutiny, or Repine at God, when we have Ill Kings, more than when he sendeth Diseases, Plagues, Cater∣pillars, Blightings or Blasts. For wicked Kings are but Blast∣ings of the People that God is pleas'd to Punish: neither must we think Our Condition worse than that of Wicked Kings; (notwith∣standing their Temporall Impunity) for certainly it is much Better, both in regard of Punishment in the World to Come, and commonly in This. For the Next World as Their Sin is greater; so it is declar'd that their Punishment shall be greater also, Hear, Oye Kings, and
Ʋnderstand, &c. Because, being Ministers of Gods Kingdom, you have not judg'd aright, nor kept the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of God; horribly and speedily shall he come upon you, for a sharp Judgment shall be to them that are in High Places, for Mercy will soon pardon the Meanest, but Mighty men shall be mightily Tormented. Wisd. 6. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Whereas Subjects, who suffer with Patience, because they are so com∣manded by God, make him their Debtor by their Sufferings; and he always payeth faithfully, who saith, that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also Reign with him. And for this World, their Wickedness and Oppression is still accompanied with these Fears, Destractions, and Horrors of Conscience, which have ever been inseparable from Tyrannies; by which their Lives are render'd more uncomfortable, than the Unhappiest of their Subjects. And for the most part, their Ends are as miserable as their Lives; for what they Fear, and by their Tyranny seek to prevent, doth commonly fall upon them: Their People do Revolt and Rebel; and although they be never so well Chatechi∣zed in the points of Obedience; yet their Natural Inclination to recover their Liberty, much more to cast off Ʋnjust Burthens, and Oppressions, is such, that sleight and weak Arguments will easily perswade them to that, whereunto they are so strong∣ly inclined, and the least pretence of Religion, or Colour of Reason or Lawfulness, countenancing or tolerating the Freeing themselves from Subjection, in any Case, will be more prevalent with them, than the most passitive Precept of God's Word, enjoyn∣ing Obedience. If in any case taking up Arms be admitted, theirs shall ever be that Case. And if the Wickedness of their Prince shall be allow'd as a ground of their Rebellion, their Prince shall ever be the most Wicked: Of all this, all Ages have produced many Examples, and especially these Later Times, through all the Estates of Christendom. And wicked Princes will find, that Precepts in this ease will not serve the Turn; for tho' Hostile Resistance against the King be expresly prohibited by the Word of God, both in the Old and New Te∣stament; tho it be against the Doctrine and Practice of the Primi∣tive Church, and the present Tenets, and Confessions of Faith, of all the Reformed Churches in the World, though it be con∣trary
to the Solemn Oath of Fidelity, and Allegiance sworn to the King; rhe Laws of the Land (which make it Treason) and Moral Honesty and Justice; yet will it be in this point of Resistance (as Tacitus says of Divinations in Rome) which was a Wickedness that had been, and ever would be forbidden, yet ever would be Retained: Semper Vetabitur, & semper reti∣nebitur. And so to Princes that will highly Oppress, and make their Will, and not the Laws, the Rule of their Government, although (I say) to resist be a Wickedness, and that it be against the Law of God and Man to do it; yet where the Wrongs are Great, and a Fair Opportunity offer'd of Prevailing, it will be ever done: For that amongst men, there are a Thousand for One, that prefer their own Interest or Inclination, before Du∣ty or Conscience. And certainly, a Prudent and Foreseeing Prince, that will impartially examine things, cannot but ex∣pect it should be so. For why should he suppose, that Other men will be more Honest, or more Religious than Himself? And when he breaks through all the Bonds and Ties of Oaths of Divine Precepts and Moral Justice, only to stretch and extend his Power and Greatness; why should we not expect, that Sub∣jects should make as bold to transgress the same Duties, in hope of Recovering Liberty; with even the False shew, whereof People are apter to be further transported, than by any Earth∣ly Desire whatsoever? Neither will the Fear of Death or Danger restrain them; because they will not Attempt, untill Opportu∣tunity make them hopeful of Prevailing; and then they consult by Power to provide for their own Impunities. BƲT besides this Proneness in People to be easily led and perswa∣ded into Rebellion, under the false and specious Shew of reco∣vering Liberty; the great Monarchs and Princes of Christendom have been (in great part) the Fomenters and Upholders of it, and their Doctors have not so much by their Preaching and Wri∣ing beaten it down, as the Kings themselves have, by their Ex∣amples and Actions, given Encouragement unto it; for although I shall ever speak with Reverence of Princes and their Proceed∣ings, yet I shall hope that the humble Representation of this, Truth will receive a fair Interpretation. For it is undeniably true, that in this latter Age, all the great Monarchies and States
of Christendom have been render'd unhappy by Intestine Warrs, which have been encourag'd (if not contriv'd and design'd) by one Christian Prince against Another, every one countenancing and indulging Rebellion, untill it become his Own Case, and then he is offended. Of this I shall give no particular Instances, the Notariety of it is too great, and I fear every State may too ea∣sily apply it to what themselves have done: And it may be ap∣prehended, that the sad Condition of many States of Christendom, at this present day, may exhibit something of Gods Judgments, upon that Account, who hath said; With what Measure ye mete, it shall be measur'd to you again. Mat. 7.12. AND wicked Kings, as they are sure they shall not 'scape the severe Judgment of God in the next World (if they do believe the Scripture) so (if they will believe ancient Histories of what has past in former Times, or their own Experience of what they see daily with their Eyes; or that they do believe that God will repay unto them that which they have either countenanc'd or con∣triv'd against others) they must expect to have troublesome and uncomfortable Lives, accompany'd with Hatred, Hazzard, and Infamy. And if these Considerations will not restrain them, yet We must not be Wicked, because They are so: Neither will God admit of Recrimation for our Excuse. Our Duty of not re∣sisting is Positive, upon pain of Damnatition; from which no good Success or Prevailing, can keep us, although it may save us from the Gallows. Beside this great Hazard of our Souls, Moral Prudence teacheth us, that a Civil War which (I hope yet we have no great reason to fear) is commonly a Cure much worse than the Disease: For no Oppression, nay no Tyranny, brings with it half those Miseries and Calamities, which of Necessity, do ever accompany an Intestine War. Wicked Kings may be cruel, covetous and licentious; yet their Oppressions and their Lusts are restrained to some Wicked∣nesses, and to some Persons: But in a War, Rapes, Murthers, Robberies, Sacriledges, and all manner of Impieties break in, and all sorts of People are made miserable, which the poor Kingdom of England has found true by sad Experience; where, in the Space of five years on∣ly, (from 1641 to 1646) more was taken from the Subject, than would have been exacted by Subsidies, Projects, or any unjust Taxes
whatsoever, by the worst of Kings, in the Space of a Hundred and so were all other Wickednesses increas'd proportionably. I SHALL conclude this Discourse with my humble and hearty Prayers to God Almighty to avert his heavy Displeasure (which the Multitude of our Sins may give us just Cause to dread) from this Nation; at present the most prosperous and flourishing of any in Europe; and that the publick Calamities that befell the Kingdom in the late unhappy War, and the lamentable Distra∣ctions, and Confusions that were wrought by our Dissentions, both in Church and Commonwealth, may be a Lesson to the People to value and esteem Peace, and not so wantonly to engaage themselves afresh in New Miseries. THE END.
