S4774 99832146 36617
Evangelium Sydereum: OR, REVELATION Demonstrated. In THREE PARTS. The First being a Philosophical Discourse leading to the Second. The Second is Holy Scripture, Astronomically hand∣led from the Radix of a Nativity, and a Direction of the Luminaries, &c. The Third is an Appendix touching the Scheme of Sol's Ingress into Aries for the Year 1677. The whole being a Divine Treatise recommended to the serious perusal of the unprejudic'd Mathe∣matician and Astrologer, as also of all other Persons, to the intent they may behold God's glorious Wonders revealed in the Heavens. By John Southworth, an Experiencer of the Love of Jesus, and a Well-wisher to the People in Scorn called QUAKERS. Where there is no Vision the People perish, Prov. 29.18. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, Psalm 19.1. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and sold at the Sign of the Three Bibles in Ludgate-street, 1680.
TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, THE Subject of this Trea∣tise being a Divine Pa∣raphrase upon the Po∣sition of the Heavens at that In∣stant of Time wherein a parti∣cular Person was born, may peradventure be less acceptable unto thee, (the Art of Astrology, whereupon this depends) be∣ing so generally exploded by the strictest Professors of Reli∣gion,
of what kind soever) than if Divinity had been treated of after some other manner. Yet, in regard Christianity it self in the dayes of Jesus was as e∣villy esteemed of as is Astro∣logy in these dayes, and that by Zealous Professors too, viz. the Scribes and Pharisees: I hope it may in some measure appear unto thee, that all things are not to be totally rejected which are lightly esteemed of, nor to be neglected, which are evilly spoken of, since the Spi∣rit of the Lord may reveal something beneficial to Man∣kind
out of such things as are aforesaid. Therefore I hope thy Can∣dour will prevent a rashness in thy Judgment, as touching the Subject-matter of this Treatise, more especially if thou under∣standest it not; since it is an Act of Imprudence for any Per∣son to condemn such things as he doth not understand. That the Stars were set for Signs before the Fall of man, when all things were in a state of Purity, the Holy Scriptures imply, Gen. 1. And if so, then they must necessarily signifie
holy things; and, as they are for Signs in these dayes, what are they more likely to signifie than the Appearance of Jesus in Spirit to his people? which is a matter of no less Concern than man's everlasting Salvation. I have little more to annex, onely I think it requisite to in∣timate thus much, viz. That in regard the word [Native] is frequently made Use of in the Second part of this Book, the outward Person of the Party in∣tended is not alwayes meant thereby, but for the most part, and in a more especial manner,
the Spirit of Jesus born in him. Here the Spiritual Birth is treated of in the Astral Dialect, and the Wonders thereof im∣mediately revealed, according to the power of the Coelestial Mo∣tions, which I recommend to thy Impartial perusal. Read without prejudice, and consider without an unjust Re∣flection upon him, who recom∣mends thee to the protection of Jesus, and is, 12th of the 5th Month called July. 1679. Thy Well-wisher in all things J. S.
THE CONTENTS Of the FIRST PART. GOD the immediate Teacher of his Peo∣ple, Page 1. Christ Jesus, the Light within, unfolds all Mysteries both Natural and Divine, Page 2. The Stars converse with the Soul of Man, giv∣ing Divine Visions, ibid. The Heavens, a more worthy part of the Crea∣tion, Page 3. Christ Jesus, &c. revealed by the Heavens, and that effectually, Page 4. The Heavens declare the Glory of God to the Soul, giving Visions, Page 5. The Stars Evangelize, ibid. Their Language Ʋniversal, Page 6. A Vision of God is Divine Love, Page 7.
Heavens gave the Death of the Native's Mo∣ther, ibid. Growth of Vegetables and Minerals from Heaven, ibid. Stars have power to cut off man's Life, yet no Causes of evil Destiny to mankind, Page 8. Stars no more concerned in the evil Destiny of Persons, than the Law. Page 9. Time of Violent and Natural Death of Per∣sons, predicted by the Stars, Page 9, 10. Some Natural Experiments for which Reasons cannot be given, Page 10. The Righteous man guided by a Direction from Heaven, Page 11. Wonderful things observed at the coming of Christ's Kingdom, Page 12. Stars operate both upon the Soul and Bo∣dy, Page 13. Rules of Astrology, and Names of the Signs verified by Syllogisms, Page 13, 14. Rules vindicated by Scripture, Page 15. An Appeal to the Impartial Artist, Page 16. Names of the Signs Divinely mysterious, Page 17. How the Names of the Signs have been mis∣applied by the Heathen, Page 18, 19. An impertinent Objection answered, Page 19, 20. Rules of Astrology may be a Demonstration
of Holy Scripture, yet no Cause of them, Page 20, 21, 22. Stars no Causes of mens evil Inclinations and Sins, Page 22, 23, 24. Righteous sometimes suffer as Malefactors, Page 25. God, by the Heavens, inflicts Judgments up∣on the Wicked, but administers Blessings to the Righteous, Page 26. The Regenerate man sees that thing glori∣ous, which the Unregenerate sees obscure, Page 27, 28. Rules of Astrology differ from the Answers of Oracles Page 29, 30, 31, 32. Sacred Mysteries of Arts and Sciences reveal∣ed by God, Page 32. Names of the Planets, though admitted Hea∣thenish, yet lawfully used, Page 33. Heathenish Names of Planets as lawful to be used, as Heathenish Names of Cities, Page 33, 34. Names of Men and Women may be as law∣fully excepted against, as the Names of the Planets, Page 35. Heathenish Names of Planets lawfully used without Adoration, Page 36. Monuments of Idolatry to be destroyed, ib. Name implies the Nature, Page 36, 37.
Supernatural Reasons for the Number of the Coelestial Houses and Signs, Page 37, 38. Divine Reasons why Seven Planets onely, Page 38. Astrological Terms of Art lawful to be used, ibid. The incertainty of Astronomy no impeachment to Astrology, Page 39. Death of Picus Mirandula Astrologically pre∣dicted, ibid. Scripture-Objections, &c. against Astrology, their Answers referred to, ibid. An Opponent, his unreasonable way of Ar∣guing, Page 39, 40. Mirandula's Death a firm Example to prove the truth of Astrology, Page 40, 41. Artist's Judgment dilating it self beyond Art, and its confines, Page 41. An Objection against the Eclipses treated of (in the Second Part) answered, ibid. Eclipses effected by Transits, Page 42. The wonderful Power of Transits exemplified, Page 42, 43, 44. Astrologers, their Reflexions upon this Trea∣tise, or the Author, would be no Impeach∣ment upon either of them, Page 44, 45. Reasons why the Subject-matter of the Se∣cond
Part is founded upon a particular Nativity, Page 45, 46. Reasons in Art for giving a General Judg∣ment from a particular Nativity, Page 47. The Seal of the Great King of Heaven pro∣duced, Page 48. The Author's seeming Contradictions recon∣ciled, Page 49. That Astrologers can receive no Spiritual Disadvantage by reading this Treatise, Page 50. Zealous Persons, their evil Opinion of Astro∣logy, is no Reason why, as here treated of, it should be with-held from Publick View, Page 51, 52. The Unskilful not perswaded by this Treatise to the study of Astrology, Page 52. And though thereby induced to the Study there∣of, yet vindicated, Page 53. Reasons why the Terms of Art are used at large, and their Characters rejected, Page 53, 54. Terms of Art, though obscure, yet not un∣lawful to be used, Page 54, 55. This Treatise vindicated from Tautology, Page 55. An Exhibition of the Planets Names, with their Derivations Page 55, 56. Erasmus his exploding these Derivations, not to be regarded, Page 57.
Tycho's or Selden's Reflections upon A∣strology for Cardan's Errours, not worthy to be noted, ibid. The CONTENTS of the Second Part. RAdical Scheme and Speculum, page 1, 2. Luminaries Arch of Direction, ibid. Salmon's Via Dirigendi nova, page 2, 3, 4. Via Exemplificata, page 5. Revolutional Scheme and Speculum, page 6, 7. Testimonies of the true Radix, ibid. Observations upon the Solar Exortum, page 8, 9. Visions of God and Angels, page 10, 12. Angelical Vision resembled page 13. Divine Visions given, page 14. Invisible Honour from God, ibid. Native's Principles contemned, page 15. Art's and Religion's mysteries, ibid. Visions and Revelations, ibid. Native's good Principle stifled, page 16. Principles altered for the better, ibid.
Reward from God, page 17. The strait way entred, ibid. Native's Principles scandaliz'd, page 17, 18. The Title [Quaker] honourable, page 18. A Lowly Principle, ibid. Hid from pretended Divines, ibid. Lowly Principle descended from on high, and Exalted, page 19. Native's Direction in the wayes of Love, his pleasant weeping and sweet tribulati∣on, page 20. Fervour of Holy Love from the Sun of Righ∣teousness, page 21. Native's Delightful weeping, ibid. God's winning Love, and Dove-like Inno∣cency, page 22. Cause of the Native's Sorrow, Light of Hea∣ven revealing Sin, ibid. A Divine Marriage, page 23. Native's pleasant Savours, ibid. Sweet Odours perfuming the low Valleys, ibid. A mortifying of the Native's Evil wayes, and his Strength made perfect in weak∣ness, page 24. Direction of the Luminaries powerful, page 25.
The Grave fallen, and the Lamb exalted, ibid. Principle of Light shining in a Dark place, and dawning to the perfect day, page 26. Light encreasing to a Fulness of Glory, ib. Singing in the midst of Sorrow, page 27. Spica Virginis ascending out of the Twelfth into the Eleventh, with Songs of Praise, page 27, 28. Judah's Lion reigning and opening the Seals of the Book of Mysteries, page 27. The Serpent chained down, casting floods of water after the Virgin, &c. page 28. Justice returns the Inundations, ibid. Serpent aims to bruise the Virgins heel, ib. The Ear of Corn, or Seed of Life, caught up to the Throne of God, ibid. Bulls of Bashan fixed down, page 29. Earing time and Harvest come, ibid. Wilderness a fruitful field, ibid. Jesus the Reward of Holiness, page 30. Death swallowed up in Victory, ibid. Grave fallen by the Lamb, ibid. Christ reigning, the Dragon bound page 30, 31. All formal Worships falling, page 31. Lord releas'd out of Servitude, ibid. Baptism with the Holy Ghost and Fire, page 31.
Justice the Prison-keeper, page 32. Christ and his People exalted, ibid. Light and Way of Life seen in Eclipses, ibid. A strange Direction into the paths of Righte∣ousness, page 32, 33, 34. A wonderful Eclipse, and its hidden things discovered, page 34. Promises in Scripture fulfilled, ibid. Light of the Moon become as the Sun's Light, the Sun's Light being seven-fold, &c. page 34, 35. Glad Tidings of Salvation, page 35. A pleasant Voyage, ibid. Raging Seas becalmed, and blustring Winds, rebuked, ibid. A pure Language turn'd to the People, ibid. A Demonstration of wonderful Eclipses, page 36, 37, 38, 39. Hidden Light shining in Darkness, page 38. Sun and Moon darkened; Stars withdraw their shining, page 39. Moon turned into Blood, ibid. page 40. Light shining in Darkness reveals Mysteries, page 40. Servants of God crowned with a Diadem of Praises, &c. page 40, 41. Blind Worshippers groping in Darkness, &c. page 41.
Spiritual Chymistry or Christ Jesus the Philo∣sopher's Elixir, page 42. The Soul purified, sings Allelujahs unto God, ib. A Spiritual Hymn, &c. page 43. Eclipses further paraphras'd on, page 44, 45, 46. House of Life bruising the Serpent's Head, page 46. Sun and Moon by Transit totally Eclipsed in the World, ibid. Sun and Moon darkned, Stars withdraw their shining, page 47. Eclipses further explained from the Lumina∣ries their Transits, ibid. The Moon confounded, & the Sun ashamed, page 48. Sol immediately touching the same point of the Ecliptick twice, ibid. Ecliptick line seems dilated, page 49. Sun reeling in his Course, is ashamed, and the Moon confounded, ibid. Lord of Hosts reigns in Mount Sion, &c. ib. Moons Nodes duplicated, page 49, 50. Dragon's Kingdom at Enmity with it self, falleth, page 50. Sun further ashamed before the Almighty, ib. Sign of the Son of Man appearing in Heaven, page 51. God enthroned, and attended with an Angel in the Sun, ibid.
Christ Jesus typified by the Ear of Corn in the Virgin's left hand, ibid. Moon confounded, Sun ashamed, ibid. Luminaries thrice Eclipsed upon the Bodies of one another, page 52. Sol eclipsed at the Full, Luna at the New Moon, page 52, 53. Light shines in Darkness page 53. Luminaries Bodies dashed together, Lights of Heaven destroyed, page 53, 54. Serpent dashed against his own fore-head, page 54. Off-spring of the New Jerusalem, ibid. Eccentrick Orbs and Epicycles, ibid. Moons Nodes duplicated, ibid. Power of the Heavens shaken, page 54, 55. The Luminaries their Direction further hand∣led, page 55. Seed of the Woman bruising the Serpent's head, page 55, 56. Light a Heavenly Direction, page 56. Promises of Mercy and Judgment fulfilled, ib. Serpent and Death their Kingdoms demo∣lished, ibid. Sun no Light by Day, Moon no Light; the Lord an everlasting Light, page 57. Sun no more go down, Moon alwayes present, the Lord an eternal Light, &c. page 58.
A Kingdom oppos'd by its King, falls; Deaths Kingdom subverted, ibid. Righteous possess the Kingdoms of their Ene∣mies, page 59. Death fallen to the Righteous, ibid. Sun of Righteousness subverting Death's Kingdom, page 59, 60. Serpent's Heart wounded, &c. page 60. Jesus walking on the Sea, page 60, 61. A Rainbow round about the Throne, &c. page 61. Thundrings, Lightnings, and Voices out of the Throne, page 62. Morning Star given, ibid. Angel in the Sun, page 63. Seven Golden Candlesticks, &c. ibid. Lord of the Virgin is Light, ibid. Angel flying through the midst of Heaven, page 63, 64. Native rapt up, page 64. God overcomes his Servants with Love, page 64, 65. Angels in bright Rayment, page 65, 66. Jesus arisen from the Dead, page 66. Angels Testimony, ibid. Death conquered by his Resurrection, page 66, 67. Mary meets Jesus being arisen, with Spices, page 67. Mary being arisen with Spices, meets Jesus with Spices, page 67, 68.
Mary with Spices, meets Jesus being arisen with Spices, ibid. Morning Stars sing together, Righteous as Stars, ibid. Pretended Divines falling backwards, and groping in Darkness, page 68, 69. Jesus transfigured in the Mount, page 69, 70. Moses and Elias appear in Glory, &c. ibid. God takes away the Reproach of his People, page 70. He wipes away all Tears from their Eyes, and changes their Tribulation into Joy. page 71. The same things pure to the same Man being Regenerate, which were formerly impure to him being Ʋnregenerate, page 71, 72. Times of Rejoycing, page 73, 74. Angel offers up Incense with the Prayers of the Saints upon an Altar of Gold, ib. Incense ascends out of a Censer of Gold, &c. ib. Sea of Glass mingled with Fire, &c. page 75, 76. Elias represented by Mars, Moses by Mercu∣ry, page 76, 77. Whirlwind carrying Elijah, page 77. A Sequel to the Second Part, page 77, 78. A Vindication thereof, page 78.
The CONTENTS of the Third Part. SCheme of the Ingress, is the Seale of the Almighty, 1, 2. Serpent dashed against his own Forehead, 2, 3. Serpent's Heart wounded, Dragon fallen, Bulls of Bashan fixed down, 3. Comet in Heaven, ibid. Death upon the Enemies of God, 4. Serpent bound, ibid. Salvation by the Light, ibid. Christ Jesus the Light, 5, 6. His Promises performed, ibid. He no Respecter of Persons, ibid. A further Judgment upon the Solar Ingress, 6. Death vanquished, ibid. God exalted in the Lamb, 7. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah reigning, ib. God's wonderful Love, ibid. His Condescention, Love and Sweetness, 8, 9. A perswasion to tenderness of Spirit, 9, 10.
An Exhortation to Mourning, 10, 11 Jesus and the Angels appear to Mary, weep∣ing, 11. Divine Encouragement for Spiritual Tra∣vellers, 11, 12. Sacred Zeal, its Effects, 12. ERRATA. IN the first Part, page 26. line 4. read, have recount∣ed to them the most eminent Accidents of their Lives already past, whether good or evil, as also the time of their first appearance, &c. pag. 30. l. 7. read, Rules are derived, yet from these arises a two-fold construction. p. 32. l. 27. for of, read at Princes Ta∣bles. In the second Part, p. 11. l. 20. read, which is in the Ninth. p. 29. l. 7. read, under the Earth. p. 36. l. 27. for, and 2 deg. read, in 2 deg.
Evangelium Sydereum, THE FIRST PART, BEING A Philosophical Discourse leading to the Second. GOD who is pure, in order to the ful∣filling of his promise made of old to the Sons of Men, hath vouchsafed, of his infinite love, to become the imme∣diate Teacher of all those who are willing to ac∣cept of his Divine Doctrine; yea, his Love is such, and so immense, that he hath sowed the seed of Eternal Life in every mans bosome, but (the more is the pity) it lies oppressed under the Tares of Iniquity; for most men do disregard it, and choak it with the burthen of Sin and Transgression: This is the love of God unto ungrateful men, viz. he who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all; he, I say, who is the King of kings, and Lord of Lords, hath vouchsafed to come down from Hea∣ven to teach the Sons of men, or rather to teach
them in the place of his abode, which is in Hea∣ven; he being Light, as aforesaid, hath put his Law into mens Hearts, and his Spirit into their In∣ward parts, by yielding obedience unto which, he becomes their God and they his People: This is he who gives his good Spirit to the Rebellious, yea, to all men in general, for he is no Respecter of Persons: The Spirit of God, which is Light, is put into the Inward parts; hence it appears, that there is a holy light within man; the Law of the Spirit of Life is Light, and is put into the Heart; and since the Heart is within man, it must of ne∣cessity follow, that the Light of Life is seated with∣in man: This is that Light within, which unfolds all Mysteries both Natural and Divine, unto which I recommend all those that are willing to become the Sons of Wisdom, as to an holy and immediate Instructor in all things whatsoever. Thesis. The Stars, as Coagents with God their Cre∣ator, converse with, and have their Influences and Effects upon the Soul of man, and that in order to its Salvation; they give Divine Visions and Revelations. For the proof of this Position, I shall elect two or three portions of Sacred Scripture, making them Bases whereupon to raise my Arguments: Basis. The Invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead; so that men are left without Ex∣cuse, Rom. 1.20. Argument. The visible Heavens are a most glori∣ous part of the Creation, and Synonoma's to the Invisible, which are the Throne of God, whereas he calls the Earth his Foot-stool; moreover, the Heavens had their Priority in the Order of the Creation, for we read, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; observe the Order, viz. He first created the Heaven, and then the Earth, as a Dependent upon the Heaven, to the end it might subsist: but the Earth was without Form, and void, Gen. 1.2. We do not read that the Heaven was so. Hence it appears, that the Heavens are a more worthy part of the Creation, and such a part hath God made choice of, whereby to de∣clare his holy Wonders, and to explain the Invisi∣ble things of his Kingdom; the Heavens are a principal part of that Book by which we read their Omnipotent Creator; Now the invisible things of God (who is a Spirit and Immortal) cannot be seen but by the Spiritual, Immortal, and Invisible part of man, which is the Soul; for his Earthly part, which is his Body, cannot stand before the Rayes of such resplendent Glory. If the Heavens never have an Effect upon the Soul, by giving a Sight or Vision of the Eternal Power and Godhead, then I affirm, that they give it to no purpose; which to conclude were Errone∣ous;
but they have an Effect by giving a Vision of Gods Glory, for his Eternal Power and God∣head is clearly seen, &c. as saith the Apostle; which seeing is a Vision; Now to say that Visions of God are given to no purpose, is blasphemous. If the Invisible and Eternal Power and Godhead are seen by the means aforesaid, then the Everlasting Father and the Son Christ Jesus are seen, to see whom is Life Eternal; here is a fight of the Worlds Saviour, given by that part of the visible Creation, which was appointed to declare his Glory, viz. the Heavens; and the sight of this Saviour hath an Effect upon the Soul, for it gives Life Everlasting by working its Conversion. If Jesus, the Power of God be seen, and reveal∣ed by the visible Heavens, then they preach the Go∣spel, for the Revelation of Jesus is the Preaching of the Gospel, or glad tidings of Salvation unto the Sons and Daughters of men. Now if this Doctrine of the Heavens never have an Effect, then is it vain; which to affirm were blasphemous; from thence would arise this absurd Conclusion, viz. That the Heavens, as part of the Creation, were ordained to shew forth the Invisible things of God, and that in order to mans Salvati∣on, by declaring Jesus the Eternal Power of the Father; but this Ordinance is void, having no Effect, for 'tis evident, that whatsoever is without Effect, is void: Therefore, since it is absurd and blasphemous to make the aforesaid Conclusion, it will on the contrary be regular and pious to con∣clude,
that the Heavens have an Effect upon the Soul, by declaring and giving a clear Sight or Vi∣sion of the Invisible things of God, and of his Glo∣ry, which is intended for mans Salvation. Hence it appears, that the Stars of Heaven converse with, and have Effects upon the Soul of man, &c. ac∣cording to the intent of the fore-going Thesis, which was to be proved. Basis 2. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, &c. Psalm 19.1. Argument. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, (which Glory is Spiritual and Invisible) then they must of necessity declare it to the Soul of man, which is also Spiritual and Invisible, it be∣ing the onely fit receptacle in man of that Glory; for the Body, which is mortal, cannot make its ap∣pearance before so Divine a Principle, and retain its Being, neither is there any Unity or Commerce betwixt Carnal and Spiritual things. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then they declare Jesus the Eternal Son of God; for the Son is the Glory of the Father, and the Son and Father are united. If they declare Jesus, then they preach the Go∣spel; for the Declaration of Jesus is the preaching of the Gospel. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God (which is Spiritual,) then they give Visions of that Glo∣ry; but the Heavens declare the Glory of God
(which is Spiritual,) ergo they give Visions of that Glory; for a Declaration in this case, is a making manifest, clear, and apparent to the eye of the Soul; Now the Spiritual Glory, or glorious Spirit of God, being thus made manifest, is a Sight or Vision of God, and of his Glory. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then they make manifest the Glory of God, which ma∣nifestation is a Vision; but the Heavens declare the Glory of God, ergo, they make manifest the Glory of God, which Manifestation is a Vision. Hence it appears, that the Heavens being created by God to declare his Glory, they, by that De∣claration, have an Effect upon the Soul, in giving Visions of his Glory: and since a Vision of God is a Revelation of Jesus, 'tis evident also, that the Heavens do Evangelize, or Preach the Gospel, and that universally; for, there is no Speech nor Lan∣guage where the voice of the Stars is not heard; their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World: Psalm 19. vers. 3, 4. Now since the Heavens so largely extend their Virtue towards mankind, and that in order to its Salvation, it is evident, that the Blacks of Africk have not such cause to curse their Stars, as some have said, but rather to bless them. Also, since it is made apparent, that the Heavens give Visions of Gods Glory, it is not improperly by me affirmed in some part of this Treatise, that the Positions, Dignities, Aspects, and Transits of the Planets, in the Radical and Revolutional Fi∣gures,
gave Divine Visions and Revelations. A Vision of God is a symptome of his Love, therefore when a Vision is given, the fervour of holy Love is also given. Hence appears the truth of the following Paraphrase, as it is in some part of this Book, viz. Sol directed to the Body of Lu∣na, Lady of the Ninth, gave the resplendent fervour of holy Love, &c. Now, if the Celestial Inhabitants, viz. the Ra∣diant Stars, administer such gifts unto the Soul, much more might they give or effect the death of the Natives Mother, by removing her Soul from its earthly Tabernacle, into a state of everlasting Bliss and Glory; and this according to the Power, Order, and Divine appointment of their mighty Creatour. I believe few will deny, that the Heavens, as Mediums, produce upon, and in the Earth, the growth of Vegetables and Minerals; Now, if some veneniferous Vegetable or Mineral being ta∣ken into the Body of man, hath power to destroy Life, by separating the Soul from the Body, or some other, endued with a Cordial property, hath power to restore decayed Nature by the preserva∣tion of Life; much more then may the Influence of the Stars, which gave such Vegetables or Minerals their Nature and Being, effect the Death, or pre∣serve the Life of Mankind; for Nihil dat quod non habet. But the Scripture it self doth evidently manifest, that the Stars have power to cut off mans Life:
and (to shew that they have eminent Power given them, the Scripture frequently calls them the Host of Heaven) the ending of Life after which me∣thod, is also accomplished to Gods Honour and Glory, and that in the destruction of his Enemies; for we read, Judges 5.20. that the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera; thus sung Deborah and Barak, who had delivered Israel out of the hands of Jabin and Sisera: Now, since the Stars fought against Sisera, 'tis evident that they slew him in the Conflict by Jael, an Instrument in Gods hand, who drove a nail through his tem∣ples. Now the precedent Paragraph seems to give way to this Objection, viz. Obj. The Stars, by their Effects, are the Causes of evil Destiny to mortal men, and bring them to untimely ends. Answ. The Circumstances of the death of Sisera, before hinted at, if read at large, as they present themselves in the holy Scripture, Judges the fourth chapter; and seriously considered, will sufficiently answer this Objection; for Sisera the Captain of Jabin King of Canaan, who had oppressed the Israel of God twenty years, went against Barak the friend of Israel: with intention to subdue him, that so the Israelites might still remain under the same Oppression; but God being his Aversary, execu∣ted his Divine Justice upon him, and that by the Stars of Heaven, which fought against him, and got the Victory; thus was Israel miraculously de∣livered
out of the hands of its Oppressors. Hence it appears, that the Stars are as Instruments in Gods hand, whereby to inflict Judgments upon the wicked, and to execute Justice upon his Ad∣versaries; they also shew forth the wonderful De∣liverances which he can accomplish by their means: Hereby it is also evident, that they are no more concerned in the evil Destiny of Persons, than the Law is, which brings Malefactors to the place of Execution for evil doing: but the no less merciful than just God, many times takes pity upon such Offenders, by giving them Repentance, and shew∣ing them the evil Accidents which attend those that offend him, all which is done in love towards them; so that coming to a shameful end, as before men, yet their condescending Lord doth compassi∣onately receive them, not despising them in that reproachful state of Death, though men may de∣spise them, but receiving them into the Arms of everlasting Glory. Other Malefactors being also summon'd by the Heavens to the place of Execution, (for I averr that these things have been found true by Experi∣ence, and been truly predicted from the Position of Heaven at the Birth, as also the time prenoted by directions) may have sinned out their day, and so given up by God (being forsaken of him) to a state of everlasting misery: I say, that the time of the violent Death of Malefactors hath been pre∣noted by the Art of Directions, and that from the Birth; as also the violent Death of others (and
the time thereof) who never were executed as Delinquents, or breakers of any Law, either Mili∣tary or Civil, but have received their Death by Ac∣cident; yea, the time of the Natural Death of ma∣ny hath been predicted from the Birth by Directi∣ons and Transits in the Nativity, and may again be predicted without impeachment of Divine Ju∣stice, or a detraction from his Mercy; for his Wonders in Heaven are thus declared, and he acts many times in such sort as that Humane Reason cannot dive into the Mystery of such Wonders, yea, some of his Wonders in Nature we cannot give reasons for, though found true by Experience; therefore Experiences are not to be rejected, be∣cause unbelieving Opponents cannot be convinced of them, for want of Rational Arguments where∣by to vindicate them; neither doth it always seem good unto God, to shew unto his righteous People the mystery of his Proceedings, whether in things Na∣tural or Divine. It is a hard matter to shew a reason why the Glo-worm shines by night, or why the Magnetick Needle respects the Arctick Pole; as also, why the little Remora stops a ship upon full sail, by hanging upon the Keel; yet the two first of these have been obvious to the eyes of most men, and the last sometimes experienced by Navigators, to their great admiration. I my self do affirm, (and that in the presence of Almighty God, who knows the secret thoughts and intents of my heart, and before whose All∣seeing
eye every thing lies open and bare) that I have witnessed the truth of the Rules of Astrology, and of the measure of Time by Directions in the Heavens, and this in reference both to things Spiritual and Temporal: as to things Spiritual, surely no one will deny, that the course of a Righ∣teous mans Life is steered by a Direction from Hea∣ven, for the just mans path cannot be walked in without heavenly Institutions or Directions. Object. Times and Seasons are in the hands of the Lord, Acts 1.7. Answ. Yet the wise mans heart knoweth time. Ec∣cles. 8.5. Obj. The secret things belong unto God, Deut. 29.29. Answ. Yet the Secrets of the Almighty are with those that fear him, Psal. 25.14. Obj. The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with Ob∣servation, Luke 17.20. Answ. Yet it follows not, but that at the coming of the Kingdom we may observe wonderful things, and that in the visible Heavens too, yea, and according to the time suiting with the Arch of Direction: this I am a living witness of, and dare do no less than affirm the truth of my own experience. And as to what I have written in this Book, the Contents thereof are Coelestial Demonstrations of my Spiri∣tual Experiences, at the Coming of Christs King∣dom unto me, for I can testifie, that at the glorious appearance of the holy Dove, the Heavens were moved, and shewed the time unto my Soul. Now,
that there shall be wonderful things seen in the Hea∣vens, may be made apparent from several portions of Scripture, whereof I shall onely give in one for instance, viz. There shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, Luke 21.25. and these are the Signs of the Times which the Hypocrites heart could not discern, yet the Signs themselves shew their Times. But, having made this ample Digression, 'tis now time to return to my former purpose, which was, to prove, that the Stars have Effects upon the Soul of man, and that from the second Basis afore∣going, viz. Basis 2. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. Argument. If the Heavens declare the Glory of God, then that Declaration must have Effect; for otherwise it is vain, and to no purpose: Now to say that God created the Heavens to declare his Glory in vain, is the production of an Absurdity, to avoid which, we must of necessity acknowledge that their Declaration hath an Effect, and such a one as David himself experienced; for he was there∣by excited to glorifie God, in saying, The Heaveas declare the Glory of God. Hence it is apparent, that by the Heavens their Declaration of the Glory of God, the last mentioned Scripture was given forth; and the Heavens declaring the Glory of God, thereby declare Jesus the Son of God, for the Son is the Glory of the Father, as is aforesaid, and in declaring Jesus, they declare that holy Spi∣rit
by which the other Scriptures were given forth. If the Stars have no Effect, then were they crea∣ted in vain; but since they were set for Signs, they have Effect, for they work an effect upon the In∣tellect, in shewing what they signifie. If the Stars operate upon the Soul and Spirit, and not upon the Body, or upon the Body, and not upon the Soul and Spirit, then the Harmony in mans Creation is destroyed, and the Sympathy betwixt the Soul and Body in this Life annihila∣ted; but that there is this Sympathy is evident to all men, for when the Soul is separated from the Body, then the Body dyes: Now to abandon these Enormities, it will be prudence to conclude, that the Stars do effectually operate both upon the Soul and Body. Obj. The Rules of Astrology, and names of the Signs made Use of in this Treatise, are false, and were invented by the Heathens, therefore no truth can arise from them. Reply. Having before lately proved how the Scriptures were given forth by God in the Heavens, I shall introduce my Answer to this Objection with these following Syllogisms, viz. Syl. 1. If the Rules of Astrology, and names of the Signs be lively demonstrations, or apparent and intelligible manifestations of the Words and Cir∣cumstances of the Holy Scriptures, (whose Pillar and Foundation is Truth it self, viz. the Creator of all things) then the said Rules and Names are
true; But the Rules of Astrology and Names of the Signs are lively Demonstrations, &c. ergo, the said Rules and Names are true. Syl. 2. If the Rules of Astrology, and Names of the Signs do accurately shew forth the Words and Circumstances of the Sacred Scriptures, which had their original from the Creatour of all things, then they shew forth such things as are of greater Antiquity than the Heathen or their Fictions; But the Rules of Astrology and Names of the Signs, do accurately shew forth the Words and Circumstan∣ces, &c. ergo, they shew forth such things as are of greater Antiquity than the Heathen, or their Fictions. Syl. 3. If the Rules of Astrology, and Names of the Signs shew forth such things as are of greater Antiquity than the Heathen or their Fictions, then the Heathen never invented them; but the Rules of Astrology and Names of the Signs shew forth, as aforesaid, ergo, the Heathen never invented them. It is very improbable that the Heathen should in∣vent Rules and Names to shew forth things which they either never knew, or never believed, viz. the truth of the Holy Scriptures, which were given forth by that Spirit of Life which is more ancient than themselves. But admit the Heathen did give them forth, since they manifest the Truths aforesaid, it must needs be confessed, that God revealed them unto them, thereby to declare his Omnipotency, and
therefore not to be rejected: If so (which is not impossible) what cause have the Sons of men to praise his holy name, who by such improbable means can declare his Wonders unto them? The Book it self sufficiently proves the verity of the fore-going Syllogisms, to the perusal where∣of, I shall refer the Astrologer, as my most compe∣tent Judge in this case; yet I shall here give in an instance or two out of the Book, whereby to prove the Verity of the foresaid Rules and Names, which Instances the Astrologer may compare (because exempted therefrom) with the Figure of the Ra∣dix inserted hereafter, at the beginning of the Se∣cond Part. First Instance, to prove the Rules true. In the Scheme of the Nativity, Mercury Lord of the 8th House, being near Cazimi, and Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, being aspected of all the Planets; I say, Mercury Lord of the 8th being immerg'd in the over-powering Beams of Sol, Lord of the Me∣dium Coeli, &c. shews Death to be swallowed up in Victory, Isaiah 25.8. 1 Cor. 15.55. Second Instance, to verifie the Rules. Saturn, Lord of the 4th House, is Retrograde, and posited in the 6th, an Evil and Cadent House in Aries, the Sign of his Fall, which intimate, that the Grave is subdued, and fallen by the Lamb, in whom the Lord of Glory is exalted; for Sol Lord of the Meridian, hath his Dignity of Exaltation in Aries, 1 Cor. 15.55. Observe, that the significa∣tion of Aries is a Ram, signifying the Ram caught
in a thicket by his horns, which Abraham offered up instead of Isaac his Son, his hand being stayed at the Command of the Angel, Genes. 22, 13. This Ram was a Type of Jesus, the mercy of God, who is also the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World. Now let the Impartial Artist judge, whether or no there be a wonderful Harmony betwixt the Rules followed in the fore-going Instances, and the quoted Scriptures, he cannot but acknowledge that there is such an Harmony or Consent betwixt them, as may sufficiently evince, that the same Spi∣rit gave forth the Rules, which gave forth the Scriptures; and likewise proves, that Saturn is Lord of the Sign Aquarius, Sol of Leo, and Mercury of Gemini, which are the Rules, the truth whereof was to be proved. Whoever shall object, that Ptolomy, or any other Astrological Author, (whose Works are extant) was the first Inventer of the Rules of Astrology, I put such an Objector upon the proof of his As∣sertion; if he urge their Invention of them, be∣cause inserted in their Works, I say, such proof is invalid; he is to produce an Author, who in his Books acknowledges himself to be the first Com∣poser of them; for my part, I never saw any Author yet, who pretended further, as to the Rules of Art, than meerly to paraphrase upon them, endeavouring to explain their mysterious sig∣nification; but let my Opponent know, that it is one thing to invent a Rule, and another
thing to shew the Use of a Rule already consti∣tuted. First Instance, to prove the Names of the Signs Divinely mysterious. In the Radix at the beginning of the Book, the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis fixed upon the Cusp of the Medium Coeli, shew the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, enthroned in the midst of Heaven for ever, Revel. 5. vers. 5, 6. This is also the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven, Matthew 24.30. Second Instance, to prove the names of the Signs of Divine importance. In the Theme of Heaven for the time of Birth aforesaid, the Sign Virgo placed upon the Cusp of the 11th, shew, the Virgin Mary seated in Heaven in the House of Praise, for the 11th is the House of Praise, Luke 1. from the 46, to the 56 verse. Hence I hope the Astrologer cannot but confess on my behalf, and in the defence of the former Syllogisms, that the aforesaid Rules, and Names of the Signs, are Demonstrations and manifestati∣ons of Sacred matter contained in the Scriptures, which were given forth by the Spirit of God, who is of greater Antiquity than either the Heathen, or their fictitious Inventions, But in my opinion it seems contrary to the Law of Humane Reason, yea, of common Sense it self, that the wicked Heathen (for I suppose my Opponent means the worst sort of them) should be conceived by any man to be
the Inventors of such Rules and Names of Con∣stellations, as demonstrate the Prophecies of the Servants of God, so as they are recommended to us in Holy Writ; more especially considering that the Scriptures of Truth are as a sealed Book unto them. Now for the satisfaction of some who may be in doubt as touching this matter, I shall endeavour to explain the manner how these names of the Signs have been misapplied by the Heathen; which I shall do according to the measure of that Under∣standing which God hath given me. These Names coming into their hands (perad∣venture when the Temple of Solomon was ransack∣ed, who undoubtedly was acquainted with the Divine, no less than the Natural Mysteries of the Creation) they might so far be given to under∣stand, as to know that the said Names were enno∣bled with some Divine property or signification of Future things, whereupon they endeavoured, by a strict observation of such Contingencies as fell out amongst them, as also of such Accidents, which by any means they might come to be informed of, to make these Names presignificant of the said Contingencies: As for instance, the Heathen ha∣ving the name of the Sign Leo, they still expected to have the result of the prophetical signification of that name accomplished amongst them, or at least-wise to hear of its accomplishment elsewhere; whereupon, in process of time, observing some va∣liant man (as for instance, Hercules) to slay a
Lyon in the Wood Nemaea, as they say: Hence they judged, that the mysterious meaning of that Name was then fulfilled, and that (as peradven∣ture they would pretend) by their fore-knowledge, then led on with vain-glory, they would needs have the Actors which were concern'd in the ful∣filling of this Prophecy (viz. Hercules, and his slain Nemaean Lyon) to be stellified in Heaven, as Monuments (not indeed of the truth of their Prophecy, as they would have it, but) of their erroneous Idolatry; thus was the Name of the Sign Leo by the Heathen misapplied, and Hercules by them fictitiously stellified; but the Spirit of God hath unfolded the true meaning of this Name unto me, intimating that it shews forth the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah in Heaven, who is from ever∣lasting to everlasting, though Hercules and the Nemaean Lyon (if any such Creatures there were, for if not, 'twas onely a Fiction) be vanished for evermore. Obj. The Rules of Astrology used in this Tract, are false, which is apparent from the manifold Er∣rours of Astrologers in their Predictions, by follow∣ing the same Rules. Reply. This Objection is weak, and not suitable in this place, for though I follow the same Rules, yet I use them not to the same intent and purpose, they predict such things only as may probably fall out according to the course of Nature, which are temporal, I use them in the demonstration of things spiritual; so that how far Demonstration and Pre∣diction
do differ, as also how far things Temporal and Visible do differ from things Spiritual and Invi∣sible, so far is this Objection impertinent to the pur∣pose: but admit the Rules were false, in predict∣ing things temporal, yet it doth not therefore follow, that they are unfit to demonstrate things Spiritual; for the same Rules may serve truly for one intent and purpose which may not serve for another. Yet this I affirm, that the Rules may be true for the Astrologers intent in predicting out∣ward Contingencies, notwithstanding his Errours, which ought rather to be imputed to his misappre∣hension of the Rules (wherein is couched a My∣stery) than to any falshood in them; Ars enim ve∣ra est, sed pauei Artifices reperiuntur. Obj. If the Rules of Astrology be lively Demon∣strations of the Holy Scripture, then they are a Cause of them; for a Demonstration in a Syllogism is of the highest nature, and is a Cause of the thing demonstrated; therefore, if the Rules be not pro∣ved to be a Cause of the Scriptures, the Syllogisms will not hold truly Logical. Answ. If my Antagonist carp at the word [live∣ly] this I must tell him, that since he is a Scholar, and, I believe, a Rhetorician, surely he cannot but know, that words are not always taken in the strict∣est sense, and the word [lively] (if Logick do not altogether exclude Rhetorick) may be taken for [intelligible] per , and so Demonstration for Representation (or such like) by the same Trope: but that I may not seek thus to evade him,
I shall endeavour to prove the Validity of my Syl∣logisms, though the words thereof be taken in the strictest sense that may be, and that in such manner and form as Astronomy (being the subject of this Treatise) will admit of. A Demonstration in Astronomy is that which represents to the view of the Eye, or rather of the Intellect, the several varieties of the Coelestial mo∣tions, and that by right and circular Lines protract∣ed in plano, or by circular Lines only circumscribed on a Globe. Now I question not but that Astrono∣mers may have the privilege of arguing syllogisti∣cally as well as men of other Functions in Learn∣ing, in order to vindicate the truths of their Sci∣ence, and may likewise use the word [Demonstration] in a Syllogism, according to the sense above descri∣bed, without making any breach upon the Rules of Logick; if so, my Argument is firm and Logi∣cal still, since I pretend to no other than an Astro∣nomical Demonstration of Divine Revelation, and that from the Position of the Heavens at the precise time of Birth, which Position was found by Calcu∣lation Trigonometrical, or a mutual proportion of Sinical, Tangent, and Secant Lines amongst one another, and from the Thesis of Heaven thus found, as upon a Ba sis, the Judgment (presenting it self in this Book) was raised. Hence it appears, that my Opponent fell short in not distinguishing upon the word [Demonstration] since it is apparent that a Delmonstration is not alwayes a Cause (as he would have it) of the thing demonstrated, but the
thing demonstrated sometimes a cause of the De∣monstration; for 'tis evident, that the Motions of the Heavens may be shewn forth by Lines, as afore∣said, yet it were absurd to conclude that lineal De∣monstration to be the cause of those Motions, but rather those Motions the Original of that Demon∣stration: Hence also it appears, that the Heavens may demonstrate the Circumstances and Words of the Holy Scriptures, without being a Cause of them: Yet I doubt not but that I could (if I thought it expedient so to do) prove in some measure, that the Rules of Astrology, considered in their most sublime Sense, are a cause of the Scri∣ptures; yea, and that such proof is possible, the Judicious Reader may casily discern by my fore-go∣ing Arguments; but I shall refrain therefrom, lest I should give offence to many honest minded Peo∣ple. Now, lest some should suppose that I judge the whole course of man' Life to have an absolute De∣pendance upon the Position of the Heavens at Birth, in such sort as to make the Stars guilty of their Evil Inclinations, and so consequently of their Sins, which frequently bring them to an un∣timely End, I think it requisite to discourse a lit∣tle upon that Subject, although I have in part done it before; and first I shall lay down this Position in order thereunto, viz. Positio. The Righteous and Penitent man suffers pa∣tiently under God's Judgments, and under all manner of such inevitable Tribulations and Exercises both External
and Internal, as God in his Justice shall see good, to in∣flict upon him for the tryal of his Faith; but on the contrary, the impenitent Sinner rejects the Mercies of God, frequently tendred unto him, neither submits him∣self to bear patiently the aforesaid Exercises, that so thereby his Soul may be purified; I say, he rejects them, until such time as the day of his Visitation be over. God the Creator of all things, by the Position of the Heavens at Birth, shews the good and evil Inclinations which Mankind shall be prone or sub∣ject unto; as also all good and evil Accidents like∣ly to befall him during the whole term of Life, the truth whereof I my self have experienced, and do still daily experience, to my great admiration and astonishment; and though I could give no rea∣sons for these things, yet I dare not but confess to the certainty of them; yet this I know (which may stand for some reason, though dangerous to be too deeply div'd into) that there hath been, is, and will be a secret hand of Divine Providence in all mens transactions under the Sun, of what kind so∣ever, whether good or evil, and that in order to the preservation of his Saints in Glory. The Judgments of the Lord are the Discovery of Wickedness in its most horrid appearance, and the Lord by the Heavens is willing to discover unto every man the manner how the spiritual Enemy of his Soul will make intrusions upon him, in order that he may patiently bear them, waiting for De∣liverance from his Maker, who is only able to re∣scue
him out of the thraldom brought upon him by the Prince of the power of the Air, working in the hearts of the children of disobedience, as they are in the Fall. So that though this Enemy of Mankind may, by the Almighty's permission, some∣times inflict grievances upon the Righteous (such as are prenoted by the Heavens at Birth) for the exercise of their Faith and Patience; yet, as their Eye is unto God, they shall see such Evils work for their everlasting welfare, the Eye of Heaven sweetly reflecting the Rayes of Love upon them, when the Sentence shall be pronounced, viz. These are they which have come through great tribulati∣on, having washed their robes white in the Blood of the Lamb, Revel. 7.14. Then shall the visible Hea∣vens give in their testimony, thereby to justifie their Patience, in such Exercises; But, on the con∣trary, the Wicked ones are either voluntarily act∣ed by the power of the Enemy, and with a seem∣ing pleasure through his Wiles, betrayed into everlasting perdition, being swallowed up into the Abyss of Darkness, because they have con∣temned the Sacred Light, in mercy bestowed up∣on them; or otherwise have through cowardise fallen under the temptation of the Enemy, and fled from Judgment, wilfully opposing the Re∣proofs of the Holy One, not submitting them∣selves under the yoke of Patience, but have continued in Rebellion so long, as that the mer∣ciful Spirit of Jesus hath departed from them, who saith, that his Spirit shall not alwayes strive with man, Gen. 6.3. And if the Heavens fill the
Ungodly with outward Blessings at any time, (for we read, that the wicked sometimes flourish as a green Bay-tree) the same Heavens and those Bles∣sings shall testifie against their Unrighteousness to their greater condemnation, but when the Stars seem to frown upon the Righteous, by bringing Crosses and Adversity upon them, 'tis onely for the tryal of their Patience: Now the Righteous themselves have sometimes been deli∣vered up into the hands of wicked men, to suffer as Malefactors, a (seemingly Ignominious, though) really Honourable Death, by Martyrdome; the time of whose Death (yet I will not say the Cause) may possibly be predicted from their Birth, by the Thesis of the Heavens thereupon, and the Art of Directions; Neither shall I affirm, that the Cause of a Wicked mans Violent Death may be predicted; yet, that there is a possibility of predicting the Time of both their Deaths, whether Natural or Violent, as also of all other remarkable Transactions, during the term of Life, I do absolutely affirm, and that by the Art of Astrology too; but they that are endued with the Spirit of God can best perform these Predictions by the aforesaid Science; for the Judgment of all others is too much obscured with Darkness, neither are the Secrets of the Almighty truly revealed to any other Persons but such as fear him. They that shall scruple at the Truth of these things (which I believe some may do, and those truly honest and righteous Persons too) might, I am assured, receive ample satisfaction, would they but trust the time of
their Genesis or Nativity into some honest Person's hand, who hath skill in the Astral Language; for they should not only have recounted to them the time of their first Appearance, but also the time when all other Accidents, yet to come, shall unveil themselves before them; and all these things may be discovered, according to the order of Time wherein they will happen; when they have expe∣rienced these things, they can do no less than glorifie God for revealing his Wonders so mighty in Heaven. The Scriptures themselves testifie, that the Hea∣vens are ordained by God, to inflict his Judg∣ments upon the sinful, but to dispense his Mer∣cies amongst the Righteous; for, saith he, threat∣ning the Wicked, Thy Heaven that is over thy head shall be Brass, and the Earth that is under thee shall be Iron, Deut. 28.23. But, on the contrary, promises the Righteous, that he will hear the Heavens, and the Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oyl, and that the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oyl shall hear them, Ho∣sea 2. vers. 21, 22. These Scriptures I have wit∣nessed to be fulfilled in a Spiritual sense, and there∣fore can set my Seal to the truth of them; for, since I became obedient unto God, I have felt the Divine Influences of the visible Heavens sweetly shed abroad within my Soul, (and that according to the Order of their Motions) giving pleasant sa∣vours, and most fragrant odours; yea, the whole Creation hath been presented before the Eyes of
my Soul, most concinnate, beautiful, and glorious, whereas, whilst I rebelled against my Creator, (merciful in Love and Condescension) my Hea∣ven was to me as Brass, and my Earth as Iron: for the Virtue operating is altered by the Foun∣tain of Wisdom, according to the nature of the Subject receiving; The Sun makes the Clay hard, but the Wax soft, by the same fervour of his Rayes: The Heavens sterilize the Land of the Wick∣ed, but make the Land of the Righteous fertil, as is before proved: Yet any Position of the Heavens whatever, retains its glorious Excellency; since they never swerv'd from that Divine Order, (ex∣cept by the immediate Command of God) where∣in they were first created. Thesis. The self-same things look with an amiable and glorious Aspect to the regenerate man, which look with a quite contrary Aspect to the Ʋn∣regenerate; for, to the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, their mind and conscience being pollu∣ted, Titus 1, 15. I shall prove the verity of this Thesis and Scri∣pture Astronomically, by an Example deduced from the Radix inserted at the beginning of the second Part, as followeth, viz. Mars Lord of the Ascendant, is combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, being both fiery Planets, in Sagittary a fiery Sign, and posited in the second:
The signification of these to the Ʋnregenerate, are, The Native is Violent, Furious, and Passionate, Imperious, Scorning, and hating Reproof, profuse in his Expences, and thereby consuming his Sub∣stance, kept (notwithstanding his ambition) in slavery, or fear of some greater Person over-awing him. The significations of the same to the Regenerate are, The aforesaid furious, violent, imperious, passio∣nate Spirit, &c. is burnt up, so that from these Ene∣mies the Native gets freedom by the Sun of Glory, shewing the Native to be cloathed with his Beams, and thereby defended from approaching Danger: In this state Mars, though naturally and Infortune, is now become a Fortune, for he is refin'd, by be∣ing combust of the Sun, so that he shines in his pu∣rity as at the beginning, viz. as in the years of the Native's Infancy or Innocency, and signifies him to have in his possession the Riches and Jewels of the Sun of Glory. The fore-going Thesis thus proved, hath given occasion to a religiously zealous and Learned Anta∣gonist, to compare the Rules of Astrology to the Amphibology of Oracles; he sticks not to com∣pare them to a Latin Verse, which (as some say) was composed by the Devil, and given to a Scho∣lar) being so framed, that read backward or for∣ward, it was still the same; and if the same, then of the same signification: yet herein are they dia∣metrically
opposite; for the Rules of Astrology in the precedent Example, are read the same way, and retain the same Form, being derived from one and the same Position of Heaven, without the least alteration; yet produce Matter of different signifi∣cation. Now let me see how the Thesis aforesaid will make the Rules correspond with Answers from Heathenish Oracles. First, it is to be known, that these Answers are dubious, either because their words admit of transposition, or of a twofold man∣ner of distinction, whereby their meaning is ren∣dred alterable: But, that the Reader may more plainly apprehend the nature of them, I shall here give an Instance or two of such Replies as were made to the Consulters of the said Oracles. Instance 1. Achilles going against the Romans, consulted the Oracle of Apollo, concerning his Suc∣cess therein, whereupon he received this promiscu∣ous Answer in Latine, viz. Aio te, Aeacide, Romanos vincere posse. From this Answer, Achilles, looking upon himself as Victor, went against the Romans, but was de∣feated; for he expounded the Verse aforesaid con∣trary to the Event, by taking the Accusative Case [te] as precedent to the Infinitive Mood [vineere] whereas he should (or at least wise might as well) have taken [Romanos;] thus was Achilles deceiv∣ed: Yet still this Method differs from my Thesis,
and the Rules concerned therein; for the words in this Verse must be transposed, to infer from it a dou∣ble meaning; whereas the Order of the Thesis still retains the Rules in a direct Form, as also the Po∣sition of the Heavens the same, from whence the Rules are derived. Instance 2. To the like concern this Answer was given by an Oracle, viz. Ibis redibis nunquam per bella peribis. This Answer may be diversly distinguished; for, admitting the first comma, or note of distinction, to be made at the word [Ibis,] the second at [redibis,] and the period at [peribis.] a favourable Interpreta∣tion may be made thereof towards the Consulter: but if the first note of distinction be made at [Ibis,] the second at [nunquam,] and the third at [peribis.] as aforesaid; then will the Exposition be quite otherwise; prenoting the Inquirer's overthrow; thus did the Devil deceive his Servants by doubtful Answers: But herein lyes a vast difference betwixt my Thesis and this Reply; First, the Rules of A∣strology cannot be diversly distinguished, whereby to produce from them a double sense: Secondly, they are not us'd with an intention to deceive, but to undeceive People, and to prove the truth of this Scripture, whereunto the Heathen were strangers, viz. to the pure all things are pure, but to the impure all things are impure, &c. Titus 1.15. Observe, the Apostle doth not say, some things, but all things,
are either pure or impure, according to the diffe∣rent states and qualifications of all Persons; now, if a state of Regeneration or freedom from Sin, (which is a state of purity) be attainable in this Life, (which I am sure is possible, if the words of Jesus be true, and if we make him no respecter of Persons, who saith, Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect) then it must of necessity follow, that the same things (secluding Sin) must be Pure to one and the same Person, in a state of Re∣generation or Purity, which were formerly Impure unto him, whilst he was Unregenerate, or Impure, so that the same Position of the Heavens (after what manner soever it be) is pure to the same Native, being Regenerate, which was formerly im∣pure to him being Ʋnregenerate: this is to be un∣derstood as a general Axiom, relating to every Po∣sition of the Heavens, and Native born under it whatsoever. But to return to my present purpose, which was to prove a disproportion betwixt the nature of the Rules of Astrology and the convertible Answers from Oracles. Some may object, and say, that the Rules used in manner aforesaid, do exactly concurr with the An∣swer of the Oracle last mentioned, in this respect, viz. in that the interpretation of both is two-fold, as also, that the Oracles words and said Rules of Art, are retain'd in the same form without need of Transposition; yet (notwithstanding this) can they be no sooner reconciled together, than the
Spirit of Enmity can to the state of the Holy Pro∣phets of God, though he may appear so Angel-like, and seemingly come so near the Truth, as to quote their words out of the Scriptures. But here∣in still lyes a vast difference; for the words of the Oracle were an Answer to Proposals Temporal, whereas my Thesis, and the Rules, have relation to Matters Spiritual; The Oracle made a Reply to a Question; but these Rules are by me used to de∣monstrate a Thesis. I might annex other disagree∣ments, but let these suffice; so that still it is evident enough, that the Similitude will not hold, there being little probability of a reconciliation betwixt the Rules of Astrology here used, and the ambiguous Answer of the Oracle. Obj. Arts and Sciences cannot reveal the Mystery of Holiness. Answ. Yet the humble Spirit of the Almighty hath revealed the Sacred Mysteries of a Science; this was done at my request unto him, as is alrea∣dy hinted in the fore-going Epistle; and I felt his Garments fending forth a Smell sweeter than Per∣fumes made of the choicest Spices, yea, I felt the pleasant relish of Coelestial Manna temperately ad∣ministred unto me, far transcending the Delicate Varieties of Princes Tables; I say, I had a true and lively sense of these things, when Jesus revealed the matter in this Book unto me. Obj. Supernatural things (which this Book pre∣tends to) are contrary to Art and Nature, where∣as the Rules of Astrology are artificial, and therefore cannot demonstrate them.
Answ. It hath been before proved, that the Rules of Astrology (though, admitted Artificial) do arise from a Principle no less than Divine: Hence it appears, that there are Supernatural My∣steries included in them, (which this Treatise will prove to be revealed) and that therefore they are not only Artificial (if so admitted) but Divine; for God is the God both of Art and Nature, every ingenious and lawful Discovery in Art proceeding from him, whom all the Inhabitants of England, and many other Nations (except such as are pal∣pably apparent Atheists) will acknowledge to be a Spiritual, and not a Natural Being. Obj. The Names of the Planets are Heathenish, and therefore not lawful to be used amongst Chri∣stians. Answ. So are the Names of Cities too; and if the Use of Names be so religiously scrupled at, and censured as unlawful; why may not the Names of Cities also? more especially considering that they have their Original from Heathenish Gods and Goddesses; yet these Names we cannot avoid the Use of in our mutual conversation with one ano∣ther, nor in the reading of the Holy Scriptures. Neither did the Apostle Paul himsel scruple to use such Heathenish Names of Cities, as are Rome and Athens, which may appear by his Epistle to the Romans, and also by his Preaching against the Su∣perstition of the Athenians, Acts 17.22. to whom he directs his Speech, after this manner, viz. Ye men of Athens, &c. Here it is evident, that the
Name [Athens] though proceeding from the Hea∣then, was not looked upon by him as Superstitious, for if so, he would not have used it in reproving them of Superstition, lest he should appear to be con∣demning such Evils in them, as himself was guilty of by his own Expressions; But, that what I say may not be taken upon trust, I will here give an Instance whereby to prove, that the Name [Athens] is descended of Heathenish Parentage. Athenae, à Minerva dicitur, quam Graeci  appellant: ferunt enim Neptunum cum Minervâ de Ʋrbis hujus nomine contendisse, tandemque inter eos ita convenisse, ut Ʋrbi nomen imponeret, qui utilius huma∣no generi manus edidisset; cumque Neptunus equum, Pallas oleam produxisset, victum suffragio uno Neptu∣num Minervae concessisse, quae Ʋrbem recens conditam de nomine suo Athenas appellavit. In English thus; (the Parentheses excluded) viz. Athenae, or Athens, is derived from [Minerva] (the Goddess of Wisdom) whom the Greeks call Athenae, for they report that Neptune contended with Minerva concerning the name of this City, and at length so covenanted with one another, that which soever of them had published their Handy-work after the most beneficial manner towards Mankind, should give the City its Name; And when Neptune (the Sea-god) had produced his Horse (whom the Heathen feign to have first in∣vented the riding of Horses,) and Pallas (being synonomous to Minerva) her Olive-branch, (who was feigned to have first invented the Use of Oyl)
Minerva won it of Neptune by one Vote, who there∣fore called the new-built City [Athens] after her own Name. Hence it appears, that if the Heathenish Names of Cities may be used without offence to God, then by consequence the Names of the Planets may be as lawfully used, and that in matter of Divine im∣portance too; for Paul preaching the Gospel, used the aforesaid Heathenish name [Athens] as is al∣ready proved, and therefore may the Heathenish names of the Planets (no Divine mystery being at∣tributed to their Names, but onely used in this Treatise to distinguish them one from another) be as inoffensively made Use of in the Demonstration of Divine Revelation. Moreover, the names of Men and Women (con∣sidering the manner how they are given in these dayes, viz. not without observation of Religious Ceremonies in the way of false worship) might as justly be excepted against, as the Names of the Planets; more especially considering, that they are frequently given them by most prophane Parents and Relations, which, if so, our mutual conversa∣tion with one another in this World would be de∣stroyed. My Opponent, before he had urged any thing against the Names of the Planets, or Stars, as Ido∣latrous, should first have considered, that Idolatry hath its residence in the Heart, proceeding thence to the Mouth; for 'tis out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaketh, Matth. 12.34. This Scri∣pture
seems (though it do not so really, as is made apparent by the former reasons) rather to withstand than vindicate my Cause; yet I can make it evident, that it much befriends me, if compared with other Scriptures; because an ido∣latrous mentioning of the Heathen names of gods, viz. a naming them in the way of Reverence, or actual Worship, is forbidden in the Scriptures, and not a calling the Planets, or any thing else, by the Names, under which, as gods, the Heathen did worship them, if done for no other end, than meer∣ly to distinguish them one from another: 'Tis true that David saith, Psalm 16. I'le not take their names into my lips. Why? because he did not harbour their Worship in his heart; for the Worship is the Original of the Name, and not the Name of the Worship; whence it is Eminent, that the Name may be used without the Adoration, but not the Adoration without the Name; and if the Name may be used without the Worship, then it may be lawfully used. 'Tis true also, that the Monuments of Idolatry (which is False Worship, and not a calling by Names onely) were to be destroyed, Deut. 12.1. viz. out of the Heart, in a Spiritual sense, which may be done without taking away the privilege of using Names, if used for no other end than meerly the cause of distinction. Now they that are acquainted with the phrase of the Holy Spirit, know, that the word [name] in the Scripture doth not alwayes imply the out∣ward
naming of a thing, but in a Spiritual sense it signifies the Nature; For instance, The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prov. 18.10. Here 'tis evi∣dent, that the Nature or Power of the Lord is spo∣ken of, and not any external Name of him, as Jehovah, Adonai, or such like; so in like manner it is the Nature of the Heathen that David speaks of, as if he should say, I will not entertain their Natures in my heart, nor will I take their Names into my mouth, their Names being defcended from their Natures, and therefore not to be used by way of Adoration. If the fore-going Arguments be well consider'd, it cannot but be perspicuous enough, that they suf∣ficiently warrant the Use of the Planets Names in this Treatise to be lawful. Here follow some Divine Reasons why there are onely 12 Houses, 12 Signs, 7 Planets, and neither more nor less. Reasons. There is a Sacred Mystery in these Numbers thus explained, viz. The 12 Houses of Heaven shew the 12 Founda∣tions of the Wall of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which are immoveable. The Names of the twelve Houses, in their pu∣rity, shew, the Names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb, in the Foundations. Again, the twelve Houses represent the twelve Gates of the aforesaid Holy City, the twelve Signs the twelve Angels at the Gates; the Names of the twelve Signs shew the Names of the twelve Tribes of
the Children of Israel, written upon the Gates, &c. Revel. chap. 21. from the 9th verse to the end of the Chapter. The seven Planets are the seven Stars in the right hand of him that stood in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, who was like unto the Son of man; these seven Stars being the Angels of the seven Church∣es, and the seven Candlesticks being the seven Churches, Revel. 1 Chap. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, verses. These, I hope, are Reasons authentick enough for the num∣ber of the Houses and Signs, &c. Concerning the terms of Art. The terms of Art here used cannot rationally be objected against, they being either derived of some significant Latine, Greek, and Arabick words, or being the words themselves; and it is no more unlawful for an Artist to use them, than it is for a Tradesman to use some terms in his own Employ∣ment, which seem strange and obscure to others, not skilful therein; nor is it any more unlawful for me to speak of Divine Revelation in the Dialect of Astrologers, whose terms have their Original from the Languages aforesaid, than it is for a Ser∣vant of God to preach the Gospel in such frequent English words, as are derived of the Greek and La∣tin; their own terms being alike understood by ei∣ther of them. Obj. The incertainty of Astronomy (being the Basis upon which Astrology is builded) must
of necessity prove that Astrology is uncertain also. Answ. My Opponent brings in for instance (whereby to confirm his former Objection) the difference of time in Calculation by the Alphonsine, Prutenique, and Tychonian Tables: but this is little impeachment to Astronomy now, because it is much improved by more modern Authors: nei∣ther have I rais'd my Calculation from any of these aforesaid, but from the Caroline Tables, accounted inferiour to none this day extant. As to Scripture-objections against Astrology, for the Refutation of them, I refer the Reader to the perusal of the 2d Chap. of Sir Christopher Heydon's Defence of Astrology: also I refer him to some other Chapters in the same Book, for the refelling of Critical Argu∣ments relating to the incertainty of Astronomy, of the Birth-hour, or when Twins born, &c. where∣by the Astral Science seems to be invalidated; for, to treat of them in this place, would render the Book too voluminous. The Death of Picus Mirandula (the time where∣of was truly foretold by the Doctrine of Astrono∣mical Directions) being exemplarily produced, in order to prove the verity of the Sydereal Learning, was thus unworthily reflected on, and that by one not meanly Learned, and no less transported with Zeal, viz. That the Predictor of his Death might pos∣sibly Effect his Death by Witchcraft or Sorcery, saying, that many an honest man is hurt by a Witch.
Now do but observe this unreasonable way of Arguing; what Truth can stand, or be defended against such a Disputant? For first, he sayes, that the Astrologers Predictions are Erroneous, then, because verified by Example, alledges, that the truth of their Predictions is effected by Sorcery: This runs parallel with the manner of the Scribes and Pharisees, who first required a Miracle of Jesus, whereby to convince them that he was the Son of God, the Saviour of the World; and then, when they saw his Miracles, said notwithstanding, that he effected them by Belzebub, the Prince of Devils. Yet I might defend the aforesaid Prediction from his Calumnies, by his own way of Arguing, (if such a Defence were not too feeble, and indeed too ridiculous) whereby he endeavours to render the Effects of the Stars void, as to matter of Divine concernment; he reasons (if it may be call'd rea∣soning) after this manner; viz. Although there may be an Eclipse of the Sun, and I walking in some particular Place at that time, it doth not therefore follow, that the Eclipse is the Cause of my walking, nor my walking, of it: So in like man∣ner, the Sorcery (if the Predictor used any) was not the Cause of Mirandula's Death, nor Mirandula's Death the Cause of that Sorcery. By this method of Disputation, all manner of good or evil Operati∣ons may be made ineffectual, yea, all the Miracles of Jesus might be annihilated: Therefore, since my Opponent's way of Reflection is proved so Ir∣rational, it is still manifest, that the Example of
Mirandula's Death (who for his Antipathy and Arguments against Astrology was called Astrologo∣rum Flagellum) remains firm enough to prove the verity of Sydereal Predictions. Obj. The Rules of Astrology admit of such a Latitude, that a man may make of them quidlibet ex quolibet, every thing of any thing, and so conse∣quently nothing certain. Answ. These Rules are already sufficiently veri∣fied from their correspondence with Holy Scripture; yet if any such Latitude be, 'tis not in the Rules, but in the Artist's Judgment, dilating it self beyond the Confines of Art, and thereby running into Er∣rours: yet, let my Adversary consider, that the Mysteries of the Divine Being admit of great Lati∣tude also, arising from the incomprehensible Foun∣tain of Wisdom, the Creator of all things, who is Omnipotent, and can therefore reveal an Unity in such things as seem in themselves to be discre∣pant or contradictory, and can limit things that have the greatest Latitude, according to his Divine Order and Appointment. Obj. Eclipses Supernatural are contrary to Art and Nature both, therefore the Eclipses handled in this Treatise, are either meerly Natural, because found out by Art, or else Imaginary, because not visible to the external Eye of others. Answ. They that are experienc'd Astrologers are not unacquainted with the admirable Effects of Planetary Transits over the Bodies and Aspects of one another; Now, to the intent that Vulgar Ca∣pacities
may be reached unto, I shall define what a Transit is. A Transit is the passing of any Planet (by his Motion in the Heavens) over the place where the Body of another Planet was at a particular moment of time, or over that part of the Ecliptick where∣unto another Planet did project his Aspect, or dart forth his Rayes at a particular time, as afore∣said. Now the Eclipses here objected against, were effected by Mutual Transits of the Luminaries over the Bodies of one another in the Radix, the No∣cturnal Luminary having at that time either little Latitude, or none at all: and if what appertains to true Religion, or Spiritual Matter be Supernatu∣ral, then, since Luna in the Celebration of these Eclipses is Lady of the Ninth House in the Radix, Caput Draconis being therein, and Luna in the Third, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, it is evident they were Supernatural; and, as they were Invisi∣ble, so were they the more significant of Spiritual and Invisible things; the manner how they are demonstrated to be Supernatural, may be seen in the second Part. But, to return to mean Capacities, I shall here insert what hath been proved by Experience, touch∣ing the Power of Transits. It hath been frequently observed, that when the Moon hath transited, or passed over the place where the Planet Mars was in the Scheme, or Position of Heaven, set for the time wherein a Person first fell
sick of a burning Fever, which time is called the Decumbiture; I say, it hath been observed, that at the time when this Transit was made, the sick Per∣son hath been violently afflicted, the Disease being more intense; yea, although the real Body of Mars hath been alibi in the Heavens, then the Moon then was, peradventure, many Signs distant, and out of all A∣spect with her, yet hath the burning Heat been strangely augmented: and if Mars at the Decumbiture was Lord of the House of Death, (no benevolent Rayes of good Planets intervening to cut off the Transit's malignant Influence) then hath the Pati∣ent yielded up his Spirit into the hands of his Cre∣ator. I my self, by such like Observations as aforesaid, have predicted the Death of a sick Person (a Week before-hand) to an hour, and of such a Person as I never had any thing to do withal by way of Phy∣sical Administration. These words I am constrain'd to annex, lest some envious Person should dare to say, that I might administer Poyson to the aforesaid Party, near the time foretold, thereby to verifie my Prediction. The reason of the said Effects of Luna's Transits over Mars his Body, is, because the Seal and impres∣sion of his virtue is left there where he was at the Ingress of the Disease. On the contrary, Luna transiting the Body of Venus, being Governess of good Houses, and free from Affliction, the Disease at that time hath been more remiss, and the Patient's Body cooled, and
that without the administration of refrigerant Me∣dicines. From the fore-going Circumstances it may ap∣pear, that the Eclipses by Transit treated of in the second Part of this Book, are not Imaginary but Real, and really Effectual as well as Artificial; and since the Moon is Lady of the House of Religion, &c. in the Radix, they are also Effectual, as to matter of Divine signification. Obj. Astrologers themselves will account this Book but a whimsey, and therefore its publication can be of little benefit to them. Answ. This is one of my Opponent's Arguments, whereby he would have disswaded me from expo∣sing this Treatise to publick view; but surely had he considered, that the Truth of God it self, and his holy Worship, is accounted whimsical, by the prophane Persons of this our Age, he would have sought to convince me by more solid Reason. What is more scoffed, flouted, derided, and jeered at, than true Religion it self? yet the Truth is not therefore to be evilly thought of by any one, or less esteemed of by those who have experienced the goodness of it, by receiving it in the love thereof; neither is the preaching and publication thereof to be neglected. And if the experienced Truths of Astrology be accounted whimsical by Astrologers themselves (though grounded upon the Principles of their own Art) or by any other Persons, I shall not therefore in the least decline from affirming the truth of such Experiences, nor from the publication
of them; more especially considering, that there lyes upon my Spirit no restraint from God, as to the contrary; but that the benefit of Astrologers is in∣tended thereby, it being a salutation of Love and Mercy unto their Souls, granted me (upon my earnest Supplication unto God) to deliver forth unto them, whereby they may be satisfied that Di∣vine Revelation is not ceased, here being a De∣monstration of the same, according to the Precepts of their own Science, and those without the least alteration. These things will stand in Authority over the hireling Priests of our time, who possess the Nati∣ons with a belief, that God reveals not himself in these dayes, as he hath done in former Ages. As to the Vindication of this Demonstration, if objected against by Astrologers, because founded upon a particular Geniture, being the time when the Native was a new-born Babe, I recommend to their serious Consideration these following Scrip∣tures, viz. Out of the mouthes of Babes and Sucklings hast thou perfected praise, Matth. 21, 16.—I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and hast revealed them unto Babes, &c. Matth. 11, 25. These portions of Scripture being seriously weigh∣ed (more especially after the perusal of the second Part of this Book) may come to work an Effect upon such an Objector, both of great Wonder and Satisfaction.
But if any Astrologer shall reflect upon so general a Judgment, extending it self to the Estates of of others, from a particular Geniture and Directi∣on, I shall endeavour to satisfie him of the possibi∣lity thereof, not onely by Artificial Reasons, ground∣ed upon the Principles of his own Science, but also by Scriptural. The experienced Verity of Directions, few Astro∣logers (I suppose) will deny. The Course of a Righteous man's Life is steered by a Direction from Heaven: But to proceed. I shall first begin with Reasons from Scripture, by repeating again one of the former quotations, as it is in Psalm 8.2. viz. Out of the mouthes of Babes and Sucklings hast thou ordained Strength, saith the holy Prophet David, who was guided by the Spirit of Jesus. If from the mouthes of Babes, &c. Strength be ordained, for whom is it ordained, but unto others? As if the Prophet had said, Thou, O Lord, wilt administer strength unto others out of the mouthes of Sucklings, &c. From a due considerati∣on of what is afore said, I may hope that this small Treatise will tend to the Benefit of Astrologers; and when I speak of the Righteous, or Wicked in ge∣neral, by inferring a signification of good or evil unto them, from such Positions, Aspects, &c. as present themselves to view in the particular Geni∣ture; in so doing I may thus vindicate my self; viz. There is an Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, amongst those that are born of God, and they have power given them to discern the state of
the Enemies of the Great Jehovah. Moreover, the Lord is not tyed unto mens wayes and manners, or obliged to satisifie their corrupt humours, he will chuse what Position of Heaven pleases him to shew forth generals and particulars too, for the Hea∣vens are his, and who can restrain him? But that Noble Creature Man hath all Mysteries in himself; he hath the Spirit of the Divine Being, which un∣folds all Mysteries in his Soul: God can shew forth the general state of Kingdoms to a particular man by Divine Inspiration, and from his particular Radix at Birth, he can chuse what Position of the Heavens he pleases to glorifie himself withal, either in a ge∣neral or particular way. Now to come to Astrological Reasons whereby to prove, that a General Judgment may be given from a particular Geniture, and from the presignified Effects of a particular Direction. Let us suppose from the Nativity of a King, that upon some Coelestial Direction he is likely to become the Vanquisher of his Enemies, this Direction doth not onely manifest its Power in respect of the King, as a Conquerour, but also in respect of the over∣throw of his Enemies, as being conquered. Here it is apparent, that a general Judgment relating to the state of the King's Enemies (which possibly may consist of several Nations) is deduced from a Coele∣stial Direction in the particular Genesis of the King: Or let it be supposed, that upon a Direction opera∣ting, his Subjects shall be loving and loyal unto him, this Direction doth not onely display its Ef∣fects
in respect of the King, as being a Governour but also of his Subjects Qualifications and suitable Demeanour, in shewing forth their Loyalty unto him. The like may be judged from the Genesis of a mean∣er Person, as concerning his Servants, their Love and Fidelity, &c. Hence, I hope, it is made apparent enough, and that from the Astral Science it self, that a general Judgment may be given as touching the Affairs of others, from a particular Nativity. Yet I shall make it undeniably manifest, (by producing the Seal of the Great King of Heaven to warrant my Assertion) that the Judgment in this Book given, is of general Concern to the Nation of England, &c. this shall be done near the beginning of the third Part, where I have placed the Scheme of Sol's Ingress into Aries for the year 1677, to be compared with the Radical Figure at Birth, that so the wonderful Unity of those two Coelestial Themes may be observed; which time of the Ingress is intercepted betwixt the two extreme Limits of that year, wherein the Di∣rection of Sol to Luna's Body (she being Lady of the House of Religion) did begin to operate, whose Effects are the Subject-matter of this Trea∣tise; for the said Direction began to manifest its effectual Splendour (in summoning the Native to appear at the Court of Heaven) about the 30th of the 5th Month call'd July, in the year 1676, as may appear by the Calculation; and the Figure of Sol's Ingress harmonizing, is that of the year 1677,
as aforesaid, which is seven Months and somewhat more distant from the time wherein the said Dire∣ction of the Luminaries began to issue forth its Di∣vine Operation. Obj. My Opponent takes an occasion against me, as being guilty of Contradiction, because he finds the Planet Saturn in one part of this Treatise term∣ed a Significator in Religion; in another part there∣of, the Enemy of Mankind; and therefore Queries how these things will be reconciled? Answ. This Objection is weak and frivolous, as will appear, if the second Instance before-going, used to prove the Verity of Astrological Rules, be but well observed; for in that Instance, although Sa∣turn, as he is Lord of the 4th, signifying the Grave, or mortality of Man, is the Enemy of Mankind; yet in respect of his Situation in the Sign Aries, being the place of his Fall, and of his Position in the 6th, a Cadent House, where he is Retrograde; I say, in this respect, he is a good Significator in Religion, forasmuch as he portends the Grave to be fallen by the Lamb, 1 Corinth. 15.55. So from the first Instance, Mercury, though Lord of Death, is a good Significator in Religion, be∣cause by his immersion in the Solar Rayes (Sol being Lord of the Medium Coeli) he shews Death to be swallowed up in Victory, Isaiah 25.8. These Reasons (I presume) do apparently re∣fell the fore-going Objection, and bring the afore∣said seeming Differences to a perfect Reconciliation, as was required.
Some Reasons why this Treatise is no inducement to Astrologers to set too great an Esteem upon their own Art, nor to engage their minds in the further study thereof, in such sort as to forget those things which concern their Souls everlasting welfare, as hath been objected. In regard this Book is principally intended for skilful Astrologers, in order to their Satisfaction in this Point, viz. that Divine Revelation is not ceased, as also considering, that what is here writ∣ten, I do truly testifie to be given forth by Divine Revelation; I cannot see wherein this Treatise will tend to their hurt, but rather to their Advantage and Information, and rather cause them to have a less Esteem for their Rules of Art, than too high∣ly to promote them; and that for this reason, be∣cause by them alone, without Revelation from God, they were never made capable to give a Divine Judgment from any Position of the Heavens what∣ever, neither have they ever pretended thereunto; but, hereby they may be satisfied, that there is a Di∣vine Mystery in their Rules, which nothing but the Spirit of God can unfold, whereby they may be induced to wait upon God, the Fountain of all Wisdom, to see if he will open their Understand∣ings in their Art, and if not, yet to be contented. Moreover, considering the wicked course of Life which many Astrologers (the more is the pity) do lead, I cannot see wherein they may be deterio∣rated,
but rather embettered by this Book: I am sure, for my own part, that I bear no evil Will unto them, but wish their everlasting Felicity, and that they may come to enjoy the sweet Presence of Him in this World, and in that which is to come, Whom to know is Life Everlasting. Some Reasons why this Art, though evilly esteemed of by many honestly-intending, and zealous Persons, yet, (as treated of in this Book) is not to be with∣held from Publick view, as hath been objected. First; it is to be considered, That all things are not Evil which are evilly thought of, nor all things to be esteemed Evil, which are evilly spoken of, though by such as mean well, and are zealous in their way; for many of the Scribes and Pharisees (who undoubtedly had a Zeal for God, but not ac∣cording to Truth) spake evil of the Name and Power of Jesus, who, had they known what they did, would never have crucified the Lord of Glory; yea, many in these dayes are not zealous for, but against the Truth, yet still hoping that their Prin∣ciples are holy; now, if for these Reasons, the pub∣lication of the Name of Jesus, and of the Truth, should be neglected, then would the Commands of God be violated, who taught his Disciples to preach to the ends of the Earth, amongst the Sons of Men, the glad tidings of Salvation, and that through the Power of the name of Jesus, the Prince of Glory. In like manner, the Benefits which may
arise from the Science of Astrology (according as the Spirit of God reveales the mystery thereof) are not to be with-held from Publication, because that Art is of evil report amongst such Persons as are zealously inclin'd, and generally looked upon to be the better sort of People; more especially consider∣ing, that the Subject of this Book is not Astrology, as it is commonly practised, but as the Mystery thereof is revealed from Heaven. Some Reasons whereby to prove that this Treatise is no inducement to those that are wholly unskilful in this Art, to initiate themselves in the study thereof, where∣by their Affections may be inordinately drawn out to the forgetting of God, as hath been objected. If this Treatise were an Introduction to the Art of Astrology, shewing forth the Precepts thereof from the very Beginning, there would be better grounds for this Objection; but since it is not so much in∣tended for the Unskilful, as for those that are well read in that Science, I cannot see so much reason for it; more especially considering that I do not perswade any Person to pry into that sort of Learn∣ing, but rather to retract their thoughts inwardly to wait upon the Spirit of God, which can unfold Mysteries unto them of another nature, with such Joy of Soul, as the Tongue of the Learned, and most acute (though they were sensible of the same) is not able to express. Moreover, this Book is in some measure purposed to perswade all sorts
of People (so far forth as they are capable of un∣derstanding it) that Divine Revelation is not ceased, and not to perswade them to the study of Astro∣logy; that so they may hearken to the Voice of Jesus in them, who reveales Wonders, and that many times according to mens particular Capacities. But suppose this Book (whose Second Part is, An Astrological Demonstration of Divine Revelation) should excite any Person to the study of Astrology, I might thus argue, both in defence of the Stu∣dent, and of my Book, viz. If the proof of Divine Revelation be the Original Cause of any Ʋndertaking, surely the Success thereof cannot be Evil. Obj. Why are the Names of the Signs, Planets, Aspects, and other terms of Art, set down literally in this Book, and not the Characters of them, ac∣cording to the custom of Astrologers, considering that the sound of the Letter in such obscure words can no more satisfie the Understanding of the Igno∣rant, than the sight of the Character? Answ. Thus doth my truly Learned Opponent still create more Exercise for me, to whom I return this Answer, (as I have hitherto done all others) with great respect towards him, viz. That although the terms of Art, &c. as they are delivered in Letters at large, are still sufficiently obscure, yet, the sense in reading will be somewhat more perfect, and rather the more intelligible to a mean Capacity; yea, the terms writ down at large are so near of affinity to the words from whence they are derived, that one meanly Learned, who
knows but the Use of a Dictionary, may find there∣by the Interpretation of them, whereas, if the Cha∣racters had been used, the Dictionary could have ad∣ministred no light in order to the understanding of them; and indeed, since most Persons, both Pro∣fessors and Prophane, lay out their Moneys upon, and bestow their Time in the perusal or reading of Almanacks; I think their Moneys may be fully as well bestowed upon this Book, and their Time as well spent in the reading of it, without the least prejudice to their Souls. Obj. These terms, &c. are obscure, whereas the Spirit of God loves plainness. Answ. Yet it follows not, that all things which are obscure are not of God, for Godliness it self is a great Mystery, as saith the Apostle, 1 Tim. 3.16. and that which is mysterious is not plain, but ob∣scure; therefore Piety is obscure because it is myste∣rious, and mysterious terms in the Exposition of a holy Mystery may legally be used. 'Tis true, the Spirit of God loves plainness, that is, it loves to make things plain, which are abstruse or hidden; for we read, Prov. 15.19. that the way of the Righteous is made plain: Observe, it is not said, is plain, but is made plain; and when 'tis made plain by the Al∣mighty, 'tis then so plain, that the wayfaring man, though a Stranger, cannot err therein. But what saith the Voice of Wisdom, Prov. chap. 8.8, 9, verses? All the words of my mouth are in righteousness, there is nothing froward or perverse in them; They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that
find knowledge; as if Solomon (the wisest of men) had said also, that the words of Wisdom are obscure to such as understand not, which must follow the other words of that Text by a necessary Consequence. Hence (I presume) it is apparent enough, that Godliness, or Divine Revelation, being a Mystery, may lawfully be treated of in the obscure and mysterious terms of Astrology. Some may reflect upon this Book, as full of Tau∣tology; to whom I answer, that if Tautology be Repetitio Vocis, then I may bring in the Learned Cardan for my Defendent, thus expressing himself, Segm. 4. Apho. 85. Repetitio in hac Scientia est ne∣cessaria, meaning Astrology, which was the Subject he was then concerned in: And indeed Repetition herein could not be avoided, where the same Coele∣stial Position and Direction do demonstrate such varie∣ty of Divine matter (which may appear by the Se∣cond Part) as could not otherwise be rendred in∣telligible to the unprejudic'd Mathematician and Astrologer. Of the Names of the Planets, being the Contents of their Natures, (as hath been frequently verified by Experience) with their Derivations. Saturnus, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercurius, Luna. Saturnus, quasi saturans, vel Ʋrna sati, as it were filling with Plenty; for he governs standing Corn,
and Fruits of the Earth, Tillage, Husbandry, and such like. Jupiter, quasi Juris Pater. He signifies Justice, Temperance; and governs Laws, Ordinances, and the setters forth of them. Mars, quasi Mors vel Mavors, id est magna vertens; signifies Death and Destruction, with Violence and Oppression, and overturns great Enterprizes by his malefick Influence. Sol, the Sun, the name is good, dicitur Sol quasi solus, quia solus ex omnibus Planetis in Ecliptica vaga∣tur, vel quasi solus apparens, quia caeterae Stellae radiis suis obscurantur. Venus, à veniendo, quasi forma ad omnes veniat; She is the significatrix of Comeliness, Decency, and and Beauty in all things. Mercurius, à curando merces, he signifies all man∣ner of Merchandize, Traffique, Buying and Sel∣ling. Luna, the Moon, quasi Lux aliena, quia luce Solis mutuatâ resplendet. As to the Nature and Names of the Signs, the mystery of them may be read in the ensuing Trea∣tise. My Opponent sticks not to affirm, that what I say as to the Planets Names aforesaid, (containing their Natures) is false; yet proves nothing of what he affirms, except his saying that they are Heathenish Names, be a proof of his Assertion; but I trow not; and therefore shall believe my own Experience (which I am confident many Astrologers can truly
second me in) before I will give credit to his Af∣firmation without a proof. And, as to what Eras∣mus sayes of such Derivations, as are here given, I shall not look upon his Sayings in this case as Evan∣gelical, nor upon his Opinion as Authentick and undeniable, but shall rather attribute it to a conceit∣edness in him, whereby he would seem wiser than other Learned Persons, who admit of such Deriva∣tions, for he may from as good grounds explode all Derivations whatever as these before-menti∣oned. Neither do Tycho's or Selden's Reflections upon Astrology for Cardan's Errours touching the Nati∣vity of Jesus Christ, in the least impeach that Sci∣ence, if considered as it is practised in its Purity; for Abusus Artis non tollit Ʋsum. But to conclude, since my Adversary in Dispu∣tation hath been so candid, as to desire me to take what he had written objectively, not as Determina∣tion, but as Argument onely, I can in reason do no less than acknowledge his Discretion herein, be∣cause he hath not disputed as one fixed and unalter∣able in his Judgment, but as one willing by sound reasons to be convinced. Having thus far proceeded by way of Introducti∣on, and in order to the refelling of the fore going Objections, I now come to the Second Part, which is, a Demonstration of Divine Revelation, according to the known and ccommonly received Rules and Principles of Astrology. FINIS PARTIS PRIMAE.
Evangelium Sydereum, OR, Revelation DEMONSTRATED. THE SECOND PART. Wherein Holy Scripture is Astronomically handled, from the Radix of a Nativity, and a Direction of the Luminaries, &c. Being intended as a Proof that Divine Revelation is not ceased in these dayes, and that according to the known and commonly received Rules and Prin∣ciples of Astrology. By JOHN SOƲTHWORTH, a Lover of Righteousness. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are left without excuse. Rom. 1.20. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.
TO THE SERIOUS PERUSAL AND CONSIDERATION OF THE More Learned and Ingenious, J. S. Recommendeth these his Astronomical Revelations; Hoping that they may serve as so many SIGNS from HEAVEN Of that which is the TRUE RELIGION.
The Preamble. Thesis. IF the Stars have signification (which is experi∣mentally found true) in Natural things, which are of less concern, and momentary; much more doubtless in Spiritual things, which are of the greatest Weight, and Eternal. God being a Pure and Holy Spirit, and the Cre∣ation ordained for his Service, according to his Divine Appointment and Wisdom; it must of ne∣cessity follow, that the things created do in their Places, according to their Specifick Properties recei∣ved from him, serve him as he is, viz. a Spirit. But the Divine Secrets in Natural things included (whereof they are a type) are out of the reach of any other Person, except such a one whose Under∣standing God shall enlighten by a Supernatural Re∣velation: To such a one he shews his mysterious Workings by his Spirit, upon Secondary Causes, and how they signifie his appearance in Spirit to his People, who, though now contemptible in the eyes of the World, yet are endued with a portion of his Power and Glory, and are made experi∣mental Witnesses of the sweet and precious work∣ings
of his Heavenly Spirit in the Inward Parts, and of the fulfilling of the Law in their hearts, accord∣ing to the gracious extent of the new Covenant, Jer. chap. 31. 33, 34, verses. Psal. 40.8. I say, to such as are of an humble and contrite Spirit, and tremble at his Word (which is nigh in the heart, and in the mouth, and is God) he reveales his Se∣crets, enlightening their Apprehension after an astonishing manner, in the more occult Mysteries of the Creation, still opening the Treasures of Wis∣dom, after a more plentiful manner continually, and discovering Sacred things, beyond the power of Ut∣terance, so that the Tongue is silenc'd; yea, be∣yond the power of Conception, the Senses being overcome, and the Soul delightfully ravished with the sweetness of their Contemplation: the love of the holy and gracious Lord God (which is Love indeed) powerfully subduing them by its gentle, delicate, and tender dealings with them, accosting them mildly, and with his comfortable Embraces wonderfully refreshing them. He draweth them with his fragrant Odours, and over-shadows them with the wings of his pleasures, and his Fruit is sweet to their Taste. He doth even more than ob∣lige them, giving them cause to praise him, be∣cause he doth so plentifully shower down his sweet, intellectual, and invisible Blessings upon them; and then for those Praises (he being the Subject of their Praise, yea even the Praise it self) he cau∣ses their cups to overflow with his undeclarable Love more than before; so that they are constrain'd to
say with David, being made willing to part with all for him: The Zeal of thine House, O Lord, hath eaten us up, Psal. 69.9. For the more they praise him, the more abundant cause to praise him is gi∣ven them; there being a mutual provocation in Love betwixt their Praises and his Glory, so that zealous for one another, they are even more than United by these invisible and most sweet Espou∣sals. Their Souls are emparadis'd in the Arms of their Saviour, and are exalted to the lowest degree of Humility, which is indeed the truest Exaltation. And though they may for a time be surrounded with Terrours, whilst under the Judgments of the Almighty, which indeed are more precious than fine Gold, purifying the Soul (for Sion is redeemed through Judgment, and her Converts with righteous∣ness; and when the Judgments of the Lord are set up in the Earth, then the Inhabitants thereof will learn Righ∣teousness) yet the Lord, according to his promise, viz. to lead gently on those that are with young, layes no more upon them than they are able to bear, but arises mercifully in the midst of Judgment, imme∣diately, yea, in a moment of time, quicker than Lightning, and beautifies those Terrours, causing them to be made for food unto them, by his wonderful Mercy and Omnipotency, and converting them all into ravishing Joyes. See Isa. 1.18. Isa. 1.27. These things are premised to signifie, that the Se∣crets of the Almighty are with those that fear him, and that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, Prov. 1.7. Prov. 9.10.
Characteres Signorum. Aries, ♈. Taurus, ♉. Gemini, ♊, Cancer, ♋. Leo, ♌. Virgo, ♍. Libra, ♎. Scorpio, ♏. Sagit∣tarius, ♐. Capricornus, ♑. Aquarius, ♒. Pisces. ♓. Characteres Planetarum. Saturnus, ♄. Jupiter, ♃. Mars, ♂. Sol, ☉. Venus, ♀. Mercurius, ☿. Luna, ☽. Characteres Aspectuum. Conjunctio, ☌. Sextilis, ✶. Quartilis, □. Tri∣nus, △. Oppositio, ☍. Characteres Nodorum. Caput Draconis, ☊. Cauda Draconis, ☋. Sors, ♁. The Longitude of each Planet is inserted in the Scheme of Birth, calculated from the CAROLINE TABLES. The Latitude of the Planets at the Genethliacal time, is, as followeth, according to the said Tables, viz.
♄ 2. 35 Lat. Australis. ♃ 0. 10. Australis. ♂ 0. 37 Australis. ♀ 1. 59 Australis. ☿ 1. 39 Australis. ☽ 0. 43 Borealis. Planetarum Antiscia & Contrantiscia. ♄ Ant. 2. 18 ♍, Contr. ♓. ♃ Ant. 29. 01 ♊, Contr. ♐. ♂ Ant. 6. 05 ♑, Contr. ♋. ☉ Ant. 0. 13 ♑, Contr. ♋. ♀ Ant. 20. 11 ♏, Contr. ♉. ☿ Ant. 29. 28 ♐, Contr. ♊. ☽ Ant. 27. 39 ♏, Contr. ♉. Here follows the Radical Scheme, and its Specu∣lum, whereby the Artist may discern the General Fate of the Native, as to its External state and con∣dition, as also his particular Fate, from the Effects of Directions and Transits; his Spiritual state being handled in the ensuing Treatise.
RADIX 2645. ♃, 22°. Dec∣embr.s die Natus 3 hor: 52 mi: 32 Sec: manè, sub Latitud: 53 gr: 27 m: ☽ a □ ♄ ad ☌ ♀ & ☋. ♀ Almuten Figurae, ♃ Particeps. astrological diagram
Speculum Radicis. Long. ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓ Latit. 00°:32′ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☿   ✶ 38°:20′ 00:59 □ ✶   ♃   ✶ □ △   ☍   △ 38:46 02:22 ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☽   20:26 03:28 △   D8   △ □ ✶   D2   ✶ □ 49:26 04:47 ✶   AId   ✶ □ □   ☍   △ □ 00:00 04:48 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   Ant   ✶ □ 00:00 09:34   D7   △ □ ✶   Asc   ✶ □ △ 53:27 09:49 ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♀   23:22 20:25 □ ✶   D9   ✶ □ △   D3   △ 34:00 20:39 △ □ ✶   ☊   ✶ □ △   ☋   00:00 22:08 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♁   ✶ □ 46:35 28:32 ☍   △ □ ✶   Spi   ✶ □ △   00:00 20:07 D6   ✶ □ △   D12   △ □ ✶   49:26 23:55 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♂   ✶ □ 42:39 24:52 △ □ ✶   Reg   ✶ □ △   ☍   00:00 25:37 △ □ ✶   MC   ✶ □ △   IC   00:00 27:42 ♄   ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   52:38 28:22   ☍   △ □ ✶   Fr: ♏   ✶ □ △ 00:00 28:23   △ □ ✶   D11   ✶ □ △   D5 34:00 29:47 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☉   ✶ □ 39:27 Long. ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓ Poli. place 1. and 2. part 2. page 1.
Evangelium Sydereum. PART II. THE Direction whose Effects are here handled, is of Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, to the Body of Luna, Govern∣ess of the Ninth, viz. the House of Religion in the Radix. The Arch of Direction found out according to the Argolian Method of Calculation, is as follow∣eth, viz.   D. M. S. ☉ the Significator's Longitude is 29. 46. 42 ♐. South Declination under the Earth 23. 30. 00. Right Ascension 269. 45. 00. Distantia ab Imo Coeli 58. 08. 00. Pole of Position 39. 17. 00. Difference of Ascension 20. 50. 00. Oblique Ascension 290. 35. 00.
☽ the Promissor's Longitude is 2. 21 ♒ North Latitude 0. 43   Declination South 18. 57   Right Ascension 304. 28   Different. Ascensional. sub Polo ☉ 16. 19   Ascensio Obliqua sub eodem Polo 320. 47   Substract 290. 35. the Oblique Ascension of Sol, from 320. 47. the Oblique Ascension of Luna under the Sun's Pole, and there remains 30. 12. the Arch of Direction; to which adding 26 min. the Equation, the Sum is 30. 38. the Arch equated. These 30 degrees point out 30 years of the Natives Age compleat and ended, and 38 minutes shew 38 parts of 60 of the 31st year, falling upon the 30th day of the fifth Month called July, Anno 1676; near which time the Lights of Heaven, gave a Di∣rection to the Native in the wayes of Righteousness. The fore-going numbers of Calculation were found according to the Precepts of Spherical Tri∣gonometry, exhibited in the third part of Clavis Astrologiae Elimata, pages 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, &c. Only this of Sol the Significator, and Lu∣na the Promissor, being sufficient for the present pur∣pose, the rest of the Hylegians are here omitted as needless. There is another Method of Direction, first pub∣lished to the view of the World by Dr. Salmon, in his Horae Mathematicae, lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 16, 17. as also Chap. 18. Book 4. of the same Treatise;
which indeed I cannot but acknowledge to be no less ingenious and rational, than facil: and hath been frequently verified by my own and others Ex∣perience to Admiration, never failing of Truth, being wholly grounded upon the infallible Axi∣oms of Art, and backed by several passages in the Holy Scriptures. The Measure of Time, according to this Me∣thod, is the allowance of a day for a year; for as all the Points of the Ecliptick pass through the 12 Mansions in the space of 24 hours, or a Natural Day, so the Sun makes his Circuit through all the said Points of the Ecliptick in a year; which is a ra∣tional Proof in Art, that a day must stand for a year. Moreover, This Measure of Time is countenan∣ced in several passages of Holy Scripture, where we may read, that a Day is the measure of Time for a Year, as to the accomplishment of Ezekiel's Prophe∣cies, with other circumstances of Sacred Writ which are here omitted; Now, since a Day for a Year is the measure of Time allowed for the ful∣filling of Divine Prophecies, why not the same al∣lowance of Time for the accomplishment of Coele∣stial Mysteries, or such mysterious Transactions as are made by the Stars in Heaven; more especially considering, that the most Divine and Supreme Be∣ing is the Mover of the Heavens, administring un∣to them their powerful Influences? Now, since the Heavens never swerv'd from the Command of their Maker, (whose Works are all Divine) they being Synonoma's to the invisible Throne of his Glory,
whereon he swayes the Scepter of his Divine Pow∣er, must of necessity be privileged above any other part of the Creation (man excepted) to speak forth Sacred and Mysterious Predictions; for, the Heavens declare the Glory of God, from whose Spirit the effluvia of all Divine prenarrations are exhaled. But to proceed. The Moon passing through all the Signs of the Zodiack in a Month, and these Signs passing through the twelve Houses in a Natural Day, are a rational ground in Art, that a Day shall stand for a Month as well as for a Year, in this way of Direction. Here 'tis evident, that this measure of time de∣pends upon the two great Luminaries of Heaven, to whose resplendent Influences it seems rational to judge, (if their radiant Lustre may testifie for them) that the Influences of the other Planets and fixed Stars are subordinate. In commending this, I do not go about to ex∣plode Argol's way, far be it from me, since I have found much Verity therein, but shall rather con∣clude, that there is truth to be found out by both these wayes. I shall here give a brief Specimen of the Directions operating (according to Doctor Salmon's new way) the one and thirtieth year of the Native's Age current, as followeth; being found out by In∣spection onely, viz.
Sinister Directions Annual. Sol to Cornu Capricorni Australe, near the Radical Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth, just changing his Sign. See Horae Mathematicae, pag 274. Book 3. Chap. 19. Sect. ult. ☽ to the △ of the Cusp of the Ascendent, and of the Ninth. Dexter Directions Annual. Luna to the Conjunction of Venus, and Sextile of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, she Lady of the Ninth. Sinister Directions Mensurnal. Venus to Cornu Capricorni Australe changing the same Sign that the Sun did the Annual way, viz. out of Capricorn into Aquarius, and so approaching the Radical Body of Luna. Mars Lord of the Ascendent to the Conjunction of Jupiter, having the Dignity of Exaltation in the Ninth. Dexter Directions Mensurnal. Luna to the Trine of Mercury, Trine of Venus, Sextile of Mars, Sextile of Jupiter, Trine of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli.
In the next place follows the Revolutional Figure preceding the Direction of the Luminaries, together with its Speculum, whereby the Concordance be∣twixt the Transits of the Planets in the Radix, at the time of the Exortum, &c. and the Aspects and Transits of the Revolution, with the Effects of the Direction, may be more easily discerned. I have throughout all the following Pages, ab∣stained from the Use of Astrological Characters, that all Persons which are ignorant of those Chara∣cters may read the Book, though it might have been somewhat more compendious, if those Cha∣racters had been used, which then could have been read but by an Astrologer onely. Certain testimonies that the Radical Figure is truly taken, &c. The Direction it self was of Sol Lord of the Tenth in the Radix, to the Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth House therein: The Radical Figure and Speculum thereof are prefixed at the beginning, together with the Figure of the Revolution prece∣ding the Direction, and its Speculum. I have not used very much exactness in drawing the Revolu∣tional Scheme and Speculum, the matter in hand not altogether requiring it; but however they may serve to shew what Directions and Transits were to happen therein that year. The Nativity was recti∣fied
EXORTUM: 1675. ♄. 22:0 Decem. die, 1 h: 14 m: an∣te meridiem ☽ a ✶ ☉ et ♃ ad ✶ ♄ et ♀. astrological diagram
Speculum Exortivum. Signa Zodiaci et asp.t{us}. Long. ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓ 00:30 □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♃   ✶ 00:50   ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☽ 02:21 □ △   ☋   △ □ ✶   ☊   ✶ 05:43   ♄   ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶ 07:23 □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♀   ✶ 10:07 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☿   ✶ □ 12:35 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ♂   ✶ □ 13:00 △   IC   △ □ ✶   MC   ✶ □ 13:01 □ ✶   D. 6.   ✶ □ △   D. 12   △ 19:18 ✶ □ △   D. 7.   △ □ ✶   A. sc   20:21 ♁   ✶ □ △   ☍   △ □ ✶   23:23 D. 2.   ✶ □ △   D. 8.   △ □ ✶   26:03 △   D. 5.   △ □ ✶   D. 11.   ✶ □ 26:44   D. 3.   △ □ ✶   D. 9.   ✶ □ △ 29:47 △   ☍   △ □ ✶   ☉   ✶ □ 30:00 ♈ ♉ ♊ ♋ ♌ ♍ ♎ ♏ ♐ ♑ ♒ ♓
by the Ascendents Direction to Frons Scorpii, a fixed Star of the second Magnitude, in 28 deg. 11 min. of Scorpio, in the Ascendent, near the Ecliptick, of the nature of Saturn and Mars, upon which Direction, happening about the 22d of the 12th Month, called February, in the Year 167½, the Na∣tive was invaded with a violent Distemper, viz. Melancholick and Cholerick, of the Nature of Saturn and Mars, as aforesaid, which was aggravated by the Ascendent's Direction to the Terms of Saturn near the same time, Saturn being posited in his Fall, in the sixth House of the Radix, and Retrograde; (his Place, and of the other Planets, being calculated de Novo from the Caroline Tables for the time of Birth) the Planet Mars being Lord of the Sixth, and As∣cendent in the said Radical Figure; the Revolutional Figure preceding the said Direction, confirmed the truth of the operation of the said Direction, concur∣ring therewith in signification, both as to the Ma∣lady, as also in other things relating to the Native's Concerns in this World. Another eminent token of the Radical Figure truly taken, is this, viz. Sol Lord of the Tenth, changing his Sign in the Second, being the Fifth from the Tenth, near the Body of Mercury, Lord of the Eighth in the Figure, over whose Body he makes his first Transit, as also im∣mediately after applying to an Opposition of Jupiter, Lord of the Fifth, the House of Children, the Fifth being the Eighth from the Tenth, and Jupiter afore∣said posited in the Eighth of the Figure Retrograde, gave the Death of the Native's Mother on Child-bed
when the Native was born. Luna, a general signifi∣catrix of Mothers, posited in the Third, viz. the Sixth from the Tenth applying unto Venus in Con∣junction with Cauda Draconis in the Sanguin Sign Aquarius, gave her a Surfeit by drinking inconveni∣ent Liquors, which corrupted the Blood and Hu∣mours. Jupiter in Opposition to Sol, the Liver or Mass of Blood, was corrupted, &c. Other Circum∣stances might be instanced, to prove the truth of the Radix rectified, as the correspondence of Acci∣dents past, with Directions near the time by them pointed out; as also Marks, Moles, and Scars of the Native, Description of the Body, Conditions, Quali∣ties, &c. but let these suffice. Observations upon the Figure of the Solar Exortum preceding the DIRECTION. By comparing the Revolutional Scheme with the Radical Scheme and Speculum, and adjoyning their Significations to their proper Consequences, it will evidently appear how the Heavens (whose Mover is God) did harmonize with the then pre∣sent condition of the Native, and likewise with his Condition ensuing upon the Direction, which be∣gan to operate about the time prenoted thereby, viz. the 30th of the fifth Month call'd July, Anno 1676, being the thirty first year of the Native's Age, current. The Arch of Direction was by Trigonometrical Cal∣culation (a Synopsis whereof is given at the be∣ginning
of the second Part) 30 deg. 38 min. But to proceed. Jupiter, a general significator of Religion, and a Holy Life and Conversation, having Dignities in the Ninth House of the Radix, (viz. his Exaltation and Terms) is Retrograde, and near changing his Sign in the Radix; Mercury a general Significator of Mutations (by the convertibility of his Nature) having lately changed his Sign in the Radix, is in the beginning of Capricorn, a moveable Sign, oppo∣sing Jupiter in the Radix, situated, as aforesaid, in the beginning of Cancer, a Sign moveable: Mercury is likewise in Conjunction of Sol, Sol being in the last Degree of Sagittary, ready to change his Sign also: Jupiter (I say) dispos'd as aforesaid in the Radix, is Lord of Pisces, intercepted in the Ascen∣dent, as also of the Tenth and Eleventh Houses of the Revolution, the Tenth House, or Medium Coeli, re∣presenting the Deity of Heaven; and the Eleventh is the Bonus Genius, or good Angel: Jupiter being Lord of the aforesaid Houses, transits the Bodies of Mercury and Sol in the Radix: Mercury is placed in the Ninth House of the Revolution in Sagittary, dis∣pos'd of by Jupiter, and being Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius in the Radix applyes in the Revo∣lution to the Conjunction of Mars, Lord of the Ascen∣dent in the Radix, and of the Ninth in the Revolu∣tion, for the Ascendent of the Radix is upon the Ninth of the Exortum. It is to be noted likewise, that Sol the Significator in the Direction to ensue, is near the Conjunction
of Jupiter, in the Eleventh House of the Revolution, Sol applying to Jupiter Lord of the Eleventh, or Bonus Genius, to make him in Cazimi, Jupiter hav∣ing lately chang'd his Sign, and Sol about to change his Sign. All these gave an alteration in Principles of Religi∣on, for the better, as also Sacred Visions of God and Angels, which is the more confirm'd by what en∣sues, viz. Jupiter Lord of the Sign Pisces, intercepted in the Ascendent, as also of the Tenth and Eleventh Houses in the Revolution, is placed in the Eleventh House of the same Revolution; Sol applies to his Conjunction, (as also to the Conjunction of Caput Draconis) so that Jupiter is near Cazimi, and also applies to the Conjunction of the Dragon's Head, in the Revolutional Eleventh House (that Node being plac'd in the Ninth of the Radix) Jupiter, as aforesaid, being Lord of Pisces, intercepted in the Ascendent, as also of the Tenth and Eleventh Houses of the Revolution. Luna, Governess of the Ninth in the Radix, and Promittor in the Radical Direction, anon to be treated of, having lately changed her Sign in the Revolution (as also in the Radix) transits the Sextile of Mercury in the Radix; he being Lord of the ele∣venth the bonus genius thereof, and near Cazimi, is placed in the ninth house of the Revolution in Sagit∣tary (dispos'd of by Jupiter) and applies to the Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent in the Ra∣dix, and of the ninth in the Revolution, as aforesaid.
Luna likewise being Lady of the ninth in the Ra∣dix &c. transits the Trine of Jupiter in the Radix with mutual Reception by House, for Luna is in Pisces, the House of Jupiter, at the time of the Revolution, and Jupiter in Cancer, the House of Luna in the Ra∣dix, he being Lord of the tenth and eleventh Hou∣ses of the Exortum, going to Cazimi or Cor Solis, and Conjunction of Luna's North Node (viz. ☊) in the eleventh House of the Revolution. It is to be remembred in these Considerations of Luna, that she is Governess of the House of Reli∣gion in the Radix. Luna being Promittor in the Direction hereafter to be treated of, &c. separates from the Sextile of Sol, the Significator in the aforesaid Direction, and from the Sextile of Jupiter, (Sol and Jupiter apply∣ing to a Conjunction, and near the Aspect) in the Revolution, as also both of them applying to the Conjunction of Caput Drac. (which is the Ninth of the Radix) in the eleventh House of the Revo∣lution. Luna separating as aforesaid, applies to the Sex∣tile of Saturn and Venus, Saturn being Lord of the Ascendent in the Revolution, and prov'd in the first Part of this Volume, to be a good Significator in Religion: Jupiter afterwards applies to a Trine Si∣nister of Saturn Lord of the Ascendent, with recepti∣on in the Exortum. Jupiter is situate in Capricorn, the House of Saturn Lord of the Ascendent, and Saturn in Taurus, the House of Venus, she being Almuten of the Radical
Figure, which makes this Trine Aspect betwixt the two Superiours Saturn and Jupiter more forci∣ble. Venus (to whose Conjunction Luna applied in the Radix) is posited in the eleventh House of the Revolution, viz. the House of Hope or Faith, in Trine of Saturn Lord of the Ascendent, with mutual re∣ception, by House, and Saturn is posited in the se∣cond House of the said Revolution, &c. These Positions, Dignities, Aspects, and Transits of the Planets aforesaid, did not only effect a notable Change in the Native's course of Life, for the better, but gave stupendious Visions, and Divine Revelations of God and of his Angels, beyond the Limits of Expression, to the fulfilling of that Scripture, viz. Your young men shall see Visions, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.17. together with an admirable opening of the Mysteries of the Scriptures, even to the ravishing and astonishing of his Soul with extreme Pleasure and unutterable Joy, yea, even to the amazement of his External Senses, being unable to bear the weight or rather Divine Excellency of such Delight and Glory, so that the Native's Body was cast to the ground, he lying in a Trance for a considerable space of time, not well knowing whether he was in the Body or no, for in a Saul-like-state he met with Jesus in the Spirit coming in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and great Glory, signifying to him, that his Redem∣ption drew nigh, Luke 21.47, 28. whose coming was preceded with signs of pleasant and delightful weeping and mourning, proceeding from Divine
Love, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, viz. They shall mourn over him whom they have pierced, as one mourneth for his onely Son, &c. Zech. 12.10. But in another Portion of Scripture, Your mourning shall be turned into Joy, John 16.20. A faint Resemblance of an Angelical Vision exem∣plified from the Coelestial Radix and Revolu∣tion before specified, viz. Jupiter in the Revolution Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, being prope Cor Solis, as also Mer∣cury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius in the Radix being near Cazimi, shews an Angel standing in the Sun. The disposition of these, and of the other Planets in the Radical and Revolutional Themes, gives the accomplishment of the Angels words in the Heavens, Revelat. 19.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Now I come to treat of the Effects of the Dire∣ction, viz. of Sol to the Body of Luna in the Radix. The Arch of Direction by Trigonometrical Calcula∣tion, came forth 30 deg. 38 m. which was the Arch of the Aequator, intercepted betwixt the Significator Sol, and the Promittor Luna. These 30 degrees point out 30 years from the Native's Birth, compleat and ended, and 38 minutes point out 38 parts of sixty of the year next ensuing, viz. the 30th day of the 5th Month call'd July, Anno 1676, which was the 31st year of the Native's Age current, at
which time the Direction had begun to manifest its Vigour. The same things may be understood here con∣cerning the Direction and its Effects, which were of the Revolution; onely the Native at the time of the Direction, or near it, witnessed the former Ef∣fects after a more firm and powerful manner, hav∣ing strange Raptures and over-powering Visions of Divine Joy and Wonder. But to come to the more particular Effects, viz. Sol the Significator subterranean, and in Conjun∣ction of Mercury in the Radix, in the second House, Sol and Mercury being both in Opposition of Jupiter in the eighth House, Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, yearly, from the time of Birth, renewing his Transit over the Antiscion and Body of Mercury, and Oppo∣sition of Jupiter, and his own Antiscion, the Nativi∣ty likewise Nocturnal, Sol in Trine of Saturn in the Radix subterranean, and in Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent in the Radix; I say, Sol ra∣dically thus disposed, and Lord of the Medium Coe∣li, carrying the aforesaid Influences to the Promittor Luna, Lady of the ninth House, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, Almuten of the Radical Fi∣gure, and all the Planets subterranean, except Jupi∣ter; gave to the Native Intellectual, Invisible, and Religious Honour from God, 1 Sam. chap. 2. vers. 30. John 12.26. and the Treasures of an Holy Life and Conversation, because the Medium Coeli is the second from the ninth, as also an insight into Arts and Sciences, and Divine Mysteries, 1 Tim. 3.16.
All the Planets subterranean, except Jupiter, and he Retrograde in the Eighth, near changing his Sign, and entring into Gemim, the last Degrees, where he is Detrimented, signifie, that the Native's alteration of Religion is noted and observed, but with an eye of Contempt and Prejudice, especially amongst the pretended Divines, shut up in the House of Death, except they repent. Jupiter in Opposition of Mercury in the Radix, moderated Mercury's Instability and Changeableness, Mercury rules the Apprehension, Jupiter the Judg∣ment; Mercury swift in Motion, Jupiter Retrograde in Opposition to him, as aforesaid, Mercury like∣wise being near Cazimi, and Luna Lady of the Ninth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, Almu∣ten of the Radix, must therefore give a sound Judg∣ment, and an understanding of mysterious and hid∣den things relating to Art and Religion; especially Sol, the Significator in this Direction, carrying the virtue of Mercury and Jupiter thus disposed in the Radix, to the Body of Luna the Promissor. Sol carrying Mercury's Antiscion annually to Mer∣cury's Body, Jupiter's Opposition, and his own Anti∣scion; Mercury in Opposition of Jupiter, associated with Sol's Body and Sol's Antiscion, &c. must of necessity give a penetrative intellectual Faculty to the Native, the opening of Mysteries, Visions, and Supernatural Revelations, at that time when he so dispos'd, and his Virtue was administred by Sol's Direction, Lord of the Medium Coeli, to the Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth in the Radix, she applying
to the Conjunction of Venus, a Fortune, and be∣holding the Degree of her own Exaltation in Tau∣rus, the House of Venus, with a Quartile, she being Almuten of Taurus upon the Cusp of the Seventh, the Fortune Venus, Almuten of the Figure, likewise beholding the Cusp of the Seventh, her own House, with a Quartile, she plac'd in the Third, the House of Luna's delight. Luna Lady of the Ninth, in the Third, the House of her delight, and applying to the Conjunction of Venus therein, Venus being near Cauda Draconis, the Moon's South Node, Luna applying to her Node, where she hath no Latitude, but to the even way of the Sun in the Ecliptick; Caput Draconis in Leo in the Ninth House, &c. all these gave a good Prin∣ciple from the Birth: I say, Luna Governess of the Ninth, so dispos'd as aforesaid, gave the Native a good Principle of Religion from the Birth; but she being subterranean, it was hid and stifled, Luke chap. 9. vers. 44.45. Luke 18.31, 32, 33, 34 ver∣ses. It is a significant Testimony (if there were no more) that the Native upon this Direction would change his Formal Principles and Evil course of Life, for a better and true Principle, because Luna Lady of the Ninth in the Radix, separates from a Quartile of Saturn, an Infortune, and applies to the Conjunction of Venus, a Fortune, so dispos'd as before rehearsed, in the House of Luna's delight, viz. the Third. Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, posited in the Second, dispos'd as aforesaid (the Medium Coeli
being the Second from the Ninth) Directed to the Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth, gave not the Native External Riches, but an entrance into the Treasury of Religion, and the Profits of a Holy Life and Conversation, receiving his Reward from the Giver of Holiness, to the fulfilling of these Scriptures, viz. He is come, and his Reward is with him, &c. Isaiah 40.10. Isa. 62.11. Rev. 22.12. The Nature of the Principles of the Native, and the manner of his Conviction, must be collected from the Promittor Luna, and her Disposal at the Birth, &c. Luna applying to the Conjunction of Venus, a Fortune, and Almuten of the Radix near the Eclip∣tick, and also applying to her Node, viz, Cauda Draconis, in the fix'd Sign Aquarius, where she comes to the even way of Sol the Significator, not having any Latitude, viz. the Ecliptick; Sol repre∣senting the Deity, or Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. I say, he being Significator, as also Lord of the Me∣dium Coeli in the Radix, argues an entrance into the pure and even way of Life, viz. the strait way, where there is no deviating to the right hand nor to the left, but a perfect and strait way of Holiness, Math. 7.13, 14. Luna and Venus being so near Cauda Draconis, but in the constant Sign Aquarius, gave a Principle that lies under a Scandalous, Reproachful, and malicious Title, given in Scorn and Contempt, viz. Quakerism, and that it is wicked, and of the Devil; but 'twas said of old, that Christ had a Devil, and was mad,
John 10.20. and 'tis evident, that the Apostles bore the reproach of Jesus, (besides, Cauda in a fixed Sign gives Slanders, and not tales of Truth.) But this Title of Derision and Slander by Cauda's being so near Luna and Venus, is the fulfilling of these Scriptural Prophecies, where we find the Pro∣phet Jeremiah complaining thus, viz. The word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it, &c. Jerem. 6.10. Jer. 20.8. Lament. 5.1. Observe the words of Jesus and the Apostles in the ensuing Scriptures, Luke 6.22. 1 Tim. 4.10. Heb 11.26. Hebr. 13.13. To which annex the words of the Prophet Joel, chap. 2. verse 17. and it will not be strange that the People of God should re∣ceive of the World a disdainful Title. But the word Quaker in it self is honourable, because Qua∣king or Trembling (for the words are Synonoma's) is a Divine Quality, and a Symptome of a Servant of God, whose word by the Prophet David is, Psalm 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce with trembling: and by the Apostle Paul, Philip. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trem∣bling. As the Direction's place was subterranean, it gave a hidden and mysterious principle in lowliness, but more especially hidden from the exalted and pre∣tended Divines, that are ready to retreat from, and change their Notions (traditionally received) in the time of Tryal; for Jupiter is in the Sign of his Exaltation and Retrograde above the Earth, ready to change his Sign, the Direction under the Earth,
its place being in no Aspect at all with Jupiter's. It gave also a Principle leading to Meekness and Humility, to the fulfilling of these Scriptures, viz. I have chosen the weak and foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, &c. Matth. 11.25. Luke 10, 21. 1 Cor. 1.17. Luna applying to Venus Lady of Libra, a Sign of Equity, and both of them posited in Aquarius, a fixed and good Sign, gave a lasting and just Prin∣ciple. Sol Lord of the Tenth, directed to Luna Lady of the Ninth, both Significator and Promittor being Subterranean, gave an holy and honourable Princi∣ple, descended from on high. And as Sol and Luna (the Luminaries or Lights of this Direction) are in the ascending part of Heaven, yet Subterranean, signifies, that it is such a Principle of Life and Light, as from a state of Humility, Lowliness, and Meekness, will arise over all other Principles, to the highest degree of Exaltation, according to these Scriptures, viz. He will exalt that which is of low degree, Luke 1.52. Blessed are the humble, for they shall be exalted, &c. Ezek. 21.26. James 1.9. Luke 14.11. Luke 18.14. Prov. 29.23. Isaiah 57.15. James 4.6. Matth. 18.4. Matth. 23.12. 1 Pet. chap. 5. vers. 5, 6. Which is confirmed, because Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli (viz. the Second from the Ninth) beholds the Sign upon the Cusp of the Tenth (which is his own House) the Angle of Honour, with a Trine, Cor Leouis near the Cusp, and Sol generally signifying Renown; as also Luna the
Promittent Planet beholding the degree of her Ex∣altation by Quartile; and in Conjunction of Venus Almuten of the Figure, beholding her own House the Cusp of the Seventh, with a Quartile, the De∣gree of the Moon's Exaltation being situate in the descending part of Heaven, Sol, Luna, and Venus, as aforesaid, being Subterranean and ascending; all which Testimonies do infallibly promise the Exal∣tation of this lowly Principle. The Promittor Luna Lady of the Ninth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus in the Radix, both be∣ing watry and tender Planets, as also located in the Third House in Aquarius, a courteous Sign, Venus Lady of the Seventh and Twelfth Houses in the Radix, but having Dignities in the Fifth, viz. her Exaltation, near the Cusp thereof, and being a ge∣neral Significatrix of pleasantness, they being both Subterranean, Sol directed to Luna's Body thus qualified, did signifie to the Native a direction in the wayes of holy Love, and gave him a sweet, humble, meek and gentle frame of Spirit, with a most pleasant and delightful weeping and mourn∣ing, for Venus is Lady of the Twelfth, signifying Anguish and Tribulation; but it was such Sorrow, because sweetned with Love, as the Native could wish alwayes to remain with him. The greatest Delights that the World can afford are not worthy to come in competition with the sweetness and plea∣sure of that Sorrow, having its Original from Di∣vine Love, in Meekness, and breaking the Stony Heart with its living tenderness. Behold the fol∣lowing
Scriptures, viz. Zech. 12.10. Isaiah 61.3. Jer. 31.13, 16. Matt. 5, 4. Isaiah 31.14. Isa. 61.2. Isa. 66.10. Lam. 1.4. It is observed by Meteorologers, that the Sun com∣ing to the Body of watry Planets, dissolves them by his Heat, causing them to distill their liquid In∣fluences in dropping Showers of Rain, to refresh the parched Earth, that thereby it may become more fertil; Even so, Sol the Significator in the Native's Geniture, representing the Sun of Righteousness, (Mal. 4.2. Psal. 84.11. Psal. 89.36.) directed to the Body of Luna, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, being both watry Planets, as aforesaid, gave the resplendent fervour of holy Love shining hot upon the Native's Spirit, and causing him to melt into Tears, (observe here that Sol and Luna do govern the Eyes, which are the Organs of weep∣ing;) which delightful and sweet trouble of mind was occasioned upon a due consideration of his own unworthiness to be so kindly treated and dealt with by that Holy Spirit of Life and Truth, to which he had so long before liv'd in Rebellion: I say, the Original of that Heart-rejoycing-tribulation and Soul-refreshing-mourning was Divine Love, after a winning and precious manner accosting that Soul which had most barbarously used it, and with cru∣el dealings evilly entreated it, without upbraiding the Soul in the least for such unkindnesses, but, af∣ter a wonderful, meek, and innocent manner, Lamb-like overcoming it with Love, Lowliness, and Humility: See Zech. 12.10. Isaiah 61.2, 3. Jer.
31.13, 16. Matth. 5.4. Isai 38, 14. Isa. 66.10. Lam. 1.4. Then the undeserving Soul being so lovingly conquered, (yea, with a more than Dove∣like Innocency) (Cant. 2.14. Cant. 8.6.) and with such miraculous, sweet, and render Love and Power subdued, became exceeding Zealous for that Love, Cant. 8.6, 7. and willing to give up all for it, to the fulfilling of these Scriptures, viz. My Peo∣ple shall be a willing People in the day of my Power: and they shall mourn over him whom they have pierced, as one mourneth for his onely Son, and shall be in bit∣terness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his First∣born, Psalm 110.3. Zech. 12.10. Mal. 4.2. The cause of the Sorrow is evidently discerned in the Radix, by the Moon's application to the Conjunction of Venus in the Third House, which is the Seventh from the Ninth, viz. opposite thereto; Venus being Lady of the Twelfth and Seventh, which intimates, that the Cause of the Native's Sorrow was for living so long in Rebellion against so gracious a Principle of holy Light and Tender∣ness; Light it may well be called, because both Significator and Promittor were Luminaries, and be∣cause it shews unto a man the Evil of his wayes, and reproves him for them secretly, when no eye seeth him; which is also evident by these follow∣ing Scriptures, Psal. 27.1. Psal. 36.9. Psal. 37.6. Psal. 43.3. Psal. 56.13. Psal. 97.11. Prov. 4.18, 19. Prov. 6.23. Prov. 13.9. Isaiah 2.5. Micah 7.8, 9. Luke 1.79. Luke 2.32. John 1.4, 5. John 3.19. with many others that might have been instanced, but let these suffice.
The last-mentioned Considerations of Sol, Luna, and Venus, might portend unto the Native a Spiri∣tual and invisible Marriage, that mourning and holy weeping being the celebration of the Nuptials, and a signal token of Reconciliation betwixt the Soul and its Divine Being; for Luna and Venus were posited in the Third, which is, as aforesaid, the Seventh from the Ninth, and gives unto the Native a marriage in righteousness. Consider the Sun's position (as is before re∣hearsed) in the Radix, and his Aspects and Transits to Mercury and Mars, &c. and it will not be strange that the Native should be affected and accompani∣ed upon the Direction of him to the Body of Luna (applying to the Conjunction of Venus, having her Exaltation in the Fifth) with most fragrant and odo∣riferous smells and delightful tastes, which, after a Su∣pernatural manner, attended his Person and intel∣lectual Senses, the gentle breathings thereof like precious Air or Oyntment poured forth, perfuming the delightful Valleys, to the fulfilling of these Scri∣ptures, viz. Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth; Draw me, we will follow after thee, by the savour of thy good Ointments: Because of the savour of thy good Ointments, therefore do the Virgins love thee: I sate under his shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my taste, &c. Cant. 1.3. Cant. 4.10. Matth. 26.12. John 12.3. Cant. 1.12, 13. Cant. 2.3. Cant. 5.13. Cant. 5.5. Cant. 4.11. Here it is observable, that the Native is destitute of the natu∣ral Sense of Smelling.
Sol transferring the Virtue of Mercury Lord of the Eighth house Subterranean, and in Opposition of Jupiter posited in the eighth, to the Body of Luna Lady of the ninth by Direction; signifies a religious mortifying of the Evil of the Natives ways by the living Spirit of Love and Holyness; Love, because Luna ap∣plies to the Conjunction of Venus. Rom. 8.13. Col. 3.5. Although the Radical Figure seem to promise no great store of external Wealth or Honour to the Native that will be of Continuance, but rather Trouble, and a wasting of the Substance; yet he hath learn'd to be in all States and Conditions satis∣fied, accounting the Fruition of a Saviour, whose Kingdom is not of this World, sufficient Gain un∣to him; and as to Honour, he is satisfied, that heavenly Honour is beyond that which is Transito∣ry. And if it shall please the Lord to bring him into a low and mean Condition, he hath learned to know, that the Grace of God is sufficient to support him in the midst of Anguish, Tribulation, and Sor∣row; yea to reprieve him out of the Jaws of Death it self, and that his Strength in God is wonderfully made perfect in Weakness. 2 Cor. 12.9. As Luna applyed to the Conjunction of Venus Lady of the Seventh, Luna being Almuten of the Seventh, having the Degree of her Exaltation in the Sign of the Seventh, and her Triplicity there, in Re∣gard the Nativity is nocturnal, as also Venus be∣holding the Cusp of the Seventh, viz. her own House, with a Quartile; so it may signifie (they be∣ing both Subterranean) upon this Direction an Invisi∣ble,
Spiritual, and Religious Marriage to the Native, according to what was before spoken. Let the Strength of Sol the Significator be obser∣ved, who is impregnated with the Rays of all the Planets in the Radix, viz. Trine of Saturn, Oppo∣sition of Jupiter, Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, Conjunction of his own Antiscion, Con∣junction of Mercury and Mercury's Antiscion, Semi∣sextile of Luna and Venus, and coming by Direction to Luna's Body; Luna the Promittor likewise apply∣ing to the Conjunction of Venus a Fortune in the Third, and Almuten of the Figure, the Direction falling near a fixed Star of the third Magnitude of the Nature of Venus, having small Latitude from the Ecliptick, viz. Cornu Capricorni Australe, to which adjoyn the Fortitude of both Sol and Luna in the precedent Revolution: and upon these Considerati∣ons it will not be strange, that the Direction should be good and powerful unto the Native, which in∣deed it was in Spiritual and Religious Love and Mercy, for thereby he was directed into the lovely ways of Righteousness; because God was the chief Mover in this Direction. Isaiah. 45.13. Saturn the old Enemy of Mankind, Lord of the Fourth, the House of the Grave or End, is posited in the Sixth, the House of Servitude, being retrograde in Aries his Fall; Sol the Lord of Life having the Degree of his Exaltation in the Ram or Lamb, the House of Saturn's Fall. Gen. 22.13. Revelat. 17.14. Rev. 15.3.
Because the Luminaries or Lights (being the Pla∣nets concern'd in this powerful Direction, for Light is to direct the Footsteps of the Righteous) are sub∣terranean, Luna the Promittor being the Light of time for the Nativity, was nocturnal, and she Lady of the Ninth, being of her self an opacous Body; but enlightened by the Sun; therefore it signified (as to the Native) a Principle of Light shining in a dark place; as they were ascending towards the Horizon and Meridian, (Sol being Lord of the Meridian) Lu∣za likewise encreasing in Light, it signified such a Light as would dawn to the Day, and become a perfect Day of Righteousness, according to these Scriptures, viz. We have also a more sure word of Pro∣phecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take Heed, as unto a Light that shineth in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your Hearts. Pet. 2. Epistle Chapt. 1. verse 19. see likewise these follow∣ing Scriptures, John 1.5. Pro. 4.19. Micah 7.8, 9. Rev. 2.28. Rev. 22.16. As Luna Lady of the Ninth, and Promittor, (be∣ing one of the Luminaries) was increasing in Light and Motion, and Subterranean, receiving its splendor from Sol the Significator, the other Luminary, and Sol representing the Deity, (Mal. 4.2. Ps. 84.11.) signified such a Religious and lowly principle of Light, as would increase and grow to a fulness of Glory, receiving its Lustre from the King of Righ∣teousness, Luke 13.18, 19. Ephes. 1.23. Eph. 3.19. Eph. 4.13. 2 Pet. 3, 28. Mal. 4.2. Hosea 14.5, 7. Acts 12.24. Acts 19.20. Matth. 13.32. Revel. 21.23.
Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium, Coeli, di∣rected to Luna the Promittor, Lady of the Ninth, ap∣plying to a Conjunction of Venus, a Joyful Planet, having Dignities near the Cusp of the Fifth, the House of Joyes and Pleasures, the Application being made in the Third the House of Luna's Delight, both being tender Planets, and Venus Lady of the Twelfth, gave Singing in the midst of Sorrow and Imprisonment, the Virgins Spike adorning the Cusp of the Twelfth with Triumphant At∣lelujahs and Songs of Deliverance, Jerem. 31.11, 12, 13. Psal. 32.6, 7. according to the motion of the Primus Motor, which is God. Jer. 31.13. The Sign Leo, according to the Order of the First Mover, is predominant upon the Cusp of the Tenth, or Medium Coeli, Cor Leonis that Regal fixed Star placed upon the aforesaid Cusp, Sol Lord thereof directed to the Body of Luna applying to a Con∣junction of Venus, &c. intimates, that the Native discerns that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah reigns in the Heart of his People with Meekness and Ten∣derness, according to the Order and motion of God, and is the Lamb opening the Seals of the Book of mysteries, for Luna governs the Ninth, and Sol the greater Luminary Subterranean, &c. disco∣vers dark, hidden, and secret things, Rev. 5.5. &c. to the end of the Chapter. Jerem. 31.33. Psal. 40.8. Scorpio upon the Cusp of the Ascendent, the first 8 Degrees of him being in the Twelfth, and the other part Subterranean, Scorpio likewise being a
fixed Sign, signifies that the Native sees the chain∣ing or fixing down of the Scorpion or Serpent in the East, or in his Rising, (Luke 10.19, 20. Mark 16.18. Rev. 20.2. Rev. 12.16. Rev. 12. throughout) he being imprison'd with his first 8 Degrees, repre∣senting his Head in the Twelfth, casting floods of water after the Virgin with the Ear of Corn, but she escap'd into the Eleventh and Tenth, being the Houses of Renown and Praise, where she sings, be∣cause of her Deliverance into the House of Faith, triumphant Songs, and glorious Praises, the Virgins spike adorning the prison-door, or door of tribulation and anguish, with Songs of Victory, Jerem. 31.11, 12, 13. Observe that Libra is upon the Cusp of the Twelfth, preserving the Virgin from the water∣floods; for Libra is Justice, returning the Inundati∣ons upon the Dragons own Head in the Twelfth, there imprison'd and chain'd down for ever. The Scorpion's Head, or first 8 Degrees, is impri∣son'd in the Twelfth, aiming to bruise the Virgins Heel, and to swallow up her Seed or Child, viz. the Ear of Corn, so soon as it was sprung up and born, (Gen. 3.15. Read Revel. chap. 12. through∣out:) but she is over him in the Houses of Faith and Honour, delivered with Songs of Joy received from God, and by the force of Libra or Justice, she bruises his head in the dark Dungeon of Misery: and the Virgins Ear of Corn, Child, or Seed, is caught up unto God, and to his Throne, in the state of Praise and Glory. Gen. 3.15. Rev. 12. throughout.
Taurus, a fixed Sign upon the West Angle, signi∣fies, that the strong and roaring Bulls of Bashan opposing the House of Life, are chained and fixed down in the West, in the House of Enmity and Contention, and as he is seen with his first 8 Degrees or Head above the Earth, the Sign Leo being upon the Cusp of the South Angle, or Meridian, so they are discern'd in the Lamb's light (this Lamb be∣ing the reigning Light of the Saints) to be li∣mited, chained and fixed down, Psal. 22.12, 13. The Virgin with the Ear of Corn in her hand de∣livered out of Prison and Anguish into the Houses of Hope, Faith and Renown, sings and proclaims, that the Earing time and Harvest is come, wherein the Wheat is gather'd into the Garner, and the Chaff blown away by the Fury and Indignation of the Almighty, and that the Virgin is deliver'd, which hath the Bread of Life; through Faith having es∣cap'd the Floods of the Dragon, chain'd down in the dark Dungeon in the Wilderness. Luke 10, 19. Mark 16.18. Rev. 20.2. Revel. 12.16. and so forward to the end of that Chapter. As the Virgin's Spike is delivered out of the Prison of Trouble and Misery into the Eleventh, the House of Faith and Praise, being the Second from the Tenth; I say, the Ear of Corn being fituate in the eleventh, it signifies, the Wilderness to become a Fruitful Field. Isaiah 29, 17. Isai. 32.15. viz. Fruitful with Prai∣ses and Songs of Triumph in the Virgin-State of Pu∣rity, which is the Riches of the most high. John. 12.24.
As Sol the Significator is directed to the Body of Luna aforesaid, Sol being Lord of the Tenth; viz. the Angle of Renown, but the Second from the Ninth, the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis being upon the Cusp of the Med. Coeli, and Luna Lady of the Ninth, the House of Holiness, signifie that the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, by appearing in the Heart of his People, is become the Honour, Reputation, and great Reward of Righteousness. Isai. 40.10, 11. Isa. 62, 11. Revel. 22.12. Mercury Lord of the eighth (the house of Death) in Conjunction of the Regent, overpowering and most glorious Planet Sol Lord of the Med. Coeli and Significator; Mercury Lord of the Eighth being thus seated as aforesaid, and near Cazimi, signifies Death to be swallowed up in Victory. Isaiah 25.8. Matt. 12.20. 1 Cor. 15. chap. 54, 55 Verses. Saturn Lord of the Fourth in the Sixth, in his Fall in Aries, intimates that the Grave and End of all things is subdued and fallen by the Lamb. Ob∣serve that the sixth is a House cadent. 1 Cor. 15. chap. 54. & 55. Verses. As Caput Draconis is in the Ninth, viz. the Twelfth from the Tenth, in the fixed Sign Leo, his Tail with his Head passing through the Diame∣ter of Heaven, his Tail (having drawn the third part of the Stars of Heaven along with it) being plac'd in the Third, the House opposite to the Ninth, the Dragon's Head being gone off the Angle of Honour, and the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis come on, intimates that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah hath
captivated and bound the great red Dragon, seen by Saint John in the midst of Heaven, and reigns victo∣riously in his stead, he now coming to reign whose Right it is; and as he is posited in the Ninth, it signifies that all Formal wayes of Worship, that are out of the true Worship (of which false Worship he is the Author, and whereby he hath so long de∣luded the Nations) are bound down with him in the descending part of Heaven, and falling eternally, Revel. chap. 12. throughout. It is observable, that where the Dragons Tail is situated in the Radix, there Sol the Lord of Life, and Luna Lady of the House of Righteousness, were both Eclipsed as to the Native, by Sol's transiting its place and Luna's by Body and Opposition: but more of these Eclip∣ses anon. As the 19th Degree of Aries is entred out of the Sixth into the Fifth House, being the Degree of the Sun's Exaltation, in a state of Descension and Lowliness; so it signifies the degree of the Lords Exaltation in the Ram or Lamb, passing out of Servitude into the House of Pleasures, Isa. 43.24. As Sol combures the Malevolent Mars Lord of the Ascendent, Scorpio being likewise fixed down up∣on the Cusp of the Orient: Sol the Significator se∣parating from Mars and Saturn, the two Malevo∣lents, and applying to the Body of Mercury by Transit, &c. signifies that Self is brought down, the corrupt and contentious Spirit burnt up, (Luke Chap. 3. and the latter end of the 16th verse) and that a good Ʋnderstanding is given to the Native.
As Libra is upon the Cusp of the 12th, so Justice keeps the Prison-door, that the Scorpion cannot en∣ter into the Eleventh, the House of Hope, in pursuit of the pure Virgin by Justice deliver'd from him, envying the Ear of Corn in her hand, sprung up in the Desart or Wilderness, whereby the Nations, through Faith (eating it worthily) shall acquire Eternal life. Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, directed to the Body of Luna applying to the Conjunction of Venus in the Third House, viz. the Sixth from the Tenth, being Subterranean and ascending, signifies that the honourable Sun of Righteousness (Mal. 4.2.) the Spirit of the mighty King of Glory is descended upon his Servants in a state of Meekness, Love, and Tenderness, dissolving them into Tears of Pity and Compassion, and that they are arising with him to the highest pitch of Invisible Exaltation, Eph. 4.9, 10. Rev. 5.10. Rev. 11.15. Rev. 22.5. Sol directed to Luna, as aforesaid, in the Third House, (signifying the way) and applying to the Ecliptick by descending Latitude, intimates that the Native beheld the way of life in the Line of E∣clipses: or I might have said the Light of life, for Sol is the Lord of Light and Life to the Cre∣ation. It is observable, that Sol, according to the Mo∣tion of the Zodiack, or Girdle of Life, came to the Body of Luna in the Radix by Transit, and not Luna to Sol; so likewise by Direction; viz. considering Sol nearer to Luna than Luna is to Sol, according to
the Ecliptick Motion, for there is but one Sign be∣twixt Sol and Luna in the Radix, viz. Capricorn, but eleven betwixt Luna and Sol, according to her Motion in the Zodiack, as aforesaid; so that Sol ra∣ther seem'd voluntarily to Eclipse himself (as I may say) yet really retaining his Splendor in Dark∣ness, upon his Transit over Luna's Radical place, she near her South Node, and thereto applying, and rather to overspread Luna with Glory, than she ei∣ther to Eclipse him, or lose any of her own Lustre by that Coition and Direction; but contrariwise, Luna coming to the Body of Sol, she then having small Latitude, according to the Order of Nature, eclipses the Sun; but in such a case Luna represent∣ing the Creature is the swiftest Mover, which ought to be stationary, as she is in the Radix of this Na∣tive, considering her there determined as a Signifi∣cator or Promittor to the said Native; but in this Direction, Sol, the Lord of Life is situate nearest Luna, and is the Moving Cause and Significator, according to the motion of the Zodiack, respect being had to the Axis of his Motion and Pole of Position, as Significator in the solution of the Sphe∣rical Triangles, requisite to the Calculation of this Arch of Direction, and not to Luna's, her Ascensio∣nal difference and Oblique Ascension found, having a Dependence upon his circle of Position, &c. which, together with the aforesaid Testimonies, frequently rehearsed, doth palpably denote (and is experi∣mentally witnessed by the Native to be undeniably true) that the Sun of Righteousness, the Spirit of
the Divine Being was the Basis, or only chief Mover in this Direction, by which Direction he entred into the Paths of Righteousness. Isaiah 45.13. Sol transiting the Body of Luna in the Radix, she applying to her Node, and he following her by Transit, as also coming now to her Body by Directi∣on, gave indeed the Sun's total Eclipse as to the Na∣tive, yet it was such, as that the Darkness thereof illuminated the Natives Understanding; for Mercu∣ry is near Cazimi in the Radix; so that he carries Mercury's Influence along with him to the Eclipse, Sol, Luna, and Mercury, as also the Place of the Natives Eclipse, being all Subterranean &c. which must of Necessity illuminate the Understanding in Darkness, and discover unto him, the things which were hidden in the Eclipse. The Promittor Luna encreasing in Light, &c. gave the fulfilling of Scriptural Promises, both as to Mer∣cy and Judgment. Luna Lady of the Ninth as aforesaid, encreasing in Light, and receiving her splendid Beams from Sol the Significator, Sol being beheld by the Rayes of all the Planets in the Radix; viz. Conjunction of Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, Trine of Saturn, he shining full upon Jupiter with an Opposition, Con∣junction of his own Antiscion, Semisextile of Venus, Semisextile of Luna, Conjunction of Mercury and Mercury's Antiscion; also Luna the Promittor in Con∣junction of Venus, and Sol directed to her Body; and these seven Planets governing or representing the seven days, signifie that the Light of the Moon is
become as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun as the Light of seven days. Isaiah the 30 Chapt. 26 Verse. Sol directed to the Body of Luna, Lady of the Ninth, applying to a Conjunction of Venus in the Third, the House of Luna's Delight; the Third being the House of News or Intelligence, and the Directions place there also; brought unto the Native the glad Tidings of Salvation, Luke 8.1. &c. It also signified a spiritual Voyage into the Land of Plea∣sures, Luna being Lady of the Ninth, and in Con∣junction of Venus in the Third, the House of short Journeys, Mercury also opposing Jupiter in the Eighth; but Mercury being near the Heart of the Sun, Sol the Significator separating from Mars and Sa∣turn, and coming to Mercury's Body by Transit in the Radix; becalmed the raging Seas, and rebuked the blustring Winds, Matt. 8.26. rendring the Voyage short by Reason of its pleasant Passages. Mercury in Conjunction of Sol, viz. associated with Sol's Body, Sol's Antiscion, and his own Antis∣cion, and beheld by Jupiter's Opposition &c. his in∣fluential Virtue thus carried by Sol the Significator to the Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth, applying to a Conjunction of Venus, and to the Ecliptick; signified such a Principle, as would turn to the Peo∣ple a pure Language. Zeph. 3.9. viz. Such a Princi∣ple as teaches to use the Word [Thou] to a single Person, and [You] to a plurality of Persons, ac∣cording to the Grammatical Orthoepy in all Lan∣guages: for Mercury governs the Tongue or
Speech, and the fiery Planet Sol with his Glory re∣fines it. Observe what strange Effects the following Con∣siderations did produce to the Native. Luna transiting Sol's opposite Place at Birth, as also coming to her next natural or general Opposi∣tion of Sol in the World after the Birth, loses none of her Lustre, but is fully glorified by Sol, and therefore signifieth an Encrease of this lowly Prin∣ciple of Light to a perfect Repletion. But Sol coming to the Body of Luna at this time by Direction, and as I may say (because he is the more ponderous Planet) contrary to the Course of Nature, transiting Luna's Body according to the Ecliptick Motion; she having but small Latitude in her radical place, applying to Cauda Draconis, where she cuts the solar line, intimates, that as to the Na∣tive, the Sun seem'd to be eclips'd contrary to the Course of Nature; as also Sol transiting Luna's op∣posite Place in the Radix gave the Moons Eclipse af∣ter the same manner, invisible to the Eyes of others, but of forcible Effect to the Native; for Luna as she is located in the Radix is Luna to the Native in per∣petuum: or considering the Sun, that celestial Body, as being Central and Stationary; the Earth or earthly part being predominant in the Ninth, and 2 deg. 21 m. of Leo, then Sol as to the Native was eclipsed, because (opposite to Terra) in 2 deg. 21 min. of Aquarius, the Radical Place of Luna: but when Terra overshadowed the Radical Body of Luna by Transit, she near the Ecliptick; then as to the
Native the Moon was Eclipsed, but the Earth is in the Eighth, the house of Death in the Birth. Observe that a Natural Eclipse (as aforesaid) is by Luna's applying to the Conjunction or Opposi∣tion of Sol, she then having small Latitude, whe∣ther Sol be observ'd as Central or moving in the Ecliptick; or at least by Luna's Application (as I may so say) to a Conjunction of Terra in the Ecliptick, which makes her own Eclipse, or to the Conjunction of Sol in Opposition to Terra, which makes Sol's Eclipse. And if in a Nativity Luna had, according to her Natural custom, transited by (or been directed to) the Body of Sol in the Ra∣dix, she at that Transit, or in her Radical place, as Significator, having small Latitude, it had been strange, yet not altogether so strange as that in this Nativity, Terra and Sol (being both more ponde∣rous than Luna) should spontaneously promote themselves by their Motion (either of them being accounted moveable) or otherwise Sol by his Sta∣tion and Terra's Motion to his own Eclipse, as al∣so to Luna's; whereby these Eclipses, as to the Native, annually from the Birth, by Transit hap∣ned, and now forcibly manifested themselves by Direction in their Vigour, after a supernatural and mysterious manner, being hidden from the Eyes of many, but seen by the Native to the fulfilling of some Scriptures anon following, intimating that the Native beholds the wonderful accomplish∣ment of the Prophecies therein mentioned. Ob∣serve, that as to the Native the Luminaries being
yearly both Eclipsed, according to the Position of Luna Lady of the Ninth, subterranean in the Ra∣dix, signified the Discovery of Wonders unto the Native in the hidden light which shines in dark∣ness: (Psal. 112.4. John 1.5.) for the Birth was Nocturnal, the Luminaries Subterranean and ascending, and the place of Sol's Eclipse subterrane∣an, of Luna's Eclipse subterranean also, she suffering her Eclipse, as to the Native, about two or three dayes after her general Change, or Conjunction of Sol in the World, Sol also suffering his Eclipse with her in the same state, as aforesaid, which is no less than miraculous or Divine, considering that every Natural Eclipse is at the New and Full Moon, from which Natural Course these Radical Eclipses do so strangely differ. Now Sol at Luna's Eclipse is in the Ninth supraterranean, entring into Leo, his own House, Luna Lady of the Ninth applying ra∣dically to a Conjunction of Venus: Now, I say, considering the small quantity of Light that Luna had at the Birth, upon Sol's opposition to her radi∣cal Place, she having small Latitude there, may be said quite to have lost it, her Eclipse being total, which is vindicated by her Application still nearer to the Ecliptick line after the Birth, till she come to the radical place of Cauda Draconis, where (as to the Native) she hath no Latitude, as also applying to the general place of Cauda Draconis in the world, where she also hath no Latitude at all; for Cauda had some retrograde Motion (though but little) before Luna, after the Birth, touched its general
Place in the World, so that when Sol by Transit opposed her in these Points (she, as aforesaid, ac∣cording to Nature, being past the Change) which hath been done yearly from the Birth, her Eclipses were absolutely total and supernatural: As also when Sol transited her Body in those parts of the Defective line aforesaid, where she was void of La∣titude, and having past her Natural Change in the World, his Eclipses were also total and miracu∣lous. Now observe, that Sol and Luna, as also all the Planets except Jupiter, being subterranean in the Radix, the Nativity Obscure and Nocturnal, and the Native's Eclipses all subterranean; the Stars con∣sequently withdrew their shining: for they receive their Light from Sol by Reflection. These are the Wonders that are shewn at the New Birth. Behold the promised Scriptures, which the Na∣tive in the Light-illustrating-darkness (Psal. 112.4. John 1.5.) discerns fulfilled, viz. Joel 2.31. Joel 3.15. Isaiah 13.10. Rev. 6.12. Ezek. 32.7, 8. Amos 5.8. Isa. 13.13. As Luna was totally depriv'd of her Light in A∣quarius a fixed and sanguine Sign, so she seem'd in∣fallibly to be turned into Blood. Joel. 2.31. which is confirm'd by Luna's Application by Congress to Ve∣nus in Aquarius, she Lady of Libra a Sanguine Sign; to the third Degree whereof Luna likewise casts her Trine, as also to the fourth Degree of Gemini, which is seated near the Cusp of the eighth, Gemini being
a Sanguine Sign also, and the fiery fixed Star the Bull's Eye plac'd upon the Cusp of the Eighth, in which Degrees of the Cusp, the Dragons Head hath his Exaltation: to which annex Mercury Lord of Gemint, his being with the Sun, and that these As∣pects of Luna were by Trine and Conjunction to all the Sanguine Signs, which signified an Inclina∣tion in her thus to be transmuted out of her own shining into a Sanguine Essence, in Obedience to and to the Honour of her great Creator, Joel 2.31. It is observable, that from the Birth, these won∣derful Eclipses are to continue according to the Motion of the line of Eclipses, wherein Sol continu∣ally remains, revealing wonderful Mysteries by his shining in Darkness. Psal. 112.4. John 1.5. Sol entring Leo in the Ninth at the Natives Lunar Eclipses, Luna Lady of the Ninth, and Sol Lord of the Meridian both Subterranean, and Jupiter of all the Planets only Supraterranean in the Radix, signi∣fie a Discovery of the Light of Religion in a State of Darkness. Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli near partil Conjun∣ction of Mercury in the Radix, (Mercury being Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise) directed to Luna Lady of the Ninth, in a state of Ascension, and posited in the Third, viz. the Sixth from the Tenth in Conjunction of Venus, Luna receiving her Glory from Sol, and her Light encreasing, &c. inti∣mates, that the Lord of Glory crowns his Servants with a Royal Diadem of lovely Praises, and that
those Praises reflect unto himself his own Resplen∣dency, according to the Geometrical Axiom in the Opticks, viz. that Beams of Light are reflected at equal Angles; (the Angles of Incidence and Re∣flection being equal) and corresponding to that Principle of Philosophy, viz. That every more sub∣til created Being, by an innate or natural Sympathy, quickly returns unto the Fountain from whence it sprung. As the Nativity was Nocturnal, and all the Pla∣nets subterranean, except Jupiter, and he Retrograde in the Eighth, changing his Sign, and going to his Detriment, the Luminaries subterranean and ascend∣ing, Jupiter by a retrograde Motion applying to a Sextile of Saturn, and Sol in Opposition to Jupiter, Saturn being also retrograde, and in his Fall in the Sixth in Aries, intimates, that the blind Worship∣pers, or Pretenders to Religion, are groping in Darkness and the shadow of Death, and enslaving themselves to the evil of their own Actions, yea, to Sin and Satan, the Light of Life being hid from their Eyes, and none being able to reprieve them but the Sun of Righteousness, to whom they conti∣nually live in resistance. Observe the situation of Mars Lord of the Ascen∣dent radical, and Mercury with Sol the Significator in this Direction in Sagittary, a fiery Sign, Mars and Sol being both fiery Planets, and Mars combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli in Sagittary; for up∣on his direction to the Body of Luna in Conjuncti∣on of Venus, both being watry Planets, implying a
washing, or cleansing and beautifying, it signified an insight into Spiritual Chymistry given to the Na∣tive, and a Discovery of Jesus, the true Philoso∣pher's stone, (Rev. 2.17. Isaiah 28.16. Rev. 21.11. 1 Pet. chap. 2. vers. 4, 5.) and infallible Elixir, which performs Wonders, by the Spirit of Judg∣ment and Burning, purifying the Soul from all its pollutions, Isa. 4.4. Isa. 48.10. Zech. 13.9. and rendring it more excellent than much refined Gold, operating in the Heart, as a Refiner's Fire, and as Fuller's Sope, Mal. 3.2, 3. and by his admirable Works making the Soul in him more resplendent than the sparkling reflections of pellucid Diamonds, yea, cleansing it with his precious Blood, transcend∣ing far the searlet lustre of perspicuous Rubies, so that nothing is left but the precious and durable Saline Essence, Matth. 5.13. and that which excells the Snow in purity and whiteness: Then glorious Hosanna's undefiled living Praises, and unstained Allelujahs, with joyful Songs of Restauration and Deliverance, can, by the thus regenerated and beau∣tified Soul, be given to the Highest King of Kings, he being the Subject in his Creatures of his own Eternal Honour and Renown, and his own Works alone extolling him in the Riches of his Glory.
A Spiritual Hymn to the Lord. O My Dove, my undefiled one, be not far from me; but let the pleasant Warmth of thy Trembling and Sovereign Wings, gent∣ly overspread me. Let the glorious Rayes of thy Innocency in their full Splendor, shine up∣on me; The excellent Sweetnesses of thy King∣dom, O Holy Father, are far too mighty for me: the unutterable Loveliness of thy Counte∣nance hath sweetly overcome me: The Delica∣eies of thy Kingdom, O Lord, have irresista∣bly subdued me, and my Soul languisheth if thou withdraw thy desireable Presence from me. I am at a Loss, O my God, because I cannot express the Comeliness of thy winning Fea∣tures, the overpowering mild Glances of thy Eyes, which express Love in the Fullness of its Pleasures: O my King and my well-belo∣ved Spouse, In thy Absence I am surrounded with ten thousand furious Adversaries, but at thy heavenly Presence they all flee away, in which is Life everlasting. Amen.
De Eclipsibus Tractatûs Continuatio. A Total Eclipse of Sol naturally accomplished to the eye of the World, is, by Luna's being in Conjunction with Sol partilly, and that without La∣titude, so that they being centrally joyn'd, the opa∣cous Body of the Moon, or of Luna interposes dia∣metrically betwixt our Eye, and the Sun's most glo∣rious Body; which kind of Eclipse (though na∣turally performed) very rarely happens to the In∣habitants of any one particular part of the Earth's Superficies, and when it so falls out, it is usually the fore-runner of some outward prodigious Event in the World: But, in the Radical Fabrick of this Nativity, Sol suffers a total Eclipse (notwith∣standing his being the more ponderous Planet) by his coming to the Radical place of Cauda Dra∣conis, where the Moon had gone before him, consi∣dered as having there no Latitude, as also to the general place of Cauda in the World, over which she likewise had transited, leaving her Radical Vir∣tue in both those places behind her, she being the lighter Planet, and the Eclipse happening after her Change in the World, contrary to her common Course, in fulfilling a Solar Eclipse as aforesaid, which is alwayes at her Change, or general visible Conjunction with Sol in the World.
Luna is likewise eclipsed in the Radix totally by Sol, the more ponderous Planet, his transiting the Radical place of Caput Draconis opposite to Luna in her transit over the Radical place of Cauda, as also by his transiting the place of Caput Draconis in the World, opposite to Luna in her transit over the ge∣neral place of Cauda Draconis in the World, as afore∣said, and that done after she had come to her Full in the World; whereas a Natural visible Eclipse of Luna in the World is total, by being in partil Opposition (and the lighter Planet) to the re∣splendent Planet Sol, she then having no Lati∣tude. Here note, that Luna comes by her direct Moti∣on to the place of Cauda in the World, before she comes to its Radical place; for Cauda is Retrograde in motion at the Birth, and moves by that motion a little, though slowly; therefore observe, that Luna, Lady of the Ninth, being 8 deg. 18 min. di∣stant from its place in the Radix, or at the Birth, and she by a direct Motion applying to its Radi∣cal Conjunction, in regard of the distance of time requir'd before she can arrive at its partil Conjun∣ction aforesaid in the Radix, (which is somewhat more than 16 hours, if we allow one Degree for her two hours motion) I say, in the interim of time aforesaid, Cauda moves Retrograde, and makes its place of the Moon's first Conjunction with it in the World, fewer Minutes or Seconds than its place in the Radix, for they mutually apply, the one by direct, the other by retrograde Motion; then after
her meeting with it in the World, she approaches it in the Radix; which is the proof of what was before asserted, and will be of Use to demonstrate what ensues: viz. Sol transiting Luna's Body in that place of the Ecliptick diametrically, where she transits Cauda's place in the World, he suffers a total Eclipse in the World; which truly intimates, that the Sun was totally deprived of Light in the World, not long after the Spiritual Native was witnessed to be inwardly and invisibly born, (viz. Christ Jesus, the new Birth, or the Birth of God) for Luna is Lady of the Ninth House; inwardly born, because Scorpio the Sign ascending is directed to Frons Scorpii in the Ascendent, by which Direction the Nativity was rectified, viz. by the House of Life bruising the Serpents Head, to the fulfilling of Gods promise in Paradise to the crooked Serpent, for the Direction was Oblique, viz. its Arch was found by taking the difference of Oblique Ascensions of the Ascendent, the Significator, and Frons Scorpii the Pro∣missor, which signifies the Effect of this Spiritual Birth to be wrought Internally: Invisibly born, be∣cause the Nativity is Nocturnal, as also because the Eclipse was accomplished by Transit, and not by visible Conjunction. The aforesaid Considerations, as also of Sol his transiting the opposite place of Luna, where she is in Conjunction of Cauda in the World, viz. where the Center of Sol's Body touch∣es the Moons Northern Node, she situate as aforesaid, gives the Moon's Eclipse total in the World: Now the Nativity being Nocturnal, and the place of both
these Eclipses subterranean, the Stars consequently withdrew their shining; for they receive their Glo∣ry from Sol. By what hath been before spoken it evidently appears, that the Sun and Moon were dark∣ened, and the Stars withdrew their shining in the world, not long after the aforesaid Spiritual Native was born, Joel 2.10. Joel 3.15. Now, for some Reasons not long since rehearsed, the Luminaries were totally eclipsed, as well at, as after the Birth, as to the Native; for if we have the like consideration to Sol's transiting the places of Luna's Nodes in the Radix, both as to Conjuncti∣on and Opposition, as we have already had of his Transits, opposite and conjunct, over her Nodes in the world, we may discern that the Sun and Moon were eclipsed in the Radix, or at Birth, after the same manner as they were in the World, viz. to∣tally. The same Eclipses also happen by the Moons Transits over Sol's Body, being situate upon her Nodes, as aforesaid, and that after a more swift manner; for Luna is naturally swifter in motion than Sol; He moves slowly, making the Eclipses by his Transits of very long continuance: Hence arise eight different total Eclipses of the Luminaries upon the Bodies of one another, into our present view and consideration; the first, by Sol's transit∣ing Luna's Body, seated with her center upon the place of her Southern Node in the World, which gives his total Eclipse in the World, as aforesaid; the second, by his Transit over Luna's Body, situate
upon her Southern Node in the Radix, which gave his total Eclipse, as to the Native; the third and fourth, by his transiting the opposite places to those two aforesaid, viz. by passing over Caput in the World, and also in the Radix, which gave the Moons total Eclipses, as to the World, and likewise to the Native; The other four are by the Transits of Luna over Sol, as these of Sol over Luna afore∣said. Consider that both the Luminarie's Eclipses in the Radix happen in the self-same particle of the Ecli∣ptick, viz. in 10 deg. 39 min. of the fixed and true Sign Aquarius, as also in the same precise por∣tion of the Ecliptick in the World; so that they are totally eclipsed upon the Bodies of one another, and so consequently Luna is totally eclipsed at the Change, which is alwayes, according to Nature, at the Full: and likewise Sol totally eclipsed at the Full Moon, which is alwayes, according to Nature, celebrated at the Change: These intimate that the Moon is confounded, and the Sun ashamed, shewing himself to be ashamed, by his total Eclipses, in re∣semblance of one hiding his face for shame, Isaiah 24.23. It is observable, that Sol touches the Ecliptick Line thrice, and the same Point thereof twice, and all this in a little space of time, for he first transits the place of Cauda in the world, (where Luna met with it before she came to its place in the Ra∣dix, which is before demonstrated) and afterwards passes over its place in the Radix, at which time
Cauda being Retrograde, translates his Tincture back again to its place in the World, which is equivalent to his touching the same point of the Ecliptick twice, by means of his twofold Applica∣tion aforesaid to Cauda in a state of Retrogradation at Birth, for Cauda never swerves from the Ecliptick Line. These intimate, that the Ecliptick Line seems to be dilated, as also, that the Sun staggers in his Course, which is a shame unto him, Isaiah 24.23. By imputing the same state to Luna, (yet with consideration of her small Latitude at Birth) in her application to her South Node, which hath even now been imputed to Sol, it may appear that she is confounded; the reason whereof is, because Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli in the Radix, as a Signi∣ficator, is aspected of all the Planets, and directed to her Body, she being Lady of the Ninth House, and posited in the Third, which is the Sixth from the Tenth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, &c. which intimates, that the Lord of Hosts reigns in Mount Sion, (Sol passing into Capricorn, a moun∣tainous Sign) and in Jerusalem, and before his anci∣ents gloriously, whereat the Moon is confounded and the Sun ashamed, as was before demonstrated. See Isa. 24.23. Now observe, that the Moons Nodes by the De∣monstration of their Retrograde Motion before gi∣ven, will each of them appear to be two-fold, which in the mystery of their Names are called Capita & Caudae Draconis, representing the Terrours and Judgments of the Almighty. The two North
Nodes of the Moon, called Capita Draconis, as afore∣said (being the Ideas of Terrour) are seated in the Ninth, which is the Twelfth from the Tenth House, and there imprison'd, as to the Native, in the Regal fixed Sign Leo, representing Judah's Lion enthroned upon the Mid-heaven for ever: But her two Southern Nodes, called Caudae Draconis (being the Essences of Fury) are posited in the Third, in opposition to Capita in the Ninth, as aforesaid, which plainly intimates, that the Dragons Kingdom, Reign, and Power, is at enmity and variance with it self, for the beginning and end of his Dominion are at difference one with another, so that his Power cannot stand; for Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation; and every King opposing himself, or his own Kingdom, is brought to ruin. But to return to former proceedings. The Planet Sol in his Transits having met with, and passed over that reproach-giving Node Cauda in the World, is immediately besieged betwixt Cauda in the World, and Cauda in the Radix, the Center of his Body being intercepted betwixt them, whereat he is ashamed, plainly manifesting his shame by his total Eclipses, not knowing how to steer his Course according to his usual Custom, so as that his shame may be avoided; this consider∣ed, it further appears, that the Sun is ashamed, Isa. 24.23. Now, together with the aforesaid Testimonies, observe what follows:
The Regal Sign Leo, being the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven, Matth. 24.30.) and Princely fixed Star Cor Leonis, are both seated, fixed, and enthroned upon the honourable Meridian Cir∣cle; as also Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the good Angel, and House of Praise, Faith, and Hope, is pla∣ced and seated in the Body of the Sun; and that lovely, beautiful, and most glorious fixed Star, the Virgin's Spike, or Ear of Corn, is brightly springing out of the Twelfth, the House of mysterious and hidden Secrets, as also the House of Imprisonment and Bondage, into the Eleventh, the House of Praise, where she purely flourisheth and rejoyceth with Songs of Deliverance, Psalm 32.7. Observe, that the Ear of Corn born in the left hand of the Virgin, exactly typifies or emblematizes Christ Jesus, the Bread of Life, born of a Virgin. The Ear of Corn born in the left hand of the Vir∣gin, typifies a Mother bearing her Infant upon her left arm. Now, I say, by considering all these aforesaid Testimonies, (which are a concatenation of Proofs) it is evident, that the Moon is confounded, and the Sun ashamed, because of the Lord of Hosts reigning in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and before his An∣cients, gloriously, Isaiah 24.23. Behold also these Scriptures following, viz. Matth. 24.29, 30, 31. Mark 13.24. Luke 21.11, 25, 26, 27, 28. Rev. 9.2, 3, 10, 11. There is a mystery in the number Three, it being a number of Perfection, and the fulfilling or ac∣complishing
of all things; upon this consideration observe what follows, viz. There is a threefold total Eclipse of the two Lu∣minaries (by reason of their aforesaid Motions) upon the Bodies of one another, in Aquarius, a fix∣ed and durable Sign; the first of them on Cauda's place in the World, the next on Cauda's place in the Radix, both these being accomplished by Di∣rect Motion, the last on Cauda's place in the World, by Retrograde translation; for the Tincture of the twice totally eclipsed Luminaries aforesaid, is forcibly translated back by Cauda's being Retro∣grade in the Radix, to the place of their aforesaid total Eclipses, on its place in the World; so that this third and last Eclipse being tinged with the virtue of the second, and now falling upon the first. makes a three-fold total Eclipse of the Lights, near the same moment of Time, and near the same place of the Ecliptick, to the eye of the invisible world. 'Tis observable, that this compulsive Retrograde motion of the Luminaries, is quite contrary to their usual Direct course in the Heavens. This is also worthy observation, which fol∣lows, viz. Sol transiting Luna's Body, as situate when in perfect congress with her Radical Austral Node, suffers a total Eclipse, as to the Native; under which Conflict he remaining, (for where an E∣clipse or Transit happens, that part of the Heavens is sealed with its Tincture) and Luna passing on according to her Natural motion, through the Signs,
she at length meets with the opposite place of the Sun's Contest with her in his aforesaid Defect: which considered, it may appear, that Sol was torally eclipsed at the Radical Full of Luna, whereas, ac∣cording to Nature, all his Eclipses are accomplish∣ed, or celebrated at her Change. The like Defects happen by Sol's Transits over Luna, as by hers over him in manner and Form aforesaid. In like manner, such Transits over Luna's Meri∣dional Nodes in the World, give the like Eclipses in the World. The Sun in his Transits over the Radical place of Luna's Septentrional Node, which is posited in the Ninth House, becomes Supraterranean in the Nocturnal Nativity: which gives us to understand, That the Light of Religion shines brightly in a state of Darkness, John 1.5. Note the irregular Form of all the aforesaid portentuous Eclipses, and it will evidently appear, that by voluntary Direct, and compulsive Retrograde Motion, Sol is dashed against Luna's Body, his own and her Eclipses: Luna is in like manner dashed against Sol's Body, his and her own Eclipses; so that continually there is a mutual Illision by Body and Eclipses betwixt Sol and Luna in the two-fold curved Tail of the Dragon, until, by this contention with one another in a state of Darkness, they both become extinct, and, as it were annihilated, and so consequently the Light of the whole Host of Heaven destroyed; to which annex, that these astonishing Prodigies, as also those which do, or may ensue
hereafter, are the necessary, and unavoidable conse∣sequent Effects of the Scorpion's being dashed against his own forehead, by the admirable force of an Oblique Direction (which was the Nativities Rectification, as hath been already explained) whereby this Roy∣al Off-spring of the New Jerusalem was born to the blessed Inheritance of Eternal Glory, Psalm 2.9. Isa. 13.12, 13. Jer. 13.14. Nahum. 2.1. In the next place, I recommend to the serious con∣sideration of the Ingenuous and honest Astronomer, the Eccentricity of the Planets, as also their Motions in their Eccentrick Orbs and Epicycles; together with this let him observe, that Mars Lord of the Ascendent is combust of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, which be∣ing duely considered, let him compare his Conside∣rations with the following Scriptures, and then he possibly will find some cause of astonishment, if he likewise observe, that the Almighty God and most humble Lord acts from all Eternity, yet without respect of Persons, his Love being Universal. These are the Scriptures, Isa. 13.12, 13. Joel 2.10. Joel 3.16. Haggai 2.6, 21. Matth. 24.29, 30, 31. Isa. 24.23. Note, The Nativity was rectified by the Direction of Seorpio to Frons Scorpii, whereby the Nodes of Luna Lady of the Ninth are Duplicated, (which hath before been copiously paraphrased on) where∣as, according to Demonstration upon the Coelestial Globe, she hath no more than two, viz. one Sep∣tentrional, another Austral: Now I say, she and Sol being wracked upon these doubled Nodes, with such
strange Eclipses, which Nodes, in the Mystery of them (as before hinted) are called Capita & Cau∣dae Draconis, and are Emblems, or Ideas of Fury and Indignation. These, together with the afore∣said company of Testimonies, do, by a concatena∣tion of Proofs, further confirm, and apparently shew, That the Frame and Power of the Heavens are shaken, and consequently, the Earth removed out of her place in the Fury of the Lord, and in the day of his fierce Anger: As also, that the Moon is confounded, and the Sun ashamed, because of the Lord of Hosts reigning in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem, and before his Ancients, gloriously. See the last-mentioned Scri∣ptures. Prioris Tractatûs de Luminarium Directione & ejus Effectis continuatio. THE Nativity was rectified by the Ascendents Direction to Frons Scorpii, a fixed Star of the Second Magnitude, &c. intimating, that the true Birth was found and distinguished from the estimate or false, by the Direction of the House of Life to the Scorpion's fore-head, to the fulfilling of the Word of God in Paradise to the Serpent, viz. I will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, and betwixt thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel, Genes. 3.14, 15.
It is observable, that Luna, the Promissor, Lady of the Ninth, the House of Holiness, applying to the Conjunction of Venus, projects the Degree of her Antiscion to the Scorpion's fore-head, signifying a bruising of the Serpent's head with the forcible rayes ofGod being Love, bruises the Serpents head being Envy. holy Love; and is a further Confirmation of the fulfilling of the aforesaid Promise made in the Gar∣den of Eden by the great Jehovah. As the Luminaries, or Lights of Heaven, are the Planets concerned in this powerful Direction, and Lords of the House of Holiness; so the Direction is Light, and the Light of the Direction doth lead into Righteousness. As the Heavens are concern'd in the Direction, so the Direction is Heavenly. As Luna the Promissor was encreasing in Light, and Lady of the House of Religion, so it signified the fulfilling of the Divine Promises in Scripture, both as to Mercy and Judgment. Scorpio the Sign Ascending, directed to Frons Scorpii in the Ascendent, shews the House or King∣dom of the Serpent to be broken down. Mercury, Lord of the Eighth, near partil opposition of Jupiter in the 8th, Jupiter being Lord of the Fifth, which is the Tenth from the Eighth, and he by a Retro∣grade Motion going from his Exaltation to his De∣triment, in the descending part of Heaven, shews the Kingdom of Death to be broken down, for, if a Kingdom or House be divided against it self, it can∣not
stand, Mar. 3.24, 25, 26. Mat. 12.25. Luk. 11.17, 18. Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, and Significator, as also Luna, Lady of the Ninth, the Promissor, being both subterranean in the Radix, and Luna in Aqua∣rius a fixed Sign, she being the Light of Time, so that the Nativity is Nocturnal unto the Native; but the fixed Sign Leo upon the Medium Coeli, and Cor Leonis there; the Sign Leo and Cor Leonis represent∣ing Judah's Lion; and Mars Lord of the Ascendent in the potent glory of the Sun; Luna also representing the Native, receiving her Light from Sol, and not Sol from Luna: These signifie, that as to the Na∣tive the Sun shall be no more a light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon give light unto him; but the Lord shall be unto him an everlasting Light, and his God (the Sun of Righteousnes) his Glory, Isaiah 60.19. Lux micat in tenebris, &c. John 1.5. Deus est Columna ignis per noctem, Exod. 13.21. Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, being subterranean, and in the enlightened Hemisphere, yea, in that Quadrant of the Heavens, wherein both the Lumi∣naries are seated, as to the Native, for ever, viz.Jerem. 16.15. Jerem. 23.8. the Septentrional Quarter, in which the Dire∣ction of Sol to Luna's Body happens, and Mars glo∣rified with the Lustre of the Sun, he Lord of the Me∣dium Coeli, and directed to the Body of Luna, and she in Aquarius, a fixed Sign, applying to the Con∣junction of Venus, &c. Sol and Luna past the Descend∣ing, and, as to the Native, alwayes determined to be in the Ascending part of Heaven.
These Testimonies signifie, that, as to the Native, The Sun shall no more go down, neither shall the Moon with∣draw it self, but the Lord shall be his everlasting light, and the dayes of his mourning shall beended, Isa. 60.20. Mercury, Lord of the Eighth, applying near partil Opposition of Jupiter in the Eighth, Jupiter being Lord of the Fifth, viz. the Tenth from the Eighth, and applying by a Retrograde motion from his Exaltation to his Detriment in the Descending part of Heaven, shews the Kingdom of Death to be broken down, as aforesaid; for where there is Division in a Kingdom, that Kingdom is brought to Desolation and utter ruine; and if a King rise up in opposition to his own Kingdom, that Kingdom cannot stand, but hath an end, Mark 3.24, 25, 26. for the confirmation here∣of, annex, that Jupiter is located in the Eighth, and Mercury in the second, which is the Seventh from the Eighth, he being also Lord of the Eleventh, which is the Seventh from the Fifth, the Fifth as aforesaid, being the Tenth from the Eighth, &c. These argue the subversion of Death and his Kingdom, as aforesaid: And herein are accomplished the Hopes of the Native; for Mercury is Lord of the Eleventh from the Ascen∣dent, (viz. the House of Hope and Praise) and placed in the Body of the Sun, to whom Sol trans∣fers the virtue of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, by his first Radical Transit; Mars by Transit applying to the Radical Cazimi of Sol; to which annex Lu∣na's application to the Conjunction of Venus, Venus being Lady of the Twelfth, which is the Second from the Eleventh, which gives unto the Native
the fruition of the substance of his Hopes, as also to the Righteous the enjoyment of theirs, and that their Hopes are come to a good end; for Luna is Lady of the Ninth, and Venus of the Seventh, which is the Eleventh from the Ninth, as also of the Twelfth, which is the 4th from the 9th; It also signifies them to be possessors of the Houses and Kingdoms of their Enemies; for Luna and Venus are in the Third, which is the Seventh from the Ninth, Venus being Lady of the Twelfth, which is the Tenth from the Third, the Third, as aforesaid being the 7th from the 9th. Saturn, Lord of the 4th, (which is the 8th from the 9th) is in the 6th, a Cadent house, and Re∣trograde in Aries his Fall, signifying, that, as to the Righteous, Death is subdued and fallen by the Lamb. Luna, Lady of the 9th, &c. projects the Degree of her Contrantiscion to that part of the Heavens, (viz. the House of Enmity) from which it re∣glances with an Opposition against the Scorpion's fore-head. Consider the aforesaid state of Mercury Lord of the 8th, and of Jupiter in the 8th, &c. according to what was lately spoken, to which annex Mercury his being near Cazimi, or in Conjunction with the over-powering Planet Sol, Lord of the Medium Coe∣li; Sol and Mercury both unanimously or jointly projecting the degrees of their Contrantiscions against the Body of Jupiter: Sol and Mercury being in mu∣tual Reception by Antiscion, and Sol directed to the
Body of Luna Lady of the Ninth &c. And from these Considerations it may appear, that Death and its Kingdom, are subverted andBabylon significat Confusionem. confounded by the Power of the Sun of Righteousness. Jeremiah 9. chap. 19.21. Verses. Jerem. 10.14. Jerem. 46.24. Je∣rem. 50.2. Micah. 7.16. Revelat. 18. Chap. 1, 2.10. Verses. That eminent fixed Star Cor Scorpii being placed upon the Cusp of the second House in Sagittary, shews that the Serpents Heart is wounded with the Arrows of the Almighty, wherein consists the ever∣lasting Riches of the Kingdom of Glory: for the Confirmation of which Enjoyment of everlasting Riches it may be annexed, that Sol Lord of the Medium Caeli (upon whose Cusp Leo a fixed Sign Culminates) is posited in the Second, &c. Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, coming by Dire∣ction to the Body of Luna Governess of the Ninth, or rather Luna ascending to the Circle of Position of Sol, secundùm Aequatoris motum, and she apply∣ing to the Conjunction of Venus, Shews Jesus the Lord of Glory, walking upon the Waves of the Sea, for the Spirit of God moved upon the Face of the Waters. Geness. 1, 2. John 6 Chap. 19.20, 21. Verses. Here is is worthy Observation, that Luna ascends to the Circle of Position of Sol the Significator, as aforesaid; which implyes a Willingness in the ra∣ging Seas (by ascending higher than their present State) to come and kiss the Feet of their gracious Creator, submitting themselves to be trampled up∣on
by so Divine a Being: The Coelestial Globe plainly discovers the things last-mentioned to the eye, when fitted to the Latitude of the place of Birth, and time of the Radix rectified. For the further confirmation of what is afore∣said, it may be annexed, that upon the Cusp of the Ninth, Cancer, a watry Sign, descends, Luna and Venus being both Planets of the Aquatick Region, and posited in Aquarius, a fixed Sign, and of wa∣try signification, in the Third, the House of Land-Journeys, plainly implying a walking upon the Sea as upon the Land; Luna is Governess of the Ninth, the House of Religion, and Spiritual Sea-Voyages, and Venus the Significatrix of Pleasures. These aforesaid occurrences do farther confirm the truth of what was last before demonstrated. They also shew the Mighty Creator of the World walking upon the Waters above the Firmament, which by his admirable and astonishing Power, are divided from the Waters under it, Gen. 1.7. The Arch of Direction from Sol to Luna's Body, delineates the Rainbow, whose Colour is display'd by the reflection of the Rayes of the Sun (received by the Moon) from the Moon to the Sun's Body, he being beheld by all the Planets in the Genesis, and she Governess of the House of Religion making her addresses unto Venus, Rev. 4.3. This aforesaid is an undeniable pourtraiture of Divine Mercy in the Heavens. The Sign Leo upon the Meridian Circle, being a Sign having Voice, Cor Leonis there, Sol Lord there∣of
beholding the Medium Coeli with a Trine, Sol the Significator in Conjunction of Mars in Sagittary a fiery Sign, and of Mercury a Planet of Voice, Mars and Sol being in a state of Separation, and both fiery Planets, as also Sol in Conjunction of his own, and Mercury's antiscion (Mercury in Conjun∣ction of his own and Sol's Antiscion) directed to the Body of Luna the Promissor, Lady of the Ninth, applying to the Conjunction of Venus and Cauda Draconis, the Birth being also Nocturnal, and six of the Planets Subterranean; gave thunder∣ings, lightnings, and voices in the Heavens, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, according to the invisible operation of the Spirit of the Al∣mighty, Rev. 4.5. And those Thundrings resound∣ed, Lightnings reflected, and Voices sung, unto his Glory. Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, Oriental of Sol in the Radix, Sol separating from him, and being in the Second, &c. shews a gift unto the Native of the invisible morning Star, Rev. 2.28. for the Nativity is Nocturnal, and Mars is invisible by being array∣ed with the glorious Solar Beams, and although naturally an Infortune, is now become a Fortune, for he is refin'd by being combust of the Sun, so that he shines in his purity as at the beginning. The Degrees of Via combusta fixed upon the Oriental Angle, and Mars Lord of the Ascendent combust of Sol in the Radix in Sagittary, a fiery Sign, as also the Direction of Sol to Luna's Bo∣dy operating, &c. signifie that the Native dwells
with everlasting burnings, in a state of Righteousness, Isaiah 33.14, 14, 15. Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise, upon whose Cusp Virgo ascends, is in Con∣junction of Sol, and covered with his Beams; shew∣ing that the Lord of the Virgin is adorned with Light. John 8.12. John 10.30. Luke 1.48. Mat∣thew 25 Chapter, from the 1st to the 14 Verse. Sol the Significator Lord of the Medium Coeli is as∣pected of all the Planets in the Radix, and in Con∣junction of Mercury's and his own Antiscion, Mercury in Conjunction of his own and Sol's Antiscion; to∣gether with these, consider the Operation of Sol's Direction to Luna's Body &c. And with these Con∣siderations let the following Scriptures be compared. viz. Revel. 1, 2, 3. Chapters. Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and house of Praise near Cazimi, shews an Angel standing in the Sun; The Disposition of Sol, Mercu∣ry, Luna, and the other Planets and fixed Stars in the Radical Firmament, gives the Accomplishment of the Angels words in the Heavens. Revel. 19.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Domus undecima dicitur Bonus Genius vel Angelus. Mercurius, Angelus, Nuncius. Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and House of Praise, is near Cazimi of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, and is swift in Motion, the Dire∣ction of Sol to Luna's Body, in a fixed Sign is like∣wise
in Vigour, which shews an Angel flying through the Midst of Heaven, preaching the everlasting Gospel, on the Earth, to the eternal Honour of the King of Glo∣ry. Revel. 14.6. Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium Coeli, translating the Light of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, to the Body of Mercury by a conjunctional Transit, Mercury being Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Geni∣us and house of Praise is near Cazimi, in Conjun∣ction of Sol's, and his own Antiscion; Sol being as∣pected of all the Planets, and the Direction of him to Luna's Body operating, also these things being effected in the Firmament of the Radix, intimate that the Lord of Glory hath rapt the Native up into the Caelitories of the Angels Revel. 19 Chapter 10 Verse. The Privilege which was granted to the Apo∣stle John, viz. In having the Mysteries of the ever∣lasting Kingdom revealed, is not witholden from the despised Servants of the Lord in these dayes, viz. the Quakers, who (as John did) do now also witness the fulfilling of these stupendious Mysteries inwardly; for the sure Mercies of the Lord are not decreased, neither is the arm of his mighty Salvati∣on shortened, but being unchangeable he is as free now in the Dispensations of his spiritual and invisi∣ble Love as ever. The overpowering and most glorious Planet Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, viz. The Second from the Ninth, is posited in the Second of the Radix, and as a Significator he effects a Direction by Luna's
Arrival to his Circle of Position in the ascending part of Heaven, she applying to a Congress with Venus, the part of Fortune also posited in the Second, whose Dispositor hath his Dignity of Exaltation in the Sign of the Ninth, of which Ninth House Luna the Promissor being Governess, and Venus Lady of the Seventh, are both located in the Third, which is the Sixth from the Tenth; Luna encreasing in Splendor, and receiving it from Sol. These inti∣mate, That the King of Glory overcomes his Servants with the Riches of his Spiritual Love; and who would but be a Loyal Subject to so gracious a Sove∣reign? Mercury Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and House of Praise, as also of the Eighth, the House of Death (being in Capricorn in Trine of Sa∣turn Lord of the Fourth, signifying the Grave) is arrayed with the Sun-Beams, being near partil Con∣junction with him; Mars Lord of the Ascendent, which is the Fourth from the Tenth, signifying the Grave of the Lord, is also apparelled with the solar Rayes, being refin'd by Combustion, the Ascendent likewise being the Eleventh from the Third, viz. the Bonus Genius of the Tidings: Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli being in Opposition of Jupiter Lord of the Fifth, viz. the Eighth from the Tenth, is situate betwixt the Bodies of Mars and Mercury, Lords of the aforesaid Houses, and adorned with the Brightness of the solar Rays, as aforesaid. These represent the Angels in bright and shining Rayment seen by Mary, (when she was weeping) and by the other
Disciples at the Head and Foot of the Sepulchre of Je∣sus the Prince of Life and Glory, the Angels and Apo∣stles receiving their Glory from him, who by his Death was glorified. Luke 24 Chapt. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Verses. John 20 Chap. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 Ver∣ses. Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli oriental of Mercury Lord of the Eighth, the House of Death, and of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius and House of Praise, be∣ing in the ascending part of Heaven and Subterrane∣an; I say, Mercury Lord of the aforesaid Houses be∣ing near Cazimi, and Sol arising immediately before him, intimate, That the Lord of Glory is arisen from the Dead, according to the Testimony of the Angels. Luke 24 Chap. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Verses. Sol in Opposition of Jupiter Lord of the Fifth, in the Radix, which is the Eighth from the Tenth, and Jupiter posited in the Eighth of the Figure: Sol Governour of the Midheaven accompanied with Mercury Lord of the Eighth in the Figure, and Lord of the Eleventh the House of Praise: Sol being as∣pected of all the Planets, and associated with Mer∣cury's Body, his own and Mercury's Antiscion, Mer∣cury being likewise conjunct with Sol's Body, his own, and Sol's Antiscion, which makes a mutual Reception by Antiscion betwixt Sol and Mercury: These Positions together with the Disposition of the fixed Stars in the Radical Firmament, and the Ope∣ration of the Direction of Sol to Luna's Body, &c. signifie the Conquest of Death at his Resurrection, and represent those Persons to whom he hath made, and now
makes his spiritual Appearance in the Heavens, to the Praise and Glory of his everlasting Being. The morning Stars sing together, and the Sons of God clap their hands for joy. The Righteous shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of Gods Power. See the Scriptures. Mars, Lord of the Ascendent, in Conjunction of Sol the Significator, and Sol in Conjunction of Mer∣cury; to which annex the operation of the Directi∣on of Sol to the Body of Luna applying to a Con∣gress with Venus. These aforesaid gave pleasant smells and grateful savours. How was the Native encompassed with Sweets in so sweet an Exercise, wherein he was accosted with the ensuing Sacred Experiences. viz. Mary having before the crucifying of the Lord Jesus anointed his Head and Feet with precious Ointment, the House being filled with the odour thereof, and he testifying that it was done against the day of his Funeral, being arisen from the dead, met Mary with the Spices and Oynt∣ments wherewith she intended to embalm his Body, but he was arisen before, speaking unto her in a state of weeping, to whom, stooping down and looking into the Sepulchre, the Angels in white raiment had appeared: What joyful meeting was here of the Lord of Life and Glory with his well-beloved Spouse, there being betwixt them a mutual fruition of one anothers Odours: Mary's Spices intended for him were made his and her own, for he met her, himself being possessed of those Spices which she intended to embalm him withal; she was pleasantly saluted with the fragrancy of the Ointment formerly
bestowed upon his Head and Feet, and was trebly re∣compenced with joyful Raptures into the Heavenly In∣heritance of everlasting Bliss and Glory, the Odour of their Ointments and Spices as a sweet savour going along with them in these Raptures. I say, what sweet-smelling and amiable Society was the Native in, when he witnessed the Spiritual fulfilling of these wonders, Mark 14.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. John 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Luke 23.55, 56. Luke 24. John 19.39, 40, 41, 42. John 20. These are the delightful Mysteries of the Eternal Kingdom, which are revealed unto Babes, (as may appear by these Judgments rais'd from a Phaenome∣non of the Heavens at the time of Birth, or when the Native was a Babe) but are hid from the Ex∣alted, Wise, and Prudent ones in these dayes, as may appear by what follows, viz. The Planets Mars and Mercury are placed or set Heliacally in the shining Lustre of the Sun, being beautified with his Brightness, and as to the Native in a State of Rising, but never setting Cosmically, be∣ing always in the enlightned Hemisphere: But Ju∣piter Lord of the Fifth &c. and posited in the Eighth as aforesaid, is in the Hemisphere of Darkness, be∣ing Retrograde and near his Detriment, going there∣to out of the Sign of his Exaltation, and applying by a Retrograde Motion, to the Sextile of Saturn, who is Lord of the Third and Fourth, being the Houses opposite to the Ninth and Tenth; viz. The Houses of Religion and Judgment; Saturn being like∣wise Retrograde, and posited in the Sixth, an evil
and cadent House, in Aries the Sign of his Fall: This Jupiter in the Radix is in a State of setting Cosmi∣cally, and arising, i. e. Per summam noctem ambulat vel vagatur, ubicùnque enim est dùm in hoc statu, si per∣tingat meridianum vel sit incolis verticalis, illic est nox suprema. Achronycally, his Culmination being at Midnight, for he is in Opposition of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli &c. (which Position of Jupiter doth palpably denote the Aegyptian Darkness, and Sodomitish Blindness of the Pharisaical Crew; viz. the pretended Divines of Nations, who are the more especial Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory, nei∣ther entring the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffering those that would to enter; but they are falling backwards to utter Ruine, and God is come to sweep them away with the Besome of De∣struction, that so his innocent Seed may be exalted to the Praise of his Holy Name, to whom all Ho∣nour and Glory is due for ever and for ever∣more. Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, changing his Sign, and applying to the Radical Conjunction of Mercu∣ry by Transit in the ascending part of Heaven, Mer∣cury being Lord of the Eleventh, the House of Praise, and situate in Capricorn a montainous Sign, Mars applying to the Radical Body of Sol, and be∣ing purified by Combustion, Mars and Mercury being
both glorified with the Sun Beams; Sol moving as aforesaid, being directed to the Body of Luna ap∣plying to the Conjunction of Venus, Luna and Ve∣nus being posited in the Third, which is the Sixth from the Tenth, shews Jesus the King of Splendor, going with his Apostles into a Mountain to pray, the Fashion of his Countenance in his Prayer being altered, and his Rayment being white and glittering: Mars and Mercury being brightned with the Glory of the so∣lar Rayes represent Moses and Elias, appearing in Glory, which they receive from him, and talking with him concerning his Decease, for Mercury is Lord of the 8th, and near partil Opposition of Jupiter, posi∣ted in the Eighth, who is Lord of the Fifth, viz. the Eighth from the Tenth. Luke 29 Chap. 28, 29, 30, 31, Verses. Mat. 17 Chap. 1, 2, 3, Verses. Mark 9 Chap. 2, 3, 4. Verses. Luna the Promissor encreasing in Light, and re∣ceiving it from Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium Coeli, Luna applying to the Conjunction of Venus and Cauda Draconis; Luna and Venus both applying to the Conjunction of Cauda Draconis in the Radix, as also to its Conjunction in the World, shews that the Lord Almighty is fulfilling his Pro∣mise, in taking away, or beautifying the Reproach of his People, for Venus is a Planet of Comeliness and in Conjunction of Cauda Drac. in the Radix, which signifies an adorning of their Calumnies with Decency and Beauty. Joel. 2.19. and from thence to the end of the Chapter.
The aforesaid Testimonies, as also Venus her be∣ing Lady or Governess of the Twelfth, the House of Anguish, Sorrow, Tribulation and Mourning, and in Aquarius a fixed Sign, but being by Nature a Planet of Joy, and having her Exaltation in the Sign of the Fifth, the House of Pleasures, as also the Virgins Spike, that glorious Star of the first Mag∣nitude, of the Nature of Venus, being near the Cusp of the Twelfth, and according to the motion of the Aequator going into the Eleventh, the House of Praise, plainly shews, that God is wiping away all tears from their eyes, and changing their tribulation into everlasting joy, Rev. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. or from the ninth Verse to the end of the Chapter. Revel. 21.4. Positio. The self-same things look with an amiable and and glorious countenance to the Regenerate man, which look with a quite contrary Aspect to the Ʋn∣regenerate, for to the pure all things are pure, &c. Titus 1.15. An explanatory Example proving the truth of this Position. In a Nativity, Mars Lord of the Ascendent is po∣sited in the Second, and combust of Sol in Sagittary a fiery Sign; Mars and Sol are both fiery Planets: Mars is in 23 deg. 55. minuts of Sagittary, and Sol in 29 deg. 46 minutes of the same Sign, determin∣ed
to be in that Position, as to the Native, for ever, both Sol and Mars being in the Second, and Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli. The Significations of these to the Unregenerate are as followeth, viz. The Native is Violent, Furious, and Passionate, Imperious, Prodigal, scorning and hating Reproof, profuse in his Expences, and thereby consuming his Substance, kept, notwithstanding his Insolence, in slavery or fear of some greater Person over-awing him, &c. The Significations of the same to the Regenerate are as follows, viz. The aforesaid Eurious, Violent, Imperious, Passi∣onate, and Depraved Spirit, &c. is burnt up, so that from these Enemies the Native gets freedom by the Sun of Glory, who shews the Native to be cloathed with his Beams, and thereby defended from approach∣ing danger. In this state Mars, though naturally an Infortune, is now become a Fortune, for he is re∣fin'd by being combust of the Sun, so that he shines in his purity, as at the beginning; I may say, as in the years of the Native's Infancy or Innocency, though the words in themselves are of a far larger extent, viz. as at the beginning, in the Creation of the World; they signifie the Native, as aforesaid to have in his possession the Riches and Jewels of the
Sun of Glory. And herein are witnessed in part the New Heavens, and the New Earth, in a Spiritual sense 2 Peter 3.13. Times of the Native's rejoycing to be observed by the Radical Figure at the beginning of the Book: Tem∣pus est gaudendi, ait Solomon. One time, amongst many others, wherein the Na∣tive more especially rejoyces in Spirit, is, when the Light of Religion applies to the Virgins Ear of Corn in the House of Praise, viz. Luna rectrice nonae domûs applicante ad Spicam in sinistra manu Virginis positam in undecima, viz. domo laudis, spei, & Fidei. Christ Jesus is the Bread of Life, born of a Vir∣gin. The Ear of Corn carried in the left hand of the Virgin, because Mothers bear, carry, or support their Infants upon or by their left arm. Another time of his Spiritual Melody is, when the Light in the House ofLux micat in tenebris, tenebrae autem non com∣prehendunt, Luna enim radios benevolos emittit à domo mortis ad spicam Virginis in domo laudis & fidei. Luna in octava projicit ternarium aspectum ad Spi∣cam Virginis in undecima positam. Death beholds with an aspect of Love, the Virgins Ear of Corn in the House of Praise. The Religious seek for fresh sustenance in the time of need, from the Bread of Life which preserves from Death.
Another time of the Native's inward Mirth is, when the Light in the House of Joyful Tidings, (viz. Tidings of Salvation) beholds with an Aspect of Love the Virgins Ear of Corn in the House of Praise. Luna in tertia domo (qua applicat ad Conjunctio∣nem Veneris) projiciente ternarium aspectum ad spic. Virgin. in undecima, ut antea. The Virgin's Spike is a glorious fixed Star of the first Magnitude, in the Sign Libra, signifying the sure Bread of Life seated in the House of Justice, but Luna moves, implying a seeking thereunto for Sustenance and refreshment. Many other times of the like nature might here be instanced, yet the expectation of such times ought not to bring in Neglect, or a careless living, lest the old Nature come on, and so the pure Food of Life be not sensibly felt; but let the Spiritual watch be continually moving, so will the Effects of the Hea∣venly motions appear more lovely, beautiful, and splendorous. Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, signifies the Lord of Glory, Sol is in Conjunction of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, which is the Third from the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius and House of Praise; so that, Mars is combust of Sol, Sol is in Conjunction of Mercury and of Mercury's Antiscion, Sol, Mercury, and Mars, being posited in the Second; Sol is immediately O∣riental of Mercury; for Mercury in the Radix arises next and immediately after the Sun, being in the ascending part of Heaven; Mercury is Lord of the Eleventh, the Bonus Genius, and House of Praise, as
also Lord of Gemini; Sol thus dispos'd, is directed to the Conjunction of Luna, who applyes to the Body of Venus; Luna is Lady of the Ninth, the House of Holiness; and Mercury in Conjunction of Sol in the ascending part of Heaven projects the De∣gree of his Antiscion to the Body of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli. The aforesaid Positions and Directi∣on at the time prenoted by its Arch, gave pleasant Savours and sweet-smelling Odours, shewing plainly, That the sweet Odours are the smoak of the Incense of∣fered up by the Angel, with the Prayers of the Saints upon the golden Altar, the Prayers of the Saints ascend∣ing up before God, with the Incense out of the golden Censer in the Angel's Hand. Revel. 8 Chap. 3, 4. Verses. Consider seriously the Arch of Direction as it pre∣sents it self to the View upon the Celestial Globe, viz. the Arch of the equinoctial intercepted betwixt Sol the Significator, Lord of the Medium Caeli, and Luna Lady of the Ninth, the Promissor; which may be done by erecting a Scheme of the Heavens for the Latitude and Time of Birth, according to the Precepts of using the Globe; and then circum∣volving the Globe Westward, untill the Body of Luna by Ascension arrive unto the Semicircle of Po∣sition fitted before to the Place of Sol &c. The Ninth is the House of Holiness and Sea-voyages, whose Cusp Cancer possesses, Luna being Governess thereof, is located in the Third, and applyes to the Conjunction of Venus, both of them being in the fixed and aiery Sign Aquarius: together with these
the Dispositions of Sol, Mars, and Mercury in the Radix (according as in the last Paragraph they are defined) being diligently observed and seriously weighed in the Ballance of an ingenuous Intellect, will give a true Portraiture of the Sea of Glass min∣gled with Fire, upon which they that have gotten the Vi∣ctory over the Beast and over his Image &c. do stand ha∣ving the Harps of God, singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, and saying; Great and Marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty; Just and true are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorifie thy Name? For thou only art ho∣ly, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made Manifest. Revelat. 15 Chap. 2, 3, & 4. Verses. The Transfiguration of Jesus upon the Mount, with the Appearance of Moses and Elias to him in Glory, represented by Mars and Mercury arrayed with the Sun-beams, hath been already paraphrased on, and demonstrated; now some (excited thereto either by Curiosity or Envy) may demand, which of the two Planets aforesaid signifies Moses and which Elias; To which curious or envious Enquirer (lest he should judge me as uncapable of answering him) I return this Reply, according as God Al∣mighty hath opened the Door of my Understanding. viz. Moses was skillful in all the Learning of the Aegy∣ptians, and was mighty in Words and in Deeds. Thus Stephen, as may be read in the Acts of the Apostles: These aforesaid Accomplishments of Moses are well signified by the State of Mercury in the Radix, who
is in Conjunction of Sol Lord of the Medium Coeli, and to whom Sol projects his Antiscion: Mercury is like∣wise aspected of all the Planets in the Radix, which gave him immense Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding: More∣over Mercury is arrayed with the Sun-beams and pla∣ced in Capricorn a montainous Sign, over whose Bo∣dy Sol makes his first Transit by Application, and to whose Radical Place he projects his Antiscion: These represent God's glorious Appearance unto him on Mount Sinai, so that his Face shined in the Presence of the Children of Israel. Hence it evidently appears, that Mercury represents Moses. Mars represents Elias, which I prove thus. viz. Mars a fiery Planet Combust of Sol a fiery Planet in Sagittary a fiery Sign, Mars and Sol, both behold∣ing the Medium Coeli with a Trine, whereof Sol is Lord, and whose Cusp is possessed by Leo a fiery Sign, and by Cor Leonis a fiery fixed Star of the first Magnitude. These aforesaid shew the Chariot of Fire and Horses of Fire wherein Elijah was carried unto Heaven: The Whirlwind is well represented by Mer∣cury's being swift in Motion, and in Opposition of Jupiter, who is retrograde in the Descending, but himself being in the Ascending Part of Heaven. A Sequel to this Second Part. Considering the Nativity calculated by invisible Lines, viz. by Sines or right Lines (being Semi∣chords) subtending circular Arches, as also by Tan∣gent Lines, externally respecting the degrees of cir∣cumferences
of Circles, to which annex the Secant Lines, limiting the Tangents; but more especially weighing from the Radical Position of the Heavens thus found, the glorious Judgment raised, and from such Considerations it will evidently appear to the Intelligent Reader, that, as to the Native, the lines are fallen in pure and pleasant places, Psalm 16.6. A Vindication of this Second Part. An impregnable Fortress for this Fabrick of Coe∣lestial Mysteries, erected upon the Nativity, as a most sure Basis, are these words of Spirit and Life following, viz. Out of the mouthes of Babes and Sucklings hast thou perfected Praise, Matthew 21.16. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and hast revealed them unto Babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. FINIS PARTIS SECƲNDAE.
Evangelium Sydereum, OR, Revelation DEMONSTRATED. THE THIRD PART. Being an APPENDIX touching the Coele∣stial Scheme of the Sun's Ingress into the Vernal Sign Aries, for the Year 1677. Wherein it is clearly evinced, from the aforesaid Figure of the World, that the Heavens do Evangelize, or Preach the Gospel, and glad tidings of Salvation to the Universality of Mankind (without respect of Persons) to the Eternal Fame of the Lord our God, and his incomprehensible Love and Mercy. By J. S. an Experiencer of the Loving-kindness of the Almighty; and a Lover of the People reproachfully called QƲAKERS. There is no Speech or Language where their Voice is not heard. Their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World; in them hath he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, &c. Psalm 19.3, 4. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.
TO THE READER. Friendly Reader, THE tender Mercies of the Almighty are revealed unto the Sons of men by the Visible Heavens, and that impar∣tially; as may appear by the following Appendix, or Exposition upon the state of the Coelestial Bodies, at the Entrance of the Sun into Aries for the Year 1677. If what the Prophet David sayes be true, then there is no Speech nor Language where their Voice is not heard, for their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World, Ps. 19.3, 4. Hence it may appear, that not Astrologers onely, but all men in general, do hear the Ad∣monition of the Stars, and the Language of the Heavens, expressing Divine Mysteries in de∣claring the Glory of God, which is Jesus the Eternal Son of the Father, but their ears
have been too long shut against such Sacred Counsellors. This is the wonderful Love of God which is Universal, and not to be rejected, who makes the Heavenly Bodies the Declarers of his Holy and Heavenly purposes towards mankind, in order to his Salvation, and hath made his On∣ly begotten Son Jesus the Exponent of their Declaration, and the Interpreter of their Holy and Mysterious Language, and that in the Inward Parts of every particular Person. Arts and Sciences are known unto many of the Sons of men, but the Sacred Mysteries of them can never be known until the Lord of Glory do reveal them. I advise all men to wait upon Jesus, the Light within them, who leads into the pleasant paths of Wisdom and Perfection; into whose powerful Tuition, friendly Reader, I recom∣mend thee. J.S.
REVOLUTIO MUNDI 2677. ☉ in ♈ Mens: DieHo: Me. Mart: 9.9: 49. Post Meridiem. ♀ dom: diei. ☽ a □ ♂ ad △ ♃. in part 3. page first. astrological diagram
Evangelium Sydereum. PART III. THE Figure of the Sun's Ingress into the first scruple of Aries, according to Argol's time, is nearly as before presented, it be∣ing the Great Seal of the King of Heaven, whereby he hath privileged me to publish the mat∣ter contained in the Second Part of this Treatise; yea, hereby he proves that it is given forth by his Holy Spirit, as also that it is of general Concern to the Kingdom of England, &c. Here it is worthy Observation, and great Admira∣tion also, that this Figure of the World, or of Sol's Ingress into the Vernal Aequinox, (falling within the terms of that Year wherein the Radical Direction of the Lights of Heaven did operate upon the Native) is very nearly the same (the Places of the Planets excepted) with the Radical Figure inserted near the beginning of the Second Part of this Treatise: for the fixed Stars and twelve Signs are so circum∣volved at the time of the Ingress aforesaid, as that
the same Signs, yea, nearly the same Degrees and Minutes possess the Cusps of the same Houses in both Figures, and so consequently the same Planets Lords of the same Houses; and in such sort, that if the Planets according to their Position in the Radi∣cal Figure be placed in the same Signs, Degrees, and Minutes of the Vernal Figure, the Vernal Figure becomes by that means the Figure of the Radix nearly compleat. Hereby God is shewing himself to be no Respecter of Persons, but that in every Nation and Kingdom they that believe in him and fear his Name are ac∣cepted of him, and shall inherit Eternal Life. This Doctrine of the Heavens is true, and Heaven∣ly Doctrine, and far transcends that confused Do∣ctrine of the Gain-seeking Priests of the Nations: I say, this ensuing Divine Doctrine of the Heavens will stand for ever, for the Angles of the precedent Figure are fixed, as also Jupiter, who hath his Dig∣nity of Exaltation in the Sign of the Ninth, is posi∣ted in the Third, in Aquarius, a fixed Sign, &c. And if the Heavens preach the Gospel without money and without price, and Jesus the Son of God, and Light within, vouchsafe to be the Explainer of their Doctrine, what need have we of hirelings? They must leave off their Trade, for the Hand of the Almighty is set against them. In the precedent Figure of the World, Scorpio, the Sign Ascending, directed to Frons Scor∣pii in the Ascendent by Oblique Ascension, shews to the World, that the Serpent is dashed against his own
Fore-head by the admirable force of an Oblique Di∣rection, for the crooked Leviathan must be crookedly dealt withal, Isa. 27.1. Genes. 3.15. To this annex, that Caput and Cauda Draconis are both in their Falls, eminently shewing the Fall of the Dragon. Cor Scorpii in Sagittary in the Second, shews the Heart of the Serpent to be throughly wounded by the Arrows of the Almighty, wherein consists the enjoy∣ment of everlasting riches. For the Confirmation hereof, annex, that Caput Draconis is in his Fall in the Second, as was afore∣said. The Planet Saturn Lord of the Third, being posi∣ted in Taurus, a fixed Sign, upon the Cusp of the Se∣venth, and he situate in the Seventh, gives woful In∣telligence to the strong Bulls of Bashan, that they are fixed down in the House of Enmity and Contention in the Occidental Angle of Heaven. Which is confirmed by the Appearance of a Comet near unto the Cusp of the Seventh House, and his Transit over the same Cusp. This Comet was seen about the 18th of the Second Month call'd April, in the 8th Degree of Taurus, (the Sun being then about the 9th Degree thereof) in the Year 1677. and had about seventeen Degrees of North Latitude, making him Oriental of the Sun. These are the strong Bulls of Bashan, which stand in opposition after a fixed and resolute manner, against the House of Life and Salvation, for the 7th House is opposite to the Ascendent.
Saturn Lord of the 4th in Taurus in the 7th, inti∣mates, that the Grave and Death is come upon them from the hand of the Almighty. Scorpio, a fixed Sign, upon the Oriental Angle, certainly manifests, that the Scorpion or Serpent is fix∣ed down in the East, or at his Rising. Luna, Lady of the 9th, being posited in the 11th, viz. the third from the 9th, applies to the Trine of Jupiter, he being located in the Third of the Figure, (and Direct in motion) so that there is a mutual reception betwixt them by Houses of Delight, for Luna is in the 11th House, the Joy of Jupiter; and Jupiter in the Third, the Joy of Luna: Jupiter hath the Dignity of Exaltation in the Sign of the 9th, being Lord of the 5th, and the aforesaid amicable Aspect betwixt him and Luna, is celebrated in cour∣teous Signs: Jupiter projects his Trine Aspect to the Virgins Spike, in Courteous Signs also: Luna, when she separates from the Trine of Jupiter, next and im∣mediately applies to the Conjunction of Spica Vir∣ginis in Libra, a Sign of Justice, and in the 11th, the House of Hope and Praise. These aforesaid Occurrences in the Heavens bring unto the Generality of mankind the joyful tidings of Salvation by the Light; for Luna Lady of the Ninth, the House of Holiness, was lately impregnated in the Sign of the Virgin (seated in the House of Praise) with the Glory and Light of Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, who is going to his Exaltation in Aries, the last Full of Luna Lady of the Ninth being accomplish∣ed in the Sign Virgo, as aforesaid.
These intimate, that the Righteous are filled with Divine Life and Light received from the Lord of Glory, who is Exalting himself in the Lamb; as also, that this Light is Jesus, the King of holy splendour, born of a Vir∣gin, overshadowed and impregnated with the Lustre of the Divine Being, and placed in the Heavenly House of Praise, Luke 1. from the 46th to the 56th verse. 'Tis observable, that Luna, the Dispositrix of Mars Lord of the Ascendent, (he being virtually in the 9th) separates from the Quartile of Mars, and ap∣plies to the Trine of Jupiter, having Dignities in the 9th, being Lord of the 5th, and placed in the Third, as aforesaid, whereby the virtue of Mars is translated to Jupiter by Luna, Luna and Jupiter being both seated in the Ascending part of Heaven. God, who is Light, and whose Promises are un∣deniable Axioms, who giveth of his good Spirit to the Rebellious; yea, to all men in general, a Talent of Grace, or measure of his good Spirit is given; for he is no respecter of Persons: I say, God whose Pro∣mises are absolute Performances, and are Yea and Amen for ever, hath said, That he will put his Law, which is Light, into mens hearts, and his Spirit, which is also Light (for God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all) into their inward Parts; and that he would be their God, and they should be his People. Hence it may appear, that there is a Sacred Light within men, in order to conduct them out of the wayes of Darkness. The Word, which is Christ Jesus, the hope of Glo∣ry within, is nigh in the Heart, and in the Mouth;
therefore still it is apparent, that there is a Sacred Light within men; for Christ himself said, (at whose words the Powers of the Heavens are shaken) that he is the Light of the World, as also, that the Kingdom of Heaven (which is the New Jerusalem, whereof the Lamb is the Light) was within the wick∣ed Scribes and Pharisees (much more then, in those that are holy) but it was in them their Condemna∣tion, and in the Saints their Justification in everlast∣ing Bliss and Glory. Now God is become the Teacher of his People according to his Promise, and is graciously calling the wicked to Repentance, gently accosting them, according to his compassionate Nature; yea, he is handing forth Immortal Blessings unto them, and capacitates them with an Understanding how, and a Power whereby to receive them; if they make no Use of this Understanding and Power, but refuse the Tenders of Mercy towards them, their Con∣demnation is of themselves, and they have the never∣dying Worm testifying against them for their Diso∣bedience to the Heavenly Call. God will be justi∣fied in their Condemnation, who will not that he be glorified in their Salvation. But to proceed in Judgment upon the Solar In∣gress aforesaid. Mercury, Lord of the 8th and 11th Houses, being Retrograde in Motion, is in the 4th in Pisces, his De∣triment and Fall, in the descending part of Heaven; which signifies Death to be totally overthrown and van∣quished, whereupon the hope of Salvation is grounded.
Sol, Lord of the Medium Coeli, is entring Aries, his Exaltation, and is placed in the House of Pleasures, intimating, that the Sun of Righteousness and Lord of Glory is exalting himself in the Lamb, in the Spiri∣tual Spring-season, and the time of Pleasures. The Regal Sign and Star Leo, and Cor Leonis are fixed upon the Meridian Circle, shewing the Sign of the Son of man appearing in Heaven, Matth. 24.30. and that the Lion of the Tribe of Judah is there reign∣ing for ever, and for evermore. Amen. I might proceed further, but that it were actum agere; for what is written in the Second Part of this Treatise, relating to the fixed Stars and twelve Signs, upon the Cusps of the Houses in the Radical Figure, may be made applicable to the Judgment upon this Figure, because the Signs, and nearly the Degrees upon the Cusps of the Houses are the same, as also all the fixed Stars nearly in the same Position in both Figures. Behold herein the wonderful Love of a Gracious God, who shews himself to be no respecter of Per∣sons, but vouchsafes to preach the glad tidings of Salvation to the universality of Mankind, by this re∣markable way, viz. by the visible Heavens, or his glorious Agents the Stars, as is before explained. The Great God (whose Appearance to them that have sinned out their day, is in flames of Fire to render Vengeance, or in Judgment, without Mer∣cy: but to the Penitent and Righteous man, in Judgment with Mercy) hath thus vouchsafed to preach the Gospel.
Behold, I say, and admire at this wonderful and humble Condescension of a Holy Father, rich in Mercy and goodness to those that will embrace his Love, enlarging the Joyes of the Just, and recom∣pencing the Righteous with a glorious reward into their own Bosomes, and by the sweetness of his Conversation with them, ravishing their Souls, and enriching their Minds with the delightful Contem∣plations, and pleasant fruition of everlasting Glo∣ry. Therefore, O ye Sons of men, receive Divine En∣couragement, and ye Daughters of men lift up your selves with Joy and holy Humility; Consider in∣wardly, the immense Love of your Mighty yet meek Creator; Consider that he is near unto you, and is willing clearly to communicate unto your Appre∣hensions the glorious Mysteries of his Heavenly King∣dome; I say, He is by the sweetness of his Presence revealing even to you (that have been the Crucifi∣ers of his Innocent Dove-like Spirit) his most Sub∣lime Mysteries. O! Who can be so barbarously Refractory as to refuse to obey so lovely and glorious a Commander, whose Garments are more fragrant than the flowry smell of a Garden; His Breath is sweeter than In∣cense, and his Presence is more pleasant both to the Smell and Taste than a Confection made by the uni∣ted power of all the Spices of Arabia, perfuming the places of his Abode with the smell of Lebanon, and the Soul-solacing Odours of the Heavenly Jeru∣salem: He entertains his chosen ones with the
Roses, Lillies, and Violets of his Love, who is the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys: This Gracious Prince of Life wins the Hearts of his great∣est Adversaries with the innocent Administration of his Spiritual Solaces to them undeserving, even to them, who by their wicked course of Life have been his Persecutors, making them Zealous for him, because of his tender dealings towards them, who demean'd themselves after so cruel a manner to∣wards him: This, Jesus the King of Glory is ma∣nifesting to the Eye of the World by that stately Fabrick, the Heavens, that he hath still the same Mercies in store (and to as high a degree) for his Servants now, and all those that through Obedi∣ence shall become his Servants, by a Refrenation from the Evil of their wayes, as he had for his Ser∣vants formerly: Therefore, to this King of Love, let all Honour, Glory, and Renown, with sweet Praises, humble Obedience and Thanksgiving, be rendred (as is by Justice due unto him) both now and for evermore. Amen. O hard-hearted Sons and Daughters of men! Can you yet afford no better a place for the Babe of Glo∣ry than a Manger? Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish in the way; be fond, be sick of Love; weep and lament, upon a due consideration of the crucified state of this innocent Lamb, of this Dove-like Spirit: Be not guilty of that Ingratitude, as to execute Death and Cruelty upon that Essence of pure Love which is nigh unto you to save your di∣stressed
Souls, who accounts you so dear and near unto him, that in destroying your own Souls you crucifie him, and grieve the Holy Angels: There∣fore, I say, be tender-hearted, and you shall find that the God of Love and Pity will not quench the smoak∣ing Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, but will lead gently on those that are with young, until Judgment be brought forth unto Life and Victory. Be broken in Spirit, for, with the humble and contrite heart the King of Salem dwels: He will give you a large re∣compence of Heavenly Peace and Love for your Tears, which being so many Crystalline drops, or tokens of your fervent Zeal, shine forth as Pearls in the Kingdom of Glory: Continue in your mourn∣ful state, which is attended with Pleasantness; La∣ment and weep over him whom your sins have pierced. True mourning mixt with mirth, gives Sorrow to the Heart that fills it with Joy. Your Peace shall gloriously abound, yea, it shall flow as a River; Shilo's streams shall run softly, and water the whole City of God; where every righteous Soul partakes of the Wine of the Kingdom, yea, Wine from the lees well refined, and feeds upon Coelestial Manna, with other Delicacies at the King's Ta∣ble. Your Prayers shall be converted into Praises, and you shall rejoyce in the King of Sion, who is become your Deliverer for ever, and for ever∣more.
O! throw your selves into the Arms and Tuiti∣on of your Heavenly Dove, for, so sweet a Guardian you cannot chuse but be well-pleased withal. O weep and mourn, and be tender-hearted, that your Joy may be full; Remember, that to Mary in a state of weeping, first, the Holy Angels, and then the Lord of Glory, the merciful Saviour of the World, spake and appeared; so that in a state of weeping, (as aforesaid) she receiv'd the Joyful Testimony of the Resurrection, the Angels, and the Lord himself sweetly saluting her with that gracious expression of, Woman, Why weepest thou? whereby it appears, that the Joyes of Heaven are chiefly revealed to a Principle of Tenderness, for the Great Jehovah looks with an Eye of Pity and Compassion upon the Bro∣ken-spirited, and fills them with the Oyl of Joy and Gladness, to the everlasting Praise and Honour of his Holy Name, to whom all Honour is really due for ever and for evermore. Amen. Divine Encouragement for all those that are travelling towards Sion. THat you may not be dismay'd by reason of Wea∣riness, Judgment, and Terrours, but may perse∣vere in the meekness and patience of Jesus, receive this for your Solace, that you are coming under the
Gen. 3. last verse. Flaming Sword, by entring intoThe Kingdome of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Matt. 11.12. Co-athletae, Fellow-wrestlers with Ja∣cob, Gen. 32. from verse 24. to 30. Contestes, viz. Fellow-witnesses with the Angels, or Contest with theCheru∣bims, John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Revel. 19.10. Luke 24.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Rev. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Cherubims, and what are Cherubims but Angels? and where are the Angels but in Heaven, singing Praises to the King of Glory for evermore? Amen. Spiritual Zeal in its fervour offered up unto God. So Zealous for thee, O Lord, are thy Servants, because of thy compelling Love, that they could even be content to part with thy Glory for thy Glory, Rev. 4.10, 11. FINIS. THE Author of this Treatise intends to teach these Mathematical Arts following, viz. Arithmetick Vulgar, Decimal, and Tabular; Geometry, Astronomy, Trigonometry, Navigation, Dialling, Surveying, Gaging, Astrology; and may be spoken with, or heard of at the House of Richard Ditchfield, a Graver, living in Popins Alley in Fleet-street.
