S6088 R13173 11832494 49727
A GOSPEL-GLASSE, Representing the MISCARRIAGES OF English Professors, BOTH In their Personal and Relative Capacities, for which God is contending with them, by the Sword, Plague, &c. and (since the writing of the greatest part of the following Treatise for the Press) by the dreadful Fire in London. OR, A CALL FROM HEAVEN To SINNERS and SAINTS. By Repentance and Reformation to prepare to meet God. Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thine heart: Thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour, and not suffer Sin upon him. Jer. 2.35. Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent surely his anger shall turn from me: Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXVII.
THE Authors PREFACE. WHEN it is a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds, and of thick dark∣ness, then (saith the Prophet) Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, Joel 2.1, 2. and found an Alarum in my holy Moun∣tain: Let all the Inhabitants of the Land tremble. Lam. 2.1. How hath the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the beauty of Israel, and remembred not his Foot-stool in the day of his anger? He hath violently taken away his Ta∣bernacle, as if it were of a Garden; he hath destroyed the Places of the As∣sembly: The Lord hath caused the so∣lemn
Feasts and Sabbaths to be for∣gotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger his Priests. Yea, the Lord hath cast off his Altar, he hath abhorred his San∣ctuary, the Law is no more, her Pro∣phet, also find no Vision from the Lord. O that now mine eyes could fail with tears, and my bowels were more troubled within me! O that my Liver were poured upon the Earth for the de∣struction of the Daughter of my Peo∣ple, because the Children and the Sucklings swoon in the streets of the City! We see not our Signes, there is no more any Prophet, Psal. 74.9. neither is there among us any that knoweth How Long. When we, 2 Sam. 6.1, 2. like David, were restoring the Ark of God, I mean, the presence of Christ, in his Worship and Ordinances, what Stumblings of the Oxen have we seen? What miserable Disappointments have we met with? And what sad breaches have there been made? How hath God stopt our way, and branded our Enterprises with wonderful remarks of his sore displea∣sure? Hear therefore the word of the Lord, Hos, 4.1.
ye Children of Israel, for the Lord hath a Controversie with the Inhabi∣tants of the Land. We poor Ministers have pleaded with you, till we can plead no more: the Lord hath bid us stand by, whilest he himself takes up the Controverste. O is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God? Hebr. 10.31. Are you not sensible what Arrows God hath begun to shoot amongst us? How many thousands, Psal. 58.9. Isa. 5.25. and ten thousands hath he taken away as with a whirlwind by the Pestilence? For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. How hath God shaken our Heavens, Hag. 2.6. and our Earth; the Sea, as well as dry Land? How doth he contend still by the Sword? And how much precious blood hath the Earth and Sea drunk up? For all this his an∣ger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. O! Come, Psal. 46.8. Behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in the Earth. Every Providence of God, (especially his more notable Acts) hath a reason written upon it, could mans eye read it. When the Church complained that God was as a stranger in the Land, Jer. 14.8, 10. and as a wayfaring man, that turneth aside
to tarry for a night: The Lord replyes to them, Thus have they loved to wan∣der, &c. The Controversie began on their side: they may see their Sin in the Pu∣nishment, as in a Glass. Do they win∣der I grow strange to them? The estrange∣ment began on their part. Nothing appears more our instant Duty, than to enter a se∣rious scrutiny, What have we done? Wherein have we offended? Lam. 3.40, 41, 44. Let us search and try our wayes, (saith the afflicted Church of Judah, upon this very occasion, of the Lords covering himself with a Cloud, that their Prayers could not pass through) and turn again to the Lord. Let us lift up our heart, with our hands, unto God in the Heavens. O! Hag. 1.5.7. Consider your wayes: The Lord doubled it, Your iniquities have sepe∣rated between you and your God, Isa. 59.2. and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. I find men will easily subscribe to this, that Sin is the procuring cause of all misery; but I find an aptness to transferr the guilt from one to another, from one party to ano∣ther; and though people do even sell them∣selves to work wickedness, yet so pre∣dominant is Self-love, that it sees no spots
in it self. Ahab is not the troubler of Israel, but Elijah: Nay, a good man, Aaron excuseth himself, Exod. 32.22. and layes the blame on others. The Sin is theirs, not mine. Men have a natural desire to justifie themselves, and their desire is so strong, that they care not whom they bespatter or bur∣den, so they may but ease and acquit them∣selves. And indeed, Sin is such an ugly Mon∣ster, that no man will own it, if he can choose; but had rather lay this Child of Darkness at any mans door, yea at Gods, than Father it himself. My Design in this Enterprize, is, to obviate this Distemper, and to bring you, all of you, to own your iniquity; that you may say (resolve upon it) that you will confess your iniquity, Psal. 32.5. that so God may forgive the iniquity of your sin. My Place, and Duty, as a Minister (though wholly unworthy of that Relation to God and you) binds me to cause Jerusalem to know her abominations; Ezek. 16.2. and therefore I have descended to Particulars, that, if it be the will of God, I might hit the humour, 1 Kings 8.38. and shew to every man the plague of his own heart. The Lord knoweth, I take no pleasure to
rake in these Dunghills: I dread the ill uses, that the Sons of Belial may make of this Enterprize: I expect various Censures from them, who should be otherwise mined; but my record is on high, that the great Design of this Publication is, to reduce Pro∣fessours to a more aweful, humble, serious Repentance towards God, and singular Con∣versation before men. I thank God for the freedome that a Re∣verend Brother hath taken with the ejected Ministers: Vox cla∣mantis in De∣serto. and I must profess, that since the perusal of that most seasonable Pice, I have had no quiet in my Conscience, till I entred upon this Labour. Though my bo∣dily Distempers pleaded loud for my silence; though I was told, the prudent should hold their peace in an evil day; though I know 'tis an unthankful office to admonish and reprove, &c. Yet I have laid by all Im∣pediments and Objections that Self was ob∣truding; and wish I had such gifts, and such affections, and such a discerning of the hearts and lives of Professours, as might render me some way useful, to put you upon self-reflection, upon self-tryal, in order to a full Repentance: I pray God, I may so farr at least succeed, as to obstruct that cur∣sed exclaiming against the sins of Gover∣nours,
and the sins of divided Parties, as at length to make you cry out, What have I done? O! how have I provoked God? Out of pity to your souls have I underta∣ken this subject: Our pangs, like those of a travailling Woman, are hastening: the Clouds are swelling, I am loth they should fall on you in a secure and impenitent condi∣tion, I am not ashamed to tell you, that I foresee foul weather; and I would you should be in readiness for boisterous Seas. I know nothing save guilt will then sink your hearts: the load of affliction will be so heavy and hard upon you, that I would have no∣thing else (not the load of millions of un∣repented sins) at the same time, to press you down. Sins unrepented of, will soon, as poy∣son, drink up your spirits. If sin be confessed, and repented of, if God hath forgiven, no matter what loads lye upon the back, seeing no guilt lyes upon the Conscience. Having given you an accompt of my Design, and the reason of it, I shall only add, That it may not be expected I should give you a full Catalogue of all your sins, which are provocations in the eyes of the Lord this day. Who can understand his errours?
Cleanse thou me (and the Land) from all our secret, Psal. 19.12. as well as known, faults. God forbid I should be so censorious, as to judge all Professours guilty of these sins, in all the Particularities, or in all the Ag∣gravations of them. Some are to be charged one way, some another: few can wash their hands in innocency, that they are no ways Principals or Accessories. Farr be it from me to be partial in my Charge, to advance any Faction of men up∣on the ruines of their Brethren. I desire you would take this Catalogue in∣to your Closets with you, and as you read, set a special mark of observation on those sins, which are chiefly yours, in order to repen∣tance, and amendment, and then give the Lord no rest, till he hath took his Pen, and dipt it in the blood of his Son, and blotted them out of his Diary, and remembrance. And Lastly, Let me beseech the Reader, to be very importunate with the Lord, for an humble, tender spirit; that prejudice, un∣belief, and hardness of heart, may not accom∣pany him in the perusal of the following lines, and thereby, both his, and my own endea∣vours, become abortive.
A Brief ACCOUNT OF What may be expected in the following TREATISE, By a Friend to the Authour and Reader. PRofessour, In this necessary and season∣able Gospel-Glass, there are many sad, but useful Sights for thee. First, Wouldst thou know what may be seen? I'le tell thee; Herein the Miscarri∣ges of Professours (and therefore of thine own self) are enumerated and aggrava∣ted. The Sins enumerated are either a∣gainst the Law and Gospel joyntly, or a∣gainst the Gospel and Law severally.
Professours Sins against the Law and Gospel joyntly, are hinted in the first Chapter, which shews their Regardless∣ness of their own and others Souls. Their Sins against the Gospel more pe∣culiarly, are spoken to in the seven next Chapters. The 2d. shews their Want of sa∣ving Conviction and Compunction: the 3d. their Want of Despair in Self: the 4th. their Miscarriages about Soul-troubles, the four following Chapters, their Mis∣carriages about believing in Christ: the 5th. their Ignorance of Christ, serving their turns of Christ, making base Capitu∣lations with him: the 6th. their Delayes to close with Christ: the 7th. their Ta∣king Christ partially, without conjugal Affections, and without considering the Cost they may be at: the 8th. their Shuf∣fling together false Signes of closing with Christ. Their Sins against the Law more pe∣culiarly, are either against the First or
Second Table. Their Sins against the First Table (under the Head of Ʋngodliness) are discovered in the Eleven following Chapters. The 9th. shews their Ignorance and Errours: the 10th. their Want of Love to God: the 11th. their Evil Sur∣mises of God: the 12th. their Ʋnthankful∣ness: the 13th. their Neglect of Prayer, especially of Secret, both Ejaculatory and Closet-Prayer: the 14th. their Miscarria∣ges about their Prayers: the 15th. their Slighting the written Word of God, especi∣ally in not reading and meditating on it as they ought: the 16th. their Miscarriages about the Promises: the 17th. their Abuse of Providence: the 18th. their Hypocrisy: the 19th. their Sabbath-Sins. Their Sins against the Second Table, are either Personal or Relative. Their Personal Sins are evinced in the four next Chapters. The 20th. shews their Miscarriages about Self-tryal: the 21st. their Pride: the 22d. their Glut∣tony: the 23d. their Idleness.
Their Relative Sins are spoken to in the Fourteen following Chapters. The 24th. shews their Ʋnmercifulness: the 25th. their Ʋnrighteousness, or Ʋnfaithfulness in Trading: the 26th. their Covetousness: the 27th. their Envy: the 28th. their Sins as Superiours: the 29th. as Husbands or Wives: the 30th. as Parents or Child∣ren: the 31st. as Masters or Servants: the 32d. their Miscarriages towards Mini∣sters, before their silencing: the 33d. Since their silencing: the 34th. their Miscarri∣ages towards Sinners. The Aggravations of their Miscarria∣ges, that are here enumerated, thou hast in the two next Chapters. The 37th. shews their Dis-ingenuity and Scandalousness: the 38th. their Sinning against Know∣ledge, and impenitently, notwithstand∣ing all means to bring them unto Repen∣tance. Secondly, Wouldst thou know, and that experimentally, How useful such
Sights may be unto thy Soul? Read dili∣gently the two last Chapters. The 39th. shews, What Ʋse thou shouldst make of this Glass: and the 40th. What Reason there is thou shouldst make such Ʋse thereof. And now, Consciencious Reader, (so I stile thee, because I hope thou resolvest so to be) having given thee this brief Ac∣count of what thou mayest expect in the following excellent Treatise, I cannot but assure thee, that if thou bringest hither with thee a serious and teachable Spirit, desirous to have thy Soul searched to the quick, and the sores thereof launced, and throughly cured, thou wilt not lose thy cost and pains: The closeness and pythiness of the Compilement, will not only please; but the Materials, so full of Spiritual vigour, and Scriptural-experience, will wonder∣fully advantage thy Soul, and give thee cause, all the dayes of thy life, yea to eter∣nity, to bless God, for putting it into the heart of the Reverend Authour (after he
hath sacrificed his spirits and strength, in a publick way of service to God, and his Church, with more than ordinary activity and self-denial) under many bodily weaknesses, yea under a sentence of death, thus to employ his Pen, when he cannot his Tongue, for the good of thy Soul. Every particular Chapter, will, if God add his blessing, prove a compleat Soul-saving Treatise. I shall add no more, to perswade thee to Come and see, but this; that nothing but unwillingness to see what is here to be seen, and unperswadableness to make such improvement of such Sights, can make thy Case desperate. Be sure only, Before, In, and After, thy serious perusal of these Chapters, of so much worth, that thou beg earnestly of God, that he would be plea∣sed, with some of his Sons Eye-salve, to open thine eyes, that thou mayest see; and by his Spirit move so upon thy spirit, that thine eye may suitably affect thine heart, with what so much tends to the promoting of thine eternal welfare.
The Sins of Professours. CHAP. I. Their regardlesseness of Souls. 1. HOw Careless are we of our own Souls? 1. Ignorance of their precious∣ness. O how few do believe they are men, having bo∣dies that must dye, but Souls that will never dye? How few do believe that their bodies were given them to be service∣able to their Souls? Their heads, their hearts, their eyes, their ears, their hands, their feet, &c. were all to attend upon their souls, and to help them to Heaven: But this is not believed by many: As they are ignorant of the blessed God, who made them, and of Jesus Christ, who came to redeem them, and know not whether there be an Holy-Ghost or no: So they are ignorant of the precious∣ness of their Souls: Christ hath not given
them eyes to read and understand that a man is not, cannot be, profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul. Christ's questions, what will it profit a man, &c. What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Matth. 16.26. Put it out of all question. Alas! ma∣ny, who carry the name of Christians, de∣serve not the name of men. When you begin to value your Souls, you begin to be men. Oh that men would value that, which once they shall, they must, value? The damned Spirits know now the worth of their Souls: How many will not? 2. Inconsi∣derate∣ness. How few consider the worth and preci∣ousness of their Souls? When do such thoughts, as these, possesse you? Here in this earthly tabernacle, in this house of booths dwells a thing, that I never said, that is worth a world: though here I crawl up and down, like a worm of two or three Cubits long, and am in danger to be thrown into an hole every day; yet I carry with me a Jewell, the loss whereof the whole world cannot repair. How seldome do nominal Pro∣fessours consider sadly and seriously, what will become of their souls, when their excel∣lency, Job. 4 21. which is in them, shall go, or journey, away, as Eliphaz speaks? Examine your thoughts all the day long, from morning to Evening, and few are laid out for the Soul. 3. Caring e for the body han the  Are not all the thoughts and cares laid out upon the body, though the body be but clay, and the soul is a spirit, the body must dye; but the soul shall never dye? How frequently do
we think of our odies, what their wants, burthens, necessities are? but not so of our souls. How much of every day is spent in providing for thy body, but how little for thy sou? The body should be but the soul's ser∣vant, yet men feed the slave, and starve the child. The body must be fed every day, clad every day, yea adorned every day, and hy∣sick'd if distempered; but the soul needs food, rayment, phyck continually, yet lyeth un∣regared, is left miserable, naked, starved, &c. A servant hath two talents to keep, the child, and the child's cloaths: will the Ma∣ster thank the servant, if he plead I have kept the cloaths; but I have neglected the life of the child? Thy body is but thy souls outward garment. How often have your Ministers told you, that the soul was better than the body? and that your souls needed dayly care more than your bodies? and yet you look after the one, with the neglect of the other. A day is coming, when thou wilt wish thou hadst been bred in the Field a∣mong the beasts and worms, for that thou re∣gardest thy soul no more, than if thou hadst but the life of a beast: thou wilt wish thou hadst been made a toad, a serpent, a worm, a dog, a swine, &c. for then thou shouldst not have suffered to eternity, as now thou wilt, unless the eyes of thy understanding be open∣ed to see, consider, and make provision for thy precious, but perishing soul. Thy body is pe∣rishing every day, and thy soul is upon the borders of eternity: it must live for ever;
and yet all thy care is for the body, which likely will not live threescore years and ten; but the soul is neglected, that must live threescore millions of years in hell without repentance, and then, when that date is o∣ver, thou art as far from the end of thy mise∣ry, as thou wast the first day, thou wast thrown among the damned. 4. Strange∣ness towards our souls. How many will not speak with their souls? They are greater strangers to them, than the Londoners are to their next Neighbours. Didst thou ever ask thy soul such questions? O my soul how is it, how will it be, with thee? O my soul, in what state art thou? O my soul, what will become of thee? O! what will become of thee in the next world? 5. Niggard∣lyness to∣wards our souls. At what cost were we any time for our jeoparded souls? The Physitian is consulted with, if there be an ache upon the body: we will, with the woman, part with all, beggar our selves, to recover health of body. When did you know a man starve himself, if he could have bread, and water, what ever it cost? We will be at any expence of time, labour, and charges, to keep our bodies from starving; but how are the Ordinances of God, the Word and Sacraments (the spi∣ritual food of the soul) neglected? The flesh must be satisfied; as for the soul, there is little regard to its well-being. 1 Pet. 2 2. We cannot endure to see a Cat, a Dog, a Beast want meat; but how easily do many digest the want of that milk, whereby they should be maintained and grow? God (saith one) gives
to these their requests, he gives them quailes, but sends leanness into their souls. 6. How fearless are many of soul-losses? Fearless∣ness of souls los∣ses. how common is it for people to draw back from the service of Christ? O! what is the matter? I shall lose my estate, liberty, pay such a fine, &c. They little consider what their souls will lose, if they do not perse∣vere, if they live not up their light. Pro∣fessours (pardon me that I miscall you) though you are blind, and mad; and see not the worth of your souls; yet know, that your souls are the most considerable Jewels, you stand pos∣sessed of. All the world will not weigh with one soul. Thy money may ransome thy body; nothing save Christs blood thy soul. Pause a while (Reader) and reflect on all thy sin∣full neglects of thy immortal Soul, lest on thy death-bed thou shriek and cry, O my soul, whether art thou going? 2. Careless∣ness of o∣thers souls. How little are the souls of others valued and cared for? how many masters are there, that care no more for their servants souls, than for the dogs? nay not so much? Perhaps some of you are carefull that the bodies of your families be cloathed, be fed, &c. but the souls lie unprovided for: Soul-poy∣soners not censured as they ought to be. Make no∣thing to lay poy∣son for souls. more care is ta∣ken for the pigs, than for the souls. 1. How do we justly censure them as worthy of Capital punishments, that murther the bo∣dies of men; but not so others who poyson and destroy thousands of souls? How do you hate to have an hand in murthe∣ring the bodies of any, to lay poyson for the
destruction of any? and yet how commonly do men lay the poyson of ill councell, and ill example before others to cause them to fall into the pit of hell, and are not affected with this great evil? 2. Not trou∣bled at soul-mur∣therers. How troubled are we at any that kill bo∣dies, or that murther others, but not so at the millions, that destroy their own and o∣thers souls, that have an hand in ruining, in damning themselves and others? 3. If any neglect means that might have con∣tinued the life of their husbands, children, &c. how are they dejected? how do the wring their hands, and beat their breasts? whereas, if by carelessness, if by the neglect of their duties, if by evil example, they have de∣stroyed their souls, they are not troubled about these matters. 4. Low es∣teems of those that prize their souls. How do you account meanly of all that take pains for their souls? that wait at the pools of Bethesda, that consult Ministers, and books, and attend on the Ordinances for their souls, whilst you account it your wis∣dome to lay out the most, if not all, of your time for your bodies? Hast thou the name of a Christian? I pray God to let one word to sink into thine heart; thou hast not Christ, thou hast not the Spirit of Christ in thee; he knows how to value souls, and there∣fore shed blood for them, and sends his Spi∣rit in the Gospel to be importunate for their salvation.
CHAP. II. Their want of saving Conviction and Compunction. HOw many Professours, like Paul, Alive without the Law. Rom 7.9. Rev. 3.1. are alive without the Law? How many, like Sardis, have a name to live; imagine they are alive, when they are dead? How many are alive in their own conceit, and perhaps in the conceit of others, and yet are void of the true super-natural life? How ma∣ny are contented with their being baptized? They see no need of Christ, they were born of Christian Parents, Luke 3.3. they are of the stock of Abraham: We have Abraham to our Father. They do not consider how many baptized persons are deadly enemies to Christ, and to their souls, and averse to the wayes of holi∣ness: they will not consider that Swearers, Drunkards and Adulterers have as good claimes to Christ and heaven as these have. How many also please themselves with the Re∣ligion of Education? God hath not moulded their hearts, though Parents their lives: their Parents have taught them some Principles of Religion, but they are strangers to the wonderful operations and teachings of the
Holy Ghost: they have not the Unction from above (they know not what it is) that teach∣eth all things; and yet such as these are alive, i. e. merry, jocund, jovial, confident if any goe to heaven, they shall be of the number. But to speak more particularly. First, Few con∣vinced of original sin impu∣ted. How many are there that were ne∣ver convinced of original sin, imputed, or im∣parted? 1. How few are convinced that Adam was a common person, and that we sinned in his loynes; that if he had stood, we had stood; and that it is just with God, that he ship wracking himself, we should be counted sinners in him? We did eat of the forbidden fruit in Adam, we in Adam believed the Devil rather tha God, we in Adam broke with God for toyes and trifles; we were ungrateful, diso∣bedient in him; we aposttized in him, and broke covenant with God in him; hence by one mans offence sin entred into the world, Rom. 5.12 and death by sin; for that (as Levi paid tithes in Abraham, so) we becme rebells against the Majesty of Heaven in our first Parents; when did you shed a tear for Adam's sin, for your and his grand provocation? 2. Few con∣vinced of original sin inhe∣rent. Psal. 5.9. How few see Adam's sinful nature im∣parted to them? They see not their inward part is very wickedness, nothing but wicked∣ness. Few see what a sad Apostacy from the perfection of mans nature Sin hath brought into the world; and how black an Image of Sathan it hath drawn upon the soul; they never saw what filthy, dirty, loathsome things they are in the eyes of God: they ne∣ver
saw their noysomeness and venome, the garbage and malignity of their hearts. How few see a general defect of all righteousness and holiness, wherein at first they were created? How few are convinced of an antipathy to all that is good? That they are haters of God by nature; Eph. 2.1. that they are dead in trespasses and sins (a more dreadful estate than if they were rotting in their graves) that they have an O∣cean of corruption within them, that will never be dried up in this life; that they have a worse Leprosie than that among the Jewes, which got into the walls, and would never out till the house was demolished; who almost thinks so sadly of themselves? They bless God their hearts are good, though they be the worst of men, pray not, slight Ordinances, closet duties, and family wor∣ship lies neglected; yet the Devil perswades them all is well, their hearts are good; though the heart of man by nature be like hell it self, whose fire of lust is unquenchable; though it be like Peter's great sheet, which he saw in the Vision, full of all unclean things; Acts 11.6 though it be a receptacle of all impiety, yet how few turn their eyes inward, to see their natural deformities? Alass! All the venome the Snake sends forth, is nothing to the poyson that lies in its nature: And all those monstrous impieties, which the lives of men are taunted with, are not to be compared with the venome that lurks in the heart of every man by nature. Men would not glory in their blood and de∣scent,
did they but believe how sin descend∣ed, and was conveyed: Men could not con∣tent themselves to walk heavily under some actual misdemeanours, were they convinced of the body of sin within them, their greatest sorrows would be for their sinful propensi∣ties: Neither would you wonder at any impieties and enormities in the Earth, but would admire at the restraints of Heaven, that they are no greater. Alass! If the Rea∣der were left to himself, he would presently lay hands on his nearest relations, and on himself: Certainly, the reason why we turn not Cannibals, why every man is not a Sodo∣mite, a Murtherer, an Oppressour, &c. is, because God hath a rein on the heart, and curbs it, for the continuation of mankind, that otherwise would soon be destroyed. The great boundary of the Seas, and of the Ocean of corruption, is the Soveraign above. But O! how do we commend Nature! such a man hath a good nature; such a man you may trust him, he will never commit such abomi∣nations: You may as well believe a Toad will not poyson, or the Sea will not overflow the Earth, if God leave it to its self. But to descend to particulars. 1. Few con∣vinced of the minds corrupti∣on. Rom. 8.7. How few see the corruption of their mind? How few are convinced, that the carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be? How are our minds delighted with tales and toyes, more than with the serious mysteries of God? How few are sensible, that they are as foolish and mad as any Bedlams, in that, they
please themselves with that, which should be their greatest burden, namely Sin? They are worse than the Bee or Ant, for these prepare for a severe hard Winter, these provide for hereafter, whilst most people mind present things, present pleasure, present profit, &c. with the neglect of heaven, and future glory: They mind more what to eat and drink here, what to have at present for this life, than what to lay up for eternity: They busie them∣selves to know what is of no consequence, but careless of momentous and eternal matters. How few employ their minds to know God, and how he is to be worshipped and pleased; but employ themselves in needless and un∣profitable speculations, in this, like fools and children, who preferr painted glass be∣fore jewels of value, they more set by a little mirth and pleasure, than the matters of their salvation? How are our minds enslaved to our affections; to the more bruitish, inferi∣our and ignoble parts of the soul, and we love to have it so? Through this corruption of our minds how do we justifie sin, excuse it, and plead for it? Hence also, there are swarms of idle, confused, impertinent, foolish, ridiculous thoughts, that fill our souls and duties; seldome in the day, week or year, any conceptions of God, suitable to his majesty and holiness. How unstable are our minds and judgements, so that we are as reeds shaken with every wind; now for duty, then soon wheel'd off again; now for repent∣ing and humbling work, then tired, and soon
diverted? And if we know the out-side of truths, yet how often is that a barr to our closing with Christ, and walking in him? And yet, though these poor, blind, deluded Bartimeus's fill all our wayes and paths, so that where ever we goe we meet with them; yet how seldome are any convinced of this, how seldome do any cry for eye salve, that they may see? 2. Few con∣vinced of the cor∣ruption of the Con∣science. Tit. 1.15, And though not only the mind, but the conscience is defiled; though there be a blind∣ness upon it, whereby it mis judgeth, and calleth darkness light; and though it be sense∣less and stupid, as a stone; yet few do be∣lieve this corruption: hence they take sanctua∣ry in their consciences, their consciences bear them witness; though it be bribed and cor∣rupted; and they have a good conscience, though they know not what conscience is. 3. How few are convinced of the corruption of their Will? Few con∣vinced of the cor∣ruption of their Will. How do they wish that drun∣kenness, uncleanness, &c. were no sins? How do they choose to live a merry, rather than an holy life; to be the servants of the Devil, rather than of God; to commit sin, and thereby hazard their damnation, rather than to suffer, and through many tribulations to enter into the Kingdom of God? And how gladly would most Professours enter and take up their rest in somewhat below God, if they could but enjoy the world according to their will? Few con∣vinced of the cor∣ruption of their Af∣fections. 4. Few are convinced of the pollution of their Affections. Though they hate what they
should love, and love what they should hate; though they love sin, which they should hate, and hate and slight God, to whom they should give the precedency of their love; though all be in disorder, all be mis-placed; though God be dethroned, and Sin, Sathan, and the World be set up above all that is called God; yet few do really believe that such a miserable Chaos is upon them. 5. Few con∣vinced of the cor∣ruption of their Me∣mories. How few are sensible of the corruption of their Memory? Though they are especially charged to remember God, and how to get a possession of him; and to remember duty, and how to practise; and to remember sin, and how to shun it: yet how soon do they forget such truths, and lodge in their memo∣ries injuries, that they may avenge them; and vanities, foolish jests, unprofitable toes and tales, to please themselves therewith? You can remember how merry you were such a time, how vain, how your sensualities were abounding; but you soon forget a Ser∣mon; or if you remember any thing delivered by the Preacher, it is that, which either concerns others conditions, rather than yours, or which yields you the least advantages heaven∣ward. We can remember the fall of Peter much easier than the repentance of Peter, than his bitter weepings; we can remem∣ber David's Adultery, but not his Repen∣tance, and how it broke his bones, and made his bed to swim. Few con∣vinced that sin i the great∣est evil. Secondly, How few have been convinced that sin is the greatest evil? How few have
seen it in its perfect odiousness, in its na∣ked face, as that which makes Men Devils, fighting against God? How are most strangers to its pedigree, Joh. 8.44. and consider not the Devil to be its Father? We would be thought to have nothing to do with the Devil, nor that he hath any thing to do with us; we can live in sin, and yet (hypocritically enough) defie the Devil, and all his works: We can make more moderate constructions of our sins, and call them the frailties of our flesh; but he that commits sin is of the Devil, i. e. the De∣vil's drudge; Sathan works in him, and by him. If men were convinced of this, they would not drink in the Devil's piss. Sin it comes from the Devil, it is the Devil's excre∣ment, and yet this is rolled under the tongue as a sweet morsel. O! with what greediness is the dung of hell devoured and swallowed? How few see sin to be contrary to the works of God? although God had no sooner perfected the goodly farick of Heaven and Earth, but sin gave a shrewd shake to all, it shook and dis-joynted all; and had it not been for Christ, the great Mediatour, it had ruined the whole frame of Nature. How few see sin to be con∣trary to the will of God? God saith, I will have this done; I'le not do it, saith Sin; I'le have this suffered, saith God; I'le not suffer it, saith Sin: Nay so great is the contest betwixt Sin and God, that if it could, it would un∣bee God. How few take notice of its contra∣riety to the very nature of God? God is good, Sin is evil; God is pure, Sin is impure. How
few believe sin to be universally evil, that there is no good in it? We cannot perswade men, that there is good in poverty, good in disgrace, good in reproaches with the tongue, and per∣secutions unto death; but easily are men per∣swaded, there is some good in sin. How few are convinced of the miserable effects and conse∣quences of sin? The wrath of God is not re∣vealed against their unrighteousnest and ungod∣liness, so as to make their knees to tremble. The hand-writing on the wall is not observed. They are still alive. We cannot for our hearts perswade men to goe up to heaven, to see what spoyles it made there; could we herein prevail, then would they inferr, that there is more evil in the least sin, than there is good in all the Angells of heaven; for that one sin conquered them, and spoyled them of all their beauty, and made them, of glorious creatures, to become such loathsome and hideous spectacles; neither can we prevail with any (almost) to take a journey to Para∣dise, to see its venome there; or to goe to the Garden, or to Mount Calvary, to see what work it did there; or to goe to hell-gate, to hear the doleful shrieks and cries which it hath caused there; though God hath said, Psal. 68.21. God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his trespasses; though there is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked; Isa. 57.21. though sin be the sole object of Gods hatred; for God loved the whole Creation, till its beauty was blasted and stained by sin) though sin on∣ly
seperates between God and souls, Isa. 59.2. though in the belly of it be found all miseries, deaths, and hells; though it be the founder of all graves, and of Tophet; though it fill the conscience with terrours, and hell with fire and brimstone; yet few are affected with the evils of it, but they drink in iniquity as water. Thirdly, Few sen∣sible of being un∣der the wrath of God. John 3.28, 36. Eccles. 8.11. How few Professours are sensible that they are cast by an holy and righteous Law? that they are condemned creatures? that the wrath of God abideth on them? Few have seen the black cloud full of woes, brim full of wrath, ready to empty it self upon their souls; they take no notice, that though the sentence be not executed speedily; yet it is given forth; and there may be but a little breath, and they are gone to perish for ever. How many senseless souls are there in our Parishes, whose consciences were never sha∣ken, whose spirits were never wounded, who never received the spirit of bondage to fear, who never knew what a fearfull expe∣ctation of judgement meant, who go dancing to hell in the Devils chains? and yet count themselves the noble and gallant spirits, and flatter themselves in their own eyes, and say, we shall have peace, though we walk in the imaginations of our hearts? Deut. 29.19. Rev. 3.16, 17. These are (Lao∣dicean-like) rich, and full, and needing nothing, when God is about to spue them out of his mouth, (as we discharge our stomacks of some loathsome surfets.) Pro. 26.16. These are wiser in their own conceit, then seven men that can ren∣der
a reason. Though one Minister at the heels of another endeavour with Scripture upon Scripture to convince them of, and to prick them at the heart for, their sin and danger; yet they are boysterously confident and presumptuous, that they shall to heaven as soon as any Precisians in the Country. Never did many break one nights sleep, upon the consideration of their sinfull and lost con∣dition by nature: never did they loath their ordinary food, or feel the smart of broken bones, as David did; though they have sin∣ned at an higher rate: never did they know what a wounded spirit meant, what anguish of soul was: never did they feel Gods wrath, or sin, a burthen insupportable; they were never pricked at the heart, so as to cry out, What shall I do to be saved? What shall I do to have me sins pardoned? Would you know the reason of all this security? Alas! they are dead in sins and trespasses. A dead condi∣tion is an insensible condition; death deprives of sense as well as life; the dead are not frighted with the swords and pistols at their breasts; the dead fear not, though threatned with fire and brimstone; the dead hear not, though God be on Mount Ebal thundering curses upon curses; the dead see not, though sin be so ugly a monster, and hell so frightfull a place; the dead smell not, though sin stinks worse, than the vomit of dogs; 2 Pet. 2.20. than rot∣ten Sepulchres, or than the corrupted matter of the most nasty disease; it offends not the dead to have this stinking Carrion alwayes in
their bosomes; the dead feel not, though that which is heavier than montains of lead be lying on their backs; they grown not, nei∣ther do they complain so much, as Cain did, they do not go softly in the bitterness of their souls, by reason of their sins. Many cannot say with Hannah, that ever they were of a sorrowfull Spirit. Though there be so many curses upon the heads of all natural persons, though there be an entayl of wrath upon the heads of the very sins, they live in; though their sins are, or may be, circumstanti∣ated to a greater degree, than any of the Scrip∣ture-Offendors that we read of, as being com∣mitted under the open Sun of the Gospel; though Hell be open to receive them every moment, whilst impenitent, whilst hardned; though the Valley of Hinnom is making room for them, to entertain them with the vengeance of a justly-provoked God; yet few fear, few work out their salvation with weep∣ing eyes, and trembling hearts; they are still alive without the Law; they never walked softly with Ahab, or were under Soul-trouble with Judas; they fall short of the pangs and sense of Hypocrites; Oh! Oh! Oh! I pit∣ty these secure souls; how short will they fall of their hopes, and how farr short of Hea∣ven? Fourthly, Few sen∣sible of Sathans working in them. Eph. 2.2. How few are sensible, that all this while the Devil works in them, as in his work∣house? That he possesseth the heart of every unregenerate man? The strong man keeps the house, and so all is quiet. It was a sad day,
when the abomination of desolation should be seen standing in the holy place; but what are abominable Men to abominable Devils? They did but exercise their cruelties on the bodies of the Jewes, but how many Devils have their walks in the hearts of natural men and women? If thou art in thy bloods, the Devil hath entred into thee, as sure as ever he entred into the heard of Swine, and so hur∣rieth thee into base lasts, as he carried them headlong into the Sea. CHAP. III. Their want of Despair in Self. IF Men are sensible of their sinne and miserie, Few humbled Souls. Rom. 10.3 yet how many are going about to establish their own righteous∣ness? Though some are convinced of the ugliness of sin, of he miserie by sin; yet they are not fully con∣vinced, that the covenant of works requires perfect, personal, and corstant obedience, that it admits not of repentance, that it accepts not of the will for the deed; Gal. 3.10. but Curseth every one that continueth not in all things, which are writ∣ten in the Book of the Law to do them, so that if there be a failer by a vain thought, the con∣ditions
of that covenant are broken; and no∣thing, save fearful expectations, should seize on such a Soul. Few (I say) believe this; but though they are bankrupt Children of Adam, yet they hope by their pedling Wares to set up again, and maintain themselves, without being beholden to any other, for the procuring of their salvation; hence they pray, who were prayerless before; hear, and (perhaps) with much diligence, who were wont to play away the Sabbath and Ser∣mon time; and reform in many things; and now, Soul, take thine ease, thou hast gods laid up for many years, yea for eternity; thou art converted sure, and so think all the Neigh∣bour-hood; O! what a change is here? The man was a Drunkard, not so now; an Adul∣terer, a prophane Belial; but now civilized, yea a devout man: Serious, that was flashy before; and touching the righteousness which is in the Law, Phil. 3.6. blameless. Now he is alive in∣deed; his Conscience is pacified, which be∣fore troubled him; he can hear the Word gladly, which before was burthensome to him; he can pray with affection, and with some de∣light, when before all the Ordinances of Heaven were tedious and intollerable bur∣thens to him. Now he thinks, Sure I have life within me, I am not dead. He sees not all this while, that he must have life from without, and ability from without: He doth not yet say, Psal. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. Psa. 40.12 Mine iniquities have taken hold
upon me, so that I am not able to look up. No, no he can look up with confidence, and call God Father; Job 12.6. and though sometimes he pro∣vokes God, yet he is secure. He doth not see that he is dead, i. e. damned, 2 Cor. 3.5. and insuf∣ficient as of himself to think any thing as of him∣self, but all his sufficiency is of God. He thinks he is not utterly unable to make amends for his sins, not quite dead, for he can pray, &c. He sees not, that it is as easie to make new Worlds, as to put up one acceptable Prayer to God. He sees not, that he needs an Al∣mighty power to enable him to perform his duties, and infinite satisfaction to discharge him of his debts. He is somewhat sensible of his danger by sin, Isa. 63.1. but he eyes not him that is mighty to save. He looks for help within, but not without. He sees no absolute ne∣cessity of Christ all this while. He sees not, that all his righteousnesses are as filthy raggs in Gods sight, Isa. 64.6. and that all his duties fill up the Catalogue of his sins. He sees not, that there is no Salvation in any other, save Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12. because there is no other Name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved. He hopes to goe to Heaven through doors of his own, the door of Repentance, the door of Reformation, the door of good Works, &c. hence he takes hold of the mercy of God, and the promises of pardon, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked for∣sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, yea he will abundantly pardon. Thus have I done,
(saith this awakened person) and now my Case is good. O! I would not be in mine old myres for a World: O! what a change is here? I was a careless Wretch, careless of God, and my Soul, careless of praying, reading, hearing, &c. not so now. And now that the house, Matth. 12.43, 44, 45. out of which the unclean Spirit is gone, is swept and garnished, he car∣rieth it high, and little thinks he, that seven worse Spirits are entring in. This is the case of multitude of Professours, whom Christ will never seek nor save, Luke 19.10. for that they are not lost, they are not succourless and helpless, they think they may save themselves from wrath to come. They see not, that there is a Satisfaction to be made to Divine Justice, which they cannot make; wherefore their hopes are from their reformations, not from Christ; their peace is from their performan∣ces, not from Christs blood of attonement: All these have I kept from my youth up. Luke 18.21. Hence he is consident, not from Christs coming under the Law: hence he is diligent in Prayer, &c. but careless of the way of Faith; hence he blesseth himself in his own performances, and is no way taken up with what Christ hath done and suffered for him. Moses is magnifyed, and Christ is slighted: Duties are set up, and Faith neglected: Works advanced and cryed up, and Faith is little heeded or look'd after. How few are there, who count themselves wholly destitute of every good thing, that should make them acceptable unto God? They lay not the weight of Salvation upon the
grace of God by Jesus Christ, but upon some∣what that comes from themselves: they will have a Bridge of Duties, that shall carry them over the Gulph of eternal miserie: they hope to quench Hell Fire by their tears Alass! some years agoe, you might as well have drawn Water out of the Flint, as tears from them; but the case is altered: I was blind, but now I see the deserts of sin, which I saw not before; I see it is a fearful thing to sin against God, and now I bewail my sins, and am sorry at heart for them; sure my condition is monded, I thank God I am not as other men, nor as once I was my self, I hope by my tears to wash away my sins. All the while Christ lieth without doors, the Soul is a stranger to Faith in Christ, he sees not his insufficiencies, he sees not his unwor∣thiness to goe to Heaven and Glory, he sees not his inability to think a good thought, he hopes without a Christ he can do something. If he did judge his condition hopeless, he would tremble, and have no rest in himself, till God hath delivered him; he would see an absolute necessity of obtaining Christ and his righteousness, and he would be put off with nothing else. But O! how hard a work do Ministers find it, first to take off men from their sins, and then from considence in their duties? We tell men, Christ will have no sharer in the glory of saving lost man; but people will at least have their works and Christ to divide the spoyles, to share in the glory of bringing back lost Souls to God. We ad∣vise
men to lay no weight on their duties, bt to lean alone on Christ's merits; but in vain. Christ saith, If yee seek me, let these go their way, these duties as well, as these sins; but the deaf eare is turned, and we find it much easier to perswade men, their sins will damn them, then their duties, whilst Christ is there∣by neglected. CHAP. IV. Their miscarriages about their Soul∣troubles. IF the Spirit of the Lord have convin∣ced men of their danger by their sins, Miscarria∣ges about Soul∣troubles. and their own righteousness; that they still see God angry with them, and if their Souls remain under trou∣ble and disquiet; yet are they not guilty of some, if not all, of the following miscarria∣ges? 1. Few iustifie God. How few are there that justifie God; Few accept of the punishment of their iniquities, they do not clear God, as they should, from all unrighteousness. Commonly proud hearts swell and fume against these methods of God. Though the filthiness of their hearts be laid open before them, yet they fall not down
upon their faces in the acknowledgement of their unworthiness of mercy: few charge themselves, and acquit God. They cannot be brought to give God the glory of his righteousness, if he should condemn them to the pit of hell: they do not willingly and up∣rightly own the desert of damnation, and charge themselves with it, as their due porti∣on, and most just inheritance. Lam. 3.30. Mic. 7.9. Ezra 9.13. Dan. 9.7, 8. Few give their cheeks to him that smiteth, as the Church did: they do not say, I will bear the iudigna∣tion of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, or with Ezra, thou hast punished us lesse than our iniquities have deserved, or with Daniel, O Lord! Righteousnesse belongeth un∣to thee; but unto us confusion of face. How seldome do you hear Professours with this Confession in their mouths, Lord, I am thy creature, and thou mayst do with thy creature what pleaseth thee; It pleased thee to put thine image on me,Eccl. 7.29. Isa. 52.3. to create me up∣right, but I have sought out many inventi∣ons, I have sold my self for nought, I have preferred the Devils work before thine, and therefore thou mayst abhor me, and give me my portion among the damned crew, and if I feel some sparks of hell fire (in thy wrathfull present frowns) it is of thy rich patience and mercy, that they are but sparks; if thou cast me off for ever, it is but what I have deserved long ago; it is of the Lords mercy, that I was not hur∣led from the womb or cradle to hell, be∣cause of my native sinfulness; but wo is me,
I have provoked the pure eyes of thy glori∣ous Majesty dayes without number, I have been a Rebel of a long standing against thee, my will hath been justling and quar∣relling with thine these many years, and therefore if I be sent to hell, thou art righteous and clear when thou judgest, Psa. 51.4. I can blame none save my self, if I perish ever∣lastingly, though I have many fears and sorrows on me; yet blessed be God, they are not the sorrows of hell, thanks be to the Lord, that I am not yet among the damned ones, roaring in the Pit of hell. Few believe they deserve damnation; hence Souls are murmuring at any affliction, at the loss of an Husband, Child, Estate, &c. as if God had dealt hardly with them, in depri∣ving them thus. How few Professours, Few wil∣lingly un∣der Soul∣trouble. Hos. 2.6. Rom. 8.15. when under Soul∣troubles, are willingly under them? They see not the advantage of having their way hedg'd up with these thorns. They do not receive the Spirit of Bondage. They do not accept this punishment; They take it not kindly at Gods hands. Their troubles are involuntary, few kindly works that I meet with among awake∣ned and startled Professours; they are held in the chains against their will. How many are afraid of sorrow for sin? Some think it will spoyl good faces, and their beauty may he lost through their troubles; but others think it will bring them to despair, and there∣fore farewell to such a Preacher; he is too terrible for their Souls. Hence Saul must
have his harp to divert him, the Cards must be taken up again, some merry Books, some Ro∣mances must be read, perhaps a Play may be seen, jovial frothy Company must be called in, and all this, to divert the Soul from mind∣ing its danger, lest it be swallowed up of grief, or some unskilfull and unfaithfull Em∣perick shall be sent for, to sow pillows under him, that he may sleep the quieter. Few (Daniel-like) when their cogitations much trouble them, Dan. 7.28. so that their countenances are changed in them, keep notwithstanding the matter in their hearts. How few are active in their Soul-troubles? Retire, and go alone that they may search the Scriptures, and ran∣sack their hearts in order to contrition and humiliation of their hearts? How few are gladded by any portion of Gods word, that brings their sinfulness and self-fulness to re∣membrance, and causeth any meltings of heart, and humblings of Souls under it? How do some Professours quarrel with their Mini∣sters, and snarl at the Books, that give them trouble of Spirit? 3. Few mourn on spiritual accounts. How few mourn for Sin upon Spiritual accounts? That their God is dishonoured (their good and gracious God, who hath done so much for them, &c.) doth not chiefly cut their hearts; Against thee, Psal. 51.4. thee only have I sin∣ned, and done this evil in thy sight; but per∣haps they are troubled for wronging them∣selves, endangering themselves, &c. They cry as dogs: when they have done a fault, they fear the whip, and so they houle.
4. Few re∣forming and be∣lieving mourners. How many Professors mourn for their sins, yet live in the continued practise of them? Notwithstanding their tears; yet their hearts are in league with their lusts: Thus, like the Scolds at Billingsgate, they are soon out, soon in again with their lusts; but few whilst mourning for their sins are sollicitous and carefull which way God may have satisfaction for the injuries, that have been done unto him: The mourning of many Professours last no longer than the trouble of Conscience: as soon as the guilt of sin is removed (as they hope,) their mourning ceaseth, though the strength of sin be as greatas ever. 5. Few seek comfort aright. Among the multitudes professing Religi∣on, how many seek for grace, in order to their comfort? (Joy, Peace, Comfort, being their great end) but how few seek for comfort in or∣der to grace? 6. Few mourn for unbelief. How few mourn for their slightings of Christ? (It is more natural and so more easie to mourn for sins against the Law, than those again Christ and his Gospel;) Therefore if there be many tears shed for neglect of Pray∣er, for Theft, Perjury, &c. yet how few are found mourning for undervaluing and reject∣ing Christ and his Tenders? whose Soul cries out, O! how unkind have I been to Christ? O! that he should come out of his Fathers Bosome for me, come under the Law, yea Dye for me; and yet I should keep him out of dores: that the Son of God, that the brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express Image of his person,
the upholder of all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3 when he had by himself purged our sins, and sate down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, should stoop so low, Rev. 3.20. as to stand at the door, and knock, and yet that I should not let him in; break heart, break into small dust, be trembling all over for thy unkindnesses to so great, so rich, so good a Friend. O wretch that I have been! What! more kindness to my Dog, my Cat. &c? If my Dog be whining at the door, he hath admittance, and yet thou shut out; O. I abhorr my self in dust before thee. I meet with few of these mourners. CHAP. V. Their ignorance of Christ: their serving their turns of Christ: their making base capitulations with Christ. 1. HOw many are ignorant of Christ, Too too many Ig∣norant of Christ. and of what use he is to perishing Souls? They know no more the Gift of God, than the Samaritan Woman did: they know not what an excellent gift Christ is, John 4.10. that he is the Fountain of living Water, and therefore ask nothing of him. It is one thing to hear of a Christ, and another thing to know Christ. How
few know Christ to be their only Life? If you did believe, that he that hath the Son, hath life; 1 Jo. 5.12. and he that hath not the Son of God, hath not life: And that who so findeth me (Christ) findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord: Prov. 8.35, 36. But he that sinneth against me (Christ) wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me (Christ) love death: Upon such a Conviction, what would you not give for Life? Esau will part with his Birth-right, to preserve his Life. The Woman will part with all her Estate, to recover health, and to secure her self from the grave. Of all blessings we value Life mostly, but few have such esteems of Christ. Few can say, as Paul, What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ: Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ; and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2. the righ∣teousness which is of God by faith. I deter∣mined not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Psal. 73.25. Or with David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. Few look on Christ as the Original of their Life, that they must live, move. and have their being in Christ, and from Christ alone; that they are dead without him; and hence their desires are not after him. If you knew, that you
want Christ more than Bread and Water, then would you cry out, Lord, give me Christ, None but Christ, None but Christ, in him is my help, in him is my salvation. He is the Authour of all our good affections, and of all our gracious abilities; but alass! blind man sees him not in his usefulness. Cant. 5.9 What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved? He hath no form nor comeliness; Isa. 53.2, 3. and when we shall see him, there is no beauty, that we should de∣sire him. He is despised and rejected of men. Men must dye, and be damned, without a Christ; but they know it not, they know no good that Christ is, and no good that Christ brings. Secondly, Many serve their turns of Christ. How many serve their turns of Christ, close with Christ for their own ends? When men have served their turnes, one of another, away they goe: so these, troubles they have, and ease they would have; they have stayed off from Christ as long as they could; they have tryed worldly Comforts, they will not do; they have tryed Duties, they will give no rest; and therefore, in the terrours of their Spirits, they must have Christ, so much of him, as may give them quiet and rest. Men are weary of the bands and setters, wherein they are held under the Law; they would fain be delivered from Sathan that tor∣ments them, and from the sins that now stare them in the face; they groan under the weight of the wrath of God, but not under the body of sin; Sathan as a Tormentour is un-welcome, but as a Tempter is still liked well enough.
O! I am afraid I shall to Hell. O! if there be no other way to escape, but through Christ, O! then for a Christ, then Sermons and Ministers are welcome, in hopes of bringing in (not so much a Christ, as) peace, and comfort to the troubled Spirit. So that men use Christ as sick men take meat, not for love of it, or liking to it (for their Stomachs rise against it) but for fear of death, which makes them force themselves to eat. Though many come to Christ, it is by constraint, not willingly; not with delight, not as an healthy man comes to a full table, to feed with pleasure. Many to avoid a greater mischief, to avoid damnation, to avoid eternal torments will to Christ in their sore extremities: they will then make large confessions, take up great resolu∣tions against their sins, pray to God, and with vehemency and constancy, so as they never prayed before; but upon ease to the impostumed matter, upon recoveries out of their troubles, they become if not profane, yet worldly and negligent of Christ, his Person, his Laws, his Concernments. They have of Christ what they came for: They come to Christ, as some come to Shops, not to have all in the Shop, but what they immediately want: They want com∣fort, and therefore they venture as the Leapers to the Camp of the Syrians, they had no love to them, they counted them their Enemies; but if we stay here, we perish; or as Ladies use Litters, to carry them over the
dirt; or as we use a Penthouse, during the Storm, and then Farewell; or as Passengers the Boat, they cry vehemently a Boat, a Boat, and as soon as they are Fetryed over the deep, farewel to the Boat, they think no more of it. When he slew them, then they sought him: Psal. 78.34. and they returned and enquired early after God. Then, never before, and never after. Un∣doubtedly, multitudes have been affrighted to Christ, who were never truly and throughly converted to him, and have left their Sins from compulsion of their judgement, not from the propension of their will; not from any love they have borne to Christ: they love to be safe, but still hate to be holy. O! O! how many are herein deluded, who have pretend∣ed a great deal of love to Christ, whilst base Self, the love of pleasure and ease, and to be exempted from horrours and fears, hath been the Bias that hath drawn them to Christ? I appeal to thy Conscience, whether Christ be valued, be look'd after, save in a strait? When trouble is upon thee, then this Physi∣cian is sent for; but when the pang is over, the Physicians company is too chargeable, is no way desirable; the sooner he turns his back, the better. When Women are great with Child, and when, Men and Women both, hear it thunder, and see it lighten, when the Arrows of the Lord fly thick, and a great mortality is sweeping many to the Grave, O! then how shall I get Christ? then Books are read, Sermons heard and valued, Prayers not neglected; but when the fears of
death are over, Psal. 4.6. Ephes. 5.16. O! then who will shew us any good? Then Redeem lost time, not for God and Souls, but for the World; then head and ears in the world again, then secret Prayer is neglected; then the Bible lies in a dusty cor∣ner, not viewed, till the next storm arise; and then Christ must be awakened with, Ma∣ster, Mark 4.38. carest thou not that we perish? I will tell you what your Ministers have told you be∣fore, Sin and the World were your Companions in days of health, ease and peace; and Christ your desire in cloudy days. Is it not so? If Christ in the day as well as in the night, lies chief between thy breasts, thou hast cause to say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name. But I fear most pitch on Christ for themselves, and not for Christ. Christ in the time of Contagion shall go for something; but Christ in dayes of health and ease shall be valued no more than a meer Chimara, a Cipher, a Nothing. It is one thing to take Christ to pacifie the Conscience and another to take him to purify the heart. An unquiet Conscience is to most a greater burden, than an insensible, seared, and pol∣luted Conscience, than an impure heart. Oh! Repent of thy juglings with Christ. Psa. 78.36. They did flatter him with their mouths, and they lied unto him with their tongues. They pretend to come to Christ, in order to service and obedi∣ence, when all the while they serve themselves on Christ. Base Ca∣pitulati∣ons with Christ. Thirdly, How many have base Capitulations with Christ? Many come running to Christ,
and ask him, (as the man in the Gospel) Good Master, what shall I do, Mark 10.17.21, 22 that I may in∣herit eternal life? Christ tells him and them, Gee thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in Heaven, and come, take up the Cross, and follow me; But as he, so they are discontent∣ed, And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had great Possessions. Undoubtedly many Hypocrites have some glimpse of Christs glory, and they run to Christ, whilst others deride him; but they like not the Price that Christ sets; They would have Christ on their own terms. Christs terms are to have the Heart; My Son, Prov. 23.26. give me thy heart: Do not lend it only, but give; give it chearfully, give it presently, give me it now: Now, that it is called to day, To day, Heb. 3.7, 8. if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Give me thy heart, to be framed and fashioned by me, to be stamped and sealed by me; be no longer thine own: I will not be content thou lend me thy heart for a Sabbath, or for a day of Prayer, and then that thou call for thine heart again, and bestow it upon thy lusts; give me thine heart, and do not sell it for base ends, for base respects; give me thine heart, do not keep it to thy self; lay up and leave thine heart in my hand, for me to keep it for thee. But alass! how shamefully do we break with Christ? We would live as we list, and do as we list. We are content to give Christ the body, the outward man, the ear, the tongue, the
head, &c. but we reserve our heatts for the service of the World and of Sin: or if we are perswaded to give the heart; yet it is but a devided heart, not the whole heart, but a piece of it. Mat. 22.37. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, saith Christ; but Pride, Covetousness, and Voluptuousness would fain have a share; hence no l closings be∣tween Christ and many Professors; Christ and they part. They, as some Customers, seem to commend the wares, but they like their money better. Few see themselves so mi∣serable without a Christ, as to come up to the price. Their cursed Leagues with base Lusts bind them so fast in Chains, that they cannot, they will not come up to Christs proposals, to Christs demands; they will treat with Christ on no other terms, unless they may have the pleasures of Sin, and may fulfill the lusts of the flesh; but if Conscience be disquieted, and troublesome, then they make new offers; they will leave many sins, they will except but one; There is but one ex∣ception they have, and if that may be accep∣ted, then they are Christs; they have but one reserve. These Swine are contented to escape the pollutions of the World, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22. through the know∣ledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, so they may have one mire to return to, and wallow in. If Christ will stoop to these terms, then welcome Christ; if one sin and Christ may share the heart betwixt them, the man is con∣tented; but few are contented, that every knee should bow, that every sin be parted from.
The Lord be mercifull to me, If I bow in the house of Rimmon. No, saith Christ, All, or none. If the Conscience be not quiet upon this; then, as Marriners throw overboard their goods, their Jewels, their Bales of Silk, and other pleasant wares in a Tempest, to ease the Vessel, which they wish for in a Clm, and labour to fetch up again, if it be possible, when the Storm is over: So many Professours will part from all the practice of sin, throw all over-board, as the Marriners did Jonah, though much against their wills, in hopes of riding out the storm, 2 Pet. 21.22. and then wish for their lusts again, yea with the Dog, return unto the Vomit, and with the Sow to wallow in the Mirc. Doubtless many, (like him, who had a mind to his Kinsman's land, and would have paid the purchase-money, but liked not the terms of marrying Ruth.) They would have Christ buy the purchase of their duties: they hope by the Stock of Pray∣ers, Tears, and Obedience to purchase Christ; but will not match with Christ, and have the Inheritance by that way of conveyance. That man liked Ruth's means, but not Ruth's person, and many like somewhat of Christ, but not his Person, not all of Christ: they like Christ's pleasant Summers, but not his pinch∣ing Winters; love and like his Heaven, but not his severe Commandements; they like his Sacrifice, but not his Service. Many Ped∣ling Customers Christ hath, but few, very few, who will come roundly up to Christs offers, and take all off his hands. They would take
off his Mercy, his Peace, his Righteousness; but not his Spirit, his Grace, his Holiness, &c. What saith Christ? If you will have my Comforts, you must have Me too; if my Pardons, my Person too; you must take Me, as well as Mine; you must have Me, as well as my Heaven. This makes many go away sorrowfull. Again, If you will have me (saith Christ) you must be at some cost, at some pains and trouble to enjoy me: nothing of Me, or Mine is got without difficulty and industry; your cold Prayers must not suffice, your lazy hearings are not enough: you must watch your hearts all the day long, you must make a Covenant with your eyes, and keep your lips, as with a bridle. Are ye so contented? Oh! no (saith the slothfull Professour) I would go to Heaven on a Feather-bed, I would be contented to Pray now and then, Morning and Evening, so I may be at my own dis∣pose all the following hours. Hearken (O Daughter) and consider and encline thine ear; Psal. 45.10, 11. forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Three Alls I expect you part with (saith Christ.) 1. All your sinfull lusts, all the wayes of the old Adam: Our Fathers house. Ever since Adams apostasy, God and man have parted houses. Ever since, our Fathers house is an house of ill man∣ners, Isa. 55.7. an house of sin and wickedness. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighte∣ous
man his thoughts: and let him return un∣to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundant∣ly pardon. 2. All your worldly advantages. By faith Moses when he was come to years, Hebr. 11.24, 25, 26. re∣fused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's daugh∣ter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in E∣gypt; for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. If any man come to me, Luk. 14.26. and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disci∣ple. He that hath all these must be ready to part with all; they are joyn'd not dis∣junctively, but copulatively. 3. All self, self-will, self-righteousness, self-sufficien∣cies, self-confidences, and self-sesings. But, Oh! how do many pretenders to Christ hate these Proposals? I can tell you what many of your tearms are; I will have a Christ, if I may live as I list, and love as I list, and walk as I list; Ile indent with Christ to make much of him when my Con∣science gnaws and troubles me, so I may but dismiss him, when I have sung Lullaby to Conscience.
CHAP. VI. Their delays to close with Christ. 4ly. Many de∣layers to believe. HOw many do delay in their coming to Christ? And O! what indignities are herein put upon Christ? How long doth he stand at the dores of sinners, ere they let him in. Cant. 5.2. Hebr. 3.7. Jam. 4.14. Mark 16.16. 2 Cor. 6.2. Gen. 6.3. My head (saith Christ,) is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, Though he limit linners to a day, To day if ye will hear his voice, &c. Though our life be even a vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away, ready every moment to expire; though we must needs perish and be damned, if we believe not in him before we dye; He that believeth not, shall be dam∣ned; though now is the accepted time, though the Spirit may never invite more: My spirit shall not alwayes strive with man; though we are not sure of one day of grace more; yet how do many hazard their eternity rather than they will be yet beholding to Christ for Life and Salvation? Though they may have his Righteousness, his Redemption, his Spirit, his Image, his Heaven, his Glory, his Love, his Honours, his Inheritance by coming to him; yet what trifling delays are mens hearts
filled with? Though they are actually con∣demned by the Law for their Capital Offen∣ces, for high Treason against the Majesty of Heaven, and pardons be offered freely by Jesus Christ unto them, if they will but ac∣cept of him and them, yet so is Christ fall'n in the accompt of them, who yet are nominal Christians, that they will hazard their Souls, rather than they will yet be so much behold∣ing to Christ. This desperate enmity against Christ and his offers is the condemning sin. This is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19. that light is come into the world, and men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their deeds were evil. All other sins are nothing to this; what? when God hath limited thee to A day, wilt thou, darest thou carelesly mispend that one day, when thou art not sure of another? Believe it, your trifling delays are more hideous sins, do more stain your souls, and provoke God, than drunkenness and unnatural lusts in such, as ne∣ver had one of your Calls. How darest thou, having so many wayes transgressed against this God, having provoked him to wrath by so frequent breaches of his Holy Law, to add to all these iniquities thy trifling delays of coming into Christ, that thou maist be par∣doned? How durst thou, when lying under the wrath of a justly incensed God, send away Christ as Faeli did Paul, with Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee: when (wretch) is that con∣venient season? Is it then, when thou hast ser∣ved the Devil some weeks, months, or
years longer? When thou hast spent all the flowre of thy time and strength in the service of Hell? Must Then Christ have the dregs of thy time? Must he have nothing but Sathans leavings? O! Doubtless for these delays is Christs wrath ready to be powred out upon this Nation to the uttermost. The Lord Je∣sus shall be revealed from Heaven, 2 Thes. 17.8. in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: By delaying to hearken to Christs calls and invitations thou tellest Christ to his face, that he is not altogether lovely, that he is not the fairest of ten thousand, that there is somewhat in Sins service and the Devils, that is more desirable than what can be had in Christs. And canst thou imagine such Blasphomy, viz. (To tell Christ to his face, that thou valuest thy lusts above the enjoyment of him,) is not pro∣voking? O! if ever these come over fully to Christ, if Christs patience be extended yet longer, and they be at length wone to him; How will they befool themselves that they came into Christs service no sooner? Nimis sero te ama. O! I have loved thee too late. Oh th oy, the unspeakable Joy I have lost! Oh the peace, that I might have had! Oh the assurance of Gods love, that my Soul might have been filled with! Oh the experiences of the grace of God, that I might have had, if I had come into Christ on Christs first call and intreaty! Oh the opportunities of service, that I might have had, when the marrow was in my bones,
when I was young and fresh for duty! Oh! Lam. 3.27. How good had it been if I had born Christs yoak (sooner) in my youth? O the many sins that I have been guilty of! Oh! how long withstood I the Grace of God, and grieved the Spirit of God? Oh! What a burden was I to Christs Ministers, and much more to Christ himself? But God alone knows, how soon his Spirit shall cease striving with these poor Souls, and how long they shall be within a capacity of obeying the Heavenly Call. The Jewes have a Rule, that if a man vowes any service to God before he dyes, he must do it presently, because he may dye present∣ly. Rev. 6.8. Death and Hell are described coming on Horseback, in full speed: Ask thy self there∣fore Jeremiah's question, Jer. 12.5. Can I out-run or escape these Horsemen? However, through the great and wonderful averseness there is in mens hearts from Christ, they stay and linger, like Lot in Sodom, that if God do not work a miracle upon them, and for them, they will perish in the flames. They know what the foolish Virgins lost by their delayes; all is one, no coming to Christ, as long as possibly they can make any shift to live without him, and until an Almighty power exert it self on their Souls, to make them willing of a Christ. One hath a Wife, another a Yoak of Oxen, all of them some business or other to detain them for the present from Christ. They do not utterly deny to come, but at present they have such employments, as that they have no present
freedome to wait upon him. The Son of God must dance attendance on them, they must be banqueting with the Devil within, and Christ must stand without, yea wait their leasure, till they receive him in. There are several sorts of these delaying Professours. 1. Delayes to come to Christ. Some (and they the worst sort) from their great love to their lusts, and to the com∣forts and sensualities of this life, which they fear, From love to worldly Lusts. when they are under Christs yoak, they shall be bereaved of, delay coming to Christ. Sin hath so rooted it self in their hearts and af∣fections, that they are loth to take a final farewell thereof, loth to mortifie their earth∣ly members; Sin is so prevalent with them, that they had rather part from their right eye, hand, and foot, than part from their sins; hence they choak their Convictions what they can, admit of any pleasures and diversions, to wear out the impressions that are made in their Consciences, that they may still lodge sin in their bosomes, and not come to Christ; hence they labour to quench the Spirit of God, and through the prevails of spiritual sloth, will not use the means, whereby they may be fully converted to Christ. They pretend they are desirous of Christ, only they doubt whether Christ is willing to receive them; but that which lieth at the bottom is this, they are loth to leave their darling lusts, and loth to pray and watch their hearts, and to do what God re∣quires and expects at their hands, in order to Conversion. You may imagine God is highly provoked hereby; for God to send his Son
unto you, the best Jewel that ever lay in his bosome, and for you to neglect and undervalue him, and preferr swinish lusts before him, 'tis a plain argument, that you never saw sin aright in its nature and effects, and that you do not credit God in his discoveries of the glory of his Son. You do not believe you are so miserable without a Christ, as indeed you are; you slight the greatest Gift, that ever God conferr'd up∣on the children of men; you make void the great counsels of God, all the thoughts of his wisdome and grace, in contriving such a way, as by Jesus Christ, to save you from wrath to come; you also frustrate the expectations of God, Mat. 21.37. for Surely (saith God) they will re∣verence my Son; whereas, by your trifling delayes, you tell God and men, that you be∣lieve not any advantage you shell have by the Son of God; you think it will be to your loss, to receive in the Lord of glory. He tells you, Psal. 36.8. Ye shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his House, Cant. 5.1, 3. and ye shall drink of the Rivers of his Pleasures. He tells you, He hath ga∣thered his Myrrh, with his Spices; He hath wine, milk, and honey. You cry out, Prov. 24.33. I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on, &c. A little more slumber in the Devil's Lap, a lit∣tle more folding of the hands to sleep. You are told of Joyes unspeakable, and full of glory; 1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.7 John 17.3. of Peace that passeth all understanding; of eternal Life by knowing Christ. You are told, you can never be reconciled unto God, but by Christ; that he must end all Controversies between Christ, and your Souls; that He is
able to save to the uttermost, Hebr. 7.25. Psal. 19.10. Acts 24.25. Luke 14.18. Jo. 8.24. Jo. 3.36. Pro. 8.34, 35. Rev. 3.20. all that come unto God by him; that His Word is more desirable than gold, yea, than much fine gold. But all this prevails not with you. When I have a convenient Season, &c. Yet I cannot, I pray have me excused. He tells you, If you believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins; and that he that believeth not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him, yet delayes still. He tells you, Blessed is the man that heareth me, and who so findeth me, findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord. Behold, I stand as the doer and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Jo. 6.35 I am the Bread of Life, he that cometh to me, shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me, Ephes. 2.19. Jo. 1.12 shall never thirst. He tells you, Of Strangers and enemies, you shall be∣come Children, and yet this seems a light mat∣ter, to be so near related to the King of Kings. Is not this Englaeds great Provoca∣tion, to refuse so great an honour and dig∣nity? Rom. 8.1 He assures you, There is no Condemna∣tion to them that are in Christ. And shall he not condemn Wretches, that slight the Par∣dons that are offered to them? Hebr. 10.29. These must expect a double wrath. Of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy, &c. 2. From be∣lieving Satan be∣fore God. Others, in imitation of the old Adam, believe the Devil before God, credit his Sug∣gestions, beyond all Gods Discoveries. O! O! What a black grain'd Sin is this? Saith the Devil, You have sinned against Light, and
therefore Christ will not favour you: Saith God, Let the wicked forsake his way, Isa. 55.7 and his thoughts, and I will abundantly pardon. Saith the Devil, You have sinned more than others, you have provoked God exceedingly, and therefore never hope for saving benefit by Christs death: Saith God, Cease to do evil, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. learn to do well, come now, and let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Saith the Devil, You have sinned not only against the Law, but a∣gainst the Gospel, you have neglected Christ: Saith God, Luke 12.10. Every sin against the Son of man shall be forgiven. Saith the Devil, You have no right to Christ, it is in vain to come: Jo. 3.16 Saith God, Whosoever believeth shall not perish. Saith the Devil, Your day of grace is past: Saith God, To day, whilst it is called to day, Hebr. 3.7, 13. hear his voice. Saith the Devil, God never in∣tended you good, you are a Vessel of Dis∣honour: Saith God, As I live, Ezek. 33.11. I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live. Now I pray consider, whether God takes it kindly at your hands, John 8.44. Titus 1.2. that you should lay more weight on the Father of Lyes, than on the faithful God, who hath promised, and can∣not lye; who must cease to be God in that ve∣ry moment, wherein he ceaseth to be true. You perhaps deceive your selves with the Pharisees Comforts, Luke 18, 11. You are not as these Har∣lots, as these Publicans, no Drunkards, &c. but little think that you put the Lye upon God. You believe the Enemy more than the Friend. O! what a Provocation is this?
3. Through Pride. Rom. 10.3. Others, through the pride of their hearts, will not come (as yet) unto Christ. They have no mind to submit to the Righteousness of faith. He is judged a proud man (without a Jury sitting on him) who when Condemned will not submit, will not stoop so low as to ac∣cept of a Pardon. I must indeed correct my self, men are willing to be justified; but they would have their duties to purchase their peace and the favour of God: they scorn to be beholding to Christ. Thousands will dye and be damned rather than they will have a pardon upon the sole account of Christs Me∣rits and Obedience. O the cursed Pride of the heart! When will men cease to be wiser than God? To limit God? When will men be contented with Gods way and method of sa∣ving them by the bloud of the Everlasting Covenant? How dare men thus to prescribe to the infinitely wise God? Is it not enough for thee that thy destruction is of thy self? But must thy Salvation be of thy self too? Is it not enough that thou hast wounded thy self? But wilt dye for ever, rather, than be behold∣ing to a plaister of free grace? Wilt be dam∣ned unless thou mayst be thine own Saviour? Jo. 3.16. God is willing (So God loved the World, that he gave his Son) Art thou so proud, as that thou wilt not be beholding to God? Thou wilt deserve, or have nothing. What shall I say? Rev. 3.17. Poor thou art, and yet proud, thou hast nothing but wretchedness and mise∣ry, and yet thou art talking of a Purchase. This is a provocation. God resisteth the proud,
especially the spiritually proud. He that is proud of his Clothes and Parentage, is not so contemptible in Gods eyes, as he that is proud of his Abilities, and so scorns to submit to Gods methods for his salvation by Christ and his righteousness alone. 4. Others, Through hopes to prepare them∣selves, and make them∣selves fit for Christ. through their ignorance and weakness stay off from Christ, in hopes of working that, which cannot be wrought without a Christ. Were their hearts so humbled and melted, as such and such are, could they see all their sins subdued, were their hearts more fitted and prepared for to lodge so great a Friend, they would then close with the Pro∣mises, with Christ; whereas they should come to Christ, as soon as they apprehend they are poor, blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17, 18. for them lie calls and invites. But alas! a sight of their wants, is a barr to their coming. They would have the Fruit first, and then the Tree; have their hearts purified, and then come to Christ (Who is appointed by God to be Sanctification to them.) God comes, by his Spirit, to con∣vince them of their sinful nature and weak∣ness, on purpose, that they seeing their ne∣cessity of Christ, might flye to him, as their City of refuge, and they are driven farther off by the sight of their sins and unworthiness. Whereas they should come to Christ, as to a Magazine and Store-house, and wait on him, in the use of means, for the broken heart, the pure heart, and all other spiritual mer∣cies, which their Souls are yet destitute of, but they will not. O faithless Generation!
How long shall I be with you? Mar. 9.19. how long shall I suffer you? Christ is put to the utmost of his patience, to bear with Unbelief. 5. Through seeming modesty. Others, through some kind of seeming modesty and tenderness, delay in their coming to Christ. They are afraid of abusing the ho∣liness and justice of God, if they should hope for any privilege in the blood of Christ, and mercies of God. What mercy for me? me a proud wretch, an unclean wretch, an ene∣my to God, a slighter of his Spirit? I de∣serve nothing but Hell, what Heaven for me? I have affronted the Majesty of the great God, and what? This God bestow a Christ on me? Who can believe, that the Just God, who turned down the glorious Angells to Hell for one transgression, will save me, who have committed more sins in number, than the hairs on my head, than the sands on the Sea shore? And what, Mercy for me? Shall I have a Christ? Will Christ accept of me, who have wronged his Father and him for so many years toge∣ther? O! how long doth many an awake∣ned Soul hang in doubts and fears, ere it will venture upon Christs graciousness alone; and then, when the Soul hath long stood out, the fears increase. I have refused Christ so long; to all my former transgressions I have added this, my puting off Christ and Salvation, when freely tendered, and therefore sure I may not now come. And now if Christ offers them mercy, still they are fearful; they cannot believe that Christ
is serious and real. O! by these jealousies of Christ, you provoke him not a little. You are ready to say, This is too good news to be true: What is this, but to say, The Gospel is false, it is no true and faithful Word, 'tis not to be received with all acceptation, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save the greatest of sinners, blasphemers and perse∣cutours of Christ? This is the great Sin that made Christ weep. You seldome find Christ weeping over the Idolaters of the World: I find him not weeping over Sodom and Gomor∣rah; but if Hierusalem refuse Christ, this makes him weep indeed, Hierusalem, Luke 19.42. Hieru∣salem, O if thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace! Christ became a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3 was acquainted with griefs, &c. on hopes he should see of the travail of his Soul, and be satisfied. It troubles Christ to see thee to goe about to make God a Lyar to his Son, and to be deni∣ed thy loves and affections, for whose sake he submitted to his Fathers frowns. O! this sin of Unbelief hath great unkindness in it, Mar. 16.14. and therefore no wonder if Christ upbraids for it. A man is properly upbraided, when as the kindness that hath been done to him, is re∣vealed to him, together with his ungrateful∣ness. But what shall I say? So farr are Souls from coming to Christ, that they do seldome bewail this sin, and seldome seek to God for power against it; and though men pretend they cannot come to Christ, yet the truth is, they will not (so Mr. Fenner, in his willful
impenitency hath abundantly proved.) The immediate cause of your not coming is not a natural deficiency, but a moral opposition of Spi∣rit against Christ. CHAP. VII. Their taking Christ partially: without con∣jugal affections: and without considering the cost they may be at. 5ly. Many take Christ partially. IF at length men are perswaded to come to Christ, yet they take him partially, both as King, Prophet, and Priest. As their King. They are contented he shall rule in ma∣ny things, but not in all. Their drudgery to one or two lusts must be preferr'd before Christs Scepter and Government: Some part of Christs Yoak of Commandements they will submit to; but are not pleased that Christ shall impose what they will; they pick and choose: here they will obey, in another thing I pray have me excused: few are brought to say, Lord what wilt thou have me to do? Any thing Lord, I am called to thy foot, as the man of the East was, ready to trudge af∣ter thee to the ends of the Earth. As their Prophet. Here they divide too; many things
they will learn of Christ, but they must part∣ly lean to their own understandings, and be taught for Doctrines, the Traditions of men, They are also partial in their close with Christ as their Priest. They hope to be saved partly by his mediation, and partly by their own. As the Papists, so many Protestant Pro∣fessours are for a divided Christ; few are for exalting Christ alone, so as to renounce all other Lords, who have had Dominion over them, and to count all other Teachers besides Christ as vain, absurd, unsound, and weak. Few re∣nounce all their own righteousness, as dung, to put the Crown on Christs head alone, to make Christ their alone Mediatour, their a∣lone Intercessour. No, they must have Cisterns of their own to keep their water in, and Sands of their own to build upon, and so Christ, the Elect precious Stone, is refused by the Builders. How many hope to be par∣doned, partly by Christ, and partly by their Civility, and new Obedience? They lay their title to God, Heaven, and Glory, partly from Christs merits, and partly from their own deserts; few whose hopes are founded on Christ's satisfaction alone; but their hopes rise or fall according to what they do for him, rather than according to what he hath done and suffered for them: their hopes of accep∣tance with God are more from their reforma∣tions, than from Christs entring within the Vaile: If they have peace of Conscience, they ascribe it to their Prayers, rather than to Christs Intercession, and if they Pray in
secret in their Closet, and in their Family too, when both before were neglected, they hope to pass by this Bridge to Heaven; but if it be too short, they will set Christ to patch up what is wanting, that they may land on the other shore. Hence it is that many Pro∣fessors are much more consciencious in their obedience to the moral law, than they are to the Law of Faith, for that they hope their o∣bedience will steed them asmuch, if not more than Jesus Christ; but if they understand that without Faith there is no pleasing God, then they will labour for a faith that may justifie them, rather as an act of theirs, than in re∣spect of the object Christ. Christ is still used only upon necessity, and to make up the want of somewhat else; but very few dare rest on the merits of Christ alone, so as to see all their righteousness to be as filthy rags. To few s Christ made of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Let me ring a peal in your Ears, Totum Christum et totum Christi. You must receive Christ entirely, all Christ, and all of Christ, or you are not Christians, though you have a name to live. Christ is coming to distin∣guish names from things, and then you will curse the day you had the Name, or heard of the Name; you will have your portion with Hypocrites. These are indispensible terms on which Christ will insist, All, or none; Christ as a Refiner, as well as a Sa∣viour; Christ as a Lord, as well as a Sa∣crifice.
Sixthly. Many close with Christ without coniugal affections. If men are perswaded in the horrours of their Spirits to take Christ as Priest, Pro∣phet and King, as a meer shift, to shift off their troubles and sorrows, and their sins (the occasions of them;) yet their hearts stand off from Christ, as an Husband, they have not conjugal affections to him, their hearts are not brought over to him, they receive him not into their bosomes, into their choicest affections all this while. There is still some secret lust more precious than Christ; he is not the chief Corner-Stone, whereas to them that believe he is precious, exceeding precious. Few, like Paul, deter∣mine to know nothing else save Christ, and him Crucified. One Christ was enough to take up Pauls thoughts to eternity; Si Chri∣stum noscis, &c. he did not care what he was ignorant of, so he knew Christ. Though he was brought up at Gama∣liels feet, he laid down all his knowledge at Christs feet. 1. Are your hearts so drawn to Christ, From esteeming Christ the most necessary good. as to count him the most necessary good in all the World? And all other things to be but ad∣juncts, so that you are able to live without them, but not without Christ? Liberty is sweet to a believer; but he can live in a Pri∣son, yea and live merrily too, he can sing there, if Christ be within the grate: Bread is sweet, but he can live in a Wilderness (a de∣solate houling desart) and sing there too, as Moses did, if Christ be there, yea and pre∣ferr it before Canaan. If thy Presence go not with us, carry us not hence. A Wilderness
with Christ is more precious than a Canaan without him. If ye were through Believers, the World would not be accounted among the Necessaries. One thing is necessary, One, not many. Other things may divert, or may a little refresh, but Christ is the Neces∣sary. 2. yea, the only good Is he in a sense the only good to your Souls? Is nothing else good separated from Christ? give a Believer what you will without Christ; it weighs nothing, he droops, as the Mary∣gold, when the Sun withdraws. What is all this whilst I am Christless? There is none good but Christ. Riches are miscall'd goods: they are not good sure in their reference as they relate to Christ, as they come from Christ, from that bosome of love, and as they advance Christ, and bring Christ and the Soul to nearer Communion. If the World in its glory, splendour, and fulness, hinder communion with Christ, by deadning; flatning, and distracting the heart, it be∣comes a burthen: He is burthened with friends, relations, enjoyments of all sorts, that rob him of Christ, that ecclipse the face of the Sun of Righteousness, through their unhappy interposals. Phil. 3.7 What was gain is count∣ed loss. As he enjoyeth much or little of Christ, thereafter he laughs, or weeps, he riseth or falleth. In Christ are Riches, ho∣nours and friends: yea Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, &c. The Lord is the Temple; He is all in all; Col. 3.11. He is all things, and in all things, not only by way of merit, whatever
they have, or expect, is on Christs account; nor only by way of conveyance, through him we have all good communicated; nor only by way of causality, as he worketh all in all; but he is all virtually, he is instead of all things to them, he makes up the defect of all things. If no Estate, no Friends, no Liberty, no Health, no Comfort, &c. yet the Believer wanteth nothing: As having nothing, 2 Cor. 6.10. and yet possessing all things. Thus the Woman told the Persecutour, when he threatned her, to deprive her of her Husband, Christ is my Husband. Professours, look to your hearts, Isa. 24.16.56.3. to your affections, and then you will have cause to cry, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me, I am a dry tree. Seventhly, How few Christians have, Few con∣sider the Cost be∣fore∣hand. in their closing with Christ, considered the Cost they may be at? They were told of the Cross, but the Cross was at a great distance, and things, when remote, seem little. How many little studied the import of that word Cross? What a shameful, painful, tedious death it imports? Something of trouble they would undergoe for Christ, but really they never thought of dying for Christ, of spilling their hearts blood for Christ: So that they did not close with Christ understandingly, either they were ignorant of Christs person, or of the consequents of closing with him; that they should be hated of all men for his Names sake; Mat 10.22. Acts 14.22. that they must through much tribulation enter into his Kingdom; that they shall be put out of the Synagogues, and that the time
cometh, Jo. 16.2. that whosoever killeth them, will think that he doth God service. Hence when unex∣pectedly the rain descends, Mat. 7.27. the floods come, and the winds blow and beat upon their houses, (the stately spiritual buildings, which they have been erecting) they do not only totter, but fall, and great is their fall. Even Cedars are taken up by the roots. How many in such times put away a good Conscience, and concern∣ing Faith have made ship-wrack? 1 Tim. 1.19. Jude v. 12. How many are Trees, whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots? They see not the riches of Christ will make them a∣mends for all these losses and perills: they cannot ballance the troubles of the Flesh with the comforts of the Spirit; the present evil things, with the future inheritance in Hea∣ven: the Temptations they meet with are unexpected. They are like some Ladies, that put forth to Sea for pleasure; they launch forth towards Christ, but as the King of Na∣varre, who said, he would not venture far∣ther, than he could quickly retreat, in case of danger. The Storm makes them return to their Harbour; yea, with the Dogg to the vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22. and the Sow to the mire. These poor Souls (O that my heart could bleed for them) were willing to come up to some of Christs terms, Gal. 3.4. to lose a little, nay, to suffer many things, but they cannot endure to lose Life. O my Soul! weep in secret for them, when thou considerest, that the Children of the Kingdom (Church-Members) shall be cast out into outer daarkness, Mat. 8.12. there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Matth. 5.18. Luke 9.23. Luke 14.26. God will not abate a punctum of what he requires, he expects that we take up the Cross daily, that we hate Life it self, as well as whatsoever else is near and dear unto us. The Conditions imposed on his fallen Creatures are irreversible, he will never stoop lower. O! this makes many a man to goe away sorrowful. I beseech the Reader to goe over with the work of Conversion again, now that the Cross is in sight, now that Tribulation ariseth; Now let him see, whether Christ is better than Name, Liberty, Friends, Relations, Lively-hood, and Life it self; and whether he can believe, Luke 9.24. that he that will save his life, shall lose it, and he that will lose his life for Christs sake, shall find it, and that with advantage. CHAP. VIII. Their shuffling together false Signes of closing with Christ. 8ly. HOw do many Professours shuffle to∣gether a company of false Signes of closing with Christ? Many rest in false Signes of closing with Christ. How do they count them true and infallible, which are but question∣able; yea, which have been found in un∣sound Hypocritical hearts; and so deceive
themselves, Their ground∣less Pleas, that they have clo∣sed with Christ. as if they had a Christ, and real Grace within them? How do they live upon these Signes comfortably all their dayes with∣out a Christ? Excuse me, if I bring in their Pleas, and answer them briefly. 1. I am changed from what I was, nay, changed inwardly. So was Saul, And it was so, 1 Sam. 10.9. that when he had turned his back to goe from Samuel, God gave him another heart. Thou mayest have another heart, and yet not a new heart. 2. I have extraordinary Gifts: I was dull, unable to speak of God, tongue-tyed among the Saints; but I can now hold a discourse with them, and manage some of the highest services, as well as they. Might not Saul say so much for himself? had not he the Spirit of Prophesie to admiration? When a company of Prophets met him, 1 Sam. 10.10, 11. the Spirit of God came up∣on him, and he prophesied among them: Then the people said one to another, What is this that is come to the Son of Kish? Is Saul also among the Prophets? The Spirit of God was upon him also at another time, 1 Sam. 19.23, 24. and he went on, and pro∣phesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah; and he stript off his clothes also, and prophesied be∣fore Samuel in like manner, and lay downnaked all that day, and all that night. He was so great a Proficient, that (as one observes) As soon as he was admitted into the Society, he commenced Doctour, and prophesied with the best of them: They stood and prophesied, he went on, he could run and prophesie; yea, he was so full of the Spirit of Prophesie, that he
neither eat, nor drank, nor slept, nor rose; but lay down naked all the day, and all the night; he was as in a traunce all that while, and wanted neither meat, nor drink, nor clothes, nor sleep. 3. I was full of revenge, but now I am come to such a pitch of Religion, that I can pass by Offences; yea, pass them by, when I have an opportunity of punishing them that affront me. Had not Saul so much Religion? The Children of Belial said, 1 Sam. 10.27. How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought him no Prosents; but he held his peace. He bears much, that can bear being derided. 4. Though I am meek in mine own Cause, yet when the Name of God, and the Church of God suffer, I can be very much inflamed. So was hypocritical Saul, 1 Sam. 11.2, 6. When Nahash the Ammonite told the men of Jabesh, On this condition will I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, the Spirit of God came upon Saul, when he heard those tydings, and his anger was kindled greatly. 5. I am merciful to men, to mine Enemies, because God hath shewed me mercy. So was Saul, And Saul said, 1 Sam. 11.13. There shall not a man be put to death this day, for this day the Lord hath wrought Salvation in Israel. Though he was incited to revenge, yet he would not. 6. When I have any Mercy from God, I see God in the Mercy, and is not this a good Sign? Truly no better than Saul had, 1 Sam. 11.13. To day the Lord hath wrought Salvation in Israel.
7. I engage God with me; before I set upon any considerable Undertakings. Did not Saul so much? Then said I, the Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made Supplication to the Lord; 1 Sam. 13.12. I for∣ced my self therefore, and offered a burnt Of∣fering. And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hi∣ther the Ark of God, &c. And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I goe down after the Phi∣listines? 8. When I Pray, I look what becomes of my Prayer, and I suspend many of my Motions, till I have an Answer. Saul the Hypocrite went so farr; he look'd after his Prayer, and would not goe down after the Philistines, 1 Sam. 14.37. because God answered him not that day. 9. If I have no Answer to Prayer, I exa∣mine the Reason, and I am sure this is more than most Professours do. But not more than Saul did, When God answered him not that day, 1 Sam. 14.37, 38. Saul said, Draw ye nigh hither all the chief of the people, and know and see where∣in this sin hath been this day. 10. I am troubled for other mens sins, and cannot but reprove sinners; Is not this a Sign of Sincerity? I answer, No, unless Saul were sincere: When he was told, the Peo∣ple eat the blood, he was troubled, and re∣proved them too; 1 Sam. 14.33. He said, Ye have trans∣gressed. 11. My Zeal against Sin is such, that I punish it where-ever I find it; I am imparti∣al in my rebukes of sin: my Children, as well as my Servants, are corrected, if they trespass
against the Lord. Hence I conclude mine estate is good. And so might Saul. 1 Sam. 14.29. As the Lord liveth, who saveth Israel, though it (the sin) be in Jonathan my Son, he shall surely dye. 12. I conclude God loves me from a con∣stant series of smiling Providences, that fol∣loweth all that I take in hand: I find that the Lord blesseth me in my goings out and com∣ings in; whatsoever I do doth prosper. And had not Saul strange Successes and Victories? When Israel was so low, that they had no weapons for Warr, nor Smiths to make any, Saul took the Kingdome over Israel, 1 Sam. 14.47. and fought against all his Enemies on every side, &c. and whither soever he turned himself, he vexed them. 13. I find a readiness to confess others better than my self; so did Saul with tears in his Eyes. And Saul said, 1 Sam. 24.16, 17. is this thy voice my Son David? And Saul lift up his voice, and wept, and he said to David, thou art more righteous than I. 14. I continue my duties when I fear God hath rejected me; even in desertion I keep on worshiping. So did Saul, when Samuel told him, God hath rejected thee, 1 Sam. 15.25, 30, 31. he desired Sa∣muel to turn again with him, that he might worship the Lord, and he prevailed with Sa∣muel to turn again, and Saul worshiped the Lord. 15. I see a beauty in the Church and People of God. So did Balaam. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Isra∣el!
As the Valleys are they spread forth, Numb. 24.5, 6. as Gardens by the Rivers sides, as the Trees, &c. which the Lord hath planted, and as Cedar trees besides the waters. 16. I cannot for the greatest advantage be brought to sin against God. Neither could Balaan. Numb. 24.13. If Balak would give me his house full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond the Com∣mandement of the Lord, &c. 17. I live up to the dictates of Conscience, though I hazard the displeasure of great men thereby. Numb. 24.10. So did that Sorcerer, though Ba∣laks anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together. 18. I have some sights of another World, and I desire to spend an eternity with the Saints. So had Balaam, Numb. 23.10. and did not he desire so much? Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. 19. When I think of the day of Judgement, I am affected with it, whereas before I was sottish and secure. So was Felix. As he (Paul) reasoned of Righteousness, Acts 24.25. Temperance and Judgement to come, Felix trembled. 20. I am an Orthodox Protestant; so thou mayst be a Teacher too, thou mayst not only know Gods will, and approve the things that are more excellent, Rom. 2.18, 19, 20, 24. being instructed out of the Law, but confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of them, which are in darkness, an Instructer of the foolish, a Teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law; and yet fall short of Christ, and of Heaven, yea the name of God may
be blasphemed among the Gentiles, through thee. 21. I am free from the scandaious evils of the times, So were they in Peter, They had escaped the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22. yea and that through the knowledge of Christ (which is more than the moral Heathens ever had) and yet were dogs and swine still. 22. I live inoffensively, none can lay any thing to my charge. But was not Paul, whilst Christless, Phil. 3.6. touching the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless? At the same time he was Persecuting the Church of God. 23. I have obeyed the Commandements of God for a long time. I am not like a Mushrom, soon up, and soon vanishing; I am a constant Servant to the Commandements of God. So was the young man in the Gospel; Matth. 19.20. he said un∣to Christ, All these things I have kept from my youth up; what lack I yet? 24. I have inlargements in duties, and sa∣tisfie not my self with ordinary duties, Matth. 23.14. Luk. 18.12. but make Conscience of extraordinary duties, I fast, and that oft. And did not the Pharisees make long Prayer, and fast off? I fast twice in the week. 25. I have joyes in Ordinances. the word of the Lord is sweet and precious, I know the time when it was not so. But did not Hered hear the word of God gladly? Did he not see an excellency in John? Mar. 6.20. Had he not his Virtues and Graces in great esteem? Had he not a Reverend behaviour towards him? Did not he observe him, and care to please
him? He heard him, and that gladly: He was much delighted in John's Preaching. 26. Nay but I go farther, for I stirr up o∣thers to frequent Sermons. So did the Elders of Israel, Ezek. 33.30. Come I pray you, and hear what is the word, that comes forth from the Lord, &c. 27. I obey as well as hear; I hear in order to practise. And was not Herod conformable to John's Doctrine? though John Preached not placentia, Mar. 6.20. he was a rough Preacher, a bur∣ning, as well as a shining light, yet the Text tells us, e did many things. 28. Matth. 7.28.13.54. Mar. 1.22.11.18. When I hear the word, I am strangely taken with it. So were the people, when they heard Christ, they were astonished at his Doc∣trine. 29. Many a time under a Sermon my knees and heart ake. So it was with Felix. As he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, &c. Felix trembled. 30. But I Pray and Pray oft as well as hear, and therefore is it not well? It may be ill e∣nough, if thou hast no better evidence. When you make many Prayers (when you mul∣tiply Prayer, when you add Prayer to Pray∣er) yet I will not hear. Isa. 1.15 31. There was a time, when I felt sin no more, than a dead man feels a mountain up∣on him; but now it is heavy; 'tis burthen∣some. And was it not so to Cain? And Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment (or, mine iniquity) is greater than I can bear. Was it not so to Judas, Mat. 25.8, 10. when he repented himself, and restor'd the thirty pieces of silver, saying I
have sinned, in that I have betrayed the Inno∣cent blood, and went and hanged himself? 32. I have desires after grace, and am wil∣ling to be at cost for it. So the foolish Virgins. And the foolish (being awakened out of their security in their form of Godliness) said unto the wise, give us of your Oyl: Matth. 25.8, 10 yea they went to buy. They were willing to be at cost for the power of Godliness. 33. I associate only with Gods people, yea with the purest and holiest. So did the foolish Virgins, they associated not only with Vir∣gins, but with the wise Virgins. Matth. 25.1. Both wise and foolish went out together to meet the Bride∣groom. 34. I consult Ministers for my Soul, and have high attainments. But wherein dost thou go beyond those, of whom it is said, Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my wayes; as a Nation that did Righteousness, and for∣sook not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice: they take de∣light in approaching to God? Wherein dost thou go beyond those in the Hebrews, Hebr. 6.4, 5. who were once inlightened, and had tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy-Ghost, Hebr. 6.9. and had tasted the good word of God, and the Powers of the world to come. If thou hast not better things than these, thou hast not savingly closed with Jesus Christ; for as yet thou hast nothing that accompanieth Salvation, from which Salvation cannot be seperated.
O! I cannot but pitty these poor hearts, these Almost-Christians. Almost Christians, and Almost Saved, I may say they are not farr from the Kingdome of God, and yet in a sense they are farther than any others. Our greatest difficulty hath been to undeceive these, to unchrist these, I mean, to take off these figleaves, with which they have covered themselves, that they may come to Christ for clothing, and so prevent the appearing of their nakedness. O! It is hard tough work to perswade a proud Pharisee, that all his Righteousness will not steed him, that he must fling away all, that he must have some∣thing else to shew for Heaven and Glory. O! How have men fled in our faces, when we have told them, that yet they have nothing that is essential to a Christian, as a Christian, or which makes a Christian a Christian, no more than a picture hath of the essence of a man? You may imagine a man, that hath be∣stown 20 or 30 years in building, how loath is he to pull down all again? Though he fears the foundation is but on the Sands; he will rather venture, than begin all anew: He is even ashamed to unravell all the Clue of his ungrounded confidences. What begin upon a new bottome? No, not he; and so Christ and he part. He takes his supposed grace to be a Christ, or at least, that there must be Christ, where such changes are, and so cries out, Soul take thine ease, thou hast goods laid up for many years, yea for Eternity.
CHAP. IX. Their Vngodliness: their Ignorance: their Errours, etc. HAve not many Professors been ungodly men, , men without worship? Profectors Vngodli∣ness. If to deny or withhold any part of that respect or honour, that is due unto God, Jude 4. be ungodli∣ness; how much ungodliness hath there been, and is there still amongst us? Which of us hath not been guilty of not giving God his right or due honour? Have not we suck'd in many un∣godly Principles? As that it is in vain to worship God, there is no happiness (comparable to what the World doth afford) in communion with God; Religion is but a notion and fancy; Policy is the only Piety; This world must be look'd after, whatever becomes of Conscience, &c. Psal. 50.21. Job 22.12, 13. Psal. 14.1. Have not we been guilty of ungodly thoughts? have not we thought, that God is not so harsh, but we may take liberty in sinning; that he taketh no notice of what we think, speak and do, yea that there is no God? Have not we spoken ungodly words? have not we uttered those very hard speeches which ungodly sinners speak? Have not we spoken against Gods ser∣vants? yea have we been afraid to speak against
his Servant Moses? And have not many of our deeds been ungodly, yea though we have not ungodly committed them? God hath always been sorely provoked by ungodliness; The Flood swept away the World of the Ungodly; 2 Pet. 2.7. but yet we might have been ungodly under the Law, at a cheaper rate, than under the Gospel; because the Gospel gives us more clear, and certain notions, of Gods excel∣lency and glory, and lays more obligations upon us to respect God, and therefore is cal∣led a doctrine according to godliness. 1 Tim. 6.3. Psa. 1.5. Jude 15. The un∣godly shall not stand in judgement, neither in the world to come, nor in this world. The day of Judgement is appointed on purpose to take vengeance of ungodly persons. First, Their Ignor∣ance of God. 1 Cor. 15.34. John 4.22. Have not some Professors been, and still are, altogether ignorant of God? Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this (saith the Apostle) to your shame. May it not be said to many of us, Ye worship ye know not what? Do not many Professours worship God upon no other account, than the Romans did their Jupiter, or the Ephesians their Dia∣na, viz. because he is the God of the Nation wherein they were born; because he was their fore-Fathers God, because his worship is in credit, and because the Magistrate com∣mands that God be worshipped? Have not we worshipped God by Tradition, more than out of Conviction of Judgement? Hath not our worship been to the unknown God? Acts 17.23, God is tru∣ly, in a Scripture sense, unknown to all, that do not know him experimentally and pra∣ctically.
Now, have we tasted and seen, Psal. 34.8. that the Lord is gracious? Have not we said, we knew God, and yet kept not his Commande∣ments? He that saith so, is a Lyar, 1 Jo. 2.4, 3. and the truth is not in him: Hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his Commandements. If we do not thus know God, we are none of his Children; he hath no Child so little, but he knoweth his Father: Jer. 31.4. They shall all know me, from the least to the greatest. Our being the People of God in Profession, will not se∣cure us from ruine. Hos. 4 6 2 Thes. 1.8. My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge. The Lord Jesus will come in flaming Fire, to render vengeance on us; for he will so deal with all that know not God. Secondly, Their Erours; How erroneous have been Profes∣sours? None can be such a stranger to our Is∣rael, as to be ignorant, that a Spirit of De∣lusion hath been let loose abroad, from Dan to Beersheba, so that the Pillars of Religion are shaken, the most concerning Truths que∣stioned, if not exploded with scorn and con∣tempt. Have not some made God the Au∣thor of Sin? Have not others forgot that they were Creatures; and have assumed the liberty, or rather highest impudence, to say, that they were Godded, and that the fulness of the God-head doth dwell bodily in every Saint, in the same measure as it did in Christ Jesus, whilst he dwelt upon the Earth? Nay, have not others affirmed, Jesus Christ to be a Bastard? Have not o∣thers said, They were Christ, and would,
in the pride of their hearts, have others to worship them? Have not some denied Christs Deity, affirming, That he was not God essentially, but only nominally; yea, that his pure Nature was stained with Sin? How many have denied the Trinity of Per∣sons? How many, under pretence that the Law of Works binds not, have abrogated all the Laws of Christ, and turned cursed Libertines? How many have, under pre∣tence of advancing the Spirits testimony, maintained Sanctification to be a dirty qua∣lification, and cryed down all marks and signes? How many have held, that the Doctrine of Repentance, Fasting, and Hu∣miliation, are too Legal for the Spirit of a Christian? How many have denied Christs sitting in a Body at the right hand of God? How many have denied his Satisfaction and Purchase? Have not some held, that there is no Heaven, no Hell, no Resurrection from the Dead, and that the Beast and Man have one common end? How many have been altogether for Inspirations, and pro∣fess'd themselves above the Sphere of all Ordinances? How many have denied Wa∣ter-Baptism, the Supper, the Ministry, yea the Scriptures of God? How many have accounted it their highest Perfection, to sin away all tenderness of Conscience; and look'd upon themselves the more holy, by how much Villany they could be guilty of beyond others?
How can we refrain from weeping out our eyes, how should our eares tingle, Consider∣ations to promote mourning for er∣rours. to see and hear these Abominations? How hath the God of Truth been provoked by these cursed miscreants? What horrible affronts have been offered to the dread Majesty of God thereby? How many thousand Souls have perished by these Delusions? And what adishonour hath come to the Christian Religion by reason thereof, I cannot express. Certainly (saith one) there is more deadly mischief, Bp. Hall. and high∣er offence to God in them, than in those practi∣cal evils, which honest hearts profess to abhorr: These, as they are immediate fruit of our spiri∣tual part, so they do more immediately strike at the God of Spirits in his truth and holiness: And as Religion is the highest Concernment of the Soul, so the depravation of Religion must needs be the most dangerous and damnable. When Hezekiah heard the blasphemies of Rabshekah, it is said, He rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the House of the Lord, and said, This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blas∣phemy. If an Assyrian Blasphemer was so great a troubler, what troublers are Nominal Christians, thus abusing their Profession, and the God they pretend to serve. But alas! Professors miscarri∣ages as to errours, Not mourning for them, How little have we been affect∣ed with the Floud cast out of the Serpents mouth after the Woman? Though the Trumpet hath sounded, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, because of Spiritual Plagnes; We have been puffed up, and have
not mourned; We have spoken laughingly of those sins; We have not considered this Judgement, as coming from the Lord, as a token of his wrath (in giving up so many of our Country-men to strong delusious, to believe lyes) We have shewed little Zeal for Gods glory, that hath been blemished by these de∣testable things: Neither have we pittied the many that have followed these pernicious ways. How little have we mourned for them, though the Apostle saith, their damnation slum∣bereth not. How few means have we used for their re∣ducement? Not using mouns to reduce the erro∣neous. hardly put up a Prayer for them? not admonished them, but let them alone to perish in their delusions? Not so much as re∣quested an able Minister to have recourse to these poor deluded Souls in order to the turn∣ing of them from the Idols of their own brains? How little have we endeavoured to strengthen our selves? Not pre∣paring Antidotes against the Infe∣ction. to prepare Antidotes against this Infection? We have not studied the Scriptures, that we might warn the unruly, and resist gain-sayers, and be established in the present Truths; but, though we have seen so many ship-wrack their Faith and Consciences, yet we have been high-minded, and have not feared. Have we not been guilty of not expressing our dislike of the wayes of Hereticks as we should? Not dis∣liking them. We have not shunn'd them as we ought. To maintain a Party, to strengthen a Faction, how have we too much counte∣nanced
them? their fellowship hath not been enough avoided. How little have we regard∣ed those Apostolical injunctions? Now I be∣siech you, Brethren, mark them, Rom. 16.17, 18. which cause divisions and offences, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. 2 Thes. 3.14. And if any man obey not our word, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. We have shunn'd the house where one with the Plague∣fore dwells, Prov. 19.27. but we have not with-drawn from them that cause to erre from the words of Knowledge. What shall I say? Nor con∣tending for the Faith. We have not so hearti∣ly and vigorously contended for the Faith, which was once, and but once, delivered to the Saints, as we ought. The Lord humble us for our luke-warmness. We have cryed up Moderation, and counted him an Hagio ma∣stix, that hath appeared against the abomina∣tions of the Head. Sure we have not been valiant for the Truth upon the Earth. Jer. 9.3. We have not sparkled so much the more in an holy Zeal, because others have perverted the right wayes of the Lord. Because Fools have not been answered, Prov. 26.4, 5. they have grown Wise in their own conceit. We have been afraid to meddle with some, because they have (unreasona∣bly) shrowded themselves under the name of Saints; Gal. 2.11. but Paul with-stood Peter to the face, when Truth was like to suffer. I do not
in all this go about to justifie undue rigours. God knows how for base respects, interests, names of our own, we have been too severe against some things of less moment, some cir∣cumstances of Church Government, &c. too much zeal about mint and anice: we have been too imposing of what lies dark and ob∣scure in the book of God: and this while the Enemies tares have been suffered to grow, and the Fundamentals of our Religion have been (at least) endangered. But that which hath been Englands Sin is too much permitting and countenancing of damnable Doctrines. What shall I say? When God hath said, Who is on my side? who! We have hardly answered for our selves. We have been doubtfull in the Faith, wavering and reeling, not quite on, nor quite off, but staggering and tottering: Our Religion hath been rather Opinion, than Faith, so that we have stood looking on as Neuters, whilst Hereticks have made Mer∣chandise of Souls with fained words. 2 Pet. 2.3. The great Truths of God have lyen loose upon our hearts, they have not been fastned by the Master of the Assemblies, as nails in a sure place: and having little experience of what we profess to know, hence luke warmness followeth on course, or blind zeal for our Ancestours Religion. O how by reason of the great defection a∣mongst us hath the way of Truth been evil spo∣ken of? 2 Pet. 2.2. The common Enemy fastneth all up∣on Religion. They will not distinguish be∣tween Truth and Errour, yea between Truth
and Heresie, and never would put a difference between the Orthodox and the Heterodox; but if any one that had been called a Christian fell into any damnable Errours or Practises, all Christians suffered thereby; which forced the Primitive Fathers to Penne Remonstran∣ces, Confessions of Faith, and Apologies, that they might clear Christ and his Church from being Mother or Nurse to such a cursed Progency. And though some amongst us have by Confessions of Faith, and otherwise, born witness against Errours, yet doubtless our Consciences will tell us, that we have not by Fastings, Prayers, Studies, and all En∣deavours improved all our time and Spirits for the suppresssing and drying up the floud of the Serpent, the Soul-destroying floud, as we should; but if we have had any Acrimony of Spirit, we have let it forth upon them, that have crost us about Modes of Government; rather than against them, who have shaken the Foundations of our Religion. When I consider the multitudes of Sects that have been, and are still amongst us, I wonder not that the Gospel hath had a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts. In all times Christianity hath suffered hereby. Zozomen saith, that many would have followed Christ, Noscio quod dogma e∣ligam, quod praefe∣ram. but they were dis∣couraged by the divers Doctrines amongst his followers. Chrysosteme professeth that an Heathen told him, He would become a Christi∣an, but he knew not to what party of them to joyn, there are so many opinions and contentions among Christians. When the multitude of
Christians were one-soul'd, Act. 2.32, 33. then Fear, and Aw, and Reverence upon all the people; But now that one saith I am of Paul, &c. Now Religion is had in derision, and Atheisme grows exceedingly. O that mine head were as waters, &c. CHAP. X. Their want of Love to God, 3ly. WAnt of Love to God is another great branch of ungodliness a∣bounding amongst Professours. Profes∣sors want of Love to God in Christ. This is o great a branch of un∣godliness, that Jesus Christ hath reduced all the Commandements of the first Table con∣cerning the Worship of God to this great one, Matth. 23.36. thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all thy Might. Indeed every one pretends to love God: I hardly ever met with a person but said he lo∣ved God: He that hateth, dissembleth with his lips. Prov. 26 God may say truly, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? God is loved, but not for himself, but for what he brings. God is used, and the World is embraced. If God comes empty handed, or with his hands full of trouble, misery,
&c. Farewell. God is loved, 2 Tim. 3.4. Job. 21. but with a se∣condary love; Professours are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. God must stand by, and give place to sensuality, therefore they say unto God depart, &c. They like God whilst they may enjoy their pleasures too, whilst they may not be infringed. Let but a few things be considered, and we will see how much want there is of love to God in Christ. 1. Whom we love we are not ashamed of. Eviden∣ced in be∣ing asha∣med of a Relation to him. The Mothers is such to her Child, and Gods to us, he is not ashamed to be called our God. But do not we conceal our Title to God in some Companies that hate him? How do we throw off our Livery, Mar. 8.38. and dare not to be known to have walked with God. Remember he that is ashamed of me, &c. 2. Not trou∣bled for his disho∣nour. 2 Pet. 2.8. Psa. 119 53. 158. Not ha∣ting Gods Enemies. Psal. 139.21. Not ha∣ting self for not lo∣ving God. Parents are troubled when their Chil∣dren are dishonoured, and so Children when their Fathers: but are our Souls vexed, rack∣ed with the filthy couversations of Sodomites? Where are the Rivers of waters? Where is thy horrour because men keep not Gods Com∣mandements? 3. Those we love, their Enemies are ours; Parents Enemies are the Childrens Enemies. But do we hate them, that hate God, yea with a perfect hatred? 4. True lovers of God hate themselves for not loving God enough. How oft do they thus sigh? Wretch that I am, to grieve God, to estrange my self from God, so sel∣dome to be with God, to stay with him no longer! How can I content my self with
these transient glances, with these sudden casts of mine eye, and to be instantly wheel'd off from my God again? O this fleeting mind of mine! when will it fix on God, and abide with him? O this gadding heart of mine! when will it center in its true and perfect happiness? When I turn mine eye from earthly objects, either I am displeased with them, or there is some better thing that draws off my mind and heart: But dare I say so of God? that be is unlovely? and yet I have been weary of him. 5. Not trust∣ing him. Did we love God, we would trust him, we dare trust our very lives in a Friends hands: But we dare not so trust God. What would a carnal man give that he had but his life and health in his own dispose? When he is poor he had rather it were in his own hands to sup∣ply his wants, than in Gods; for he thinks it would go better with him. We trust God for little. We think our selves quite undone, when we have nothing save a God and a Pro∣mise to trust to. 6. Not joy∣ing, nor grieving as they ought. How little do we joy in the presence of God and Christ, and grieve for their absence? Is God all in the want of all, and is God the All in the enjoyment of all? Can we say, shew us the Father and it sufficeth us. When we have no Fig-tree left, can we rejoyce in the God of our Salvation? Can we say, Take all Ziba, now that my Lord is come, now that the Lord stoops to dwell in houses of clay. O worldlings! take your riches, and make the best
of them, I envy you not, I have enough in God. Do we so grieve for the absence of God and Christ, that nothing but God and Christ can make amends? O that our happi∣ness, life, comforts, were folded up in God and Christ! Can we live no more with∣out God and Christ, than a Beam without the Sun? 7, Not thought∣ful to please him. Rom. 12.2. Ephes. 5.10. True Lovers are thoughtfull to please the Beloved. But is there any thing that we think less of than pleasing of God? A true lover of God is alwayes proving, what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord. He is still searching that he may know more wherein he may please God, as willing al∣ways to be more useful for God: What have I to do more? but how seldom do we ask our hearts, what way may we walk in all well pleas∣ing? How seldom do we design for the glory of God? 8. True Lovers are open handed, and bountiful to God: they bestow readily and freely any thing they have on him: they will part with their Isaaks, their dearest things, with Limbs, &c. Rutherford that man of God, wish'd every limb a man, every bone a man, yea every hair a man to set forth the praises of God. When God calls for limbs, can we say Farewell to them? Are there not some things so dear to us that we cannot spare them to Christ? Are we so taken with Christ, that our hearts are dis-ingaged from the love of o∣ther things? is every thing vile, but Christ?
Is all you part from instantly supplyed in the loves and smiles of Christ? 9. True Lovers of God are contented with nothing by way of return from God, save only love from him: returns of love they must have. They do not pray save for love, they go not in before God for Corn, Wine, Oyle, &c. but for love, for God to open his heart, to take off his mask from his lovely face, and shew them the light of his countenance. They are not like the Raven, that came to Noah: more for necessity, Isa. 26.8, 9. than delight. Yea in the way of thy Judgements, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee: With my Soul have I desired thee: in the Night, yea with my Spirit within me, will I seek thee early. 10. Not prai∣sing him. True Lovers are wont to praise each other: But how seldom do we set forth the praises of Christ? Love is witty, full of elo∣quence, Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. witness the Spouse, My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thou∣sand, his head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, black as a Raven, his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set, his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his lipps like Lillies dropping sweet smelling myrrhe: his hands are like gold Rings set with the Berill, his belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires, his legs are as Pillars of Marble set upon sock∣ets of sine gold, his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, his mouth is most sweet,
yea he is altogether lovely. This is my Be∣loved, &c. I'le praise thee with uprightness: Psal. 119.7, 164. Septies, i. e. Sae∣pissime. Psal. 148. I'le praise thee seven times a day. Yea, Da∣vid thought seven times a day too little, and therefore he call'd in all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth, Air and Sea, to praise God: the Dragons in the deep must not be silent. True Lovers praise God as much as they can, they exalt God to the utmost of their power; and then, from a sense that God is above all their praise, they would have eve∣ry thing that hath breath to praise the Lord, yea and inanimates too for to joyn in the Quire, Doth Praise wait for God? 11. Did you love God, Not lo∣ving all of God and Christ. Jo. 13.34, 35. 1 Jo. 4.19. you would love e∣very thing of God: Do you love his Omni∣presence, his Justice, his Holiness? True love to Christ sticks not barely in the Person of Christ, but reacheth to all that have an Union with him. Do we love Christ mystical, as well as personal? Are we of Catholick Spirits? The Apostle is peremptory, and brandeth them all as Liars, that pretend to love God and Christ, and do not love Saints. 12. Not thirsting after nearer Commu∣nion. True Lovers of God thirst after nearer Commuion with God. My Soul followeth hard after thee. The Soul still encroacheth upon God. Let me see thy Glory, saith Moses, though he saw more than Mortals were (com∣monly) permitted to behold, yet Semper avarus eget, Much would have more. Psal. 42.1, 2. As the Hart panteth after the Water-brooks, so pan∣teth my Soul after thee, O God: my Soul thirst∣eth for God, for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before God? A true Lover of God is under an holy impatience, till he cea∣seth to see darkly in a glass: He would fain see with open face. O! (saith such a Soul) the distance between Christ and me is too great: O! I cannot but groan earnestly, when I con∣sider I am absent from the Lord, whilst pre∣sent in the body. Lord, (saith Austin) I will dye, that I may enjoy thee; I will not live, but I will dye: I desire to dye, that I may see Christ; and refuse to live, that I may live with Christ. The broken Rings, Contracts, and Espousals, content not the true Lover; but he longs for the Marriage day. Here are Clouds that oft pass 'twixt God and my Soul, O that I were above them! Here, if I see and enjoy, the fear of losing so sweet a sight, abates the comfort of fruition; but then wel∣come an eternal day, that shall never have a night. 13. Being weary of his Com∣mands. If you loved God, his Commande∣ments would not be grievous to you. Love cannot be easily poised: Love hath a kind of Almightiness in it, so that heavy burdens are made light, 1 Jo. 5.3 and almost impossible things be∣come feasible. But of how many things do we say, Mal. 1.13. What a weariness is it? How are you haled by Governours, by Conscience, and by the terrours of the Law unto Duties? How like Slaves chain'd to Gallies, you must work, though sore against your wills? Did you love God, you would count nothing te∣dious, Hebr. 12.1. save dulness, in his service. Sin would only be the Weight. O the burden of
Formality, Pride, &c! But O the pleasures of the wayes of God! His yoak is easie, his burden light. 14. Did you love God, Not fear∣ing how it goes with Gods affairs. 1 Sam. 4.13. you would be jea∣lous, lest it should goe ill with Gods affairs. The loving Mother trembleth, lest the Child should suffer, when she is off from it. But alas! how few Elies are there, whose hearts tremble beause of the Ark? Do you really fear, lest Formality should eat out the Power of Godliness, lest Traditions should make void the Commandements of God, lest your Trades should spoyl your Communion with God. You may easily imagine, Consider∣ations tending to humble us, for want of Love to God. the want of Love to God, must needs be a great Provocation. O to pretend love, and yet Judas-like, betray Christ with a kisse; to say, Hail Master, and yet preferr a base Lust before him? What an indignity is it to the Husband, that the Wife loves the Slave before him? The World should be your Slave, but it hath got the heart, the bosome; and Christ must stand without doors till his locks are wet. Cant. 5. O that God should stoop so low, as to love you, as to make you the birth of his everlasting counsels of love; that he should carry you long in the womb of his eternal purpose! This goodly Fabrick of Heaven and Earth had not been e∣rected, but as a Stage, whereon he would shew his love to you. And did he not, in the fulness of time, purchase you by the blood of his First-born, yea of his only begotten Son, and for this very end, that he might gain your love, as well as reveal his own love?
And yet that your love should not be like an Eccho, which returneth what it receiveth? Sure you should cast back Gods beams of love upon himself. This is all he expects, My Son, give me thine heart: All the command he layes upon you, Mat. 22 36, 37. is, in one word, To Love him. God might have commanded our Children to be sacrificed, to pass through the Fire. O! what a favour is it to love the Lord? That God will honour us so farr, as to suffer us to love him? And yet we love any thing, any sordid base Lust, rather than God. We would count it a favour, if a Prince would give us a privy Key, to come to him when we please: Here is more honour, we may have recourse to the bosom of God when we will. God would have us to love him with all the heart, with all the soul. The Lord would not lose one grain of our love. O that we should deny him that which he (with reve∣rence be it spoken, and thought on) is so fond of. Deut. 10.12. And now Israel, what doth the Lord require of thee, but to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul. God requires not now Cattle upon a thousand Hills, or Rivers of Oyle, Only, Love me, Love me, Love me heartily, constantly, chiefly; and yet we deny him our loves. O! I hate my self whilst writing this, that I love the Lord so little, so seldom: It was he that made me, and not I my self: He hath wonderfully formed me, and wonder∣fully preserved me, and shewed many wonders in the deeps to me. O! what shall I do to love
the Lord with a superlative love? O I am rea∣dy to say, Let me love nothing, if I love not thee; nay, love nothing, till I love thee! O that you would grieve abundantly for want of Love to God! You have past as through the Red Sea, you have been as the flaming Bush, God hath looked after you, as if he minded none but you, you have been as the Signet on his right hand, nay more, you have been engraven on his Palmes, and what, not love the Lord? Shame upon you, that you can dote upon the dark, filthy, dirty World, and neglect the Lord of Glory. All the Affecti∣ons you have, God gave them, (when he gave thee a reasonable Soul) but for this end, that you should place them on himself, and not on his Enemy. Is it not hard measure that God should be denied Love, when he gave you power to love? If a Friend sends you Bot∣tels of Wine, it is hard, that when he comes to you, you should deny him a taste of his bounty. Believe it Sirs, whatever you do for the Lord, unless you Love him, yea, un∣less you Love him more than any thing else, it is not accepted. 1 Cor. 13.3. Though you give your Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profit∣eth you nothing. Though you bring forth Fruit, yet you are empty Vines, Hos. 10.1. because you eye Self, not God. Your most exquisite Services are but pieces of dead Carrion, un∣less they be seasoned with the Salt of Love. This People draw nigh with their lips, but I abhorr them, and their Duties, because the silly Dove is without an heart. Whatever a
man gives me, if his heart be not in it, I slight it: God much more. What shall I say? The Holy Apostle counts him worthy of a Curse, that loves not Jesus Christ. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 16.22. let him be Auathema Ma∣ranatha. And is it not sad to be cursed to the coming of Christ? He deserves it, that loves not Christ, and he must and shall be forced to own the Righteousness of God in sen∣tencing him to Eternal flames, who might have been secured against them, had he but loved Christ more than a base dunghill Lust. CHAP. XI. Their evil surmises of God. 4ly. Their e∣vil surmi∣ses of God. EVil surmises of God is another piece of ungodliness found too frequently among some of the more raised Professours, even such as have the root of the matter in them. I shall the rather insist on this sin, because right thoughts of God are the fuell which main∣tains the fire of Religion: without which it soon decayeth and is extinguished. 1. Miscal∣ling his love-to-kens, Do not we miscall Gods love-tokens? Hath not God sent thee many love-tokens by his Spirit to assure thee that he owns thee and
delights in thee, as his Spouse? For thee to question thy relation to him upon every turn must needs be grievous to him, how grievous then is it for thee to deny all his tokens of grace and love to thy Soul, and to count them but delusions, but the works of the Infernal Spirit, transforming himself into an Angel of Light? To call light, darkness, good, evil, sweet, bitter, the work of Christ, the Devils work, is ill resented by the Lord, it goeth un∣to his heart. You that are Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, cannot endure to have your love and fidelity suspected upon every base suggestion and whisper. Believe it God takes notice, and laies to heart all your jea∣lousies of him, all your base unworthy cen∣sures of him. 2. How ill are Gods Providences resented? III re∣senting Gods Pro∣vidences. 1 Cor. 3.22. Rom. 8.28. Although God hath told you there is a beauty in their contexture, that things present and things to come are yours, that all shall work to∣gether for good, that your Providential losses, as well as your Providential enjoyments, that your changes, as well as your setlings, your wants as well as your abundance shall all be Sanctified to you: yet how few, with that blessed man, bless the Lord, Job. 1.21. Rom. 5.2, 3. when taking a∣way? And with Paul, rejoyce, yea glory in tribulations? God assures you, that your sick∣nesses, reproaches, wants, shall do you good, yea death shall do you good, all shall be good, or do you good, all shall be food, or physick, out of the eater shall come forth sweetness, even from Gods desertions you shall have advanta∣ges,
your very thorns shall drop honey, shall bear grapes, yet notwithstanding what hard thoughts have you of God under such dispen∣sations? Didst thou onely accuse thy self, judge thy self, abhorre thy self, it were well; but in speaking against thy self, thou fallest foul upon God himself by questioning his love from these providences. Deny thy self what thou wilt, but beware of a denial of Gods love, and of the Spirit of grace, that hath taken up his lodgings within thee: O that all melancholly doubting Christians would consi∣der of this (too seldome suspected) provo∣cation and unkindness of theirs towards God! O! take up, and keep up better thoughts of God, what ever his carriage be towards you. Though he slay you, yet trust in him. When will you be as David, who though beleague∣red with Enemies, yet kept up good thoughts of God, he doubted not of Gods pitty, of Gods favour, and protection, and therefore I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, Psa. 3.6. Psa. 27.3. v. 1. that have set themselves against me round a∣bout. Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear, &c. in this will I be confident. In what? Why that the Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, and the strength of my life. God hath not spent all his stores, he hath enough for me, he will not suffer me to be tempted above what I shall be able to bear, but will with the temptation make way for my escape. And hath not God told thee, that the mountains shall depart, Isa. 54.10. and the hills be re∣moved, yet his loving kindnesse shall not depart
from thee, neither shall the Covenant of his peace be removed? But alas! Thou canst en∣tertain good thoughts of God in fair weather, Mar. 4.38. but let them fall in a storm: then it is, Ma∣ster, carest thou not that we perish. Thou canst trust in God when he carrieth himself as a Friend, and answereth all thy requests, and granteth all thy desires, but not so, when he seemeth an Enemy. Canst thou with Paul say, I am perswaded, that neither Death, Rom. 8.38, 39. nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Pow∣ers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? Whilst the Candle of the Lord shines on thy Tabernacle, whilst thy bones are full of marrow, whilst thou washest thy feet in butter, whilst every Mor∣dechai boweth in the gates, whilst thou hast dews on thy heart, meltings and enlargements in Ordinances; so long thou canst keep up good thoughts of God and his love; but let the Scene be altered, let the Sun wrap up it self in a Cloud of darkness, let the rod lie on the back, and the Arrows of the Almighty pierce the heart, and then not only grace with∣in is questioned, but the love of God without. I am cast out from before thine eyes, his mercy is clean gone. Then all men are lyars, even Samuel himself. But alas! how ignorant art thou of the methods of God? Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. Doth not he chasten every son that he receiveth? Should not he have liberty to use what rod he pleaseth, whilst all are for thy Profit, that thou mayst
partake of his Holinesse? Rom. 8.29. Phil. 3.20. Matth. 20.23. Col. 1.24. Might not Christ have had ill surmises of his Father upon high∣er grounds, than any thou canst name? Who art thou to hope for milder usage from God, than he shew'd to his own Natural Son? If thou art predestinated to be conformable to Christ, to be partaker of his sufferings, to drink of his cup, wilt thou doubt thy filiati∣on from thy filling up the sufferings of Christ? 3. Conclu∣ding thence sadly of Gods in∣tentions. How do some draw sad conclusions from Gods Providentiall dispensations concerning his intentions for the future? When they lose dear Relations, an Husband, or the Wife of the bosome gone, a sweet Child snatcht away, and perhaps by inadvertency; O then no sooner can we enter into the house of mourn∣ing, but we hear cries from you, O my hypo∣crisie! O my formality! O this is one of Gods Arrows of Vengeance! O! God is begin∣ning his Controversie, which will never end, till it laies me as low as Hell! Whereas you should entertain other thoughts of God, viz. That now he is removing the Idols of jealou∣sie; now he is weaning your hearts from Creatures, that he may have all your love; he knew how much Spiritual Communion you have lost by the company of your Rela∣tions, and now he himself would have more of your company; now he would have you to delight your selves more in himself; now he hath but dryed the stream (a weak, unsatisfying stream) that you may drink and drink abundantly of the purest Chrystal waters, that drop from the blessed
Fountain immediately; now God hath a blessed design of grace to prepare you for glory; he is now making the earth an howl∣ing Wilderness, that you may long for Ca∣naan; he is now leaving you to naked walls, that he himself may fill them; he is now turning all out of doors, that you may have the more liberty to treat with his Majesty with the less disturbance, without inter∣ruption. Alas! you know not how unkind and burdensome, yea treacherous your Friend, your Relation might have been, if continued longer to you; you know not what a dishonour to God and to your selves, he might have been, if longer continued in the land of the living, and therefore to preserve him from scandal, and your selves from heart-breakings thereby, God hath in mercy, pity, and faithfulness, removed him, taking him away (it may be) from the evil to come. Few put these Com∣ments upon Gods Providences towards them; but commonly take all in the worst sense they can. 4. Calling Gods love in questi∣on for want of Eviden∣ces. How do some instantly call in question Gods love, if Evidences be not seen, if they be not fairly writ, so as the Soul can read them? But may not the money be in the Saeks mouth, though the Brethren see it not for a while? Yea though the Soul hath had a welcome from God, yea many a welcome, yet how soon is the Soul so crest-fall'n, that it is afraid to go into Gods presence? and through the power of Satan and Melancholy, duty, yea
many duties have hereby been intermitted? This provokes God exceedingly: What? When you have had his Stffe, and his Brace∣lets, when you have had such admirable proofs of his Love, in sending his Son, and Holy Spirit after you, to work so great and glorious a change in you, coming in the still voice, and whispering Love unto you, dandling you as on the knee, welcoming you again and a∣gain to the Throne of Grace, oft filling your empty Bottles, answering your thousand Doubts, sealing the Covenant of Grace, and granting and confirming to you all the Patents of Love: And yet at every turn have you doubted, whether God loves you or no? God chides Zion for this, Isai. 49.14. Let not Zion say, the Lord hath forsaken, &c. 5. Conclu∣ding God no Friend because Satan is an Enemy and doth tempt them. Are there not some good Souls (though their goodness lies not in this) that are apt to question the Love of God to them, from the blasphemous thoughts and injections that they are harrazed with? But what, because Satan is your Adversary, must God therefore not be your Friend? Because Satan doth tempt you, will it therefore follow, that God doth not love you? Were we not wonderfully prone to evil surmises and distrusts of God, we would not make Satans Malice a ground suffi∣cient to doubt of the Love of God. Doth the Husband love his Wife the less, for that she is tempted, whilst she defies the Tempter, and is burthened with his foul and daring sol∣licitations?
O how is Satan gratified hereby? Consider∣ations a∣gainst e∣vil surmi∣ses of God. He is the great Accuser, the great Tale-bearer, that se∣perateth choice Friends: He goeth betwixt God and Saints, as a Mediatour of Differences, to accuse Saints to God, and God to Saints, and will you any longer be Tale-hearers against God? Believe it, the false witness which he brings, is against him, who hath given you wonderful proofs of his everlasting Love to∣wards you. When, O! when will you com∣plain of Satan, in the words of the Psalmist? The Enemy hath persecuted my Soul, Psal. 143.3. he hath made me to dwell in darkness, like those that have been long dead. It is the Enemy that vails and obscures the work of the Spirit what he can, that you shall see it no more than a dead man can behold any company that is in the Room, Vault or Grave with him. When Satan tells you, your Graces are counterfeit, your Faith but that which a temporary may have, your Graces but moral Vertues; O! how soon is your Enemy credited? how much more believed than God, his Ministers, and all the testimonies of Gods Love that are brought you? Hence you are one day jealous of the Kindness of Christ, another day of the Fulness of Christ, then of the Intentions of Christ, he means no good to me: Hence al∣so you doubt of the acceptance of your Persons, and Duties; There is a Cloud hangs over my Prayers, that they cannot pass up: If I come to Christ, he will not look on such a Wretch as I am. Many such hard thoughts of Christ are suggested by Satan, and too soon enter∣tained
by us: Whilst so, you can never thank God for any Mercy; for you doubt whether it be a Mercy to you. Can you bless him for life, health, and length of dayes, whilst you have this Suggestion, that your account swells with your time? Can you bless God for Estates, Honours, Friends, &c. when you have this jealousie, that God is fatning you as Hoggs for the slaughter? Can you bless God for Ordinances, whilst you sus∣pect, that there is a Commission given forth, that though you have eyes, yet you shall not see, &c. And that the Sun is to har∣den you, whilst it softneth others? Yea, how can ye bless God for Christ, when you imagine he is set for your fall? By giving way to these Jealousies, you dam up the Springs of Praise, that should slow from your lips day and night. Hereby you will also be hindred from waiting on the Lord, with that free and chearful Spirit as ye ought. I cannot wait on an Enemy, as on a Friend. If I have cursed jealousies of any man, I find no pleasure to be in his company; and if he employs me about any thing, I goe grudgingly about it. The truth is, So long as you entertain suspitions of Gods willingness to make you happy, Patricks Parable of the Pilgrim. P. 27, 28. and to af∣ford you sufficient means to make you hap∣py, all your Religion will degenerate into a spurious and base-born Devotion. In∣stead of that free and friendly converse that ought to be maintained between God and your Souls, you will only flatter him in a
servile manner, and bribe him not to be your Enemy. Worship God you must, for fear of incurring his displeasure, and lest your neglects of him should rouze up his anger against you; but you cannot en∣tertain any chearful and friendly society with a Beeing which appears in a dress so horrible to your Souls. Now between this necessity of coming to him, and that fearfullness to approach him, what can there be begotten, but a forced and con∣strained Devotion, which, because you do not love, you would willingly leave, did not the dread and horrour you have in your Souls of him, dragg you to his Altars? And what are you wont to do there? Truly nothing but cry, and look as if you were going to Execution, till you can flatter your selves into some hopes, that he is moved by your cries, and forced submissions, to lay aside his frowns, and cast a better aspect upon you: But your hard thoughts of God returning, you are constrained to renew your slavish Devotions, that you may pur∣chase another gracious look from him. In this circle do your poor Souls spend many dayes, and advance not one step towards the New Jerusalem. No wonder therefore if God be so provoked at this sin of evil sur∣mises. This is what I have observed very common among the Lords People, they will pray with some earnestness, and perhaps have some confidence; that God is gracious, and will answer their prayers, and grant all
their desires; but no sooner off from their knees, but (if they think of God, yet) they lay down their expectations of receiving any thing from God, and fall to distrusting and to renew their jealousies of God as soon as they have done Praying. What? Is God yea and nay? Is he kind, when thou art on thy knees, and unkind as soon as off? Will God take it well from thee, that in thy duties thou shalt put to thy Seal that God is true, and loving, and minds thy good? And presently take off the Seal, yea rather Seal to a parchment of the Devils drawing; that God is false, chur∣lish, and one that seeks thy ruine? O! whilst there is a Devil, and a melancholy-humour to be wrought upon, I do even despair to see this cursed God-dishonouring and debasing sin, to be quite rooted out of the hearts of Christians; but yet it is a Provocation, and Let it be for a Lamentation. CHAP. XII. Their unthankfulness. 5ly. Profes∣sours un∣thankful∣ness. UNthank fulness is another piece of un∣godliness that Professours are very guilty of. Praise, or Thankfulness is as the Penny or Pepper-corn, which God ex∣pects
as acknowledgement, as high Rent, to be paid him for all we hold of him. But how hath this been denyed? And thereby how justly have we forfeited all into the hands of God? Psa. 65. ult. Isa. 46. ult. Though the paying of this rent penny be the only Heavenly work that can be done on Earth; the only joyfull imployment, that shall last to all Eternity in another life; a work that should ever wait for God in Zion, and therefore Zion is called Israel my glory; not only because God glorieth in Zion, but be∣cause Zion should continually glorifie God: yet how unthankfull are the most Professours? The very Heathens will rise up in judgement against unthankfull Christians; They had their hymns to their Gods. Plato when rea∣dy to die, gave God thanks for three things, that he was made a man, that he was born in Greece, and that he lived in the time of Socra∣tes. How much more should our lips shew forth the high praises of God, who hath made us not only men, but new men? That we are born of God, adopted the Children of the most high, and regenerated by the Spirit? That we have breathed not in Greece, but in England, in Ariel, a place of Visions, in the Valley of Vision? O the riches of free grace I that our Mothers Conceived with us in this place of light, and at such a time when the Nation was most enriched with the light of the Gospel, when it was full of gracious Mi∣nisters, the best that ever the world saw since the Apostles dayes! Why had not God brought thee out of the Womb when this
land was overrun with Paganism? with Po∣pery? Why had not the Lord shut thee up and imprisoned thee with the rest of the World in darkness, and in the shadows of death. O that when the Gospel shines but upon a little spot of ground, which God hath inclosed for himself, and stiles it his pleasant place, his garden, that thou shouldst be the man born there! That when the rest of the world is like the barren mountains, on which no rain falls, and brings forth nothing but bryars, that God should bring thee forth in the place of his Tabernacle! And yet thou in∣gratefull wretch will hardly confess, that the lines are fall'n happily, and that thou hast a goodly heritage. How seldome is such lan∣guage as this heard from thee? Blessed be the Lord that my lot is fall'n in so fair a ground; blessed be God that I was born in England, and not in the Wasts of Arabia, or America; thanks be to the Lord, that I have had more than the light of the Sun, Moon, and Stars to conduct me to Jesus, that so many wells of Salvation have been opened unto me, which have been shut unto the most of the World. But to return to Plato: If he thanked God for living in the dayes of Socrates, we may say that greater than Socrates have been amongst us. We have had those, with whom we have taken sweet counsell, with whom together we have gone to the house of God, who have been burning, as well as shining lights; many examples of close-walking heavenly Christians have we enjoyed,
such as have had the wisdome from above, and more pure learning, than ever Socrates or Pla∣to could pretend to. The Society of how ma∣ny heavenly, grave, serious, active, fruitfull Christians have we been blest with, such as have been faithfull admonishers, such as would not suffer sin to rest upon us, such as have dayly told us here is the way, walk herein? O the helps we have had! But O the cursed un∣thankfulness of our hearts towards God, not∣withstanding his bestowing upon us so many lights to guide us, so many fires to warm us, and so much salt to season us! 1. Instead of giving God the glory of all, O! Eviden∣ced in their Sa∣crificing to Instru∣ments. Hab. 1.16. how have we sacrificed to our own nets and to o∣ther Instruments? We have praised our selves, rather than God for what we have. We have not ascribed the glory to God, but to Instru∣ments: like that Cardinal, who writ down how much such a Prince honoured him, what such a Lord did for him, and what such a Pope conferr'd on him: whereupon another infers, This man remembred his Friends, but forgot God. Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands; but God hath little or no share in the Triumph. 2. Too much Com∣plaining. How sensible are we of our wants and straits? But O how unaffected with the good∣ness of God towards us? How full of com∣plaints are we? but empty of acknowledge∣ments? Hath not the want of some one thing robb'd us of the comfort of all our enjoy∣ments, and God of the praise that was due to his name? We have been (such is our way∣ward
Nature) more troubled for the want of some one thing, than thankful for many mer∣cies: Like Haman, one Mordecai not bow∣ing to our desires, hath made us heavy and senseless under all our honours, and Gods vouchsafements: Like Achab, we have been more dejected for want of Naboth's Vine∣yard, than we have bless'd God for a King∣dome. 3. Being most in the Peti∣tionary part of Prayer. Are not we oftner, longest and heartiest in the Petitionary part of Prayer? We are still craving the supply of wants; but seldome, very seldome, too too seldome blessing of God for what we are stored with: Our Peti∣tions are long, but Praises are short; To whom be praise, honour and glory, serves for a suf∣ficient Doxolgy: Yea, how earnest, how fer∣vent, how importunate are we in the Petition∣ary part; but how dull and heartless are we in the Gratulatory part of Prayer? 4. Setting up their rest in Gladness. Do not we set up our rest in being glad of Mercies and Deliverances? Whereas it is one thing to be glad of a Mercy or Deliverance, but another thing to be thankful for it. Then are they glad: I but that will not serve the turn; Psal. 107.30, 31. it is a return of an higher nature, which God looks for: O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness! 5. Forgeting Mercies. Isa. 17.10. Are not we unmindful of the gracious dealings of God with us? Have not we forgot∣ten the God of our Salvations, and been un∣mindful of the Rock of our strength? He is an unthankful man (saith Sekeca) that de∣nies a Benefit received, so is he that dis∣sembles
it, together with him that requites it not: but of all the rest, he is most un∣thankful, that hath forgitten it. 6. Not ma∣king Ca∣talogues of Mer∣cies. Psal. 78.5. Deut. 4.9.6.7.31.19. Have not we neglected to make Catalogues of the Mercies we have received, to help our memories? How can we, that have not, and will not submit to this Divine Ordinance, look upon our selves as some of Gods Israel! This God hath ordained for a Law, and a Statute for Israel: What was this Ordinance? That they should write it (what God had done for them) and so provide, that the Generations to come might know what God had done. But alas! how little care have we, that what∣soever God does, may be for ever to his glory? Eccles. 3.14. How injust are we unto our Children, and the Generations to come, in depriving them of a faithful Record of Gods Mercies to us, in which God speaks to them, as well as unto us? What God spake to Jacob at Bethel, he spake to Israel, that lived in Hosea's time, Hos. 12.3. a∣bove a thousand years after it: There he spoke with us. How injurious to them? By such a faithful Record, they might read the right way in sayling Heaven-ward; by our Falls, they might know where lye the Rocks and Quick∣sands; and by our Deliverances, where Out∣gates are to be found. Not speaking of Gods Mercies unto others. Psal. 66.16. 7. Have not we been too silent concerning the Goodness of God towards us? How seldome do we with David say, Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my Soul. How unlike Saints are we? Thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of
the glory of thy Kingdom, Psal. 145.10, 11, 12. Isa. 63.7 and talk of thy pow∣er, to make known to the sons of men thy mighty acts. I will mention the loving Kindnesses of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord, accord∣ing to all that he hath bestowed on me, &c. So sings Zion. 8. Not stir∣ring up others to joyn with them in praising God. Have not we neglected to call on others to joyn with us in the blessing of God? When did we make a Collection of Praises from our Friends, that would gladly have been in the Quire? A thankful heart is fill'd with enlar∣ged desires, that others, that all, would joyn in the work of Praising God. A gracious heart doth not think it enough to praise God a∣lone; though it would be praising God, were there none in Heaven or Earth to bear it com∣pany. But I shall speak more particularly, Their Vnthank∣fulness. and in∣stance in some of those choice personal Mer∣cies (to wave national ones) for which the best of us are too too unthankful. How have we forgot the hole, For Con∣version. and deep pit, and miry clay, out of which we were digg'd? Have not we been unmindful of the blessed Jubilee, when the Prisoners were let out of the Prison-house? Paul remembreth many Circumstances of his Conversion, the Place wherein, Acts 22.6, 7. in a journey nigh to Damascus; the Time when, about Noon; the Manner how, suddenly there did shine from Heaven a great Light round about me, and I fell to the ground, and heard a voice, &c. He remembred also what he was before Conversion: 1 Tim. 1.13. I was a Per∣secutour, a Blasphemer, and injurious. What
saith God? Remember this day: What day? The day wherein you were delivered from the house of bondage under Sin, the World, and Satan, O! how have we forgotten, that the Lord, by a strong and irresistable work of his blessed Spirit: translated us out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of his dear Son? It was he that made Jordan to give back, and delivered us from Egypt, and the Wilderness, that we might inherit the good Land. O! what Enemies were we, studying to be damned, galloping to Hell, till God met us? How seldome do we look back to the Spring from whence all our Mercy flowes? For Ele∣ction. How un∣thankful have we been for that Original-foun∣tain-Mercy, eternal Election? Why should God single us out a People for himself? Why did Grace blossom from Eternity? Why did God plot and study my happiness before I had a beeing? What was there, that Jacob is smiled upon, and Esau not so? God might have had his Revenues of Glory out of my ruine. O that he should glorifie the riches of his mercy in my Salvation! And yet how little is God magnified for this? How little do we bless God for Christ? For Christ. Though he be the Stream that alone refresheth the City of God, yet how seldome is his Love, his stoops and condescentions for us, his bleed∣ing and dying for us, remembred by us, with hearty Praises and Thanksgivings? For the Covenant of Grace, and the Spirit. How little do we bless God for the Covenant of Grace, which Mr. Allen excellently calls,
The Bow in the Cloud, after a Deluge of Sin and Misery, the forfeited Lease of Eternity renewed, the Magna Charta of the City of God, the Hopes of Sinners, and the Riches of Saints? And in particular, for the Promise of the Spi∣rit, in all his Offices and Operations, for the application of the purchased Possession? Ezek. 36.27. For out∣ward Sal∣vations. I will put my Spirit within you. How little do we remember to bless the Lord for outward Salvations? You begin perhaps with a little, as Jacob, and now behold you have two bands, a troop of Children, Friends, &c. and an Estate to maintain them. When others have had one Mess, you have had Benjamin's Portion, the silver cup put into the sacks mouth; Riches, and God too; Estate, and Christ too; Peace, and the God of Peace too; the World, and a good Title to it: and yet do not you seldome cry out, Bless the Lord, O my Soul! and let all that is with∣in thee praise his holy Name? How seldome do you consider who hath maintained you all this while? Who hath delivered you, and pull'd you as brands out of the sire? You have had the Sentence of Death in your selves; you have been, with David and Paul, in the mouth of the Lyon, and yet saved; near to perish by the Bullet, Sword, Pestilence, Feaver, and other dangers, and yet your Lives given you for a prey: But how soon have you forgotten the wonders shewen unto the dead? O the many pre∣venting Mercies that you have been made par∣takers of! Hath not God secured you in many travails? How many have died much younger
than you, whilst the Lord lengtheneth out your dayes in order to Repentance? How many have died in an instant, and been snatch'd away, without any warning given of Death's approach; whilst you have had many an Harbinger, to give you to understand its nearness to you? How many have been crush'd by falls from houses, and coured by beasts, and by other accidents have been hastened to their long home; whilst God is long-suffering to you? How many have you seen drawn on Sleds, led to shameful and vio∣lent Deaths, whilst you have been kept from such dismal ends? And are there no thanks due to the Name of God? And yet how sel∣dome do you admire at distinguishing Provi∣dence, and preventing loving kindnesses? You have a guard of Angels to attend you day and night, to secure you from danger; but how little do you bless the Lord for the Heavenly Host? And yet, if you do thank God for some signal outward Mercies, perhaps for ease from the Stone, Gout, Cholick; perhaps for security from the rage of the devouring Pestilence: if you thank not God more for deliverance from Hell, from the guilt and power of Sin, than for outward Salvations, you discredit God, and his choicest Mercies, by under-rating Spirituals to Temporals. We should have blessed God for his Rod, For suf∣ferings for Christ as well as for his Staffe, for both are Mercies; but how unthankful are we even for sufferings for righteousness sake? God expects, that in every thing we give thanks; as we should not
be partial in our Obedience, so neither in our Thanksgiving. How little have we imitated the ancient Christians, whose mouths were alwayes full of Thanks be unto God? They sa∣luted one another with Deo gratias; and when they heard tydings of Persecution or Protecti∣on, of Crosses or Comforts, still they cried out, God be thanked. How unlike are we to famous Bradford? If (said he) the Queen will release me, I will thank her; if she will keep me in Prison, I will thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her. Thou shouldst say from thy very heart, Though sick, though scorned, though threatned, though all the day long counted as a sheep for the slaughter; yet blessed be God that I am counted worthy to suffer for his Name: Blessed be God, that he counts me for a Son, and chasteneth me for my profit, that I may be made partaker of his holiness: Blessed be God, that I am chastened, that I may not be condemned. But how few give thanks alwayes in all things unto God? Eph. 5.20. Isa. 24.15. 1 Pet. 4.16.13. We have been too backward to glorifie God in Zion, much more in the Fires. The Apostle Peter would not have any man, suffering as a Christian, to be ashamed; but to glorifie God on this behalf, and to rejoyce, in as much as he is partaker of Christs sufferings. But God knows how farr from Praises we have been, when the Storms have been high, and threatned our Tabernacles. How hath God charged us to remember Mer∣cy, Confider∣ations a∣gainst Vnthank∣fulness. and to praise him for it? Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: Praise him, O ye Servants
of the Lord! Praise thy God, O Zion! Psal. 22.23.135.1.147.12.148.1.150.1, 2. Praise him in the heights: Praise God in his Sanctua∣ry: Praise him for his mighty acts: Praise him according to his excellent greatness. Doth not the innumerableness of Gods requiries of Praise and Thanksgiving, aggravate our neg∣lect of this Duty? What Provision hath Christ made against this Sin? Hath not he appoint∣ed the Sacrament of his Supper, on purpose to help us to Remember him, and his saving benefits? Do this in Remembrance of me. But have not many Professours been so resolved to be unthankful, that they have neglected this great Ordinance, which was appointed to strengthen their Remembrance of past Mer∣cies? Hath not God told us, that he hath form∣ed us for his praise? And what, yet back∣ward thereunto? We can never love God to an height, whilst we forget his loving Kindnesses. I wonder not, that many complain of their decayes of Love to God, whilst they forget his wonders of Grace and Love to their Souls. Even Publicans will love those of whom they are beloved. And did we oftner recount the Mercies of God, they would work endear∣ments betwixt God and our Souls: Did we consider, what a wonder it is, that God should draw us out of nothing; that he, who stoops to behold the things of Heaven, should put his singer to our workmanship; that he should curiously work us, as Needle-work, in the dark Vaults of Nature; and that when we were fuller of sin, than the Toad of poy∣son, that yet he should feed a Toad, and
cloath a Cockatrice: the Fire of Love to God would burn within our breasts. How is God provoked by this sin? God took it ill at the hands of the Israelites, that they remembred not his hand, Psal. 78.42. nor the day in which he delivered them: How much more do we grieve the Lord, who remember not the goodness and salvations of the Lord in Canaan, yea in Zion? Our Saviour was grieved, that his Dis∣ciples remembred not the five Loaves, Mat. 16.8, 9, 10. and the seven Loaves, and how many Baskets they took up: Innumerable greater favours hath God shewed to us, and yet we forget them. How have we forgot the God that bridled Natures proud waves, and said, Hitherto ye shall goe, and no farther? When we were ripe for Judgement, then Mercy stept in, and yet how slow to give thanks? Hardly one of tea blesseth God for cleansing Mercy, as they ought. Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? This makes me fear, People have not had a deep sense of the misery and stains of Nature, for that their Saviour is no more thanked. Did not the Lord force thee, by an over-powering work of Grace upon thy Soul at first Conversion, to be willing to be made happy? Did not he com∣pel thee to come into the Feast? Was it not God that brought thee to such a Parish, to such a Minister, and to such a Text? And did not he, by his Almighty power, en∣able thee to believe and apply? Was it not he, that broke thine heart, when as hard as a nethermost Mill-stone, and made it soft,
malleable and pliant to his will and plea∣sure? And what, forget the wonders of the Lord in the deep? This vexeth the Lord to the heart. Did not he cause the Walls of Jerco to fall, as by the voice of Rams∣hornes, by weak inconsiderable means? Did not he alienate thine heart from Lusts, that were dearer to thee than thine eyes? Did not he present the face of Christ, as lovely to thy Soul, who before was despised aend rejected? And hath not Christ fed thee with fresh supplyes of free Grace, that have watered thy Soul every moment, so that you have been kept through his mighty power? How many doubts hath Christ answered; and how many scruples hath he, by his Holy Spirit, satisfied thee in? And yet, O wretched heart! how unthankfull hast thou been? Thou hast forgot all his benefits. A man would think it were impossible, that every unpleasing Providence should make us so forgetful of all the mighty Works, that have been done within doors upon our Souls. How just is it with God to plague us; for this our unkindness unto him? Isa. 17.10, 11. Because thou hast for∣gotten, &c. therefore the harvest shall be an he. In the beginning all succeeded well, (saith Vatablus upon the place) according to our desire: In the day the Plant grew, and in the morning the Seed flourished; but because of unthankfulness, extreme misery followed. Wonder not, that the Showres are with-held, that the Lord causeth the Sun to set on the Prophets at Noon day, that the Manna falls
not before your doors, that the hidden Man∣nah, Ingrato quod do∣natur, de∣perditur. Sen. and white Stone, are denied you, you have been unthankfull, you have not taken care for the fragments, that nothing be lost. Gods Mercies have been lost upon you. Or Waters were become Wines, our Gleanings were better than the Worlds Vintage: God dealt with us as Sons. But now, if he draws in his hand, and make his Garden as a desolate Wilderness for this sin, who can say unto God, What dost thou? Must not all of us put our mouths in the dust? Did not we sit un∣der our own Vines? Had we not our solemn Assemblies? Did not we goe in troops to the house of the Lord? Was not Holiness in cre∣dit? Did not the mix'd multitude joyn with us, and desired to be numbred amongst us, because God was with us? Did not fear come upon all the People? And had not the Churches rest? Did we fear the shaking of the Spear? Might we not have been as holy as we pleased? Had not we as much liberty as we desired? But O then how unthankfull were we? How troubled were we, that every Mordecai did not bow; that every one would not be of our mind, and dance after our Pipe? God knows what a Controversie there is with the Land, for the Unthankfulness of them that dwelt therein. O how glad would ye be of one of the dayes of the Son of man; of your old Pri∣vileges, and Spiritual Liberties? Because ye have not served God with joy and praise in dayes of plenty, therefore it is but a righteous thing, that you serve in scarcity and famine of Bread: of the Word of the Lord.
CHAP. XIII. Their neglect of Prayer, especially of se∣cret Prayer. 6ly. NEglect of Prayer is another part of Ungodliness, Professors neglect of Prayer. too common even among Professours. Request and Thanksgiving are (saith one) like the double motion of the Lungs, by which they suck in, and breath out the air a∣gain. In the Petitionary part of Prayer, we desire either the bestowing of some good thing, or the preventing or removing of some evil from our selves, or the inflicting of some evil on Gods implacable Enemies: And in the Gratulatory part of Prayer, we return the praise of glory, of what we have received from God, unto God. Though the Thanksgiving part of Prayer be most, yet the Petitionary part of Prayer is too much neg∣lected. It is Ungodliness to goe about any Business, or Journey, to fix our Abode, to use any Creature, Food, or Physick; with∣out asking Gods leave and blessing in Prayer: Yea, it is a branch of Atheism; this Brat of irreligion is laid at the door of Atheism by the Psalmist. Is it not a Lamentation, Psa. 14.1, 3, 4. and
should it not be for a Lamentation, that so many Professours should be guilty of such Un∣godline? Are there not many, that never prayed in all their lives? Never Praying. Professours are looked upon by the world as Praying people; but O! how is the world mistaken in many of them? Thou hast not called upon me, Isa. 41.21, 23. O Jacob! Though Jacob was a People sever'd into a Church-State, with an aim at Gods praise, yet Jacob pray'd not: This was grievous unto God. Do not many Professours clearly evidence, that they are prayerless Souls, by their disobedi∣ence to the Preceptive, their impatience under the Providential Will of God? By their dis∣trust of the All-sufficiency and Faithfulness of God? Zeph. 3.2. She obeyed not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in the Lord: she drew not near to her God. By their entring in∣to so many Temptations? Matth. 26.41. Jer. 10.21. Watch and Pray, lest you enter into Temptation. By their being deceived, and labouring to deceive others in the things of God? The Pastours are become bruitish, and have not sought the Lord. By their Back-slidings, Zeph. 1.6. Consider∣ations against this sin, Psa. 10.4. Joh. 21.15. and Apostasies? And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord. Doth not this sin speak out high contempt of God? That God is not entertained, so much as in a thought? He will not seek God: God is not in all his thoughts. That the thoughts of God are blasphemous? What profit should we have, if we pray unto him? Yea, Doth not this sin speak out the hearts denial of God?
What saith the Psalmist? Psa. 53.1, 4. The Fool hath said in his heart, there is no God: he calls not upon God. To live without Prayer, is to be dead while alive; for it is to live without God. Jer. 10.25. The Families that know not God, and that call not on his Name, are the same. What? Will ye not do so much as Pray unto God? What can you do less for God, than by this homage, to own him for your Maker? Or less for your own Souls, than to beg their lives of him, whose hand of Justice is lift up against them? Their Souls (and theirs only) shall live, Psa. 69.32. that seek the Lord. No Malefactours dye more unlamented, than those, that when cast, will not beg for their lives. How many also are there, Restrain∣ing Pray∣er. that have cast off Prayer? How many have restrained Prayer? And that both when they have thought they have prayed themselves out of affliction, they have had no more to say to God, Job 15.4 till under af∣fliction again: and when they have for some time prayed for deliverance to no purpose. This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait any longer? This is worse, than not to pray at all. Not to pray at all, notes only the neglect of duty; but to cast off Prayer, a distaste of duty. But I shall be more particular. Though Prayer be the only Key, Neglect∣ing Ea∣culatary Prayer. to unlock the Store-houses and Treasuries of all Bles∣sings; yet how little hath this Key been used? I shall wave publick and private, and only instance in secret Prayer, and that both sud∣den, and composed, and solemn. How few Professours have made conscience of Ejaculatory
Prayer? How seldome have we darted up our Souls to Heaven, upon sudden emergent occasions, in some short desires? As when we are hearing, Lord, set home this Word upon my heart: When in Prayer our hearts are melting, &c. Lord, suffer not my heart any more to be hardened from thy fear: When we are about our worldly employments, Lord, keep my heart with thy self, &c. Are not some of us wholly unacquainted with this kind of Praying? Not such a Dart (saith one) to be found in all their Quiver. They know not how, in the midst of their worldly businesses, and company, yea in the midst of their solemn religious duties, in hearing, reading, conferring, praying, &c. to send their thoughts to give God a visit, though a short one, in a desire or two, to speak at least one or two heart-words unto him. Have not most Professours too much contented themselves with their solemn Visits of God, but between their solemn Duties have scarce ever conversed with God? What account shall we be able to give of our thoughts (the first-born of our Souls) from morning to evening? Is not this the highest improve∣ment of them, to send them in embasies unto Heaven, and by them to converse with God? Do not the best of us find strangeness apt to grow between God and our Souls, between our set Duties? And may we not impute that strangeness to our omission of these more ansient and occasional talkings with God? How many precious things, in Christian con∣ference,
in Sermons, in our solemn joynt Prayers, are lost, for want of present liting up our hearts to God, for his presence there∣in, and blessing thereupon? How many bles∣sed motions or the Holy Spirit, suggested to us in our particular Callings, are quench'd, for want of these short sallyes of our Souls to Heaven, for more grace, that these sparks may be kept alive, yea blown into a flame? Neglect of this kind of Prayer is no small pro∣vocation: it grieves God: there is much un∣kindness in it, that God should be so graci∣ous, as to let his door stand wide open at all times, and that he should assure us of wel∣come, when ever we come to him, and yet that we should not be so kind, as to step in to visit him, with a desire, hour after hour; and that, though we may thus visit him, and not neglect (but rather further) any bu∣siness we have in hand, and without being uncivil to any company in which we are, He cannot but take this udkindly. How few Professours have made conscience of closet-Prayer? Neglect∣ing closet Prayer. Though Christ takes it for granted, that his Disciples will thus pray, and hath annexed a sweet promise to the due performance of this duty, When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, Mat. 6.6. and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is in se∣cret, and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly: Retire thy self, get thee a place, set thy self a time, wherein thou mayest vacare Deo, be at leisure to make it thy business to pray to God, &c. Yet how
is this duty wholly omitted by some, and too too seldom performed by others? Satan pre∣vails with some (otherwise honest Souls) to put off this duty from time to time, by tel∣ling them, either that they will but play the hypocrites therein; or that the time is not convenient, by reason either of some bodily, or of some soul distempers; or that this and the other worldly business must of necessity be dispatch'd at such a time, &c. O how little do such love the Lord, that are afraid to talk too secretly, or too often in secret with him! But alas! how many omit closet-Prayer al∣together? Some content themselves with praying with others, either in the Church, or in the Family: How can such look upon themselves as Saints, whatever Profession they make? What? a Saint, and yet never desire any privacy between God and thy Soul? a Saint, and yet find no errand to in∣vite thee to speak with God alone? Sure thou rather seekest to approve thy self to men, than to God. Thou mayest for a time be the worlds Saint, but God will at last un-case thee, and present thee before the eyes of all the world for an Hypocrite. Mat. 6.5, 6. The tre Lover delights to visit his Friend, when he may find him alone: like that good man, who, when the set time for his closet-Prayer was come, would break from any compony he was in, with this handsome speech, I have a Friend that stayes for me, Farewell. Others put off this duty, by pretending they pray alwayes, every hour they are darting up Ejaculations
to Heaven. As the pretence of every day-Sabbath (saith one) comes just to no Sab∣bath; so the continual Pray; of some carnal Professours, is not Praying a a. Eacula∣tory Prayer should not hinder, but rather fit for, solemn set Praying. Fire must be kept upon the Altar continually, but that must not hinder the Morning and Evening Sacrifice. True Christians cannot be satisfied with a bit and away, but they must ve their set meals. Others look at Closet Prayer to be at the best but a Free will Offering (as they term it) which they may offer, if they will, but will not own it a duty: Surely such are little sen∣sible of their heart-plagues, or else they would alone, one by one, make Prayers, 1 Kings 8.38, 39. Zech. 12.10, 11. and Suppli∣cations. Such either have  Spirit at all, or else but little, very little of the Spirit, (or else they would be Praying apart. In all my observation, e raines of Christians have begun in their Close neglects, either by o∣mitting the duty totally, or by areless, for∣mal, customary management of it. The truth is saith a late neat Writer) this is the first step towards Apostacy: Back-sliders grow first out of acquaintance with God in secret, then delight in this duty declineth by little and little, then are they less fre∣quent in their visits, upon which followeth a casting off the duty, and yet they may ap∣pear great sticklers and zealous in publick Ordinances; but if they recover not what they have lost in their secret Trade, they will ere long break here also.
No surer sign of an Hypocrite, than to neglect secret Prayer, it turns thee into a Nebuchadnezzar, into an Heathen; nay in∣to a Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 10.21. a Beast: They are be∣come bruitish, and have not sought the Lord. Thou pretendest a love to God, didst thou love him, thou wouldst love to be with him, yea lovers covet to be alone, where they may more freely impart their mutual affecti∣ons: perhaps in thy family, Religious wor∣ship of God by Prayer is (yet) kept up, to keep up thy credit with men, that thou mayst not be thought an Atheist, that thou mayst be trusted; an hundred things may keep thee, and hold thee to publick duties, but herein is the tryal of thy uprightness, what thou dost in secret for God, and with him: when the Masters part (the two great ones, God and World) then is the trial of thee, whose Ser∣vant thou art; but oh! when the Master is alone, then he is mostly neglected. When alone thou art fittest for this duty of calling upon God; when the World is shut out, then thou hast a discharge from the cum∣bers of the Earth: an Heathen (Scipio) will tell the; I have never better company, than when I have no company; for then can I freely entertain my own thoughts, and converse with all the learned that have been in former ages. But thou art called to greater honour, to im∣prove thy solitude, Joh. 16.32. to converse with God, when alone to have thy Father with thee. Yea God, like a modest lover, commu∣nicates most of his affections, to his people,
when they are in secret: Psa. 63.6. when David was in the night watches, then his Soul was filled with marrow and fatness, not that he wanted Gods presence in the day; for seven times a day he praised God, but his day-sacrifices yielded him not that marrow and sweetness, as he tasted in the night, when he was sequestred from all company and business. O! the hid∣den Mannah is the sweetest. Cant. Hos. 2.14. The Church leaneth on the breast of Christ in the Wilderness, and there he speaks to her heart. Unhappy Soul! innumerable are thy losses, by neg∣lecting Christs calls, Come my Beloved, Cant. 7.12. let us goe forth into the Fields, there will I give thee my loves: That God should so lovingly invite thee, to take a turn or two with him every day, inorder to his opening his breast to thee, and yet be denied? Again: When alone, and not with God, thou art lyable to Sathans foulest Temptati∣ons, to Atheism, Discontent, or Pride of heart: When the Devil finds the house empty, he will furnish you with company enough, seven other worse Spirits, if worse may be; you shall be employed: Fear a Rape at least, if God be not engaged to be a little Sanctuary in thy Closet and retirements: Sathan fre∣quents the high wayes, and that Robber takes men aside into a corner, and then pillageth them of their treasure: He thought so to have dealt with Christ, and therefore takes him into a Mountain alone: Mat. 4.8. When alone your dangers are greatest, therefore should your cries to Heaven be most vehement.
How few Professours have observed the fittest time for secret Prayer? Not early enough in the Clo∣set. Mark 13.33. God would have us, in this sense, Watch unto Prayer: God would have us early to tell the world whose Servants we are, and that we dare not undertake any business, without first enga∣ging God with us; Mark 1.35. that we dare not enter on Sathans territories, without Christ, our great Champion with us: This Post should be sent to Heaven in the beginning of the day; for no sooner in the morning, do we begin to live, and stirr, but we need fresh succours and Auxiliaries from Heaven. True Christians count that the sweetest air they breath in, which is the fruit of Prayer; and all things relish well with him, that  through this golden Pipe of Prayer; and therefore he is up early in his Closet, that  may receive all, this way, from the Lords bounty, and faithfulness: Therefore  sooner doth he open his eyes, but he opens his heart to God; and before he puts on ragg, he must to Heaven in secret Ejaculati∣ons, at least, before he goes to his Closet, to pour out his Soul more plentifully before God: He expecteth no good day, unless i be begun with a good duty; and therefore my voice shale thou hear in the morning, Psa. 5.3.119.147. in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee: Da∣vid prevented the dawning of the morning; na he prevented God, (i. e.) his Provi∣dences and Favours which he expected, he loved to have them in the Channel of Prayer.
But alas! how do Professours shuffle with God, by deferring and deferring? And here∣by many mischiefs attend. The World, that Pest of Souls and Graces, is admitted, before we have got our Antidotes against the Infection of it: Hence deadness of heart ensues, multitudes of worldly distra∣ctions; so that after a few hours, the Soul hath no mind at all to speak with God; but though it must to the Closet, yet there is it pestered with wandring thoughts, discontent∣ed thoughts, worldly thoughts; so that the time which should be spent in pure Commu∣nion with God, is taken up in driving these Fowls from the Sacrifice. Besides, God is an holy God, and jea∣lous for his Name, and he esteemeth it a re∣flection on him, to be so neglected, that he must be served last of all, and therefore with∣holds his influences from the Soul, to con∣demn such salocy abuses of his great Name; and then no wonder if thou be soon overcome with a world of vain impertinent cogitations. By neglect of early going into your Closets, you credit the World too much, as if it were more worthy of your time and strength, than the Lord is: Whereas you should profess, that all your hours are Gods, and therefore you dare not, Prov. 3.9. but honour him with the first Fruits of all your increase; you will thereby sanctifie all the Harvest, all the Vintage, by presenting God with the green Eares. By neglect of your Mornings, you hint to other Observers, as if you were not, First
to seek God, and his Kingdom, and the righ∣teousness thereof. You neglect the sittest season, for then the mercies of the night are freshest, smell sweetest, which after a while, like Flowers, will lose their scent with us: Whilst the Iron is hot, it is our wisdome to strike; His Mer∣cies are renewed every Morning, so should our Praises. By entring on business without calling on God, you declare, you need not the Lords assistances, and that you depend not on him for every thing, but can make a snift to live without him: Whereas God feeds us from hand to mouth, and hath not left any stores with us, that we may make our addressments to him night and day, who must water us every moment. Poor Souls, did you but see your dangers, by reason of the three great Brigades of Enemies, the World, the Flesh, the Devil, you would not be so fool-hardy, to venture abroad, untill you have be∣seeched God, to help poor, needy, indi∣gent Creatures: Remember, You want as soon as you wake, and those things you want, as none but a God can supply you: You need Divine Power to follow your Call∣ings. By neglecting this season, the Devil, and the World, have often made you forget, or omit the Duty for the day: You have no lei∣sure in the Morning, and what then? the Devil fills thy hand with unexpected business, that the excuse grows stronger, and more
plausible: But must we serve the Slave, and neglect the Lord of glory? By omitting this hour, you are the unfit∣ter for Family-worship; were the Instrument tuned before, it would be the fitter to play in consort. But oh! what hazards dost thou run, not only by preferring other things and business before God, but by neglecting the first hour of the day, when thou art not sure of a se∣cond? Thou purposest such an hour to pray, but what is thy Life save a Vapour, which may expire before that hour? CHAP. XIV. The miscarriages of Praying Professours about Prayer. 7l. Praying Professors miscarria∣ges, THere is not only Ungodliness in not Praying, (Prayerless Souls worshipping God no more than Beasts, an Oxe, or an Asse, &c.) but in Praying amiss. And O! how many wayes do Professours fail in and about this Duty, both before, and in, and after? First, before the Dury. How do Professours fail before their entrance upon this Duty of Prayer?
1. Neglect∣ing Me∣ditation, Psa. 5.1. of God, By neglect of Meditation? Few can say, Consider my Meditation. Have not we rush'd upon this Duty, before we have meditated of the God we were approaching to? What an holy God he is, and how unworthy we are to take his Name into our mouths? What a consuming fire he is, and what dry stubble we are? Have not we rush'd into Gods Presence, his Holi∣ness, Omnisci∣ency, Heb. 4.13. as the Horse rusheth into the battel? Have we considered, that his eyes are piercing, as flames of fire? That all things are naked and open (as it were dissected) before him, with whom we have to do? We have not set God before our eyes: neither have we be∣lieved, that he is as certainly an Observer of us, as we are with our selves. Our thoughts would not be so low, so earthly, so distracted, did we believingly consider into whose Pre∣sence we are coming. Have we considered Gods Almightiness? Omnipo∣tency, That He can do more for us, than we can ask or think? He that cometh to God (in Prayer) should believe that God is, 1 Sam. 15.29. that He is the Strength of Israel, that what we are to beg of God, Pardon of Sin, Victories over our Lusts, &c. are Mercies beyond the Crea∣tures power to reach forth to us; but the Lords arm is not shortened, that he can∣not help. Have we meditated on Gods bounty, Gods goodness and grace, pity, and tender compassions? As one more ready to give, than we to ask; as one who giveth liberally, and upbraids not with our oft com∣ming? We want vast thoughts of the great
goodness and mercy of God: we have base beggerly thoughts of God, as if we should trespass too much upon him, and weary him by coming to oft to his door. Have we mused upon the Faithfulness of God? his Faith∣fulness, Who is under engagements to relieve us, to ease us, to be found of us, when we seek him with our whole hearts. 1 John 5.14. And this is the consi∣dence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us. Have we meditated of the Way, of the Way unto God. Odi De∣um abso∣lutum. Luth. by whom we must come to God? How daring are Souls to venture on an absolute God? How is the new and consecrated Way neglected? How is Christ laid by, as if there were no need of a Mediatour, of an Advocate with the Father? How seldome do we pass through Glgotha, to the heavenly Jerusalem; and see, that none can come to the Father, but by the Son? We see not our need of Incense and Odours to be mingled with our Sacrifices: Revel. 8.3, 4. little do we consider, that the Opportunity of speaking with God, is the price of blood, of the precious blood of the Son of God. Have we meditated of our Sins, of their Sins, of those to which we are by nature and custome most∣ly addicted; and of those with which we have since the last Duty polluted our Souls? From the want of Meditation hereof, ariseth formality in Duties, the heart is not humbled in Confession, neither is the Soul importunate with the Lord for pardon and victory. Have we made conscience to meditate upon our Wants, what Graces we mostly need, of their Wants, what
we are most defective in? From this neglect we pray as if we did not pray, without zeal, earnestness and importunity: Whereas, had we viewed our Wants of God, of his Grace, Spirit, Protection, Mercy, and Presence, we should pray as for Life; and those strag∣ling vain thoughts would hereby have been suppressed. When the Malefactour is beg∣ging his Life at the Barr, his Soul is not run∣ning adrift after every Feather, but he minds his business, 'tis Life, and his Life that is en∣dangered, and therefore he gathers up all possible arguments, that may induce the Judge to abate of the rigour of Justice to∣wards him. But how oft have we been on our knees, and have been ignorant of what ailes us, so that we might truly say, we knew not what to ask? When you goe to your Markets, you consider what you and yours want: but do we so, when we goe to our Spiritual Markets? Have not we neglected to meditate of the Mercies of God, of Mer∣cies re∣ceived. which we have received? Hence we come either customarily before God, or not with that holy boldness, as we should. One Mercy opens a door to another: The Valley of Achor was given as a door of hope to Israel: Hos. 2. Forgetting the returns of Prayer, makes our hearts ake, and knees faint. We should book the passages of Gods grace, how he remembred us in our low condition, how he hath visited us day by day; when we have come in as the parched ground, we have found God a dew to us, and springs of water have appeared
in the wilderness: When we have come in be∣fore God with our Shackles on our Feet, with Irons that have entred our Souls, God hath made it a Jubilee, he hath proclaimed the acceptable year, he hath let us out of the Prison∣house, and hath set our feet in a large place: When we have come in before God with guilt on our Souls, and with fearful expectations, how hath God given us the white stone, and sent us away with his blessing; and with glad∣ness of heart? The neglect of our Diaries of the Providences and Mercies of God; the want of reflecting on all the Rings that God hath sent us, makes us more like Slaves than Children. Do we with David cry out, Psa. 40.5. Ma∣ny, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou hast done, and thy thoughts, which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbred. Have not we neglected to meditate on the great and wonderful things, of the prevalen∣cy of Prayer. that have been done upon the Prayers of Gods People? We should have in everlasting remembrance, what a powerful Engine Prayer is. Gen. 32.28. Exod. 32.32. Jam. 5.17, 18. It hath held the hands of the Almighty: Jacob and Moses prevailed over God: It hath been a Key to open and shut the Heavens; Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly, that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth, by the space of three years, and six months: And he prayed again, and the Heaven gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. And O what wonderful
things hath God promised to a Praying Peo∣ple! Jer. 33.3. Mat. 21.22. Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not. Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, &c. Here is more than Herod offer∣ed, that was but half the Kingdome; here is a Whatsoever. Did we appear before God with these instances of grace, and promises, fresh in our thoughts, we should not say, What a weariness is it? Or that there is no pro∣fit in serving God; and gallop through our duties as we are wont. 2. Not stir∣ring up Grace re∣ceived. Another neglect before Prayer, is, The not stirring up our Graces, before we set upon the Duty. We too much rest on habitual pre∣paration, whereas actual is necessary. He that leaps immediately from the Shop to the Throne of Grace, and labours not to quicken his dull Soul, and to leave worldly businesses behind him, (as Abraham his Servants, when he goeth to sacrifice) no wonder if he lose the Duty, and provoke the Lord, rather than be accepted with him. The Well is sel∣dome so full, but that you may, nay you must, throw in a little, to fetch up the more. It is thought, by the redoubling of David's charge, that he found not his heart in a good frame, for the exalting of God, and therefore cries out so vehemently, Psa. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name: Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. 2ly. When Praying. How have we failed, when we have entred upon the Duty? And that in Invocati∣on,
in Confession, in Petition, and in Thanks∣giving? 1. In our Invocations? In Invo∣cation, We call God Fa∣ther, and yet how unlike are we unto him: we resemble not him we call Father: we re∣verence not him we call Father: we trust not to him with that confidence we would, to re∣ceive of our Fathers of the Flesh: we fear, when we ask Bread, he will give us a Stone: we have lower thoughts of Gods bowels, than of our own: we think our selves more pitiful, better natur'd, than God himself: If I were a Mother, and my Child in distress, I should de∣ny him nothing. 2. In our Confession of Sin? Con∣fession, Psa. 119 26. We are not full, and free, and ingenious: we sit with Rachel upon some Idols: we do not declare our wayes unto him, but rather cover our trans∣gressions as Adam. Few can clear themselves as Job did. You will perhaps confess, Job 31. We have erred and strayed from thy wayes like lost sheep: We have left undone, &c. Dolus in generali∣bus. Psa. 32.3. but still in generals. David was in this gravelled, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. But you descend not to particulars, or if to particulars, yet the Benjamin is reserved, loth to let Benjamin goe, loth to confess envy, pride, breach of vowes, want of love to Saints, loving the rich only, neglecting the poor. You will confess what every man knows you are guilty of, or what every man is addicted to; but you shame not your selves, by instancing in the particular neglects and commissions, by
which you chiefly provoke the Lord: the Agags are not brought to execution, the best of the Cattel are kept back, one Wedge is hid in the Tent. Or if you confess most particu∣larly, yet it is without hatred of the sins con∣fess'd: You confess sin, yet hugg it, bosome it, plead for it, within one quarter of an hour: You confess sin, but without self-ab∣horrence: 1 Kings 8.38. Job 42.6. you loath it not, as the Plague of your hearts. I abhorr my self, saith Job: This implies a dislike, an hatred, an indignation a∣gainst, an utter alienation from, and an op∣position against sin. God knows how little of this is mixed with the Confessions of most Pro∣fessours. 3. Petition, as to the Matter, In their Petitions? Both Matter, and Manner, and End? Have not we been faulty in the Matter, Have they been alwayes for the best things? Life, Liberty, Estate, &c. are desired; but Grace, Victory over Pride, Passions, Worldliness, &c. lye unsought for. We fail also, when we pray simply that we may not suffer; for there is no foundation in the Promise for such a Prayer, and we may not pray, save for what God hath pro∣mised. Have not we fail'd in the Manner? Manner, Have we alwayes pray'd with Earnestness, Humili∣ty, Faith, Sincerity, &c. Hath the whole man been employed? Few can say, as Da∣vid, Psa. 109.4. But I Prayer. He was all Prayer: or all of David, or in David, was herein employ∣ed. Few can say, With my whole heart have I intreated thy favour. 119.58. Alas! few pray effectu∣ally.
The heart and soul is not at work in the Duty. James 5.16. It is the effectual fervent Prayer that avails. We pray as if we had a mind God should deny us. Qui frigi∣de rogat, docet ne∣gare. Colos. 4.2. We are too much like Chil∣dren, scribling over a piece of Paper, which when they have done, lay it aside, or break it, or think no more of it. We have not continued in Prayer: we have not back'd our Prayers with Prayers, reinforced them: we have soon fainted: we have not been the right seed of Jacob, I will not let thee goe, un∣till thou bless me: we soon faint, and our de∣sires expire. Have not we fail'd in the End? End. James 4.3. May I not say as the Apostle James, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your Lusts. Hath not our level been too low? We should have made Gods Glory our End, and we have made Self, to quiet Conscience, to obtain pardon of sin, rather than purity of heart and life: Hos. 7.14. They assemble for Corn and Wine. You have been perhaps ear∣nest for the pardon of your own and Englands sins, and yet selfish in all: You fear (and well you may) temporal Plagues, you are a∣fraid that Sodoms sins may bring down fire and brimstone; and therefore, for your own sakes, rather than Gods, you pray, and with some vehemency; but your End is still too low. Never do you pray aright, till you pray more for Christs sake, than for your own: for his glory, rather than for your own pre∣sent, future: temporal, or eternal advan∣tages. It is one thing to seek our selves, and
another thing to seek God in a duty. They that pretended so highly, begin to expostu∣late with God, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou seest not, and takest no knowledge? Mens Lusts Pray, rather than their Graces. Pride and self-love endite the Petitions: You have been suckling your lusts, whilst seemingly de∣vout: You make Provision for the flesh, whilst about spiritual work, and whilst your inward man seems to be exercised. 4. Thanks∣giving. In our Thanksgivings? who is free from guilt in the gratulatory part of Prayer? Some bless God for Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, &c. and are strangers to these Pri∣vileges, yea, if catechised know not what these mercies are, no more than Parrots know what they prattle: Others if, like the Leapers they are cleansed, yet return not to bless the Lord: They are large in Petitions, but very sparing in their Praises. Unthankful Beggars are an abomination to God and man. We should be thankful for the least mercy; but though we have had the honour to be admit∣ted into the Presence Chambers as Favourites (an honour not vouchsafed to the most of mankind) yet we are sullen, and slow to re∣turn Praises for so great a vouchsafement: You have not come to dry breasts, you are every day full of mercy; 2 Chron. 32. but alas! You ren∣der not according to what you have received, therefore wrath is against you. Hast thou had no meetings in Prayer, no enlargements, no desires to fear the Lord, no importuni∣ties, no wrestlings? why yet it is mercy,
that thou livest upon the patience and bounty of God: 'Tis much, that thou shouldst have a beeing, and be preserved to this day: 'Tis a wonder he should feed thee, cloth thee, protect thee, strive with thee, suffer thee, who art but dust and ashes, to speak with him: The last night thou might'st have lain on a bed of fire, or by the hedge, or have been in the great deeps; but alas! few so ready to praise, as to pray. We are too much like the Vagabonds, when we have what we come for, away we goe, and come no more till pinching necessity drives us: Yea, we too oft aggravate our miseries, and over-look the benefits we enjoy, that are mix'd with our crosses. 3ly. How have we, After the Duty. when our Prayers have been ended, fail'd of our duties toward God, by running post hast from the Throne of Grace to the World, if not to our Lusts? Not considering how our hearts were in time of duty, whether straitned, or enlarged; Nor exa∣mining how the Duty hath been done, whe∣ther composed, or distracted; whether we had the face of God toward us, or his face vailed; whether we were lively, or lifeless; dead-hearted, or quickned; serious, or slight; what Faith was stirring, what Repen∣tance exercised? The Church and People of God observed their hardness in duty: Isa. 63.17. Why hast thou hardned our hearts from thy fear? We should look back upon our Prayers, that we may be humbled for all our vain thoughts, untowardness, distractions, and unbelief in the duty: and we should do it, then, whilst
we are in the highest capacity to know the miscarriages of the Soul, what the aggrava∣ting circumstances thereof are, &c. And not only in order to Humiliation, but Refor∣mation, that for the future we may not dare to touch the Mount of Gods Presence with such beastly frames. In case we were in a good frame in the Du∣ty, quickly losing what was got in the Duty, Did we labour to retain the influences of the Ordinance upon our hearts? Did not we let the fire goe out again? Have not we, like some in a great sweat, gone into the open air too soon, and took a cold? That's dangerous. David was more careful to maintain his fresh and lively frames, and therefore he intreat∣eth the Lord to keep the same in his Servants heart for ever. How have we been faulty, not look∣ing for an answer, Psa. 5.3.85.8. in not believing that our Prayers shall be answered We direct our Prayer unto God, but we do not look up, till God look down, as David. We do not hearken what God the Lord will speak. Paul observed how long the Lord was silent to his Prayer, 2 Cor. 12.8. Hab. 2.1. For this I besought the Lord thrice, and yet no answer. O! when shall we resolve with Habbakkus, to stand upon our watch, and look and see what he will say to us? The neg∣lect of this hath bred so many Formalists in our Congregations. After we have put our Prayers into Gods hands, we never mind them more. We would be angry with Beg∣gars, if they begg'd an almes, and away pre∣sently, as careless of answers.
The sincerity of thy heart would be more evidenced, Not bles∣sing God for an∣swers. if thou didst consider what re∣turns thou hast that thou mayst bless God for them, and improve them for God, and in case of denials, 1 Sam. 1.15. to be of a troubled Spirit as Hannah was, for that her Prayer for a Child was so long denied. What mournings hast thou for that thy Pride, Not mourning for deni∣als. Worldliness, Unbelief, hardness of Heart, &c. are not yet pardoned and subdued. Poor creature, thou continuest in the road of Du∣ty, but observest not whether God hears thee, or not, Saul went beyond thee: 1 Sam. 28.6. He observed, and was troubled, that God an∣swered him not by Urim, nor yet by Prophets. Have not we by carelesness, by returning to our vomits and mires, intercepted our own Pray∣ers. Have not we torn our own Petitions, Tearing their own Petitions. Isa. 59.1, 2. and snatch'd them out of Gods hands? Behold the Lords hand is not shortned that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear? How seldome have we took Bernards ad∣vice in his gloss upon, Not joyn∣ing endea∣vours. Oremus & Labo∣remus. Jo. 8.21. Ezek. 39.23. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands, that is (saith he) let us pray and endeavour. We love to employ God to subdue our sins, &c. But we sit idle, we hate taking pains; we are not co-workers with God. I may say unto you, as Christ, I goe away, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins. The Heathen shall know that the
house of Israel went into captivity for their ini∣quity: because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, Mic. 3.4. but he will not hear them, he will even hide his face from them, at that time, as they have behaved them∣selves ill in their doings. Prayer is a Key to open Heaven to Believers; but it may be so managed, as to open Hell to thee. CHAP. XV. Their slighting the written Word of God, especially in not reading, and meditating on it, as they ought. 8ly. Profes∣sours de∣spifing Gods written Word. SLighting of the written word of God is another piece of ungodliness, which Eng∣lish Professours have been very guilty of. There is not a surer sign of despising any person, than the setting light by what he saith unto us; for according to the honour we give unto the Speaker, the words spoken will be of weight with us. But alas! how hath the Bi∣ble, Gods written word, been undervalued by us? How little have we credited Gods written word? Eviden∣ced in their not crediting it. And yet it is natural for us to believe whatsoever is said by one, of whose truth we
are confident. Have not Scripture-affirmati∣ons been doubted of by us? How little hath our knowledge of them been attended with building a Christian life upon them as a foun∣dation? Have we believed that Scripture commands come from God, and are most just and fit for him to lay upon us? Hath this be∣lief brought forth obedience? Have we believ∣ed that Scripture-threats are Gods-threats, and will therefore be performed to every impeni∣tent Sinner? And hath this belief kept us from sin, or promoted repentance? Have Scrip∣ture promises been believed to be Gods-pro∣mises, and that therefore all the absolute ones shall certainly be performed to the Elect, and all the conditional ones, to those that per∣form the conditions? And hath this belief stirr'd us up, and help'd us to perform the con∣ditions? God hath magnified his Word above ell his Name; but so have not we. Psal. 138.2. Not ho∣nouring it above Gods other Names. We are apt to be afraid at the appearances of the great God in his extraordinary works in the World; but who trembleth at the appearances of God in the Scriptures? And yet God appears more in the glory of his Majesty therein, than in all his other works, whether of Creation, or of common Providence. Mat. 5.8. God maketh more ac∣count of his written Word than of Heaven and Earth: he had rather lose Heaven and Earth than one jota or tittle of his Word. Accoun∣ted it a small matter to swerve from it. But have not we accounted it no great matter to swerve a little from the written Word of God? Yea have not we made a light matter of leav∣ing
undone what is therein required, and of doing what is therein forbidden? Were the Scriptures high in our esteems, did we look upon Gods testimonies as wonderfull things, our very Souls would be in keeping them? Psal. 119.129 Thy testimonies are wonderfull, therefore doth my Soul keep them. Have not we accounted them fools that have preferr'd the Word before whatsoever hath been near and dear unto them in this World? Accoun∣ting ten∣der Con∣sciences more nice than wise. Rev. 6.9. Have not we accounted them more nice than wise, who have been slain for the Word, who have lost Name, Liberty, Livelihood, Friends, Re∣lations, yea Life it self, and endured all Tor∣ments and Tortures, rather than they would offend the written Word of God in any one thing, either by omission, or commission? God hath written to us the great things of his Law (or word) but have they not been ac∣counted a strange thing, Accoun∣ting it a strange thing. Hos. 8.12. a thing that we should have got little good, if we had obeyed them, and little hurt by disobeying them? Have not we used the Word as a stranger, only for our own ends, to serve our own turns, as we have had advantage thereby? Have not we made the Word a stalking horse for our own carnal designs? Making the Word a stalking∣horse. Have not we pretended very great Zeal for the Word, when all the while we have been Zealous for self, either our own opinions and perswasions, or our own honour and greatness, or our own livelihood? Have not we, like boat-men, looked one way, and rowed another, cryed, the Word of the Lord, but meant the other thing?
Have not even Scripture Doctrines eb'd and flowed upon politick considerations? How seldome have we discoursed with others Seripturally? Not talk∣ing of it. Deut. 6.7. The Scholar is upon every oc∣casion discoursing of those Notions, which he prizeth; but hath not our speech bewrayed our low esteems of the Word? Have not we been willingly and contentedly ignorant of Scripture-discoveries? Willing∣ly igno∣rant of it. Job. 21.14. So is not the Scholar of those Notions which he affects and valueth. Haven ot our hearts cryed out many times unto the Bible, depart from us for we desire not the knowledge of Gods wayes, either as to worship, or manners, and that be∣cause knowledge is an obligation, yea a provo∣cation to duty, and a sting in case duty be neg∣lected? What things we prize we search into; Not searching the Scrip∣tures. Jo. 5.39. But how little have we searched the Scriptures, as diggers in Mines do search for gold and silver in the Earth, as the Word signifieth? And this leads me to those two main Evidences of our slighting the written Word of God, our not reading, and not meditating upon it, Not read∣ing them. Dent. 31.11. Matth. 12.3.5.21.16. Luk. 10.26. Deut. 17.19. as we ought, which I shall a little enlarge upon. How have we been guilty of not reading the Scriptures as we ought? That every one ought to read them, is so evident, that there is no way for the Papists to keep men from believ∣ing this truth, but by keeping of them from reading the Scripture. No business can dis∣charge any from this duty, and yet how is this evident duty neglected? Some have not been so farr wrought upon, as from sense of
their own ignorance and blindness in the things that concern their Everlasting welfare, and from conviction, that they can know such things only by the help of the written Word of God, to take up firm resolutions to undertake the study of the Scripture? Others notwithstanding their resolutions ne∣ver set upon the reading of the Bible over. At all. They have seen no excellency in this book: they have seen more in a piece of Philosophy, in a rational discourse of Divinity, in an inge∣nious History, in a politick discourse, yea in a Romance, or in a Play, Polititian-like, who preferr'd an Ode in Pindar before all Davids Psalms. How many read the Bible too seldome, Oft e∣nough. thinking it too much to read it dayly, to spend one hour therein every day? Have not some spent several hours in a day, in reading some good books of mens inditing, but not a quarter of an hour in reading Gods-book? I even hate mine own works (said Luther) and oft times wish they were burnt; because I fear lest they should withdraw men from reading the Scriptures. How much greater is the Number of those, Aright, not reve∣rently. 2 Sam. 7.18. that have not read the Bible aright? Are not all of us in this number; When have we pre∣pared for the reading of the Scriptures, as be∣comes those that are going in unto God (so going into the Sanctuary, where the Word of God was kept, is tearmed.) Have not we read fearlesly? Tremb∣lingly. When we were going to take the Bible into our hands,
have we trembled at the Word? Isa. 66.2 lest we should not sanctifie the Name of God, yea, lest we should take the Name of God in vain in our reading? Have not we read heedlesly? Atten∣tively. Not diligent∣ly marking the Duties commanded, the Sins forbidden, the Rewards promised, and the Punishments threatned therein? Have not our thoughts been wandering and gadding, and not fixed upon what we read? When did we attend to Scripture words, as heedfully, 1 Kings 20.33. as Benhadad's Messengers did to the words of Ahab? Have not we read unbelievingly? Be∣lievingly Deut. 29.9. Rom. 15.4. Josh. 1.5. com∣par'd with Hebr. 13.5. Conscien∣eiously. For right Ends, Not be∣lieving that the Scripture is the Word of God; that whatever we read therein is true and good; that the Spirit of God, the Inditer of every word in this Book, did particularly in∣tend our good in every Verse; that in the Scripture Life and Death is set before us; yea, that Scripture words are our Life? Have not we read out of custome, and not conscienciously, in obedience to the command of God? Have not we read for wrong ends? Either to satisfie our curiosity, and not to regulate our hearts and lives: or to have matter of discourse, but not matter of practise; to have Scripture at our tongues end, not at our hearts: or only to know, being ashamed to be ignorant of those things, which all Christians know; and to be able to say nothing of such matters, which we cannot but have occasion divers times in company to talk of, but not to do?
When did we read the Scriptures with this particular intention, that they might be a Lamp unto our feet, Psa. 119.105. and a Light unto our paths? That we might thereby be help'd to order our conversation aright? When did we read the Bible with the same attention, re∣verence, Quid est Scriptu∣ra Sacra nisi quae∣dam E∣pistola Omnipo∣tentis Dei ad Creatu∣ram su∣am. Greg. Hos. 8.12. and resolution, to follow every rule therein; as we think we would (if we had lived when Christ was upon Earth) re∣ceived a Letter from him, directing us what to believe and do, that we might be saved? Or as we think we should a Book writ imme∣diately by the singer of God, as he wrote the Ten Commandements in two Tables? Why, the Bible is Gods Letter to every one of us in particular, written by himself, though me∣diately: I have written to him the great things of my Law: To him, it is in the singular number, because to every man and woman particularly. When did we read the Bible, as Children read the last Will and Testament of their deceased Parent? Have not we read the Scripture, With Prayer. without begging of God his Spirit, to help us to un∣derstand what we read, and to practise what we understand; at least, not so importunate∣ly, as we would, if we had been begging for our Lives, at the Barr of a Judge? Have not we sown this seed among thornes, in un∣plowed hearts, Jer. 4.3. and have not so much as prayed to God, to take away the heart of stone, and to give an heart of flesh, a teachable, plyable, tractable spirit, ready to receive every Di∣vine impression? O! when shall we make
conscience of reading the Scriptures daily as we ought? The Emperour of Heaven (saith Gregory the great) the Lord of Angels and Men hath sent to you, that which concerns your life, and will you (still) neglect to read it with a fervent and zealous Spirit? How guilty have we been in not meditating in the Word of God as we ought? How little, Not medi∣tating. if at all, have we dwelt in our serious thoughts upon the matters contained in the written Word of God, to the end we might under∣stand how much they do concern us, and that our hearts may thereby be raised to some holy affections and resolutions? Though medita∣tion be commanded as a chief means sanctified by God for the keeping of his Word; Josh. 1.8. Psa. 1.2. though we cannot be holy and happy without it alto∣gether; though it be one of the Profitablest duties of a Christian: the Reader and Studier of Scripture may see the beauty, and smell the sweetness of the flowres that grow in this Di∣vine Garden; but it is the Meditater, the Christian-Bee, that gathers the honey out of them; though it be the duty by which the Soul digesteth truths, and draweth forth their strength for its nourishment and refreshment; yea the duty by which all other duties are im∣proved; yet how much is this duty neglected by all sorts of Professours, because though it be the delightfullest task to the Spirit, yet it is the most tedious to the Flesh, that ever men on earth were imployed in. Have not many been long Professours, At all. and yet if they would tell all the truth, they will
confess they never spent one hour together in mediating on the most weighty Scripture-truths, on God, on Mans Estate by Creati∣on, Degeneration, Regeneration, Glorifica∣tion, on Christ, on the Vanity of the Crea∣ture, on the Beauty of Holiness, on Death, on Judgement, on Heaven, and Hell. Me∣ditation (saith Mr. Baxter in his Saints rest) is confest to be a duty by all, but by con∣stant neglect denyed by most: and (I know not by what fatal customary security it comes to pass, that) men, that are very tender Conscienced toward most other du∣ties, yet do as easily overslip this, as if they knew it not to be a duty at all: they, that are presently troubled in mind, if they omit a Sermon, a Fast, a Prayer in publick, or private, yet were never troubled that they have omitted Meditation, (perhaps all their life time unto this very day.) How few have mannaged this duty aright? Aright. Hath not that which we call Meditation been Study only? Hath not some controversial point, or some nice speculation been the mat∣ter of our Meditation? Hereby we evidence that we have not so great spiritual hunger af∣ter Righteousness, as we should: Hungry men (saith one) do not use to stand and pick bones, when they have meat enough to eat. Hath not our end in meditating been only the increasing of our knowledge, and not the improving of our knowledge? Have not we begun this work without God? When we were going about to Meditate, have not we neglected Prayer for help from Heaven
to go through with the work, though with∣out God we can neither know, resolve upon, nor perform what is good; for from him, yea from his own good pleasure comes both the will and the deed? Have not we idled away our meditating seasons? If we have sequestred our selves from worldly businesses, and com∣pany, for meditation at any time, have not we idled away that time, by suffering our thoughts to gad and wander up and down to no purpose, to be sure not to fetch in consi∣derations for the stamping holy impressions upon our hearts and lives? Have not we in meditating been without a due sense of Gods presence? May not we cry out, Gen. 28.16. surely the Lord was in such and such a place where I have been meditating, and I knew it not, i. e. I consi∣dered it not. Hath not the work of our un∣derstandings in this business been to retain, and not to convey truth into the heart? Have our understandings represented what should work holy affections and resolutions aright? Have they presented things good, of a Di∣vine and Heavenly nature as God, Christ, Heaven, &c. in their prime and beauty? Have they presented things in their nature simply evil, as Sin, Gods wrath, Hell, at their worst? Have not we left off meditating before we at∣tained the end of Meditation? before holy affections and resolutions are wrought? Have not we rush'd out of this duty as well as rush'd into it? Have not we gone from this work, as a bird out of the snare, with joy and speed? Have not we ended as well as begun this
work without God? not praying to God for strength to perform, what we have been in∣abled by grace to resolve upon for God; and for pardon of what hath been amiss in the du∣ty? O! when will English Professours be prevailed with to make conscience of this du∣ty of duties? I once more intreat thee (to use Mr. Baxters words) as thou art a man that maketh conscience of a revealed duty, and that darest not wilfully resist the Spirit, as thou valuest the high delights of a Saint, and the Soul-ravishing exercise of Heaven∣ly Contemplation, and as thou art faithfull to the peace and prosperity of thine own Soul, that thou speedily and diligently set upon this great duty. O! Conside∣rations against flighting Gods written Word. what a mighty blessing is it to have such a book, wherein are written by God himself the great counsels of his will concerning mans Eternal Salvation? What a sin is it then to have low, mean, yea vile and base thoughts of it? Is not our slighting of the Word of the Lord the cause of all the wickedness in our hearts and lives? Whence are all our omissi∣ons and commissions, but because we make a light matter of sinning against the Scriptures? Certainly this great provocation hath a great hand in our miseries, and threatneth utter ruine to us. Prov. 13.13. Isa. 5.24. Who so despiseth the Word shall be destroyed: Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff; so their root shall be rottenness, and their blosome shall go up as dust; because they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy one of Israel.
CHAP. XVI. Their miscarriages about the Promises. 9ly. Professors miscarria∣ges about the Pro∣mises. MUch Ungodliness is also evidenced in Professors miscarriages about the Promises of the Ward; the promises being the great promoters of godliness in the world, not only as arguments to induce it, by shewing how God will reward it; but likewise as prin∣ciples of godliness, or the chief instrument, whereby God makes Souls partakers of the Divine nature. 1. Not be∣lieving their truth. How little do we believe the truth of the Promises? How little do we believe that the Spirit of God and glory rests on them, that suffer for Christ, and his Gospel? and that as tribu∣lations do abound for Christ, so shall consolations by him? or that we shall have an hundred fold advantage by any loss we sustain for Christ and his concernments? All that fear of man, all that cowardise, all those tremblings of heart, that are upon Professors this day; all that en∣mity against the Cross of Christ, which ap∣pears on the faces, and hearts of men, are clear demonstrations how little the promises for the bearing up under suffering, for the deliverance out of suffering, or rewarding of
suffering for Christ are believed: We cannot set the Promises against all Crosses. 2. Not pri∣zing them enough. How low are our esteems of the Promises of God, of the great and faithful God, in comparison of what they are concerning the Promises of honest and sufficient men? I ap∣peal to thee, if a King should promise thee a thousand pound per annum, whether it would not more rejoyce thine heart, than the Pro∣mises of eternal Life, which God hath made unto thee, do? With how few Professours are the Promises of God exceeding great and precious? 2 Pet. 1.4. Not ad∣miring Gods conde∣scention therein. 3. How little do we admire at Gods stopping so low, as to oblige himself by promise to such varlets as we? God might have dealt with us by way of absolute Soveraignty and Dominion, imposing only upon us commands to do our duty, without adjoyning any promise of a reward, he being our Creatour, and we his Creatures: It is his great condescention, to deal with us by way of Promise, which is not only an insinuation and signification of what he will do, but a laying a bond or obligation upon himself to do so and so. Herein God did more condescend unto Man, than unto the fallen Angels: they have not any one, not the least Promise of any good, made by God unto them. And yet how little are we in ad∣miration? Not bles∣sing God for them. 1 Jo. 2.25. 4. How little do we bless the Lord for those Jewels, that are wrapt up in the Promises; for the Fruit, that hangs on this Tree of Life? This is the Promise, that he hath promised us,
even eternal Life. A Crown is promised: Jam. 1.12. He shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. A King∣dome is promised: Hearken, Jam. 2.5. my beloved Bre∣thren, hath not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of the Kingdome, which he hath promised to them that love him? Yet how unthankfull? This doubtless pro∣ceeds from our diffidence of the reality and faithfulness of the Promiser, and therefore that shall be another Question. 5. How little do we relye upon God, Not rely∣ing on the Pro∣miser. to make good his Promises? How many think God the Promiser as changeable as themselves? Men in Boats, being in constant motion upon the Waters, are apt to fancy, that the Land and Trees move, as they themselves do: So many Christians think, as oft as they fail in point of strict duty, God will fail too. Who layes all the stress upon the faithfulness of him that hath promised? Do not we lean partly to the Promises, and partly to our own endea∣vours, and the means we use, and so divide our dependencies betwixt the Promises of God, and our own Duties, to bring in par∣dons, peace, holiness, or any outward com∣forts? 6. Do not we eye Promises, Not eye∣ing Christ in them. without eyeing Christ? Do not we dote on the Bracclets, but neglect the Friend? Do not some set a greater value on the Promise, than on Christ's Per∣son: Though the Promises are only the Chry∣stal Streams of that River of Life, Rev. 22.1. which pro∣ceedeth out of the Throne of God, and the Lamb;
yet do not we make them the Primary, and not the Secondary Object of Faith? Who look upon Promises only as Instruments, to bring Christ and the Soul together? 7. Not hoping for the good of them. How little do we hope for the good laid up in the Promises? What fearful expectations have many Prosessours, though they walk close with God, though they abstain from that which is evil, though they fulifill after God to the utmost of their power, though they de∣sign which way to walk in all well-pleasing, be∣ing fruitful in every good word and work; yet how cast down, how discouraged are they? how do they pine away, and their hearts dye within them? how are they as Reeds shaken, as Ships driven, and cannot cast anchor within the Vail? Moses himself was shaken, when a deliverance of Gods own promising met with opposition: And Moses said, Lord, where∣fore hast thou so evil intreated this people? Exod. 5.22, 23. why is it that thou hast sent me; For since I came to Pharaoh, to speak in thy Name, he hath done evil to this people, neither hast thou delivered thy people at all. It is Gods wonted course, to bring signal mercies under a sentence of death, before we enjoy them: and yet how prevailing is unbelief, when God deferrs, and the Promise is obstructed? How faint are we? Our hope is not lively. 8. Noc wait∣ing for the good of them. Heb. 10.36. How little do we wait, till that good, which is in the Promises, be given out to us? I may truly say to many, yea to most, Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the Promise.
Sure, The Vision is for an appointed time, Hab. 2.3. and God would have us to wait, though it tarry; because it will not tarry, beyond the time ap∣pointed by the wise and saithful God: But, though God never fail of his own time, yet he seldome comes at ours, and then we run into unbelief, if not impatiency of spirit. How oft do we Antedate the Promise, and set it a time before Gods time? Jam. .4. Patience hath not its perfect work, so that if God save us out of our miseries, we shall not be able to say as the Church, Loe, this is our God, Isa. 25.9. we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoyce in his salvation. This li∣miting the holy One of Israel, either as to means, (when we tye up the Lord to work by wayes and causes of our own) or to dayes and hours of our own bold and impudent pre∣scription, is no small provocation. Psa. 78.40, 41. How oft did they provoke him in the Wilderness: and grieve him in the Desert? Yea, they turned back, and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel. Some will wait a month or two for the Promise of Pardon, that they may have peace in their Consciences, and for Promises of outwards; but when they see nothing comes of their waiting, 2 Kings 6.33. then there is no hope, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? That Wretch waited a little, but not long enough. We allow time to the Physician to cure us, we yield, that he knows the fit∣test time to apply cordialls; but we yield not so much to God: We would have the smart∣ing
Plaister pulled off, before the Wound be healed; whereas it is best for us, to have it kept on. David's foot was almost slipt, when he saw the Promise of the Kingdom deferred, he makes a bad inference from the delay, One day I shall fall by the hand of Saul. 1 Sam. 27.1. We do not stay our selves on the Promises, till the thing promised be given into our bosomes. David waited patiently; but so do not we: Our hearts are not at rest, but we stagger like Drunkards, we reel this way, and that way, but are not established and setled: In this we are not consident, that God who hath promised, cannot lye, and therefore will perform the word, that is gone forth from an unfeigned lip: We are too hasty in our desires, whereas God knows the fittest season for the Promise to bring forth: We shall have it, when the time is come; but we hasten the birth, and spoyl the conception. The Pro∣phet of old complains of some, Isa. 35.4. Isa. 28.16. that they were of an hasty heart: whereas, He that believeth, maketh not hast. God deferrs, to put an edge on our desires, a value on what is promised, and to exercise our Faith. The Word, that is gone forth out of the mouth of the God of truth, should quiet; but it doth not. Isa. 60.22. Psa. 102.13. I the Lord will hasten it in its time. The Lord will arise, and have mercy upon Zion, when the time to favour her, yea, when the set time is come. And is not Gods time the best? 9. Abusing Promises. How have many abused, rather than ap∣plyed Promises? How many dogs take the
Children's bread? How many Hypocrites tast of the forbidden fruit? Lay hold on that which doth not belong unto them? When they read those sweet delicious promises of the pardon of Sin, of the love of God, of the freeness of grace, of the glory to come, they count them as theirs, whereas they are but Usurpers, they set their mark on anothers goods: they are thieves and robbers; for they are strangers to the Promises. How many a∣buse the mercy of God in the Promises, so that even the Promises become an occasion of stumbling, whilst they continue in sin, in hopes of pardons through the Promises? We are not led by the sweetness of the Promise to Repentance; but rather harden our hearts, presuming of pardons on course from the God of grace: Gluttons surfet soonest upon the greatest dainties: thus many venture to con∣tinue to sin that grace may abound: hence Re∣pentance is put off; because men hope God will abundantly pardon, when ever the wick∣ed forsakes his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. The Promises are not made a Sanctuary unto which men fly from sin, but as a Sanctuary to protect them in their sinfull courses. God is mercifull, slow to wrath, he will abundantly pardon, &c. therefore &c. Do not we overlook all the threatnings and ter∣rible denunciations of God against our sins, and wholly pitch on the comfortable Promises of the Gospel? Do not we eye Promises, and yet hate Commands? Do not we mind Tem∣poral Promises, with the neglect of Spiritual,
and therein disparage God, by setting a deep∣er value on Earth than on Heaven, on our back and bellies, than on God? Do not we eye the Promises that speak of mercy, but pass over those that lead to duty? View with pleasure pardoning Promises, but neglect the Promises of sprinkling us with clean wa∣ter, and that Sin shall not have Dominion over us? We like it, that God will be our God; but we love not to be Gods people, un∣der his command, and at his dispose. How do we eye the absolute Promises, but neglect the conditional? We take hold of Promises of deliverance, when under any misery; but we forget the condition: If my people shall hum∣ble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their evil wayes, &c. little is that minded by us, which the Prophet speaks, At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, Jer. 18.9, 10. and concerning a Kingdome to build and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voyce, then I will repent of the good where∣with I said I would benefit them. We love, we like, Promised mercies, and every one is looked upon as an unbelieving Thomas, that doubts of the mercy, but we overlook the preparatory duties of Fasting, Praying, Re∣penting and Reforming our hearts and wayes, &c. Hence men dote almost on the Promises of grace; but secretly hate the Promises to grace; because they find no gracious qualifi∣cations in themselves: they love to hear of Gods readiness to pardon; but they are loth to hear that they must come to Christ for Re∣pentance and then for Remission; they would
fain have the penny, but they cannot endure labour. God hath linked his Promises and our seeking together. Ezek. 36.37. Thus saith the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them: But how many of us do either altogether neglect, or slothfully go about to perform the condition of the Promise? Are not some of us altoge∣ther strangers to faith, the condition of the whole covenant of grace? know not what an heart purifying faith means? We never gave our selves unto the Lord, yet run away with the Promises of forgiveness: though igno∣rant of the Mediatour betwixt God and sin∣full creatures, though full of pride and high concerts of our own Righteousness, though we live in an open disesteem of the Gospel of Christ, though we cannot but find an incompliance of heart with subjection to Christ, yet we boast Abraham is our Father, the blessing of Abraham is come upon us, the Promises are ours. How do the Promises of God make some slothfull in the use of ap∣pointed means? How formal in duties are we? May it not be said of us, Deest aliquid intus. as of the I∣mage, there is somewhat wanting within? Are not we silly doves without heart? Are not we only bolstred up with the Promises? O! these pillows under our heads make us slum∣bring Virgins: All is well, God is mercifull, &c. but we do not sweat and get our living by labour, we strive not to enter in at the straight gate, &c. We look for the blessed hope, but we live not soberly. I know (saith God) the thoughts that I think towards you, thoughts
of peace, Jer. 29.11, 12. but not of an evil, to give you an ex∣pected end; but be sure, that ye call upon me, and goe and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. 10. Nicely applying them. How nice and curious are some in apply∣ing of Promises? They forsooth take no plea∣sure in any Promises, but such as they think no hand touched before their own: They neglect the plain, clear, open, rich Pro∣mises of the Gospel; and if any be more ab∣struse, and hard to be found out, by an or∣dinary eye, they are greedily suck'd in: They are only or mainly for mystical Promi∣ses. Such think they are delighted with the goodness of the Promise, whereas they are only pleased with the newness of it, or with their own invention, and that they can see farther into a Mill-stone than another. I have known some of these, and I have seen what is become of them: their pride and af∣fectation hath led them also from the plain paths of holiness. 11. How many will not close with a Promise (such is their folly) till the thing promised be found within them? Not ap∣plying them, till they have what they should apply them for. Because their hearts are so corrupt, therefore they will not apply the Promises of subduing iniquity, and of puri∣fying the heart: whereas there is no way to get their corrupt hearts cleansed, but by lay∣ing hold on such Promises; and the longer they keep off the Promise, the worse it will be with them: There is no other way, but by this Ark, to escape drowning; and the longer they wander in this Wilderness, the
more hard it will be at last to enter into Cana∣an: the longer they keep off from the pro∣mise, the more corrupt will their hearts grow, and the more corrupt they grow, the work of the heart-purifying-faith will be the more difficult. 12. Eyeing Provi∣dences more than Promises. How many of us eye Providences more than Promises? and make the Providences, rather than the Promises of God, the Ground of their Faith? One saith well, The Star∣light of one single Promise, is of more use to Christians, than a Constellation of many Providences, both to assure them in their wayes, and to support them under any difficulties. 13. Do not we pretend to eye the Promises, using in∣direct means for getting what is promised. and yet use indirect means to bring our devices to pass? We have pretended to live the Life of Faith; but God knows what shifts men have had, and wicked (at least questionable) courses men have taken; how much evil hath been done, that good may come. Have not we, to help Gods Promises to bring forth, turned out of Gods way, resisted Dignities, offered Violence to known Laws, wronged Conscience, forgot all Obligations upon us, Not look∣ing that they at∣tain their ends in our Souls. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Jo. 3.3. regarded nothing that stood in our way of compassing our designes? 14. How little do we exmaine the Fruits of Gods Promises in our own Souls? The exceeding great and precious Promises are given, that we might be partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust: that we might purifie our
selves, even as God is pure: But do we look for these ends to be attained by the Promises in our Souls? Do we look not only for a Change from Looseness to Civility, but a through Sanctification in Body, Mind, and Spirit? 2 Cor. 7.1. Alas! which of us can say, Having these Promises, we do cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and are per∣fecting holiness in the fear of God. CHAP. XVII. Their Abuse of Providence. 10ly. Professors Abuse of Provi∣dence. ABuse of Providence is another branch of Ungodliness, too much spreading among Professours. God is to be honoured, not only as the chiefest Good, and as the su∣pream Truth and Authority; but as the first Cause, that giveth Beeing to all things, and therefore ordereth and disposeth of all things as he pleaseth, having absolute Dominion over all events: But O! how is God dis∣honoured, by abusing his Providence? The blind World are not only guilty, who do not acknowledge God at the other end of Causes, as swaying all things by his Wisdome and Power, but set up an Idol, called Chance; but even Professours, eminent Professours, are herein very guilty.
1. Eviden∣ced in their non∣observing it. How seldome do we observe Gods Provi∣dence? The Finger of God is in all the Crea∣tures; not only We, but all Creatures live, move, and have their beeing, from God, and in God: The whole course of Nature moves, as it is turned by the hand of God, and di∣rected by his counsel: It is not with the work of God, as with the Artificers Clock, which, put into a frame, and hang'd with weights, will goe, though the Artificer be off from it; but though God set all the Creatures in frame, yet the motion of every wheel depends on God. There is not a drop of rain falls, till God utter his voice, Jer. 10.13. and cause the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: Yet how is God not minded? We see not his footsteps: We may say in this, He passeth this way, and that, and we see him not. Our eyes are held to secondary Causes: We look when the Wind, or Moon, will change; but we are so short-sighted, that we reach not God. How seldome do we consi∣der, that though Gods Providence doth de∣liver up his choicest Friends, into the hands of his and their Enemies, yet doth it not deliver them up unto their will: they cannot do what they please, but only what pleaseth God: Such of Gods own are still engraven on the palmes of his hands, though turned over into the hands of the Ungodly: they are Gods Fa∣vourites still, though the wicked say, Perse∣cute them, and take them, for God hath forsa∣ken them. How little do we mind, that our times are in Gods hands; and that as Satan is in a Chain, so are his Instruments: We fear
Men more than God. O! when shall we hear that Word of God, Say not a confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a confe∣deracy; Isa. 8.12, 13, 14. neither fear ye their fear, nor be a∣fraid: Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; And he shall be for a Sanctuary, &c. 2. Not being affected there∣with. How little are we affected with the conti∣nual course of Providence, though it guards and keeps us every moment? The Stars in their courses would fight against us: the Sea would swallow us up, and break in as a devourer: the Beasts of the Field would arm against us; if God did not check them, and bound them: yea, one man would eat up another, were it not for the Lord, who sets bounds to the rage of all the Creatures. It is the eye of jealousie that is still wakeful for us: it is the Lord, that puts the hook into the nose, and the bridle in the lips, of the Senacheribs of the World; and yet how little are our hearts affected? how little are they comforted, and born up? how little do they cleave unto the Lord? On the contrary: But di∣strusting t. How distrustful are we of Gods Providence, in a time of seen dan∣gers, though we are wonderfully delivered from invisible ones every day? Who can number the legions of Devils? so many deli∣verances hast thou by Gods Providence every moment; and yet how diffident and doubtful are we, upon all new imminent outward dan∣gers? How little do we believe, that God will bring in good to us, by such Providences
as are ungrateful to Sense, to Flesh and Blood? Though nothing is more usual, than for God to take away some comforts, and lay in better comforts; to take away an Abel, and make it up in Seth: to deprive Noah of the comforts of the whole World for a while, and then to wash it from its filthiness, and to deliver him the possession of it, with mani∣fest proofs of his singular distinguishing care of him and his Family, whilst all the rest of the Creatures perished in the waters: to de∣prive Mary and Martha of their Brother La∣zarus, and to return him from the dead unto them with great advantage: to deprive Job of his Children and Estate, to make his last dayes better than his first, Job 1.3. compa∣red with Ch. 42.10, 12. and to give him twice as much as he had before; for seven thou∣sand Sheep, he had fourteen thousand; before he had three thousand Camels, afterwards six thousand; before five hundred Asses, then one thousand; yet how little can we trust Provi∣dence in such cases? How hardly were the Disciples perswaded, that the absence of their Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, should be supplyed in the Spirit? And yet saith Christ, Nevertheless I tell you the truth, fo. 16.7. it is expedient for you that I goe away: for if I goe not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him to you. Christ in his Spirit, dwelling in our hearts, is better than Christ in Flesh, dwelling in our houses. When the unclean Spirit departs from a man, Mat. 12.43. and re∣turns again, he brings seven Spirits worse than himself, and the latter end of that man is worse
than his beginning; but when Christ withdrew from Earth to Heaven, he brings seven con∣solations better than at first, in the powring forth of the Comforter, and the end of such (in whom the Spirit supplies the want of Christs bodily presence) is better than the beginning. Why cryest thou for thine afflicti∣on? thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity, Jer. 30.15, 16, 17. &c. Therefore all they that de∣vour thee, shall be devoured, &c. for I will re∣store health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, &c. Nothing more usual with God than to make the loss of one comfort, the means of enjoying another with advan∣tage, yea with the advantage of the hundred fold: But alas! most fear they shall be losers by Christ and for Christ. God doth as Mar∣riners, row one way, and look another: he brings most of his great ends about by look∣ing quite aside from what he hath a special in∣tent to bring to pass: the Lord seldome pro∣ceeds in a direct way to his ends, i. e. in a right way to our apprehensions, in such a way as we would have him go in; but he leads us about, Psa. 107.7. as he did Israel, and yet that was the right way indeed: though the means seem to oppose the end; yet he works to the praise of his Name: he can write right by a crooked pen, and bring honey out of the Car∣kas of the Lion: make use of strange instru∣ments, break down Jerichos walls by the sounds of Ramshorns: But O! how little do we trust Providence when the means are not probable
to effect our expected end? Zech. 14.7. Hebr. 11.12. Who believes there shall be light in the Evening? And that Sarah shall have a posterity as the Stars in the Firmament for multitude, and as the sand on the Sea shore, which is innumerable, when she was old, had been barren so long, and her Lord old also? Who will think that the Sun and the Stars shall bow to Joseph, when he lies in the Pit, or is in the Dungeon of the Heathen King? How slow to believe were the Disciples, when Christ is dead and buried, Luk. 24.21, 25. and lies three dayes in the Grave? We thought this should have been he that should have deli∣vered Israel. How little doth the Worm Ja∣cob (Jacob when reduced as low as the earth, when creeping into holes for security, when as contemptible as a worm, that no man scru∣ples to tread upon, when so easily to be destroy∣ed, as a worm) believe, Isa. 41.15, 16.17. that yet the Worm Jacob shall thresh the mountains and fan them, and the wind shall carry them away? Alas! how unseemly is the behaviour of many, if Providence thwarts them in taking away a Child, an Husband, an Estate, how discoura∣ged and cast down are we, as if God in his Providence had pulled down that, which he could never build again, or rooted up that which he could never plant again. O! how few believe that if God pull down their brick∣houses, that he will build them again of hewn-stones, and that if he consume their Fir∣trees, he will build again with Cedars? Do not many afflicted Christians think it impossi∣ble for their sorrow to be turned into joy?
Whence is all our dejectedness under Cross-Providences, Hence de∣jectedness under Cross-Providen∣ces. but from our not believing that all things are disposed by the wife and gracious Providence of God? We believe not enough that the Eyes of our loving Father run to and fro throughout the Earth, to shew himself Marvellous for our help in a time of need and danger. David was thus overta∣ken, till he school'd himself into a better frame, with Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, Psa. 42.5. and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance. Few can say, God is our refuge and strength: Psa. 46.1, 2. a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be removed: and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Few be∣lieve that if the Lord be pleased to lay a great burden upon their shoulders, he will give great strength to bear it, and if he gives but little strength, he will surely proportion the burden to it. Whence are all our uproars of Spirit, and disquietness of heart, but from our not trusting upon Providence? When God is working desolation, did we see it his work, we would be still. David was so, when strangely provoked by Shimei's insolen∣cy and railings. God hath bid Shimei curse. Abisha was not so much concerned in the affront, as David, but he sees not God in the lips of Shimei, and therefore his Spirit is inflamed. All the boylings of Revenge that are in the hearts of men one 'gainst another may be Boyling of re∣venge.
attributed to mans blindness and injudicious view of things, they see not the wicked to be Gods Sword to let out their corruption: they do not believe that God intends to pur∣sue gracious designs by such instruments. Joseph was easily conquered and perswaded to forgive the unkindness, yea the cruelty of his Brethren in making Merchandize of him to the Ishmalites, he could say, Gen. 45.8.50.20. It was not you that sent me hither, but God, &c. As for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it un∣to good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive. He insinuates to them, that they had no cause to fear his revenging himself on them; for that he could easily pardon that offence of theirs, out of which God hath drawn so much good to his people, and so much glory to his own Name. How silent would we be, yea how full of praises, if by an eye of faith we did see the end of God in all his Providences, that they lead to holy∣ness: Before I was afflicted I went astray; Psa. 119.67, 75. Hebr. 12.10. but now I keep thy Word: I know O Lord, that thy judgements are right, and that thou hast af∣flicted me in faithfulness. He for our Profit, that we might be partakers of his holinesse. Can we fume at the Physician for prescribing a dyet, or bitter pills and potions, if he pro∣vides these for the purging away diseases, that threaten our ruine? Shall we fly in the face of him that binds us, in order to the Sa∣ving us? and yet what murmurings have we, whilst in the hands of the Physician? Prov. 19.3. The folly of a man perverteth his wayes, and his
heart fretteth against the Lord. How should we honour God, if we did believe, that in his hand our breath is? How carefull are we to please them that have power over our lives, And care∣lesness to please God. Dan. 5.23. and to whom we are beholding for every breath we breath? O! study how much you labour to comply with men, and how little with the Lord, and you will find your distrust of Providence, that you do not believe, that God sitteth upon the flouds. 3. Justifying their acti∣ons and states by Provi∣dence. How oft have we made Providence an ar∣gument to justifie our actions and states? That, because God doth not punish us, but tolerate us, therefore he loves us, and approves of our way? Whereas the Scriptures and Ex∣perience shew, that there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongs his life in wickedness: The Lord sometimes puts his Hoggs into the fattest pastures, in order to the Slaughter; yea, sometimes his not punishing, is the greatest punishment. Hos. 4.14. I will not punish your Daughters for their Whoredomes: God lets Adulterers and Adulteresses to prosper and thrive. Hierome observes, that God deals with us, as Parents with Children, whilst there is any hope of reclaiming them, Vae illi ad quo∣rum pec∣catae con∣nivet Deus. Luth. they are corrected; but otherwise they are let a∣lone, to do as they list: Or as Physicians con∣tinue their applications, whilst there is any hope of the Patients life; otherwise they let them alone. How do some bless themselves, that they never fasted and prayed as others,
and yet they ride on horseback, whilst others foot it out: But what saith Hierome to there? Quando videris, &c. When thou leest a sinner flow with wealth, and braving of his power: when thou seest him very healthful, and to have a company of brave Children bravely arrayed; then say, the threatning of God, by the Prophet Hoseah, is full filled upon that man. Dives had his good things here, and Lazarus evil: Dives fa∣red deliciously every day, his misery is reser∣ved to hereafter, as Lazarus his comforts are reserved till death. Mark the perfect man, Psal. 37. and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. i. e. a confluence of all good. What said one of the late English Bishops? It is the common lot of the true Children of God, because they have many out-fly∣ings, wherewith their holy Father is not well pleased, to come under the scourge oftner than the Bastards do. If they do a∣miss, they must smart for it either here or hereafter: now God meaneth them no con∣demnation hereafter, and therefore he giv∣eth them more chaslning here. 1 Cor. 11.32. It is a con∣siderable passage of a very learned man, in weakning the late position of some, that God had borne Testimony to their cause, by the many Victories which he had given them, saith he, This concluding of yours will by the same reason infer that Christianity is not, and that Mahumetisme is the true Religion; because when the Turks asserted one, and the Greek-Church the other, and that dif∣ference
begat a War betwixt them; it is clear that the Turks were successful, and the Greek-Church was sadly wasted and subdued by them, and so remains to this hour in that un-returned Captivity. Doe not all things com alike to all? Eccles. 9.2. And yet good men, some of the best that ever breathed, have been stumbled at these dispensations: Lord (saith the Prophet Jeremiah) thou art righteous, Jer. 21.1. yet let me reason with thee, Why doth the way of the Wicked prosper? Thou art of purer Eyes (saith the Prophet Habakkuk) than to behold evil, Hab. 1.13. and canst not look on iniquity: Wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue, when the Wicked de∣voureth the man that is more righteous than he? The Saints also of the New Testa∣ment were apt to stumble at the Cross, at Gods Providences towards his Saints and fa∣vourites, that they should suffer such hard things: so that the Apostles were forced to counsel them, and to rectifie their thoughts, in this particular; My Brethren think it not strange concerning the fiery tryal: 1 Pet. 4.12. 1 Thes. 3.3, 4. And the A∣postle Paul sent Timothy on purpose to com∣fort them, and to establish them, that no man should be moved by these afflictions: Yea our Lord himself knowing how apt his Disci∣ples were to stumble hereat, preacheth on purpose on this subject. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye be not offended: What things were these? They shall put you out of the Synagogues (excommunicate you, cast
you out like dogs:) Yea the time shall come, that whosoever killeth you will think he doth God service. Good men, when they see the wicked thus walk on every side (go where they please, and do what they please) they are apt, either to doubt of Gods Providence, Whether he governs the World, or to call in question whether they have any relation to Gods special care. But do not we know that the Child is oft beaten, whilst the Servant or stranger is spared? Doe not we know that judgement begins at the House of God, yea, 1 Pet. 4.17. yea, and stays long there, and all that while the tents of ungodliness may be free: these may wash their steps in butter, and the Rocks may pour them out Rivers of Oyle: they may wax old and grow in a wealth; Job. 21.7 ad 15. their seed may be establi∣shed: the Rod of God may not be upon them: they may rejoyce in in the sound of the Organ, &c. and yet wicked enough: All this they may have with the Curse of God, for they say unto God depart, &c. 4. Censuring others and themselvs upon the account of out∣ward Pro∣vidences. How oft have the generation of the Just been censured for Hypocrites and ungodly, meer∣ly because of outward Providences? Thus was Job censured by good men; because he sate on the Dunghil, who was wont to sit with Princes. Let a man be under grievous losses by Sea, or by Land, yea let but a Viper hang upon the hand, and what then? This man (say they) surely is a murtherer, Acts 28.4. who though he hath es∣caped the Seas, yet vengeance suffereth not to live: Mens outward conditions is made by Barbarians, yea by Christians, the line to
measure Mens relation to God by, they inter∣pret love by prosperity, and hatred by adver∣lity: whereas the Lord tells us that through many tribulations we must enter into the King∣dome of Heaven. I wonder not at this, when I consider, that the Servant is not above the Master: Isa. 53.3, 4. When Christ was a man of sorrows, they did judge him smitten of God. How rea∣dy also are we to say this is a just Judgement of God upon such a suffering Professour, for—? Yea we censure our selves for Hypocrites, when God crosseth us in some earthly comforts, and designs. If a Child dies, &c. then we question the root of the matter, whether there be a spark of grace. 5. Making Provi∣dence an hinde∣rance to depend∣ing on God. The more Providence hath favoured us, have not we the less roled our selves on the Cove∣nant of grace? Hath not God had the less of our dependance and faith? Have not the promises lain more neglected, so that God hath been even necessitated to draw in his hand of bounty, that, like the Widdow, when destitute, we may trust to him? The Cisterns leak apace, that the Fountain may be in greater request. 6. Being dis∣comen∣ced with. Provi∣dence. How discontented are we to this day with Gods Providential administrations toward us? How do we prescribe to God? Some would be richer than they are; others more honou∣rable: Some covet to be above others. We have bad memories, or else we cannot but remember how ill some of us improved our talients of power and honour, when we had them. Is it reasonable that God should be
charged for an hard Master for not entrusting ten talents in our hands, when we have been so unfaithfull to our former allotments? Je∣surun-like we waxed fat, and never were more beast-like, than when we were in the greenest pastures. God would be charg'd even with indiscretion, if he should commit ten talents again to thee, till thou art humbled for thy former unfaithfulness. 7. How do we take Gods work out of his hand,? Taking Gods work out of his hands. How carefull are we in many things, though we should be carefull in nothing? Though we cannot add one Cubit to our Stature by all our cares; yet what sollicitudes eat into our hearts, and cut them in twain? We should serve Providence in the use of means, but should have nothing to do with the issues and events of the means we use, but leave them to God. That which is not under our Power, should not be under our Care. Eccles. 9.11. All things are ordered by the deliberate Counsel of God. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of under∣standing, nor yet favour to men of skill, but time and chance happeneth to them all. 8. Distasting Religion because of adversity. How do rotten-hearted Hypocrites distast God, grow careless of serving God, yea fall in∣to an abhorrence of Religion because of Gods frowning upon his people in Providential dispen∣sations? Hence innumerable sorts of these hollow-hearted Professours, desert their for∣mer Profession: when the Wind and Tide of Preferment is against them, they will not ha∣zard
their outward comforts, for all the Pro∣mises of the Gospel: whilst they see how lit∣tle Providence favours the Saints as to the comforts of this life, and that Providence suits not their desires, they rage and swell, and are ready to cry out, like that wretched King, 2 Kings 6.33. This evil is of the Lord, wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer? Now Farewell to God, Farewell to Profession: if when the Children ask bread, he gives them stones, Farewell to such a Father. 9. Neglect∣ing Pro∣vidence, and shift∣ing for them∣selves. How commonly do men neglect the Provi∣dence of God, and betake themselves to their own shifts to extricate themselves from their mi∣series? Is man wiser than God? And yet men hope rather to help themselves by their own wits, wiles, and endeavours, than by leaning to the Providence of God. Such there were in Jeremiahs time: God had told them that he had brought them into straights on pur∣pose to engage them to repent of their sins, and to turn to the Lord: Thus saith the Lord, behold I frame evil against you, Jer. 18.11. and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your wayes and doings good; But they loved not humbling work; v. 12. And they said there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his own evil heart: They had devices of their own, such as God approved not: And have not we (some of us) had such? Hath there not been devising how to sow discords between supe∣rious and inferiours, betwixt Magistrate and
people? v. 15. Hath their not been stumbling in our wayes from the ancient paths in a way not cast up, in an untrodden way? O! how have men run to extraordinary courses to deliver them∣selves out of their miseries? For this, God may make our land desolate and a perpetual his∣sing, or derision: v. 16. v. 17. he may justly scatter us as with an East wind before the Enemy, and shew us the back and not the face in the day of our ea∣lamity. 10. Being partial in viewing Provi∣dence. Have not we been partial in viewing the Providences of God? Have not we taken some one Providence, and fixed our eye upon it so long, till our hearts have been ever over∣whelmed with sorrow? But we have not viewed the Providences of God in their con∣texture, nor in their relation to gracious ends for our good: some take more notice of smi∣ling Providences than of frowning, of what in Providence makes for them, and their courses, than of what makes against them: but others take more notice of frowning Pro∣vidences than of smiling, of what makes a∣gainst them, than of what makes for them. In this we have shewn our selves fools; for who is wise shall understand these things: Hos. 14.9. These words are restrictive: Who? That is few or none are such, and then there is an earnest wish or desire of the Prophet, O that men were wise to understand these things: the wayes of the Lord are right, though men think them not so.
CHAP. XVIII. Their Hypocrisie. 11ly. Professors Hypocrisy HYpocrisie is another piece of Ungodli∣ness, which like leaven, hath dif∣fused it self through the whole body of Profes∣sors. It is the greatest ungodliness, that can be, to rob the Lord of his dominion over the Conscience, and therefore Hypocrisie is called Blasphemy. Rev. 2.9. I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not. God is not honoured unless he be acknowledged as the supream Authority, not only over the life, but the heart; and therefore his Authority is never more undetermined than by a meer form of godliness. 2 Tim. 3.5. Hypocrites are clouds without rain, wells without water, trees without fruit, though not without leaves: Yea (to use Christs simili∣tude) they are garnished tombs: they appear to be one thing, Abscondit quod est, quod non est menti∣tur. Bern. but are another thing: they appear to be the greatest Worshippers of God; but are the greatest dishonourers of God: They profess that they know (worship) God; but in works they deny him, being abo∣minable, and dis-obedient, and to every good work reprobate. Tit. 1.16 The Hypocrites piety is not piety, his religion is not religion; but dou∣bled
and trebled iniquity. Quis non itascatur videns homines, ore Deum confiten∣tes: ne∣gantes moribus? Seculum verbis, et non factis renunci∣antes? Aug. Eviden∣ced, in their Pro∣fessing. Should not this make us to tremble at the greatness of the hypocrisie of this age? O! How many Apo∣thecaries-boxes are there, that have golden titles and nothing in them? How many curi∣ous pictures drawn to life; but look be∣hind them, and there is nothing but dust and cobweb? How many have glorious signs, but within ill customs: an Angel for a sign, a Lamb for a sign, but within are Devils and Cheats? How many have taken up Religion under pretence of its being an help to Heaven, when they have made it a means to get earth, to get custom, credit, &c. Hence when they cannot compass, but rather obstruct their worldly designs, Farewell to Religion: if it contribute not to their private ends, they give it up again. O! How few have embra∣ced Christ and Truth, for Christ's sake, for Truth's sake? Have not most embraced Christ and his Gospel, as they have Servants, for what they can do for them? and adhered to Profession as the Ivy to the Tree, not because it loves it, but sucks from it, and is succoured by it? Have they not alwayes worshipped the rising, and not the declining Sun? How few own the declining sinking cause of Christ? How hard is it to perswade men to stand for truths, that stand not with their advancements and accommodations? Hence many now stand idle, as the people in the Market place, who would not go into the Viyd  they were hired. How few will own any way
be Christs, till they see how it stands with their secular advantages? How many New∣ters now, who once were forward Profes∣sours? If we entertain him (saith they) the Romans will come, and take away our place and Nation. We find the truth of a learned mans Assertion: He that will serve God for the world, will serve the Devil for the world: He that serves God for a little, will serve the Devil for more: where he can mend his wages, he will give his service. How many Professours have with Absolon gone to Hebron to worship, but all the while have promoted their own ambi∣tious designs, raising even sedition in order to their earthly advantages? In how many hath the tongue prayed, Speaking to God. when not the heart? These have been much in fasting and prayer, and have thought them∣selves much wronged that they were not heard: Isa. 58.4. but God gives them a reason: Ye shall not fast as ye do to make your voice to be heard on high. The Hypocrite may lift up his voice strongly, and yet never be heard: his voice for want of the heart therein may never come up to Gods dwelling place: his Prayers ma∣ny times fall back upon his own face, like spittle against the wind. How many have u∣sed Prayer as an hook to draw in outwards from God and Man; but not as a sword to de∣stroy their lusts? How many have cryed ve∣hemently unto God for assistances in their du∣ties, chiefly, if not solely, to get themselves a Name in the Earth? How many tell God with a brazen face that they love him, yea
that they love him with all their hearts, whereas they love not God, but God's, some∣what of God: they flatter God with their lips: they delight not in his presence: yea all the while they are serving their turn on God? Fain they would partake of Gods boun∣ty, of Gods protection, and Gods pardons, but they love neither God nor his Image: when God puts them to express their love by self-denyal, then you shall see the graves to be full of rottenness: they hate to spend and to be spent for God. How many tell God that they are troubled for offending him, when they are only troubled that he is displeasing them, and about to correct them for their a∣buses of him? They will cry out in Prayer, O my carelesseness! &c. But alas! It is not Sin, but the Judgements of God, and the con∣sequents of Sin that disturb them. How ma∣ny will tell God twenty times over they are ashamed of their Sins, and within one hour after they are not ashamed to commit them a∣gain, no more ashamed are they, than the Sow is to lye tumbling in the Mire? How will many tell God they fear him, and his Judgements, when indeed and intruth they fear neither, witness their frothy loose spi∣rits and conversations? How will they tell God that all the world is but as a drop of a bucket in comparison of his Majesty, and that all flesh is contemptible, when weighed with him, and yet they fear the wrath of Man more than the wrath of the Almighty God? How many will tell God that they are contented
with all his will, and yet their hearts are full of inward risings against the Providence of God? How many tell God they believe in him, trust to his Mercy, depend on Christ, and O! forsooth all their cares are cast on Christ, when God knows, their care and work, like Bees, is to get honey to their hives? They mind earthly things, and are scraping the dust of the Valleys to themselves, as if they thought it their wisdome rather to lean to their own providing, than to be beholding to the Lord and dye beggars? How earnest are some in their cries to God for victory o∣ver Sin; but secretly hate it not? And doth it not appear in this, for that having direct∣ed their Prayers to the Lord, they do not look up, to see whether the corruption be more mortified, and their love to it abated yea or no? How have the speeches of many in their converse one with another bewrayed their hypocrisie? To men, concern∣ing things. How do many covet mightily to insist on the refinements of hypocrites, and thereby they escape (as they hope at least) from being judged such themselves? How have some studied to disgrace Sin to the ut∣most, and yet secretly cherished that, which they laboured to make odious to others? In company they cry down self-love, hypocrisie, formality, earthlyness, and pride, but private∣ly they keep up these, and make them their companions. How Zealous have some been in discourse for the Protestant Faith? How have they cryed out against errours, and for
a reformation; but can tell no more of a work of God upon the heart than an Heathen? How have some contended for opinions, and have put a jus divinum upon such and such a way, and counted others as little better than Pagans, that would not submit to their way, and yet by fear and flattery have soon faced a∣bout. How will some cry up such and such for most eminent in grace? Persons, Others. and O how doe they love them! when all the while self-love acts them, and if they gain not by them, they will surely have an howbeit to blot them? They are as the foreman to praise the rich, from whom they hope to squeeze some of their gold; but bring up the rear, are the last to commend them, from whom they ex∣pect nothing of advantage by their glavering tongue. How much Hypocrisie hath appear∣ed in our declaimings against others sins? O! we must not suffer this: the House of God must be kept clean: it must not be made a Den of Thieves, an Hog-sty, and cage of un∣cleanness: and all this while their zeal is no∣thing but revenge; a secret grudge there is against the Delinquent, and now that an ad∣vantage offereth, they will have their penny∣worth out of him. How many are alwayes finding faults, Them∣selves. bla∣ming Magistrates, Ministers, all but them∣selves? This man wants courage, and ano∣ther wants another grace, whilst they them∣selves want all grace, as being meer pieces of pageantry. How many whining Hypocrites
have we, that will in all companies, especi∣ally where Ministers are, be crying out a∣gainst the baseness and treachery of their own hearts, and the wickedness of their own lives, and rest in their lazy complaints, but reform not? How severe are some in their censures of sin in others, Censu∣ring. as Judah against Thamar, she must be burnt? who will now suspect Judah to be unclean? Mat. 7.3. How ready have we been to judge and censure others, rather than our selves? To behold a mote in others, but not the beam in our selves? How many censure Ministers for too seldome preaching in pri∣vate, and yet are themselves Sermon-glutted, as yet they have not got a stomach, so great was their surfeit with the former plenty; yea, when they have Sermons, neglect them; or if they attend with their Bodies on them, yet have no fellowship with Christ in them? We are just like Consumption people, apt to be angry, and fret, if we have not our wonted meals, and the Cooks are blamed for negli∣gence; and when the meat is brought before us, we are even weary of the smell of it. How many censure others for being to talk a∣tive, Acting, better a∣broad than at home, in publick than in seeret dit∣ties. and therefore would impose silence up∣on others, because they have neither heart nor tongue, to vindicate God, and to promote Religion? How many are full of perswasions of the love of God, and of the grace of God, and yet ignorant of the first Principles of Christi∣anity; neglecters of Family-Prayer, or Clo∣set-Duties?
They think well of themselves, because in their Duties before men they are devout and zealous, and carried forth to the wasting of much time; but in their Closets they are straightned, and put the Lord off with a short Collect. How many, like your City Maids, goe in their best, are neat, cleanly, and in gorgeous apparel, when walking in the views of others; but if you follow them home to their houses and cham∣bers, how nasty, how foul are they! How many are there whose Religion lies in their face, habit, gesture: seem demure, humble; walk with their eyes looking downwards, bow with Absolon to the people, and yet their hearts full of pride and loftiness? How oft e∣ven on Fast-dayes have you had sour faces, and inwardly light, frothy, and unserious hearts? As an evidence observe when the day ends, the Dog returns to his vomit, the heart becomes vain, or rather, the vanity that was smothered and pent up in the day breaks out as soon as the duties are over: We can hang down our heads like a bull-rush, we can rough cast our faces, but it is hardly for a day. How hath Hypocrisie followed thee from the corners of the streets to the very closet? Seeming to be more in secret du∣ties than they are. Thou hast shut thy door, as if thou wouldst shut out World and Devils, and there hast fall'n asleep, or (which is as bad) hast par∣lied with the Devil, and pampered thy lusts: Hypocrisie, like the Frogs of Egypt, hath crept into thy most secret retirements.
How few can pretend to Uniformity in their obedience? Being not univer∣sally obe∣dient. Psal. 119.6. How many will be ashamed, be∣cause they respect not all Gods Commande∣ments? still they clip the Law: still some re∣serves: they will let go profaneness, so they may but reserve covetousness: they will pray, hear, &c. so they may cheat their Neighbour under a demure behaviour: or they will be strict to rules of Justice and equity among men: but they will rob God of his honour: some of them are punctual to a day, to a far∣thing (Blush, Reader, if thou art short of the Hypocrites stature) they will not cheat you with a brasse Shilling; but rob God of his due, of his due in the Closet, and in the Family too. How frequently do we hear some desiring to know the least measure of saving Grace, Desiring to know the least degree of saving grace. and why? because they would sit down there∣with. There is not a surer note of an un∣sound heart, than to be contented with the least degree of grace, and not to press for∣ward. How generally do men hate to be examined and tried about their state? But not to be ex∣amined, nor to consult with Mini∣sters a∣bout their condition, much less to follow their di∣rections. This is a sure sign of a rotten heart, of a painted-Christian; paint will not endure the fire: Hypocrites hate lancing and piercing work. How many continue in a course of Religion, and yet their hearts are hardned more and more, and they know it, and yet will hardly consult with Ministers about their sad condition? or if they do, yet practise nothing more than before? I am confident there are many who
make it their business to keep up their reputa∣tion among the Saints, but have lost (and know they have) their credit at the throne of grace; and though they have their reward, the Saints embrace them for Precious, yet Christ neglects them, and when they spread out their hands all the day long to the Hea∣vens, they have no welcome with God. Isa. 1.11. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, saith the Lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of the Rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I delight not in the bloud of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. And when you spread forth your hands, v. 15. I will hide mine eyes from you: yea when you make many Prayers, I will not hear. O! Conside∣rations a∣gainst hypocrifie Isa. 48.1, 2. What a Controversie hath God with England for its great Hypocrisie? We have called our selves of the Holy City, and have maede mention of the God of Lrael, but not in truth, not in righteousness. Though you have past for Saints in the account of blind, and short-sighted men; yet you are but Devils in Christs account: So was the arch-Hypocrite Judas, One of you is a Devil. Of all Devils none so bad as the Professing Devil. Re∣member the vengeance which fell on Bel∣shazzar, when he carouzed in the Bowls of the Sanctuary. 2 Pet. 2.3. Their damnation slumbereth not, who through covetousness make use of the covering of faigned words. O! When will ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and True holiness? Eph. 4.24. Believe it, if thou art a whited wall God will
smite thee. Though thou get some present glory or profit by thy outside holiness, yet God more abhors thee, than the bleer and imperfect observing World can applaud thee. Will a King indure it, that thou take his Robes, and cloath a Swine with them? or that thou take his Crown and set it on the head of a base Varlet? God is coming against the Hypocritical Nation. And he accounts it a disgrace, for thee to voice thy self to be the Son of so great a Prince, whilst thou art a Slave to Hellish lusts. All you do for God will not profit you, you lose all you have wrought, whilst acted by self, and corrupt in your ends and aims. Though you trust in ly∣ing words, Jer. 7.8. Isa. 57.12. in your outward shews, yet I will declare thy righteousness, and thy words, for they shall not profit thee. What shall I say? There is no acceptance for you to be had without the Benjamin of sincerity with you. A day of trouble is hastning, and you think then to pray, but will God hear your cry when trouble cometh upon you? Job. 27.9. Psal. 106.15. Psal. 51.6. If you deny God your heart, never expect his ear. Quails you may have, but with a vengeance, with leanness in your souls. That which God desireth and looketh for, is truth in the inward parts. God and Religion have received so much dis∣honour by pretenders to Christ and Truth, and so many Atheists have been made, con∣firmed, and hardned in England, by the Observations they have made on Professours hypocritical pretensions, that I fear the stains will hardly be wash'd away without blood,
and some probably will be called forth to seal to the Truth of Christ by their death, to con∣vince men, that there are some real Christi∣ans, who will spend, and be spent for Christ; and that whilst many have but a Name to live, yet there are a few in our Sardis, who are not defiled with hellish Hypocrisie, but love Truth in their inward parts. CHAP. XIX. Their Sabbath-Sins. Lastly, WHen you remember the evil of your wayes, Professors Sabbath-Sins. of your un∣godly wayes, you may not omit your Sabbath-Sins. God hath appointed the Sabbath: He hath sanctified it for special and entire communion with himself. The Law of the Sabbath was given before the Fall; because man was to labour and dress the Garden on the six dayes, and therefore could not have that compleat and indistracted communion with God, even in his estate of innocency, which he might enjoy by a total seperation from all earthly and heterogeneous employments: But since the Fall, this Rest is of more absolute neces∣sity; for that we cannot now apply our minds
entirely to matters of so different a nature, as heavenly and earthly things are. The Sab∣bath is many wayes honourable: it was anti∣ently set apart by God; it was written with Gods own finger in the Tables; God rained Mannah on that day; it's called an Everlast∣ing Covenant, by way of eminency, as if no∣thing of Gods Covenant were kept, if this were not: Yea, God puts a Remember on this day, and no other: Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. If a Friend send∣eth to you, that he will come and solace himself in your company such a day, and tells you the set time, when he will come; will he not take it ill, if you neglect him then? If you are full of employments, and other guests, and have no leisure to attend communion with him? Thus saith God, Remember such a time, I will set it apart on purpose to enjoy you, and feast you; I will then take you into my Cellars, my Wine Cellars, and (after an holy manner) inebriate you with Divine comforts: You are on your other dayes clogg'd and cum∣bred with earthly affairs, so that I can have therein but broken communion with you; but pray Remember to lay aside all other bu∣siness, to rest from all your other works, that I and you may freely converse together. But instead of this, How little Preparation do we make for the observing of this day unto the Lord; Their not preparing for it. Though Remember be a Watch-word of solemn Prepa∣ration for it? Remember it, think of it be∣fore
it come, that so thou mayest be ready to sanctifie it, without any distraction by world∣ly business. Which of us dispatcheth his worldly business seasonably on the six dayes? Nay, is it not a wicked custome, to engross more business into our hands and hearts the day before, than on any other day of the Week? Do not greedy Professours sit up la∣ter on Saturday Night, than any other Night? Hereby their hearts are cumbred with the World, and their natural strength and spirits wasted and spent, so that they cannot with a free Spirit wait upon God. Such is the re∣verence that is due to the solemn and publick Duties of Devotion, that they require, not only a surcease from other works and thoughts, for the time of the performance; but also a decent preparation before-hand, that we look to our feet, &c. that so our thoughts and affections, which are naturally bent upon the World, and not easily with∣drawn from it, may be raised to a disposition becoming the day. God alone knows, how oft the Devil, and our own hearts, have in∣tangled us with occasions on the Saturday, whereby our minds have been distracted on the Sabbath: Yea, have we not at times e∣ven secretly wished, that the Sabbath were over, or might be adjourned, that we might pursue some worldly design, which is ob∣structed by its interposal? The Sabbath is the Saints Market-day, or Fair-day: You know what preparations are made, by World∣lings for their dayes of gain; would to God
we had learned wisdome from carnal men, so to fit and prepare for the advantages to our Souls we may reap upon Gods day. Their curtailing it. Amos 8.4. How have we curtailed the Sabbath? Have not we risen later on the Lords day than on any other? and gone sooner to bed on that day than on any other? When will the Sabbath be gone? Do not we make it the shortest day of the Week? O! If God had reserved all the dayes to himself save one, how diligent would you have been, to take all the day to your worldly business? This is a clear evi∣dence, that your minds are more on your Profits and Pleasures, than on the Service of Christ. How lowring are our countenances, Being sad when the Sabbath begins, and glad when it ends. and how lumpish and heavy are our hearts, in the beginning of a Sabbath, much more than up∣on any other day? Doth not this prove the day to be no way pleasing to us? And how chearfull are some of us, when the Sabbath is ended? The heart is not so well pleased all the day, as then: yea do not some cheat and delude themselves hereby, as if they had joy in the Lord, and had received comfort from the Word and other Ordinances; whereas they are glad that the yoak of Ordinances, the burden of the Word of the Lord, and the burden of the day of the Lord is taking off their Shoulders? Being hindred from pro∣faning it only by external motives. How many are there, who would pro∣fane Gods Sabbaths and wholy neglect the Ordinances of them, were it not for the Laws of men, and the eyes of their Rela∣tions?
How quieted are some when they have at∣tended the publick service? Satisfied with wor∣shipping God pub∣lickly. and do they be∣twixt and after those solemn duties refrain their lips from worldly talk, from imperti∣nencies, from such discourse, as bears no proportion with the holiness of the day? When works of Necessity and Charity hap∣pen out beyond our expectation or forecast, Glad to be hin∣dred from works of piety. are we (at all) troubled at them? Do not we rather rejoyce, because we have thereby a dispensation to withdraw from the immedi∣ate worship of God? And how many neglect to do all their works on the six dayes, Exod. 20.9. though the Lord so expresly chargeth them so to do, that they may have a pretence of necessity to do much servile work on the Sabbath? How common is it to dress meat on the Sabbath, more than on any other day, when there is not the least pretence of weakness, &c. Here∣by not only Servants, but the whole house are too much in labour and destraction, and hindred (if not from the solemn Assemblies, yet) from Family, and Closet worship. How do many gossip, complement, Eating too much on the Sabbath. and feast away (abroad) the day of the Lord? or else eat to an excess at home, and thereby make themselves fitter for a bed, than to wait on the Sanctuary, to hear Christs voice, to me∣ditate on his love, and to feed in his pleasant pastures? How carefull are we to keep our selves, Stealing Gods time. and ours, from pilfering from our Neigh∣bour? but not from stealing from God his time? yea are not some Governours so un∣godly,
unmercifull, that they will allow their people no time but the Sabbath to recreate themselves from their labours? If they need recreation, you have more time than God hath reserved, sure you should not steal from God to pleasure them. In the discharge of the works of mercy to Man and Beast, Not per∣forming duties of mercy aright. Do not we respect more our own commodity, than the will of God, than the dispensation of God, and the creatures necessities? Are these works of mercy atten∣ded with such spiritual meditations, as they do afford us, if our hearts were holy? How few bless God for giving them one day, Not bles∣sing of God for the Sab∣bath. wherein they may lighten their hearts of all worldly cares, and throw off all griefs and secular cumbers, and may seek for relief and comfort in their God? Perhaps the Master observes a day unto the Lord; Careless whether those un∣der them observe the Sab∣bath. but how careless is he, that his Sons and Daughters, and all within his gate honour the day of the Lord? Do not many Professing Governours of Families let them sleep away the Sabbath, that they may be the fitter for their drudgeries the following week? O! when will Governours be as diligent, that their Servants and Houshold serve the Lord, as that they serve themselves? You have been carefull that your work were done on the week; but careless whether Gods work were done by them on the Sabbath: careless whe∣ther your Servants profited by the Sabbath yea or no? When will Gods glory and the good of your peoples Souls be nearer to you than
your worldly advantages? You ask your Ser∣vants, what work they have done for you every day, and call them to frequent ac∣counts for your gains-sake, and what? never reckon with them about their Spiritual Soul∣work? O! how little is the love of God shed abroad in your hearts? How justly may God be angry with us, till he hath consumed us, for our desiling the day of the Lord? It was Gods express Law, Exod. 31.14. that eve∣ry one that desileth it should surely be put to death. When the people were weary of the Sabbath, when they said, Amos 8.5. v. 7. When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat, &c. v. 7. The Lord swore by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works. v. 8. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a floud, and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the floud of Egypt. v. 9. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that I will cause the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will darken the Earth in the clear day. v. 10, And I will turn your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into lamentation, &c. v. 11. Behold the dayes come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a Famine in the land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. v. 12. And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.
CHAP. XX. Their miscarriages about Heart-examination. THe more that the Lord of Heaven chargeth us with a Duty, Professors miscarria∣ges about Self-exa∣mination. the more inexcusable are our neglects of it: There are few things more com∣manded us, than to try and examine our hearts and lives: 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, &c. Prove your selves, &c. We are apt to be strangers to our selves, to cheat our selves with vain presumptuous hopes, to rest in notions; therefore , Examine your selves, take an experimental knowledge of your selves: We are apt to prove others, and cen∣sure them; therefore , Prove your own selves, begin at home, try your state, try your actions, bring the mettal to the touchstone, see whether it be sound or counterfeit; try your Faith, whether it be temporary or saving; prove your Repentance, whether it be through or superficial; examine your Love, whether it be sincere or hypocriti∣cal; and your Obedience, whether it be uni∣versal or partial. Deut. 4.39. Know therefore, and consi∣der it in thine heart, make a return or answer
to thine heart. Commune with thine own heart, Psa. 4.4 1 Cor. 11.28. Lam. 3.40. Their o∣mitting the Duty altoge∣ther, hold intelligence with it. Let a man examine himself. Let us search and try our wayes. But yet notwithstanding these Injunctions, 1. How many are there, that never set about this Duty? They will Pray, &c. but will not be perswaded to look inward: They are as great strangers to their own, as to others hearts. They are at no pains, to try in what state they are: They will not try, Nor exa∣mining their Estates, whether they are new-born, or not; whether sancti∣fied, or not; whether a saving change hath past upon them, or not: They will not com∣pare themselves with the Characters, which are given by Ministers and Books, to see whether they be in the gall of bitterness, or not, in the bond of iniquity, or not: They never examine what Justification, and justi∣fying and saving Faith be, and whether they are justified, and shall be saved, like Gallio, Little caring for these things: They examine which way they may be greater in the World, how to add to the heap, how to load them∣selves with thick clay, how to escape the wrath of man, how to prolong their dayes; but not how to prepare for Eternity, and how to make sure of Heaven: You ask one another, what news from Navies, from Ar∣mies, from Court, from Country; but when did you spend one hour to ask your hearts this serious question, O my Soul! what will become of thee, when thou leavest this earthly Taber∣nacle? We travel any where, but where we should: We are better read in any Book,
than in the sealed Book of our own hearts: We are not at all for a personal treaty with our own Consciences: We are too much prying into other mens hearts, but our eyes turn not inward: We know not how it is with our Souls, and what will become of them, and we have no mind to know such matters. As we commune not with our hearts about our States, Nor Actions. so we do not commune with them about our Actions, neither before, nor after the doing of them: Before we act, we do not advise with our Consciences, whether, what we be about to do, be lawful or unlaw∣ful; and if lawful, whether expedient or in∣expedient: After we have acted, whether our actions be good or evil. How many are contented, so the matter be good, but exa∣mine not themselves about the manner, prin∣ciples, ends, and motives? Though the Children of Israel knew, by the Word of the Lord, and from Abraham their Father, that Canaan was a Land flowing with milk and honey; yet they sent Spies, and searched it, and thereby were confirmed: If men had ne∣ver so much confidence of the goodness of their Prayers, &c. yet for Confirmation-sake, they should send down Spies into their hearts, to see the Clusters of their Zeal and Affecti∣ons, the utmost of the goodness of them: But alas! how many wholly neglect this ne∣cessary and possible Duty? If all were like these, God might take up his old complaint, No man cryed out, Jerem. 8.6. What have I done? Or, O my heart! What hath God done for thee?
2. The back∣wardness of the best here∣unto. How backward are a more refined sort of Professours to a compliance with this Duty? How oft have your Ministers invited you, beseeched you, to hold intelligence with your own hearts, and yet cannot prevail? How backward are the best to keep a strict eye up∣on their little house within, to see what is done within those doors? We are apter to study others lives, yea hearts, than our own. If the best knew, how much work lies within doors, they would not be so much abroad, as they are. 3. If we do examine our hearts, Not ma∣king use of the Word as the Rule. yet not by the Word of the Lord. God would have us to try and prove our selves; then there must be some measuring Line, some Standard, some Rule, to try our selves by; but herein we are hugely defective: We try our selves by some sudden pangs, or by the good opinion of others concerning us, or by the lives of o∣thers, (we being in an Hospital, where e∣very one almost is lame and defective) or by some other easie Rule, that we our selves frame unto our selves, and so miserably cheat our selves. O! how loth are we, that the light of Gods Word should be let down into the dark Cells of our hearts, for want where∣of, there is much dust unobserved, and not swept away? How loth to try states or acti∣ons by the Scripture, though thereby they must be tryed at the last day? He is a good Text-man, that compares Scripture with Scripture: and he is a good Christian, that compares the Scripture and his own heart to∣gether,
that credits his own heart only, when it hath the consent of the Prophets and Apostles, making them Umpires in the decisi∣on of all his Soul-controversies. Have re∣course to the Light that shines in a dark place: 2 Pet. 1.19. But alas! Who obeys this form of wholesome words? 4. Being su∣perficial therein. How overly and superficial are many in the examining themselves by the Word? How few do examine their State, or their Actions fully? Though our hearts be very great Im∣postours, Jer. 17.9. deceitful above all things, great Sup∣planters, full of guile; though there be thou∣sands and thousands of Lusts that lye hid in our hearts, and Deceits like the Sands on the Sea∣shore, yet how carelesly do we set upon this work? We take no pains in it. 5. Being too seldome in it. How seldome are we in this work? Some deferr it till a Sacrament, and then perhaps the house is searched for the leaven: whereas we should keep a petty Sessions in our hearts e∣very day, and do what we can to know the bottom of the projects, devices, workings of our heats. When going to Prayer, we should examine our selves, whether we have clean hands, and pure hearts, whether we are double-minded; James 4.8. if so, there is no drawing nigh to God: And when we come off from the Duty, we should conferr with our hearts, what enlargements, quicknings, meltings, humblings we had in the Duty; what promises, what threats were applyed by the Spirit; whether we saw the face of our Beloved, or not? When going to a Ser∣mon,
we should examine in what posture we are to meet with God, what Oyl we want, that we may be supplyed? When going to our Beds, we should examine our hearts, how the day hath been spent, what sins were committed, what Duties, and how discharged, what temptations were resisted, what mercies received, and what growth and increase of grace we have obtained? When going to Visit, this Duty should be taken up before and after: Before, thus, Wherein may I honour the Lord my God in such company? what are their wants, that I may endeavour to supply them? what are their temptations and discouragements, that I may labour to support them? what are their graces and best attainments, that I may profit by them? After, thus, O my heart! What good didst thou do or receive in that company? wast thou eyes to the blind, feet to the lame? didst thou labour to bring thy Friends nearer to Jesus Christ? or hast thou more estranged and prejudiced them, from and against the way of truth? O my heart! Didst thou take heed to thy wayes, that thou didst not sin with thy tongue? Didst thou keep thy mouth as with a bridle? When going into the Shop, or Field; yet with Isaack thou art to meditate there, and conferr with God and thy heart, thus, O my heart! for whom dost thou labour, for Self, or for God? whose Servant wilt thou be to day, the Worlds, or Christs? O my heart! How many snares are there in the
World? what a dirty place is the World? and how great is thy danger, if God pre∣vent not by special grace? O my Soul! What need hast thou of Almighty power to keep thee, that thou mayest retain thy sweet∣ness in salt waters? But alas! How seldome do we reflect on our words, or silence; on our speaking, or hearing; on our behaviour abroad, or at home? When do we consider, what our affections were most set upon, in such and such a place, in such an hour; and what our demeanour God-ward, and toward our Neighbour, was? We do not believe Bernard, who tells us, If we would examine our selves as oft as we need, Bern. in Cant. we must do it alwayes. And Chrysostomes pa∣raphrase and counsel on Psalm 4. is of as lit∣tle credit with us, Let this account be kept eve∣ry day, have a little Book in thy Conscience, and write therein thy daily transgressions, and when thou layest thee down on thy Bed, bring forth thy Book, and take an account of thy sinnes. 6. Crowing weary of the work, before they have brought things to an issue. Do not we grow weary of this work, be∣fore it be brought to any considerable Issue? We flagg before we come to the up-shot. Still some were learning, and never came to the know∣ledge of the truth: And so some (pretend at least to) be alwayes trying; but they hold not fast: They try their hearts, as some did truths, till they be wholly sceptical, as ignorant whe∣ther converted, or no, as ever: They know not more this year, than they did seven years since; but hang betwixt Heaven and Hell, in
a dubious state, for want of skill or pains to decide this matter. We are not resolute and peremptory enough to have an account of our Souls, yea such an one, as that we may have boldness in the presence of Christ. When David thought on God, and was troubled, Psa. 77.3, 6. he never gives over his heart, till he ended this controversie: He communed with his heart, and made a diligent search. We should com∣mune, till we know, whether we be natural or spiritual; and accordingly be humbled greatly, or greatly rejoyce in God our Saviour. But alas! This Age is strangely dull and slug∣gish: those Duties, that will cost expence of spirits, and call for the labour of the mind, we wholly omit, or do them very negligent∣ly. Reader, Could I but prevail with thee, to set in good earnest upon Occasional Me∣ditation, and Heart-Examination, and So∣lemn Meditation, and Self-Tryal, I should bless the Lord as long as I breath for this enterprise of mine. The searcher of hearts knoweth, that I took Pen in hand on this design, to labour with thee in order to in∣side Duties, that thou might'st not be con∣tented with a Form of Godliness, and rest in the external part of Religion: that more work might be done within doors, in Clo∣sets, and Hearts. O that you would re∣form! Not pass on to another Chapter. till you have engaged your slippery inccon∣stant hearts, to attend on this necessary Duty! Take a few Considerations to im∣pell you.
1. Motives to this great duty, Heathens else will rise up in judgment against us. The very Heathen will rise up in judge∣ment to condemn you, if you neglect this duty. A Roman Philosopher every night, before he slept, would examine himself thus, Quod malum hodie sanesti, &c. What sin hast thou opposed? wherein art thou bettered? Cato also would daily at evening call to mind, what ever he had seen, read, or done that day. I use (saith Senica every evening) to plead my cause with my self: when the candle is gone, and all silent, I review all that I have said or done in the day: I hide nothing from mine own scrutiny: I pass by nothing. Pithagoras gave also this severe rule to his Scholars, that they should no night suffer sleep to seize their senses, till they had three times recalled the accidents and passages of the day, what evil have I committed? what good have I omitted? Except your Righteous∣ness, exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (saith Christ) (may not I say, of the Heathen) how can you hope for Salvati∣on? O! how hath thine heart cheated thee with vain confidences? How hast thou cry∣ed, the Temple of the Lord: I have Abraham to my Father: whilst moral Heathens have been better acquainted with their hearts, than thou art? Yea, Sensitive creatures will else shame us. 2. The very sensitive creatures may shame thee into the practise of this duty. Go thou sluggard to all the souls of Heaven. Do they not sit in the Sun, and view themselves, look inward to themselves, turn every fea∣ther to set it at rights? Do they not look over their feathers, and pick out and throw away
that which is bad, and set others in their pla∣ces, when misplaced. Nay, 3. We shall else be self-con∣demned. You your selves will be judges of your selves. You take the glass, and what is amiss in the hair; in the face, in the body, you recti∣fie by it: and what? no observation to be made of the faces of your Souls? O! take the word of God; and make use of this glass, which now is in thine hand: doth it discover no spots, no neglects, no failings? O! view thy self, and humble thy self, reflect on thy self, and conserr with thy self, till thou art ashamed, till thou abhorrest and loathest thy self before the Lord. 4. You have a sure sign of hypocrisie on you, The neg∣lect of this duty a sign of hypocri∣sie. whilst this duty lies neglected; for all the up∣right have been very carefull to commune with their hearts, to search their hearts, to make diligent search, lest any lust should be cove∣red, as Rachel covered her Idols, or as Saul was hid in the stuff. Nothing is more desired by a sincere Soul, than to be throughly search∣ed: examine me O Lord, Psa. 26.2. as Artificers do whether their gold be weight or no: and prove me, as Artificers do their silver in the fire: try my reins and my heart, the most in∣ward motions of my Soul: search me more deeply and throughly than the world can do. Unfound hearts have one Dalilah, they have one house of Rimmon, that they cannot endure to be examined and found out: they are loath to search too farr, lest they should see what they are unwilling to see, and so be put up∣on judgeing and condemning themselves for
that, which they love beyond an Eye, or an Hand. 5. The sad conse∣quences of the neglect of this duty. O the sad consequences of the neglect of this duty! By this neglect your hearts will become careless, for that they are not call'd to an account, as Servants and Factors are wont, when their Masters neglect to exa∣mine them. Hereby Sins will grow bolder with you, and the more easily beset you; for that you examine not wherein their strength lies, and which way they oftnest pre∣vail over you. Hereby the work of Repen∣tance will be obstructed; for that innumerable Sins, which you are daily guilty of, will pass away unobserved, with those circumstances attending them, which make them of the greater magnitude. Hereby your uncertain∣ties about your spiritual estate will remain: it may be converted, it may be not, it may be a Son of God, it may be not, but a Child of Hell: it may be a Believer, it may be an Enemy to God, and e of Gods curse. Hence will follow great dejectedness under e∣very Providence of God: no condition will please you, whilst doubting and staggering: you will be apt to fear whether your food be in mercy, your dayes in mercy, your liberty, yea the Gospel in mercy to you: you will sink under adversity; for you cannot say, the Lord is my portion; you know not whether God will be your strong Tower, Fortress, &c. you cannot manage any duty well, whilst this lies neglected. Mica. 6.8. How can you walk before God with an humble heart, when you know not
what your hearts are? How can you serve him with an upright heart, whilst a stranger to this duty? The very Heathens knew how ne∣cessary this was to all their duties, and there∣fore discreetly caused to be writ over the Temple at Delphos, , Know thy self. Miserable are the disappointments that will attend English Professours, unless they fall into a compliance with this duty: you will dye deluded: like the foolish Virgins, you will not know your undone condition, till it be too late: you lie deceived in matters of the greatest and highest concernment: you are cheated hitherto in things of eternity: you are vexed, when deceived by a Friend, when supplanted by a Neighbour: O! how will it pierce your Souls, to be cheated by your selves? When we would exclaim against a Knave, we say, he will cozen his Father; the nearer the Relation, the more sordid the Cheat: O! but here is one that lies in thy bosome, and thou and it, go to cheat each o∣ther continually. Let no man deceive himself: 1 Cor. 3.18. it seems we are apt to do so: But O! how great will your confusion be when this deceit shall be manifested, when you shall see your selves frustrated of all your hopes, and the glory, your hearts promised you? How will you be confounded, when you shall say, we looked for Heaven; but behold Hell: we looked for Salvation; but behold Destruction: we look∣ed to be made perfectly Happy; but (O how our hearts have cheated us!) we must be dam∣ned: we thought we had as good hearts as any,
as true Faith, as sound Repentance, as cordial love to God, as any of our Neighbours, as any Precisians of the Countrey: we fools counted their life madness, &c. O! what daggers and swords will these frustrations be to you? 6. We and our hearts shall not alwayes be stran∣gers. If you be loth to see how it is with you now, how will you be able to behold what shall be seen at the day of Judgement? Though you now will not know your hearts; though you are so stately, as not to speak with them, or loth to examine the dirty Corners; yet God is coming with his Fan: the books must be open∣ed, and every page of thy heart will be un∣folded; for God will bring to light every hid∣den work of dishonesty: God will pluck off the rough garment, which thou wearest to deceive: thy inward parts, which are very wickedness, shall be made manifest: and then thou shalt be speech-less, as if thou hadst a muzle put upon thy mouth, as the word signifieth. Well, see∣ing murder will out (as we say) the secrets of the Soul must be brought forth, is it not bet∣ter by judging our selves by a severe tryall and sentence on our selves to prevent the wofull∣ness of the last day? Judged we must, and shall be: is it not then thy wisdome to judge thy self here in thy Closet, that thou mayst be judged by God with a judge∣ment of Absolution, and not of Con∣demnation? Is it nothing to have all thy un∣repented and unforgiven sins published on the house-top, made known to all the World, Ezek. 22.14. at the great day? How will thine heart endure then, when the Lord shall come to deal
with thee? You will not see; but you shall see: Isa. 26.11. You will not retire, the World lyes in your hearts, Business comes in, and takes up all your time and spirits: God is about to strip you, to ease you of your Callings, you shall come naked to the Barr of God, you shall have no Family business to distract you: a fair tryal there shall be, but a sad one for thee; Your sins shall find you out. Numb. 32.23. You have had many Calls: once more I call upon you, in the Name of Christ, to examine your hearts, by the words of this Book, which you have, or shall read: And be sure of it, If you will not nor try your selves by the Word, God will try you by his Works. Thus saith the Lord, Jer. 9.7. I will melt them, and try them: But how will God melt them, and try them? Shall I not visit them for these things, saith the Lord: v. 9. Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, v. 10. and for the habitations of the wilder∣ness a lamentation; because they are burnt up, so that none can pass through them, neither can men hear the voice of the Cattel, both the Fowl of the Heavens, and the Beasts are fled, they are gone. And I will make Jerusalem heaps, v. 11. and a Den of Dragons; and I will make the Cities of Judah desolate, without an Inhabi∣tant.
CHAP. XXI. Their Pride. BEhold, Professors Pride, Ezek. 16.49. Eviden∣ced in Ir∣reverence in addres∣ses to God. Gen. 18.27. This was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Pride, &c. And is not this De∣villish Sin become our National Sin? 1. With what a bold and impudent face have we come and appeared before God? Who hath sensibly exprest himself in Abraham's words, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes. In∣stead of a reverential fear of God, our beha∣viour hath been stout against God, and we have not trembled in his presence, no not whilst we have been terribly threatned by God, yea when his dreadful threatnings have been terribly executed upon us: Even in such times we have irreverently rush'd into his Presence. 2. Not stooping to the Will of God. How have our Wills risen up against the Will of God? The humble Soul stoops to Gods Preceptive and Providential Will; but we have wretchedly thwarted God in all his Counsels and Dispensations. The great Con∣troversie betwixt God and man, is, Whose Will shull stand, God or mans? O! How im∣pudently have we contended with the Lord
about this? We have even thought our selves too great to be crost. How many think it e∣ven a disgrace to their noble Spirits, to be still and silent, even under the hand of God, but they must be clamorous, and speaking against the very Heavens? They are ready to say, This was not well done by God, he might have given, or continued to us, this and the other mercy: They mislike many of Gods Dispensations of Providence: they cannot heartily say, that God holds the reins best, and and guides all his affairs with the greatest wis∣dome: they think if they were the Orderers of matters in the World, things would be better governed: like proud Absolon, 2 Sam. 15.4. who wished he were in David's stead, they wish they were in Gods stead. A proud man would have others under him, yea, he would have the great and glorious God subject to his will, to do what he pleaseth, to yield to his desires. Whence are all your disputings and quarrel∣lings with God, save from the Pride of your hearts? The humble Soul cryes, Not my will, but thine be done. It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him good; But so over-grown are we with an opinion of out own wisdome and worth, that we must limit the Holy One, and order him how to rule the World: God must stoop to our prescriptions, or else we swell and break with discontent. O! Is not God wiser than man? Shall the clay say to the Potter, Why hast thou shaped me thus? Rather let the potsheards strive with the potsheards (wormes with wormes)
about the preeminence of wills, than we contend with God. O! When will your proud hearts stoop to God? when shall his Will be the Rule? when will you be willing to be dealt withall as God pleaseth? 3. Lothness that God should be exalted, unless they be instru∣ments and sharers. How loth are we that God should have any glory in the World, unless we share in it, or un∣less we be the immediate instruments of exalting of him? We are willing God should have some glory, so we may share with him: con∣tent that Free-will and Free-grace should di∣vide the spoyles: the honour of our salvation shall be ascribed, partly to our endeavours, and the honesty of our wills, in choosing the way of life, and partly to Christs merits. We are willing God should be exalted, so it be by our selves, so that we may be famous in pro∣moting the design; else we are discontented. Few are contented that Gods work should be carried on by any hand save their own, that some glory may descend on them. Most are like the proud Senatours of Rome, that could have been contented, that Christ should have been numbred among their Gods, but that the Motion began not with themselves. O! Think with your selves, how many good mo∣tions, tending to the edification of the body of Christ, have miscarried upon this account, because others should not have the honour of beginning them? Whence can it be, save from the Pride of our hearts, that we have so little rejoyced, when God hath been ad∣vanced by others, and we had no hand there∣in?
We are afraid that others glory will ec∣clipse ours. 4. Scorning some D∣vine Com∣mande. How scornfully do we look on some of the Lords Commandements? To reprove Of∣fendours, to visit the Poor, and conferr with them, yea to be seen in the company of poor Christians, is accounted a disgrace; we think it an abasement to our Spirits, and a discredit to us, to be known in any relation to them. Who can bow to the meanest services of the Sanctuary? 5. How unwilling are we to come to Christ, unwil∣lingness to come to Christ, till wor∣thy of him. till we have our double money in our sacks, till we have fitted and prepared our selves, and made our selves worthy of him? Hence all the offers of Christ are neglected, till the Soul hath wrought it self into a better disposition for Christs embraces and loves; and therefore when we can weep bitterly, and pray fer∣vently, we will come to Christ, but will not be beholding to him to work both to will and to do: We would be the Alpha, and he shall be the Omega: We would begin some glorious work, and then tye him to our per∣formances, and oblige him by our great and glorious services and reformations: We hate to be Almes-people; To begg I am ashamed: We are loth to receive all from God, we would purchase and merit somewhat. 6. How Unthankfull are we? unthank∣fulness. A Proud man is alwayes an Unthankful man, and an Un∣thankful man is alwayes a Proud man. He thinks he deserves all that is conferr'd upon him. The humble man counts himself less
than the least of all Gods mercies; but the proud man reckoneth all that he enjoyeth too little. Do not we think God is beholding to us for our Duties and Services, more than we are to him for Life, Breath, and all our Possessions? 7. Setting upon great works in their own strength. Dare we not set upon the highest Services in our own strength, without calling in the help of the Almighty? The Proud man seldome be∣lieves his own insufficiencies to think a good thought: He can rush upon Prayer, reading the Scriptures, Meditation, and such diffi∣cult works of Christianity, without im∣ploring the aid and succours of Heavens In∣fluences: 8. Being hasty Beggars. Are we not hasty Beggars? If we peti∣tion for Pardons, or Holiness, and God comes not to the door at the first or second knock, away we are flinging: There is no hope, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? We dare prescribe God a day, and by thus limiting God, our Pride appears, as if we knew the fittest seasons for deliverance and mercy. Were we of an humble heart, we would wait all our dayes with patience, yea we would resolve to be exalting of God, whatever be∣comes of our selves, and to pay him the ho∣mage of duty, though he for just reasons be pleased to frown upon our Prayers, and to deny us all the requests of our Souls. I hear some say, they would pray, hear, read, wait upon God all their dayes, so they were sure God would accept them, and smile up∣on them in the last hour: I say to these, You
ought to serve God with all your time and strength, you are bound to God in duty, though God were under no obligations by promise unto you. O the Pride of our Spirits! that we dare tell God, We will not serve thee unless thou humour us. 9. Account∣ing Gods Judge∣ments greater than their Deserts. Do not we think God hath punished us a∣bove our Deserts? Do not we hence cry out more of our smart and pain, than we do of our sins and provocations? Were we humble, we would bless the Lord, that he hath re∣strained his rough wind in the day of his East wind: We would wonder, that it is so well with us, that we are not in a worse conditi∣on: We would cry out, Lam. 3.40. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed. Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the pu∣nishment of his sins? How loth are we to con∣fess our iniquities have deserved all that we suffer, and a great deal more, and there∣fore to humble our selves for our sins? How do we endeavour to hide our sins from God, Man, and our selves? 10. Admiring what they suppose they have. How apt are we to admire our selves for supposed Excellencies? For supposed Beauty, Parts, Reason, Wit and Understanding, yea and for supposed Grace? Man (saith one) is a proud piece of flesh, and a small matter will make him shew his pride, and spread his plumes. 11. Boasting of what Good they have and do. How apt are we to boast of any Good we do? Of our Valour in the Field, of our Dis∣courses in such and such Company, how wise∣ly we discharged such a Service, how well we
behaved our selves, in such an Action? Come see my Zeal for the Lord. Look to your hearts, you will find them unduly transport∣ed, as with the thoughts of your gifts and graces, so with what you do through the gift of grace. Our very Graces are often an oc∣casion of boasting. 'Tis a rare thing to see a man rich in gifts, 1 Cor. 8.1. Puffed up with any thing of theirs. and poor in spirit. Even knowledge puffeth up. 12. Doth not any thing of ours swell us? Are not some puff'd up with their fine Clothes, new Attires, Ribbons, Dressings, yea with their very Spots? Their Feathers, their Hair, the excrements of Beasts and Men, make them flye high. Are not some puff'd up with their Birth? Hence they boast, that they have the Blood of Kings and Nobles running in their Veins; or else that they are of the Stock of Abraham, descended from Parents eminent for Piety, though they have sadly degenera∣ted from their lives and walks. How many are swell'd with their Estates? That they have Shops full, Houses full, and Baggs full, puffeth them up. Whilst all the treasure is shewed, how glad is the heart? Even Heze∣kiah was glad to shew the Embassadours the house of his precious things. Isa. 39.. How are others puffed up with the smiles and respects of great men? And yet how soon may the Sun be over-cast? Then they are no more heeded than the Dial is, when the Sun is in a Cloud, How doth the bodily strength and perfections of others swell them, though every moment they are going down into the dust? What is
your life? It is even a vapour, James 4.14. that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. How are others swell'd with their Church-priviledges? The Temple of the Lord, Ezek. 7.4. the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we. These are lying words not to be trusted in. Others with their revelations and high en∣joyments? 3 Cor. 12.7. Paul was in danger of being ex∣alted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, therefore was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above mea∣sure. Rom. 12.3. Gal. 6.3. How few have heeded that of the A∣postle, Let no man think of himself more high∣ly than he ought to think? and that, If a man think himself to be something, when he is no∣thing, he deceiveth himself. How have we been puff'd up with our Reformation, Mini∣sters, Churches, Professours? Preferring them before others at home and abroad. 13. How little suspicion have we of our selves? Not sus∣pecting them∣selves. Of our baseness, and sinfullness, the deceits and treachery of our own hearts? With how much confidence do we thrust our selves into wicked mens company, and fear not to be leavened with them? How little do we sus∣pect that we shall fall from the grace we have, or seem to have? We are high minded and therefore fear not. We do not suspect that there are worse abominations within than yet are discovered. How do we (pretend to) bless God that our hearts are good? We fear not the worst of our selves. If others be o∣vercome with uncleanness, passion, &c. we
are confident we shall never so dishonour God. 14. Fuming at plain dealing. Do not we fret and fume when any go a∣bout to discover the vileness within? I have heard of some Ladies, that have hated the glass that gave them a true sight of their spots, Psa. 141.5. and deformities. Humble David lo∣ved them best who most convincingly re∣proved him for what was amiss in him. 15. Not be∣ing able to deny them∣selves in any law∣full con∣tent. Being troubled that any Rule be∣sides them∣selves. We must be pleased: we must have our sports, and the utmost of our liberty, though GOd and man suffer by it never so much: we cannot stoop to deny our selves some lawfull contentments, though God be to be honoured thereby. 16. How have we been troubled that any save our selves have Ruled and been in Authority? Few have learnt the Humility of Jothams Olive-tree, Fig-tree, and Vine? The Bram∣ble thinks himself worthy to be in the highest place. O! what fightings, what sidings, what Plots to get higher? Haman was never contented till every knee bowed: not so much as one Mordecai must be excused. If men would but speak out, they think they are fitter for Magistrates and Ministers, than those that are employed: so that whereas the humble man thinks every one better than him∣self, they on the contrary think themselves the only men. 1 Pet. 2.13. Do not we account it below us to to submit to every Ordinance of man, though for the Lords sake? And when we can∣not do what we are commanded, who suffers meekly and not in anger against the highest
Powers? Do not we suffer in proud wrath? Prov. 21.24. And glad to be commen∣ded by o∣thers, though they dis∣commend them∣selves. 17. How glad are we if others take notice of our actions? And how are we pleased if they commend us for them; and yet we would not have them think so? We will discom∣mend our own Prayers, for deadness, strait∣ness, and our selves for want of parts, &c. on purpose to draw forth others praise. How few are unwilling that others should have good thoughts of them, in reference to them∣selves? How few are troubled at the praises of their friends more than at flashes of light∣ning cast into their faces? 18. How do we rejoyce, when others cry us up, yea to be cryed up undeser∣vedly. even when we know it is unjustly, when we know how hollow-hearted, low-spirited, and selfish we are? Are not we exceedingly pleased at the flowers that are spread upon our dead Corps? Though the praises be not due to us, yet how do we drink them in as the Hart doth water. 19. How Magisterial have we been? Being Dicta∣tours to others. What great Dictatours to others; as if all were bound to dance after us? We will not abate at all, but every poor Mordecai must do obeysance to our opinion. 20. How are we guilty of despising, Despising others. yea scorning those that are (as we think) below us in Birth, in Estate, in Power, in Parts, and Gifts, yea in graces? Isa. 58.9. How do we evidence our slighting of them in our looks, in our words, in our gestures and behaviours? Pride (saith one) is a bad Mother of many bad Children, these three especially, boasting of our selves, contending with, and despising of
others. Job. 35.6. How unlike are we herein unto God? Behold God is mighty (i. e. most mighty, most great, the positive is put for the superlative degree) and yet he despiseth not any, i. e. any of those who have no might, no greatness: yea how do we herein reproach our Maker? God (saith one) made every man an object of respect, or pity, 'tis Pride that makes any the objects of contempt, Prov. 17.5. and in them their Maker. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker. 21. unwilling to confess their faults un∣to others. How few will confess their faults unto others? Perhaps they will reform, but hate it to the death to go and acknowledge their trespasses to others, whom 'tis clear and pro∣ved they have trespassed against. How ma∣ny have you injured by tale-bearing, back∣biting, &c. Must not God work a miracle to perswade us to make reistitution, to go to the parties wronged, and confess the wrong there, and then to go from house to house to vindicate and clear the party, there where before we had wickedly stained and aspersed him? This makes me cry out, Lord, who shall be saved? Lord, many are called, but few are chosen. 22. Repro∣ving haughtily Isa. 3.5. When we go about that too too much neg∣lected duty of fraternal correption, how loftily do we manage it? How do our words, yea looks, and gestures, evidence our haughtiness? The Child behaveth himself proudly against the Ancient. Vindica∣ting themselvs malici∣ously. 23. What a stirr, what a noise do we make to vindicate our selves when aspersed and calum∣niated?
Whereas the humble Soul would ne∣ver stirr to clear himself (as knowing how much guilt and sin there is within) were it not for the honour of God, and the edifica∣tion of the Lords people, which may be hin∣dred, if prejudices and unjust reproaches be not removed: Alas! most men study reven∣ges, and like the Grave are unsatiable in their malicious vindications. 24. Being bloudily minded toward their dis∣senting Brethren. How bitter have we been against dissent∣ing Brethren? Would we not have cast them out of the Land, if we might have had our wills? Did not we talk of shipping away all that would not submit to our way of wor∣ship? Did not we count them, who were divided in circumstances and ceremonies from us, like Dogs and Pagans, unfit to sub∣sist among us? No wonder if for these things God make us a shame, and a derision, a Proverb, and a by-word to all the Nations round about us. O! our Pride testifies to our faces: we are guilty of what brought down fire on Sodom: This is the sin, that God setteth himself in bat∣tel-array against, Jam. 4.6. (so the word for resisting in that Scripture, God resisteth the proud, sig∣nifieth:) 'Tis that which makes God abhor us and our offerings. Prov. 16.5. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. Be∣lieve it, Gods eyes are upon the haughty, that he may bring them down, and he watch∣eth his opportunity to do it. Psa. 38.6. The Lord know∣eth the proud afar off. When God meets with a spectacle, that he cannot endure to look
upon, he turns from it, whilst it is afarr off. What shall I say? Pride is the first of those seven things, Prov. 6.17. which are an abomination to the Lord. And no wonder that God so loatheth it, whilst it crosseth the great design of God in the Gospel, which is to humble the moun∣tains, 1 Cor. 1.29, 31. that no flesh should glory in his presence, but that he that glorieth, should glory only in the Lord. CHAP. XXII. Their Intemperance in Eating. THough Pride was the first spark that blow'd up the glory of Sodom, Professors Fulness of Bread. yet there was also Fulness of Bread, that made the flame the greater. Behold, This was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Ezek. 16.49. Pride, Fulness of Bread, &c. Their Pride was evidenced in their Fulness of Bread, as the Cause in its Effect. The word , which signifieth to be temperate, is (as one well observes) applyed frequently to the Mind, in opposition to Pride; because Sobriety proceeds from an humble sense that nothing is ours, but all that we have is Gods; and all Intemperance is commonly the issue of a proud Spirit, which makes men look on
themselves as Owners, and all Creatures as their proper Goods, which are perfectly at their disposal. Hence the Crown of Pride, Isa. 28.1, 3. and the Drunkards of Ephraim, are both names for the same persons. And is not our Pride evidenced in our Fulness of Bread? Sodoms intemperance in eating (not to insist on intemperance in drinking) was very great, but I fear Englands hath exceeded Sodoms: I will not say all your labour is for the mouth, Eccles. 6.7. (as Solomon complains) and yet the appetite is not filled; but this I say, that some live to eat, some sacrifice all to the belly, to some the belly is a God. Few can displease their ap∣petite: like prophane Esau, they part from their heritage, from the blessing of the first∣born, for a mess of pottage, for a little plea∣sure to the taste. How will we deny our selves in respect of Life, when we cannot deny our selves in respect of a little Meat? As Heaven and God are low, very low with them, that cannot deny themselves in a little Iudian-Smoke, in a Pipe, in a cup of Liquor, but will be immoderate in these, though thereby they hazard the displeasure of God: So are they very low with us, if we cannot deny our selves in our Morsels. All our ruine came in at this door, that Adam ventured the displeasure of God, to eat a little pleasant Fruit. A man would think, Eviden∣ced in their much eating. that the wounds we received by the mouth, should make us check our appetite all our dayes. 1. How have we been guilty of eating too much? A little would content Nature, which
hath therefore given us a little Mouth and Stomach, to teach us (saith an Ancient) Moderation. How have our hearts been over∣charged with surfetting, whilst wicked men with drunkenness? Luke 21.14. How have we forgot Christ's charge against this sin, even to his own Disciples? Have we not hereby been disabled to perform the service which we owe to God? As some have been strong to drink, so others to eat: Both have been unfitted to wait upon God thereby. The end of our eat∣ing should have been to fit us, not to indispose us for the service of God. We should mea∣sure our Chear by that which Nature re∣quireth, and not by that which a greedy Ap∣petite desireth. We divest our selves of Man, of Reason, that should guide us, when we are led by a sensual Appetite. And yet alas! When we have eaten enough, and perhaps more than enough, a new Dish at the second course makes us fall on without fear or wit, and we put not a knife to our throat. Prov. 23.2. Serving divers lusts and pleasures, is the high way to damnation. This way sin entred into the World, and in this way, O! how many are posting to Hell? If you would adopt your selves Children of wrath, Eph. 2.3 then fullfill the de∣sires of the flesh. O that we should be so senseless, so bruitish, as to venture the eter∣nal ruine of our Souls to gratifie our appe∣tites for a quarter of an hour! She that fared deliciously, Rev. 18.7. hath torment and sorrow given her. If that you will choose to be beasts here, and to eat as beasts, as much as you can, Know
that Heaven will not (as Noahs Ark did) ad∣mit of any Beasts within it. When Tertullian gives an account of the Christians Feasts; In our feeding (saith he) we remember that we are to pray at night: Prayer is the first and last dish of the feast: and when we depart our beha∣viour is so religious and modest, that one would have thought, we had rather been at a Sermon than at a Supper. Blush, O Reader! to con∣sider how far short we fall of these Christians in our banqueting hours. Believe it, Intem∣perance and Luxury are National sinnes, the sins of England. It was spoken (unless I am mis-informed) of our Nation, That we build as if we should live for ever, and eat as if we should die presently. O! when shall we imi∣tate that great Apostle? 1 Cor. 6.12. All things (saith he) are lawful for me; but I will not be brought un∣der the power of any. It is a base thing for a man to be under the power of Drinks, Ap∣parel, Recreations, and so of Flesh, of Meats, to be a Vassal to those things over which the Lord hath given him dominion. He that loveth any thing too much, Qui nimis rem ali∣quam a∣mat quo∣dam mo∣do servus istius effi∣citur. Rom. 6.16. Mat. 24.38. (saith Aquinas) is in a sense Servant thereunto. And what saith the Apostle? Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of sin, &c. How many serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies? How many are like the men of the old World, Given to eating? so the word in the Original properly signifieth.
2. The costliness of their Diet, How have our meats born no proportion to our gains and incomes? The rich man, that fared deliciously, had some pretence for it, for he had riches to countervail the expences of his Table: Above their Estates, But doth not the lowness of our Estates require a meaner Table? God knows we have been worse than Infidels on this ac∣count, in that we have been so farr from pro∣viding for our own, that to pamper the flesh with costly diet, we have suddenly impo∣verished our selves, and brought our Children to live upon others trenchers, whereas we should have abated of our superfluities for their sakes, if not for our own. Goe vo∣luptuous wretch, unto the Ant, and to the Bee, they provide for Winter; but thou hast had no forecast, and so Poverty comes in on thee and thine, as an armed man, ir∣resistably. 3. unsuita∣ble to the Times. How have our Tables been unsuitable to the Times we live in? Whether Zion wear the garments of joy, or of heaviness, all's one, the belly must be served, our dishes must not abate. Thou farest deliciously every day: All times are alike to thee. This is a great sin, and I cannot but charge many Pro∣fessours with it. Respect is not had to the tokens of Gods wrath. Jude v. 12. We eat without fear: Without fear of the wrath of God, that is ready to break forth upon us. In this day doth the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, (actions
lawfull enough at another time) eating flesh, and drinking wine, &c. And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord God of Hosts. We have made little or no distinction of times: Perhaps a Fast every month is (carelesly) kept; but every day should be a day of abstinence, every day we should abate of what we might enjoy, if the judgements of God were not amongst us, and others impending over us: God hath a controversie with us for feasting, when Jo∣seph is in the pit, Amos 4.6. and for our eating the Lambs of the Flocks; for that we are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. 4. Not re∣specting the Saints necessities How little respect have we had to the ne∣cesities of the Saints? O! if there were any true love to God, to Religion, to the Church of God, and to the Saints of the most high, we would abate of our worldly comforts in this day, Mem∣bra puti∣da & mortua quae sen∣sum non habent; tales sunt Christi∣ani, qui de alienis affectionibus non dolent. Aug. in Psal. 130. we would cut our selves short of what we were wont to lay out, not only in fine clothes, but in house-keeping, in expensive meats and drinks, we would not give such liberty to the satisfying of the flesh, we would be more sparing in our diet, that we might be in the greater capacity to promote pious and charitable designs. But alas! iniquity abound, and the love of many (save to their guts) wax∣eth cold. 5. Eating without fear of God. Doe not we eat without an holy fear of God? The Elders of Israel did eat their bread
before the Lord. Exod. 18.12. But so have not we, so do not we, eat as in the presence of God. Have not some been so eager upon the pleasing of the flesh, and gratifying of their sensual ap∣petites, as that they have (secretly at least) been troubled at a long grace (as it is called) before meat? Have not some fall'n to their meat without invocating God to be with them? How unlike are such unto Christ, whose usual practise it was, to lift up his eyes to Heaven, and crave a blessing upon the creatures before he did partake of them? How distracted have been the thoughts of o∣thers that have prayed, in that short time? How were their thoughts on the meats and drinks? How hastily do men after a blessing is craved run to the Dish, without any the least pause or consideration whether God heard them yea or no, when they called to him? How commonly do we raze our Petiti∣ons, snatch them out of Gods hands, I mean, contradict all our Prayers? We pray our dis∣courses may be heavenly, and they are alto∣gether earthly. Few can say as Blessed Dod was wont at the close of the meal, Blessed be God, not one word of earthly things since we sate down? We pray we may eat for God, and we eat for our selves. We cannot say that our Spikenard sends forth his pleasant smells, whilst we are at the Table. We have not so good a plea to make as some, we have eate and drank in thy presence. This is not written o∣ver our Tables, Thou God seest. We can sel∣dome call our Table Penuel, because we have
seen God in this place. Hos. 2.8. How little do we consider, that they are Gods creatures. She did not know that I gave her Corn, &c. And that as the meat is Gods, so it is he who gives us appetites, and strength and ability to put every crum into our mouths; for in him we live and move. How little do we believe that we must account fore very bit and drop? How little do we consider that God stoops the creatures to us, that we may stoop to him, and lay down our lives as willingly for Gods honour, as God causeth the creature to bleed and die for our use? How little do we think of the Heavenly banquet, that our Father is preparing for us; where the cloth shall never be taken away, where we shall hunger and thirst no more, but be fully satisfied, and that for ever and ever? Examine your spirits and frames at your Tables, whether the fear of God be before your eyes, whether you stand in awe of him? It may be found that you never more forget God, than when God is mostly remembring you: When his goods are most in your hands and mouths, your mouths are so full, Deut. 8.10, 11. that they cannot shew forth his praise: your eyes are so held to your Belly-gods, that you forget Jehovah. Are there not some that will crave a blessing before they eat, that yet fail to return thanks after∣wards, Joel 2.26. Of scan∣dalizing others. though Joel saith in his Prophesie to Gods people, ye shall eat and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God? 6. Have not we fed without a Christian fear of scandalizing others upon our eating pro∣fusely?
What saith the Drunkard? Why may not I toss the Kan or Pot (in plain English) be drunk as well as such and such gormandise? why may not I drink immoderately as well as such eat immoderately? Jude v. 12. why may not we sit one or two hours to drink, as well as such sit one hour or two to fill their panch with meat? Gluttons harden and justifie Drunk∣ards. Ecce qui jactant se re∣demptos, &c. Cyp. de duplici Marty∣rio. Rom. 14.21. Of snares in eating. Jude will tell you, that sensual per∣sons are the Spots of a Christian society. The old Gentiles in Cyprians days were much scan∣dalized at the intemperance of Christians. Lo, these great Boasters, who pretend to be redeem∣ed from the tyranny of the Devil, and to be dead to the World, what slaves are they to their own sensual desires? O my Brethren! It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, or any thing else, whereby they Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak. 7. Do not we eat without a prudent fear of the snares that are in our Dishes? In eating there ought to be much caution. Job. 1.5, 6. Job was a∣fraid of the entertainments of his Children. He was a wise man, and knew that there were more guests than were invited. I wish wee knew it too. We think if the Sonnes of God come together, the Devil will not come with them, though the Scripture assures us he will. It would be some check when we sit at the Table to consider that the first immoderate Sop is handed over by the Devil, and in goes he with it into our Souls. Eating for low and base ends. 8. How have we had low, base, earthly, sen∣sual, and Devillish ends in our eating? not to refresh our bodies, but our pallats, not to
glorifie God, but to pamper the flesh? yea have not some men fed on such and such dishes on purpose to irritate and provoke their lusts? Sure our Enemy is strong enough, we had need beat down the body and keep it under, and not put weapons into our Ene∣mies hands. What saith the wise man? When thou sittest to eat with a Ruler (such keep plentifull tables, especially Magistrates on their Feast dayes) consider diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, Prov. 23.1, 2. See the large English Annot. if thou be a man given to appetite, i.e. Bridle thine appetite by diligence, yea force, let not the slave alwayes be on horseback, al∣wayes rule, be as circumspect, as if thou wert under the razour: or thus, consider dili∣gently what is before thee, else thou puttest a knife to thy throat, i. e. thou endangerest thy life, yea thy soul, shouldst thou give way to thy greedy appetite to feed upon all the dain∣ties on the Table? tis a thousand to one but thy meats will be incentives to lust. 1 Cor. 10.31. What saith the Apostle, Whether you eat or drink, &c. let all be done to the glory of God. Why doth the Apostle name those actions of eating and drinking, but because we commonly eat and drink (at best) meerly to please the ap∣petite, and not to fit for Gods Service? When we have taken as much as serves this end, yet we must have one bit more, or one dish more to please our fleshly desires, and so God and the Devil must part stakes. To shut up this: I believe many men dig their graves with their teeth, and their hells with their tongues, their liquorish tongues.
Among the millions that are now in the grave or hell, their inordmate appetite sastned most thither. I say not but we may please our pallate, at some times especially, a great liberty is indulged to the sick; but if we have not an higher design than to please the appe∣tite, our Belly is our God. Little do many think that they are setting up another God at their Tables. The Babilanians had Bel for their God, a God of Brass; but these men have a God of flesh. The Rabbies say, he is a Glutton or Belly-God that eats a pound of flesh, and drinks a quart of wine. Have not we ma∣ny such? and do they not sacrifice to their God with a bowed knee too? Repent, O England! repent, of thy abuse of the good creatures of God, and thereby of thy sacrilegious rob∣bing of God of his worship and time. How often have ye so cramb'd your selves that you have been unfit for any acts of worship, yea for any of the works of your particular cal∣lings? Your heads have been heavy, and spi∣rits dull, and so God hath had the Carkas, but excesses have taken away the heart. The ta∣bret and wine are in your feasts, Hos, 4.11. Isa. 5.11, 12, 13. but you re∣gard not the work of the Lord, &c. therefore my people are gone into Captivity. I wish two things for you, First, That you would be as ingenious as Austin was, who confessed he was no drunkard; but yet sometimes too immode∣rate in eating. And Secondly, That you would be restless till God hath taught you, what he did him: Lord (saith he) thou hast now taught me to use my meat, as my medicine, to repair,
not to oppress nature. O! Tit. 2.11, 12. when will the grace of God appear, and teach us to deny worldly lusts, and to live soberly? CHAP. XXIII. Their abundance of Idleness. A Third Sin of Sodom was Idleness, Profes∣sours Idleness. Ezek. 16.49. Be∣hold, this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, &c. an abundance of Idleness was in her and in her daughters. This Sin is the Compani∣on of the former: when the belly is full, the bones would be at rest, and when men have eat and drunk to excess, then they rise up to play. This, and the former, are City-sins, they were found in Sodom and Gomorrah, and I wish they were not among us also. 1. In their particular callings. How are we guilty of abundance of Idle∣ness in our particular callings? Few have this for their Motto, Laboremus, Let us be work∣ing, I mean, working that which we ought. How many at the great day will God upbraid with, O wicked and slothfull servant! Every man hath a Talent of time and strength, but it is hid, it is not imployed, at least as it ought. God made not man to play, but to sweat out his living. 'Twas Gods Ordinance in Paradise, and since that we are enjoyned
to labour with our hands, Ezek. 18.18. and not to eat the bread of Idlenest. How many, because they have not done good among their people, shall dye in their iniquity? Our land is full of drones; and no wonder; for we train up our Children in Idleness, and indulge to them, whilst wasting the first of their dayes in foolish plea∣sures and recreations. Forraigners breed their Children (to our shame be it spoken) to work those gaies with their hands, which our Children must play away their time with: hence they having inured themselves to Idle∣ness they hate labour for the future. Christ saw some standing Idle: Mat. 20.3, 6. here he might see ma∣ny: He could not endure it, he thought it unreasonable, why stand yee here all the day Idle? O! how many are idle all the dayes of their lives? How many Gentlemen and their Sons are there without a calling? They live as if God had sent them into the world to make their hands as pirches for birds to sit upon: they are of no use to the Publick. In Cities how Idle are the Dames? They live as if God had given them reasonable Souls, and the light of the Sun only to dress themselves, to view a glass, and to paint and adorn their Carkasses. There are some among you that work not at all; 2 Thes. 3.11. Nihil a∣gentes, fed curio∣se sara∣gentes. and yet busy-bodies, busie to invent wayes to pass away time, though time be still running, and they are hastning into Eternity. Doing nothing (saith the Apostle) and yet work∣ing every where, save where they should: busie to go from house to house to comple∣ment friends, to devour others times: busie
to carry tales and news, but hating the work of their calling, wherein God hath set them. The whole life of many is to eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport, and sit, and talk, and laugh themselves fat (but there is leanness in their Souls.) A kind of vagrant people they be, that having little to do, the Devil is loth they should be idle, and therefore he hires them to devour time, to carry news and tales to mispend others times: 1 Tim. 5.13. They learn to be I∣dle: they study which way they may mispend time, wandring from house to house, and yet they are not only idle, but busie-bodies. One compares them to Pedlars, opening their Packs, and dropping here a tale, and there a tale. These are at leisure to hear the Devil, and to observe his Orders. He that will not serve God at home, the Devil, ra∣ther than he shall stand out, will send him of his errands, and get him to put his Sickle into another mans Corn. Go (saith Satan) in∣to that house, and rail against such a good man, carry his miscarriage from one to a∣nother, till his name rots and stinks in their Nostrils: Go to such a mans door, he is employed in reading the Scriptures and good books, or Catechising his Family, &c. Go and divert him, eat up his time, that he may have no leisure for such works. He goes, he is a busie-body, a tatler too. He must goe whom the Devil drives; Hence occasion is given to the Adversary to speak reproachful∣ly, for that so many are turned aside after Satan. Let it be considered and lamen∣ted,
how much precious time is devoured in the Bed; Five hours sleep will suffice for some constitutions: The utmost that Physi∣cians allow, is seven hours; but some waste and bury themselves in their Beds almost half their time. How little do many con∣sider, that in the Day of Judgement, they must give account, as for every idle word, so for their idleness in their Bed-chambers? Sluggard, view the Sun, its running a race, whilst thou art tumbling on thy Bed, and crying, O that this were to la∣bour! View the Wind and the Air, they are in motion: View the Waters, they stink and corrupt, unless running: nay view the dull earth, it is not so dull as thou art, it brings forth for the use of Man. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, Prov. 6.6. yea any where, consider the ways of all, save thy self, and be wise. What! a Professor, and yet guilty of an unnatural sinne? Nature puts all creatures into motion, and to provide for themselves: 1 Tim. 5.8. thou art worse than an Infidel: yea worse than a Beast: The poor Infant cannot suck without labour, and yet thou wouldst live without labour. God takes this so ill, 2 Thes. 3.10. that he would not have them to eat, who will not labour, and if we know such, we sin if we feed them. God hath not forbid meat to be given to any other sinners, only these are not to be fed, let them starve and die, if they will not labour. The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold, Prov. 26.4. therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing: God hath no pity for drones, and he would not
have us to pity them: Drones are to be beat∣en out of the Hive, and starved in Winter: It is the Workman that is worthy of meat in Christs account: Mat. 10.10. Idleness hath brought much evil upon you, and bred many in you, it be∣gets many diseases in the body, but many more in the Soul: Psal. 91.11. it exempts a man from the protection of Angels, and it exposeth to Gods wrath: it brought ruine upon Sodom, and the Cities round about, Jude v. 7. and they are set forth for an example suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. 2. In their general callings. How are we guilty of abundance of Idle∣ness in our general callings? And above all Idleness, Spiritual sloth is most dangerous. I find some, with unwearied diligence, la∣bouring to enlarge their Possessions, and to raise their Posterity; they rise early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness, but all is for the Body: they do little or no∣thing for their precious Souls, and for Eter∣nity. Christ and Heaven stand by, and few regard them: Few work out their Salvation with fear and trembling. Some will not be at so much pains for their Souls, as to perform the common outward Duties of Religion. They will goe to the Market, or to be merry with Friends, many a mile; but if a Lecture he but a few paces from their thresholds, they count it intollerable to wet their et, to ex∣pose themselves to the air: Well, Well; God hath eased you of this labour. But if men are for some easie parts of Religion, yet how few are for the difficult parts thereof? They
cannot endure to watch their hearts, to san∣ctifie the Lords day so strictly, as not to think their own thoughts, nor speak their own words, nor do their own deeds. How many Professours have so long given way to their lazy distempers, have lain so long upon the Bed of sloth, that when we press them to any painful and laborious Duties, they think it ex∣cuse enough, to say, We have put off our Coat, and loth we are to put it on: We have given way to sloth so long, that we hate to take pains for Christ, and for Eternity? Hence Self-examination, Meditation, Watchfulness a∣gainst the first risings of sin, Mortification of in∣ward heart-sins, &c. these works are totally laid by; and the longer we neglect them, the more ado there is to perswade us to take them up. We are like truant-Boyes, who hate their Book after a long vacation. All we have to uphold our selves with, is this, that the Spirit is willing, when God knows the contrary. We are willing to be rich, and therefore take pains: So we would in Spiritual things too, if we were so desirous of them. If we were willing to enjoy Christ in our Clo∣sets, would we be even asleep there upon our knees? If we were willing to know the way to Glory, would we not take so much pains, as to goe to the Shepheards tents, and ask for the good old way? O! O! It will cut you to the heart, when you come to Hell-gate, that you mist of Heaven, for not enquiring the way thither; and that you took more pains to be rich, and
to damn your Souls, than to save them. Had that time been spent in Prayer, holy Conference, and in Self-arraignments, which was wasted in the Bed, Shop, Fields, unnecessarily, you might have had an e∣ternal rest; whereas Hell will be, as in∣tollerable to all, so especially to them, who have stood idle all the day long. CHAP. XXIV. Their Unmercifulness. THE Fourth Sin of Sodom was this, Professors unmerci∣fulness. Ezek. 16.49. Neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: That is, they were unmerciful and inhumane. And are not some Professours even in England very hard-hearted and cruel? I have oft thought and said, That Our late Civil Wars have had too great influence upon us, to make us cruel. If there be among you a poor man, of one of thy Brethren, within any of thy Gates, Deut. 15.7, 8. in thy Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor Brother; but thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, Luke 14.13. in that which he wanteth. O! The poor we have alwayes
with us! But, When we make a Feast, do we call the poor? Who invites the Guests that Christ hath bid for our Tables? When I con∣sider how rare, Bowells of mercy and kindness are, Col. 3.11. it makes me fear (and I have Scripture∣grounds for my fear) that few are the Elect of God. O hard-hearted Professours! Hear ye the Word of the Lord: Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgement without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy. He shall have all judgement, pure judgement, without any mixtures of mercy, unmixed wrath shall be his portion: Christ is so resolved to punish the Unmerciful, that he will over-look any sinner, rather than him; yea, for the greater honour of the Justice of God, Mat. 25.41, 42, &c. Mat. 9.36. The Lord seems to begin and end the great Assizes with the Arraignment and Sen∣tencing of the Unmerciful man. How few com∣passionate Professours are there? The proper, vital act of Mercy, is Compassion. How few resent the miseries of others, as if they were their own? Luke 10.33. How few set themselves to do good, to those who are miserable? Such, what-ever they pretend, are indeed unmer∣ciful; for Mercy is an active, and a commu∣nicative thing. How few are merciful to o∣thers Souls? How few pity, and set them∣selves to help sinning Souls? (but more of this under another Head.) How few are mer∣ciful to the Bodies of others? How many are there, that will not spare of their superflui∣ties, to cloth Christs naked shoulders, or to fill his hungry belly? Men lay out more to adorn a Cup-board, or the walls of their
houses, than ever they gave to Jesus Christ, and his Servants, all their dayes: Men can feed their Birds, their Catts, their Doggs, their Swine; but the Sucklings and Lambs of Jesus Christ perish for want: Christ tells you, what kindness you shew to his Spouse, Matth. 25.40. his Friends, his Children, he counts as done unto himself: and believe it, all the scornes, and neglects you have cast on, either, his Am∣bassadors, or poor Saints, he will remember, another day. Go to thy Closet, and carry this with thee, who so stoppeth his ear at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, Prov. 21.13. but shall not be heard. If you give, to whom is it? Is it not only to the poor of your own party? But hath not the Lord charged you, to give to every man that asketh? Luke 6.30. Gal. 6.10. Hath he ex∣cepted any, but idlers? Are not you to doe good to all, though especially to the Houshold of faith? And among them, should not your greatest charity have been set forth on them, who are become poor, not by vile courses, but by Gods Providence, and for Conscience sake? But alas! how few can appeal to the heart-searching God concerning their merci∣fulness? How few (if destruction from God be any terrour to them) dare imprecate upon themselves, what Job did in case of unmerci∣fulness? How few dare say to God, If I have withheld the poor from their desire, Job 31.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. or have cau∣sed the eyes of the Widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the Fatherless hath not eaten thereof, &c. If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without
covering, &c. then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. CHAP. XXV. Their unrighteousness, or unfaithfulness in Trading. ALas! Professors miscarria∣ges in Trading with re∣ference to Buyers and Sel∣lers. Alas! Instead of Mercifulness, Behold Oppression, Violence, De∣ceit, Fraud, &c. This is a La∣mentation, and should be for a La∣mentation. Instead of giving to others that which is our own, we deny them that which is their own: Instead of letting goe our own right, and those dues, which in Justice o∣thers are bound to pay unto us; yea, instead of giving more of our own, to help them in their necessities, (which Mercy calls for, even not only not to require, what others owe us, when Providence hath dis-enabled them to pay us, but also to give them more to support their feeble state withall) behold Injustice, in propriety of speech. What defraudings is there one of another? How do men, not only take all advantages of their Brethren, to get what is due to them, as to seize on a Mortgage, when the Mort∣gage-money
cannot be paid, or to sue a bond, or turn a man out of his lease, when the day of payment is mist, &c. but also take advantage from the necessities of the poor to over reach them, to get from them, either their houses or goods, to be sure what is not their own? Have not we grinded the faces of the poor? God will reckon for this speedily. Look over the Prophets, and see whether un∣mercifullness and unrighteousness ever went unpunished. How few are there who mete to others, as they would have them to measure to them∣selves? The rule of Christ, whereby peace among men would be preserved, and much scandal prevented, is not heeded by us. We do not deal with others, as we would be dealt with, though Christ sayes unto us, Mat. 7.12. Phil. 4.8. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, and though we are al∣so exhorted by the Apostle to follow what e∣ver things are true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely. We are apt to follow a mul∣titude to do evil, what the greater part of the world are wont to do, is the rule whereby we steer; hence we vary from that rule of righteousness, which the Lord hath prescri∣bed: through the prevalency of self-love, through a covetous humour, As to Sel∣lers, sel∣ling for as much as can be got. we are loth to heed, what may any whit thwart a worldly interest. How common, but cursed a principle is it, that every man may get for his wares, as much
as he can? Hence men take advantage of o∣thers necessities, or of their want of skill: Hence bad wares are put into mens hands for good wares, or else unreasonable demands are made to the prejudice of the buyer: would we be so dealt with? When men depend upon our honesty and ingenuity to sell them a good pennyworth, Over∣reaching those that trust. how common is it with a glavering tongue, and seeming affection to our Neighbours good, to over-reach him, and cheat him, though he re∣poseth confidence in us? How commonly do men demand a farr greater sum for their wares, Asking more than they will ac∣cept. than they will accept? Here∣by they shew an oppressing mind, if their Customers would but comply with them. The Quakers will rise up in Judgement, to con∣demn this generation. Is it not a foul shame, that they by their light within (which at best is but the light of a natural Conscience) should exceed others, who pretend to an higher principle, even the light of Grace? But O! how do men mind profit more than their own honour and reputation, yea (which is more inexcusable) than the reputation of Christ and his Gospel? The name of God suf∣fers, not so much when thou art rotten heart∣ed in thy Closet, as it doth when thou art a Cheater in thy Shop. But wo and alas! Men are so set upon gain, that they can be con∣tented to be voiced for Cheats and Couse∣ers, so they may but greaten their Estates: This is a salve for their soar: they cannot be ignorant how the Gospel suffers, and how
many prejudices are strengthned in the hearts of wicked men against Religion, by observing Professours unseasonable demands for their Wares, and yet they continue grievous ex∣acters. Is it not matter of lamentation, that some profess, they had rather deal with a Turk, or with a Jew, than with such and such a Christian? And that they meet with fairer Quarter from Drunkards, &c. in their Trades, than from Precisians? Rom. 2.24. By reason of you the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles. Wherein doth your Light shine be∣fore men? They cannot dive into your hearts, they can only discern your actions: They know not what your Love to God is, though you pretend much to knowledge, yet know∣ledge void of charity and honesty, is to them an abomination. How few trade in fear, Not fear∣ing Soul∣losses e∣ven in their gains. lest by getting an Estate, they lose God, and a good Conscience? When one told Latimer, That he was con∣sened in paying for a Knife double to what it was worth, No, (said he) He hath not cou∣sened me, but his own Conscience. No won∣der that Tradesmen complain of deadness in their Familsies and Closets, and impute it to their Callings, (and thereby charge God implicitly) Alas! it is not their Calling hath straitned and deadned their hearts towards God; but their oppression and deceit in their businesses, hath provoked God to leave them; and then they are, in the business of God, like a silly Dove, without an heart. Hath not God expresly charged you, Let no
man goe beyond, 1 Thes. 4.6. or over-reach another in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such? The vengeance of God is upon thee, in the straitness of thy Spirit in Du∣ties, and without Repentance it will fol∣low thee, till it hath laid thee in the Pit of Hell. How do men labour to ingross all Trade to themselves, Ingross∣ing all Trade. by exclaiming against their Neighbours, and by under-selling them, at one time, that they may engage the Buyer to become their Customer, of whom they will surely fetch out their penny-worths, in the next bargain that is driven? How do men boast of their selling their Com∣modities at such and such Rates, Boasting of selling too dear. though their Consciences must needs suggest to them, that they have over-sold them, and therein have declined the rules of moderation and righ∣teousness? When you have selled too dear, Loth to make Re∣stitution. and so cheated your Brother, though Conscience, in times of sickness and danger, begins to contend with you about it, yet how loth are you to make restitution for the wrong you have offered? How unlike are you to them in Ne∣hemiah? Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of them; Nehem. 5.12, 13. so will we do as thou sayest. If a Nehemiah should say, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this pro∣mise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied, you would hardly say Amen, and praise the Lord.
When men buy a Commodity, As to Buyers, crying out 'tis naught. how apt are they to discommend it, to bring down the price, to say, It is naught, when all the while they know it is offered on easie terms? How do Buyers take the Advantage of the Seller's Ignorance of the worth of his own Goods? There is a cursed Proverb amongst English-men, but in too great request, That a man may not only sell as dear, but buy as cheap as he can. Few like Austin, that bought a Book, at an unskilful Stationer's hands, for an inconsiderable price, and afterwards gave the value of it. Prov. 20.17. Bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel. How often do Buyers (even as Sellers often say, they will not, Saying, They will give no more, and yet do. they cannot take a penny less for such a Commodity, so) answer, that they will not give a farthing more, for what they have cheapened, and yet all the while intend to come up to the Seller's price? How common is it, Falling at the day of pay∣ment. for men to take up Wares, and to promise payment at such a day, and yet fail? Yea, how do they promise, though they know they shall not be able to be as good as their word? It were better for thee to begg thy bread, than thus to steal from thy Neighbour. Thou art ashamed to begg, as he of old: thou shouldst be ashamed much more to do worse, viz. to defraud thy Neighbour. Prov. 21.6. The getting of treasures by alying tongue, is a vanity, tossed to and fro of them that seek death: It is a thing very
frequent, tossed to and fro, but it is a vanity, and they that use it are Felones dese, they do but seek death and destruction by it. How few are there, As to Buyers and Sel∣lers both. that in their buring and selling, give a proof of their loving their Neighbours as themselves, their Neighbours goods and welfare as their own? O! 1 Pet. 1.15. When will ye be holy in all manner of conversation? Holy in your Trades, as well as in your Church-Assemblies? Holy in the Shop, and in allsecular employments? So holy, as to abide with God in your Cal∣ling? When will ye trade for God, ra∣ther than for Self? When will ye labour with your hands, Eph. 4.28. that ye may be able to give, and not only to receive? When will ye trade in fear, and be in the fear of the Lord all the day; and that, lest your Shop should prove your bane; and whilst seeking after the Mammon of this life, ye lose the true Substance? Is this thy Prayer before thou enterest upon thy Calling? (O that it were! Lord help me to trade for thee, whilst for my self; and for the good of my Neighbours Soul, Body, Goods, as well as for my own. How few, With re∣ference to the King, Stealing Customes. among all the several sorts of Traders, render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's? Hierome long since hath told you, That Caesar is not Proper, but Appellative. All the Emperours were called Caesars, from Julius Caesar. Confider∣ations against it. How can you quiet your Consciences to steal Custome, as many of you do? What is
it, save the Law, that gives you right to all you have? And by the Law, so much of your Goods is the King's: it is alienated from you to his Crown and Revenue: How dare you cheat him? Should you think it hard measure to pay so great a tribute? Have you forgot what Christ (who came under the Law) dd? Mat. 17.24, 25, 26, 27. Though tribute was exacted of him, when the Children were free, yet he would work a Miracle, rather than give offence, in deny∣ing to pay the Fine, that was imposed on him. Why do ye not take the safest course, if it be a disputable matter? To be sure you will not give offence to God, to the King, to your Conscience, by paying Customes; but you may to all by defrauding. Do you herein as you would be dealt with? If you were the Head, would you have the inferiour Mem∣bers impoverish the Head? If you were the Political Father, would you have your Chil∣dren cheat you? Do not you by bribes and o∣therwise, tempt the King's Officers to be false to their trust, and to damn their Souls by per∣jury and treachery? Lastly, Consider, that self-love, and self-interest are prevalent, as to make you to fa∣vour and enrich your selves, so also to bribe your minds and judgements, and to enslave them to your base passions. O! Consider how apt is every one unequally to favour himself, and to suck in any corrupt and absurd reasonings, whereby he may greaten himself, though by the ruine of others? If you say (as they of the Silver-shrines, This brings in our gain)
We cannot subsist without stealing Cu∣stomes: How else can we live? A Father will tell you, Indigna vox Christiano, &c. It ill becomes a Christians mouth, to ask, How shall I live? Not one that Christ call'd to forsake Trades and Professions, did ever an∣swer him, I must not give over my gain. They only reformed, or relinquished their Trades, when Christ call'd them. Till you can relinquish unlawful gains, you are none of Christs Disciples. Those in the Acts, that burnt their unlawful Books, to the loss of thousands, Acts 19.20. shewed themselves true Con∣verts, so mightily grew the Word and prevail∣ed. O! When Tyre shall be converted, her trading and dealings shall be sacred, Isa. 23.18. Her merchandise, and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord. Here give me leave to add the Sin of Lye∣ing, Their Lying. too too common among all sorts of Traders, as well as others. And truly this Sin comes not improperly under the Head of Injustice. V. Pa∣trick's Epitome of Mans Duty. P. 45, 46. Justice, even when it is not ta∣ken most largely, (so it is taken for all Reli∣gion) comprehends our whole duty to our Neighbour, as to matters of right: Thus, by vertue of the fifth Commandement, to do justly, is to give our Parents their due ho∣nour, whether they be Natural, Civil, or Spiritual: In respect of the sixth, it is to preserve the Life of our Neighbour, and to have a care, that we injure him not in his beeing: In reference to the seventh, it is to preserve his just Relations, and not touch
them, or cause the violation of their faith to to him: in reference to the eighth, it is to preserve his estate, and not meddle with his goods: the 9th. requires that we preserve his good name, and not defame him, nor do any prejudice to his credit, no more than we would to his estate: and by vertue of the tenth, we are to moderate our very desires, so as not to envy him that which is his, nor to long to have it in our possession. To be sure there is righteousness to be look'd after in words and expressions, as well as in deeds and acti∣ons. But alas! How doth the sin of lying a∣bound among us? (And no wonder when Perjury is so common a sinne) for this God hath a controversie with the Land. Hos. 4.1, 2. Is there not need to take heed every one of his Neigh∣bour, and not to trust in any Brother? Jer. 9.4, 5. will not every one deceive his Neighbour, and not speak the truth? Have not they taught their tongue to speak lies? If you are not couzening∣lyers, or false-witness-lyers, yet are you not reviling-lyers? Do you not upon every petty difference speak of one another ye care not what? do ye not spread lying defamati∣ons? Jer. 20.10. I heard the defaming of many — re∣port say they, and we will report. Is not the fawning-lyer common among us? Their words are the words of Jacob, but their hands are the hands of Esau. Psal. 55.21. The words of their mouths are smoother than butter, but warr is in their hearts: their words are softer than oyl, yet are they drawn swords: their is no faithfulness in their mouth, their throat is an open sepulcher.
Upon this occasion give me leave to use Da∣vid's Prayer, Help Lord, for the godly man ceaseth, Psal. 12.1, 2. for the faithful fail from among the Children of men. Why, wherein consists their ungodliness? they speak vanity every one with his Neighbour: with flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. Is there not also many a Newes-telling lyer among us? They believe in their Consciences, that it is false, Hos. 7.3. what they relate; and yet, to promote an interest, for to make hearts glad with lyes, they will spread that which is false. How many officious-lyers have we, who tell lyes for some good end (as they think?) The highest end is Gods glory; but will ye speak wickedly for God, Job 13.7. and talk deceitfully for him? The Vulgar reads the Text, Numquid Deus indiget vestro mendacio? It contains a truth, though not the sense of the place: What! hath God need of your lye? It is a dishonour to God to be thus help'd. And if we must not speak evil, that good may come to God, sure then we may not (whatever the Roman Doctours teach us) speak evil, that good may come to our selves. How can you think you are Gods Chil∣dren? Consider∣ations against Lying. Isa. 63.8. God engageth himself for his people, that surely they will not lye, surely they are my people, children that will not lye. Austin long agoe gave his judgement concerning lying, that a man must not tell a lye to save the whole world: if it were (saith he) to save thy Father or thy Mother out of Hell, if possibly it could be, thou must not tell a lye, or if it were to save
a Kingdom from destruction: And yet to gain a little mirth, or to gain a penny, or to prevent the frowns of a Superiour, how do some teach their tongues to lye? Not consider∣ing, Prov. 6.17. that among the seven things that are an abomination to the Lord, lying is one, yea, (as one observes) he repeats lying twice, though under several names: Rev. 21.8. Tit. 1.2. that all lyers shall have their portion in the burning lake: that herein they are like unto the Devil, who is the Father of lyes, and most unlike unto God, Eph. 4.25. who cannot lye. O then! put away lying, and speak the truth; away with mental reservati∣ons, and Jesuitical aequivocations. Let thy tongue be the faithful interpreter of thy heart. Be faithful in your promises and engage∣ments, be not yea and nay. Remember Ci∣cero the Heathen's saying: None but the most villanous will deceive him, who had been safe, if he had not trusted. CHAP. XXVI. Their Covetousness. IF there be so much unrighteousness, Professon Covet∣ousness. no wonder that there is also much covetousness that must not be forgot, when we remem∣ber the evil of our ways. Covetousness is
the seed of all unrighteousness, 1 Tim. 6.10. V. Wells on Mich. 6.8. P. 18. Mat. 21.38. the rot of all evil. It was Jezabels covetousness that made her unjustly deprive Naboth of his Vineyard. This is the heir, come let us kill him, and seize on his inheritance. Flectere si nequeo Superos, acheronta movebo, If I cannot pre∣vail with Heaven, I will to Hell for an E∣state is the voice of covetousness: yea (which is more sadly to be considered) this is that which will put men, not only upon injustice to others, but to God himself; it will make them offer violence to Religion, to Divine honour, and whatever is sacred in the world, all these shall be prostituted to serve the ends of covetousness. That man will stick at no abuse of God, whose God is his gain. How notorious was that of one of the holy fathers of Rome, a Pope, O quantas divitias peperit haec fabula Christi! O how gainfull unto us hath been the fable of Christ! And is not co∣vetousness and earthly mindedness an Epide∣mical sinne? Eccles. 6.2. Solomon calls it an evil disease. 'Tis called by one Aurugo, the yellow jaun∣dise, which makes the sick person look yel∣low all over. This is the Grave which never saith, Prov. 30.15. it is gh, but like Solomons Horse∣leech it cries give, give. O! what bound∣less appetites have many, who can neither use what they have, nor put a period to what they desire: as in the Sea one wave ri∣seth above another, so here every desire of having is out-gone by a new desire of get∣ting.
Are not your great cares for riches? Eviden∣ced in se∣veral par∣ticulars. Do not your thoughts thus run out, O! how shall I thrive more in the world, get more estate, custome? but not, O! how shall I get the favour of God, the pardon of my sins, and victory over my lusts? how anxious and sol∣licitous are you, every day for the world, but how flat in your coming to have the I∣mage of God renewed? How dejected are you when you miss of a good bargain? or when you meet with some loss by Sea or Land? But how little troubled if you lose an opportunity of communion with the Lord? How joyous are you when a little of the world comes in? But how little pleas'd with the galleries, wherein the beloved may be held? How are men pleas∣ed with the earth, but find no more rellish in Christ and his ways, than in the white of an egge? What great journeys have you taken, even compassed Sea and Land, to gain riches? and hardly can go a mile or two to meet with God? How is every opportunity laid hold of to get more to the heap? But do not you remain contented, with the least measures of grace, yea with somewhat below grace? How oft have you left your meat to serve a Customer? but when so, to serve the Lord Jesus Christ? How few design for riches, as a means to carry them to a further end? They should be but as the rounds of a Ladder, not to stand upon, but thereby to ascend higher, even to glory, and to the new Hierusalem: But alas! few desire the world in subordination to God, and as a means to glorifie God; but the more
they love the World, the less God is loved; and the more their desires are carried out af∣ter riches, the less after God. How few pur∣sue earthly things in obedience to Gods call? How many out of a desire of filthy lucre? How few seek the World with an holy indiffer∣ency? How few reserve their zeal, and hot∣test endeavours, for heavenly things? Is not the general cry, Psa. 4.6. Who will shew us any good? We need no proof of this, there are instances every where. How, for the get∣ting of a penny, Note. will some debarr themselves of Ordinances? Is it not a sufficient excuse with some; for not attending on the Worship of God, that they met with a Customer, that kept them from the Ordinance? Doth not the Clock strike too fast, whilst thou art selling to advantage? Doth not time run away too fast? Dost thou not wish thou couldst with Joshuah cause the Sun to stand still on a Market-day, or on a Fair-day, when trading is quick? But O! The Sexton is blamed for suffering the Clock to stand still on a Sabbath day, and when thou art in the Worship of God, O! When will the Sabbath be gone? Amos 8.5. When will the Duty be over, that we may fell? How many Hypocritical out-cries are there against the World? O! It eats up my time: O! It eats up my spirits: It robs me of communion with God: We say it is an Enemy, and yet we can bosome this Snake, lodge this Ene∣my, Col. 3.5. that God would have us to kill. Mortifie Covetousness.
How oft hath God charged thee against Co∣vetousness? Take heed and beware of it: Consider∣ations to withdraw the heare from Co∣vetousness Luke 12.15. Two words to the same purpose, all little enough to take thee off from earthly pursuits. How apparently hath God with-drawn from thee, ever since thou wast taken with this Dalilah? How hardly art thou pull'd out of the deep pit, and miry clay, to Duty, much more to God? And wilt thou be rich? Art thou resolved to run into the bryars? Then farewell to thee, not only in time, but to eternity. Mat. 13.23. How many convictions and impressions of the blessed Spirit have your worldly cares choaked? How have your inordinate desires of riches puzled your Souls, and diverted them from minding and improving the counsells of God and Consci∣ence? But O! How unreasonable are earthly prosecutions in this day of Gods wrath; When God is plucking up by the roots, now to be seeking great things for our selves, to have Baruck's sore running on us, Jer. 45. ult. this makes us the more inexcusable sinners. This is alto∣gether unseasonable, this is no time for it, this is ignoble, yea base. O that we were ashamed of it! We say, The last dayes are perillous dayes; we pretend to expect the Cross, and is this good preparation for the Cross of Christ, to load our selves with thick clay, to crack our Consciences, and thereby to incurr Gods farther displeasure? How unlike art thou to the primitive Converts? Paul, when converted, Phil. 3.8 counts all things but dung in com∣parison of Christ. And Zacheus no sooner had a work of grace begun upon him, but
down went the World, faster than ever it went up: He parts from riches with more freedome than he sought them: The half of my goods I give to the poor; Luke 19.8. and if I have wronged any man, I will restore four-fold. John, the beloved Disciple, affirms, That there is an inconsistency between loving the Father, 1 John 2.15. 1 John 5.4. and the World; and that Whosoever is born of God, evercometh the World: But alas! Our hearts are as Cities without walls, the World hath a thorow-fare in them, and may come and goe without any Pass from Heaven. How hath God put a remark of his sore displeasure upon our worldly endeavours? We have, to dwell in our seiled houses, neg∣lected Gods house, Hag. 1.2, 4, 6. and said, The time is not come for the building the waste places, for the restoring the Worship of God, for the build∣ing of the house of God; and how hath God caused many of us to vomit up our sweet morsels, which we rolled under our tongues? O! Consider your wayes: Ye have sowen much, and bring in little; ye eat, but have not e∣nough; ye drink, but ye are not silled with drink; and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bagg with holes. How hath this Sin deadned you to all the Worship of God? How, by the interposition of this dark body of the Earth, hath the light of Heaven, yea the light of Gods countenance, been darkned? and how hath thy Soul been benighted and clouded? They say, If a Knife be put into the Earth, it will lose its edge: I am sure of this experiment, That
Christians, who were once lively and active for God, yet by engaging their hearts to the World, they have lost their zeal, their keen∣ness, and their lustre, which once they had. When thou hast gained time from thy busi∣ness to think of God, and to discharge duty, hast hot thou miss'd thine heart? hast not thou left and lost it in the croud? How dost thou debase thy self hereby? The curse of Cham is upon thee, a servant of servants thou art, a slave to that which thou shouldst rule over: God did not give thee a reasonable Soul, that thou shouldst choose the Serpents curse, to crawl and live upon the Earth. O! What sordid practises have some stoop'd unto, for the getting this Worlds riches? Ahab, to gain a few handfulls of earth, dares walk to it through Naboth's bowells. Judas, to pocket thirty Pieces, will venture to betray his Lord, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth. O! tremble to think what sad effects your Covetousness may have upon you before you dye. Demas left Christ, lost his Soul, ship∣wrack'd his faith, and all to embrace this pre∣sent evil world. Prov. 28.20. And if thou make hast to be rich, shalt thou be innocent? Whether thou place thy confidence and hope in thy gold, or in a golden calf, thou art guilty of Idolatry, Col. 3.5. of having other Gods besides the true God, and so dost as highly offend the true God: and God usually gives up such men unto spiritual judgements. Rom. 1.21.24. It makes me fear you have not tasted of the upper springs, because the puddle of the World is still sweet to your
taste. Luke 5.39. No man (saith Christ) having drunk old wine, straightway desireth new, for he saith, the old is better. If you had tasted of the joy, peace, mercy, and comforts of Christ, your earthly comforts would be dis∣relished: Gal. 6.14. If you did glory in the Cross of Christ, the World would be crucified to you, and you unto the World. The sweetness of Christ would drown all Creature-sweetness. But alass! Psa. 84.10. To which of us, is one day in Gods Courts better than a thousand else-where? Austin said, If one drop of the joyes of Heaven might fall into Hell, it would drown all the bitterness of Hell: So would it drown all bit∣terness in the Soul, and all the sweetness in the World. Worldly comforts would be too course, too slat, too low to recreate your hearts. Did ye but know the honey and milk of Canaan, ye would not so much mind the Onyons of Egypt. Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or he will cleave to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon. O! What a surpassing indignity is this to Christ, Si terram amas ter∣raes. Aug. to set him below the foot-stool, to value thirty Pieces of Silver before him, to preferr Earth before Heaven, present things before future; that the love of God, the recompence of reward, shall not lye nearer the heart, than the treasures of Egypt? O! What a miserable life dost thou live? This Sin brings an Hell with it: thou art the De∣vil's Martyr. 1 Tim. .9. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish
and burtful lusts, which drown men in destru∣ction and perdition. Thou enjoyest neither God, nor the World: Thy only happiness is a fancy: And this is thy great misery, that thou still desirest that which will never satisfie thy desires; The more thou hast of the World, the more thou wantest: the more thou drinkest, the more thou thirstest: a Dropser is upon thee, Semper avarus eget. Hor. Hebr. 13.5. Prov. 23, 5. ch. 8.21. Eccles. 5.1. and thou knowest it not. Discontent is alwayes the Companion of Covetousness. Let your conversation be without covetousness: and be content with such things as you have. Why wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Grace and Godli∣ness is substance: Why, with Esop's Dogg, wilt thou let goe the substance for a shadow? The things of the World are fancies, the things of God realities. What good is there to the Owners of riches, saving the beholding them with their eyes? Do not you all this while bear false witness against God; Do not you pro∣claim to the World, that God is not enough to answer, to fill your desires, and that therefore you goe out after the Creature? Is it nothing to you, to call God, who is all-sufficient, who is a fountain of living Water, a barren Wilderness? Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, Jer. 2.12, 13, 31. be ye very desolate, saith the Lord; for my peo∣ple have committed two evills's they have for∣saken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, broken cisternes, that can hold no water, O Generation, see ye the Word of the Lord; Have I been a Wil∣derness
unto Israel? a Land of Darkness? Wherefore say my people, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Hereby you break the conjugal Relation: God looks on you as Adulterers and Adulteresses, James 4.4. Prov. 5.19. and will judge you accordingly. God expects that his breasts should satisfie you, and that you be alwayes ra∣vished with his love: and dare you tell the World, that your God hath deceived you? and that you were mistaken in your choice of God? and therefore after other Lovers you will goe? No wonder, that for the iniquity of our covetousness, Isa. 57.17. God be wroth, and smite us. We are greedy of more, but what have we done with our former talents? Account we must for one, Mat. 25.5. for two, for ten talents: the more we have, the greater still will be our account. There is a reckoning day at hand. O that our moderation were known to all men, Phil. 4.5 because the Lord is at hand. If thou art not sincere, I am as sure as this Book is in thy hand, thou wilt curse the time that ever thou hadst an Estate, and wilt wish thou hadst been a Beggar, for then thou hadst not so much to answer for before God. It is cer∣tain (though some doubt it) that thou shalt carry none of thy estate away with thee; 1 Tim. 6.7. nothing is to be carried away, save guilt, to Hell; in case of mis-improvement of an Estate; yea, if you have not rendred unto God according to what you have received, 2 Chron. 32.25. the heaping up of wealth, is but the charging of thy account: thou must account, how thou hast disbursed to a farthing. I will suppose thou hast (by
neglects of thy general Calling, and by rising up early, and sitting up late) gained an Estate, thou mayest put all thy gain in thine eyes, and never see the worse. What will thy Estate advantage thee, when the Arrows of the Lord enter into thy Soul? What will the World advantage thee, when the Gout, Feaver, burning Pestilence, &c. are upon thee? What, hast thou got only that which may stand with Gods eternal hatred? Never count thy gains, till thou hast got that which is inconsistent with Gods wrath. What hast thou got, above that which God throweth unto the Doggs; Shew me Childrens bread, or never boast of thy gains. Did you ever find any Child of God worse for afflictions? but have you not found many worse for their thrivings in the World? Jeshurun waxed fat, Deut. 32.15. and kicked. Whilst you have Bonds and Bills upon others, do not you run into ar∣rears unto God? And how will you discharge those Suits, which God will commence a∣gainst you? When you lye a dying, will ye not wish, that your time, your strength, your spi∣rits, had been powred forth upon better things, than those of this life? That you had traded for Grace and Glory, rather than for the Gold of Ophir, for a little gilt Clay? O ye great Projectours for the World, I do even fore-see the troubles and horrours, the doubts and fears, the anguish and amaze∣ments of your Souls, which your un∣ties, as to your future estate, will put  into, in your dying Rooms. How
take up such language as this; Fool that I was, to cumber my self about many things, and neglect the one thing necessary! Fool that I was, to set my thoughts and affecti∣ons on things below, (none of which now give me a drop of water to cool my tongue) and to neglect the things above! O! If I had never heard of Christ and Glory, I had been more excusable for my earthly prolings. Psal. 69.6. O! How have I disquieted my self in vain? I have heaped up riches, and know not who shall gather them. Had I been as faithful to Christ, as I was to Mammon, O! with what joy might I have removed hence? What abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdome might I have had? O! Labour to prevent the horrours of Death, and the gnawing Worm of Conscience. It is sad, when the Sting of Death, and the Worm Conscience, Prov. 11.4. bite the man together. Riches a∣vail not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death. Believe it, it will cut you to the heart, to think, that less pains might have served for eternal Life, than you have bestowed for temporal Goods. This plague attends the covetous man, the more he desires, and heaps up, the less he is desired, and the less he is lamented when he dyes. He is like a Swine, that is good for nothing, whilst he is alive; not good to bear and carry, as the Horse; nor to draw, as the Oxe; nor to cloath, as the Sheep; nor to give milk, as the Cowe; nor to keep the house, as the Dogg; but ad solam mortem nutritur, fed
only to the slaughter: So the covetous man doth no good with his riches whilst he liveth; but when he is dead, his riches come to be disposed of. Prov. 13.22. The riches of a sinner are laid up for the just. How can you choose but tremble at Dooms-day? You cannot desire the com∣ming of Christ: If the Church cries, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, you cannot joyn in that Prayer; for that your hearts are glued to this present World: You preferr Paris before Paradise. It is to the Saints loss, to be kept so long from Heaven; but you count it not so. You cannot say, Thy Kingdome come. What will you do in that day, when all the Estate and Friends of Dives cannot re∣lieve with a drop of cold water? Riches are like bryars and thornes, good to stop gaps, but not to lay in our beds, and set our hearts upon, lest we lye down in sorrow. Few re∣member the Devil's offer, (All these things will I give thee, is the last temptation that old Professours are baited with.) Take heed therefore and beware of Covetousness. CHAP. XXVII. Their Envy. ENVY is a Sin seldome confessed, Professoss Envy. James 4.5. but yet much diffused among Professours. The Spirit that dwelleth in us, lusteth to Envy.
And indeed Covetousness and Envy are never asunder: they are sins against the same com∣mand: Such as long, that what is their Neighbours, should be theirs, envy to him that which is his: and such as envy to him that which is his, long to have it to be theirs. How desirous are Professours to grasp all to themselves? And therefore how apt are the very best to be envious at the power, greatness, riches, if not goodness of others? Doth not the experience that you have of your own hearts (if you be not strangers at home) testisie, that this Spirit is stirring and acting in you? The poor envy the rich, the base the honourable, as if they had the less, because others have so much. Some think that this was the sin that threw down the Angels from Heaven, that they envied Adam's glory, in that he was made after Gods image, and that they relinquished their glory to divest Adam of his: To be sure, the Devil was restless, till he had im∣plunged Adam in the same sin and misery, that he was brought into. Sure, maligning the prosperity of others, is not from the Spirit of God. He that giveth freely to all, would not have us to envy those, to whom he gives more freely, than to our selves; and he that giveth us more, doth not envy us for what we have. If you have not so much as others, it is because you are unfit to receive, not because God is unwilling to give. Do not we see how this poyson dif∣fuseth it self? An early sin it was, if not in
the Angels, (as some think) yet it was in Eve: She envied the all-knowledge of God, and must forsooth have at least an equality with God himself: It was also strong in the first man, that was born of a woman: and we still suck it in with our Mothers milk, and it seldome dyes till we dye. This sinne is commonly among people of the same Pro∣fession: One Mechanick envies another, one Merchant another, one Scholar another, one Gentleman another, one Commander another, as Saul envied and hated David, because the Women sang, that Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands, one Minister another, as those in Paul's dayes, that envied him, and affected an high strain of eloquence, on purpose to obscure that reputation which Paul had got among the Churches. And happy had it been, if this cursed sinne had dyed in that age, but it hath been still working in all ages of the World. Is there not a greater promptitude in us, Eviden∣ced in de∣tracting from others worth, to detract from mens worth, than to credit and exalt them? To write down their blots and imperfections, than to set forth their due vertues and graces? If we cannot reach o∣thers by imitation, we will by calumniation; and therefore Luther saith, Envious men feed upon the dung of other men: They are like flies, that love to be upon sores. It is admirable to see, how dull sighted we are, as to the vertues and graces of our Brethren, but quick sighted as Eagles to discern their
imperfections: Mat. 7.3. The beams of Vertue are not seen, i. e. not taken notice of, but a mote in a Brother's eye is soon espyed. Are we not more greedy to receive and spread any thing, Readiness to receive and spread de∣famations. whereby our Neighbour is infamed and obscured, than we are to entertain and dif∣fuse what tends to his praise and glory? And is not this the reason hereof, viz. the great desire we have to shine alone, and that we would none to vye with us in glory, much less to excell us therein? Is there not (oft-times) a secret gladness in our hearts, Gladness in their being brought lower. when some sad Providences afflict others, in their Names, Goods, Health, and Relations, that thereby they may be brought to a level with us, or to an inferiority, in a lower estate? When you have seen some Congre∣gation wedged in with a concourse of hea∣rers, and yours thin and naked; and when some have been cryed up for their purity, gravity, activity, and zeal; and when o∣thers have greatened their parts, or estates, and yours rather have been impaired, have ye not been ready even to burst with Envy? Have you not been glad, when some blot hath attended these, whereby they have sal∣len in that esteem, which once they had a∣bove you? There is no Envy in God, Disliking their own enjoy∣ments. and his holy Angels: they rejoyce at our advancement, and at the glory of the humane Nature, that it is so exalted above theirs; but unhappy we! that cannot see any excellency in ano∣ther, but we dislike our own enjoyments, and
are more vexed at the welfare of our Neigh∣bours, than we would be at our own cala∣mities. The Beasts do not envy one another, Consider∣ations to withdraw the heart from Envy. Gal. 5.20. but Men do: yea, the Devils envy not one another: some Professours are herein worse than Devils. No wonder if there have been hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, and heresies, whilst envyings have abounded amongst us. You know the mi∣serable effect of Envy in the first man, that was born of a woman: through Envy Cain hated, Prov. 27.4. and then kill'd his Brother Abel. Wrath is cruel, and Anger outragious, but who is able to stand before Envy? This is so filthy, so shameful a sin, that few will own it: Observe the confessions of men in Prayer, and Conference, and you will hardly find a Professour acknowledge Envy. The malig∣nity of this sin appears, in that it strikes di∣rectly at the Providence of God, who disposeth of the inequality of mens conditions, accor∣ding to his soveraignty and wisdome: It hath a tacit accusation of God, for raising up some so high, and laying others so low: It is deeply unsatisfied with Gods bounty to the Children of men, that he gives so liberally to some, whereas he is not bound to any. Whilst others complain against God, for making the World no better, the envious man is troubled, that he hath done so well, for some of his Creatures. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. No wonder the Apostle reckoneth Envy among the gross sins of Murder, Uncleanness, Idolatry, Witch∣craft,
&c. and concludes, Heaven is no place for such. They which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. This is a sin so damnable, and so ugly, making you so much like the Devil, that it is high time you watch against it, mourn for it, and seek its ruine. O! When shall we hear the Ex∣hortation, Let us not be desirous of vain∣glory, provoking one another, envying one another? When shall we in honour pre∣ferr one another? When shall we, like Barnabas, Acts 11.23. When we see the grace of God, rejoyce? When shall Ministers reprove the Joshuahs, that are envying for their sakes, in Moses words, I would to God all the peo∣ple of the Lord did prophesie? When shall we like John the Baptist, be contented to decrease, so that Christ may increase? and to be laid by, if others more able may be substituted to do Gods work? When shall we rejoyce if God useth others to convert by them, more than by us? and with fa∣mous Mr. Dod, I would to God (saith he) that I were the worst Minister in England: his meaning was, that all should excel him in gifts and graces. We pretend to evidences of our conversion from our love to the Saints, but let us hear what the ef∣fects of true love are: 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. Love seeketh not her own, love envieth not, love is not puf∣fed up. As love is the fulfilling of the Law, so envy is the dissolution of it. O! when shall we instead of envying our Brother, bless God for him? If he hath more than
we have, more strength, parts, riches, honours, graces, &c. the account he must pass with God is the greater: let us pity him rather than envy him: Believe it, God is wiser than we are, and if his di∣stributions are various, we have as many talents as we can well improve. Let us look to our own duty in the places wherein God hath set us; and pray for them, that have ten tallents more than we have, that they may serve the Lord ten times more than we can. O that thine eye might affect thine heart, that thine eye should be evil because Gods is good. CHAP. XXVIII. The sins of Family-Governours. Profes∣sours mis∣carriages in their Families, As Go∣vernours, Not com∣manding their houshold to serve God. Gen. 18.19. 1. HOw guilty are such of you, as have fa∣milies to govern, of not commanding your houshold to serve God? Of how few can God say, as he did of Abraham by way of approbation, I know him, that he will com∣mand his children and his houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to justice and judgement, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. By your Authority you should com∣mand
them to subject their hearts, wills, and consciences, to the will and pleasure of Je∣hovah; but alas! how many of you have been careless in this? your Children and Servants, yea Wives, must know your Authority upon worldly accounts, you command them (im∣periously enough) to fullfill your will and pleasure, to serve you, but how Gallio-like are you, little caring whether they obey the Lord? 2. Being Zealous against disobedi∣ence to them∣selves, not to God. How much passion have you discovered when Children, and Servants, yea and Wives too, submit not to your will and pleasure? But when do they see so much Zeal against their neglects of Gods work, as they find in you, when they neglect your secular commands? These passions are of a scandalous nature, and may make your inferiours to believe, that you value more your Authority, than Gods, the having your own will to be obeyed, than that Gods requiries should be observed. 3. Not ca∣ring for the Souls of their Families. How many Professing-Governours are there, that shew great care for the bodies of their Families, but not for their Souls? Meat, and drink, and clothes, or money to buy them, they shall have, but none, or little, instruction. How little do you Chatechise your Families? Not Cha∣techising them. Heb. 6.1. Prov. 22.6. How seldome do you ask them any questions concerning the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ? If you do Chatechise your Chil∣dren, as you ought in obedience to those Divine commands: Train up a Child in the way wherein he should go. Bring up your Chil∣dren
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephes. 6.4. Yet how few of you do Chatechise the rest of your houshold, your Servants and Wives, Heb. 6.1. though they be but Babes in Religion, Chil∣dren in Understanding, and this Milk is ap∣pointed for Children in Understanding as well as Age? Neither doth the work of Chate∣chising them, belong only unto Ministers (to them indeed it doth belong as such as watch for their Souls) but unto you; Heb. 13.17. for it belongs to all that have the charge of Souls, and you are charged not only with your Children's, but with your Servant's, and with your Wives Souls. Whatever any of you may fancy, there never comes a Wife, a Child, or Ser∣vant into any of your Families, but with this warrant from the great Lord of Heaven and Earth; keep the Soul of this Wife, this Child, this Servant; for if it be missing amongst the number of my sheep at the great day through thy neglect in instructing, &c. thy Soul shall go for it. Hence not only should your Chil∣dren be taught by you, but your Wives and Servants. The Wife is commanded to learn of her Husband at home, and the Husband to walk with her as a man of knowledge: and your Servants should be trained by you in Re∣ligion, Gen. 14.14. as Abrahams Servants were by Abra∣ham, thus some of the Hebrew Rabbins think that Abraham's trained Servants are therefore so called. Not con∣versing personal∣ly with them a∣but their Souls. How seldome do you converse personally with every one in your Families concerning the prac∣tical part of Religion? How seldome do you
ask them any questions, how it is with their Souls? and what they think will become of them to all Eternity? Are you not as great strangers to the inwards of their Souls, as you are to the Souls of the Indians? If their bo∣dies be in danger, meat, physick, attendance are procured; but their Souls may perish in formality and carelessness for any help you will afford them. Some Professing-Gover∣nours never treat with their housholds about their Spiritual Estate from one year to ano∣ther: Hence comes the great Apostasy of our times. The Lord humble us, and deli∣ver us from bloud-guiltiness. Many an Hus∣band may cry out, O my Wife's Soul is like to perish, through my default: many a Pa∣rent may shriek, O! I am verily guilty of the bloud of my Child: and many a Master may impute to his own account all the disor∣ders of his Servants; for that they have no personal conference with them about Origi∣nal Corruption, Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, &c. Perhaps thou prayest in thy Family every day, but not knowing the inward lusts and workings of their hearts towards God or Sin, thou knowst not, how to pray as thou oughtest: thou knowst not what to confess, and what to pray for, nor what to bless God for. 4. Not walking with gra∣vity. Have you walk'd with that gravity be∣fore your Wives, Children, and Servants, as ye ought? Have you not made your selves vile by lightness, frothiness, and unseemly car∣riages? Governours of Families are the Vice∣roy's
of God: they are in the place of God; and therefore should keep up their Authority, and not sinfully run into such vanity and fa∣miliarity with their inferiours, as to breed in them contempt of the Ordinance of God. 5. Not gi∣ving them time to serve God in. You have given your Children and Servants time to work for your selves, but have you afforded them time to serve their God in? Too too many use their Inferiours, just as they use their Beasts; they work and feed their Beasts, but never instruct: no more do they instruct their Inferiours. When do you call your Wives, Children, Servants, into your Closet, and not only press them to look after their Souls, and in order there∣unto, to spend some time in Prayer, Read∣ing, Meditation, &c. but tell them how God wrought on you, how he awakened you, what corruptions prevail'd with you, and how God help'd you to crucisie them: How do you know, but the same motives might melt, reduce, and turn their hearts too? 6. Have not you miscarried, as to the time, Taking undue time for Family-Duties. In the Morning, too early. for the management of your religious work, in your houses? Some Governours Pray in the Morning too early: so early, with a small part of their Family, whilst others are in Bed, or in the service of the World, so that they worship not God together, as they ought: and this is past over with silence; but if they miss of their Servant in the Shop or Field, O! how doth the fire of Hell break forth at their lips? How angry is the Gover∣nour?
he cries out, O! I shall be undone by the unfaithfullness of my Wife, Children, Servants; but sees not a greater danger, a more probable ruine falling on him for not having his Family to worship God with him. Others deferr Morning Prayer till it be al∣most Noon. Too late. They will adventure into all worldly imployments, (as we say) without fear or wit: they see no need of God to pro∣tect them from outward or inward dangers, no need of Gods blessing, till they are ready to fill their panch, and then some Collects must be said, some short Prayers; it is the Custome of their fore Fathers, it is the Re∣ligion of their Ancestours, or Conscience will trouble at the total neglect of the Mor∣ning Sacrifice, and therefore the Prayer shall be run over with more hast, than the boy that saith his lesson; that they may rise up to eat, drink, and play. And as some are unseasonable in their duties in the Morning, At Eve∣ning too late. so at Evening. Whilst their strength lasts to serve the world, they attend it, some 'till even midnight, and then; come let us go to Prayer; when the poor Wife, Children, and Servants, had rather be in bed, than on their knees. The Governour Prays dully enough, 1 Sam. 2.17. Putting off family Prayer with a long grace. and that while the poor fami∣ly sleep, or nauseate the duty; and so like Elies Sons, these Sons of Belial cause their people to abhorre the offering of the Lord. Are there not also some Professing-Gover∣nours (unworthy of the name of Christian) who think to please God and the family with a
long grace before meat, which shall be in lieu of all the service of the day? 7. Not read∣ing Scrip∣ture and good books. How few are there that read the Scrip∣tures and good books in their houses? O! this will take up too much time; as if God had given men all their time to neglect him in, and to indulge to the services of the Flesh, World, and Devils. CHAP. XXIX. The sins of Husbands and Wives. HUsbands and Wives are call'd to reflexi∣on on their miscarriages, joyntly, Husbands and Wives sins. se∣verally. Joyntly, for their not being so carefull of their choice, as they should have been: not seeking God enough in a matter of so great consequence, which was for tearm of life, and wherein the Souls of each other were so highly concerned. 1 Cor. 7.39. The Wife is bound by the Law as long as her Husband liveth; but if her Husband he dead, she is at liberty to be mar∣ried to whom she will, only in the Lord. 2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with un∣righteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? That they came together upon
low, earthly, and lustfull motives, for profit, pleasure, beauty, rather than to further the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men, that they were fair; Gen. 6.2. and they took them Wives of all which they chose. That they did not by Pray∣er and Fasting try to live unmarried, though the Apostle told them of the advantages of serving Christ thereby. 1 Cor. 7.32. He that is unmarri∣ed, careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. Severally. The Hus∣bands sins in not lo∣ving as Christ. Husbands, ye have not loved your Wives, as Christ the Church; though the command be express, Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, Christ is faithful to his Spouse. I will abide for thee. Thou shalt abide for me many dayes, thou shalt not play the Harlot, Eph. 5.25. Hos. 3.3. and thou shalt not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. But though you have not been Adulterers in any gross act, yet how oft have you wish'd the bond of marriage were broken? and have not you had eyes full of Adultery? hath not your love to others degenerated into secret lust? Christ is patient to his Church, but hath your love suffered all things? upon light mat∣ters, what frowns, I will not say what blows? Hath not family-prayer been neglected through your wrath? Christ gives no occasion of jealousie; but have not some of you? The Lord searcheth hearts. Christs love is boun∣tifull; how short have you kept your Wives, contrary to your engagements to endow them with all your worldly goods? Christ keeps com∣pany
with the  of his bosome; but have not some of you been more abroad than at home? Christ edifieth his Church: Do ye dwell with your Wives as men of knowledge? Christ doth communicate secrets to his Spouse: Are not ye strangers to the hearts, though perhaps not to the bosomes, of your nearest Relations? Christ doth confer often with his Church about the mysteries of God: I wish you did so. I fear some of you are silver tongued abroad, to get you a name, forward to speak of Christ, but dum at home even to your Wives as well as Children. The Woman learns not, 2 Cor. 14.25. though she ask her Husband at home. Christ gives the spest rebubes to his offending Spouse pri∣vely, and when he gets her alone; But do not you rbroe before Servants and Children? Hereby they learn frowardnesse, when brought into this relation, and at present slight the Wives of your bosomes. Christ doth not blaze his Wifes infirmities; but so have ye. Christ puts the best construction on what his Spouse doth. The spirit is willing, though the flesh be weak. But do not you put the worst? When your lusts are quenched, your love is gone. Christ doth pitty his Church as the weaker vessel; if ye did so, the family would be the better governed. Christ doth sympathize with his Church: In all her af∣flictions he is afflicted; but how fretfull, chur∣lish, and Nabal-like are you, when the hand of God is heavy on your nearest Relations? Christ doth vindicate his Spouse, and is greatly dis∣pleased when she suffers from the world; but
cannot some of you help to deride your Wives  and not frown when they are wronged and a∣bused. Christ doth not upbraid his Spouse with her low condition before he he put honour on her; but alas! How oft have ye cast into the dish what the condition of your Wives was before you cast your eyes upon them? Christ gave his life for his Church: what hast thou done and suffered to save the Soul of thy Wife? Christ rules his Church, not with a rod of Iron, but with a Scepter of Love: Is your dominion exercised with discretion and love? Are all things done in Charity? Is she to thee  a loving Hind or Roe? Prov. 5.19. Christ doth not count his Spouse as a Servant, but a Friend; he doth not domineer over his Church, but hath high thoughts of her; but how many husbands use their Wives hardly better than Servants? Christ notwithstanding keeps up his authority over his Church, but do not ma∣ny Husbands loose it through too much uxori∣ousness, and make themselves contemptible, by yeilding to their Wives, as Adam to his, whence came at first all sin, disorder, and misery into the world? How did Solomon fall? Christ yeilds to many of his Wives petitions and suits to him: but many are worse than the Heathen was to his Wife, He said unto her, What wilt thou Queen Esther? Esth. 5.3. and what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the Kingdom. The poor Wife must use the mediation of others to have her desires ac∣complished. When Christ doth command his Wife, his Church, he doth it mildly:
We pray you in Christs stead. But many Hus∣bands imperiously enough, too much, God knoweth, Philem. v. 9. when for loves sake they should rather intreat. Christ doth love his Spouse, though he gains nothing by her; but alas! How many are severe enough to their Wives, when they fail of that Estate, &c. that they expected from them? As Husbands fail, so do Wives; Wives miscarria∣ges, in not loving their Husbands as the Church Christ. Eph. 5.24. Psal. 73.25. even as the Church is subject unto Christ, so should ye have been to your own Husbands in every thing. But how have ye affronted your Light? The true Church of Christ loves him inwardly, as well as outwardly: so should ye have loved your Husbands; but alas! How little have ye shewed the union betwixt the Church and Christ by your affections? The Church loves Christ more than Angels: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. But how many Wives are commending others Husbands more than their own? If my Husband were thus, and thus, &c. Thy Husband should be to thee the most precious of all persons, the most lovely in thine eyes. Not parts and gifts, but the good pleasure of God, should be the ground of this special love. The Church honours Christ above all other persons in the world; but have not some of you mean, low and base thoughts of your Husbands? The Church is subject to Christ in all things; but will not some of you wear what you please, goe where you please, eat what you please, and employ your selves in what you please? Yea,
though contrary to your Husbands just com∣mands, and meek entreaties? The Church fears Christ: so should Wives: I say not either should, with a slavish, but both should, with a reverential fear. Remem∣ber Michal, 1 Chron. 15. ult. She despised her Husband in her heart, (She did not exprefs her slighting of him, as many do, in words) and she had no Child unto the day of her death. God took the Husband's part, and put a remark of dis∣pleasure upon that her saciness. For slight∣ing the Ordinance of God, her Head, (though but in her heart) God plagued her in her Womb with barrenness. The Church loves Christ more and more; but O the decayes of Womens affecti∣ons to their Husbands! Partly through levity, and partly through age, and partly through cross Providences! Prov. 2.17. Whereas thou shouldst have kept the Covenant of thy God. The Church doth commend Christ; but seldome are Wives careful herein, to imitate the Church of God. How many do blazon their infirmities more frequently, than commend their graces? The Church is careful to please Christ in all things: 1 Cor. 7.34. The married Woman should care (study) to please her Husband, by her attire, behaviour, words; She should goe, speak, and do so, Eph. 5.24. as may render her most acceptable in his sight, in every thing. How many cross Wives are there, that love to vex, rather than to delight their Husbands? They will cloath and adorn their bodies, to make them lovely to strangers, rather than to their own Husbands. The Church bears patiently re∣bukes
and blows from Christ: so should Wives; as Sarah was commended for her meekness. 1 Pet. 3.4, 5, 6. The ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, is in the sight of God, of great price; for after this manner, in the old time, the holy Women adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own Husbands, even as Sara, &c. The Church gives Christ reverend Titles of honour and esteem: but alas! Wives are so proud, so self-conceited of their own worth and merit, that they cannot but disrespect all others, even their own Husbands. Hereby they shew not themselves to be the Daughters of Sarah; Gen. 18.12. 1 Pet. 3.6. She having occasion to think of her Husband, presently this title Lord came out of her heart into her mouth: and the Holy Ghost takes notice of it: yea a second time, sure it was for some high end; and proves that she obeyed Abraham, because She called him Lord. Perhaps the Wife will tell me, these are but trifles that I cross my Husband in: I must tell thee, to break the order of God for toyes and trifles will greaten thy sin at the day of accounts. What wilt thou, darest thou for so slender a matter tread down the Law of thy God, and hazard the ruine of thy Soul? O! consider this, and turn not your duties to your Hus∣bands into matter of talk and pastime, as the manner of most Women is.
CHAP. XXX. The miscarriages of Professing-Parents and Children. PArents, As Pa∣rents. O! how little do you plot for the good of future generations? how little do you care whether God hath a Name when you be dead and gone, that Christ survive, and holiness flourish, when you shall be rotten in your graves? O! 'tis through your de∣fault, that the name of Christ is not had in everlasting remembrance: if you were faith∣full, how would the generations to come bless the Lord in your behalf? If you were active and diligent, you might convey holiness down to your posterity, as you have been unhappy instruments to convey down a stock of sinne, you have been instruments to con∣vey down the curse; but are not you care∣less to convey down grace? The World would soon me, the Church of Christ would soon regain its antient lustre and beau∣ty, if ye did but faithfully discharge your du∣ties to your Children: you might suffer little Children to come to Christ, yea you might fill the Kingdom of Heaven; but do not you ra∣ther fill the Kingdom of Hell? And as Jere∣boam
made Israel to sin, do not you instead of leading them the way to Heaven, lead them the way to Hell? O! consider seriously and sadly how farr you are guilty with respect to the Souls of your Children. 1. By giving them bad examples. Giving their Children bad ex∣amples. Chams not covering his Fathers nakedness was a sin conveyed down to all his race, and therefore God chargeth the Church of the Jews against that sin, under the expressions of walking in the manners of the Nations. Levit. 20.11. & 23. compar. Ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations; which I cast out before you; for they committed all these things. Your pride, sensuality, carelesness in the worship of God, your passions towards your Wives, and Wives towards their Husbands, your frowardness toward servants, &c. teach your Children so to carry themselves towards others. One check't his Son, and said, never Parent had so wicked a Child; yes (said the Son) My Grandfather had. 2. Cocker∣ing them in sin. By humouring and cockering your Chil∣dren in their Sins: Teaching them early to be proud of their fine clothes; and to re∣venge, Come, give me a blow, saith the Mother to the Child; whilst it sits on her lap. By indulging to his voluptuous course of life, it is thought Isaack smarted in his Son's future disobedience, even by suffering him to sport and hunt away too much of preci∣ous time. Many, like Apes, kill their Chil∣dren with culling them. Austin tells a sad Story of one Cyrillus, who loved an only Son immoderately, and let him do (without
correction) what he would: afterwards this cockered Son, in a fit of drunkenness, of∣fers violence to his Mother, killed his Fa∣ther, wounded mortally two of his Sisters, and would have ravished another. Through foolish pity, Parents, especially Mothers, give the reines unto their Children, when they are young, and thereby they grow head∣strong, Prov. 29.15. and are a shame to the Mother that bore them. The sparing of the Rod is the ru∣ine of the Child. Do not you reprove your Children, as old fond Eli did? Thereby he brought a plague upon himself and upon his posterity. What saith one? never cease convincing or correcting till thou hast sub∣dued the spirit of thy Child, if he contends with thee. You pretend such harshness is in∣consistent with love; but I say from the Lord, such fondness and indulgence is consistant with hatred; and I am sure the Lord is on my side, in this. Prov. 13.24. He that spareth his rod hateth his Son, he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. Is it love to suffer a wound in thy Child to fester (and thereby to destroy him) rather than to apply a painful corrosive for the expediting the cure? But what saith the fond Mother? O! If the Child should be the worse for my correction, it would be a trouble to me whilst I live. O that such a doting Mother would hear the Lord himself! Correct thy Son, Prov. 29.17. Prov. 23.13. and he shall give thee rest, yea he shall give delight to thy Soul. With hold not cor∣rection from the Child: for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall not dye. Foolishness is
bound in the heart of a Child, Prov. 22.15. but the rod of correction shall drive it farr from him. 3. By not acquainting them with the Lord, Not in∣structing them. and his wayes, and that betimes. Hath not God commanded, that his Laws should be whetted by you, upon your Children? Deut. 6.7. Thou shalt teach them diligently (Hebr. whet or sharpen) unto thy Children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou lyest down; and when thou risest up. Some con∣ceive, that Catethiling of Children is not obscurely hinted in this ancient Precept. And is not Child-hood and Youth the time, wherein Solomon adviseth the Children of men should be trained up in the way wherein they should goe? O Parents! Prov. 22.6. If God be worth your own acquaintance, is he not worth the acquaintance of such as are so near and dear unto you? Can you without trembling think, that as soon as Death breaks up your house, you may to Heaven, and your Children must to Hell, and thither through your de∣fault? But if you should dye in this neglect of instructing your Children, you will be miserable as well as they: And O! What a greeting will there be hereafter between un∣godly Parents and Children? What an hear∣ing will it be to your tormented Souls, to hear your Children cry out against you, All this that we suffer was long of you, you should have taught us better, and did not: What an addition will such out-cries be to your misery?
4. Suffering Children to fall out with one another. By not redressing the disorderly carria∣ges of your Children towards one another. How few Reboccah's are there? She was carefull to remove jars and mischiefs that might a∣rise between her two Sons. 5. Not pray∣ing for hem. By not praying for your Childrens Souls, and against those very particulars, which their natural constitution leads them mostly to. 6. Not cor∣recting a∣right. By not correcting them aright: as to time, not early enough; He that loveth him correcteth him betimes: not, whilst the fault is fresh in his thoughts, with all the aggra∣vating circumstances thereof; Not, with compassion enough. You have reason (saith Mr Dod) to be angry with your selves, ra∣ther than to be bitter to your Children; for you correct your own sin in your Children. If the Child be curst and froward, hath he not seen his Parent brawling and contenti∣ous, &c? not ushering correction with Pray∣er, that God would bless word and rod. Commonly Parents correct in an high passi∣on, whereby Prayer is hindered, and the Medicine becomes invalid. 7. Being o∣ver-angry By being angry without a cause, or a∣bove the desert. Anger must be let out ac∣cording to the nature of the offence. If Pa∣rents be always chiding or correcting, they make their Children resolute, like Hagar and Ismaei, to take up their heels, and into the Wilderness will they, any where to be delivered from such hard usages. Provoke not your Children to wrath. Eph. 6.4 Some Parents
want natural affections: are too severe; Cor∣rection like Physick, if too frequent, will work no more with Children, than our meat with us. 8. By loving your Children more than God, Loving inordi∣nately. loving them as they are yours, not as they are Gods, as they bare your Image, not Gods, for their beauty and parts, rather than for their graces; loving a beautifull Child; that is voyd of grace, more than a deformed Child, though eminent in grace, loving one excessively, as Jacob, Joseph, hence Joseph is envyed by the rest: prodigal favours to some, especially if without reason, are offensive to others, who are less respected: Loving so, as loth to let them go when God calls for them, you cannot say as Eli, it is the Lord, 1 Sam. 3.18. let him do as seems him good. God pulls and you pull, and you quarrel with God about the goard, and you think you do well to be an∣gry. Job blessed God, when God took all away at once by one blow. 9. Not pro∣viding callings for them, or not the best. By not devoting them to some honest cal∣ling, but letting them live in idleneness, and so they grow up monuments of your neglect. Some Gentlemen train up their Children to hold an Hawk, to follow a Dog, and com∣monly they dye in an Alehouse, or shorten their lives thereby. But if you do provide a calling for your Children, is it not what is most gainfull, rather than what will be most usefull to the good of the Soul? Had you not rather have them rich Factours among Idola∣ters (where they learn the manners of the
Heathens) then to have a meaner calling at home, where the Gospel is preached in power and purity? 10. Not matching them aright. By not matching them to godly per∣sons, but rather to the rich: Hereby ye shew that the silver shrines are in higher re∣pute than grace and Godliness. 11. Giving away all to them. By giving all to your Children, though the Church of God hath more need of it. Hereby you evidence that you prefer not Zion before your chiefest joy: that you love the outward grandeur of your Children more than the prosperity of the Church. It is a wonder (saith Mr. Baxter) how so many seemingly holy, can quiet their Consciences in such a sin as this is? If one of you have two or three hundred pounds per annum, it is a wonder if you leave an hundred pounds a year of it to pious or charitable uses. Nay do not Parents leave all to their Children, when they have apparent proofs that they will spend it in the service of Hell? O! Let Pa∣rents tremble. What wilt thou inable and strengthen thy Children to rebell against God? put fuell to the fire? put swords into their hands to sight against the most high? Parents I beseech you look diligently to your duties, be humbled for these and such like miscarriages. O! look about you, and you will see a sad Apostasy in Children, Pa∣rents civil, the Children debauched: Parents godly, the Children formall or loose: Parents eminent for grace, Children notorious for lewdness. Let your bowels turn within you
to see so great a degeneracy. Double your diligence, that there may be an holy seed. Knock off the chains of Hell from your Children what you may: lay not out all your time how they may be rich. It is no time to seek great things for your selves; seek them not. Pitty the Souls of your Children, that are slaves to the Devil. How can ye mind your trades, fields, bodies; whilst the Souls of your Children are in danger of perishing? How can ye see the Devil driving your Children to Sin and Hell, and ye stand still with a Gallio-Spi∣rit? Go to your Closets, and ask your hearts, whether the Soul be not the prin∣cipal part of the Child? and whether that needs not your care more than the body? Do not throw away the Blade to preserve the Scabbard. God hath set you to watch their Souls, to train up their Souls, to pro∣vide for their Souls: if you do not, what is your love more than a Pagans, a Turks, towards your Children? You think you should be unnatural if you should not lay up for your Children (though many Pro∣fessours upon pretence that God will pro∣vide, indulge to the flesh, pamper their bo∣dies, and starve their Children) but here is the best laying up to lay up a stock of Pray∣ers for them, and a stock of Counsell and Instruction in them. O Parents! Once more I beseech you, put on bowels of pit∣ty and compassion. Pitty the perishing Souls of your own Children. Command
your Children to keep the way of the Lord: suffer them not to fashion themselves ac∣cording to the course of the world. Con∣nive not at them in practising what you think is abominable in the worship of God. Re∣member they are Gods Children more than yours. Ezek. 16.20. All Souls are mine. God claims a special right in them, thy Sons and thy Daughters whom thou hast born unto me. If you neglect your duties, you and your Children are like to have sad greetings, when you meet before the Lord another day. How will your Children lay their hells and torments to your dores? how will they curse the day they were born of such fond women, who indulged to them in their neglects of God? Cursed be the day that ever I saw the passions, the pride, the formality of my Father, or of my Mother; for thereby I learned to sin against the Lord. O your examples undid me! I had not come to this place of torment had it not been for you. Children, As Chil∣dren, evi∣denced in several particu∣lars. Are not you also greatly faulty towards your Parents? If Children be richer than their Parents, how irreverent are they? how over familiar with their Parents? as if they had forgot the first Commandement with promise. How disobedient are they to their law∣full commands? though the command of God be express, Col. 3.20. Ephes. 6.1, 2, 3. Children, obey your Parents in all things, and it is added, for this is well-plea∣sing unto the Lord. Children obey your Parents in the Lord for this is right. Honour thy Fa∣ther
& thy Mother (which is the first Comman∣dement with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou mayest live long on the Earth. Was Christ subject to his Parents, Luk. 2.51. and should not you be subject to yours? Sure you should have obeyed them as farr as without sin, though their commands crossed your natural desires: as Joseph, when Israel said unto him, come I will send thee to thy Brethren at Sechem, though he knew he should be sent to them who hated him; yet he said unto his Father, Here am I. How stout and rebellious are Children when corrected? Hebr. 12.9. How few can say, we have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence? This Sin so provoked God, Deut. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. that he made it Capitall in the dayes of old. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious Son, which will not obey the voyce of his Father, or the voyce of his Mo∣ther, and that when they have chastred him, will not hearken unto them: then shall his. Fa∣ther and his Mother lay hold of him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his City, and shall say, this our Son is stubborn and rebellious, &c. and all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evill away from among you. How rebellious are Children in refusing the eallings which Parents have appointed for them? If the Parent be bound to bring them up to a calling, are not the Children bound to attend that calling? Brethren, let every man wherein he is called; 1 Cor. 7.24. therein abide with God. Christ probably was brought up in his reputed Fathers calling. Is
not this the Carpenter? Mar. 6.3. How disobedient are Professing-Children in their marriages? Chil∣dren are the Parents goods, so God reckon∣eth them, yea so the Devil reckoneth them. When the Devil had commission to meddle with Jobs goods, he falls on the Children. Some are worse than Ishmaels, Gen. 21.21. Nature and Civility made him submit to his Mother for the choice of his Wife. If Children must o∣bey their Parents in littles, much more in weighty matters. How little have you requi∣ted your Parents? This you are bound unto, To shew piety at home, 1 Tim. 5.4. and to requite Parents, is good and acceptable before the Lord. Your Parents took care of you when you were as beasts, you had your life and education from them, and what now slight them when old or weak? What laugh at their follies? What when you are high, reject your parents that are low? The very Heathen Oratour de∣claims against this; We are not born (saith he) for our selves, but partly for our Country, part∣ly for our Parents. How are you degenerated from your Parents commands and examples? There are few true Rechabites, who forbore wine from generation to generation. It makes my heart ake when I read that the peo∣ple served the Lord all the dayes of Joshuah, and all the dayes of the Elders that out-lived Joshuah, Judges 2.7, 10, 11, 12, 14. who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel; but there a∣rose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, &c. and the Children of Israel did evill in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim: and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, &c. and provoked the Lord to anger: and the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoylers, that spoyled them; and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. O! in vain will ye relieve your selves in your Baptismal relations unto God, that you have Abraham to your Father: Mat. 8.11. Gods judge∣ments will be more bitter to you, more heavy on you, than on others, when the Children of the Kingdome shall be cast out. You will be ready to curse the day you came of such Parents, that ever you had such holy instru∣ctions and examples, to no purpose, save to greaten your condemnation. The Lord said unto Moses, Deut. 31.16, 17. This People will goe a who∣ring after the Gods of the Strangers of the Land, whither they goe to be amongst them, and will forsake me, and break my Covenant, which I have made with them: Then mine an∣ger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evills and troubles shall befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evills come upon us, because our God is not a∣mongst us? Nay, Abraham (whom you trust to, and the Privileges by him) will upbraid his Son Dives with his former good things: Son, Luke 16.25. remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise.
Lazarus evil thing: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. O most dreadful! Your very righteous Parents shall rejoyce in your ruine. The righteous shall rejoyce, when he sees the vengeance, Psa. 58.10, 11. &c. So that a man shall say, Verily, he is a God, that judgeth in the Earth. CHAP. XXXI. The sins of Professing-Masters and Servants. FIrst you Masters, As Ma∣sters, see how guilty you are in the Relation of Masters. 1. Not chooling godly Servants. Psal. 101.6. Should not your eyes, like Davids, have been upon the faithfull of the Land, that they might dwell with you? How curious should you have been in this particular? But alas! ye would not buy an horse, an house, a Field, but ye would try them; but how careless have ye been whether your Servants were godly, yea or no? If they were strong to labour, was not that all ye look'd after? you look'd that they should be diligent in your work, your interest made you look to that, but have you look'd for such as walked in a persect way to serve you? Hence many have been taken into Professours families, who
were found wanton, and unclean, and thereby Religion hath suffered exceedingly: and others sweet tongued, gossiping, glut∣tonous, drunken Servants, and so Acteon was devoured by his Dogs: All the Masters gengv been put into a bag with holes: a just an ghteous jdgement upon the Master for is preferring self before Religi∣on: yea (which is a sdder consequent) hece the Children are cerrupted by evil ex∣am  ey being more apt to smitate the , than the Parent in  you had been curious in  you procured holy ser∣va  zeal forwardness and care of  Children, what families might you have  would have been pliable to your holy counsels. Should you not have removed wicked Servants as soon as all your counsels would not take effect on them? David did so. Not re∣moving wicked ones. Psa. 101.7. He that workh deceit, and telleth lies, shall not tarry in my sight. You on the contrary keep them as you do horses, if good for labour. It will never be said to your glory, the Church in your house: but may it not be said, there is a nest of Snakes, a cage of Devills in your house? Being over∣rigorous. Gen. 31.2, 5. Mat. 5.22. 2. Are not you too rigorous towards your Servants? Do not you too much frown upon them, as Laban on Jacob? Do not you use words of reproach in your speaking to them? Whosoever shall say, thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell sire. Do not you strike them
unnecessarily or immoderately? Have you for∣gotten the commands from Heaven? Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour, Levit. 25.43. Col. 4.1. but shalt fear thy God. Masters, give unto your Ser∣vants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. And ye Masters, Eph. 6.9 forbear threatning, knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons with him Do you herein as you would be dealt with? Would you have God to deal with you, as you deal with your Servants? Remember, you and your Servants have one and the same Master, to whom you are both accountable, you for your rule, and they for their subjection. 3. Nor di∣recting them distinctly. Have not you neglected to give that di∣rection to your several Servants, as is proper for them, so that they intrench upon each o∣thers work, and the painful work lies neg∣lected, to your trouble, and to the raising of strife and passion? How few Mistresses, yea or Masters, are like Solomons vertuous Woman, of whom it is said, She looketh well to the wayes of her houshold? Frov. 31.27. Every one should know his place and work in the Fami∣ly, that all things may be done decently, and in order: But in how few Families is it thus? 4. Not being diligent them∣selves in their company. Do you give your Servants examples of diligence? So did that vertuous Mistress: She riseth also whilst it is night, &c. She girdeth her loynes with strength, and strength∣neth her armes: She layeth her hands to the Spindle, and her hands hold the Distaffe: She
maketh her self coverings of Tapestry: She maketh fine Linnen, &c. She eateth not the bread of idleness. 5. Not shewing special respect to those that are godly. Philem. 16. What love do ye show to your Servants that be godly? Do you receive them as be∣loved Brethren? As Paul would have Phile∣mon receive his Servant, after his Conversi∣on: Receive him not now as a Servant, but above a Servant, a Brother beloved. A Chri∣stian Servant should be in the place of a be∣loved Brother, and should be preferr'd be∣fore a lewd Son. Prov. 17.2. A wise Servant shall have rule over a Son that causeth shame: and shall have part of the inheritance among the Bre∣thren. How seldome do you show them good, as well as receive good from them? When they are sick, how little attendance and necessaries have they as to diet, fire, and physick? 1 Sam. 30.13. Are not too many like the Amala∣kite, who left his man on the plain fields, be∣cause he fell sick? How are many poor Servants (who contracted their diseases by the un∣mercifull commands of some Professours) cast off by them when sick as unprofitable bur∣thens? 6. Do you pay your Servants their wages? Not pay∣ing wages as they ought, Do you not pay them dodgingly? Hast thou not forgot that the Isralites were required, when they set any servant free, not to let him go away empty, Deut. 15.12, 13, 14. but thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floore, and out of thy wine-press: of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee, thou shalt give unto him? Hast not thou aba∣ted
them of their dues for the time of their sickness, or the time they have spent in the service of God? 7. Not suf∣fering them to speak. Job. 31.13. Doe not you deny liberty to your Ser∣vants to speak unto you? Job would not slight his Servants cause. God hath set Masters o∣ver Servants; but he hath not given them liberty to trample them under their feet. Servants are under their Masters power, but not their lusts. You shew your selves Na∣bals by this churlishness and austerity. He is such a Son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him. 8. Suffering tyranny among them. As Ser∣vants. Being apt to think, that they must be subject to none but Christ. Do not you suffer one Servant to tyrannize over another? Secondly, You Servants that Profess; I have somewhat in charge against many of you. 1. Your Pride, sawciness, familiarities with your Governours, make me think you would easily swallow the errour of old, that we are to be subject to none but Christ, as if your freedome by Christ, had exempted you from all civil subjection to men. By your refusing the yoak of your Masters commands, you reflect more upon your Master in the Heavens, than upon your earthly Gover∣nour: What saith the Apostle? Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, 1 Tim. 6.1. count their own Masters worthy of all honour; that the name of God, and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. Servants, Eph. 6.5 be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh with fear and trembling in singleness of your heart, as unto
Christ. Servants, be subject to your Ma∣sters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the foward. But alas! how sawcy are Servants? Carrying them∣selves proudly, saucily, and too familiarly with their Superi∣ours. Mal. 1.6. Blazon∣ing their Masters Infirmi∣ties. Obeying them on∣ly in what they please. Col. 3.22. Tit. 2.9. Mat. 8.9. May not your Master say, If I be a Master, where is my fear? How fearless are you of your Masters, especially if your Masters be not very rich and honourable in the earth? who respects Gods Ordinance? Hence many Professing Servants sland covered in their Masters presence, sit before them, bow not to them, nor rise up before them. 2. Do not you when you meet together blazon the infirmities of your Masters? Do not you carry your selves as Spies rather than as Ser∣vants? you do not herein as you would be dealt with. 3. Are not you disobedient to your Masters commands, unless in what pleaseth you? You are rather the Servants of your own lusts, ra∣ther than your Masters Servants: you do not obey in singleness of heart, yea, you are not indeed obedient. The Centurion could say to his Servant, goe, and he went, &c. The Heathen Servants excel some that pretend to great attainments of Religion. He is the Master, that must have his own way; Judge ye then in your selves, whether you abide in the place, wherein God hath set you? 4. Not an∣swering, when call'd. Job. 19.16. Do not ye refuse to answer when you are called by your Masters? This was Job's plague, I called my Servant, and he gave me no an∣swer. Silence is sometimes a sign of consent, but here of contempt. If a Servant answers
not, when he is called, he forgets what his calling is. The Servants in Davids dayes were of better dispositions, they did pick out their Masters mind out of every motion and turning of his eye, and hand, and so were tontinually in a posture for obedience. The eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Masters, Psal. 123.2. 1 Tim. 6.1. and the eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistriss. For want of that honour that is due from Professing Servants to their Masters, the name of God is Blaspemed. 5. Answer∣ing again. Tit. 2.9. As some by silence, so others by their tongues dishonour their Masters by answering again. They should not answer by way of contradiction, or reluctance, as Servants are very apt to do. Some will even brag, how they gave word for word (perhaps blow for blow) nay two words for one. Hereby their Governours, if ungodly, fall foul upon Re∣ligion. Is this the fruit of your profession? prayers? running after Ministers? 6. Diligent only un∣der their Masters eye. Eph. 6.5, 6. Not de∣signing to please God in their pleasing their Ma∣sters. How lazy are some professing Servants? Diligent only when under their Masters eye. Few serve their Masters, as Jacob, Laben, with all their might. The command is that you should obey in singleness of heart, not with eye-service as men pleasers. Mark, eye-ser∣vice stands not with uprightness of heart. As you would not be branded for Hypocrites, work behind your Masters backs, as if their eyes were upon you. Consider how short you fall of this, and mourn before the Lord in secret for your eye-service. 7. How do some, yea many servants, eye
only the pleasing their Masters, Eph. 6.5. Tit. 2.9. but doe not their work so spiritually as to seek to please the Lord? Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. It is true Servants should labour to please their Masters, yea in all things; but they should seek more to ap∣prove themselves to God, than to any earth∣ly Superiour. 8. Mis-tim∣ing duties How imprudent are some Professing Ser∣vants as to the timing of their duties? Some, when never so urgent business is to be dis∣patched will then go in secret to call upon God; whereas going to bed later, and ris∣ing earlier, would prevent much straitness as to time, and spirit in that great duty: Some will fall a talking of the things of God to their fellow-servants very unseasonably, not when they are at leasure, but when they are most busily imployed for their Masters, to the hindring of their work. 9. Defraud∣ing their masters. How many cheat and defraud their Ma∣sters? Some cheat them of their time, by idling it away, being tattlers, and busie-bo∣dies, or gossiping it away: Others cheat them of their money or goods, hiring others secretly to do their work, and pay them with their Masters money or goods. Is not this purloyning? and therefore forbidden? Tit. 2.10. Not provident for their gain. 10. How many are improvident for their Masters goods and gain? They will see things spoil before their eyes: they will give what is not their own to give: they make no con∣science to eat and drink what their Masters
do not allow them: they are not contented with his allowances: they will steal small matters, and yet whatever they take, though but little, is the breach of the 8th. Com∣mandement, and the less the temptation, the greater the sin, that they will break Gods Law for trisles; and serve the Devil for pie∣ces of silver, and morsels of flesh. What saith Mr. Dod? If ever they look for sound peace of conscience, they must make re∣stitution of all such things: How much so∣ever they steal, Numb. 5.7. Zech. 5.4. so much they must restore, and the fifth part thereto, or if they keep it, unless they repent, they keep Gods curse with it, and a woe unto their Consci∣ences. 11. Regard. less of their Souls. How many are altogether careless to get any good to their Souls whilst under Religious Governours? They ask not the way to Hea∣ven, and if examined, they are tongue∣tyed, will give no account of the hope that is in them. 12. Murmur∣ing at re∣proofs and cor∣rections. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. How do many murmur under reproofs and corrections? What saith the Apostle? Ser∣vants be subject to your Masters, not only to the gentle, but to the froward; for this is thank∣worthy, if a man for Conscience towards God endure grief, suffering wrongfully: for what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently: this is acceptable with God. Unfaith∣ful to Children. 13. How unfaithfull are many to their Ma∣sters Children? Not heeding them, and pro∣viding
meat, and other necessaries for them in their Masters absence? 14. Receiving scornful∣ly a Ca∣talogue of their duties. How scornfully do even Professing-Ser∣vants receive a Catalogue of their duties? How loth are they, yea how do some un to know the mind of God, as to the extent of their obedience? 15. Their miscarria∣ges to∣ward their fel∣low-Ser∣vants. How many wayes do you fail towards your fellow Servants? Do not you seek to un∣dermine them of the respect their Masters bare them? Do not you labour to supplant them? Do not you envy them? Are not you unfaithfull to one anothers Souls? Do not you wast time in idle and impertinent-dis∣courses? Are not you evil examples to each other? Do not you suffer Sin to rest upon each other? Are not you guilty of not easing and relieving them, when they are over∣charged with businesses? Do not you carry your selves proudly and magisterially towards Apprentices? Do not you joyn in a confe∣deracy to tell tales against your Governours? And do not you charge your fellow-Servants with secresy therein, whereby the Name and Authority of the Master is lost, and all hopes of edifying are taken away?
CHAP. XXXII. Their miscarriages with reference to the Ministers of Christ, whilst they were resident with them. 1. Professors miscarria∣ges to∣wards Mi∣nisters be∣fore their removal, Not e∣steeming, but slight∣ing them. 1 Thes. 5.13. HOW little have you esteemed them, and how much have you slighted them? Though they were the Embassadours of the Lord of Heaven, and should have had respect, according to the rank of their Master, that sent them; yet how little did you honour them in your hearts? Did you know them, and esteem them highly, for their Works sake? Have you not very much slight∣ed both their Persons and Message? How many have thought they knew as much as their Ministers, and therefore under-valued them? How many Ministers have been slighted for their mean Parts? As if the effi∣cacy of the Ordinance depended on the Rheto∣rick of the Preacher: as if no dainties could be brought them in a homely dish, no treasure in an earthen vessel: as if God could not speak out of the mouths of Babes: as if the using Jordan were too contemptible a means? I have feared the unsoundness of many hearts
from the itching of their ears: Paul was care∣ful to preach not with enticing words, 1 Cor. 14.18. with the wisdom of words: Though he could speak with tongues more than all, yet he desired to speak rather to edification. It is likely your Ministers could have been Seraphical, and in the clouds, but they stooped and descended to your capacities, and denied themselves that they might gain you: more desiring that you should be brought in love with the naked truth of the Gospel, than with the dress it comes in; But nothing hath pleased your squeamish stomachs, but meat so sawced: you have loved the meat for the sawce, when there was no sawce you cared not for the Sermon, and when the sawce was gone you were weary of the Sermon; you would have no more of the meat. A Sermon full of plain naked Scriptures would not down in our last times: We were Christ-glutted, Gospel-glutted. It's observed by an Histo∣rian, that before the great Massacre in France, the Protestants were for a luscious wanton kind of Preaching. Truly (saith one of our own about 18 years since) We cannot absolutely determine what will become of us: only we have cause to fear that consciencious, Sermons, as much despised as they are, may be a commodity dear enough in England ere long, 1 Sam. 3.4. and visions may be less open, that they may be more preci∣ous. How unworthily have the Ministers of Christ been slighted by even such Professors, who a little before, pretended at least, to have had their life & growth from them, and
that they were the Seats etr istry, that they were begotten and bred up under their shadow; and yet in process of time have had low, mean, base and unworthy thoughts of them, debased them as brats of Antichrist, as limbs of Babilon? Have not many eminent Professors been ready to entertain reports a∣gainst their Ministers? and have they not lost their esteems of them for one real or supposed weakness of theirs? though you have been under so many engagements to them for your spiritual life, &c. yet if you have seen a lit∣tle failing or miscarriage in them, have not you forgot all their worth, and all their ma∣ny years labours and cares for your eternal welfare? Have not you been so far from e∣steeming the Messenger for the Message, that you have slighted the Message for the Messen∣ger? Hath not this been the language of your hearts, if not of your months, What nothing but this preaching? Have not those that at first admired, afterwards made nothing of this Heavenly Manna, because of the common∣ness thereof? When pearls were common a∣mong the Romans, they wore them upon their Shooes. Uniones emergere e luto cupiunt Tert. Hath not even the pearl of the Gospel been trodden under foot by you? Have not you considered only the matter, and not the stamp of the Coin? Have not your Ministers, though they have not kicked the dust of their feet against you, yet oft com∣plained to God of the contempt you have put upon them, and how much their Embassy hath been undervalued by you? It may be
you have thought it was no great matter to slight them and their counsels: but know for your trembling and amazement of Spirit, therein you have slighted Christ himself. He that despiseth you, despiseth me. Luk. 10.16. Mat. 10.15. Prejudi∣ced a∣gainst them. May you not fear it will be more tollerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgement, than for you? 2. How full of undue prejudices have your hearts been against your Ministers? and you have not had the honesty to examine the grounds? When they have delivered truths of a sublimer Nature, than ordinary; or have delivered any thing more obscurely, than at other times, how rarely have you confer'd with them thereabout? Have not you gone among your Companions and fill'd your own and their hearts with prejudices against them? When they have insisted long upon one sub∣ject, have not you been offended? But when did you ever cry out of others for be∣ing too long telling Money to you, for spending too many hours therein? Hereby you have done the Devil as great a piece of service as any you could have done him in your life time. Let me publish that to thine eye, which was once whispered in the ear: Take heed what thou dost, this man is a Roman: Should not you much more have taken heed of filling your own and others hearts with prejudice against your Ministers, seeing they were the Prophets of the most high: these men were men of God: they were the speci∣al Ambassadours of Heaven? I think he said
well, that Prejudice against the Preacher is the great prejudice to the hearers. This Fea∣ver of prejudice hath made many, like the full stomach, to loath the honey-comb. Hath not God met with repulses, whilst your Mi∣nisters have been entertained with prejudice? So long as you have been prejudiced, though you were convinced of many duties, yet you have not been perswaded to obey the truth. This hindred the Jewes from closing with Christ, and made their house desolate, over-turned their Temple, so that a stone was not left joyned to a stone: it brought a kind of Dooms-day on them. 3. Not bles∣sing God for them. How little have you blessed God for the Gospel-Ministry which you have enjoyed? and yet hath it not been the best under the Cope of Heaven? This distinguishing Mercy did not affect your hearts as it ought. Some there were (but very few) would say, Brown Bread, and the Gospel, is a Feast. Few, like the Christians at Constantinople, cryed out, Better the Sun not shine, than Chry∣sostome be silenced. You could bless God for Health, Estate, &c. but not for these great Luminaries of Glory, who were ap∣pointed to conduct and guide you unto the Heavenly Jerusalem. 4. Not pray∣ing for . How little did you Pray for them? How little have you prayed for gifts and abilities to goe through their whole work, for preser∣vation for them, and for a sanctified use of all Gods dispensations toward them? How little did you deprecate the stopping of their
mouths, and supplicate that their mouths might be kept open, Eph. 6.19. and that utterance might be given unto them, that they might open their mouths boldly, to make known the Mystery of the Gospel? Have not they oft begg'd your Prayers, in the words of Paul, I beseech you, Rom. 15.30, 31. Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christs sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive to∣gether with me, in your Prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea (in England?) and yet have not you neglected to call upon God for their deliverance? How can you tell, but their mouths had still been opened, had not you neglected Prayer? Mat. 7.7, 8. Hath not Christ pro∣mised, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you: To him that knocketh, it shall be opened? 5. Making Excuses for not hearing them. Have not you made sorry Excuses for not hearing them? How little have you believed that Word, He that heareth you, heareth me? And by consequence, that not-hearing of them, was not-hearing of Christ himself. What slight excuses have been deemed suffi∣cient to keep you from the Shepheards Tents? The Apostle would have us Swift to hear: James 1.19. Swiftness notes diligence in taking the first occasion; but how have you, to complement with a Friend, to indulge to the flesh, for fear of a little rain, for fear of wetting your feet, for fear of losing a six-penny, yea a penny-Customer, declined several oppor∣tunities of attending the Embassadours God sent you? For these things the wrath of God is breaking out upon you: the day is come,
or coming, Amos 8.12. Cant. 5.3, 6. Their miscarria∣ges be∣fore, in and after hearing, Before, Hearing without antece∣dent me∣ditation. when ye shall wander from Moun∣tain to Hill, from Sea to Sea, and sek bread and find none. This very excuse, the fear of de∣filing her feet, would not serve the Spouse. 6. How did you miscarry, both before, and in, and after hearing? How slender was your preparation to attend upon these Deputies of Christ? How little did you meditate on the Word you were to receive at their lips? Did you thus consider? The Gospel that I am a∣bout to hear, wil be the savour of life unto life, or of death unto death: I shall be nearer Hea∣ven or Hell by this Sermon I am going to: If the Gospel be alwayes hid, I am a lost Soul and shall perish: is my Soul hungry? This is the bread of Heaven: Is my Soul thirsty? this is the water of life: this is the milk where∣by I must grow up unto eternal life: this mes∣senger of Heaven will be for the fall as well as the rising of many in Israel: If he be not in∣strumental for my Salvation, he will be for my Damnation: Isa. 55.10, 11. As the rain cometh and wa∣tereth the Earth and returneth not thither, &c. So shall Gods Word that goeth forth out of this Ministers mouth, not return unto him voyd. How little did you consider the excellency and necessity of the Word that you were to partake of? What reasure was afforded you in an earthen vessel? That the Truths and Do∣ctrines that your Ministers taught you, were of as much worth, as your Souls, as Heaven, as Salvation? How little did you pour out your Souls in Prayer unto God before you went to hear your Prayer.
Ministers Eher  your Ministers, that God would open their mouths to speak the word truly, sincerely, powerfully, and seasona∣bly, and suitabty to your condition: or for your own Souls, that God would open your hearts, to entetain the word so as to profit by it, that you might not have open ears, and shut hearts, that you might not have ears, Prov. 20.12. and yet hear not, as knowing that the hearing ear, and seeing eye, the Lord hath made even both of them? How careless were you to purge your Souls before you came to hear the word? Putting off the shooe, Moses be∣fore he was to hear God speaking put off his shooe, to intimate that you should put off your carnal and earthly affections before you come to hear Gods word; But have not you rush'd out of your worldly employments to many a Sermon? How careless were you to lay apart all filthiness, Jam. 1.21. and superfluity of naughti∣ness, that you might receive with neekness the engrafted word, Eccles. 5.1. which is able to save your Souls? If you have not come without habitu∣al; have you not neglected actual prepara∣tion? When you have been actually under the Ministry, Have not you heard irreverently? In hear∣ing irre∣verently. without awfull apprehensions of Gods Majesty and presence? Have you said of the place where any Minister of Christ hath preached unto you, as Jacob of Bethel, how dreadfull is this place? Have you in your hearing Ser∣mons set your selves in the presence of God, Acts 10.33. as Cornelius did, when Peter was preaching unto
him? The King of Moab will rise up in judgement, to condemn the irreverence of many of our Professours; when Ehud told him, Judg. 3.20. I have a message to the from God: the King arose from his Throne, and bowed himself. Have not you evidenced your irreverence in hearing carelesly, Carlesly. dully, drowsily, sleepi∣ly, &c. Have not you lent a more atten∣tive ear to a Tale, to a Fable, to a Romance, to a Ballad, to a Stage-Play of several hours length, than to a Sermon of an kour? Have not you come to Church, as to an Apothe∣caries Shop, for a recipe to sleep? Hath not the Gospel come unto you in word only, and not in power? When the Minister threatened you from the Lord, could you say, My slesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy righteous judgements? How many months and years did Gods Servants threaten you with a Famine of hearing the Word of the Lord? but did this Judgement fright you, and humble you, whilst it lay in the cloud of the threaning, as the least appearances of an outward Famine have awakened you? When your Ministers came with the tydings of Peace to you, were their feet beautiful? May not your Ministers complain of you, as Christ of the Jewes, John 8.. My Word takes no place in you? So careless have you been of any thing that hath been spoken to you by them, though in the Name of the Lord. When your Ministers declaimed against your sins, did you so mind what they delivered, as to
be any whit troubled? Zech. 7.11, 12. Did you not harden your hearts as an adamant? Were you not so farr from being troubled for your sins, that it was your only trouble, you could not commit them without controul? Were you not even troubled with admonitions and counsels, commands and threatnings, that crost you in your sins? Can you say, Acts 17.11. that you Received the Word with all readiness of mind? Have not you heard heartlesly? Heart∣lesly. without a real sense of your want of the Word, and without an appetite to it? Had you such ve∣hement desires after the treasure your Mini∣sters were bringing you, as covetous men have after the treasures of the Earth? Could you ever, with David, say, Psal. 119.20. My Soul break∣eth for the longing that it hath unto thy judge∣ments at all times? Have not you heard unbelievingly? unbe∣lievingly. Not crediting your Ministers Doctrine, and not applying it to, but shifting it off from your selve? Have not their Sermons been there∣fore unprofitable to your Souls, Heb. 4.2 because not mix'd with Faith? Can you say, that you received their Word, 1 Thes. 2.13. as the Word of God? That you applyed it to your Souls, as that which concern'd you? May not we say, with grief of Soul, as our Lord hath said already, John 5.37. You have not heard his voice at any time? When you heard the Word, which is Gods Word, did you hear God himself speaking his own Word unto your hearts?
Have you not been cautioned by the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his Ministers, with a Take heed how you hear? Luke 18.18. Carpingly And yet how oft have you heard the Ministers of Christ carp∣ingly? Not with a willingness to be judged by the Word, but to judge it, and the Preacher for it? Have not you let slip the most material passages of the Sermon, and pitch'd upon the weaknesses or impertinen∣cies of the Minister? How oft have you, when you could not blame the subject mat∣ter, found fault with the method, and the manner of delivery; and over-look'd that, wherein your Souls were especially con∣cerned? Have not you heard Non-obediently? Non-obe∣diently. Have not you been untractable and unteachable? Have you not heard proudly, and not hum∣bly? With hard hearts, and not with hearts of flesh, ready to receive the impression of the Word, and willing to be moulded and fashioned according to it? When could you say to any of Gods Ministers, as Cornelius to Peter, We are all here present, to hear all that is commanded of God? When wast thou of such an yielding Spirit, Acts 9.6. Job. 34.32. as Saul was of, Lord, What wilt thou have me to do? His ear and heart was open to every command: So was Job's, That which I see not, teach thou me. Have not you had your Exceptions? If Mini∣sters have enjoyn'd you to pray in your Fa∣milies, perhaps you heard them therein; but if they enjoyned from the Lord (the same Legislatour) that you pray in your Closets,
that you examine your selves, that you fill your hands with both the Tables, they could not be heard; one reserve at least: Where∣as the right hearer cries out, Lord, What wilt thou have me to do? I will do any thing, Lord, actively or passively, to get Hill out of my Soul now, and to keep my Soul out of Hell hereafter. After hearing the Embassadours of Heaven, After, Not exa∣mining what they have heard. how faulty have you been? In not examining what you have heard by the written Word? The Bereans consulted with the Oracles of God, brought the Doctrines they heard to the measuring Line of the Sanctuary; but so have not you: They say, a man will tell money after his Father; but you have been too careless, to tell over the Doctrines you have heard. How many were there, to whom the reputation and worth of the Teacher, was sufficient proof of his Do∣ctrine, receiving all that was stamp'd with his tongue? Mat. 23.9. Jude v. 16. Have not you called such and such a Minister, Your Father on Earth, in the same sense in which Christ forbids it? Have not you had the Persons of men in admi∣ration, and that for advantage? No wonder that Errours have abounded. Men, that through an over-esteem of the Minister, take all upon trust, or through sloth will not examine Doctrines, are like to be de∣ceived. May not Christ check you, Not re∣membring it: Mar. 8.18. rather than the Disciples, with, Why do you not remember? Have not you heard the Word, and instantly
forgot it? Hath not the Word gone in at one ear, and out at another? Have not you let slip the Word? Jam. 1.25. The word  is me∣taphorical, taken from a Sieve, or leaking Vessel, when the liquor runs out as fast as it is put in. Heb. 2.1 Have not you hereby been ever learning, but not come to the knowledge of the truth? Your Memories should be like the Ark, wherein the Pot of Mannah was kept; but alas! When you heard the Word, then came the wicked One, Mat. 13.19. and catched away what was sowen in your hearts: and was not the Word, and the labours of Christs Ministers fallen so low, that you were contented, at least little troubled, thus to be pillaged of this heavenly treasure? Have not you neglected Meditation upon the Word you have heard? Not me∣ditating on it. It was one special way, whereby, in time of the Law, the clean Beasts were known from the unclean, chew∣ing the end. Levit. 11.3. Luke 11.25. But how few ruminate upon what they have heard and received? They do not, with Mary, keep the sayings, and pon∣der them in their hearts. Blessed are they, that hear the Word, and keep it. How few retire into their Closets, and reflect on the usefulness of the Word, for the nourishment of their graces, for the destruction of their sins? How few consider, whether they have met with God in the Sermon, yea or no? You should have gathered up the words of Christs Minister, as Christ said of the frag∣ments, so as none should be lost; or as the Gold-smith looks after the very dust of gold:
but as soon as Conscience was quieted, did you ever think more of the Word? How few have gone from the Church to the Closet, Not pray∣ing over it. there to pour out their Souls for a bles∣sing upon what they heard? From the Pulpit to the Trade is bad; but from the Pulpit to the Ale-house, that's abominable: but all are not clear herein. O! If when your sin was discovered, you had gone into your cham∣bers, and begg'd humiliation for it, and vi∣ctory over it: and if when neglected duty was prest in publick, you had retired, and prayed to God to incline your hearts to keep Gods statutes, would it not have been better with you, than now it is? Have not you neglected to talk of what you have heard? Have not some, Not talk∣ing of it. as soon as dis∣miss'd from the Sermon, fallen into imper∣tinent discourses, about news and trifles, or into worldly business; Mat. 13.7, 22. and so the thornes choak'd all the convictions, which they re∣ceived under the Ministry? They consider not, that the Word they have heard, hath been the savour of life, or of death; 2 Cor. 2.16. and that every one that goes from a Sermon, goes off either with God, or the Devil, in his company. Have not you been hearers of the Word only, Not pra∣ctising it. Jam. 1.22. and not doers of it? Have not you so deceived your own selves? Your Ministers have prest you to secret Prayer, and to constancy in it; but have not you gone away, and continued in the neglect of that, wherein the power of godliness, and heart-sincerity mainly con∣sists?
Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, Luke 11.28. and keep it, i. e. that are good Pra∣ctitioners, that have a conscionable care to regulate heart and life according to what they hear and know: They are rather blest, than the Mother of Christ was, for bringing him into the World: Christ puts a rather upon the good Practitioner, than upon the Vir∣gin Mary. But alas! Let it be for a La∣mentation, that so many Professours have been for hearing; but for doing only what they listed: Amos 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sab∣bath, that we may set forth Wheat? Making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and falsifying the Ballances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shooes; yea, and sell the refuse of the Wheat? The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works. Shall not the Land tremble for this, &c? The Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, Mat. 21.43. Luke 12.43. and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof: But Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. When did you find the Glasses to discover and amend your Spots? Have you been cast into the Form of the Doctrine, which ye have received? Have you obeyed from the heart the Form of Doctrine delivered to you? Hath your profiting appear'd answerable to the many months and years you have sate under the Dews of Heaven? What do you know more than you did before? What do you believe,
love and hope for, more than you did? Have your hearts and lusts stooped more and more to this Scepter of Christ? Believe it Sirs, If Sin be not more odious, and Christ more sweet and precious, after you have been in the Shep∣heards Tents, you have lost your hearing hours, yea contracted more guilt to your Souls. That you have not been chang'd from glory to glory, is a great stain to the Ministry, and a great ground of sadness to the poor Ministers, who fear they have laboured in vain. And yet have not you been such unprofitable hearers, that Seekers, Ranters, and Quakers, have took occasion to cry down the Office of the Ministry, as a Cheat, as an old Almanack out of date; because they have seen how un∣successful the labours of Christs Ministers have been upon your Souls? If you had come down from these Mounts with your faces shining, if you had received more of God upon your hearts and lives, you had more credited the Ministry, and put to silence these foolish men. What shall I say? A worse Famine is coming on Professours, than what happened to Egypt, and if you have laid up no store, what will ye do in the years of lean Kine? 7. Have not you greatly miscarried, Their miscarria∣ges, as to consulting with their Ministers. Mat. 16.19. as to consulting with them? Though one great work of your Ministers was, to deal person∣ally with your Souls; and God intrusted them with the power of binding and loosing, (doctrinally at least) and hath promised to loose in Heaven, what they loosed on Earth;
and to confirm the Word of his Servants, Isa. 44.26. and perform the Counsel of his Messengers; yet how little weight have you laid upon their judgements? Have not you more credited the Physicians opinion of your Bodies, Laying little weight on their Judge∣ments. Not con∣sulting with them at all. and the Lawyers a∣bout your Estates, than you have your Mi∣nisters concerning your Souls? How seldome are Ministers consulted with about the business of the Soul and Eternity? Will not they in the Acts rise up to condemn this Generation? They repaired to Christs Ministers, with, Men and Brethren, What shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.37. But alas! How many have sate 30, 40, 50. Years under a Mi∣nister, and never advised with him what to do? They have been no more moved, Through hard. Hearted∣ness. Bride. than the Rocks were, that Bede preached to. Or else, through the Pride of their hearts, they have thought to heal themselves: They have been so puff'd up with their own know∣ledge, that they have not cared to hear what their Ministers could declare unto them. If they be to take a Journey, they will ask the Way of every one they meet; but so un∣reasonably consident are they of their know∣ing the Way to Glory, (though there be many Wayes, Prov. 14.12. that do indeed lead down to Hell, yet seem the right Way to Heaven) that they will not so much as ask the Way thither-ward of any Guide. Prov. 26.16. The Fool is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men thas can render a reason.
Or else they have thought as well of their Souls as some doe of their flesh, Thinking the wound will heal of it self. that the wound will heal of it self. And hath it not so done? no body knows, how? Can you tell how the troubles and impressions made by the Ministry in your own Souls have worn away? have not Ministers sound after the House hath been swept and garnished, that seven worse Spirits have entred into the Souls of many convinced, and terrified Professors, and their latter end was worse than their begin∣ning? Many (saith famous Hooker) in a stu∣pid kind of sottish senselessness, wear out the blow, and so wast away to nothing: as many out of sorrow have become like sense∣less blocks. How oft hath Satan, like a Cut-purse, drawn thee into solitudes, disswaded thee from going near thy Minister, that he may rob thee of thy Convictions? and the better to effect this, hath he not perswaded thee to look on the Minister as proud, high, scorn∣ing to condescend to hear thy Soul grievan∣ces, and complaints, whereas he hath many and many a time with the greatest importu∣nity beg'd this trouble of dressing thy sores? If you have consulted with your Ministers, Not con∣sulting with them soon e∣nough. Acts 24.25. have not you delayed going to these Soul-Physi∣cians? When the wound was newly given, and bleeding, you should have repaired to them; but like Faelix, you have dismist your convictions to some other opportunity. How hath Satan befool'd many? perswading them that there needs not so much adoe, that the
Minister is too legal, that he will drive to despair, that (as Ahab thought of Michai∣ah) he will not speak one comfortable word, or that he will blazon the secrets of their souls, and so they shall get a blot by unbo∣soming themselves. 8. Their low and base ends in visiting them. Have not you had low ends in visiting them? yea, not only low, but base in going to your Shepheards Tents? Perhaps they are full of History, and you would enrich your selves with the knowledge of the times of many generations past: perhaps they were merry, (too merry God knows, too full of squibs and jests, the Lord forgive the unseri∣ousness of Ministers) and you have delighted in them, as Saul did in Davids Harp, to drive away sadness and melancholy: or per∣haps your Ministers had quick, nimble parts, and you went to them to pick a Sallet from their Gardens, to pick some flowers of O∣ratory, or to please your fancies, or to spend away time; but how seldom to receive virtue from Jesus Christ through these pipes? how seldom to have your rockie hearts brok∣en, and to be cured of your earthly Spi∣rits? 9. In invit∣ing them to their houses. How oft have you invited them to your houses only to feast them, and to shew outwardly your respect unto them? but have not put the opportunitie to such uses, as Mary did Christs coming to her house? how light, vain, unserious, and jesting have you been in their companie? It had been more your wisdom, as well as dutie, to have propo∣sed
some necessary Queries to them with re∣spect to your eternity: you should have drawn out their gifts and graces by proposing such Questions as these. How Sir shall I know the difference be∣tween the assisting, Questions to be ask'd Mi∣nisters, and the informing and inhabiting presence of the Spirit? How shall I discern the Spirit of bondage, from that bondage Sathan works in the Children of disobedience? How shall I know the diffe∣rence betwixt temporary and saving Faith? 'twixt legal and evangelical Repentance? How shall I know moral Vertues from Graces? How shall I know that I am gone beyond the utmost refinements of Hypo∣crites? How shall I know whether the Gospel hath had a saving efficacy on mine heart? How shall I know Satan's tempta∣tions, from the suggestions of mine own heart? How shall I know when Satan, and when the Spirit applyes Promises? How shall I discern the motions of the Holy Ghost, from the impulses of Satan, when transforming himself into an Angel of light? How shall I know the teachings of the Spi∣rit, from the teachings of Men? How shall I distinguish Fancy from Faith? How shall I know, whether I have only dreamed, that I am full, when all the while I have been empty? How shall I know the Devils black temptations, from mine own cor∣ruptions, that I may know whom to charge? How shall I get assurance that my Sins are pardoned? How may I obtain
victory over the World? How may I be delivered from spiritual sloth? What shall I do, that I may retain the influences of Or∣dinances upon my Spirit? How may I be more usefull to all my Relations? How may I bridle my tongue, so as to speak evil of no man? How shall I know what is the work of my Generation? How shall I do to work the works of God? What shall I do to get a trembling heart under the Word and Works of God? How shall I get a soft heart, to mourn for my own and others Sins? How shall I know what is my constitution sinne? How shall I know whether my courage be from natural temper, or the grace of God? How shall I know whether my Patience be natural or spiritual? How shall I know, that I shall spend an eternity with God? Such Questions as these should have been seriously debated with your Ministers; but woe and alas! When you and your Ministers have spent hours together, have not you contracted guilt, and made your selves un∣fit for secret duties, nay perhaps have not time for the discharge of them? 10. Their wasting Ministers time. How have you devoured much precious time in the presence of your Ministers? Both your own, (which is short enough, therein to make your calling and election sure) and (which is a much more hainous evil) your Mi∣nisters time? Have not you diverted him from his great meditations and projects for the everlasting good of your Souls? Have not you called your Ministers from their knees
and studies to entertain you? and have not you proved Wells without water? Have not you by needless vain conferences obstructed your own good, and hindred your Ministers from being usefull to your own, and many more Souls. 11. Being swift to speak be∣fore, and slow to hear their Mi∣nisters. When you have met with your Mi∣nisters, have not you been swift to speak (when to little purpose) and slow to hear, what your Minister, Gods Deputie, would have said unto you? whereas God requireth you to be swift to hear, and stow to speak. I have wondred to see the impudence of some wo∣men herein, who (as if none had tasted of the tree of knowledge, save themselves) have been like bellies full of wind, ready to burst till they had vent, and had no respect to the presence of their Minister, who could not be heard, because of their noise and clamour, though the Apostle hath sealed up their lips, by sending them to ask questions of their Husbands at home; yet they must be pratling, 1 Cor. 14.35. as if they had a Monopolie of all knowledge, and as if their MInisters were to learn of them, rather than they of their Ministers. I am confident it is not the Spirit of God; but the Spirit of Pride, Self-conceit, and vain Glory, which putteth private persons upon these bold intrusions: so that the Minister, who is the mouth of God, 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. Prov. 10.19. is made dumb by their overmuch speaking, who should learn in silence. What shall I say? hear not me, but the wisest of men, yea the only wise God in him: In the multitude of words there want∣eth
sin; but he that refraineth his lips is wise. Believe it, there hath been wanting in most Professours much humility, much ousness, much reverence of their Mini∣sters: you have not had that fear and awe which because you: 1 Sam. 16.4. few have trembled at their approach to their Ministers, as the peo∣ple did, when Samuel drew near. 12. Their niggard∣liness to them. Your Niggardliness to your Ministers is none of the least of your sins; and therefore I shall take liberty to enlarge upon it. If mens titles to their Cottages, their water∣courses; their wayes, their easements be que∣stioned, presently a Lawyer is see'd: we will be at any cost to settle the world surely ours: if our health be in danger, the Physician is sent for: both Lawyers and Physicians hou∣ses and rooms are full of Clyents and Atten∣dants; but men are contented to clear up their own titles to Heaven and glory, and to heal themselves of their sin sicknesses: a plain argument, that they thought the Mi∣nistry but useless, and that they could make a shift to live without Ministers. Thou hast had Prescriptions for thy Souls recovery and health for these many years, and yet perhaps hast not given one farthing to thy Soul-Physi∣cians. If a Physician write a few lines, pur∣ses are opened: if a Lawyer plead a quarter of an hour, yea if he plead not at all, but on∣ly give his advise, you think he deserves a fee; but the Ministers work is so low in thy esteems, that he might have starved if all were as niggardly as thou hast been. Let this
be considered and lamented. Your Mini∣sters have been under a temptation to with∣hold the pressing of this duty upon you; for that many lay in wait to discredit them, as if they preached for nire, and sought yours, ra∣ther than you? but let me be your Remem∣brancer this day. We cannot say of you, as Paul of the Galathians, that you received us as Angels of God, yea as Jesus Christ, and that you would have pluckt out your eyes for us: Alas! what did you for us more, than the con∣straints o the Law compell'd you to? And how many wishes had you, that all the Laws for Tithes had been abrogated, upon pretence that Ministers should have had a better main∣tenance by a voluntary contribution? But do not we know that the great stick∣lers for this have been most close-fisted to the Ministers? Giving nothing to them for their mainte∣nance. Have not some of them refused to give one penny to the Ministers, whom they waited on for years together? I wonder how you could in your reading the Scrip∣tures (if you have indeed read them) so long overlook, 1 Cor. 9.7. who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a Vineyard and eateth not the fruit thereof? or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? v. 8. or saith not the Law the same also? v. 9. For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shalt not muzle the mouth of the Oxe, that treadeth out the Corn. Doth God take eare for Oxen? Or saith he it alto∣gether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt, v. 10. this is written; that he that ploweth should plow
in hope: and that he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. v. 11. If we have sowen unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? v. 12. If o∣thers be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power: but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. v. 13. Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Al∣tar? v. 14. Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. That you may be the better con∣vinced of the neglect of your duty, see the Apostle claimes it as his , his Power, his Right, and lawful Authority, to receive maintenance from the Corinthians: And in∣deed Christ hath impowered his Ministers, and they may demand it, without any just imputation of covetousness and self-seeking, as the Labourer may his hire. The Apostle had power to forbear working, i. e. at his Trade: He implyes, that the Ministry would be the saddest employment, because of the laboriousness of it, if Ministers should not live of their Ministry: Be sides, Ministers give people gold for brass: Again, They who ministred about the holy things, lived of the things of the Temple, yea and plenti∣fully too; for they had the Tenth, and yet were scarce the Sixtieth part of the People; for the number of the People, without the Levites, amounted to a thousand thousands
and three hundred thousands: and the Le∣vites, numbred from the Infant to the old man, were found but two and tweenty thou∣sands. But alas! Though the Apostle be so peremptory here and else-where, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things: And the Wise-man, Prov. 3.9. Honour the Lord with thy sub∣stance, and with the first-fruits of all thy in∣crease; Yet I may renew an old complaint: Many have dealt by their Ministers, as Car∣riers do by their Horses, they lay heavy bur∣dens upon them, and then hang Bells about their necks: hard work, and good words they shall have; but easie commons, and slight wages: as if they were of the Camelion-kind, and could live by the air. But if you have parted with any thing to the Minister, hath it not been as Almes, Or else giving only in charity, not in justice: as an almes, not as due. not as Dues, not as Right? Have not you excused your selves from giving what was due from you, with, The Minister needs it not, He hath a fair Estate, or at least a com∣petency? Yea, but what saith the Apostle? Have ye not reaped our spiritual things? and should not we your carnals? Have ye not been instructed? Why then did ye not communicate to your Ministers in all good things? Hath not the Lord expresly alienated a proportion of Goods for the Ministers labour? How dare you live in the Sin of Sacrilege? Is it not Sacrilege for you to detain from God what is due to him? You are in the snare; Prov. 20.25. for you have devoured that which is holy. Suppose a man
should work for thee all the day long, would it be an excuse for thy detaining his dues from him, to say, The man hath a compe∣tency, yea he is rich, he is richer than I am, my Children want it more than he doth, he hath little or no charge? O! saith the Lord, The Labourer is worthy of his hire. Wouldst thou not say so in that mans case? O! Live up to the Light of Nature, or throw up thy Profession. It is no less than a wonder to see how little honesty there is among men, yea among Professours. To defraud a Mini∣ster is hardly counted a sin. The rise of this is the great contempt of the Ministry: A Sin that God is now reckoning with you for. The Lord God of your Fathers sent to you by his Messengers, 2 Chron. 36.15, 16, 17. rising up betimes and send∣ing; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place; but you mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets: May it not be ad∣ded? Untill the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. For this Sin, God brought upon the Israelites the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maid∣en, old man, or him that stooped for age, he gave them all into his hand. Have not you cause to fear, lest you shall also be so given into the hands of worse Babylonians? You can judge what is a Ministers competency; but when have ye a competency? You can add field to field, house to house, hundreds
to hundreds, and yet the Horse-leach cries Give, Give: Yet do not you judge a small stipend, that will hardly keep body and soul together, a competency for a Minister? What is that great service you do for God a∣bove the Minister, that you should think it reasonable, to leave hundreds, yea thou∣sands to your Children, and that the Mini∣ster should be kept so short, that he cannot leave them a groat? What shall I say to you? Let me borrow the words of God by the Prophet: Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8, 9, 10. Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have we rob∣bed thee? In Tythes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, Bring ye all the Tythes into the Store-house, that there may be meet in mine house, and prove me now here∣with, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. O! Restituti∣on to be made by such, as have not given what was due from them to their Mi∣nisters, Do not any longer detain what is due to your former Ministers: make restitution of unjust gain, as ever you hope to be saved. It is not enough to say, Lord, forgive me, I thought it not my duty; but thou must reckon how many years thou hast reaped Spi∣rituals, and pay what thou owest, or Judas will condemn thee, for he thought it unsafe to keep what was unjustly got. Remember Zacheus, he thought it not enough to give over his oppression, but, when converted, he made conscience of making restitution.
Let the Elders that rule well, 1 Tim. 5.17, 18. be counted wor∣thy of double honour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine: For the Scripture saith, thou shalt not muzzle the Oxe, that treadeth out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his reward. Here you see double honour, honour of reverence, and honour of maintenance, was due unto your Ministers: Here is an allusion to the right of the first∣born, who were to have a double portion: Their maintenace was due from you; neither should their maintenance have been ordinary mercenary wages, but such as is given by way of honour, as well as by way of reward. Have not you lived in the contempt of an Ordinance of God? 1 Cor. 9.14. The Lord hath ordain∣ed, &c. as before. Do not any longer de∣lude your Consciences, by crying against Tythes, as Antichristian, as Jewish. Did not Abraham, before the Jewish Laws, pay Tythes to Melchisedech? And are there not from thence arguments drawn that you can∣not answer? Why do ye not fear, lest, through the prevalency of Self, you should be too base, covetous and partial in your own matters? O! Give to God, what is Gods: Deny not your Ministers their dues: You owe vaste summs to them, which if you detain in this day of their wants, God will call you to a speedy account for the grinding of the faces of these poor, yea he will make you vomit up such sweet morsels, with all the rest of your substance, Jam. 5.4. if not with your blood. Behold the hire of the Labourers,
which have reaped down your Fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crreth: and the cryes of them, which have reaped, are entred into the eares of the Lord of Sabbath. Lydia even enforced the Apostles to accept of her gift. The Macedonians beseech'd Paul with much entreaty, to accept of their bounty. If thou wert converted by one of them, thou didst owe to him no less than thy self: What thou art and hast, should not have been counted too dear for him, who was Gods Instrument, to pull thee as a brand out of the fire, even when thou wast half burnt. Say at length with David, I will not serve my God with that which cost me nothing. I shall conclude this head with the saying of a Re∣verend man, It is a plain argument of a base esteem of God, of Grace, of the Kingdome of Heaven, that a Servant, a Factour, should have twenty times the alloance of Heavens Factour for your Souls: You are not come up to the ho∣nesty of the Pharisee, Mat. 23.23. He gave Tythes of all that he possessed, even of the smallest things, of Mint, and Annis, and Cummin: Luke 11.42. And doth not Christ say, These things ye ought to have done? What were your Ministers more unworthy than the Priests of that Age? Their re∣gardless∣ness of the Wid∣dons and Children of their dead Mi∣nisters. 13. If you have not been niggardly to∣ward your Ministers whilst alive with you, have not you been niggardly towards their Wives and Children after their deaths? Veri∣ly not minding the Widows and Children of
deceased Ministers is a sin that God will re∣member in the day of accounts. David en∣quired after the seed of Jonathan: he evi∣denced his true love to the Father in remem∣bring the posterity. O! when shall love be without dissimulation? 14. Their grieving their Mi∣nisters. Have not you been a very great trouble to their Souls? Your Ministers were so affe∣ctionately desirous of you, that they were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel only; but also their own Souls; be∣cause ye were dear unto them: And is this your kindness to your Friends? to break e∣ven their hearts, who were glad to spend and be spent for you? How proudly have you carried it toward them? God threatned the Israelites that the Cananites should be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides: Surely it better became Cananites to be thorns to the Israelites, than for you to be thorns to your Ministers. How oft have you grieved them to see your stoutness; and re∣bellion against all their Counsels! May not your Ministers say as David, Psal. 119.158. I beheld the Transgressours, and was grieved: because they kept not thy Word? May they not say, We have seen your lukewarmness, your sloth, your earthliness, &c. and our Souls were troubled? You should have been like the Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 5.19. the crown of our rejoycing; but you have been crowns of thorns, which have pierced not our heads, but hearts: You should have refreshed our Bowels, been as Cordials, and sweet refrectives, after all
our wearisome labours; but have not you dealt unkindly with us? and the more we have loved you, have not we had the less love from you? Have not you be more merciful to your Horses and Dogs than to your Ministers? You have baited, and been kind to those creatures; but God knows how, after all our toyle, our rising up early, and sitting up late, our spending our strength, our lungs, our spirits, yea and our estates among you, you have requited us evil for good, even to the spoyling of our Souls. Acts 7.51, 52. Ye stiffe-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do al∣wayes resist the Holy-Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? &c. Have not you in your hypocrisie made outcries against o∣thers for silencing your Ministers? for taking away the bread out of yours and your Chil∣drens mouths? and for removing them from their stations and dwellings? But may not I profess in the name of all my Fellow-Suffe∣rers, that your misimprovements, your in∣constancies, your pride, and earthliness, have been, and are our chiefest burdens? a greater pressure to us, than any burdens, that lye up∣on our names, bodies, or estates? I cannot but think of a passage of holy Mr. Shepheard: The Jews (saith he) did long for Christ, and when he came, they Crucified him: and you would have Ministers, and you had them, and though you did not (immediately) cast them out of their places; yet you so wearied their Spirits, and grieved the Spirit in them, that
you made them glad to bury themselves, and leave their places: you had Prophets and their tes and their sorrows too, yea and their bld too, and O! what a light matter was it tes you to break their very hearts? How little did you obey them that ruled over you, Hebr. 13.17. and submitted your selves, that they might give their account with joy, and not with grief? How little did you believe, that that is un∣profitable for you? Have not you made nothing of it, for your Ministers to lose their labour, to put them upon crying out, I have laboured in vain? Isa. 49.45. Yea how have you grieved their ve∣ry Souls with reproaches? Some who have pretended affection to them, yet have had their reproachfull Names of Priest, Parson, Vicar, &c. Though God hath put a Crown of honour upon them, by making them his Ambassadours; yet how have some impu∣dent Professours blasted them with their stinking breath, and prosane scoffs? Ambas∣sadours are inviolable by the Laws of Nati∣ons. The Lord (saith one) hath set a bet∣ter mark on them, than Cain had, and given them a better pasport: touch not mine anoin∣ted, and do my Prophets no harm: yet you have made a light matter of vexing their very Souls. When you could have nothing else against your Minister, have not you been censuring him for his manner of speaking? 2 Cor. 10.10. His Letters (say they) are weighty and powerfull, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech con∣temptible.
Lastly, And be∣ing weary of them. Have not your Ministers been so troublesome to you in your sins, in your forma∣lity, worldliness, lukewarmness, &c. that you were even weary of them? Have not you been as weary of them, as the Children of Israel of Angels food? as weary as weak so∣machs are of feeding on one dish? Your Mi∣nisters urged flesh-displeasing and self-deny∣ing duties: they would not suffer you to sin quietly; and were not you therefore bur∣thened with them? they would not stand and comply with your carnal ends and sinfull interests; and did not your hearts therefore cry out away with them? Have not you been like the Gadarenes, more willing to part with your Ministers, than with your swinish lusts? Rom. 1.28. Because you did not like to retain God in your knowledge, 'tis no wonder if God give up many of you to a reprobate mind. Hath not the Gospel been too costly, too chargeable to some of you? and too irksome, requiring too much pains taking, to others of you? O! when you Remember your cry∣ing iniquities, for which God is chiefly con∣tending with you, forget not this dreadfull sinne of being weary of Gods Ambassadours, of being weary of speaking with God, and of hearing God speak unto your Souls.
CHAP. XXXIII. Their misearriages with reference to the Ministers of Christ, Profes∣sours mis∣carriages toward their Mi∣nisters since their removal. Not find∣ing the want of them. Not esteeming the loss great e∣nough. since their removal. 1. H How many of you do not find them wan∣ting? This will be evident by the following Queries. Have you indeed accounted that none in the world want help like your selves upon this very account? Do you look upon your selves as litting in darkness, yea in the region and sha∣dow of death? under a worse Plague than the Egyptian-darkness? that was a darkness, wherein men lived; but do you look on this as a darkness of death? Do you account a Throne without the Gospel but the Devils Dungeon? Wealth without the Gospel, fuell for Hell? Advancement without the Gospel, but a going high, to have the greater fall? Do you look upon your selves as under a worse famine than that of bread? Cannot you your selves make up this great loss? cannot you set other things in the breach? Do not some of you set good books in the room of your Ministers? Going about to make it up, by good books. I confess (saith a Reverend Man) Reading hath its use; but the voice hath a secret force upon the Soul, it hath a Ministerial efficacy, by which the Authority
and Soveraign efficacy of the Spirit is convey∣ed. I pray God the fruitfullness of the Press may not beget a dis-esteem and contempt of the great Ordinance of the Minister already: you have been told already that Luther had rather his books should be burnt, than the Scriptures suffer a dishonour and neglect by perusing his papers. Do not some of you set your own parts and gifts in their room? Their own parts and gifts. Do not some of you think that you have so profited by their Mi∣nistry, that you have no further need to at∣tend upon any Ministers of Christ? May not such doubt whether their experience of the power and efficacy of the Ministry hath been true, seeing true experience thereof sweet∣neth the Ministry unto Souls, raiseth up their esteems of it, and engageth them to a further and more chearfull attendance upon it. A true tast will sharpen the Souls appetite: the true Christian gets a Stomach by eating, as the new born babe by sucking. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby, if so be that ye have found that the Lord is gracious. Do not some of you go about to make up your selves by attending on Christ's compani∣ons in the sense of Solomon? And Christ's compani∣ons. Cant. 1.7. by going to Wells without water? by sucking empty breasts, whence you can draw nothing, but wind or blood? what is this but seeking the living a∣mong the dead? expecting gracious showers from Clouds without rain? making up the want of bread with stones, if not poyson? O!
why do not you say, Tell me, O thou whom my Soul loveth, where thou feedest, where thou makest thy Flocks to rest at Noon? for why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions? What sighs, Not mourning enough for the want of them. sorrows, tears, &c. hath the re∣moval of your Ministers cost you? Cannot you rub it out very quietly? If you lose your Jewels, Estates, Names, Friends, Children, &c. we can read the sorrows of your hearts in your countenances: you are almost angry with God when a goard is smitten. O! what sinkings of heart are there among Profes∣sours? what cares? fears? griefs? not only to the sadning of their hearts, but altering of their countenances, when the world vanish∣eth? And yet no aking hearts, no dejected countenances for the glory's departing, for Gods shutting up house and departure? I am confident it hath not broke one nights rest to many, who yet will think themselves wronged, if they be not placed in the highest form of Profession. What time hast thou set apart to humble thy Soul for all thy abuses of the Gospel and Mi∣nistry thereof? Not Fast∣ing under this Judg∣ment. If a Child be sick, time must be set apart to humble thee before God: this is your duty; but the other should not have been neglected. Thou may'st subsist better without Children, than without these Spiri∣tual Fathers: a Gospel Ministry is a greater Jewell, than many Sons and Daughters. Thy having sinned away the food of thy Soul should have put thee in Sackcloth, and upon
Fasting with mourning long ago. All Israel lamented after the Ark; But are not you as merry and sensual at your tables as ever? Yea are not you secretly glad at the removal of your Ministers? yea se∣cretly be∣ing glad for their removal. Ministers and Ministry (saith Shepheard) are bills of charges to a Congregation, and too costly Inhabitants a∣mong them. 2. Not justi∣fying God in their removal. Have you justified God in the removal of them? God as a wise and provident Master gave you glorious lights to do his work by; but you have plaid away your time: is it any wonder that he hath put out your Tapers and Candles? Have you confest the righteous∣ness of God herein, that he will not be at cost to find you Candle light to play by? Hath this been thy hearts acknowledgment, God gave me these lights, that I might work for him by them; and because I did not, but wrought the works of darkness; there∣fore he hath most justly left me in dark∣ness, and in the shadows of death: 2 Thes. 2.10, 11 be∣cause I received not the truth in the love thereof: I took it into mine head, but not into mine heart; God may justly send me strong delusions, that I should believe a lye. Vide Pareu in Act. 5.36. It is the observation of Pareus upon many of the Jews being seduced, that it was just with God, that they should believe im∣postours; because they would not give credit to Jesus Christ. O! God may make short work with us in his Judiciary pro∣ceedings. When God hath departed upon repulse, he hath left a dismall curse be∣hind
hind him: I say unto you that none of these men, which were bidden shall tast of my Sup∣per: If the meat be on the table; yet it is just with God that I shall never tast of it; for I have controuled the Spirit again and again: twenty, thirty, fourty years have I vexed the good Spirit of the Lord; and therefore he may swear in his wrath that I shall never enter into his rest: If some shall never tast that have neglected one Call, woe is me, who have neglected thousands. Take words and say; because I have not obeyed the voice of thy Ser∣vants, Job. 36.12. 'tis righteous that I perish by the Sword, and dye without knowledge. 3. Not bles∣sing God for for∣mer op∣portuni∣tles. How little have you blest, and do you bless God, that once you did enjoy a Gospel Mi∣nistry? and such a Gospel Ministry? How sel∣dome are such words as these, Blessed be they, and blessed be their Counsels, and blessed be the Lord, that sent them out to meet me in for∣mer dayes, and for so many dayes, months, and years together, found in your mouths? It is a sign that your disesteems of the Gospel and Ministry do still abide, whilst you cannot find in your hearts to thank God for enjoy∣ing so choice a blessing for so many years to∣gether. 4. Not cry∣ing for their re∣turn. What cries have you sent up to Heaven for the return of your Ministers? Dare you thus imprecate, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I forget to pray for Zions welfare in this particular? Had the Ministry of the Gospel been counted a glori∣ous
blessing, you would have sent strong cryes to Heaven, for the return of it: Had you believed, that they came to treat with your Souls, about your peace with God, and that God hath appointed this as the great means to bring your Souls to himself, you would not have parted with your Ministers so easily, being as little moved, as at the withering, and throwing to the dunghill, of a formerly flourishing Nose gay of Flowers; and you would have wrestled with the Lord, for the return of these glorious Lights of Heaven. How can you chuse but feat, the Lord hath no more Souls to convert in that place, from which the Gospel is re∣moved? Jesus Christ prayed, Isa. 49.8. com∣pared with 2 Cor. 6.2. that the Gos∣pel might be sent to the Gentiles: In an ac∣ceptable time have I heard thee. O! How should you have prayed for the fruit of Christs prayer? Have you back'd prayer with prayer? Have you doubled your Prayers for the return of your Fathers? Have they not begotten you? Judg. 9.17. Should they not be unto you as Fathers? Will not Idolatrous Micah else condemn you? 5. Not pre∣paring for such a mercy. How little do you set your selves in a po∣sture for the return of the Gospel and the Mi∣nisters of it? Until you have humbled your Souls as low as the dust for your unprofita∣bleness, pride, sensuality, earthliness, dis-esteems, and neglects of the Gospel, for your abuse of the talents of Gold, that you hid or wasted, can you imagine that God will intrust you with more talents? A∣las!
few put themselves in a readiness: few prepare to meet God, as formerly they have met him in the solemn Assemblies. Verily, God is gone and returned unto his place, Hos. 5.13. till you acknowledge your offences (your Gospel-sins) and seek his face. But if ye seek him not early, how can ye hope for the bringing back the Captivity? that the glory and strength will return? 6 Being niggardly even now toward them. How little do ye now lay out for the re∣freshing and feeding of your poor Ministers, now that their necessities are so growing? you cannot now excuse your niggardliness with this, they have a competency: Alas! most of them, and their many little ones are in great straights and exigencies, and what, still straightned in your bowels? Is not the Proverb made good, Out of sight out of mind? If all were as unmercifull as some of you, they and their Children would swoon away in desolate Wildernesses. Remember Ha∣gar and the Child: Did God pity that Egyp∣tian? and have you no pity on your poor Ministers? Are not you so far from the Ma∣cedonian bounty, 2 Cor. 8.3. of giving above your pow∣er, that you will not afford them your su∣perfluities? Who is there that redeems from his table, from his belly, from his cloaths, to cover these naked shoulders, and to fill these empty bellies? Doth not Baruck's sore run upon you, you trade for your selves, seek great things for your selves, and send a∣way your spiritual Fathers, with, I pray God bless you, &c. be ye cloathed, &c.
but do not give according to their necessities, and your abilities. O! Jam. 2.15, 16, 17. How dwelleth the love of God in you? Boast what you will of your Profession and Faith, your Faith with∣out Works is but dead. CHAP. XXXIV. Want of Love among Professours. AS touching brotherly love (saith the Apo∣stle Paul to the Thessalonians) you need not that I write unto you; A com∣plaint of the want of love a∣mong Christi∣ans. 1 Thes. 4.10. for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another, and indeed you do it: But may not I say to English Pro∣fessours, As touching brotherly love, you need that I write unto you, for you are not taught of God? The fire of brotherly love (saith one) is almost ready to goe out, scarce a∣ny spark of it yet remaining among us; but instead of the fire of love, the wild-fire of passion rageth vehemently, and is predo∣minant. Many live as if they had been born on the Mountains of Bether, the Mountains of Division; and as if they had been baptized in the Waters of Meribah, the Waters of Strife. Oh! that my head were waters, and mine eyes fountains of tears,  weep day and night for the want of love in
the Christians of this generation towards one another. How common hath it been, to confine our love to our own party? We have not loved all the Saints. Col. 1.14. How few Bucers are there? How few love all in quibus aliquid Christi vident, in whom they see any thing of Christ? Many even hate those that differ from them, though but in Circumstantialls: Others, though they are ashamed to profess their hatred upon such an account, Prov. 26.26. yet cover their hatred by deceit, till their wickedness can be hid no longer, but shew'd before the whole Congregation. The Devil began his Leger∣demain this way, by covering his Enmity with pretence of Friendship. What saith the Apostle? Let love be without dissimlati∣on: Rom. 12.9. Psal. 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.22. 1 John 3.18. But alas! With a double heart how do Professours speak? How few have turified their Souls in obeying the truth through the Spi∣rit, unto unfeigned love of the Brethren? Most love in word and in tougue only, but not in deed and in truth. Many, like your Fea∣ther caps humble Servant, pretend love; but it never appears above-board: it is Dear Friend, Good Soul; but their hearts are not with you. Eviden∣ced in calling for Fire from Heaven against those of different perswasi∣ons, In order to the convincing of us of our guiltiness herein, O that our Con∣sciences may be suffered to give in full an∣swers to the following Queries! 1. How have we call'd for Fire from Hea∣ven, (like the two Disciples) when we have thought our selves dishonoured, in that others have not given such a reception to our wayes and practises in Religion, as we expected? Have
not Magistrates been instigated against godly persons, if of a different perswasion from our selves? Have not we wished others, that divided from us in some Circumstances of Worship, even banished? Have we not cryed out, the Land is not able to bear them? Have not we been glad, when such were put out of all Offices and Places of Profit? And have not some thought it good service to God, if they had been kill'd? Whilst some, under colour of mercy and tenderness, oryed for a general Toleration, even of blasphemy: Others ran into the other extream, and would endure nothing, that they deemed an Errour. Even to this day, if men scruple at the lawfulness of some Ceremonies and Ge∣stures in the Service of God, they are thought worthy, not only to be cast out of the Church; but to be delivered over to the Secular Magistrate, for Imprisonment, and Confiscation of Goods at least: So much is Pauls meekness forgotten and un-imitated, who (though zealous against the Faith-de∣stroying Errours of Hymeneus and Philetus, yet) would have much forbearance for o∣thers, when doubting of the use of Meats, and the Jewish Ceremonies. Baxters Saints Rest E∣dit. 8. part 1. chap. 7. p. 111. I read in∣deed in Pagan Writers (saith one) that Christians were as cruel as Bears and Tygers against one another, &c. But I had hoped that this accusation had come from the ma∣lice of Pagan Writers: Little did I think to have seen it so farr verified, &c. Lord, What Devils are we Unsanctified, when
there is yet such a Nature remaining in the Sanctified? Such a Nature hath God in these dayes suffered to discover it self, e∣ven in the Godly, that, if he did not gra∣ciously and powerfully restrain, they would shed the blood of one another, and no thanks to us, that it is not done. 2. un-Saint∣ing of them up∣on that account. Hilder∣sham on Psa. 51. P. 691. To facilitate the destroying of such without remorse, Have not we blotted out the reputation of their holiness, and represented Saints even as Devils? It is utterly a fault mong you, (said one of our English Wor∣thies formerly) that the difference in judgement and practice about the Cere∣monies of our Church, hath caused such strangeness, and alienation of mind and affection, between such as do truly fear God, both Ministers and People; We are so farr from receiving, esteeming, loving and maintaining society one with another, notwithstanding this difference of judge∣ment about these things, that we are apt to despise and judge one another for it, and doubt whether there be any truth of grace in them, that differ from us in these things. Surely, (saith the one side) the indiffer∣ency and lawfulness of these things, is now so clearly manifested, as these men must needs be willfully blind, that do not see it: Nay, certainly they cannot chuse but see it well enough, and were it not for a car∣nal respect to their credit with the people, among whom they have gotten a great Name and Applause, by standing out so
long, they would doubtless conform them∣selves, And surely (saith the other side) the utter unlawfulness of these Ceremo∣nies is now so clearly revealed, that these men must needs be wilfully blind, that see it not. Nay, they do see it well e∣nough, and were it not for a carnal re∣spect they have unto their worldly peace, and estate, they would never use them; certainly they sin against their Conscience in observing of them: And what truth of grace can there be in them, that are will∣fully blind? and for carnal respects doe thus sin against their own Conscience? Thus do both sides grosly and dangerously erre, and sin against their Brethren: 1 Cor. 8.12. And when ye sin so against the Brethren, ye sin a∣gainst Christ. For the experience of all times, and of this present age, proveth evidently, that there be of both sides, that fear God unfeignedly, and in the whole tenour and course of whose conversation, the life and power of true godliness doth manifestly appear. And if thou do not see this (who-ever thou art, that art most bitter and violent of either side) then art thou certainly thy self most willfully blind. And I do assure thee (in the Name of the Lord, and by good warrant out of his Word) that if thou canst not unfeignedly love every one that truly feareth the Lord (whether he conform, or not conform) If thou canst not bewail and strive against these hard conceits thou hast been wont to
entertain against such, thou canst have no comfort at all in thine own estate before God. Thus far he that was in his time Englands best Preacher. And is the matter any whit amended now? O! How have Professors spoken all manner of evil against those that have differ'd from them in circumstances? Have not they publikely railed one at ano∣ther? What filthy Names have they given one another? Schismaticks, Rebels, Divi∣ders, Peace-breakers, enemies to the State, &c. even as bid as the Heathens gave the Christians? Have not we been so eager a∣gainst such, that all the peoples time hath been swallowed up in invectives of one par∣ty against another? Have not we been cool∣ed and blunted, and lost our zeal in matters of greatest moment, by letting out our zeal against the supposed errours of our Bre∣thren? 3. Back∣biting them. Levit. 19.16. Deutr. 27.24. Rom. 1.29, 30. Prov. 10.12. If we have not been guilty of Un-saint∣ing them; yet how little have we heeded the commands of God against back-biting? Thou shalt not go up and down, as a Tale-bearer a∣mong the people. Cursed be he that smiteth his Neighbour secretly. When the Apostle would set forth the great abominations of the Gen∣tiles, he saith, they were whisperers and back-biters. Were there love, it would cover all sins. Whom we love, we are wont to commend and praise; but instead of this, how do we speak against those that differ from us, behind their backs, though we speak fair
to their faces? O abominable Hypocrisier! Have not some commended an action to the face of the man, and presently in another place and company censured the same? whom we love we would have others to love; but by back biting we seek to draw off others al∣so from their duty. Herein, O! how do we serve the Devil, who is the great media∣tour of differences? I have oft thought upon the Artificial kind of Back-biting in Bernards time: When they slander, Videas praemitti alta sus∣piria, Doleo vehe∣menter de co grande damnum, &c. Bern. in Cant. Serm. 24. they will fetch deep sighs as if they were much grieved, that others should be so and so guilty; yea they will say, I am exceedingly sorry for such an one, that he should commit so hai∣nous a crime: when perhaps it was all the while but a base lying report. Besides they will charge the Tale-hearer with the greatest secresy, when they will take li∣berty to asperse as far as they have oppor∣tunity, they tell the fault only to a Friend, that will tell no body, but Folks, of it. But why may not he have forfeited the gift of keeping Counsel, as well as thy self? Why shouldst thou think that the Hearer will conceal, when thou the Teller canst not? And if thou hast a mind the Brothers infirmities should be hid, why dost no thou hide them? Or why dost thou disclose them to one; whom thou suspectest to be no way friendly to the infamed person? If a man of a different perswasion live so humbly; that we are forced to commend them, yet we will surely bring in one Ca∣lumny
or other, that shall blot the person, and weaken all our encomiums of him: when we have been forced to speak of o∣thers good actions, how commonly do we lay in a But, something or other, to abate the esteem, that is due: it were well done, if the ends were right, if from good principles, if not done in hypocrisie, &c. and by these insinuations we restrain others from loving proportionably to the merit of the per∣son. This is Doeg-like: he told the truth; but he insinuated as if David had an evil in∣tention, and the Priests were in the Con∣federacy. Or we add, we should like him well, if he were not thus and thus; but he is a leaper, &c. proud, covetous, &c. At feasts, if not in more solemn meetings, what liberty have we taken to speak against our Brethren? When Dionisius feared Plato would revile him in the Academy among his Companions: God forbid (said Plate) that there should be such scarcity of matter to talk of in the Academy, that they should talk of thee. Believe it, we had spent our time better to warm one anothers hearts with the love of Christ, than to exasperate and inflame the Spirits of each other against our Brethren. What saith Plutarch, another Heathen? You have matter enough at home, and within, to bu∣sie your selves about. 4. Heark∣ning to back∣biters. How easily have we entertained a report, and credited it against Brethren of different perswasions? The love of Mothers makes them incredulous as to any charges laid against
their Children; Prov. 25.23. but how seldome have we driven away a back-biting tongue with an an∣gry countenance? how have we been Tale∣hearers; how have we encouraged the Back∣biter to open his pack? how have we receiv∣ed all the defamations he would bring us? how have we credited reports upon heresay, with∣out any examination? Qui sta∣tuit ali∣quid parte in∣audita altera; Aequum licet stà∣tuerit, haud ae∣quum fuerit. Sen. Trag. Prov. 14.15. Psal. 101.5. how apt are we to cen∣sure and judge before he, which is the Accu∣sed, have the Accuser face to face. This was the Romans Law: I wish it were the Christi∣ans. Some of you learnt long ago, that it is injustice to determine without hearing both parties. Have we loved our Neighbours Name and Credit, as our own? May we not conclude that God will measure to us, as we have to our Brethren? Is it our wisdome to believe every word? Would, not David cut off those whom we embrace? We pretend we are not the first reporters; but are not we glad the report is spread beyond recall? are not we glad that others good names are stoln away? and do not we harbour the stoln∣goods? When others set our Neighbours Names on Fire, do not we look on, and gladly warm our selves by it, and cry Aha! So would we have it? But when do we go to the defamed Neighbour to hear what Apolo∣gie he can make for himself? were we not willing he should fall in our esteems, we would have the Accuser and Accused face to sace. 5. Aggrava∣ting their offences. How have we amplified and aggravated the offences of differing parties beyond their due
proportion? For fty have not we set down an hundred? Have not we represented that as done against light, which was done igno∣rantly? and that done with deliberation, which was done rashly? We have not made a difference between raigning sins, and hu∣mane frailties: between ins repented of, and not repented of. How have we been guilty in drawing consequences from our Adversaries Assertions, and fastning such opinions on them, as we knew their Souls abhor'd? and yet hardly hath one of a thousand retracted these unjust charges, or humbled himself for this great iniquity before God, or Man. 6. Not silen∣cing Names of distincti∣on. Have we silenced our characterising Names even to this very day? These have been the Devils-bellows, which he hath put and kept to our mouths, to blow up our dif∣ferences to the greater flame: These one calls, the trumpets of discord, and a main ob∣stacle to peace. 7. Not en∣deavour∣ing peace as we ought. Did we begin to stop breaches betimes? did not we suffer our wounds to be kept o∣pen too long? and how few yet are there that endeavour to compose the jars and diffe∣rences that are among us? When there were bickerings concerning Moses, the Law, Cir∣cumcision, and Sacrifices; how doth Paul beseech Enodias and Syntiche? How few are like one of the Fathers, who was so much affected with the divisions of Christians, that he profest himself ready to let out his heart∣blood to cement them together? I hear many outcries against division: and now it is in e∣very
mans mouth, it is time to agree; But ask them; what they mean by agreement? and you'll find Conformity is intended: they would have you to stoop to them, even a∣gainst Conscience: they will not abate an inch of what they have pretended, and pro∣fessed as their principle? Few entreat for peace, and those few that do indeed endea∣vour to hinder the strife of Brethren, fare no better than Moses: He is thought to carry on a design for a party that sues for peace, and desires brotherly and amicable Conferences. Many cry for peace, and commend it; but they will not be at cost for it. The cursed principle is still harboured, that it is a dis∣honourable thing to yield first; but that o∣thers must begin to stoop to us: Whereas it is Gods honour, that he stooped to us first. We are loath to sue for peace, and to beg reconciliation with those, that have been more in the offence than we. I find little condescending to remove mistakes and pre∣judices. If we have once offered terms of peace and reconciliation, we satisfie our selves therein; but have not pursued and followed after peace: we have not used means upon means: This is a clear evidence of our too much indulging our discords and animosities. When there is a dislocation of one Member of the Natural Body, if one Bone-setter sets it not right, we try another: and leave no means unessayed, till all be brought into Order again. Sure our hearts are not overcome with the love of peace: I
wish we could say as Luther once in an Epi∣stle to the Pastours of Straesburgh, I pray you be perswaded, that I shall alwayes be as desirous to embrace concord, as I am desirous to have the Lord Jesus propitious to me. 8. Our dif∣ferences making us to mis∣like good enterpri∣ses, and discom∣mend what we have ap∣proved, and that in the whole party. Have not our differences come to that height, that we have condemned those actions of Dissenting Brethren, which before they dis∣sented from us we approved and commended? Demetrius of Alexandria liked Origens mak∣ing himself an Evenuch, till they fell out, and then he wrote against it. Yea, have not we discommended some very good enterpri∣ses, meerly because they had an hand in them? Thus some confessed that they had liked many of Luthers Reformations, but that so contemp∣tible a Monk should have the honour of be∣ginning them. When men are highly in∣flamed for some one thing, they will dis-like all the party doth, whilst they are in that passion. Besides have not we been apt to quarrel with, and mis-like whatsoever is done by, a whole society, if we be fall'n out with one of that society? Not con∣fessing their faults one to ano∣ther; but upbraid∣ing one another as the causes of all our miseries. Hath not a whole family sometimes suffered, because we have been angry with one of that Family? 9. How few are there that mutually confess their faults each to other? though doubtless both sides have had their failings in such a time of darkness and temptation? But instead of this are there not mutual upbraidings? if not to the face of each other, yet (which i more criminal) behind each others backs? Do they not impute the cause of all the mi∣series
felt and feared to such and such disor∣ders of such parties? Who is so ingenious as to confess, and take shame for his own, and his parties miscarriages? 10. Not for∣getting unkind passages. How strong are our memories (even to this day) to retain all bitter, & unchristian pas∣sages of one party toward another? And if some have buried them; yet are there not some of the Devils agents, that are raking them out of the dust, to exasperate Spirits afresh, and so to widen our difference? 11. Suffering Sin to rest on them. How have we suffered Sin to rest upon others? and why? They are not of our Church. Thou shouldst not deal with a Turk, as thou hast dealt with Christians: nor with a Beast, going astray, as thou hast with thy Brothers-Soul. O! Into what times are we fall'n? That the Jews were kinder to Beasts, than we are to one another: if any go astray, we help them not to return into the right way: if they perish, let them perish, for any care we take to reclaim them: if non-members, they must not be regarded. Thou shouldst not hate thy Brother in thy heart, but reprove him: and not foolishly confine and narrow Bro∣therhood to thy particular Congregation, and suffer others to be damned, when thou by a faithfull reproof might'st have saved them. Whilst you care so little whether God be ho∣noured, or dishonoured by others, your zeal against Sin in your own bosomes, or in your Society, may justly be called in question, whose Image doth it bear? Instead of re∣proving a Christian, that differs from us, ac∣cording
to the rule of Christ, for any miscar∣riage, that we are privy to, have not we let him run on, and then told on the house top, what was done in secret? We hide their imperfections, whom we love, and faithfully, but secretly, admonish them; but have not some pretended an high Friend-ship to others, on purpose to espy their liberty, that they may afterwards have an occasion to reproach them, and all their party on their account? He that seeth his Brothers face fowl, and tells him not of it, hath a mind that others should see his spots as well as himself. And is this love to thy Friends? O! How have we uncovered that, which ingenuous Humanity should have concealed? Can you talk so of your Friends, that are most dear to you? 12. Restrain∣ing Pray∣er for them. Have not we restrained Prayer for such Christians, as have differed from us? Whom we love we pray for: But have not our diffe∣rences been so great, that we have excluded one another out of our Prayers, unless to reproach each other before the Lord? If any man see his Brother sin a Sin, 1 John 5.16. which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them, that sin not unto death. How sel∣dome are we very serious and earnest in wrestling with God for others, if in some things divided from us? Mat. 5.44. If we had counted them Enemies, we should have so loved them, as to have prayed for them. O that Abraham should pray so vehemently for the Sodomites, and not we for Saints! That Samuel should pray for Saul, and not we for the Lords
anointed ones! Have not our differences interrupted not only civil, but all religious communion? Yea, have not we neglected to pray, not only for dissenting Brethren, but for the reconciling of them? How few are there, that pray heartily, feelingly, be∣lievingly, for the Peace of Hierusalem; though there are many Promises to en∣courage us therein, Zech. 14.19. that his Name shall be one, and they shall worship with one shoulder, and Judah shall not envy Manasseh, Jer. 32.39. nor Ma∣nassh vex Ephraim: And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them? should we not also have been encouraged to pray for that, which Christ so affectionately desires? Will not Petitions be welcome to Heaven for that, which would be the joy of all the Heavenly Host to see effecten? Peace on earth among the Saints would be the joy of God, who is the God of Peace: of Christ, who is the Prince of Peace. May we not confidently pray for what Christ sweat and bleed? 13. Not pri∣ling their gifts, not blessing God for them. How unready have we been to respect and value the gifts and enoblements of such Christians? We have neither heartily prayed to God, that they might be useful, with all their Talents, for the good of many: nor blest the Father of Lights for communicating so much to them. 14. Envying them. Hath not the Spirit in us lusted to En∣vy? Whom we love, we rejoyce at their gifts and enjoyments; but hath not a Spirit
of Cain prevailed among us? Have not we envied, if others had greater acceptance with God, than our selves? Have we re∣joyced at the gifts and graces of differently-perswaded Brethren, as if they were our own? or have not we (secretly at least) re∣pined at others praises? Have not we been afraid that we and our party have been ob∣scured thereby? Hath not this been evident in our being more backward to speak of their graces, than of their imperfections? Doe not we gaze only on the Sun, and call in o∣thers to be spectators of it, when ecclipsed? Do not we like Kites, pass over the sound sheep, and pitch on the weak and dead Carion? or like the Butchers Dog, not touch the sound flesh, but the offals and putrified pieces? or like Swine, pass over the flowers, and wal∣low in the Mire? If we know one of a dif∣fering Congregation from ours, that hath a blemish, our mouths are full of him; but o∣thers graces, and heavenly walks we can pass over in silence. 15. Not help∣ing them. Have not we refused to help such Chri∣stians? We help what we can those whom we really love; But are not we like Specta∣tors in a Tragedy (Austin complains of such in his time) who mourn much to see a sad story acted; but let the Play goe on. True pitifull love would express it self by the hand, Heb. 6.10. 1 Cor. 13.4. as well as tongue. We read of the labour of love: love is bountifull. We pre∣tend to love all Saints; but what do we for those that are of different perswasions from ours? If such an one be in Prison, do we vi∣sit
him? If Naked, do we cloath him? If hungry, do we feed him? If we remember all the Lords people, that are in bonds, as if we were bound with them, then doe we really love them. We love our selves, and we are liberal to our selves; we can bestow time, care, estate, good things upon our selves; but not so on divided Brethren. We have words at will, Oyle and butter in our mouths to supply them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; but we give not those things, that are needfull. Love will suffer any pains for the sake of the Beloved: So Paul loved all the Saints, that he was willing to spend and to be spent, like a Candle, to wast himself for their good. Which of us hath so spent himself? Love will counsel the Belo∣ved, especially if in any straight; But God knows how little others have been beholding to us even this way: possibly we have after∣wards insultingly told them, this you should have done, and herein you failed; but as we found them in a Ditch, so we left them, and directed them not to a way of deliverance. The best counsel we can give is for the Soul; but let the divided parties, yea and others, consider seriously and sadly how backward they have been, and are to this day, to ad∣vise to the best way for peace, holiness, and glory. If we believe such an undertaking will impair our Neighbours Name, estate, ro Soul; yet how slow are we to inter∣pose for the disswading of him from so un∣happy an enterprize? I should hardly think that Parent loves his Child well, that sees
him run over a cliff, and with-holds him not, what he can. 16. Not sym∣pathi∣zing with them. Have not we been so far from helping them, that we have not sympathized with them? Love is pittifull. When they have been sick, when did we get over our thresholds to en∣quire how it fared with them? How sel∣dome have we felt their pains? If they be in an errour, in a dangerous one, the more we should compassionate them, considering our selves also, who have the seeds of the same errours within us; considering the blindness of our own minds; how we also differ from others in some matters; how it is the Spirit, that leads into truth, &c. But have not some rejoyced, when any of a different perswasi∣on have fall'n into the Bogs of Familisme, Ranterisme, Quakerisme, &c. that they may thence draw their absurd inferences against the whole body, whereto such an one was related? Yea how little have we laid to heart the afflictions of any of Gods people? Have not we been as unconcerned in their suffer∣ings in Germany, France, Holland, Piedmont, Ireland? &c. How seldome have we had a∣ny great conflict for those whose faces in the flesh we never saw? Have not we been like Jacobs Children, unmercifull enough: sate down to eat and drink, and forgot Joseph in the Pit? Have not we had a late instance of this our hard-heartedness, when the Plague so forraged in London, and the parts adjacent? How little did we mourn with them that mourned? Perhaps fear lest the Flying Role
might visit us, caused us a little to put finger into the eye. I must tell you (I wish I could weeping) that iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxeth cold. 17. Insulting over them. 1 Cor. 13.4. Have not we been so far from sympathi∣zing with them, that we have insulted over them? Reall love vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; But how have we vaunted over fall'n Brethren, fall'n into misery: that is bad; but fall'n into sin, that is abominable? How oft have I known some high Profes∣sours making it an entertainment, a banquet for their Friends, to speak of the Spots, Va∣nities, Gestures, &c. of others different in some Opinions or Practices, from them, when their laughture hath given evident proof what contentment they took in the in∣firmities of their Brethren? Ye are puffed up, 1 Cor. 5.2. and have not rather mourned, &c. said Paul to the Corinthians: and may not I say so to English-Professours? Have not we been worse than Dives's dogs; seeing they licked the soars of Lazarus: whilst we have rub'd and fretted them, and insulted over his mise∣ries? 18. Publish∣ing their secrets. Have not we very unfaithfully published their secrets? We are wont to keep the se∣crets of those we dearly love, especially when they charge us, and we promise so to do; But how many of us are swift to hear, but not slow to speak of what we hear even under the rose? Few faithfull Spirits, Prov. 11.13. that conceal the matter. How many are there that creep into houses, yea farther into bosomes,
to know secrets, that they may inslave them to their wills, for fear of their publications, or else when they have got what they can of them, most wretchedly betray the trust re∣posed in them? This makes me even to cry out, trust not in a Brother. 19. Selfish∣ness. 1 Cor. 13.5. Have not we been selfish in our love? Cha∣rity seeketh not her own. Observe it, the most love, that is going is Publican-love: we are careless of their company, or to have any intimacy with them, from whom nothing is likely to be returned: if a Professour be rich, he hath many Friends, such as they be; but the poor is despised of his Neighbour. O! how base and mercenary is our love? Even your Ministers, to whom you have pretended dear and high affections, yet if they be laid by, or removed at a distance from you, that you cannot have them as a pleasant song to you, how strange are you instantly to them? How soon do you forget them? Judas may kiss you; but he hath a design upon you: Joab may salute; but he is working nothing but his own base design. 20. Incon∣stancy. Hath not our love been inconstant? Re∣al love is abiding; but do not we quickly ex∣change Friends? Do we keep them as long as an Almanack, to the end of the year? Do not new pickt flowers tempt us to throw by the old? 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity suffereth long; But how soon is our love quenched? It makes a blaze; but soon is out, soon kindled, soon quench'd: like Children, won with an Apple, lost with a Nut: How have we been at swords point
for every trifle? Those seven ones, one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all, should have been as so many quoines to lock together all parts of the building into one; But alas! every extravigant, or extrinsecal opinion hath broken us and our hearts to pieces. Have not we been humourish, pee∣visn lovers? Our love is dearly bought, and more hardly kept. Humour is like tinder, as soon on fire as touched: no love without conformity in every thing: we could hardly bed, board, or house together, unless we all said the same thing: we loved only whilst pleased, and our humours were not crost; but the least unkindness, the least difference, though our agreemenss were more by hun∣dreds than our differences) would quench, or at least abate, our love. Charity is not ea∣sily provoked. 1 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.1. And to fullfil the law of love its requisite in the Apostles Judgement, that we bear one anothers burthens. But O! ever since I can remember, what a rigid, impe∣rious, and tyrannical commanding of an Uni∣formity in every punctilio hath there been? Though the pretence be love to Christs Church; yet if men would consult their own hearts, 'tis love of their own power, and rule, and Lordship over their Brethren: and therefore the same party of men, when in the Saddle, when uppermost, have cry∣ed for this rigid Conformity, away with cursed tolleration, &c. and when reduced and brought lower, have as much commended
Charity, Love, Forbearance in matters less momentous. Now, when these things are thus amongst us, The greatness of this evil. shall we sit still in silence and stupidity, and suffer the sweet and soft fire of love quite to expire, and the wild-fire of passion and con∣tention to spread and prevail, without moving a tongue or hand towards the repressing of the one, and reviving of the other? This were enough to make the dumb to speak; and therefore may justifie my writing, when I may not speak, yea my expatiating a little, in venting my thoughts about this great evil, and the desires of my heart to redress it. Is it nothing to us, In its dis∣obedi∣ence. See Wil∣liams tran∣scenden∣cy of Christs love. Chap. 9. Sect. 3, 4, 5. John 13.33, 34, 35.14.12.15.12, 17, that hereby we are in a special manner guilty of disobedience to Jesus Christ? That all Christians would love one another, was our Lord Jesus his dying charge, which he frequently inculcated, sweetly insinuated, and powerfully enforced it as a Commandement, not a bare advice and counsel: It is a Commandement of Christs own prescribing, A Commandement I give unto you: It is a Commandement given, as a special Love-token, in his last Will and Testa∣ment: It is a new Commandement, A new Commandement I give unto you: It is a most excellent Commandement, in a new Edition, corrected and amended, from the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and enlarged from his own example; Before it was only, Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self; now it is, Love one another, as I have loved you: This new Commandement is not once
only given, but given again, and again, and again, by our dying Lord, to intimate, that as he had one Disciple, who went by the name of the Disciple whom Jesus loved: So he would have a darling Commandement, and that this should be it, Love one another; Yea, he calls it, These things, as if this one thing were all things, and disobedience to this Commandement, were disobedience to all. Is it nothing to us, that hereby, Crossing Christs Prayer. as much as in us lies, we make the Prayer of Christ of none effect? Christ knew the evil of heart-burnings and divisions, of wrath and bitter∣ness against one another (though we do not) and therefore having preached up love among his Disciples on earth, he sets upon praying down Union from his Father in Heaven, and what he insisted most upon in his Sermon, that he enlargeth most upon in his Prayer. John 17.11, 21, 22, 23. And now I am no more in the World, but these are in the World, and I come to thee, holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are: That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: That the World may believe, that thou hast sent me: And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them: that they may be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in me, Throw∣ing off Christs Livery. John 13.35. that they may be made perfect in one. and that the World may know, that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. Is it nothing to us, that hereby we throw off Christs distinguishing Livery? By this shall all
men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to another. He doth not say, Hereby you shall be my Disciples; but hereby it shall be known: Nor doth he say, Hereby I shall know; nor hereby you shall know; but hereby shall others know: Nor doth he say, Hereby they shall ghès and conjecture; but hereby they shall know, as by a sure and in∣fallible sign: Nor doth he say, Hereby some, a very few, shall know this great secret; but hereby all men shall know: Nor doth he say, Hereby all men shall know, that you seem to be my Disciples; but that you are so in∣deed. Is it nothing to us, Represen∣ting Christ as an Impo∣sture. that hereby we make the Jewes and Heathens look on Christ as an Im∣postour? How can they look upon him o∣therwise, whilst they see his Coat so full of seams, yea his Body so full of rents? Hereby we hinder the World from being convinced that Christ is sent of God: Christ therefore prayed, John 17.21, 23. Making Christs doath of none ef∣fect. that His might be one, that the World may know, that God sent him. Is it nothing to us, that hereby we make (as much as in us lyes) the Cross of Christ of none effect, and his blood to be shed in vain? Christ not only preach'd up Love, and prayed for it, but also paid for it. As he went from preaching up Love on Earth by his Sermon, to pulling it down from Heaven by Prayer: So he went from praying to paying for it; and the Price which he laid down for it, Ephes. 2.14, 15, 16. was his Blood, saith a late ingenuous Writer. For he is our Peace, who hath made both one, &c.
having abolished in his flesh the enmity, &c. for to make in himself of twain, one new man, so making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body, by the Cross. Shall Christ dye to break down partition walls: and will we dare to keep them up? Shall he shed his blood for peace? and shall we imploy our wit and interest to blow the trumpet to War? Is it nothing to us, Calling in questi∣on Gods Promises. Isa. 65.25.11.6. that hereby we make Jews and Pagans call in question the truth of Gods promises? What can they think of those promises (that the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord. That the Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid: and the Calf and the young Lyon, and the failing together, and a little Child shall lead them.) When the Lambs cannot fold together with∣out pushing at one another. Is it nothing to us, Grieving Christ, and the Spirit. that hereby we grieve our dear Lord Jesus, and the ever blessed Spi∣rit? May we not easily imagine what a grief it is to the head, to see the members of his body renting and tearing each other? to see heirs of the same hope, those that lye toge∣ther in the same bosom of Election, and whose Names are on his Breast, and whom he pre∣sents before his Father together in Heaven, to be thus broken asunder on earth? O! me thinks if we had any love to Jesus Christ, we should study to be of one affection. What Luther said once to the Ministers of Norim∣berg
is very considerable: Suppose (said he) you saw Jesus Christ standing bodily in the midst of you, and thus bespeaking you, What do you; O my dear Children! whom I have Redeemed by my blood, that you might mutu∣ally love one another.—There is no danger in your difference, but there is much in your dissention: Do not thus sadden my Spirit: do not thus spoil the holy Angels of their joy in hea∣ven: Am not I more to you than all your mat∣ters of difference. How can we expect the company of the Spirit of grace and peace, whilst such fiery contentions are amongst us? Were the Disciples quarrelling and contend∣ing, when the Holy Ghost fell on them? No, They were all with one accord in one place. Acts 2.1, Psal. 133.10 Where men dwell together in Unity, there the Lord commands the blessing for ever. God will not (saith a learned man) sow the pre∣cious seed of his grace and love among bryars and thornes, the enemies of peace. Is it nothing to us, Rasing Sion. that hereby we do (what in utlyes) to rase Sion, even to the foundation thereof? The stones support the building, by being coupled together. Mat. 12.25. Making real Saints weaty to support the World any longer. How can the house stand, when the stones are severed, when not a stone is left joyned to a stone? Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation: and every city or house divided a∣gainst it self, shall not stand. Is it nothing to us, that hereby we make re∣all Saints, the pillars of the World, weary of staying in the World; to support it any longer? It was the sight of the divisions among
Christianss, that made Grynaeus, Melancthon; Strigclius, those pious and precious Souls wea∣ry of earth, Psa. 55.6. and to wish and desire the wings of a Dove, that they might sly away, and be at rest in that place, where there is a rest remain∣ing for the people of God, Hebr. 4.9. as from all other evils, so from this of divisions and dissentions among Brethren. It was e conjecture of one that as Go is first Judgement against the old World was by Water, against the heat of Lust: so his last Judgement upon the World that now is, will be by Fire against the cold∣ness of Love. If this be true, how do we hast∣en the great and terrible day by our coldness in Love one towards another? Is it nothing to us, Gratify∣ing the Devil, rejoycing the wick∣ed, and Justifying their re∣proaches of Saints. that hereby we gratifie the Devil, rejoyce the hearts of the wicked, and justifie their reproaches of Saints? The great stratagem of Hell is to promote our differen∣ces, and to keep us from Union: all the bones they throw among us are to set us by the ears: the Devil knows that Societies of Christians are immortal, if they do not kill themselves by Division: Divide & impera, Divide them, and rule them is a maxime in Hell, and among the Antichristian party. Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another a Consumption will be the consequent. Why should we be imployed in the Devils work? Hath he not instruments and tongues enough of his own? O! how doth Antichrist yet ground by the Animosities and Divisions among Christians? Certainly what Tacitus saith of some in his time, we may of the Papists and all our For∣raign
Enemies, Nihil spei, nisi per discordiase habent. All their hopes of ruining us aris from our homebred discords and divisions: Were all the Arrows in one bundle, they would by tryal and experience find it next to an impossibility to break them. Methinks the proud boasts of the Man of Sin should make us bury all our discords: were we but of one heart before God, and uniting our Prayers, the Mountains would become Plains, yea the seven Hills among the rest. Sure we do not consider where, and among whom we are. Are we not in the world, where Sa∣tan rules? Shall the Children quarrel in their Enemies quarters? Gen. 13.7. Abraham sues for peace upon this, as a taking consideration, that we are Brethren and the Perrizzite dwelt in the land. Wicked men are Spectators of our fewds and discords. The very Heathen have calmed the mutinies of their Souldiers, by saying, your Enemies yonder behold your muti∣nous behaviour. What one said prophetically some years ago, Europae Specu∣lum. p. 173. I cannot but recall: that unless God did stir up some in the Protestant Churches, and cloth them with a mighty Spi∣rit to accommodate our differences, the end of them may be, that our Enemies will laugh, when we shall weep. Have we not Enemies enough, but must we be dogged and cruel to one another? We say the Fire burns the hotter for the cold weather: Would to God the Antiperistasis were blessed, that the cold abroad, the oppositions against us, may intend our affections the more to God, to his wayes,
to his people. And are not the wicked justi∣sied in their reproaches of the Saints, whilst they do but write after our Copy? Is it nothing to us, Perjury that hereby we are per∣jured, yea often perjured, as oft we have re∣ceived the Communion? Christians (saith our great Usher) should remember, that as oft as they come to the Lords table, so oft do they enter into new bonds of peace, and tye themselves with firmer knots of love together, this blessed Communion being a Sacred Seal not only of the Uni∣on, which we have with our head by faith, but also of our conjunction with the other members of the body, by love. Lastly, Is it nothing to us, Hindring pardon. that hereby we hinder the forgiveness of our own iniquities? How can we hope we shall be forgiven, if we forgive not one another? How can we look that Scripture in the face, Mat. 6.14, 15. if ye for∣give men their trespasses, your Heavenly Fa∣ther will also forgive you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses? Or that, with what measure you mete, Mat. 7.2. it shall be measured to you again? Would we have God deal with us, as we deal with our Brethren? These, and such like considerations, have made some, even of the Episcopal perswasion, to complain for want of love, Bishop Reyn of the peace of the Church. p. 16.17. and to sigh for more Charity towards Christians, though of different per∣swasions: That in the case of unavoidable differences among good men (saith one) there should be no more mutual charity,
meekness, moderation, tolerance, and ∣manity expressed, &c. this is a lamentati∣on, and will be for a lamentation. Be∣tween the Episcopal, Presbyteria, and la∣dependent parties (saith a second) much of the acidness and sharpness of the hu∣mour would be alayed, Bishop Gaudens Serm. Printed 1660. if this policy of charitable censure and interpretation were applyed on all sides, &c. I should be glad to see the beams of this candour, this kind∣ness, this charity, shine in all saces from all sides, that the Shiboleths of different dia∣lects and designs, &c. might be laid aside by being all for Christ, Bishop Hall's Serm. be∣fore his Majesty, 1641 &c. A third pres∣seth to a charitable construction of each others acts and intentions; because there is nothing in the world, which may not be taken with either hand, whether the right hand of favour, or the left of malice. We see the Son of God himself, in whom the Prince of this World could find nothing, yet was exposed to mis-construction, Matth. 11.19. Be∣hold a Glutton, &c. Good Lord! what un∣charitable censures are men apt to pass up∣on each other: Let a man be strict and austere in moral and divine duties, though never so puaceable, he is a Puritan, and every Puitan is an Hypocrite. Let him be more free, and give more scope to his concersation, though never so consciona∣ble: he is a Libertin: Let him make scru∣ple of any innovated form, he is a Schis∣matick: Let him and for the anciently received Rites and Government, he is a
time-serving Formalist. — Let me tell you he is right, that hath a right heart to his God, what forms soever he is for. The Kingdome of God doth not stand in eats and drinks, in stuffs, or colours, or Fashions, in Noyses or Gestures: it stands in Holi∣ness and Righteousness, &c. Let us study now, not to widen, or gall, or ranckle; but how to salve, and heal, &c. I shall conclude this Chapter with beseeching, yea conjuring you in the words of the Apostle Paul to the Philippians: Phil. 2.1, 2. O quam sacro fascino usus est? Ipsa suada credo, si loqui posset, not potuisset , ubi quot verba, tot tela, quae nimium animos nostros per∣cellant, &c. Mortoni sent. de pace procuranda inter E∣gel. p. 25. If there be therefore any consola∣tion in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowells, and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like∣minded, having the same love, being of one ac∣cord, of one mind.
CHAP. XXXV. The faults of Church-Members towards those of their particular Congregations. Church-Members miscarria∣ges. 1. useless∣ness and unfaith∣fullness. YOu have Professed in your Creed to be∣lieve the Communion of Saints: You have been admitted to the Priviledges of this Communion: you thought it not safe, or good for man to be alone; to live retired from the Society of Saints: you have been inrolled a∣mong the Saints in Jerusalem, which came down from above: you have with some Solem∣nity engaged your selves to be faithfull to the Souls of your Brethren: and yet what an un∣profitable Hermit hast thou been in Zion? Like a wild-beast thou comest out of thy Den for thy prey, to feed upon the Mountains of Spices, to enjoy the provisions of Gods house; but immediately thou retirest, and art no way ser∣viceable to the Body. It is a wonder to me, how Christians can content themselves with the Priviledges of Gods house, and neglect the mutual duties, that are incumbent on them. A learned man complains of many Ministers, that they are but Traditional-Preachers: and I fear there are too many Traditional-Christi∣ans,
who are very zealous for the practising of some Duties, which they have received from their Fore-fathers, whilst they can over-look many express Commandements, obliging them to take care, as Members of the Natural Body do, each for other. The Apostle tells us, that the meanest Members in the Church yet are necessary. But alas! How many are there, who shut up their Light in dark-lanthornes? who immure themselves within their own walls? who are so involved in worldly businesses, and have so little care and zeal for the house of God, that they no way profit, no way edifie their Brethren? How can such over-look those plain express requiries of Christ by his Apostle? Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, Rom. 14.19. 1 Thes. 5.11. and things wherewith one may edifie another. Wherefore comfort (or exhort) your selves together, and edifie one another, I wish I could add, as the Apostle doth, even as also ye do. 1 Cor. 14.12, 26. Ephes. 4.16. For as much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church. Let all things be done to edifying. From whom (i. e. Christ) the whole body fitly joyned together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. v. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace un∣to the hearers. Rom. 15.2, 3. Let every one of us please his Neighbour, for his good to edification. For
even Christ pleased not himself, &c. But ex∣hort one another daily, Hebr. 3.13. while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened, through the deceit∣fulness of sin. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, 10.24, 25. and unto good works. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves to∣gether, as the manner of same is, but exhort∣ing one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching. Look not every man on his own things, Phil. 2.4, 5.  man also on the things of others.  excluded: it is every mans work.  mind be in you, which was also in Christ esus. Hebr. 12.15. Look dili∣gently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness spring up, trouble you, and thereby many be defile. If they do not over-look, how dare they ntemn, all these Commandements of our  Jesus Christ? How can they look upon themselves as no way concerned in these duties?  a Lamentation, and should be for a La  on, that so many Church-Members, like  of prey, slye alwayes alone; and through  ritual sloth, through a lothness to displea through want of charity and pitty to the  of their Brethren, suffer them to perish in carelessness, sensuality, formality, &c. ra∣ther than they will labour to quicken, restore and save them. An Ingrosser is hateful to men; But of how much sorer punishment shall ye be thought worthy, who ingross your gra∣ces, your gifts, your experiences, where∣with a Church of Christ might be edified  Every man is a Steward, (Give an account of
) But you are Stewards in an  meaner: You are Stewards of the  the spirit, which are given to profit . How dare ye hide your Talents in a . You have a greater trust committed  others have: You have Souls  to your care; for Church-Mem∣ber are to care even naturally one for ano∣. If God hath two Servants, and he in∣ one with his Lumber, the other with  children; and if both be negligent: sure  all suffer the highest indignation from the Lord, who neglects the Children. What are you afraid, you shall have the less light, the less grace, the less comfort from Christ, for that others share with you? And therefore will ye turn Ingrossers and Monopolists? O! Know the more useful you are to invite the Children to their Father, the more you your selves will be inriched and supplyed; and whilst you are dividing your loaves, God will act at a wonderful rate for you: the bread will multiply: you shall receive, whilst you are disbursing: your light and heat will increase by your holy dispersing it. 2. Neglect∣ing godly Con∣ference. How is godly conference neglected even a∣mong Church members? What! are you a∣shamed of your God? is the speaking of grace and glory some kind of disparagement to your tongues? When Saints come toge∣ther,  precious time is devoured in back- undue, unseasonable censuring of , who are not capable of making  esence, or else in foolish im∣pertinent
discourses of worldly matters. Few, like the Disciples in their journey to Emaus, discourse of such matters, as Christ himself joyns with them in, and causeth their hearts to burn: When do you warm one anothers hearts, and sit each other to enter into Com∣munion with God in secret? How do many complain of you, that their hearts are estran∣ged from God by converses and intimacies with you, and that they loose their affections by keeping up correspencies with you? and therefore count it their wisdom to retire into their closets, rather than mispend precious hours in foolish communications with such barren, frothy, empty Professors. How many weak Christians are there, who are not acquainted with the wiles of Satan, and they sit down pensive and dejected, thinking no condition like theirs, and conclude here∣upon that they are none of Gods Children, whom (if you were spiritual, pitiful, active, and free to acquaint them with your own ex∣periences, that you have been tempted as they) you might succour under their tempta∣tions, and comfort with the comforts, where∣with you have been comforted, and ease them by hearkning to their doubts and com∣plaints, and shewing them a way how to de∣liver their Souls; Were you of a Christ-like Spirit, you would not break these bruised reeds, nor quench these smoaking flaxes; but rather blow up their graces, and labour to scatter and disperse those fogs and mists, which over-cloud their Souls: you should
be eyes to the blind; but you are not: you should be of a merciful Spirit to all Souls: more especially to the Souls of all Saints, most especially to the Souls of those Saints, to whom you are peculiarly related; but you are not. Exod. 23.5. 1 Thes. 5.14. 1 Cor. 12.7. Mal. 3.16. In the old Law God took care of Asses: if they lay under a burthen, Israel was to help them. Doth God take care for beasts? and will not ye for men, for Saints, for the redeemed of the Lord? God requires of you, that you comfort the feeble minded. The ma∣nifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withall. Christ expects his own with increase. They that feared the Lord spake of∣ten one to another, to comfort one another with the promises of God made to his peo∣ple, against the flourishing of the wicked, and overflowing of ungodliness: and the Lord hearkned and heard it, and a book of Remembrance was written before him, &c. the Lord book't that good service, Nihil de Scriptu∣ris, nihil de salute Anima∣rum agi∣tur; sed nugae & risus, & verba pro∣feruntur inven∣tum. he pur it up∣on record; But though the Lord hearknet and hears, yet he seldom finds us so employ∣ed: our neglects are sealed up in his bag. I pray God we may lay it to heart, repent, and reform. Bernards complaint may justly be revived: Not a word of the Scriptures, nothing of the Salvation of the Soul; but trisles and to yes, laughter, and words as light as the wind, eat up the time. I know there have been too many Uzza's amongst us, who have had an itching desire to be fingring of the Ark, thinking of themselves more highly than they ought to think, and like the ambitious Sons of Levi, taking too much upon them,
whereby the Ministry hath suffered much contempt. The Lord forgive these daring Phaetons, who have set the world in a slame hereby: But let not us run from one extreme into another. Let us give to the Ministry their due; Jude v. 20. and yet not neglect to build up our selves in our most holy faith. Mutual duties should be exercised between Christian and Christian: The Apostle is express for it in the places already quoted: I shall adde one more, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you rich∣ly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another. O! if God would be with me so far, as to make me an instrument to pre∣vail with you to go, and visit one another, and stir up one another, that knowing the ter∣ours of the Lord, you may perswade men. O! bewail thy unserviceableness, thy private spiritedness, thy want of love and bowels to others; especially now, when the Ministe∣rial help fails to such a degree, and when there is so great an Apostasie. Sure, then is no time, wherein Christian-fellowship is more called for, and wherein it may be more pro∣fitable, than at this time; But alas! How are the wise as well as the foolish, Virgins a∣sleep, generally secure, without action, no way usefull to each other, no more than they are, who are fast asleep in their beds of rest? O! how few are there like Jonathan and David? how few enter into a brotherly promise to exhort one another, to call one another to account, to tell one another their fears, to know of one another their growth
in Religion? We are proud, and loath to have our nakedness appear: yea some of us have few stories to tell of Gods goodness and bounty to our Souls, and we hate a disco∣very, how low, earthly, vain; backslid∣ing we are: Hence reserved to each other; But God will bring forth the hidden works of dishonesty. 3. Not ad∣monish∣ing, or not aright. How is Fraternal correption neglected or spoyl'd in the managing? Some totally neglect reproving their Brethren: Gallio-like, they little care for these things, they are little concern'd whether God be honoured, or dishonoured. Others delay admonition. Either neglect∣ing it alto∣gether, or delaying it. The Flesh is backward to this self-denying work, and so the many weighty circumstances, which should bring the Offendor to Repentance, are forgot: The Offendor is also hardned in his Sin. He thinks by thy silence, thou art altogether like unto him: so he judgeth of Gods silence, these things hast thou done, and I kept silence, Psa. 50.21. thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self: so he judgeth of thy silence. It's much easier to fetch out a spot of inck from a cloth the day it is stained, than afterwards. Sin like a Mole, will quickly bury it self, and the longer let alone, the harder it is to dig it up. The longer a disease is let alone, the har∣der cured: Cronical diseases are seldome a credit to the Physitian. Besides if you neg∣lect the Reproof this day or hour, perhaps by the next he will commit the same Sin again; for either he knows it not to be a sin, or in case
he knows it, yet every new act doth strength∣en the habit of sin. It is the nature of sin to blind the Mind, to stupifie the Conscience, and to harden the heart. Exhort therefore one another dayly, Heb. 3.13. while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardned through the deceitfulness of sin. If the finner add sin to sin, put that to your account for neglecting the Ordinance of God for his reducement: If he loseth the favour of God, and neglects hereupon all private communion with the Lord, put that to thy account: If at length he becomes im∣pudent in sin, so that, like a Bedlam, he feels not the pricks of sharp admonition, put all this to your account, because you have de∣layed to cure, to heal, to save the Soul of your Brother. A timely reproof might have saved a Soul, and covered a multitude of sins. Besides, have you time at your command, that you with Faelix, will do your duty at a more convenient season? May'st not thou dye? or the Offendor dye? and both in sin, thou in the sin of Omission, and he in the sin of Com∣mission unrepented of, before the day comes, wherein thou art resolved to tell him roundly of his fault? Why art not thou trembling with fear of blood-guiltiness? Is Soul-mur∣ther no sin with thee? Or have you the Holy-Ghost at command? Without the Holy Spi∣rits a sistances and concourse, your labour will be in vain, you will get a blot by re∣proving, the delinquent will flye in your face, hate you for telling the truth, he will add sin unto sin, and perhaps put you into a
flame too: and must the Holy-Ghost dance attendance on you? If you observe his hour, you must go presently whilst the wound is fresh and bleeding; but if you neglect his call, it is a question, whether your hour will be Gods. Others miscarry in reproving. Some reprove, Or mis∣carrying in it, not re∣proving privately. Matth. 18.15. Prov. 10.12. Si solus nosti, et vis coram pluribus arguere non es, Correc∣tor, sed Proditor. Augustin. but not privately; though Christ be so expres for it, If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: though the Law of Charity binds us to cover our Brothers nakedness, as much as we can. Love covereth all sins; yet some Doeg-like backbite their Neighbour, and tell it to every one save him, who should hear of it. How few modestly, affectionately and hum∣bly, in the most private manner communi∣cate their fears of sins, decayes, and infirmi∣ties to the supposed delinquents? Are not most too forward sinfully and wickedly to di∣vulge their undue suspicions to others, whereby the names of some suffer, Souls lye neglected, prejudices and heart-burnings are promoted. Schisme is made in the body of Christ. Though the Law of Wisdome bind us not to use more means than needs must, if gentle private reproofs will serve to re∣claim, not to blazon infirmities, yet Pro∣fessours through pride, envy want of Chari∣ty, at least want of wit, publish on the house top what is done in a corner. Herein we do, as we hate to be dealt with, were it our own concernment: Hereby we make the Offen∣dor to hate us, and beget in him due prejudi∣ces
against us, viz.  we th to draw the blood of his Name yet how many Church-Members are pecan herein? It will be hard to make him believe thou come to heal  Soul, if thou ha already wounded his Name. Have not some Church-Member  or bringing it immediately to the ? Hereby innumerable evils ensue, many are grieved, many offended, the party that is im∣peached stands on his guard pleads for his sin, extenuates it, or is strengthned in his sin by the uncharitable proceeding, and irre∣gular acting of the Brother, who first took cognizance of the miscarriage, and so Judah justifies Samaria. Others reprove that those injuries that have been offered to the  may be recompenced, Reprove∣ing self∣ishly. rather than tha their Brothers Soul may be healed, and it appears erein, if the wrong done them may be remidied, little do they heed, whether there be any other Repentance. They reprove not to gain their Brother; but to make gain of him: and therefore Jehu-like, they drive furiously in their own cases, but in Gods they are dumb and dull enough. Other busie-bodies would be thought very tender of Christs honour, Reprove∣ing only for dispu∣table things. they tithe Mint and Annise, &c. they reprove such things as are disputable, and neglect to teprove, where there are too many just accusations to lay in. They will be very severe in censuring their Brethren for their Hair, Cloathes, or some controverted recreations; and yet let them alone to live in worldliness, sensuality, luke∣warmness, pride, sloth, &c.
Others are so Magisterial in their reproofs, Reprove∣ing Ma∣gisteri∣ally. as if they had forgotten that they are in the body, as if they had no native corruption remaining in them, they want the Spirit of meekness, they have forgotten the Apostles Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1. ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of meekness, &c. O! how haughtily do some carry it towards offending Brethren. I wish you would sling the first stone at your selves. If you are not guilty of the same offence, yet you are of others, at least you have the seed of the same Sin within you. O that offending Brethren might know that it is only Conscience of duty, that brings you to them, and that it is love to their Souls puts you upon such displeasing work to your flesh; But wo and alas! How few will condescend? The work is not managed with that humility as it ought, and therefore no Brother is gained. Others are so light, frothy, Reprove∣ing light∣ly. and unserious in this business, that they spoyl all. They do not invocate God to accompany them in the work, they do not cry out, who is sufficient? They forget it is Soul-work they are imploy∣ed in, they forget how abortive such labours have been, they do not set upon it with that fear and trembling, which they should. Few rebuke with authority, as having Gods Glory, and mens Everlasting Salvation in their eye: and hence, when they come off from this work, their Conscience smites them, that they have been no more seri∣ous
and fervent in a matter that concerns life and death. Few continue their admonitions, Putting an end to Reproof too soon. and follow them, till the Delinquent be brought to con∣jession, repentance and amendment. We soon tire, and put the ill names of Doggs and Swine upon our offending Brethren, to ex∣case our sloth, and to take off that diligence about their Sou's, which their dulness, and hardness of heart calls for. We should in meekness instruct them, though they oppose themselves: We should bear with their pre∣sent stubbornness and abuses, and wait if God peradventure will give them repentance: We forget how many years God waited on us, though we were stout, stubborn and refractory, how patient and long-suffering he was unto us. Though the more we love, the less we are beloved; though men even flye in our faces: yet we should do as our Lord, and his Ministers, not presently shake off the dust of our feet against them. 4. Not bearing Reproof Christi∣anly. How few behave themselves Christianly under Reproof? When men come to you from the great God, to discharge the duties they owe to your Souls, your behaviour is such, that none will meddle with such Pati∣ents, to dress their wounds, if the Lord had not charged them with this Com∣mission. How few receive a Reproof kindly and affe∣ctionately? Not lo∣vingly. This makes me fear, that there are more Hpocrites in Churches, than we are aware of. It is a great mercy to be re∣proved,
As many as I love  rebuke. Rev. 3.19. To sin against Reproof, is aggravated wicked∣ness. The revolters are profound  make slaughter, Hos. 5.2. though I have been a rbuker of them all. It is an argument of atred, not to reprove, Levit. 19.15. Thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy Neighbour, &c. Yet how are they counted turbulent, pragmatical, void or affection, rigd and censorious, who will not let them goe on in their sin. He that hates reproof, Prov. 15.10. shall surely dye. There is not a sadder Omen, that God hath an endless controversie with thee. I know (saith the Prophet to Ama∣ziah) the Lord hath determined to destroy thee, 2 Chron. 25.16. because thou hast not hearkened to my re∣proof. Others seem to earken to the Re∣prover, and give him verbal thanks for his plain dealing; but from that day their hearts boyl inwardly, and they are fill'd with pre∣judice, which will express it self, when ever it meets with a fair opportunity. How few do engage some Friend, to be a faithful Monitor to them, to be open-hearted to them, in telling them their faults? We are so over∣run with self-love, that we think no stan∣der by can discern so much as we; and we are so unwilling to be censured, that we stand aloof from having such a Looking glass near us, to reflect our spots to us: Few, with David, would count it a kindness, for the righteous to smite them. How few do amend upon a solemn serious reproof? How few retire to their Closets, Not obe∣diently.
and there upon their knees bless God for emboldning any to tell them of their Sins, and there beg pardon and strength to re∣form, and enter into a religious vow by the grace of God to amend whatever is amiss? 5. Minding only the pling of m∣selves. Rom. 15.1, 2, 3. Most Professours seek to please themselves and not their Neighbour. A man would think they never read, we that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one please his Neighbour for his good to edification; For even Christ pleased not himself, &c. Pofessours are self-willed, they will walk to the utmost of their liberty, and if others be offended, they little care for grieving and stumbling their weak Brethren. They will tell you in the pride o their hearts and loftiness of their Spirits, the weak must be satisfied: But what if they cannot? O! how opposite are Professours to the Apostles condescending frame? They think that in different ccum∣stantial things the weak should sollow the strong, and therefore slight what they think of their actions. Gal. 5.13. 1 Cor. 8.1. But what saith the Apostle? Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh. Know∣ledge puffeth up, but Charity edifyeth. A firm and full knowledge of our liberty in things indifferent, (saith a learned man) if it be seperated from Charity, is apt to swell the mind with Pride, and make men to despise, and set at naught weak, doubt∣ing, and scrupulous Brethren; but Chari∣ty is carefull to avoyd what may stumble the weak, and cause them to fall into Sin,
and therefore judge this , Rom. 14.13, 22. that no man put a stumbling or occasion to full in his bro∣thers way by the use of differerts. Hast thou faith, concerning the ullness of the use of things indifferent (for of them the Apostle speaks) have it unto thy self before God, make not a vain publication thereof, to the exasperating, grieving, or stumbling of the weak, who may by thy example, even against Conscience, use the same liberty that thou dost, and so through thy knowledge shall thy weak Bro∣ther perish, 1 Cor. 8.11. i. e. thy using this liberty hath a tendency to destroy him. You may think this is no great matter; But the same A∣postle informs you, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. Rom. 14.20. that you hereby sin a∣gainst Christ, you destroy the work of God, the Soul of thy Brother, and no man on earth can priviledge you from the wrath of God, if you destroy them with your meats (with the use of your iberty) for whom Christ dyed, and therefore the Apostle professeth, 1 Cor. 8.13. if meat make my Brother to of∣fend, I will eat no flesh, while the world standeth, lest I make my Brother to offend. O! that men were suole as Paul, in the condescention of their Charity; But alas! All men seek their own things: if they are sa∣tisfied concerning the lawfulness of the things, they look no farther: they little mind the souls of their Brethren; but are se∣curing themselves some outward peace, and earthly advantages. Few naturally care for the good of others, for the glory of God, and the edification of their Brethren.
6. Valuing Chri∣stians by externals. How are Christians valued and preferred by externals, rather than by internals? By gold-rings, by outward honours and privi∣leges, rather than by their graces? They who should have most o your esteem, love and respect, have least. A rich Formalist's company is more prized, than an humble, mortified, poor Christian's. The miscarri∣age that was in the Apostles dayes, is de∣scended to this age, and is a blot upon many of the Professours of it: Jam. 2.1. O my Brethren! Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. How are mens judgements blinded by some external glory and appearance, so that a little in a great, rich, honourable man, is counted much; and much grace in a poor man is de∣spised, 1 Cor. 11.22 over-looked, and accounted but lit∣tie How do the rich contemn the poor? How are the poor neglected in visits? But a rich, though forml Professour, shall have many Friends. How common is it for the rich to enjoy Ordinances together, and ex∣clude the poor? You goe to the houses of the rich, but seldome goe over the threshold of the poor: and yet what said Christ to him that bade him? Luke 14.12, 13, 14. When thou makest a Dinner or Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren, neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbours, lest they also bid thee again, and recompence be made thee; but when thou makest a Feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recom∣pence thee; but thou shalt be recompenced at the
resurrection of the just. You do not value men by their eminency in grace, but in parts and worldly endowments: as if gold did set men off more than grace. Those who have most of Caesar's Image, are held in higher re∣putation, than those who have most of God's Image. What a reflexion is this upon the great and blessed God? 2 Cor. 5.16. Paul durst know no man after the flesh; yet dare you esteem men by their fleshly greatness in the world. When you should fix your affections, where you see most grace, you are taken where you see, either most of the world, or most gifts, prudence, learning, or most morality. You know, 1 Cor. 12. that you bestow not most honour on the uncomely parts, on them who have least of worldly Privileges, though the Apostle, yea God expects it. How rough and rigorous are you to poor men, if over-taken in a fault? how is his offence aggravated? how severely is he censured? But if a rich mans transgression be the same, or more to be ag∣gravated from the light it hath affronted, and from the danger of its scandal; yet how is it past by, extenuated, if not excused and par∣doned? O! This having mens persons in ad∣miration, over-reverencing men for worldly things, is a great disparagement to the grace of God, as if riches and honours were more excellent than Religion and Grace: They who are highly descended, or who relate to the Courts of Princes, or who have their stores in their houses, are in greater esteem than o∣thers, who are descended from above, who
are related to the God of , who are Favourites in the New Jerusalem, and who have store of grace in their hearts. O my Bre∣thren! Jam. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. If there come into your Assembly a man with a gold ring, and there cometh also a poor man in vile rayment, and you have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, &c. are not you partial in your selves? Have not you made a difference, a groundless difference, a difference grounded on carnal respects, and not upon solid reason? Are not ye become judges of evil thoughts? Have not you made your judgement of such persons, according to the dictate of your own evil thoughts, and not according to the rule of the Word? O! how seldome do Professours value and re∣spect as God doth? Let rich Professours be sick, or under any other stroke of Gods hand, what a doe is there? what running to him? what sending after him? what endea∣vours to comfort him? But O! how are the poor of the Church despised? Little sending to them, though they want necessaries for their Bodies, in the time of their Visitation, and their Souls are ready to sink, for want of a word in season. Your frequent visiting of some, when under Gods hand, and sel∣dome resorting to others, when in the same extremity, Jam. 2.6. Hebr. 2.11. John 20.17. evidenceth, that you despise the poor: Yea, are not you ashamed to be in the company of a mean Christian? or to call a poor Christian, Brother? to own any such near relation to him? And yet the Lord is not ashamed to call such, Brethren: Goe to my
Brethren, &c. But woe and alas! the same mind is not in us, which was in Christ Jesus: Matth. 11.29. Learn of me; for I am lowly. But we are proud and haughty, and we learn of the high and mighty of the Earth to despise others of a lower condition, than our selves. The proud rich man can be content to claim kin∣dred of Abraham, he calls him, Luk. 16. Father A∣braham; but you read not that ever he said, Brother Lazarus. It will not serve us, nor save us (saith a late Bishop of England) to be able to say, Abraham is our Father, except we will charitably acknowledge the poorest Chri∣stian, even Lazarus for our Brother. Besides how soon is a rich Formalist admitted to Fel∣lowship? How hardly the Godly, if poor? 7. Slighting weak, as well as poor Chri∣stians. How do they who count themselves Chri∣stians of the highest form, who have had great acquaintance with Christ and his wayes, who have had a long experience of Christs sweet∣ness, and Satans deceits, keep by themselves, with the neglect of the lambs, of them who are but of yesterday, and know little of the mind of God? How do we slight them (Christ did not so) who have but a mite or two for to cast into the treasury, I mean, who can contribute but little to their gifts or graces. They that are poor in spirit, as well as poor in the world, have but very little respect now adayes: whereas we should treasure and re∣spect the smallest dust of Gold and Pearl: we should resemble the Lord Jesus Christ: his greatest care seems to be of the Lambs. Feed my Lambs. The Children in the Cradle, and
when they begin to take then feet should then be most dandled, should then mostly be, help up, they then should be never out of hand. If ye are Fathers, ye are unnatural ones, if you throw off the care of all the Children, that need your care, and take care of them who need it not. As grace, so growth in grace, is given to edesie the body of Christ, the eye is not for its self, but for the blind members, to lead them in paths of Righteousness. Your care should be like Gods: his care is for the least sly, as well as for the greatest of the creatures. Christ did not will the Salvation of one believer more than another, he dyed equally for all, all be∣lievers stand alike justified through the blood of Christ, Christ knocks at the poor mans door, as well as the rich, if Christ makes any difference, it is in this, the poor weak Christian hath more expressions of his love and affection, than the strong have, he shews most pitty to the greatest objects of pitty, to those that are in greatest want: yea the young Saint at his first Conversion, when he lately dropt from the Womb of the Gospel, when he is but a Babe in Christ, a sucking-Infant, he hath more kisses and embraces, more joy and comfort, than (perhaps) he meets with till he be a grown man, and old man in Christ, till he be not only a gracious, but a glorified Saint. The very Philosopher observes that by Nature Parents are still car∣ried with their greatest affections to the Child that is youngest; because that is com∣monly
most indigent, that is most hug'd in the bosome, dandled on the knee, kiss'd and smiled upon. I wish there were more of this Nature even among supra-natural Chri∣stians. It is lamentable to see how little honour is bestowed upon the weaker Vessels, and how few there are to be found, that car∣ry the lambs in their bosomes (next their hearts) and gently lead those that are with young. 8. Not com∣passiona∣ting fall'n Brethren. How little compassion is shew'd to fall'n Brethren? to such as are overtaken with a fault, yea with many? When their hearts, like the sluggards fields, are overgrown with weeds, we do not lend them our Spade, and Mattock and Knife: we do not labour to pull the brands, that are half burnt, out of the fire: to save our selves this labour, we deem them Ca-awayes, as if there were no hope of their Restitution and Salvation, we never more look after them, to be sure, we do not as the blessed Apostle John did, who (as Eusebius relates in his Ecclesiastical History) ran after the back-slidden Pro∣fessour, who was turned an High way-man, to take him by holy guile, and to recover him out of the snares of Hell. We carry it, as if we held, that sins committed after Con∣version were unpardonable. Art thou a stranger to thy own heart? If not, thou knowest God pittyeth thee, though thou fallest seven times a day, and it ill becomes thee, who hast been so oft holpen out of the deep ditch, to deny help to thy Brother,
that lyes there, and perhaps will perish, if none be more merciful than thy self. Are there no solemn engagements upon thy Soul towards thy Neighbour? Will not God take thee by the throat for thy unmerciful∣ness? Mat. 18.32, 33, 34. O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all thy debt, because thou desiredst me: shouldst not thou have had compassion upon thy fellow-Servant, even as I had pitty on thee? Verily, the Lord is wroth with you, and if this be not amended, he will deliver you to the Tormen∣tours, till you shall pay all that is due unto him. O! Repent of your defectiveness in this thing. Multitudes are hastening to the Val∣ley of Decision, multitudes are departed from their former Profession, some of them are become scandalous: their sins will lye at your doors, and their blood too, if you, through unfaithfulness, or through negligence, or through fainting, endeavour not to restore them, to set the bones again, that are un∣happily dislocated. Ye which are Spiritual, restore, Gal. 6.1. &c. Are ye all Carnal? are none of you Spiritual? If there be one, here is work for him, as he will answer the contrary at his peril. 9. Ground∣less sepa∣ration. On how uneasie and sinful (because un∣warrantable) accounts, do many withdraw from the Communion of their Brethren? What, have not they read, or heard, Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, Hebr. 10.25. as the manner of some is? It was then dangerous not to sepe∣rate; but it was more dangerous to seperate: Not to seperate was dangerous to the out∣ward
to seperate was dangerous to the inward man. When ever you hear of Demas, that he hath left us, the next news you will hear of him, is, he hath embraced this present World. If the Devil can, like a subtle Cutter on the road, draw thee off from thy company, he will soon cut the throat of thy Profession. It's no wonder to hear an house is robbed, that stands alone from Neighbours. Two are better than one. The Church of God is compared to a City, the weak walls of the houses therein, would never endure a blustering wind; but by their Neighbour-hood and Contiguity, they suc∣cour each other: But when one stands di∣vided, the next news you may expect to hear of, is a sall, and if it be a towring-house, the fall is great. And yet alas! upon every prejudice and discontent, if one Brother falls out with another, presently the whole Con∣gregation is threatened with the loss of the prejudiced and discontented party's company, and condemned for the miscarriages of one, and perhaps the supposed Offendour hath not the liberty to know his Offence, in order to his Repentance, nor the Church regularly acquainted therewith. 10. Not sepe∣rating from Per∣sons under Censure. The last great Evil among Church-Members, that I shall mention, is, Their not withdrawing from every Brother that walks disorderly, when under Censure. How so∣lemnly is this required by the Apostle? Now we command you, Brethren, 2 Thes. 3.6. in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your
selves from every Brother, that walks disor∣derly. Who can tell what blessed effects of Gods own Censures their eyes might have seen, had not Professours been herein guil∣ty? By a general dislike the person censured might soon be convinced and humbled. Un∣doubtedly it was your duty to have added weight unto the Discipline of Christ, what you could, and to discountenance those, whom the Lord had discarded. Instances are not wanting of such as God hath brought to repentance by the strangeness of such as were once their Fellow-members. Possi∣bly you may be condemned for such a carri∣age, but if ever God bring such Censured persons to Repentance, though it be upon their death bed, though it be in a forraign Country, God will not suffer them to dye quietly, till they have acquitted, yea justi∣fied your carriage towards them. CHAP. XXXVI. Their miscarriages towards Sinners. 1 MAy not too much familiarity with pro∣fane wretches be justly charged upon Church-members? Church-members associa∣ting with the Pro∣fane. I know man is a sociable creature; but that will not excuse Saints as
to their carelessness of the choice of their company. The very Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Field, love not Hererogeneous company: Birds of a Feather flock together. I have been afraid, that many, who would be thought eminent, of an high stature in grace and godliness, yet see not the vast dif∣ference there is between Nature and Rege∣neration, Sin and Grace, the Old and the New Man, Whence? From not believing the en∣mity that is in the feed of the Ser∣pent a∣gainst the feed of the Wo∣man. Psal. 14.4. Prov. 28.15. Isa. 51.20. Psal. 22.12. Mat. 7.6. Ezek. 2.6. Prov. 4.16. seeing all company is alike unto them. And is it not thus with thee? Is it not all one, whether thou art with a Child of God, or with a Child of the Devil? Are not those fit Companions for thee, who slight and rebel against God every day? O! How few consult and believe the Scrip∣ture's setting forth the enmity of wicked men a∣gainst Gods people? The Scripture tells us, They eat up Gods people, as bread, which im∣plyes a strange inclination in them to devour the Saints, and that they take as great delight therein, as an hungry man in eating, and that it is natural to them to molest them: The Scripture compares them, for their hurtful qualities, to Lyons and Bears, to Foxes for subtilty, to wild Bulls, to greedy Swine, to Scorpions, to Bryars and Thornes, (grievous and vexing things.) The Scripture represents them as industrious and unwearied in their bloody Enterprizes, they cannot sleep without doing mischief: Herodias had rather have the blood of a Saint, than half of a Kingdom: Haman would pay a great Fine to the King, so the scattered Jews (who
keep not the Kings laws) may be cut off. Wick∣ed men will run the hazard of damning their own Souls, rather than not fling a dagger at the Apple of Gods eye: though they know, what one word (Aha) cost; yet they will break through all natural, civil, and moral obligations to ruine Gods people: The Ho∣ly-Ghost calls them implacable men, 2 Tim. 3.3. fierce and headstrong: they are like the hot Oven for fury, like the Sea for boundless rage: yet who hath believed this Scripture Report? Did we believe what Enemies all wicked men are unto all Saints, Eviden∣ces there∣of. We should not lean to our own prudence and discretion to secure us from any danger by these men: we would get an Ark to secure us from the deluge of their wrath: If at any time we be cast among them and delivered, we would bless God with the three Children, that the hot fiery Oven did not consume us: we would not wonder, when we hear of any of their barbarous cruelty; but ra∣ther wonder at Gods restraining them eve∣ry day: we would be suspicious of receiv∣ing hurt, when cast among light and frothy Companions: we would shun their com∣pany, as we do Lyons and Scorpions: we would never commit any trust or secret in∣to their hands: we would not be light hearted, whilst in their Society: we would not rely on their promises any more than we would on the promise of the Devil, their Father: we would long for Heaven to be delivered from the tents of Kedar:
we would not count any of the Saints secu∣red from danger, though related to any great wicked man: we would not twist our selves with them by matching our selves or Children to these Sons and Daughters of Belial: neither would we make choice of Devils to be our Servants How few do believe what a quarrel God hath with wicked men? From not believing Gods quarrel with them. Act. 2.40. And that not only with the loose; but the formal and hypocritical also? If we did, we would tremble as much to be among them, as to be in an house, that is falling: we would endeavour to save our selves from this untoward generation. The Apostle would not so have adjured them, so charg'd, so intreated them, had he not known the danger of wicked company. Psa. 7.11. God is an∣gry with the wicked every day; his bow is bent, his arrows are on the strings, the instruments for their ruine are all prepared. And is it safe to be there where the Arrows of God are ready to fly about our ears? How was the Apostle afraid to be in the Bath with Cerin∣thus? Numb. 16.26. Depart (saith God by Moses) from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, lest you be consumed in all their sins, How have the baskets of good figs suffered with the bad! Is it not prejudicial to the gold to lye with the dross? Lot had been ruined by his Neigh∣bourhood to the Sodomites, if God had not wrought wonderfully for his deliverance. Will you put God to work miracles to save you from your ungodly company? It is dan∣gerous being in the road with thieves, whilst
Gods hue and cry of Vengeance is at their backs. Prov. 13.20. A Companion of fools shall be destroyed. The very beasts may instruct you to consult better for your security, the very Deer are afraid of a wounded chased Deer, and there∣fore for their preservation thrust him out of their company. How few believe their own experiences, From not believing that they have suf∣fered from them. what they have suffered by the company of the Un∣godly? It had been better we had gone to the Pest-house, and eat and drank with per∣sons infected with the Plague, even whilst the soar and botch was running on them, than to accompany with wicked men: our bodies would have been endangered only by the one; but our Souls are by the other. Is not the poyson of Asps under their tongues? Doth not the Devil act them? Eph. 2.2. Doth he not work effectually in the Children of disobedience? Doth he not inform them? Is there any breath, that is not infections, coming from their lips? How soon could Joseph rap out an Oath by living with Pharaohs Courtiers? It was not long time, that Peter was (nne∣cessarily, without a Call) in the High-Priests Hall, and how quickly do we hear him Curse and Swear, and deny his Lord and Master? We are insensibly insnared, and defiled, by wicked men, as we are black'd and discolou∣red by lying long under the hot and scortch∣ing Sun-beams. Do not we yet know and feel how a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and that one sinner destroys much good, and that those that were mingled among the
Heathen, learned their wayes? Have not you found after such company-keeping, how your hearts have been dead, dull, straitned, loth, and unwilling to come into Gods presence? It is difficult (saith a late ingenious Writer) even to a miracle to keep Gods Commandements, and evil company too. How suddenly after your Soul-refreshments in your Closet Com∣munion have you lost all your heats, and spi∣ritual fervencies, which you had in secret, and have instantly cooled by going forth into cold and corrupt air? When a Saint hath been in private ravished with the love of God, and the joys of Heaven, and afterwards meets with company, which neither doth, nor can speak one word of such matters, what a damp is it to him? What a quenching (as it were) of the Spirit of God in him? Nay is not that true which one saith, that the people of God do generally lose more by worldly men (that are of a blameless conversation before men) than they lose by wicked and profane men? O! how oft hath communion with carnal men been at least an occasion of blotting your evidences? and of your suspecting the truth of your own graces, whilst you have omitted the duties of admonition and reproof, when there was a call thereto? O! how oft have you said, If I cannot suffer such a mans frowns and dis∣pleasure, and therefore have omitted my duty to their Souls, and durst not appear for God against their sins, how shall I deny my self in greater matters? How shall I suf∣fer at a stake for Christ? How shall I resist
to blood, fighting against sin? You hold the Wolfe by the Ear, whilst among them: If you reprove them, you get a blot; if not, you fear, you are too cowardly to be inrolled among the Saints. I will acquaint you with an Observation of mine: When I have seen a Christian fall into an intimacy with vain and erroneous company, I have counted it a mark of a back-sliding heart, and have found it so too too oft: And no wonder; for we our selves count it a disgrace to us to accompany with them, who associate with people sus∣pected for uncleanness and dishonesty, and so doth the Spirit of God, who will not par∣take in the scandal of such Association: Ve∣rily, He will not be a Partner with you, when you are not choice of your Fellow∣ship. How few consider, From not consider∣ing, how hereby they har∣den them in their wicked∣ness. how they harden wicked men, by an intimacy with them, Whereas withdrawment from them, might be a means to make them ashamed? Whilst we are mer∣ry and jovial with them, we make them be∣lieve their condition is not deplorable, their danger is not great; whereas, if we shun∣ned them, as we would a Bowed-Wall, whilst they remain enemies to the Lord, this might do them good, for the startling of them, and rouzing of them, out of their unhappy se∣curity, and strong delusions, wherein they are held. Not dis∣charging Duty in their company, Secondly, May not neglect of discharging the Duties owed to wicked men, whilst in their company, be also justly charged upon Church-Members?
Professours carelessness of the perishing condition of the Souls even of the vilest, is a sin much to be lamented. It is an Iron Age we live in, and mens hearts are strangely hardned, as to any pitty they shew to the multitudes, who are in a natural and damnable condition. Me-thinks you should reflect on the misery of an unconverted state, whilst you your selves were so lately in it. Are not you convinced, Several weighty Consider∣ations, to perswade Professors to be treating with Souls a∣bout their eternal Estate, what-ever company they are in. that those with whom you converse daily, have reasonable, immortal Souls, capable of eternal life or misery? Have not they the same common Nature with you? Are there not (at least) many civil bonds, wherein you stand related to them? Doth not their misery call aloud for your compassions? Are they not in the gall of bitterness, and bonds of iniquity? Have they yet any part or fellowship in the pardon of their Sins? The endeavouring to heal the back-slidings of Christians, though a very ne∣cessary work, is not so necessary (for they will surely be pardoned and healed, they are not in such hazard of damnation) as to en∣deavour to open the eyes of these poor blind wretches, and to turn them from the power of Satan unto God. Would you not make more haste to cure a man, that is taken with a swooning fit, than one that hath a little swelling in his singer? I wonder you are no more affected with the miseries that attend your Unregenerate Friends and Acquain∣tance, who must suddenly be Converted, or Damned: Me-thinks you should pitty them
the more; because they pitty not themselves. Me-thinks the value that Christ hath put up∣on Souls, by bleeding for them, the ran∣some that he hath given for miserable man, and the unwearied pains he takes for the re∣ducement of fall'n man, should teach us to open our lips, to give some directions and counsels to them, who are within a stride of Hell, but a breath between them and eternal ruine: And yet how are Gods people strait∣ned towards these forlorn and miserable, un∣done, condemned Creatures? Though they are under the curse of the Law, though the sentence of death be past against them, and is ready to be executed every moment; yet you exhort them not to flye from wrath to come: If they will perish, they may perish, for any spiritual contribution that you will afford them. It grieves me sometimes, to see how Gods people eat up their own and others time, with vain, frothy and unsavo∣ry words: When they should be speaking some rouzing, startling words of Hell and Damnation, of the necessity of Regenerati∣on, of Eternity, of the foolish choice men make in preferring the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, before eternal joyes; of the deceits of the heart, of the cheats of the Devil, of the malignity of sin, of the curse of the Law, &c. they are talking of this fa∣shion, or of that, they are perhaps censu∣ring one another, but endeavouring nothing for the undeceiving their deluded Compani∣ons. You cannot but know what advantages
you have by your intimacies with them, to deliver that to them, which they will receive from you, when Satan perhaps hath imbit∣tered them against their Ministers, so that all Pulpit-counsels and reproofs are lost up∣on them. Besides, You are in private with them, and you know by your selves, how loth, how backward you were, to apply the truths of God to your own Souls, but you, as Nathan to David, may goe and say, Thou art the Man, thou the Woman: You may hear their pleas for themselves, and so have an opportunity to confute them; whereas they are reserved to their Ministers, though they have been friendly, earnestly and frequently invited to a Christian conference: And yet how do you neglect all these Opportunities of serving the Necessities of your Friends: You pretend love unto them; but how can ye see the blind before your eyes tumbling into the Lake of Hell, and yet not call on them to return and live? It is admirable, that you should think you have the Divine Nature within you, and yet be void of com∣passions to these miserable Objects, who lye wounded before you, where-ever you goe or come. O! Me-thinks, when you enter the house of an Unregenerate, you should thus meditate, Now have I an opportunity to save a Soul from Hell, to have a greater con∣quest than Caesar or Alexander could boast of: Now may I shew my self a Friend of God, by pleading his right to the Creature: Now may I have an occasion to make all the Angels of
Heaven laugh and sing, and all the cursed De∣vils to roar, by saving a lost Son. And will you see these wounded in your way, and pass them by with an unmerciful Spirit? If you see your Brother have need of outward things, (much more if needing Grace, the Image of, and Peace with, God) and you shut up your bowells of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in you? You have some pitty left, when you see a man fall'n under his horse, or strugling for life upon the waters, or in an house fired, your bowells are turned within you; But a∣las! here are they that are dropping into the Lake of Fire every moment, that are drag∣ged up and down, from one Lust to another, by the Devil, (a sorer bondage by farr) and yet you do not pitty them. O! Pitty them, pitty them; Goe over to Macedonia, and help them. It is a grief to my Soul, to consider, how dull, how useless Christians are, in the Towns and Villages, where Providence hath cast them: If they meet with a man, they will not so much as ask, whether he be bound for Heaven, or Hell? whether he knows the necessity of the new Birth, yea or no? whether he hath left Sin, as his greatest bur∣den, whether he be willing of Christ, and Salvation by him, upon his own terms? Nay, Professours will not so much as counsel them to read a good Book, or lend them one, if they are poor and unable to buy: they will be at no cost to save a Soul, that is really of more worth, than a World. How
is it, that you account your selves Christi∣ans, whilst you have no higher esteems of Souls? Or how can you have any assurance, that you hate Sin, whilst you labour not the removal of it, in whomsoever you find it? If you see men trifling away their time, why do you not put them upon redeeming their time? If you find them lovers of pleasures, why do you not invite them, and press them, to look after cordial joy and mirth, and the true pleasures, that are at Gods right hand? If you are the Subjects of Christ, how can you endure Treason against him, and not suppress it? I'le never believe, that man ever mourned for sins of his own, that doth not for sins of others; or that he ever hated sin in himself, that doth not endeavour to ruine it in others Souls, as well as in his own. Be ashamed at your pretensions, as if you had hearts of flesh, when you have hearts of stones, the hearts of Tygers, the hearts of Infidels, or else you would pitty the miserable unconverted Souls. And what, if they desire not your help: the more need you have to pitty them: the less awakened they are out of their cursed security, the more miserable and dangerous is their state. O! Put on the bowells of Jesus Christ: car∣ry not your selves in an high, proud way, in a lofty, magisterial way, towards these poor Souls: Do not think thou hast dis∣charged duty towards them, by running into a corner, and backbiting them for blindness, hardness, contempt of Christ, &c. but ra∣ther
help them to some of your eye-salve, that they may see. Consider you have Tal∣lents, and account you must for them, and be-think your selves, whether you may not give a better account, by endeavouring to reduce these poor Souls, that are straying to Hell, than by letting them alone to damn themselves: Consider sadly what answer you will make, when Christ shall arise and plead with you, when Christ shall say, Where is thy Brother? Will Cain's answer serve? Am I my Brothers keeper? Will not Christ reply on you? Did not I come from Heaven on purpose to redeem these perish Souls? Did not I charge you to exhort one another daily? to do good to all? Did not I furnish you with wisdome and experience, that you might be able and ready to help o∣thers? Did not I by wonders of Provi∣dence prolong your dayes, that you might be useful? Did not I give you an interest in the affections of your Neighbours, that you might be as the Dew, and as the Rivers of Waters to the parched ground? that you might be the Light and Salt of the Earth? Nay, did not I remove the Ministry, (a∣mong other weighty grounds) to try your affections to perishing Souls? And is this your answering all my designs and expecta∣tions, to rail at them, as the ungodly par∣ty, and not to endeavour to make them better? O! Consider how sad your case will be, if the blood of thousands of Souls shall be lain at your doors, for your neg∣lects,
for your carelessness, for your being worse than Balaams Ass; for he once repro∣ved, perhaps you have never. How do you know, but a few words of yours might be as forcible as Jonah's to Nineveh, as the Sa∣maritan woman's was to the City? Is this to love thy Neighbour as thy self? Do'st love thy self, and not regard thy Soul? And canst thou love thy Neighbour, and not endeavour to save him from perishing? to pull the brand out of the fire? Have you so learned Christ? When our Lord dwelt in flesh among us, was he dumb before sinners, as you are, when he saw the multitude want∣ing bread, did not he deal forth the bread of life to them? did not he prefer this work before his meat and drink? had not he com∣passion for the ignorant? did not he enlighten poor ignorant Souls? and reprove the Hy∣pocrisie of others? When he went into the Publicans houses, did not he preach of the Kingdome of God unto them? And hath not he given you an enample, that you should do as he hath done? Should not you make it a matter of Conscience to write after so great, so safe, so glorious a Copy? to follow so worthy a Leader and Pattern? Add withall, what stumbling blocks you have laid in the wayes of sinners? how many have been of∣fended by your conversation? And will you send so many hundreds to Hell, and not en∣deavour the conversion of some? You pre∣tend the want of parts: But alas! you want bowels, you want affections, you have not
a real sight, and deep sense of eternal mat∣ters: If you had, you would with tears in your eyes beseech your Neighbours to mind their perishing Souls. Have not you so ma∣ny parts as to say to your Neighbours, Repent, and Pray, if perhaps your sins may be forgiven. Go into thy Closet, Professour, and there mourn over thy hard heartedness, and un∣mercifulness to the Souls of thousands, of whom thou might'st have been an instrument of Conversion, if thou hadst but attempted it. Or could you not have gone and be∣seeched your Ministers to lay to heart the pe∣rishing estate of such a man or woman? Or might you not have entreated those Souls to consult some Minister about their Everlasting State? You have not done what you could: you pretend you cannot convert them; but you will not, you will not try whether you can work them over from sin to God. You say they are dead in sins and trespasses, they have hearts of stone, as insensible as stones, as stupid, as blockish, as impenetrable as stones: And wast not thou so some years ago? Hast thou forgot the rock, out of which thou wast hewn? Nay, is there not too much stone in thy heart, that thou canst see thy God so dishonoured, Christ so reproached by those, who are baptized in his Name, and wear his Livery,, and yet not endeavour to pull them out of the fire? Thou relievest thy self with the mercy thou shewest to the bodies of the poor, that beg at thy door: when thou seest their soars, their lean cheeks,
and naked shoulders, thou succourest them, there things thou oughtest to do; but not to lay aside the Spiritual Almes, that were due unto them: thou shouldst have counselled them, admonished them, enlightned them; and now if they perish in their ignorance, will not their blood be required at thy hands? O! tremble at your blood-guiltiness. The Lord of Heaven and Earth, who layes his claim to Souls, All Souls are mine, hath charged thee, not to hate thy Brother in thine heart, not to suffer sin to rest upon him, but to reprove him: And yet thou lettest him alone, to perish in his iniquity. You are so taken up with your own temporal or eternal good, that you lit∣tle regard what becomes of others to all eter∣nity. How do some hope to slink to Heaven alone? Perhaps they seek their own profit; 1 Cor. 10.33. but not the profit of many, that they may be saved. O that men would cast their eyes a∣broad (saith one) the very dumb inanimate Creatures would teach them better; every Creature assimulates, Fire turns what is near it into Fire, Earth converts into Earth, Flowers will be scattering of their seed and scent. How canst thou hope the blessing of the new Creation rests upon thee, when thou dost not increase and multiply? O that you would be prevailed with, to help, counsel and direct others to Heaven! If you have found the way thither, be pleased to shew others the way to life, the way to glory. O! Pitty them, as Christ pittied you; Christ hath led you out of the wilderness of sin and
trouble, Be you eyes to the blind, direct them the right way to the Land of Promise, tell them what course you took, declare un∣to them what God hath done for your Souls. Do not you see how industrious Christs ene∣mies are to diffuse their poyson? Do not Turks and Papists endeavour to proselyte? Will they not compass Sea and Land to spread and diffuse their Leaven? Do not all people (besides you) labour to win to their Gods? Do not unclean persons and drunkards entice others to the same wicked∣ness? shall Satans Vassals be filling Hell? and will you not labour to fill Heaven? Is it not your Honour to bring many Sons and Daughters unto God? What will become of the next Generation? How few Servants (if any) will Christ have, if others take no more pains, than you do, to convince, to allure, to convert? I fear Christ will take up the old complaint, Mat. 8.20. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds have Nests, but the Son of Man will not have where to lay his head. Consider how oft your poor Ministers have beseeched you to enter on this work, lest other-mens∣sins prove your damnation; and yet how hath a dumb Devil possessed you? O that yet you would commune with your own hearts, whether you are willing that thousands should perish, and go to Hell? and if they answer, No, Ask them a second question, why do not you use the means to prevent it, Namely Exhortation, Reproof, and Coun∣sell? You have covered over your want of
Zeal and tenderness with a pretence that you have not the gifts of Ministers, you cannot so exhort as Ministers, &c. But have you not been told that God can work by small means, as well as by great, and that by things that are not God can confound the wisdome of the flesh, and bring to naught the things that are? Is not this like the pretence of not being eloquent? Do you not know, have you not heard, that the issue, and event depends on the blessng of the Lord, rather than on the work it self? Is it not all one to the Lord, to wound by a short, as by a long sword? Cannot God bless a few words in thy mouth, as he did in Christs, and the Apostles? Can'st not thou say, follow Christ? and may not pre∣sently a Matthew, a Publican leave his sinfull courses and embrace the Christian faith? Can'st thou not say, Repent and Believe, that your sins may be blotted out? and may not God concur with thee, as he did of old times? Is the Lords hand shortned, that it cannot help? If Israel be not gathered, yet thy reward is with the Lord, if thine heart were upright, and could testifie that night and day thou hast not ceased to warn, to rebuke, and counsel. Certainly your memories are not so bad, but you must remember the weight of sin, and of the wrath of God: you have seen the wonders of the Lord in the deeps: you, that have escaped to shoar, can tell of the Rocks and Shelves, and Storms, which you have been delivered from; and will you set other Ship∣wrack their Souls, rather than hold out your
light unto them,  may avoyd their ruines? What shall I say to humble you? There is more  in Hell, than you can afford: Blush, blush, and be ashamed to have less zeal, love, and pitty, to perishing Souls, than Dives in Hell had, he would have his Brethren saved from the Valley of Hinnom. Your silence will make others think that Hell is a tollerable place, that sin is not so evil and bitter a thing, that to lye under Gods wrath is not so great a misery, whilst you are so slow and backward to warn your Friends and Acquaintance that they slee from these, and take Sanctuary in the true City of Refuge, the Lord Jesus Christ. O! If you know the worth of a Soul, pitty the multi∣tude, with whom the day is not broke, whose forlorn Souls are under a continual Massacre from the bloudy Butcher of Hell: Besmear your Souls no longer with the guilt of their bloud: Let them not starve for want of bread, whilst you have to give them. I shall bless God for ever and ever, if this your negli∣gence of the Souls of those, whom you may account without, may be cordially bewailed, and you for the future double your diligence for their conversion. Ministers cannot con∣vert without the Concourse of Omnipoten∣cy, neither can you. Though Satan and thy own lazy heart hath told thee, thou art unfit to set upon this work, yet better do it meanly, than wholy omit it. God (like Pa∣rents on earth) loves to see his Children lift at those duties, which are too hard for them,
and then he steps in and is a Co-worker with them. What God did by illiterate Fisher∣men, by Priscilla, he can do by thee. The Lord pardon thy former unmercifulness to the Souls of men; But if thou continue careless and cruel, if thou wilt not by Pray∣ers for them, and counsels to them, seek their reducement, as sure as thou art reading, the voyce of thy Brothers blood is crying against thee from the earth. By your example be∣fore (if not since) Profession, you have been the cause of the destruction of Souls, of how many who can tell. And, as Jerobo∣am made Israel to sin many years after he was rotten in his grave, so your sin, your wicked examples may propagate the trade of sin from generation to generation, until Christ shall come to Judgement. Tremble, trem∣ble at the thoughts of it, if thou hast not the heart of a Beast in thee. O! how many Souls are crying in Hell against thee, cursing the day they knew thee, or their Ancestours knew thee; for that by thee they learned to sin the more, and were strengthned in their wickedness by thy tongue, and by thy life? And now are not you bound to do your ut∣most to make restitution? to labour to save them that be alive? Is it not reasonable that you should labour to win Souls to Gods, as you have to the Devils, service? and to have many blessing God in the Heavens for you, that ever they were in the company of such an active zealous Christian, who by word and life was instrumental to bring them
to the knowledge of themselves, and of their God? And is it not a glorious work, to hold forth such Light to the World, that they seeing your good works, may glorifie God, and you may be Propagators of Zeal and Holiness, from Generation to Genera∣tion, till Christ shall appear to judge the World, and to reward you for all the servi∣ces you have done to his Name? O! how welcome shall that man be to Heaven and Christ, who hath fed the Souls, and clothed the Souls, and visited the Souls, which he hath purchased with his own precious blood? Christ will own thee for his Benefactour. CHAP. XXXVII. The Dis-ingenuity and Scandalousness of their Miscarriages. WHen God had given the Prophet Ezekiel a large Catalogue of Ju∣dah's Abominations, The wicked∣ness of the for∣mer mis∣carriages. Ezek. 8.9. V. 6, 13, 15. he then shew'd him the Wickedness of their Abominations: He said unto me, Goe in, and Behold the wicked Abominations they do here. He commanded him once, and a∣gain, and again, to turn him yet again, and he should see greater Abominations. I can∣not
indeed promise thee, that thou shalt now see greater Abominations, than those already mentioned: All that I shall now do, shall be to represent the former Miscarriages in their crimson dye, and scarlet colour. And, The First Thing I shall mention, Com∣mitred against so good and kind a God. Eph. 4.30. as ma∣king your Sins (Professours) out of measure sinful, is your Dis-ingenuity in so sinning a∣gainst God. O! You have sinned against a gracious God: You have grieved the good Spi∣rit of God, whereby (some amongst you) have been sealed to the day of Redemption. I am bold to say, that one godly man's sinning against light and mercy, doth more break the heart of God, than the bruitish Sins of a Pa∣gan Kingdom. Ezek. 6.9. I am broken (saith God) with your whorish heart, which hath departed from me, &c. And ye shall loath your selves for your evils, which ye have committed in your abominations. Amos 2.13. God hath been press'd down with your sins, as the Cart with sheaves, till he hath even Creak'd under the weight. God expected more from the Treet planted in Zion, than from the wild ones in the Wilder∣ness. Luke 13.9. Grief and Burthen springs much from unexpected Unkindnesses. I looked for Fruit, and there was none. How were David's and Saul's Sins aggravated from the merciful Dispensations of God to them? 1 Sam. 15.17, 18, 19. And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast not thou made the Head of the Tribes of Is∣rael, and the Lord annointed thee King over Is∣rael, and the Lord seat thee on a journey, and
said, Goe, and utterly destroy the Sinners, &c. Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the Lord? And Nathan said to David, &c. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, 2 Sam. 12.7, 8, 9. I annoint∣ed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul: And I gave thee thy Masters House, and thy Masters Wives into thy bosome, and gave thee the House of Israel, and of Judah, and if that had been too little, I would morcover have given unto thee such and such things. Wherefore hast thou despised the Commandement of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? And hath there not been as much dis∣ingenuity and unkindness in our Sins? The Lord hath given his Statutes to us, and his Laws, He hath not so dealt with all the Na∣tions under Heaven: He hath nourished and brought us up as Children; Isa. 1.2, 3, 4. but we have rebel∣led against him. The Oxe knoweth his Owner, and the Asse his Masters Crib: but Israel doth not know, my People (my People) doth not cousider. Ah sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, &c. God fetcheth a deep sigh (Ah!) under the burden of this In∣gratitude: His Spirit is laden and troubled with it. They have provoked the Holy One of Israel. Mis-improvements of Mercies are very provoking. When God comes for Bread, to be sent away with Stones, must need vex the good Spirit of the Lord. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth; for the Lord hath spoken it. Oh for Professours to be worse than Publicans; for they will be kind to such as are kind to them! Have not
we sinn'd against God, even with his fa∣vours, and requited him evil for good? May not the Lord say unto us? Deut. 32.6. Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father, that hath bought thee? All the mercies we have received, greaten our sins. The more richly that God hath heaped his Blessngs upon us, the more wan∣tonly we have followed the swinge of our own Lusts, and the more contemptuously spurned at his holy Commandements. We have great cause to be ashamed, for that all our sins have been  gainst mercy, and therefore against the Principle and Law of Nature. It is a perpetual Spot, not to be worn out by time, that of King Jeash, that he slew Zechariah, the Son of Jehojada, the High Priest who had been loyal unto him in the getting of the Kingdom, and faith∣ful in the administration of it. Chron. 24.22, 23. Thus Joash the King remembred not the kindness which Je∣hojada his Father had done to him, but slew his Son, and when he dyed, he said, the Lord look upon it, and requite it. And it came to pass, at the end of the year, that the Host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the people, from among the people. But alas! What Engagements could Zecha∣riah possibly lay on Joash, that may weigh with the Mercies of our God to us? And yet how have we made his choicest Favours as Arrows, to shoot at the God that sent them? What wretched Prodigals have we been, to
wast all in the service of Hell, which were conferr'd with so open an hand, to draw forth our time, strength and spirits, in the praises and services of God? For this our In∣gratitude, Ezra 9.13, 14. the Lord may justly be angry with us, till he hath consumed us, so that there shall be no remnant, nor escaping. O that you would remember the Lord from Shittim to Gilgal, Mica 6.5. i. e. from the beginning of Mer∣cy, to the end of it! And you will hardly find, that you (any of you) have been the better for it; but many, Jeshurun-like, have waxed fat, and kicked. God is this day cal∣ling out of Heaven to England, and to each particular person in it, Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people, and unwise? I could even wish, for the thousands of our Israel, that they had received fewer Privi∣leges, or had had the grace to serve the Lord in the abundance of all things, better than they have to this very day. If ever you pur∣pose sound Repentance, then take a view of all the Mercies of God towards you: Goe back to the time, when the first stone was laid; yea goe back to the eternal projects of God, to make thee out of nothing, and to redeem thee, when worse than nothing: Review the upper and lower Springs, with which Soul and Body have been refreshed: Remember how many eminent Deliverances and Salvations God hath wrought for thee: And if at any time thou hast been straitned in outward comforts, yet remember how thou hast been enlarged with spiritual graces;
if God hath denyed thee in one kind of mer∣cy, he hath supplyed it by a gracious won∣derfull commutation, in another, in a better: if thou hast been denyed the fleshpots of Egypt, and the land flowing with honey, yet it hath been all made up in the bread (the Mannah) that fell from Heaven: if thou hast had some∣times bodily infirmities, yet thou hast been strengthned with all might in the inward man: if thou hast been denyed thee the gold of the earth, yet God hath supplyed thee in ma∣king thee rich in faith: If sometimes Friends have been unfriendly, inconstant, or trea∣cherous; yet God hath stood by thee, when all left thee. God hath dealt with you, as with Sons: your gleanings are better than the Vin∣tage of the world. Having laid these, and innumerable such mercies in one Scale, now lay in the other Scale thy soul ingratitude, not only that particular sin of unthankful∣ness, that thou hast been guilty of (of which before) but the ingratitude that hath been in all thy sins, in thy pride, hypocrisie, for∣mality, self-love, self-seeking, impatience, neglect of duty to Superiours, Equals, and Inferiours, profaneness, intemperance, un∣righteousness, &c. that Remembring the Lord and his goodness towards thee, together with thy cursed returns, thou may'st yet abhor thy self in dust and ashes. Take words, and say, My Salvations are more than I can number, Blessed be God, the Father of all mercy; But my sins also are innumerable, I cannot recount them, shame upon me, O! how
vile have I made my self, whilst by abuse of rich mercy, Mat. 5.47. Isa. 1.3. I have lived below the in∣genuity that is found in Publicans and Beasts? O that God would give me the suc∣cess, that the Angel had on such a sinfull people as you are! Judg. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And the Angel of the Lord come up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you into the land, which I swear unto your Fathers, and I said I will never break my covenant with you, and ye shall make no league with the Inhabitants of this land, &c. but ye have not obeyed my voice, why have ye done this, &c. And it came to pass, when the Angel of the Lord spake these words to all the Children of Israel, that the people lift up their voice, and wept. Secondly, Very scanda∣lously. The scandalousness of your miscar∣riages is another aggravation of them. Had all the forementioned abominations been committed in Defarts and Holes of the earth, where none had been privy to your irregula∣rities, you had had no sin in comparison of what you (now) stand justly charged with: If you had been only rotten hearted, that would not have been under the eye and cen∣sure of the World: Religion would have had no blemish, no loss, no considerable loss thereby: But men have looked to your hands and feet (whilst God to your hearts) and find∣ing so many defilements on you, hereby the Name of God hath been blasphemed, God is spoken evil of, whilst you have done evil before men. You knew the world was an
observing world, greedy to espy all the Er∣rata's of your lives: you knew spots in Cam∣brick would sooner be marked, than in course cloth: you knew how apt the world was to condemn all Saints for the miscarria∣ges of a few pretenders to Christianity: you knew how the world lay in wait, like the Arabian for his prey, waiting for somewhat to calumniate Christ and his followers with: you knew the tongues, that are set on fire of Hell, would belch out their emnity upon the sight of your sins: you knew how apt they were to be prejudiced against you, and (as the people in Elies dayes, from the mis∣carriages of them, that pretended to draw near to God) would by your occasion ab∣horre the Offerings of the Lord. 1 Sam. 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.16. 2 Sam. 12.14. 2 Tim. 2.26. You should have walked with such a good Conscience, that, whereas the world would speak against you as evil-doers, they might be ashamed: But insteed of this you have opened the mouth of Blasphemy: you have gratified the Devil exceedingly: were he capable of joy, you have furthered it, by being contented to be winnowed by him, and to be led captive at his will: The scandals of men reputed for holi∣ness have been his greatest Harvests, his greatest advantages: He hopes by the falls of Cedars to break down and crush the Shrubs and tender plants, that grow nigh. God a∣lone knows what mischief you have done to Religion already, and where the mischief will end. Jeroboam made Israel to sin, many years after his death. Whereas ye should
have left a precious Name behind you, holy exact copies of Righteousness for succeeding generations to write after, you have laid the stumbling block of your iniquitie before the faces of hundreds and thousands, to cause them to fall. Give over wondring that for these last ten years the Gospel hath had a a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts, know, you have, like the Serpent, the Dragon, stood as in the place of bearing, you have hindred the Birth, or devoured the Child as soon as Born: you have been of the old ge∣neration of Gods Curse, you would not to Heaven your selves, Luke 11.52. and hindred others, that would, if you had not laid your offences in their way. Perhaps some of you may think to relieve your selves, that you know none are taken in these Gins and Traps: you will know shortly that he that tempteth to evil commits an hainous sin, though his tempta∣tion prove not effectual. God will not re∣ward men altogether by the event of scan∣dals,; but by the tendency of Scandal in its own nature: Others not sinning after your example will not excuse and lessen your faults, which were so apt to lead them into sin. Matth. 18.17. Wo (saith Christ) to him, by whom the offence comes. Wo to them that take offence; but greater wo to them, that give it. If God threatned Eli to take him up by the roots, for not punishing Scandals in his Sons: 1 Sam. 3.13. be∣cause his Sons made themselves vile, and he re∣strained them not. What dreadfull judge∣ments are we exposed to, who are the
offence-givers? Wonder not if having cau∣sed many to stumble at the Law, that God will make us contemptible and base before all the people. Ye are departed out of the way: Mal. 2.8, 9. ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of Hosts: therefore have I also made you contemptible and base be∣fore all the people. How oft have we been as unsavoury Salt? Mat. 5.13. and is it any wonder if we be cast out, and thrown to the Dunghill? O that you would remember David, take him into your Closet with you, he was scan∣dalous in the matter of Uriah and Bathsheba: it is true, he repented in dust and ashes, he abhorred himself, made his bed to swim, the sin was pardoned, the guilt thereof removed, a solemn absolution was sent him by a Pro∣phet, and yet how did God follow him with misery upon misery? He might in the death of the Child, in the defilement of his Daugh∣ter, in the murder of Ammon, and in the treason of Absolon, in his weeping and going barefoot, in his Concubines being defiled, and his own Crown and Life jeoparded, in all these things he might see the woful fruits of Scandal. 2 Sam. 12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Wherefore hast thou despised the Commandement of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? Thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the Sword, and hast taken his Wife to be thy Wife, and hast slain him with the Sword of the Children of Ammon. Now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thine House, &c. Behold, I will raise up evil against thee, out
of thine own House, and I will take thy Wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbour, and he shall lye with thy Wives, in the sight of the Sun. For thou didst it se∣cretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The Lord also hath put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the Child also that is born unto thee, shall surely dye. If David, repenting of his Scandals, be thus punished, what will become of you, who have made Religion to be abhorred? and yet are insensible, unbroken and unhumbled to this very day? Well may (unrepented of) Scandals lye in your bones many dayes hence, Psal. 51.8. Psal. 38.8. seeing David's did, yea he roared because of his sin: Well may you goe drooping to your graves, being bereft of all joy, and com∣fortable looks from Heaven, whilst repent∣ing David lost so long the joy of Gods salvation. Psal. 51.12. What shall I say? O all ye, who have lost your Virgin affections to Christ, who have gone a whoring from your God, who are co∣vetous to a wonder, and over run with cark∣ing cares, and sinful despondencies, who break out daily into scandalous passions, who by divisions, envies, animosities, over∣reachings, perjuries, and hypocrisie, have made Religion vile! Know from Christ's mouth, Mat. 18.6. it had been better for you, that a Milstone had been hang'd about your necks,
and that you had been drowned long agoe in the depth of the Sea, than to live so offen∣sively towards men, as you have done; Jer. 34.16. be∣cause hereby the Name of God is polluted. It had been better you had never known the wayes of God, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. than after Profession and Knowledge to depart, and to be as Doggs and Swine. If you had never profess'd Gods Name, you had never polluted it; but God will reckon with you about it. I am bold to say, that a Drunkard, Adulterer, Robber, &c. doth not so provoke the Lord to wrath, as a Pro∣fessour may, even by an impatient, discon∣tented word: and for this compare two Scrip∣tures: In the former there is unbelief, and quarrelling with God (face to face, as it were) and yet God pass'd that by, Numb. 11.21, 22. with Numb. 20.10. and Deut. 32.51. it being in secret, with a short check, Is the Lords hand waxed short? But in the other place, Because ye believed not, &c. to sanctifie me in the eyes of the Children of Israel, &c. there∣fore ye shall dye in the Wilderness, and never set foot on the Land of Promise. One scan∣dalous Professour doth more hurt, and more stain Religion, than hundreds of Drunkards: and therefore their Hell shall be the standard to that, of all other sinners. Atrocius sub nomi∣nis Chri∣sti Profes∣sione pec∣cat. Salvian. Mat. 24.51. Appoint him his portion with Hypocrites. Thousands in Hell will curse the day, wherein they saw your looseness on Earth; for thereby they have blasphemed Christ, as a Friend of Pub∣licans and Sinners, and as if he countenanced you (secretly) in your Lusts, though (for state and form) he hath spoken great things
against such courses in his Word. O! how frequently have you made boasts of God, Rom. 2.23, 24. and the Law; but by breaking of it, ye have cau∣sed his Name to be evil spoken of. When you should have been leading others to Heaven, you have by your example lead them to Hell. How deep shall their Hell be, who are plunged thither with their own, and other-mens sins also? Though God should give you repentance and pardons; yet how oft will your Souls bleed to consider, how many you have compell'd by your example to sin and blaspheme, who are actually in the chains of darkness, Gal. 2.14. or hastning thither in a full career? O that you would no lon∣ger be like the body of Amasa, to cause o∣thers to stand still, or go back from the wayes of Holyness! O thou scandalous Pro∣fessour! What account must thou pass with God shortly, before (perhaps) thou hast turned thine eye to the next page? Will not the blood of multitudes, who perish by thy means, be required at thy hands? One sin may become many millions of offences, as the Numbers may be that shall hear of it. No wonder that men are emboldned to sin, that the Adulterer cares not for the Curtains of the Night, nor the Drunkard for the sha∣dows of the Evening, no wonder that the Swearer can spit the Name of God so impu∣dently out of his mouth: these have been in∣couraged by thy revolts, backslidings, care∣less, and seldome duties, and violent earthly seekings. O! if you would consider, you
bore the Ark of the Lord, you were entrust∣ed with his honour, but you have let it fall, yea cast it in the dirt. O! tremble at what the God of Heaven hath made a standing decree upon this occasion, 1 Sam. 2.30. them that honour me, I will honour, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. And though it some∣what comforts me, that God will wipe off whatsoever can be cast on him; yet know to your sorrow, you shall not so easily discharge your selves of the Plagues, that are ready to be powred out upon you. God expected that you should have been Kings and Priests to him: Rev. 1.6. Jo. 3.35. you should have been burning and shining lights; you should have been like Innes, which have their Signes on both sides: you were of the King guard, you should have had the Arms of the Crown on your Breasts, and on your Backs, so that if any had viewed you, had met you, or had follow∣ed you, they might have known you for Gods Servants, by the stamp and cognisance of Heaven upon you: But you have rather been like those Pictures, that if you look on one side, you may see an Angels face, but on the other the Devils. O my Soul! how canst thou write of these, speak or think on them without weeping? O Reader! retreat, retreat quickly to thy Chamber, and spend some considerable time to reflect on thy scandalous Words and Actions, and how much the Name of God hath thereby been blasphemed, and thousands endangered to stumble and fall through thy occasion. How
many, that should have een as Shields to ward off those blows of reproach, that would fall on God and Religion, have proved Swords in the hands of the wicked, where∣with the Name of God is wounded, and whereby multitudes are in danger of perish∣ing: yea, and the poor reall Christians are even ashamed to look up, and to shew their faces, and profession to the world; because there have been such Spots in their commu∣nion: Jude v. 12. such unclean, scabbed, and unsavoury Sheep, that have walked among them. CHAP. XXXVIII. Their sinning against Knowledge, and im∣penitently, notwithstanding all means to bring them to Repentance for their Sins. 3ly. Against much light. YOur Sins are yet further accented by being committed not only against such means of Knowledge, but against much Know∣ledge got thereby. You have had the most powerfull Ministry under the whole Hea∣vens: And believe it sirs, if you had not heard him that spake from Heaven to you, If Christ had not come, Joh. 15.22. you had had no sin (com∣paratively.) But now you have no Cloak for your sin. You have sinned against more light than the rest of the World. You know that
covetousness is a sin, Isa. 57.17. Isa. 45.5. Tit. 3.2. and that for the iniqui∣ty thereof God hath been wrath; and yet you seek great things for your selves still: you know that you are to speak evil of no man; and yet you bespatter every man, almost, to set off your selves by staining and blotting of others reputations: Isa. 58.5. Luk. 12.47. Ezek. 21.10. you know God abhors them, that, for a day only, hang down their heads, like bull-rushes; and yet this hath been your manner from the beginning of your Profession: you know your Masters will, you know you should not make mirth when the Lord is angry; and yet you dare, even then be vain and frothy: you know the Lord is much grieved at the backslidings of his peo∣ple; and yet you have lost you antient faith, love, tenderness, zeal, publick-spirited∣ness, and communion with God: yea you have not only known these to be sins, but you have spoken against them, as evils; you have told men how hainous a thing it is to sin against the Lord, and yet you your selves have added iniquity unto iniquity: What cloak have you for your sins. And very impeni∣tently. Fourthly, You have sinned impenitently, notwithstanding all means for your repentance and reducement, which God hath most won∣derfully vouchsafed you. The Lord hath for many years striven with you to put a stop to your sins, and to reclaim you from your miscarriages: Sometimes God hath gone up to Mount Ebal, and threatned you with Sword, Famine, Fire, and Pestilence, and yet you have refused to hear from thence:
he hath leapt up to Mount Gerazim, and al∣lured you by all kind of blessings; and yet you have carried your selves stoutly and im∣pudently towards all the offers and tenders of grace for your recovery. Jer. 3.4, 7. God would have healed you: he hath said, wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth, turn thou unto me; yet you returned not. You have had many of the Lords faithful Ambassadours, who have laid siege at you hearts, to engage them to the Lord, and to take you off from your sinfull wayes; but alas! all the glad tidings of mercy have not affected you, have not won you: all the Ordinances of Jehovah have found little place in you, have left no im∣pre ion upon your Souls: Ezek. 16.51. Hos. 4.17. You have justified Judah and Samaria in all their stubborness and rebellion against the Lord. How righteous is it with the Lord to call upon the Ministers, Let them alone, threaten them no moe, promise them no more. Rev. 22.11. Let him that is fil∣thy he filthy still: you have broken through Armies of Ordinances to commit sin; there∣fore Gospel and Gospel-Ministers let them alone: judgements overtake them, my plagues, my curses seize upon them, Let them suddenly be destroyed, Prov. 29.1. and that without reme∣dy, because they have hardned their necks, though often reproved. God hath waited more than three and three years on you, ex∣pecting fruit; but he sees little save the Clusters of Sodom upon you: he hath born with you so long, he hath held his tongue;
and said nothing (so long) that you have (wickedly) thought God to be such an one as you; Psal. 50.21. So that God must needs be a swift wit∣ness against you for the vindicating of his great and glorious Name, unless you speedi∣ly repent, and seek the Lord, Zeph. 2.3. if perhaps he may be found. O! how long hath God com∣manded you every where to repent; not only by his threats, but by his judgements, which have begun at the House of God: What lowd calls have we had? Joel. 2.11. 1 Pet. 5.6. Turn to the Lord with weeping, Let your laughter be turned into weeping: Humble your selves under the migh∣ty hand of God; and yet how stupid, how insensible, how impenitent have you re∣mained to this very day, though you have felt the Arrows of the Lord stying amongst you; yea though you have been told, Jer. 18.8. If you repent, it shall repent the Lord of the evil he had thought, either to continue upon you, or to bring down on you: yet alas! where are the stirrings of your affections, the soundings of your bowell, the meltings and relentings of your repenting hearts? O what marble breasts, and hearts of Adamant have you? How few are there mourning for all the wrongs they have done to the Majesty of God? Eviden∣ced in their be∣ing in∣fensible of their own sins. for all the abuses offered to the grace of God? Perhaps the fear of Hell (and so indeed self-love) hath humbled some Ahabs, and made them crouch, because they would not be miserable; But how few are humbled for their abuse of the love and grace of God by
their great offences? Wha the Lord com∣plains of by the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezek. 3.8. of the house of Israel, that they would not hearken to the Messengers be sent them; but were impudent and hard hearted may be again renewed a∣gainst England, and all its dominions: the heart of stone is not yet taken away, where is the man, almost, that can say, God hath made m heart soft? Job 2.16. Though you have born arms against God; though you have sinned against the Lord with an high hand; though upon self-tryal you may sind those very sins amngst you, which brought Fire and Brim∣stone on Sodom and Gomorrah, Psal. 42.3. and desolation on Israel; yet alas! when were tears thy drink? When didst thou make thy Bed to swim? Is thy beauty gone away for trouble? Dost thou abhor thy self in dust and ashes be∣fore the Lord? Know (Reader) that the Authors Pen had proceed∣ed thus far, be∣fore he heard of the late dreadful Burning of Lon∣don: the following lines shew thee what impressions it made on his thoughts, and should on thy Soul. Perhaps in Rama there is a voice heard, Lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning: Rachel weeping for her chil∣dren, that dye by the Sword, or Pestilence, or are burnt in their beds: Perhaps in London, and throughout the Land, there are some tears shed for the Coals of fire that God hath scattered (the last week) over that famous and antient City; But how few are mourning for their pride, worldliness, contempt of the Ministers, and Apostasies, for which God seems to be contending not only by the Sword, and the Pestilence; but by Fire
with us? where are the Dovs of the Valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity? A haraoh may so far repent, as to say, Take away the Plague; but few cry out, Take a∣way iniquity: Few detest their sins, few loath them, few are so burthened with them, as that they desire heartily to have them taken away. Possibly Sin in its effects, in its sad consequences (as it consines men to the Pest∣house, as it endangereth health and life, as it is the founder of graves and hells, as it burns up your houses and goods) is someway burthensom, but few are troubled with it, Ezek. 10.2.7.16 Hos. 14.2. as it grieves, resisteth, and quencheth the Spirit of God, as it is a piece of the highest ingratitude, and as it kicks against the breasts of mercy: And therefore no wonder if Few are to be found mourning for other mens sinnes. Though Jesus Christ be crucified afresh, Of other mens sins, and put to open shame: though the blessed Spi∣rit of our God be always vexed and resisted: though there be so much Atheism, Epicu∣rism, contempt of God, and his Ambassa∣dours and Gospel, Blasphemy, Violence, Falshood, Pride, Adultery, Sodomy: though there be setting up the posts of men, with an apparent contempt of Gods holy in∣stitutions: though all the sins, for which God cast out the Heathen, and cast off his Is∣rael oe found amongst us, and these highly aggravated, and innumerable circumstances; yet how little are we concerned therein? How seldom do we express our inward sor∣rows by Tears and Fasts? David beheld the
Transgressours, a was grieved; because they kept not Gods word: Horrour seized on him; because they made void Gods Law: Yea Ri∣vers of water ran down his eyes? because men kept not Gods Law: Psal. 119.158. v. 53, 136. 1 Pet. 2.7. But where is the sorrow∣ing after a Godly sort? Where are the weep∣ing Jeremiah's, Naltons, Midhopes? or whose Soul, like Lots, is vexed (pierced) with the unclean conversation of the wicked? If ever God did call us to weeping and to mourning, this is the day; but behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in mine ears, saith the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. saith the Lord God of Hosts. When Elijah saw how iniquity a∣bounded, how the worship of God was crushed, how things went among the great ones of those wicked times, how Idolaters were countenanced, the faithfull prophets durst not shew their faces, he is so burthen∣ed at what became of this, that he knows not how to live: 1 Kings 19.4. It is enough, take away my life: He is weary of the world, weary of his own Land, though the best under the cope of Heaven: yea he thinks it a good time to re∣move, that his eyes may see no more of these detestable things, and that his Soul may be no longer prick'd with these scratching Briars: But the searcher of Hearts knows how little we have been affected with all the shipwrackt faith and conscience, that our eyes have seen,
how seldome our heads have been fountains of teart, how seldome we have made our hou∣ses Bochims, how insensible we have been of all the ungodliness and unrighteousness, which we and our people are guilty of. Wo is us, we have not been wounded through Gods sides: we have not sympathised with a Christ Crucified every day; But like Gallio, we have not laid these things to heart: And yet we have still (impudently enough) laid claim to Christ and the priviledges of the New Testament, purchased by his bloud; Though we never followed Christ to the Cross weeping; though we have hardly shed one tear for all the contempt and abuse of him, which is Epidemical, which abounds from Dan to Beersheba, from one part of the Nation to a∣nother. We pretend we have great sor∣rows, though they are not expressed by tears, in a sensitive manner: we think to re∣lieve our selves with the dryness of our con∣stitution; and yet we have tears more than a good many, to express our sorrows by; if a Relation drops into the Earth, we can follow the Herse wringing our hands and beating our breasts: if an Estate (which we have got by carking cares, by neglect of duties, heart-duties, and family-duties) be in one day consumed, and dissolved by a flame into ashes, we then can express our sorrows by weeping and lamentation: witness some of your howlings, your cries at the late Desola∣tion by Fire; But commune with your own hearts, whether you were ever made so sen∣sible,
ever so affec and unk with the con∣sideration of the honour, that God hath lost by you, and by thousands like your selves? Was God ever more affronted by a profes∣sing people, than by us? Was ever Christ so set at naught, as of late times? Was he ever more despised in his Person, Offices, and In∣stitutions, by the Rhabsheka's of the Earth, than he hath been lately by them, who have had a form of godliness? Zech. 7.12. and yet our hearts are bard as an Adamant. O! what grounds have you to question all your mourning for your own sins, whilst you mourn not for the sins of others? Did you mourn for sin, as it is against God? You would mourn for other mens sins; for they are against the Lord also: Ezra. 9.3. You would be like Ezra, he rent his garments, pull'd off the hair of his beard, sate down astonished for the sinfull marriages of the people: But we are insensible; though God be much more dishonoured by the A∣dulterers and Adulteresses; by the Blasphe∣mers and Atheists; by the Worldlings and Apostates, who swarm in the midst of us. How can we perswade our selves that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, whilst he is so much reflected on; and yet we no way (suitably) affected therewith? If a Child, if a Father, if an Husband, if a Friend, be in∣jured, thou art much affected with the in∣jury; but not so with all the affronts that the Sons of Belial put upon the blessed God eve∣ry day. How can we imagine in the least, that we have any true love to the Souls of
our Neighbours, wh we behold them lifting up the heel against their Maker, wounding and destroying their Souls by their sins; and yet we not sign; if not weep in secret for the desperate nazards they are run∣ning? Nay, how can you imagine you love your selves, your estates, liberties, lives, &c. whilst God is provoked to ruine you and them for their great provocations? Josh. 7. You know one Achan brought a Plague upon the whole body of Israel; and yet his sin was secret; But we have Street-Drunkards, Street-Swearers, Street-Adulterers and A∣dulteresses, Street-Scoffers at Piety and the Worship of God: And are ye not in danger to partake of the Plagues that these sins are crying for? And what yet are your hearts as insensible, as Rocks? The Lord be mercifull to you, and take out the heart of stone. How can you be free from being guilty of all the known sins of the land, whilst you do not mourn for them before the Lord? Nay, yea, of the o∣kens of Gds dis∣pasure against Sin. Isa. 22.45. Joel 2.2. to shew yet the greatness of your stubbornness, you are insensible not only of your own, and other mens sins; but of the tokens of Gods displeasure against those sinnes. God hath emptied us from Vessel to Vessel; followed us with the Sword and Pestilence, and wonderfully so lately by dreadfull flames: God hath spoyled us of our glory, and hum∣bled us as low as dust and ashes: it is a time of treading down; and therefore we should weep bitterly: it is a day of darkness and of gloomi∣ness, a day of clouds, and of thick darkness:
We have had such a Plague, as never the like: such a Fire hath been kindled, as never the like amongst us: the Protestant Nations are very low, and the Antichristian very bold and consident; yet we can hardly hang out harps upon the Willows; Eph. 4.19. but as if our hearts were past feeling, we are insensible both of sin and wrath. O! I hear some cry out of hard times; but there is much more reason to cry out of hard hearts. We are too much like Gideons dry fleece, and like the Moun∣tains of Gilboa, or rather like Jonah fast asleep; though the Winds blow, the Seas roar, and make a noyse, and we are ready to be dash'd every hour against the Rocks. I confess Israel was an hard hearted people; but yet they mourned, Psa. 137.1. they cryed with a voyce, they wept when they remembred Zion: So have not we: The Rod of old was the on∣ly engine, by which Moses was to work all his miracles, on the Rock, on the Aegypti∣ans, on the more obdurate Israel: But the Rock, Pharaoh, and Israel, were sooner sen∣sible of the Rod, than we have been. How do we evacuate and reproach, frustrate and defame all Gods Methods? and pronounce to all the world, that God hath miscarried in his design upon us? God hath not yet heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. Jer. 31.18. It is true God hath chastised us; but we have not been as sensible as the Bullock, nor so soon tamed: we have not been mended under the Rod, nor edified by the dolefull Lectures, that God hath read us. Therefore thus saith the
Lord God, Woe to the bloody City, Ezek 24.9.10, 11, 12, 13. I will e∣ven make the pile for fire great. Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burnt: Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed. She hath weari∣ed her self with lyes, and her great scum wene not forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire. In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Jerusalem shall be burnt, and why? In thy filthiness is lewdness, thou art obsti∣nate, hardned in wickedness: Obstinacy in Sin is worse than the Sin it self. Jerusalem had Prophets, Ordinances, Sabbaths, Sacri∣fices, Mercies, Judgements, by which God would have purged her, but she was not purg∣ged, She did not humble herself for her sins, the scum went not off. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Woe to the bloody City, Ezek. 24.6. to the pot, whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it, bring it out piece by piece, let no lot fall on it. Thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved, Jer 5.3. thou hast consumed them; but they have refused to re∣ceive correction, they have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to re∣turn. This is a Nation, Jer. 7.28. that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receiveth cor∣rection. How many years hath the word of
the Lord come to y, Jer. 4.4. that you should circum∣cise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore-skin of your hearts, ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth like Fire, and burn, that none can quench it; because of the evil of your doings? And hath not the Lord cut off in his fierce an∣ger the horn of Israel, and burned against us like a flaming fire, Lam. 2.3, 4. which devoureth round a∣bout? He hath poured out his fury like Fire. And yet how few behold the desolations that he hath made? How many look on this Judge∣ment as chance, But consider not the hand of the Lord that is gone out against us? Do not some say in the pride and stoutness of their hearts, Isa. 9.10. Isa. 26.9. the Bricks are fall'n down, but we will build with hewn stones: the Sycamores ar cut down, but we will change them into Cedar? When judgement is executed, and Gods hand is lifted up, men should fear, and learn righteousness; But if you will still go on in wickedness, God will reckon with you for despising him, and his judgements. I doubt not but thousands and ten thousands are sen∣sensible of poverty coming in upon them and theirs, as an armed man, irrisistably: But I fear we are too insensible that it is the Lords controversie with us. How soon was the Pestilential Judgement forgot? Were not men as vile Drunkards, Sensualists, Sabbath∣breakers, Oppressors, and Unclean since the dreadfull Plague, as before? and others as proud and formal since the Plague, as be∣fore? That Arrow shot so remarkably from
Heaven, was soon forgot: And now that the fury of the Lord hath been upon the City (and therein upon the whole Land) in the late shower of Fire, I am afraid, that even this Dispensation will be forgotten, at least not improved as it ought to be: Many and many a time have I feared, Isa. 29.10. that the Lord hath powred upon us the spirit of a deep sleep, and that the Judgement on Ariel, is de∣scended on us: Like men in a deep sleep, we are not able to with-stand the Judge∣ment, and like such, we have been in∣sensible who hath wounded us, or why we are wounded: We have not considered the deserving Cause, (Pride, Carelessness, Intemperance, Idleness, &c.) and what way to heal our selves, and extricate our selves out of our miseries? Like a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.20. that can hamper and entangle it self more and more; but takes no course to wind its self out of its misery. Who searcheth for the Achan, that hath troubled our Israel? Who sits down, and justifieth God? Who con∣demneth himself for Pride, for contempt of the Gospel, for Luxury, for Idleness, for Covetousness, and prophaning Gods Sabbaths? The Lord humble us; Jer. 6.29. for the Bel∣lows are burnt, the Lead is consumed, and yet the Founder melteth in vain. The Lord took it ill from the men of Judah, when they were not turned by the signes he gave them by Ezekiel, When he was to take a Tile, Ezek. 4.1, 2, 5, 11, 12. and pourtray Jerusalem upon it, and lay siege against it, &c. When he was to lye upon his
left side 390. dayes: When he was to drink Water by measure, and to bake his Cakes with the dung of man: When he was to take a Ra∣sor, and shave his head and beard, and to burn a third part with sire, Ezek. 5.1, 2, 3. and to smite a third part with a knife, and a third part to scatter in the wind; and to bind up a few hairs in his skirts, and to take of them again, and to cast them into the midst of the fire: When by these and such like signes, they were not awake∣ned out of their security, when they re∣formed not, when they feared not the wrath and judgement of God; but said, It is not near, Ezek. 11.3, 23. Let us build houses: Then the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the City, and stood upon the Mountain, which is on the East side of the City. And when the glory de∣parted, then. Thus saith the Lord, of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the Land of Israel, They shall eat their Bread with care∣fulness, Ezek. 12.19, 20. and drink their Water with astonish∣ment, &c. And the Cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste. Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, As the Vine-tree among the Trees of the Forrest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the Inhabitants of Jerusa∣lem. Ezek. 15.6, 7. And I will set my face against them, and they shall goe out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them. Such ruines were to attend them, that Ezekiel (though the Mes∣senger of them) yet must sigh, Ezek. 21.5, 12. with the breaking of his loynes, and with bitterness; yea, he must cry and howl, and smite upon his thigh. You may easily imagine, if God
were so angry with Judah for their insensi∣bleness of his wrath, when it hung in the cloud of threatnings and Types: How much more will he be provoked to fury, if we lay not to heart those fearfull signs and tokens of his wrath now that the cloud is dissolved into the Pestilence, Sword, and Fire? Is. 16.11. O that my bowells may sound like an Harp for England! O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, Jer. 9.1.11. that I might weep day and night! O that for the mountains I could take up a weeping and wailing; because they are burnt up; because Jerusalem is made heaps; because Gods fury went out like Fire, and burned that none could quench it; because of the evil of their doings! O ye Sons of men, Jer. 21.12. Ezek. 24.2. write you the name of the day, even of the same day, the God of Heaven set himself against Jerusalem this same day. How oft did we profane that day by gluttony, exessive feast∣ings, gossipings within dores, by unneces∣sary walks and sports, without dores? How did we cry, when will the Sabbath be gone, Amos 8.5, 8, 9. that we may attend our callings? Shall not the Land tremble for this? and every one mourn, that dwelleth therein? Your Sun is gone down at Noon-day. God hath turned your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into La∣mentation. How dare you now make mirth? What, Now drink Wine in Bowls? The Lord take away the heart of stone, and give us hearts of flesh. The Lord powr out a spirit of mourning upon all the Land, that we may lay to heart the wonderfull effects of Gods sore
displeasure. Wo to them that are at ease, and are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Shall not the Isles shake at the sound of thy fall? Amos 6.1.6. Shall not the Princes of the Sea come down from their Thrones, and lay away their Robes, and put off their broidered garments, and cloth themselves with trembling, Ezek. 36.15, 16, 17, 18. and sit upon the ground, and be astonished at thee? and take up a lamentation for thee, and say, how art thou destroyed? thou that wast inhabited by Seafairing men, the renowned City which was strong in the Soa, She and her Inhabitants? Now let the Isles tremble in the day of thy fall. Come behold the works of the Lord, Psal. 46.8. what de∣solations he hath made in the earth. Desola∣tions by the Sword, Desolations by the Pe∣stilence, and desolations by Fire. Some smart that others may Fear. Now all these things happen for examples, and they are writ∣ten for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. 1 Cor. 10.11. God means not only to punish, but to teach, and not only the pre∣sent generation, but all generations to the end of the World? O the much precious blood that the Sword hath devoured! How many thousands hath the Pestilence swept a∣way? And now one of the most flourishing Cities of the Christian World, famous for the Gospel, famous for frequence of Traf∣fick, in a few days lyes buried in Ashes, or Rubbish. If we have any bowells of pity, let us weep with them that weep, let us com∣miserate the grievous sufferings of multitudes of Men: Women, and Children. It is
certainly now, a time to weep, Eccles. 3.4. Jer. 7.28. and not to laugh. And must our Jeremiah's complain of England. This is a Nation that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their God, nor recei∣veth correction? If some amongst us are sensi∣ble of the heat of the Fire, and other plagues, yet we mourn not, Isa. 28.21. we do not habitually mourn for those sins and provocations, which have moved God to do this work, this strange work upon us and against us: Possibly some cry and howl for the Goods and Houses, that are consumed by Fire, and for their Friends whom the Sword and Pestilence have devou∣red: But how few are mourning in secret for their contempt of Christ and his Gospel, for controlling and checking the Spirit of God, for their spending away so much time and strength to get a little money, and neg∣lecting to give all diligence to make their cal∣ling and election sure? you have mourned for your silver shrines; but not for the pride, carelesness, and covetousness of your hearts: you fear poverty and reproach will be your portion; but why do you not fear what will be the issue of the hardness of your hearts? Hear ye the Word of the Lord, They are not humbled unto this day, Jer. 44.10, 11. Jer. 23.39, 40.29.17, 18. neither have they fear∣ed, nor walked in my Law, therefore thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah. I even I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the City that I gave you, &c. and will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, &c. And if
you will not, after all this, turn unto the Lord, read your doom, I will make them like vile figs that cannot be eaten, they are so evil, &c. I here publish my fears to all the World: I am afraid that our view of the de∣solations that God hath wrought, are too short and transient, and that some want hu∣manity in their being insensible of the plagues and miseries of their Brethren, and more want the spirit of mourning for their own and other mens sins. Nay are there none of the Race of Ammon left, Ezek. 25.3, 6, 7. Prov. 17 5. Luk. 13, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezek. 25.8 9. Psal. 137.7. Ezek. 12.13, 14. who say Aha a∣gainst Gods Sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the Land of Israel, when it was de∣solate? at least rejoyced in heart? Behold God will stretch out his hand upon such a people. He that is glad at calaities, shall not be unpu∣nished. The Tower of Silo fell to lead o∣thers to repentance. If any will scoff and blaspheme as the Moabites, by saying, the House of Judah is like unto all the Heathen, who have not suffered more, nor so much as they: God knows how to open the side of Moab, and to let in the Sword and ruine up∣on their strongest Cities: And if the Chil∣dren of Edom, who were long ago for razing down our Jerusalem to the foundation thereof, rejoyce, God will remember them, and make them desolate, and lay his vengeance on Edom: And if any of the bordering Philistines shall deal by revenge, V. 15, 16, 17. and take vengeance with a despightfull heart, God knows how to stretch out his hand upon them, and to destroy the remnant of the Sea coast, and to execute great
vengeance upon them: And if any of our Neighbours round about shall with Tyrus say against Jerusalem, Aha she is broken, Ezek. 26.2, 3, 4. that was the gates of the people, she is turned unto us, we shall be replenished, now that she is laid wast: God can soon stoop these Mountains by causing many Nations to come up against them: as the Sea causeth his Waves to come up, and scrape their dust from them, and make them like the top of a Rock. Amos 3.2. God cannot bear it that the Heathen should be insulting, whilst he is correcting his own: and therefore God hath confirmed it by an Oath that he will deal se∣verely with such Mockers. Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10. I have heard of the reproach of Moab, &c. therefore as I live saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, &c. Zech. 1.15. And I am sore displeased with the Heathen, that are at ease, for I was but a little displea∣sed, and they helped forward the affliction. Leave we these to the Righteousness of God, and let us return to our selves: whilst they are insulting, Isa. 64.4. Numb. 16. Job 31.3. may we be on humbling, and repenting Work. God is come down, and hath done terrible things, that we looked not for: we have been visited; but not with the common visitation of all people. God hath strange pu∣nishments for the workers of iniquity. And no wonder, when strange Oaths have been minted of later times that our Forefathers never heard of: there have been strange wayes of Epicurisme and Gluttony: strange wayes of uncleanness: strange unknown fashions in apparel: and for Fraud, cheat∣ing
and Tricks of Legerde main they have fresh and new, and frequent every day. Hath not God then a just controversie with his people? If the Lord draw out Judgements that were never heard of be∣fore, and make us signs and wonders to the world, and an astonishment to all Nati∣ons, may we not justifie his proceedings? If we exceed our Forefathers Sins, what wonder is it, if we feel Judgements, that they were never sensible of? CHAP. XXXIX. What use Professours should make of this Gospel-Glass. ANd now (Professour) to all thy for∣mer Sins, Quarrel not with the Glass. do not add this great abomi∣nation, that, having had the Glass of the Word, so faithfully revealing many of thy sins to thee, thou shouldst go away and strait forget what manner of man thou hast been. Let not Satan tempt thee to quarrel with the enterprise; for that the Glass is not broad enough to shew to thee all thy stains and deformities: know here are enough, presented to thy view, to lay thee low e∣nough in Hell without Repentance. Per∣haps
also by thy corrupt reason thou canst plead for one or two particulars, or bring it under debate, whether they are stains or not? But know to the confusion of thy face, here are spots, unquestionable spots discovered, and such as are not the spots of Gods Children. But wouldst thou improve this (or any o∣ther such) Glass for the good of thy Soul? Let Gods Honour, and thy precious Souls everlasting welfare perswade thee to receive in meekness and love the following Counsels. 1. Reflect on all the particulars, Improve it for pro∣moting Conside∣ration and Me∣ditation. that thou may'st see what are thine iniquities. Do not behold only, and so goe away: be not contented with slight apprehensions; but muse, that the Fire may burn: Consider how oft in the Bill of Attainder, thy Conscience tells thee thou art guilty. O! ponder these things in thine heart; chew the Cud, recoyl upon thy self: Let the Lord hear one the more for thee crying out what have I done? How have I provoked the Lord? By medita∣tion retain the memory of thy sins, with all their aggravations, as much as thou canst: set past sins in present view, and possess the sins of thy youth, as if they were just now committed: now track the abominations of your lives: charge this duty upon thy own Soul, as that which must be done, as thou wilt answer it at thy peril before God and Angels. Perhaps hitherto you have forgot your corrupt lives, and hearts, as you have your natural faces forthwith; but let it be so no more for Christs sake. Consider not
only how many of these sins you have been guilty of; but how frequently, and for how many dayes, or years, thou hast lived in some of these abominations, having oft been guil∣ty of the same sin; though perhaps thou knew'st it to be a sin, and hast prayed and resolved against it: And because the parti∣culars may seem little sins (though in a sense there is no little sin; because there is no lit∣tle God, and sins have their accents and ag∣gravations from the person, who is affron∣ted) yet because it is with sin, as it is with stones, you may carry this stone and that stone without trouble, with much case; but when many little stones are heared together, they become weighty and heavy to bear: therefore I advise that by serious meditation you sum them up joyntly, till your backs, or rather your hearts be broken, and you take up the language of the Prophet, My sins are passed over my head, Psal. 38.4. they are become too heavy for me to bear: Reflect not only on thy Pride, and carelessness, and other particular miscarriages; but put all the Items into one main Sum, that it may stoop thy heart. 2. Confessi∣on. Away now, and present thy self be∣fore the great and holy God, whom thou hast provoked by these, by all these great a∣bominations, and upon thy knees give glory to him by confessing to him as many of thy sins, as thou canst remember, with all their aggra∣vating circumstances. Josh. 7.19. It is the same advice, that Joskuah gave to Achan, tell God what
thou hast done, and what thouast left un∣done, Hide it not from him: Confess to God all thy low unworthy thoughts of him, all thy enmity against him, his Laws, and People, &c. Go, and confess what envy, what malice, what ranckour hath lain in thine heart against thy Neighbour: Confess to the Lord how oft thou hast spoke evil of dignities, of the blood-royal, of the favou∣rites of Heaven, of the Sons and Daughters of the most High, who were more righteous than thy self. Many times thou hast brag'd with the Pharisee, what sins thou hast not been guilty of: now confess what thou hast been guilty of. I know if thou art an Hypo∣crite thou art loth to bring it forth, thou thinkest it will be a shame to thee; But let me tell thee, it is a shame that thou art guilty of so much sin; but it is no shame to acknowledge it. Only in your Confessions take this advice. Set your sins in order: enu∣merate the several sins you have been guilty of, and though every numerical thought and Act of sin is not possible to be cited; yet give diligence to find out as many as thou canst, and spread them before the Lord. Bring forth especially that sin or sins, All your special sins. which are thy special sins, whereby thou hast most provoked God. David gave a touch at his Sins in the beginning of his Penitential Psalm; but his Adultery and Blood-guilti∣ness lay most upon him, and he is never at ease till he hath vomited them up in con∣fession.
Be sure then that, Of all of them. upon a review of this, or any better Catalogue, thou cry unto thy heart, as Samuel to Jesse, Are here all thy Children? Are here all thy sins? He that doth not confess a sin, hath a mind to commit to that Sin again. An hypocrite will confess some, nay many, sins, but there is one sin he is loth to bring forth: it is a Jacobs Benjamin, Job. 20.1. they would keep it back: one sweet bit is covered under the Tongue. But certainly it is extreme folly to impose upon God; for he knows every thought of thy heart, yea he knows thy thoughts before thou know'st them: he knew what thoughts Is∣rael would have in the Wilderness. David lay somewhile under this piece of Hypocrisie: he kept silence a long time, which made his bones wax old, his moysture was turned into the drought of Summer: Psal. 32.3, 4, 5. But at length (though it was long first) his sin came out, I acknow∣ledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my Transgres∣sions unto the Lord. Be not like Judas: he confesseth his betraying of Christ, but there was a close sin which he would not uncover, viz. his covetousness. I meet with many who will confess such sins as are most in fashi∣on, viz. their dulness under Ordinances, their formality, their vain thoughts in duty, &c. But when did you hear Professors con∣fessing their envy at the gifts, graces, and privileges of their Brethren. Paul's sin was persecuting Gods Church, and how ready is he to tell God and all the world of it? A good Copy to write after.
Bring forth the aggravating circumstances, With all their ag∣gravati∣ons. and lay them before the Lord. Some confess sin, but their confessions are accompanied with strange excuses and extenuations, viz. it was done through the instigation of the Devil, it was done inconsiderately, &c. Such are not for shaming themselves before the Lord; but like Lawyers, plead as well as they can for a bad cause. Avoyd all extenua∣ting Confessions: Father not thy Brats upon the Devil, lest thy account swell even for wronging Satan, when indeed thou wast in∣ticed and drawn aside by thy own lust. Beware of this folly; for know that extenuating sin aggravates it, and aggravating extenuates sin before the Lord. Let thy Confession be ingenuous and free. Freely. Sometimes Conscience, like an over-charged Stomach, doth so over-press men, that they cannot hold, but must out with their un∣cleanness, &c. Thus it is especially when the Horrours of Death have compassed them round. This confession of sin proceeds not from hatred of sin, and displicence with it; but from fear of punishment: they hope if they confess sin any how, any way, they shall obtain mercy, and this makes many throw up what otherwise they would hide for ever. But O! that you would be more ingenuous in your acknowledgements than Pharaoh and Judas were, who should say something upon the Wrack, when Gods Hand and Consci∣ence prest them down. I know what you will do upon the perusing this sad Catalogue,
if God do not sanctifie the book unto you: you will confess sin, but not your own: you will fall a censuring the person or party you do not love, crying out O! how guilty are such and such before the Lord? O! how is God dishonoured by them? how doth Reli∣gion suffer by them? yea, but how much hath Gods Name suffered by thy lightness, frothiness, pride, sensuality, back-sliding? &c. O! run with tears, and confess all thine own sins before God. God requires it, Only acknowledge thine iniquity, Jer. 3.13 that thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God: And God tells you it is a means to obtain remissi∣on, 1 John 1.9. If ye confess your sins he is just and faith∣full to for give. Some say, confess, and be hang'd; but I say confess, or you'l be damn'd. If you had rather be damned than be shamed, thou lovest thy Name better than thy Soul: The Lord be mercifull to thee, or else thou wilt lose both, when Christ shall come to Judge the Earth; for then whatsoever is hid, shall be published. Let your Confession be frequent, Fre∣quently. yea constant, until at least God hath done away thy sin. It may be you may fear your heart is so hard, that you shall but sin by a formal dull con∣fession, or enumeration of your sins; But yet do it as well as thou canst, and if thy heart be hard, go, and complain of it to God, and beg him to take away the heart of stone: let the sight of this hardness drive thee the soon∣ner and the oftner to the Throne of Grace, and there lye before the Lord, till he cleave
the Rock, that the waters gush out, till thy tears vye with thy sins: Do as our English Martyr, who ceased not his Confessions till his heart was melted and broken for his sins. 3. Contri∣tion. Labour to get your hearts broken for all your Rebellions against God, for all the impu∣rities of your hearts and lives. Son of Man, Ezek. 21.9, 10. Prophesie and say, thus saith the Lord, say, A Sword, a Sword is sharpned, and also furbish∣ed: it is sharpned to make a great slaughter: it is furbished that it may glister: should we then make mirth? Heb. 12.25. Ezek. 22.19, 20, 21. Even our God hath been a consuming fire: and shall not we mourn? The house of Israel is become dross, even the dross of silver, and therefore God hath gathe∣red them into the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather silver and brass, iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the Furnace, to blow the fire up∣on it, and hath blown upon them in the Fire of his Wrath, and they have been melted in the midst thereof; and shall not we lament? Yea God hath been exceedingly dishonoured by Hypocrisie, falshood, breaking of Vows, Murmurings, cruelties, neglects of his Worship, &c. Should we then make mirth? Have not we great cause, even more cause than ever any people had, to tremble, not only at the dreadfull Judgements of God, that are already upon us, and that hang over our heads, but at the hellish impieties, that swarm in our hearts? View not only this im∣perfect Catalogue, but look from Genesis to the Revelation, and what ever filthiness wa found in Men or Kingdoms, may be foun
upon our skirts: and shall not we hang up our harps? refuse to be comforted? shall not we lye down prostrate before God, and pour out water before the Lord, and weep till we can weep no more? Tremble O my heart! under all these provocations: And let your hearts be as the leaves of a treee that is shaken by the Whirlwind. What so many hellish lusts to swarm in thy heart? What guilty of so many millions of iniquities against the God of Heaven, and yet thou se∣cure, light, vain and frothy? I profess if I did not know what a stone I have within, I should wonder all the day long, how it is possible we can stand under so much guilt without shreiks, cryes, and lamentations: I should wonder how you eat, and drink, and sleep, how you can laugh or sing, whilst God is so provoked. Can I think that man lives, who is not moved by the weight of a mountain on his back. Professour, thou hast that which is heavier than Mountains of lead upon thy Soul, and yet thou hardly feelest it: Thou dost not groan under that, which drew not only tears of water, but of blood, yea clots of blood, from the eyes and veins of Jesus Christ. I wonder how you conti∣nue your claims to Christ, how you can call God, Father, Christ, Redeemer, whilst you have so little love to him, and whilst you were never pricked at the heart, for all the injuries that you and others have done him: Whom you love, you are troubled for, if he be injured, by your selves, or others:
But where is your Soul-trouble for your own and other mens sins? Are not many as sensual as ever? as great servants to the flesh as ever? Have you not your Feasts and Entertainments as formerly? Though it be a day, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. wherein the Lord calls to weeping and mourning, to baldness and girding with sackcloth: yet be∣hold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and kil∣ling Sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: And hath not the Lord sent you a word, that may make your knees to tremble? Is not the hand-writing plain? It was revealed in mine ears, by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this ini∣quity shall not be purged from you, till you dye, saith the Lord God of Hosts. O! Fall down amazed, fill thy Spirit with horrour, away into thy Closet: though thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; yet pray to the Lord, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart, and the wickedness and prophaness of thy life, and particularly thy unseasonable mirth, and fleshly indulgencies, may be forgiven. How can you trade with so much guilt upon you? You have had your pleas for your co∣vetousness, and inordinate affections to the World, that God bids you provide for your own: But what think'st thou of thy Soul? Is that no part of thine own? Is that no piece of thy charge? O! Provide for thy Soul: Thy Soul cannot be safe, whilst stained with so many thousand impurities, which were never mourned over to this day. O! Let sorrow enter into the very inwards of thy heart, and let the insupportable pressures of
sin sink thy very Soul: Zech. 12.10. Mourn as the tender Mother for her only Son: be in bitterness, so as thou canst not relish those things, which thou hast hitherto followed with so much eagerness: Let the loathsomeness of thy sins be continually before thine eyes, as thy standing dish: So it was with Repenting David, Psa. 51.3. Lam. 5.16. Lam. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 13, 21. My sin is ever before me: So it was with the Church, Woe to us, we have sinned. It is true, they were under fearful Plagues: How doth the City sit solitary, that was full of people? How is she become a Widow, She that was great among the Nations, and Princess a∣mong the Provinces, how is she become tribu∣tary? — Among all her Lovers, she hath none to comfort her, all her Friends have dealt treacherously with her, &c. She dwelleth a∣mong the Heathen, she findeth no rest: all her Persecutours overtook her between the straits. The wayes to Zion mourn, &c. She came down wonderfully, and she had no Comforter, &c. The Enemy hath magnified himself, &c. From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it pre∣vaileth against them, &c. All mine Enemies have heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou hast done it. Lam. 2.3, 15, 16. The Lord hath burned a∣gainst Jacob like a flaming fire, which de∣voureth round about, &c. All they that pass by, clap their hands at thee: they hiss, and wagg the head, at the Daughter of Jerusalem, say∣ing, Is this the City, that men call, the Per∣fection of Beauty, Lam. 4.6, 11, 16. the Joy of the whole Earth? All thine Enemies have opened their mouth a∣gainst thee: they hiss, and gnash the teeth,
and say, We have swallowed her up: Certain∣ly this is the day we looked for, We have found, We have seen it. The punishment of the ini∣quity of the Daughter of my people, is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hand stayed on her. The Lord hath accomplished his fury, he hath powred out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath de∣voured the foundations thereof. The anger of the Lord hath divided them, &c. Lam. 5.2, 8, 10, 11. Our Inhe∣ritance is turned to Strangers: our Houses to Aliens. Our Necks are under Persecution, We labour, and have no rest. Servants have ruled over us: there is none to deliver us out of their hand. Our skin was black like an Oven: because of the terrible Famine. They ravished the Women in Zion, and the Maids in the Ci∣ties of Judah. But yet they mind not their misery, so much as their sin, Woe unto us; for we have sinned. In order to the promo∣ting of this godly sorrow, I do importune thee, with the highest fervency I can, that thou seperate some extraordinary time, to humble thy self, by Fasting and Prayer, that God would give thee Repentance, for thine own, and thine other mens sins: Per∣haps to this day thou hast never observed one in order to the getting of a broken heart. O that I could now prevail with thee; for this is the means, that God hath blest again and again: On such dayes God hath softned ma∣ny an heart, and cast out the Devil of secu∣rity and hardness, which could not be cast
out in ordinary times of waiting upon God: Let thy main request on that day be for a deep consideration of all thy sins, with all their several aggravations, and a deep hu∣miliation for them. O! I beseech you, if you have any love to Christ, to the credit of Religion, to your perishing Souls, break through all businesses and impediments, and retire your selves, and fall down at the foot∣stool of God, more solemnly, than ever you did: If you are, by the consideration of your provocations, humbled in the very dust, be sure to keep Conscience tender; Let not your convictions dye, strike again and again, smite on the thigh again and a∣gain, whilst the Iron is hot: This fire may be kept alive, by bringing new fuel to it. Labour exquisitely to afflict your Souls, that you should be so foolish, so vile, as under Christs Livery, to commit so great, and so hideous abominations. Take words, and say, O the Light that I have abused! O the means of Grace that I have slighted! O the lit∣tle service that I have done to Christ! O the many dis-services! Let these things cut, and grave, and afflict, and humble thy Soul ex∣ceedingly from morning to evening, and from evening to morning, till God be paci∣fied towards thee: beware lest the motions of a lazy heart cause thee to desist sooner. A patient that hath had a long disease, must continue in the use of the prescriptions, till the ill humour be purged away.
4. Indigna∣tion. Let your sorrow be accompanied with detestation. See all your sins and loath them, and your selves too. This is promised, they shall loath their ways and doings which are not good? O! how much sin have we confes∣sed, which yet we have secretly hug'd in our hearts? Labour to have your hearts rise against your pride, hypocrifie, &c. Hate sin not only for Hell, but as Hell, yea hate your selves for your sins, yea hate your selves that you can hate your sins no more. O that my hatred of my Lusts might be greater than e∣ver my love was unto them! I wish from my Soul Professors were more apprehensive of Gods Judgements, that are upon them and the Nation for their sins: I wish many of us were come up to the frames of the hard∣hearted Jews, and expressed so much ten∣derness, as they did, when Gods hand was heavy upon them, their sins also were an hea∣vy burden: Hos. 7.14. In their affliction they sought God early: they mourned and humbled them∣selves very much; though with the removal of their trouble, their sorrows wore away. However be not satisfied with this sorrow; but labour for such sorrow as David had, when he was wounded in his heart for sin, though Nathan told him his sin was forgiven, yet he continued his sorrows for his great transgressions: Labour I beseech you for tears of hatred and indignation, be greatly displeased with your selves, because you have so foolishly and wretchedly dishonour∣ed God, and ventured your eternal undoing;
and if yet thine eyes be not like the Fish∣ponds of Heshbon for thy sins, take words, and sament before God thine hardness of heart, that thou shouldst so grievously offend and provoke God, so good, so gracious a God, and that notwithstanding thine heart should remain unbroken. 5. Supplica∣tion. Let there be added hearty cries to God for pardon of all these and all other abominati∣ons. Who forgives him, that scorns to sue for Remission? Here is your work in this day: the Devil and a false heart will put you upon other work; but this is your present work: Cant. 1.6. They made me the keeper of the Vine∣yards; but mine own Vineyard I have not kept. But O! do not leave the work that God sets you about. I know it is your duty to pro∣vide for the bodies of your Children; but consider the danger of thy Soul, what guilt thou art under, and give the Lord no rest till he hath blotted out all thy sin, and art assured that he will remember it no more. Relieve not thy self with the general bounty of God, or with the free grace and rich mer∣cy of God, whilst thou neglectest to cry to God for grace and mercy. He will be sought unto by the house of Israel. Prize thy condi∣tion, that thou art alive to pray: (thou mightst have been in Hell, there to howl for ever and ever) Seek the Lord, whilst he may be found: Seek in time before it be too late: And if thou doubtest whether thou hast an interest in Christ and the promises, because of thy hideous transgressions; yet remember
the gracious words that tell once from the mouth of Christ to the Samaritan: John 4.10. If thou didst know the gift of God, thou wouldst have asked, and he would have given thee living water. Though thou art unworthy of Chil∣drens bread, and hast deserved to be cast forth among the dogs; yet thou hast to do with a bountifull and mercifull Lord: and therefore be not cast down, so as to be dis∣couraged from waiting on the Lord. It was ill said of him, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? There is no hope. I would have thee take better words into thy mouth, and say, Lord I am unworthy to be the object of thy mercy, unworthy to live, worthy to be denyed, because thou didst call and I did not hear, therefore if I call, thou mayst justly turn me off in thy fury: thou mightest answer me by terrible things in righteousness, But deal not with me ac∣cording to my deservings: O! make me the great instance of the power of thy grace, let thy mercy in pardoning be great, exceeding great O God! Do not delay the suing out thy pardon, Without delay. away quickly to the Throne of Grace. Remem∣ber Faelix put off his work till some other time. There is danger in delays, lest your sense of sin and sorrow for it vanish and de∣cay: blow up the first sparks of grace, lest they go out and dye again: take the first ad∣vantages of the grace of God. Hast thou an inclination to humble thy self, to pray, to seek Gods face, improve it quickly, lest the
wrath of God (who is nighly provoked alrea∣dy against thee) break form upon thee, and there be no remedy. Do not you know that you have lost the sense of the love of God? But have you also lost all sense of Gods wrath! Do not you wonder you escape? that you are yet alive? that you are not free among the dead: incorporated with the Hy∣pocrites and damned crew? Will you, dare you, go on in your hardness of heart? Will you treasure up wrath against the day of wrath? O! God forbid. Lay by the world (thy false friend, thy treacherous Joab, that hath smitten to the earth, with its kisses, and its smiles) Here is a business on which thy life, the life of thy precious Soul depends. Prepare to meet thy God: wrath is gone out from the Lord, howl, weep, cry, it may be you shall be hid is the day of the Lords wrath, it may be your sins shall be forgiven. Though the law be a looking-glass to shew you your spots (the Baver under the law was made of looking-glosses) yet it cannot cleanse you: it is the Gospel alone, that par∣dons Away ye wandring Sheep to the great Shep∣heard of your Souls: Hebr. 13.20. great he is in affection and love to his flock, he hath laid down his life for you, he hath purchased you with his own bloud. Nathans parable of the Ewe-Lamb is most true of Christ, and his beloved Flock: he hath nourished you up, and he is willing to lay you in his bosome. View your great Surety this day. He came under an Arrest for you, he hath discharged the
debt of all that come by faith to him. Rom. 4.25. He was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification. He is willing the in∣cestuous (when penitent) should not have his wounds lye undressed, lest Satan take any advantage thereby. Act. 20.21. I there e Repentance to∣wards God, let there be Faith towards the Lord Jesus Christ. If he hath given you the fore-runner, you have his pledge, his pawn, that he will forgive you. Do not say, God heareth not sinners, whilst there is a Foun∣tain opened for sin and for uncleanness. All thy sins cannot shut it; because it is opened to wash away sin. 6. Add to Supplication Resolution. Resolu∣tion. How can you pardon your very Child, that will not promise to do so no more? Let it be in the purpose of your hearts to neglect medi∣tation no more, to keep up bitterness a∣mong Christians no more, &c. Enter into an holy Vow against your sins. Be a through Protestant, protest against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. It will be thus if your hearts be throughly humbled for your sins, and truly inflamed against them. O say! what have I to do with Idols any more? O that you were very resolute, come Life, come Death, come Heaven, come Hell; yet I will change my course: I will not (through Gods grace helping me) do as I have done, omit as I have omitted. If you are not very peremptory to resist Satan and Sin, not to yeild unto Temptation, you encourage the Enemy to tempt you, whilst you are not re∣solved
to deny his  citations. That wo∣man is in danger of new sollicitations to un∣cleanness, who doth not resolutely bid de∣fiance to the first Temptation of the Ruffian. Perhaps you wonder, that after many pray∣ers, &c. your sin still prevails; But know (saith one) sin will be your Conquerour, if you be not resolved to be its enemy. Till resoluti∣on against all sin be wrought in you, God will hate all your prayers for the pardon of your sins. He hath an impudent forehead, a fore∣head of Brass, that dares go in before God, and say: O Lord! I beseech thee to par∣don my worldliness, and earthly-minded∣ness, for I am not yet resolved to be Hea∣venly minded: O Lord, pardon my envy, and I trust thou wilt do it, for yet I am unresolved to part from it: Pardon my Rebellions; for I am not yet resolved whether I shall cease to be a Rebel. Be∣lieve it, whilst you do not resolve to hate sin, it is a clear sign you have nor a spiritual knowledge of its evil: Did you in the light of the Spirit see sin in its nature, and in its bitter effects, did you see it as utterly incon∣sistent with all real happiness, and as the in∣fallible and unavoidable precipice of your in∣tollerable and eternal damnation, this would make you hate sin, and to be irreconcilable to it. But here I must give you this caution, In the strength of Christ. that you raise not your resolutions on your own strength, for then you will soon quit them by reason of your own weakness. When
you bind your self by a Vow against such a sin, take Christ into the Bond to be surey for you, to give you help and strength to per∣form in the hour of temptation. Augustine professed that though the thoughts of leav∣ing his sins were once a great burthen to him, yet at length being peremptorily Resolved, he found it a most easie and de∣lightfull thing to live without them. Friends, your sufferings may be nearer than you are aware of: Your sands I am sure run fast, and no stop is put to them: you may not expect that the shadow will go backward ten degrees, it may rather go forward: you may hardly have one hours warning before you must remove hence: how suddenly hath God cut down the Cedars and the thistles a∣mongst us? O! in that day it will be as scal∣ding lead to thee, that death and judgement surprized thee, when thou hadst not so much as resolved to leave thy cursed Rebellions a∣gainst thy God. 7. See what becomes of your Resolutions: Reforma∣tion. Psal. 119.106. how they are made good: thou hast purposed not to offend, yea covenanted with thy God for better obedience, yea thou hast sworn to keep his righteous Judgements. But hast thou dealt uprightly with thy God? O! be not sa∣tisfied with purposes and resolutions; but look to the performances of them. Blessed are ye of God, if all the sinnes you have been convinced of, and have engaged a∣gainst, be now put away: if there be no more pride, covetousness, contention,
self-seeking, &c. returning with seven worse Devils upon you. I pray God we may see (more than Resolution) some real and permanent effect of all your Confessions, Sorrows, and Resolves. O! O! O! how would it rejoyce my Soul to see an effe∣ctual alteration in the Faces, and Lives, and Conversations of Professours? How shall I bless God for ever, if by seeing your Faces in this imperfect Glass, you be transformed, and your hearts and Eves be put into a new frame of obedience? A∣mong all the sigts in the World, none sadder than to see multitudes, that had their Faces Zion-wards now facing about to the vanities of the Gentiles. O! how glorious, how desirable a sight will it be to see these returning with weeping and supplication. Here remember your Reformation must be general and special, General O! Labour to do as much for God and Grace, as you have done for the World and Self. As ye have yeelded your members servants to iniquity unto iniquity: Rom. 6.19. So now yeeld you members Servants of Righteous∣ness unto Holiness. Redeem all former omis∣sions by a double diligence: you having idled away much of your time, had need spur up your selves. See that you walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the time. But it is not only a general Reformation that I advise you to: Special. Watch also and pray a∣gainst those sins by which you have most disho∣noured
God. If thou a recovered of a dan∣gerous disease, thou wilt generaly me a good diet; but especially get Antidotes and Preservatives against that diseae thou wast so lately cured of. O, where the enemy hath made the greatest breaches, there let there be double guards, and double o∣cations. Be Tertullians, true penitents: Nonvult iterum Divinae miseri∣cordiae oneri, &c. Tert. He would not burthen the Spirit of God, again to deliver him from that sin. Follow a wor∣thy Pattern, When David had shed blood, and had prevailed with God to pardon that sin, afterwards, though he longed for the waters of Bethlehem, yet he abstains, and checks himself, because it did but hazard the blood of his Captains. CHAP. XL. Motives to make sueh use thereof. ANd now (to hasten to a conclusion) O that it would please God to make my words as an Hammer, Motives to let our hearts be broken for and from our Sins. to break the Rocks! O that I may be thus usefull to your Souls! O that somewhat at last may be hinted, that may, through the blessing of Go, break your hearts for, and from sin! that may promote your Repentance for your own, and your other∣mens
sins! And indeed unless your hearts be broken for sin, they will never be broken from sin; But the more bitterness of Spirit you are in for sin, the more probability there is you will not return unto sin. When men have furfetted upon a Dish, and are greatly afflicted and pained by it, the more unlikely they are to return again unto that Dish. That is certain (saith Mr. Burroughs) either a mans sin will make an end of his mourning, or his mouning will make an end of his sin. Yea, if your hearts be not broken for other mens sins, they are not kindly broken for your own sins. You will never put it out of all doubt that your sorrow is right and genuine, unless you mourn for others, as well as your own, sins; for it will alwayes be objected, that if Sin as Sin were your Burden, if Sin as dishonouring God, as wounding Christ, as grieving the Spirit, then other mens sins be∣ing reslexions on the Authority and Will of the great God, Father, Son, and Spirit, should have some considerable weight upon your Souls. The truth is, others sins become thine if thou knowest them, and mournest not for them. O then! In what a case are all the hardned jolly Professours, who can make a sport of Drunkeness, Uncleanness, Superstition, Perjury, &c. in others. Con∣sider therefore by the Help of this Glass others sins, as well as thine own to help on thy brokeness of heart for and from sin. Psal. 119.158. Behold (with David) the transgressour, and be griev∣ed; because they keep not Gods word: Let your
Souls (with Lot) be vexed: there are great∣er sins found among Professours in England, than were in Sodom: Let thy Soul be (as his was) as in Hell, as upon the Rack. How can you evidence that you are translated from death to life, because you love the Brethren, whilst you are not troubled to see them wounding and damning their souls by their sins: you are grieved to see any Friends of yours in great hazards and dangers by the Sword, by Sickness, by Fire; but the Souls of your Friends are in the greatest danger, yet you lament not the sight of these deplo∣rable spectacles. God forbid that any of you should have grounds of hope to gain Liber∣ties and outward Privileges by others provo∣cations, whilst all their sins become yours, whilst you are not humbled for them. But to lay before you some Considerations, that may (set home by the Spirit) draw water out of the Flint. 1. God is greatly incensed. Should not your hearts be broken for and from sin, seeing sin hath so incensed God against the Land of your Nativity? Can you retire from the World, and seriously consider the Prints of Gods displeasure against poor Eng∣land, and yet remain impenitent? Is it no∣thing to you, that God hath for many years been withdrawing from his Sanctuary in Eng∣land? O! Your Ministers have had miscar∣rying Wombs, and dry Breasts: Though they rose early, and sate up late, were much in watchings, and in labours, for the Conver∣sion and Edification of Souls; yet how sel∣dome
have any been under the Pangs of the New Birth? How seldome were any pricked at the heart? How seldome have any cryed out, What shall we do to be saved? And for others (concerning whom we hoped better things) How have they shed their Leaf? How have they pined and withered away, as to Practical Godliness? How have they lost that Seriousness, that Heavenlyness, that Pow∣er of Godliness, which before they seemed to have had? Your Ministers saw this, and la∣mented it, they acquainted you with it, in∣vited you to remember from whence you are fall'n, to repent, and do your first works; But yet You returned not unto the Lord. Should not this pierce your very hearts? Is it no∣thing to you, that not only your selves, but so many Professours in England, should lose their faithful and painful Ministers? Is it nothing to you, for God to call home by Death, and otherwise, so many of his Embassadours, whom you have grieved, whom you have despised and affronted, and who have been more burthened with your Pride, Earthli∣ness, Divisions, Sensuality, &c. than they are with their present Poverty and Dis∣honours, under which they lye? What doth it portend, save War and Hostility, when Embassadours are called home? And may not you fear, that the wrath of God is, and will be against you, till there be no remedy? They mocked the Messengers of God, 2 Chron. 36.16. and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, untill the wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
till there was no remedy. If God will treat with you no more: believe it, he will fight with you. And O! O! O! Who will set the Bryars and Thornes against him? He will goe through them, he will consume them in his wrath. Is it nothing to you, that there is yet such a Spirit of Division in the Land? O! What heats and heart-burnings, what ani∣mosities and jealousies are there? so that a Brother cannot trust a Brother. Is it nothing to you, that God hath been so long contending with the Land, by the Sword, and by the Pe∣stilence, and so lately by Fire? Is it nothing to you, that God permitted that dreadful Fire in London to break forth about Three of the Clock on a Lords Day morning? Did he not thereby cause his Sabbath in a manner to cease in London? Did not he make his holy Day of Rest, a Day of labour and disquiet? Did not he hereby as it were anticipate his Peoples conventions to expiate him, and so drew them as it were off from the Remedy, that his hands being loosened, he might punish, 2 Chron. 7.12. Deut. 9.14. Jer. 2.2. and not be prevailed with to pardon? May we not say with Jeremiah, even upon this account, The Lord hath swallowed up all the Habitations of Jacob, and hath not pittied, he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong Holds of the Daughter of Judah, he hath brought them down to the ground? Is it no∣thing, that at the same time, God should send forth such a boysterous Wind, to fann and blow up the Fire, East, West, South, and North, God therein executing the
Judgement threatned against Elam, Jer. 49.36. of bring∣ing the four Winds from the four Quarters of Heaven, &c. If the punishment of one Element (saith a late Writer) be dreadful, as the Water was to the old World; and the Air is in Pestilential Infections; and the Earth was, when it opened its mouth to swallow up Corah, and his company; how dreadful is Gods punishing a Land or Person with double and treble Judgements in one? What vengeance is that like to prove, which hath Gods Armies of Fire and Wind united? Is it nothing, that the Fire burned at some time contrary to the Wind, and as it were in opposition to it, and was then as uncheck∣able, as when it had the Winds raising and chasing it? Is it nothing, that in the drought of the season, and the want of water, God seem'd to hinder the application of Remora's to both Wind and Fire? Was not therein the Judgement executed upon England in its heart, which God threatned against the Chaldeans, a drought is upon her Waters, and they shall be dryed up; Jer. 50.38. for it is a Land of gra∣ven Images, and they are madd upon their Idols? Is it nothing, that the rational and probable anticipations of the constagrating progresses of the Fire, which might have been, were hid from the eyes of those, whose interest it would have been to have improved them? Did not God at that time take courage from the mighty, and wisdome from the wise? Is it nothing, that London, the great Bulwark of the Reformed Religion,
against the assaults and batteries of Popery and Prophaness, is in a great measure de∣stroyed? But (above all) Is it nothing, that generally there is so little sense of any of these Judgements? The Wine of Astomsh∣ment is given us to drink, and we reel to and fro like Drunkards; But alas! 2 Chron. 7.14. Who humbleth himself, and prayes, and seeks Gods face, and turns from his wicked wayes, that God may heal our Land? 2. The sins of any one of us may be the Incendi aries. Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing the sins of any one of you in particular may have been the great Incendi∣ary? This is certain, God hath, for the de∣linquency of one man, yea for one sin, brought Plagues upon many. If any thing will move thine heart, this will; but no∣thing will without Gods concurse: The Lord fasten this nayl, the Lord fix this upon thy Soul, and let it be as Frontlets between ine eyes day and night. When Achan was guilty of one sin, and that a secret one, when he had stoln a wedge of Gold, when he had impropriated it to his own use, which God had destined to another, he troubled the whole Church of God: the Armies of Is∣rael fell before the men of Ai, the generation of Gods curse, yea Joshua, their Prince be∣came dejected, and his communion with God was thereby for a while broken. And the Lord said unto Joshua, get thee up; Josh. 7.10, 11, 12, &c. 22.20. wherefore lyest thou on thy face? Did not A∣chan the Son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the Con∣gregation
of Israel? And that man perish∣ed not alone in his iniquity. The iniquity of Peor, though committed long agoe, yet raised a cloud of wrath, which was ready to empty it self upon the whole Church of God for it many years after. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, Josh. 22.17. from which we are not cleansed to this day, although there was a Plague in the Congregation of the Lord? The Gibeonites (who had craftily se∣cured their Lives, by an exchange for their Liberties) got an Oath from Saul, and al∣most 500. years after, when this Covenant was broken, in the slaying of many of them, and Saul was dead, the flourishing Church of God suffered three years Famine for this Perjury. Then there was a Famine in the dayes of David, 2 Sam. 21.1. three years, year after year, and David enquired of the Lord: And the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house; because he slew the Gibeonites. Manasseh sinn'd, and that cost the Liberties and Lives of many, good as well as bad: Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great anger, 2 Kings 23.26. wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the Provocations that Manasseh had pro∣voked him withall. Pharaoh refused to give liberty to Gods Church, to worship their God, and this brought unparallel'd Judge∣ments and Plagues upon the whole Land of Egypt. Amalecks abuse of Gods people was not forgotten for an hundred years; but God took up an everlasting quarrel with them;
till he had rooten them out of the Earth; Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, 1 Sam. 15.2. I remember that which Amaleck did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt. Yea, the Sins of one good man; have brought down Plagues upon many. David (whether out of curiosity, or vain∣glory, or confidence in an arm of flesh) would needs number the people, (a little sin in comparison of what we are guilty of) yet it cost the lives of 70000. by the Pestilence. So the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel, &c. 2 Sam. 24.15. and there dyed of the people, from Dan even to Beershea, seventy thousand men. Solomon was a good Prince, and yet by his sins he brought miserable confusions on the most considerable part of the Church of Israel, by that great revolt which it occasioned. Where∣fore the Lord said to Solomon, 1 Kings 11.11. For as much as this is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my Covenant, and my Satutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the King∣dom from thee, and will give it to thy Servant. Eli, a good man, and a good Magistrate, yet because too indulgent to his Children, (a Vice common, but seldome considered and bewailed) what a fearful Plague brought he upon his Posterity, as well as himself? And the Lord said unto Samuel, Behold I will do a thing in Israel, 1 Sam, 3.11, 12, 13, 14. at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle. In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his House: When I begin, I will also make an end; for I have
told him, that I will judge his House for ever, for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And therefore I have sworn unto the House of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies House shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offer∣ing for ever. Luk. 11.50, 51. Mat. 23.35, 36. The blood of all the Prophets, (saith Christ) which was shed from the Foun∣dation of the World, shall be required of this Generation, from the blood of Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple: Verily, I say unto you, it shall be required of this Generation. And yet who holds up his hand to Gods Barr, and cryes, Guilty, Guilty? Who saith as Da∣vid, when the Angel forraged among the People, 2 Sam. 24.17. Let thy hand be against me; for these sheep, What have they done? We are quick∣sighted enough, yea too much, to espye and aggravate the sins of others: We expect fearful Plagues for others Adulteries, Drun∣kennesses, Swearing and Blaspheming; But the Lord hearkeneth when we will own our Sins to be the Incendiaries, Jer. 8.6. saying, What have I done? And What have I done, to stop the mouths of so many of Gods faithful Mi∣nisters, to unsheath the Sword, to bring forth the destroying Angel, to kindle the dreadful Fire in London? Are there not such sins amongst us, for which God hath plagued much people? If secret sins of particular Per∣sons, have drawn down wrath on whole Na∣tions, Why not thy scandalous sins? Say no more, Such Opposition, Oppression, Ido∣latry,
uncleaness, &c. will bring in misery, as an armed man: but say, there is danger lest God should make an utter end of poor England for my pride, for my unthankful∣ness, for my trusting in an Arm of flesh, for my back-slidings: O! how many have I caused to fall by the Sword? and how many by the Pestilence? And how many have I caused to be ruined by the Fire? Verily, if thou art guilty of no other sin, save pride, yet thou canst not clear thy self from being one of Englands Incendiaries. O! how was the wrath of God upon Jerusalem, and Judah, because Hezekiah's heart was lifted up? But Hezekiah rendred not again accord∣ing to the benefit done unto him; 2 Chron. 32.25. for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah, and Jerusalem. 3. No Re∣pentance, no re∣turns of mercy, but more wrath. Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing without repentance the mercies you are deprived of, because of your sins, will never be returned, or not in mercy, yea greater judgements will follow? Unless you return unto God, from whom you have de∣parted, God will not return unto your Souls. If ye forsake him, 2 Chron. 15.2. he will forsake you, imports as much as, if you continue to forsake him, he will continue to forsake you. If you repent not, God will not re∣turn your liberties, your trade, his own Ordinances in purity and power, or at least he will not return these, or any other mer∣cies, you have sinned away, in mercy: But you may expect greater judgements than e∣ver
yet you saw, to fall, not only upon your selves and families, but upon the Land. Think not that they were the greatest sinners in England, upon whom the Sword, or Pe∣stilence, or Fire fell: Remember Christs I tell you Nay, Luk. 13.3, 5. Luk. 6.25. but except you repent you shall all likewise perish. Wo unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep: And will you run the hazard of this dreadful Wo? Will you run the hazarding of perishing all, and alto∣gether? Is it not better to mourn now, than to cry and howl in the pit of Hell for ever? God hath determined within his own breast, nay he hath expressed this to be his pleasure to the Children of men, that sooner, or la∣ter, all shall mourn for sin, either in this life, or in the next: And is it not better to feel the weight here, than on a death bed, or in Hell? What said a Ruffian once; when in the midst of his jovial Companions he clapt his hand on his breast, and cryed out well, one day I must know what a wounded Conscience meaneth. God is resolute in this, you shall one time or other find it an evil and bitter thing to provoke him. And shall this consi∣deration nothing move you: I know this should not be the chief ground of your sor∣row: But yet Christ was no legal Preacher, when he cryed out, sin no more least a worse thing happen to you. Go thou sluggard to the Ant, provide in Summer for the Winter. But O the great cheats that poor souls put upon themselves! they hope, though they repent not, though they remain careless, worldly,
&c. yet others are not so careless as they: though they fast not, yet they hope some do: though they spend not days in prayer, they hope others do; and they hope to fare the better for them. This is like the Doctrine of Rome: the Romanists teach that there are some opera paenalia, some penitential works, that you may have others to do for you, and yet fare as well as if you did them your selves; But for my part I shall as soon believe that I shall be cured of the stone in the bladder, or of a filthy Leprosie by anothers taking Phy∣sick for me, as that I shall be saved by ano∣thers repentance. O! what folly is this to take relief and sanctuary in others fervent Petiti∣ons and deprecations of wrath, whilst thou thy self cryest out, Soul take thine ease, store is laid up for thee by others? Alas! how dost thou know what others are a doing? Doe they blow the Trumpet, when they go to fast? the more likely it is that they be Hypocrites. But hath not God said, Ezek. 9.4. Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark (only) upon the foreheads of the men, that sigh and that cry for all the abo∣minations that be done in the midst thereof? and again, Son of man, when the Land sinneth a∣gainst me by transgressing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send a fa∣mine upon it, Ezek. 14.13, 14. and will cut off man and beast from it. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deli∣ver but their own Souls, by their righteousness, saith the Lord God.
4. Impeni∣tents lose all they do and suffer for God. Should not your hearts be broken for, and from your sins, seeing so long as you are impe∣nitent, all you do, and suffer for God is abomi∣nable in his sight? Hardness of heart is a nasty disease; it is like a Leprosie, that makes all to shun a man: If you had such a disease, that all would abhor you, would it not hum∣ble you to the very dust? your impeni∣tency makes you neither fit company for God, nor his Saints: you are loathsome in the sight of both, whilst you are under so much guilt, and yet insensible of it. A ten∣der broken hearted Christian is lovely in Gods, and his peoples, eyes; but how ug∣ly a sight is it to see a daring, bold, insensi∣ble sinner, persisting in a course of sin, without repentance? If the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, &c. in his righteousness that he hath done shall he live, &c. But when the righteous turneth away from his righteous∣ness, Ezek. 18.21, 22, 24. 2 Ep. of John v. 8. Gal. 3.4. Their persons are loa∣thed. and committeth iniquity, and doth ac∣cording to all the abominations, that the wick∣ed man doth, shall he live? all his righteous∣ness that he hath done shall not be mentioned. And is it nothing to you to lose the things you have wrought? Is it nothing to suffer, and to suffer so many things in vain? 5. Should not your hearts be broken for, and from your sins, seeing so long as you are impe∣nitent God doth not only loath your services, but he cannot take any delight in your persons, yea you cannot be restored into his love and fa∣vour? without Repentance there is no Remis∣sion:
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, Act. 3.19. that your sins may be blotted out. And what? have you no mind to be forgiven your own and your other mens sins? Deus no in∣fund it oleum miseri∣cordiae nisi in vas con∣tritum. Bernard. have you no will to be at peace with God, and to be restored into his love and favour? Are you content that all these, and innumerable sins more should be charged upon your Account? O then! beg of God to break your hearts for, and from your sins. A broken vessel, a bro∣ken heart, will hold best the oyl of mercy. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God! thou wilt not despise. 6. But their Repen∣tance would ex∣ceedingly please God and refresh his Mini∣sters. Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing your Repentance will be so pleasing, and so reviving to your even broken∣hearted Ministers? Your Repentance will more please God, than all your sins have dis∣pleased him. Though your sins have very much displeased him, yet he was loth to de∣part from you, he hath departed only gra∣dually; But if you will repent he will readi∣ly return: in his departure he hath gone as it were a Snayles pace, but if you will return, he will return with speed, he will turn to∣wards you, and fall upon your Necks, and kiss you, and not upbraid you with any of your for∣mer miscarriages. And O! what a refresh∣ing will it be to your fainting Ministers to see you returning Prodigals? Believe it, our Chains would be worn as Bracelets and Jewells, and our Exiles would be a Paradise to us, did we see you putting your mouths
in the dust, and crying out because of all your Provocations. It is your security, your seeking great things for your selves, your pride, your foolish expectations of our returns, whilst you, and we are so un∣fit for such a mercy, that is our greatest burden, and lies heavier on us than the wrath of any, save of God Almighty. God knoweth, who knoweth the secrets of our Souls, that we could be contented to be banished from the face of men, so that you were delivered from the power of your lusts: If you live and stand fast in the faith, we live, and though we have nothing, yet we possess all things, joying and rejoycing to see your Zeal, your Repentance, your Indignations and Revenges against your sins. But we is unto us, we fear we have spent our Lungs, our Time, our Studies, our Life in vain upon you, whilst we be∣hold your benummedness, your insensible∣ness of all the tokens of Gods displeasure, by reason of your transgressions. And will you add affliction to the afflicted? Is it not enough that we are turned out of the Vine∣yard, where we loved our work better than our lives; Is it not enough that we are cast forth from among our People and Friends to seek bread for our selves and lit∣tle ones from door to door? But will you have a greater hand in our misery than any others? Will you lay the greatest load of trouble upon us, whilst others oppress our outward man, will you go on to vex our
Spirits? Have pitty upon us, O Children! whom we have begotten in the Gospel: you call us your Spiritual Fathers, you did re∣ceive us as Angels, yea as Jesus Christ, you would have plucked out your eyes to do us good; O! now what do we beg? not to have your eyes out, but fill'd, fill'd with tears, Gal. 4.15. and your hearts fill'd with sorrow for, ha∣tred and indignation against, your sins? Weep not for us; but weep for your selves: And is there not a cause? Your tears will be our meat and drink: a great part of our joy will arise from seeing your godly sorrow: Hagar was not more refeshed with her fountain, than we shall be to find your heads as waters, and your eyes as fountains of tears, and you weeping day and night for your own and others provocations. Let it suffice you that you have so long grieved us and Christ by your Security, Self-love. Worldliness, Pride, and Passi∣ons. O that now the Egyptians, that we have seen among you, may be seen alive no more! Let us not be hastned to our graves by your impenitencies and stubborn departures from God. We are troubled to find still among you and upon you, those very sins, which have laid Kingdoms and Churches wast, and yet you secure: as if the Lord had powred out a Spirit of slumber upon you: those very sins, which overthrow the Churches of Judea and Asia are found among you, and will you not repent, and do your first works? It grieves
us to the heart to see sins run through you, as water through a Mill, and you regard it not. We beseech you out of love to God, to your own Souls, and to us and our com∣forts, that you would cease to do evil, and learn to do well: Be moved with fear, and prepare an Ark. The old world would not believe Noah; But the Lord made them to know he was a Prophet of Righteous∣ness. We pitty your Souls, we are trou∣bled to see what confidence you put in un∣certain Signs and Prognostications, which beget carelessness and security in you, and how little you fear the threatnings of most dreadfull Judgements against those very sins you have lived in: many a sad thought we have about you, whilst we see your fickleness, inconstancy, stupidity, and un∣grounded, (because unscriptural) hopes. O! return, return, repent, repent; that we may be able to say, ye are our joy, our Crown, our rejoycing in the day of Christ. 7. , or ver, for ought they know. And Lastly, Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, even by what may be seen in this Glass, seeing now God gives you not only time to Repent, but an opportuni∣ty of Repentance, and such an one, as if you neglect it you may never have the like again? When time and the means are married and lodged together (saith one) they beget oppor∣tunity. Now time, and means meet together to effect your Repentance. If this oppor∣tunity be lost, you may never have another: and if you should never have any other, your
case is desperate. Opportunities cannot be pray'd, or wept back again. Heb. 12.17. Esau's instance puts it out of all doubt. In Gods opportu∣nity it is an easie thing to repent; but if this opportunity should be lost by you, (which God forbid) it may be impossible for you to repent, See Mr. Fenners danger of defer∣ring re∣pentance folio 35, 36. God may justly give you up to Ju∣dicial impenitency. It may be God doth now by this Treatise speak home unto thy Soul, now it may be God warms thy heart, now it may be God works in thee good thoughts and desires; Now is thy day of grace; But (to use the words of one of the chiefest of Englands late Alarming Preach∣ers, with some little variation) If thou let this day pass, thou maist desire to have one of the drops of that blood, that hath been offer∣ed to thee, and yet never have it: thou mayst desire to feel one drap of his spirit, that hath knockt at thine heart; and yet go without it: thou maist intreat for one dram of that mercy, that hath been offered, and thou hast rejected; but it shall never be granted to thee: God may clap that fear∣full sentence upon thee, Now henceforth never grow fruit more on thee, never repen∣tance come into thine heart more. If now thou wilt not repent and be converted, the Lord may set it down in his decree, that from this day forward thou mayst fumble a∣bout thy sins; but shall never get victory over them: thou mayst ever be mourning for thy corruptions; but never mourn aright for them: thou mayst blunder about repen∣tance,
but never do the work. You shall not mourn, Ezek. 24.23. nor weep; but you shall pine away in your iniquities. There is many a Soul for contemning of God, and not taking up re∣pentance, while he may have it, upon whom this plague of God is come, that they are ever repenting, but never able to repent; ever poring upon their sins, but never able to come out of them; they pray and pray against them, but their prayers moulder away under them; for they shall pine away for their transgressions. What is the reason? Ezek. 24.13. Why? because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged any more. May not God say to thee thus? Because I have given thee line upon line, precept upon precept, call up∣on call; not only outward, but inward calls, ordinance upon ordinance, provi∣dence upon providence, book upon book, motion upon motion: Because I have used all means, fair means, and foul means; I have plainly shewed thee thy sins by my Word and Rod, and by this glass, I have a∣wakened thine own Conscience, yea and stirred up, as by other Sermons and Trea∣tises, so by this, good thoughts and de∣sires in thee; because I would have cleansed thee, and thou wast not cleansed, thou shalt never be cleansed. Is not this a fearfull sen∣tence? Alas! Thy heart is very hard, and thy Conscience very much seared, if the reading hereof doth not make thee quake and tremble. What shall I say? Now is the
Axe laid to the root of the Tree. Mat. 3.10. Thine op∣portunity is now: If thou pass by this Now, thou art gone for ought I can tell; thou mayst be chopt off presently. O! Neglect not the present Now, lest thou be cut off for ever. Thou art in danger of being present∣ly cut down, if thou dost not presently re∣pent. Every Tree which bringeth not forth, (in the present tense) good fruit, is (even for the present) hewn down, and cast into the Fire. I shall conclude with the words of the Apostle, The Earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed, re∣ceiveth blessing from God: Heb. 6.7, 8, 9. But that which beareth thorns and bryars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: But, Beloved, we are perswaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation (such a repentance as cannot be separated from Salvation) though we thus speak: yea therefore we thus write. Soli Deo sit Gloria.
ERRATA. Such Sense-spoyling Mistakes, as (notwith∣standing the great care of the Printer and Corrector) occurr in the first 19. Sheets of this Glass, the Candid Reader is desired to correct thus, PAge 2. Line 18. for said, read saw. p. 37. l. 20. for buy, read by. p. 39. l. 20. for self seizings, read self-seekings. ibid. l. 17. after joyn'd, adde, and must be taken. p. 52. l. 20. for they, read he. p. 56. l. 15. for sure, read save. p. 84. l. 23. for poised, read posed. p. 106. l. 10. for begin, read began. p. 123. l. 21. for salocy, read sawcy. p. 124. l. 25. after want, adde, are such. p. 134. l. 32. for meetings, read meltings. p. 158. l. 1. dele an. p. 161. l. 28. for of, read as are. p. 168. Marg. for illi, read illis. p. 182. l. 26. for to, read too. p. 194. l. 13. for , read . ibid. l. 16. for , read . p. 202. l. 5. for sanesti, read sanasti. p. 225. Marg. for affectionibus, read affli∣ctionibus. p. 250. l. 11. for for, read or. p. 269. l. 23. after to, adde do. p. 299. l. 20, 21. dele rather.
