s927a 99833360 37836
The Power OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT In point of JUDICATURE briefly discours'd. At the Request of a Worthy Member of the House of Commons. SIR, TO give you a short an account of your Desires as I can; I must crave leave to lay you, as a Foundation, the Frame or First Model of this State. When, after the Period of the Saxon Time, Harald had advanc'd himself in∣to the Royal Seat; the Great men, (to whom but lately he was no more than Equal either in Fortune or Power) disdaining this Act of Arrogancy and Ambition, called in William Duke of Normandy, (the most Active Prince of any in these Western Parts, and renowned for the Victories that he had successfully Atchieved against the French King, then the most Potent Monarch in Europe.) This Duke led along with him to this work of Glory many of the Yonger Sons of the best Families of Normandy, Picardy and Flanders; who, as Voluntiers, accompany'd the undertaking of this Fortunate Man. The Ʋsurper being Slain, and the Crown, by War, gained; to cure Certain to his Po∣sterity what he had so Suddenly gotten, he shar'd out his Purchase retaining in Each Coun∣ty a Portion, to support the Soveraign Dignity, which was stiled Demenia Regni; (now the Ancient Demesnes) and assigning to others his Adventures such Proportions, as enga∣ged to himself the Dependency of their Personal Service (such Lands only ezcepted, as in Free Alms, were allotted to the Church) These were termed Barones Regis or the Kings Immediate Free-holders; for the word Baro imported then no more. As the King to These, so These to their Followers, Subdivided part of their Shares in∣to Knights-Fees, and their Tenants were called, Barones Comitis, or the like; for we find, as in the King's Writ, so in Theirs, Baronibus suis al Francois & Anglois, to their Barons, as well French as English; the Royal Gifts, for the most part, extending to whole Counties or Hundreds; an Earl being Lord of the One, and a Baron of the Infe∣riour Donations to Lords of Townships or Mannours. And as the Land, so was also the Course of Judicature divided, even from the Mean∣est to the Highest Portion; each Several had his Court of Law, preserving still the Cu∣stom of our Ancestors the Saxons, who jura per Pagos reddebant, distributed Justice throughout each Village: And these were termed Court Barons, or the Freeholders Court, (twelve usually in number) who with the Thame, or Chief Lord, were Judges.
The Hundred-Court was next, where the Hundredus, or Aldermanus (Lord of the Hundred) with the chief Lord of each Township within their Limits, judged. God's People observed This Form; in the Publick Centureonis & Decam Judicabant Plebem omni tempore. Hundreds and Decennaties administring Justice to the People at all times. The County-Court, or Generale Placitum, was the next; This was to supply the De∣fect, or remedy the Corruption of the Inferiour: For Ʋbi Curioe Dominorum probantur defecisse, pertinet ad Vice Comitem Provinciarum; where the Hundred-Court was found Defective, matters were referr'd to the Lord of the County, The Judges here were Co∣mites & Barones Comitatus, qui Liberas, in hoc, Terras habeant; Earls and Barons of the County, that were Free-holders in the same. The last and Supreme Court, and proper to our Question; was Generale Placitum apud London, the General Council at London; Ʋniversalis Synodus, the Ʋniversal Synod, in Charters of the Conquerour, Capitalis Curiae, the Capital Court; by Glanvil, Magnum & Commune Concilium coram Rege, & Magnatibus suis; the Great and Common Council be∣fore the King and his Nobles. In the Rolls of Henry the Third, It is not Stative, but summon'd by Proclamation. E∣dicitur Generale Placitum apud London (says the Book of Abingdon) whither Duces, Prin∣cipes, Satrapae, Rectores, & Causidici ex omni parte conftuxerunt ad istam Curiam, saith Glanvil, the General Assembly was called at London; whether Dukes, Princes, Peers, Rectors, and Lawyers resorted from all Quarters: And Causes were referr'd propter aliquam dubita∣tionem quoe emergit in Comitatu cum Comitatus nescit dijudicare; upon any Question or Difficulty which the County Court was not able to solve. Thus did Ethelweld, Bishop of Winchester, transfer his Suit against Le ostine from the County ad Generale Placitum, or the General Assembly: In the time of King Etheldred, Queen Edgine against Goda, from the County appealed to King Etheldred at London, Congregatis Principibus & Sa∣pientibus Angliae; where the Princes and Wise Men of the Land were met together. A Suit between the Bishops of Winchester and Durham, in the time of S. Edward, Coram Episcopis & Princibus Regni in praesentia Regis ventilata & finita; was handled and deter∣mined by the Bishops and Princes of the Realm in the presence of the King. In the 10th year of the Conquerour, Episcopi, Comites & Barones Regni potestate adversis Pro∣vinciis, ad Ʋniversalem Synodum, pro causis audiendis & tractandis, convocati; the Bi∣shop, Earls and Barons of the Realm, &c. being assembled at the Universal Council to hear and determine Controversies, (says the Book of Westminster.) And This continu∣ed all along in the succeeding Kings Reign, until toward the end of Henry the Third. AS this Great Court or Council, (consisting of the King and Barons) rul'd the im∣portant Affairs of State, and controlled all Inferiour Courts; so were there certain Of∣ficers, whose transcendant Power seem'd to be set for the circumscribing the Execution of the Pinces will; as the Steward, Constable, and Marshal, fix'd upon Families in Fee, for many Ages. They (as Tribunes of the People, or Ephori among the Lacedemonians) growing by unmanly Courage terrible to Monarchy, fell at the feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain at Evsham. This Chance, and the dear Experience H. the Third himself had made at the Parli∣ament at Oxford, in the fortieth year of his Reign; together with the Memory of the many straits his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumny-Mead near Stanes; brought this King to begin what his Successors fortunately finished; in lessening the Strength and Power of his Great Lords. And this was effected by searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar Soveraigns, whereby they were found to be (as the Book of St. Albans termeth them) quot Domini, tot Tyranni, how many Lords, so many Tyrants; and by weakening that Influence and Sway which they carried in the Parliaments, by com∣manding the Service of many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, to the Great Council.
Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons; Their assent not only used in Money, Charge, and making Laws, (for, before, all Ordinances pass'd by the King and Peers) by their Consent also in Judgments of all Qualities whither Civil or Cri∣minal. In proof whereof I will produce some sew succeeding Presidents out of Re∣cord. When Adamor (that proud Prelate of Winchester,Lib. S. Al∣ban. f l. 20. 7. An. 44. H. 3. the Kings Half Brother) had ag∣grieved the State by his formidable Insolence; he was banished by the joynt sentence of the King, the Lords, and Commons. And this appeareth expresly, by the Letter sent to Pope Alexander the Fourth. who expostulated a Revocation of him from Exile because he was a Church-man, and so not Subject to any Censure: In This the answer is Si Dominus Rex aut Majores Regni hoc vellent (meaning his Revocation) Communitas tamen, Ipsius In∣gressum in Angliam jam Nullatenus sustineret; though the King and Lords should consent to his Revocation, yet would the Commons never allow of it. The Peers Subscribe this Answer with their Names, and Petrus de Mountford vice Totius Communitatis, as Speaker, or Proctor of the Commons. For by that Stile Sir John Tiptoft (Prolocutor) affirmeth under his Arms the Deed of Entail of the Crowns by King Hen. the fourth,Charta O∣rig. sub Si∣gil. An. 8. H. 4. in the eighth year of his Reign, for all the Commons. The Banishment of the two Spencers in the fifteenth of Edw. 2d. Prelates, Comites, & Barones, & les autres Peeres de la Terre, & Communes de Royalme, the Prelates, Earles, and Barons, and the rest of the Peers of the Realm, and Commons of the Land, do give Consent and Sentence to the Revocation and Reversement of the Former Sentence; the Lords and Commons accord; and so it is express'd in the Roll. In the first of Edw. the 3d. when Elizabeth the Widdow of Sir John de Burgo, com∣plained in Parliament,Rot. parl. 15. Ed. 3, vel. 2, that Hugh Spencer the Younger, Robert Boldock, and William Cliffe, his Instruments had by Duresse forc'd her to make a Writing to the King, whereby she was despoiled of all her Inheritance; Sentence is given for her in these words; Pur ceo que avis est al Rvesques, Counts, & Barons, & autres Grandes, & a tout Cominalte de la Terre, que le discript est fait contre Ley & tout manere de Raison, si faist le dit Escript per agard del Parliament dampue alloquens al livre a la dit Elixabeth, Forasmuch as it appeareth un∣to the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and all the Comonalty of the Land, that the said Writing was made against all Law and Reason, it is adjudged by Parlea∣ment, &c. In An 4 Ed. 3 it appeareth by a Letter to the Pope that to the Sentence given against the Earl of Kent the Commons were Parties as will as the Lords and Peers for the King directed their Porcedings in these words Comitibus Eagnatibus Baronibus & aliis de Communitate dicti Regni ad parliementum illud congregatis injunximus ut super his discernerent & judicarent quod Rationi & justitioe conveniret habere proe Oculis solum Deum qui eum concordi unanimi sententia tanquam Reum criminis loe soe Majestatis mori adjudica∣rent ejus sententia &c.Prela. Par∣liam. 1. Ed. 3. Rot. 11. We have commanded the Earls Peers Barons and others of the Commonalty of the said Realm assembled in Parliament to determine in this matter according to Reason and Justice having only God before their Eyes; and by an unanimous consent they have sentenced him to death as guilty of High Treason When in the 50th year of Ed. 3. the Lords had pronounc'd the Sentence against Richard Lions otherwise than the Commons agreed,Parl. An. 5. Edw. 3. they appealed to the King, and had Re∣dress, and the Sentence entred to their Desires. When, in the first Year of Richard the Second, William Weston, and John Jennings,
were Arraigned in Parliament for surrendering certain Forts of the King's; the Com∣mons were Parties to the Sentence against them given,Parl. An. 1. Rich. 2.11.3.8. & 3.5. as appeareth by a Memorandum an∣nexed to that Record, In the first of Hen. the Fourth, although the Commons referre, by Protestation, the pronouncing of the Sentence of Deposition against King Richard the Second unto the Lords; yet are they equally Interressed in it; as appeareth by the Record: For there are made Proctors, or Commissioners, for the whole Parliament, one Bishop, one Abbot, one Earl, one Baron, and two Knights !Gray and Erpinghan) for the Commons. And to infer that because the Lords pronounc'd the Sentence, the point of Judgment should be only Theirs, were as absur'd, as to conclude that no Authority was vested in any other Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer, than in the Person of that Man only that speaketh the Sentence. In the 2d. of Hen. 5. The Petition of the Commons importeth no less than a Right they had to Act and Assent to all things in Parliament; and so it is answer'd by the King. And had not the adjourned-Roll of the Higher-House been left to the sole Entry of the Clerk of the Ʋpper-House, (who, either out of neglect to observe due Form, or on set purpose to obscure the Commons Right, and to flatter the Power of those who he immediately served, omitted them,) there would have been frequent Examples of all Times to clear this doubt, and to preserve a just Interest to the Common-Wealth. And how conveniently it suits with Monarchy to maintain This Form, lest others of that well-fram'd Body knit under one Head, should swell too great and Monstrous, may be seen with half an Eye; it being (in my Opinion) at least equally Liable to suffer a fresh under an Aristocracy, as a Demo∣cracy, SIR, I am Your most humble Servant. H. S. FINIS.
