t2778 09618932 43825
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION of several Notorious Malefactors AT TYBURN, On VVednesday April the 16th. 1684. Viz. Charles Close, Brnerd Trevers Hugh Kelly, Katherine Smith. and Mary Corbet, who was Burnt at Tyburn for High-Treason. THese Malefactors, with three more, were Tryed and Condemned at the last Sessions at the Old-Bily, of which two of them, by his Majesties great Favor were Re∣preived, and the other, Jane Robinson, being found quick with Child by a Jury of Women impannel'd for that En∣quiry, was respited till her Delivery. I shall first give you a True Account, of the several Crimes, for which each person suffered, and then a Re∣lation of the Behaviour of them, from the time of their Sentence, to that of Execution. Charles Close was an old Offender, and one of those Rogues, who about two years ago, Rob'd Mr. Croom an Ale-house-keeper, near Soho Fields, which was thus, he and two more of his Companions went in to drink, and af∣ter they had stay'd sometime, and found an Opportunity sit for their purpose; There being no other Company in the
house they sent down the Master for another Tankard of Drink and one of them followed him down Stairs, and of a sudden knock'd him down; the other coming in to his Assistance, they us'd him very Barbarously, and afterwards rob'd the house of a very considerable sum in Monys and Place, and made their Escape. But Justice which never suffers such heinous crimes to go unpunished, at last over∣took this Offeder in the Commissin of a second Robbery, with Bernard Trevers and Hugh Kely, who were all In∣dicted for Robbing the house of John Shutleworth, an Inn-keeper at Wood-Green in the Parish of Tatenham, and take∣ing away, in Plate and Mony, to the value of two hundred and fifty pounds, they laid their design with a great deal of cunning, by first going to drink as of they had been pass∣ing forward towards Hornsey. The Inn-keeper seeing thm in the habits of Gentlemen, ok them for such, and made much of them, thinking he had got good Guests, and offered them a Lodging if they would stay all Night, when it was dark Bernard Trevers let in several others, who a∣sisted them to bind the Family and rob the house. Hugh Kelly was taken at Portsmouth and part of the Plate found with him Bernard Trevers was taken about Charing-Cross, and either was, or went in the habit of a Grana∣deer. These three confessed upon their Araignment that they were Guilty of Felony and Robbery, but not of bre∣king the house: however it being proved that Trevers un∣bolted a back door to let in the rest of his Companions, they were all three found Guilty of Felony and Burglary. Mary Kelly, the pretended Wife of Hugh Kelly was Indi∣cted as Accessary for comforting, aiding, and harbouring them after the Robbery was committed, and a Gold Ring which was part of the Goods stole found upon her, but was acquitred Katherine Smith, alias Sandimore was a person very well known amongst the Pick-pockets by the Name of Yorkshire Kate, and was Indicted for stealing handkerchief and o∣ther Linen, the Goods of Thomas Williams, and found Guilty of Felony and Burglary, she had been and Incorri∣ble Offender, whom no Acts of Clemency could oblige to
an honest Life, she having formerly Six or Seven times, received the mercy of the Bench. Mary Corbet was formerly a Broker, and by her conti∣nual Crimes had rendred her self Obnoxious to the Law, but Mercy still prevented that punishment which she had so often deserved, she was now Indicted and Condemned for High Treason, for that she had Made, Coin'd and Coun∣terfeited twelve pieces of Copper, Tin, and other Metals, in∣to the likeness of Shillings, commonly called Queen E∣lizabeths Shillings, and twelve other pieces of like Coun∣terfeit Metal called Queen Elizabeths Sixpences, which Fact was proved against her, by two Women, who had often seen her make the said counterfeit Mony, by melting Pen∣ter, Copper, and the like, to a pound weight at a time, and pouring the same into Molds of Wood, which fashi∣oned it like the Shillings and Sixpences before mention∣ed. They also confessed they had put off much of that counterfeit mony for her, and several pieces were produ∣ced in Court, upon which Evidence, she was found Guil∣ty of High Treason. Having thus given the Reader an Account of the se∣veral heinous crimes for which these Malefactors were con∣demned I shall now proceed to speak of the Behaviour of each person under so great a Tryal, and how they spent those precious Minutes which formerly were often tedious to them, but now grown so valuable, that no good Chri∣stian, but would part with all the Pleasures and Riches of the World to redeem his mispent time, or gain some few hours to pray to God for Mercy upon his Soul, which be∣fore he had so often slighted. After their Return to Pris∣on. Charles Close, tho before he seemed so steel'd in wick∣edness and hardned in iniquity, that neither the danger of his Life, or the Eternal Ship-wrack of his Soul, affect∣ed him with any serious consideration, yet coming into the condemned hole, he gave a great Sigh, & by some pri∣vate Ejaculations, discovered his heart was not so Obdu∣rate and impenetrable, as to be altogether unconcerned at his present condition. This happy change was soon taken notice of, by that Vigilant and Worthy Person Mr. Ordinary, who took all Opportunities to improve the least
spark of Penitence or Contrition, to a true sence of that miserable State he was in, a Confession of those manifold and grievous Crimes he had been Guilty of, and an absolute Resignation of himself to the Will of God, and the punishment of those Laws he had so often Transgressed. Bernard Trevers, and Hugh Kelly, as they had been his former Com∣panions in sin and wickedness, so now do they share with him in his present miseries and distress: They now afresh Confessed with Sor∣row that Guilt they had Publickly owned at their Tryals, and as persons whose Education was always loose, and either encouraged by the Vitious Examples of others, or prompted by the pravity of their own Wills and Affections, or both; have been often Guilty of breaking the Sabbath, and spending the Lords Day in pursuit of Worldly business as too many do, or else in gratifying the Lusts of the Flesh, unlawful Pleasures or more wicked Deboches. On Sunday they were at Chappel, both Morning and Afternoon, & behaved themselves with that Reverence and Attention, as became persons who were so suddenly to give an Account of every idle Thought or sinful Glance, as they had so lately of their wicked Acti∣ons. The worthy Preacher, like a true Physician of souls first apply∣ed Corrosives to make them sensible of themselves, and that wretch∣ed State they were plunged into by that sinful Course of Life they had so long Rioted in, he Terrified them with Gods Judgment on impeniten sinners, the Eternal Damnation of soul and body, if they did not now, while it is Called to Day, repent and turn to the living God. But on the other hand, he mercifully poured Oyle into their wounded Consciences; and as none ought to Presume on, so not to dispair of the Mercies of Everlasting Goodness. Katherine Smith, and Mary Corbet, tho they had been both. No∣torious Offenders, yet by their humble and submissive Behaviour, seemed truly Penitent, and I hope the great Labors of those wor∣thy Divines who visited them, wrought them into a sincere Repen∣tance, and that sweetness of Temper, as a good Christian would re∣joyce to die in. At ten of the clock they were put Into Carts; And Mary Corbet drawn on a Sledge to Tyburn, where she was burned and the rest Hanged. LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, 1684.
