T3384 12295913 59029
THE TRIBE OF LEVI. A POEM. Doubtless a Church-man, while he keeps within the Sphere of his Duty to God and his People is an Angel of Heaven, but when he shall degenerate from his own Calling, and fall into the Intriegues of State and Time-serving, he becomes a Devil, and from a Star in the Firmament of Heaven, he becomes a Sooty Coal in the blackest Hell, and receiveth the greatest Damnation. Dr. Gumble, Pag. 23. of Monk's Life. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCI.
THE TRIBE OF LEVI. A POEM. SInce Plagues were order'd for a Scourge to Men, And Egypt was chastised with her Ten, No greaten Plague did any State molest, Than the severe, the worst of Plagues, a Priest. Some Savage Beasts, by Laws of Nature bound, Only in Woods and desart Lands are found, No Land, no Climate, can this Monster bind, But like some Hydra multiplys his kind,
Through th' extended Orb directs his Course, And is at best a Universal Curse. An happy Albion, to the Gods most dear! How bright thy Rocks and fertile Lands appear? The Oceans glory, and its Nymphs delight, The Nations Terror by thy Men of Might: Thrice happy Albion! had there ne're possest Thy spacious Kingdoms, the consuming Priest! Who Locust-like the Nations overspread, In every place a Priest erects his Head, These, as the Fishes in the Water breed, And on the Fat of all the Pastures feed. Nor are they satisfy'd to have a Power To drain the Nations and its Fat devour, But like the Devil always bent on ill, They plot new Mischiefs and Devices still, Their unknown Virtues do the Crowd deceive, What Priestly Knaves report, dull Fools believe; Nor is a Prince (how great so'ere he be) From their deceit and studdied Malice free,
Like Feinds ascending from the House of Smoak They all aroud the gilded Palace flock, And in the Ears of Monarchy they sing, That had they not been Priests he had ne're been King. Set off with Titles and a Specious name, They quickly set the wondring World on flame; Methinks I hear its burthen'd Axles break, And of the Priests dead weight distinctly speak; The senseless Elements together moan, And all around the vast Creation groan. Yee juster Deities are Friends to Men, Assist my Muse, and guide my fainting Pen; A generous Passion raise within my Breast▪ That may affect the vilest Monster Priest, Let my Muse lash, the strokes be bold and good, As if my Pen were Steel, my Ink were Blood. Close by those Banks, the Banks where Silver Theams Still glides along with unpoluted Streams, A Fabrick stands, no Storm of Fate molests, From its Foundation was possest by Priests;
Here Levi lives, o'er grown with sin and Years, Good God, what Lewdness lurks in hoary Hairs, As chief of Priests imperial sway does bear, For he alone is God's Vicegerent here; His lesser Villians of the Church are Slaves, For he that's chief of Priest is chief of Knaves. 'Twas this same Levi did our Iames enthrone, And when h' had done as basely pull'd him down: The Levites first his Sovereign will declar'd, The Levites first his Sovereign will debarr'd; And thus old Levi, through mistaken fame, Had got a Patriots and a Martyrs name; Him th' unstable Mob with praises grace't, And thus his humour, for his Conscience past, Morose and Peevish, insolently proud, Levi would stoop to none but to the Crowd, Who, e're the Rable could his Blessings crave, His Apostolick Benedictions gave. Unhappy Iames! Prepostrous was the Fate! That brought on thee the Clergys frown and hate,
Hadst thou our Civil Rights and Charters took Not half a word the Clergy then had spoak; But to molest the Church was to depose▪ God's holy Blockheads, and set up his Foes. Now Foreign Troops invited o're the Main, Come to disturb the Scenes of thy short Reign, Grown mad with fear when thou hadst lost the Day, And in inglorious haste didst run away. Our pious Levi, loyally came down T' invite our future Monarch to the Town. How beggerly's the Crown? how mean the State, That does depend on Bishops love or hate! Nor can Conventions now make him a King, Till Levi does the Regal Vestments bring: If vain's your reasoning, in vain your toil, If Levi but keep back th' anointing Oyl. 'Twas not for this the Hero was brought o're, Only to settle Church as was before, To beat his Dad, and call his Mother Whore.
Should he be crown'd, Levi's Designs are crost, The juggle too of the Succession lost, If Iames be reinthron'd we must ascribe His Restoration unto Levi's Tribe: And thus the Hierarchy of course bears Rule, And the weak Monarch is the Bishop's Tool; None but the Church should keep their Civil Rights, And all Dissenters be but Gibeonites, So much these Arguments with Levi sway'd That he aside his Faith and Conscience laid. At once the Sanhedrim and God forsook, And to his own pernicious Councils took, Rather than have his Priests lest in the lurch, Would damn himself only to save the Church. Thus in a Fret he to his Cell retires, To plot new Mischiefs and blow up new Fires. Had this retirement been well design'd, Only to case the Plague of human kind, Levi, thy absence then we ne're could mourn, Nor been ambitious of thy loath'd return;
But since thy Den's become the Lyon's Court, Whether in Black the Beasts of Prey resort, May'st thou from thence thy final Journey take▪ And on some Gibbet thy just Exit make. Nor shalt thou Corah, now my hand is in, Escape the justest censure of my Pen; Corah, in the lewd List, must next take place, To Man and to Religion a disgrace. In him, when Young, the Priestly Sign appears, Did promise Mischief in his tender Years, No cost was wanting to provide him Tools, To pass the learned drudgery of the Schools, Where Youth is with the Laws Corruption fed, Where Priests are form'd and holy Cheats are bred. Their cursed Tenents much our Corah lov'd, And in the Tricks of Priesthood soon improv'd: He from the Pulpit did his Doctrine breath, And shed his Venome on the Crowd beneath: He taught, That Kings might Govern by their Will, And like the Gods themselves could nere do ill;
That Princes had an uncontrouled Power, And might their Subjects, when they pleas'd, devour; That God all Reason gave to Kings and Priests, And that all men besides were only Beasts: But when his Lyon from the Throne was driven, Disown'd by all good men and juster heaven, A King set up the Nations all approv'd A King, that God and all the People lov'd, Our treacherous Corah had his Faith forgot, Ad turn'd his fam'd Obedience to a Plot; His scruplous Conscience would not let him swear, Whilst Father liv'd, Obedience to the Heir; But in the head of a Rebellious Race, As void of moral Vertues as of Grace. Corah the new made Monarch did disown, And since the other went, each Action done, Until King William's Fate resounds from sar, His great Success and Enterprise in War, And Fame aloud does of his Fortunes tell, How by his hand the Sons of Corah fell,
Now Corah is become a milder Priest, And swears as well as any of the rest; Priests are like▪ Spaniels ne're inclin'd to good, No longer then they see▪ or feel the Rod. Ah William had I but thy Scepter Royal! By Heaven▪ i'de beat the Dogs, till they were Loyal. Ungrateful Corah! I'll bid the adieu! Since God hath left thee, I will leave thee too! Nor shall my Satyr 'ere disturb thy Life, Since thou hast got a Satyr in a Wife. Dathan must next be from Oblivion free'd, Who in the Feild obtain'd the Bishops meed, Was bred a Soldier, now by Trade a Priest, Though not so wise or learned as the rest, He seldom does to preaching make pretence, But does excuse it by his want of sence. Yet Dathan never like his Tribe was mad, Nor were his Crimes so great or half so bad; Dathan did never question his Belief, But pinn'd his Faith upon his Father's Sleeve,
Sometimes was in the right, but vay'd soon, And changed his Opinion with the Moon. Dathan did with King William's Intrest close, Yet like a Sot encouraged his Foes; Who but wise Dathan would his sence prefer, And take the part of a Petitioner? Favour the City Mob so lately fam'd▪ For Murderers and Evidences nam'd; Yet Dathan, though thy Crimes too far exceed, I'll pardon all thy Faults for one good Deed. But damn'd Abiram, must my Anger feel, Whose lewdness is as deep, as black as Hell, Such as a Muse, scarce as Old Nick can tell. Abiram did late Iemmy's will controul, And made a Seventh in the famous Roul; Abiram with 'em entred his Protest, And grew as sawcy as did all the rest: But now his Conscience does by Levi's square, And his lew'd Thoughts with Levi's Notes Compare.
Levi, to God nor to the Kingdom true, The Elder Brother of the Factious Crew; He chose Abiram out of all the Tribe, To be his Secretary and his Scribe, Who best to Mr. Redding might present The strength and weakness of the Government, How stiff the Levites to his Intrest stood, As true as Steel and firm as Oaken Wood: But poor Abiram does the toil endure, Whilst Levi in his Cell does sit secure: Levi of freedom knew the worth and price, And therefore sent the Fools to break the Ice; Though some in forming Plots may well agree, Yet few think good to hang for Company: But poor Abiram! it would vex a stone, To plot in number and to hang alone; Yet never at thy Destiny repine, Hanging's the fittest Death for a Divine: For who does ever at the Gallows swing▪ But 'ere he's turn'd off a Psalm does sing;
And though thou art a dire Example made, Thou'lt leave the World in thy way of Trade▪ Nor must Abiathar be here forgot, For he that will can write can make a plot: Of any Faith he never maketh doubt, But like the Wind his Conscience veers about▪ In lofty strains he Tyrant Noll did praise, And to his Fame a lasting Statue raise; Who in Usurpers praise employ their Pens, Have no Affection to their Lawful Prince, What e're pretence to Priesthood may belong, Gold is their God and Glory guides their Tongue; These even Belzebub have quite outdone, In Priest thy Athen's Plagues are cram'd in one. But now my Muse another Story tells, Pray hear the sound of Pious Aaron's Bells, Whose strength of Zeal suppresses that of Sence, Where Flesh does fail Devotion does commence; Tyr'd with Age of Youthful Vigour free, He is devout of meer necessity;
His great Austerity his Tribe does suit, He sometimes rides, but oftner walks on foot; Such pageant Zeal attendeth Bishopricks, He well may walk▪ where follows Coach and Six▪ Nor can he pray but where his Pictures stand, To fix his Zeal and wandring Thoughts command; Thcse Images do pious heats Confer, And raise Devotion up the Lord knows where; He soars so high and to the Clouds does grow, He quite forgets all Loyalty below, Can take no Oath nor swallow any Test, But must be stubborn as are all the rest. Let lasting Infamy Curst Zadoc damn, Who maketh all Religion but a sham; Zadoc, who boasts of Fighting, Drinking, Roaring, And above all his mighty strength in Whoring; Yet to debauch his Conscience is loath, And swears by God, he cannot take the Oath: Let Zadoc to his Sins stand firm and stiff, 'Till Triple Tree shall take the Triple F—
Next; in the List, must Eleazer come, A Foe to England, and a Friend to Rome: Priests in Divinity take little Pains, And with Religion seldom crack their Brains: This Want of Sense made Eleazer run The first to worship the arising Sun. When Brother Priests arrived here from Rome, Good Eleazer did invite them Home: He took his Coach, and mighty Stir he made To be assistant at the Cavalcade; But yet thy Coachman, as the Act exprest, By most was thought the better sort of Priest, He would not drive nor Rome's black Feinds adore, When thou wer't but Postillion to the Whore, Whilst honest Slash did for his freedom strive, Thou, like the Devil, unto Rome didst drive▪ Thy Brethren banisht by the present Reign, Thou longst to view and wellcome here again, Not the lewd Levites, which arrive from Rome, Are greater Villains than our Priests at home;
The Churches Warriors of thy py-bald band▪ That Plague the Natives of this wretched Land, That blow the Coals and warmer Blood ferment, To cause a Feaver in the Government. I'll mention but one more and then have done, 'Tis fighting Iosuah the Son of Nun, Though he to Men of Sence is a Buffoon, He serves to make a Spiritual Dragoon; What though he cannot preach, or pray, or write, He 'gainst his Country and his King can fight; He's strongly arm'd, with a double Sword, To fight God's Battils and to preace his Word: What Wonders in the Feild were lately done, By fighting Iosuah the Son of Nun? He bravely Monmouth and his Force withstood, And made the Western Land a Feild of Blood; There Iosuah did his reaking heat asswage, On every Sign-Post Gibbet up his Rage, Glutted with Blood like some most Christian Turk, And scarce out done by Iefferies or K—;
Yet now the Priest is grown a Rebel too▪ Aud what Monmothians did himself can do, Since thou like them art equally to blame, Their Fate was to be hang'd, be thine the same. Should I of all the lesser Villians tell, It would a great, a bulky Vollume fill, Fit for the Devil's Library in Hell. Should I their lewdness and their crimes relate, Their Lust, their Perjuries, theis Envy, hate, Their filthy Drunkenness, their height of Pride, Their Avarice yet Luxury beside, Their want of Goodness and their want of Sence, And their Repentance in the future Tense, Their new coin'd Tenets▪ which the Pulpits fill, Would tire Pelling's Passive Lungs to tell. Hophnie of old laid down his Rampant Whore, And thump't her Carcass at the Temple-Door; But who can tell what Tricks our Driests do use▪ Behind the Altar, and within the Pews?
The ancient Levites (as the times then stood) Were Men of Cruelty and Men of Blood, The former harmless Bulls they did surprize, And near the Altar shew the Sacrifice; Although the Butcher now does not take place, The Cruelty's entail'd upon the Race, Our Priests are all discended from that Stem, Nero and Aretine are Saints to them; They oft the Blood of War in Peace have spill'd, How many Prisons has their Mallice fill'd? How many Widows have they made a Prey? What Goods the holy Guzmans stole away! Well may they grieve now having lost the Power, By which they Widows Houses did devour, That Land's accurst, hath reason to lament Where Priests are made▪ a piece of Government; They damn our Souls and lead us weary Lives, Mislead our Daughters and debauch our Wives; Whatever shew of Zeal the Priesthood paints, They are at best but Cucoldizing Saints,
The Pious Vermin, that molest a State, The Scource of all Disorder and Debate: The bane of Princes, a Tumultuous Crew, Not satisfy'd with what is old or new▪ For Iames they under went a wondrous Toll, And greas'd his Head with their Anointing Oil: But when he to the Jesuits tack'd about, They as the Devel with Pray'r cast him out; Nor are they with their new made Monarch glad, (The Priests have still a priviledge to be mad) Though easie, gentle and averse to Blood, His only Crime he's to his Foes too good▪ Well may he have the Priests to be his Foes, They even God Almighty would Depose. FINIS. ERRATUM. Page 10. Line 1. for vay'd read v'd.
