W1476 13494184 99757
OTIA SACRA Deus nobis hoec Otia fecit. Virg: London Printed by Richard Cotes. 1648.
Columna Fidei. OUR Senses are bewitch'd, and seem to grow So to the Creature, and on things below, That all our busied Fancy can devise, Serves more to sink them, than to make them rise: For out of sight and minde, at once agree To blind-fold Nature from Eternitie; And leave her groveling, for to groap her way Here in This Transitory bed of Clay, Till Faith steps in; and in the stead of wings, Unto Beleef, a lofty Pillar brings, Whereby we should be raised up; And thus Ascend to Him, descended once for Us. ΚΑΡΔΙΑΓΝΩΣΤΗΣ. On the Title Page. THere is a Fowle wont hide its head, To Passe so undiscovered: Judging it self exempt from eyes Of others, whilst it none descryes. Not much unlike are such to these, Who commit Closet-trespasses And Chamber-dalliance; and then Goe for unseen, 'cause so of Men. If They my Pillars top attein, They'l finde an eye tryes heart and rein: But Natures Pur-blinde sight short is; Nor can she rise alone to this, Till Grace assist, which will such vertue yield, As both t'ascend the Pillar, gain this Shield.
OTIA SACRA. Ad Libellum suum. GOE without Dedication, for that might Imply I sought to Shelter what I write Under some Patronage: I can afford None Sharers in this Offering with my Lord: His are both Line and Leisure, which mis-spent, The fault lyes on th' unhappy Instrument That should improve both better: But 'tis done, And Thy fate is decree'd, why woof is spun; Censure must passe: Yet Blush not since thy Strings Are onely consonant with holy things. Ad Viatorem. NUmina, non Nummos, Me dum cernis Meditantem, Et Me-ditantem crede (Viator) habes.
EST In Vnitate Trinitas. THat Number 'bove the rest, For ever Blest, Which God Himself doth daign To Branch into, yet Re-unites again, For as His Prescience could tell When Angels fell That Man would follow, and there should be On Sent for to make Redemption: So from our Misery did He Infer Th' necessity of a Comforter. This doth inspire, That did Create, The second did Regenerate: Thus though Distinct, They are Yet singular, And One wise-ever Power it is doth Tie This Triple Knot into a Unitie.
Mundi Ex Maxima Parte nondum Vocati. Participes Verbi es Sacramentorum qui fuêre vocati sed nondū electi. Ad Sanctificationem. Qui propter externam vocationem Domini per Verbum, interne & effe∣ctualiter vocantur per Spiritum Sanctum. Justicationem. Grex parvulus Christi, Luk. 12. 32. Glorificationem. Tertia pars Domini, Za∣char. 13. 9. Electi, ideoque vo∣cati. Let me not tread the Broad highway to Sin, But being Elect declare my Call therein. Seminantur à Deo Inter Homines à Diabolo Veritas Inter Homines Mendacium Pax Inter Homines Discordia Amicitia Inter Homines Inimicitia Ut Alterutri prodessemus Ut Alterutrum devoremus.
A Morning Thought. Sithence it is givenPsal. 104.73. To Man, to follow's Labor till the Even, And when that Star doth close Up Day, then to seek quiet and repose, Let Us what's of our Own Learn to make known, To be But so much Cash of purchas'd Misery; All else Confess (Of Love and Providence) true happiness. For as our Souls had been A Combating all Day with Flesh and Sin, And then for Captives led In Slumbers Fetters; Prison'd in a Bed. So by the Nights Exchange again to Day They may (Set free) take up their Armes, And having overcome those Charmes, Boldly Conclude the Victory to keep When as they Warr for Him kept them asleep. No other Ransom Need To Speed This Liberty; but once awake, Into our thoughts to take, What such Confinement might Administer of Danger in One night, And how th'all-wakefull eye Provided had for our Delivery; Which on the wings of Contemplation rais'd Again, w'are Mounted, whilst His name is prais'd.
Psalm 19.Coeli enarrant Gloriam Dei. ARe we asleep? or doe we see No more than did blindThe Son of Blindness in the Syriac. Bartime? Or are our Senses Charm'd to lie Benumm'd into some Lethargie, Whilst Sin makes of's a Conquest? Rise Flesh-buryed Soul, and from the Skies Let thy wing'd thoughts to thee relate Who 'twas those structures did Create, Where in Thy Hemisphere at large is pen'd, More wonder then frail Clay can comprehend. Whether a Sun, a Moon, a Star, A Comet or a Meteor, A Various Bow, true sign of Peace, Swoln Clouds, which cause on earth increase When breaking they Distill; the Glum And horrid beat of Thunders Drum We hear or see: Why are these sent? But t'shew He is Omnipotent, Who thus in Characters doth write, whereby We have a Lecture in Divinity. For as those great and lesser Lights Distinguish Time by Dayes and Nights; So was it Day with us untell Our Disobedient Parents fell. Yet as the Tincell'd Night gives way At th'opening o'th' true Golden Day; So did the powers of Darkness fly, The Sun of Righteousness being by: And when we Comet-struck, int' Sin had run, The Father did redeem us by the Son.
When th'Undertaker first did dain For to restore His world again, He us'd no other lock or sluce I'th' Clouds, but sent a Bow of truce. What did His Mercy less, when we Who are the Worlds Epitome, Delug'd in Sin, lay Breathless, Drown'd, Untill Our Saviours Pretious Wound Open'd a Drayn, wherewith he laid us dry, From wickedness into fertility? The Aire imprison'd, fain would try The virtue of more Liberty: Yet meeting with a tougher Cloud Is forc'd to quarell, and speak loud. So if we seek our freedom heer, We must no Cloud of Fortune fear: But like Bonargeses, proclame What we profess, then be the same. For whilst the Face looks one way, and the Mind Another, 'tis like Rain brought against the Wind. There shall no Thunder-crack, nor dash of wet, Prodigious Comet, in us fear beget; But the Suns Purple, and the Silver wings The Moon puts on, bespeaks us Saints and Kings, Whilst Iris Endless Peace, the numerous Lights Adorn the Night, discypher all delights: Which for to seek to compass and obtain, He that quits life and all here, makes great Gain.
My Countrey Audit. BLest Privacie, Happy Retreat, wherein I may cast up my Reck'nings, Audit Sin, Count o'r my Debts, and how Arrears increase In Natures book, towards the God of Peace: What through perversness hath been wav'd, or don To My first Covenants contradiction: How many promis'd Resolutions broke Of keeping touch (almost as soon as spoke.) Thus like that Tenant who behind-hand cast, Intreats so oft forbearance, till at last The sum surmounts his hopes, and then no more Expects, but Mercy to strike off the score. So here, methinks, I see the Landlords Grace Full of Compassion to my drooping Case, Bidding me be of comfort, and not griev'd, My Rent his Son should pay if I believ'd. Cui in calamitatibus soli sit fidendum. WHen first the Towring Hills, the loftier Pine, Exchang'd to ride upon the swelling brine Neptune prepar'd, and with more Active skill Grew sometimes in the Vale, sometimes on th' Hill: Whilst Floating in a compleat tackle drest, Iuv. Sat. 10.She's taught to Sayl from Cadis to the East Where Ganges runs, and from those coasts being come, To steer a course back to Illyrium: Then was that coward Fear banish'd the Mind And Heart of Man, ambitious still to find
More worlds and works of wonder, wherein He Might trace the Greatness of the Deitie. Then as if fortify'd with steel and brass,Hor. Od. 3. Ventur'd his Bottom on this field of glass, So brickle and unconstant, as contrives A nearness unto Death, yet with reprives. A small Gale over-fils the sayls, a leak Is sprung, in shorter time than I can speak. Then being o'r-set above, o'r-charg'd beneath, What can expected be but present Death? Unless we seek to Him, at whose command Becalm'd into Obedience, Tempests stand, Rising when He so pleases, and are gon When He Planes o'r their rugged Motion: Whose Power at life's exprest, when weight ascends, And almost to the Crystall Skie extends:Psalm 107. And then again, when Nature on't doth enter, It is permitted for to wash the Center. Then are such troubled as on it doe ride, Rowling and Tottering from side to side, Being drunk through fear and sorrow; nor can tell How many Sands shall knowl their Passing-bell. Thus in a Trance dismay'd, and quite bereft Of sense, save of a little spark that's left To kindle hopes, They to their Maker Cry, Who straight releases them from Misery, Sending a Calm; whereat the Liquid plain Becomes to them a Looking-glass again: So They in mind restor'd, have quick access Unto the Haven of their Happiness.
My Carroll. ARise, arise Dull Fancy from the bed of Earth, And that low strain Besots thy vain; That so thou mayst devise Some Record of that famous Birth, Which about This time, as our Date will have, One Son for All the rest the Father gave. Leave to the Bee To set a Valuation On this, or that Fair Garden-plat, There t' Browse some Flower or Tree: And to some Forraign Nation, To crown their Annals with the Pelican, Or far-fetcht Cordiall, Mirabolan. Here's Comfort more; A gift that's far beyond all worth, The Curious mind Could ever find In what a Plant e'r bore, Or Barren wilderness brought forth: Sweetness excels the Bee's Bagg, and such Good As prov'd our Strong Restorative by's Blood.
To overcome by Contraries. IN humane things 'tis held a Maxime wife, To seek to Overcome by Contraries: And in Diviner, if we will express Obedience of God, it holds no less; For t'conquer Pride whereby we fell, no Art Is comparable to a Contrite-Heart. To Improve Afflictions. IF David found it good He'd been in Trouble, What would it teach Me am a sinfull Bubble; But that th' Afflictions we meet with heer, Are sent to Steer Us to our God more neer? Who thus improves his thoughts on things goe cross, Without a Riddle, makes Great gains of Loss. They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Ioy. AS in the Countrey-Parable it's found, God's meant by Husbandman, and Man by ground, His Word the pretious Seed, that doth excell All other grain; Our hearts the Arable: So would't inform We should our soil prepare, To recompence so Great a Seedsmans care; And neither prickt with Pride, stupid like Stones, Laid Common to all wicked Motions: Be unprovided t'save, much less t'afford Increase against the Harvest of the Lord:
Wherefore as Earth 'thout Culture sithence mans fall Is of fruits barren, Thiftles Prodigall: So doe the dispositions and desires Nature brings forth, abound with Thorns and Briers; Which to correct, the Masters strict Command Is to break up again the Fallow-land: And by Contritions Coulter and Plough-shares To dress our Minds, furrow our Cheeks with teares Of true Repentance. And those thus destroy The Weeds of Sin, shall surely reap in Joy. Ascensus Gratiarum, Descensus Gratiarum. IF there be any Vertue left that can Pull Blessings down, 'tis Gratitude in Man; And to be humbly thankfull, that alone Makes Him true subject for Compassion. All Other Graces as Assistants sit Upon the Wool-sacks for to farther it; In representing how the Law concludes On Gods Rich Bounties, Our ingratitudes: So thereupon Impeachment's drawn to show Delinquencies, and what He gives, we ow. First then unless dejected Care possess The Heart and Soul for by-past wickedness, And stir up Resolution to become Henceforth more righteous, ev'n to Martyrdome: In vain it is to hope, or yet surmize The acceptation of such Sacrifize From Him, whose all-discerning eye doth pierce The very Center of the Universe, And knows before we think: Let our thoughts flye To overtake His Providentiall eye;
Then we shall straight be conquered, and confess His Bounties, but our own Unworthiness. And like the Eagle, first such flight begin From the low contemptible Vale of sin, Untill Confession and Amendment raise Our stretcht our Pinions to the clouds in praise. And then when all is done that we are able, Still we must know, we're but Unprofitable. Contemplatio Diurna. WHen we behold the Morning Dew Dissolve ith' rising Sun: What would it shew? But that a Sun to us did rise, Our Fathers hoary sin to Atomise. And when the Flowers display'd appear, To entertain the mounting Charettier: What would they speak in that fair dress? But Man's redemption out of wrethchedness. For the shade-shortning Noon can tell The Proud, and such as with Ambition swell; That whilst upon Opinions wing They seek to sore, they work their lessening. And the Prognostick Western set, May Our Conditions rightly counterfeit; For if we rise, shine, and set Cleer, The Day-Star from on high's our Comforter: If Sin beclowd us as we fall, Our next dayes rise will prove our Funerall: Et quid lachrymabilius?
Vbi desinit Medicus, incipit Theologus. Pharmaca aegrotantibus Optima. COrpore si tu agrotas, AEsculapius vocetur: Anima sin sit, devotas Preces quisque Meditetur. Convictus facilis & maxime Nutriens. Nec quid comesurus cures, Paucis nam Natura gaudet: Verbum Dei si procures, Dapes (quis quis velit) laudet. Aer Optimus & ad Veram Valetudinem propius conducens. AEra dum Malignum quaeris Sis morbosus; nec sit mirum: Sancto sodale si frueris, Té que efficiet talem virum. Exercitium veram sanitatem comparans optime. EXercearis licet tota Nocte Die{que} Fata vocent: Sed si Deo facta, Vota Sint sincera, Haec non nocent: Ad sanitatem potius veram Et aeternam, Viam docent. Where the Physitians skill can doe no more, Divinity must best of health restore.
Annus annulus, &c. Diminutione largimur. AS the Year, Serpent-like doth cast its Skin, And's stript o'th' Old, when as the New comes in; What would 'tinform, but that anew w'invest Our selves in Christ, Old Adam's Rags detest? And if a Ianus Bifronted doth stand, Looking at once to this and t'other hand, What would He teach our Consciences, save this, To see at one View whence Salvation is, And whence our woe came; that for this we may Our Tribute Tears, for that all-praises pay? Now when the Season blossomes in its Spring, And time puts on a party-colour'd wing; Why should not our Souls, which before did lye Defil'd through th'smutch of Sin, receive a dye (Whereat the Rose may blush) from that same flood (All Streams surpasses) of our Saviours Blood? For if that Leprosie we fain would heal, This is our Iordan, stain'd with Cutchinneal. If from our first Sire we receiv'd a wound, This is that Spikenard that can make us sound. And as th'approaching Sun comes daily on For to supplant the Winters Garison: So should our frozen hearts be thaw'd, and Melt When we to Mind call what our Jesus felt, And we deserv'd; His Zodiack should bring Us to the Tropick of our Summering In those warm thoughts, till ripe in faith and hope, Love like a Vale, cover Our Horiscope: For what can we return for His, who rent The Temples to free us from Punishment?
O let the Lustfull Clusters we behold Betasseling Autumn, and those Ears of gold- Resembling Corn, say to us, if we thirst Or hunger: He who is both Last and First, Did tread the Wine press for us, and fulfill What was to us due for our Parents ill; That so we might be numbred 'mongst those guest The Lamb invited to his Mariage-Feast. And though we once fell by what one Tree bore, God by Anothers fruit did us restore. Then whilst the Sharp'd-breath'd Winter seems to lay Stripes on the bearing earth, and Blasts th'array She late was deckt in; Spitting on her face Its Feather'd-rain, (all embling the disgrace For Us He felt, who would have known no shame, Had we been Innocent and without Blame) Doth't not discypher how a Lilly pure Sprung up 'midst Thorns, Scourgings to endure: And how They Spat upon a Face that Shin'd, Which prov'd our Eye-salve, who before were blind? My Observation at Sea. THough every thing we see or hear may raise The Makers Praise; For without Lightning or Thunder, His Works are all of wonder; Yet amongst Those there's none Like to the Oceon.
Where (not a Catalogue to keep Of severall Shapes inhabiting the Deep) Let but our Thoughts confer With what once Gravel'd the Philosopher: And we must straight confess Amazement more, but apprehension less. The Fire for heat and light Most exquisit: And the All-tempering Aire Beyond Compare. Earths Composition and Solidity, Bountifull Mixed with Humidity. But here for Profit and Content, Each must give place to th' Liquid Element: Whose Admirable Course, that Steers Within Twelve Houres Mariners, Outwards and Homewards bound: May be Sufficient Ground To raise Conclusion from thence At once, of Mighty Power and Providence. For as the Cynthian Queen Her bounty less or more vouchsafes be seen: So by her wain She brings The Tides to Neaps, and by her Full to Springs: Yet not but as He pleas Who set Her there, chief Governess of Seas:
Which understood Truly by such would seek for Traffique good, They must their Anchors waigh Out of the Oozie dirt and Clay Earths Contemplations yeild, And hoysing Sayles, They'l straightway have them fill'd With a fresh-Mackerell Gale, whose blast May Port them in true happiness at Last. There th'in a Bay of Bliss, Where a Sweet Calm our welcom is: Let us at length the Cables Veere Fore and abaff, that may our Moorage cleere From warp or winding, so ride, fixt upon Our Hopes Sheat-Anchor of Salvation. Vpon Moses put young to Sea, or hid in an Ark of Bulrushes: Exod. 2. 2, 3.THis son of Amram, soon as born did find Pharaoh a Tyrant, but the Midwives kind: So being from that bloody Doom set free, Becomes His Mothers Care and Huswifrie; Who to His safety, that She might confer More hopes, She makes him first a Mariner: A good presage; whereby it was implide, His People He through the Red-Sea should guide. In Mosen adhuc Infantem Amni commissum. Exod. 2. 3. 14. Cur latitans Iuncis Moses fit Nauticus Infans? Ut ducat Populum per Vada Rubra suum.
Docem Praecepta. Acrost. Konist. 1 I n AEgypte cum fuisses, respexit (Solus) ut Exisses. 2 E rrantes in Eremo plectit paucos, posteros ut reddat Cautos. 3 H abeas Nomen non in Vano ore, sed in Corde Sano. 4 O pere, nec sordeat Dies, in quâ jussa Sancta quies. 5 V erus Amor Paternalis docent in Parentes qualis. 6 A rdens Cura ignoscendi, tollat Rabiem Plectendi. 7 D oceat Casta Vitae normam qui & Vitam dat & formam. 8 E ripiendi queis fruentur alii, nec sit Mens libenter. 9 V era Testimonia Testes reddant laetos, falsa Moestos. 10 S is Contentus tuâ sorte; Nec Iunctam cupias Portam Porta: Capias Vitam tunc pro Morte. The Contempt of this World, raises the Others Esteem. WHen all the Vertue we can here put on, Is but refined Imperfection, Corruption Calein'd: A Minerall vain, Where Clay (to be more priz'd) some Ore doth gain:
Why should we not employ the best of Care, To learn wherein Truest Contentments are, And how attain'd? The Jewellers command O're Art, is how to Foyle the Diamond As may add Lustre to it: So, who tries Less to Esteem of This worlds Flatteries, Sets higher Value on the Other, where Perfection proves th' Eternall Jeweller. In Diem Natalem. NE morìatur Homo, Sanctus de Virgine purâ, Mirificxsque hodie nascitur Ille Puer. Ne Peregrinetur Factus Peregrinus & Idem est, In Cunis Stabulum Glorificatque suis. Ne pro Delictis Proavi plectatur, amara Pocula fert, alio non patienda Modo. Exul ut è Coelis Migrans terra{que} Mari{que} Iactatus, tenebras Mortis, & Ima petit, Nos ut surgamus Sancti, quoque Luce fruamur AEterna, Astriferas incolit Ille Domus. In Eandem. Christus Vita Venit: Christus Veritas Venit: Christus Via Venit: Venit Mors Discedunt Venit Mendacium Discedunt Venit Error Discedunt Laeta Dies Cunctis, Mors quâ calcanda recessit, Nascitur in Domibu dummodo Vita suis: Plena Dies Lucis Verum quâ clarius exstat, Et Falsi Fuscum tollitur Omne Genus: Fansta Dies in quâ Via stornitur Omnipotentis, Error & aufertun, Clara, Beata Dies.
To Kisse Gods Rod; occasioned upon a Childs Sickness. WHat ever Gods Divine Decree Awardeth unto Mine Or Mee, Though't may seem ill, With patience I am resolv'd to undergo, Nor to His purpose once say no, But Moderate both Mind and Will: And Conquering th' Rebellions of Sense, Place all content in true Obedience. Thus I create it good When His Correction's understood, Which is, Not to destroy, But to reclaim, And t'cause me turn a new-leaf ore, Count all an Error-writ before, So find the sting of Flattering Joy: Making the scope of all My future aim, To Reverence and Glorifie His Name, Thus when our God will frown, if we weigh it In Judgments Scales, we mak't a Benefit.
My Penthouse against the Storm of Grief, occasioned upon the Death of a dear Friend. O How the Blasts Temptation Casts Against my Naked Ston, Threaten Subversion; Sithence the Decree of late was Thine To take away My Sheltring Vine! Well, let them blow, Break clouds and rain, Their Gusts and Show'rs in vain; For Confident I am, My Gratious God upholds the Frame, Whilst I the Olive Sprouts see grow. Thus to my Hart I may impart Th' assurance of a Peace, Wherein such Trials cease If Patience-born; that Fear is good When it withstands ill, not of ill withstood. Man Levens the Batch. GOD makes all things for good; 'tis Man Sowers and worsts Creation: Who Leven'd by his Father, thence Becomes all Disobedience;
No thought, no word, no action He Contrives, can own Integrity To Him that made Him, for by Deeds As Words and Heart, his growth's in weeds, Which whilst neglected doe express Gods Grace, but Man's unfruitfulness: Now if again man would bear Corn, He must himself a Weeder turn. The Attributes of true Love. WE call that Patience, when provok'd we can Deferr revenge, but 'tis true love in Man: And when with open hand we would express Our Bounties Tribute, some style't Lavishness: But They mistake, as farr as those despise All steps whereby an Other Man doth rise; Yet think they have Love too; and boast no less Than that She is their constant Patroness: If Her Decrees be not to seek her own Praise, (as not seemly) whither are such blown, As thus would tempt Her anger, when 'tis taught She is not to be mov'd to an ill thought, But's ever pleas'd, and doth rejoyce to see Truth sit in Triumph o're Iniquitie: As She sustains, and is contented still With what wind blows, so doe her hopes sails fill, When from the windows of Beleef doth breath A steady Gale, t'advance her course beneath: Till by the Saints transplanted, and above, She's Moor'd within that Port, and call'd True Love.
Contraria juxta se posita Gal. 5. 19. to 23. C-upio Formans A-dmiror Creaturam R-eminiscor Injurice O-btempero Vosunteti S-anctitatē Curo V-irtuti Seruio T-rucsentiā Sperno I-ncontinentiā Noso R-apacitatē fugio I-rasei nequeo P-atientia Vineo S-asutem Spero Like Night to Day, or foyles that Raise The Lustre of the Diamonds praise: Such, and no other Vertue Lies Hind in th' approach of Contraries.
Love begets Fear. 'TWas of Thy Goodness (Lord) at first I had Knowledge of what was Good, and what was bad: Yet through the Ill of Nature become blinde, I followed Sin, and left thy Fear behind: By which I forfeited a Blessing, till Thou of thy Mercy, free and Gracious will Sign'st me a Pardon in that style, Repent, That so I might avoid all Punishment. Thus then rows'd up and wak'ned, I began Thy Judgments, Blessings, Love, and Fear to skan: And in a Scoale when I them all had waigh'd, Methought I lov'd Thee still, still was afraid. My Invocation. GReat, and Good God, of Justice, Love; As That to Fear, so grant This move My Trembling Heart, till It retain Some Sparks of heat and life again; Sithence My Creation-Fuell's don Lighten again the Turf by thine own Son. Small hopes of This, unless I may In awe to That, finde a decay Of such Lewd Thoughts, Words, Acts, did bring My whole Man to a wintering In Lust, and Sin, and growth of Grace, T'assure a fruitfull Spring-tide in the place.
How's that attain'd? By heat, not cold, 'Tis that the Bounteous Marygold Displayes its Treasure; and kinde Showers (Not Frosts) befriend both fruit and Flowers: Thaw then my Breast till't open Zeal, And let my Eyes those sighs reveal In rain, that my Affections may subdue, So from my Old Congeal'd Clot raise thoughts new. Misericordia Dei Splendidissima. GODS Mercy shines 'bove all His works, as farr As doth the Cyprian-Queen out-light a Starr. To Man. Epig. HArd-Hearted Man! what canst thou say, That Thou thy self hast turn'd to Brick thy Clay: But that Thy Hopes are built upon His Promise once sent Fountains out of Ston: Wherefore to Sacrifice to Gods desire, Psalm 51. 17Mans Heart must be the Altar, Sighs the fire. My Pool of Bethesda, or the Effusion of Christs Merits to heal our Miseries. WHen Children would goe, or Cripples stand, Crutches and Stools are fram'd for Arm and Hand To rest upon, lest such attempting shall Without like Props occasion them to fall.
What are the Sons of Adam? if we try, Condemn'd to Lamenesse and to Infancy Through Sin, and so disabled to Pace The Paths of Vertue, tread the Steps of Grace; Till God of's Mercy pleased to Confer A standing stool, as if from th' Carpenter, Though He himself was Artist, and did frame This Remedy for Those were Weak and Lame: So that without a farther Inquisition, We All were, and are such, Christ's the Physition. The Five Porches to Bethesda. MAn is Bethesda, and's five Senses be Porches unto that Great Intermery, Where Divers Cures are sought for; yet not one Attain'd but through an Angels Motion, Grace powred on the Heart; which who so can Improve, becommeth straight a perfect Man: But Those who Opportunity neglect, Must not an other Saving help expect. For as the Cripple Thirty eight years lay, And had done more, had not Christ come ith' way: So whilst these powr'd out waters we would try, Others step in, Prophane their Sanctity. Lusts both our Ears, and Eyes, and Palates charm: Through Nostrils and by Fingers we doe harm; And' cause all over Leprous and defil'd, We'd fain be cleans'd, to health be reconcil'd, Yet cannot get so soon into this Tide, Afford us of that Jordan from Thy side.
Soliloquium. ANima, quid tam tristaris? Ocule, quid Lachrymaris? Cur in Pectore singultus? Cur Moerore madet vultus? Quî fit, gemitu plangescis Cor, ut si integram non esses? Cum, quo hic fruamur toto Nostro non in Dei voto. Ejus est suffragii, sortem Dare, Vitam dare & Mortem. Mortis certitudo, brevem Vitae Curam reddit levem: Et post Mortem, sit levamen Quod Vivetur semper tamen: Nec mensurâ quâvis, horae Vespertinae, vel Aurorae Metitur: aeternâ Luce Sed (haec dicta Dies) duce: In quâ, cum gandeat omnis Sanctus, Luctus sistat, sileat planctus: Poenam (hic) quâ laboramus Somno Mortis nam mutamus: Et quid mali hora dedit, Gaudio Sempiterno cedit. Qui sic mutant, invidendos Sentio solos: non deflendos. è contra Pectora Peccatis data, Cor corruptum, Ora lata, Animam infectam Malis, Nox dum sequitur fatalis, Lugeat, doleat Omnis Tales.
A Carroll. (IF nothing else) may not this season move, Or Time become true Chronicle of love? And so allay the Fury, stint the Rage Or madness doth predominize this age? When for to Ransome Man, whose least Offence Was character'd in Disobedience, He who knew no Sin came, that, to fulfill The Mercy Statute of His Fathers will: Thus He forgave, and gave, to let us know What to our Very Enemies we ow, By His Example; and decrees this fate To the Posterity unfortunate Of too-beleeving Adam, That They must Give themselves over to no other Trust Than what His Word assures, nor to make less That first of Sins, Create them numberless, In Envie, Malice, and Ambition, But joyn to Charity Contrition For by-past faults, and resolutions raise To spend the future in our Makers praise: Obey Him first, then Those His Glorious Powers Shall substitute for our Superiours: And with our own Condition whatsome're Content, enjoy a full Harmonious Sphere; Leaving no Orb for Discords fond increase, Sithence He that's born for us was Prince of Peace.
A Quid Retribuam. POor sin-bound-naked-creature Man, ne're knows What to return for that His God bestows; But as Prosperities increase, goes less I'th' retribution of Thankfulness: His eyes not open but with Clay made dim, Renders that Miracle, not wrought on Him, Remains so stupid, but where Faith's declin'd Int' unbeleef, such are for ever blind: Now that I may like Judgment still prevent, By entertaining True-Souls-Nutriment, Not Poyson: let Example spurr me on To take the Cup fill'd with Salvation; And t'praise his holy Name that did prepare Such Cates for those heavie and Laden are, Sins Dromidaries swift by Nature led To run to Evil, here unburthened By One who bore both Crosse and shame, to free The Pliant branch of Eves posterity: (So have I tender Saplings seen unbroak, When Tempests have o'r-turn'd the sturdier Oak:) And if in Sacrifice we'd passe degrees, The best for acceptation's from the knees, Outward and inwardly exprest; whereby To notifie unfeign'd Humility; For such deny to shew repentance thus, Surely forget Christ came from Heaven to us: And those of that short memory may know Their Portion's here; They shall not to Him go, Who's Riches, Rayment, Food, and all Relief To them Condemn this World, make Him their Chief.
E-dat V-itam C-aelestem H-omo A-nimi R-ecti I-ejunent S-imulantes T-alibus I-nest A-morities Though All must truly say, They've done amiss, Yet there Goes more than Ord'nary to This: For He that would not make the banquet sower, Must form His Relish to his SAVIOUR. A Pelican feeding her young with blood out of her own Brest, a type of our Saviour. P-orrigit E-ximtos L-atus I-ndulget{que} C-ruores A-leseant N-ati V-ulneribus{que} S-uis. Behold Here from the PELICANS Brest sprung A stream of precious blood to feed her young.
In Sanctam Coenam Domini, Epig. WAsh and be clean; Eat, Drink this, and 't will save: So easie is the suit our Lord doth crave: Yet with the healed Creeple, back He'll call thee, And bid Thee, Sinn no more, lest worse befall thee. A Dedication of my first Son. IS it not fit the Mould and Frame Of Man, should dedicate the same To God, who first Created it: and t'give To Him the first fruit of that Span we live? In the worlds Infancy could Hannah tell, Shee ought to Offer her sonn Samuel To Him that made him, and refine That Sacrifice with Flowre and Wine? Was Abrams long expected seed From Sarah's womb condemn'd to bleed? And shall the times now they grow Old, conclude In faithlesness, and in ingratitude? Let shame awake us, and where blessings fall, Let every one become a Prodigall In paying vows of thanks, and bring The best, and best for Offering.
Where am I then; whom God hath deign'd to bless With hopes of a succeeding happiness Unto My house? Why is't I stand At th' Altar with an Empty hand? Have I no Herds, no Flocks, no Oyl, No Incense-bearing-Shebah-soyl? Is not My Grainary stor'd with Flowre that's fine? Are not my Strutted Vessels full of Wine? What Temporall Blessing's wanting to suffice And furnish out a lively Sacrifice, Save onely this, to make a Free-Will-offering of an Infancy? Which if I should not doe, that pil'd-Up wood, whereon lay Sarah's childe; The Temple would accuse me, where the son Of Elk'na first had Dedication. Wherefore accept, I pray thee, this Thou'st given, and my first Sonn is: Let him be Thine, and from his Cradleling, Begin his services first reckoning. Grant, with his Dayes, thy Grace increase, and fill His Heart, nor leave there room to harbour ill: That in the Progress of His years He may express whose badg He wears.
In Quadragesimam. WHen all the Dayes w'have borrowed are mis-spent, Had we not need to beg more time were Lent; And not to suffer This too, to be gon, Because abus'd through superstition? A knife to cut with's good, but if to kill It be abus'd, why then we deem it ill. All things are made for use; Abuses came But as Usurpers to deprave the same: And in some kinde or other all we do, Speak, think, or have, those have their morals too. Our Pampred Bodies oft such thoughts put on, That they become like to proud Iessuron: And when our minds from full Cups are exprest, They're like to Baltashazzer's at His Feast: Our Actions too, laden with Temporall good, Cannot permit t'aspire at Spirituall food; But over-fed, we surfet, and becom Like to the Beast in all things, save being dumb: Tongue-tide we are not, when we would express Our Enmity, from th'root of Bitterness: Nor yet uncharitable, unless in this, To judge that those who hunger doe amiss, And such as thirst too, whilst our Cups run o're, And Bellies are made Magazines of store. It should be otherwayes, if we would shun The heavie doom of sad Temptation; And as the Meat and Drink of Faith, prepare A Holy-Fasting-sanctifying Prayer, Cook'd from our Corner'd hearts, and not the streets, A Sacrifice Incens't with Love for sweets. And thus performing what is Lent aright, We'l fear no Schismatick, nor Anchorite.
A Hymm occasioned upon going to receive the blessed Sacrament when it was a snow. INvited now to Sup with Thee my Lord, All that I am is at a Period How to be fitly drest, And so t'become a worthy Guest; For 'tis prepar'd alone For such as have the Wedding garment on, Which through, Guilt I want, And all my Substance t'buy one is too scant. Make Me a Purse then, from His Sacred Score, Whose institution 'twas, and will doe more For Those beleeve His name, That to redeem us Sinners came Into the World, and shed His precious blood, which might stand all in stead; By a quick Faith apply The Soveraign Balsome of His Agony. For like the Man met Theeves, we all were left Naked and Wounded, Spectacles of Theft And Rapine too, wherein We weltring lay, a prey to Sin; Till th' true Samaritan Passing this way, Redemption began, Not sparing Wine, nor Oyle Out of His Hands, and Feet, and Side the while.
Thus now upon Recovery agen, Bound up in His Grave-cloaths, brought to our Inn, And Earnest left, to prove His high Compassion and Love: What care should be t'express In all our future Actions thankfulness? Which no way's better spent Than in partaking right this Sacrament: Which, without Cleansed hearts, and mindes that Can Turn a new leaf with the Centurian, More of a Christian show, Made white as is this day with Snow; And like the Prophets sute Purged with Hysope from what doth pollute, We cannot hope to do; Nor that, 'less prompted by thy Grace thereto. Whereto (I pray Thee) so much mercy add, That I may have some Balm from Gilead To heal my Leprous Sore, Whilst humbled for my Sins before, My future dayes may be The Inventory of more Piety; My forehead bear thy stamp Rev. 7. 3. Mat. 25.4.As servant, having Oyl still in my Lamp. A Reveille Mattin, or Good morrow to a friend. AS the Black Curtain of the Night Is open drawn By the Gray-fingred Dawn, To let out light,
And bid good Morrow to the Teeming Day: So let all Darkned thoughts Through Sin, Call in Their Powers, that led them in a blind-fold way: And Rows'd up from security, Bring better fruits unto Maturity. For now the Fragrant East The Spicery o'th' World, Hath hurl'd A rosie Tincture o'r the Phoenix nest; And from the last Dayes Urn An Other springs, And brings With it a Charettier too in its turn: So then by this new fire Be Goodness Hatcht, all wickedness expire. Then as This Prince of Heat doth rise, In Power, and in Might seem stronger, Proclaiming that 'tis Night no longer; By vanquishing the Witchcrafts of the Skies, The Spelly-vaprous Mists: So let th' enlightned Soul Controul Our Actions, that no farther they persist To follow sense, whereby t'invite Ruine, the sawce t' unruly Appetite. Thus now it's cleere, Out of all Question, The world's unmask'd, and all of Vailing gon. Phoebus Triumphant o'r our Hemisphere:
Let us not therefore in disguise Seek, or Bravado, To shadow as if under Maskerado So many faults and Villanies, Knowing that He who made the Light, Cannot Himself be destitute of sight. But though His Providence Did this beget, That Suns that rise should set, And in appearance vanish hence: Yet doth He claim for th' interest Of Day-lights bliss, We slumber not amiss; When as our Light is borrowed by the West: But the Choice Cabbinet of minde adorn With Contemplations may befit next Morn. Trium Gratiarum maxima Charitas. WHen all Perfections prove But like some sound Of Brass, Wherein no certain Note is found, Without Harmonious Love; What do we see then more, than through a Glass? We may with Eloquence Beguild our Speech, And then Offer at more than we can reach, And bring an Influence Of Works to raise us: yet are we but Men.
For if provok'd we be, We'll not forgive; And so Forget the wrong we did receive, Though it be Love's decree; Untill we can work our revenge in wo. The Churle, whose sparing skill Denies to feed The Poor, And such as stand in greatest need; Yet thinks he doth no ill, Whilst He walks double on his Ivory floor. An Other, Envie-swoln, When once 'twas heard By chance, That such a one was new prefer'd, Cries, What are honors stoln! Yet by the same tract strives Himself t'advance. This Mushrum may appear, When first the Sun Doth rise; But when His Hemisphere is run, And that the Ev'n draws near, It shuts up all its treasure, and so dies. Unless reviv'd again BY Loves sweet Charm, O'r which No Night or Vapour can do harm; For neither Pride, Wir, Gain, Can make us truly Live, or truly Rich.
But if Affection To Truth prevaile, And say, No Suffering shall turn the Scale, Nor yet promotion: This Night will turn into eternall Day. Matth. 13.El Sembrador, or, the Sower. ALL are Solicitous, who grounds possesse, To know Both when and how to sow, That promise may to them the Most increase. And by the severall Seasons, Change, or Wain, Full, or Increase, to stir them for What might be properest of every grain. Nor do they search so deep as for a Mine Of Gold; Yet what's the fittest mold For every seed, can readily define. And doth not great neglect and sloath appear In these, Whom Barley, Wheat, Rie, Pease, Affect alone in being cheap or dear: Whilst that the Fallows of their hearts, untill'd, No more Can promise than before, To be with Cockle-thoughts and Darnell fill'd.
For when the Bells do seem all In to Chime, They'll say This is some Holyday; So never frame a work unto the time. All that they pray, or hear, or read, or do, Shall be Choak'd with the Brierie Cares of this world, which they are Slaves unto. Before the Reverend Preacher can divide His Text, Some one soon tels't the next, Yet's robb'd of it; For 't falls by th' high-wayes side. An Other gets a Point by th' end, and may Go on Till Persecution Declare him Niobe: then he must stay. As when a Soil's prepar'd with art and Care, The Hinde Such Crops doth alwayes finde, As to's endevours answerable are. So let our Hearts be throughly wed of Sin, And then They'll prove good ground agen, And bring us more than thousand profits in.
Necesse, est Vt Temporum Vitia Careant Deiamicitia Absque vera tristitia. Terminus à quo Rom. 13. 13. Gula Scortum Ebrietas per quem Joel 2. 12. Iejunium Luctus Maestitia ad quem Luk. 1.53. Abundantia Gaudium Laetitia. Opera Tenebrarum — Fugienda Poenitentiae — Amplectenda Misericordiae — Acquirenda. Sic fiet; Ut DentiumMundities. Candor cedat Copiae & ubertati Armorum Clangor cedat Paci & tranquillitati Pestilentae ardor cedat Sanitati & temperiei. Quod fac sit Dominus huic Mundi angulo Anglise. AMEN.
A Caroll. WHat though't be Cold, and Freese, Let no good Christian leese So much of heat and Zeal, As not for to Remember That blest day of December: And what to Shepheards Angels did reveal, Which doth of right Claim lay To All that ever Man can write or say. A Saviour's born for Us, What News more precious? Wer't but some Neighbours Son, The Bells would straightwayes ring— In Cakes for Gossipping; So soon the Tydings o'r the Town would run, And many a light brain tost Amongst the Goodwives, where to place their Cost. And shall my frozen heart Not thaw, and bear its part In Jollitie for this: Whereby not I alone, But each beleeving one May promise to Himself eternall bliss? For such can ne'r be Cold, Who have this Birth-day in their hearts enrol'd. But may be said to burn, Till sone thanks they return, Which though far short they reach, The comfort is most sure,
'T hath healing wings to Cure Not for reward, but to make up the breach, Which so repair'd 't is we Must make it good 'gainst Satans Batterie: Whereto belongs this Care In Chief and Singular, That stricter guards we keep, Because both night and day Th' Artillery doth play, Nor doth our Adversary ever sleep: Then we shall shew hereby Christs Favour hath not slipt our memory. Vpon the birth of a Childe. WHen I (O Lord) Thy Mercies scan, Stooping unto the Publican, Who stood afar off, and didst daign To give, that He might ask again: (For not the Outward-beaten-brest, Nor down-cast-look could make Him blest; But 'twas thine own Power did controul His former Vice, stamp New His soul.) Methinks I am so far set free From all Sins bonds and Tyrannie, As that rais'd up in hopes; no More I need Zacheus Sycamore: But (though a Dwarf in Grace) conclude I see Christ 'bove the Multitude Calling me down; as if to say, He meant to be my Guest to day; And (though a Sinner) crown My wish, Bringing an Olive-branch for's Dish.
This is a true saying, That Christ came, &c.Tim. 1. 1, 15. BE a thing true or false, our Nature lies Alwayes so prone to Novelties, That we are caught: and what is done or said, Tickle, till we have uttered; Yet are a sleep whilst this True saying's come, (Or else with Zachary struck dumbeLuk. 1. 20 Through incredulity) although 't express In it the height of our unworthiness: And this the Scope, That He was 'nointed King Although he govern'd every thing, Contented was of's footstool t' make a throne Where He might work Salvation, And so is a true Jesus; nor doth thusMat. 9.13. Become unto the Righteous,Mark 2.17. But to Those likewise who through sins decree Condemned were to Miserie, Amongst whom the Apostle, whilst he'averrs Himself as chief, so little errs: What should we Judge our selves to be, whose all Of Life is but Apocryphall, Less than the least of Mercies: yet again When in our ills we not remain, Goodness shall cause that Scepter to distill All saving Grace into the will; So that repair'd by this, forgiv'n by that, We may thus far be Consolat, That Princely Clemency, and wonted love, May both the Crime and guilt remove: Then though the chiefest of the Chief we bee, If we repent, this Verse may set us free.
My Looking-Glass. FOe to Ill-faces for thy truth, be free And Shadow back my Souls Deformitie, Thou'lt please me better far, than that which can Return a Raven White, or black a Swan: For if thou shouldst like to thy self, rubb'd ore, Give All for Moteless that comes Thee before, I might suspect, (that justly) whilst thou'rt set To me 'n Diameter for Counterfeit, So horrid black my Conscience doth present My Guilt-complexions Night Firmament, Not Tincel'd with one Star of Grace, or Spark Of Goodness, but Sin-clouded o'r and Dark. How shall I then presume to Claim a right In any Dawn of Mercy and of light? Unless My Faith give credit for the Loan; And so Gods Son lend from th' Reflection Of His Bright Merits, so much power to say, My Pardon's seal'd, and Night is turn'd to Day: And then, and not before, I may seem drest, When His Great Favour, my Great Sin's confest. Sham'd by the Creature. THe Thankfull Soil Manur'd and Winter Drest, Returns the Hinde an Autumn interest For all His care and Labour: nor denies To be uncloath'd, to deck his Grainaries: So doth the Youthfull Vine those Prunings own, When as her Blossomes are to Clusters grown;
Nor (to shew thanks) doth spare her blood to spill, That so the Planters Vessels She may fill. This Vegetable Lecture may indeed Cast a Blush o'r me, whose return for seed So far fals short, as not for every one To bring an Ear; but for a whole Season none, No not that Corn again was left in trust, And Harrowed up under My barren Dust: But pregrant Nature doth so rule and raign, That with wilde Oats She Choaks the better Grain; And where My Gratefull Heart should dye my Press, It's all Besmeared with unthankfulness. Nor can a Thought, a Word, or Act proceed Out of My Clay, that turns not straight to Weed: And for My Fruits, ere Ripeness is begun, Abortive-like, They wither in the Sun Of Self-Conceit: Lord prune once more this Vine, And Plow this Ground, left the Figtree's doom be Mine.Luk. 13.7. To Man, on his frail Condition. WHat permanence to Earth or Clay is due, Fond Man consider, for that Emblems you: This Day brings humane flesh under Death's yoke,Hodie vidi, herividi, &c. And yesterday I saw a Pitcher broke. Our Forms are different, Substances the same: The subtil Artist doth both Vessels frame For Honor and the Contrary; and thus Our great Creator moulds and fashions us. If we would then our Makers praise set forth, We should take Care to become Those of worth.
The Fallacy of the outward Man. ARe we awake, or doe our Eyes Onely with th' Gloworm sympathise, To light the Pismire to his bed, When it through toil and labour's wearied? Doth not the Bank of Moss appear Crispt up in Moon-shine far more clear; When Argus-ey'd with many a Mite, It waits upon the Goddess of the Night? Have not the wanton Fairie-Elves Their Torch-bearers, Light as themselves, That with our Fancies sport and play, Untill they lead us quite out of the way? Cannot a Spangle, Pin, or Bead, By Candle-light, int' Error lead; And representing Treasure, claime A stooping to the Mat or Bord for th' same? 'Tis from no other, but from hence That whilst alone with th' outward sence We doe behold, and not with th' Minde, We are asleep, or we are blinde. Awake and See: Let Sin no more Lock up the Window and the Dore To thy fair apprehension (Soul,) But let its own allurements give Controul.
Let this false treasure, vapour, spark Of candid dew, shine in the Dark, And the Bejewel'd worm Eschew The morn, left that her Diamonds prove untrue. But Let Thy Lustre Foyl-less be, And so present the Day to thee: Let Sparks of Grace, and Truths light steer Thee to Contemplate Thy Lord Treasurer. Who not on Bords or Mats did lie, But did Install Humility: Whilst in the Chambers of the Inn One spies a Bead, an Other sees a Pinn. He is that Light which doth convay All wise men to th'eternall Day, Whilst Fools by false Illusions fire, As in the Dark slip into Dirt and Mire. 'Twas He alone; whose wounded side And Hands and Feet are glorifide, Whilst Potentates with Jewels hung, But Barren Moss-banks are, and filthy dung. No sweat, no Travail, grief nor Pain, Did His Love Shun, to win again Thee that wer't Lost: His Mercies Shon Far above th'Glance of Truest Diamon'. Wherefore if Thou mak'st use of this Worms Love to Raise thy thoughts to His; If with Industrious Care Thou bring Home to thy self His suffering;
If by reflection thou return, Sighings unfeign'd, for sighes, and burn In Zeal: no Falsifi'd delight Can e'r deprive thee of thy sight. But with the eye of Faith thou Maist behold A Crown Immortall priz'd 'bove purest Gold. Vpon the Times. A Wake thou best of sence, Intelligence, And let no Fancy-vapour steer Thy Contemplation t' think that peace is neer, Whilst war in words we doe bemone, There's nothing less left in Intention. England that was, not Is, Unless in Metamorphosis, Chang'd from the Bower of bliss and rest, To become now Bellonaes Interest, In danger of a Funerall Pile, Unless some happy Swift means reconcile. Which how to bring to pass, Beyond Mans hopes, alass, Therefore be pleas'd (Thou) who didst make Atonement for His sake, To silence this unnaturall spell, As Thou didst once the Delphian Oracle.
My Reformation. If all the Span Of Dayes Lent here to Man To Pilgrim in, And in Times Kalendar enrol'd, God should but Skan, What might He finde for weight and Measure, But Pounds and Pecks of this and t' other evil; No one markt to His Praise, But spent or sold For Profit, or in Pleasure: By whole-sale Unto Sin; And by Retaile Unto the Flesh, the World, the Devil. If the Immense Goodness Did not dispense Its power upon Our frailties, that like Clay or Glass Makes no defence 'Gainst Potters, or the Glasiers skill: What could we promise to withstand such loss, Our Miseries redress, Unless (alass!) His Son He let them kill: So Himself t' pay That by One, Which on all lay; And t'expiate, through grief and cross.
Here am I lost, So small, Yet so much cost, Wherein the debt Would wel-nigh drive into despair, Had not the Most Of me been dross, and so unfit To take the stamp of any Grace or Good; Untill he that made all, Did to repair My Crackt estate, and knit By His pain; Wherein met To set again That Breach for Balm, His precious Blood. Captives ye know Are led Into much woe And Sufferance, Untill by Ransome they get free Again; and so No more are bound, but to those wayes: Where lies my bond and Obligation then? To Sin was Cancelled, But still with Thee My Saviour, whose Bayes O'r Death's sting, Hell, and Chance, A Conquest bring To set me at full Liberty again.
Not what I will To speak, Or doe My fill, As Appetite, Not Reasons Fescue shall direct; But with that Skill, Thy Gracious Mercies shall infuse To make me truly sensible of those; Whilst I the Fetters break, And so detect That which did me abuse, My Young years, Which were light, Too void of fears, That so I might the rest for Thee compose. My Close-Committee. HOw busied's Man To seek and finde An Accusation Against all those He deems his Bodies good, or Goods oppose! And winks at such as Hazard Soul and Minde. Nothing of late Is done or spoke, But either King or State Concerned are; The while Each 'gainst his Neighbour wages War, So 're all the bonds of love and friendship broke.
And how Comes this, But that we do Or utter what's amiss In every thing; Making Each Fancy Lord, each Will a King, And all that Checks not Reason, Treason too? Were't not more wise, To lay about Which way for to surprise That Traitrous band Of Sins, that in our Bosomes bear command; And entertaining Grace, t' cause those March out? Our Lust, our Pride, Ambition, Or whatsome'r beside, Seems to give way To that unjust Militia and Array, Bring we t' our Close-committees inquisition: Thus when our hearts these for Malignants brand, Commit them not, but banish them Thy Land. Humiliation without Reformation, a foundation without a Building; Reformation without Humili∣ation, a Building without a foundation. BEst Architects whether in Brick or Ston, Cast first to lay a sure Foundation, Then raise the Fabrick; Confident hereby T' assign 't a term of perpetuity:
While Lesser Artists failing of that Care And skill, erect them Castles in the Aire, An Element unconstant, which betrayes To Ruine whatsoever there those raise. Such, and no Other are They, so profess To add by Reformation, happiness; Yet want the Basis for to build upon To make it last, Humiliation; When others seemingly cast on the flore, Yet are reform'd no better than before: So here Foundation without Building is, And there a Building on a Precipice. Wherefore let me be humbled first, and then Reform so, as never to sin agen: Blending these two together, with intent To Build an Everlasting Monument. A Carroll. A Wake dull Soul,Luk. 2. and from thy fold of Clay Receive the blessed Tydings of the Day:8. 10. Not of a Foxes Cubb,13. whose guile might be A promise of successive Tyrannie.32. Nor o' th' Victorious Eagles farr-spread wing,2. 1. The chiefest of the Worlds parts covering:Iohn 1. 20. But of a Lamb that's yean'd, a Childe that's born, No Spectacle of Glory, but of Scorn;Luke 2. For in the house of bread, This Bread of life,17. For us, is come to Ioseph and his wife:11. And though the City David's were,7. therein His Son no Throne Possesses, but an Inn.4. 5.
There thou maist finde him, at whose mean, low birth, The mightiest Potentates of all the Earth, Nay Oracles, are silenced and gon, Nor longer serve the Devils delusion. The Delphian Fiend confesses, He's o'rcome. And by an Hebrew-born-Childe stricken dumb. Dion, Suidas, Nicepho.The Letters of th'Old Law effaced are, Down falls the Statue of great Jupiter, With th' Twins, and their nursing Beast: which shour Of Prodigies, rouse up the Emperour, Who thus farr in the dark could see, t' erect In honor of th' Almighty Architect, An Altar in the Capitoll to's Son First-born, with the sole dedication. If Light thus thorow darkness shone, why is't, That thou who hast the Gospels beams, the mist Of errors canst not dissipate, but still Becom'st Idolater in doing ill? How doth thy Pride and Envie hatch deceit, And fond Ambition raise thee in conceit Psalm 44. 20.Of thine own worth, when all such honors can But dress thee up more stately Beast, no Man? The Serpents brood like Twins doe alwayes Pare, Which by Thy beastly humors fostered are: Thy tongue no more thy hearts cross-row doth spell, Than if thou were't an Other Oracle: Be silent then, nor longer more prophane 1 Cor. 6. 19.That Holy Temple, for which thou art tane; But let the Lambs blood wash away the stains And Characters were written in thy veins By thy first Parents, and which sithence thou hast By thy Endevours into Volumes cast,
Throw down thy self for Him who meekly came Into the world for thee, a Childe, a Lamb, Born to be Slain for thee, yet slain before, To make the Victory and Conquest more. Humility's a Childe; a Giant, Pride; Goliah from the hand of David dide: So though like Foes, thy ill Affections grow Unto immensity, a Powerfull throw, Out of the Sling of Faith, of Hope, and Love, May all that Monstrous-uncouth-brood remove. Then maist thou raign without suspition, free As Pharaoh did, till this Nativitie: Then shall Thy Conscience Oraclise thy Fate, Than was Augustuses more Fortunate; Nor in the Capitoll, but in thy Hart Erect an Altar to Him, let each Part Express thou art awake, and seeing canst tell, That now Salvation's come to Israel.Psalm 14. 11. In Pueros Bethlehemiticos quos Herodes morte Christi causa multavit.Mat. 2. 16. INnocuis nocuit, Iusto dum Injusta minatur, Infanda Infantum Laurea Poena dabat.
My Handkerchief to dry my eyes after the losse of a most dear Friend. LOrd, sithence the best Of Thine, Their Portions have Of Sorrow, Sickness, and the Grave: Why should the worst repine, Though Thou lock'st up their chiefest joyes in rest? Joyes, here but Lent, And so That we can say, W' enjoy them for a day, 'Tis of meer Mercy, when for all we owe, The Landlord must distrain to have his rent. This the unthrifty course we take, Begets, Whilst Pity mov'd, he tells Us, He'll repair our tottering Cells, And quite strike off our former debts, If with Contentment, thankfulness partake. These against sadness are An Antidote, Preventing its Cold Poyson, and A heat-allaying-Julep, where Thy hand Doth Thy displeasure in a Fever note: They style the Grave, whether 'tbe near or farre, T'be but a Bed; wherein when all must sleep, Let them rest envy'd, for our Sins we'll weep.
On the Proto-Martyrs Death. THey w'r of Deucalions race, could be of no other, Who ston'd St. Stephen, Pyrrha was their Mother. In Epiphaniam, sive manifestationem.Psal. 148.3. DUm manifesta Novo Christi quae Gentibus Astro Lux hodierna refert, Astra loquantur Ave. A Morning Fancy upon recovery from sickness, and the birth of a Son at the same time. MArk but the Sluggards shame, the Change Where Pismires numerously doe range; And you'll conclude, no sight so quick to try Distinction in Those Creatures industry. See but a shower of Motes that seem to beat Some busie Traffick in a Sun-beams heat: Then tell me what eye's so distinctiall, As for to single One out of them all. This, and much Less is Man, whose numerous fry Fills the world to preserve posterity: And yet there was an Eye both frown'd and smil'd; A Sickness here, but there a Lovely Child. Singling out One, to shew at once the room, Where's Mercy do His Judgments overcom: And when the Fatherly Chastisement's don, Crowns him the joyfull Father of a Son.
What can be here return'd? the full expence Of a whole Summers toyl and providence, Or such a pack of lighter Merchandize, As in the Sun delight to exercise? These, and no better are what we can raise, To shew our thanks, saving a heart of praise, Which God Himself must give; and then 'tis no more, Than t'borrow of one, to pay the same a score. Yet Lord, here be my Creditor, and lend A Soul, that may so much to Thanks pretend: That whilst it seeks thine own but to restore, Thou by acceptance maist create it more. Psalm 82. 6, 7.From God to all Princes for moderation in taxing their Subjects. THough styled Gods, yet must ye die like men, Saith God the Lord: Hear what he speaks agen, Whose Children if you'ld all accounted be, (O Israels Princes) leave off cruelty: Ezek. 45.9.And let your judgments, Justice so put on, That there be no room for Oppression: Neither exact from those who call you Lord, More than your needs require, their powers afford. 1 Cor. 1.31.Verbum Dei manet in aeternum. Psalm 105. 119.LAEtari in Domino juvet; & cum Lubrica turbent, Psal. 8. 6.Solamen Verbum Nocte dieque suum.
Vt sit & Cogitationibus, Verbisque, Factisque propitius Omnipotens. GReat God in whom all Justice raigns And Truth, Let not the reins of youth, So slacken in me still, T'enthrall and Captivate my thoughts to Ill, Much less my Deeds: but as thy Son Begun Where Solomon Laid Ston: So make thy house my heart, And scourge out of it each Mechanick part. Neither let words that die when spoke, Provoke My Soul to think, They'l sink Into Oblivion, As soon as They are uttered and gon. Place a Sentinell before My dore, That by my Tongue be song No Anthem but Thy Praise, Nor let it ever send forth other Layes.
Thus may my thoughts and words, which usher on My Deeds to Action, By Thy Divine Power purg'd from th' dross of Sin, Pave me a Golden Tract to Progress in: Which if thou crown with Grace too, let appeer Dormant, yet watchfull, ceasing never heer. Non est bonum Iudere cum sanctis. OMnis Caro moritur, Mal. 4. 2.Et Sol Iustitiae Oritur, Luke 1. 78.Proferens Sanitatem, Isa. 60.1, 2.Si volumus, In Alis; Quâ curet Vanitatem, Quam Colimus In malis. Ideo Qui timet Omen Inferni, Metuat Nomen AEterni; Et absit pravaricari, Si velis Sanari. Ad Angliam in quinti Novembris Feriam Annoalem. FEstum quid proferas Insula? quid Diem Commemoratione dignam existimes Si Hanc praetereas? in quâ Mirabilis Acta est benignitas Liberationis, Qualem qui comparet Antiquis seculis, Parem inveniat nusquam in Atavis,
Gigantum licet repetat Fabulam, Quâ Coelum ipsum stultitiâ petitur; Mons super Montem palam ostenditur, Ast hìc ad Centrum usque & Infernas Terrarum nigras itur Cavernas: Monet opertâ fronte malities, Sed caeca jugulat, neque à pendente Malo, quam à periculo latente Tam dirum Nefas; munit Conditio In quâ praevalida stet admonit io. Serpens Innocuus dummodo tuendus, Quoniam Reptilis facilè fugiendus Herbarum sub umbra conditus metuendus. Cui nec dissimiles Dolos fuisse Hos subterraneos, Quos latuisse Usque ad Vigiliam Diei festi, Memineris in quâ Manifesti Amoris Divini patuêre Radii. O! si mihi faveat Arcadiae Terra, vel Nemus, ut inveniam in Illis Quibuscum notare Diem: Lapillis, Uti mos Ve terum, nec mihi Rubro Tinctus sit Calamus atramento, Cum Luceat Dies & à sanguine Liberata: Nigroque carbone notata Nusquam Conveniat; nam licet Atra Machinatio Ista & Tartarea Frustavit Hanc Dominus, & Tenebrarum Orcum fugavit Lumine Gratiarum. Tutior Anglia ut in posterum sies Cordibus Gratis notetur Dies.
Quid maxime semper in votis habeat. VOtis si faveant Numina fervali, Peccatis Placeant parcere; quantulum Parcae Temporis & cedere posteris Vitae Limitibus velint Texetur Melioribus Telis in addent. Contemptu in habeat Splendida Seculo in Hoc Nugalia: nam in Vespere Condita est Aurorae facies, nec rugit amplius, Cum Nox adfuerit Dies Lethi, sic Thalumis modo Dormiet Omnis. Dum mane est fugiat Machina Tartari, Nec in Meridiem Serdida contrahat, Vespertinaque tunc Tempora conspicit Laetus, Iudicium cupit, Sperat Coelicu, at Iprobus Altera suadet. Times Mintage. OF all the scattered Brood, Or Brotherhood, Drawn from Creations line, To Blazon Providence divine; The Worm, the Snail, The Ant, the Fly, Best make discovery What Adam did entail On His posterity.
To dwell with Dust and Clay, Which Symptome may Mans Low condition, That without intermission Heaps up with care What here is got, And Ignorant knows not, These Transitory are, Nor shall endure, but rot. What was Domitians game, Or th' Sluggards shame, The Bloodless creeping beast Carries his house wherein to rest, Or Legless one, But Emblemer Of frailty, would infer Danger to be trod upon By every Passenger. And doe we break our ease, To follow these? Fly at preferments pitch; And adding to our heaps grow rich In Muck and Slime? When 'tis our Soul Immortall should controul, And so Calcine our time From all such dross to Gould. Which by afflictions tri'd, And worldly crosses purifi'd, Our Great Redeemer will apply His stamp to give it currency.
Parab.In Divitem & Lazarum. Luke 16. 19.DIves Quidam Ingens, sed nondum Nomine Dignus, Purpureo Decoratus erat; Victuque Superbo Gaudet & Assiduis Dapibus; nec sumptibus ullis Parcitur, Ingluviem Queis possit pascere Foedam, Sed Mare Consulitur Totum, & longinqua Potestas Terrarum excutitur: nec non Iunonia Regna Addunt Ingenuis cumulatim proemia Mensis: Nec deerat, nisi Flammiferens Ignisque futurus. Mortuuus Iste tamen, Somno Lethale sepultus Dicitur— nil aliud— Pauper & Alter erat, gracilis Quem buccea reddit Spectandum Charitate Magis, nudisque lacertis, Frigidus ante fores procumbens Divitis, Omne Solatium à Canibus Lambentibus esse fatetur: (Non etenim blando hoc captanda est gloria seclo) Mortuus est etiam: Sed Queis discrimine vitae Dissimilis Fortuna fuit, His Mortis & idem: Nempe; Quod in fragilis gaudetur tempore mundi Vertitur in Lachrymas; Durissima quaeque fuêre Illius Arbitria, accipiunt pro munere Pectus.
Vpon the Rich Glutton, and Poor Begger.Parable. THere was a Certain Mighty Rich man, had No other name (in Scripture) although clad In Purple: who delitiously did fare Daily, for which there neither Cost nor Care Was spar'd, to feed his Gluttony with store, Of what the Seas could yeeld when Galed ore; And whatsome'r both Earth and Air afford, Seem'd Heaped Tributes to his quainter bord: So that no Element to his desire Was Niggard, save what was reserv'd, the Fire. Yet this man Died, and on that sleepy score Was Buried—and no more— There was an Other, whom spare Diet made More spectacle for Charity, being laid Naked and Cold before the Rich mans gate; Who full of sores, and all Disconsolare, Saving from what the licking Dogs apply, Concludes all this worlds pomp but slattery: Then He Dies too. But as in life these were Nothing akin, so in Diameter Death Their Condition states, for now't appears, What here was sown in Joy, there's reapt in tears; And He who by hard Fate was here opprest, In Abrams Bosom finds an Interest.
A Reveille Mattin to my best Friend. LOrd, when the Casements of Mine eyes, To welcom in The Morn, first open'd are; Grant that my Heart may early sacrifice To Expiate for Sin, Prepare: And mustring up Thy Favours and Its Crimes, Cashiere the One, let th' other stand enrold To evidence at full that Time of Times Wherein Thou Ransom'dst me, who once was sold. Let all the Drowsie Vapours prest My Fancy down, Dispell and give it way To rise betimes, and to be better drest; So Dignifie and Crown The Day With Anthems may set forth that Glorious flame Thy love burst out in, when my fault was so, I'd line for e'r benighted in the same, Hadst Thou not vanquisht and o'rcome my fo. Cause (I beseech thee) that moist dew That falls upon My waking Temples tress By every yawn, Thy goodness taught to shew, An Exhalation Express,
Obeying no heat save what did proceed From that most Righteous Sun, whose beams alone Were of full Power to refine the deed Our Parents Dross'd by their Corruption. And as My Armes unfolded stand, To fathom out The Latitude, as't were, 'Twixt the Beds either side Meridian: Let my Thoughts sore about That Sphere, Unparalleld for Grace: and stretch to be Embracers of those Mercies did extend Beyond all sounding Plummet or degree, And thither all my Kids and Fatlings send. Thus tane by th' hand by His whose felt What mine deserv'd, I'm up; and straight perceive The Mornings Birth Bedew'd with his whose smelt All of Perfumes, and serv'd T' conceive Such Raptures in Me, that no part nor sense Could be at quiet, till it rose to make This Offering, and from a full influence, Inspir'd of Love, Dull Thanklesness t'forsake. Now if my Eyes, my Heart, my Head, my Armes, Embrace, Contemplate, feeling, seeing Charmes, Where can this Exorcism trulier stay, Than on that Star which chang'd our Night to day?
Quid Amabilius. IF I must needs Discover I am in Love: be Christ again my Lover, And let His Passion bring My Actions to their touch and censuring: Who in this world was born, Liv'd in it, and was put to death with scorn, That I to Sin might die Being born again, so live eternally: Thus I'l no longer make Addresses to my Glass for this Curles sake, Or that quaint garb, whereby I may enchanted be with flattery: Nor on Luxurious vow, Becircling Rose-buds seek to Gird my brow; But with a melting thought Bring home that Ransom whereat I was bought, In Contemplation Of that same Platted Crown He once had on. And when my Glove or Shoo Want Ribbond, Call for th' Nails that pierc'd Him too: Else farther to be drest, Borrow the Tincture of His naked brest: Nor wash, but in Soul Pride, Then use no other bason than His Side: So, up and ready, think How He, for Me, low in the grave did sink, That I again might rise With Him, who was both Priest and Sacrifice, To make atonement in The Difference 'twixt his Fathers wrath, Mans fin; Whereto it must remain, That I through Faith requite this love again.
Luke 24. 5, 6.Quare Viventem quaritis? Non Hic est. Quare inter quaritis? enim est. Quare Mortuos quaritis? surrectus est. Dumin Luxuria & Libidine, Et in omnium deni{que} malorum consuetudine conquiescamus, Arrogantiae & Avaritia, Et in omnium deni{que} malorum consuetudine conquiescamus, Tranquillitate & Tyrannide Et in omnium deni{que} malorum consuetudine conquiescamus, Et tamen Salvatorem & Salvationem, Denique quicquid bonoium ex omni munificentia & singulari providentia largiri dignetur Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid aliud ni viventem inter Moriuos quarimus? Veritatem & Vitam, Denique quicquid bonoium ex omni munificentia & singulari providentia largiri dignetur Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid aliud ni viventem inter Moriuos quarimus? Immunitatem & Immortalitatem, Denique quicquid bonoium ex omni munificentia & singulari providentia largiri dignetur Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid aliud ni viventem inter Moriuos quarimus?
Ut ita{que} Mortis amaritudine relicta Vita foelicitatis fruamur aeternâ Vitia vitemusutpote ad mortem aeternam du∣centia, & Amphoram amplectemur aquae Caelestis. Nequitiam in nobismetipsis necemus, Ut beneficia Resurrecti acquiramus. Descendamus per poenitentiam pro peccato in nostro∣rum ipsorum Contemptum, Ut Ascendamus per benevolentiam humilitatis ipsius in Gloriam. Sic responsum habeamus, Quando sponsum videamus, Vt deposito Terrestri simus induti cum caelesti. Et sepositis in sepulchro Carnalibus, Non illic speretur frui spiritualibus. Sed veriùs de talibus dici potest hic non enim surrecti sunt & eū illis Animae nostrae. Foelices ter & amplius, Qui Peccato ita Mortui fuerint Vt simul cum Christo quam certissimè resurrexe∣rint.
The necessity and grounds of Faith. MAN in the state of Innocency, knewGen. 1. 26. Nothing to fear (whom all things were set under) But was Created by perfections pattern,Gen. 1. 28. And so above all hopes: till he whose PrideLuk. 10.18. Sent him like Lightning from the place of Bliss, To become Prince of Darkness, (which alone2 Pet. 2. 4. Proves Nurse to Envie and Maliciousness:)Iude 6. Drownd in his hopeless Fortunes, seeks all meansRev. 20.10. To make fond Man partaker of his woe. By Deprivation, not of ParadiseGen. 3. 24. Alone, but of the glorious Makers presence;Gen. 4.16. And of those Visions Beatificall,Ezek. 1.5, 15 The Banishment from which, is Held to be The Chief of Torments threatned for degree: So 'twas decreed, to sharpen Satans Crime, Sweeten Gods Mercy: t' cause his Comforts less, Gods glory to appear by much the more; And therefore mark how 't fals out; Man's alone, So God provides him for CompanionGen. 2. 20. Part of himself, a help, but such, whose skillGen. 2.23, 10 Fit to receive the subtil Serpents guile,Gen. 3. 1. And help to cheat too, when the subject's, Pride, Ambition, or the like, what ere's forbidden; As straight betrayes him to the greatest offence He could have faln in, Disobedience.5, Now whilst he seeks to know, hee's Ignorant,6, Yet knows more than he should, That he was nak'd,7,
And so provides him Leaves to Cover that Which without Leave he thus was stript into, Nor rests he there secure; it seems the guilt Of what he had done, presented as a glass His Souls deformity through Nakedness, 10,In not beleeving God, (whose Voice but heard) 8,They Boldly enter Thickets, though afraid: Hence may that Passion count its age, and then, What antidote prescribable, save hope, That still Looks forward, 'less in Promises Which calls the thoughts back, to see what shall come: And this must work by Faith, and Faith recall 15,The first Seducers Doom, (to be o'rcome Heb. 11. 2.By the same sexes Issue, was o'rcome first, Which is the substance of our wish'd Desires, Rom. 8.24,And Evidence of what each soul admires, Iob. 1.16.Yet sees not, though thereby Salvation's wrought, 2 Cor. 1.20.And Grace to win it; Absence prompts the minde Iob. 3. 15, 16.To Incredulity; till faithfulness, Luke 23. 2,Grounded upon those Promises ne'r fail) 24,Assures it self of Pardon and forgiveness, 46.Through him that was accus'd, condemn'd and died, Yet Lives to try, and Judge hereafter all. Rom. 8.34.By whose alone sufficiency of Merits, 1 Tim. 2.5.And intercession as our Mediator, There is found ground and Ankerage for Hope Ephes. 2.9.To Stretch the Justifying Cable on; When all that ever from our selves proceeds, Avails us nothing, but t' increase misdeeds: Yet as a Body without motion, Iam. 2.26.Or spirits quickening, so Faith alone, Without some operative concurrences Is Dead, not Lively, but a Dream or Shadow,
Chimera, or such like, wherein we seem To have some fancy-glimmerings of the truth, Yet not beleeve it, not so much awake As t'apprehend Christ and his benefits: So suit our works according to his will, Whose will it was to suffer that which we Deserved had: and t'undergo the wrath1 Thes. 1.10. We justly had pull'd down upon our selves. The outward sense prevails much with our nature,Ephes. 2.3. And every one is apt to apprehend Some wonders thence: from Lightning, Thunder, Hail, The stormie winds and Tempests (without doubt, Gods warning-peece) laden with Natures Cartridge, Whereat the very Heathen feat and tremble,Nero, &c. And the Meer worldling is convinc'd thereby To think there is a God, whilst all the fruits And benefits the earth repays him with For all his sweat and labour, be ascribes Solely to th' Seasons temperature and bounty, Not thinking in whose Fist the deeps and hills are;Psal. 95.4. And Both (for Nature couples them) impute What ever good successes they obtain, Or health, strength, wealth enjoy, to Casualty, Chance, or Good Fortune, (as they call it) born To tread a few steps here, and then return They know not whither, they beleeve still well: So how they should beleeve well, scorn to Learn; When on the contrary, that Soul subduesLuk. 1.46. The motions of the sensuall appetite,49, Which causes surfet upon outward means,50, And fixes all Imagination,51, Up to the Throne from whence all blessings rain,52, 53.
And Chastisements but drop, (yet so, as when They mollifie, not with their often fall, They surely doe confound and break withall, Is in pursuance of the Makers praise, Luke 23. 47.And contemplation of that work of Wonders, Mar. 15.39.Made the Centurion first think of God: It doth beleeve the Sampler, and endevour To work it stitch by stitch, whereof such Love Iohn. 15.13.Was never shewn before, begins the Thred, Ephes. 5. 2.Humility and Meekness seconds it; Phil. 2. 8.Charity, Patience, and Long-sufferance Mat. 11.29.Winde up the Bottom: for these well Cast o're, Iob. 10. 11.Will perfect Faith, so that it need no more, Rom. 2. 4.To Rise to him, that did descend for Us, And bring his Mercies down to take that rise by, Mal. 4. 2.Craving his Healing Wings to Impe our Feathers, That so we flagg not through Lasiness Towards what good is, nor yet make a plain- Discovery that our quarry still is earth, But like the true-bred Chicken of the Eagle, With rais'd up Beak behold the glorious Sun, Ibid.That Sun of Righteousness, till all the Dark And misty Vapours that our sins had rais'd Dispell and vanish at his Merits Rayes. Ier. 8. 22.No Balm from Gilead may refresh and heal The festered sores of our Corruptions, But such as that Samaritan applyes: For as our Leprousie through sin was grown To a more cankered Infection 2 King. 5.15,Then Naman, the Assyrian's, and Gahezies: 27.There must another Iordan be found out Zach. 13.1.To work the cure; a Purple stream of blood
Flowing out of a precious saving Side, To wash our Souls white, when apply'd by Faith; Not onely Seven times, but all that Time Alots us here to breath in: That Disease2 King. 5.27, Compar'd to snow, being cur'd, resumes the flesh14. Of a young Infant: Here an Infants fleshLuke 2. 21. And blood not spar'd, procures so bright a tincture, As that no snow can parallel for whiteness, The Lambs blood-washed Robes, wherein the SaintsIob. 1.29. Are clad here, first by Christian faith and Grace,Rev. 19.8. And therein drest, hereafter enter glory; So thenceforth shall we promise happiness Unto our selves in each condition; When our Assurance, for foundation, Hath the try'd Corner-stone, and all the fabrickIsa. 28.16. Is pedestall'd upon those precious pilesLuke 23. 26. He bore, and bore him, bidding us bear after.Phil. 2. 8. And by which plenall satisfaction,Mat. 10.38. The Vials of his Fathers wrath were stopt.Rev. 16.1. God by reproof sends Sluggards to the Ant,Prov. 6.6 Proud Courtlings to th' Riches of the fields:Matth. 6.28. And why should we not think that we are taught By Love, to love again? were our hearts iron,Magnes Amo∣ris Amor. A Loadstone might attract them, and (such Love is) Doe the milde Turtles so engage themselves By natures mandate, That the loss of one, Denies the other benefit of Like? And shall we not resent that benefit Our Saviour purchas'd for us, quitting Life, To make ours sure for ever? Or, how is't We can survive, not droop and pine away, For our offence (which was the cause) we ought,2 Cor. 5. 15.
1 Cor. 15. 21.And the Dominion that sin hath o'r us, Else 'tis an other lesson Grace instructs, Luke 24. 26.And that's to entertain his Sufferings 1 Pet. 2.24.As our enlargement, his Stripes, for our healings; Embracing all those Bounties with such Souls, May ready be to melt and to dissolve 2 Cor. 6.4.In tears contritionall for their Corruptions; 5,Yet rais'd with Comfort of such Mercies, Riches, 6,Be fruitfull in the works of Piety 10.Henceforth, and praises of his holy Name Ephes. 1.23.Who is the Fountain, and must give the same, Iohn 4. 14.Unless with Bartimeus we were blinde, Gen. 2.7.How doe we not perceive the Clay we tread on, To be the substance whereof we were made: And by the Sun that Attom'd into Dust, Tells us but what we must dissolve into: Or like the Shadow represents us, see We not what 'tis, and what we all shall bee? That in observance of our bubble Thoughts, We still aspire, and make our Fancies dance Within the Imaginary pool of Pride, Or sea of Self-conceit; This not of Eyes, But dimness of the Minde is too too bad, Wherewith bemisted in our apprehensions, We dream we fathom all perfections, And yet but grope after the least of truths, It may be in the twilight of our reason, We offer at obedience to instruction, And seek to be inform'd: If what we hear Iohn 3. 1,Fly not beyond our pitch, (a great Professor, 4.Master of Israel, once was gravelled Upon that Shelf) and 'twas through lack of Faith;
Had he but had so much, as t'have compar'd With that least Grain of all,Mat. 17.20. no Mountain could Have bragg'd of firmness 'gainst his moving power. But to shew truly what esteem we ought To set upon our selves, 'tis here set down, When the prophetick Prince, and Prince of Prophets,Psalm 22.6. Compares his Royalties but to a Worm; And by the best Authority can vouch,Math. 18.3. An innocent, and little harmless Childe Is plac'd for us to imitate: And those Who would aspire great blessings of salvation,Mat. 20. 16. For to be Last is First, and First but Last,Mark 9. 35. Least greatest, greatest Least:Luke 9. 48. Epitomise Our selves, and we become voluminous In Graces Library: when if we swell With pride of our own Worth, the smallest vent Un-winds that blather, blasting our intent:Luke 18. 11. And that we may once more Example scan,12, Consider th' Pharisee and Publican.3. But if all these not serve to break our ston And iron hearts;Zach. 9. 9. mark what he Rode upon Into the City, who Salvation brings,Psalm 18.10. And when he lists rides on the Winds swift wings. Doth the least cross or rubb we meet withall, Set our whole little world afire, and raise Tempestuous motions to disturb the rest And quiet of our Souls:Psalm 44.11. Prompting revenge? And yet behold,Iob 31.20. our Food and Raiments friend Led to the slaughter, Dumb,Isa. 53.7. and to the Shearers Without an angry Bleat to shew distaste! Are we so frozen-handed, that we fear To open any help to those that need, Upon this scruple, lest thereby we seem
To break the Ice for Merit to start out at, So seek to share with him in whom all Lies, Gal. 5. 6.As if we knew not that our Faith were lame, 1 Cor. 13. 1.Without this Grace for to support the same; And that if in his Name who fed the hungry, Cur'd the diseased, heal'd both Lame and Blinde, Administring (whilst here he was amongst us) Luke 19. 9.All comforts, for our imitation And pattern to walk by) we doe refresh Deut. 15. 7.Any the sons of Abraham with water, Mat. 23.40.A Mite or Ragg may help necessity, Luke 16. 9.He will accept it, as to him 'twere given, And the reward or recompence is Heaven. Call we to Minde when mov'd to any wrath, How many wayes we daily doe transgress Our gracious Gods decrees, who as the sarcell Or master Feather of his Mercies wings, To raise them above all his other Works, Abounds in Patience, and delays due Judgment, To favour our Repentance with more time, Mat. 26. 67.Never forgetting, how He bore the Taunt Mark 14.65.That whited Wall cast on him, nor the Buffet, Luke 22. 63,Scourging, or Spittings on, all that disgrace, 64.Envie, and Malice could contrive for us Mar. 15. 17,Who had deserv'd no less; and then perchance 18.Such Lessons may procure our temperance. To suffer is a double kinde of phrase, For so he did that died for us, yet still 'Tis through his sufferance that we are alive, And suffered to enjoy one benefit; Whilst by our Evil wayes, what in us lies We crucifie the Lord of Life each houre:
As when our thoughts forge mischief on our beds,Psal. 36.4. Are not his temples Crown'd anew with thorns? Our hands that should be open to Relieve, If that they graspe more than our own, so thieve Or work oppression: and our feet are swift In shedding Blood too: how doe such again Nail his unto the Cross? our tongues are tipt With poyson'd Envies and Maliciousness, False lying, slanders, all that's impious, Tuning our Lips to Blasphemy, and loose Unsavoury talk.Iohn 19. 34. Doe they not seem to spit On him afresh? tearing that window open With our spear-pointed Discord, that let in The Gall-less Dove brought the true branch of Peace And Reconcilement, whilst from thence did flow A Crimson shower of pure Compassion, And satisfying Mercy in the height, His Side (I mean) that like Noes Ark had been Our safeties from the Deluge wrought by him, And now Remains our pledg, that those that flie Unto that Sanctuary never Die. We through our Natures weakness, not of power To give the Least of Sufferings resistance, Although we promise fair, as Peter did, May here be taught to trust so far to Faith, Not that proceeds from vain security,Luke 22. 33. Lest then the Crowing-Cock give us the lie;34. But such whereby we are Regenerate,Rom. 3. 28. And Justify'd, more than bare Law could promise, As to o'rcome the great'st temptation, And judge the Beffetings of Satan Blessings;Matth. 4. 1. The World, the wilderness,8, 5. and Every high
Conceit of our own worths we are tickled with, To be the Mount: Superlative designes, As when we pry too far into Gods Ark, And sift those Mysteries, 'neath the Cherubs wings, We seem upon the Temples Pinnacles. Thus travailing like Pilgrims here a while, Nothing but dangers and vexations, Allurements through enticing change, betrays Us to the snares of His precipit ways, Whose Art destructive by enchantments power, Seeks to encompass us within that circle He fell himself into through presumption: Which to eschew, whilst Gods long-suffering, patience, And charity shewn to his handy work: His meek Humility, and chief of graces, Favours us with forbearance; Let's come home Psal. 95. 8. Heri vidi Fragile Frangi, Sen. trag. Hodie vidi Mortalem mori. Sen. trag. Quim Dies vidis veniens Superbum, Hunc Dies videt rediens Iacentem, Ibid.Whilst 'tis to Day, (for who can tell to whom The morrow shall belong?) and in that way, Tract by the Prodigall i'th Parable, Luke 15. 13,Seek out our Fathers face with love and meekness, 18,And we are sure of his embracing Armes. 19,For though through Natures subtilty we have been, 20.As 'twere, hid deep within the caves of Earth, Buried in Worldly cogitations; Rom. 5. 6, 8.The Merchant of our Souls did spare no pains Nor cost in myning through the earths dark vains To purchase us, so brings again to light. Yet as pure Gold requires the Finers art, And Diamonds polishing, and to be cut: So here He past the Furnace, and became
Chief Jeweller, for 'twas the Blood o'th Lamb,Heb. 10.4. Not of he-Goats could serve; and if we grindeHeb. 9. 12. Our selves for Sin to powder,The sacrifices of the Old, but shadows of the New. we'r Refin'd So as at first we were, unman'd by her Should be our help;A Diamond dissolvable by Goats blood, and to be cut with the help of its own powder: that still she might so prove God brings't about, no other Vessell serves To entertain a ghest of so great price, As that must Ransome all the world besides, But of that Sex;Luke 1. 28. and though the news at first Strook terrour and amazement,29. afterwards It was sole Remedy against fear: for as The name of Caesar to the Seaman once,Quid Times? Caesarem & Fortunam suam vehis, Luca. Prov'd of security, sufficient To make him put to Sea: So here the Virgin Assured that 'twas Emmanuel she carryed,Matth. 1.23, 24. Gave Ioseph courage not t'abandon Her; But casting Anchor on those promises, To become full of Faith, and by what ere The Lord suggested In that Course to steer.Gen. 12. 3. Thus was time brought abed of what its young And tender Infancy had onely shewn By Revelation to the Patriarchs,Isa. 7. 14. Prophets, and men of God; and which now past,Iohn 3. 15. Upon these latter Times by Faith is cast:Gal. 4.4,5. So he that was before all time begun,1 Tim. 2.5. Came in the fulness,1 Sam. 17. 26,36. and remains a Son To mediate with the Father, that our fears Cancell'd by Faith, we might become Coheirs.Psal. 3. 6.
Bona Regni Terreni Potestas quibus op∣ponuntur Infirmitas Horor quibus op∣ponuntur Ignominia Divitiae quibus op∣ponuntur Paupertas Deliciae quibus op∣ponuntur Luctus. Regni Coelestis Haec Temporaria sine Illis. Sempiterna. Illis. Joyes Flitting Pleasures, Transitory Lie, Accompanied with much Infirmitie Below here: whilst without th' allay of wo, Heav'n for eternity doth those bestow. The Brazen Serpent. THe world's a Wilderness, and Man therein Exposed to the bite and sting of Sin, Whose wages, Death, from that same curse began, Ushering in need of a Physitian: Then did the Great Creator of Mankinde (And all things else) a ready Balsame finde To cure those wounds, corrupted Nature so Contracted had for its own overthrow: Whose Mercy by a Type, at first invites Unto belief the stiff-neck'd Israelites, Brings Moses into credit as they pass, By setting up a Serpent made of Brass, To foil Sin at's own weapon, and to bring The future hopes of our recovering
By Him alone who lifted on the Tree, A cursed Death endur'd to set us free; His goared Head, Pierc'd Side, and Hands and Feet, With Crown of Thorns, and Spears, and Nails did meet, That we might tread on Carpets, and become Coheirs with Him in truest Elizium: That bitter Cup he did vouchsafe to pledg, For us whose teeth by sower grapes set on edg, Were almost helpless; must incite us on, To seek the liquor of salvation. Taste Vineger and Gall here first, and be Greatly Ambitious of humilitie; Cast down our selves for him was rais'd for us, If we desire to rise Glorious. Bear Crosse, be rob'd and hurt, shame undergo, Passe from Ierusalem to Iericho, There meet with theeves, no healing hopes we can Expect, but from This true Samaritan. Good Fridays Reveille, or on the Passion. Salutis Cataplasmus. MAy we call this Dayes task to minde, And prove we to each other still unkinde? Doth Passion bear o'r Reason sway, Making us quite neglect this Passion day? Why are we suffer'd so to err, As not t'remember our Great Sufferer In Praises due? who whilst he dies, Shews what He'd have us doe for Enemies, Forgive them first; for thus He sues Unto His Father for the cursed Jewes:
Next, whatsoever Crosses come, To be like Sheep before the Shearers, dumb; Or Lambs unto the Slaughter led In Meekness, not with fury hurryed: Then through that Conflict he endur'd, If humbly we beleeve we shall be cur'd; For it falls short in other art, To frame a remedy for such a smart, As from the sting of doing amiss, In following Sin to death here heap'd up is; And to apply this Plaister, lay it on, There needs no Others hand, save Faith's alone. On Easter-day. 1648. Death, where is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory? EAch thing below here hath its day, As in the Proverb's said; And so it comes to pass that they Conquer are Conquered. For He who for mans fault assign'd Death, and 2 Graves reward, Was pleas'd those bands for to unbind, And so himself not spar'd, But issuing forth his heav'nly throne, Vouchsafes the Earth to bless, And became here a little One To make our Crimes goe less: Not that our disobedience can In weight or measure shrink;
But that this Great Physitian Before us takes the drink, That bitter Potion we had Deserv'd to quaff, and thus He weeps Himself, and becomes sad To purchase Joy for us. And more than so: for every one Will for his friend lay down Some spark of love: but he alone His Enemies to crown Refus'd not Death; so deep from high His Mercies did extend; And if you ask the reason why, 'Twas meer for Mercies end. Yet that grim Death and mouldy Grave No longer be His Prison, Than He himself alone would have, He 'bides not there, but's risen. And if we would as Conquerors rise With him who vanquish'd those, We must not fear where danger lies, For Him all to expose: But though the Grave doe open stand, And persecutions reign, At Hels desire and Deaths command, Look on our Sovereign, His Banner doth present the Cross He bore, and bare Him too For us; and we must count it loss To fail what he did do. Thus Sin and Hell, the Grave and Death Must quit the field and fly,
Whilst in contempt of borrow'd breath, We'd live Eternally. Thrice happy day whereon the Sun Of Righteousness did rise, And such a glorious Conquest won, By being our Sacrifice: And as unhappy He, that shall Not finde the white and best Of Stones to mark the same withall, And priz't above the rest. To Prince CHARLES, in Aprill, 1648. Upon the hopes of his Return. SEems not the Sun more Glorious in his ray, When as the Cloud that shadowed's blown away? Is not each beam He darts then truly said, Of triple heat after being sequestred? The Crimson streaks belace the Damaskt West, Calcin'd by night, rise pure Gold from the East, And cast so fair a Dapple o'r the Skies, That all the Air's perfum'd with Spiceries: And shall we think when Jealousie and fear Are out of Breath, the Day of hope's not near? Doth it not bloom already, and untie That stubborn knot of Incredulity? When blossomes fall, we say our Trees are set, But so, as may a womb of fruit beget. Thus when the clumsie Winter doth incline His candid Icicles, for to resigne
To Flora's beauty, and the Spring drives on, T'oretake Maturity's perfection, The Cold so tyrannised had o'r blood, Is thaugh'd, and each enjoyes new livelyhood: The Mariner meeting a stress of weather, That with his Shrowds and Tackle shakes together His apprehensive thoughts, till they are spent, And nought but Death and danger represent: With what a full Sea of content doth he Making a Coast embrace security? These, and much more, Illustrious Sir, become The Issues of your little Martyrdome, With whom all good and Loyall hearts did bring Ambitious heat to joyn in suffering; For Seas prove calm when as the storm is ore, And after Cold, warmth is of Comfort more. Best Diamonds may have foyles; mistakes have gon To blemish; yet rais'd disposition More splendid in esteem; no more to say, You are the Aprill to our future May. To Easter Day. WElcome Blest Day, where on The Sun (Not of the Spheres alone) Did rise, But that of Righteousness, who shon Our True-Light, was our Sacrifice.
For 'thad been night With us, Dark, Everlasting, Dismall, Vaporous, Entail'd from our first Parents Appetite: Till by the Power and Might Of this Light of the world, our Shades took flight. Death, Hell, the Grave That ever Crave And never satisfi'd appear, No longer their Dominions have, Sithence vanquish'd by this Conquerer, Who doth enlighten every faithfull Sphere. Now that each Orb consenting prove The while, And trulier might feel those comforts move From so Great Light, such precious love We must reflect, and back recoil, To see what either hath in's Lamp of Oil. For without Doubt Their share is Darkness, let their lights goe out: And where agen Ones light doth shine through vertues before Men, 'Tis True Divinity, Our Heav'nly Father's Glorifi'd thereby.
Soliloquium ad Salvatorem. QUid in Me conspicuum Nisi Vitium? Peccans ab Originale, Non vult adhuc nisi Male. Vile Lutum, Fit Pollutum. Quaenam est conceptio Mentis? vana, Seu Prophana: Verba sed (Heu) nostra ventis Parent; non rationi Mentis: Facere nec quidquam lubet De Illo, quod Ipse jubet. QUid in Tua facie Nisi Gratia? Sed qui Tempus antecedit In Tempore Seipsum dedit; Sanguine lavare, Emundare. Ast, quod caro factum fuit Verbum, instruit: Dum quod scriptum est loquutus Qui & vinctus, & solutus: Qui pro Illis quos creavit, Nulla pati denegavit. Verba Facta Cor Correcta Fac sint, Qui pro summa Laude, Vacuus est ab omni fraude. AMEN. The true Bread of Life. John 6. 48. BRead is the staff of life,Lev. 26.26 and life's the scope Of every mans desier, aime, and hope; Yet He who was the spoil of Death (for so The Syriack renders him) yeelded thereto.Gen. 5. 25.
And after more than any else e're saw Of Years and Dayes, did at the last withdraw, To shew the frail condition here beneath Of those who in their Nostrills bear their breath: So that compar'd unto Eternall bliss, A Shadow, Bubble, Span, all Emblem This. Why then should Thoughts be tost to Court such Clay, But that Our natures mandate we Obay? And may doe so, whilst appetite puts on No other garb 'save Moderation: The bounty Ceres from her Golden Ear Scatters to bless the painfull Labourer, Comes from above too, yet when ground and bread, 'Tis but our Tabernacle's nourished, And that but for a while; the Soul must be Beholding to an Other Grainarie; Not that which Moses Prayer caus'd to fall To satiate the Israelites withall; 2 Kings 4.Nor of such Barley-loaves grew once on earth, 42, 43.Wherewith Elisha fed some in a Dearth: These might have hunger after; but Those blest With the True batch of Life may ever rest So satisfi'd, as with the height of store, For such shall, never need to hunger more, But an Eternall life enjoy, wherein No dearth or famine is, save that of Sin: Plenty and Joyes for evermore dispose Themselves to be the Comforters of those. And whilst our Faith makes that a life indeed, The other seems to trust a broken reed. Afflictions sowre that Temporall bread with Leaven, Which this is freed of, for it comes from Heaven.
A Carroll. WHen we a Gemm or Precious stone have lost, Is not the fabrick or the frame Of Fancy busied, and each thing tost And turn'd within the room? Till we the same Can finde again, Is't not a Martyrdom? Doth Vanity affect us so: yet are We slumber-charm'd, nor can employ A thought that backward might reduce, so farre, Lively to represent Our Misery, Who fell, and thus incurr'd a Banishment? Shall we leave any corner Reason lends To give sense light, unsought, untry'd? To finde how far our Liberty extends, And how refound we were Re-edify'd By th'Shepherd, and by th'Son o'th' Carpenter? May not this skill and love in him, require The white and better stone to Mark, And t'raise this time above all others higher, Wherein He came (though Light) Into the Dark, For to restore unto Mankinde its sight? Most sure it will: and where neglect denies To be observant of this Day, It proves not onely forfeiture of eyes, But all parts seem asleep Or gone astray: So's the house again unbuilt, and lost the sheep.
Tragicomoedia vitae Humanae. ORimur & Morimur, Mors & Nativitas simul introcunt: Quid ergo Gloria Mundi Istius? Verùm Theatrica ingredi Scilicet, Egredíque semper, Mos fuit vetus, Est etiam hodie, erítque, donec Postrema scena peragenda est, in quâ Simul Omnes iterum partes ut agant prodierint: Laevaque acies multis Miseriis Finem imponet, suae Tragoediae; Dextrum Cornu dum in Choreis Sponsi resonet Epithalamium: Ambo Epilogum Tragicomoediae Narrent, dum manet Ambos Conclusio. In Horologium. MEntitur celeri facilis rota tempora cursu, Et properans Tardam praeterit Illa Diem: Sic Horam Alatam superet modo Plumbea virtus, Cum juvet in stimulos pondere pressa suos. Faltere quam facile est dum non sentitur, amisso Pondere tarda rota est, tempora sed fugiunt. O! mihi sic Liceat prudenti Corde fugaces Annumerare Dies, ut mihi Pondus erit. Sic possem subito vitam disponere seclo, Ut renovet Claram Candida sera Diem.
The Tragicomedie of Mans life. HEre One is born, and there an Other dies, Nativity and Obsequies Enter at once; What then is all This worlds Pomp, but Theatricall? For to come out, and to goe in Hath evermore the Custom been, And will be till the latter scene Summons us all at once again. Then shall the Left-hand file in Miserie, Shut up the story of their Tragedie: Whilst with a Chorus the Right wing The Bridegrooms Epithalamie doth sing, Both giving a Catastrophe Unto this Tragicomedie. Vpon a Clock. THe swifter lying Wheel o'r-runs the Day, Would make it seem as guilty of Delay; And the wing'd hour out-stretch as conquered In swiftness, by the Plummets weight of lead: The fallacy is easie, for admit That weight were off, then time would out-fly it. O let my flitting dayes so numbred be By a wise heart, they prove of weight to me: So may I life dispose, that in the end By setting bright, it may a clear Day send.
Quid Vita Vera, Quaenam Mors certissima. Soli vivunt— QUi in Christo vivunt. Soli Mortui— Qui in Peccato remanent. Seducit in Tentationem Vivificat per sui Ipsius oblatione. Vpote Conditionis nostrae Vpote Mileriae nostrae & Misericordie AEmulus Satanas Patris quam Memor Christus. Veram igitur ut Vitam habeamus, A Peccato dehinc abstineamus. Moriamur itaque— Non in sed à Peccato; Ut Fruamur Vitae— Quae sit & in & à Domino. Vpon a very wet S. Stephens day. GOd would his Saints should be bemoan'd, So the day weeps for Stephen ston'd. In Diem Circumcisionis ad Adamum sive totam humani Generis stirpem. Luke 2.21.CIrcumcisus erat, Legi sic paruit Olim, Ut parat invitis Pilea certa suis: Gal. 2.4, 5.Et Novus in vetulo dignatur Parvulus Orbe Vivere, Nos animis Vestiat Ille novis. Tempora sic fugiant, Magna est Mutatio secli, Non Mutare, suas mutet Adamus Opes.
Vpon Easter day. SIn buryed Soul awake and rise, Let not the Conquered More O'r thy Affections Tyrannize: All that This world affords for Ore But Drossie is, nor the least Mite Of happiness in Fleshly Appetite. The Devill from the first was styl'd A Lyer, and hath still Improv'd His malice, so beguil'd Us as our Parents to his will; Each Word we utter, Thought conceive, Or Act, all serves but t'help him to deceive. No marvail then if Thou wer't bound, When 'twas a Threefold Cord, A Trident mischief that doth wound, Requires a Treble Patience to afford Relief: with which we here were sped, When th'Womans Seed did break the Serpents head. First 'twas One God in three Compact, Vouchsaf'd to work this Cure, Though't seem'd the Sons alone, this Act, Both Father and Spirit were there most sure: For 'tis without Contention, All Three in One work'd Mans Redemption.
They were three Wisemen from the East Conducted by a Starr, Refus'd no Travail for this Guest, But came with Presents from afarr, To Court Heavens Munificence With Gold, with Myrrh, and Frankincense. Those three indeed bewitch our sence, And what could Men bring rather? Faith was in Infancy, and thence It chose to suit the Gift, I gather, As whereby t'shew what Dawning 'tis That Entertains the Blossomes of our Bliss. The Fruit comes after: and that was, When He who knew no sin, Condemned, yet contented as A malefactor Great had bin, Not onely Born, but born to bear Our Crimes, became for men a Sufferer. Suffer He did, and was interr'd, And shall fond man refuse To Die for Him; or be afeard To bear, nay, t'see his cross, and chuse Rather to pass a moments pleasure Here, than partake of such a lasting Treasure? Shame Rouse us, and as He did sleep Three Dayes within the Grave: So let our Sins be buried deep, That They no more Dominion have; Nor hang like Plummets on our thighs, When with our Blessed Saviour we should rise.
Who for our sakes this Conquest won O'r Hell, the Grave, and Death, Three that sought Mans Confusion; Till Man-with-God-unite, beneath, So far prevail'd, as first to Die, Then Rose again to Crown the Victorie. Christ alone the Author and finisher of our Faith. WHilst we beleeve (no more) we but resemble The Devils, for Those doe so too, and tremble. He who for Mans redemption was sent, Will be of true Faith the accomplishment, As well as framer; and assurance gives, Though yet unseen, of Large Prerogatives, As to become Coheirs in that estate Which He did purchase for th'regenerate: No Others to be quoted are, but all Authors besides This One, Apocryphall: He opens to's the door to true Beleef, Who seeks t'come in another way's a Theef. Vpon a Thanksgiving day for a Victory. TRue Victory, on Fames wings taught To fly aloft, So covers all the Plash Or Stream wherein her falser tydings wash, That none of them more rise, Upon our Faiths to Tyrannise, But put to plunge what shift to trie, Shunning the Hawks pounce, meet the Pole, so die.
Now as In Aqueducts, the source Must guide the Course, And to the same degree, Heighthen the reach of its humiditie; So 'tis but just and even, That Benisons sent down from heaven, Should thither rise again in praise, And fill each Kalendar with Holidayes. Not such as wont make red-Ink dear, Charging the year In memory, t'express This or that Man's a Saint, could go no less. But by duties t'show Our Thanfulness, and what we owe; As from that Place alone we can Conclude our spring of Blessings first began. Thus whilst for praise we set apart Both Day and heart, And sweetly doe embrace Gods mercies meeting in his holy place; 'Thout question He'l go on To perfect the Conclusion, And crown the Conquest farther, so That that ne'r more be our friend, He deems foe.
Gloria Pyramidum sifeat Memphiticaesensus Pyramide ad Dominum quâ libet me potest
Lucis Amplectenda, scilicet Ioel 2.12. Poeni∣tentiae Iejunium Fletus Planctus Tenebrarum Fugienda, scilicet Rom. 13.13. Nocturna Securita∣tis, Comessatio & Ebrietas, Scurrilitas & Luxus, Lis & Invi∣dia. Quorum Proemia sic diverse; His Ex Misericordia, Copia, Hilaritas, Gandium, Conferuntur. Illis Ex Iustitia, Penuria, Anxietas, Moestitia, Conferuntur. This difference in works is known, The first is Gods, t'others our Own.
My Embassie. Aliter cum Domino & cum Principibus Mundi istius negotiandum. Votum Deo si mandatur, tOr gemitibus rumpatur, siT ocellis fons, in ore ferUens precis, cum amore eleeMosynentur Manus, Nec Legatus rediet vanus. Forma Cordis, sed infecti jUvet, os pictura recti, neC blandities parectur, donUm dum prameditetur, Sub alternum Regem satis, Flectent Ista Quem nil gratis. Catena Causarum ad Salutem pertinentium Mans Hart's soe sinkt to Sin wedded to Vice It needs a Chayne to bring it unto Christ.
The Seed of the Woman breaks the Serpents head. Pegasus.ALipes Astra petens (sic Fabula) gramina rumpit, In Fontes Montis Helicon.Culmina versa stuunt: Siccantes Horat. Ovid. Ar.Vatum satiantur Hippocren.Nectare venae, Ne careant animis Obid ani∣mas quasi ha∣bere dicuntur utpote & im∣mortalia quo∣dammodo videntur, & Immortales etiam creasse: nam, Dignum Laude virum Musa vera mori.Carmina digna suis. Nec careant dum Luke 1. 31.vera subit victoria, frangit Serpentem Genesis 3. 15.soboles gui Mulieris erat: Vnde fit ut cunctis virtutum Flumina manant, Luke 1. 70. 1 Pet. 1. 10.Vatidicis Matth. 10.41. & 5.12.Cunctos praemia dumque manent, 1 Cor. 6.11.Diluit & Genus ab humo huminum, & ade in Peccatis volumini ut omni Gratiarum succo prosus vacuum videatur.siccos, sic Pulvere Gen. 3. 19.spargit amorem, Luke 22.44. Iohn 19.34.Purpureum: 2 Pet. 1. 3.fidas & 1 Pet. 3.4. Christi Passio induit Fidele & Purpurâ: Resurrectio vero & ascensio Coronam addunt Victo∣riae, ut ita Secum Reges etiam simus participesque Patri, Gloriae.Diadema capis. A Carroll. Luke 2.WAs all the world by Caesar tax'd to know, What wealth each Country, City, house could show? Did that Decree extend but just so far As where Cyrenius was Governor? Yes sure, where e'r the Roman power bore sway, None could decline the Doom of Syria. So cam't to pass, that He of David's stem, Hast'ned from Nazareth to Bethlehem
With his espoused Mary, and got there Of what's before time, Time's th'accomplisher: Nor would the Darkness of those Dayes confess A currency unto such Preciousness; But house and City, Countrey, all three seem To cast upon those Guests the Low'st esteem; And so the other Strangers well may be, Shuffle these Friends into the Ostierie. What doe we less, whilst Emperour-like each one Bears o're his lesser world Dominion, And freedome hath to tax each Sense, to bring Its best of treasure to this Offering: Yet as asleep, or blinde with Natures light, We learn to court all Objects save the right: And whilst those houses should been tricked ore For Him alone, they'd let in Sin before: The Cities of our hearts possest with vice, Will not change garison at any price; So what the Region of our Souls can grant, Is, t'appear rich in ill, all good to want: Yet though this Province, Fort, and Sconces all Taken, betray'd, and under Satans thrall; 'Tis not presum'd, but that by Faith being led, All these may eas'ly be recovered, Nay, all are won already to that brest, Prepared is to welcome this new guest. In Sanctum Stephanum Protomartyrem pati∣entem & duritiem Corduum Judaeorum Lapidantium. MArtyrii dum prima Petris sua Laurea vincit, Saxea Saxosi Corda Manusque gerunt.
To New-years Day. IF Eagles shifting but their Bills, have made Their youth return, so years seem retrograde; And if't be true, that every change of Skin To th'creeping brood, doth a new age begin: Or whilst th'eleven Months like food appeer To satiate the hungry Ianivere. Why should not man this Riddle too unfold, And be renew'd by putting off the Old? Armamenta ad oppugnandos Hoftes, Carnem scilicet, Mundum & Satanam, Maxime necessaria. VErus Christianus sit, Ephes. 6. 11. &c.Veritate Cinctus Iustitiâ armatus, Pacis Calceamento vinctus, Salvatione Galeatus, Super Omne, Fidei scutum Cum Spiritus Ense reddent tutum, Nec deesse potest Ei, Heb. 6. 19.Unquam Anchora Firma spei.
In stead of Jacobs Ladder heer is one To teach thee how to goe to heav'n upon, His in a Dream did Angels represent Passing both from and to the Firmament But this applide unto thy Heart will guide Thee broad awake, to thy Redeemers side
Amasse Licuit, Quem peccasse poenituit. VT in initio Annorum Inscii, In Hamum Satanae, Et Improvidi Incidimus: Ita Malorum Nostrorum Conscii, Zach. 3. 8.Ramum Esay 11. 1.Salvationis Fide Capiamus: Tune — Spes Libertatis erit—si non amplius nimis—Cura Peculî. Quid proficiet homini fi totum Mundum lucretur, & perdat Animam suam? QUae sibi lucrae facit Fragilem Qui comparat Orbem Totum, Animam cúmque Hic perdat & Ipse suam? Nulla salus Terris, Brevis & mundana voluptas, Coelicolis nulla est turbida perpetuò, Preferat immeritis Haec splendida Lubrica Nugis, Terrestris superûm nulla valoris erint.
Ad quendam tam Potentia quàm Intelligentia & Doctrina, Divitiis aequè ac Nobilitate & honoribus praeditum. INgeniosus Homo es, nec quisque Potentior Orbe Ditior & nullus, Nobiliárve fuit: Partibus eximiis juncta est Vigilantia fortis, Nec decrat titulis Copia magna tuis. Hoc tantum si scire placet (me judice) restat, Ut reddas Domino qua tibi Cuncta dabat. English'd: Thou art a witty man, nor's every one I'th' world for Power thy Companion; In Birth and Riches all thou dost outfly, And exc'lent Parts back'd with Authority. On Thy arrears this only now may fall, Thou spend these to His praise who gave them all. Temporibus hisce Maxime discendum. FAcilè credimus quod volumus: Velimus igitur Bonae, Et statim credemus Non omni Mendacio, Sed Potius Verbo Veritatis Ipsi. Omnis Anima Potestatibus subserviat superioribus.Rom. 13.
Such as stand upon false Bottoms in saving their SOULES. The Ignorant.INscius innumeros Domini meditatur Amores, Et salvum nihilo se putat esse suo: The Presum∣ptuous.Alter at indubi as Veniarum concipit Artes, Ut sibi, dum Cunctis Victima Christus erat. The worldly Wise.Mundanis nimium sapit Alter amoribus, at{que} Hic Sola Deo profert Munera ut accipiat: The morally Civill.Hic quoque civilis fruitur jam tempore vitae, Nec dubitat Coelis quin fruiturus item: The Hypo∣crite.Sanctior oppositis sibi dum blanditur Inanis Fictilis, & Meritis se valuisse suis, Rumpitur, & nullam capit Ille vel Iste salutem, Durabit Christo quae stabilita Fides. In Epiphaniam sive manifestationem Domini. Iohn 1. 5.Nonne putes Merito Caecos Qui Luce serenâ Numb. 24. 17. Luke 1 78.Nil cernunt, ad quos Phosphorus Ipse venit, Iohn 3. 19.Nec tamen Evigilant? Densâ Caligine Gentes Luke 1. 79. Ephes. 5. 8.Umbrantur Miseri, (vespera tota Dies) Matth. 2. 1.Sed tamen inveniunt stellam, sic noctis Imago 2 Thess. 5. 5.Versa est è tenebris quâ duce clara Micat; Matth. 2. 1. 1 Iohn 3. 5.Et Magus in magno meditatur Lumine Divum, Isa. 10. 3.Sponte Novum Astrologos Astrum agitatque viros. Iohn 1. 16. Luke 2. 6.Sin quorsum hoc rogites? ut sit Manifestus ad Omnes, Gal 4.4.Omni Qui in pleno tempore natus erat.
Natus, Damnatus, Necatus, Glorificatus. Descendere descendit è Coelis ut (pravitate quâ depressi simus Carnali relictâ.) ascendamus in Coelos: Pati dig∣natus in Mundo pro immundis, Vt possideant Lucem, Qui meruissent Crucem. Morte mulctari se praebuit, Vt Vitam capiat, qui Mori debuit. Agnus in Montem passus, pastus & in Montem agnus. Pastor succumbit Oneri Legis, ut languori succurrat parvuli gregis. Ne desit Fons, adest Mons: ad depremendam sitem, (Hanc) cape, Veram Vitem: Qui multo cum cruore Mori vellet; ut humanos ab humanis erroribus avellat. Anguis ut à praecipitio redimatur Ingra∣tus; sanguis Pretiostssimi effunditur, & confossum Latus: Tumuli limitibus se Captivum tradidit, Vt à Satanae Mili∣tibus nos Liberos redderet. Sepulchro obdormivisse Lapideo videtur, ut duritiei Cordis humani oblivisceretur. Morti pro triduo Temporis paret, Mori ut peccatis quotidie nos praeparet; & ne quid in Redemptione sit amissum; horren∣dum Barathri petit Abyssum. Sed Qui Lux vera est, & ab aeterno, non manet tenebris nec in Inferno; Ast Palmam feriens verae victoriae, Coronam Fidelibus texnit Gloriae. Et ne sit Fidei Thomae defectio, Octavo iterum die est ae∣facta resurrectio. Postquam ab eis per quadraginta Dies notus fuit & conspectus, Nubem induit & susceptus: à Monte qui Oliveti vocatur sursum receptus est Pacificator, Cujus readventus est futurus, ita cum Iudicaturus. Mente Me Deus sic donet Spirituali, Vt non sim iterum Reus hujus Mali.
A Threefold Cord is not easily broken. MEek, Lowly, Humble, was that threefold Cord, Our Lord, To pull us up to Heaven did afford. He bore the Cross first for us, and became Esay.A Lambe; Wash'd His Disciples feet, to teach the same. But who takes out this lesson? is not Pride Our Guide. Envie, Oppression, Malice too beside? To cross what's good, bleat after Natures call, T'enthrall Others; set traps t'ensnare their feet withall. We can the best of care and thought unbinde, To finde What may enrich the Body, not the minde. So still be cumbered about serving much, And grutch That Others have not equall share in such. When if our Saviour we beleeve alone, But one Luk. 10.42.Thing needfull was, and that was Maries owne. That better permanent part, grant that I May try, To compass through unfeign'd humility.
Regula nullo modo Spernenda. Ut sit Deo Gloria Uni veri solo etsi Triplici Trinuno unanimitèr non secundum hominis fictum, sed sui ipsius id est veritatis verbum Totus inservire, quoniam Non vult participem cultus Iesus. Principi Honor Debitam obedientiam utpote guber∣nandi causa in nos, ab Ipso Domino in omne scilicet quod Mandata non exuperet Licitae Praeposito, reddere, quoniam Oppugnat Dominum sper∣nere Regem. Reipublicae salus Tantam tribuere Legum institutioni∣bus et constitutionibus reverentiam, ut in omni actione unam vel alte∣ram instar metae appetitui praefi∣gere, quoniam ut salus Populi su∣prema lex, sic sine Legibus nulla salus Populo.
Sic Veram Devotionem in Deum verum, verbo dum sacro Fides adhibeatur sancta compares. Agnitionem & remunerandi observantiam quam humi∣lem, Grato, Pio, & Patientiae summae Fatrono-Principi. Pacem sic Tranquillam & ab omnibus [bonis scilicet] maximè optatam Patriae. Quibuscum Armatus Deterreant. Nec Papalis haeresis Nec Fatalis Hypocrisis Nec effrenata Anarchia Confusionis Anomalia Nec Galeata Dementia Ex Plebeia Insolentia Quin Homo Probus sis Tam uno quam Ambobus.
Triplex hominum Conditio. Creatio prima, Gen. 1. 26. In Innocen∣tia Cre∣atus, Ephes. 4.24. Deprava∣tio secū∣da, Gen. 3. 6. In Disobe∣dientia disloca∣tus, Gen. 3. 23, 24. Restaura∣tio ter∣tia, Gen. 3. 15. In Summa clemen∣tia re∣dinte∣gratus, Rom. 8. 32. Indutut spiritu divino, 1 Cor. 15.45. Captus Dolo serpen∣tino, Gen. 3. 4. Florens sole ma∣tutino, Luke 1. 78. Ab origi∣ne quàm puro sine labe vel peccato, Postea in statu nō securo, utpote hortide∣privato, Donce in Christo redem∣pturo tunc cre∣dendo suble∣vato. Haec cum Fide perce∣pisses, Etsi Mi∣serri∣mus fu∣isses, Causum Spei in∣venisses.
In Passionem & Resurrectionem Domini. QUimodo tantorum Tumulorum vincula solvit, Carceribus Tumuli traditur Ille novi: Sic Placuit, maculâque animae purgentur ab omni, Sanguine jam proprio diluit Ille suo. Humanum inveniens aperit humus illico venaes, Sarcophagus Dominum sed retinere nequit. Quid sedes in Tumulum somnose Miles apertum? Quem vigiles vigilant Mortis & arma rapit. Cum sociis stupefacta videt Maria Sepulchrum, In queis latitia & Mista pavore fuit. Inveniant Dominum veniunt ut Marmore clausum, Mane situs Dominus, nec manet usque diem: Visurae gaudent Christum, metuúntque remoto Saxo, dum visus Angelus est Domini. Crux Vera Non in Ligno, Sed in Signo, Ducis Victoria, Crucis Gloria, Privatio Vitae Donatio. All other CROSSES may disquiet rest, But this was that by which Mankinde is blest.
C-R-V-C-J-F-I-G-I-T-V-R. -urrit ad Exitium Genitrix, repetitque Reatum Filiolus: Poenas Hic dabit, Ia suas. -uminat ut Miseros Rex Inclytus, Alta relinquens Ima petitque, subit Nubila lucis Opus. -nicus à sceptris humiles facit Ille recessus Sponte, suam tribuit Qui quoque vita fuit: -um brevis è teneri concretáque pulvere forma Quam vitiosa regunt, Ambitiosa velit. -uncta Viro Consors, quâ cum de sorte perenni Consulit, & Culpa haec (Morte) perennis erat: -actus homo Dominus moritur, sed Morte subacta Commutat fortem, & vita Perennis erit. -rritat Superos Gens improba, sed super omne Grata est, quae à scisso Pectore fusa fluit. -ratia pro ingratis datur integra, Iustus Iniquis, Pro Peccatore haec Pectora laesa mancnt. -nduit & nostras humanâ faece volutaes Naturas, nobis Coelica tecta facit. -ransfixúsque fuit, quo transeat omnis alumnus, Et videat passum pacificúmque virum. -ictus Amore hominum vinctus, Captivus & Idem, Ut Libertatis spes modo certa siet: -espice sic Miserum, Miseros qui è gurgite Mortis Eripuit, rapiant Viscera nostra, sua.
Spectaculum vere Humilitatis. C—um. H—uc. R—espicis I- S T—ibi V—ita S—alur. S—uccumbit I—nnocens M—ibi O—nus N—atum If in a glass one would descry Perfect and true Humility; Then goe no farther, but observe He bore the Cross which we deserve.
Pilat's Inscription.Joh. 19. 19 I—ustus N—ascens R—edimit I—njustos.1 Pet. 3. 18 What PILATE wrote, He wrote, and did refuse To alter for the High-Priest of the Jewes: This Just mans birth with Prophesie suits well, Who came to save the lost of Israel.Mat. 9. 13. P—ater I—gnosce I—nsciis R—emitte E—rrantibus G—ravissimo I—udicio S—ubditis C—ondones O—bsecro M—iseris P—eccantibus A—missoque S—aluti S—uccurres I—n O—blatione. Of All the Vertues happiness Create, None out-shines this, To be Compassionate: Mercy the God of Glory doth prefer, Although All's other works are singular. This Kingly Pattern here before us set, Should teach us to forgive, and to forget.
La Citta Improvida. J—aceo E—versa R—uinis U—tpote S—anctum A—ngularem L—apidem E—misi M—eum. A Building that is Tight and free from weather, Hath all its parts well Cymented together; For where such Unity In it self's away, That structure falls under some quick decay. This City bore name of Peace alone, Whose Builders did refuse their Corner stone. Il vero monte Testaccio. G—erit O—ssa L—ucet G—loria O—mnibus T—remor H—umilis A—lius Memento mori, or a Deaths-head worn Upon a finger, oft becomes a scorn; For what through use familiar is grown, Nature counts less by apprehension. Yet be advis'd, this Mount of dead mens skuls, A greater dread and terror on thee puls, Who durst by Sins, and loose desires below, Make him again pay that which thou didst ow.
Easter dayes Resurrexit. SEt the Cliff higher Now, And raise Each hearts key, To present a Vow In praise Of him who lately was our buyer, And of this Day Which He makes clearer farr then Other dayes. For look we back, and there We may with ease See what we were, Transform'd beyond All works, did please The Maker So That whilst He did commend What He had done, Man wrought his endless woe; Nor of those praises longer was partaker. Before when known To be, By Innocencies Liverie, The fairest likeness of Creation; All other Things Were but to Man as Offerings, Whereby He might maintain The Title of the worlds true Soveraign.
Justice and Mercy both, The King of Heaven Delights to show; And in his hands the Skoals doth hold so even, That whilst enforc'd to punish, yet he's loath To overthrow; And so a way prescribes, wherein Man may revenged be of sin. To this effect, When He saw time, His Son was sent, That all disgraces of the Crime On Him being spent, No Contumelie or neglect Might lie behinde, To sink into Despair a troubled minde. So suffered He To set Man Free Again, Whose debt Requir'd no less To recompence The Guiltiness Of so great Disobedience.
Which bond discharg'd, All are enlarg'd, Who can through Faith arise With Him who Clarifies Beyond our apprehension, The Splendor this Dayes Skies Put on, To Embleme His Bright Resurrection. In Diem Natalem etiam & Jejunalem quoniam Mercurialem Mensis ultimam. Quondam Festa Dies, nunc Iejunantibus apta es, Ut Queis non prosunt Gaudia Maesta juvent. English'd: A Holiday thou wast, and art so still; For Holy Fasting saves, when Riots kill. In novi Anni Diem Primam Dialogismus. DUm novus Annus init, an nos nova Pectora flectent, Cum Vetulo Vetulas vin periere vices? Quid potius? nam qui memorare novissima certet, Immemor errati gaudeat esse sui.
Ineffabilis Amor at{que} Admirabilis Christi. Vt manus In Crucem. alat.extensas pandit Iudais.Crudelibus, Ipsos Gensila.Nos velut amplexu comparat Ille suo: Ovid. Met.Pythonem innumeris adimens Hydramve Vam labo∣rum Herculis.sagittis Serpentum The old Ser∣pent, the Devil.Proavum, Smon vir∣gins.haec a sagitta neca. Nullus Apollonia salvios fiat arte Neporum, Nec quisquam Alcidis obore major erit: Hic tamen haec magni Christs con∣quest over death.repetit victoria mundi, Ferendo serit.Es superat poenas Ille ferendo suis. Pauperis est numerare Pecus, duodecimus olim Herculeanus erat Huic Labor innumerus Man had so offended God, that nothing but God and Man could make atonement.Nempe quod in nostris ranta est numeratio Culpis, Vt nisi qui posset singula nulla juves. All power was given him of the Father, who voluntarily undertook the work of our redemption.Posse & velle suum est, sic nos redempsit iniquos, Et firma in st tuat Anchora He becomming the truest Anchor of our hopes, we cannot vere out the Cable of faith upon bet∣ter security against all shipwracking.vera Fidem.
To my Gracious God. REtir'd into a Calm of Leisure, Led By Providence thus: grant me busied Here after for My King and Countreys good, The Church and State where I took Livelihood: That in my Calling I may never falter, But hew wood and draw water for thine Altar. The Object of Love and Power. J—nspicps E—mentem S—acrificantem V—ictorem S—acrificium. Lost Man, when to be sav'd cannot devise To expiate His guilt by Sacrifice; Till Priest and Prophet, King, and all agree In One, to offer and winn Victory; This for what's past; the other act of power He gain'd for us, who is our Saviour.
Vse and Memory Parents to VVisdome. VSe out of Date, and to Remember Our Saviours Birth, wont bless December, Cry'd down: What may we judge by these? But this, That Wisdome's in decrease, And certainly must Folly own, When other Parents are not known. The End of the First Part.
—Tutus in Umbra Silvestram tenui Musam meditatus avena. Virg: W.M. sculpsit
To my Book, upon the second Part, and the Title Page. Famulentur Prioribus. THy first Part bears a stamp Divine, And so may pass for currant Coin; Though Momus Cark, and Zoilus bark, Thou art preserv'd as in an Ark: For what one doth by Faith apply, No flood of Envie can destroy. Yet how to help thee at a lift, That must be now my Second drift: For seeing thou wilt not alone Come forth, but be attended on, It's fit thy servant still should be, Adorn'd with modest Loyaltie; Such as the Hils, and Groves, and Brooks Afford the Fancy, 'stead of Books; And help Contentedness to wade, Though not to swim under a shade Of such Security may give 'Gainst heat and cold Prerogative Defence: where no times rayes or Thunder Shall blast or scorch those so lie under. But who themselves in Peace can thus read ore, Need but be thankfull, and ne're wish for more.
The Second Part. Humane Science Handmaid to Divine. Famulentur Prioribus. ALl were not Cedars that grew on The Top of Towring Lebanon, But here and there some less Plant set To give attendance on the great: So have I seen a grove of Pine Becircled with Eglantine; A Towle of Oaks that seem'd the higher, For over-looking of the Brier; The Beech, Ash, Elm, tak't not in scorn From the low Shrub and prickly Thorn That underneath their shades they dwell, And guard their roots as Sentinell: Medows, and Fields, and Gardens all Produce both simples, Med'cinall, And herbs of less esteem; yet these May some one sense or other please. Fountains with Crystall may compare, As they run out are known to share With this and that Land-water, til They colour change, yet Rivers fill. And if I would my Fancy rear, To lineat a day most clear; It should be such a one, wherein Some wooll-pack Clouds in corner's been. Thus the wise God of Nature chose And things in order to dispose: And Humane Raptures onely doth command As servants to Divine, to wait at hand.
Occasioned by seeing a Walk of Bay-trees. NO Thunder blasts Ioves Plant, nor can Misfortune warp an honest Man; Shaken He may be, by some one Or other Gust, Unleav'd by none: Though tribulation's sharp and keen, His Resolutions keep Green; And whilst Integrity's his wall, His Year's all Spring, and hath no Fall. Inter Acus & Aculeos pugna. MAn like a little world, opens a pack Of Government, to all such Climes as lack; Wherein those humors that disturb the health, For Power, doe represent a Common-wealth; And Nature (uncontrowlably) would try, To subject all under her Monarchy; But in that Conflict findes no small disease, Whilst all restrain'd Authorities displease. Here may we see as from a Chaos spun, Discord, at push of pike; and Factions t'run A tilt: so break int' shivers and destroy The strict command of eithers soveraignty. Yet neither Title need we fear to leese, Sithence there's both King and Common-wealth 'mongst Bees.
Sorte tua sis Contentus. DUm fremit immodic is rapiturque voragine ventis, Et vetat irato Gurgite Navis iter, Littoribus Placidum Pelagus, non Indica reddens Munera, sed Conchâ dat propiore dapes. Elige quod mavis est, Tumidos insistere Fluctus An Portum, Exitium quarere, sive bonum: Tentet Avarus Opes, & Amara pericula Ponti, Tuta cupit modicis rebus inesse Fides: Quamvis Castrae petas, Fora vel Togatus Amasses, Invenias Laqueis haec comitata suis: Sola manet requies Animo Quem jurgia nulla, Nulla vaporiferaeque Ambitionis habent. Sed satur, in proprio formentur pectore pacis Semina, quae fugiant Militiam atque Forum: Gaudeat umbriferis Sylvis pro Classe, Loquaces Lympharumque Choros Curia nec sileat. Namque Avibus junctis repetitur murmure cantus, Et saltabundum ceruat ubique Pecus: Gramineis locuples jactet jam terra tapetis, Et violae soboles sub sepe coepta ferunt. Pisciculis avidis Esca est inimica voracem Dum Condens hamum, sic cupidos capiens. Nec minus Agricolae dum tendit retia Turdus Praeda fit, aut Visco fallitur Ipse suo: Si sequeris Leporem, pedibus petit Ille salutem, Currenti stimulos addit & Ipse metus. Sin Rubis evigiles iremulas multo cane Damas, Ostendunt nemori non adhibenda Fides. Sis ubicunque velis, facias modo quid libet, Omne Te Cruciat, Menti ni sit amica quies.
Insula Britannica ad seipsam. QUid moror in terras? Pinus descendit in undas, Et tondet Vitreas Classica sylvacomas. Gallia, quid profers? quid Tu Teutonica tentas? Hesperiésque tuis quidve Carina Malis. Num dabitis Legem Oceano Mihi Iura negantem, Littora Cui, Liquidus paret & Oceanus. Conficiam eximias Aurato tegmine Puppes, Signentur Rubrâ candida vela cruce. Ne caream verbis ubi Rectum quaerere Ius est, Pulmones strenuos, AErea Lingua vomet. Moenia si quisquam violenti fulmine tundet, Lignea forte putet, Igneaque inveniet. Chloris Complaint. DOe not the Planets (howsoere They wander) still retain a proper sphere? And seasons serve the year to bless, Although the Storms and Tempests are no less? Seem not becalmed Seas more fair, Than if th'had never been irregular? And shall fond Man alone be said, To be of all things else unpacifi'd? Lions to Lions kinde, and Bears Friendly to such; so Wolves partake o'th' fears With their pursued kin; The fell Est Tyger can with her associate dwell: And yet (as if unhuman'd) we By no means with each other can agree;
So that (we may degenerate From Natures mandate) all our Passion's hate, And where a Mishcief may befall, All Disposition's turn'd to Prodigall, Nor is there for Compassion Left any room (now t's out of fashion,) Befriend me wind, I'll try the wave, Though some ther be must sink, yet som 'tmay save, My Kalendar yet marks out spring, Dis-gust may shake, not blast the Blossoming. And therefore as I roav'd astray, 'Tis reconciling Truth points now the way, In which I would be thought as farr From variation, as the fixedst Starr; But with a constant shining thence, Serve King and Countrey by my Influence. My New yeare-gift to the Times. NOvum aperiens Ianitor nunc Annum, Iani Bifrontis Quis Nothus Caesarum, Restet ab victam longè Britanniam, Templa clausurus iterum Britannicis? Barbariem nunquam, (vel raro saltem) Tam feram memini Legisse seclis Vt jam ostenditur, Fratres in Fratres; Filiae Filiique, Obedientiâ omni, Tanquam protinus soluti, In matres etiam & in Patres, Vim ferunt rapide, Parentes mutuo
Natos natasque maximo Habent Odio, Sexus, AEtates licet numeras, Dissensionum undique querulas; Rixasque intelligis & Invidiae Artes ministratur assiduè; Majorem sub Leonino Temperiem invenias Axe, vel Canino, Tam fervida Torquet Alterutrinque Ira, Adeoque torret Discordiarum Flamma, Vt destruit & consumit Omnia: Friget in hoc aestu tamen, Charitatis solamen, Et quicquid saevitiae Produxit unquam Scythiae: Glacialis Sphaera, Hujus inimicitiae Fiat Imago vera. Bellica fuimus Praeda Romanis, Nec non Saxonibus, Quondamque Danis, Vicinis etiam victima Normannis. Ast in Postremo Hoc (absente Populo) Qui nos confundat Seculo, Ipsosmet petimus Et pro Purpureo victore, Quisque nunc tingitur Fratris Cruore.
The Fift of November, being in Kent a stony Countrey. AM I in Kent? and can I be no more Befriended than to want a Stone to score That scape from Danger; which had it o'r-come, Might have both Conquer'd Kent and Christendome. Dye-mans although not rare now, Rubies are Through our Dissentions made peculiar Blaz'ners of Vertues Heraldry: nor can The Tincture serve of the Cornelian; The Topaz, Saphire, and the Emrald may On fingers worn, proclaim it Holiday: But I must finde a whiter, though it came Not far, but whence fair Albion took its name, The Cliffs of Dover, on whose Candid Brest I shall presume to share an interest On this Occasion, that no Rubricks spell May henceforth in some Bookers Chronicle Eclipse my glory, or exempt my praise, By ranking me amongst the Workedayes. Surely the Dye that black design put on, Would crave the best of all, and whitest Ston To mark that Providence, which did prevent The mischief of that vap'ring Element: Which Hatch'd below, should our Conceptions rouse, (In that before it grew pernicious, The Shell was crack'd; and so that enterprise Was vanquish'd, with th'abortive Cockatrice) First to the great Deliverer, and then A freedome of acknowledgment 'mongst men, That all of them may (as their fortunes are) Spend something on a solemnizing care. And as the Powder should have been our chance, Now let 'texpress loud our deliverance.
Anglia Hortus. THe Garden of the world, wherein the Rose In chief Commanded, did this doubt propose To be resolv'd in; Whether sense to prise For umpire to Create it Paradise: One led by th'Ear of Philomel tels tales, And straightway cals't the land of Nightingales; An Other sharper sighted, ravish'd, cryes, O that I could be turn'd now all to eyes! A Third receiv'd such raptures from the tast Of various dainty fruits, that it surpast; A Fourth was caught (not with perfume) commends The Indian Clime, but what here Nature lends; Last, if you would Sattins or Velvets touch, For soft and smooth, Leaves can afford you such. And thus dispos'd, whilst every Sense admires, 'Tis sensless t'plant 'mongst Roses, Thistles, Briars. Naumachia. In Pugnam Navalem inter Hispanos & Batavos, die Octobris, Anno 1639. Commissam in freto vulgò Le manche; ubi victoria His, tulna quàm foelicissimè Illis accidit. Castiliana suos ardentes linquere Portus Iusta est Neptuno & frigidiore frui: Occurrit Liquidis Teutonica classis ab Oris, Vt Ligno huic Ignes supped'tare queat.
Sole exusta suo solvit de littore Puppis, Frangitur & Tepidis Artibus inter aquas. Bella gerunt Homines, nec non Elementa vicissim, Contendunt vires notificare suas. Ignea sublimes vis occupat, Altera mergit Tumosa AErios Ambitionis habet: Sola manet nostras Terrestria tuta salutes Conditio: maneat sic stabilita Diu.Ab Aqua & Igne libera∣vit nos Do∣mus. Ad Amicum super quatuor Anni Tempora & quatuor AEtates hominum Comparative. BRumalis secli inconstantia, Te reddat Moestum ab Infantia, Ver praebeat Flores vanitatis Ideo juventutis, satis Viribus Virilis aetas, In AEstate cum nil metas AEstuet vano: dum senescis Para fructum, adest messis. AEstivum, Hyemale, vernum, Ceres ducunt in aeternum. My happy Life, to a Friend. Dearest in Friendship, if you'll know Where I my self, and how bestow, Especially when as I range, Guided by Nature, to love change: Beleeve, it is not to advance Or add to my inheritance;
Seeking t'engross by Power (amiss) What any other Man calls his: But full contented with my owne, I let all other things alone; Which better to enjoy 'thout strife, I settle to a Countrey life; And in a sweet retirement there, Cherish all Hopes, but banish fear, Offending none; so for defence Arm'd Capapee with Innocence; I doe dispose of my time thus, To make it more propitious. First, my God serv'd; I doe commend The rest to some choice Book or Friend, Wherein I may such Treasure finde T'inrich my nobler part, the Minde. And that my Body Health comprise, Use too some moderate Exercise; Whether invited to the field, To see what Pastime that can yield, With horse, or hound, or hawk, or t' bee More taken with a well-grown Tree; Under whose Shades I may reherse The holy Layes of Sacred Verse; Whilst in the Branches pearched higher, The wing'd Crew sit as in a quier: This seems to me a better noise Than Organs, or the dear-bought voice From Pleaders breath in Court and Hall At any time is stockt withall: For here one may (if marking well) Observe the Plaintive Philomel
Bemoan her sorrows; and the Thrush Plead safety through Defendant Bush: The Popingay in various die Performes the Sergeant; and the Pie Chatters, as if she would revive The Old Levite prerogative, And bring new Rotchets in again; Till Crowes and Jackdaws in disdain Of her Pide-feathers, chase her thence, To yeeld to their preheminence: For you must know't observ'd of late, That Reformation in the State, Begets no less by imitation, Amidst this chirping feather'd Nation; Cuckoes Ingrate, and Woodcocks some Here are, which cause they't seasons come, May be compar'd to such as stand At Terms, and their returns command; And lest Authority take cold, Here's th'Ivyes guest of wonder, th' Owl, Rufft like a Judge, and with a Beak, As it would give the charge and speak: Then 'tis the Goose and Buzzards art Alone, t'perform the Clients part; For neither Dove nor Pigeon shall, Whilst they are both exempt from gall. The Augur, Hern, and soaring Kite, Kalendar weather in their flight; As doe the Cleanlier Ducks, when they Dive voluntary, wash, prune, play; With the fair Cygnet, whose delight Is to out-vie the snow in white.
And therefore alwayes seeks to hide Her feet, lest they allay her pride. The Moor-hen, Dobchick, Water rail, With little Washdish or Wagtail; The Finch, the Sparrow, Jenny Wren, With Robin that's so kinde to men; The Whitetail, and Tom Tit obey Their seasons, bill and tread, then lay; The Lyrick Lark doth early rise, And mounting, payes her sacrifice; Whilst from some hedg, or close of furrs, The Partridge calls its Mate, and churrs; And that the Countrey seem more pleasant, Each heath hath Powt, and wood yeelds Phesant; Iunoes delight with Cock and Hens Turkies, are my Domestick friends: Nor doe I bird of Prey inlist, But what I carry on my Fist: Now not to want a Court, a King- Fisher is here with Purple wing, Who brings me to the spring-head, where Crystall is Lymbeckt all the yeere, And every Drop distils, implies An Ocean of Felicities; Whilst calculating, it spins on, And turns the Pebles one by one, Administring to eye and eare New Stars, and musick like the Sphere; When every Purle Calcin'd doth run, And represent such from the Sun: Devouring Pike here hath no place, Nor is it stor'd with Roach or Dace;
The Chub or Cheven not appeare, Nor Millers Thumbs, nor Gudgeons here, But nobler Trowts, beset with stones Of Rubie and of Diamonds, Bear greatest sway; yet some intrench, As sharp-finn'd Pearch, and healing Tench; The stream's too pure for Carp to lie, Subject to perspicuitie, For it must here be understood, There are no beds of sand and Mud, But such a Gravell as might pose The best of Scholars to disclose, And books and learning all confute, Being clad in water Tissue sute. These cool delights help'd with the air Fann'd from the Branches of the fair Old Beech or Oak, enchantments tie To every senses facultie; And master all those powers should give The will any prerogative: Yet when the scorching Noon-dayes heat, Incommodates the Lowing Neat, Or Bleating flock, hither each one Hasts to be my Companion. And when the Western Skie with red- Roses bestrews the Day-stars bed: The wholsome Maid comes out to Milk In russet-coats, but skin like silk; Which though the Sun and Air dies brown, Will yeeld to none of all the Town For softness, and her breaths sweet smell, Doth all the new-milcht Kie excell;
She knows no rotten teeth, nor hair Bought, or Complexion t'make her fair; But is her own fair wind and dress, Not envying Cities happiness: Yet as she would extend some pitty To the drain'd Neat she frames a ditty, Which doth inchant the beast, untill It patiently lets her Paile fill; This doth the babbling Eccho catch, And so at length to me't doth reach: Straight roused up, I verdict pass, Concluding from this bonny Lass, And the Birds strains, 'tis hard to say Which taught Notes first, or she, or they: Thus ravish'd, as the night draws on Its sable Curtain, in I'm gon To my poor Cell; which 'cause 'tis mine, I judge it doth all else out-shine, Hung with content and weather-proof, Though neither Pavement nor roof Borrow from Marble-quarr below, Or from those Hills where Cedars grow. There I embrace and kiss my Spouse, Who like the Vesta to the house, A Sullibub prepares to show By care and love what I must owe. Then calling in the Spawn and frie, Who whilst they live ne'r let us die; But every face is hers or mine, Though minted yet in lesser Coin, She takes an Apple, I a Plumbe, Encouragements for all and some:
Till in return they crown the herth With innocent and harmless merth, Which sends us Joyfull to our rest, More than a thousand others blest. De Imperatorum Julianorum lineae ultimo Et Sulpitii sive Electorum primo. VT Cadat infoelix nec sicca morte Tyrannus, Vindictam Patriae Vindicis Arma dabant: Nempe Neronis erat Fatum dum terruit urbem, Tandem terrifico succubuisse Iugo. Sic Calvum Galbam appellant, sceptroque recepto, Temnunt Calvitiem Plebs opinata suam. Quid tu Caesareo gauderes nomine Sergi? Cum non Caesaries ulla relicta tibi. Imperium si fortè velit supplere relictum, Debuit & Capiti Comperiisse Comas. English'd thus: That the unhappy Nero might be said To fall most like a Tyrant, not in bed. Vindex in France rais'd Armes, and sought thereby To vindicate the wrongs of Italy: The Fates were just to Him, so frighted Rome, Making at last fear Master of his doom: So Bald-pate Galba to the Throne did rise, Whom straight the Common-people 'gan despise, Crying, Why shouldst thou Caesars name put on, When all the hair grew on thy head was gon? If He the Empires Barque anew would rigg, He should have brought with him a Periwigg.
In quendam Fictilem infirmi Corporis. INfirmum & fragile est Corpus tibi (Fictile) verum Mens tua sub curvo corpore recta latet. Placet in Vulnus, Maxima cervix. FLagranti stomacho Turdus vorat undigue Zuras, Dum ferit arte gelu frigidiore Diem: Sic modo Pinguescens capitur, citiúsque paratis, Aucipis ingeniis praeda petenda jacet. Saepiùs hoc discat Ditescens atque Gulosus, Sic moderare dapes ut sibi lucra fiant. Prospera nam subito mutentur tempora lapsu, Et latet in pulchro gramine Mortis acus. Vpon a Iourney of His Majesty's into Scotland, and His safe Return. THe Planets whilst they move in severall Spheres, Cut out our time in weeks, in months, in yeeres; In Night and Day; whose revolutions bring The day, night, week, month, yeer into a Ring. What doe our Princes less, when they goe forth A Progress West or East, or South or North? Is not the first step that they forward set, The Suns, when He his Golden locks doth wet In Thetis lap, to all that stay behinde? Is not the world Eclips'd to them, and blinde?
Doe not all Minutes stretch, and seem to grow Each to an hour, to such as think them so? Doe not our crost, yet longing hopes, present Each hour a month or year in banishment? They doe: and 'twas not long since we were they Who stood as Exil'd from our Star of Day; Whilst visiting Those parts whence He did rise, He cast a Generall splendor o'r those Skies, Leaving us onely Cynthia and her Train, To gives us hopes He would return again: And so he doth enrich again our Sky, Bringing those hopes unto maturity, Our Clime with Tropick's changed, and the same Season of day, now lengh of night doth claim: Those onely who by Elevation Before enjoy'd a lucid Horizon, Once yearly now with more perfection shine A whole month, Phoebus, suffering no decline: Did I but call't a month? They deem'd it less, If they could apprehend their happiness; And we I'm sure had reason t'think it more, Than many Ages counted ore and ore. For as the Suns withdrawing leaves one world, Into a Winters Tyrannie t'be hurld, Whilst it doth bless an Other; so 'twas thus In Scotland, Iune; but February with us Till his return; which chang'd the Season quite, Then ours with Corn, with Snow their hils were white; The night that was resignes, and day's begun With us already by our Gracious Sun. Let Them pass Envie-free who boast them may In the possession of this Month or Day; For time wrapt up in swiftness doth appear When past, as if an Age were but a year;
A year a month, a month a week, and That An houre or minute, whilst we consolate Our selves may in this bliss; that future time Seems alwayes slower-winged in its Clime: Their Jubile was short and quickly gone, Ours under CHARLES is a Perpetuall one. In quendam nomine Stone-house. SAxea Pulchra Domus frons est sed nulla fidenda, Nam si Ipsam introeas, invenies vacuam. To N. B. an Angler. THou that dost cast into the Silver brook Thy worm-fed Hook, The greedier Fishes so to cheat Seeking for meat, Remember that Times wheel will bring Thy deeds to censuring; And then as thou through wile Those Creatures didst beguile, So caught thou'lt be for thy deceit, And made the food for thine own bait. Let this suffice to cause thee t'steer aright, Both day and night; That skilfully avoyding this, That Shelf thou miss; For 'tis not all for to repent Thy youthfull Dayes misspent, But care must now be had, The future be not bad. And as thine Audit waxeth near, So Thy accounts make perfecter.
In Quendam Glareosam. QUisquis Te docuit Praeceptor, fecit & Idem Littora Qui & sterilem bobus aravit Humum. Amoris Sigillum. C-orpore Cor latitans nondum est manifeste notatum, O-re, neque ingenio semper inesse queat: N-empè quod eximium est pretióque notabile cernunt, D-ifficiles aditus Cordit & alter opus. I-nnocuos quae corda viros, faciáneve Fideles, A-ssimilent animis Pectus & Ora suis. English'd: Mans heart Lockt up within his secret brest, Cannot by tongue or Gesture be exprest; For what's of so great worth, we must suppose, It is a work of power to disclose: Such hearts as make Men faithfull and upright, Are those at once both Looks and Mindes unite.
Genii Hujus Laris & Penatum salutatio; Ad Rivulum Stanliacum nuper in stagnum hoc Mervordianum Ductum. O Dulce Flumen Vitreum, Fundens Crystallum Liquidum In Mare Hoc Domesticum, In verum Nectar Piscium: Mulces & Allicis dum curris Somnos, Musicis susurris: Nec evigilat Cadentis Aqua vestra ut Torrentis. Liceat Rhodano Loquaci Strepitus, quoniam fugaci: Domum Hanc Circundatam, Munis & veddis Insulam; Sicut Orbem dat Rotundum Thetis, Tu cingis hunc Mundum. Afferat Hortorum Decus Priapus, Pan donet Pecus: Tu silvane mittas flores, Cypria Hic conflet Amores, Dearum seu Deorum Chorus, Totus fiat Munificus, Ut pro splendore laude Digno Undecimo addaris signo: Tunc Omni Numine propitio, Frui detur sacrificio.
Virtus vera Nobilitas. WHat doth He get who ere prefers The Scutchions of His Ancesters? This Chimney-peice of Gold or Brass, That Coat of Armes Blazon'd in glass; When those with time and age have end, Thy Prowess must thy self commend. The smooty shadows of some one Or Others Trophees carv'd in stone, Defac'd, are things to whet, not try Thine own Heroicism by. For cast how much thy Merits score Falls short of those went thee before; By so much art thou in arrear, And stain'st Gentility I fear. True Nobleness doth those alone engage, Who can add Vertues to their Parentage. Vpon a Roe. TRamite nil metuat recto Qui incedere vellet Capreolus, casus devia Rupis habent. Vpon a Cock. IAm mea Nocturnos Pellat vigilantia somnos, Nuntius Aurorae dummodo Gallus adest.
Vpon King CHARLES return out of Scotland in November, 1641. DOth CHARLES return to make our Climate shine, And shall not every Spring run Claret-wine? Is not the Kalendar reverst, and where Decembers dirt, and th'Frost of Ianivere, Threatn'd a winter, now those sheets display Themselves ore fruitfull Iune, or teeming May: For thus as 'thin the Tropicks may we boast, That two fair Seasons have twice blest our Coast Ere one whole year ran round: The time He went Seeming the Springs forerunner, or our Lent; For so He was but borrowed, and we rest Pleas'd with's return alone, who's interest Sufficient of Himself, in which bank lies The Treasure of His subjects hearts and eyes: See how they Flock else, and with tumbling hast Are less content because so soon He past. Be satisfi'd, ye have your Prince again, Fro'th' North, and CHARLES triumphant, not in Wain. In quendam nomine Squier, haud Generosum. ARmiger es neque Arma geris, non Martis at Artis, Indutus Galea es Ingenioque vales.
Vpon the King and Queens meeting after long absence. THe welcome showers of Aprils morning dew Distill'd upon the Bosom of the Earth Beget a May; whose Liverie anew Cloaths Fields and Woods, and there creates such mirth Amidst the winged Quier; that Eccho tells It ore again from Natures Minstrells. The Spicie Gumms that so perfume the East, To bid the Sun good-morrow; are not more Esteem'd for that, than is the golden West, But that of Treasures Both have hidden store, Is manifest: no perils can deter The forward hopes of the Adventurer. No world, no season, spring, summer, nor fall In Fruits, in Flowers, Treasures could e're present Such sweet and wealthy Joyes Harmoniall From Countrey, or from Element: As when our Gracious King and his bright Queen, Did after Twelve months parted interveen. In Sim. & Lev. Pot. & Top. NAtura His par est, Vitio nam non caret Alter, Et virtute Carens Alter, uterque Opibus.
Cordium Concordia vera. It is not meant, that three in one should be, But in each heart triple Capacitie, Wherewith to serve ones God, ones King, ones Friend, To which assign'd, and for no other end; In Flaming Zeal upwards to mount again, In Loyalty to own a Soveraign, In mutuall Love society t'maintain. To N. B. for his Company. FRiend, Can I be at home, and you the same, Yet neither meet? The Curteous Flame the Flame, And Streams each other greet, Although it seem from either Pole they came, Or farthest stretch'd Meridian fetch'd.
Surely it is but some malignant Starr That would debarr This influence, for fear We should more bright appear: Souls in Conjunction frame the perfect'st Sphere, So I to you must move, or you move here. Ad Amicum, de Vita Beata. ME qualem capiat Iudice Formulam, Vita Commodius Tempora solvere: Nec tantum tenui pareat Ilici, Quem frangant Aquilones, neque vertici Pinus stelliferae fidat ut arduo: Imis non Careant Coelica Culmina, Dormitque Occiduis Lucifer Alpibus. Non est ut nihilo Laudéve Parvulo Speret maxima; nam semper honoribus Tantis praefigitur Lubrica Scalula; quae Ergo, nec cupiat Ditior ut siet Ponti Teutonici Littore: Fertiléque Agro vivere Fagis celeberrimo Nondum nunc Placeat: Vinea Ripula Secretis liceat sit nota passubus Mentem nec laceret, Pondera talibus Incumbunt Gravia: est Montis Acutuli Ditantem-Locum ut in subsidium petat. Alis Si-Lineis pervolet aequora Quisquam, Naufragium vix fuget ultimum: Et si in Remiget Omnibus Amnibus.
Portus non Aditum hic invenit Ullibi; Nam Quot in Tonitru Hesperies Vomit, Dotes provideant Indica viscera; Dum Marsupia fert Alter Apostolus Simonis Filio nec fit Iniquior: Captis vae nisi sit cautus Agellulus, Cum Parvo sonitu subrepit Inscia Frigilla, & Nemorum jurgia suscitet, Subrisum moveat Pullus Hirundinis, Necnon & Monachi cui Domus arbore. Exit ter nobilis cedere Conjugis, Voto qui voluit sit licet improbum, In Vanumque habeat quidquid & impedit, Mentem quin sibi jam comparet integram Vivat nam facili, cumque parabili Re; nec Carleolis invidet Artibus. Sed Coco vacuus praeparet Allia, Gustum sic patina in contrahat optimum: Nec desint Oleo Crurula Pulluli, Reprensa ex Pridianóque superstite, Adsit Bos Aridus, Lingulaque Hinnuli Suis Buccina, Ientacula optime Condit Rancida tunc Artocrea addita Baccae Cervisia est in pretio, afferat Promus Poculáque Alcimedontica: Sectari Leporem Climate Limpido, Dum suadet Catulis hora sagacibus, Cedant Temporibus dumque Caniculis Brumae sydera jam quaeritet anxiè: Damorum Domus, in Queis tremebundula Terret Hospites & Silva Populeis. Si quando libeat Limine proprio Versari Officiis, non Saliaribus
Iactet Foemineis; Sed ut Equestribus Se exornet studiis, Ferra Ferocibus Dans Pullis; Sonipes Lorea despuat: Nunc volvens pedibus queis viduaverat Vulturnus Nemora, & nunc Folia, abditis In Musaeolis & vertere Dactylo, Sic fitque ut valido Corpore gaudeat Solutus Medico Hic, atque Animo simul. In praise of Fidelia. GEt thee a Ship well rigg'd and tight, With Ordnance store, and Man'd for fight, Snug in Her Timbers Mould for th'Seas, Yet large in Hould for Merchandies; Spread forth her Cloth, and Anchors waigh, And let Her on the Curld-waves play, Till Fortune-tow'd, she chance to meet Th'Hesperian home-bound Western Fleet; Then let Her board-um, and for Price Take Gold-ore, Sugar-canes, and Spice. Yet when all these Sh'hath brought a shore, In my Fidelia I'll finde more. Two Turtles billing, and death with his Sithe over them, ready to make separation; To whom this Divide & Impera. NAture hath ore Affection so much won, To knit a knot never to be undon Whilst life remains; but Death to shew his power Cuts and Divides, so becomes Emperour: Yet the Relict for to prevent Fates charmes, Doth voluntary fleck into Deaths armes.
To Sir John VVentworth, upon his Curiosities and Courteous entertainment at Summerly in LOVINGLAND. WHen thou the choice of Natures wealth hast skan'd, And brought it to compare with Lovingland; Know, that thou maist as well make wonder less, By fancying of two Timbering Phoenixes At the same time: and dream two Suns to rise At once, to cast fire 'midst those Spiceris: (Pregnant She is) yet that must not deny The purest Gold to come from Barbary, Diamonds and Pearl from th'Indies, to confer On every Clime some thing peculier, (For so She hath:) And like a sum to all That Curious is, seems here most liberall, Affording in Epitome at least, What ere the world can boast of, or call best. Now as contracted vertue doth excell In power and force, This seems a Miracle; Wherein all Travailers may truly say, They never saw so much in little way: And thence conclude their folly, that did steer To seek for that abroad, at home was neer In more perfection: Wouldst thou Phoebe meet, Apollo, or the Muses? not in Creet And Greece, but Here, at Summerly, those are Remov'd to dwell, under a Patrons care, Who can as much Civility express, As Candie lies, or Grecia Barbarousness: Wouldst thou be sheltred under Daphnes groves, Or choose to live in Tempe, or make loves
To any place where Shepherds 'wont to lie Upon the Hills, Piping security Unto their flocks? here the sweet Park contains More eevenness than the Arcadian Plains: Nor yet enchanted by those shadowed rings, Some say the Fairies print with Revellings, But's all in one dye clad, and doth appear Like the Springs Favourite throughout the year. The usefull Ash, and sturdy Oak are set At distance, and obey; the Brambles met Embracing twine int' Arbours, to conceal And harbour such as stock this Common-weal; Untill their Master please they should delight His, or his Friends desire and appetite: All tales of Satyrs banish'd are from hence, And fabled Goblins that delude the sence; 'Tis reall Venison and abroad, in paste Alike may satisfie both eye and taste. The Nobler Plants, as Firre Deal, and the Pine Weeping out Rozen, bleeding Turpentine; Like the Life-guard, upon the Hall attend At nearer distance; where the Gods descend To keep their Courts, and either Globe's devis'd, To grasp the Elements Epitomis'd. The Sun-beams steady Fire, with the Aire Of the inconstant winds Indiall'd are: So whilst the one, the Houre doth infer, The Other Points a rule for th'Mariner: Earth here's Embroydered into Walks, some strait, Others like Serpents are, or worms to bait Occasions hook till every humor come, And feed here fat as in Elysium.
Nor is there water wanting in this wood, Clear as if running, Calm as if it stood, And so contriv'd by Natures helper Art, There's no appearance from the whole or part, That any sullen Sluce to malice bent Can open, to impair that Element; Nor yet th'Ambition of a Springs ore-flow, Cause it t'exceed, or Limits overthrow. Thus like a gold Chain link'd, or Bracelet strung, From Carkanet Pleasures on Pleasures hung, And such delightfull objects did descry Pursuing of each other, that the ey Astonish'd at such wonder, did crave rest, For fear of Forfeiting its interest In so great bliss, for over-dazled t'grew, And dim of sight made by each object new. So there's a parley granted, and some space To gather strength 'twix This and t'other place, But very short, not half a Mile at most, We landed were again, and made a Coast; Where if all ancient Poets were to write, They'd need no other fountain to indite Story of all kindes with, but dip their pen, Then swear the Muses more then nine, were ten; For here dwelt one whose Magick could infuse A fluency beyond all other Muse, And Court the Soil, with so much Art applide, That all the world seems Barbarous beside. Here Fish and Fowl inhabit with such state, As Lords and Ladies wont when serv'd in Plate, Rich Arras, or the like, Bill, Breed, and swim In all delightfull solace to the brim.
Decoy'd by so much rapture, on we pass Unto a Castle that enchanted was By th'magick spell of Musick; till there set We found a Cod like to Euterpe's net, To catch all Passengers, the Lesbian Lute, O'rcome in harmony became there mute: Whilst as for Table to the Song-books serv'd The Crystall fountain: so have I observ'd, When walking near a stream, the heavens to be Beneath my feet, to ease Astronomie: There tell the Gammuth of the Stars, and crack Of all their motions even with Tychobrack. The Fablers of old, I guess, might finde Some Objects t'help invention, but the minde Was sure Prophetick, for what ever is Describ'd for rare by them, 'twas meant by this. And yet this falls short too, when He to whom The Cost and Care Owes tribute, 's there to sum Up All, with such humanity, and press Of crowded Favours, and heap'd Curtesies, As Friendship were a Jeweller the while, His welcome seem'd the Diamond, Those the foile. Ad Amicum aegrotantem. OMnes Te invisum veniunt AEgrote valebaes, Nec fuerat Comitis spes tibi, solus eraes: Haud te etenim invideo, tanti nam non valet hospes, Quem mihi det morbus, sed bene Solus ero.
Vpon King CHARLES's meeting with the Dukes of YORK and GUOCESTER, and the Lady ELIZABETH, his three children at Maidenhead, the 15 of July, 1647. AFter a drowth, like welcome rain, To Bless the Grass and Flowers again, Lick up those dusty heats destroy Their Brisker hude, Virginity: No less of Comfort and of sweets Proves it now Charles his Children meets; When an intestine Warlike force, Had caus'd so many years divorce. He prays for them; their tender eyes Return'd Him duty sacrifice: Untill each others brest appears Affection all dissolv'd to Tears, Which to the High-mark-point flown on, Stand ready brim'd for passion. But here all Humors that annoy Are banish'd, and give place to Joy; Yet such as doth prevaile oft times, To make a tear no mark of Crimes. All streams come from, and return to the Sea. QUaeris aquas sitiens? nescis quod Flumina Cuncta In Mare se rapiunt, nec satur? ah sitias.
Nox Diem sequitur, & Post Tenebras Lux. NOn sine nocte Dies, Tenebrae nec luce carentes, Sed Comitem sequitur Alteruterque suam. To Prince CHARLES. SO doth the early Plumb, the Pear, the Cherry Commit a Rape, and make nice Females merry, When longing-ripe; as Your return will bless The Brittish Islands with new cheerfulness: Be pleas'd no longer therefore, SIR, to tarry, Lest a whole Gleek of Kingdomes should miscarry; But You that are the Blossom of all hope, Dispell the Mists from off this Horiscope; And in the stead of Jelousie and feares, Let there be harmony throughout Your Spheres. There needs no other Midwifery to these, (As wish'd for truth, and now desired peace) But Your fair Hand to bring the same to pass, And place Your Royall Father where he was. This be Your Noble issue, whilst all those Abortive prove, that so seem'd to oppose; And while they'd bring to birth, and yet want strength, Teach them to know themselves and You at length.
In readventum meum ad Antiquos Lares. TEmpora sic renovant verno sub sidere Terras, Sylva & frondiferis sic reparata Comis, Post tenebras sic grata Dies: sic Fluminis unda Gaudens Oceanum reperiisse suum: Ut Meus Antiquos iterum spectare Penates, Exultans Animus quod liquisse suos. English'd: The Spring thus doth the Earth repair, The Wood thus puts on Leavie hair Of more acceptance, so's a Spark Of Light after it had been dark: The Rivers thus express desire, Hast'ning to finde their proper Sire; As all this My return implies To My Old Houshold Deities. Navis in Tempestate. FOrtuna & ventis agitur Loca certa tenere, Nescia fit Dominis paret ut Illa suis. The Fallacy of hopes or wishes. ALl present good goes less: by Hopes we deem Things Great; as Lights farr distant greater seem.
My Farewell to the Court. GOe (fond Deluder of our senses) finde Some other Objects Henceforth, to make blinde With that thy glittering folly; for no more I will be dazled with thy falser Ore: Nor shall thy Syren-songs enchant, to tast Or smell, or touch those Sorceries thou hast: But I will strive first in my self to be So much mine own, as not to flatter thee; And then my Countreys, for whose welfare still My native thoughts prompt to impress my will, And that draws Action forth, whereby to show To whom, and what, and when, and where I owe: Not as this nod, or beck, or wink, or glance Would dictate and imply, to follow chance, Fortune, or Favours ever-turning wheel; But to be firm and Constant, back'd with steel And resolution for to give the True God what is his, and Caesar Tribute due, And that in season too for time and place, As th'one requires, and th'other affords grace: Not such as onely from vain Titles springs, And turns to bubble, to court Prince or Kings With feign'd applauses of whate're they speak Or doe, be't ne're so frothy, fond, or weak; But what is clad in truth, and dares not lie, Though all the world should turn its Enemie, Brand it for want of breeding, and conclude Because it not dissembles, therefore t's rude. Those dancing dayes are done, nor longer sute My disposition to the Harp or Lute,
Horn-pipe, or other Instruments have been The Common-wealths disease, ore-swoln its spleen. Iockie and Iinnie footing may appear Most trim at the next Wake in Darby-shire; Gotyer sail from the Clouds to catch our ears, And represent the harmony o'th' Spheres; Will. Lause excell the dying swan: Lancer Nick it with Ravishments from touch of Lyre, Yet uncontroul'd by These, I safely may Survive; sithence not stung by th' Tarantula, (That tickling beast, Ambition, that makes sport In our hot Climate, call'd the verge of Court) And so resolve, dressing my mindes content, Henceforward to be calm, and represent Nothing but what my Birth and Calling draw My life out for, my God, my King, my Law. And when for these my wearied breath is spent, Let with my last bloods drop one sigh be sent. How to ride out a Storm. HE onely happy is, and wise, Can Cun his Barque when Tempests rise, Know how to lay the Helm and steer, Lie on a Tack Port and Laveer, Sometimes to weather, then to Lee, As waves give way, and winds agree; Nor Boom at all in such a stress, But by degrees Loom Les and Les; Ride out a Storm with no more loss Than the endurance of a Toss: For though he cannot well bear saile In such a fresh and powerfull Gale,
Yet when there is no other shift, Thinks't not amiss to ride a drift; To shut down Ports, and Tyers to Hale in, To Seal the hatch up with Tarpalin; To Ply the Pump, and no means slack, May clear Her Bilge, and keep from wrack; To take in Cloth, and in a word, Unlade, and cut the Mast by bord: So Spoon before the Wind and Seas, Where though she'll Roule, she'll goe at ease; And not so strain'd, as if laid under The wave that Threatens sudden founder; And whilst the fury and the rage, Leaves little hopes for Anchorage; Yet if She can but make a Coast In any time, She'll not be lost, But in affections Bay will finde A Harbour suited to her minde: Where Casting out at first the Kedg, Which gives Her ground, and priviledg Of stop, she secondly lets fall That Anchor from the Stream men call; The Others all a Cock-bell set, One after other down are let Into the Sea; till at the last She's come to Moorage, and there fast, In hopes to be new Shethd 's inclin'd To lie aside untill Carin'd; That when She shall be paid again, So Grav'd, She may endure the Main. Thus when his Vessell hath out-gon This and that rugged motion,
His Pole-starr's fix'd, and guides him there Where CHARLES is not in wain but sphere; Then He'll another Voyage try, Laden with Faith and Loyalty, Which He no sooner parts with, than Dry-ground becomes an Ocean. In Incursionem Gustavicam, vel introitum in Germaniam. QVemBohemiae rex seu Palatinus. Domus Austriaca ab Patriis secluserat Oris, HuncRex suetiae. Gustave suum adjam remeare facis: Nempè Palatinum Coelesti numine tutum Fecit, & est Populi Dux Deus Ipse sui: Vidit, & attonitas aperit FranconiaPro omni in Palatinatus Ci∣vitate. portas, Be Opnam.Hispanos refugos, Wirtsburg.Caesareósque ferunt. Magdeburg.Dura per immites salierunt moenia flammas, Saevitiam pingens MilitisGods acre praelium Lipsie Arva jacet. The Blve flum German.Albis clara suis lymphis mutata, colore Et quasi Rubescens sanguinolenta fluit. Vnde fit? aut quorsum mutatio tanta? requiris Palatioum in Prague.Cur fugis á Portis Walstane dire tuis? QuaeImperator in fugm paratus ut fama. fugiendi animum Fernande occasio reddit, Quis Tibl dat vulnus? quis metus oratenet? Tillius in Mo∣nasterium subre∣ptus ut lama sed mendax.Quid latitas Claustris tanta foeliciter annis Castra regens? vivens cur Monumenta petis? Vltor adest Dominus, Gentem victamque reponit Victricem; Populum restituitque suum, Saxoniae duae qui se neutralem huc usque reser∣vasset.Saxioniásque vires tandem laxavit in usum, Et Suecus Hoc ita di∣ctum à multien∣dine militum.lango Hoc vero à puritate causea ad-suscipiendum hoc Bellam maxime movan∣tis,  ut Aquilae juen à Principi∣bus Populoque Germanico tollatur & ut eis pristiae restaurentur Libertates: Almania quasi Tora de quae Hyocia sylva cincta Sibi subdie.flumine cuncta tulit.
Roses & Lys unys. QUid Ganymedaeas formas canis & Irvis Ignes, Reddit enim Caecos Ipse Cupido Deos: Quidve Helenam numeras? nempe est perfectio Formae Unica, cum fuerint Lilia nupta Rosis. Mart. l. 7. Ep. 38.Vpon Celius. WHilst Celius can no longer hear The Newes-transporting BabbIer; Nor yet endure a Morning spent In entertaining Complement From This or That Great person: He Feigneth a Gouty Infirmitie; And better falshood to difguise, His founder feet with swathes he ties, And seems to goe in pain as far, As art can prove a Crippeler: Till She to Nature turns at last, And so in earnest Celius's fast. Mart. l. 10. Ep. 47.A happy Life. THat which Creates a happy life, Is substance left, not gain'd by strife, A fertile and a Thankfull mold, A Chimney alwayes free from Cold; Never to be the Client, nor But seldome times the Counsellor.
A Minde content with what is fit, Whose strength doth most consist in Wit; A Body nothing prone to be. Sick, a Prudent Simplicitie, Such Friends as of ones own rank are; Homely fare, not sought from farre; The table without Arts help spread; A night in Wine not buried, Yet drowning Cares; a Bed that's blest With true Joy, Chastity, and rest; Such short sweet Slumber as may give Less time to die in't, more to live: Thine own Estate whate're commend, And wish not for, nor fear thine end. In Magis. Vilet. ANni Haec prima Dies Veris sic prima videtur, Quâ simul & Violam vidimus & Glaciem; To Quintianus.Mart. l. 5. Ep. 18. THat in December when gifts fly From this to that Friend mutually, I nought but Books send, thou'lt Judg thus, Perhaps I'm Avaricious; No, know I hate those fond deceits, And Crafts in gifts are like to baits On hooks, whereon a Fly doth cheat The greedier Fish when it would eat. And whilst a Poor man sendeth not at all Unto's rich friends, He seems more Liberall.
In quendam Militem panem in dorsum portantem. VEntrem ut Hic oneret, non tergam oneraere recusat, Ventrem Onerat tergam quae exonerare suam. Ad Scoto-Britannum cui Carolus noster se subtraxit. QUod fugit ad Scotos Rex, quid mirabile Scotus, Mutuo nempè Anglis dum datur ille suis Redditus est igitur: sic cum modo debita solvant Cuncti iterum, Regem fac revenire Tuum. English'd: What wonder is't, the King to'th Scots is fled, When by the English He was Borrowed, So now's restor'd: that all their debts pay thus, I'd wish our Brethren send Him back to us. Naturae defectus. SI Peccare grave est placidum simul, integra non est Natura,Pastor Fido. exitium quae cupit Ipsa suum: Lex vel dura nimis, quâ cum atara videtur Offensa, & Vinctis se opposuisse suis.
In Mortem sui Thesei, J. D. sororem ducturi, Anno 1623. NOmine si hoc unquam mors (Invidiosa) meretur, Tempora sint Lachrymis digna vel ulla meis, Ecce adsunt: Hymen ipse Tedas cum ascendere inssit. Accenditque suam Mors gemibunda facem. Inque Elegos vertit Nuptialia Carmina, risus In Gemitus; vestes nunc Color unus habet: Amaracîque fugat flores invisa Cupressus; Atque suis Ramis Tempora Cincta tenet. Dúmque Mea jam partens animae rapit, altera resto Mancus, & ingrata est quae mihi vita manet. In Obitum Nobilissimi Principis Mauritii Hassiae, Landgravii, Anno 1633. GUstavum doleant Alii, doleánt vesecessi Heu Frederice tuum; nec Careant Lachrymis, Fontibus ex biis gemini maenâre dolores, Nam duplex Cordi Causae gementis erat: Nunc ni Triformi huic maneat pars altena telis, Impercussa suis Mors inopina redit Tertius & Princeps semper deflendus ab omni, Parte perit Patriae Lausque decusque suae: Virtutes Alii quibus est facundia narrent, Suppressa Haec tanto pondere Musa filet.
An Epitaph on E. W. NAture lent time, so He grew old And prodigall at once in this, Setting it all at stake 'gainst gold, Whereof He made his greatest bliss: But when She saw He took of All Men interest, yet paid Her none, She Calls for in the Principall, And layes it up under this Stone, Defessus est ambolando. On a Player. THou that so oft in jest was wont to die, Art now tane at thy word, and here dost lie: Thine Acts had many Scenes, Death's had but one, His Entry was thine Exit, bad be gone; Thou act'st a King no more, no that's laid by, Nor any's Parasite in flattery; Thou hast put off the Clowns slops now, nor art. Wrapt with the fury of a Lovers part; But suit'st thy self in one, wherein all must Thy fellow-Actors be, to sleep in Dust.
In Obitum Ben. Johns. Poetae eximii. HE who began from Brick and Lime The Muses Hill to climbe; And whilom busied in laying Ston, Thirsted to drink of Helicon; Changing His Trowell for a Pen, Wrote straight the Temper not of Dirt but Men, Now sithence that He is turn'd to Clay, and gon, Let Those remain of th' occupation He honor'd once, square Him a Tomb may say His Craft exceeded farr a Dawbers way. Then write upon't, He could no longer tarry, But was return'd again unto the Quarry. Of an Old Man. HAppy is He who on his own fields stage, And no where else, hath acted ore his Age; He, whom his own house, (had it eyes and tongue) Might say it fees Him old, and saw him young, Now trusting to a staff, he treads those sands He formerly had crept on with his hands: So reckons up the long descent and (dotage Through decays) of that his homely Cottage, He ne'r was drawn with fortunes Train to haste, Nor did He flatter Forain springs with taste; He was no Merchant-man might fear the Straits, Nor Souldier fancying Military baits,
He never Pleaded, neither strife nor force, Of brabling Law-suits ever made him hoarse: But (as uncapable of business) free, Cannot resolve what the next town should be, Yet doth enjoy a prospect (may controule All others) of the free Aire, and Pole. Nor casts He up the year by Consuls now, But as the Fruit-trees to their seasons bow; By Apples Autumn, Spring by Flowers befalls him, One field hides Phoebus-face, the same recalls him: And thus This Countrey-swains observing way Measures within his Ozh at the Course of Day. He did remember yongre at Oat, when 't stood But for a sapling, so's grown old with's wood: And judging that same Ile (with less wits blest. More Barbarism) to be th' Indies East: He doth conclude the Red-sea to be neer, Beholding Stanground, Farcet, and the Meer: And yet through strength unconquer'd he may gather Comfort, the third Age sees him Grandfather. Let others wander to the farth'st of Spain, The way is onely Theirs, but life His gain. De Tristibus. To a Cat bore me company in Confinement. ASsociate to my Tears, whose nature tride Makes thee a fit Companion for my side, Who Captive sit under Confinements wing For Being too active to act suffering,
So become Passive too: Scratch but thine ear, Then boldly tell what weather's drawing near. For I'l conclude, no storm of Fortune can Prevail ore Caesar's barque, an honest Man. Sola Bella clie piace. 'TIs but a folly to be nice, Since liking sets on Beauty price, And what we doe affect alone, Becomes to Each His Paragon: All Colour, Shape, or Form, we know Improve to best to those think so; For where Esteem its Anchor wets, There grows true Pearl, no Counterfets: Were She as Crooked as a Pin, And yet could Love, it were no sin To love again; for Writers tell,Magnes amo∣ris amor. That love hath in't the Loadstons spell: Were She proportion'd like the Sphere, No Limb or Joint Irregular; Yet to my fancy if she Jarr, I shall not sail by such a Starr: Did She out-vie the new-born Day, Or th'richest Treasuries of May, So that what Skies or Flowers put on, Give place to her Complexion, I'l sooner deem a black Wench white, Thats suiting to my Appetite Well, in conclusion, hath She Fair, Or Brown, or Black, or Golden hair Where one is Cupid struck, Venus is there.
To Retiredness. NExt unto GOD, to whom I owe What e're I here enjoy below, I must indebted stand to Thee, Great Patron of my Libertie; For in the Cluster of affaires, Whence there are dealing severall shares: As in a Trick Thou hast conveigh'd Into my hand what can be said; Whilst He who doth himself possess, Makes all things pass him seem farr less. Riches and Honors that appear Rewards to the Adventurer, On Either tide of Court or Seas, Are not attain'd nor held with ease; But as unconstancy bears sway, Quickly will fleet and Ebb away: And oft when Fortune those Confers, She gives them but for Torturers: When with a Minde Ambition-free, These, and much more come home to Me. Here I can sit, and sitting under Some portions of His works of wonder, Whose all are such, observe by reason, Why every Plant obeys its season, How the Sap rises, and the Fall, Wherein They shake off Leafs and all; Then how again They bud and spring, Are laden for an Offering: Which whilst my Contemplation sees, I am taught Thankfulness from trees.
Then turning over Natures leaf, I mark the Glory of the Sheaf, For every Field's a severall page, Disciphering the Golden Age: So that without a Miners pains, Or Indie's reach, here plenty raigns; Which watred from above, implies, That our acknowledgments should rise To Him, that thus creates a birth Of Mercies for us out of Earth: Here, is no other Case in Law, But what the Sun-burnt Hat of Straw, With crooked Sickle reaps and bindes- Up into Sheaves to help the hindes; Whose arguing alon's in this, Which Cop lies well, and which amiss, How the Hock-Cart with all its gear Should be trick'd up, and what good chear, Bacon with Cook's reports express, And how to make the Tenth goe less. There, are no other Warrs, or Strife's— Encouragers, shrill Trumpets, Fyfes, Or horrid Drumms; but what Excels All Musick, Nature's Minstrels Piping and Chirping, as they sit: Embowr'd in branches, dance to it: And if at all Those doe contest, It is in this, but, which sings best: And when they have contended long, I [though unseen] must judg the Song.
Thus out of fears, or noise of Warr, Crowds, and the clamourings at Barr; The Merchant's dread, th'unconstant tides, With all Vexation besides; I hugg my Quiet, and alone Take thee for my Companion, And deem in doing so, I've all I can True Conversation call: For so my Thoughts by this retreat Grow stronger, like contracted heat. Whether on Natures Book I muse, Or else some other writes on't, use To spend the time in, every line, Is not excentrick but Divine: And though all others downward tend, These look to heaven, and ascend From whence they came; where pointed hie, They ravish into Mysterie, Nunquam minus sulus.To see the footsteps here are trod Of mercy by a Gracious God. To my Book. GOe, and my Blessing with Thee; then remain Secure, with such as kindly entertain: If sent to any Others, tell them this, The Author so takes but his Mark amiss: Who's fearless of reproach from Criticks skill, Seing, t'look a given horse ith' mouth sounds ill: And what alone to Friends he would impart, Hath not at all to doe with Fair or Mart. Wherefore whoever shall peruse these Rimes, Must know, they were beguilers of spare times. ΤΕΛΟΣ
IS there a Child born? what great worder's that? When 'tis natures property to Generat; But here's a Sonne too given, which implies All that can be ascrib'd to Mysteries; For He's a Father, Brother, Kinsman, Friend, Both Sacrifice and Priest to recommend That offering up: Samaritan past by Himself, to Act the height of Charity On us lay stript wounded; A Physitian Cures the disease of our indisposition To ought that good is; Shepheard to redresse, And bring us back out of the wildernesse; Where we had gon astray into his fould, A Merchant that Redeems us who were sould To sinne and bondage; and to make all good, Contented was to spare his precious blood So was a Lambe before the Shearers led, To be disroab'd, despis'd, and slaughtered, That we might Live in credit, and put on The whiter Robe of his Salvation: This Atlas-like the Government doth bear Upon His shoulder, and if Counsellour We would esteem Him, we should be content To make his mercies our encouragement: For mighty faults deserve a mighty rod, But He an Everlasting mighty God, The Prince of Peace, full of Compassions store, Holds out the Golden scepter evermore, And that this Birth and Gift to us be knowne, He pleads himself Our cause at's Fathers Throne.
Christus. Totus, Solus, Omnibus. NE tibi defictas fac sie tibi Totus Iesus Nec metuas, Christus sat tibi solus, erit Omnibus & capreus rebus gaudere secundis Conferat in Dominum singuta facta suum. That to your selfe you be not wanting, make Iesus all yours, and Christ alone your stake; For who desires enjoyment of good things Must place upon his Lord what e're hee brings. Tantillus Homo, & Tantus Peccator HOw small a thing is Man, and yet Immence, In acting over Disobedience; From the first sparing time He did begin To hatch Rebellion, and to foster sin: Dispute His Makers mandate, and make choice To yeeld unto the Subtil Serpents voyce: Thus then betray'd, ere since he doth preferr Custome to be New natures Usherer; And so prescribes, Thinking he doth no worse Then his Fore-father who entail'd, the curse, A new Beleefe of credit would put on, That God would signe a new Redemption: As if his Sonne into the world did dain, Once for to come, should come for him again; And so He will; yet not by Ransome led, To purchase that again man forfeited.
By second Error, but as Judge to try (Whilst Conscience verdicts) each enormity: And as mans misdemeanours They expresse, Though Great in Guilt, in Goodnes He'l goe lesse. Ad Amicum. PRandia parva juvant, Parvis, lectus{que} domusa; Nec magnus Puer est, nec focus illetuus Parvis magna solet virtus gandere micatque Oppositis positum grandius ingenium. Before a Sacrament. IS there a Feast to day? must I make one At so great Celebration? And am I yet to seeke how to be drest As to become a worthy Guest? If to some other Table bid I were My Taylor, and my Shoomaker, Sempster, and Barber, all might mustred be To add to my Formality. But this more reall than all else, implies A Banquet fill 'd with mysteries: God's manifested in the Flesh,Tim. 3. 16. and thus The height of mercy shown to us: And if the Rule of charity begins At home, let's call to mind our sins, Befreind our selves so farre as to Confesse, How much He did, and we doe lesse, Be joyfull for so Great a Saviours Power, Yet in Contrition mst a shower, To think how oft whilst lewd affections guide We make our Lord New crucificte,
Then if we would no more of horror dread, We may approach and take this bread And wine, the Comfort and the staffe, whereby Not Life but Lifes Eternity Secured is, and then with Grace possest Shew that we have an interest In his high merits which alone Comprise Iob. 2.14.Power to quell our Enemies. And though our former Actions turn'd to weed, Let's now bring Faith though but a Mustard seen So may we all remove that high appears In our Conceipts, into a sea of Tears; For 'tis His Blood no other Jordan can Cuer the Leperous Assyrian 1 Cor. 1.30.Qui factus fuit nobis a Deo Prov. 9. 10.Sapientia; Vt Timeamus utpote Initium. Cor.1.29.Justitia; Vt nostra nihili pendamus quoniam carnalis. Sanctificatio Redemptio, . Non Recussantes, Cruci viz. Afflictionibus & Tribulationi∣bus pro Illo suecumber, Que astius Gravitatem & Anxi∣etatem pro abbis sustentaverut.
