w1804a 17290965 106339
AN ACCOUNT OF THE ARTICLES Drawn up here in ENGLAND by the East-India-Company AGAINST THE King of SIAM, And remitted to their Servants in India, as a just Ground to make War on that Prince; Together with a full Answer to every Particular; as 'twas prepar'd to have been Address'd to the Honourable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in PARLIA∣MENT Assembled: By Samuel White. And is now most humbly Presented to their Judicious Consideration, by his Brother George White. I Have already given a true Relation of some of the dismal Effects of the War our East-India-Company has made with the King of Siam: And I cannot but suppose that every English-man will account himself so much a Party concern'd in't, to be very inquisitive into the Grounds of this Quarrel, and desirous to know what intolerable Aggressions on the Part of the said King, has provok'd the Company to do violence to that ami∣cable Temper that is genuine to our Nation; and for which, to my know∣ledge, we have formerly been so much belov'd and esteem'd in all Parts of India:
I shall therefore render a faithful Account of this Matter; engaging my self to prove all I affirm by undeniable Evidence, and then leave the Merits of the Cause to the Sentence of all Men in the World that can, and dare, judge im∣partially and honestly, including in that Number those very Members of the East-India Committee, who deserve that laudable Character. And first, I Premise (what I suppose will admit of no Objection) That the favourable Reception, and kind Treatment, which the Merchants of our Na∣tion have always formerly receiv'd in that Countrey, has not been exceeded; if I may not say, equall'd, at any Place within the Limits of the Company's Charter: Nor is it less true, that those Courtesies have not sometimes met with correspon∣dent Returns: For there is an old Story still too new in those Parts, That in the time of this King's Predecessor, the Factors then Resident there, did privately withdraw themselves when they were indebted to the King, so considerable a sum as, ty Thousand pieces of Eight, on which Account the Trade was for many Years discontinu'd, till his present Majesty to take of that Obstruction, and give an obliging Invitation to the renewal of a Friendly Correspondence and Commerce; did in the Year 1660 freely and fully forgive the said Debt, by delivering the cancell'd Obligations to Mr. Richard Bladwell, who being then bound on a Voyage from Suat to Mccasser in the Service of Sir Matthew An∣drews, was by adverse Winds forc'd to take shelter in the chief Port of that King∣dom; Whereby it appears That it has been in the Nature of this Benign Prince, to suptrogate in generous Favours: But our present Business, is to enquire how he has since degenerated, and misbehaved himself, to incur the Company's Dispeasure in so high a degree, as has engaged them to draw their Swords to chastise him: And that this may be fairly try'd, I will lay down the very Ar∣ticles which were exhibited against the King; and examine the Validity and Justice of each of them particularly. Now their Demands were as followeth. The King of Siam is Debitor to the Honourable East-India-Company, for the following Particulars:   l. s. d. FOR Richard Burneby's Debt, from the 30th. of Sept. 1681. as by Siam-Journal H. fol. 5. and Journal I. fol. 13. Cattees 158 04 14. at l. 12 10. each Cattee is 1984 18 05   For five Years and three Months Interest thereon, at 10 per Cent. yearly, In∣terest on Interest, 1157 01 07     3140 00 00 For Thomas Ivat's Debt, from 30 Sept. 1683, as per Siam-Leidger I. fol. 6. Cattees 9. 2. 8, at l. 12. 10. is ster∣ling 0114 01 03   For 3 Years and 3 Months Interest, at 10 per Cent. accounting yearly Interest on Interest, 0000 41 09     0155 02 00
For Goods lost in the Fire, to the value of Cattees 114. 1. 3. as by Journal I. fol. 5, 6. Dated 30th. Decemb. 82. is Sterling. 1793 09 00   For four Years Interest thereon, 0832 04 00     2625 08 00 For Demorage of the Mexico-Merchant from the time of her Arrival there, being the 1st. of Sept. 1683. till her Departure, the 9th. of January 1683/4. is 131 days at l. 5. per diem,   0655 00 00 For imprisoning the Companies Factors and Servants, Peter Crouch, John Thomas, and Abraham Navarro, hindring their Trade by the Ship Delight.   2000 00 00 For the King's Debt, being Cattees 316. 15. 6. and several Debts, in all 332. 00 06. is together Cattees 648,15,12, as by Siam Journal I. fol. 13. Dated the 30th. Sept. 1683. is Sterling 7999 16 10   For 3 Years and 3 Months Interest at 10 per Cent. amount, accounting Inte∣rest on Interest, 1881 07 02     10791 04 00 For the Charge of the Company's Fa∣ctors, and imprisoning of their Persons, beating some with Coffrees, over∣throwing their Voyages, preventing their Access to the King, to make their Complaint, and the insufferable Disho∣nour done to the Company, and to our Nation in general, We demand   5000 00 09   23366 14 09 This is an exact Copy of the Charge drawn up here in England against the King of Siam, and remitted to the Company's Servants at Fort St. George; But I will by no means do the East-India-Company that Dishonour to call it Their Act; tho' this, as many other such unaccountable things, has pass'd under their Name: For as I shall always pay a most Profound Respect to those Noble Lords who have condescended to be of the Committee; But can't be suppos'd to give themselves the trouble of a particular inspection into these Affairs; So I must also do right to some Honest Gentlemen that sit amongst 'em, who I am well assur'd could not be wanting to express their Abhorrence of this Evil thing, if it had come to be regularly examin'd and debated in their Court: And after these Salv's, in behalf of those to whom they are due, I must likewise give another true Character, In declaring that HE or They who were the prime Projectors, or did with deliberate fore-thought, approve, or assent to, this In∣strument of Demand; were not only grosly ignorant of the Affairs of India, but even of the common Notions of Right and Wrong, according to the Sentiments of all the civiliz'd part of Mankind: Or if the failure was not from want of Sence, I am sure it lays the heavier load of Guilt on the Consciences of all are concern'd in't; As a brief Enquiry into the Articles will sufficiently demonstrate.
The first is, for Richard Burneby's Debt, with Interest upon Interest, 3140 l. This Mr. Burneby, is that very Person I did occasionaly mention in the Account of the dismal Tragedy at Mergen, who after he return'd to Siam by leave of the Company's Factors then residing in Batavia. My Lord Phaulkon according to his accustomed kindness to those of our Nation, promoted him to a consider∣able Employ in the King's Service, as he continu'd, till he unhappily lost his Life at Mergen; And it seems he stands charg'd with this great Debt to the Company; which however it happens, unless it can be prov'd that the King did by Word or Deed become bound for it; It may with as much reason be de∣manded of the Great-Cham, as the King of Siam. The next is, Tho. Ivat's Debt, with Interest upon Interest, 155 l. 2 s. Which is an exact Copy of the former: For Mr. Ivat was one of the Company's Factors who came to Siam with Mr. Gosfright, and remain'd there in joynt Commission with Samuel Pots, 'till upon some difference 'twixt them two he left the Company's Service, and was afterwards employ'd by the King of Siam on a message to the Governour and Council of Fort St. George, to request their assistance in procu∣ring some Jewels for his Service: Of which unhappy Affair I shall say more afterwards, having only here to take notice, that Mr. Ivat dyed soon after his Arrival at the Fort on that expedition: But now how the King comes to be justly chargeable with his Debts to the Company, it lies upon the Author of the Articles to give the World some rational satisfaction. But these two are scarce worth wondring at when we come to the third, which is for Goods lost in the Fire and Interest thereon, 2625 l. 8 s. And this indeed is so surprizing a Demand, that I confess I know not how to answer it, because I cannot possibly imagine what should be the meaning of it; for surely 'tis not intended for those Goods were destroy'd when the Factory was burnt? and yet I think it must be so, because I never heard of any other Goods the Company lost there by Fire: Wherefore taking it so at a ven∣ture, I will tell the true Story of that unhappy Thing. Samuel Pots whom I mention'd in the preceding Paragraph, was left by Mr. Gosfright Chief in Commission for the Company's Affairs: And tho' I hear he is since dead, I must not on this occasion decline giving him his due Character, in declaring, that no Man could be more unfit for that Employ than he, who was a publick disgrace to the Nation and a vexatious Trouble to all that were ever concern'd with him, as I will prove by sundry credible Persons now in England, who can ground their Attestations on their own Experience. This Man among his many other Irregularities took into his protection several lewd Mariners who had Rebell'd against their Com∣mander, entertaining them as his Companions in the Factory, which was a House of the King of Siams, part of Brick, and part of Timber, very commodious in all respects, and not contiguous with any other Buildings, but stood in the midst of a large Yard enclos'd with a high Pale of Bamboes. And on the sixth of December 1682, about Ten at Night, there broke out a Fire in a Room made of Boards, that stood in the midst 'twixt the Timber and Brick-Buildings, formerly the Butler's Store-House; But at that time the Rendezvouz of the foresaid Seamen, whose roaring Revels there, were overheard by the Neighbourhood not above half an Hour before this happened: Mr. Potts was at a Friend's House near home when it be∣gan; And no sooner got into the Yard, but instantly Arm'd himself and his Seamen, keeping the Gate fast, under pretence of preventing any ones coming into steal, till such time the Fire had got so much head, 'twas
