W3717 12269535 58186
A SPEECH spoken in the Council-Chamber of the City of OXFORD, the 16th of September, 87. by William Wright, Esq Deputy Recorder of the said City, being the Day on which the Right Honourable James Earl of Abingdon took the Oath, and accepted the Office of Lord High Steward of the City aforesaid. Mr. MAYOR, IT was the Custom of the ancient Romans, the greatest and wisest People that ever liv'd, to dedicate their Cities and Free-towns to the care and protection of some God, to whom they fled in all their Calamities, if they were invironed by their enemies, or threatned with any impendent danger, there they sought and there they expected to find relief. IN conformity to this great example, we of this place, tho' we do not pretend to such a choice, have sought and gain'd too the protect∣ion of one of the greatest men; a person, who for his temperate zeal, for the establish'd reli∣gion, his firm adherence to the Laws of Eng∣land, his steady and unshaken loyalty to the Crown, is deservedly the glory of the present, and will be the wonder as well as the example of all succeeding Generations. WE have seen his unwearied pains in serving the Crown, we have tasted his pious care of us, our Liberties and Franchizes, and have in all respects found him a zealous as∣serter of the public Good; and that which makes him more dear to us now, a Champion for the Rights and Priviledges of this Corpo∣ration. Therefore he that shall search the Re∣cords and look into the former Triumphs and Glory of this City, will at no time find a great∣er occasion of Joy than is now afforded us; for what can he that consults the honour and re∣putation of this City desire greater than to see this noble Lord become our Patron and Pro∣tector, to see him that has always made it his choice now make it his Duty to assist and de∣fend us? MY LORD, OUR unanimous Choice, the joyful Accla∣mations and general Satisfaction which at∣tended your Lordship's Election, do sufficient∣ly evince how much you are the Darling of this City, and your Lordship's constant Inclination to assist us, even when you were under no Ob∣ligation, doth give us all possible Assurance that we shall never fail of your Lordship's Care, Shelter and Protection. In humble Confidence of this, we do repose in your Lordship's Care, a City in some mea∣sure worthy of so noble a Patron, a City com∣pos'd of wise, discreet, and understanding Members, that have been in all Times famous for their Loyalty and Integrity to the Crown, and have therefore, in every King's Reign, since Henry II. been adorned with fresh Grants of Royal Franchizes, as Monuments, and noble Rewards of their couragious, and brave Adherence to their Sovereign. And lastly, a City that has been always honoured with the Protection of the Prime and Flower of the English Nobility, such as amongst many other were Ch. Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, Tho. Lord Cromwell, Francis Earl of Bedford, Robert, Earl of Essex, John Lord Williams, the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Tho. Knollys, the Lord Eleemore, Lord High Chancellor of England, the Lord Knollys, the Earl of Berks, and the late Duke of Buckingham, and we have now obtained the Protection of your Lordship also, as the Crown and Glory of them all. MY LORD, To perform well the Office of Lord High Steward of this City, requires no other mea∣sures, than what you have always practised. It hath been your Lordship's continual Study to do us good, and thereby you have per∣formed that Office, without the least View to your Lordship's Person. Your Lordship is now become as a Guardian Angel to this Place, and have given us a Title to bring our Complaints, and to pray your Assistance in all our Difficulties; and by the Security of so Noble a Patronage, your Lord∣ship has given us an everlasting Establishment, and made us the Envy of all other Corpora∣tions, and thereby, as an humble Acknow∣ledgement of the great Honour your Lordship has done us, I do, in behalf of myself, of this House, and of the whole Body of this City, return your Lordship our humble and hearty Thanks, making this our most earnest Request to Heaven, that your Lordship may flourish in all Honour and Greatness, and that there may never be wanting one of your Lordship's Name and Blood to protect us so long as this Corporation last, which I hope will be to the World's End. Price Two-pence.
