1185 99856034 21548
THE BOY OF BILSON: OR, A TRVE DISCOVERY OF THE LATE NOTORIOVS IM∣POSTVRES OF CERTAINE ROMISH Priests in their pretended Exorcisme, or expulsion of the Diuell out of a young Boy, named WILLIAM PERRY, sonne of THOMAS PERRY of Bilson, in the County of Staf∣ford, Yeoman. Vpon which occasion, hereunto is premitted A briefe Theologicall Discourse, by way of Caution, for the more easie discerning of such Romish spirits; and iudging of their false pretences, both in this and the like Practices. 2. Thes. 2.10, 11. Because they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should be∣leeue a lye. AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for William Barret. 1622.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. BEing acquainted with the mind and pur∣pose of the Author of this ensuing Trea∣tise, and hauing thereunto added those other Pieces (vnto which I am no stran∣ger,) to make the Narration complete, as concerning the Boy of Bilson: I thought it my duty, after much sollicitation, to communicate the whole in print; and so to make it iuris publici. And this (as I thought) these very times did exact. For now the Po∣pish Priests haue so cauterized their consciences, and rub'd their foreheads, as that they take delight, and blush not, daily to forge and coyne most monstrousWitnes (among many others) their fresh Ma∣ster-lye, touch∣ing the supposed Apostasie of the late L. Bi∣shop of Lon∣don. vn∣truths; all to support their drooping and dropping Cause. Since therefore their appetites are so well whetted and set on edge (by whatPerhaps the same that one of them hanged about the Boyes necke. vid. pag. 63. Stone we may easily ghesse, it be∣ing their due reward,) as that they make no bones of whatsoeuer is set before them; to stay their stomacks a while, let them be chewing this bit, (which otherwise they shall not now eschue,) Vt quam falsa dicendo & scrthendo voluptatem ceperint, eandem vera legendo & audiendo amittant. Here then (good Reader) in the first place thou hast a Treatise professedly written for a Discouery of, and a Caution against the enueagling proiects of Romish Priests, chiefly in that one particular, viz. their preten∣ded Priestly Exorcizing and expolling of Diuels out of bodies possessed. By which thou maist iudge, whether these Mirabularies deserue not the reputation of the
varest Mountebanks of these times. Next followes, A faithfull Relation (for so they name it) made by these Priests, touching their proceedings with the Boy: which they did purposely write and disperse,Vide pag. 45. To the end (as they professe) that all indifferent mindes may magnifie and praise Almighty God, that hath left such power to men, &c. such (for sooth) as they had, in Exorcizing and coniuring the Diuell within that Boy, being their supposed desperate Demo∣niack. Which glorious worke of theirs when these Ro∣man Aruspices shall, at their next enteruiew, recog∣nize,cie. Mirabor si non riserint. And that so much the rather, after they haue perused the Remaine of this Booke, in which the Euent and successe of the whole busi∣nesse is truly related; and their formidable Mormo pro∣ued no other then an Apish Cobalus. Whereby it will al∣so come to passe that these Catholike Gentlemen (for so they stile thēselues, albeit by theirSee their de∣scriptions in this Booke. pag. 63.64. &c. outward garbe one would rather suspect thē for Serning-men & attendants on such persons, nè quid grauius) shall be so cleerly con∣uinced of palpable Quacksaluing, as that a very meane Herald, knowing the house they come of, may blazon their Armes; and so expose thē vnto shame and laughter. But I will not intertaine thee (gentle Reader) with any longer parle in the entrance, after that I shall put thee in mind of that sound aduise, which an Heathen Philosopher long since prescribed (but neuer so necessary as now, when Popish impostures are so rife,) viz. Ipicharmus. Which may be thus englished; Bee wise, and bee not hasty to beleeue. which precious Amulet I commend vnto thee, and All of vs to the rich mercy of our most gracious God. Ryc. Baddeley.
THE GENERALL HEADS of this Booke. I. A Discourse, by way of Caution, concerning Popish Exorcizing of vncleane spirits. Pag. 1 II. A Relation made by certaine Romish Priests, and by one of them dispersed; wherein they magnifie the power of their Exorcisme ouer the diuell, in the Boy of Bilson. Pag. 41 III. A description of the admirable guile and cunning of that Boy, in counterfeiting him∣selfe possessed of the diuell. Pag. 55 IV. The meanes and manner vsed by the R. Reue∣rend Father in God THOMAS Lo. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, for discouering his dissimulation. Pag. 56 V. The two examinations of the Boy, taken be∣fore the said Reuerend Father; together with his plaine and direct Confession of the whole Complot and Practice. Pag. 61, 69 VI. The Successe and euent of all, shewed in the Boyes (first) priuate, and (after) publike Ac∣knowledgement made before the whole County, in the Summer-Assizes held at Stafford this present yeere 1621. Pag. 72
Faults escaped in some Copies. Pag. 14. lin. 2. reade, will you so. p. 25. l. 11. r. the third poynt. p. 28. l. 14. r. Adiuration. p. 33. l. 6. r. to prooue. Besides, mend the numbers of the Pages, in the letters E. H. I.
A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING Popish Exorcizing. A Miracle being (as Diuine learning doth teach) a Worke of Omnipotencie, farre excee∣ding all naturall power of any Creature, is the broad Seale of Almightie God, for the con∣firmation of Truth: which whosoeuer shall dare to counterfeit, must needs be guiltie of no lesse then high Treason against the su∣preme Majestie. Necessarily therefore will it con∣cerne, as in speciall those that take vpon them the Office of working Miracles in these times, to feare and tremble at such dangerous impietie; so also in generall euery Christian and religious Soule to be∣ware, that he be not circumvented by any forgerie in this kind, and thereby drawne to admire and e∣steeme, as the finger of God, the lewd and ridiculous iuglings of wretched men. For which end I haue aduentured to set downe certayne Aduertisements, whereby others may bee reasonably directed how to discouer & auoid such kind of Popish delusions.
The first Aduertisement; Against a false Proposition of the Romanists, who make the vse of Miracles to be a perpetuall and ne∣cessarie note of the Catholike Church. THe Proposition much insisted vpon and pres∣sed by Bellarmine, Coster, Valentian, and other Iesuites, is, that the vse of Miracles is a necessarie, per∣petuall, and prositable Character and Note of the true Church of Christ, aswell in these Times as it was in the Dayes of the Apostles. This we are warranted to call a false Proposition. First, because that Gift cannot bee called perpetuall, which ceased by little and little;Chrysost. Aug. insomuch that Saint Chrysostome and Saint Augustine, could say of their owne times (which bordered neare vpon the Dayes of the Pri∣mitiue Church) that diuers kind of Apostolicall Miracles were then ceased. How much lesse there∣fore can this Power bee expected in these latter Times, of which the Romanists owne Bishop (who Rued in the dayes of King Henry the eight, and whom they haue magnified with the Title of a Martyr, that is, a Witnesse of the Truth) did auouch, saying,Ich. Roffens. E∣piscop. cor. Luth. de Capt. Bab. c. 10. The promise of God touching Miracles, God would not haue to be perpetuall in his Church. Secondly, if they were necessarie (especially) for the confirmation of the Doctrines of Faith, as the Romish Priests doe in their Exorcismes professe; then would not S. Gregorie, the first and grea∣test Pope of that name, haue held them necessarie onely for the first begetting, breeding, and nour∣cing
of the Church:Greg. hom. 49. in Euang. Euen as (saith he) the watering of plants is necessary, when they are first planted, which, after they be come to growth, will be of no vse. Which sentence of S. Gregorie, did peraduenture draw the like Assertion from the quill of the Iesuit Del∣rio,Delrio Ics. Disq. Mag. Tem. 2. l. 4. saying (although somewhat mincing it) For the establishing of the Faith, there is now little necessitie of Miracles, or none at all. But more thorrowly their said Bishop, who holdeth them not necessarie, but for the time of the birth and breeding of the Church.Roffens. sup. Whereunto (to forbeare any further search after Witnesses) their Iesuit Acosta accordeth;Acosta Ies. de sa∣lut. Iudor. l. 2. c.  There being a difference (saith he) betweene the primitiue Times and these Dayes wherein we liue, for what need we any confirmation by Miracles? So he. Thirdly, touching the profitablenesse of Miratles in the latter Ages of the World, Saint Chrysostome durst say, that it is more profitable to want them;Chrysost. as hee is alleaged by Acosta. ibid. c. 2. it being a matter of greater worthinesse to beleeue with∣out them. Yea, their owne Preacher, entring into this contemplation, taught publikely,Stella in Lue. 11 that Miracles now would be rather an hindrance vnto Faith. And I cannot beleeue he spake without booke, seeing that our Sauiour Christ (as Saint Augustine obser∣ueth) hath giuen vs a caution,Aug. Tract. 13. in loh. 3. against these Miracle∣mongers,Mar. 13.5. willing vs to take heede that we be not decei∣ued. Whereof their Iesuit will giue vs some reason, euen,Acosta Ies. de temp. nouiss. l. 2. c. 19. Because that in the time of Antichrist it will bee hard to discerne true Miracles from false. Where then shall a Christian cast Anchor in so great dan∣ger of seducement by Antichristian Miracles? the true answere to this will giue vs full satisfaction;
and this wee haue confessed by the mouth of the same Iesuit, as absolutely as any Protestant can professe.Acosla ibid. l. 1. cap. 10. Our strongest hold (saith he) must be the holy Scriptures, which are of more strength than any Miracles: nor can the Seruant of Christ haue a stron∣ger Fort against the power of Antichrist. Which Tenet, concerning the securitie of Christians by Scriptures, was anciently held before the dayes of Antichrist, as we reade in the ancient Authour of the worke, passing vnder the name of S. Chryso∣stome:Hom. 49. in Matth. True Christians (saith hee) were discerned in former times by Miracles, but now by Scriptures. This is the Fort which will defend vs, and therefore we aboue all things ought to defend it. The second Aduertisement; Shewing the false Assumption of the Romanists, in challenging to themselues the power of Miracles, as a perpetuall gift peculiarly belonging to their Ro∣mane Church. ALthough the Iesuit Turselline talketh and boa∣steth of many maruelous Miracles, daily done in Italy,Hist. Domus Lauret. Which (as he saith) are no lesse glorious than those miracles in the dayes of old: yet doubt we not to call this Assumption a meerely vaine presumpti∣on. For if wee require them to shew vs in their Church the power of Prophecie, they might take (I thinke) a Lanterne to seeke thorowout all Italy, and not find any one whom they can point out to
bee professedly a Prophet. If we inquire after the gift of Tongues, to speake strange languages, where can they shew this? Miracles (saith the Apostle) are for vnbeleeuers, or Infidels:1. Cor. 14.22. and no Miracle more necessarie for the conuersion of Infidels in the Indies than to be able to speak the languages of those Na∣tions, because Faith commeth by hearing,Rom. 10.17. 1. Cor. 14. and hea∣ring of a knowne language. Yet wee know that the Priests, who daily labour for the conuersion of those Infidels, confesse that they are glad to labour and studie Moneths and Yeares, to learne the lan∣guages of those Countries. But, to speake more generally, How can this be said to be a perpetuall Badge of the Roman Church, whereof a famous Bishop (liuing but about foure∣score yeares since) being posed by Luther, to shew in all Europe where there was any that could pro∣fesse himself endowed with that Gift; answered plainly,Roffens. in Luth. de Capt. Babyl. cap. 11. and without any Parable (speaking of the power of Miracles) Cuius (saith he) effectum nunc nullum cernimus: Whereof wee see no effect in our dayes. When wee further insist, and aske, concerning this great signe of the ordinarie worke of Miracles, where this Starre doth appeare? surely, not at their Ierusalem, the Citie of Rome; nor yet in Europe, their Iurie, for they send vs to seeke it in the new∣found World, in the conuersion of Pagans; pro∣fessing (as it may seeme) and that iustly with their Espencaeus,Espen. in 2. Tim. 3 that Miracles are no where necessarie, but among Infidels. Here then, if any where, we are to seeke it, to wit, in the Indies; where behold Bel∣larmine,
and their other Magi doe see it rising (as it were) in the East-Indies, and setting in the West-Indies. No question therefore, but wee are like to find it in those Indies; that which is their ordinarie Assumption. For confutation whereof we need not to trauell so farre, to trie this; two famous Iesuites, who haue beene most conuersant there, and taken (as is said) most paines for the conuerting of Infidels to the Faith of Christ, come vnto vs by their Bookes, and tell vs, the one, that this Assumption is false, the o∣ther, though auouched by them, yet not saying that it is true. For of the East Indies, their Iesuit Acosta saith asseuerantly;Acosta Ics. de salute Indor. l. 4. Prodigia nulla facimus, signa nulla edimus: We worke no Wonders, we shew no Miracles. In the West Indies, who more resident than their Iesuite Xauier, whom they report to haue beene their Thaumaturgus,Ballar. l. 4. de Not is Eccles. c. 14. and to haue bealed lame, dumbe, deafe, blind, yea and to haue raised the dead to life. Notwithstanding, when wee consult with Francis Xauier himselfe, in his Volume of E∣pislles, directed vnto the Fathers of his owne Socie∣tie, vnto Cardinals, and others of best esteeme; hee maketh no mention there of these miraculous works. Which wee doubt not but hee would haue done, if any such Acts had beene wrought. For we may not thinke that Iesuites would professe more modestie, in this kind, than the holy Apostles of Christ, who, to the glorie of God, and comfort of his Church, did professe to reueale and report (speaking of their Miracles) Magnalia Dei; The wondrous works of God.Act. 2.11. Therefore we take this his
not verifying the report of his Miracles, so com∣monly suggested, and so greedily intertayned by o∣thers, to amount to no lesse than the deniall of them to be true. Let me adde vnto Francis Xauier their Francis de Victoria, Professor of Diuinitie in Spaine,Fra. de Vict. Re∣lect. 5. sect. 2. who dis∣cussing this great point, whether that the Doctrine of Christ were so sufficiently reuealed vnto the Infi∣dels of these times, by Word, or Miracles, that they, which would not bee conuerted, mightiustly bee condemned of so vnpardonable obstinacie, as to deserue to bee persecuted by Sword; after his deli∣berate and earnest search to satisfie himselfe and o∣thers in this, answereth (concerning Miracles) Signa nulla audio: I heare of no Miracles. The third Aduertisement; Shewing that it hath beene a custome among Romish Priests, willingly to deceiue the people by counterfeit Acts and Reports. HOw shall this bee newes to Any, who hath beene acquainted with some of their owne Au∣thors? One confessing,Lyrain Dam. that People are deceiued by false miracles, deuised by Priests, and such as adhere vnto them. A second,Melchior Canus loc. Theol. remembring (as hee himselfe saith) with griefe some Historians, abusing the credu∣litie of the people, by relating the miracles of Saints. A third inueighing against the prodigalitie of some vaine Reports of false miracles. A fourth,Eras. ante lib. Consess. Aug. and also a
fift partly scorning,Agrippa de Ʋa∣nit. scient. Ʋiucs in Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8. and partly abborring their fa∣bulous relations, and vaine forgeries of Miracles. These confessions may setue for the present. We need not be inquisitiue into Examples fetcth from other Countries, concerning the iuggling tricks of the Friars of former times, which haue beene detected to their shame; nor yet of a lateHistoire admi∣rable de la pos∣session & con∣uersion d'vne Penitente, se∣duite par vn Magicien, &c. conduite a la S. Baume poury estre exorcizee, l'An 1610. soubz l'autorite du R.P. F. Seba∣slien Michaelis, Prieur de couent Royal de la S. Magdaleine a S. Maximin, &c. A la Reyne Re∣gente, Paris 1613. auec pri∣uilege du Roy. It was transla∣ted into En∣glish, accor∣ding to the o∣riginall Copie, by W.B. and printed, Anno 1613. which Edition is here after obserued. Printed, Anno Domini 1603. Ad∣mirable Historie (as they call it) of notable Exor∣cismes, performed at Saint Baume in France, which will hereafter bewray it selfe by its owne contradi∣ctions: because our owne halfe Isle, euen little En∣gland, will be found to abound as much with varie∣tie of false Miracles, as Africke with Monsters. For here hath beene seene a Maid with a miraculous A∣pron, casting little flashes of lightning in the darke (for this also was a worke of darknesse) and easily done by an artificiall tincture of Sulphure. Not long after (which the World gazed at) they pro∣duced the Image of Garnet the Iesuite in a straw: wherein there was nothing more wonderfull, than that any should account it miraculous, it being (by the confession, vpon oath, of such Recusants as had kept it) no more like Garnets face than any other mans; and so little exceeding the power of man (therefore no Miracle,) as that a young youth ad∣dicted to the arte of limbing did then draw (and that more perfectly) a number of such like, in the huskes of eares of Wheat, in one day. The Booke intituled, A Declaration of egregious Impostures practized by Romish Priests, setteth forth whole Pageants of counterfeit Exorcismes; one vpon Sara Williams, another vpon her sister, Fris∣wood
Williams, a third vpon Anne Smith, a fourth vpon Richard Mayne Gentleman, a fift vpon one Marwood, the seruant of that Babington, who was executed for treason. The Priests, who are recko∣ned as Agents in these feats, are named to haue beene Master Dibdaile, Master Sherwood, Master Cornelius, Master Stampe, Master Edmonds, alias Weston, Master Dryland, Master Terrill, Master Tal∣lice, Master Ballard, with others; and in conclusi∣on, all miraculous Exorcists, by the confessions (vpon oath) of foure of the parties themselues that were exoreized: albeit it was proued to be nothing but deceitfull cunning, and plaine cosenage. Although these and the like pranks haue beene often hissed of the Stage, for stale and grosse forge∣ries, yet notwithstanding haue they aduentured to publish that, which they call A faithfull Relation of their proceedings, in exorcizing the Boy of Bilson,See this Rela∣tion whole, in the end of this Treatise. as possessed of the Deuill. Which Relation who so readeth, shall thinke that hee hath seene a Comedie, wherein the Actors, which present themselues, are these; A craftie old man, teaching the feats and pranks of counterfeiting a person Demoniacall and possessed of the Deuill; the next, a most docible, subtle, and expert young Boy, farre more dextrous in the Practique part, than his Master was in the Theorie; after him appeare three Romish Priests, the Authors of seducement, conjuring their onely imaginarie Deuils, which they brought with them; and lastly, a Chorus of credulous people easily sedu∣ced, not so much by the fubtletie of those Priests, as by their owne sottishnesse; which will hereaf∣ter be better manifested.
The fourth Aduertisement; Shewing, that Romish Priests baue thought it lawfull for them, to delude men by forged Miracles, and feined Relations or Reports, vnder some religious pretences. IF in practise of vnlawfull things they were not perswaded that they may doe them lawfully, there might bee some hope that they would at length bee brought to detest their dissimulations: but now that they varnish their godlesse forgeries with the colour of Godly intentions, how can we euer expect that they will renounce their custome of lying? And that it is so, in some Romish Priests, their owne Canus wil witnesse, where he inueigheth against some,eanus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6. Qui pietatis loco duxerunt mendacia pro religione fingere, that is; Who hold it a point of godlinesse to lye for the aduantage of Religion. As also Erasmus, complayning of others who indeauour to excite men to their Religion,Eras in censura ante lib. Confess. Aug. Fabulisvanis, & fi∣ctis miraculis, that is, By vaine fables, and feigned miracles. Yea, and their Agrippa putteth this in the Catalogue of vaine sciences, and not without indignation; Qui piè nonnihil admentientes sup∣ponunt reliquias, fabricant miracula, confingunt ter∣ribiles fabulas,Agripsa de van. scient. c. 97. that is, Who by the mixture of some godly lyes deuise supposititious reliques, forge mira∣cles, and faine fearefull fables. The like complaint made their Viues against their deuout lyes.Viues in Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 22. We may iustly recount among these the Romish Doctrine of Indulgences, which (since the Coun∣cell
of Trent) is by Pope Pius Quartus added vnto the Romane Creede;Pius Quarlus in forma Inramene. albeit, at the time of their first inuention, they were iudged by men learned and professed in the Romane Religion, to be no better than piae fraudes, that is, Godly deceits.As Greg. de Ʋa∣lent. reports. Tract de Indu'g. cap. 2. And what shall wee say of their Historie called the Legend, graced with no lesse a Title than Aurea, Golden; which it was lawfull to translate into any language, that it might lie open vnto all people, for their in∣struction in the fundamentall points of Poperie, when as yet the written Word of God, and the sa∣uing Gospell of Iesus Christ, was purposely shut and locked vp in a strange tongue? Notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, if we beleeue their owne Do∣ctors, that there is not a more absurd booke than it:Espen. in Tim. Digress. 1. Or thus,Royard praef. ante, Hom. de festo Sanct. By the fables and fooleries whereof the Truth it selfe is ouerthrowne: Or thus, Wherein there are more Monsters than Miracles.Canus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6. And the counterfeit Miracles, by Exorcismes, wrought by Priests in France and England, haue (as their owne Relations doe manifest) a double inten∣tion, to wit, of gayning estimation vnto the Priests, and beliefe vnto that which they call their Catho∣lique Cause. Nor may any obiect, that such forge∣ries are wrought by some obscure men, of small iudgement, or lesse conscience; for these are Priests who haue their mission, and cōmission from Rome, being sent (as they say) to suffer persecution for the Romane Cause: for the which some of them are in the Catalogue of their Martyrs, as namely, Dibday, Ballard, Harrington; who, with the other Priests, in acting these parts, were of the same Faith with
their fellow Priest Thomson,Declar. of Impost. who held those their practizes to be good, and the credulitie thereunto Godly. The fift Aduertisement; Shewing the falsehood of their former Presumption: and prouing, that no pretext of good intention, or purpose whatsoeuer, can iustifie any lying wonder, or yet any false Report thereaf. VVE haue seene what masks these deceiuable Miraculists doe put on, not onely for co∣uering, but euen also countenancing their owne de∣ceitfulnesse, to wit, their pretence of Deuotion, Re∣ligion, Godlinesse: in all which there is a good in∣tent, which is to them the soule of such actions. Surely, if this kind of dealing were lawfull, then might it be vsed, especially for the gayning of mens soules, for the credit of the Messengers of God, and his Christ, or for the supreme end of all, which is the glorie of God. But none of these so gracious and glorious pre∣tences can excuse them. First, not the gayning of mens soules,Wisd. 1.11. because it is written, The mouth that lyeth slayeth the soule. Now Charitie, by Gods Law, beginneth at a mans selfe; and can it then consort with Charitie, that, for the sauing of another, any man may murther himselfe? And secondly, neither will it suffer to intend the credit of Gods Ministers, and the establishing of their message of Faith, be∣cause
this must needs be not onely damnable in it selfe, but also damageable to the Faith both of the Preachers and Hearers. The first the Apostle pro∣ueth, by reprouing them that should say of the A∣postles, that they taught men to doe euill,Rom. 3.8. that good might come thereof: of which Calumniators hee concludeth, saying, Whose damnation is iust. And if it be damnable to say that of any vniustly, then is it twice damnable for any to doe euill that good may come thereof. Concerning the second, the same A∣postle is as direct.1. Cor. 15.14. If we (saith he) preaching Christ to be risen from the dead, Christ be proued not to be ri∣sen, then is our preaching in vaine, as being false wit∣nesses; and then is also your faith in vaine. Noting, that the preaching, and consequently writing of falsehood doth gayne nothing but losse of credit to the Preacher, and engender infidelitie in him that was a beleeuer: which are due wages, the one of wilfull lying, the other of light credulitie. Nor yet will it preuaile, that for the honour of Christ, whose attribute is Truth,Ioh. 14.6. I. 8.44. they practize to deceiue by a Lie, the right cognizance of the Deuill, who is a Lier from the beginning: for what societie then can there be betwixt Christ and Satan? Lastly, the end of all goods ends, the glorie of God, cannot priuilege any mans lie. The friends of Iob disputed against him, though ignorantly, thin∣king him to be an Hypocrite; and their whole scope was to magnifie the iustice of God vpon him: but Iob, holding nothing to bee more dishonourable to God than to pleade for him by a lie, stands at de∣fiance with them that sought to pleade after that
manner; answering, with detestation of that Er∣rour,Iob 13.7. Will you spwickedly for God, and talke deceitful∣ly for him? will you accept his person? will you yet con∣tend for God? do you so mocke him? shall not his excel∣lencie make you affraid? What refutation can bee more emphaticall, or yet more iust? for it is writ∣ten,Heb. 6.18. It is impossible for God to lye; and as impossible must we thinke it for God to approue or iustifie any lie, how much lesse wilfull lying? What then are they to forfeit, who stampe a fained pretence, as it were a false face vpon a Miracle, the act of Gods om∣nipotencie, which should therefore haue engrauen on it Truth, the first attribute of the God-head, the perfect Image of the God of Caesar (that is) that it be a true Miracle? The sixt Aduertisement; Discouering their doctrine of Mentall Reseruation, which we may iustly suspect to be the art of concea∣ling their deceits, whensoeuer they abuse men by their false reports, THeir Mentall Reseruation is (as they define it) a mixt Proposition, part in speech, and part in minde: as when a Priest, being in any danger to be discouered, is examined whether hee be a Ro∣mish Priest? who notwithstanding doth answere; I am no Romish Priest, (retayning in his minde this clause) To tell it vnto you; (or) that you may know, or the like: and the latter clause of the minde (say
they) maketh the words, I am no Priest, (otherwise false in themselues) to be true, as it were one Pro∣position. And thus they thinke to auoyd the guilt of a lie. This Sophistrie did Master Garnet teach in wri∣ting, and practized it egregiously in the Tower: and this Master Parsons did vehemently defend, which other Priests vsed as a Gygas Ring, to become inuisible to men; that no Examiner could espie any of their Priest-hoods. If they thinke it lawfull thus cunningly to e∣quiuocate, for the preseruation of their owne bo∣dies, and the bodies of others, will they not iudge it necessary, for the gaining of mens soules, trowe we? What credit then shall wee giue vnto such re∣ports, which they shall falsly inuent, to draw men vnto their Religion, by saying (as they haue most falsly done) such a Protestant Bishop died in the Ro∣mish faith; or such a Boy was exorcized and dispos∣sessed of the Deuill, by the helpe of a Romish Priest? Or such a vision of our Lady appeared vnto me, tel∣ling me that I cannot take the Oath of Allegeance, without mortall sinne? To these men we obiect, Are you so vnconscionable as to lye thus? They readily will answere vs, we lye not, for we did equiuocate. As for example, He died a Catholike, (reseruing) for ought that you shall know: and the Boy was dispossessed by a Priest (reseruing) if dispossessed: And the blessed Virgin appeared vnto me, (reseruing) but only in my conceit. This being the professed guile and deceit of these kind of men, we haue iust cause not to be∣leeue them.
The seuenth Aduertisement; Shewing that Mentall reseruation is no better than lewde lying. THis tricke of Mentall reseruation hath beene sufficiently proued to be not only a lye, but e∣uen the blacke Art of lying. As for example; If a Iesuite, being asked whether hee be the true Sub∣iect of the King of Great Brittaine, shall answere, contrary to their meaning, I am, (but reseruing in his minde this negatiue particle) not; can this make one Proposition? Is it not rather a Contradiction, and consequently a flat lye? Let Truth it selfe speake,Mat. 5.37. Iames 5.12. Let your yea be yea (saith Christ,) and your nay be nay: wherein as rash swearing is forbidden, so is true speaking cōmanded. Now I suppose that none can denie but, I am, is yea, and, I am not, is nay; and consequently that their, I am, is alewde lye. And that indeed all such Reseruations (as can∣not be qualified with some circumstance of speech, which vnto the intelligent hearer can no way im∣port that he is no Priest) are vndoubtedly a lye, hath beene euinced from the testimonies of the learned men of their owne Schooles, in a Treatise purposely not long since writ vpon that subiect. Only I adde for this present, that this Arte of Mentall Reseruation transcendeth all the wit, not only of Heathen men, but euen the practice of De∣uils in their Equiuocations. For the Heathen, in saying,Cic. Offic. Iurauilinguâ, mentem iniuratam gere, were so farre from execusing this from a lye, that they
called it false; only they thought it (but erroneous∣ly) lawful for them to lie in such case of necessitie; when they had to deale with Pirates and Out∣lawes. But it neuer entred into the Morall or Lo∣gicall apprehensions of these great Masters of Learning, to conceiue otherwise of such Romish secret Notions, than as of very lies. The Deuils, wee know, did Equiuocate in their Oracles, but only by a verball Equiuocation, con∣sisting of an ambiguitie of words of double and doubtfull signification: wherein although there were deceit, yet was it not by a flat lie, but by an indirect truth. For example, To speake to a man, denying that he hath any money, and to say, yes fellow, thou hast a crowne (meaning, the crowne of his head;) the verball Equiuocation is in the word, Crowne, whereby the man is deceiued by the indirect, but yet true sence of the same word. Neuerthelesse these (we confesse) were called lying Oracles, not because of their verball Equiuocations, but because thereby they did seduce men into Er∣rours. But Mentall Reseruation is such a Cacus' den as neyther Man, or Deuill by any circumstance of speech can possibly spie out. The eight Aduertisement; Shewing the meanes to discerne false Miracles, ly vn∣derstanding the properties of those that are true. THere are foure obseruable properties of diuine Miracles: I. is that the worke of the Miracle
be done Transcendently, by exceeding all power of Nature or Art; II. Presently, without delay; III. Perfectly, without defect; The IV. is in re∣spect of the forme, Sincerely, voyd of idle Super∣stition. These are the true Characters of diuine working, by which if the Acts of Romish Priests be duely examined, they will be found exorbitant in all. The ninth Aduertisement; Shewing the falshood of such Romish practizes; be∣cause they are not done by a transcendent power. ALthough the power of false Miracles, pro∣phesied of by our Sauiour Christ, shall some∣times worke such great wonders, as are able to de∣ceiue,Mar. 13.22. if it were possible, the very Elect; so that wee must confesse (with their owne Iesuite) that False Miracles are sometimes so like vnto true, that they can hardly be discerned;Acofla Ies. de temp. nouiss. lib. 2.6.19. Bellar. l. 3. de Pant. c. 15. which (as another of them acknowledgeth) The Deuill worketh by secret, but naturall meanes, yet such as deceiue the sight and iudgements of men: Notwithstanding many others are done only by either naturall, or else artificiall workings. As namely all that are not done either presently or perfectly, as shall be shewed. But be it that the workes done by these Priests, could seeme to be done as perfectly as they would haue them, yet can they sauour of nothing but mans craft. To instance but onely in that one thing,
wherein (as it seemeth) they ioyntly glorie,Bellar. Bozius, and the Admi∣rable Hist. which is the adoration done by bruite beasts, as namely by a Mule, a cade Lambe, and a Ma∣stiffe Dogge, vnto the Hoast in the Sacrament. Why haue you neuer seene Apes and Babions so disciplined, as to kneele downe, and make courtsie? Did not Bankes teach his Horse the like feates; When to acquit himselfe of the suspition of dea∣ling with the Deuill, he made his Horse Morocco to kneele downe before a Crucifix in France? Come we neerer to our Exorcists, and see their doings, and wee find (by the confessions of their owne Patients) that if there be any disease, as sup∣pose the Mother, then they call this a Deuill; and if there be none, yet through violent and vntempe∣rate working by their hallowed fumes and sulphu∣rous odours, which they vse in their Exorcismes, they make a Deuill, that is, some disease; and after, by suffering their supposed Demoniack to take a little rest, O then behold a Miracle! forsooth, they haue stilled the Deuill. I should but take paines fot repentance to busie my selfe, or my Reader with ripping vp the friuolous Wonders, which they haue registred, touching the power of expel∣ling of Deuils. If any mans appetite serue him for these iunkets, let him reade their Legend, touching such Maruels, and he may soone satisfie, yea, and surfeit himselfe.
The tenth Aduertisement; Shewing (for the better discerning of false Miracles) the II. and III. Properties, which is, to be done Presently and Perfectly. THe second, which is Presently, their owne Bi∣shop Abulensis hath obserued;Abulen. in Mat. 8. q. 15. Nullum mira∣culum successiuè esse factum, sed statim, quandò Christus illud fieri voluit: that Christ wrought no Miracle by piece-meale, but out of hand, so soone as hee would haue it done,Mark. 8.24, 25. What can bee obiected against this, but only the cure of him that was blind, whom Christ made first to see, and after to see perfectly? To this the same Bishop answe∣reth most fitly, that This may be said to haue beene done presently,A'nden. ibid. because suddenly, and as soone as hee would haue it done. The third, to doe it Perfectly, is as well acknow∣ledged to be a proper character of a true Miracle, whereby diuine Miracles are distinguished from those that are Deuillish:Anastas Cochelet. Palaest honor. cap. 31. Dlrio Ies. disq. Mag. l. 1. c. 3. and that When they that are cured relapse into their former diseases, it is a certaine signe that it is not the gift of God, whose workes are perfect. Now let vs weigh the Priests practizes in these scales, and their workes will bee found too light, as not being done Presently: for these Exor∣cists labour alwayes vpon their parties possessed, as Physicians doe vpon their Patients, consuming monethes in practizing their Art, before they can seeme to haue finished their cure. So it fell out with the Exorcists at Saint Baume in France, at Denham
in Bucking hamshire, at Hackney neere London, and at Bilson in Staffordshire. Then that they are not so Perfectly holpen,See hereafter. doth appeare by the Exorcists often boasting, how they driue the Deuill (as though it were a running gow∣tish spirit, flitting from one ioynt to another) som∣time into the Tongue, sometime into the Toe, and sometime into places, for modestie not to bee na∣med. Wherein they play with the Deuill only as idle fellowes doe with their Apes, making them skip from one place to another; when as the power of diuine Exorcisme was instantly and absolutely to expell the Deuill, but not to dally and sport with him in his hold of possession. The eleuenth Aduertisement; Shewing the last note of false Miracles, by want of the fourth propertie of true workes, to wit, religi∣ous Sinceritie without Superstition. AGainst this they erre both in their manner, in∣struments, and end of working. The manner is by vsing some set forme of words. The twelfth Aduertisement; Shewing their Superstition by their formes. THat is worth our obseruation, which hath falne from the penne of their owne Iesuite,
namely,De'lrio Ies. disq. Magic. in quest. var. de morb. sa∣nand. that Holy men of former times [non sunt vsi formis conceptis, &c.] did not vse any set formes of words, but sometime one manner, and sometime another, such as the Spirit of God did suggest vnto them: nor did God grant vnto them the gifts of hea∣ling vnder the condition of vsing any forme of speech. Which is no more than that which their Espencaeus will haue vs to obserue in the practise of Christ and of his Disciples. Christ (saith he) vsed not a∣ny peculiar Ceremonies,Espen. in Tim. Digress. l. 1. c. 15. but simply commanding the Deuill, by his inuisible power did driue him out. Nei∣ther yet doe wee reade that the Apostles of Christ did vse any set forme, or ceremonie. If wee shall bring the practises of their Priests to be tryed by this test, wee shall find that their formall Exorcismes differ but little from Magicall Incantations. For (to o∣mit others) our Exorcists at Bilson did professe at their first comming to the Boy that they could doe nothing,See hereafter. for dispossessing of the Deuill out of him, before that they had obtayned a Booke called Thesaurus Exorcismorum, which (said they) is now at London. Doe you not now see the distance betwixt the Spirit and the power of the Priest to bee as much as from Bilson to London, that is, an hundred miles at least? are these Exorcists? And although we know that the Deuill is a great Scholler, yet did euer the manner of Exorcising anciently consist in Booke-formes? is not this grosse Superstition? So likewise are their other Circumstantiall Acts, of almost, stifling their Patients with sulphureous Fumes; buffetting them with their Priestly stoles; besprinkling them with pale fuls of Holy-Water,
and Herbes; yea, and (whereof notwithstanding some haue not beene ashamed to boast off, as wor∣thie of the dignitie of a Miraculist) Daemonem po∣dicis crepitu, aut recentis stercoris foetore depellere:See in their Cosmus Philiarch. de offic. sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 11. that is, The repelling of the Deuill with the blast of such a winde, and the stench of such an herbe which I shame to english. Which if it were possible for a man to beleeue, yet might they consider the va∣nitie of these fooleries; and vnderstand that the Deuill, that nimble Antique, doth but dally with them, passing and repassing as Boyes doe in their sports, when and how hee listeth: as was discer∣ned in a yong Monke obsessed of the Deuill,Gerard. Naza∣reth. apud Zuinger. theat. hum. vit. lib. 4. in Tit. de Daemo∣niacis. which Deuill indured the application of holy-Water and o∣ther hallowed things, but yet refused to depart from the partie obsessed vntil such time as this Nouice was soundly lasht with a Whip; whereupon the Deuill gaue place, and then he was deliuered. The thirteenth Aduertisement; Shewing their second point of Superstition, in respect of the ordinarie instruments of working, which in these latter times are Images. THe Patriarke Tharasius in that latter Synod of Nice (which was the great Patronesse of the worship of Images, but after contradicted by the Councell of Frankford) did confesse in the presence of all the Bishops there assembled, that No Mira∣cles were then wrought by Images among Christians,Surius Tom. 3. Conc. Act. 4.
for their beliefe. But he that shall now trauell tho∣row either Romish Countries,' or Bookes shall bee stored with any Miracles, of whatsoeuer sort, (put them all together) more than those which are done by the Images of the blessed Virgin, as at Lorretto, at Hales, at Sichem; where with the Bookes of Tur∣sellinus, Lipsius, and Costerus are so fraught. But because their Patriark durst say in so great and generall a presence of Bishops and Diuines, that no Miracles were wrought by Images, except a∣mong Infidels, what can any collect from thence but either that Images were not so miraculous in those former times, when notwithstanding, ifeuer, (that being the time wherein they most of all con∣tended for the worship of Images) they were to bee exspected: or else that the people of these times, which are so addicted to such Miracles, are more Infidels. How soeuer it must needs sauour of much Superstition that the vulgar people (as appeareth by the complaint of their owne Authours) Ado∣ring Images most idolatrously, should be nourished in their Idolatrous fancies by the pretended Miracles wrought by Images. In all which maruels nothing seemeth more maruellous then the fascination of men, in beeleeuing them. This place required that I should speake of their diuers Ceremonies in their Exorcismes, to shew their numerall Crossings, Reliques of false Saints, their Holy-Water, which they consecrate both to driue away Deuils, and to purge veniall sinnes; besides other formes of their practice, which are altogether superstitious, if not also sacrilegious. For
(to instance in the last) what greater sacrilege can there be, than to assume power to ordaine any ele∣ment, for conferring of a spirituall grace of remis∣sion of sinnes? What is this else than to institute a Sacrament, an act properly and soly belonging to the authoritie of him, who is the Creatour of soules? But these things being obuious vnto all men, I tooke hereby occasion to insert the former obseruation, concerning Images, albeit without Exorcismes. The fourteenth Aduertisement; Shewing the second point of their Superstition, by their impious and abhominable Consultation with Deuils in their Exorcismes, for resolution in points of Religion. COncerning this I will first manifest that they vsually practize it; and secondly, propound their Reasons for so doing, and confute them. That they vse to consult with Deuils about doctrinall points in Religion. LEt any man reade the Bookes, or heare the Re∣lations of the Romish Exorcists of these latter times, and he shall find that there is nothing more ordinarie with them than their familiar conference with the Deuill, touching questions of Religion. Cotton the Iesuite his Interrogatories put to the De∣uell
to resolue off, concerning Purgatory for his Ca∣tholikes, and Hel for vs Protestants, with many other curious questions, are more than notorious. The Priests at Denham in their Adiurations were fre∣quent, by which they sought to satisfie their Ad∣herents about the truth of the Immaculate Conoep∣tion of the Virgin Mary,See the De∣claration of Impostures, &c. of Pope Gregorie XIII. his being a Saint in Heauen, of the Sacrament of the Altar, and Christs bodily presence therein. The Ie∣suite Tursellin contendeth by all the strength of his wit to giue satisfaction to his Reader,Tursellin. Hist. Dom. Laeuret. concerning the truth of the miraculous Transmigration of the blessed Virgins house from Iurie to Loretto in Italy.Idem Epist. de∣dic ante Hist. Iustus Baronius Epist. Which one house of the Virgin excelleth (as they say) all others that euer were dedicated vnto her. Whereun∣to there is daily concourse from all Nations of the World, especially from France, Spaine, the Indies, and most remote parts by Kings, Princes, and other people. yet was not the truth of this Historie so absolute in all points vntill an horrible Deuill,Tursellin. quo su∣pia. called Arcto was consulted with, who affirmed that That house was the very same place, wherein the Angell Gaebriel saluted the blessed Virgin. Our Romish Preists at Bilson are desirous that their Disciples should know (which is their maine question) whether the Protestants or Romanists are more safe in their Religion: to this purpose they aduise with their faithfull Doctor the Deuill, and set the resolution downe in that which they call A faithfull Relation, (and that to vse their mar∣ginall phrase) as a Markable thing.See heereafter Pag. 51. I (saith the Priest) commanded the Deuill to shew how he would
one dying out of the Romane Church: which he did by violent pulling and byting of the clothes. Then I would know of him how he did vse Luther, Caluine and Iohn Fox, which he did after the same manner, but in afiercer sort. Then I asked what power hee had ouer a Romane Catholike dying out of mortall sinne? Hee then thrust downe his head trembling, and did no more. In all which they sufficiently manifest that their profession is vpon such like doubts, to take their resolution from the Deuill. But of all stories of this kind that (I thinke) was euer committed to Print, that which was pub∣lished in France is most famous: and so the Roma∣nists will haue vs to know, intituling it an Admi∣rable Historie of their Exorcismes, and dedicating it to the then Queene Regent. Wherein they bring in, for proofe of many Articles of their Romane faith, a Deuill named Verrine, constrayned (as they say) by the power of God to say and sweare by the liuing God, that Christ is in the Chalice after Conse∣cration; bload, and bones,Admir. Hist. pag. 52. & 98. as when hee was crueified vpon the Grosse. And so hee proceedeth in that Booke, preaching both  orall and Theologicall points of Religion vnto e end; and all to this end that the hearts of people might receiue satisfacti∣on by the Deuils Sermons. Where also F. Mi∣chaelis the Exorcist himselfe, in the Epistle to the Reader before the Booke, further saith, and profes∣seth as followeth. We are in good hope that this Hi∣storie will be no lesse vsefull and profitable in France, than that was of Laon, printed Anno 1566. which greatly confirmed the Catholike faith, and conuerted
many Heretikes, who heard the Deuils say many times in an high voyce, that these Her etikes were his friends and confederates. So that wee cannot but see that it is their profession to receiue assurance of their faith from the Deuill; which may bee yet more euident vnto vs, in as much as that they doe reason for the iustifying of themselues in so doing, which is the next point. The fifteenth Aduertisement; Shewing the falsitie of their Reasons, for their consul∣ting with Deuils, by their Exorcismes, in questions of Religion. THe Adinration, which they defend to bee so powerfull, is of two sorts, the one is of an ab∣solute command, the secondis of stipulation or ob∣ligation, by a formall Oath. The Adiuration by absolute command they contend to proue first by the example of Christ a∣gainst the Deuill; the next by the example of the Deuill against Christ. The second they labour to make good by vertue of the band of a formall Oath. My part and office will bee to confute them in all, as well particularly as generally.
The particular Confutation of their first Reason, whereby they vse to prooue the lawfulnesse of con∣sulting with Deuils, by the manner of Adiura∣tion; which they collect from the example of Christ against the Deuill. THe first foundation, which they lay for this, is that the Deuill is constrained by the power of God to speake truth: and therefore they may inter∣rogate the Deuill, and receiue from him an assurance of the same truths. This power of God the Ad∣mirable French Historie doth obsorue in their De∣uill Verrine, whom first they acknowledge to haue beene sent immediately from God, by whose power hee was compelled to instruct men in the truth, to confound Belzebub, and other Diuels: and, as if there had beene difference of religion among the Deuils in hell, and that this Verrine (yet by constrant) had beene a Catholike Deuill, hee confirmeth to the world many points of Romish faith; insomuch that the Priests and Exorcists doe put an Eoce vpon him, saying, Behold a miracle vn∣heard off, that a Deuill should conuert soules!Admir. Epist. pag. 7. We may rather say, Behold soules Christian neuer read of before, that would be couerted by the Deuill! But to the matter. Their first ground they take from the confession of the Deuill, when hee ac∣knowledged Christ to be the Sonne of God.Matth. 8.29. Mark. 5.7. Luke 8.28. We easily grant, that Christ could as easily com∣pell the deuill to speake truth, as he could aske him the question concerning any truth; and that there∣fore
the deuill could no more conceale that his Confession, concerning the God-head of Christ, ac∣knowledging him to bee the Sonne of God, than hee could deny his name to bee Legion. But this being granted, that Christ could so constraine the Deuills, yet what can the Priests collect from hence? Their first collection is, that Christ did inforce the deuill to make this Confession. But Saint Chrysostome will deny this,See this after. saying, That Christ was so farre from desiring this Confession of the deuill, that hee did abhorre the Confessor, and presently inioyne him silence. Their second collection from hence is this;Admir. Hist If (say they) Christ did extort truth from the deuill, Why not wee? Which if it were spoken of them vniuersally, as if they had absolutely the same power in Miracles, that Christ had, it were an inference very blasphe∣mous; because as all diuinity doth teach, Christ had in him, potestatem excellentiae (that is) diuine power to the full, as the Sunne hath light; and all others haue it but deriuatiuely from Christ, as is the light of the Moone. But to vnderstand these men in their more moderate sense, that whatsoeuer concerneth the authoritie of commanding or countermanding deuills, they may presume to haue receiued it from Christ, yet is it most false; because Christ went out of his owne accord into the Wildernesse to com∣bat with the deuill: will you therefore say, Why not wee likewise? Doth not the Lords Prayer teach you not to follow, but to flie temptations? To come nearer to you. Christ, at the time of his questioning the deuill, concerning his name,
(whereof you haue spoken) had in himselfe a pow∣er of dispensation and permission to suffer the De∣uills (they requesting as much) to goe into the Hogges of the Gadarens, and to carry them headlong into the Sea; an Act of his owne omnipotent Iu∣stice. Dire you assume this power vnto your selues, of permitting the deuill, if hee should aske you, to enter into other mens Oxen, or Hogs, vp∣on the firme presumption of Why not we? Furthermore, to shew you why not you, Christ had the wisdome of discerning of spirits, to know what spirit he had to deale with, and that infallibly: but the deuil, how easily may he deceiue you or others, when transforming himselfe into an Angel of light,2. Cor. 11.14. and pretending himselfe an Author of truth, hee shall become but a Messenger of lies; whereof the Iesuit Del'rio, and other Authors can satisfie you by manifold Examples.Disq. Mag. Lastly (to pose you a lit∣tle) tell vs, when did euer Christ interogate the de∣uill concerning any doctrine of truth, either Theo∣logicall or Morall points of Faith, or precepts of life? The onely question he asked him was, What is thy name? and the deuill answered, Legion,Mark. 5.7. Luk. 8.30. for we are many; euen troupes of deuills. Which Christ did to manifest the power of his God hend a∣gainst the whole hoaft of infernall powers. You therefore that thus arrogate his power should ra∣ther imitate his wisedome, who neuer conferred with the deuill touching any doctrinall or dogma∣ticall truth.
The sixteenth Aduertisement. Shewing the falsebood of their second Reason, for the proofa of their power of Adiuration, to constraine the Deuill to speake truth, taken from the Deuills adiuring of Christ; with the particular confura∣tion thereof. THey set this down for an vndoubted Maxime, that the Deuils must necessarily speake truth, Whensoeuer the Exorcist shall exact an oath of the De∣uils,Admir. Hist. pag. 131. compalling them to sweare, according to the meaning of God and his Church. They doe not de∣ny (neither doe we charge them with it) that the Deuill, when bee speaketh of himselfe, is a liar, and the father of lies: but onely say, that being adiu∣red to tell the truth, hee is then compelled to speake truth.Epistle to the Reader, before the History. Their proofe is thus grounded. The Deuill said vnto Christ, Mark. s. [I charge thee by God, that thou doe not torment vs, but suffer vs to enter into the herd of Swine:] Wherein  may obserue (saith he) a remarkable point, that Christ being adiured by the name of God, although it was done by the Deuill, yet condescended to the Deuils tequest. And thus they would perswade vs, that by virtue of this band of an Oath the Deuill is tied infallibly to confesse the truth. And hence it is that these Priests in France, and they at Denhom, and at Bilson, to∣gether with others, in then questioning with De∣uills, doe relye altogether vpon the coaction of them by an Oath. But, concerning the example which they haue vrged, of the Deuills adiuring of Christ in the name
of God, it cannot but prooue to be either an illogi∣call argument, or else blasphemous. For wee de∣mand, whether the Deuill, adiuring Christ in the name of God, did constraine Christ to speake truth, or no? If they say that hee did not, then is it no small absurditie, to proone a compulsarie charge of a Priest, against the Deuill, by Christs voluntarie answer to the Deuill. But if they say, that the all∣iuration, vsed by the Deuill, had power to con∣straine Christ, by virtue of the name of God, to make an answer, then is it altogether blasphe∣mous, for what is it else, than to make the Deuill the Exorcizer of Christ? It had beene well that these men, that thus vrge and presse their power of Exorcization, had remembred that which is re∣corded in the Acts 19. of the runnagate Exorcifts, the sonnes of Sceua a Iew, when they tooke vpon them to adiure euill spirits, saying, [,] Wee adiure you by Iesus: but what?Acts 19.13. &c. It followeth, The Deuils in the possessed partie did violently fall vp∣on those Exorcists, and made them runne away; then might they haue learned rather to reason thus, That if Exorcisme was not of power in it selfe by the name of Iesus (who is God blessed for euer) to driue away the Deuills; how then could we say that it had power from the mouth of deuils, in the name of God, to mooue Christ Iesus himselfe? And inferre thereupon, saying to themselues, Why doe wee not now blush that wee haue argued so fondly?
The seuenteenth Aduertisement. Shewing their second ground, taken from an Oath, by virtue of the band of an Oath of Stipulation (the Priests imposing a formall Oath vpon the Deuill,) and the falshood thereof. FOr in their Admirable French Historie the Exorcists say,Admir. Hist. pag. 186. that the Deuils, when they are con∣strained by the Name of God, and by the authoritie of the Church to take an Oath, the Oath bindeth them. And as if, by vertue of the same Oath, the Exorcists themselues were bound to beleeue the Deuill, they put the Deuill to an Oath,Pag. 206. saying, It was thought fit, that Vetrine the Deuill should solemnly sweare vpon the blessed Sacrament, for confirmation of that which he had aboue spoken. But did euer the Deuill take such an Oath?Pag. 95,  239. Yes (say they) hee sware by the liuing God, that he was constrained to say the truth; And, he moke a solemne Oath, with all the properties of an Oath. The eighteenth Aduertisement. Shewing the falshood of this piece of nice learning, in imposing a formall Oath of Stipulation vpon the Deuill, and the impietie thereof, the Deuill being no way capable of a formall Oath. THe word [, I exorcize,] in the vse of Diuines,Exorcizare di∣cuntur, hoc est, per diuina Dia∣bolum ad urande expellere. Aug. de beat. vita. in Christian Schooles, is not taken for the Imposition of a formall Oath vpon Deuils,
but an allegation of the powerfull Name and au∣thoritie of God, to command the Deuills; as wee see not onely in the example of the Apostles, but euen by the Acts of those deuellish Exorcists, Act. 19. saying vnto the spirits,Acts 19.13. Wee adiure you by Iesus. Now the forme of an Oath is of two kindes; and accordingly the Band and Obligation is two∣fold. The first kind is a simple Inuocation of God, by calling him to witnesse; and thus the Deuill sware, saying, By the liuing God, &c. The second is a mixt Oath, by an oppignoration and pledge; pawning some pretious thing vnto God: thus the Deuill, they say, did sweare By the Sacrament, and by the Gospel. And wee make no question but the Deuill was able to sweare by God, and by the Gospel of Christ, thereby seeming to seeke Gods glorie. For what cannot hee sweare to doe, who can change himselfe into the seeming shape of an Angel of light? But our onely probleme is, whe∣ther the Deuil be capable of the band of an Oath, or no? Wee thinke wee may sweare he is not; nei∣ther of the band of an Oath, made only by Inuo∣cation and Testification, in calling God to witnesse; nor yet of oppignoration and pledge, which is a se∣cond and more solemne tye in an Oath. For the band of an Oath of Inuocation consist∣eth, betweene the Iustice of God, and mans con∣science,Rom. 2.15. being bound by that law written in his heart, his conscience bearing witnesse, and thoughts accusing or excusing him before God. This is the band of conscience towards God, whereby the partie swearing acknowledgeth himselfe obliged
to speake a truth, lest that hee become gulitie of transgression against God. Therefore to impose an Oath vpon the Deuill, is to suppose him being a damnable Reprobate, whose propertie is to bee most, maliciously obstinate against God and godli∣nesse, to be capable of such a Conscience, which is required in an Oath, and consequently a conscio∣nable honest Deuill. The mixed Oath is not onely the inuocation of the supreme Iudge and auenger, in a generall man∣ner, but the addition also (for more specialtie and solemnitie) of some thing else, by way of pledge, which is called an Oath by oppignoration; as if a Christian should in solemne protestation, sweare by God his Sauiour, and by the Sacrament, or by the holy Gospell: intending thereby the ingage∣ment of his owne portion of comfort and blessing by and in them; and forfeiture thereof if hee vio∣late his Oath (as in all Oathes is implyed a volun∣tary Execration vpon default) by losse of those precious benefits, which he might otherwise enioy in those pawnes and pledges. Now as for the Di∣uels, what interest can they haue in the promises of Christ belonging to saluation reuealed in the Gospell of Christ, and sealed by his Sacraments, who are forlorne of all interest in Christ himselfe, crying vnto him and saying,Mark. 5. What haue we to doe with thee, Iesu, thou Sonne of the highest God? &c. what for∣feiture can they feare of loosing their pledge, which they haue irreuocably lost, when they first aposta∣ted from God, and thereupon did eternally loose all hope of happinesse; being reserued (as the Apo∣stle
speaketh) to the chaines of darknesse,Iude v. 6. for euer∣more? Moreouer, an Oath being that high part of re∣ligious seruice belonging vnto God, which hee ap∣propriateth to himselfe, saying, Thou shalt serue the Lord and sweare by his name (where,Deut. 6.13. in the LXX. it is ; and , by the confession of the Romanists, is proper only vnto God himselfe, as a supreme part of his worship) let them, who pre∣sume of such familiar conference with the Deuill, consult with him vpon this question, whither hee can be capable of the office of . Howbeit wee thinke it no lesse than a Diabolicall propha∣nation of the name of God to impose vpon those damned spirits the band of an Oath, whereof they cannot be any way capable, to performe it truely and internally, by reason of the obstinacie of their wils, and the desperatenesse of their state and con∣dition. Thus farre of our particular confuration of their particular Reasons. The nineteenth Aduertisement; Shewing the Confutation of their profession of con∣sulting with Deuils in generall, by manifesting the infatuation thereof. LEt Romish Priests imagine what they please, of the power which they haue ouer the Deuill, to compell him to speake truth; yet this wee hold
for a truth infallible, that it was neuer permitted to any to aduise with the Deuill, about questions of Religion, to receiue any satisfaction from him, but directly the contrarie. The twentieth Aduertisement; Shewing the falshood of their doctrine, for consulting with Deuils; first from the examples of Christ, and of his Disciples. THe Priests, for the establishing of their autho∣ritie, in Interrogating the Deuill in questions of Religion, and power of constraining him to answere the truth, haue pitched vpon the confession of the deuill,Mark. 5.7. when he called Christ, The Son of God: And then, adiuring Christ not to torment him: And after vpon Christs asking the deuill his name. From whence their collections are in effect these. First, Christ asked the deuill a question: Ergo, wee may interrogate the deuill. Secondly, The deuill said, thou art the Sonne of God: Ergo, hee was constrayned to speake a truth. Thirdly, The deuill adiured Christ, saying, I adiure thee; and Christ condescended: Ergo their Adiuration of the deuill doth inforce him to speake truth: and consequently they haue licence to demand questions of the deuill, concerning Re∣ligion; authoritie to adiure the deuill, to answere; and power to enforce him to answere nothing but truth. Whēce it must follow that men may receiue
their resolution, in Theologicall points of Religi∣on, from the deuils. I maruell what Deuill gaue them these grounds of thus reasoning, sure I am they haue no founda∣tion in the Gospell of Christ. For (to answere order∣ly) first, the only question that euer Christ asked the deuill was this, What is thy name? neuer any, concerning any matter of doctrine; whereof wee haue shewed the reason before. Secondly, the de∣uils Confession, that Christ is the Sonne of God, was neyther extorted, nor imbraced by Christ, which we are now to proue. Thirdly, the Adiuration, which the deuill vsed to Christ, our Sauiour condes∣cended not vnto, but repelled; for the deuill said, I adiure thee that thou torment me not. But why said he thus? it followeth in the next words, Because Christ had said to the deuill, come out of the man: therefore the deuill adiuring Christ, that hee him∣selfe might keepe his possession, and Christ not∣withstanding expelling him out of his hold, it is euident that Christ condescended not to the deuils ad∣iuration. Thus by way of Answere. We are now to retort their Arguments, and to driue their weapon to their owne pates, by pro∣uing, from the example of Christ, that we are not to admit of any colloquie with the Deuill in Exor∣cismes, about matter of Christian Learning. The first place is Mark. 1.Mark. 1.24, 25. Where one deuill confessed Christ to be the holy one of God; a blessed confession, but, because a damned Confessor, instantly Iesus (as the Text sheweth) did rebuke the deuill, saying,
hold thy peace,Mark. 3.11, 12. and come out of the man. In Mark. 3. diuers impure spirits when they saw Iesus, cryed out and said, Thou art that Sonne of God. but what? it immediately followeth, And Iesus straitly charged them not to make him knowne. What may we iustly inferre from all this?Espen. in Tim. digress. l. 1. c. 14. I had rather your owne Espen∣caeus should tell you. Christ would not suffer the de∣uill to speake, no not the truth; to teach vs that wee giue not any credit at all vnto the deuill, although it may be he speake a truth.Orig. hom. in Exod. And to this end he produ∣ceth the iudgement of Origen, concluding from the same Scriptures that Wee are not to interrogate de∣uils, nor to entertaine any colloquie with euill Spirits, but to dispell them by Prayer and Fasting. Wee find the same Father thus reprouing and condemning the Heathen Inchanters.Orig. in Num. c. 23. hom. 16. God (saith hee) will not haue vs to bee the disciples of deuils; it is better to bee ignorant than to be taught by them: for this cause our Lord Iesus did not vouchsafe to receiue any testimonie from the deuill, but saith to him, hold thy peace thou foule spirit, and depart out of the man. Wee need no other Comment vpon these Texts than that which hath beene receiued from the golden mouth of Chrysostome.Chrysost. tom. 2. hom. 5. in Mar. Christ saith to the deuill, Mar. 3. Hold thy peace, and come out of the man: As if Christ had said (saith hee) I came not to seeke my approbation from thy testimonie, but to cast thee out of my crea∣ture? no commendable commendation can proceede out of the mouth of a Sinner: I need not the testimo∣nie of him, whose torment I desire: let thy silence bee my prayse, hold thou therefore thy peace, get thee out
of the man; what doest, thou in my House and Inne? &c. So Saint Chrysostome, euen so plainly, that for me to make any collections from him were but to comment vpon a Comment. Yet may we not omit that when Christ (if euer) had conference with the Deuill in the Wildernesse,Mat. 4. the Deuill was still the Opponent, and Christ neuer obiected or interrogated, but answered: to the first it is said, Christ answered, it is written, Man,Ver. 4. &c. to the second likewise Christ answered, It is written,Verse 7. Thou shalt not &c. & to the third Christ answered, Get thee hence Satan. Wherefore, as Christ,Verse 10. so eue∣ry Christian may make answeres to the deuill, ne∣uer seeke answeres from him; and allow no vse of Conference with him but that which may put him to silence. The Apostles of Christ were the Disciples of their Master, as wel in practise as knowledge, which we may obserue in the example of Saint Paul. and Silas, Acts 16. For Saint Paul (to vse the words of Origen) imitating Christ,Orig. hom. 16. ni Acts 16. turning himselfe to the Spirit of diuination, said, [I command thee in the Name of Iesus Christ go out of her.] Wherein though some may peraduenture aske why Saint Paul should in such vehemencie rebuke that Spirit; What, did the deuill speake any Blasphemie? [The Woman (saith the Text) hauing a Spirit of diuination followed Paul and them that were with him, and cryed saying, These men are the Seruants of God most High, who shew the way of saluation. Whence it is manifest that Paul was not offended at any words of blasphemie, but
that he held it an indignitie vnto his preaching to re∣ceiue any testimony from such a spirit. So Origen. And indeed Saint Paul and Silas did not spend any time of conference with that spirit, but instantly discharge their office of Exorcizing, commanding the spirit to come out of the Maide, and he went out at the same houre. An Act altogether repugnant to the practice of Romish Priests, who professedly aske questions, compelling (as they say) the de∣uils to testifie that which may best serue for the dignitie of their Priest-hood: whereas the Apostle did not daigne, but rather abhorre, and was grie∣ued at this so specious a testimonie, that they were the Seruants of the Highest. On the contrary, these Priests doe greatly glorie in such Te∣stimonies; as among others, the French Priests re∣ioyce to heare the deuill Verrine auerre,Admir. hist. p. 133 saying, of them; You are Priests, it is no offence if a man neg∣lect and turne from an Angell of Heauen, and doe ho∣nour and reuerence vnto you. Compare those diffe∣rent examples, the one holding it an indignitie, the other a dignitie to receine testimonie of their offi∣ces from the deuill; and the distance will appeare to be little lesse than betweene a Professor Apostoli∣call and Apostaticall.
The one and twentieth Aduertisement; Shewing the falshood of the same doctrine, concerning consultation with Deuils in questions of Religion, by testimonies of Fathers, and necessarie Reasons. WE haue alreadie heard the testimonies of Origen, and Chrysostome, concerning this point;Thyraeus Ies. de locis infestie, part. 1. Maldon. Ies. Com. in Matth. Chrysost hom. vlt. de Lazare. Tere. de anima. Athan. ad An∣tioch q. 11. & 13 Theophy. in Mat. 8. Isidor. Etym. lib. 8. c. 9. absence from our Aduersarie Papers will not suffer me to inquire exactly into other Fathers: nor shall I greatly need it, especially seeing the Ie∣suites themselues doe acknowledge, that ancient Fa∣thers, such as were Chrysostome, Tertullian, Atha∣nasius, Theophilact, Isidore, doe all denie that the soules of men departed doe at any time appeare , that is, in their owne persons; but that they who take their semblance vpon them are verie deuils, who seeke to seduce vs. And therefore these Fathers aduise vs not to haue any businesse with them, or to giue any credit to their testimonies, but to content our selues with direction from holy Scriptures. Which they should not haue done, if that those spirits might, by the power of Adiurati∣on, be compelled to shew that they were deuils; and that, being knowne, they would confesse nothing but truth. All which notwithstanding, the Romish Priests ordinarily seeke to bee informed of them concer∣ning Purgatorie, Indulgences, worshipping of Images, and other Mysteries of Romish Superstition; which Bellarmine and other Iesuites doe endeuour to confirme by Apparitions of the dead: when as
(according to the iudgement of ancient Fathers) the soule that it conuersant in holy Writ will re-resolue,. that though the Deuill (as in the petition ofNot to omit (which is else-where forgotten) that the Boy of Bilson did fayne him∣selfe to abhor, and to be affe∣cted with this Petition as with the first verse of Saint Iohns Gospell. Ʋide pag. 58. 59. Deliuer vs from euill) may come into his Pater-Noster, yet that he shall neuer enter into his Creed. Not to stand any longer vpon Antiquitie, I would but desire any one Example of any one Father, in the space of fiue hundred yeares after Christ; or Historie, in the same compasse of time, recording and approuing any Conference with the Deuill, by way of Exorcisme, or otherwise for satisfaction of any Christian in points of Religion. Let vs at last reason the matter with these men. The two and twentieth Aduertisement, Shewing the Reasons which may be produced against this perswasion of the Deuil; arising aswell from the Cause it selfe, as from the Euents. Reasons of the first kind. Two reasons may suffice, if they be pregnant. The first thus. If such be the power of Ex∣ercists, that they constraine the Deuill in the Name of God; and by the warrant of the Church, to con∣fesse any truth that shall be demanded of them, by Adiuration; then should there need, for our satis∣faction in matter of Religion, no other Questio∣nists then Exorcists; no other Catechists than De∣uills; no other Tradition, Councell, Scripture, or
Gospel than the confession of Deuils; yea and then the Decrees of Popes, which are held as Oracles in that Church, must now (for many of them haue erred) giue place to the testimonies of Deutls. I may not except their Councell of Trent,Conc. Trid. Ses∣sio 5. cap. 1. which would not determine the question concerning the naturall Conception of the blessed Virgin, whether shee were originally immaculate; for either great was the ignorance of those Fathers, that could not; or else obstinacie, that they would not set it downe for an Article in their Romane Creed (as they haue done many other Articles, as far repugnant from truth) seeing that Verrine the Deuill,Admir. Hist. pag. 205. by power of Exorcisme, was brought to sweare vpon the blessed Sacrament, and did answer vpon that Oath, that she was originally immaculate. Albeit Bernard, Tho∣mas Aquinas, Bonauenture, and many hundreds in the Romish Church would heerein haue giuen the deuill the lye. It had beene good, before they had giuen credit to this deuill, to haue sought some certaine resolution, how to reconcile the different reuelations made to Saint Bridget & Saint Kathe∣rine, concerning the same question: Katherine be∣ing told by reuelation, that the Conception of the blessed Virgin was immaculate; but Saint Bridget informed of the contrarie. And because such con∣tradictions will admit no reconciliation, it would become them to learne how to discerne, whether these Reuelations came from the deaill, as from the lying Angel; whereof wee thinke the deuill Verrine can be no competent Iudge. Secondly, you that question the deuill, suffer
your selues to bee questioned in a few words. If the deuils be made (as you say) Messengers of di∣uine truths, by the power of your Exorcismes, why doe you indeauour to expell them? Are they but lying Oracles? Why doe you then conferre with them, and not presently expell them? Many other reasons might bee added, to con∣uince these Priests, by the deuil's contradictions in their owne stories, euen then, when hee was ad∣iured to speake truth: But to labour to prooue, that the deuill cannot lye when hee list, and that hee will also, whensoeuer hee can, for a mischiefe, were to deny him to bee a deuill, whose propertie is vel falsum, vel ad falsum dicere: either to speake that which is false, or else to a false end. What a dangerous thing it was in our first Mother, to en∣tertaine and maintaine parle with the deuill, con∣cerning our religious dutie to God, all mankind feele by that woefull experience of originall cor∣ruption, which they must carrie with them to their graues, That which no Aduersarie shall euer be able to refute, is, that the power of Exorcisme was giuen vnto the Church of God for expulsion of the deuill, neuer for consultation with him, in mat∣ters of Conscience. Thus haue I endeuoured to dispell this doctrine of conferring with deuils, in such cases, with the same zeale as I would wish to dispell the deuill himselfe; and hold it a good resolution not to be∣leeue those Priests, for direction, in matters of Re∣ligion, who make the deuill their ghostly Father. Wee choose rather to conclude with the sentences
of the holy Fathers of the Church; one directing vs how to auoid such fascinations, saying,Cyprian. Non statim, &c. We ought not presently to admit, of such Acts as are done in the Name of Christ, except they be done in the Truth of Christ: The other detesting them, saying,August. Remoueantur illa vel figmenta men∣dacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium spirituum. Away with those workes which are either the fig∣ments and deuices of lying men, or else the deceitfull acts of prodigious spirits. The 23. and last Aduertisement Is to demonstrate the Romish falshood, in Exorci∣zing, by the Euents: which is particularly exem∣plified in a discouerie of their Impostures, about the Boy of Bilson; not inferiour vnto any of the rest of their prankes in this kind. BVt before wee come to lay downe the naked truth of the matter, touching that Boy, and how things stood de facto; let vs first suffer the Romish Priests to boast themselues a while of their miraculous power, in Exorcizing this Child; whom for a while you must imagine bee really bewitched and possessed of the Deuill: that after∣wards, by the the euent, may be verified of these Miraculists, that Scripture, which saith,Phil. 3.19. Whose glorie is in their shame. Heare we then the Priests speake.
helpe the child was, if they had sought medicine still in Israel, and not at Endor, and of Belzebub. First then to shew how the Child grew thus to bee tormented, as I haue vnderstood it of his Parents, and haue heard the Child confirme it himselfe. The Boy returning homeward, from schoole, to Bilson in Staffordshire where hee dwelt, an old woman, vnknowne, met him, and taxed him, in that he did not giue her good time of the day, saying that he was a foule thing, and that it had been better for him if he had saluted her. At which words the Boy felt a thing to pricke him to the very heart.How the Boy came first to be possessed. In fine, the Boy came home, lan∣guished some dayes, and at length grew into ex∣treme fits, that two or three, (though hee was a child of 12. yeeres of age) could hardly hold him. The Parents of the Child, seeing the extremity of the fits, and the misery and imminent danger of death euery houre the Child did lye in, mooued with tender compassion, sought helpe of Catholicks, and with cap and knee, by the meanes of some friends, did sollicit a zealous Gentleman; who o∣uercome with their earnest suit, did vse some prayers and lawfull exorcismes allowed by the Ca∣tholicke Church, with whose prayers the Child was eased something, and the force of the spiritu∣all Enemie abated. The Gentleman insisting to know how many was in him; to his thinking hee said, Three. Hee (good Gentleman) called away partly by the danger of the place, as also by his vr∣gent businesse,Two others meddied with him ere Jcame. they sought and sent for a zealous Gentleman, whose zeale and vertues are sufficient∣ly
knowne, yea and acknowledged by Gods ene∣mies themselues. He moued with compassion came thither, vsed his best prayers and meanes that at that time he thought conuenient; very much wea∣kened the diuels force, and quelled the extreme fiercenesse of the fits. Yet hee, within a day or so, withdrew himselfe for the same cause; yet though absent in person, was most mindfull of his misery. In so much as he did negotiate with mee, in that I had been present many times in the like occasions, that I would see him, and make tryall whether hee were possessed, or obsessed. I was very vnwilling, yet ouercome by his intreaty, and the former mo∣tiues, I promised him to doe my best, and to see him within the space of one moneth: yet so I dis∣posed of my businesses, that I came thither in the space of a weeke, about Thursday before Corpus Christi day, where I did finde the Gentleman that requested me to come: and finding that they had vsed Sorceries of Witches, which made the Child offer violence to himselfe, wee would not meddle with him, till they had burned those Sorceries ap∣plyed to him, which they forthwith did fulfill. Whereupon we vsing the reading of the Litanies, and the holy Gospels, together with the Exorcisme of Saint Ambrose, when I came vnto those words that shewed the power that Saint Peter had ouer Simon Magus,The diuell could not seduce Saint Peter and Saint Paul. and Saint Paul on the Magician Bariesus, the Child would bee so tormented, that three or foure could hardly hold him; which words tooke effect in manner as often as they were vsed. The other Gentleman call'd away, I was left alone,
till it pleased God the Gentleman that had first meddled with him, by great chance came thither. He and I both did our best, till Saturday about two of the clocke, at which time, vrgent occasions, though diuers wayes, called vs away: yet wee left holy water,The vertue of holy water, and of holy oyle. also water properly against Witchcraft, and holy oyle: the first hauing that power, that it would make him speake, though dumbe, and his tongue turned into his throat; and the second that force, that being applyed in a little quantity vnto his legs and armes most grieuously contracted, that a strong man could hardly vnfold them, onely with the force of the holy oyle they would bee stretched forth as they were vvont. Wee intreated them in our absence, to vse the holy waters and oyle in his extremities, and that wee absent, would assist him the best that wee could in our prayers; which they continued: on Saturday, Sunday, and Munday, with extreme fits and heauings hee brought vp pinnes,Strange things voyded. wooll, knotted thred, thrums, rosemary, walnut leaues, feathers, &c. the which he still drinking of the blessed water, brought vp: and when hee could not speake, hee would make signes for that water, with the letting dovvne of vvhich, presently he recouered his speech. Well, on Thursday, being Corpus Christi day, about three or foure of the clocke I came againe, found the Child in great extremities, continually heauing vp, and in this time he had brought vp 11. pinnes, and a knitting needle folded vp in diuers folds. On Fri∣day next, he brought vp the last pinne. I told them that I vvas glad that hee brought vp most of those
things in my absence, that well they might see that really they came from him, and that it was no col∣lusion of vs. On Saturday night finding the Boy to my thinking somewhat obstinate; I, before the Parents, wished him not to be deluded by the E∣nemie, but that if he spake any thing within him, he would impart it to vs, that wee might counsell him for the best. A great while the Child would not heare vs, yet at length hee said, hee would not tell vs before all the company. I asking then to whom he would tell it, he answered, to your selfe, so the others would leaue you: hee gaue mee leaue after to signifie vnto his Parents, sisters, and bro∣thers thus much: First,The Boy tels what the diuell and Witch say in him. that the spirit bade him not to hearken to me in any case. Secondly, that the Witch said, that shee would make an end of him, and that she would bring in othergates things into him, if it were not for me, whom she called a Ro∣guish P. Thirdly, shee said I destroyed all her good things. Fourthly, shee said, that though I should helpe him, yet shee would haue a saying to his brothers and sisters. Fifthly, hee desired mee to tarry with him vntill Munday, for when I should leaue him, he said hee should be torne in pieces: whereupon I, according to the prescript of the Thesaurus Exorcismorum, did blesse fire, and did burn those maleficialia, Sorceries, those filthy things that came from him; at smoke of which, and the fire thereof being temperate onely, and in a Cha∣fing-dish, and the smoke onely of Frankincense, he would vehemently cry out that he was killed, bur∣ned, and choked; though my owne selfe, and di∣uers
others were neerer to all then himselfe. At length hee seemed greatly to reioyce, and with great eagernesse dranke vp the smoke, saying that he saw his Enemies tormented. I wished him then to pray for the Witch, and for her conuersion from that wicked life;The markable deuotion of the Child. which he did: then the Child did declare that now hee was perfectly himselfe, and desired that his bookes, pennes, inke, clothes, yea that euery thing he had might be blessed; wishing his Parents, sisters, and brothers to blesse them∣selues, and to become Catholicks; out of which faith, by Gods grace, he said hee would neuer liue or dye. On Sunday also I exorcised him, but di∣uers Puritans resorting to him, I could not haue conueniency to come till towards night. All which day he had many fits, and I comming to him, lear∣ned of him that still while the Puritans were in place on Saturday,The force of ill company. as also at other times, hee saw the diuell assault him in forme of a Black bird. Well, I persisted in exorcising him, left him very well speaking and merry, retired my selfe, hauing seene his meate and drinke blessed. They then af∣ter giuing him a Syllibub, the sugar whereof being not blessed, he presently at the taste thereof began grieuously to be tormented. Yea, though he loued flowers,The power of blessed things. yet if vnblest, hee would teare them in pie∣ces, and distinguish them from other; and vn̄∣blessed Raisins he would say were too big for his mouth. I was sent for, and I had not charged him long, but at each charge I did finde the diuell very much to tremble: I hoping of Gods especiall as∣sistance at that time, made the diuell to swell in his
mouth, in signe of his presence, and to expresse first by signe, how many were in him: which he did, holding vp three fingers. I caused them then, one by one, to descend into the great toe of the right foot, and at the entring thereof to shake it, and to stirre the legge; all which they did higher and higher, to signifie how one was greater then ano∣ther: then I caused the Boy to speake, who did ac∣knowledge that hee would liue and dye a Catho∣licke, wishing father, mother, and all his friends to serue God: then I called vp the chiefe Fiend, and did demand him to shew himselfe, who presently puts forth the Childs tongue, and swelled the end thereof. Then I (all being Protestants,A markable thing. sauing one Catholicke) commanded the diuell to shew by the sheet before him, how he would vse one dying out of the Romane Catholicke Church? who very vnwillingly, yet at length obeyed, tossing, pluck∣ing, haling, and biting the sheet, that it did make many to weepe and cry forth. Then I commanded him to shew how hee did vse Luther, Iohn Caluin, and Iohn Fox; which vnwillingly he did performe after the same manner, but in a fiercer sort. Then I commanded him to shew what power he had on a good Catholicke that dyed out of mortall sinne? hee thrust downe his armes, trembled, holding downe his head, and did no more. Heereupon the Parents were instant with me, presently and out of hand to helpe the Child. I told them that I did not doubt but by the power of Gods Church (on which I did onely relie, and not on any personall vertue of mine owne) to cast them out presently.
But I said,A coniecture why the Child might be pos∣sessed. I did feare that the innocent Child was punished for the sins of his Parents, which might be for their lacke of beliefe; which is a sinne great enough, since without faith it is impossible to please God. Yet hereupon I said to his mother, Good woman, will you promise mee that you will become a Catholicke, if in your sight I cast out these diuels in forme of fire? shee answered, that she must consider of that: then said I, I am afraid this Child will not haue helpe; for, fearing the Child was punished for her lacke of beliefe, I doubted that the cause remaining, the effect also would remaine. Hereupon the Child gaue a great shrieke, began to be vehemently tormented, grew obstinate, in so much that I feared another diuell was entred. I exorcized him also a long time: but the diuell with the Childs voyce cryed, The Lord in heauen, the Lord in heauen. A long time I exorcized him, but still he was obstinate, crying out, Father, mother, helpe me, helpe me, saying that I killed him: and when I gently strooke him on the head with a soft ribbon blessed, he yelled forth that I kil∣led him, cursing me, saying, A poxe of God light on the P. saying moreouer, I will neuer bee conuerted; to which word a Protestant then by, that had seene all, replied, Thou wilt then do worse. Here I commanded the diuell that spake,The Child being himselfe, denies all the diuell had vttered by his tongue. to shew himselfe in the tongue, who comming forth as out of a trance, I asked him gently, whether he had vt∣tered any of these words? he vtterly denied to haue spoken them, asking forgiuenesse, saying, that it was not hee that spake them; and affirming, by
Gods grace, that he would be constant in the Ro∣mane Catholicke faith till death. Then I called vp the wicked spirit, tooke his oth, that with trem∣bling hee tendred to be obedient in all to lawfull Exorcists, and not to hinder the eating, drinking, or sleeping of the Child. Then it being almost three of the clocke in the morning, I retired to bed: the next day, being Munday, I came and told the Parents, that I had tarried there as long as I had promised, and as long as I well durst for dan∣ger, and as my promise to others would permit, but promised them to come againe as soone as I could. The father then offered me the Child to dispose of as I would. I told him I had no conue∣nient place for that purpose; but I said, that if hee would not deale with Witches and Sorcerers,The reason why J lest to come any more. I would come as often as I could. The father said, he would seeke of Witches, or of any other for help. I being sorry to heare his bad resolution, told him that I would not mingle God and the diuell together: and then got his promise that hee would not vse holy water and oyle blessed, if they meddled with Witches. Yet I heare, that he hath not complyend with his promise, in extremities of the Boyes fits, hauing recourse to blessed things, saying, he will course him with them. Well, the substance of all this I haue heere written, at my comming away I declared before three Prote∣stants, and the Childs Parents, desiring them, that if I did not say truth in all things, that they would challenge me therein. Then the Child being  a sounding fit, anoynting him with holy oyle,
bring him vnto himselfe, in so much that with a staffe he walked vp and downe; and since, hee did eate, drinke, sleepe, and walke, hauing onely short fits, as I am faithfully informed, yea till shortly af∣ter they entertained many Witches and Sorcerers; notwithstanding whose helpe sought in vaine, hee is more grieuously tormented then euer before. Here before my departure, the Parents of the child offering me money and gold, I refused it, thanking them, saying, If they would giue mee 20. pound, I would not haue one penny: Charging them that they should not indanger their owne soules, and the soule of the poore Boy, in seeking vnlawfull meanes. And thus on Munday was fortnight I left him: and the truth of this I must say with S. Paul, that God knowes in all this I doe not lye. Thus desiring that all may succeed to Gods glory, the good of the Child, and the confusion of all Sorceries and Charmes, which in my heart and soule I detest, I leaue the Parents, Child, and thee, Christian Reader, to the mercy of God. Iuly the first. 1620. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam. Yours in charity, loue, or in any good office, J. W. This Relation was published by the Priests themselues, and deliuered by one of them, called Master Wheeler, into the hands of Master Thomas Nechils Gent. a Recusant dwelling neer the aforenamed towne of Bilson: as appeareth by his owner confession, vpon oth, taken before the L. Bishop of Couen∣try and Lichfield; and added in the end of this Booke.
THE EGREGIOVS CVNNING OF THE BOY OF Bilson, in counterfeiting himselfe to be bewitched, and possessed of the diuell. THis Boy, being about thirteen yeres old (but for wit and subtilty farre exceeding his age) was thought by diuers, to bee possessed of the Diuell and bewitched, by reason of many strange fits, and much distemper, wherewith he seemed to haue been ex∣tremely affected. In those fits hee appeared both deafe and blinde, writhing his mouth aside, conti∣nually groning and panting, and (although often pinched with mens fingers, pricked with needles, tickled also on his sides, and once whipped with a rod, besides other the like extremities) yet could he not be discerned by either shrieking or shrink∣ing, to bewray the least passion or feeling. Out of his fits he tooke (as might bee thought) no suste∣nance which hee could digest, but together with it, did voyd and cast out of his mouth, rags, thred, straw, crooked pinnes, &c. Both in, and out of his fits, his belly (by wilfull and continuall abstinence
defrauding his owne guts) was almost as flat as his backe, besides, his throat was swolne and hard, his tongue stiffe and rolled vp towards the roofe of his mouth, in so much that hee seemed alwayes dumbe, saue that hee would speake once in a fort∣night or three weekes, and that but in very few words. Two things there were which gaue most iust cause of presumption that hee was possessed and bewitched; one was, that hee could still discerne when that woman (which was supposed to haue bewitched him) was brought into any roome where he was,Ione Cocke. although she were very secretly con∣ueyed thither, as was one time tryed before the grand Iury at Stafford: the second, that though he would abide other passages of Scripture, yet he could not indure the repeating of that text, viz. In the beginning was the Word,Ioh. 1.1. &c. Ioh. 1. vers. 1. but instantly rolling his eyes, and shaking his head, as one distracted, hee would fall into his vsuall fits of groning, panting, distraction, &c. In which plight he continued many moneths, to the great wonder and astonishment of thousands, who from diuers parts came to see him. Thus much of his cunning. The meanes of discouering his dissimulation. AT the summer Assises held at Stafford,Summer Assises held at Stafford, xviij. Iacobi R. 1620. the tenth of August, Anno Dom. 1620. the afore-menti∣oned woman, supposed to haue beene the Witch, was brought to her triall, before the R. Worshipful Sir Peter Warberton, and Sir Iohn Dauies Knights,
then his Maiesties Iustices of Assize for that Coun∣tie: before whom appeared some slender circum∣stances, which were vulgarly esteemed strong proofes of Witch-craft; but after some speech, ma∣nifesting the idlenesse of such fantasticall delufi∣ons, the woman was freed by the Inquest. At what time the Iudges were pleased to commit the care and (if it might so be) the cure of the Boy vnto the L. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, then, and there present. When he had been with him at the Castle of Eccleshall, about a moneth (much of which time his Lo. was necessarily absent from home) although diuers symptomes gaue iust cause to suspect that he did but counterfeit; as namely, the easie and e∣quall beating of his pulse in his strongest fits, his quiet rest and sleepe, commonly the whole night long, his cleere complection, and (which plainly tells euery beholder that his tongue lyed in saying nothing) his swallowing of whole morsels of bread without chewing, his spitting forth from him as naturally and perfectly as euer hee could doe in his best health, (neither of which could possibly bee done with a tongue turned vpwards, and doubled towards his throat, as he would seeme to haue it,) besides, his ordinary comming forth of his fits al∣wayes with one kind of lowd and large tunable grone: yet notwithstanding his vsuall casting vp of his meate, his much fasting, and lanke belly, his patience, or (as it might rather seeme) senselesse stupidity, in induring those many prickings and violent extremities, without any signe of feeling,
did argue some bodily disease and infirmity. Therefore it was, that no experiment was vsed on him, vntill that the iudgement of some well ap∣proued Physician might be had, to deliuer in what state his body then was: neuerthelesse, after a long∣some expectation of such an one, an occasion of∣fered it selfe, which required and exacted a more speedy and present triall. The Father of the Boy (an honest Husbandman of sufficient ability, innocent and ignorant of any practice in his child) came with an Aunt of his to see him: when, being out of his fit, the Father ear∣nestly demanded what might bee thought of his sonnes case, and whether he were possessed, or not? Whereto it was purposely answered, that nothing seemed so maruellous, or so much to betoken any such thing, as that at the hearing of those words of the holy Gospell of Saint Iohn,Iohn 1.1. [In the beginning was the Word, &c.] he still vsed to fall into his fits. For further proofe whereof, then presently in the Fa∣thers hearing those words were repeated; and ac∣cordingly vpon the repetition thereof the Boy fell instantly into his fit. Lo (quoth his Father then) doe you see? what thinke you of this? This (said the Bishop) doe I like very well; for vpon this must I begin to worke. The same day in the afternoone (when word was brought that the Boy did speake) diuers resort∣ing vnto him, the Bishop calling for a Greeke Testament, said vnto him; Boy, it is either thou, or the diuel, that abhorrest those words of the Gospel: and if it be the diuell, he (being so ancient a scholer
as of almost 6000. yeeres standing) knoweth and vnderstandeth all languages in the world, so that he cannot but know when I recite the same sen∣tence in the Gospell out of the Greeke text: but if it be thy selfe, then art thou an execrable wretch, who playest the diuels part, in lothing that part of the Gospell of Christ, which (aboue all other Scrip∣tures) doth expresse the admirable vnion of the God-head and manhood in one Christ and Saui∣our; which vnion is the arch-pillar of mans salua∣tion. Wherefore looke to thy selfe, for now thou art to bee put vnto triall; and marke diligently whether it be that same Scripture which shall bee read vnto thee; at the reading whereof thou doest seeme to be so much troubled and tormented. Then was read vnto him, in Greeke, the twelfth verse of the first Chapter of Saint Iohns Gospell, [, &c.] which he supposing to be the first verse, did accordingly, as he was formerly wont, fall into the passion of a trance. This fit being quickly passed ouer, next was read vnto him, in Greeke, the first verse, being indeed the aforesaid text [ &c.] yet he suspecting that it was not the same text, was not any whit troubled therewith. By this meanes was his notable fraud, in a man∣ner, fully discouered, in so much that he seemed to be greatly confounded heere with: notwithstan∣ding, staring with his eyes, and casting his head on both sides the bed, wheron he lay, that he might dissemble his dissimulation the better, hee told the company y he was troubled at the sight of 2. mice.
After this discouery, (to the end that  might be freed from further triall, and bee sent home a∣gaine to his father) hee complained of extreme sicknesse, and by writing, as well as hee could, did signifie that he had a great paine in his belly: and the morning following, making water in an Vri∣nall, his water was as blacke as Inke; for there were some that writ very legibly therewith. And in the like sort, two dayes following hee seemed to make water of the same colour. Which that hee might the more cunningly dissemble, hee, in the making thereof vehemently groned; and there∣upon one comming into the roome to him, the Boy did shew him his manner of making water, whereof a little remaine came then from him, of the same blacke tincture, which hee purposely had reserued within the skinne, to make semblance that it so came immediately from him. But the third day following (which was the Lords day) by diligent watchfulnesse, and other meanes which was vsed to obserue him, hee was espyed mixing Inke with his Vrine, and nimbly conueying the Inkhome into a priuate place. When being suddenly deprehended in this his conueyance, after an earnest, but louing exhorta∣tion made vnto him, this deafe began to heare, and dumbe to speake: and at the sight of his vngracious and godlesse practices, he brast out into plentifull teares, confessing all, to his owne shame, and Gods glory. Which confession (before he had heard of the aforesaid Relation of the Priests) hee made the same day, in manner following.
THE FIRST EXAMI∣NATION, AND CONFESSI∣ON OF THE BOY OF BILSON, NA∣med William Perry, taken before the Reuerend Father in God, Thomas L. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, at Eccleshall Castle, 8. Octob. 1620. touching his counterfeit practi∣ces, &c. BEing examined how long since, and of whom hee had learned such tricks and coozening deuices? The Boy re∣collecting himselfe, answered as fol∣loweth: In Lent last (said he) there met me, not farre from my fathers house, an old man, who called himselfe Thomas (but his surname I cannot remember) hauing a gray beard, russet apparell, and carrying a cradle of glasses or pots on his backe, who said vnto mee after this manner: Now, pretty Boy, where dwellest thou? dost thou goe to schoole? If thou wilt doe as I shall teach thee, thou shalt not need to goe to schoole; for (said hee) I can teach thee such tricks and feats, that the people that see thee, shall beleeue that thou art bewitched, and so shall lament and pitty thee. Whereupon I being
willing not to come at schoole, for feare of whip∣ping, was desirous to learne such tricks. By and by this old man began to teach me, first, how to grone and mourne; next, to roll and cast vp my eyes, so that nothing but the white of the eye should bee seene, after that, to wrest and turne my necke and head both wayes towards my backe, then to gape hideously with my mouth, & grate with my teeth, to cling and draw in my belly and guts, to stretch out my legs, and clutch my hands: after that, to put crooked pinnes, rags, and such like baggage, into my mouth, that I might seeme to vomit them vp. And although (said he) that some folke shall put thee to paine, by pricking, and pinching thee, yet thou must indure all patiently. After this sort hee taught and learned me some six seuerall times pri∣uately in a Close, where none could see vs. And further, that old man made mee beleeue, that a body possessed could not indure to heare the first verse of the first Chapter of S. Iohns Gospell,Iohn 1.1. (viz. In the beginning was the Word, &c.) and that therefore whensoeuer I heard it, then I should fall into my fits. Besides, hee willed mee that I should begin to doe these feats, when it should next hap∣pen that I should be ficke: and that then I should accuse some one body or other (whom I had heard to be accounted a Witch) to haue bewitched mee. And thereupon afterwards, of my selfe, I did accuse one Ione Coxe, and was once minded to haue made my picture in clay, and to haue conueyed it into her house, for the better proofe of her bewitching me.
Being examined how long after it was that hee began to put these things into practice, and vpon what occasion? Hee answered; Not long after, (which was about the Easter following) I began to be sicke, and my father sought helpe for mee in di∣uers places: and then some Papists did perswade him to seeke for helpe at the hands of some Catho∣licke Priests. But my mother did rather desire to haue some learned scholer or Diuine that was no Papist. Yet at length, by their perswasions, there was first brought vnto me a Priest,I. Priest. of an indiffe∣rent tall stature, with long blacke haire, in a gree∣nish suit, his doublet opened vnder the armepits with ribbons. As soone as he came to me, hee drew a stone out of his pocket, and hanged it about my necke, say∣ing some Latine prayers ouer me, putting also his finger into my mouth: whereupon I seemed to come out of my fit. After that, hee made holy-wa∣ter, and witch-water, saying certaine prayers ouer them, and putting salt into the witch-water. Then he gaue me a bottlefull of the one of those waters, (but of which I doe not remember) and willed me now and then to cast some of it ouer my bed; and himselfe, with a little Isop, did besprinkle me there∣with also. Before he went away, he said certaine o∣ther Latine words or prayers ouer those waters, (which to my remembrance) did thus sound, Eggse eggse atque famulo Dei Gulihelmo ante damnando, and more there of I cannot remember. The next morning (as I remember) this Priest came againe, at which time (because I lay in a
lower roome, where many people thronged in to see me) they remoued me into an vpper roome, more priuate and fitter for them to pray in, where they continued and vsed the like meanes towards me, as they had done before, betwixt a fortnight and three weekes space, during which time I con∣tinued my wonted fits. Then at last, this Priest said that he could not helpe me, because hee wanted a booke, which hee sent for vp to London: but after that the book was brought, he then said yt he could not helpe me, without the aide of another Priest, whom after that he brought with him.II. Priest. Hee was a short big fat man, with blackish long curled haire, in a kind of russet coloured suite, with a sword by his side. As soone as he saw me, he said, that by the helpe of God and our Lady, and the holy Saints of heauen, he would either cast the Diuell out of mee that night, or else it should goe hard. And first, hee drew out a little booke of the bignesse of a Pueriles, in which he continued praying, til about 11. a clock. of the night, and casting holy-water on me. Then both these Priests went away, but came a∣gaine vnto me in the morning, and then they made as much holy-water as a pale could hold. But in the end they confessed that they could doe mee no good, without the helpe of a third Priest, whom they did send for by a Weauer of our towne. About a weeke after came the third Priest,III. Priest. being a reasonable tall old man, in a horsemans coat, with long head-haire: before hee came to our house, he did say to the man that fetcht him (as I did heare) that if the spirits came to me, then I was
obsest; but if they were within me, then I was pos∣sest. The big fat Priest came in with this last Priest, and first hee put his finger into my mouth, and said, that I was bewitched at the tongues end: wherfore he bade me drink three or foure draughts of holy-water, which I did: he taught mee also to pray to the Virgin Mary, and to my good Angel, and to all the Saints in heauen to helpe me. Then he washed my head, feet, and belly with the same water, saying now and then to mee, Thou art now somewhat better, Boy? and I would say, Yes, a little better. About the same time, my father comming one day home before supper, he asked mee what I had seene in my fits? and I told him that a thing came to me in the likenesse of a Black-bird. And now the Priest that came last vnto me, went out of towne, these three Priests hauing bin with me about three weekes, but could doe me no good. About a weeke after,II. Priest. came the big fat Priest a∣gaine, and held on his former course, saying, that by. Gods grace he would helpe me. About which time hee made a Sermon to certaine Catholickes which were with me, hauing a white Surplesse on him, with a stole (as I remember they called it) a∣bout his necke: his Text was, My flesh is bread in∣deed, and my blood is drinke indeed. After his Sermon, he prayed with me as he had vsed to doe: and then made another paleful of holy-water, wishing them to boyle certaine herbs in water, to wash mee with∣all; as Time, Isop, and such like. Vpon the Sunday following, people came in so
thicke to see me, that the Priest durst not preach; and he intended to be gone the next day. His fashion was, to blesse and crosse all the meat which both themselues and I did eate: so that when my mother once gaue mee some of a Sylla∣bub, which the Pr. had not crossed in the same manner, he told them that there was a Puritan spi∣rit entred into it. These three Priests dealt with mee at sundry times, that I should confesse my sins vnto them: which I did sometimes, when I listed to speake, but that was but now and then. They wished mee also to turne to their religion, and that then I should haue helpe. Vpon that Sunday night before that this fat Priest was to goe away, he said, that by the helpe of the blessed Virgin, and the Angels and Saints in hea∣uen, he would cast the Diuell out of me. A little after, he began to aske certaine questions of the spirit within me; as first, what should be∣come of the Puritans when they dyed? and he told me, that if they went to hell, then the spirit should tug and shake the bed-clothes: which I did doe after the same manner he bade me. Next, he asked what should become of the Roman Catholickes, and if they should goe to heauen? that then, in signe thereof, I should lift vp my hands, which I did also. Then the Priest said, Come out of thy fits, Will, in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the ho∣ly Ghost: whereupon I seemed to come out of a fit, and then hee prayed by mee, and said, that hee would cast three diuels out of me that night. And
so he hanged about my necke, and put vnder mine arme a fine stole, wrought with great siuer letters: and with the one end thereof, being very hard, hee did beate me about the head and face, vntill to my thinking hee made mee blacke and blue; chafing & rubbing my neck with that stole, which was so rough, that it made my necke very sore: and still he spake to the spirits within me, thus; Come out, you Rogues, you Villaines, I charge you by God and the bles∣sed Virgin, and by all the Angels and Saints in heauen, that you suffer the Boy to eate, and sleepe: and withall, he stamped with his feet, as he spake those words. Then he told my father that he would throw out those three spirits one after another, so that they should plainly see them come forth. And if hee should doe so, hee asked my mother whether shee would become a Catholicke, or no? She answered him that she would consider of it. Then, said he, wil I also consider whether I will helpe your sonne, or no. But yet the Priest continued as he had begun, and said vnto me, If there be three Diuels in thee, then giue three knocks, in signe thereof; and so I did: but at the biggest Diuell hee willed me to giue the greatest thumpe, which I did at the last. And still the Priest did beate me with his stoale, & so continued with me til about three of the clocke in the morning: during which time, certaine Papists were sent to pray with me, bringing hallowed candles with thē. At the same time, the Priest tooke suchViz Crooked pins, rags, straw, &c. and such things as the Boy could sinde and steale, into his mouth; as he did once halse a knitting∣needle. things as I had seemed to vomit, and burning them with Frankincense, hee tooke an old rusty sword, and
said a Latine prayer, resembling it to the sword wherwith Peter did cut off Malchus his eare: he also did beate the same things with an hammer, beto∣kening that hammer which nailed Christ to the Crosse. The morning being come, the Priest was to bee gone, and then my father said vnto him, Sir, I see you can doe my Child no good, and therfore I must seeke for some other helpe. Yes (said the Priest) you will goe seeke for helpe at witches to ease his body, but you care not for damning his soule. But yet before he went away, hee did hallow more water, and then he departed. And here the Boy was suffered to pawse, and repose himselfe, by reason of his weake∣nesse; and was not then further ex∣amined till the next time.
THE SECOND EX∣AMINATION, AND ANSWERE of the said William Perry, made vnto certaine other questions, which (vpon iust and special presumptions) were propounded vnto him by the Reuerend Father in God, THO∣MAS, Lord B. of Couentry and Lichsield, taken at Eccleshall Castle, the 13. day of Octob. Anno Dom. 1620. FIrst, it was demanded of him, that seeing the old man (called Thomas) perswaded him that at length hee should be cured by some Popish Priest; whether hee meant not ac∣cordingly in the end to seeme to bee dispossessed by some, or one such of them? He answereth, yes; and further, that thereupon he meant to become a Papist. Secondly, being asked, that if hee did meane so, why then he would not, after so long a time, and so great paines taken about him by those Priests, yeeld to their Exorcismes, and seeme to bee dispos∣sessed by their meanes? Hee answereth, because that much people did
resort vnto him, and brought him many good things; as also for that he was not willing to goe to schoole againe: yet that in the end his meaning was to be holpen by them. Thirdly, being asked that after hee saw himselfe halfe discouered, whether in his griefe and feare that all should come to light, he had not an intent to doe himselfe some bodily mischiese? He answereth, that he had; for (saith he) the Di∣uell hadIt was his owne word. steeled my heart, so that I cared not to hang my selfe; and had purposed to doe so one night, but that I was watched, and hindred. Fourthly, being asked how it could be thought that he should be moued by any Papist, to charge a woman for bewitching him, which was her selfe an obstinate Recusant? He answereth, that hee was moued by Thomas the old man, to lay it on some woman so suspected: but that onely of himselfe, without the perswasion of any other, he named thisIone Cocke. woman; because she was a woman ill thought of, and suspected for such like things. Being here put in mind of the desire, which for∣merly before his discouery he had to be prayed for, as was accordingly then done, but (as at the same time was told him) not to driue the Diuell out of his body, but onely out of his soule, wherin the Di∣uell had possessed him, by a diuellish obstinacy of his heart, in faining himselfe to be bodily possessed of the diuell: And being further wished to remem∣ber how that after those prayers he writ on a paper, that he had found much ease thereby: He was here∣upon demanded, whether he did not as then intend
and resolue with himselfe to make an end of his former course, and counterfeit practices; and seeme to be dispossessed by such prayers? He answereth, that it was indeed in his minde to doe so, because hee had then wearied himselfe with dissembling so long, and was also in feare to be discouered and found out. And albeit this was easily discerned to haue bin his resolution, yet (as was at that time told him) it became not the Professors of truth to imitate the Popish Priests in such cases, who falsly arro∣gated to themselues such an Apostolicall power, by Exorcizing to expell Diuels, although it might (in mans opinion) much worke for the glorifying of God, edifying of Christian people in our Church, and also for the conuerting of Romish Recusants vnto our true Religion; because this ought to bee the profession of Christians, to seeke to glorifie Him onely by truth, who will bee worshipped in spirit and truth. And here was an end made of examining the Boy any further. Examinat'. coram praefat'. Rdo Patre dictis diebus, anno, & loco; Praesente Ryc. Baddeley, Notario Publico.
THE BOY OF BILSON, his priuate and publike Acknow∣ledgement, &c. NOw after those PopishBilson in Staffordshire, is a Chappelrie within the pecu∣liar Iurisdiction of Wooluer∣hamptō, where sacrilegious im∣piely hath pro∣duced such ef∣fects, that it is much insected with Popery, & insested with Popish Priests, whose ordinary Rendeuouz it is. No maruell therefore if they made choyce thereof, as the fillest nest wher∣in to lay and exclude their addle and sup∣posititious egs of politicke impo∣stures and god∣ly deceits. But this Cockatrice was crusht in in the shell, and their viperous disseine thereby deseated. Priests were departed, and had left the Boy (as be∣fore is confessed, and set downe) his Father sought for further helpe by the meanes of Witches, (but as wickedly, so all in vaine) vntill such time as he was brought from the towne of Bilson aforesaid, vnto Lichfield, before Doctor Master Chancellor of the Dioces; where he continued vntill hee was carried to the Assizes at Stafford, and there by the Iudges referred and left vnto the aboue-named Reue∣rend Father in God, the I. Bishop of the Diocesse; who after a very short time sent to Bilson for him, and after his arriuall did deale with him, as former∣ly in this discourse hath been related. Since which time, the Boy, vpon laying to his charge the hainousnesse of that his offence, as be∣ing blasphemous, in respect of Christ, whose words in the Gospell he fained himselse to abhorre; and di∣uellish, in respect of the Diuell, whose person hee would seeme to bee possessed of; and also murthe∣rous, in respect of the poore Woman, whom he wil∣lingly occasioned to bee brought (as much as in him lay) to the poynt of death: He hath earnestly
bewailed these his sinnes, and (as after his first Ex∣amination) by prayer coneiued by himselfe, to such purpose, craued forgiuenesse at Gods hand for the same. So hauing continued at Eccleshall Castle afore∣said, vntill he was perfectly recouered of his for∣mer weaknesse, and benummed limmes, and that his Parents were willing to dispose of him other∣waies, hee was finally brought againe to the last Summer-Assizes held at Stafford, the 26. of Iuly,Summer Assi∣zes held at Staf∣ford, 19. Iacobi R. 1621. Anno 1621. where before Sir Peter Warburton, and Sir Humfrey Winch Knights, his Maiesties Iustices of Assize, and the face of the County and Coun∣trey there assembled, the Boy craued pardon first of Almighty God, then desired the Woman there al∣so present, to forgiue him; and lastly, requested the whole Countrey, whom hee had so notoriously and wickedly scandalized, to admit of that his so hearty Confession, for their satisfaction. And thus it pleased God to open the eyes of this Boy (that I may so say) luto, with the clay of the Romish Priests lewd impostures; and sputo, with the spittle of his owne infamy, to see his errors, and to glorifie the God of truth. Gloriasoli Deo.
THE EXAMINATION AND ANSWERE OF THOMAS NECHILS of Nechils, in the County of Stafford, Gentleman (a Recusant) taken vpon oath before the R. Reuerend Father in God THOMAS L. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, at Eccleshall Castle, the 17. of Octob. Anno 1620. touching the afore∣mentioned Relation of the Priests, of their proceedings with the Boy of Bilson. BEing examined whether hee knew a written discourse then shewed vnto him, touching the Boy of Bilson, enti∣tuled and beginning thus; A faith∣full Relation of the proceedings of &c. and ending in these words, Yours in charity, loue, or any good office? Hee answereth, that hee doth very well know, and remember the same. Being examined how hee came first by that dis∣course, or Relation, and from whom he had it? Hee answereth, that it was deliuered vnto him by a Gentleman, whom he met iourneying on the way towards Lichfield, whose name was Master Wheeler, as he told this Examinate. And, being further de∣manded, he saith that he was as a man of a reaso∣nable
stature, round faced, about fiftie yeeres old, and of a blackish complection. Being examined what further discourse did at that time passe betwixt them two, touching the said Boy, called VVilliam Perry? He answereth that the said Master Wheeler then told this Examinate, that he would acquaint him with the whole busi∣nesse, concerning that Boy: whereupon hee gaue this Examinate a copie of the afore-named dis∣course or Relation (hauing two copies at the same time about him) and willed this Examinate to get it copied out, and to giue one copie thereof vnto one Philip Higgins of Westbromage Yeoman (as hee this Examinate remembers.) And further, that the said Master Wheeler said vnto this Examinate, that was no matter who should see it. Being further examined what the said Master Wheeler did at the same time acquaint this Exami∣nate with, touching himselfe? Hee confesseth that he told him how that he did often vse to resort vnto the French Embassadour: that hee did know the Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield; and fur∣ther, that he was knowne to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Tho. Nechils. Examinat'. coram praefat'. Rdo Patre dictis die, anno, & loco; Prae∣sente Ryc. Baddeley Notario Publ.
