12169 99841504 6090
Floreat.
THE Passionate Sparke of a Relen∣ting Minde. ¶ WRITTEN BY Simion Grahame. Quo fata vocant. Seene and allowed by authority. Printed at London by Humfrey Loynes, and are to be sold at his Shop at the West doore of S. Paules Church. 1604.
TO THE HIGH AND Mightie Prince Iames, by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, Fraunce and Ireland. &c. THis sparke comes from the quenchlesse fire of my euer-burning loue, which (to your Highnesse) J sacrifice vpon the Altar of my spotlesse hart. Jn the seruent flames of this ardor, my Muse with restles flightring wings combur's, stil hoping to be Nourished with the radiant beames and propi∣tious splendors of those gratious Eyes. Then, O then let not the
Mistie Ʋapors of darke Obliuion o∣uercloud the bright quickenesse of such shining Suns. But rather let the Jnfluence of their admired ver∣tue exhaust these my rude lines vp into the rare and rich treasure of your Maisties superaboundant fa∣uor. So ending (to begin againe) J wish your Grace a most happie and long Reigne. Your Maiesties euer louing subiect. Simion Grahame.
To the King his Maiestie. 1 GO thou proud Muse with thy ambitious flight Let Wisdome with her pleasing plumes adorn thee If lofty thou should'st soare thy selfe from sight, What need'st thou care, the worlds Enuy to scorn thee? 2 Let Heau'ns thy Song with Ecchoes still resound, A Royall Subiect doth thy wings vpholde, And bids thee Mount aboue the valted Round, Loue hath no scope, bee prodigall and bolde. 3 Go then my Muse His mightie Muse adore Pull of the Veile that hid thy high desire With consort sweet she shall thy song decore, Her feathers faire giu's promise to aspire.
4 Then like the Larke ascen'd the Azure Ayre, With quiu'ring wings goe houer in the skye, Out blast thy Notes, and send them here and there Filling his eares with this melodious Crye. 5 O mightie King, Celestiall glory shine Ouer thy Crowns and thy earth'ruling hand, Let harts inspir'd thy happines deuine: And let the world come stoupe at thy command. 6 Fame through this Globe most furious-like shall thūder Fraught with thy praise on Vertues worth to flee And choke the Earth with such admiring wonder That potent Kings may come and honor thee. 7 Hartes shall Consume, of thy astonish'd foes To see thy rare and high stupendious street All paueat (whereon thou sacred goes) With Crownes and Scepters thrown before thy feet. 8 Why hear'st thou not thy smiling Fortune call, And bids thee spurne that pleasure mak's thee stay? Goe climbe her wheell, be not afraide to fall Thy strength but thinks this world a slender pray.
9 Seeke first thy owne, what force can thee resist? A name with nought, makes all thy people rage Like eager Haukes, reteinde vpon the fist, Who cannot haue their hunger to asswage. 10 The Apple stayes the simple Childe to weepe, And doth appease his sobbing heart of harmes: So flatt'ring songes lulles courage fast a sleepe, And makes the Souldier throw away his Armes. 11 Now sits he wrapt vp in a warme furr'd gowne, Ouer the fire with firme-fixt-gazing eyes: There battels braue Characters doth set downe, Hee apprehends which thought deceiuing sees 12 An Armie there in bloudy rage forth goes, With furie for'st, swelde with reuenge and griefe: And yonder flyes their faint and feeble foes, Heere standes some troopes cut of without reliefe. 13 Some Martiall men bewitch't with beauty rare, Are intricate in Laborinthes of Loue: And for'st to trie in fancies flatt'ring snare, What sweet-mixt-sowre or pleasing paines can proue.
14 Then Nymph-like-she with strange intising looke Doth so inchant the gallant minded men The bayte still hides the poyson of the hooke Till they be fast, and thus betray'd, what then? 15 Poore captiue slaues in bondage prostrate lies Yeelding vnto her mercy-wanting-will Shee in disdaine scornes all their carefull cries. And Circes-like triumphes in learned skill. 16 With ambling trippes of beauties gorgeous grace Aurora-like in firie colors clad And with bright reflex of her fairest face She tempting goes with brainsicke humors lad. 17 Fearing that if she should but looke below Then Beames would from her burning eyes descend On Iuory brest proud swelling hils of snow Would melt, consume, and all their beauty spend. 18 And so she lets her curled lockes downe fall Which do allure the gentle cooling winde To come and play stil wrapping vp in thrall Chaines of her haire, fonde louers hearts to binde.
19 Beautie in prime adorn'd doth feede the fight From Crimson lipps sweet Nectars gust forth flowes Odor's perfumes the breath, not Natures right White Iourie hands a sacred touch bestowes. 20 And when those pearle of Orientall-rankes With treasure rich of tempting sound deuides From two bright daintie mouing-corall-bankes In▪circkled cares calme smothing speeches slides. 21 Ech sencelesse sence on doting pleasure fast Doth in a carelesle Register inroule. Wishing that course of swift-wing'd Time to last Which spots the spotlesse substance of the soule. 22 But oh beholde, Nature in morning weede Wepes to be wrong'd with supesttitious Art For what can braines of rare inuention breede? Or what's vnsought which pleasure may impart? 23 The sharpest wit whose quicke deceiuing still Makes restlesle musing of their minde to try Vaine trifling snares, mixtur'd with Magicks skill So Art adds that which Nature doth deny.
24 And thus much more sweete Syrens songs she sounds, To charme, coniure and tempt his hstning care: Oh, then the poore Captiued wretch abounds In peruerse vowes and monstrous othes to sweare. 25 By furious force of Fancy more than madd, With fond desire in restlesse course hee hunts: Blinde Loue can not discerne the good from badd, When on the eye-plumde tayle of pride it mounts. 26 The curious minde makes choise of good or ill, Then scales the fort of his engine to clym Aboue the top of Art exceeding skill, Perfect in that predominates in him. 27 Drunke with the wonders of a worthlesse worth, From prospect of a looking glasse he takes Strange Apish trickes to set his folly forth, Mockt with the gesture, that his shadow makes. 28 When foolish feates no waies will serue his turne, All hope is drownd in despaires groundlesle deepe: In restlesle bed (hee martir'd man) must mourne, Thoughts, sighes, and teares admitt no kind of sleep.
29 Thus layes the Conquest Conquerour of fieldes on his hurte harte he carries Cupids skarre. The skiruie fainting Coward basely yieldes: to idle Loue the enemie of warre. 30 Now Trumpets sounde, braue Martiall musick turnes To fiddling noise, or ells some am'rous songe, That glorious fame her winges of worth now burnes, When golden youth in prime must suffer wronge. 31 Thus gallant sprights doe quintesence their wittes, Spending the rare inuention of their braines, On idle toyes, at which high honor spittes, Nor memoriz'd memorials remaines. 32 What Marble minde at this would not amaze, To see the ambusht robberies and spoyles, O Royall Sir, with Conquring eyes now gaze, Conquer this losse tha'ts lost in all thy soyles. 33 Goe, goe, and make the skiruie world to yielde force Which trembling stoopes, made feareful with thy Outsprede an host vpon ech forreigne fielde: And from selfe pleasure, doe they selfe diuorce.
34 (But stay my Muse recall this word of woe) Thy selfe shall with thy second selfe abide, The glorious issue of thy loynes shall goe His honor shall the proude earths honor hide. 35 It's he the florish of thy Princely prime, It's he that Kings are made for to adore It's he bewayles the slow and tardy time, It's he that weepes there is not worlds in store. 36 It's he that with a greater Courage com's, Than Godfrey did to sackt the Pagan Turke With Trūpets sounds & with great noise of Drum's, It's wondrous hee will set this world on wourke. 37 In his approach allegreat thy owne, With mightie Musicke of a Martiall mirth. Beholde thou mak'st great Neptunes pride be showne, Adorning him with such a gorgeous birth. 38 Let matchlesse marching-Castles with the winde, In Armies strong and stately troopes forth shine: Now let them goe as harbingers to finde▪ Ech vnknowne Coast and tell them all is thine.
39 Looke on that power that potent thou Commands, In learned Militarie Art, and how, Thy eager-harted ventring Subiects stands Wayting that Gallant warriours word. Goe tow, 40 Then doe not stay Victorious Troph's to raise, Let my Tryumphes through Sea and earth be spred, When thou art dead high fame shall pen thy praise, Of great renowne in volumes to be read. 41 Thou Eagle thou looke not on base fowles winges, Out-stretch thy owne and flye this world about. Thou Lyon thou leaue beasts and hunt at Kinges, From their vsurped dennes goe rouse them out. 42 Prowde Valor for the vangard shall make strife, And loftie sprights for Honor will aduance. Let him be loath'd that loth's to loose his life, Or in thy quarrell skornes to trye his chaunce. 43 He willbe first who dying liu'd to see, This soyle thy right gouern'd with thy great grace: And that blacke mist of vap'rous clowdes to flee Which long obscur'd the splendors of thy face.
44 O, when he heard thy peoples ioy proclame The righteous King in their exalting Cryes, And when he heard them sound thy sacred Name, He threw his hatte vp in the azure skies. 45 On the Tow'rs toppe incarcerat he stood, And said, O rare and sweete exchange in deede! Thou fleetst on Neptunes dutie-paying flood▪ Hatte, thou art lost, and I haue gainde a heade: 46 His Lady staide her sweete eyes siluer streames, The hart-burst sighes which that deere dame did breath: Thou with the radiāt brightnes of thy beames Expeld her woes, and his vntimely death. 47 Pittie in thee doth Pitties selfe surpasse, With pittie heare thy peoples mourninge songes: Looke in abuse, as in a looking glasse, Appease this plague of their pestif'rous wronges 48 With treasure rich and rare adorniug giftes Of Iustice ioynde with mercy both in one: See how the worngde Complainer kneeling liftes, His hands, his eyes, and sighes with martring mone.
49 He saies O Sir I would to God thou sawe, What numbers great, Damn'd Vsurie doth kill The snakye Lawyer with vnlawfull lawe He suckes the hartblood of his Clients still, 50 His hopelesse shiftes will promise very fayer, And take their soule, if that their soule were golde He robbes them first, then drownes them in dispaire, So poore mens right, is to the rich men solde. 51 To come to thee alas they'r chokte with feare, Some are put backe, when kneeling on their knees Doe what they can before they get thy eare, The bribrous Minion, needes will haue his fees. 52 He takes in hand ech sute both great or small, And sweates they'r sure yea to them surely lost. For first he tryes the walue of them all, And selles them quite to those that will giue most. 53 When dayes, weekes, moneths and yeeres are spent he telles The Kinge will no waies graunt your sutes: farewell, This whorles the poore man in a hundred helles Both them and theirs to begge, to robbe, and steale.
53 O Heau'ns what filthie Colors can I haue. To painte such vgly Monsters in their kinde: They flatter most when they would most deceaue, There hony tonges stinges with a Vip'rous minde. 34 It's this vile Caterpillers Mischeifes-Nurse, That fills thy Commons full of sad Complaintes, Thou com'st to cure this strange consuming Curse, At which I know thy ruthfull hart relents. 55 I care not for the falty-ons enuie, I know this Phisicke makes his soule to smart: O that it could both make him Weepe and Crie. Whil'st Conscience-worme eates vp his giltie hart. 56 Spare not Reuenge, God sends thee to redresse, Long-suffring-greife, and Rigor to remoue Treade down their heads that would the poore oppresse So shalt thou win and keepe thy peoples loue. 57 Still may thy loue with their true loue be bought, Still may thy Crown bring Crownes vpon thy Crown Still may thy worth with wond'rous worth be wrought Stil may renowne inrich thy rich renowne.
51 Still maist thou reigne in happines and health And still mayst thou in being euer bee: Belieue me Sir my loue is all my wealth, And all that wealth I sacrifice to thee. So only Loue hath giuen my Muse this flight, And makes her come salute thy sacred sight. FINIS.
Of a Bee. De l' Ape ch' loprenai Dolce, e Crudele Le ago nel Core, Nella bocca La mele. Madrigall. Once did I see a sounding Bee. Amongst her sweetned swarme still would shee flee and fauour me. Then did I dread no harme. Now whilst in Nectred-glory of her gaines, Shee sitts and suckes the fayre well-florisht flower: My sugred hopes are turn'd to bitter paines, And lookt▪for-sweete is nothing elles but sower Ah cruell sweete Bee sweet and cure my smart, Honny my mouth, but doe not stinge my hart. FINIS.
To the famous Ile of Glorious Britannie. 1 ON Parnasse hill whilst as I sit to sing▪ Of stately ioy the streames that by me slides: Sweet consort yeelds from the Castalean spring Whose murmure still in Siluer veines deuides, Then intricate with courses to and fro▪ They seeme to turne whil'st as with speed they go. 2 The Muses scarse in circuit is sat downe, When Laureat troopes comes kneeling mee before, In humble show ech takes his Lawrell Crowne, And sweares they shall this subiect all adore: So am I forc'd by thee, O wondrous worth! In warbling notes sweete consorts to send forth. 3 With nine-voyc'd mouth, my Delphin song I sound, Of all the world blest bee thou Brittaines Ile. Thou, onely thou within this mortall round On whom the Heau'ns haue lou'de so long to smile For Phanix-like thou hast renewde by kinde In getting that which lay for thee iushtinde.
4 Thy present time doth winter-blast dispaire At force of Joy the barren branch decayes Long florish'd hope now fruitfull is and faire Whose lod'ued birth with burthen bowes the bayes, So downeward tops inclining still below Such homage to their owner do they show. 5 Then soyle in this most happie haru'st your right Ripe sweete desire in spight of vilde Enuie So shall you with your Monarches▪matching-might Make earthly Kings to feare your conqu'ring crie The circuit of this spatious Ball at length shall yeeld vnto your armie potent▪strength, 6 As sounds below relents the Ayer aboue That hideous noyse of Thunderclaps may swage So proud vsurping mindes shall stoope to mooue The Lion read to stay his roring rage Their honors high when he hath made them thrall Since with his force their forcelesle force must fall. 7 Hee threatens th'earth with such tryumphant might That makes his foes afraid to heare his name On Vertues wings oreshinde with honors light Borne through the world with euer flying fame Which still the Eccho of his might resounds A terror threatning these terrestiall bounds.
8 His Scepter proud and his great conqu'ring hand Will erect Troph's of high Triumphes on all Earth-ruling mindes stooping at his commaund Adorn'd they are by him to bee made thrall. So Monarch hee must cause ech potent King, For him and his rich tributes for to bring. 9 No treasons gilt, such threatningss can abide Nor Vipers vilde who cates their tongues to barke With feares confus'd must needs their selues go hide And lye obscure in the Cemerian darke. From light debar'd to pressage Plutoes place Where mōstrous spirits such mōsters shal imbrace 10 Sweld with Enuie and poys'ned great with griefe Most serpent-like spewes Vennome on their owne Damn'd harts abhord whose mutins breeds mischief They with their selfe, their selfe shall bee orethrowne. So diu'llish braynes brings restlesse murther still They silthie frogs ech one shall other kill. 11 Then subiects true on honors throne set forth No death your eternized life can end For famous feates ad's wonders to such worth▪ And truth still doth a shining light out send Whose glancing beames reflexing heere and there By flowing quilles of Poets are made rare.
12 Now happie Ile sequestred liues no more Since ioyn'de expell the excrements of wrath And let their foule ambitious factes implore Their owne orethrow and well-deseruing death. Rase downe, tread on their turrets of Enuie Whose pride would mount aboue the valted skie. 13 The Register of Memorie beholde How God of wonders, wondrous works hath wrought When life past hope to Treason he was solde, Till threatning▪death in dangers mouth him brought In such extremes deathes ambush was in vaine For Heau'ns strong hand did saue him stil vnslaine. 14 All high attempts of deu'llish foes was foyld All hideous noise of horrors did asswage All tragike troopes of hellish thoughts was spoylde And rigors selfe gaue rigor to their rage Ensignes displaid whose terror them confounds Whilst conqu'ring Ioy victorious trumpet sounds. 15 The ship which death with tempests grief did threat'n And gulfes of seas was readie to deuoure When restlesse-mercy-wanting-stormes had beat'n At last came safe vnto her long-sought shore. So heau'n now brings him to his hau'ning place Still to succeed to him and all his race.
16 The vpright in each true externall thing Bewrayes the force hart▪burnig-loue doth yeald For smiling lookes of such a gratious King Shall make your loue with lise and blood be seald, Vnworthie to enioy this mortall breath Who for this King or countrey feares their death. 17 The Altar is a spotlesse minde whereon You sacrifice and offer vp good-will Loue yeelds the fuell from the hart alon Which once inflam'd is quenchlesse burning still Then Martiall feates shall breed couragious strife, In battels braue to trye a carelesse life. 18 Though the Idaa of your long desire Vnsetled Time obscures him for a space Yet shall this Time with comming Time expire And then receiue fruition of his face Who Iustice seekes, his wisedomes eyes shall see With Reasons right each may contented bee. 19 Lo Spring-time comes, long dark'ned Sun com's out All to renew that Winter blastes had spoil'd When sending forth, his gorgeous beames about, Hopes haru'st expel's which high dispaire had foil'd So hope triumphes, dispaire lies quite o'rethrowne Sweet Soyle thou hast which God hath made thine own.
20 Misconster not his well-inclining-minde Doo not mistrust, for Triall lurkes in Time Why to his Kingdomes shall hee prooue vnkinde, And glorie stayne of his adorning prime? No counsaile can make him become so strange, Nor earthly pompe his burning loue to change. 21 Murmour no more nor bee not discontent When constant loue and spotlesse Iustice stands With eager piercing lookes for to preuent All kinde of foule oppression in his lands. This is the right inricheth his renowne, This is the oath made to his royall Crowne. 12 And you whose long tormented hearts hath still With cloudie mistes and darkenesse been obscur'd You all the world with Tragike volumes fill What woe's deuis'd that you haue not indur'd Your Register this Rigor may recall, Shame, bloodshed, death, still captiues led in thrall. 23 In guiltlesse him, no crueltie doth dwell Nor from his mercy neuer sprang mischiefe Your conscience read and it shall surely tell His hands are wash'd as causelesse of your griefe Then let the bloud the banishment and death Bee on their heads the Authors of your wrath.
24 What though a King? yet Kings are sometime forc'd To yeeld consent with vnconsenting hart As from his will vnwillingly diuorc'd That no vprore should rise any part: Such is the onely prudence in a Prince That 'gainst a murm'ring Momus makes defence. 25 Why, doe not then degorge satyrike words Vsurping right, thou shalt vsurpe thy braine For lo nought else such foolish feates affords: But diu'llish guerdon for thy greatest gaine, And still thou shalt infamous make thy name When as thy end's to end in endlesse shame. 26 If Christian thou, then Christian-like abide Till flowing fauour from his Kingly loue By Stately rule thy fredome shall prouide When mindes remorse and mercy shall him moue, So Conscience thral'd, made free and griefe is gone Then shall his Soyles contented hue in one. 27 And dark'ned Clouds that lowers vpon you heads Giues place vnto the glori'us shining Sun Whose burning beames with radiant splendor spreads A restlesse race not ending still begun To shew the ods 'twixt heau's Caelestiall light And glomy mist of Helles eternall night.
28 From treasure rich of Gods immortall store Let feruent loue in fity flames descend And sill you: hearts with pittie to implore That heau'ns preuenting hand may him defend Let highest curse breath forth consuming woes For to conuert or else confound his foes. 29 A gratious King whose Mercie still abounds A gallant Queen by Nature made none such▪ A Prince whose worth Iames restles Trumpet sounds And Princesse she I cannot prayse too much A King a Queene, a Prince, a Princesse rare O Soyle, what Soyle, can with this Soyle compare. 30 Then happie Ile, in this thy happie day Gods thundring voyee with harts relenting heare Whil'st heau'ns high Troopes theatred in array With sounding loy before Christs throne compeare In consort sweet melodious songs to sing Liue hue great Iames most blest and potent King. FINIS.
To Scotland his Soyle: To thee my Soyle (where first I did receiue my breath) These Obsequies I sing Before my Swan-like-death. My loue by nature bound which spotlesse loue I spend From treasure of my hart to Thee I recommend. I care not Fortunes frowne, nor her vnconstant Fate: Let her dissembling smile and tryumph in deceate. Curs'd be that man which hoords his hopes vp in her lap, And curs'd be he that builds vpon her haplesle hap. I tread on that blinde Bawd and scorne hir sowre-mixt-sweet, In spite of all her spite I spurne her with my feet. Now let her spet more wrath (If any more yet bee) Let horror of her hart thunder at carelesse-Mee. Then all the flatt'ring showes of Fortune I disdaine, So farewell Soyle and friends, a Pilgrime once againe. FINIS.
His Passionado when he was in Pil∣grimage. 1 THou Phaeton thy fity course do'st end, and Cinthia thou with borrow'd light do'st shine These woods their silent horrors doo out-send, And Vallies lowe their mistie Vapors shrine, Each huely thing by natures course doth goe To rest saue I that wander now in woe. 2 My plaints impart these soli'd partes to fill, Whil'st roaring Riuers send their sowndes among Each dreadfull Deen appeares to helpe me still, And yeelds sad Consorts to my sorr'wing song, How oft I breath this wofull word alace, From Eccho I sad accents backe imbrace. 3 I wil▪ aduance, what feares can me affray▪ Since Dreades are all debar'd by high dispaire, Lake darke nights-Ghost, I Vagabond astraye With trobled spri't transported here and there, None like my selfe but this my selfe alone I matur'd man bewaile my matchlesse mone.
4 You flintic stones take eares and eyes to see This thundring greife with earthquake of my hart That you may sigh and weepe with miser-Mee Melt at the tragicke Commentes of my smart. Let these my teares that fall on you so oft Make your obdurate hardnesse to be soft. 5 You liquid droppes distilling from mine eyes, In Christall you▪ my second selfe appeares▪ Patterne of paine, how do'st thou sympathize In visage wan, and Pilgrim's weede thou beares? And on those signes of miscontent attire Still doe I read, debar'd from my desire. 6 This hairie Roabe which doth my corps contain This Burden and my rough vnrased heade A winter and a summer haue I bin In dangers great still wandring in this weede, Loe thus the force of my disasters strange Hath made me vse this vnacquainted change. 7 I am dri'd vp with Dolors I endure My hollowe eyes bewray my restles night My Visage pale selfe pittie doth procure I see my sores deciph'red in my sight. A Pilgrime still, my Oracle was so, And made my name, AH MISER MAN I GO.
8 Now doe I goe and wander any way, No strange estate no kinde of trau'ling toyles No threatning Crosse nor sorrow can me stay, To search and seeke through all the sorts of soyles. So round about this Round still haue I run, Where I began, againe I haue begun. 9 In strangest parts where stranger I may bee, An outcast lost and voyed of al reliefe: When saddest sights of sorrow I can see, They to my graue shall helpe to feede my griefe▪ If Wonders selfe can wofull wonders showe That sight, that part, that wonder I will knowe. 10 Thus doe I walke on forreigne fieldes forlorne, To carelesse-Mee, all cares do prooue vnkinde, I doe the Fates of sickle Fortune scorne: Each Crosse now bredes contentment to y minde Astonish of stupendious things by day, Nor howling sounds by night can me affray. 11 You stately, Alpes surmounting in the skyes The force of floods that from your heights down falles There mighty Clamors with my carefull Cries, The Ecchoes voice from hollow Caues recalles. The snow froz'n-clowds down frō your tops do thū∣der Their voyce with mine doth teare the ayre a sunder
12 And Neptune thou when thy proude swelling wrath Frō gulphes to mountaines mou'd with Winters blast In anger great when thou did'st threaten death Oft in thy rage, thy raging stormes I past And my salt teares increast thy saltnes more, My sighes with windes made all thy bowells rore. 13 The spatious earth and groundlesse deepe shall beare, A true Record of this my mart'ring mone And if there were a world of worlds to heare (When from this mortali Chaos I am gone) I dare approue my sorrow hath bin such That all their witts cannot admire too much. 14 On the colde grownde my Caytife-Carcasle lyes, The leaueles trees my Winter▪blasted-bed. Noc Architecture but the Vap'rous skyes, Blacke foggie Mist my weari'd corpes hath cled, This lothsome Lae on which I restles tourne Doth best befit Mee-Miser-man to mourne. 15 With open eyes Nights darknes I disdaine▪ On my Cros'd▪brest I Crosle my Crossed armes And when Repose seckes to preuent my paine▪ Squadrons of Cares doe sound their flesh alarmes So in my sleep (the Image of pale Death) These sighing words with burthen brus'd I breath.
16 I euer row'd my Barge against the streame, I scal'd those steppes that Fortune did me frame I Conquer'd, which impossible did seeme. I, haples I, once happie I became Now sweetest Ioy is turn'd to bitter gall The higher vp the greater was my fall. 17 What passing Follies are in high Estates, Whose foolish hopes giue promise to aspire: Selfe-flatt'rie still doth maske the feare of Fates Till vnawares deceiu'd in sougth desire, This breeds dispaire, then force of Fortunes change Setts high Estates in dread and perrill strange. 18 There secret grudge, Enuie and Treason dwelles There Iustice lies, in Dole▪bewraying weede There slyding Time with alt'ring feates still telles The great Attempts ambitious mindes doe breed. They who haue most still hunt for more and more They most desire that most are choak'd with store 19 Henceforth will I forsake Terrestiall Toyes, Which are nought ells but shawdowes of deceat What Couer'd danger is in earthly ioyes, When vilde Enuie, triumphes on each Estate. Thou Traytor Time thy Treason doth betray And makes youthes Spring in florish fayre decay.
20 What's in Experience which I haue not sought All (in that All) my will I did aduaunce At highest rate, all these my witts are bought In Fortunes Lottrie, I haue try'd my Chaunce. So what I haue I haue it not by showe, But by experience which I truly knowe. 21 Long haue I search'd and now at last I finde, Eye-pleasing-Calmes the tempest doth obscure. When I in glory of my prosp'rous winde, With white▪sweld▪sayles on gentle seas secure And whē I thought my Loadstarre shin'd most faire Eu'n then my hopes made shipwracke on dispaire. 22 My light is darke whil'st I am ouerthrowne, Poore silly Barke that did pure loue possesse: With great vngratefull stormes thus am I blowne On ruthlesse Rockes still deafe at my distresse. So long-sought-Conquest doth in ruin's bost And saies behold, thy loue and labor's lost. 23 Since all my loue and labor's lost, let Fame Spit forth her hate and with that hatefull scorne In darke obliuion sepulchrize my name: And tell the world that I was neuer borne. In me all earthly dream'd-of-Ioy shall ende. As Indian herbes, which in blacke smoke I spende.
14 All-doting-pleasure, that all-tempting-Deuill, I shall abhor as a contag'ous Pest I'le purge and clense my sences of that Euill I sweare and vow, still in this vow to rest, In fable habit of the mourning blacke I'le solemnize this oath and vow I make. 15 Then goe vilde World confused Masse of nought, Thy bitternesse hath now abus'd my brayne Auoid thy deu'llish Fancy from my thought With idle toyes torment me not agayne. My Time which thy alluring folly spent With heart contrite and teares I doe repent. FINIS.
Against Time. SONNET. GOe traytor Time and authorize my wrong▪ My wrack, my woe, my wayting on bewray Look on my heart which by thy shifts so long Then tyranniz'd with Treason to betray My hopes are fled, my thoughts are gone astray And sencelesse I haue sorrow in such store That paine it selfe to whom I am a pray Of mee hath made a martred man and more. Go, go then Time, I hatefull thee implore, To memorize my sad and matchlesse mone Whilst thy deceipts by death I shall decore My losse of life shall make them known each one, So (I poore I) I sing with Swan like song, Go traytor Time and Authorize my wrong. FINIS.
¶ The Estate of worldly Estates. 1 EAch hath his Time whom Fortune will aduance Whose fickle wheel runs restlesse round about Some flatt'ring lye oft changeth others chance Dangers deceipt in guiltie harts breeds doubt. It's seene What yet hath beene With tract of time to passe, And change Of Fortune strange At last hath turn'd their glasse. 2 Enuie triumph's on tops of high Estate All ouer-hung with veiles of feigned show Man chmbes aboue the course of such conceate That lothe-like, they loath to look below. And what? All's haszard that Wee seek on Dice to set, For some To height's do come Then falls in dangers net.
4 The gallant man, if poore, hee's thought a wretch, His Vertue rare is held in high disdayne The greatest Foole is wise if he be rich And wisedome flower from his Lunatique brayne, Thus see Rare sprit's to bee Of no account at all. Disgrace Hath got such place Each ioyes at others fall. 3 The brib'rous minde who makes a God of gould He scornes to plead without he haue reward Then poore mens suites at highest rat's are sould Whilst Au'rice damn'd, nor Ruth hath no regard. For heere He hath no feare Of Gods consuming curse His gaines Doth pull with paines Plagues from the poore mans purse.
5 The furious flames of Sodom's sodaine fier, With feruent force consume vaine Pride to nought With wings of wax let soaring him aspire Aboue the Starres of his ambitious thought. And so When hee doth go On top of Prides high glory Then shall His sodain fall Become the worlds sad Story. 6 Ingratitude that ill,-ill-fauor'd Ill In noble brestes hath builded Castles strong Obliuion sett's-vp the Troph's that still Bewrayes the filthie vildenesse of that wrong. Ah minde Where deu'llish kinde Ingratitude doth dwell That Ill Coequals still The greatest Ill in hell.
7 On poysons filth contagious Error spreeds Heau'ns spotlesse eyes looks as amaz'd with wonder Their Viprous mindes such raging horror breeds To teare Religions virgin-roabes asunder. What then O wicked men And Hels Eternall pray Go mourne And in time turne From your erronious way. 8 What course wants crosse? what kinde of state wants strife? What worldling yet could euer seem content? What haue wee heere in this our thwartting life? Ioy, Beautie, Honour, Loue, like smoak are spent. I say Time goe's away Without returne againe How wise! Who can despise These worldly vapors vaine. FINIS.
His Dying song. 1 NOw haplesse Hart what can thy soars asswage Since that art grypt with horror of Deaths hand? Thou (baleful-thou) becoms the Tragick stage Where all my tort'ring thoughts theatred stand: Griefe, feare, death, thought, each in a monstrous kinde Like vgly monsters muster in my minde. 2 Thou loathsome bed to restlesse-martred-Mee Voyd of repose, fill'd with consuming cares, I will breath forth my wretched life on thee, For quenchlesse wo and paine, my graue prepares Vnto pale-agonizing-Death am thrall Then must I go, aud answere to his call. 3 O Memorie most bitter to that man, Whose God is Golde and hoords it vp in store, But O that blind-deceiuing-Wealth what can It saue a life, or add one minute more? When hee at rest, rich treasures in his sight, His Soule (poore Foole) is tane away that night.
4 And strangers gets the substance of his gaine, Which he long sought with endlesse toyles to finde This vlde worls silth and excrements most vaine, Hee needs must dye and leaue it all behinde. O man in minde remember this, and mourne, Naked thou cam'st, and Naked must retourne, 5 I naked came, I naked must returne▪ Earths flatt'ring pleasure is an Idle toy For now I sweare my very Soule doth spurne That breath, that froth, that moment fleeting ioy, Then farewell World, let him betray'd still bost Of all mischiefe that in Thee trusteth most. 6 Burnt-Candle, all thy store consum'd thou end's, Thy lightning splendor threat's for to be gone, O how do'st thou resemble Mee that spend's And sighs forth life in sighing forth my mone? Thy light Thee lothes, I loth this lothed life, Full of deceipt, false enuie, grudge, and strife. 7 I call on Time, Tim's alt'red by the change, I call on Friendes, friendes haue clos'd vp their eares I call on Earthly Pow'rs, and they are strange I call in vaine when Pittie none appeares. Both Time and friends, both Earthly Powers and all All in disdaine are deafe at my hoarse call.
8 Then Prayer flowe from my hart-humbling knees, To the supreame Celestiall Throane aspire, And shew my griefe to heau'ns all seeing eyes, Who neuer yet deny'd my iust desire. Mans helpe is nougth, O God thy helpe I craue, Whose spotlesse blood my spotted Soule did saue. 9 Then take my Soule which bought by thee, is thine, Earth harb'ring-worms, take you my Corps of Clay, O Christ on mee Eternall mercy shine, Thy bleeding woundes wash all my sinnes away. Now now I come to thee O I-su sweet, Into thy hands I recommend my Street. FINIS.
