1468 99842663 7338
FOVRE BOOKES of Offices: ENABLING PRIVAT persons for the speciall seruice of all good Princes and Policies. Made and deuised by BARNABE BARNES. LONDON Printed at the charges of George Bishop, T. Adams, and C. Burbie. 1606.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE LORD, IAMES by the grace of God King of great Bri∣taine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. And in him, Barnabe Barnes (the most humble and loyall Subiect of his Maiestie) wisheth the very perfection of all spirituall and temporall felicitie. Blessed Soueraigne. A Iust King (which like a single eye fixt in the righteous scepter of God, and by diuine ordi∣nation sent as a bright Angell of his worship to gouerne amongst the children of men) is hye∣roglyphically represented by figure of the sun. For as a vertue which vertueth other inferiour Starres, it holdeth the golden bridles of the day: whose seate is therefore by preheminence esteemed most noble, because as a iust Iudge placed in the middest, it equaly distributeth light to those other Planets, giuing grace to Saturnes grauitie, might to Iu∣piters maiestie, fortitude to the force of Mars, beneuolence to the beautie of Venus, pith to the persuasion of Mercurie, with con∣stancie to the Moones mutabilitie by the royall gouernment of his equall power and diuine sapience, which moderateth all vn∣stayed perturbations of his people, as the Moone doth (by noble influence from it) restraine all turbulent and outragious billowes
of the violent seas, being through domination of this seuenth sphere so metaphysically kept within their bounds, that they can∣not transgresse nor vsurpe vpon earth. The Sunnes Chariot also (representing the iudgement seate of imperiall authoritie) drawne by foure horses figuring the foure columnes of royall maiestie, deciphered in these insuing offices, leadeth him through the Zo∣diak of the twelue Morall vertues; in and through which hee raigneth and gouerneth vpon earth in comfort, peace, and plentie, blessing the foure mightiest Princes of this world with the light of his countenance: as in ministring fire to Vulcanus, to Pal∣las the gray morning and balmy verdure of Ayre, which repurifi∣eth her vnderstanding with knowledge; to the great towering Goddesse Ops that motherly fruitfulnesse, which crowneth Ce∣res, Bacchus, Minerua, Pales, with corne, wine, oyle, and milke; lastly, to Neptune and Thetis, that infinite seed ingendred and multiplied of them in the waters: so that those foresaid Elements (out of whose vertues all creatures liuing & vegetant are by diuine ordinance composed) receiue life, and influence from the Sunne. This kingly Planet likewise holdeth dominion ouer the torments of hell; which should seem to be made out of the excesse and poi∣son of those foure Elements; as is euident by those angels which fell from the three hierarchies for their sins in pride, disobedience, Barth. Cassan. in  ter∣ partis catal. gor. mundi. sloath, wrath, enuie, lecherie, and gluttonie: for by the diuine musicke of Orpheus, these furies and torments were appeased, so that hee brought thence his wife Eurdice. For Phoebus is by the philosophicall Poets mythologically called, the God and Patron of Musicke, Prophecies, and Chirurgerie: which was to life expressed by that holy King Dauid, who (being both a blessed Prophet, and diuine in lyricall musicke) had by force of his melodie charmed that euill spirite, wherewith King Saul was possessed. Onely the chyrurgeries wherein true Prin∣ces are principally skilled, appeare in the saced notice and cure of those inward diseases and griefes that infect and ma∣cerate their flockes, which they like good and fatherly Shep∣heardes should heale with good Lawes and Discipline. And yet your Grace, hath that oyle of grace and comfort pow∣red vpon you more then your fellow-princes, to cure all mis∣chieuous and infistulated impostumes which GOD smiteth
vpon the iawes of his people, to make your glories the more in healing, and his glories infinite by those blessings bestowed vpon your annointed hands (which diseases are otherwise remedilesse) being a diuine gift from aboue to that holy King Edward your Maiesties antecessor, and after him to the rest of his sanctified seed by sacred direction legacied, as hath formerly beene to the Kings of France also. Wherefore your Highnesse (being Vnctus in regem & sacerdotem cum vnguento laetitiae super omnes terrae reges socios tuos) fitly resemble this bright Planet in his cleerest Maiestie; euen as that most sacred Psalmist King Dauid also, both for your Poeticall faculties, as in respect of your diuine Priest-hood, and chirurge∣rie, hauing by good experience (more then any man liuing euer did) tasted of the wonderfull wisedome and loue of God; who by such strange wayes surpassing humane reason, hath wrought out your Graces fortune in the weale of vs your louing and loyall subiects, farre beyond all the wily machinations, plots, and ima∣ginations of men, which haue (as your Royaltie well knoweth) beene manifoldly frustrated; that it might bee performed which God had ordained and promised by the mouthes of diuers sooth∣saying Augers, to perfect and establish in your seede the true try∣umphant and vniuersall Christian Monarchie. Howbeit as no man liuing can haue a sweeter taste or cleerer declaration of Gods vnspeakable power (beyond all the soundest counsels & resoluti∣ons of our mortal Princes) then your Grace hath had in all actions; considering the strange meanes that hath been wrought by God through the plots of men destined to other purposes, to make your name glorious, and that your royall seede might inherite this Empire: so neede wee not doubt but that like a good Physi∣tion, your Maiestie (as it hath already graciously begun the cure of some small diseases in this kingdome, which God onely left vn∣to your gacious wisedome, that the whole body might be kept cleane and at ease) shall auspiciously continue the same, to be the same vnder the golden rodde of your right royall posteritie for∣euer, by strong purgation and correction of the proud, cholle∣rick, and melancholick humors thereof, which is the true methode of a kingly Phisition, and shall doubtlesly bring the head and whole bodie to perfect peace, and health.
Against the Sunne (vpon which no reasonable creature can stedfastly fixe his mortall eyes, least they be dazeled, infeebled, or blinded with the pretious cleeretie thereof (being another type of sacred Maiestie) that imperiall bird soueraigning ouer the swift fethered creatures of the ayre by nature opposeth his sight: as Orus Apollo writeth in his hieroglyphiks, how the Sages of Aegypt and Chaldaean Priests (whē they would signifie diuine power, humane Empire, preheminence, blood, or victorie) did pourtraict an Ea∣gle. What miracles he findeth through his stedfast, sharpe, and penetrating inspection within that sanctified Orbe of bright ver∣tue, may be referred to those misticall naturallists, which in the Metaphysicall cardes of their reason haue obscurely shadowed those things, that by mythologies are out of many curious heades from farre shot at, by some neere hit, and by very few truely tou∣ched. Caius Iul. Caesar (to whom this Land with others contributed) gaue in his ensigne of golde, a blacke Eagle perpendicularly mounting: which Plinie noteth in the nature of that bird. For it is written, that ouer Caesars Hoasts when he marched to fight, di∣uers Rauens and Vultures did houer, and that two Crowes pro∣digiously with their wings and tallons eager in combination, strooke at his Beuer; wherupon auspiciously came an Eagle which (combating against their violence) slewe them both; and then immediatly perched vpon his imperiall crest. This ominous prodigie by the Augers was interpreted sinisterly, that Caesars insuing gouernment should be tyrannous: since which time the Romane Emperors haue alwayes borne in their ensignes that roy∣all bird, with which fortunately spreading his wings against their enemies, the Romanes did generally tryumph in many victories, and conquests. This Eagle also viuely representeth vnto vs, your Maiesties person, being onely your Highnesses scepter-bearing bird, with siluer fethers; which with his auspicious wings sha∣doweth the crownes of this Britaine Monarchie with peace of soule and bodie rooted in your blessed posteritie for euer. Vpon earth next to the Sunne and ayre, that aufull Magistrate (if of his Maiestie men may so terme the Lyon, bearing the scheme and fi∣gure of magnanimitie, which hath dominion ouer foure-footed beasts) is another portly representation of a perfect Prince: for
he despiseth dangers, remēbreth & obserueth him that shal woūd his bodie, thogh he be impaled with millions of men; thē he mer∣cifully spareth which vpon his pursuit prostrate their bodies; wo∣men and children (vnlesse vpon extreme hunger) he wil not hurt. Vigilancie (being another right royall garbe of a carefull prince) was portended by the picture of alyons head; forsomuch as that beast onely sleepeth with his eyes open: Qui tanquam sol patenti ig∣neoquèoculo Bart. Cassan. 78. consid. 12. partis catal. glor. mundi. terram conspicit. This noble creature in the person of for∣titude vpon the right hand supporteth the royall Escucheon of your imperiall crowne, assisted in our late deare soueraignes, and your Maiesties famously remembred sisters gouernment with prudence and vigilancie, portended by the Dragon; and since her death (if it may bee so called) with temperance, not exchanged; but as with the perfections of all vertues relieued, or reuiued ra∣ther in your Highnesse Vnicorne: of all these your blessed Ma∣iestie royally participateth, as in the person of a true vertuous, and sanctified king vpon earth. Vile is that wretched analogie, which the corrupt Florentine Secretarie Nicolo Machiauelli seruant to Duke Petro di Medici, did in his puddle of princely policies produce be∣twixt a true Prince and a mixt monster; resembling him (by the Il. Prencipe cap. 18 comm se debbe osser∣uar la fede. example of Achilles who was instructed by Chyron the Centaure) vnto a lion & fox, importing his strength & caution in all affaires: whereas it is well knowen, how no true prince can aptly be com∣pared to that vnsauory curre, if the very royall minde (which amply possesseth euery iust King) bee respected. For why not much more fitly might the comparison of Kings with Eagles then with base Foxes haue sorted, if that imperiall birde which in op∣position with his eye-brightnesse amiably looketh into the sun, can search, and penerate into the perfection of wisedome and knowledge, being figurately shadowed in Phoebus or Apollo, bearing also with him the thunderbolts of Iupiter (who mystical∣ly reueileth soueraigne Maiestie) to grinde, burne, and consume into powder the violence of his enemies? semblably me seemeth, that there should not be found any such difference in the state and condition of Princes, which the subtile Italian Sanazar made of a Pope in his time; that he was Bonus Princeps & malus vir: because he knew well how to gouerne, and did rule the people well, hauing
no proper facultie (by moderation of his owne appetites) to bee good vnto himselfe; for as Cicero citeth it out of Ennius, Nequicquam sapere sapientem, qui sibiipsiprodesse nequierit: (being intended there by the minde onely) so certainely cannot any Prince be verely good vnto himselfe, if he doe not gouerne his flocke (which is the grea∣ter part of himselfe) in the feare of God and exercise of Iustice: whence it was that Homer termed Agamemnon in one place, : and in another part : aswell for the pastorall charge, as for the prudent counsell and assiduitie required in him towards that function. Sanctitie & Iustice therefore (as I first said) by the propagation, corroboration, and aeternization of all crowns and Monarchies, are the two maine pillars of principalitie; being those inseperable adiuncts of your right royall Maiesties lawfull and victorious quadruple crowne of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, composed of the 4. cardinall vertues, which in this ensuing myrrour, framed out of the 4. immediate ministers or columnes rather of kingly Maiestie, with all humble dutie subiecting thē im∣polished as they be, to your princely eyes, I present to your royall hands, vnder a special pardō for my boldnes in daring as a poore vnlearned Scholler (which offereth his ignorance in some rude exercise vnto his learned Schoole-master) to trouble your sacred Maiestie with these imperfections. Howbeit, as euery man which writeth ought to rest vpon & leane vnto the grace of his Patrone; so can it not choose, but that hauing chosen so gracious a Patrone, farre exceeding all other in goodnes, I shall finde more true grace and beneficence out of your royall nature, for this one Caracter of my bounden dutie respected by such a Soueraigne, then by the be∣neuolence of any subiect And therefore I presumed to your high Grace, being the Castalian spring head (which the Greek Sages did say to be patronized by that bright Lord of wisdome & Poetrie) thinking there (after my labours) to refresh my troubled sences: where though vnworthy to tast, yet shal I receiue some ingenuous alacritie, by seeing that pure & preciously-purling current. And that I may the more to my consolation contemplate the royall sun-shine and serenitie which enuironeth your sacred temples (though your Grace lay not apart the beames of your Maiestie) yet vouchsafe I beseech, with your diuine annointed hands to an∣noint
these eyes of your humble subiect with the balmie dew of your gracious beneuolence, that I may bee the better inabled to looke vpon that consecrated Orbe of true maiestie; for had I been so timerous or faint, as in the regard of the vnworthinesse of my Booke protected the same by some priuate friend: then had I somewhat withdrawen from worth of the matter, which (how∣soeuer the methode and disposition thereof deserueth) doth also merite a royall Master, and had miscarried in the manner of my proceeding also: thinking that because these foure insuing estates immediately ministring vnder all crownes in euery Com∣mon wealth, are protected by royall soueranitie, your Grace was fittest also to patronize these my simple studies wholy conuersing in the properties and attributes of those Offices; which shall bee most highly honoured by the maiesticall protection of such a vertuous King, to his poore subiects exceeding comfort. My consi∣deration therefore was, that your Highnesse out of the Princely nature, which God with your Essence hath infused, would deigne so simple present of a poore Scholler, with the beneuolence which your Grace natiuely doth extend to learning: and that being hereafter published vnder that high Title many learned eyes, and curious fingers (not so much for the matter & forme of the Trea∣tise, as for the Maiestie patronizing it) would peruse these yong rules in this vnperfect accedence to gouernment, and percase beare them through diuers of your Maiesties Kingdomes. I haue also through my whole discourse (as occasiō serued) in di∣uers places made a continuall Apostrophe to your Maiestie, which I beseech your Highnes (euē as it is in sinceritie) so to refer it vnto the true meaning of my most dutifull & immaculate hart towards your Grace, and not to any vaine singularitie, nor presumption in my self. The God of al true light cōtinue that illumination, bright∣nes, and wisedom, which appeareth in your true graces, by that fi∣gure of the Sun; confirme that piercing inspection, apprehension, & prenotion of all princely deuises, wisdoms & practises, which may be bent in opposition to your Maiestie by forren kings, de∣cyphered in that imperial Eagle; & corroborate that true fortitude to the confusion of Gods & of your Highnesses enemies, which is expressed in the royal Lyon; so that your kingdoms being sustei∣ned, amplefied, & conserued by Iustice, prudence & fortitude frō
posteritie to posteritie through many generations, so long as it shall please God euenly to susteine this earth in her owne place within the firmaments, such serenitie may beame forth from your gracious wisedome; as foreuer may moue the peoples hearts of these your Kingdomes, of all your confederates and contributo∣ries, to daunce inwardly with praise and thankefulnesse vnto God, for that blessing which through your Graces speciall goodnesse infinitely succee∣deth to Gods people vnder your imperiall Scepter. Your most high Maiesties most humble and obedient Subiect. BARNABE BARNES.
To Master Barnabe Barnes, this Madrigall vpon his Booke. IF all the world were sought from Malta to Mone, From candid Gaule, to black-brow'd Calicute; No frame more various mought haue been made one In eu'ry ioynt, or point like absolute: For as some Spirits while they haue beene attent On states of Princes, and on earthly right, Haue follow'd the wordly side, with that intent; And yet vnmindfull of the highest Sprite. Others againe (too much I ween yblent With heauenly zeale and with Religion) Haue for the same the Secular forwent: So if a meane there be (as meane but one To twine the Crossier with the sword atone) O let me then (with licence) to avow, T'will, right Paladine, be by onely you. W. Percy. MVSOPHILYS. Spes calamo occidit. In honour of the Author by Tho: Campion Doctor in Physicke▪ To the Reader. Though neither thou doost keepe the Keyes of State, Nor yet the counsels (Reader) what of that? Though th'art no Law-pronouncer mark't by fate, Nor field commander (Reader) what of that? not this Boo for if thou mind'st to be Vertuous, and honest, it belongs to thee. Here is the Schoole of Temperance, and Wit, Of Iustice and all formes that tend to it; Here Fortitude doth teach to liue and die, Then, Reader, loue this Booke, or rather buy. EIVSDEMAD AVTHOREM. PErsonas proprijs rectè virtutibus ornas (Barnesi) liber hic viuet, habet Genium, Personae virtus vmbra est; hanc illa refulcit, Nec scio splendescat corpus, an vmbra magis.
To my singular good friend Ma∣ster Barnabe Barnes. GRaue Architector of a Commonweale, Well trauail'd in the mysteries of state, Vouchsafe me roome, among the rest some deale, Thy loftie frame to view, and wonder at: And where the workemanship doth please mine eye, To say, t'was wrought with painefull industrie. That's euery where, for all doth merit praise, The forme, the firme foundation, and the frame. The forme Quadrangular, most meete to raise, A Pallace sacred to eternall fame, Founded on wisedome, builded vp on high, With goodly lawes, and Christian policie. Vp held with foure strong Piles, whose bases ar, Sage Counsell, awfull Iustice, armed Might. Aboundant Treasure, sinewes of the war These make it strong to last, and faire to sight. Where soure such pillers doe the bulke sustaine, What feare we thunders, tpests, winds, or raine. Heere maist thou fix with bold Almena's sonne, NIL VLTRA, as the farthest continent, That wisest statist euer yet did runne, Within this world of ciuill gouernment. And as the woorke, so doth the style excell, That of Boterus, Bodin, Machiauell. Tho: Michelborne.
R. H. In commendation of the Author. Some vncouth Muse which mountes vpon the wings Of siluer fountaines, or sweet breathing windes, Chaunt out her notes when she diuinely singes To dignifie the state of these foure kindes: Which Treasurers to moderation bindes. And gracious prudence to graue men of State, Where Themis rules of sacred Iustice findes; Where fortitude doth sword-men animate, O let some potent muse, these great designes relate. And let bright fame whose worthy spirit pearceth The worlds whole center and those heaueuly speeres, Assume this taske for him, which here reherseth These morall Offices of States and Peeres. And thou that soundest in the prudent eares Thy golden trumpet of rich Oratorie, Gracious Thalia, let these learned Queares Be graced as thou doest, each gracious Story, That BARNES may liue by them, in euerlasting glorie. Robert Hasill.
Iohn Forde in commendation of his very good friend the Author. Not to adorne, but to commend this Frame, Drawne by the curious hand of iudgements art; Nor to commend, for this commends the same; But solace to thy labours to impart: A worke of thankes, out liuing terme of fate, In briefe prescriptions of a formall State. Great were thy paines, but greater is thy fame, Lock't in the Iewel-house of precious treasure; Which doth by Counsailes wisedome reare thy name, In equall Iustice of well-ballac't measure; Thou teachest souldiers discipline of fight, And they againe defend thy merits right. Write on rare Myrrour of these abiect dayes; Thy good example others will aduise: Thy subiect values loue, thy Studies praise, A president to youth, life to the wise: So euer shall (while times and Empires last) Thy workes by thee, thou by thy works be grac't. Verba, decor, grauitas, confirmant, denotat, ornat, lepidum, re, grauitate, manu. Iohannes Forda Encomiastes.
Barnabe Barnes his Preface to the honourable and discrete Reader. I Haue apportioned my foure bookes of Offices (wherin certaine speciall qualities and principles are expressed for generall go∣uernement, and the choise both of ciuill and martiall ministers in euery Commonwealth) vnto the foure vertues cardinall. For as much therefore as royall treasure (being the mainte∣nance of euery state, without which no principalities can con∣sist, or augment) ought to be mistically couched within the di∣uine treasure Temperance (which is the moderator & guide of her other three sister vertues ensuing) I therefore haue placed Temperance in this first Paralel, considering the resemblance which it should haue with a Princes treasure, so well in the manner of getting & leuying, as in the sauing & disbursing of mony by discrete moderation; which office of Treasurers possesseth the first booke of these offices. Prudence the substance of my second booke (deciphered & figuredin the secret counsellors office) participateth of that reasonable moderation, which is expressed in the first. Also Temperāce the treasurer with a gracious mildnes & motherly decency prudently pondereth and examineth all her actions, which are right noble and many, with her passions. Yet is it contrauertible whether temperance be passionate or no; though one of her sweetest graces gouerneth in patience. My third booke comprehendeth Iustice, which is in all causes seasoned with a re∣quisite moderation and taste of ingenuous temperance, and prudence: temperance being of it selfe an indifferencie void of extremitie, viuely representeth Iustice, be∣ing incorporate with equitie and prudence: because with a certaine prouident cir∣cumspection it iustly weigheth all things in the balance of reason. My fourth booke (in the same rancke conteining certaine qualities of a true soul∣dier) heroically representeth Fortitude; which with Temperance expressed in her patience, with Prudence in her foresight, and actions of honourable perill, with Iustice in the execution and maintenance of right, without any tolleration of publicke violence sisterly combineth: whereas semblably temperance in her bridling and re∣straining of inordinate appetite, prudence in her stout and constant equabilitie, Iustice in her seuere and firme equalitie (being merely pure from all blemishes of feare and affection) are all in themselues a fortitude. This is a diuine harmonie representing mentally by due distribution of humane charitie, the sacred vnison of mans soule sanctified with God. This is that mysterie
which Hermes, Salomon, Pythagoras, Solon, Plato, Socrates, & Aristotle, haue all of them oracularly shadowed in their eternities of wisedome: and by these foure are all blessed Monarchies, Kingdomes, Commonweales, and policies susteined, go∣uerned, directed and protected, that is by Temperance, Prudence, Iustice and For∣titude, shadowed as I said in the Treasurer, Counsellour, Iudge, and Souldier: for they be moderate, wise, iust, and valiant alike; that not any difference of their places is discerned, which of them may be greater or lesse then another. To this harmonious consent or concordance (whose ground in vison consisteth of a medium, which is the moderator or nauel-string of this unspeakeable musicke, re∣presenting the concealed and misticall accord of the numberlesse starres and planets contuning by the ineffable power of the most Almightie God in number and Sym∣phonie; by which sacredforce he worketh his will in all creatures: from fat all influ∣ence of which diuine torches of light, by the most miraculous power of the most migh∣tie mouer, all worldly chaunces happen; which some not well aduised haue called the wheele of fortune) there are extreames by the most metaphisicall disposition ordained preuaricating or transgressing those foure diuine centres, or moderators, which I doe thus denominate, define, and distribute. To Temperance therefore my first countertenor, one base, and one alie: for out of discords with the countertenor (being moderator) is the concord composed of per∣fect harmonie. The base hereof is couetous and vnnecessarie penurie when ability doth sufficiently reabound; the triple or alteis raised from extreame profusion or excesse, making a shrill and riotous confusion of all: one of these extreames continually conuer∣sing in basenesse and the other in haughtinesse throughout; as in the rest ensuing. To Prudence which is my second countertenor or moderator, the base falleth in∣to follie; the triple or alte lifteth it selfe into malicious wilinesse and calliditie. Here∣in doth follie participate with the first being couetousnesse, in that it wanteth a rea∣sonable discretion to make vse and comfort of Gods blessings bestowed: In extreame opposition thereof malicious craft or wilinesse accordeth with the first alte, that in publike and priuate affaires, it is a secret consumer; as extreame profusion or prodiga∣litie wasteth both publike and priuate treasure; the persons qualitie being considered. Thirdly to iustice which is my next moderator, the vile base is dissolute indulgence or secure lenitie, when honestie by the couin of iniquitie lieth mortally wounded, and iniquitie scaping punishment receiueth honour and support: the triple or alte, extreme crueltie. Dissolute lenitie therefore in this consenteth with the first base which is cal∣led couetousnesse or vnreasonable sparing; for as much as contrarie to reason, it coue∣teth a confusion of other mens estates by sparing the wicked; as couctise doth of o∣ther mens possessions by sauing of her owne, herein alluding to the second base which is follie: because such kind of foolish pittie or mercie (as some men tere it) cannot haue any taste of discretion or charitie. Likewise extreame crueltie consenteth oppo∣sitely with the first alte prodigalitie thus; by being so lauish and prodigall of blood as that other is of treasure: and with the second alte being craftie wilinesse; that in the prodigall effusion of blood, or in the tragicall end of impious, nefarious and barba∣rous treasons, conspiracies, and murthers, malicious craftinesse from crueltie diffe∣reth not.
Fourthly to fortitude (which is the last moderator) the base is basenesse of spirit or pusillanimitie, proceeding from inordinate sloath, feare, and luxurie, which is a sub∣iection, or rather mancipation of the mind to slauish and brutish affections, passions and perturbations, when appetite tyrannizeth ouer reason: the triple or alte audaci∣ous temeritie. Pusill animitie therefore in this consenteth with miserable and auari∣cious sparing (which is the first base) that it is as fearefull and miserably parsimo∣nious of a little harish blood, when honourable causes sommon it like a iudge in skarlet iustly to defend his owne with the guard of his heroicall spirits, and to contend for right; as that other basenesse is of treasure when speciall reasons doe most require a liberalitie: and with the second base being follie thus; that there can not appeare any more foolishnesse, then when people timerously and basely without resistance damne themselues voluntarily slaues to the tyrannous gallies of their owne inward and out∣ward enemies, wheras with a little paines and knitting of themselues vp together they might restraine or vanquish them both: also with the third base, which is secure leni∣tie: for what weakenesse and abiection of mind can be discerned in one more then in another? for lenitie wilfully confoundeth euery priuate and publike estate; whereas basenesse or softnesse of spirit or pusillanimitie (the persons qualitie being respected) doth the same. Furthermore audacious temeritie, which violently without reason doth precipitate it selfe into perils herein oppositely concordeth with prodigalitie being the first alte; that it is more profuse (if possible) in effusion of blood, in rash partitipation and abbarretting of mutinies and quarrels then that other excesse is of treasure, of vnreasonable and inconsiderate expenses riot and surfeits: and with the second alte which is malicious wilinesse and calliditie; that whereas wrath and the venemous de∣sire of reuenge doth in a kind of desperation and temeritie, rush into the turbulent seas of danger: so doth malicious wilines by the secret labyrinths, snares, & curious traps of mortall villainies make vp the mouth of mischiefe to bring about her diuelish designes; both of them being alike deepe in blood: and with the third alte or triple (being cru∣eltie which is the ast consent in opposition with audacious temeritie) herein appeareth the finall concord of these discords euen that which reason and nature teacheth vs; how no greater cruelty can be shewed then that a man either vpon mere malice or some other hellish and fierie passion of wrath or blind affection (as a principall in the murther of himselfe (should rashly, violently, and irremediably croude into the speare∣pointed troupe of perils, as Curtius and Decius, one mounted in armes on horseback to satisfie the wrath of the gods, vpon the maine carriere entred and was swallowed vp in the fierie gule, which prodigiously did exhale sulphurous and vnquenchable flames: the other being consul, armed in a Romane lacke or brigandine (as Liuy re∣cordeth) did single on the same fashion run with full speede in gallop amid the battels of his enemies the Latines: and sacrificed himselfe for weale of the Romane hoast; where he thrasting his life into the very throats of his enemies choaked them that swallowedit. So that to conclude with this consent of discords; being the certaine confusion of euery the most florishing state where it tragically noiseth; as the first harmonious con∣cordance of the sphoericall vertues is the corroboration and amplification of euery kingdome which is formerly noted: so doe I say that Temperance is valiant, iust, and wise: Prudence is temperate, valiant, and iust; Iustice is wise, temperate, and va∣liant,
valor is iust, wise and temperat. In opposition semblably because the geometricall & analogicall harmonie draweth these other rebels, excrescents, or excrements of ver∣tue rather, to this vniuersall muster, that they may be precisely viewed and measured by the cube of reason; receiuing prest and wages answerable to their natures and qualities: also for as much as it may be misconstrued by such as are more learned, or some that percase louen opposition, I will leaue this as a Paradox, whether auaritious misers be foolish, vniust, and timerous, whether timerous persons be miserable, foo∣lish and vniust, whether vniust men be timerous, miserable and foolish, and whether fooles are vniust, timerous and miserable. In opposition likewise ex diametro, whe∣ther prodigals in their actions generally be not audacious, cruell, and craftie: whether craftie knaues to feth about their diuises be not prodigall, audacious, and cruell: if cruell fellows in their hopes or rather feares be not craftie, prodigall, and audacious: and if audacious persons in their distracted humors of desire, reuenge & coller proue not cruell, craftie and prodigall. For a man (if he would perfectly know the secrets of gouernment) must warily serch forth these infestious leprosies of States; considering how there is not any good or bad in man-kinde, which is not contained in these oppositions: the causes of which euils being perfectly knowne, and presently remoued, all their effects of daunger must of force presently be drawne away with them. And he which cannot skill of this my concatenation, my wheele, or rather the true loue knot, and labyrinth of vertues with their opposites (though in other matters he vainely thinke himselfe wise) yet shall vndoubtedly misiudge of other mens con∣ditions, attributing and adiudgeing improperly good and bad qualities to people con∣trary their depraued or natiue inclinations: nay moreouer I dare affirme, that he which shall perfectly learne and practise this Lesson shall soone attaine the true knowledge of himselfe. To conclude therefore, least I stand vpon these points more curiously then accep∣tably, I say that those kingdomes or Commonweales are blessed and victorious, whose Treasurers are valiant, iust, and prudent; whose counsellers are temperate, valiant & iust: whose iudges are prudent, temperate, and valiant, whose captaines are iust, pru∣dent, and temperate: such as for example Marcus Cato whom Liuie magnifieth for his excellent quickenesse and dexteritie fit for all noble offices; as in the whole course of his life temperate and decored with moderation; as in his admirable wise∣dome and sagacity to counsaile and direct in the most serious affaires of his countrey; as of his Iustice and skill in the lawes, which was incomparable; with his great courage & valor in the wars, which was inuincible: al which I mentioned in my second booke. And in such accōplished magistrates which by these instructiōs here insuing are made absolute is cōteined the whole morall force of a most gratious & ample monarchie. These my beneuolent (though simple) Elucubrations, recommending heartily to your honorable constructions, I wish your welfare as mine owne; which if you with good Aequanimitie shall take fauourably, then haue I wonne the largest stipend of my studies that I could either trauaile or wish for. But if persons of vnindifferent cen∣sure and iudgement (as amongst many, there bee which may more then saltly taxe my labours) shall shew some seueritie more then criticall, their malignitie cannot preuaile; because I shall accompt no time mispent, which tending so much to the com∣mon benefit of our yong country men is bestowed vpon such morall considerations. Yours resolued and assuredly B. B.
❧ The first Booke of   Offices. ALbeit Anniball for scoffing at the most profound and lear∣ned Philosopher Phormio, because hee began abruptly to prescribe a forme for the order and instruction of Battels, was by some very wise men condemned of extreame and very barbarous pride; as in repining, that any man being shadowed at home amongst his bookes, should attaine that  excellent skill in warre which he by learning expressed: yet doe not I my selfe thinke, being so meerely weake and farre short of that Philo∣sopher in all good knowledge and literature, as there is distance of leagues be∣twixt the spheres of Saturne and the Moone, but that I were worthie to be rebu∣ked and canuased, if either I should write these offices, as instructions for noble∣men, and sage Counsellors of any Commonwealth, so farre exceeding my skill and iudgement as there haue yeares passed betwixt the date of Phormioes death and of my wretched life: or if I should bewray such stupiditie, by teaching men equall in degrees and arts with my selfe that which they can as well or bet∣ter relate than I: or to bee short, if in the Leuin of arrogancie I should presume to talke of things surreaching the scope of my apprehension. Yet hauing colle∣cted  many things by reading; a little with experience, and somewhat through obseruation, I did as appeareth simply couch them together in a little volume, containing these foure bookes of Offices, which I submit to the learned and right honourable Reader: for that onely respecting him, I would cleere my selfe of such scandalous imputations, as otherwise percase might wound my negli∣gence with the points of foolishnesse and arrogancie. The discourse ensuing is both short and luculent, needing not (for memories sake) any preposition of ar∣gument or Dycotomie, such as it is simple and naked, with a most willing and cheerefull heart I profer: onely requesting pardon for my boldnesse, and to bee protected by them that are verily noble from all grosse and malicious misconstru∣ctions  of the vulgar. The first and chiefe place in all ciuile gouernment vnder princes and Com∣monweales, Office of Treasurers. according to Dion Cassius, Francis Patricius, Barthol. Cassanaeus, Hyp∣polito, Furio Ceriolano, with others, which haue by their bookes opened the
formes of counsels, concerning the state of any kingdome, remaineth to the  Treasurers, which by the Romanes were called Quaestores à quaerendo, because they did seeke how to magnifie, corroborate, and amplifie the Commonwealth by lawfull and honourable meanes, for the speciall weale of those states and princes vnder whom they did administer; and also did faithfully conserue those riches to their trust committed. Hence is it that Dion tearmeth, Quaesturam pri∣mum Lib. 52. gradumin Senat: howbeit Iustus Lipsius, not wholly suffragating to that o∣pinion, Cap. 16. de Mag. Romanorum. sayth, Quòd inter magistratus fuere quaestores ordine primi, dignitate vltimi. Which office (being auntiently deriued from the Greekes) was first erected a∣mongst . the Romanes in the first bud of that Empire, after it was growne to some height; when the societies of those people, louingly knit and assembled,  had in the citie by their policies, valour, and industrie gathered and got a great masse of treasure together: wherein euery free citisen had equall share: at what time they did first institute two generall Quaestores or Treasurers, which were famous amongst them for their Iustice, valour, moderation and prudence, that had the tuition thereof, keeping their office in Aede Saturni. This institution of Treasurers Tacitus would haue amongst the Romans, when the Consular estate was first established, Anno 23. after their kings were abolished: some thinke they were first ordained, Anno Vrb. conditae 269: But it is not so doubtfull, as needlesse, precisely to stand vpon that point: onely this, the place of Treasurers being first amongst the ciuile magistrates (as at this day in Fraunce; where Les generalx des  Barth. Cass cons. 13. 7. partis cat. gloriae mundi. Geo. Bened. in Repet. cap. Rayn. in verb. finances, & les presedents des accomptes, haue a prioritie not onely before both the Counsels strict and at large; but also before the foure Primiers Presidents in that realme; as our Lord high Treasurer of England hath also: whose place with vs is highest next vnto the Lord Chancelour in ciuile reputation) giueth me some cause to digest the same into my first booke of Offices; being as I may tearme it notvnfitly that liuer wherein the blood (which possesseth the mouing life of eue∣ry commonwealth) is contained. For euen as moneyes are fitly called the sinews of war, so may we likewise properly tearme them the blood of peace: and there∣fore that state or kingdome, whose treasure is exhausted (though it be most am∣ple, populous, and puissant in other things) may be called bloodlesse and langui∣shing,  according to the saying of that learned Lawman: Nobilitas sine diuitijs pené Bonus de curtili. mortua est, tanquam corpus exangue. Riches therefore may bee properly tearmed the blood of peace, that entering the veines or conduits of the liuer, which may semblably be likened to the Treasurers office, and reflowing thence, benignely disperseth it selfe into the members of the whole bodie, resembling analogically the Commonwealth, for the generall sustentation and nurriture thereof. It is the bone of that strong arme, by which the kingdome is in time of peace streng∣thened against all hostile attempts. It is the marrow by which that bone is sea∣soned, soupled, and confirmed: or rather that arme which is strongly nourished, enabled, and knit with those sinewes, veines, blood, bones, and pith; wherein  remaineth a proportionable strength, guiding the sacred sword of iustice in hand. The charge of Treasurers consisteth in the receiuing, keeping, and disbursing of the prince his money, consisting in the reuenewes of his Empire; amplified by the tributes of his subiects; supplied by the subsides, fines, and forfeitures of
cities, societies, and malefactors; relieued with the tallages and customes of mar∣chants  and aduenturers; magnified in the prizes and presents, ordinarily resulting from forraine princes and people, either friends or enemies: and as Titus Liuius writeth: Munera Quaestoris sunt pecuniae publicae acceptio & expensio; signorum mi∣litarium Lib. 4. & 7. ex auro, vel argentoin aerario asseratio; praedae venditio & subhastatio; le∣gatorum exceptio & deductio; hospitij assignatio. All which were most honourable attributes peculiarly permitted to the Treasurers: and (as Lipsius noteth it) such was that auncient honour of those Quaestores, that amongst the Romanes of old Cap. 16. de Mag. vet. Pop. Ro. it was permitted vnto them to make lawes and decrees, to subscribe vnto suites, motions, and petitions, being both keepers and presedents of the Lawes and of Iustice: which power is with vs and in France deuolued vnto the Lords Chan∣cellors,  howbeit in that realme principally; where the Lord Chancellor is high∣est in the kings counsels, of whom in all causes appertaining the weale of that Vinent. Lupan. state, the king taketh aduice, as of some oracle: so that when any rescripts, edicts, or decrees contrarie to law, bee by the king either vpon misinformation or neg∣ligence graunted, the Chancellour hath ex officio power to cancell or annullate them, whereupon was first deuised the name Cancellarius; which office in Ve∣nice hath the most secret particulars of that state in managing, and yet is not so powerfull in his authoritie. Likewise the French, Generalx des finances, vpon the like considerations, and respects may cut off, or curtall at their pleasures the kings gifts and bounties, issuing out of his Treasuries, Lands, or Reuenewes (if in their  wisedomes it seeme expedient:) and therfore (as I should thinke) they might by the like reason also be called Cancellarij, because they Tanquam Tutores, limit the kings mind intra rationis & moderationis caucellos. This counsell of Trea∣surers conuerseth in the exportation of such commodities, as euery Common∣weale out of her friendship, or abundance exchangeth or ministreth; hauing equall respect vnto the induction, or reinuection of such other marchandize, as their people need and couet most: Likewise in all treasures vnder ground, as in mines and minerals of gold, and siluer, copper, tinne, lead, and yron; the richest commonly belonging to the prince of that soyle, where such treasures are ope∣ned; and others either bygraunt or otherwise, according to legall tenure of Frank Charter, or of other immunities royall in tenure of such subiects, as accordingly  make payment to the custome, or imposition of the prince or countrey. Where∣fore it behooueth, that such as be chosen into that place and authoritie, bee men not of learning and temperance onely; but of good yeares and much experi∣ence also: howbeit the Romanes did make choice of their Quaestores at twentie fiue yeares, according to Tacitus. Which greene age could not amongst vs haue Annal. lib. 3. had that maturitie of iudgement, and foresight in these times, that is required in a worthie Treasurer: although amongst those Romanes in that golden age of nature, we may by circumstances find, that young noble men were in all the parts of their life generally, temperate and frugall, with a certaine specious ap∣parance of liberalitie; yet did not in thē appeare that precocitie, which is in many  of our young heads of this age, which are so free at the first, that they bee soone poore and thredbare of vnderstanding, before the bruit of their rare pregnancie be well dispersed: and those young men were so well instructed from their in∣fancie, that they did contend how to bee thought most noble, vertuous, and fit
for places of reputation in their countrey, by suppressing many lusts, motions,  commotions, and vnperfect passions of the mind, with a moderate domination of reason and constancie. They were full of modestie, full of dutie, and full of such religion as then was professed amongst the prophane Gentiles, obseruing in all words and deeds a temperat moderation, without any deturpation or defor∣mitie. And these qualities in those young Romans, worthily made them eligible and fit for such great dignities and offices. The Lord high Treasurer of England his office is in the Exchequer, erected by king William the first, for safe custodie of his crown lands, and of those records which may concerne them. To which Queene Marie ioyned the Surueyors ge∣nerall, the court of Augmentations and reuenewes of the Crowne, with the first  fruits and tenths of Benefices, being erected by that king of good memorie, Hen∣rie the eight. This office is called Scaccarium, of a certaine large square table, which according to Geruas of Tilburie, cited by M. William Camden, hath a chequered cloth brought and spread vpon it, in the tearme of Easter, as a place or table of iust proportion, account, or iudgement; in all causes respecting the royall treasure or reuenewes: where all ciuile causes betwixt the prince and his tenants are indifferently decided. Iudges in this court are, the Lord high Treasu∣rer of England, the Chancelour of the Exchequer, the Lord chiefe Baron of that court, with other foure Barons assistants, the Remembrancer, Engrosser, Controller, Clearkes of the Pleas, and of the Pipe-office; Auditors with their  clearkes, Apposer, Chamberlaine, Clerke of the Streights, Marshall, Clearke of the Summons, deputie Chamberlaines; Secondaries to the Remembrancer, to the Treasurer, and to the Pipe-office. Also in the office of receit M. Vice Trea∣surer, Clerkes of the Tally, and of the Parchments, with diuerse other inferiour officers. All which are ordained for the conseruation and amplification of those foresaid reuenewes, and of diuers other pecuniarie duties, ordinarie and extra∣ordinarie; by which the ciuile state of all principalities is necessarily sustained: for it is manifest, that without the competent force of mony no Commonwealth can hold together absolute in her members. And to that purpose was it first de∣uised, Arist. in Polit. when people and nations were necessarily constrained to require supplies  and succours out of remote countries, by commutation of cōmodities through exportation and importation of them from and to forraine places; howbeit the principall exchange is for gold and siluer coyned in little round plates and be∣santes of greater and lesse value, being authorised by the edicts of those princes and Commonweales where they bee stamped, and passe currant amongst the people. Foure kinds of mettall haue auntiently beene coyned amongst the Ro∣manes, one of lead; which when it first was deuised, exceedeth all records of true memorie, as Iust. Lipsius writeth: another of brasse or copper, which the Cap. 1. de re Pe. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 3. Romanes therefore called Pecunia quod esset nota pecudis signata: of which coynes diuerse vnder the Romanes here in Brittaine, as well of copper as yron  likewise were stamped, according to M. William Camden in his booke of Brittaine antiquities. Siluer amongst the Romanes was first coyned, Anno, ab vrbe cond. 484. F. Pictore & Qu. Oculeio Coss. The coyne of gold 62 yeares after the siluer, Plin. lib. 1. C. Claudio Nerone, & Marco Liuio Salinatore Coss. The beginning and end of coyning was for commerce, as by pieces of some value for exchange of other
commodities to people of other nations: by whose diuers and seuerall stamps  the countries with whom they traffiqued were knowne. And hence is it, that those coynes of mettall are infinite; which dependeth vpon two reasons also: the first is, vpon couetousnesse of people, which would abundantly bee serued with things which their minds couet for some needfull vses: the second, vpon pleasures; for which many men seeke for great heapes of money: but the want of things desired amongst men is infinite, and the choice of pleasures endlesse, all which are attained by money. The desire of treasure therefore can neuer bee fulfilled, according to the saying of Cicero, Expetuntur diuitiae cum ad vitae vsus Lib. 2. Oss. necessarios tum ad perfruendas voluptates. Dilectant enim magnifici apparatus vitae∣que cultus cum elegantia & copia quibus rebus effectum est vt infinita pecuniae cupi∣ditas  esset. A Treasurers prudent care and whole studie therefore, leuelleth at all such honourable meanes and iust occasions as may serue to bring in diuers summes, and how to maintaine a continuall haruest of getting, to sustaine those infinite burthens of necessarie disbursement; how to leuie for the Common∣wealth with good discretion, and nothing without vrgent cause. Vnto which contribution, that it may be more liberall and cheerefull, is required, that the people be generally well affected both towards the prince and vnto that com∣mon necessitie which importuneth the same: for the better effecting whereof, some plausible and effectuall declaration published vnto them by their Soue∣raigne, readily prepareth their hearts, moouing in them a more benificent kind  of alacritie; and therefore it is in such cases most behoofefull, Vt omnes in∣telligant Cic. 2. O. si salui esse velint necessitati esse parendum. For beeing persuaded, that the generall safetie dependeth thereupon, you shall find the couetous, readiest to contribute. Moreouer it addeth very much vnto the loue of people towards their princes, and to their good opinion of his grace and meekenesse vnto them correspondently, when he by suit seeketh that which his regall authoritie might exact. The respects are great, and those necessities important, which should vrge a prince to violence in those cases: yet a good Soueraigne can neuer haue cause of compulsion: For when the king which hath authoritie to constraine, vseth a  facilitie to persuade, it importeth some vehement necessitie. Can any priuate Commonweale mount without tributarie wings? Or could the firmament of peace be cleere, if all clouds had not first beene dispersed with the thunder of warre? Are armes exercised without wages? Are ships prouided of men, victu∣als, and of artillerie, without mony? How shall officers which be continually bu∣sied in ceaselesse seruice for the common securitie, haue reliefe without salaries? May vertuous or needie persons bee rewarded or succoured without some ge∣nerall supplies? Few be those princes of Christendome (so neere as I can iudge) whose owne priuat reuenewes are able to supply the publicke charge onely: so that the more puissant any prince is in dominion and territorie; so much more the common charge doth aggrauate his necessities. For this office therefore, all honest and needfull meanes of getting are to bee carefully studied and prouided: towards the true maintenance whereof it high∣ly benefiteth to forbeare all superfluous damnable and intollerable subsidies: for if such publicke businesses in a Commonwealth oppresse the prince, which
according to the best iudgements being great and multiplied, doe through pru∣dent  consultation, foresight, and caution ioyfully propagate all Soueraigne em∣pire; then must it necessarily follow, that a generall aid be ministred by the com∣mons for their generall good: least otherwise the publicke treasure be (through want of such tributarie supplies) drawne to the bottome, whereas it ought con∣tinually to bee multiplied and cherished: Etenim qui rempublicam gubernabunt consulere debebunt, vt earum rerum copia sit quae sunt necessariae. Which if they do Cic. 2. Off. carefully respect, sildome or neuer shall any vehement cause happen to them of exaction. And therefore that good and charitable Emperour Traiane vtterly disallowing, and detesting all compulsion and priuie pinches in those cases, Fis∣cum lienem vocauit, quod eo scilicet crescente artus reliqui cōtabescunt. Howbeit, that  In vita Iuliani. sentence in some cases to me seemeth more verely physicall according to the let∣ter, than morally philosophicall, answering to the sence. And therefore partafru∣galiter tuendo, many such inconueniences are preuented, Magis etenim dedecus est parta amittere, quāomninò nō paruisse. This treasure therfore ought to be cherished, Salust. bell. Iu∣gurth. lib. the cherishing wherof is principally found in cutting off all idle and superfluous expences: for therein it doth as well encrease by sauing as receiuing. It likewise augmenteth by the bold and industrious valour of them, which make great and honourable aduentures, as well by land seruice, as nauall for their countries glorie: returning after a long, laborious, and chargeable voyage, loaden with treasure and commodities. So did the noble Romane Aemilius bring from the  Macedonians; which spoyle was so rich and great, that it eased the people of Rome many yeares after from tributes: of which hostile booties he was knowne not to bring any thing to his priuate houses or hampers, sauing onely the re∣noume of his triumphs and victories: which how well he demerited, is witnes∣sed in noble historie. Such excellent and precious countreymen should be fur∣nished at the common charge with ships, men, armes, and prouision, that they might exercise themselues in those seruices, which should increase and magnifie the Commonwealth. I may not forgett Sir Francis Drake, so much remembred and acknowledged through the whole world (which he cōpassed) for his noble skill and industrious fortitude, who did both much benefit & magnifie the state  of this land; being not borne of any very noble parentage: Howbeit that his working good spirit, and better fortunes alwaies incited him to some honoura∣ble interprise, which in the late raigne of blessed Queene Elizabeth brought much coine, and bullion of gold and siluer vnto the princes treasures, somewhat out of hostile spoyles from the Spaniards, taken by that euer renowmed Earle of Cumberland in his nauall voyages. To whom at this day we shall find few com∣parable George Clifford. for their painfull aduētures, equiualuable with the trauels either of Crist. Colombo, or Hernando Cortez; if you will superadde therunto that excellēt fortune and natiue valour, which alwayes accompanied and winged their heroicall enterprises. I might speake here of Sir Thomas Candish, & of Sir Humfrey Gilbert:  but hauing mentioned Sir Francis Drake, in him is comprised so much as they could deserue. Diuers other gallant gentlemen, borne here in England amongst vs, which being yet young and aliue, haue percase some fortunes in store, to make them as glorious in such seruices, as any that euer trauailed. My meaning is not here, that by the direptions, piracies, depredations of cities or nations
confederated and vnited (which is meerely dishonest and vnprofitable) to farce  and gorge vp the common Treasuries: for so much as it withstandeth all reason and humane policie, with true colour emblazoning the violation and breach of peace and amitie, which vndoubtedly bringeth a most lamentable confusion with it vnto those princes and Commonweales in their estâtes, that are both agents and patients in these cases: but onely with the spoyles of maleuolent, mischieuous, and professed enemies; by whose oppression their whole state is weakened, and in whose weakenesse our forces are confirmed: such as cannot be more malicious or mortall aduersaries for any violence which wee can offer vnto them. Treasures gotten from such ambitious and maleuolent people, are laudable, and magnifie the state of our kingdomes. Such verely were the spoiles  which Lucius Mummius (Collegue in Censorship to Paulus Aemylius aforesaid) brought from the state of a most opulent and braue citie: by which atchieue∣ments, Cicero noteth in his Offices, that Mummius was not a penny the wealthier in his owne priuate purse than before. Adde hereunto, not vnlike in magnifi∣cence, though their fortunes were vnequall, the condition of that sometimes right noble and vnfortunate Lord of good memorie, Robert Earle of Essex, after his expedition to Cales: By which example in himselfe hee made knowne to the couetous captaines of his time, and vnto those which had heard of his victories, that true glorie was meerely the subiect and substance of his seruice, which hee shared with his countrey: treasure the meede of his militarie men, which hee  magnificently distributed amongst them. And certainely, there is not any thing which more to life representeth the noble conditions and natures of gallant soul∣diers in highest militarie reputation, than either their great victories and spoyles, or their calamities and disfortunes: for the bearing of themselues equall, and the same in both extremities, without insolence or abiection, clearely manifesteth to the world their vertues. Neither can any thing be more precious and amiable in the sight of people, than a magnificent and bountifull magistrate. Hunc enim ma∣ximé Cic. Off. 1. populus admiratur qui pecunia non mouetur: quod in quo viro perspectum sit, hunc dignum spectatu arbitramur, &c. Such princes therefore vndoubtedly win a generall good opinion and admiration, in seeming to despise those treasures, and  pleasures, which some weake princes, and all vulgar persons hold precious: how∣beit with such a negligent semblance as neither prodigalitie may preiudice their estates; nor their negligence (by not seeking out honourable means to maintaine that excellent good fame) may diuert all lawfull and commendable helpes for the support thereof. This Office amongst diuerse otherwayes to weaken it, is laid open to those massie charges which the prince vndergoeth in his warres: and from the foun∣taine thereof all inferiour Treasurers of armies, garrisons, nauies and prouinces, with such like, are continually serued. It is therefore most reasonable, conside∣ring so many riuers are supplied therewith, that diligent circumspection bee re∣quired  to preserue the Spring alwayes full by beneuolent, and due retribution of waters through those siluer pipes, which may without stop cheerefully conuey them to that fountaine from the calme riuers of the Commonwealth, redispen∣sing them with a carefull kind of beneficence to the common good and tranqui∣litie. This fountaine must be kept alwayes (if not full) yet not neere drie, least by
defect of the slenderest vaine branching from it, penurie succeede, being a  most pestilent feauer, or consumption rather to the king and Common∣wealth. A curious eye with vigilant regard must bee bent vpon the Collectors, Re∣ceiuers, Auditors, and other inferior ministers belonging to this office; least in exactions, or by fraudulent deuises they satisfie there priuate auarice with a kind of extortion or crueltie. For auarice is an inordinate lust of hauing, whose appe∣tite is infinite, whose acquisition immoderate, whose possession vnlawfull, whereby the prince vndoubtedly may bee brought into daunger. It is like that Hydra which Poets talke of, that though the stroke of Iustice execute vpon it continually; yet will it miraculously reuiue againe: it forceth not ei∣ther  the lightening, thunder or thunderbolts of the law prouided against it. Salust describeth it a beast rauenous, cruell, and intollerable: where it haunteth, huge Cities, Fields, Churches, and Houses are laid wast: Heauen and Earth prophane∣ly mingled; Armies and strong wals cannot restraine the violence thereof: It spoi∣leth all mortall people of good Report, Modestie, Children, Nation & Parents, &c. So doth this brightnesse of gold bleare mens outward sences, so fuming in their heads, and fastened in their hearts, that they feare not any mischiefe which can accompanie Lucre. Such wicked, vniust, and rauenous officers, eating the peo∣ple as bread, are to be squeezed like sponges full of water. Great caution there∣fore must be vsed against the violence of officers in such extortion, least the  prince after some few yeares patience of the people, vpon new grieuances, be∣come odious: which king Henry the eight in the second yeare of his raigne did most politickely prouide, in his proceedings against Sir Richard Emson and M. Dudley, late inward and of counsell in such cases vnto his sage father, king Henry the seuenth. By good example of whose punishment others might vpon the like inconueniences suffer. For if the people find not redresse vpon their complaints, then will they rise (as at that time it was feared) in open hostilitie: which if the blood of those extorting officers can expiate without some humane slaughter sacrificed to tenne hundred scpulchers, then is it happie: but such generall hurts haue commonly no compensation, without a generall con∣fusion. The peoples payments ought so to be disposed therefore, that all men ac∣cording to their faculties, by due discretion of good and honest sworne officers in euery shire or prouince, may take such reasonable dayes, and times of pay∣ment limited, as they may without any grudging or disease contribute heartely. Moreouer, that such (as are in speciall affaires of their prince, and for the Com∣monwealth employed; hauing by such occasions largely spent of their owne priuate for the common good, as euery good man will in such cases) bee for examples sake, for the good encouragement of others, precisely exempted from all kind of burthens and impositions. Also such as haue formerly done much  grace and honour to their countries and princes (if they be not at that time so high in blood, that they may well away with phlebotomie) should bee graci∣ously spared; according to the French order: for all courtiers and seruants, at∣tendant vpon the kings person in his house, are (by the ciuile lawes of Fraunce) Barth. Cassan. 32 Consid. 6. partis Catol. glor. mūdi. excepted in time of peace from all collections, tallages, gabels, exactions, cu∣stomes
and impositions whatsoeuer, which others are tied vnto: likewise in  the times of warre, from any burthen of receiuing, quartering, and billet∣ting of souldiors. Obseruation (concerning these collectors and ministers before named) dependeth vpon the chusing and displacing of Officers either iust or corrupt. First, the choice of such ministers is made out of men, honest, stayed, and well approoued for such a purpose; bad Officers which did ex∣tort or vnlawfully compasse, being with losse of their places and possessions punished. Dispensation of these tributes and subsidies must bee to the generall, and not any particular vse: for no man will sticke at a little charges employed to publicke behoofe, if it once appeare, that the prince doe not consume his  treasure in vnnecessarie cost and riot; but keepe a moderation with decencie, which (albeit the vulgar do not generally marke: for they respect onely the princes proper faculties and reuenewes (which ought to be by the treasurers concealed so much as may bee) yet certaine captious and dangerous heads, full of quarrels and aduantages; such as are of fierie spirits, coueting innoua∣tion: which commonly lead the blind and abused vulgar into dangerous acti∣ons) will narrowly sift and make a breach into the common peace, vnder the pretext of taxes and impositions, as hath beene found in certaine commo∣tions in the dayes of king Richard the second, and king Henry the sixt, with o∣ther princes, vpon the like occasions. Such gettings therfore as proceed from  the subiects beneuolence, must bee sparingly spent and husbanded: and so should the Treasurers beare themselues in that Office, as stewards of other mens goods, and not of their owne. That most prudent and worthy Lord Treasurer William Cecill goodly well approued ouer all causes, and in all businesse either publike or priuate, during the late and most deare mirrour of good gouernment, Queene Elizabeth, of most renowmed and euerliuing memorie, did leaue behind him a liuely pat∣terne and precedent of his singular care and excellent wisedome, to the great encrease of that stocke, committed then to his charge, as may serue euerla∣stingly to them which yet are or euer may be credited with that office, to get  and maintaine eternall reputation. The generall good opinion and report of him after his death in the mouths of all good men, may stirre vp his successours in that place truely to resemble his vertues and integritie. The treasure therefore may not bee wilfully wasted or exhausted for sa∣tisfaction of any prince in his priuate prodigalitie. Vera enim & simplex via Oratio Philippi in Senat. ex Sa∣lust. est, magnitudinem animi in addendo, non demendo reipublica ostendere. For per∣sons of lauish humours and exorbitate affections, thinke not that there is any true fruition of treasure without profusion. Diue deepe therefore into the bottomelesse danger thereof by manifold and most manifest example and obseruation, as in Archigallo king of the Brittaines, who was deposed by the people for his extortion, after hee had raigned fiue yeares, and then vpon his  reformation restored. And amongst diuers vnaduised princes consider, that it was not the least cause of decay to Edward of Carnaruan, king of England, Edw. 2. when hee by such meanes lost the loue of his commons, by listening vnto flatterers, and wilfully robbed himselfe of the fealtie of his nobles, which o∣pened
his sepulchre for other matters more securely. Men of such pro∣fuse  qualitie, which extort much, as if they could not keepe any thing, but that which is taken with a violent extortion, are in themselues miserably poore. From hence likewise brauncheth another speciall rule of moderation, that no leuies surmount the princes occasions: for if it tend not to the subiects great benefit, being very necessarily dispensed, it dishonoureth any Soueraigne to straine them in so small a matter. And such impositions must also be sil∣dome, that the people grow not wearie with them, being fashioned more or lesse according to their plentie or pouertie: for such princes are haunted with the furies of a lamentable infamie, whose treasuries deuour the subiects la∣bours,  and neuer rest satisfied with bloodie booties. Wee may reade likewise in the French Chronicles, that those impositions which Philip le beau and Charles the fift, kings of that realme, had set vpon the wines and salt, caused the men of Gascoyne and others in the dayes of Henry the second, king of Fraunce, to rebell, which was a great preiudice and danger vnto that state, al∣beit now by custome a speciall part of that crownes reuenewes (at which no man, by reason of the long continuance in these latter times, repineth, but willingly submitteth himselfe to the burthen) dependeth vpon them and the like Monopolies. Good princes also will take heed of that pernicious desire, which in prosperitie filleth vp the still gaping mouths and purses of parasiti∣call  flatterers, and temporizing Sycophants: howbeit some liued in the late raigne of good Queene Elizabeth, which abusing her high grace, extended towards them out of her meere royall nature, compassed such things as were both preiudicall to her reputation, and to the Commonwealth in some sort: such persons as these cannot be truely called seruants, but vnto their owne intollerable affections; neither will I giue instance of them, namely, being so generally knowne, and fresh in our memories; as also for many more reasons of modestie which inhibite it. It is therefore most certaine, that all newly de∣nised monopolies vsurping vpon the subiects trades and trauels, are odious, and commonly daungerous: such as amongst other Vespasian tooke of Vryne,  who (because his sonne Titus seemed to mislike therof) told him, that though the subiect was vnsauourie, yet the accident was sweet. And what a beastly Monopolie or monthly tribute is that, which is at this day taken into the Popes treasuries in Rome and at Bologna, from those curtisans and whores, which by profession prostitute their bodies for gaine. Which the very Gentils and Atheists as Lampridius writeth in his Histories, did prohibite, That any tributes issuing from harlots or bauds, should bee receiued into the sacred Treasuries, but reserued in another place for the disposition of the Ediles Curules towards the furnishing and setting forth of publicke playes and showes, as also to the reparation and mending of bridges, ports, and high  wayes for the cities Commonwealth. Likewise wee find, that Alexander Se∣uerus taxed all sorts of artificers, drapers, glasiers, skinners, masons, plaste∣rers, shoomakers, with such like, in a moderate order; the Romane Em∣pire being then growne vp to that height, which could not easily permit in∣surrection or mutinies. Onely this according truely with the state of princes
in such cases, Vectigal optimum est parsimonia: for by beeing frugall of his  owne, he winneth the loue and fauor of his people in sparing of them. Clau∣dius Nero, thought his tyrannies and oppressions of the people had purchased him a generall and mortall hatred amongst them: yet deuised this one way, (Quasi pulcherrimum donum generi mortalium daturus) to free the Romanes Cor. Tac. lib. 13. Annalium. during his time from all tributes, and thereby to wash out of the peoples re∣membrance all infamous notes of his owne misgouernment: howbeit, the Senate told him, That it would be the subuersion of his state in posterity, that those fruits by which the imperiall state was sustained, should bee taken a∣way. And certaine it is, (if there bee many Monopolies in the Common∣wealth) that diuers good princes will either remit or diminish them; which  Charles the eight of Fraunce (as Lupanus writeth) had done, but that death o∣therwise preuented his beneficence. Howbeit, in all affaires concerning the conseruation or amplification of any Commonwealth: Regis Aerarium est Ioh. Tilius lib▪ m. de rebu∣gall. aerarium populi, & aerarium populi mutuò regis est aerarium. And therefore, when little or no publicke cause of exhaustion impendeth, frugalitie most ho∣noreth a prince, by keeping a due proportion betwixt the treasure got and his disbursements, according to the square of necessitie. In leuying of Subsidies it must be specially respected, that equalitie with∣out any partiall or affectionate passion in the collectors and officers bee pre∣cisely respected: that the contribution of Cities, Societies, and Husbandmen,  according to their lands and reuenewes, bee measured with indifferent pa∣ritie: for my selfe haue sometimes heard the mutterings and grudgings of diuers people, which (though they most willingly would exhibite: yet did they repine at their vnequall taxation, saying, That they were so much the more assessed than others, by how much the lesse they were rated in the Subsidie bookes. Such must therefore be chosen, as will not either in malice or fauour oppresse or succour. For being ordinarily vexed at inequalitie, the people naturally will grow malicious, measuring their losses with other mens gaines: And hence is it, that a more diligent circumspection is required in them which haue that charge in hand. Moreouer, it helpeth the common po∣licie to know perfectly the differences of patrimonies, dignities, ages, and offi∣ces,  with all arts and professions of persons remaining vpon record. By which order, according to precise iudgement and discretion, all tributes are by due proportion leuied, and people assessed. It behooueth them therefore in their priuat consciences first to compare their own particular estates, together with the Commonwealth in all equitie, appointing cōmissioners as censors, which can discerne and take notice of the peoples off-spring, ages, families, and sub∣stance euery third or fift yere. For some of them may remoue their dwellings, others may die, diuerse also may encrease or decrease, during that space, in goods or possessions: by which knowledge had of peoples ages and abilities, they may bee chosen either for militarie seruices, or enioyned to burthens in  the common cause of their country, when occasion shal opportunely require. Thus much concerning the charge and conditions of Treasurers. It followeth now, that I declare how far, according to the sagest and best approued writers a prince should extend his arme in the fruition or dispēsation of these benefits.
It is very commendable in a prince to be reputed liberall, which some cu∣rious  and cunning writers would haue out of the purses of others; so that his owne hampers be not diminished: for it is intended, that how much more the common necessitie doth import, so much more patience and alacritie Nicolo Ma. il preu. cap. 16. De liberalita & miseria, &c. should appeare in the people frankely to contribute towards the conseruation and encouragement of that peace by which they were enriched. Hee may not make the people fearefull of his liberalitie with grieuous and vnneedfull impositions; but onely sparing his owne, vsing their beneuolences to their generall comfort, with a couetous kind of liberalitie: which beeing with good cunning and discretion exercised, the people will with all honour to the prince embrace it louingly: for he which is vertuously liberall, according to  strict conscience, shall neuer bee commended nor honoured for it: because that is not vulgarly tearmed liberalitie in princes, which walloweth not in ex∣cesse: a course euery way pernicious to the soueraigne and subiect: first occa∣sioning a priuate pouertie to the prince; to the subiect then in grieuous and insupportable supplies for maintenance of that iolitie; forcing them to diso∣bedience, and himselfe to shame and rapacitie. And I am verely persuaded, that all prodigall persons are of a fierce and turbulent spirit, during that hu∣morous tempest, readier (when want approcheth vpon their imprudence) by most wicked meanes to maintaine that riot, than to fall vnto some honest and meane course of quiet liuing, as many times when I consider hath ap∣peared  to me liuely by good example; which also consenteth with that say∣ing of Salust: Annius ferox praua via ingressus (vbi consueta non suppetunt) Ad Caes de Rep. ordinanda. fertur accensus in socios modò, modò in ciues: mouet composita & res nouas vete∣ribus acquirit, &c. Such a course therefore sometimes will vndoe both the prince and subiect, being a very daungerous kind of liberalitie. What must he therefore doe to maintaine a good opinion of that vertue without perill? First, let him not fret in wardly, though he be condēned of parsimonie, so close∣ly smothering auarice, that he be not reputed couetous: for admit that attri∣bute be blacke stone, yet is the subiect thereof bright gold: for a prince can∣not make safe vse of liberalitie, neither hold his owne sure without danger.  But of these two difficult choices a wise prince will affect parsimonie, for growing rich with sparing hee shall be magnified amongst forrainers; which will therefore stand in feare of his puissance: and at home with his owne people, for that in sparing his treasure, the subiects liuings are likewise spared: which forbearance they willingly tearme an honest and vertuous liberalitie. Such opinion did Titus Flaminius purchase amongst the Greekes, which vp∣on the ouerthrow of king Philip of Macedon, enfranchised all the cities of Greece from tributes by publicke proclamations in euery place. Likewise Pertinax graunted vnto all that exercised tillage and husbandrie, franke in∣termission from tenne yeares tribute. Howbeit, if princes haue laid a firme  foundation, how they may through high liberalitie multiplie dominion, then will not they commonly spare at any cost: yea people naturally breath and hunt after the fortunes of magnificent princes: But hauing once firmely effected their purpose, their purchase is by little and little as warily cherished. Neither is the course of their gouernment in any iot impeached, but magni∣fied
thereby. To princes militant also profuse liberalitie much auaileth, if  they can with hostile spoyles encourage their souldiors, taking examples by Cyrus, Caesar, Alexander: for that both retaineth and augmenteth their repu∣tation, if the generall burthen bee not carried out of their owne cofers. Let this onely be considered of prodigalitie; That it is a great vessell bottomelesse, a big chest locklesse, a vaine profusion carelesse. And if I should paint that strum∣pet to life, I would place her in great and iolly pompe, variably plumed, mar∣ching betwixt a notable foole, and a singular braggart, seruing for two villa∣nous weake supporters: and seconded at an ynch also by two forlorneslaues; one of them a miserable begger, and the other an vnpittied penetentiarie. Me seemeth it a fit comparison betwixt the viper and princely prodigalitie:  for that infinit spawne which is bred of this serpent (being composed of in∣ordinat affections, intemperat appetites, base flatterers, and of the most conta∣geous off all and poison of all princes courts) eate out the bowels of the parēt at the verie time of their birth, which perisheth by them that were cherished by her. These young viprous vices liuely represent ingratitude, to which all of them be subiect that are fostered by prodigalitie. These are those hounds which mythologically deuoured Actaeon, when after the murtherous plea∣sures and concupiscence of his eyes and flesh, he was transformed into a fear∣full beast, excellently shadowing that pusillanimitie which through excesse of sensualitie depriue him of a reasonable creatures shape and faculties, leauing  him a lamentable spoile to those deerest and most inward enemies, his owne affections. Yet for as much as I run here into some morall considerations, me seemeth it should now be verie fitting to make some demonstration of those ethicall parts that are in Temperance, by which the treasures of all wise prin∣ces and people ought to be restrained and gouerned. Temperance therefore is a vertue which subiecteth pleasures to the yoke of reason, limiting all things within moderation: Cicero defineth it to be the con∣stant and moderat domination of reason, restraining vs from lusts, and from other violent imperfections of the mind. Plato with Aristotle consenteth, that Temperance is most speciously seene in passing ouer, and as it were fearefully,  but more painefully poasting away from all voluptuous appetites: and there∣fore they tearme it Sophrosune, being the conseruator of prudence, signifying a moderation or frugalitie: for if fleshly concupiscence or inordinate plea∣sure subiect the noble part of man, then will they forceably banish all rea∣son and moderation, manacling and fettering him within the mazie wil∣dernesse of secure sensualitie: so that neither foot nor hand shall haue power to discharge their naturall functions in any due proportion, but are sopped and steeped in the dregs of all riot and profusion, which dragge along with them (as I sayd before) rapacitie, shame, and beggerie. Wise princes and potentates therefore, to whom God hath imparted treasures in abundance,  ought with all vehement intention to ponder, how dangerous intoxicating a poyson this is, because vnto them more than to others, such momentanie furies misguisedly masking in the falsed habiliments of sweet comfort and contentment, like enchauntresses, oft and many times appeare. For as much therefore as pleasures either proceed from a naturall instinct, being corporall
and common to all creatures hauing life, or from some inwardly conceiued  opinion: of which, some haue reference to good and honest purposes, which are meerely directed by the rule of temperance; others are extreamely bad besotted and nuzzled in brutish sence: all wise and perfect princes will so mo∣derate their owne appetites, freeing them from all exorbitat and luxurious pleasures, as may both encrease their honor, health, wealth, and empire. How∣beit, Seneca writ, That there be delights with which temperance dispenseth, & others also which she doth hate and banish: considering therefore how nature is nourished and supplied with a little, and that temperance by the direction of reason prescribeth a necessitie to nature, that it may liue within a mediocri∣tie: these pleasures of excesse in diet, ornaments, and of all luxurious appetites,  are ascribed to the bodie Other delights, as when a man is arrogant & opinio∣natiue, or infected with a vaine selfe dotage, or when he libidinously prosecu∣teth his owne fantasies, oppressing his pure reason with the foggie mists of li∣cenciousnesse, are well appropriated to the mind. Cicero diuideth temperance into three parts: first into Continence, by which desire is restrained vnder the gouernment of counsell, and which in all corporall diet & ornament keepeth a meane. Vnto which Abstinence is annexed as a part thereof, & manifested in binding mens hands from rapine and theft: next into Clemencie, which is a mentall temperance, when there is power and sufficient meanes to punish and reuenge, or rather (as Seneca tearmeth it) a lenitie discending from the superior  to the inferior in cases of punishment. Mercy (being the mother of gentlenesse and humanitie, highly pleasant in the most high presence of God) is adiunct to clemencie: and thirdly vnto modestie, which (as Cicero defineth) is a conti∣nent moderation or cohibition of lusts, mouing and reuelling in the mind. He likewise sayth, That honest modestie through shamefastnesse doth retaine a noble and Lib. 3. ad Heren. constant authoritie. Adiunct to this is the feare of shame or disgrace, as by the Lib. 2. de innent. philosophicall definition of Verecundia should appeare, which Tully semblably calleth ingenious timiditie, with a reuerence expressed vnto men: whereas by the naturall inclination and propertie thereof it will not hurt any man; but is that true comelinesse or decencie which the Philosophers call , perfect∣ly  manifested in temperate and well affected bodies, when they bee suddenly prouoked, commoued, or stirred vp with some vndecent or cōtumelious acti∣on, speech, or behauiour, in others repugnant to their ingenious and toward natures, which moueth in them a sudden and well beseeming blush presented from a certaine feare of shame, disgrace or turpitude, being the very badge of honestie, which is dispersed & opened by the force of their modest spirits. And hence is it that Plato in his dialogue of temperance citeth or faineth a saying of Critias to Charmides, a beautifull young man disputing with him concerning a medicine or charme for the headach, That tēperance would cure that disease, with all grieuances of the body likewise: and demāding of Charmides, whether  he were possessed of that medicine, Plato faineth, Genas eius rubore suffusas gra∣tiorē speciē ostēdisse, pudorē etenim eam atatē decuisse. This affectiō albeit Philoso∣phers Plato. lib. 20. Charmides siue de temp. do not call a vertue, yet is annexed therunto. Whēce it was, that Diogenes termed it the tincture of vertue, proceeding frō thēce & frō a natiue ingenuity; modesty being a decent seemlinesse & good order in al things, cōuerseth in mode∣rating
the perturbations and motions of the mind, by the retaining of a con∣cordance  or harmonie, quieting and calming all humane actions, so that no∣thing vnfit or immodest be done or spoken: nothing in hatred, malice, affecti∣on, lust, ambition, arrogancie, or other such violent passions and distractions of the spirit. The parts of modestie be lowlinesse or humilitie; so forceably depressing insolence, that by how much the more worthie men bee, so much the more humble they may shew themselues. Which lesson our Sauiour Christ com∣maunded vs to learne of him, considering, that in vs, as of our selues, nothing can be decent or commendable, but onely proceeding from the precious gift of God. This lesson teacheth vs the fruition of that Oracle, Nosce teipsum;  when a man doth not attribute any goodnesse to himselfe, but acknowled∣geth, that hee receiued the same out of the fountaine of all bountic from a∣boue. The second part of modestie should seeme to be the desire to learne and be taught: which is seene in men, that recognizing their ignorance, are studious and desirous of instruction. The third part of modestie doth speciously declare it selfe in pleasantnesse of speech, alacritie, comitie, and affabilitie. This ought to bee well knowne and practised by wise courtiers: for these qualities grace them amongst per∣sons of the best qualitie: And this is reputed a kind of moderate and well ta∣sting  vrbanitie; when in speech and answeres men auoid bitternesse, and salt taunting, hardly set on; and more than indifferently poudered, in respect of the times, places, and persons. Let them therefore alwayes obserue a certaine honest moderation, delaying, or rather perfectly purging all the mentall per∣turbations with a pleasant medicine of words and cheerefulnesse. This ther∣fore should be the scope of all speech: In serious matters to shew seueritie; in pleasant discourses festiuitie; regarding, that our tongues bewray not any corruption of manners, which staine is specially noted in those that either contumeliously, ridiculously, slaunderously, seuerely, or raylingly back-bite any persons. Likewise it is as vndecent and intemperate, that any man should  praise himselfe; which as a foolish trumpet soundeth out his owne disgrace and folly to wise men. The fourth and last part is moderation in apparrell, and in other corpo∣rall ornaments; being the mediocritie betwixt riotous curiositie and slouen∣rie: shewing, that all garments should be neat fit for the body, and agreeable to the sex which should weare them: in worth and fashion correspondent to the state, substance, age, place, time, birth, and honest custome of those per∣sons which vse them. To conclude therefore I say, that Temperance is a ver∣tue, than which nothing is more powerfull, towards the repressing of affecti∣ons, nothing more fit for the good composition and confirmation of mens manners, nothing more effectuall towards the attainement of Gods fa∣uour,  that can either be deuised or spoken: and certainely, there is not a∣ny thing good in the whole course of mans life, which may not bee re∣duced vnto Temperance, as to the centre or spring of humane happi∣nesse.
It followeth needfully, that I speake somewhat of intemperance, and of  the oppositions to these foresaid good parts. Intemperance therefore accor∣ding to Cicero, is such a kind of obedience vnto lusts, meerely repugnant to Lib. 3. Tusc. the right mind, and vnto all prescription of reason, that the priuate desires can neither be gouerned nor contained in any moderation; and thereof are two parts: one which excessiuely nuzzleth it selfe in delicacie, and another which doth not. By violence of the first, men vnreasonably gallop into the perillous gulfe of pleasures, by spurring vpon their libidinous appetites a∣gainst reason: That other, which is called , is a kind of saluage o sencelesse hardnesse or dulnesse in despising all pleasures, honest and disho∣nest whatsoeuer. Of which temper wee shall not in this our age find many;  howbeit, certaine auaricious misers (which haue no sence nor feeling in∣wardly) doe some deale encline to that humour. This is a most pernicious disease of the mind, noysome to him that is so affected, and most daunge∣tous vnto them that conuerse with people of that strange disposition. In∣continence being opposite to the first part of temperance, is seene in rior, luxurie, and drunkennesse: vpon which, infinite sorts of diseases are bred; blunting the sharpenesse of reason, and dulling the wits edge; making persons altogether vnfit for the performance of any noble Offices. And often haue I wondered, that our nation breathing in such a temperate climate, should so much encline to that Dutch distemperature of drunkennesse, which Se∣neca  tearmeth Voluntariam insaniam. For thereby nature is weakened and cor∣rupted, the keene edge of the best vnderstanding rebated, wrath without rea∣son kindled, lust without measure incensed, secrets of greatest moment dis∣closed, words to particular persons, and sometimes to the Commonwealth, offensiue vttered. Wonder it is therefore, why men should voluntarily drowne themselues in excesse; a little is comfortable and that Prouerbe, Ne∣quid nimis, very medicinable, if it can be willingly disgested. Rapacitie being adiunct to incontinence, hurteth many, proceeding from riot and immeasu∣rable expence: when princes and noble persons impose grieuous burthens vpon their subiects and tenants, to maintaine that excesse; or when they put  cruell and vniust meanes in execution, to take away mens goods by strong hand or hypocriticall violence vnder the robe of iustice. Against gentle∣nesse, being the second part of temperance, the deuouring fire, vengeance, or crueltic, standeth opposite: Adiunct thereto, mercilesse, or (as it were) stee∣led immanitie. Such are those which tyrannize ouer captiues, persons pro∣strated; nay, such will not spare the dead, but like wilde beastes feede vpon them with the fangues of malicious and venemous rancour. Opposite to mercie (which is the adiunct of Clemencie) standeth lenti∣tude; or foolish pitie, being the part of a blockish magistrate, as I will partly note in the Morals of my third booke. But crueltie doth not only resist tempe∣rance  & iustice, but fortitude also, which I shall also manifest in the Morals of my fourth booke. Against modestie (which is the third and last part of temperance) contu∣maciously stand impudencie, being a most detestable vice in the presence of God, or of all good men, which contemneth or neglecteth all decencie, with
honestie of life, opening a large and easie way to vicious conuersation,  void of all feare and shame. Also Pride and Arrogancie (which withstand humiliation) is another opposite rotten member; whereby men in a blind loue of themselues imagine more excellent parts and perfections contained in them than are, and arrogating vertues beyond their apprehension and practise: This may be called a vaine, insolent, and foolish ostentation: a vice rie in many princes courts, and proper to flatterers, braggarts, and buf∣fones. Carelesnesse and negligence likewise, beeing the qualities of sluggish dolts, and persons assotted with curiositie, (which is the inordinate dili∣gence or desire to learne arts vnprofitable, euill, and vnnecessarie) stand  opposed vnto the true studies of learning: semblably, scurulous prating, and vnsauourie girding, (such as parasites, stage-players, and other giddie∣headed Mimickes vse, according vnto the opinion of Aristotle) opposite∣ly Lib. 2. & 4. ad Nchomachum. stand against ciuile and ingenuous speech, discourse, and affabilitie. Howbeit, the wittie, well seasoned, and discreet sayings of prudent and sage persons, with a decent alacritie, which minister no cause of offence, (but may bee with reasonable and plausible modestie conuerted) is very commendable and praise-worthie. For such as abhorre ieasting, are dee∣med dull, clownish, vnsociable, and Stoicall after a fashion. Which sort of people, to toward and ingenuous persons is more odious than the bit∣ter  Buffone. There is likewise another sort of people, which in countenance, speech, action, gate, and gesture, grossely counterfeit a kind of grauitie, to con∣ceale their foolishnesse: whose adulterate sapience to men of sound iudge∣ment is most absurd and ridiculous; and others which in princes courts (to make the nobler sort laugh) practise (though not so cunningly) the parts of Tarleton: by simulation deeming in themselues, how that shew will bee thought somewhat contrarie vnto their owne natures, which are more than halfe the same: and these fellowes at vnawares palpably fall in∣to some foolish and odious affectation of ciuilitie: whereas (indeede) in  them there is not any condition verely vertuous, or constant. Others which are not, and yet would seeme ciuile (adulterating their arrogant natures, with the meere colours of grauitie) slubber it vp most improperly and odi∣ously. Howbeit, these qualities (though herein somewhat I haue digressed from the subject of my matter) are more fit for the knowledge of Palla∣dines and Courtiers, which I referre to Baltasar Castiglion, and Duro di Pascolo, in their discourses vpon Court-ship: Onely this which Plato ci∣teth in the person of Socrates, our outside and inside must bee the same in all. Contendendum est enim potiùs vt sub legitimis institutis temperati effici∣amur, Plat. lib. 20. quàm vt sub dialecticis rationibus de Temperantia disputemus: quando∣quidem  summa quadam difficultute cognoscitur; & cognita sine vsu non modo nihil prosunt, sed & obsunt quamplurimum: quodquè magis est nisi re ipsa possi∣deatur, perfectè cognosci nequit, &c.
The fourth and last extreame of Modestie doth consist in excesse of ap∣parrell,  garments, and other ornaments of the bodie, when they bee made onely for vaine ostentation of the mind: which hath beene a notable im∣putation, wherewith all our English men, more than any nation of the world, haue beene shamefully branded amongst forrenners for their dis∣guised fashions, and sumpteous habiliments beyond the bounds of pru∣dence, moderation, or habilitie: some women after a preposterous fashi∣on, attired like men in dubblets; and some men like women in pettie∣coates. This excesse hath so generally dispersed it selfe in our nation, that by their exterior new-fangled robes the wisest of our aduersaries or emu∣lators in forraine parts haue past their iudgements of our giddie minds and  vnconstant behauiours, inwardly saying, That in wearing Dutch hats with French feathers, French dubblets and colletts after the custome of Spaine, Spanish hose, and rapiers of Valentia, Turkish coates, Italian cloakes, and perfumes, with such like; wee likewise had stolne the faults and excesses of those countreyes which wee did imitate naturally. Besides, what a shame was it for vs to bee noted with this exorbitate excesse, that base tailliers, and others which worke as hirelings, aspiring to that abhomina∣ble and vndecent singularitie, should equall themselues in the cost and fashion of their attire, with some of the greatest Barons in this land: a fault not to bee imputed vnto the lawes, for those are precise and strict in  such comely considerations; but in the dissolute and intemperate affecti∣ons of people, which in steed of a little libertie, make a licence at large, tyrannizing vpon the princes gentle disposition and lenitie. Hence was it, that the nobilitie to distinguish themselues by this outward apport of their degrees and riches from the rascall rabble of base ruffians, were driuen to most extreame charge, that they might make a difference of themselues from them equiualent in proportion. Which course had the prince then kept, an∣swerable in her state abuse some Ladies and others in the like analogie: then might shee with ease haue consumed the vnspeakeable masse of Treasure. By this meane the substance of other tailliers, craftsmen, and mechanicall fellows  was dayly more encreased, and the fortunes of our gentlemen exhausted. Which leprosie did in short time so spread itselfe through this nation that diuers liuings of auntient demesne and inheritance which haue continued in succession from manic grandfathers of one race did hang in tailliers shops and were piled vp in the Persian and Spanish merchants coffers. This emu∣lation and excesse hauing further preuailed, grew to such outrage, that when proper maintenance fayled in some to support such riot, they vio∣lently or secretly tooke from others to supply the same: which hath beene the demolition and confusion of many noble families and persons, lately great in worldly reputation: others in a priuate want, purchased by their  owne intollerable profusion, haue perished in their pestilent practises, tending to the common spoyle, for satisfaction of their insatiable appe∣tites: Semper etenim in ciuitate quus opes nullae sunt bonis inuident, malos Salust. in con. Cat extollunt, vetera odere, noua exoptant; inopia suarum rerum mutari omnia
student. This profusion therefore next to the vice of gluttonous surfeit,  ought principally to bee restrained by wise and moderate princes and no∣blemen: for it drayneth their treasure, enfeebling that true heroicall spi∣rit of their minds, either adding to their pride (vnto which people com∣monly that delight in such gay things, are most subiect) or mollifying and deprauing their liberall natures and conditions with lust and ouer-delicat effeminacie. But thus much in breefe as I could, expressing the adiuncts and mem∣bers of Temperance, and of her opposites, subalternately respecting the purse: now somewhat concerning the beneficence and liberalitie which be∣fitteth potentates. It is not thought fit, that princes should precisely stand at vtterance with true liberalitie beeing of it selfe meerely vertuous: but that they shunne a generall largesse or profusion rather, which most Kings affect most in the beginning of their reignes, considering that there are many (whose seruices hauing long expected recompence) which should bee seasoned and encouraged in their faithfulnesse and honesties with some secret taste of royall Munificence. This consideration in some proceedeth out of a magnificent heart, most liberally garnished with true vertues; and in others, from ambi∣tion, and a vaineglorious desire of somewhat more than ordinarie, cunning∣ly couched in their owne heads. Princes therefore shall so much, or more  bee warned and take heede of this excesse then of auarice after a sort, least by such bestowing, the force of beneficence be deminished according to Cicero Officiorum 2. Stultum est quod libentèr facias, curare vt id diutiùs facere non possis, For how can a man properly, tearme that a benefite bestowed which is a meere mali∣fice to the bestower; and hence is that Prouerbe of Hunius fitted to this pur∣pose, Benefacta malelocata malefacta arbitror. Yet if God haue so prouided that a Prince must surely fall into the choise of those two damnable extreames (both which all Princes should hold detestable as snakes) of the two mischiefes, I would hee rather did encline to couetise: for wealth giueth some shaddow to shame: albeit our wise men and all Philoso∣phers  consent that it is dishonestie; but after rapacitie, which is engen∣dered out of the putrifaction of prodigalitie, ragged infamie doth attend with an almes basket. Neither is it entended, that princes should tie such a Gordian knot vpon their purse, as nothing may without Alexanders re∣solution and necessitie loose the same, but that they may with moderation and vpon good cause exceede rather in liberalitie: which the seldomer vsed, may be the richer when it happeneth: and if it come often, then so much the shorter and sweeter. There is another fashion of Liberalitie peculiar to princes, which may  bee tearmed a beneficence: and this braunch of vertue graffed, is in the ry top of iustice: for in all Common-weales, of the soundest instituti∣on, there are alwayes some capitall crimes and forfeitures, out of the
which a wise prince in his iustice, may by good discretion very commenda∣bly  giue a pleasing tast of his liberalitie to persons vertuous and of desert, ac∣cording to their qualities, that good men may liue by the fall of euill mem∣bers, and not that bad people may be made worse by the spoyles of honest men, vnto whome the dignities and possessions of such as are worthely rooted out for their wickednesse, may be collated. By which kind of be∣neficence he greatly magnifieth himselfe. First, in beeing honoured for his iustice against offendours: secondly, by preferring persons noted for their worthinesse; thirdly, with his care had of the Commonwealth, which hee ciuilizeth and secureth by the extirpation of such malefactors: fourthly, through giuing heart and courage to men of qualitie, so to demeine them∣selues  by profitable studies and vertuous liuing, that they may stand in the like grace: fifthly, by taking away from the people all opinion of coue∣tousnesse in himselfe, when hee reserueth not any benefite to his priuate vse, but is seene to doe it in iustice, without any desire of hauing. Lastly, by not extenuating his proper faculties in such bestowing. Thus shall others bee satisfied, his owne power strengthened, and his priuate treasure spa∣red. Which kind of beneficence, king Henry the eight vsed (when the Chaunteries and religious houses, to the value of two hundred pounds yearely, and vnder, with all lands and goods belonging them, were by Parlia∣ment graunted vnto him in the seuen and twentieth yeare of his raigne) by  bestowing those lands vpon the speciall gentlemen in euery Shire, where they were dissolued, more manifesting a good conscience, than any coue∣tousnesse in the cause. And hence was it, that the commotions in Lincolne Shire, Yorke Shire, and in other parts of this Realme, vnder the colour of a dislike, vpon a new size of Subsidie to be leuied, were so quickly quieted by the gentlemen, principall heads in those disturbed parts, whose very counte∣nance amated the seditious commons, which once and againe stirred to di∣sturbance and subuersion of the present quiet; beeing (as it was thought) first kindled at the fire, which M. Thomas Cromwell, then Lord priuie Seale, and Vicegerent generall of the Spiritualties, brought with him, to make  desolate those houses, and all other Abbeyes, which were soone after dis∣solued. For Treasures of princes, noble men, and priuate persons, by their gifts to gaine a good opinion amongst good men of their true liberalitie, these three cautions are required: First, a respect vnto the time; secondly, to the quantitie; thirdly, to the person: when, how much, and vpon whome they will bestow: the time limitted, when it may stand them in most steed which bee rewarded, not preiudicing others to maintaine the same, according to the saying of Cicero, Ab hoc genere largitionis, vt alijs detur alijs auferatur abe∣runt ij qui rempub, tuebuntur: As in graunting of Monopolies to the plea∣suring  of some one man, by the preiudicing of a multitude, which is very dangerous: as also when one rich marchant is suffered to ingrosse some one whole commoditie into his owne hands. As it is written of a craftie Syci∣lian; who with money that was none of his owne, but lent vnto him as in
trust to bee restored, vpon demaund bought all the yron out of the yron∣mongers  shops in Syracusae: and when marchants had from diuers places repaired to that citie, this Ingrosser furnished them with that commoditie, not greatly raising the price thereof: yet so, that for the disbursement of fiftie talents hee gayned an hundred; which was a double vse: for a Talent Atticke amounted to sixe hundred crownes: in so much, as by bestowing thirtie thousand crownes, he gained cleere threescore thousand, and had a quicke returne of his money. But the bruit hereof beeing brought vnto the tyrant Dionysius; albeit the money was not taken from him, (which many miserable tyrants would haue done) yet was hee banished from Syracusae. Which punishment was so much the lesse, by how much  the more that tyrant was taught by the like precedent. These & such like Monopolies (where many businesses are handled for the Commonwealth) are onely fit for princes, and not to be diuolued or vnad∣uisedly bestowed vpon marchants or other subiects: forsomuch as they pro∣cure a generall malice of the people for a priuat mans thankes vnto the prince: and some princes get not so much as thankes. The quantitie likewise ought to be measured by the rule of their owne faculties which bestow them: the per∣sons vpon whome it is bestowed respected according to their worth and qua∣litie, taking good heed that they benefit not their friends by preiudicing stran∣gers, or oppresse any to maintaine the report of their liberalitie, breaking that bubble of vaine glorie soone puft vp with emptinesse, which allureth babes  and fooles into the bottomlesse waues of confusion: Suum namque cuique in Cic. Off. 3. commodum ferendum est potiùs, quàm alterius commodus detrahendum. In giuing therefore, respects are had vnto the qualities of those persons benefited, not to their fortunes, Melius est enim apud bonos quàm apud fortunatos beneficium collo∣cari Off. 2. (saith Cicero): all eminent tokens of good knowledge and vertues in peo∣ple must be cherished and encouraged with beneficence: such as loue them much, should be rewarded with much; which is intended by the interior and not any exterior speech, as for meere affection onely, not benefiting flatterers which intirely loue for lucre, considering how the cares of this fraile honour with the deceitfulnesse of riches & fleshly lusts, enter the thoughts of such Si∣cophants  possessing their hearts, and choaking the diuine grace within them which is made vnfruitfull: also they that by such deceit seeke riches, vndoubtedly fall Mark. cap. 4. into temptations, snares, and into manie foolish and noisome lusts, which drowne men in perdition. Tim. 1. cap. 6. They therefore that in giuing vse these respects, resemble fruitfull grounds, yeelding much more graine than they receiued; when in a charitable re∣spect and for necessitie sake some bee rewarded, that haue not any manifest tokens of desert or vertue requiring it: which in such good and sound dis∣cretion consoundeth melodiously with the giuers vertues and dignities. Yet for so much as the number of people crauing and wanting is infinite, reliefe  and preferment must extend in speciall to their owne countreymen, natio∣nals, friends, and fellowes: some of which are woon with a resemblance in fashions, manners and conditions, others with benefites and gracious offers
mutually done and receiued. Which obseruation likewise seemeth in Salust,  who writeth, That Vbi Romani virtute pericula propulerant, socijs atque amicis Iconiur. Cat. auxilia portabant, magisque dandis quàm accipiendis beneficijs amicitias para∣bant. Malicious parasites and picke thankes, the canker and rust of iust ho∣nour and riches, must bee blotted out of the bookes of your beneficence, as the most vngratefull vipers of nobilitie: for if they find your inclinati∣on to their subtleties, then will they neuer cease, like a Northeast wind, till they haue blasted all before them, both stocke and reputation. Malitia nam∣que praemijs excercetur; vbi ea dempseris nemo omnium gratuitò malus est. By Ad Caes. de Rep∣ordinand. these meanes likewise may circumspect princes aucupate the seruices of  informers, tale-bearers, delators, and promotors; not by proposing the li∣uings and goods of condemned persons vnto them for reward; but by fee∣ding them onely with money, Ne praediorum quaerendorum proposita spe ad calumniandum impellantur: sin autem delatoribus praemia eripiantur, vix est vt Iob. d. de Rep. vlla peccatorum vltio sequatur. Wee haue here in this our Commonwealth much like order obserued: as that any man preferring iust information a∣gainst priuate persons, transgressing the statutes penall, shall haue for his meed halfe the forfeiture and penaltie limitted: which if in other matters capi∣tall, and of more moment, it were permitted, would bee a sure and vn∣doubted meanes, to restraine many crimes, and hainous transgressions of  people. There is likewise a kind of Liberalitie most expedient, which Cicero cal∣leth beneficence; being as it were a willing habite, or inclination, moouing men to doe good. This goodnesse hee defineth by the similitude of them which will not restraine the course of a riuer freely running, as not maliciously crossing anothers preferment, when it withdraweth not one mite from their owne, but further, or aduaunce it rather. The contrarie to which is very rife in euery princes court at this day. Likewise it is held a kind of Liberalitie, to giue sound and honest counsell from a well-willing heart to the best of their cunning, vnto such as will consult with them: this  is a Liberalitie from a faithfull Counsellour, peculiar vnto his prince and countrey: which faithfulnesse ought mutually to bee recompenced vnto him by the prince with honour and dignities: for wee read it in the Psalmes of that blessed Prophet: Dilige bonum servum vt animam tuam, & tracta cum vt fratrem tuum. Good Princes therefore will shew their beneficence vnto good Counsellors, being absent, present, aliue, or dead: euen in ad∣uauncing their children to those offices after them, if they bee found wor∣thie. Which truly royall beneficence hath woon so many good counsellours hearts, that not onely they haue left all their lands and possessions at their death vnto the king; but some of them haue most ioyfully sacrificed their  liues for his safetie. The third strayne of beneficence, is by similitude of him that giueth light vnto the torch of another from his owne: for this is a neighbourly beneficence, not hindering his owne, in len∣ding helpe vnto friendes and countreymen. Which kinde of honest
lending and dutifull repayment is very needfull and commodious, being  a true vertuous braunch of Liberalitie, as is witnessed by that royall Psal∣mist, Vir iustus liberalis est & mutuum dat; declaring, that lending is a member of Liberalitie; which vndoubtedly tendeth to the conseruation of humane societie. Thus much (least I should wearie my selfe or the Reader with matters too vulgar and generally knowne) I thinke sufficient for this Office. How∣beit, there are many things which I would and may not set downe: and much also which I cannot, though I would most gladly; because I want meanes to attaine vnto the knowledge of some speciall secrets in this Of∣fice of Treasurers: howbeit, finding my force vnworthie such my∣steries,  I rest well satisfied with these ordinarie rules; refer∣ring my selfe to some things, which (as occa∣sionshall offer in this Booke ensu∣ing) do subalternatly respect it. Finis Libri Primi.
The second Booke of  Offices. IT is a most chargeable burthen, heauily leaning on Office of Se∣cret Counsel∣lors. princely shoulders, to gouerne by the compasse of sapi∣ence, to minister iustice with equabilitie, to bridle the boldnesse of vice, to giue a liuely spirit to the desire of vertue, to maintaine a due proportion in all Offices, and to win the constant loue of a Commonwealth with ex∣cellent prudence and desert: yet without these either in the prince, in him that counselleth, or in them both, no Commonwealth can flourish: for the natures of mens wits are threefold; that which is prin∣cipall  and sacred, can out of his owne iudgement (without assistance) aduise and execute soundly, with all commendable facilitie: the second dealeth wisely by direction: the third can doe neither; the first excellent in it selfe, the second laudable by the first, the last vnprofitable in all. If therefore the prince haue this principall gift, then is hee the Sunne to those starres of his Counsell, which giue a reasonable light from his influence; being a sweet perfection of goodnesse in any Commonwealth. And if his Counsellours haue that diuine spirit of Sapience in themselues by Gods ordinance, for the weale of his people, where the prince hath this second facultie, to be directed or perswaded by them; yet is that notwithstanding a strong, sufficient, and  good state: But if both the Prince and his Counsell hold the substance of all good wisedome in themselues wisely to consult and direct, being willing also to be counselled and directed in wisedome, without doubt that dominion will flourish and amplifie. Contrarily, what a wretched and ruinous estate, which faileth both in the prince, and in his counsell? As when God had pur∣posed to destroy the state of Israel, he threatened to that nation, how children should beare their scepter, and feeble persons direct their publicke counsels. Which kind of feeblenesse is attributed not vnaptly to foolish and ambicious counsellors, whom Salust in one Oration to Caius Iulius Caesar resembleth vn∣to the superfluous ballase of a ship, which as things vnprofitable, minimique precij (vpon the suddaine violence of any tempest) the masters and Officers,  (being puzzled and in distresse) hoise first ouer board. Neither can it serue, that the prince haue all (which may be required) in himselfe onely; but that they which must ayde him in administration of his estate bee furnished with
competent knowledge also: for as it sufficeth not, to keepe the bodie in  health by withdrawing all euill humors and infirmities from the head, vn∣lesse the heart, with other principall and inward members of the bodie, bee semblably with due correspondence attempered in their seuerall functions: so doth it not accord, that the king being absolute in his parts onely, the state also should be safe, if his Senatours doe not by some dutifull diligence and proportion of vertues answerable, knit all up in perfection. For what is hee that can consult and dispatch many serious causes at once and absolutely without helpe? Suppose him more found in wisdome and knowledge than Salomon, or stronger by three degrees than Hercules; yet doth experience in nature teach vs, that a necessarie necessitie requireth this election of approo∣ued  good Counsellors, without which ayde no prince can support the bur∣then of a kingdome: neither can his owne outward sences properly per∣forme those inward Offices, which are required towards the ruling of a mul∣titude. Besides, according with Tacitus, No man is so naturally prompt, or hath that dexteritie to deale in his owne cause, which he shall find in himselfe; solli∣citing for another. And in another place, Grauissimi principis labores queis or∣bem terrae capessit egent adminicutis: The most serious labours of a prince (by which hee winneth the whole earth) stand in need of helpes. For they to whom much businesse and many people are committed, haue much need of counsell. Euery good Prince which did formerly gouerne, was attended with as many Counsellors, as he was with eyes, eares, and hands: Caius Caesar with Hyppol a coll. de Cons. & Consili. Quintus Paedius and Cornelius Balbus; Augustus with Mecoenas and Agrippa; Adrianus with Celsus, Saluius, and Neratius; Marcus Antoninus with Scaeuola, Mutianus, and Volatianus; Seuerus with Papinianus. And to be short, our late Princes of most fortunate and blessed memorie, Queene Elizabeth, and your Maiestie, with Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Walter Mildemay, Sir Iohn Cheeke, Sir Francis Walsingham, William Lord Burghley, Robert Earle of Leycester, Robert Cecyll Earle of Salisburie, Sir The. Egerton Lord Elesmere and Chancellor, Sir Tho. Sackuylle Earle of Dorset now Lord Treasurer, with diuerse others. And hence is it, that Cicero noteth, Not with swiftnesse and bodily strength great  In Cat. Ma. matters are ordered, but with counsell and authoritie. Likewise Salust, With much reading and hearing I find, that all Nations haue beene prosperous, so long as iust counsell preuailed with them: but being once with partialitie, feare, and pleasure corrupted, presently their wealth wasted, their Empire vanished, and sla∣erie tyrannized vpon them. And as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus writeth, the cause Lib. 2. why Rome so long flourished, was, That the gouernours of the Empire were directed by Counsels of the Senate, not following their owne opinions: for by the assembly of wise Counsellors, the princes wisedome is encreased. As Capitolinus writeth: Bonus fit si bonis amicis vtatur: That Prince which maketh vse of In it. Alex. good friends, is made a good Prince. By their Counsels likewise saith Otho  the Emperour in Tacitus is the goodnesse and wisedome of princes opened: Lib. 2. Annal. also Salust calleth, Prosperitatem regis famam Consiliarij: The kings prosperitie to depend vpon the Counsellors fame: and so by good inuersion, the fame
of a Counsellour to depend vpon the kings prosperitie. But it is needlesse  to stand so much vpon the necessitie thereof, being so well knowne to the weakest iudgement. A Counsell therefore, according to Bodin, is a lawfull congregation or assembly of choise persons, which aduise the king in times of peace and warre how to gouerne the Commonwealth: and as Furio Ceriolano defineth them Counsellors are apt persons chosen for fit businesse, in whom there is requi∣red good sufficiencie towards the administration of all matters debated in Counsels. Demosthenes therefore calleth consultation, The chapiter and con∣stancie, the base of all vertues. I will particularly speake in my third booke of Offices somwhat concerning  the Councels of England: and hauing in these Offices occasion generally to touch the secret councels of a state also, I will breifely write what I haue in part gathered concerning the strict and priuat councell of France, omitting the councell at large (which is called the Grand Counsell) consisting vpon the L. Chauncellour to whom with the maisters of the Requests for their more ease and expedition in publicke businesse (with which theyformer∣ly were much entangled) king Charles the eight added seuenteene counce∣lours spirituall and temporall. After whom his successor Lewes the 12 super∣added one prelate and two more counsellours fulfilling the number of 20 be∣sides two secretaries, whereof one did serue in place of an actuarie: it being  Vine. Lupan. de Mag. Franciae. further ordayned, that these should keepe six moneths continually together in councell betwixt seuen and ten in the forenoone and after dinner betwixt three and fiue houres. This Senate therfore (which the French king doth by peculiar demonstration call his own councell from which by the edict of Phi∣lip le beau no persons of that Realme can appeale, because the king himselfe which acknowledgeth no superiour in his dominions vnder God, is the chiefe thereof) conuerseth in all publicke affaires of the Common-wealth, respecting the king and gouernment, which is aduised and directed thereby. Albeit the king be iudge of this Counsell, and of the Parliament, yet is hee subiect to the lawes thereof. Nam Parliamentis secundum deum rex solus  Imperat, qui absens aquè in Parliamenti ac in priuati Consilij decretis loquitur: Ioh. Til in Com. de Rebus Gall. For (as a God) the king himselfe only ruleth in the Parliaments: who (though hee bee not present in the Sessions) yet hath his voyce royall assenting or dissenting both in the Parliaments and priuate Counsels of state: Albeit the Parliamentall iurisdiction surpasseth this Counsell. Neither is it permit∣ted, that any President, Marshall, or other principall magistrate shall (during the time of his authoritie) retaine his place, or giue a voice in that Office; but is sequestred or suspended from entermedling in those secret consultati∣ons vpon very reasonable and needefull respects: because certaine expostu∣lations may be concerning some negligent, indirect, or corrupt dealings in  their places otherwise. In this Counsell king Charles the eight instituted, that the Lord Chauncelor should bee present, who (being directed by the true rule of Iustice, should take the rites and suffrages of those other Coun∣sellors by iust number in any serious causes. King Philip le Longe ordained of
this Counsell twentie Noblemen: whereof six were of the blood, two Ma∣rischals,  the Archbishop of Rhoane, the Bishop of S. Malo, with the Chaun∣cellor of Fraunce, and nine others. These had the determining of all great causes; ordering (as in their wisedomes was thought fit) the families of the King, of his Queene, and of his children: also to take account each moneth of the Treasurers, and to reforme any thing which needed helpe in that Of∣fice. In which (as in our Counsell chamber of England) there is a register or Diarie booke kept of all speciall causes there handled and debated, which de∣serue monument. And this Counsell is therefore fitly called the Common∣wealths heart; wherein the knowledge and vnderstanding is placed, beeing properly tearmed, Dux & Imperator vitae mortalium: The Captaine and Com∣maunder  of mortall mens liues. For those are the chiefe Morall faculties of the mind; vnto which euen as the bodie by obedience is bound, so semblably should the people dutifully subiect themselues to this Aristocraticall Senate. And therfore that extreame & straine of prudence, is in extremities permitted to this Counsell onely, because they can make best vse of it, finding (in their prudent foresight) when and vpon what occasions for the Commonwealth to put the same in execution, as Salust in one of his Orations: Patres consilio valere debent, populo superuacanea est calliditas. The Fathers and Senatours should exceed and preuaile in their Counsell: Calliditie becommeth not the Commonaltie▪ Them therfore that serue in such Office, it behoueth to be very well skilled in princely cunning being with diligence employed in affaires of state, and politicke matters, narrowly respecting gouernment. This Counsell especially conuerseth in ciuile causes; as in punishing of Rulers, Deputies, Iustices of peace, Generals of armies, Coronels, priuat Captaines, inferior Counsellors of the prince ciuile or martiall, concerning their iust dealing or iniquitie in exe∣cution of their Offices. In whose doome it resteth, whether they shall bee dis∣charged or retained in their places, which persons are to be thought seruicea∣ble, & which not. This Counsell likewise prouideth, that there be no falshood in paying of wages and prouision for victuall vsed by the treasurers & prouant  masters in campe or garrison. It hath in like sort a regard limited vnto the trea∣surers and officers of the prince his great receit, to whom the collection and conseruation thereof remaineth: but the dispensation and imployment only resteth in the command of this Counsell, which likewise hath in trust the con∣sideration of all weightie treaties of peace betwixt their people and other na∣tions, of leagues, amities, commerce & entercourse, of militarie complots, con∣federacies, and actions, and of dispatching away well instructed embassadours with any complementarie tearmes of beneuolence towards forren princes or states, really or verbally to be professed or coloured: to deliberate and resolue by what meanes in how short time and whether in priuate or publikely such  businesse should bee managed: with some other intricacies of more impor∣tance: of which here I may not take any notice; neither (if I could) can it bee thought fit that I should open them, being only reserued as mysteries peculiar to this which the prince calleth his owne Counsell.
Those secrets of a State, which commonly fore beyond the vulgar appre∣hension,  beeing certaine rules, or as it were cabals of glorious gouernment and successe both in peace and warre (apprehensible to few secret Counsel∣lors in some Commonweales, which either languish or wax vnfortunate) are locked vp in foure generall rules. First, in the congregation of wise magi∣strates, including the prinat Counsell. These vpon importune causes in mat∣ters of highest consequence (that cannot otherwise bee remedied, but by meanes most necessarie to bee concealed) knit vp the prudence of their reso∣lutions in sinuous knots and serpentine wreathes of mysticall and intricate meanes, and instruments, fetching in their curious machinations and denises with bait, hooke, and line, for any graue purpose beyond ordinarie reason.  The second is in the maiestie of State, which includeth euery prince his pri∣uate power with the strength of his wisedome and fortitude, in allies, monies, confederates, inuasions and euasions, in all glorious hazards and aduentures. In seeking certainely to learne out those mysteries, the vulgar are commonly deceiued: for it is so shadowed, as not all princes are well acquainted with their owne force, and how faire their armes may by meanes sufficiently stretch: onely some few very prudent and industrious Counsellors, of grauest and most iudicious obseruation, are throughly well acquainted withall. The third consisteth in iudgements: wherein vpon the decision and appendance of some weightie matters (respecting the common quiet and securitie by cer∣taine  mysticall circumstances in handling) strange Oracles, not apprehensible by vulgar sence, are oftentimes closed: as by suffering a mischiefe rather than an inconuenience, and by breaking off a leg or arme, to saue the best ioynt from perishing. The fourth concludeth in the warie leuying of warre, in the skilfull exercising, leading, and encouraging of souldiors vpon seruices vnto them vnknowne, and tending to the most renowne, protection, and augmen∣tation of their countrey; which entirely dependeth vpon stratagemes of warre, deuised and executed by the Commaunder his noble and industrious sagacitie and secrecie; and in them many times are the weales and safeties of puissant kings and kingdomes wholly contained. In choice of this most honourable Senate it is very needfull, that the prince shew great prudence and discretion: as in that sufficiencie which must serue the mature expedition of all causes committed to the administration therof: so that Election (being as it were a franke action of the mind, which in choice of gthings accepteth the best, and in doubtfull euils auoideth the worse) wholly belongeth the prince. Likewise noble industrie (being a ceaselesse and sincere cogitation, and ment all lucubration for the iust and inuiolable honour of his Prince and of the Commonwealth) is the true cognisance of a good Counsellor: and these two qualities in them both are apparant and true tokens of both their wisedomes. The worthiest choice that a Prince can make for such a Senate, is  out of the true nobilitie, which vnder him should gouerne and amplifie the Commonwealth: I meane principally those that are notable and approoued for their vertues and honour, encountering neerely with the dignities of their blood and families: such as flie not into the palaces of a Commonwealth by
the casements of their couetise, with the lazie wings of their wealth, but enter  the triumphant port of honour, marshalled by their conspicuous vertues Ve∣ry noble was that sacred institution of S. Louis and Charles the fifth, French kings, which by their speciall edicts cautioned, that in their dominions no ma∣gistracies or Offices might bee sold and bought, but frankely bestowed vpon prudent, learned, continent, and honest persons, to the best of their good fame and skill respectiuely: for such dinundation of dignities (as Heliog abalus and Vespasian vsed, and which was by the iust Emperour Alexander Seuerus refu∣sed) is most corrupt, odious, and pestilent in any Commonwealth, according to M. Bodin in his booke of Commonwealth: In omni genere ciuitatum tar∣pissima ac perniciosissima honorum ac praemiorum (quae virtuti debentur) merca∣tura.  In all sorts of cities, the marchandize of honours and rewards which are due to vertue, is most foule and pernicious. For what more dishonour in any state can bee found, than when honours and dignities are vnworthily di∣stributed? Iacet etenim & sordescit reipub gloria cum indignis honores tribuuntur: For the glory of euery such Commonwealth (where honours are vnworthi∣ly Ioh. Bodin. distributed) is throwne downe and defaced. Such vertuous and worthie Counsellors therefore by the princes sacred discretion (as it is in his Maiesties Realmes of England and Scotland) may be chosen out of those Principali∣ties or Prouinces which bow to his scepter. For if wise men of approoued goodnesse and sufficiencie for that place find themselues and all of their na∣tion  exempted from this honourable societie, it is vnspeakeable, how con∣temptuously they will stomacke it, thinking not without some ground, that they be not respected but suspected. And from hence (though by misprizion they smolther vp their rancour for a season, yet hauing attained some matu∣ritie; Hyppol. a . malice, dangerous and odious conspiracies and machinations, with in∣ductions of forren princes, breake forth imediately: raising rebellions, and arming subiects against their naturall Soueraignes. Ex rebus namque leuissimis Ioh. Bodin. discordiae saepè nascuntur, quae velut scintillae slammas excitant; ac postremò bello∣rum ciuilium Maxima incendia totam rempub. peruadunt. For out of most weake beginnings are discords many times bred: which euen as little sparkles breake  out into flames; so that in conclusion, the greatest fires of ciuile warres take hold of the whole Commonwealth. And therefore it is held for a certaine truth, That nothing so soone moueth discord, as too much partiall distributi∣on of rewards and honours. A prince therefore beeing assisted with Coun∣sellors chosen out of his owne kingdomes, may better and more commodi∣ously prouide against any future calamities. My iudgement is slender, but it may be thought how some discontentment vpon this ground, added to the fedicious fire in Ireland, when those stubborne rebels formerly withstood the proceedings of our late Soueraigne and her Deputies with the Counsell esta∣blished i that realme. No persons though most prudent (for this is a sure and  infallible position) being priuately discontented and ambitious, may safely be chosen into the fellowship of any princes priuat Counsell, but the guides and ringleaders of those Irish rebels were alwaies knowne to be discontented inwardly disturbed and ambitious: therefore the state was well handled in
that point. To conclude vpon this therefore a prince without great impedi∣ments  and principall remedies medicining that daunger, may not make choice of his secret Counsellors out of one kingdome onely, if hee retaine more principalities than one: because in bestowing all fauour or the greatest part thereof vpon one peculiar people, they grow so proud, that their astoci∣ates, neighbouring them, stirred vp with indignation, and despiteously re∣pining thereat, with generall maledictions crosse their proceedings: by which meanes commouing sedicious cauils and quarrels against them, they sometimes vnder that abhominable pretext may make a way to diuest their liege Soueraignes, and it hath euer more beene obserued, that the like ca∣ses are most desperate, ending in much blood and crueltie. This is also most  certaine, that a better choice may be found amongst many good, than out of a bad multitude. When they therefore which are vertuously affected, see their prince like a true patrone or parent rather to studie their generall ho∣nour so much, the more readie will they be to make good remonstrance of their duties and honesties; being a principall meane to draw the worthiest of their Nobles and others to Philosophicall and needfull arts and studies: Neither may this choice bee made out of his owne house or court onely; but by diligent inquisition he may learne which are best and most excellent in all prouinces: them vnder some other pretence the prince may send for, hauing their expences in iourney beneuolently defrayed, and according to  their sufficiencie for that place proceede in Election. By which kind of in∣quisition the Soueraigne may come to sure knowledge of all the most excel∣lent and worthy persons in his realmes. Such as are not chosen of them that were approued (for peraduenture some one or two may supplie the defect in that Counsell) must be with meeknesse, affabilitie, beneficence, great com∣mendation for their vertues, and royall encouragement to perseuerance in the same dismissed. Heerein also deliberation is very requisite, a free par∣don and prouision therefore for their securitie should be graunted and pro∣claimed, as was the auncient custome against the kings of Egypt after their deaths, according to Diodorus; which in open accusation either by word  or writing can make proofe of their notable vnworthinesse for that Office: Lib. 2. bib. histor. and if any man scandalously lay some notable crimes vnto their charge, which cannot be prooued; hee which so maliciously woundeth any good mans fame, deserueth in all rigour to bee seuerely punished. Those accu∣sations which are exhibited against any of them, must bee willingly and graciously receiued, heard, and remitted (if it bee requisite) to iust in∣quisition and iudgement. This auncient custome was obserued amongst the Romanes, in election of their magistrates, by which their Common∣wealth gallantly flourished: and when that course declined, their State so much inclined, that it was miserable, and ruinous in short tie. Not  much vnlike was that of king Philip Valoys called Le Beau, who published an Edict, That euerie third yeare inquisition should bee made into the manners, state, and behauiour of the secret Counsellors, administrng in the Ioh. Tilius in Com. de Reb. gall. French state.
In this forme of triall therefore great iudgement and good heed must bee  had to those accusations so preferred, which sometimes like pilles haue their bitternesse fairely gilt and shaddowed, as hath beene manifoldly seene by good experience heretofore. In which case the Prince imitateth S. Thomas, not crediting further than his eyes and hands haue seene and felt. For ho∣nours and Offices are either bestowed vpon men for desert, for fauour, or in respect of their power. He which in this choice hath inspexion onely to the first, sheweth wisedome and vertue: but they that simply standvpon power and fauour, differ little from the touch of tyrannie. A fit Counsellor therefore a little after his election should haue adoption by the prince into that societie, before his noble and immediate ministers of Iustice; where, to him must bee shewed, that for his wisedome and honest  parts, and in regard of the peoples good opinion, attesting his sufficiencie, choice was made of him: which good fame if he would cherish, the glorie should in speciall redound vnto himselfe; whereas otherwise, the neglect thereof would disgrace and deiect him, proposing rewards and punishments suting with his demeanour: by which course the people will be well satisfi∣ed, the Counsellor tied to care how this honour may be with answerable du∣tie retained, and to knit vp the couenant, his oath being (as Cicero tearmeth it) a religious affirmation, must bee ministred vnto him in presence; which will summon his conscience to warie circumspection and faithfulnesse in that Of∣fice, arming him with honest constancie, when partiall respect of blood or  friendship shall chalenge him vpon vniust tearmes; by which means he may take honourable exceptions against them. And hence is it that Salust sayth, How Counsellors should in their difficult consultations set apart all hatred, friendship, wrath, and mercie. Haud etenim facile vera prouidet animus vbi illa officiunt: neque quisquam omnium libidini simùl & vsui paruit: For hardly can the mind foresee the truth where those offend, neither did euer any man become subiect at once to his lust and commoditie. And (to make it the su∣rer) an oath is most auaileable with honest and ingenuous consciences and natures, which Cicero likewise addeth to the charge of a magistrate. Neque Officiorum 3. contra rempub. neque contra iusiurandum ac fidem amici sui causa vir bonus fa∣ciet:  nec si Iudex quidem erit de ipso amico: A good man will not enter into a∣ny action either against the Commonwealth, or contrarie to his oath, for any respect of friendship: no, though he were the Iudge in his friends cause. For euery noble magistrat which respecteth honour, will onely doe those things, Quae salua fide facere possit: Nullum etenim vinculum ad astringendam fidemiure inrando maiores arctius esse voluerunt. For our Elders were of opinion, that there could not bee deuised any firmer bond to retaine a mans faith, than his solemne oath. If Princes therefore will hold this course in planting Counsellors, many  very noble persons by birth, will with vertuous studies furnish and enable themselues for those Offices: and suppose, they beeing licenciously nuzzled in delicate effeminacie, corrupt their natures with pestilent sluggishnesse; yet will other ingenuous spirits (not so pampered and assotted with sensualities
in their education) naturally contend to become absolute, and with some ex∣perience  and practise prooue planets of happinesse to the Commonwealth, where they minister. In my iudgement that was a very strange and politicke prouision of for∣mer times in Fraunce, which did so worke in the phantasticall spirits of those Noblemen: For Vincentius Lupanus noteth, That they did abhorre as a quali∣tie base, barbarous, and disgracefull, that their gentlemen of the most liberall birth and nature, should bee learned in the liberall Sciences and in Philoso∣phie: prouiding onely, that their education should tend to good skill in horsemanship, in hunting, and in the practise of armes. In which opinion it seemeth to mee, that they were formerly confirmed, and animated by the  kings of that realme vpon very prudent respects: howbeit, I could neuer read it written in any booke, neither haue I receiued it from the mouth of any mans opinion, what cause might induce them to that kind of stupiditie. But (vnder pardon) I deeme, that they being of a fierie, stirring, and haughtie sto∣macke (as the noble natures of that Nation hath beene many times by many wise obseruers noted) and being rooted or implanted rather to the ciuile fa∣ctions of diuerse Dukes and pettie princes, through blood and alliance oppo∣sitely combined against some kings, and others of those prouinces; it hath beene a kind of foolish caball, tending to the preseruation of that State, and taught vnto them for the priuation of their rationall and intellectuall know∣ledge,  which otherwise, through their sedicious complots and deuices, (such as haue alwayes beene plentifull amongst them) they might haue coyned out of the noble mint of hystories and other politike discourses, and therewithall endangered the publicke state. For certaine it is, that (by the goodnesse of God, and the naturall benefit of that climate vnder which they liue) those no∣ble men of Fraunce are docile, ingenuous, apprehensiue, variable, rash, and for the most part fitter for alteration than confirmation of great affaires. How∣beit, in the flourishing age of king Frauncis the first, some threescore and ten yeares past, at what time God graciously visited the most parts of Christen∣dome with his spirit of all true knowledge and literature; when the most  comfortable beames of his blessed sonne our Sauiour Christ his Gospell, af∣ter a long and infernall eclipse of ignorance, beautifully brast out, and was dispersed amongst the poore, leane, and hunger-starued sheepe of his pasture, as well with vs in these Realmes, as with them, and in Germanie: euen then did the French Nobilitie take it as their highest honour, and a true type of perfect glorie to bee learned in all vertuous contemplation and studies, that therein also (which so much surreacheth momentanie fortunes) they might like as many starres surmount, and be discerned from the vulgar shddowes. So that vnto men enriched with those noble qualities, the prince vertuously studying to glorifie the state of that flourishing kingdome, diuolued the great  and noblest Maiesties, Offices, and Magistracies of his state (whereof the num∣ber is infinite) vnto such as were learned and vertuous. Sola namque virtus vera Nobilitas est. For very Nobilitie is composed of vertue onely. And cer∣taine is it found in all kingdomes, That if the Prince delight in hunting, Poe∣trie,
Musicke, Armes, Astrologie, &c. not onely those neerest him in court,  but the vulgar will fashion themselues, according to their abilities vnto such studies and pleasures. And (if hee take comfort in wise and honorable coun∣cellours) all his Nobles and Barons within the space of foure or fiue yeares will bee fit to serue in secret Councell to the best princes of the world; nay more, a king may make apt Counsellors of very meane men (Qui maioribus suis virtute praelucent: Which giue more light of vertue than their ancestors) onely by this rule: so that his house or Court shall soone become a Schoole-house or Colledge of sapience and vertue. This likewise in the election of a Counsellor is one exceeding Principle, That euery Prince in the beginning of his reigne, without very weightie  cause to the contrarie, continue those Counsellors in their places, being left in seruice of his predecessor. Which wisedome hath well appeared in your most worthily renowned Maiestie; who with good successe and auspicious grace yeelded your selfe to that course, vpon your Graces imitation to your heri∣tage of this Crown imperiall of England, with the royalties annexed. Which some writers haue noted in diuers prudent kings, but amongst others in Lewis the eleuenth, the French king: who being readie to depart this life, commen∣ded to the trust of his sonne Charles the eight (then readie to succeed) the fide∣lities of those Counsellors which instantly did serue him; intimating to him in this caueat, That hee by good experience in himselfe had formerly felt the  smart which ensued vpon the displacing of such approued, vertuous, and ho∣nest ministers. Whose counsell tooke such effect with king Charles, that hee li∣ued in such happie state amongst his Peeres and Counsell, as that in griefe conceiued of his death, two of his Officers about his person, then in seruice, suddenly died also. This Charles was so beloued, as hath not beene mentioned in the French histories of any king like him, except of the Emperour Titus; before whom (for his humanitie, lenitie, liberalitie, goodnesse, and vertues) he was much preferred. Vnto the making vp of this politicke bodie, the profit, ruine, honour, and shame of the prince and subiects are surely fastened. It behooueth therefore  specially, that Princes haue a sharpe sight into them of this societie: for ad∣mit some could be contented to deceiue; yet those finding the Prince more warily like a carefull father than a vigilant tyrant, which attendeth bloodie vantages, to looke into their actions, become faithfull, albeit against their will: and then being well encouraged with dignities and preferments in their diligence and honesties, they shall not haue any cause to wring from others vniustly: insomuch as they (finding that the prince groweth studious of their weale) shall bee mooued entirely to neglect their owne priuate, for the better aduauncement of his seruice, and Maiestie. In which, if they doe not both of them keepe rule, space, time, tune, and eare recipro∣cally,  then shall they both certainely mistake in the descant of their plaine song. Hereupon dependeth also, that secret Counsellors (in weightie matters by the Prince to them concredited) keepe counsell and secrecie: for (it being
deemed most odious, when a priuate person dispaleth the secrets of his friend  that relieth vpon his Taciturnitie) how much more contemptuous and dam∣nable is it in him, which discloseth the priuate consultations of his Prince; when such ouerture portendeth great dammage to the Common-wealth? Heerein he reuerseth his truest honours, violateth royall affiance, and without any sence or religion had of his oath, (as impiously prophaned, as assumed solemnely) transgresseth to the death. In these considerations it is most be∣hoofefull to conceale matters important from the knowledge of women; be∣ing of themselues by nature commonly desirous to heare, to know, and to talke all things. And hence was it, that Salust inueighing against Cicero, did obiect, That he did Cum Terentia vxore consulere de Republica: That hee did  consult with his wife Terentia concerning State-matters. Certainely, such Counsellors (if a man may so tearme them, because they cannot keepe counsell, but lay that open to the great harme which is deliuered vnto them in trustiest secret for the generall good) are for the most part basely disposed, vicious, loaden with heinous crimes and nefarious practises, vaine, audacious; which glorie (to their owne shame) hauing no power nor moderation in hand, tongue, or heart: such as Quintus Curius, who communicating with a noble Romane strumpet called Fuluia; the treasons of Lucius Catiline (where∣in he was a vigilant partisan and principall Sergeant himselfe) euen in the very forge of their treasonable practises, subuerted himselfe, with all his complots  and complices. But it is euident by the example of young Papirius, (when vpon the importunacie which his mother vsed, to learne out of him the Se∣nates seerets) that he deuised a ridiculous bait, which tempted her with other Ladies verbally to prostitute their shame in the Senate; wherein they made manifest their owne intemperance: but concerning this, being so common and notable, I referre them that list, to the Historie. Of the like nature was Sempronia, of whom Salust sayth, That it could not be discerned, whether she were more prodigall of her owne good fame, or of her money: Sic enim li∣bidine accensa fuit vt saepiùs viros peteret, quam peteretur: quae sibi fidem prodi∣derat, & creditam abiurauerat: For so vehement was the fire of her lust, that  In coniur. Cat. shee did much more desire mens companies, than men did hers: who did betray the trust of those that reposed in her, and perfidiously deale with those that credited her. It is not vnknowne what ciuile calamities in the Realme of Fraunce, both amongst the royall brethren and princes thereof, happened vpon participation in the great Counsels of that State with the late Queene mother Caterina di Medici, daughter to the Duke of Florence: and it cannot but be fresh in their remembrance through Christendome by them of this late age; because no Commonwealth, but hath in some one or other thing suffered extremities, when this Cath. (as a President to both the Counsels of Fraunce) steered the helme of that Commonwealth, which shee misguided  after her owne lust and pleasure. Vpon diuers considerations by that law Salique (which king Pharamonde made in his owne patrimonie neere Xantoigne, called Salique, whereupon Ioh. Tilius in Com. de Reb. gall. that denomination first was) women were exempted from many priuiled∣ges.
And Gaguinus noteth of king Lewis the eleuenth of Fraunce, which in  Lib. 10. his last Testament at his death amongst other things entreated his sonne the good king Charles to commit no councell of trust vnto his mother Charlotte the Duke of Sauoyes daughter, which scarcely did liue one whole yeare dow∣ager after her husband: peraduenture he doubtfully fantasied, that she had vniustly or wickedly dealt with him in his estate or life. But I will not insist herein, submitting my selfe to them which are the fathers of wisedome and experience, and can discreetly tell how with honour and constancie to bridle their affections in such cases; hauing by good example of others more power in this vertue to performe, than the most wise & valiant of mortall men, king Salomon and Sampson had before; whose prudence and fortitude were scanda∣lized  and subuerted by women. Howbeit, I doe not here intend from all sorts of women, and in anie weightie causes of consequence to make a questi∣on of foeminine insufficiencie; because in other greater causes of right and gouernment (according to the auntient lawes, priuiledges, and customes of diuers Realmes and Countries) there is great reason why they should retaine their immunities: as Plutarch writeth was sometimes in Fraunce: Cum Celta∣rum In tractas. de mulier, &c. mulieres Consilijs publicis interfuissent, in quibus de pace & bello tract abatur: At what time the French women were alwaies present at their publique Counsels; in all matters ciuill and militarie. For hee saith in the said Treatise, how such articles of confederacie were betwixt the Gaules and Hanniball, that the Carthaginian Magistrates should order all wrongs done vnto them by the  Celtes; and that the Celtique women answerably, such wrongs as was done vnto the Gaules by the Carthaginians. Which auncient custome being odi∣ous to diuers princes of that Realme in posteritie, might peraduenture haue giuen cause vnto king Pharomonde of his law. But sure it is, that many wo∣men haue worthely gouerned heretofore in diuers places: And diuerse very learned and politicke women, such as Aspasia, whom Pericles loued, and with whom Socrates did often consult. Howbeit if Counsels of the state in these our dayes should be referred vnto them. I thinke neither the time nor date of their continence and experience would permit the same againe in Fraunce. But that I may conclude vpon this point of secrecie: for by that peculiaritie  Counsellors ought to be chosen and cherished. It is written in Diodorus Si∣culus, how the Egyptians did ordaine, That hee which opened the secrets of Biblioth. Histor. cap. 3. lib. 2. that Commonwealth to his trust committed, should haue his tongue rooted out. Those sixtie learned Areopagites of Athens did carefully prouide a∣gainst this crime also. Moreouer, it is instituted by the ciuile lawes, that they which diuulge secret Counsels of the publicke state, shall bee burnt at a stake, Transf∣rit. de . or hanged vpon a gibbet. It is required in persons of so worthy place and nobilitie, that to this faith∣fulnesse they superadde fortitude and honest constancie towards the defence and maintenance of iustice and truth both in giuing, receiuing, and in con∣cealing  of Counsell, as is warned by the example of Sardanapalus, the thirtieth and last Monarch of the Assyrians; who through his sensualitie, pusillanimi∣tie, lacke of grace, and of true fortitude, was within his huge citie Niniuie
besieged by Arbaces, captaine of the Medians: through whose power, and in  feare of the Oracle, which was fulfilled in suddaine falling downe of a large Diodori Siculi lib. 2. Bib. Hist. peece of the cities wals (that made passage for the Medians, and strooke him with such a present terror) he thus feebly consulted and resolued with him∣selfe, vpon a flaming pyre, destined to that end, together with his concubines, eunuchs, and treasure, to cast himselfe, leauing all the spoyles and reliques with that Monarchie to the Medians. In the Prince therfore principally for∣titude is required, and next in his secret Counsellors, whose vertues should a∣nimate him. There is one most excellent note of true fortitude, remaining vnto such honourable Counsellors, by the example of Scauola, viuely manifesting a va∣liant  heart, fortified with a iust and vnstained conscience: hee, when Sylla with multitudes of men in armes had entred the Senate, implacably thirsting after the destruction of Marius, whom hee would haue had by the Senatours then present, denounced a common enemie to the state: onely Scaeuola refu∣sed to giue voice against him, euen when Sylla with most truculencie threa∣tened him to the contrarie, saying: Albeit thou darest mee with these heapes of souldiors, with which thou distressest this honourable presence, although thou breath forth death against me, yet will not I condiscend (in loue of my blood, which is both aged and little) to denounce Marius our enemy, through whose valour and honestie my conscience attesteth, how the citie Rome, and  all Italie, was preserued. In such cases therefore, Counsellors truly valiant feare onely the wrath of God threatening iniquitie, least as S. Augustine wri∣teth, Through feare or affection in concealing the veritie, they seeme more to respect the creature than the creator. Epist. ad Casul. 6. Vnto this faith and fortitude there are opposites, to which diuers in their deliberations and resolutions are vehemently subiect, viz. feare, being a cer∣taine pensiue heauinesse for some mischiefe future or remote; and affection, which is a partiall respect of certaine persons beyond the lists of reason. Such people therefore are not deemed wise and prudent, which feare more than is fit, con∣sidering that indissoluble accord which is betwixt Prudence and Fortitude,  according to that wise Prouerbe of king Salomon, A wise man is valiant, and a learned man strong. Notwithstanding the weake opinions of diuers which Prou. 24. haue argued in my hearing, That wise men cannot be valorous, for so much as they summe vp with the counters of reason in the audit of prudence, all chaunces and perils which may come in, by circumstances and deriuations of matters: According to that of Salust concerning Iugurth; Quod difficili∣mum imprimis est, & praelio strenuus erat & bonus consilio, quorum alterum ex pro∣uidentia Bell. Iugurth. timorem, alterum ex audacia temeritatem plerunquè afferre solent: And that which was most difficult, his stoutnesse in warre, and his soothfastnesse in Counsell exceeded: the last of which commonly (by reason of that pro∣uidence,  which forecasteth perils) doth inflict feare; the first through ex∣ceeding boldnesse breedeth temeritie. A rare position: as if there had scarce∣ly beene any meane betwixt cowardise and temeritie. Actions both glori∣ous and profitable may not be let slip through feare of vncertaine perils: yet
if we stand betwixt two dangers, let vs with firme valour aduenture vpon that  which may best emblazon our honour, bearing with it true tokens of our true heroicall vertues and spirits. We know by good experience, that a time∣rous Counsellor is by desperation (being a fearefull and horrible deiection or con∣sternation of a mind base and abiect) conuerted into rash courses; euen as rash men are by their temeritie. Furthermore, it is common in the nature of things chiefely to feare dangers most imminent, being more appalled at pre∣sent perils than is requisite; but valuing mischiefes future and remote more carelesly than they should: because hopes by times or chaunces may promise some redresse for them. But this is both sure and notable: Vbi bonum publi∣cum Salust. de Rep∣ord. ad Ca. Caes. usui est, id dubitare aggredi socordiae atque ignauiae est: It is the part of a  slothfull coward, when a man shall feare to attempt any thing which may benefit the Commonwealth. A prudent Senatour therefore equally respe∣cteth head and foot: for after long consultation and leisure had in expence of time, he cannot without great shame and difficultie recall matters which haue beene curiously sifted before: as it was spoken of Bomilchar: Qu cupi∣dus Bell. Iugurth. incepta patrandi, & timore socij anxius omisso veteri Consilio nouum quaerere noluit: Who being earnest to perfect his beginnings, and standing in doubt of his faint hearted fellow, would not alter his owne first determination for any second resolution. In blaunching these dishonourable blemishes of feare and affection, the Counsellor giueth a cleere light and perfect view of his loue and worship vnto the Prince and Commonwealth. It is worthely  noted by some, that amongst the Athenians, immediately before their consul∣tations, a cryer did by proclamation denounce a shamefull death and con∣fusion to him and all his posteritie, that should minister corrupt or vngra∣cious counsell to the Commonwealth for his owne priuate weale or secu∣ritie. O most perfect, sacred, and eternall Senate, which doth at the Coun∣sell chambers dore leaue behind all partiall hatred against aduersaries, grace towards friends, arrogancie, priuate passion, with obstinacie: which the em∣perour Fredericke caused to be curiously written with golden letters ouer the Duro di Pascolo Autic. Polit. ports of his palace at Ratisbone, That such as were thither appealed to con∣sultation, should leaue without those gates all dissimulation and hypocrisie:  The Venetians likewise, before they came to deliberate vpon any weightie matters in the State-chamber, first purifie their consciences at Saint Markes, where they leaue all priuate affections and peculiarities behind: for the foundation of perpetuall fame and glorie composed is of probitie, faith, and seuere equalitie; without all which it out-rangeth the purlues of prudence, being meere vanitie, false-hood, and a kind of wilie iuggling. The part of a Senatour therefore is vprightly to discharge a good conscience: and hee that restraineth truth in feare of any mans hatred, deserueth not his place in this Counsell. Which Seneca to this effect approoueth: He that feareth ma∣lice, cannot any skill of gouernment. A notable example remaineth of Priseus  Heluydius: Qui sola bona quae honesta, mala quae turpia, Potentiam, Nobilitatem, Cor. Tac. A. Lib. 20. cateraque extra animum neque bonis neque malis annumerauit: Who did e∣steeme onely those things good and euill which were honest, and filthy,
power, nobilitie, with such other things as were corporall, hee did only deeme  to bee the robes of good and euill. Such was his equabilitie, such his con∣tempt of riches, such his stout constancie, when iustice did importune, and his vndaunted perseuerance against all feares, as was admirable and match∣lesse. For being by Vespasian interdicted the Senate, he answered, That it re∣sted in him, being Emperour, to remooue him out of his place in counsell; yet vntill hee were formally thrust out, hee found it lawfull for him to sit in that societie: yea, said Vespasian, but be silent then. Nay, then I must speake, replyed Priscus, if you prohibite it. To which the Emperour reioyned, I must aske sentences and thine opinion amongst the rest, but it shall cost thee thy life, if thou make answere: yet Heluydius to this peremptorily surreioy∣ned:  I am a mortall man, Emperour doe thy will: I shall performe my dutie, doubt it not: It is in thy power to take away my life, and my part to die without feare. A Counsellor of such valour, faith, and constancie may worthily sit in iudgement with highest Emperours: and desperate is that prince his hope which contemneth sharpe counsell, being most healthfull and profitable in ef∣fect, though it import some present trouble: for they that feare to deale plainely with their princes, preferre their owne shame and sluggishnesse be∣fore honour, if griefe and vexation of mind accompanie the same: and marke it, that the liues of such, commonly conclude in perdition and obloquie. Now to remedie Counsellors which are timorous and doubtfull in their de∣terminations  and resolutions: first, let it be considered, that all humane acti∣ons are subiect to many perils, but wise men ought to know, that all mis∣chiefes which may come, doe not happen generally: whereas very many va∣nish by the benefit of fortune, and multitudes also by prouidence & industrie: for by considering, foreseeing, and weighing many matters, men become very warie. The generall good qualities, which like so many precious stones, as vpon he breast-plate of Aaron, magnifie the thoughts and hearts of a noble Counsellor, are in briefe; to be couetous of commendation, and liberall of coyne: Animum habere paratum ad maximum & pulcherrimum facinus aggre∣diendum;  non super fortunam animum gerere; neque per ambitionem simulare probitatem, quia difficile est illis in potestatibus temperare: To beare a mind prepared to enterprise any great and laudable attempt; to fashion and attem∣pe his mind with his fortunes equally; neither abiciously to counterfeit himselfe honest: because it is most difficult, that such persons should beare any good temper in their authoritie. These be the men which worthily spend the vertues and good faculties of their life in rule and magistracie, which liue in the sight of many. These are they whose actions are recorded in mens hearts, and though Hystories should faile, would remaine by tradition in the memorials of posteritie. If therefore they be noble by birth, let them beare  their estates without pride: if they sit vpon the seate of magistracie, let them maintaine their reputation without insolence, contempt, or enuie of persons inferiours, equals, or superiours. If they be verely religious, and spiritually lightened with the knowledge, feare and worship of God, let them set their
hearts free from superstition: if their learning purchase for them reuerence,  let them humble themselues the more, abhorring arrogancie: if they pre∣sent the person of grauitie, let them performe the same with all decencie, void of hypocrisie. In their studies and contemplations let them declare fe∣stiuitie: let them be constant in good resolutions without repining and bit∣ternesse: let them likewise shew good affabilitie to the people, without any smoke of popularitie: for when they shall consider, how the greatest fortunes haue least libertie, they will auoid all apparance of euill, concealing it from the vulgar. I meane in speciall those vices of pride and perturbation; as malice, hatred, and apparant anger; which are in meane men though a little noted, yet not long remembred, but in persons of their ranke and authoritie miscon∣strued,  and perillously pointed at; yea, and engrauen with a penne of steele by the names of Pride and Crueltie. There are besides all these, diuerse other notable qualities, many of which are included in this breuiat, and required to the complete force of a Coun∣sellor. First, and aboue all other ornaments, his wastcoat and secret armour priuate to the soule, from whence all his vertues flourish, and his robe of sin∣cere honour in highest counsels and iudgements, must bee made of zealous holinesse, which is the most venerable defence of such a reuerend Counsel∣lour. He must therefore bee studious of Theologie: for where impietie ba∣nisheth all feare, and feeling of sinne; and for as much as all Counsels of the  wicked are fraudulent, it must necessarily follow, that through them the con∣tempt of true religion (being the soule of euery well instituted State) force∣ably dependeth, dragging violently with it the Commonwealths subuersion. This diuine knowledge illuminateth his reason and vnderstanding, adding quicknesse and courage to discerne and punish persons that freese, draw backe, or stagger in cases of religion; either by their contempt of the deitie, or in ignorance of Gods true worship. This ensigneth the readiest and best course, which he should obserue in extirpation of contagious schismes and pestilent sects: and how to continue with stedfast and often prayer in faith towards God for the true sapience of his holy spirit; which is reuealed in a  1. Corinth. cap. 2 mysterie, being a concealed wisedome, and determined by God before the world for our glorification. This wisedome springeth from the root of Gods Iob. cap. 28. feare, which giueth vs vnderstanding to depart from euill; which maketh a cheerefull heart, yeeldth a ioyfull crowne, and prolongeth mans life in glad∣nesse. It is a sacred knowledge, yea, the ineffable perfection of all goodnesse: Onely fooles despise wisedome and instructon, presuming in weightie cau∣ses Ecclsiasticus 1. and consultations to succeed well without that sacred spirit of heauenly wisedome, which should direct them. But such as are wise feare that vnspeak∣able power filially; which is with a kind of heart-longing loue: and vnto such alone and assuredly hath his diuine omnipotencie prepared that, which  neither eye, eare, nor heart hath seene, heard, or certainely conceiued; re∣uealing vnto them those arcane and sacred mysteries by the spirit of holinesse, hich openeth the secret treasuries of God. All true light, which mooueth and inciteth admiration and loue, shineth from the contemplatiue throne of
cleere sanctitie, and it is full of the power of loue and mercie: which loue of  God, Salomon calleth honourable wisedome; it beeing accompanied with feare and reuerence: which is of it selfe a sacred knowledge, by vertue thereof is mans heart iustified: honour and long life are the braunches of it, fastened in the sacred root of wisedome by faith, which vanquisheth sinne and death, faith and meekenesse attending it. This heauenly loue illuminateth, and al∣most transubstantiateth our hearts of flesh by the power of God, which our Sauiour Christ (speaking to the woman of Samaria) calleth a spirit, saying, That such as worship God, must doe the same in spirit and truth. They there∣fore will learne, tast, and loue that sacred word and knowledge, which is the pure fountaine of true wisedome, the sweetnesse of which (alas) I neither  can vtter nor conceiue. After this knowledge of God, with the sincere loue of true religion, there is another kind of pietie, most excellently commenda∣ble in a Counsellor; which is, in suffering punishments cheerefully for the exact obseruation of his late deceased Soueraignes constitutions, as also prin∣cipally for the confession of his faith, that neither superiorities, honours, or any carnall and earthly respects, feares, punishments, or martyrdomes may take him from the reuerence and most sweet loue of God, which remaineth with him in Iesus Christ. The next care immediate after the knowledge of God, consisteth in his skill of gouernment and studie to maintaine the Commonweale: which weale  doth not onely comprehend the generall good, but the benefit and safegard of all priuate persons therein. These so combine and loue like turtles, that one cannot liue without fellowship of another. In which his studious and inse∣parable loue of the Commonwealth he must sequester so farre his owne pri∣uate profit and authoritie, that he be found at all times readie to bestow his honour, substance, and life in maintenance thereof: so should hee therefore respect the state and affaires of his countrey, by the prince referred to him, as Cicero sayth, Vt vtilitas sua communis vtilitas sit: vicissim & què communis v∣tilitas sua sit: That his priuate weale may proue the common weale, and that correspondently the Commonweale may become his proper weale. Which  is a principle deriued from the needfull precepts of nature. This is a vertue by Plato most commended in a Counsellor: for to this day no state hath either beene amplified or conserued, but by men of that qualitie, euen as it was said by Salust to Caesar: Firmanda Respublica non armis modò sed (quod multò magis, In Orat. ad C. Cs. d Rep. Ord. mltoquè asperius est) bonis pacis artibus. The Commonwealth must not onely be munited and fortified with armes, but with good cunning and skilfull arts to make and maintaine peace, being a mysterie of much more force and difficultie. It is written of Calicratides, a captaine of the Lacedemonians, that (in their warres at Peloponesus, when hee without any losse to himselfe might haue saued the whole Nauie, and declined the warre, then instant against the  Athenians) he refused to doe so; saying, That the Lacedemonians after the losse of that fleet might furnish out another, but that hee could not without grie∣uous inustion of shame and dishonour turne backe from them. Whereupon that whole nauie, to the irrecouerable losse of the Lacedemonians, became a
spoyle to their enemies. But Qu. Fabius the Romane Generall held a contra∣rie  course and opinion in his seruice, enduring the scoffes and contemptuous brags of his foes, which scornefully called him a delayor, till such time as (when good occasion and aduantage was offered) he so confounded Anni∣ball, then triumphing in his many victories, that he wrought out his countries libertie, with oppression of the Carthaginians by those meanes. Calicratides (hauing lost the day) lost likewise his countrey, life, and honour, beeing for the reward of his follie named in their Annales Calicratides Temerarius. Fabius who by cunctation had giuen life and honour to his countrey, was for his actions of valour, and in perpetuall glorie thereof cannonized in their im∣mortall Hystories by the title of Maximus. And hereupon this as a certaine  note and rule may be grounded, that all hypocrites, coueous, and vaine glo∣rious persons (such as doe with Calicratides more prize their priuat glory than the publicke weale) are enemies to the generall state; and such vndoubtedly (like flatterers) if time should so serue, would not sticke (to the end they might endanger the Prince thereby) to say, That all the peoples wealth is his. By which example we viuely find represented vnto vs the warie circumspection of a good Commonwealths man in the person of Fabius, studying the pre∣seruation and honour of himselfe and of his countrey, together with the rash and foolish negligence of a vaine-glorious hypocrite, like Calicratides; which so sleightly valued the conseruation and weale of his owne Nation. In this loue and care of the Commonwealth is required a due consideration, how  the whole politicke societie consisteth of soule and bodie; the soule (as is a∣foresaid) for religion, in aduancing and maintaining the true worship of God; the bodie taken for the dwelling or place of habitation. There is likewise be∣sides that soule and bodie the spirit of liuing, which is the mouing and stirring of the bodie: this may bee properly called or compared rather to the forme of euery Commonwealth, as in knowing whether it be a Monarchie, as great Brittaine, Fraunce, Ireland, Spaine, Castile, and Portugall: or as the Empires of the Turkes and Moscouites, but more remote: or if an Aristocracie, like Venice; wherein are foure Counsels, besides the Senate and gentlemen of that state. The first called Consilio de Saui, which prudently deliberate and deale in all  the land causes: the second in like sort called Consilio de Saui, appertaining the Admiraltie: Consilio de deci, & Consilio de setti. Vpon which last seuen, the whole burthen of that Commonwealth and of the Seignories thereof is amply reposed. Like vnto which, sometimes we reade how the state of Spar∣ta was: or if a Democracie, like the present state of Swizzerland: or if the gouernment thereof be referred to the King, and to his Nobles, as now in Denmarke, and in other ages at Rome, when the kings raigned, vntill the Tar∣quines: or to the King and to his Commons, as in Persia: or to the Nobles and people together, as at Rome after their Kings were cried downe; at Athens  once, and at this day in Florence, Siene, with other free states of Italie: or to the King, with his nobles and people respectiuely; as is common in Germany, Poleland, Arragon. When he hath entred into such knowledge, then is it fit that he consider by the diseases, and by the causes procuring them, which
forme is good, and which bad: for if this life (which I tearme to bee  the forme of gouernment) bee sicke, or diseased, it is required, that the Hyppol ll. Counsellor should play the part of a wise Physition, by purgations, diets, vomites, bloud-lettings, or other remedies, to medicine and rectifie the state of that bodie, where such policie laboureth. After such notes let him measure by what seuerall formes these or any such principalities were con∣serued and lost; by what lawes and magistrates they were and must bee succoured in troublesome times. If hee bee wanting herein, how shall hee giue aduice vnto the Prince or State in any troublesome or difficult sea∣sons, towards the cure of any desperate diseases or wounds happening vn∣to the Common-wealth? Or without this knowledge, how shall hee di∣rect  him in his behauiour towards friends, confederates, enemies, or o∣thers, for their benefite, or annoyance? Hee should in like case haue per∣fect knowledge in the plots, heads, and grounds of all sedicions and trou∣bles, with the wayes to suppresse them; whether the Prince his force bee knit vp in bagges, or locked vp in the peoples hearts: what and how ma∣ny wayes may bee found with honest colour to breake peace against him that neuer gaue occasion thereof: whether it bee more meere, that Prin∣ces encounter their enemies without their owne territories, or expect them in campe at home. All which is taught by the iudicious reading of Hy∣stories. In this my Counsellor, I would require much readinesse, and quicknesse of wit: for moderate sharpenesse and dexteritie compose the heads, bodies, and fect of all good actions. That light therefore, which beautifieth euerie noble and excellent wit, must be diuine, singular, and vnusuall. Howbeit, a politicall wit, (if I may so tearme it) Quasinatum ad congregationem & socie∣tatem: As instituted to congregate, and advn people: as Freigius defineth the same, most excellently magnifieth a Counsellor: for thereby doth hee referre all things vnto the common societie, to the coniunction, vnion, or collection of people, and companies; reforming and wisely preuenting all ciuile and dangerous distractions and diuisions amongst the multitude. This  is that wit which euery gentleman (that purposeth to trauaile into forraine countries) ought to be possessed of, and without it, Caelum non animum mutat: He changeth his nation, and not his condition: Because it teacheth him the formes, constitutions, augmentations, diminutions, mutations, lawes, religi∣ons, rites, and iudgements of those nations, where he soiourneth. It is the true guide and sweet companion of iourneyes and peregrination, according to the saying of Socrates in Xenophon: Generosumest & omnifauore dignum ingenium, cui sunt cordi disciplinae politicae: That wit is generous, and deserueth all fauour, which taketh delight in politicall discipline. The apparant tokens & properties of such a wit are, when in answering they seeme prompt, sound, & short; in ap∣prehension,  quicke, iudicious, & attentiue; in teaching, methodicall, and lucu∣lent; in ieasting, pleasant and circumspect; in serious matters, diligent & warie: likewise in the whole course of his owne nature so carefull, as he may make ef∣fectuall tokens appeare of his great loue & respect of vertue. Moreouer, a noble
wit neuer walketh in wayes vulgarly frequented, neuer speaketh after the  vulgar fashion, neuer is mercinarie, neuer abruptly breaketh off a period; but doth all things with exceeding decencie. No man which is verely wor∣thied in regard of his wit, that taketh any delight in base and common matters, sayth Seneca: Et magna quae sunt ingenia aegrè serunt iniuriam: Migh∣tie Epist. 39. lib. 5. wits cannot easily brooke iniuries: according to Salust. Other garbes and attributes are likewise obserued in these wits: as in the entertainement, In bell. Iugurth. which proceedeth from such ingenuous persons, being performed with a li∣berall and most cheerefull courtesie, and sweetly seasoned with a gracious and plausible discourse. Such a wit turneth and looketh into good and euill, em∣bracing and extolling the one, rebuking and eschewing the other by good dis∣cretion,  not fearing malice, or offence. All actions flourishing out of it are cheerefull, and perfected with a commendable spirit, working alwayes in me∣ditation, contemplation, comprehension, and (as it were) a palpitation of all things, exercised in much reading, conference, and societie, with people of all conditions and humors, busied in knowledge of matters past, present, and to come, studying to be generally wel skilled in all laudable arts, neuer slouthfull, neuer wearie, triumphing in many labours, vexations, and troubles: Quippè secundaeres sapientum animos fatigunt. Such a wit should seeme was in Scipio Africanus, whose businesse seemed most great, when his action was least: Nec Cic. in Amicic. vnquam minus solus fuit quam cum solus esset. Prudentissimus etenim quisque ma∣ximè negotiosus est: Neither was he euer lesse at leisure, than when he was a∣lone  in priuat. For euery man which is most prudent, is least at leisure. And hence is this in Salust: Non enim votis nec supplicijs multebribus, auxilia deorum comparantur, sed vigilando, agendo, benè consulendo prosperè omnia cedunt. For God doth not send his succours to men onely because they doe with a broken spirit obserue strict vowes, and make prayers: but hee doth admit a generall good successe to them that are vigilant, industrious, and verely prudent. Such wits sweetly flourish in youth, and plentifully fructifie, resembling (as Plato compareth it) a fruitfull meddow. They bee the grounds of all knowledge, being studiously tilled and manured with liberall arts and morall philoso∣phie: for as great burthens (which cannot be lifted by the strength of ma∣ny  men vnited) will bee with one engine easily mooued and turned; so wit will sometimes effect, which other helpes cannot. I doe not meane in this place of subtile and fierie wits, which are more fit for innouation, than administration of matters, prone vnto rebellious and sedicious facti∣ons, which Salust luculently describeth in the person of Catiline. In illo vis eximia facetiarum, & ratio quaedam adumbrata virtutum, facilis ad com∣prehendendum omnium hominum familiaritates: His force in pleasant and wittie ieasting did exceede, with a certaine kind of reasonable counterfei∣sance, and adumbration of vertues; being prone to comprehend, and au∣cupate the familiarities of all degrees of persons. This is a liuely resem∣blance  and portraiture of a stirring hote wit, bewitching men with the shaddowes of vertue. These are wits of that eager temper and fiercenesse which will easily breake; and beeing in any great aucthorities, oppresse
themselues with their owne weight, retaining no meane, nor moderation: of  whom that sentence in Seneca may be sayd: Graue pondus illum magna nobili∣tas In Troade. premit: Great Nobilitie, beeing a grieuous burthen, did oppresse him. Howbeit, such a wit as magnified Marcus Cato may be commended vndoub∣tedly, whom Liuie describeth it for any businesse which hee would vnder∣take in these words: His knowledge was absolute both in vrbanitie and husban∣drie. Lib. 39. Some haue attained place on the seate of honour by their learning in the lawes, others by the gift of eloquence: some by the glorie rebounding from their many victories, and martiall trophies. But his wit was so pliant vnto all properties at his pleasure, that men would say, Nature without industrie did institute him; hee did all things with that facilitie: in warre most valiant, in many battels victori∣ous,  and then by degrees aduaunced, was a most renowned Emperour. In time of peace (if it stood vpon cases of right and equitie) his knowledge exceeded: in de∣claming or pleading of a cause, passing eloquent. Which patterne of noble Cato, representeth vnto vs (as in a true Myrrour) the very life of a diuine wit. From this sweet fountaine honourably floweth the purple streame of elo∣quence; which is none of a Counsellors meane graces: for in this Office hee shall happily be commended by the prince into forraine countries, either to counsell, dissuade, accuse, defend, commend, disgrace, congratulate, condole, or to such purpose. It behooueth him therefore to be richly furnished with  that qualitie, which is the Loade-stone of all stubborne and steeled affecti∣ons; not onely to reuiue or refresh dead or dull spirits, (which are with intol∣lerable perturbations and continuall torture of passions vehemently distra∣cted, and left almost sencelesse) but if it were possible, with a liuely spirit and diuine alacritie to lend essence from his owne soule in speaking; which might miraculously lift the dead to life, with such admirable and astounding force of persuasion, as might both examinate and reclaime from traunces those sore bruised affections, which hee with the thunder of his eloquence hath deie∣cted. In all sedicions and tumults amongst mutinous souldiors, in all com∣motions and turbulent factions amongst ciuile societies (when they gather  head, to the fearefull disturbance and wounding of the Commonwealth, for quenching of their inordinate thirst after blood, and vnsatiable reuenge) no∣thing is so gracious as the balmie tongue of an eloquent and stirring Oratour: who like an Euangelist, with a golden pace, and tongue ouer-flowing with persuasion, holdeth in his hand the Oliue of peace, coniuring their troubled and tumultuous spirits with force of that most sacred and omnipotent spirit of tranquilitie, directing his soule, and holding the reynes of his calme affe∣ctions with the bridle of his tongue; which like the snakie scepter of Hermes, hath power to calme the seas, quiet the winds, and pacifie the rebellious earth, when it is most out of order. So that in the Ciceronian inuectiue against  Salust (magnifying this golden gift of eloquence, which was imputed to Tully Putant quidem fa  sse ascriptam ha orationem in Sa ustm. Ea demum magna, &c. for a vice) it is written: An vllum existimas ciuem egregium qui non hijs artibus & disciplinis sit eruditus? An vlla alia rudimenta & incunabula virtutis quibus animi ad gloriae cupiditatem aluntur? What? art thou persuaded, that any
States-man can be renowned, vnlesse he be disciplined in these arts, and rudi∣ments  of Rhetoricke? Or canst thou find any better Accidencies or Primer rules of vertue, whereby mens minds are fostered and encouraged in the de∣sire and loue of glorie? For this is that admirable facultie, which protecteth our friends, succoureth strangers, relieueth the distressed, and terrifieth mali∣cious people. Hence is it, that in admiration thereof Tacitus writeth: Elo∣quentia nihil in ciuitate nostra vel ad vtilitatem fructuosius, vel ad dignitatē am∣plius, Cor. Tac. in Dia∣log de Orat. vel ad vrbis famam pulcherius, vel ad totius imperij atque omnium gentium noticiam illustrius excogitari potest: There is not any thing can bee found or deuised in our Commonwealth, either more fruitfull, if you respect the pro∣fite, or more ample, in regard of the dignitie thereof, or more extending to  the cities good fame, or more magnificent and glorious, to disperse and em∣blason the greatnesse of the whole Empire, and of all Nations, than the gift of eloquence. No Commonwealth, which hath not to her great and excee∣ding comfort tasted the diuine banquet of eloquence, when with graue and argute answeres the demaunds of forraine princes (by their embassadours in viue Oration, or by life of letters) were satisfied. This one principall qualitie in a Counsellor the prince should haue a desire to know, by conferring with him one houre or more in priuat (when leisure permitteth) with what grace, spirit, and perfection, he can expresse the sence of his mind: how he shorte∣neth and continueth his periods in Oration: his forme in the proposition, di∣uision, amplification, and conclusion of his speech; his grace, order, and pro∣pertie  when he speaketh: obseruing moreouer, if in his discourse or speech hee bee sententious, not sauouring of the schoole, but plausible, short, and sweet: and if a Prince would haue some readier assurance of his abilitie or dexteritie, vnder the pretence, that hee must forthwith write certaine letters gratulatorie, lamentatorie, or such like, done in his presence; the Prince may take a good and readie tast of his sufficiencie. Hee therefore, which can dis∣course vpon and answere vnto, with readinesse, any propositions or questions luculently and gallantly; and he that can with excellent moderation accom∣modate his saying, to the substance and worthinesse of that subiect from whence the fresh riuer of his Oration runneth: and hee likewise that can  plausibly bind vp the garland of his speech to the present benefite of time, and to the comfort of his Auditorie, may worthely be called a good Orator. Hijs namque artibus siue apud infestos, siue apud cupidos, siue apud inuidentes, siue apud tristes, siue apud timentes dicendum habuerit, tenebit habenas animorum: Cor. Tc. in Dia∣log. de Orat. For by this art of Rhetoricke, an Oratour (if he shall deale with daungerous persons, or with men couetous, with enuious people, with such as are affli∣cted, or with any persons which are distracted through some kind of feare) yet shall he preuaile in qualifying and moderating their seuerall affections and passions. For he which can speake copiously with prudence, is much more excellent than those which meditate vpon graue and wise considerations,  without eloquence: because cogitation conuerseth in it selfe, and eloquence is beneficiall towards all which heare it: for when a man enamelleth a wise speech with copiousnesse, the people will confirme their opinions and coun∣sels
in his sapience: if therewithall hee season the same (as it were) with a  pleasant modestie, infused into constant grauitie. There be foure kinds of e∣loquent speaking and writing, according to Macrobius: Copiosum in quo Ci∣cero, breue in quo Salustius: siccum quod Frontoni, pingue & floridum quod Pli∣nio Lib. 5. cap. 3. secundo, &c. The copious wherein Cicero, the briefe in which Salust, the drie, through which Fronto, the full and fruitfull for which Plinius the second were famoused. Any of which beeing ingenuously practised, without affe∣ctation or sophistrie, carrie with them great force of reconciliation. Much eloquence is found in those letters which king Philip of Macedon did write to his sonne Alexander, and in those Epistles which Antipater and Antigonus did write vnto Captaines, persuading them by benigne and fauorable tearmes  to mooue the peoples hearts, and to cherish or toll on the souldiors to ser∣uice with the Metaphysicall oyle and balme of their eloquence and persuasi∣on, but to deliuer those attributes of Oratorie (with a kind of feruencie, zeale, and affection in all causes of weight and passion) is of great auaile and force, which Cicreo specially noteth: Oratio quae in multitudinem cum contentione ha∣betur soepe vniuersam excitat gloriam: Those Orations or speeches, which in Offic. 2. audience of the people are deliuered with a vehement and stirring spirit, commonly mooue or procure a generall glorie: beeing intended here vnto the speakers, proceeding from the auditorie. Obseruing alwayes that Philo∣sophicall decencie which prohibiteth him. Tanquam luculentum suem cum  quouis volutari: non enim procacitate linguae vitae sordes eluuntur: Like a dur∣tie sow which walloweth in any puddle: for the dishonest touches of a mans conuersation are not washed out with sawcie taunts or speeches. Such like was that luxurious kind of procacitie, for which Salust and Cicero were both grieuously taxed in their verball eskairmouches, together misbeleeuing the prudent tongues of grauitie. And therefore Tacitus specially well descri∣beth that excesse of eloquence thus: Eloquentia luxuriosa, alumna licentiae, In Dialog. de Orat. comes sedicionum, effraenati populi incitamentum, siue obsequio, siue seruitute, contumax, tomeraria, arrogans; quaeque in bene constitutis ciuitatibus non ori∣tur, &c. Luxurious eloquence is the nurce of licence; the companion of se∣ditions,  the spurre which pricketh forth vnruly people, not acknowledging either seruice or dutie: it is stubborne, rash, arrogant, and neuer bred or nou∣rished in any well ordered cities. These obseruations are required in a per∣fect Counsellor, and yet wholly depending vpon his excellent wit: which I last before touched; seruing as a precious elixar of life, and mettall for many strange purposes. And by these notes and qualities of Oratorie, (if any viue ember, or spiracle of ingenuous facilitie remaine in men) it shall appeare con∣spicuously. The well speaking of many languages may bee mustered amongst the rest for one speciall and most needfull qualitie: in speciall, the tongues of those  kingdomes and prouinces which are either subiects contributaries or confede∣rates to the prince, and also the languages of his enemies: as appeareth in the learnedest of our princes his Counsell at this day. For amongst them the Greeke, Latine, Italian, Spanish, French, Danish, Polish, and Dutch tongues
are well spoken and vnderstood. This is a comfortable benefit, when forraine  people either with vs at home or abroad, are heartely glad to vnderstand, and to be vnderstood by those with whom they haue businesse, opening their own meanings better and more perspicuously by their owne mouth, than with helpe of an interpretor. Mutuall counsels likewise may by this knowledge be more safely debated, than by meanes of a third person interpreting: what more beneficiall commendation, than to heare, vnderstand, and deliberate vpon peaceable and hostile legations. If they bee friends, it better confir∣meth their amitie, when Counsellors consult or debate with them in their owne language; persuading themselues commonly, that it proceedeth from loue and good obseruation. Admit they be sometimes deceiued in that opi∣nion;  yet such a kind of frustration is auaileable. And suppose them ene∣mies which so conferre with you, by that occasion their beneuolence is so much the sooner attained. It must be noted also, that few men interprete perfectly, many more sa∣tisfying their owne humors, than the precise meaning of the parties, adding or substracting somewhat alwayes. What if vnder pretext of interpretation a referendarie be foisted in, vpon whose secrecie the whole weale and ho∣nour of a king with all his Soueraignetie dependeth? Admit the matters so require, that no delayes without danger will serue to dispatch present answer to the Prince: is it not then a double shame and offence, to make enquirie  for such an interpretor as will deale faithfully? What if no fit man can bee found out of hand? Or if hee bee found, admit the one partie credite not his interpretation? All these are most dangerous difficulties, and there∣fore the knowledge of tongues is of speciall force in a secret Counsellour; and also that he know the fashions and conditions of those people, whose language he speaketh: but for the prince chiefely necessarie, that his Coun∣sellors can speake, write, and interprete in those tongues before him, rather than repose affiance in strangers: Which trust is commonly fallacious, and then vndoubtedly pernicious. The cause why, the Latine and Greeke lan∣guages are so commonly studied and embraced in most parts of the world,  is in regard of their many most learned bookes and monuments of former time. The reason of their so many volumes and written workes, is deri∣ued from their auncient and ample Monarchies, endowed formerly with so many precious spirits; which both for ciuile and militarie knowledge so much surpassed and exceeded. Their leagues, tributes, lawes, ciuile cu∣stomes; their many battailes, victories, and triumphs: as those of Alex∣ander, Caesar, and of others infinite, beeing speciall attributes of their go∣uernment, gaue infinite matter to noble wits in those Empires continu∣ally to write such excellent dignities and exploits, as their natiue countrey men had borne away, with much honour and renowne, both in peace  and warre. The Princes, Consuls, Dictators, and Emperors yeelding royall encouragement and most munificent salaries to those Writers, (for their owne glories sake, which by such their art and industrie were ennobled) did make infinite the numbers of bookes, and Authors in all liberall faculties.
The multitudes of those bookes (through the greatnesse of these Monar∣chies)  were farre and neere dispersed. The learning of those volumes (after the dissolution of these Empires) hath beene euermore and againe thirsted and hunted after by the best and all well disposed Commonweales and Prin∣ces, which since that time were alwayes enlightened by them, yeelding a con∣tinuall patterne of perfect humane knowledge to posteritie. And in these later ages (since the time of our Sauiour Christ, of his Apostles, of their Dis∣ciples, and of those fathers, which succeeded them in the Primitiue Church, being through Greece and old Italie then dispersed) the very light of sweete Gospell hath beene by these means reserued vnto vs in those two languages: and therefore haue these tongues, (so needfull for the interpretation of the  Scriptures, the enucliation of verities, and confutation of heresies) still kept afoot the studies of them through the grace of God amongst vs to this day. The Hebrew tongue not so much in generall desire of schollers, seruing spe∣cially for the legall Scriptures and Prophets, I will pretermit, as also the Chal∣daean, Syrian, and Arabicke, peculiar to deepe Diuines and Doctors of the Church, Thalmudistes, Alcumistes, and Caballistes, surreaching the common ap∣prehension and vse of Counsellors and States-men. Heereupon a question may bee proiected vnto mee, Why then these Greeke and Latine languages might not serue (instar omnium) to fulfill all meanings & purposes by good and faithfull vnderstanding amongst princes and nations in their treaties, con∣sultations,  leagues, pactions, sessions, conuentions, accords, assemblies, or o∣ther priuate parlyes of like nature, being tongues so generally well knowne and studied in so many Realmes? My solution is replicatiuely, that they can∣not passe currant amongst all forraine princes and much remote Monarchies: for if that amplitude of the former Grecian and Romane dominions, occa∣sioned a kind of vniforme, vse, or peculiaritie of those tongues, as being the true mother languages in all the Realmes, Prouinces, and Seignories subiected to them: it doth then illatiuely follow by the like necessitie, that if our Chri∣stian Princes neere vs should send in very weightie causes men of perfection in those two languages, to the great Turke or Persian, it would bee very diffi∣cult  and troublesome: for so much as their Monarchies extend much further than all Christendome doth beside. Wherefore I iudge (by the same rea∣son) that the language amongst them is for the most part either Persian or Turkish, and not knowne to any Christians, except to some few Christian merchants or slaues, which haue commerced with them. For since the be∣ginning of those Mahemetane Monarchies of Turkes and Persians, our Christians haue alwayes held that people execrable and perfidious: so that their vulgar speech (by those Christians which inhabit the very skirts of Tur∣key vnder Rodolph the Emperour) is little or not at all practised in these dayes. Besides, what a shame it were concerning certaine honourable affaires and  policies of the State in any Realmes and Common-weales to chuse some merchant or negotiator, which should discharge the Office of a most noble embassadour, and to deale in causes of highest consequence onely, because he can speake and vnderstand the Persian or Turkish tongues. Neither will
that excellent Greeke tongue, which former writers haue vsed, and which is  at this day so much practised amongst the Schollers in Christendome, serue therefore in those Pagan parts, in regard, that all or the greatest part of Greece is now subiect to the Turke, and in such respect sooner vnderstood: because that excellent refined Greeke (euen as in old Italie the Latine) is wholly corrupt and altered, through the long and ruinous discontinuance of those two famous Monarchies. I conclude therefore, that it is not onely needfull for such as are Counsellors to mightie Kings and Princes, to be well skilled in the best languages of Christendome; but much behoofefull in respect of the Turkes and Persians also: which thing though it may seeme amongst our countrey nobles rare and difficult, yet is tanto preclarius, & viro verè nobili  dignius. For the time may come in any Christian Empire, that some ne∣cessities, or other, shall require and importune the knowledge of those tongues. One speciall point remaineth, wherein I would for our owne nations glo∣rie An Exhortation to make famous and precious our English lāguage amongst  parts of Christendome. wish, that all our countreymen would be very studious, and according to their faculties forward and ayding, that is, to labour how they may copiously deuise and adde words, deriued from the Latines, from the French and Dutch languages, fitly fashioned vnto the true Dialect and Ideome of our vulgar. For considering that the Latine, French, Italian, Spanish, and Germane tongues grew famous, copious, and ample by the commerce and entercourse  of marchants, and by the repaire of embassadors and other strangers, mutually passing and repassing too and from forraine countries amongst vs; after that their monarchies and dominions were amplified, enriched, and magnified: what doubt is then left to vs, why this our English tongue (which in it selfe is so sweet and copious, wherein wee can so succinctly knit vp much matter) but that by continuance of this Monarchie, diuinely and happily strengthe∣ned by our sacred Soueraigne and his royall issue; the same may bee desired, taught, and sought for from all places, amongst our friends, neighbours, and confederates in Christendome hereafter, which may repaire and entercom∣mune to and with vs? The weakenesse of our former estate, and the young∣nesse  of our language established in the last deducted Normane Colonies, from the Conquest, and before, did not admit hitherto that perfection, which might haue in times past encouraged either the French or other potent Na∣tions greatly to respect our tongue, vnlesse some of those marchants, which (in regard of the present necessitie put vpon them by the entercourse and exchange of their wares) were forceably driuen vnto it. This contempt and viletie therfore hath hetherto letted many singular wits of excellent hope and learning (wherewithall by the naturall temperature of that climat vnder which we liue, our nation is diuinely endowed) to write bookes in English: and the neglect thereof I feare hath hurt vs in the glorie of that sweet Latine tongue  also: for it was not vnknowne to the learned of this nation, how little their language was and would be respected in other countries. But soone in suc∣cesse of time, from the later yeeres of king Edward the third (after whose
victories had in Fraunce) the peace and foyson of this land gaue some first  light to ourlanguage (notwithstanding, that euen then our law pleadings, ac∣cording vnto Glanuylle and Bracton, were first writen in French) diuerse did write some Bookes, Pamphlets, Rymes, Romances, and Stories in barbarous English; some of which were translated out of other tongues: Howbeit, eyther for their owne priuate vse and practise, or for the meere benefite of our countreymen onely, to little pleasure, and lesse profite of af∣ter times: which being then as a garden, wherein were some good hearbes and simples of our owne, and from other parts and countries brought and confusedly planted, hath yeerely since then from time to time beene bette∣red, encreased, and reduced into squares, knots, and curious compartements,  diapred with pleasant flowers, and brought into comely fashion. The best of these which first began to reduce the confused garden of our language into some proportion, were the two laureate knights of their times, Gower and his Scholler Chaucer, in the times of King Richard the second, and King Henry the fourth. One Lydgate, a Monke of Edmoburie, succeeded them in that worke: most of whose patternes were taken and translated out of Latine, French, and Italian, intermingled with some other excellent inuentions of their owne, not including any great matters, tending vnto gouernment and moralitie. Diuerse of whose words, by times continuance, and the choice of better being antiquated (like hearbes withered from the root) haue beene  seconded with richer inuentions: according vnto that saying of the Poet Horace. Multa renascuntur quae iam cecidere; Cadentque Quae nunc sunt in honore vocabula.In arte Poet. Many words long time out of vse renew, And th'after age our best words will eschew. For words (he sayth) like leaues yeerely wither and renew. Towards this  excellent worke, we find for our more helpe, that the Latine verbes sweetely consound with our English tongue: the French aptly doth offer it selfe to polish this workemanship; and the Italian doth in many things yeeld much helpe and dignitie to the same. The Germane, from whose old stocke our first Monasyllabicall roots by their old Colonies were inducted, is of it selfe the garden plot, alreadie well tylled and copiously manured, to bring forth this lan∣guage. And since those dayes of more difficult obscuritie, the Latine Bible by diuers learned Bishops, in the reignes of king Henry the ght, and of his sonne king Edward, was translated into the vulgar: also certaine Chronicles, Trea∣tises, and Translations of that time haue added much light to the former dark∣nesse. But since the dayes of blessed Queene Elizabeth (whose happie reigne  is as the dayes of heauen) what seas of paper haue beene alwayes furthering, polishing, and encreasing this honorable enterprise? First, by that holy Bibles
more exquisite and polite translation than before: after by the bookes of Mo∣numents,  Chronicles, Treatises, and Translations, Theologicall and humane, by most ingenuous Poets; and other Poeticall pamphlets, alwayes with studi∣ous addition, and curious composition of words, phrases, and sentences: how∣be it, amongst the rest, as a very memorable register of English eloquence, high∣ly deseruing endlesse remembrance, which liueth in his owne liuing workes, Sir Philip Sidney, that diuine starre of sweet wit and inuention, hath so much honoured the language of this nation, in that his small hyue of all excellent humanitie, inueloping vnder the true Poeticall vine leaues of his labours such excellent sweet clusters of Philosophicall grapes and inuentions, both morall & naturall, as haue mightily benefited towards this rich vintage of our English  knowledge. Since therefore these great hopes and helpes are left vnto vs: first, by God in his grace plentifully poured into the wits of this nation: secondly, vnder his great power by the kings most excellent Maiestie, through that au∣spicious amity and perfect Monarchie, established and growing more & more mightie betwixt all good Christian princes and vs: and lastly, by that golden gift of peace, deriued from Gods sweet mercy seat, and from the true prudence and sapience of our gracious Soueraigne, and of his reuerend Counsell, which may giue all liuely perfections and faculties to learning; why doe we not then with a cheerefull and mutuall alacritie combine in our wits, studies, & know∣ledge, to make our countrey famous with our owne bookes and writings. Certainely, this enterprize, as it is vertuous and laudable, so is it glorious,  and highly profitable. Let vs therefore with cheerefull consent imitate those other great Empires, that our wits, learning, and inuentions, by diuine benefite equalling the best of theirs, our bookes and languages, with our men and marchandizes, may louingly bee receiued and embraced amongst them also. Then shall this our puissant little Monarchie, like a sweete fountaine, (which the fur∣ther it floweth, imboketh into the more spacious and deepe channell) bee more and more magnified, Cum ingeniorum ist torpor & ignauia, When this drowsie slothfulnesse of our wits cannot bee found amongst vs, but that we still studie to become famous in our vulgar, as those ancient Greeke and Ro∣mane  writers declared in their ancient mother tongues. Encourage and gird your selues therefore with a pleasant equanimitie to this excellent seruice: for the ground being enlarged, hath left ample space for many seeds, and choice of hearbes and roots than was before: it shall bee strongly fenced with peace and plentie, when vertuous spirits shake off that idlenesse, which hindereth so glorious a worke; so well fenced and fortified it shall bee, that nothing shall come in hereafter to corrupt or deface your garden, so Geometrically set and deuised. For sure it is, if the world and Gods blessing continue but one age of a man from this instant, our language will bee so much required by these childrens children in Fraunce, Spaine, and Italie, as those their  tongues with vs at this day. Then shall bee left matter sufficient, and as King worthie for Commentaries to bee written by our learned Caesar in his warres; or in his peaceable affaires, so much diuine, morall, and naturall
Philosophie by the Salomon of our nation: then shall wee find substance for  the penne of Liuie, and pleadings for the bookes of Cicero: Seneca shall haue his place againe, but in a glorious Sunne-shine, and fill this new Monarchie with his sage considerations. I write this therefore, oft and againe iterating it, that many Liuies, Senecaes, and Ciceroes shall flourish vnder our Caesar, if wee will worke out the fruit of our vertues by such vertuous contemplati∣ons and exercises, as may much dignifie their countries. It is most certaine, that ingenuous natures and vertuous spirits (whose di∣uine rationall ought to be fixed vpon perfect glorie) are in a continuall com∣bate and ciuile commotion within themselues, if they doe not imploy their cogitations and studies in morall contemplation, still labouring like a woman  with child to bring forth some excellent faire birth like themselues. But this luxurious whirlepoole of idlenesse and sloth (into which such excellent wits are very soone and violently throwne) ouer-whelmeth that sweete reason, oppressing this noble birth, made abortiue in the very chest of conception: Gloria namque industria alitur vbi eam dempseris ipsa per se virtus, amara & aspe∣ra est Salust. &c. Industrie is fostered by glorie: take away glorie, which is the re∣ward of vertue, and the tast thereof is harsh and bitter. When therefore the vertuous Prince himselfe, and those noble arches of his Monarchie, shall per∣ceiue this their towardnesse and trauaile in vertues, little doubt is there, that the reward of their studies and vertues shall not encourage posteritie more and  more to make learning as cheape in England and Scotland, as euer it was a∣mongst the Greekes and Romanes. The knowledge of Hystories is another quality most concerning a Coun∣sellour: as with notable attention and dilligence to peruse and marke the Re∣cords, Annales, and Chronicles of all ages, people, and princes, together with the written stories of friends, neighbours, and enemies. Historie is a viue experience of matters, the parent of Philosophie, a collection of all things, in all ages authorized by good triall and practise of many men. This is it which Diodorus in the Proheme of his Hystories doth affirme, Will teach vs, what ought to be the principall scope of our desires and detestations. This which  summoneth all creatures of all countries and fashions as to a generall muster: imitating his diuine prouidence, which in heauenly iustice and bountie be∣stoweth vpon euerie man according to demerit: all vertuous actions are eter∣nized by the penne of Hystorie: so farre doth it surpasse the sage counsels and golden sentences of our forefathers and former Philosophers, as times conti∣nuance comprehendeth more examples than one mans age. This is it which maketh young mens iudgements of parill ripenesse with old age, grounding aged persons in the depth of wisedome; to whome long experience hath al∣readie ministered a dayly triall of causes. It maketh priuate men fit for Empire, and Emperours earnest in vertue for victories; heartening souldiours to giue a  courageous charge vpon perils, for honour of their countries, terrifying ma∣lefactors, propagating Soueraignetie by good example, deuising lawes, inuen∣ting arts, preferring vertuous actions, enfranchised from mortalitie; decla∣ring it selfe a memorable and perfect marble-register of misdeedes, and gene∣rally
beneuolent. This is it which aged time onely nourisheth, when it ea∣teth  vp all things: besides, this is the patterne of eloquence, the true mirrour of Philosophie, the garden of knowledge: and hence is it, that Aristotle in his Politickes writeth, how the skill of actions and Histories of deedes done most im∣port a Counsellor to learne, because things future are like their parent which came be∣fore them: vpon which all euents of actions commonly depend. Hee there∣fore, which in noble Hystorie shall contemplate and meditate vpon the life of a good Prince or Counsellor, may find somewhat alwayes worth his own obseruation and practise; according to that saying of Seneca: Aliquis vir bo∣nus elegendus est nobis, ac semper ante oculos habendus, vt sic viuamus tanquam illo spectanti, & omnia faciamus tanquam illo videnti: We must propose some  one good man for our patterne, and alwayes looke vpon him with the eyes of our mind, that wee may so liue, as if hee were looking vpon vs; and so deale, as if all our actions were performed in his sight. Let a souldiour liue fortie yeares in seruice; great, and of continuall commaund, as great Alexander and Caius Caesar; escape in many conflicts, as Anniball and Cato; receiue so ma∣ny wounds, as Scipio and Scaeua; triumph in so many victories, subuert so ma∣ny cities, deuise so many stratagemes, consult vpon so many leagues, and truces, enterparley with so many princes, spending the full glasse of his time during those yeeres in magnificent actions, and noble consultations onely, like Cirus Themistocles, Epaminondas, Cimon, Fabius, Pelopidas, and infinite o∣thers,  auncient, and late: yet shall one moneths reading in Liuie, Plutarch, Di∣odorus, Thucydides, Polybius, Xenophon, Dion, and some few more, (which haue eternally recorded all the memorable actions and vertues of them all) open more vnto him without bloudshead (if hee will studiously conferre, and reasonably remember) than euer the seruice of many more yeeres, with the slaughters of Myriads of souldiors, could expresse. The knowledge of all persons, the meaning of all matters, the depth of all secrets is locked vp in Hystorie. In it wee find that inestimable treasure of the Lawes, by which Commonweales were first ordered and instituted, in the sentences of sage and prudent men; confirming societies in peace, and magnifying them by  vertues: like Physicke, which is an hystoricall commemoration or rapsodie of experiments, made by Physitions of old; by whose Aphorismes and Pre∣cepts our Physitions direct their iudgements and medicines: it is a methodi∣call Schoole-master of humane life, examplifying the fashions and natures of people, a certaine experience of their actions, a sound and prudent Counsel∣lor in difficult affaires. The cruelties and exceeding lust of Domitian, and of Nero, which may be read in Tacitus, hath power to terrifie princes from those vices which are recorded of them: when also they peruse the lamentable stories of Caligula, that Fax & fex hominum: That fire-brand, and filth of men. When they reuolue the monstrous obscoenities of Heliogabalus, who was amongst the people a Cannon by word, scorne, and obloquie: when  they shall looke into the leaues of Maximus his life; than whom, no man was a more cruell slaughter man of his countrey, finding what horrible epethites, denominations, and attributes, were worthely throwne, or (as it were) spit
into the blacke legend of his bloudie gouernment, being called in diuers pla∣ces  Busyris, Phalar is, Typhon, what better precedent can remaine in detestation of vice? Contrariwise, the blessed and peaceable reigne of Octauian, the goodnesse and gracious condition of Traian, of Pertinax, of Titus, and some others, are vehement prouocations, to confirme and encourage Princes in iustice and honestie. For euen as women (which curiously fashion and attire their heads and bodies by their glasse, which representeth vnto them all vnde∣cent and comely guizes) will presently shew themselues abroad amongst the people, finding their bodies by that myrrour pleasingly garnished: so Princes by the like resemblance find in the glasse of hystories, that which giueth spurs to their vertues and policie. The case is lamentable, and I haue many times with heauinesse thought it, how few be the Chronologiers and Historians of our age, how doubtfull and vnfaithfull much of their matter, how fearefully and vainly seduced by mispri∣zion and affection. Sure I am, that infinite actions remaine worthie the penne of hystories: nay, that which men write of their own princes and nation, ten∣deth lesse to truth than vnto vaine-glorie: but that which is written by men of forraine princes & people (such as Mercury Gallobelgicus falsely proclaimed in his Annales of the world) is both vncertaine, fallacious, and strongly sauou∣ring of malice, blind zeale, and partiall motions of the mind. Whereas if men would faithfully search out by the true records and memorials of realmes and  Commonweales the vertuous and vicious actions of princes and people, how would it instigate and deterre the well and ill affected rulers and commons of the world to take hold and detestation of goodnes & euill? In reading of them therefore we must carefully quote the map of actions, with the times & places, the causes, executions, and euents of things, wherein some did prosper, and o∣thers perish, with the reasons why those were gracious, and these vnwelcome. If any glorious matter happened, whether it came by chaunce or felicitie, by vertue, or good counsell, what impediments in contrarie did cause it miscarry. A Counsellor should also consider by this knowledge, what alterations haue formerly beene: as in the realmes of England, Scotland, Fraunce, Ireland,  Spaine, Denmarke, Italy, with other Nations: what Families possessed the Crownes of them, and by what titles and meanes, how long, what the causes of those mutations were, how many of euery familie did reigne, which of the princes was most religious, valiant, wise, and fortunate; which not: how ma∣ny battailes euery prince fought, against whom, at what time, where, and vp∣on what occasion: what warres haue beene for a thousand and six hundred yeeres past and since, betwixt England and Fraunce, England and Scotland, England and Spaine, England and Ireland, England and Denmarke: what with Wales, what with Heathens, and Mahemetans: what ciuile and intestine commotions: which and in how many battailes that were conquerors: what  occasioned their ruine or victorie; also the causes and captaines of commoti∣ons, how they were vanquished or quieted: what benefite or mischiefe ensued thereon. Hee that can well and aptly make relation hereof, may passe the muster, with more than ordinarie pay for his paines.
If a Counsellor therefore, hauing vnderstanding requisite, accustome him∣selfe  with patience in much reading, (which is commonly most yrkesome to the purest and most precious wits) that benefite is vnspeakeable, which by the knowledge of hystories shall enrich his mind and vnderstanding: conside∣ring how the examples of a priuat and publicke life, the beginnings, augmen∣tations, proceedings, conseruations, and inclinations of realmes, with all ciuile commutations, are discouered by them. The knowledge of which shall not be very long in attaining: for so much as men of this place shall find noble vse thereof dayly. Prudence is one speciall gift of God, attained by prayer and the due feare of his Maiestie, which (as the wise Salomon sayth) is the beginning of all wise∣dome.  Since therefore it doth principally respect the knowledge and pra∣ctise of wise magistrates to be possessed of that princely iewell, I will in so short as I can open the substance thereof, according to the morall obseruati∣ons in Philosophie. Prudence therefore is the Gouernesse and Iudge of all vertue, the knowledge which teacheth men how to liue blamelesse, or a true mentall affection, declaring (as Cicero writeth) what honest and profitable things (with their contraries) wee should desire and detest. It is likewise a kind of cunning, which with a mysticall, honest, and profitable dissimulation my∣neth into the depth of causes and actions. And in another dfinition, Est bona animi affectio & habitus indagandi quod verum sit: It is a good affection, and  Cic. in Ror. ad Herenn. habite of the mind, to sent out the truth. Prudence is either large and vni∣uersall, which wee may tearme heroicall prudence, or a vertue strict and di∣stinguished, that (being composed of consultation, cunning, opinion, and sa∣gacitie) openeth the truth in all actions: and therefore it is imposed as an e∣uerlasting iewell and endlesse victorie both in peace and warre, for any prince to weare neere himselfe. Duo sunt qua ab egregijs principibus expetuntur: san∣ctitas domi, in armis fortitudo, vtrobique prudentia: Two properties are re∣quired In vita Vlp. Traiani. in excellent good princes: in his Realmes sanctitie, in his warres for∣titude; in both places prudence. The substance of prudence is truth; by which humane reason should entirely be gouerned. Truth is the Medium  betwixt arrogance and dissimulation, mouing men to shew themselues plaine in word and deed. There is another definition of politicall truth, not much different: which is a kind of habite, to speake a truth in all publicke and priuate causes, without any fraud, arrogance, or dissimulation. Towards the knowledge of truth (by lore of Philosophie) fiue vertuous qualities are required. The first is Science, being a sure and infallible knowledge and apprehension of any thing, which may proceed out of the causes thereof, either by natu∣rall instinct, or some other reasonable demonstrations: as in Theologicall and Mathematicall practise: for so much as the learning contained in those Sciences, teacheth such things as cannot easily be wrested otherwise by rea∣son.  As first appeareth by the definition of Religion, which is the seale or bond of Theologie, being the true feare, loue, and honour of God: which re∣ligion bringeth a zealous care and reuerent ceremonie towards the worship of a superiour nature; which nature we call diuine, because it so farre excee∣deth
the corruption and perfectest apprehension of man: and amongst others  by the Prophet Dauid vnto the kings of this earth, as a monition or exhortati∣on, it is deliuered: Vnderstand, O you Kings: serue the Lord with feare, and re∣ioyce in him with trembling, &c. And therefore if religion were nothing but humane policie (which the damned and execrable Atheists imagine in their foolishnesse) yet must wee certainely know, that if the feare of God aboue were not, men would contemne all lawes and vertue: imagining, that all men had free leaue in their owne corrupt natures (which they most impiously would make their God, and be by the same directed) to doe their owne hearts lusts. The Mathematickes also (Quae sunt quasi comites & administrae viri po∣litici: Which are as it were the companions and agents of a Polititian: and  which Plutarch placeth in the soule of man, as being a part of the Theorique In Moral. or contemplatiue faculties) are arts likewise, which cannot otherwise bee wrested. And hence is it, that Science is called, Habitus demonstrandi per cau∣sas: A habite of demonstration by reasons. The second meanes towards the knowledge of truth, is art: being a kind of mentall habit or experimen∣tall skill to performe and perfect things by such means, as without them they otherwise may bee done; and as Tacitus writeth: Apud maiores virtutis id praemium fuit, cunctisque ciuium (si fiderent bonis artibus) licitum petere Magi∣stratus: Lib. 11. Annal. It was proposed to our auncestors, and vnto all citizens for a reward of their vertues, and as a thing allowable, to sue for reputations and offices,  if they did build vpon their knowledge in good arts. And from hence are all trades, professions, and mysteries (by which men liue and attaine worldly happinesse) drawne and deriued. The third part of truth is Prudence it selfe, being a certaine habite, effecting such things by reason, as either tend vnto the weale or harme of persons. Hence is it called Prudence in men, to con∣sult graciously for themselues and others, to gouerne priuate families, and to serue or minister vnto the Commonwealth in publicke causes fortunately and beneficially. The fourth being Intelligence, nobly placed in the mind of man, is a kind of habite, moouing the mind, enclining and yeelding it selfe constantly to things, which cannot be by demonstration perfected. It is likewise a  certaine habite of experiment had in the principles, or heads and grounds of causes, from whence all proofes are drawne. The adiuncts and parts of In∣telligence (according to Metopius the Pythagorean Philosopher) are iudge∣ment In lib. de virt. and contemplation, both of them issuing from reason. The fifth and last part of truth is Sapience; being a most absolute and perfect knowledge of such things as are contained within the limits of humane apprehension, as well in metaphysicall as in naturall causes: howbeit, especially leuelling at diuine matters, according to the definition of it: Quae est rerum diuinarum am∣plissima scientia: Which is a most ample skill had of diuine matters. Onely that which regardeth humane policies or affaires, is more properly tearmed Prudence: which (as Aristotle sayth) is the cause, meanes, or procurer of  Lib. 1. cap. vt. Ethicorum. Sapience. But of this last part of truth I haue spoken more at large elswhere. Vnto prudence therefore, as companions, are assigned Intelligence, which is (as I said) a perfect vnderstanding of matters: Science a iust apprehension
of causes; Art a true demonstration or ensignemnt of things: and Sapience  a sure and certaine indagation of diuine knowledge. Aristotle attributeth to prudence three parts: the first, , which is a kind of power or facul∣tie, to giue good counsell in time of neede: then , respecting a mature deliberation and perfection in doing of businesse: thirdly, , or intelli∣gence; which is a prouidence, cunning, or expert iudgement to put that in execution, which hath beene by right counsell preconsulted and determined. It is likewise the part of a prudent person, to know much in generall, and in particulars, to keepe in readiestore and memorie, things long before done and past if they bee notable: to see darts, arrowes, and all seious accidents of good hope and danger, long before they come; by which gift they may pre∣uent  and auoid the worst, turning that which is good to the best successe; and weighing the condition of things, as they stand in present state within the scales of reason and discretion: likewise, to be well aduised in all consi∣derations and consultations; to be circumspect, iudicious, and of a good con∣uersation, as well in respect of others, as for his owne sake; to ponder well the circumstances and attributes of men and matters: for by the mutations of such things wee find it often succeede, how that will bee ratified and made lawfull on the morrow, which was the day before prohibited and pu∣nished. The difference likewise of persons, & of their qualities, by the respects had  vnto their faults and punishment (as for example, in malicious killing vpon reuenge, in comparison of them that doe it in defence of their owne persons, by the law of nature, and for necessities sake, in making sacriledge the worst kind of theft; and (in generall) when by due discretion the state and condition of people and causes, either high, great, humble, or small, are examined and re∣spected: for by this course is the rule of decencie kept. Moreouer, prudence disperseth her force and vertues into three parts: first, into the condition monasticall (if I may so tearme it) which appertai∣neth all particular persons in their peculiar estates seuerally: the second, into the state Oeconomicall, which respecteth the administration of each priuate  familie; which Xenophon tearmeth the art of dispensation. The third and last being the best and right excellent part (wherin prudence sheweth most force) is the state politicall alwayes employed in ciuile causes, generally working for the Common-wealth, beeing a true kind of science to which those of this counsell must bee first bound apprentises, before their adoption into this societie. Hee therefore, that would bee a good master in his owne familie, must first by good demeanure and conuersation amongst his neighbors hold him∣selfe vp, that he may purchase a generall good opinion, witnesse, and com∣mendation of his integritie; being by those excellent deserts made fit for the  gouernment of a familie. Which when he knoweth by that circumspection, accustomed in his owne particular carriage, how to gouerne, then shall hee likewise haue his faculties by good helpe of morall obseruations and practise of vertues, surely kni and enhabled to giue counsell, and administer in
this principall Office vnder the King or Commonwealth: for if hee cannot  moderate himselfe, how shall he rule in Oeconomie? Neither can any man, not being exceedingly perfect in them both (with other excellent suppliments and vertuous helpes, such as you shall hereafter reade in this booke of Offices) deserue the place of a Counsellor. Howbeit, for as much as these two last, concerning the administration of priuate families, beeing called a Dome∣sticall, and this other noble part semblably tearmed a Ciuile gouerne∣ment, Cic. in partioni∣bus Orator. are specially directed and guided by Prudence, I will therefore in briefe declare, what the learnedest Philosophers haue noted concerning them. , which is the forme of house-gouernment, respecteth the good  order of euery mans familie, correspondent in profite and honestie to the places, degrees, and habilities of the maisters; whether they bee princes, noblemen, citizens, or priuat persons consisting of men (which includeth the maister, wife, children, and seruants) and of possessions, comprehending house and domesticall substance. They which might haue first beene wor∣thely reputed Oeconomicall maisters, were Adam, Enoch, Noah, with diuers euen to the time of Ioseph the patriarch: who did gouerne the kingdome of Egypt, establishing it with new lawes. Amongst these, Melchisedech named a king, and Abraham, who (though in forraine countries he were a stranger) yet ioyned with kings, gouerning his familie by politicall and Oecono∣micall  Empire, and maintaining warres in defence of his people. The mai∣ster of the house-hold therefore ought first to know, and put his whole power in practise, towards the preseruation of his wife and children, in vnion and societie, which both Reason and Law doth naturally mode∣rate, beeing by sacred writ of the Testaments ordained, and vnder that commaundement established by the diuine sanctions of Christianitie, that they should be legitimate, begotten in wedlocke, and not the children of ma∣ny fathers, according to the licencious rule of Plato: secondly, that the father vnto them and to his seruants shew beneuolence, and be tractable. His fami∣lie must be disposed in decent order: food, cloth, maintenance, with house  conuenient and answerable to the retinue, must be prouided, according to the nature of that place where he liueth. Wherin he must prudently consider, whether the ayre, which fostereth the places enuironing his house, be cold, hot or temperat: whether scituate vpon the continent, or sea coast, neere a riuer or poole, high, low, fennish, moist, fertile, barren, neere the barbarous and aduerse borderer, or remote; or to what winds it is most opposed, with such like: for according to these obseruations, houses are edified and fortified; streets en∣largened or straightened. Vnto which publicke workes, for the edification, amplification, or restauration of houses, villages, or cities, a Counsellors pru∣dence is needfully required. Let them take heed of exceeding sumptuousnesse and ouergorgeous mag∣nificence in building, aboue the proportion of their lands and reuenewes, en∣uironning and answering the same: for it were better, that large demesnes re∣quired mansion houses, than that glorious mannors should want meanes to
support and furnish out their magnificence. Concerning familiar mainte∣nance  (which is either domesticall, respecting tyllage, pasturage, parkes for game, warrens of hares and conies, hawking, fishing, vineyards, orchards, hop-yards, gardens, and such like; or artificiall, conuersing in arts, handy∣crafts, trades, and mysteries; in part liberall, as painture, typographie, ma∣sonrie, with the like, and partly not) it must bee decent, honest, needfull, and allowable: for the worthinesse of a good house-holder is mentall, and not corporall. Qui enim domum aut villam extruit, eamque signis, aulaeis, alijsque Cic. 2. Off. operibus exornat, & omnia potius quam semet visendum exhibet, non diuitias decori sed ipse illis est flagitio: For that person which buildeth a house or towne, and garnisheth it with armes, hangings, and other workes; making  euery thing more specious therein than himselfe, is not honourable in regard of his riches, but meerely scandalizeth them, through his owne imperfecti∣ons. Such gaynes as Vsurers, Publicanes, and Iewes of that profession make to liue vpon by the destruction of others, is most abhominable and odious: for so much as it gayneth by coynes. Whereas it is euident, that coynes were not deuised, because they should both beget and beare fruit of themselues, (being a thing hatefull and repugnant to nature) but ordained therefore, that other commodities (by meanes of exchange) should yeeld vs benefite there∣by. For Tacitus to prooue this, writeth, That the old Germanes, when coyne was first vsed amongst them, did onely loue it for commerce and exchange of  marchandize. Etiam quod argentum magis quam aurum sequebantur nulla affe∣ctatione Cor. Tacit. lib. de moribus Germā. animi, sed quianumerus argenteorum facilior vsui est promiscua & vilia mercantibus: Euen because they did more desire to haue siluer than gold: not for any vaine affectation of their mind, but because the number and value of their siluer coynes was more fit for their vse in buying and selling of diuerse cheape things of sundry natures. Semblably, those trades of adulterat mar∣chandize and traffique in buying or selling of wares (which are enriched by perfidious brocage, leasings, and such dishonesties) bee very contempti∣ble. Panders likewise and bruitish baudes, the ministers of licencious vo∣luptuositie, with mercenarie Players, Buffones, Fidlers, Iugglers, Flatte∣rers,  and couening companions, liuing vpon any kind of vnlawfull and di∣shonest shifts, by the confusion of ingenuous persons, of a liberall na∣ture, young, and vnexperienced in worldly guile, are most loathsome and filthie. Let that therefore, which is the fountaine and profession of maintenance to them that are house-holders, be iust, honest, and profitable: that which is so gotten also, let it be frugally spent and husbanded, as it is commendably gayned: that euery man according to his place, apport, and qualitie, may maintaine that decent state, which shall best answere to the glory of his owne countrey, where hee breatheth. But if O Domus antiqua might in Ciceroes  time bee spoken of many, when this crooked world was sixteene hundred yeeres and more younger than it is, and not growne to that extreame aua∣rice, vnto which all aged creatures of nature, by course more and more en∣cline:
what may be said of those pompous buildings at this day, which haue  chimneyes without fires, lodgings without strangers, kitchins without meat, faire hals without that old and comely guard of stout yeomanrie, for which England hath beene formerly famoused? In choice of a wife (if a man might so haue it) this were to bee wished, that men towards thirtie yeeres of their age ioyne in marriage with some young woman, not much aboue twentie, both of them equall in substance and birth so neere as may be, well brought vp in modestie, good huswiferie, prudent, of honest parentage, not dispara∣ging him in any thing, neither proud, nor malicious and froward, but such as may both loue him well, and be worthely beloued againe; the persons, their state and qualitie considered: ouer whom he may not (vpon any iealous mis∣constructions,  villanous suspect, or opinionatiue report of malicious tongues) beare a heauie hand, without certaine and manifest apparance of her disho∣nest carriage: but in all his actions towards her, demeane himselfe honestly, godly, decently, benignely, mildly, beeing directed by the rule of Christia∣nitie, that though he know himselfe to be the head of that double vnited bo∣die, yet he may so repute and esteeme of her, as of that other halfe of him∣selfe, ioyning with her in equall care and diligence towards the vertuous edu∣cation and instruction of his children, as hee did with her in procreation of them: considering, that education is the first, second, and third part of life; without which according to Philosophie all learning is as it were armed ini∣quitie:  the definition of Education is: Liberorum tàm in sanitate totius corpo∣ris, quàm in singularum partium concinnitate diligens consertio: The parents di∣ligent conseruation of their children, both in health of bodie, and in a generall cleanely propernesse through all parts. And in this sort also Ciantor, the schol∣ler of Xenocrates, hath distributed mans life: the first part to bee bestowed in vertuous contemplation and practise; the second, in recreation and exercise for corporall health; the third, for honest pleasures; and the fourth for the iust acquisition and collection of treasure. So that the first threescore yeeres haue reference to the education, as well for particular as generall gouernment (whe∣ther Oeconomicall or Politicall) the second prouideth in arming himselfe for  death to benefit posteritie. The care of a wife is also to ioyne with her husband in prouision for her children, that they be furnished with corporall necessaries, answerable to her estate, exercising them in true religion and obedience, disci∣plining them in arts and trades, according to their natures and capacities, or as his faculties require. He must also keepe a iust audite of his gettings and expen∣ces, ordering and husbanding his goods with such a prouident hand, as that somewhat alwayes (according to the proportion of his liuing) be with a father∣ly foresight reserued each yeere towards their stocke and prosperitie to come. Howbeit, if he be noble, or of such worth, as that by the vertues, paines, & wor∣thinesse of his antecessors hee need not to labour for his liuing, but hath of his  owne without industrie to supplie that charge: then must he so moderate and attemper himselfe to frugalitie, that he neither seeme prodigall, nor couetous, but liberall and like himselfe, suiting with his place and condition: If he liue by
trade, his apprentises must be well vsed, and diligently taught his science and  cunning: if otherwise (keeping and retaining seruants for his traine and coun∣tenance, with workmen which attend his labour for wages) he should see that they bee with good respect and answerable to their qualities entertained and kept in their offices, hauing their wages and hire benignely and carefully paied vnto them at times fit and limited, prouiding that they grow not insolent, con∣tentious, or malicious amongst themselues, but temperate and honest. The re∣spects which ought to be required in a wife, are a diligent and dayly care of her house, that she personally looke to those houshold commodities and seruices her selfe as is fit: that she behaue her selfe honestly towards her husband: that she be no scold, nor maliciously demeane her selfe: that she teach and instruct  her children and women seruants in modest conuersation, knowledge, and be∣hauior: that she bee not proud, neither sumptuous nor sluttish: which those sweet Oracles of wisedome and Oratorie, king Salomon and blessed Paul haue diuinely and luculently declared, as is read in holy scriptures, That if strength serue, she giue sucke to her owne children her selfe: for as much as all Philoso∣phers hold it the most naturall and best course of nourishing infants: that she teach vnto them frugalitie, reseruing and encreasing her husbands stocke with her owne huswiferie. In briefe (as Freigius in his Oeconomicks noteth) that she be modest, stout, iust, and silent. In like sort, that children should bee brought vp in the true knowledge, feare, and worship of God, in obedience, loue, and honour, to their parents,  in patience of their fathers seueritie: that they bee silent without procacitie, when he speaketh: that they be dutifull vnto their schoolemasters, and vnto those that teach vnto them the gouernment of themselues: that they be studi∣ous of those arts and professions to which their parents haue applied them: that they be taught to loath pestilent idlenesse and voluptuositie, beeing the perdition and confusion of all youth, from the highest to the basest: that they be reuerend towards magistrates, and vnto their betters: that they bee true in word and deede: that they lend dutifull and willing eares vnto the words and instructions of men learned, honest, and wise: that they bee modest. For in all his Dialogues wee find, that Plato with most vehemence and principally  doth adhort parents to be carefull in education of their children, verely belee∣uing, Non posse genus humanum absque gubernataribus vel honestè viuere, vel foe∣liciter gubernari: That the children of men can neither liue honestly together, nor be gouerned happily without Masters and Rulers. Lastly, the duties requi∣red in seruants, are subiection, fidelitie, promptnesse, attention, assiduitie, with obedience vnto their maisters frugalitie, moderation in diet, and apparrell, truth in matters concredited vnto their truth, patience, and facilitie: how∣beit, I will (as before) referre my selfe in this true moralitie vnto the spi∣rit of God, speaking in those Oeconomicall precepts and commaunde∣ments, which were deliuered by the blessed Apostles Peter and Paule in  their Epistles, and by our Sauiour Christ himselfe, in diuerse places and parables of his holy Gospell, diuinely shewing and teaching the duties
of fathers, wiues, children, husbands, seruants, and of all other magistrates in  their places by the lore of decencie. All which Offices of wiues, seruants, and children, haue reference vnto a superiour, by which they bee seclu∣ded from hauing absolute power ouer themselues. Such is that diuine force of order, and true disposition in all thinges, which are created of God. Whether it be lawfull for Christians to retaine slaues, to whom the Gos∣pell hath graunted libertie: such as in diuerse parts of Christendome (vnder the Popes Supremacie) be tollerated and vsed, being in part naturall, and partly legall slaues, as you shall find in the imperiall institutions, Sub tit. de seruis. I referre my selfe to the learneder opinions of Diuines, Cannonists, and ciuile  Doctors, which can make a perfect decision of that doubt: but sure am I, that amongst the true professors of Christs Gospell, seruitude is disallowed and abrogated by the generall libertie which was graunted by Christ Iesus to them that beleeue. Concerning seruants by nature, I referre my selfe to A∣ristotle. Lib. 7. de Rep. cap. 11. As euery familie composed is of seuerall persons, so doth each Common∣wealth or citie consist of many families. This assembly being thus associated in the tutelage, combination, or communion of one Empire and Law, out of his owne proper force can maintaine, protect, and gouerne the state of his affaires by policie, being the third part of prudence: which (as Plutarch defineth in his  booke of three Commonweales) is that state and order that euery citie should obserue in the rule and gouernment of things. We find in holy Scripture, how God himselfe ordained this politicall doctrine and order by his immediat ser∣uant and interpreter Moyses; proposing an example to posteritie, from whence many most behoofefull precedents towards the administration of Kingdoms, Estates, and Seignories may be taken: by this is the Prince himselfe directed, as by some diuine caball, according to his capacitie, and to that grace which God hath poured into the hearts of his secret counsell, how to gouerne all the people of this earth. For euen as to the Pylot his course and compasse, by which he capeth and wendeth, euen as health to the Physition, and victorie to  the captaine: so to the Prince and Magistrate, the blessed and peaceable life of his people and citizens is proposed, that they may grow plentifull in ri∣ches, powerfull in armes, ample in glorie, constant and honest in vertue. Like∣wise, wee find those policies most excellent, which king Dauid, the figure of our Sauiour Christ, vsed: for hee did amplifie the realme of Israel both by peace and warre; adorning it with lawes, iudgements, treasure, armes, and power, encouraged and aduaunced the studies of learning, instituted the Le∣uites, Doctors, Musitians, and other professors of good arts. This ciuile pru∣dence doth (as it were) prescribe vnto citizens their actions, conuersing in the maintenance of ciuile societies, by the vniformitie of religion, vniuersalitie of iustice, and vnanimitie in vertuous contemplation, and practise; whereby  they liue together in pietie towards God, in honestie one towards another, in prudence and tranquilitie respecting their owne priuat and particular estates.
Aristotle maketh this difference betwixt the Commonwealth and a priuat fa∣milie:  That Iustice (by the distribution of equall measure to poore and rich) is most specious in euery Commonwealth: whereas in Oeconomie, the mai∣ster of each familie doth at his owne discretion gouerne and dispose matters, as in the person of a prince ouer his children, seruants, and slaues. According to the generall opinion of all good writers, there are sixe formes of policie: whereof the three good are first placed, and the three bad drawne out of the excesse of those best. The first of the good doth consist of the prince his ab∣solute authoritie ouer the people in yea and nay: which men call a Monarchy. But of this more at large in other places ensuing. Bodin writeth, that there are two sorts of Empire or Soueraignetie: Vnum  Lib.   summum; alterum legitimum: illud legibus ac magistratuum imperio solutum, hoc legibus obligatum: summum autem magistratus est proprium, legitimum Maiesta∣tis: The first is highest, freed from the strayne of lawes, and from any sub∣iection vnto magistracie; the second legitimate and obliged vnto the lawes: but the highest rule is proper to magistrates, and the legitimate peculiar vnto Maiestie. Wee must consider also, that the king is not onely a parent and au∣thor of the lawes, but a most studious and diligent conseruator, and steward of iustice. For in the Common-wealth a Prince is placed, as vpon a stage, whose words and actions the people (vnder and about him) obserue: him if they find iust, and of good demeanure (as I touched in the beginning of this  booke) they will imitate: if insolent and wicked, then will they behaue them∣selues accordingly. Quales enim sunt in Repub. principes tales reliqui solent fieri ciues: For such as bee the Princes, such are the people in euery Common∣wealth, sayth Plato. Howbeit, kings in respect of their Empire, are superiour to the lawes & customes of their realms; which they may cōmute, antiquate, and abrogate as they list, vnlesse such as haue voluntarily restrained them∣selues in some particulars to the consent and suffragation of their Peeres and Commons: for so much as kings are the ministers and deputies vnder God: to and from whom they must yeeld account, and receiue punishment, accor∣ding to their administration to them committed, if they doe abuse the same,  or violate their oathes. And all kings for the most part, in causes concerning themselues, will annihilate lawes, or remit and mitigate them, as our dread Soueraigne Lord hath done in pardoning traytors and nefarious enemies of the State, being conuicted. Which counsell he likewise hath giuen vnto that gracious young Prince his sonne, of so great expectation and wonder, as the . world hath not seene his peere in towardnesse. But iust Princes will not com∣monly commute, annihilate, or qualifie those lawes, by which their people may be preiudiced: for such Lawes and Statutes as concerne them, are ena∣cted by their owne consents, not by royall prerogatiue onely. The second good State dependeth vpon that gouernment, which is referred to a compe∣tent  number of the wiser noblemen: as if any Prince (being weake of him∣selfe) should diuolue the whole administration of his State vnto the lords and fellowes of his counsell: and this is called Aristocracie. Which kind of state we reade in holy Scripture to haue continued vnder Iudges, from Moyses vnto
the dayes of Eli: vnder whome the arke of Gods couenant was lost, and the  politicall glorie lamentably defaced. But as it followeth, my iudgement yeel∣deth to the learneder opinions of others: That there is not any state so lau∣dable and diuine in earthly gouernment, as vnder one, according to that saying of Nestor in Homer: Non multos regnare bonum, rex vnicus esto. Vnius imperium, cui Iupiter aurea magnus Sceptra dedit, iussitque suis dare iur a tuendis. It is not good, that many kings should rule at once ouer one people: let  there bee one king and one kingdome, vnto whome the God of might hath deliuered the golden scepter, commaunding him to make lawes for the preser∣uation and tuition of his people. The third good estate of gouernment resteth in the discreet gubernation of the Commons, which is named a Democracie: such as gouerned Athens in times past, and the like amongst the Cantons of Swizzerland, at this day. Those other three remaining, and framed out of the excesse or outrage of these other three good states predefined, consist in tyrannie, by which the prince, according to lust, and beyond the limits of reason, law, or honestie,  cherisheth vicious persons, and by them strengtheneth his owne arme against all good people, which liue oppressed and tortured vnder his gouernment. The life of such tyrants is a continuall perillous and inward warre, because they cannot repute themselues safe either in front, in reare, or on the flankes, they miserably torture themselues with euerlasting danger & feare. And those are commonly called Tyranni, qui vi & armis imperium arripiunt: Which with force and in armes bereaue others of their Realms and Crownes. Such was Cirus Agathocles, and others infinite, which maintained their spoyles and ra∣pine by rauening and spoyling. These are they which despise iustice, lawes, and equitie; these which forsake the Commonwealth to multilie their owne  priuate estates; these which vexe and oppresse their people with grieuous and insupportable tributes and exactions, as vassales and slaues, base and abject: those of these conditions may not bee called kings, but tyrants and nefarious oppressors: for euen as rauenous wolues greedily rush vpon the flocke, so doe they, to dilaniate and deuour the people of God. The court of a good king containeth the least part of his riches, and his Commonwealth aboun∣deth and ioyeth in all wealth and worldly felicitie. The tyrant hoordeth vp the peoples treasure, or employeth it to his priuate vse, impouerishing and excoriating the poore subiects. A good king hath a good Angell ayding him in the administration of his estate: a Tyrant is incensed and directed by a most malicious and wicked diuell. A good king punisheth the wic∣ked,  and preferreth the vertuous; a Tyrant cutteth off the liues of good men, and prolongeth the dayes of the wicked. A good king thinketh him∣selfe most powerfull in riches, when his people doth abound in wealth.
A tyrant then reputeth himselfe most rich, when he hath robbed the Com∣monwealth  of all their goods: a good king by the Philosophers is called a shepheard; a tyrant is tearmed a wolfe: finally the good and true king estee∣meth much more the life and weale of his people, than his owne life. The Ty∣rant doth not only thirst after the riches and treasure, but euen after the bloud and liues of his subiects also. The second euill part of gouernment is called Oligarchie: which is when the Commonwealth or Vniuersalitie bee forceably yoaked vnder the violent lusts and empire of a few Nobles: as at Rome in the gouernment of the Du∣umuirate and Triumuirate: and in Anarchie, when the people confusedly by libidinous instinct and auaritious desire, make hauocke of all vnder their go∣uernment;  vsing all kinds of dishonest pleasures and purchase, as a commen∣dable and most needfull recreation and profite. For the deuill (which is au∣thor of confusion and disorder) raigneth in their spirits. Yea, ruinous and most desolate is that Nation like to prooue, whose lawes are made out of their owne lusts and perturbed appetites: Multitudo namque malis artibus imbu∣ta, Salust in Orat. ad Ca. Caes. deinde in artes vitasque varias dispalata; nullo modo inter se congruens, pa∣rùm idonea videtur ad capessendam rempublicam. For a multitude which is first disordered and euill affected, and then dispersed into diuers professions and fa∣shions of liuing, discordant within themselues, are not meete to take any charge or tuition of the Commonwealth. For the vulgar are neither wise nor  discreet, but rash and violent in all their commotions and passions; especially when they haue the reynes in their owne hands. The violence of which mis∣gouernment caused Demosthenes, a most learned and euer-renowned citizen of Athens, through the peruerse and vniust sentence of the barbarous Athe∣nians, being banished (after the losse of his countrey liberties) to crie forth in the bitternesse of his spirit: O Pallas, Pallas, quae tribus infestissimis belluis dele∣ctaris, noctua, dracone, & populo: O Pallas, Pallas, which takest pleasure in three most pernicious beasts; in an Owle, in a Dragon, and in the people. Which kind of gouernment is not vnproperly compared to the weltring and vnconstant billowes of the sea. The Romane policie, when their kings were abolished, was by the Senate managed a long time. After which the people retaining a Democraticall state (being attempered with the moderation and authorities royall, and with the Patricians, as appeared in the Consular estate, and in the Senators) did carrie with them the fasces and preheminence, vntill the reignes of Iulius and Augu∣stus Caesars. So that out of the Soueraigne rule of a kingdome, being reuiued in the Consuls; out of the gouernment Aristocraticall, represented by the Se∣nators; and out of the Democracie, manifested in the Plebeian Tribunes, a firme and absolute Commonwealth was fashioned. Those Monarchies which are esteemed most perfect and excellent at this  day, being established by the Senate or Counsell of most prudent persons, ad∣uaunced for their true nobilitie to that place with a kind of consent and appro∣bation of the commons, doe moderate, and nobly restraine the princes force within the limits of his owne lawes, made and published for the benefit of his
people generally: by which meanes their wealth & peace may be multiplied  & conserued; especially when the crowne is not bestowed vpon any through suffragation (as by briberie, faction, or affection) but by royall right of heri∣tage, to princes next in succession by blood; as it is in this renowmed monar∣chie of Brittaine vnder your maiesties imperiall Scepter at this day: for euery good Commonwealth is vnder iust gouerment with excellent counsell con∣serued and amplified: neither can it but of force must otherwise be ruined and perish. For as much therefore as euery Commonwealth consisteth of a multi∣tude (which should liue in vnitie together vnder one God, one king, and one law) I will speake somewhat of the incorporation and harmonious vnion of  people and nations one within another. So much the rather, because the pre∣sent state of our monarchie thus confirmed and happily lincked in vnion re∣quireth it; in this semblably with all requisite humiliation, as in all other things, yeelding and submitting my iudgement to the correction of wise∣dome. The first and best forme of gouernment and empire is, where one king mo∣derateth and ruleth all nations vnder his dominion vnited, according to the true spirit of vertue, which domination is properly tearmed by the sages of wisedome a monocracie: for it representeth the perfect ordination of nature, by which euerie multitude and deformitie submitteth it selfe to some one  thing which gouerneth the same; euen as all things mooueable are reduced vnto the first moouer or centre from which all Lines, Elements, and Dimen∣sions are deriued. For proofe hereof Herodian in his historie writeth, that Darius vpon a consultation, how the Persian state might be best established as a paranymph by the liuely force of a most eloquent oration defended the forme of a monarchie: which the Persian senate did also with one voice ap∣plaud; declaring and proclaming him their king thereupon. The like part did Mecanas defend against Agrippa before Octauius Caesar, and preuailed: both Dion. lib. 52. their copious and effectuall orations are yet extant in Dion Cassius. To con∣firme this both by diuine authorities, and humane nature, the blessed Apostle  saith, that there is one head, one spirit, one lord. And it is written in the prophet Ezechias, My seruant Dauid shall be their king and onely shepheard oner them all. Ephes. 4. cap. 37. Also wee find in the gouernement of nature amongst bees, one chiefe; one guide amongst cranes; one emperour or king amongst nations, vnited in obe∣dience to the righteous scepter of one; and one iudge or president ouer euery prouince. When Rome was first builded, it would not endure the gouerne∣ment of two brethren equall in empire. And in sacred monuments we find, that Iacob, and Esau disagreed in the very wombe of Rebecca. Vnum etenim ar∣bustum non alit duos Erithacos: One bush will not admit two ruddockes at once Genes cap. 25. vpon it. Neither can the Empire or kingdome of any, brooke two Phoenixes  to liue at once. Nature also instructeth and teacheth vs how one ocean imboketh many riuers, which as contributaries, subiects, suppliants, and weake ones, haue recourse and admittance into the strong bosome of the vaste seas.
In a Monarchie therefore, and in the whole course of euery good policie,  these three speciall are most certaine, and faithfully to bee receiued. The first is one God; without fellowship in power and vertue, whose sacred iealousie will not admit of any copartener or competitor, according to whose precepts and instructions deliuered, as it is written in those holy bookes to his faithfull seruants Moyses and Aaron, and after to the blessed Patriarkes, then to the di∣uine Prophets: and lastly, by the blessed mouth of Christ Iesus his sonne our Sauiour vnto the sanctified Apostles, without addition, or diminution, our true Religion Catholicke, being the vertuous baulme of our mortified soules and bodies, wounded with the darts of sinne and death, and extra∣cted out of the most precious and inestimable substance of our saluation is  immoueably grounded. The second, one king, who semblably (without any competitor or associ∣ate coequall in his authoritie) doth represent in himselfe the very person of royall iustice, according to that excellent verse of the Poet: Nulla fides regni socijs: Omnisque potestas Impatiens consorti erit. There is not any trust to be reposed betwixt fellowes in Empire: for each power is impatient of a competitor. The pats of a true prince (as Plata defi∣neth)  is Ex lege & more regere: To rule by law and custome. H being thus placed in the throne of royaltie, sheweth Go high fauour and deare loue to that people, whom hee graciously gouerneth by those wise and godly rulers, which vnder him sit on the throne of Iustice: wherein likewise the king shew∣eth his owne excellent prudence, that can by good discretion make choice of such excellent magistrates. Hence was it, that Queene Saba did magnifie king Salomon aboue all the kings on earth in these words: Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loued thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel, becaushee loued Is∣rael 3. reg. ca. 10. for euer, and made thee king to doe righteousnesse and equitie, &c. In the King therfore is comprehended the power and vigour of those humane laws  which proceeded from his diuine Sapience, answering to the natures of his people and consenting with the time necessitie: which he stands obliged to protect with the maiestie of his state, antiquating such ordinances, as haue beene formerly thought behoofefull, and not presently seruing in such need∣full request as before: for in the Prince, and in his Lawes, hauing entire re∣ference and respect to the true worship and lawes of God (which is the principall) all Kingdomes, Nations, and People are preserued, gouerned, and maintained in glorie, wealth, and tranquilitie. And hence is it, that the Prophet Dauid sayth: Giue thy Iudgements to the King, O God, and thy Psal. 72. teousnesse vnto the Kings sonne, that in Righteousnesse hee may iudge thy  people and the poore in Equitie: The mountaines and hils shall bring peace to thy people by Iustice. For which speciall and singular glits and vertues of Righteousnesse, Concord, and Iustice, Kings and Princes were first or∣dayned: whose institution was diuine and heaunly, and by the most
bountifull and gracious ordinance of God, appointed for the weale of his  people. Also they that were so chosen in regard of their prudence, humani∣tie, temperance, and other excellent faculties, wherein they surpassed all o∣thers, were therefore called to the gouernment of people and nations, by ge∣nerall suffrages and ioyfull vnanimitie. Such was the election of Deioces a∣mongst the Medians; of Samothes amongst our auncient Brittaines, and a∣mongst the Gaules; of Minos in Crete; of Numa Pompilius, the successour of Romulus; who being absent, was chosen king of the Romanes, vehemently persuaded and vrged to take vpon him that Soueraignetie, which hee most peremptorily refused a long time: for a true king is the viue patterne and Idaea of all vertues, reuerenced amongst his people, subiects, and vassales, as a god  vpon earth: whose regall authoritie being receiued from the most great and ineffable prouidence, grace, and secret charter of God, vnder the blessed seale of his omnipotencie, ought by him in all humilitie to be continually as∣cribed and reacknowledged to his incomprehensible deitie. For God of himselfe being most wise, most iust, and most good, would haue a most wise, a most iust, and a most good vice-gerent to rule his people in all righteousnes and equitie. Yea, the barbarous rabble did so wonder and adore their first kings in those former ages, that they did faine and comment, how they were not dead, but translated into heauen amongst their prophane gods. Many write, that the three speciall vertues of a king, are Sapience, Iustice, and Con∣cord,  which without doubt are three of the foure triumphant wheeles of his renowned and euerlasting glorie: but certaine it is, that hee which is vere∣ly valiant, magnanimious, and industrious, and he that with assiduitie, vigi∣lancie, iustice, and equitie doth well gouerne his people, committed to his faith and sapience (after the manner of good shepheards which carefully guide and attend their flockes) doth doubtlessely discharge his function by iust meanes well and faithfully. Finally, these three properties are they which san∣ctifie him amongst his subiects, and through the whole world: Clemencie, which is the iewell of princes; Mercy the Sun-shine of kings; and Lenitie be∣ing as it were the milke of maiestie. The third, one people including the Commonwealth, which also should acknowledge one only God and one king, considering the corporeall resem∣blance which is betwixt him and God; both of them soueraigning ouer our soules and bodies in ecclesiasticall and ciuile lawes: for so much as wee be na∣turally borne vnder that obedience, as those other two former by their proper power beare domination ouer the nations of this earth, God hauing his ver∣tue of himselfe, infinite, omnipotent, and limitlesse; the king holding his au∣thoritie by the deputation, grace, and sufferance of the most high God, as his immediate steward, to direct, and to see them instructed in his holy Scrip∣tures and commaundements as also with his owne ciuile and politicke sancti∣ons  to gouerne them, that they might liue in loue, peace, and vnion together, as one flocke, obedient and answering vnto the voyce of their spirituall and temporall pastors, without wandering or straying from their obedience, like lost sheepe, which growing wild, acknowledge not any shepheard. This third
estate is diuided into the nobler sort, including as well ministers and magistrats  immediat and mediate vnder God, and the king as the commons and folke: out of which are framed all inferior politicke corporations, trades, and myste∣ries, as I partly touched in these Morals before. From those three, the sancti∣fied, reasonable, and absolute bodies of all Commonweales are deriued, their soules being drawne from the perfect and authenticall religion, deliuered and approued in sacred Scriptures; which hold mens hearts in loue, feare, wor∣ship, and obedience vnto God, to their princes, and towards all sorts of peo∣ple. This soule ought (as I haue partly declared in the Morals of my third booke) like iustice equally to peize it selfe, without wauing either to the right or to the left hand, further than is warranted by the written word, vttered  from Gods holy spirit by the mouths of all our Patriarchs, the Prophets, and Apostles. This is the mightiest and most excellent charge, which rideth vpon the wings of euery good kings soule, presenting him sanctified and without blemish before the precious throne of God. The king gouerning and preseruing in peace and good order those na∣tions and people, which are by Gods blessed ordinance laid vnder his scep∣ter, is properly called the head of this bodie, beeing the noblest member thereof, and placed in the toppe, containing that rich treasure of all the sences, exterior and interior: as of imagination, vnderstanding, memorie, and common sence; whereas all other members, beeing subiect and obedient  thereunto, be partakers of touch onely. It likewise giueth liuely faculties to the whole bodie, as the Spring head doth to those other riuers which are naturally deriued from it. And therefore euery body without a head wan∣teth his life and sence: whereas though it want both legges and armes, it may liue and haue his being, though lame and miserable. In like sort, all waters not abounding from a Spring, are fennes, pooles, and marishes, mortified and without motion: whereas if diuerse armes and riuers braunching from the head, were taken away, yet would a liuely facultie remayne alwayes in the Spring. And therefore the best Philosophers and Physitions, as A∣ristotle and Auicenne, accord herein, that all sence and motion beginneth in  the braine: which being temperate, maketh a good memory, which is gotten by quietnesse, by which the memorie groweth rich with knowledge. In such similitude and order all the perfect sences and motions of the Commonwealth begin in the prince; who being temperate in himselfe, shall attaine that rich wise memorie (which is by the Morallists and sage Poets called very proper∣ly the mother of their nine Muses) and thereby, like king Salomon, become perfect in all sapience and prudence. This match is made by tranquilitie: for so much as the zealous care and studie to purchase peace, maketh euery king blessed and reuerend, and in the presence and sight of God, and of his people. Out of which the glorious renowne, honour, and good memo∣rie  of euery vertuous prince groweth famous in the knowledge of all po∣steritie for euer: euen as for their golden gouernment, king Salomon, and Octauius Augustus were; whose glorie shall endure with this worlds me∣morie.
O what a comfort then may rest with the royall spirits and diuine sences  Encouragement vnto peace. of your mightinesse, when all these blessings shall be plentifully poured down from God vpon your gracious head with that oyle of gladnesse, and vpon the bodie of your kingdomes, with that Angelicall Mánna of spirituall good∣nesse which was proclaimed at the birth of Christ Iesus, in the blessed dayes of Octauian, when all the corners of the earth were in a long and deepe silence as after a strong suddaine tempest: which excellent foode of peace your bles∣sed Maiestie hath in your sapience from God preserued with grace and amitie to distribute amongst all the nations and princes of Christendome. And  these you Maiesties heauenly studies and contemplations for the weale and happinesse both of your owne and of other Christian pes; your brethren  and their people, are infinite and alwayes waking: so are we with a sacred and euer burning zeale strongly bound from cheerefull and franke hearted spirits, contually to pray for the perpetuitle thereof, with your selfe and with your sanctified issue successiuely, to the ioyfull time of our spirituall redemption. The heart which contain that spirit of mouing and life, by me formerly compared to the forme of gouernment being also the sea of sapience and of intelligence, according to the Physicall saying, Corsapit: and that of Salomon, Da seruo tuo cor intelligens, vtsciat discernere bonum à malo: Giue vnto thy ser∣uant an vnderstanding heart, to discerne or iudge betwixt good and euill: by correspondent faculties gouerneth next to the head in sence and sympathie:  from which (as I said) counsell is deriued, and by which all thee faculties are grounded in the mind of man, which I may call The immed vertue of the scle: vpon which mans dignitie dependeth, if it be surely fastened in reason, that mind being as Philosophers write, pure, liquid, and diuine. Wherefore the heart being the precious casket or receptacle thereof, I doe resemble to the bo∣die of this secret counsell: for as at the time of conception it is infused, & hath his principall residence in the heart: and with it the soueraigne ladie, which is the quintessence thereof (being the immortall soule) conioyneth with it in this mortall tabernacle: so doth the forme or state of the Common wealth with religion establish themselues by the sapience of this counsell. The members  whereof as one heart inseparable should accord in wisdome, consultation, and liuely spirit, to aduance and put in practise the lawes and precepts of God and of the king. Moreouer, to that which is meditated and conceiued in the head, this heart openeth, not to discouer the mind, but vpon wise preconsultation and precaution hauing fit rtely sifted and discussed euery matter twice or thrice through the pure searle of reason like gold repurified vpon the teste: till which time it doth not cōmit any thing to the execution of arms, hands, & fin∣gers of the body: the right arme therof being analogically cōpared to the ma∣gistrats of rie iustice; and the left to ciuill ministers deputed by the king o  : such as are iudges holding the balance of equitie: which I    to the left arme and other meaner magistrates supplying the place of  . And therefore that excellent Law-father saith, that a king is   it   lege intellectus regitu; a corporall god gouerned by the law Baldus in uth. of vnderstanding. Which vnderstanding (as I said) is conteined in the heart.
Successiuely the liuer, being nurse of that bloud, which from thence in great  conduits issueth, and is through little veins and pipes decently distributed vnto the members of that bodie, resembleth the princes treasure. This beeing bred and nourished in euery part (as it correspondently feedeth and nourisheth thē againe) doth harmoniously keepe this politick body liuely and in health, each member according to nature, in his seuerall functions imparting comfort to a∣nother: as in the prince to retaine the tranquilitie of his subiects, appeareth by beneuolent retribution and dispensation of their subsidies, for their vniuersall prosperitie. In this alike as sapience or intelligence gouerneth in the heart, so doth the loue of mony in the liuer, Cogit enim amare iecur, For the liuer procu∣reth loue in creatures. And euen by how much the more bloud encreaseth in  the body, so much the more lust moueth in the members, which aptly consen∣teth with that old Poeticall prouerbe, Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit: The loue of money doth as much encrease as the money doth. Also the lungs I compare vnto lawes; because from thence, as Auicen and Hippocrates write, all organes of the voice are drawne, according to the saying, Pulmo loquitur, The liuer giueth speech: for the law is not improperly called Oraculum Reipub. lying next vnto the liuer and heart of the Commonwealth: which ought to be kept incorrupt, because it is so full of pipes, as by the least contageon and putrifaction therein, the same wil infect & endanger the whole bodie: and when those pipes are stopped, the spirit of life & mouing is extinct,  so that the body perisheth. Semblably, when the voice of the Commōwealth and legall proceedings are stopped, which I resemble vnto those pipes: the forme of policie (being also compared to the life of a kingdom) by that default is defaced, the whole bodies ruine ensuing thereupon. And hence are those re∣uerend Iudges which interprete those laws called Prudents and Sages, whose sentences haue formerly retained the same force that lawes ratified, as is no∣ted in the beginning of my third booke. The head, which is the rich treasure∣house of these lawes being resembled vnto the prince purely and precisely, di∣stributeth and interpreteth all difficulties, according to the direction of Gods blessed grace and diuine spirit, which worketh in his conscience, guiding him  in the way of truth with all innocencie and sinceritie: so that he will not suffer any thing to proceed from his iudgement and heart, in counterfeisance or any verball formalitie to blind and deceiue the simpler sort, & to satisfie the present impositions of his owne appetite, as that wicked Florentine secretarie did ad∣uise princes: but it must proceed from a sincere and iust heart, which is liberall of the knowledge of equitie, with which God hath enriched his heart, for the weale of his people, according to Architas the Pythagorean: Bonum non sempèr Lib. de morum doct. beatūest, quando quidē non in possessione virtutis, verū in vsu beatitudo cernitur, &c. That which is good attaineth not a blessed end alwayes, because beatitude is not discerned in him which hath the possession of vertue, but in him which  practiseth it: Like him that hath not power to see in vtter darkenesse. Out of that head, this heart, that liuer, and these lungs, are composed those liberall Artists and Philosophers, which in and by them are cherished in euery politicke body, such as are instructed in Schooles, Colledges, and Academies.
The loynes and thighes I resemble not vnfitly to the true Nobilitie; vpon  whom for their vertues meerely such honours are by the prince diuolued: fortifying and ennobling euery kingdome with their monuments and poste∣ritie: according to the precise estimate and attribute of true honour, which is (as it were) a due reuerence bestowed vpon persons in testimoniall of their vertue, or an externall token of the Princes, or of the peoples good opinion of him that is honoured: being Essentiall and Subiectiue, in respect of the person which imparteth honour; Materiall and Obiectiue, regarding him that recei∣ueth honour. The ribbes, bulke, and other baser entrailes may bee likened to the folke and meaner yeomanrie, which guard and impale those estates, being called  the bodie, which according to Philosophie (being composed of that earthly kind of beginnings) serueth as a certaine vessell or receptacle of the mind: or rather more properly the prison or sepulchre of those other excellent men∣tall perfections, which contaminate and infect them with a grosse conta∣geon, darkening, or obumbrating those intellectuall faculties with pertur∣bations and deformities. Such are those that acknowledge no lawes nor order. Lastly, the two legges which support the whole substance of all this little world, are honest merchandise, and tillage, or husbandrie. Merchandise consisteth in honest traffique, and barter, in exchange, in exportation, and  importation of lawfull goods, from and to places, lawfull and authorized by the commerce and intercourse of Nations, in league confederated with them, and by permission of their prince: which kind of mercature is fitly likened to the legge, because it is exercised in trauell and seruice of the body to bring in that good, which may supplie towards the generall benefite thereof. Hence was it, that the Philosophicall Poets fained Mercurius with wings at his feete, whome they tearme the God of guile and merchan∣dize. There are three kinds of commerce: Mercature, Vsurie, and Mercenarie mysteries: the noblest of which is Mercature. Of Vsure, I haue heretofore  and shall hereafter (as occasion offereth) speake more largely: the Merce∣narie trades are such vnliberall and slouenly crafts, as meerely consist in the bare workes and labour of the bodie, according to Aristotle. Poore merchants In . in euery State are dishonourable, no more fashioning out a good Common∣wealth, than a small weake legge graceth a great bodie. And therefore Ci∣cero sayth: Mercatura si tenuis sordida putanda est, si magna & copiosa multa Off. 1. vndiquè apportans, multisque sine vanitate impertiens; ac etiam si satiata questu, vel contenta potiùs, videtur iure optimo posse laudari: Mercature being poore is odious; being great and copious (traffiquing and bringing in commodities with and from many nations, and imparting againe to diuerse countries many  benefites with good discretion, and also when it is satisfied or contented ra∣ther with reasonable gaines) is very lawfull and laudable. And therefore in regard of their huge wealth and great entercourse with other nations of the world, the State of Venice (which principally consisteth of Mercature) is
accounted noble and very honorable as Bartholomeus Caepola writeth, and  in 18. opin. without all doubt, if it be not insatiate, mercature is the surest legge of a Com∣monwealth, specially to Maritime nations, Ilands, and free cities: such as this kingdome of ours, and that one very rich state of Venice; at this day being in comparison of others such a concised seignorie: and therefore one Lacon an∣swered a vaineglorious merchant which boasted in his manie ships sent out to diuers coastes of the world for choise of sundry commodities very wisely thus. Finis est lucro praescribendus propter varios fortunae euent us. Merchants must limite a terme to lucre; because fortune is variable, least in a moment they loose that gaine for which all their life time they laboured: and so be driuen into that infamous disease vpon the very desperate conceite thereof, which the  Romanes called in their lawes Decoction, although through any misbehaui∣our or misgouernement in themselues they doe not deserue the report there∣of. With which bankerupt maladie Cicero bitterly snuffled Marcus Antonius in these words. Tenesne memoriate pratextatum decoxisse? Patris (inquies) ista culpa est: etenim est pietatis plena ista defensio: illud tamen audaciae tuae, quod sedisti in quatuordecē ordinibus cum esset lege Roscia decoctoribus certus locus constitutus: Phillippic. 2. quamuis qui fortunae vitio non suo decoxissent. Remembrest thou, that being in thy roabes of honor and magistracie, thou diddest deceiue thy creditors, per∣case thou wilt reply that it was thy fathers fault, and in that excuse forsooth thou shalt shewe great pietie: but was it not audaciously done of thee, to take  thy place amongst the fourteene orders of state, whereas by the law Roscia there is a certaine place limited to banckrupt persons: albeit they did breake by some accidentall misaduenture otherwise, and not by their owne negli∣gence or vice? And herein appeareth how vile and odious this was amongst the Ro∣manes, insomuch as if a gentleman which had delt with merchants in their stocke or cash, and broke in credit or promise, the merchants did presently pro∣test against his credit, and proclaime him, fallen into the shame of Decoction, In rubric. cap. negotiatores ne militent. & vl∣pian lib. 3. fforum decrimine stellio∣natu. Cap. 38. of which Lucas de Penna. But (that merchandise or mercature is a principall and most needfull state in all cities and policies) it appeareth as well by conti∣nuall  proofe, as amongst other trades mentioned in the wisedome of Iesus the sonne of Syrach, Also Plato in institutione reipub. writeth how merchants and agents in traffique are most behoouefull in euery good citie. The difference betwixt them according to the legists, is that a negotiatour or agent is hee that buieth commodities, selling them againe without alteration of their proper∣tie: such are they which transport and batter for tinne, copper, yron, raw silkes, wooll, or woollen-clothes; with such like which they sell againe in the same nature. Those are properly called merchants which buy these commo∣dities, selling them altered into certaine instruments, or implements: as ordi∣nance, belles, vessels, stuffes of silke, clothes, and garments; with other inge∣nuous  tol. & Ale∣ander in apostill. needements for vse of people; by their mechanicall trades learned, taught, and allowed by the wardens and masters of those trades and misteries in the places where they reside or dwell. Husbandrie being that other support or tressle of this politike body (which
consisteth of pasturage or tillage) may be worthily thought the right legge:  and therefore according to the prouerbe I should haue set foorth the right leg first. Howbeit there is not any great difference, yet Cicero specially commen∣deth this exercise both in his booke of old age; and in his first of Offices, say∣ing, that it is the fruitfullest and sweetest of all temporall labours which yeeld bene∣fit, and best befitting an honest man. And likewise to Pomponius Atticus. Nihil ad sapientis vitam agrieultur aproximè videtur accedere, habet enim rationem cum terra quae nunquam recusat imperium; nec vnquam sine vsura reddit quod accipit. I will not stand vpon this being so much writ vpon, and knowen: onely that honour and reputation (which was anciently giuen vnto it) is notable. For fome Romane Emperours with their victorious hands, did hold the plough;  did cast corne into the ground, did plant, and did measure land with as great obseruation and intention, as they would in time of warre busie themselues in limiting, squaring, fashioning, and quartering their battailes and armies: ex∣ercising with as much industrie and pleasure, the spade and mattocke, as in heate of youth, their swords and launces. Such were Cincinnatus, Serranus, Portius Cato. Also the Fabij, Lentuli, Cicerones which had their names of pease, of beanes, and pulse in sowing of which graine, each of them or their aunce∣sters had exceeding knowledge: albeit, most renowmed warriours. Cicero likewise writeth of Martinius Dentatus, who did triumph ouer the Sabians and Samnites, and yet contented himselfe with a little land, and some few cattell.  Gaudenti terra vomere laureato, & triūphali aratore. The land reioycing in a lau∣reate plough, and in a ploughman which had borne triumph frō the warres. Semblably we reade that Deiotarus king of Armenia was a most diligent hus∣bandman, and Xenophon obserueth in the life of Cirus, how painefull hee was in tillage and rusticall labour. For it is manifest that out of such folke very strong and apt souldiers are chosen and enabled for the warres, because through laborious exercise, their bodies are better knit and confirmed in health and strength, then either merchants or artificers which dwell in the walled townes. And hence was it that the Romanes erected without the city, those temples to their saint of Medecine Esculapius, constantly beleeuing and  meaning that villagers were in better health then citizens; or such as inhabi∣ted walled townes. They which haue written of the dignities of agriculture and husbandrie were Chares, Parius, Hesiodus, Apolldorus, and Lemnius in the Greeke language, amongst the Latines, Cato, Varro, Columella, Vir∣gillius, &c. And in this order according to my weake inuention and iudgement haue I fashioned, and appropriated the politike parts and members of a Common∣wealth: hauing also giuen soule and life vnto it. Now for as much as it be∣hooueth needfully, that these members vnder one head, and of one body, should harmoniously conuerse and consent in loue and sympathie (which na∣ture teacheth in our owne bodies, by the compassion and succour that one  member hath of and in another; by supplying health to the common defects; and mutually mitigating the maladies in themselues, with a kind of reciprocall tolleration, passion and consent indifferently) I will speake somewhat of that
vnitie which God out of his infinite benignitie offereth and teacheth vnto vs  of this nation, so coupled and aduned vnder your highnesses sanctified scepter. The lawes of nature as I said teach vs how pleasant and consonant it is with the spirit of life, that all members accord in affection and mutuall aide one to∣wards another. Since therefore it hath pleased the true wisedome and omni∣potent grace of God, to make of these two kingdomes one bodie vnder one head: meseemeth it should not sticke in any mans opinion, how the same can any way prooue vnfit or vnprofitable. Which diuerse, more vpon peruerse opinion, than any reasonable consideration, impudently seeme to beleeue. But the wiser sort (which though fewest in number, are soundest in iudgement)  perfectly know the contrarie. In magna namquè repub. multa & varia ingenia sunt: For the wits of people in a great Commonwealth be variable and ma∣ny: Yea, such as are of repugnant opinions: considering therefore, that by nature euery bodie hath one head onely; like one roote, from which many braunches vnited in one tree, doe spring (if it be not a monstrous bodie) so semblably should each head haue but one bodie: for how deformed and horrible were it in the sight of nature, that one head should haue two bo∣dies: especially, whereas they bee knit by nature from the beginning, as these kingdomes both in one roote, being all members of one bodie, from the first vnited, then seuered againe by the great and most mysticall prouidence of  Almightie God, and now reunited in your Maiesties blessed gouernment, for the accomplishment of Gods vnreuealeable, and incomprehensible iudge∣ment? Since therefore we draw together in one yoake, wee may not sepa∣rate by dissent, some with their stiffe neckes behind, and others with their obe∣dient heads before: for oxen yoaked in such sort, can neuer tyll the land, nor tread out the corne, but leaue it barren, and out of order. For it is im∣possible, that the labour should succeede well, when some kicke with their heeles, when they should haue drawne with their heads, making a distraction so much more violent through their disobedience, by how much more force there is in them that are so distracted: and from hence breaketh out the ru∣ine  and confusion of all good gouernment and policie: which answereth to the saying of our Sauiour Christ, Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur: Euery kingdome diuided in it selfe becommeth desolate. And if this should happen, against which all good men should make their deprecations, that God might auert the calamitie, which would impend it. Doubtlessely, the same cannot but proceede from our owne maleuolence, and peruerse distortion, according to that true saying of Salust: Vbi boni mores, nunquam discordia nec a∣uaritia: vbi auaritia, nunquam boni mores nec vera concordia, &c. Where good manners, and honest fashions are vsed, neither can discord nor auarice bee found: but where auarice reigneth, you shall neuer find good manners, nor  true charitie. And therefore let vs watch and pray, that wee fall not into dis∣cord at any time after this our blessed vnion, composed by that sacred and most charitable hand of our liege soueraigne, least by those disastrous means we be∣come fearfull of those nations, whō otherwise we may retaine in due fear of vs.
Turne we therefore with ioyfull vnanimitie one towards another, and let  vs which haue receiued much light and true glory from so gracious & power∣full a king, detest all malicious factions and distractions; which assuredly breake out of minds and spirits bare of honour, and abiect vnto themselues in all vnworthinesse; which are persuaded, that auarice and ambition are the truest dignities in man, more than all his other mentall and intellectuall facul∣ties. Firmanda sunt igitur concordiae vincula, & discordiae mala expellenda: Let vs Orat. ad Caes. de Rp. Ordinand. therefore make strong the bonds of our concord, and expell the mischiefes of discord. For it hath beene our auncient honour and the Brittaine glorie, recorded of this Nation by Cornelius Tacitus: Commune periculum concordia propulsan∣dum  cognouere Britanni, in vit. Iul. Agricolae. The Brittaines by their mutuall and intestine concord knew well how to repell all common dangers to them∣selues. Vnite we therefore cheerefully: for according to Socrates, this vnion of a Commonwealth is the very worke and scope of friendship: and such as are true friends, Ettam b vehementiam amoris cupiunt connasci, & vnum ex duobus fieri: Desire euen in the vehement heate of their loue to bee borne to∣gether againe, and one entire to be made out of two bodies. Which vnion or communion of the lawes and liberties, with other emoluments, answerable to the rule of need and decencie, is confirmed by discipline, and discipline comprehended in the Lawes, and in Philosophie. When England and Scotland were separated, yet were they brethren: for in one Prouerbe they did consent, That England was the elder, and Scotland the younger brother. And of late yeares their accord was so naturall, prog∣nosticating this indissoluble vnion, that to the breake-necke spight of our ene∣mies, our late peace of Englands dauncing in spirituall consolation, fed vpon that counsell which the diuine Psalmist vttered, Ecce quàm bonum & quàm iu∣cundum est fratres habit are in vnum. And in the dayes of our fathers, when a∣ny iarres happened betwixt vs, they were such cauils or emulations rather, as commonly fall amongst brethren: which though they bee much violent for the time, yet they continue but a little time: and now the title of brethren is  gone, in respect of the body politicke, for wee bee much neerer than before. Hengist hath married with Scota, euen as Henry your Maiesties royall father, the sonne of L. Matthew Stuarte, and of Ladie Margaret, who married with your mother Mary (daughter to king Iames the fourth, and to the Dutchesse of Longueuille) after the death of her first husband king Frauncis the second, grandchild by the first ventre vnto that good prince of renowned memorie, king Henry the seuenth, as your Highnesses father was by the second ventre: so that it may most fitly be said concerning that blessed coniunction of those two faire and peaceable planets. Nuper ex atrocissimis bellorum ciuilium vulne∣ribus paulispèr respirantem amplexi sunt libertatem huius insulae, Iacobus quartus  & Margareta Scotorum coniugio sociati, &c. Out of the late most bitter wounds of ciuile warres, Iames the fourth and Margaret (being knit in wed∣locke together) haue embraced the liberties of this Island, euen when it be∣gan to faint and draw a weake breath.
This happie marriage of those two beneuolent planets portendeth the  weale of Christendome: for in it by a double vnion twice vnited in bloud: once by the sacred vnion of the two royall families of Yorke and Lancaster, and after by that second vnion in marriage, of a daughter and a sonne; that a mother, and this a father, both of them out of the bodies of king Henry and Queene Elizabeth, is this match made betwixt Hengyst and Scota, more firme than euer at the first, when Brutus raigned ouer them, before their separation in the persons of Locryn and Albanact: Iam non sunt duo, sed caro vna. Which sacred circumscription was figured and stamped in a peece of coyne of your late royall parents, vpon their vnion, figuratiuely presaging this vni∣on also. Since therefore these nations thus coupled in one bodie, be both of them knit vp in your Maiesties royall person and posteritie, there is not any doubt, but that they will liue, loue, and accord in sincere vnitie together, perfecting and accomplishing that generall peace of conscience, which was begun and yet continued from the first of your Maiesties late dearest sister her beginning in reigne, euen to this instant, of your gracious gouernment: your Highnesse representing the person of this auncient Brittaine, comprehending the new spouse Scotland within your princely bodie (though your royall residence be kept with vs, as in the bride-groomes chamber) hath that vbiquitie by God graunted you, touching the ciuile supremacie which his omnipotencie retai∣neth  ouer all creatures. For though your Grace (being head) doe not really touch certaine parts of your Commonwealths bodie, yet that power and ver∣tue which is contained in your heart, liuer, and lungs, doth gouerne and mo∣derate in those places, by direction of that head, which commaundeth and predominateth all the members: insomuch, as they neede not say, that the bridegroome is taken from them, and that they shall fast, because they con∣uerse with him in power, feasting with vs vnder his goodnesse: for wee bee children of the bride-chamber all alike. And it is not to bee doubted, but that this new bride will declare her true loue and loyall demeanure towards her husband, whatsoeuer sedicious or malecontented spirits mistrust or mis∣conster: for shee is from the first bud of her youth acquainted with her hus∣band,  hauing a perfect and infallible notice by long tryall, and hath sincerely plighted her faith. What is he then worthie, that would in the roote of all bitternesse seuer the barke from the tree by nefarious breach of this blessed vnion, that I may speake vulgarly, sowing the seede of dissention of intestine garboyle and burlyment amongst auncient brethren, by making the peacea∣ble members of one bodie to rebell against themselues, and against the will of God? Let them that haue scarcely sucked so much as of the vile dregs of na∣ture iudge hereof. For if two weake ones vnited make a competent strength, then certainely, two nations so combined and of such force, beeing seuerall, (such as haue borne battaile, and confounded the puissantest princes of Chri∣stendome)  may very well grow most mightie by their vnited force: whereas if they should not now confirme themselues in vnfained amitie, which God hath commaunded, it must necessarily follow, that it had beene a million fold
better for them, that they neuer had knit in that nuptiall band together: for  then will they both of them loose their owne forces, in mutuall resistance o∣pening their glories to the spoyle of base and despised enemies. We now stand one in more need of another, than euer we did before, if wee consider it, and onely because we haue incorporated our hearts, lawes, and obediences toge∣ther vnder one God and one King, which hath not beene of so many hun∣dred yeeres past. Nam vtrumque per se indigens, alterum alterius auxilio indiget: For both of them being single, and standing in some neede of succour, may stand one the other in steede with their owne succours. This if wee ponder with franke and honourable accord, and shall ioyfully rouse vp and vnite our noble spirits, together with all heroycall obedience and true magnanimi∣tie,  vnder our dread Soueraigne, for him against his enemies, as we haue al∣readie done our kingdomes: for if we will endeuour and accommodate our selues but to this our blessing of vnitie, which euery vaine foole (vnlesse the false tempter bewitch him) will apprehend with all comfort, profered from so sweete, good, and gracious hands of the Lord of our hoastes: then Neque or∣bis Sal. ad Cs. de Rp. Ordinand. terrarum, neque cunctae gentes conglobatae mouere aut contundere queant hoc imperium: Neither the whole world, nor all the nations and people of this earth, assembled in hostile troupes, shall haue power to shiuer or batter down this our Empire. Hereof let vs prudently consider, being a matter of such high consequence:  for no mans imagination, apprehension, precaution, or prouidence can bee so strong in this case, as is requisite; Nam de futuro nemo omnium satis callidus prudensque est. Let vs therefore prudently consider, and it shall appeare, how both these kingdomes (which were so long seuered heretofore) haue beene from the first remembrance which is remayning of this Island, since it was first inhabited by Brutus, (who shared it amongst his sonnes) and after him long and many times made one bodie: and how standeth then the present state of them in comparison? Euen as one auncient tree lopped off from the bole: wherein by processe of time, diuers old Danish, Saxon, and French graffes haue beene planted, which take their vertue from the roote of that an∣cient  Brittaine stocke, including England, Scotland, and Wales, by times con∣tinuance reincorporate, and flourishing out againe in one fruitfull tree. So that in the persons of your Grace, and of your sweete spouse (in whome the fruits of all these nations now prosper) these seuerall plants graciously sprout out on high, like the sweete Cedars in Salomons forrests: which shortly by transportation or inoculation of their sprigs into other kingdomes, may beare rule and preheminence in all the goodliest gardens of the world. Neyther can any difference bee found in a well seasoned palate, betwixt that taste which the fruits of these graffes yeeld, sauing in a little rellish, which I com∣pare to the dialect of their languages, not differing at all, if you suite them  with that old Brittaine tongue of Wales; which notwithstanding hath con∣tinued faithfull so many yeeres vnder the Crowne of England. Since there∣fore the wall (that deuided these two princely chambers, so neerely conioined before) is now taken away, and that one maiesticall lodging is made of them
both, where the bride and bridegroome doe louingly repose themselues to∣gether:  there is great cause why we should call vpon the daughters of Syon, (which are meant by the faithfull, and well affected, in Salomons Canticles) saying with cheerefull hearts: Behold King Salomon, with the crowne where Cantic. cap 3. with his mother crowned him in the day of his mariage, and in the day of the glad∣nesse of his heart. For though the bride be blacke (as her name importeth) like Scoos. king Salomons beloued, yet is she amiable, and full of comelinesse, her riches is in concealed treasure, and her beautie glistereth within; which shortly to the comfort of them both (through the great grace and goodnesse of God, is like with glorie to be discouered into Christendome. Besides, what a rich dower was legacied to these happily coupled nations by God himselfe, euen in that  faire and bright cincture of strength and peace, the true Cestus, or loue-girdle, which encloseth them both: wherein by the omnipotent great workeman (as the sacred Psalmist sayth) innumerable thinges creeping are wrought, both small and great: in which are placed multitudes of shippes militant and mer∣chant, that (like so many precious stones of speciall vertue) decore and gar∣nish the same: some hauing the power attractiue to draw benefites and com∣modities vnto them from all forraine parts of the world: others distributiue, which impart with a reciprocall benignitie, the fruits and blessings of this Island: diuers defensatiue, in the good cause of their friends and collegues, which confeathered together, as feathers all of one wing, ioyne in one fleete  against those rauenous vultures, which would tyrannize ouer them: many that haue a force repercussiue, which flaming like rockes of carbuncles (euen as in the violent eruptions of Vesuuius or Aetna) foulder and evomite the can∣non stones of their indignation and vengeance vpon those tyrannous aduersa∣ries, and assaylants of their liberties; the dreadfull smoake whereof, doth yet in some Castilian stomackes taste vnsauorly. This girdle beautifully compas∣seth our royall bridegroome and his bride, whose most beautifull vnited bodie giueth grace to this girdle, left as a pledge of this vnion, wherein all Christian princes are made happie: so that the time may shortly come, when vpon the coast of this blessed Island many potentates shall strike their toppe gallants,  beckening and bowing downe with their plumes of glorie, like homagiers to the Brittaine scepter: So that they which repine at this association or com∣bination, may (when malice is vanquished) hereafter with glorie magnifie that which they contemptuously despised before: so that as Salust writeth; ell. Iugurth. Quod difficilimum est inter mortales gloria inuidiam vincemus, si concordes & vnanimes fuerimus: That which is not easily seene amongst mortall men, our glorie shall triumph ouer enuie, if wee concord, and vnite together. For neither strength in battailes, nor huge heapes of treasure, can verely support and maintaine the states of kingdomes; but friends and faithfull countrey∣men, whom neither armes can compell, nor any gold conciliate, faith alone  shall retaine them in dutie, conquering and possessing their hearts assuredly. For who can or should bee more louing than one brother towards another? Or shall wee presume, that strangers will be faithfull towards vs, when wee breake forth in hostile variance amongst our selues? A firme state and euer∣lasting
Monarchie was brought vnto vs by that iustice, which our right roy∣all  liege Lord brought with him out of Scotland into this Realme: if we can bee benigne, meeke, gracious, and affectionate one towards another. But if in contrarie, what man is hee that can expresse our future desolation and ca∣lamitie. For euen as king Mysipsa dying, spake to Iugurth his vnnaturally foste∣red sonne on the behalfe of his owne naturall children, Adherball and Hyemp∣sall (whose honours and inheritance he most ingratefull tyrannously did v∣surpe) Concordiaparurescrescunt, &c. Small matters are encreased by con∣cord. But hereof we neede not (vnder the protection of God) make doubt: for that which is a most comfortable assurance to the people of this Nation, the knot which our Soueraigne hath alreadie knit, is like to proue indissoluble.  For the spouse hath in the bodie of Queene Anne, that comely turtledoue of Denmarke, long since brought foorth vnto the blessed bride-groome diuerse right royall braunches of this vnited kingdome: which serue as faithfull pledges and witnesses of their inuiolable loue and vnitie. Nay, shee hath sea∣led it vpon the lippes of her husband with a kisse, which kisse can neuer be for∣gotten. Shee hath kissed his lippes alreadie; from thence hath she sucked honey and myrhe, proclaiming, that her beloued is hers and shee his. Shee shall there∣fore like a new wedded spouse, forget her fathers house and name, and bee called after Psal. 45. her husband: who, because he will haue a paritie correspondent in all meeke∣nesse, asseth to himselfe the name of Brutus, from whom as from their great  grandsire, both Hengyst and Scota were delined. This auncient name is the true name, and the nobler title, because it is more ample; and yet a new name, and of late: for what is it in the course of Nature, Which is, and hath not beene, or hath not beene, and shall be? As Salomon in that sence so sagely sentenced: for one generation passeth, and another commeth. The righteousnesse hereof shall breake foorth as a light, and the saluation which commeth thereof, as a burning lampe. And as the Prophet Esay diuining of our Sauiour said: so may we not improperly applie the same to your Highnesse, beeing not his steward onely, but the constant and faithfull champion and defender of his Gospell: The Es 62. Gentiles shall see thy righteousnesse, and all kings thy glorie: and thou shalt be cal∣led  by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name thee: thou shalt also be a crowne of glorie in the hand of the Lord, and a royall diademe in the hand of thy God. And vnto Scota thus much for her comfort: Shee shall be no more forsa∣ken: neither shall it be said any more to that land desolate, but thou shalt bee called Hephzibah, and thy lands Beulah, for the Lord delighteth in thee, and thy land shall haue a husband: for as a young man marrieth a virgine, so shall thy sonnes marrie with thee: and as a bridegroome is glad of his bride, so shall thy God reioyce in thee, &c. This is that blessing which hath beene so long prediuined and promised: so that our auncestors in many fore-passed ages haue heartely longed to see  the same, but could not. Let vs therefore, which haue gotten this iewell, highly rate and esteeme it: and as we wish for the continuance of that peace which dependeth thereupon, so let vs embrace and defend the same: least the prouerbe bee verefied amongst vs, with our calamitie, That Enuie succeedeth
our first glorie: that we make not foes of our fellowes, and fellowes of our foes. Ac∣cord  we therefore with ioyfull endeauours in vnanimitie, because peace and friendship cannot possibly reigne together in people of diuerse and variable minds. Let vs esteeme our selues all alike in liberti, without ambicious crow∣ding or thronging in for prioritie; ascribing all earthly power and prehemi∣nence to the Soueraign of our nation, and liuing togeher as men commorant in one familie, Qui eodem igne & fumo vtuntur, &c. Let vs like those auncient noble Romanes dilate and propagate our honours by sociable amitie, rather than to repine at any iust and profitable equalitie, to the pernicious confusion and ruine of our estates in generall. Thus shall wee stirie vp our discontnted spirits, if in vs any such wilde of ambition reigne, to maintaine, to protect,  and to glorifie those liberties which we possesse: and by these meanes shall no forraine enemies dare to complain or repine against any thing in vs, but of our greatnesse and amplitude. By these meanes shall good fashions bee followed, ciuill and martiall exercises embraced and practised, concord and firme amitie shall be confirmed and encreased inuiolably both amongst our selues, our old friends, and new confederates. This if we shall presently ponder and put in pra∣ctise with the true vigour of our vertues, then shall we not haue cause to curse our owne imaginations and foresights, like foolish pilotes, which when a tem∣pest is apparant and alreadie begun, lamentably threaten, and (as it were) after∣tell of the calamitie, setting men to worke, when all humane hopes are past: or like to the imprudent gouernours of cities, which when the first sedicious  sparkes are kindled, and breake forth to the ruine of their states, (which other∣wise might haue beene antiuerted by their precaution) spend the remnant of their time of succour in wayling and weeping. But if my zeale carie mee too farre, to make a question of that which many peraduenture wise do think need∣lesse and impertinent, I craue pardon, assuring my selfe, that the diuell, beeing confusion himselfe, will bee very busie to make a disorder amongst the people of God, that he might supplant the root of our true Christian glory. Since ther∣fore the blessed time of our vnion is accomplished and perfected, we shall not need to doubt, but that this our bride and bridegroome shal flourish like a gar∣den inclosed, and abound in precious vertue like a spring and fountain of hap∣pinesse,  which is sealed vp. Neither is it to bee doubted or imagined, which Cantic.  some friuolous opinions haue cast out, that it cannot long and easily brooke your Maiesties absence: as if according to the vulgar prouerb, the chiefe person of maiestie being out of sight, should be banished out of her loyall mind also: for (as I said) they might know, how the diuine spirit doth not call kings by the name of gods in vaine: for so much as this royall vbiquitie disperseth their so∣ueraigne power, lawes, and authoritie through all the parts of this world. For we know, that Fraunce, which is much larger, had not many ages past diuers great and free principalities contained within her bounders: which by match and vnion, as this of ours is, and through the disobedience of some ambicious  princes, are now firme and annexed as parts and members of that crowne; such as were Normandie, little Brittaine, Aquitaine, Orleance, and others: and like∣wise in the kingdome of Spaine; where at one time Aragon, Castile, Granada,
Corduba, Gallicia, Andelosia, being all of thē little kingdomes, were seuerally  gouerned, and Portugall also lately knit vnto king Philips Crowne. All which principalities and prouinces are gouerned in peace by Presidents and Counsels established in them. There seemeth then no reason to the contrary, why Scot∣land should not containe it selfe, and continue loyall, shadowed vnder the roy∣all curtaine of your gracious authoritie by that sapience, which in your diuine policie is and shall be dispersed amongst them. For they cannot be such impi∣ous, barbarous, and vnthankfull creatures, as to forget their faith and allegeance vnto him, that from his cradle was and is so dearely affied in them, and which hath since the first spiracle of his reason expressed such mildnes, and gouerned amongst them with such moderation & benignitie. Moreouer, the nobles and  gentlemen of that nation are in this age by the maruellous beneficence of God and Nature, morethan euer, ingenuous, liberall, honourable, and for the most part vertuously affected, desirous to learne knowledge & good fashion; which oftentimes I did obserue in the conditions of thē for the most part: insomuch as it is a wonder, that a region, which was sometimes held and reported to bee rude and barbarous, could affoord so many ciuile and gallant spirits: which last good and honorable inclination is generally seene in the most of them, being a speciall braunch of temperance, drawne from modestie, noted by the Philoso∣phers, and touched in the Morals of my first booke. Shall any man then amongst the people of your Maiesties Nations bee so  stubborne, as to withstand this diuine ordinance, or so proud amongst the sedi∣tious, that dare appeale from this so charitable and peaceable decree? For be∣sides, that royall Maiestie shall discountenance him, the very Cannon of those ciuile lawes which are approued & established throughout all Christendome vniuersally, shall vtterly condemne them by that prerogatiue which is granted to your Highnesse in these words: Rex Angliae est monarcha in suo regno, à cuius fforumde Off. prat. lib. primus, prout Baldus in cap secundo, cum venissent, &c. sententia non appellatur, quia praefectus multorum pralatorum est sui regni. Much more priuiledge then is included in your Highnesse, in whom is iustly planted the soueraigne right and inheritance of both these kingdomes, now made one Nation. Since therefore this head including your regall grace, being prudently bu∣sied in continuall contemplation, premeditation, & conference of things past, present, and to come, (which are noted to be the very faculties of prudence) doth with a zealous and pastorall care tender vnto the heart, being the iewell∣house of vnderstanding and sapience, the weale of this politicall body, which it by mature deliberation disgesteth for the chiefe good thereof: euen as the liuer with bloud, the vocall organes and arme of iustice by pronounciation and di∣stribution of the lawes, and euery part in his particular function is ayding to∣wards the preseruation hereof in health and tranquilitie: so should this head, with all these mentall faculties, and that body with all his members conioyntly  labour aboue all things to preserue the soule pure and blemishlesse: for onely by that grace the countenance (which is the exterior pulchritude of this head) is made cheerefull, as saith Salomon: by this the heart receiueth vigor and cou∣rage, the liuer a long life; the lights, which are indeed the very lights of this
politicke bodie receiue illumination and power: for out of the mouths of ve∣ry  babes and sucklings the strength thereof shall be deliuered, as it was by little Daniell. By this the hands are made strong, and the fingers ght to breake a bow of steele: this couereth the bodie with fatnesse, girdeth the loynes with gladnesse, and poureth marrow into the bones: lastly, this maketh the feete of that bodie like Harts feete, swift and liuely, for transportation and inuection of all commodities and earthly blessings, making the whole bodie strong and lustie, like an Eagle. This is the consummation and perfection of all the first and last of Gods blessings in euery kingdome, to preserue the soule, being the true religion, spotlesse, and without schismes or heresies, so neere as the princes wisedome can. Which your sacred Maiesty, to the most high pleasure of God,  to the Commonweale of his Church, and to the vnspeakable comfort of your people, haue done in your royall edicts and prouisions against the Papists and Puritanes within your realmes and dominions. Without this zeale and studi∣ous worship of God, we well know, that all the mentall faculties, which are guided by the light of naturall reason (with all the vertues intellectuall) and spi∣rit of liuing, are all of them mortified in man. And therefore your Maiesties sanctitie and pietie shineth amongst the members of this bodie, which are set to continuall care and diligence, how to keepe a cleane soule within a sound bodie, against the time when our annoynted Sauiour and shepheard shall call the kings of this earth (which are his Officers vnder him) to bring in their  flockes, then in the first ranke shall your Grace (being one of his best stew∣ards) deliuer vp out of your two faire sheepefolds, Brittaine, and Ireland, the fairest and goodliest troupe in obedience and number, with cleere white flee∣ces of pure wooll, sound and entire, before the blessed Lambe immaculate, that your Highnesse may with thē receiue the wages of eternall life before the most high and euer-liuing God: which great audite, how soone it will bee summoned, and how suddaine (since it is hidden in that vnreuealeable booke of Gods incomprehensible mysteries from humane knowledge) it behoo∣ueth all princes, that they haue their accounts readie, least they beeing ta∣ken vnprouided, bee cast out with the wicked and reprobate sheepheards of  Israell. Since therefore God hath preuented your Grace with the blessings of goodnesse, and hath set a crowne of pure gold vpon your head: since hee hath graunted vnto you long life euen for euer and euer: since your honour Psal. 21. is in his saluation onely: since this worship and glorie is imposed vp∣on your Highnesse: since hee hath giuen you euerlasting felicitie, and made you glad with the ioy of his countenance, because your Grace his annoynted did put your whole confidence in him: Certaine it is which hee promi∣sed by the spirit of his kingly Prophet, That his boundlesse mercie shall not suffer you to miscarrie: euen when so many shepheards of his people  shall be consumed in your sight by the spirit of his nosthrils, vanishing like smoake out of the presence of his iustice, the angels of Gods sword and indig∣nation scattering them: and in all diligent obseruation of wise men, which by the computation of times and conference of prophecies, as well those that
were first deliuered from the spirit of God in the Patriarks and holy Prophets,  as by the diuination of our Sauiour Iesus Christ himselfe in the Gospels, and in all humane dence and Mathematicall iudgements of Philosophers, by the course and motions of nature, it is apparant, that this world gaspeth and languisheth as being readie to be dissolued, and as I may fitly compare it in the taste of a sapient palate to Vinum fugiens, which is alreadie spent vnto the lees. Since therefore your most royall Maiestie reuiueth in your owne person and posteritie this old Brittaine league as a second Cadwallader, but doubtlesse vn∣der the ioyfull and propitious comfort of the Gospell like to bee most fortu∣nate in your domination, vnlike to the first Cadwallader, who was the last and vnfortunate king of great Brittaine, that reigned before your Highnesse, and  fled from the wrathfull countenance of Gods deuouring Angell, which then with plague and pestilence vnpeopled this land. What more happinesse can wee wish or meditate vpon in this mortall life, than after the time of our cor∣ruption and sinfull seruitude to be ioyned all in one flocke vnder Christ Iesus, euen as in this life wee liue and breathe together, after that happinesse vnder the blessed pasturage of our annoynted shepheard vnder God. Doubtlessely were it not a vaine prophecie (mee seemeth) that should bee performed in your Grace, which was long-since presaged of Arture, king of the great and lesse Brittaine, who was a most zealous captaine in the cause of Christ, that a little while before the consummation of the world hee should come a∣gaine,  perfecting all that goodnesse to the Christian Church, which by his taking away was then newly begun. What is he that shall in these later times sacke these proud wals of Antichrist? Shall not he first arise out of the North? Certaine it is, that if any shall demolish that proud tower of Babell, and sup∣plant from the lowest foundations that synagogue of superstition, by casting out the Symoniacall money-changers from the Temple, by purging all cleane, for the great audite and euerlasting supper of our soules, it is your sa∣cred and highly renowned Maiestie: and as Carl. signifying Charles, (which Ioh. Tilius, lib. 1. de rebus gall. interpreteth noblenesse and magnanimitie) is one of your Maiesties names, well according with your most gracious and heroicall nature; so doth your  most excellent highnesse as a right renowned champion in the cause of God want nothing towards the execution and consummation of this euer trium∣phant enterprize, but perfection of time to make all absolute. Gird then thy sword vnto thy thigh, O thou most mightie, according to thy worship and renowne. Good lucke haue thou with thine honour, ride on, because of the word of truth, of meekenesse, and of righteousnesse, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things: for thine arrowes are sharpe, and will subdue those people that are thine ene∣mies, thy seate is euerlasting, and thy scepter righteous: for thou louest equitie, loa∣thing iniquitie, therefore hath God annointed thee with the oyle of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes. Hence is it, that thou art fairer than the children of men: hence is  it, that thy lippes ouerflow with grace, because God hath euerlastingly blessed thee. Then with a valiant courage, and diuine spirit from aboue, wee may liue to see your blessed Grace, aduauncing your selfe in the name of God like Iudas Maccabs in his holy warres against Gods enemies: which arose,
and like a gyant harnessed his breast, fitting himselfe with all his martiall furniture  Maccab. 1. cap. 3 to fight, and ouer his battailes brandished victorie with his owne sword. Where it is also written, That hee like a Lyon demeaned himselfe in the conflict, or as a Ly∣ons whelpe roaring after his prey. What a glorious appearance shall it bee to the poore militant members of Christs Gospell, when they shall see your Grace like the Sunne in his glorie rising, and as a bridegroome, with a countenance like the Cedars of Lebanon, comming out of his chamber amongst them, to be their victorious guide, sent from God, to giue them victorie in battaile a∣gainst the enemies of his annoynted: who though Fraunce bee called most Christian, and Spaine the most Catholicke king; yet is our Brittaine Lord the annoynted of our holy one of Israel, the valiant and most faithfull cham∣pion,  and defender of the faith and Gospell of Christ Iesus: who when time shall serue, like a gyant will ioy to runne his course, when the Lord of his hoasts shall put it in his heart, to giue a terrible allarum to his enemies. Then shall he throw downe from their proud horses the stubborne & blasphemous Gog and Magog, which as the souldiors of Sathan and Lucifer scomefully sub∣sannate the blessed names and mysteries of our sweete Messias, the God of righteousnesse: or like a diuine Dauid against the proud brazen-headed Phili∣stine of Gath, who reuiled the hoast of the liuing God: The flesh of which re∣probates Reg. 1. cap. 17. shall be cast out to the foules of the ayre, for their names are not writ∣ten in the booke of life. Howbeit, your Grace, vnited with a continuall peace  and loue vnto the princes of Christendome, in a bond, which cannot easily be broken, signifieth that vniuersall peace, which should happen immediately before the great day of the Lord. And therefore, as in the reigne of Octauian Augustus (vpon the birth of our Messias) the voyce of a blessed Angell was heard singing, Gloria deo in excelsis, in terris pax & cum hominibus bona volun∣ts: so in the conclusion of this Christian age, which seemeth very neere her end, your Grace may liue to see that happie time of our deliuerance, as the second and last Octauius, but manifoldly more blessed in this Euangelicall treasure than hee was: for what can these great and fatall coniunctions of the Planets, and those wonderfull eclipses (which happened immediately be∣fore  and since your Graces imitation to this Crowne) portend, but a great mutation or vniuersall gaole deliuerance of our soules. Certaine it is to be thought, that some strange mutation is at hand, either by grieuous warres in some parts, or by diuolutions or dissolutions of empires, but if by warres, then I beseech Christ, that I may most auspiciously augure against the enemies of his Gospell: or if in happie peace, then that it may to your Maiesties endlesse glorie continue, which your Highnesse hath alreadie so fruitfully and confidently laboured & effected amongst all Christian prin∣ces. Which blessed league, if it shall hold, what hope then remaineth, but that the golden time of our glorification is come to the dore: when this our bridegroome and bride (as I said) shall come with the virgines that be her fel∣lowes,  conducted into the royall pallace, prepared for him before the begin∣ning of the world. Which blessed couple incorporate in your Maiesties sacred person, shall ioyfully mount at sound of the trumpet, attended with those
three wise virgins, whose lamps are full of oyle, & lighted: to whō it shall be o∣pened  whē they knock faithfully, faith guiding hope, hope cōducting charitie, but charitie (being the most full of grace and fauour) glorifying them both: for in her (as S. Paule sayth) is the lawfulfilled, and through her are multitudes of om. cap. 13. misdeeds couered, &c. Which being sweetest of the three sisters, will doubtlesse∣ly conduct your Grace by the right hand, because through her, the peace and vnion, amongst all that professe themselues the members of Christ, is fruitfully wrought and continually sought by your Highnesse: so that vpon this second great Sabboath, bringing with it a generall rest from all our earth∣ly labours, and a perpetuall consolation in our endlesse praises and thankesgi∣uing vnto God: when Gloria shall be sung in Excelsis againe; Pax also shall be  found in Terris; and that author thereof vnder God shall be brought into the melodious chamber of that all good, all great, and all holy bridegroome, men∣tioned in the blessed Gospell, presenting before him a flocke well washed, cleane, without infection, and sanctified, readie for glorification, that they may with their faithfull shepheard sit at the Lambes supper in the holy citie new Ierusalem, where shall be no more night, neither light of the Sunne: For the Lord Ap. 19. giueth them light, and they shall reigne for euer more. Happie shall they be found, which watch, and blessed, that are accompanied with those three wise virgins: Apoc. 22. for your Grace like the true Lyon shall be found with your eyes open to wait and attend vpon that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lyon of  Iudah. I haue spoken (my priuate condition considered) sufficiently, to make knowne the iust and godly grounds of this vnion: fearing, if I should meddle further with some cautelous and captious positions, suppositions, or oppositions in these cases, not onely to be condemned of arrogant presump∣tion, (which is most detestable in all good iudgement and knowledge) but also to be venemously scourged with the malicious snakes of enuie. Modestie therefore enioyneth mee to restraine my forwardnesse in further discourse hereof: howbeit, in a man that sitteth on the seate of Magistracie, this were honest fortitude, to maintaine vijs & modis quibuscunque, without any feare or  respect of man, discharging his dutie towards God, and declaring his dearest affection vnto that Commonweale, (by which hee liberally breatheth, and hath his free being) by the promulgation and faithfull ouerture of his reason and knowledge in those points remaining. It shall therefore suffice, least I be taken with some suddaine conuulsion, to diue no deeper into this Ocean of concealed treasure, but onely to be satisfied in that my reason hath alrea∣die (with the eyes of intelligence) beheld the bottome and ground of this blessed vnitie, which by God is composed of the rich pearle and golden sand of goodnesse and felicitie: wishing to them that are enabled with knowledge and authoritie, and which ought not to be mooued with the passions of feare  or affection, to bring vp from the bottome some grounds of this hidden trea∣sure, that the misbeleeuing ignorant (if any be scrupelous or doubtfull) may see, beleeue, and embrace this happinesse: for they (whom it befitteth best to ppe vp furrowes in the mountaiues, being seated vpon them) may best
shew their eloquence and vertues impulsiue, in laying open to the sonne that  which hath bene so long concealed, if occasion herafter shall seeme to require the same. With me (that am the meanest of a million vnder your Highnesses rod) it sitteth well to plough in the valleyes, where euery man yeerely turneth vp the same glebe. Howbeit, had I said onely, that this vnitie standeth best with the will and wisedome of God (from whence Entheusiastically beameth a diuine vertue to the prudence of all good princes, receiuing their ghostly consolation from him, and by the weale of his people) which plentifully dis∣cendeth vpon them through the spirit of faithfull prayers, and is sucked into their soules by the sighes of their louing feare of God: or had I said that which I could easily proue by politicke likelyhoods, how within the reuolution of  one hundred yeares, the whole world (by this gordian knot, which Alexander himselfe could not, if hee were aliue, breake; being once surely knit in our hearts by a generall and faithfull consent) might bee made tributarie to this Monarchie, if the Brittaines would continue their loue so long towards God, and amongst themselues: then must it haue followed vpon necessitie, that the chiefe temporall weale of your Maiesties people, and a speciall meane vnto their spirituall consolation, might bee locked vp in this mysticall vnion. So that some in their loue towards God; others in regard of that glorious calme at home; diuerse in desire and hope of more reputation and riches, euen all of them for some one or other speciall affection or passion in thēselues, which they would haue satisfied, might ioyfully giue to this vnion (by your Highnes  so graciously composed) a generall approbation & consent, for their vniuersall honour and content. Now turning to the Morals of Prudence, where I left, I would speake somewhat summarily, respecting the conditions of magistrats, souldiors, and artificers in a Commonwealth. I deeme him worthie to bee reputed a good Commonwealths man, that being garnished with ciuile vertues (as with iu∣stice and fortitude, which are in themselues moderated with prudence and temperance) can as well in forraine places, and in the warres, as in domesticall and ciuile affaires, performe the parts of a noble citizen and countreyman. All  ingenuous youth therefore ought well and painefully to be taught and practi∣sed in the liberall Sciences, and exercise of Armes; to which purpose, schooles for Sciences liberall and palestricall are principally needefull in euery well go∣uerned estate. These things are semblably required in the consideration of e∣uery prudent Magistrate: that he see the Lawes obserued; Religion with all reuerence embraced; Peace and Concord retained amongst citizens; all em∣bers of discord and faction extinguished; that each man bee diligent in his lawfull profession; that no man entermeddle with the State and Common∣wealth, before he be called to that dignitie; that Tributes and Subsidies bee duly payed; that euery man aduenture his life and substance in difficult sea∣sons  for the preseruation and safegard of his country; that strangers in league with their Commonwealth, vse their owne seuerall trades and mysteries a∣mongst themselues, without losse and impeachment; and that they bee not inquisitiue or ouer-curious in matters of that State where they liue; but that
a vigilant eye be cast vpon them, to discerne of their behauiours and honesties  towards all persons, without intermeddling in any matters aboue their trades or professions, vehemently to defend the Church, to prescribe such orders (when occasion shall require) as may consent with the lawes, and times neces∣sitie: and lastly, that those of this Counsell and all other magistrates their infe∣riors behaue themselues according to the state and worth of their places and Offices, in a decent, courtous, modest, and iust sort, not rudely, couetously, proudly, chulishly, nor cruellie; but to deale vprightly without any passion of wrath or partiall affection: in rebukes and punishments to declare mildnesse, and needfull iustice, attempered with competent seueritie; to punish malefa∣ctors, to reward men of good desert, to prouide that their cities bee furned  with all necessaries for their sustentation and fortification; as with coe and victuall, with armour, and artillerie, against the dayes of famine and warre; to prepare charitably for the poore and afflicted persons within their cities and countries, that they perish not through want of foode, but that poore impo∣tent people be relicued at all times in hospitals, in spittle houses; and (in times of pestilence) that the poore artificers also, which are not able to maintaine themselues without worke, but are restrained at home, may bee relieued by the support and exhibition of the richer sort, in those parishes where they reside or soiourne. Also, that at other times, the poore able and healthfull bodies be set vnto conuenient labor and businesse, according to their strength  and cunning. Moreouer, that strangers and trauellers from forraine parts, be∣ing confederate, and in amitie with their state, be receiued and entertained, an∣swerable to their worth and degrees (and for the credite and good report of their Nation) with all liberall hospitalitie. For as Cicero writeth, Est Reipub. ornamento, homines externos hospitalitate in vrbe nostra non egere: It is a grace to our Commonwealth, when forrainers are not destitute of entertainment and hospitalitie within our citie. And lastly, that their whole care and studie bee bent to maintaine the reputation of that Common-wealth, where they go∣uerne vnder their prince. And for as much as it is one speciall part of Pru∣dence, and of good policie, that euen in the most peaceable times, militarie  preparation and prouision be made: as the wise Oeconomicall father, which in the most foison and heat of his haruest will store vp carefully for the cold and barren season of Winter: so is it required in those magistrats of this coun∣sell, that (vpon suddaine assaults and warning) they bee carefull, and readie with competent force to resist all forraine malice and ambition; howbeit, ma∣turely to consult before they leuie warre. If a prince without shamefull and dishonourable inustion cannot auoyde battaile, then with great caution to resist the common aduersarie, hauing the captaines and souldiors readily pre∣pared and trayned to fight, with a noble valour and constancie: which also must in time of peace be with sound deliberation, and vpon iust tearmes pro∣uided:  likewise a warie prouision and speciall notice of such as for their strength and sufficiencie may lead and commaund souldiors. Moreouer, that in tranquilitie (through each dominion or prouince of the Commonwealth within the reuolutions of three yeares) a generall view or muster bee taken of
those persons which are most able for militarie seruices; and that a strict ac∣count  be made as well of all militarie furniture, and priuate armour, as of pub∣licke, throughout the dominions: that beeing conferred diligently with the muster-rolles of euery Shire or Countie, the perfect force of men & arms may be conferred and knowne: and that (if any defect be found in either) a proui∣dent preparation and supply may be made; and that (whilest yet matters are in quiet) valiant and well approued captaines exercise the sufficientest of euery prouince within their seuerall townes, cities, and villages adiacent, once each weeke, or euery ten dayes, by trayning & disciplining them in martiall practise at the common charge for their vniuersall honour and defence: also that ships be rigged, manned, armed, dieted, and prouided of captaines, saylers, souldiors,  victuals, and artillerie, to resist all forraine inuasion or hostile preparations a∣gainst them: that treasure (which is truly called the sinews of war) be collected and instored for such purposes: that souldiors be taught order and obedience, hauing their wages iustly payed vnto them: and also that they be warned, and with seuere punishment prohibited, that they make no spoyle and bootie of them, in whose defence they professe and beare armes: which complaint hath beene old and vsuall amongst citizens and husbandmen in most places. Euery Counsellor therefore, and each other ciuile magistrate ought to be well instru∣cted and perfect in these militarie rudiments, which he shal with a little practise and paine taking (hauing read Csar, Vegetius, Frontinus, Aelianus, Polienus, with  such like) attaine sufficiently. And whereas in euery Commonwealth there are three states or columnes supporting the same, (the first of ciuile Counsellors or Magistrats, the second of militarie Gouernors and Captaines, the third consi∣sting of arts and artificers of trades and mysteries) mee seemeth, that a captaine equalleth the ciuile magistrate, according to his place & degree, defending and preseruing things in possession, euen as hee which attaineth, purchaseth, and ci∣uilizeth the same. And so much hereof, considering I shal haue occasion more fully to discourse of this point in my fourth booke of Offices. Now somewhat concerning the opposites vnto this vertue, which I will touch briefely. Imprudence (being ignorance, or a want of power and counsell to make a dif∣ference  betwixt good and euill, or to giue a reasonable iudgement of any thing within vulgar apprehension) is the first opposition to prudence: and hence came it, that each vniust and intemperate person was deemed by the Philoso∣phers foolish and imprudent; as hauing no force in himselfe to gouerne his inordinat appetites to moderation. Giddinesse of the mind & temeritie are an∣nexed to this vice: for imprudent persons through idlenesse & negligence take no regard vnto their children and wiues, retaining no rule or discipline in their families: but if secret Counsellors and ciuile ministers, in office vnto states and princes, be possessed of this intollerable plague, then doe the people vnder their gouernance hold it tollerable for them to sinne with impunitie: as also, when  Generals of armies are infected therewith, then do those souldiors vnder their charge wax slothfull: such as Scipi Aemilianus found at the seruice against Nu∣mantia, whom he by fresh practise, discipline, and instruction restored to their natiue valours, formerly forgotten. Calliditie & malicious wilines is that other
extreame, which oppositely withstandeth prudence, by which vnaduised peo∣ple  are deceiued with the meere semblance and counterfeit of vertues: yea, men of good natures and disposition otherwise (whose minds surmount their present meanes) oftentimes depraue their honourable conditions with hypo∣criticall medicines, adulterating their true natures with fallacious imitation of time, place, person, and the necessitie, which is by them imposed. Hence is it, that our ancestors of former ages are so much extolled aboue vs of later times, in regard of their simple, plaine, and open dealing in all actions, according to the saying of Cicero: Non placuit maioribus nostris astus: Our Elders were not pleased with craftinesse. For in those times no lesse then with some of our ho∣nest persons in these dayes guile was held most odious and abiect, eradicated  either by legall vertue (which restraineth and punisheth the malicious deuices of men) or by Philosophie, which (through the force of reason and intelli∣gence) banisheth it: Ratio namque postulat ne quid insidiosè, ne quid falentèr, ne quid simulat? For reason requireth vs to doe nothing which may bee treche∣rous, fallacious, or counterfeit. Subtilties therefore in priuate causes which do not concerne the Commonwealth, should specially bee suppressed in all ho∣nourable Counsellors, and all such hypocriticall malice as counterfeiteth prudence to life, distanding so farre from it, as a man may shoot a rouing shaft of reason: for hee (that with all his strength laboureth to doe good) may re∣taine the name of a very wiseman, and become innocent, in respect of him∣selfe,  and others. But the true conclusion is that, Calliditas sapientia perfect a non C. 3. Off. est, nec honestas, quanquam species honestatis & sapientia esse potest, &c. That calliditie is no perfect sapience, nor honestie, although it seeme both wise and honest. Wee should therefore take great care, least those vices deceiue vs, which in outward apparance resemble vertues: for the least wauering eyther to the right or left hand is vicious; let vs therefore ponder our selues in the middest. Ignorance in this, and in the knowledge of the limits, lists, and boun∣ders (within which vertues and vices consist) seduceth very many, bringing them into the number of those ideots, whose reason is adumbrated. Nam mala sunt vicina bonis, errore subillo  Ouid. Pro vitio virtus crimina saep tulit. For it is a neere steppe from vertue to vice; and vnder that maske of error hath vertue beene so deceiued, that shee hath tollerated heinous faults, by mistaking them for small vices. And hence groweth that generall mis-conceit, preiudication, and weake∣nesse of discretion, which cannot rightly measure mens natures by their passi∣ons. For example, when they call him a coward which desireth peace: if a man be subtle headed, then is hee trayterous: if simple, and a slothfull dastard,  him they repute gentle: if vnskilfull in all commendable qualities, procee∣ding from his owne lazie sluggishnesse, him they tearme simple and honest: if a man through the intemperate and irascible passion of wrath can onely de∣liuer threatening rebukes, or opprobrious speeches, him they tearme a plaine
dealing man, whose mind and tongue (though both abhominable) accord  without dissimulation: if in his pride hee beare himselfe aboue his place, fa∣culties, and birth, him the vulgar calleth magnificent: if he be furious and de∣sperate of life and fortunes, him they thinke valiant: prodigall persons are estee∣med liberall; couetous and wretched fellowes, prouident, and frugall hus∣bands; supersticious and blockish people are taken for, and reported to be de∣uout and holy persons: such as are truly learned and excellent schollers in all faculties, are censured (by them whose iudgements are not so suddaine as ma∣licious, neither so malicious as thredbare) to bee curious fooles, arrogant, and opinionatiue. And thus is euery good and bad qualitie misconstrued with a reprobate glosse: but hereof I haue sufficiently spoken in my Preface. If ther∣fore  a man will warily ponder, what things are required in him that aspireth vnto the toppe and perfection of all goodnesse: if he can so fashion and shape his owne affections generally; as in seeming, that he crediteth any mans say∣ings, whom he list to beleeue: if he can vse those honest blandishments, wilie complements, and needefull attributes, which can angle out the loue of per∣sons: Proprium enim virtutis est conciliare animos hominum & ad suos vfus ad∣iungere: For it is a vertuous qualitie, to conciliate mens minds, and to make his proper vse of them: if he can apprehend the plaine causes, which moue most honour and admiration in their hearts towards any Magistrates: if hee can wisely discerne the Spring-tide of Iustice, Prudence, Fortitude, and Tempe∣rance  (when they passe their bounders) then is he worthily deemed iudicious. In the consideration and practise of which, the whole force of prudence con∣sisteth. Peregrination of countries is another cheefe ornament in a Counsellor, in speciall the realmes and prouinces of his prince, his friends, his enemies, and neighbours. In such trauailes behooueth his care, prudence, diligence, and consideration: not to passe like those gaping and wauering fooles, in fayres and markers, which onely come to busie their eyes without benefite. But his vse of trauell must be, to know how such countries are gouerned in peace and warre: what reuenewes ordinarie out of his owne lands, and extraordinarie by contribution of the people, belong to the prince; how the realme is muni∣ted;  and how the people addicted: by such obseruation hee becommeth pru∣dent, worthie to be consulted, and in honourable respect vpon his returne. Al∣beit, Honorius and Theodosius, Emperours, supposed, that men ought not to diue into the secrets of a forraine state: yet he which (vpon the dispatch of a∣ny legation) returneth into his owne countrey, shall be deemed prudent, if he can obserue & open (when occasion is offered) such secrets as by being shew∣ed may profit his owne countrey. Amongst other things, if he bee commen∣ded by the prince to performe any great embasie, the speciall subiect of his heart vnder God must be the renowne of his prince, and the chiefe organe & directorie, by which hee must square out his businesse and worke, should  bee moderation. For if it happen that in arrogant speeches hee gallop out of the listes of modestie, then doth hee violate and abuse the maiestie and peace both of his prince and of the people. But rather if any thing in charge
be by the king, through heate or some angry passion, somewhat more sharpe  or bitterly deliuered; that when he pronounceth his Soueraignes message, the embassadour rather mollifie than exasperate any matters of litigious conse∣quence in his speech: and if other things of fauour or honour bee by him to be signified on behalfe of his prince vnto friends, his care ought to deuise, how he may make the same more gracious and magnificent by his owne wit and inuention: for it sometimes happeneth, that princes by means of some embassadours their intemperance and temeritie, be vehemently moued vnto wrath; and by the prudence of others are drawne into the true borders of friendship and amitie. The things commonly notable in trauelling of forraine countries, are the lawes, religion, and fashions of the Nation where hee so∣iourneth;  the scituation, castles, and cities of the countries; the fashions of the princes robes, and attire; the qualities, pedigrees, families, power, treasure, and buildings of the Counsellors and Noblemen. By conference (vpon such obseruation) he shall learne the good and euill of his owne countrey, how to ciuilize the people, if their manners be corrupt, how to declare himselfe hos∣pitable towards strangers: for vnder them haue diuers charitably disposed worldlings (such as Tobias and Lot) receiued Angels into their houses: how to grope mens minds or meanings, whether they bee friends or enemies; and according to the state of his businesse he shall accommodate himselfe to the time, and vnto the state of his prince, hauing good note of all occasions, opor∣tunities,  encombrances, and difficulties of places and seasons. No man shall haue power by cunning relation of salse-hood to make him swallow a gud∣gine, neither to build vpon any mans opinion. It is further required, that hee know how many myles that countrey where he hath conuersed, is in length; how many in breadth; with what munitions and artillerie the townes are fen∣ced; in what place of the countrey an armie may find safest entrance: what faire and open Harbours, Ports, Creekes, Hauens, and Promontories there are: how many deepe riuers water the countries; what the principall vertues and vices of the people bee; what their chiefest pleasure: wherein their Nobles differ from ours in England; what oddes betwixt their edifices, and ours:  whether of the princes is in power most absolute; how the people in those Nations oppose their Soueraignes; what difference in the formes of their ser∣uice, and ours: how they muster, trayne, and discipline souldiors: whether in marching or quartering of armies they spoyle the countreyman: what order is prouided, that the souldior shall not annoy the peasant. So that in his relation he may discreetly compare all those countries (where hee hath trauailed) with his owne, distinguishing of all properties with sound iudgement. For if distin∣ction be wanting, farewell election; and if that depart, prudence is also bani∣shed; the lacke wherof bringeth in confusion, which haleth on many millions of miseries. A sound knowledge and apprehension of the princes strength whom hee serueth, with the power of his confederats, neighbours, and enemies, is likewise adioyned. This shall teach him how great their seuerall reuenewes are, eyther ordinarie, or extraordinarie, from whence, by what meanes, and when they be
gathered: what forces his prince can leuie, and how long maintaine them; how  well disciplined; what gallant or caitiue captaines amongst them that are ene∣mies: which of them are confederat against the king; whose parties they pro∣fesse, and vpon what plot of malecontment, reuenge, faction, ambition, or cor∣ruption: how strong or weake those secret partisanes are; with what commo∣dities they be furnished, and wherein wanting: for this is the ready rule which measureth any princes power. Hee should likewise of himselfe seeme able and worthie (when warres require the aduenture of his state and life) to bear com∣maund ouer many souldiors, and at all assayes so well appointed, as hee may be found aequè fortis ac prudens, both wise and valiant: executing the laws of arms (as those Romane Emperours, of whom it is written) That in castris they did  agere iure summo, domique ex aequo & bono: That in the warres they did vse martiall law, and at home in peace administer equitie. When a Counsellor can with sound knowledge like a good Physition heale the diseases of his countrey, prouiding how to preuent them, before they can take hold thereof, he magnifieth his wisedome vehemently: he should there∣fore heare euery man willingly, fauour all indifferently, yet so, that most respect be fastened to the iust cause. A stranger in his good dealing and right ought to bee preferred before a neighbour: wherefore if hee were a Iew borne, or barbarous Heathen, if he were a Turke, or of what odious off-spring soeuer, let his cause, not his qualitie be respected, and in equitie let him hold the priui∣ledge of nation, cognation, countrey, citie, bloud, and familie with a neigh∣bour,  for so much as may concerne his cause. In this qualitie the Counsellor is importunately warned to take great heede, that hee with his parts doe not corroborate any faction, or vnder the pretext and robe of iustice reuenge pri∣uate wrongs. Euen as dissentions amongst captaines further the stratagems of their enemies: so doe the disunions of Counsellors helpe them, against whom their Counsels are bent. The principall and most soueraigne medicine, by di∣uers vsed, and most preuayling against the pestilence of dissention and enuie, by good experiment and knowledge, hath beene humanitie, and affa∣bilitie. Iustice and goodnesse is no little estimation in a Counsellor, when his say∣ings soothly consound with integritie, vertue, and veritie: here and there, in mouth and heart all one, in word and deede plaine, reprehending faults in others with all mildnesse and benignitie. His actions are throughly seasoned with beneuolence and courtesie: hee will not withhold his good counsell from any man: a patrone towards good persons, seuere against malefa∣ctors, in all places zealous of vertue, enemie to calumnies, detesting lyes and vanitie: no dissembler, no double-tongued person, no referendarie: for neuer was any delator of mens conditions and manners faithfull, but abiect and base minded. Moreouer, a iust man will not rebuke one, bee∣ing absent, for his faults, if hee may haue him present: that which neyther  his eyes nor hands haue seene nor handled, he will not auouch, or vere∣fie. He cannot away with flatterers or tale-bearers: for hee thinketh with Tacitus, That Adulation is an euer-liuing euill; and with Curtius, who
writeth, that people of such nature deuour and wast the princes treasure much  more then enemies: and therefore it is written in the life of Constantine the sonne of Constantius, that he called those flatterers and enuches of the court, which wast the Commonwealth, and yet are alwayes murmuring, mothes and water rats: like those dogges of which the blessed prophet saith, That they run grudging and grinning about the citie for meate, vntill they bee satisfied, whose gluttonous appetite is bottomlesse & insatiable. Nero who was brought vp in temperance and sobrietie, through flatterers became cruell: through them Caesar lifted his arme against his owne countrey; from them aspired the tyrannies of Rhoboham. But it is needlesse to produce forraine example, being well furnished with domesticall testimonies: for wee read and know, that the  second Edward of Carnaruan, and Richard the Blacke princes sonne, one and the other were deposed and confounded by the fruit of that viletie which they sucked from flatterers. A sage and honourable Councell therefore will fence his eares against the subtilties of them, least Sinon enter with the Troiane horse, and there vnrip his packe of parasites, which wildly seising vpon his hart will tyrannously vsurpe vpon his soule also. This is a whoorish danger, which first allureth, then bindeth, and being once tied, it is almost impossible for the captiued to get loose. They therefore that respect their owne quiet with the princes honour, wil esteeme more of one Clitius, than of six hundred Aristippi; for they present vnto such noble magistrats in precious vessels, that potion  which intoxicatcth their imaginations, vnderstandings, and memories, brin∣ging in with it the Commonwealths bane and ouerthrow: euen as in a most sententious Tragedie was written by Seneca. Venenum in auro bibitur, expertus loquor. I speake by good experience, that vile poyson is drunke out of fine gold. In Thyeste. Such Counsellours therefore, as are possessed of iustice and goodnesse, will auoyd these monsters especially, liuing in peace with all men, contented with their owne; they bee not any couetous money-mongers, they liue iustly and  temperately, with a desire to pay their debts, eschewing suites and contenti∣ons; they by labours, vertues, and abilitie seeke to rayse their fortunes: which if they shall vpon so good tearmes endeuour, then are they meerely magnani∣mious, iust, and generous: but if they doe not seeke for the reward of this vertue, then is it a sure signe that they want the maine, and therfore to be repu∣ted vniust, abiect, and timorous. Liberalitie likewise is a very gracious ornament, seemely befitting a Coun∣sellor: this, since I did handle in the first Booke of these Offices, entreating of Treasurers, I will speake lesse in this place: onely this, it is a principall baite to take people, because aboue all things they loue to sport themselues in those  siluer waues, or vnder the golden grauell, delighting in the sweetenesse of it. It is a meere follie to lauish in hope of gayne, vnlesse a great abilitie will beare it: Occasions of getting will not alwayes continue. Oppose with modera∣tion therefore against want, which is accompanied with the losse of time and
reputation: for certaine it is, that more credite commeth by one ducket pre∣sent  in purse, than by tenne alreadie spent. This is not spoken, that a man should be so beastly minded, as to scrape or restraine liberalitie, when esti∣mation and honour offer themselues by reasonable expences, but onely to vse a bridle in vaine, and vnnecessarie disbursements. Howbeit, aboue all things auoyd auaricious Ostrocisme, which feedeth bad Counsellors, till they bee so fat as porkes, readie to bee serued to their maisters table: as Aeneas Siluius fitly compareth. Charitie with bountie (such as Polybius prescribed to Scipio) magnifieth a Counsellor, to make so good vse of his going abroad at all times, that he be∣nefite some before his returne home: for euen as couetousnesse is the roote  of all euill, so beneficence and charitie bee the well-springs of all goodnesse. Angelicall and humane eloquence, the gift of prophecying, the secret and vnreuealeable knowledge of all mysteries, a faith retaining power to mooue mountaines, are all of no force, if they be not illumined with charitie: hee which giueth all his possessions to the poore, which sacrificeth his body to the fire or sword, meriteth not without charitie. Hee which is espoused to that beautifull nymph, is patient, bountifull, without mallice, ostentation, pride, dis∣daine, selfe-loue, wrath, euill thought: for shee reioyceth, and is inwardly ra∣uished with confolation in truth, faith, hope, patience, and perseuerance: shee, Corinth. 1. cap. 13 when prophecies, tongues, and knowledge shall cease, and bee consummated, can neuer be consumed, but liueth immortally: of those three sweete sisters  of grace and heauenly benediction, charitie (being the last after faith & hope) is the chiefest, sayth that diuine Organe of eloquence, blessed Paule, couetous∣nesse Rom. cap. 13. and malice are her open and professed enemies. Let a wise man there∣fore Prou. 10. resist them, for they beeing vanquished in him that held out in force a∣gainst her, leaue a beautifull port triumphant for charitie to come in with her gracious trayne of blessed vertues to take possession of her ennobled heart. It is written of Marcus Crassus, that hee was magnified in fiue things: in his great Plutarch. lib. 4. Conuial. Nobilitie; in his maruellous Eloquence; in his excellent sound knowledge had of the Lawes; that he was Archbishop, and the richest of all the Romans  after Sylla. But all these vertues and bounties of fortune were stained with the corruption of auarice, and with the want of charitie: such Counsellors little Plut. in Apotheg regard their charge, so they may gorge vp their owne coffers. Woe to the shep∣heards of isrdel, which onely feede themselues, dispersing their flockes negligently without foode, as the Prophet threateneth. Immoderate riches in a vile auarici∣ous person ingender pride, euen as vnexpected spoyle and victorie doth in a vaine-glorious captaine: as was noted by those letters which Philip dispat∣ened to Archidamus, after his victories had at Cheronaea; who taxed him with proud and bitter tearmes, vttered from a spirit swolne and puffed vp with fe∣citie of his good successe: but Archidamus in answere to the same, aduised  him to measure his owne shaddow so strictly as might be; and that he should not find it one haire breadth greater than it was before the victorie. Men of this nature are like them of whom Salust sayth: Quibus neque modus contenti∣s Con. Cl. inest, vtique victoriam crudeliter excercebant: Such as doe not retaine any
moderation in conflict, but exercise their vertues with crueltie. And for so  much as appertaineth their immoderate desire of riches. It is the generall o∣pinion of all wise men, that they (whom the force of auarice hath like a con∣tageous pestilence inuaded) doe make more account of worldly pelfe, than of any goodnesse or honestie: they be not truly nor aunciently noble, but beare the meere counterfeit of honour, which vpon the touch prooueth very base. Et quanquam domi sint potentes (as Salust saith) apud socios tamen magis clari sunt . Iugurth. quam honesti: Albeit they be powerfull in their countries, yet doe their coun∣try men esteeme them to be more in authoritie than in honestie. This greedie pestilence subuerteth all faith, all honest conditions, and good arts: in stead of which it raiseth pride, erueltie, false-hood, contempt of God, and authoritie.  Moreouer, this desire of money, Quam neme sapiens concupiuit, which no wise man hath coueted, as sayth Salust elsewhere, (beeing as it were composed or compounded of venemous mischiefes and euils) effeminateth and cowardi∣zeth a mans mind and body, being alwayes infinite, neuer satisfied, which nei∣ther is with plenty nor pouertie wasted. But of this vice I haue sufficiently spo∣ken in diuerse other places more at large. Beneficence being a promptnesse to deserne well, is (as I said before) a kind of liberalitie required in Counsellors: which consisteth in the aduancement of the Commonwealths profite; in admonishing, commending, reprehen∣ding, comforting, procuring, defending, not onely requiring ayde and bene∣uolence,  but by vettue deseruing the same. It is a beneficence to see, that the high wayes and bridges be made and repaired, to relieue poore people, villa∣ges, or societies, by crosse fortune or misaduenture distressed or oppressed: and (as Cicero noteth) Benignitas est Reipub. vtilis redimi à seruitute captos, locu∣pletari tenuiores, &c. It is a benignitie commodious to the Commonwealth, Off. lib. 2. that captiues bee ransomed from bondage, and that the poorer sort may bee relieued with riches. Such was that vertuous beneficence of the Emperour Titus, who when Rome for three dayes & three nights continually did burne, and that a grieuous famine with mortalitie chanced amongst the people, with his owne priuate purse relicucd multitudes of them; to many sicke persons  ministring physicke himselfe, and visiting diuers which were discomfited vpon the death of their friends, performing this in his owne person. Such like is that sacred beneficence vsed by the princes of this land, in healing of diseased persons, and in washing of feete. In regard of which excellent vertue, Vlpius Traianus was called Pater Patriae: qui per exquisita remedia multis pestilentia, in∣cendijs, & fame affectis est opitulatus: The father of his countrey: who did I vita vlpij Tr. (by most excellent good meanes and remedies) relieue and restore multitudes of his people, which had beene afflicted with pestilence, fire, and famine. Likewise, to minister stipends, reliefe, or corrodies to maimed souldiors, old seruitors, forlorne saylers, poore schollers, distressed corporations and socie∣ties,  according to the lawes, and by superadding somewhat beyond legall li∣mitation, is a speciall token of beneficence: for wee shall find, that one pen∣nie (more than statuted-prouision) auayleth more in the peoples loue than tenne pounds, which are prouided and allowed vnto them by law: and (as I
did in my first booke) so do I necessarile record it againe in this part, that base  ministers, & vnder petty pursers, which geld, and curtall the princes bounties and beneficences, should be strictly and seuerely obserued & punished in such cases: which beastly dishonor here in England our late most renoumed Soue∣raigne Q. Elizabeth could neuer endure, but vpon any complaint approued, did cause to be seuerely censured. It is likewise a gracious beneficence, to be mercifull & charitable towards Churches, Almeshouses, & Hospitals; encou∣raging such as are vertuous and commendably qualified with good testimony giuen of their vertues & good partes vnto the prince; & in furthering of their preserment at his hands. Such a counsellour protecteth iustice, defendeth the people, guardeth the nobilitie, patronizeth his countreymen, adorneth the  prince: and indeed sanctifieth him vpon earth. Gentlenesse & benignitie may not be forgotten in him towards people of all degrees & fashion, as in cheere∣full giuing of eare with diligence and attention to their desires & petitions: in answeres beneuolent; and in promise of offices serious and graue; in denying, nothing supercilious, in rebukes nothing iniurious, in dismission of suitors, nei∣ther proud nor peremptory: such a man (when the prince extendeth grace to∣wards any) doth pretend it to be twise so much as it was; comforting the sub∣iect, & honoring the soueraigne. If a petioner be frustrated, he doth beneuo∣lently, curtously, with very good words, & in plaine honesty content him: such behauiour is much more effectuall, then gold. Bountifulnesse, affabilitie, dex∣teritie,  vigilancie, with diligence appeare in him; his apparell is honest, graue, and neat; his delight is in companie; he cannot away with factions, and altera∣tions; he disdaineth no mans familiaritie, neither doth he wrong any man in bitter speeches; he delighteth in argute, & witty sayings, louing honest liberty, loathing ostentation with hypocrisie. Fortitude deseruing speciall respect in a counsellor is only ment by the interior vertue; which may be termed he∣roicall valor: here of more at large, & substantially my purpose is to treat in my fourth booke. Such therfore are sincerely studious of vertue, that with a mind aspiring celestiall honors, contemplate happily, contemning those passions & affections, which other men hold precious; as hatred; fauor, wealth, pouertie,  ease, labor, life or death; but liue well satisfied with their present estate, whither it be good or bad. His mind is neither brokē, nor disturbed; measuring himselfe by the cube of reason: wherfore (well knowing how suddenly time wil slip) he will not omit any cōmendable occasions to serue his honest purposes; but as occasion shall gallop necre him, so wil he warily catch hold of her bridle: bold∣ly counsailing, speaking, & aswering to the prince & people as he thinketh ex∣pedient; he cannot be corrupted; & detesteth for mony; friendship, consangui∣nity, prayer, or feare, to deale vniustly: he defendeth the truth, offendeth flatte∣rers. In all actions, consultations, & iudgments seuere, and constant, a professed enemy to talebearers, bold in discharging his conscience, graue in speech, not  superstitious, neither dissembling in heart toward prince or priuatperson: his honesty wil not suffer him to deceiue, his wisdom wil not brooke to be decei∣ued: his valor maketh him triumph ouer many calamities, & tribulatiōs, & his honor worketh towards him reuerence in the eyes & hearts of all the people.
By such Counsellors therefore, euery prince and euery state is strengthened  and supported, both at home and abroad: for his owne subiects will willingly serue him, and forrainers stand in awe of his vertues: so shall the prince bee generally magnified. What strong enemie was there to this our publicke state, that in the later dayes of the late deare Soueraigne of our happinesse, Queene Elizabeth, fea∣red not the valour and fortunes of Robert, then Earle of Essex; vntill such time as through his owne credulous imprudence, hee wilfully wounded himselfe with his owne intollerable appetite. Of whom I will onely say that which I might worthely cite out of Cicero, then written to the good fame of Caius Marius: Nemo vnquàm multitudini fuit carior: No subiect euer was more deare  off. 3. to the multitude; and (which was lamentable to them that depended vpon his greatnesse) not Fortunes deareling, but her babie, nay, rather Fortunes ba∣ble, whose fairest spectacle is like a momentanie bubble; as appeared by those great hopes, reports, and opinions, which the people had of him: but Non minus periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala: But the daunger of a Tacit in vita Ilij Agricola. great same, is altogether as great, as that which proceedeth from a bad re∣port. What open or close enemie was he that liued in any forraine part of Eu∣rope, which was not amated with that diuine care and wisedome, with that industrious circumspection and foresight of those two most worthie Sena∣tours  of her secret Counsels, the Lord William Burghley, Lord Treasurer, and Sir Francis Walsingham, sometimes principall Secretarie to that good Queene: which sitting quiet in their studies, wrought so many wonders in Spaine, Fraunce, and Italie, for the confirmation and fortification of this Realme, a∣gainst the tyrannous enemies of the Gospell, and of that our euer renowned Empresse of England? The first died very rich, in a most healthfull state of soule, and in honour of his countrey; which was for many yeares sustained, comforted, and protected by his prudence: the second, both in true pietie, iustice, and glorie, respecting God and the Commonwealth; honorable, and truly rich, which was in mentall perfections, and in the loue of this Common∣wealth  (which he so much loued) onely. Much therefore behooueth it Counsellors, that in all their actions, counsels and consultations they become prudent and valiant, taking vp a place in the middest betwixt the zealous and true worship of God, vpon the right hand, with his vigilant and tender care of the Commonwealth, vpon the left, respe∣cting them both with feare and feruent affection: and aboue all courtly pesti∣lence, to take antidotes and preseruatiues against the contagious breath of flatterers, which hath corrupted and ruined more princes and noble gentle∣men in time of peace, than the sword hath many times done in bitter battell. Such were they that trecherously myned into the noble nature of that renow∣med  Earle, whom I lately mentioned, being men enraged with a lust of inno∣uation, and of a present satisfaction of their all variable and licencious ap∣petites. This mune disperseth it selfe through the Courts of many Princes, in∣fecting
and eating vp whole families; like pestilence the deuouring Angell  of Gods iustice sparing none. Sycophants of this distemperature naturally (like mosse, or yuie) spread vpon great Oakes, and strong walles, neuer excer∣cised in vertuous cogitations and studies, but fraught with slaunderous ru∣mours, falshood and forgerie the professed enemies to vertue and veritie; so they may laugh, feed, sleepe, and enioy corporall pleasures, they force not what aged fathers, widowes, or orphans, waile, starue, watch, and endure endlesse vexation and calamitie. I mention this vice often, inculcating the perill, and poison of it many times, because it is so much practised in this Na∣tion; then which, nothing can be more base, more odious, or more degene∣rate from Nobilitie. There is one vertuous condition which must inseparably be fastned, placed, or rooted rather in a Counsellor; and it is a pure will, godly zeale, and ioyfull promptnesse to giue sound and wholesome counsell, (of which I spake some∣what before) as when things be by mature deliberation consulted, before they be peremptorily resolued vpon, and all the causes (with euen hand) first weighed in the ballance of iustice. A Senator therefore (which retaineth so reuerende and honourable office) must respect the ground of his authoritie, which doth best and most to life anatomize a magistrate. Sodaine and doubtfull counsels do digest more happily with them, that are sildome vexed with trou∣bles and difficulties; or with ambitious persons which onely respecting their priuate glory, feare least time of deliberation will grow scant vnto them; then  with such Commonwealths as (being placed vpon the maine toppe of all power and authoritie) can leisurely tarry for a fit time and occasion. In anxi∣ous or doubtfull matters therefore they choose such a course as most behoo∣ueth, and least endangereth: yet hath it been commonly seene in giuing of counsell, that the vulgar attribute all to the Counsellors prudence and fore∣sight, if fortune fauour the euent; but if otherwise, then is he condemned in the contrary. And hence is it, that the meede of good Counsellors is often ascribed to fortune, and fortunes serenitie attributed to good counsell. If the businesse in hand be very weightie, the counsellors (which handle it) must be very warie, and such things (as cannot admit a recorrection, or reconside∣ration)  must be with good discretion deliberated. There is likewise one excellent part in wise and compleate Counsellors re∣quired, which is to giue good eare and attention to the sayings of all men vttered vnto him; and in speciall to those of that societie, which though inferior or superior in their places speake before them. Herein a Counsellor must muster his wittes together, and remember those arguments wherwith∣all they confirme and corroborate their seuerall opinions, that (when his tourne inuiteth him to speach) he may not misse a mite in recapitulation  of any materiall pointes. Hence was it that Pericles (convening with Sophocles his fellow Pretor concerning State-businesse (vpon Sophocles his commendation of the beautie of a very faire Boy passing by) earnestly repli∣ed: It is not only fit to withhold your hands, but to withdraw your eyes from such vaine obiects in these serious cases.
For these respects Lycurgus inhibited all manner of pictures from the chamber  of consultation; least the Senatours eyes being withdrawne from serious co∣gitations and obseruations, might (by looking vpon them) forget somewhat to the preiudice of the present seruice. Deliberation also (being a diligent and prudent meditation of things future, doubtfull, and contingent, remayning in our power; by which choice is made of the best meanes to good and happie successe in any thing that may be done or spoken) is one speciall type of a Counsellors prudence. Which some compare to the Mulberrie, that flourishing last of all trees, yeeldeth ripe fruit before others: for after sound consultation matters are with expedition acted. Neither may counsell be profered, before the king require it, like a vaine physition, which  will intrude himselfe before hee bee sent for, vnlesse some speciall causes to himselfe onely knowne, and in matters of great weight he find it most neces∣sarie: for there be three fashions of counselling, by Reason, by good Autho∣ritie, by faithfull example: which three concurring, are of most validitie. If a Counsellor therefore yeeld not vnto the votes and suffrages of any thing, propounded by whatsoeuer persons: first, let him arme himselfe in good proofe, tempered with the steele of reason, to maintaine the contrarie parts more conueniently: and for so much as it standeth him in hand to confute their opinions; and that very few with due moderation can haue patience to bee conuinced: let him vse all temperance and mildnesse of speech, that  may bee, without contention: for it sufficeth a worthie Counsellor (let others thinke at their pleasure) to satisfie his priuate conscience. If memorie likewise doe not by nature richly supplie to the Counsellors reading: for so much as it is fitly called the Register of eloquence, and mo∣ther of the Muses, it will be much behoofefull, that a Counsellor studie to re∣forme himselfe by that art industriously, which by maps, characters, or Hyero∣glyphickes may be best placed. Knowledge in the studies of Morall and Naturall Philosophie, being first well grounded with Logicall rules, that he may probably discourse & dispute wisely (when any question vpon good occasion requireth) is needefull also.  The Philosophie which Plato defineth in one of his Epistles, is constancie, faithfulnesse, and sinceritie. Which tripartite kind is by the Morallists called the art of Sapience: for it teacheth vs the knowledge of God, it reclaymeth vs to fortitude and modestie; which illuminating our minds, consumeth those mystie vapours of ignorance and dulnesse, that oppresse our reason; so that we may clearely behold things aboue vs, about vs, and beneath vs: it roo∣teth out vice, harrowing the mind, and making it fit to receiue the seede of all good knowledge; without which mans nature is wounded, and miserable. They which studie these arts, are properly called Prudentes: For Philosophie is by interpretation the studie of knowledge, being the perfection of all hu∣mane  skill, and altogether necessarily to bee studied and sought for by princes and great magistrates. For as Cicero writeth: Philosophia est fructuosa, nulla pars eius inculta atque deserta: Philosophie is fruitfull, no part of which is vnmanu∣red, Offic. 3. or desert. The most profitable part whereof, consisteth in mentall Offi∣ces
and Morals. Onely by the Physickes we learne the nature of things, the  Nature which natureth, and the Nature natured; the diuers qualities of them both: from whence those bodies are, which wee call elements, lightenings, thunder, fierie impressions, rainebow, tempests, earth-quakes, inundations of waters; from what naturall causes they proceede. Also to bee skilfull in the Mathematickes: For he that neglecteth the Mathematicall arts, cannot bee a perfect Philosopher, as Caelius thinketh: for they bee certaine degrees or ele∣ments, by which higher matters are attayned. Hence was it, that Plato did Lib 5. cap. 4. in e. call it, Acumen cogitationis, The quicke apprehension of mans thought: be∣cause it heaueth vp the mind, and sharpeneth that edge of intelligence, to∣wards the apprehension of diuine causes; and therefore Fr. Patricius suppo∣seth,  Lib. 2. de Instit. Reipub. that this quadripartite art of the Mathematickes, (including Arithme∣ticke, Geometrie, Musicke, and Astrologie) best befitteth a ciuile magistrate: of the two first, Iacobus Faber writeth thus: Inter eas artes (qua Mathemata Graecivocant) dua Arithmetica & Geometria praecipuum sibi vendicant Locum; quòd ad caeteras assequenda viam sternant: Amongst those arts which the Greekes call Mathematickes, Arithmeticke and Geometrie be principall: for so much as they make easie passage vnto the rest. For he which is ignorant in Arithmeticke, can neuer proouea skilfull Musician; neither can any man which hath not attained the knowledge in Geometrie, prooue perfect in that inspectiue of Astronomie: for vpon these two first parts those other couple depend. The reason also that Plato giueth (wherefore he would haue princes  In Repub. skilfull in the Mathematickes) is, Quod sint quasi comites & Administrae viri po∣litici: Being the companions and agents of a politicall person. First therefore concerning Arithmeticke; which helpeth him to make vp his accounts of re∣ceit and disbursement, when the bils and audite of the Treasurer and Ex∣chequer are referred to his counters: of which art I shall haue some occasion in my fourth booke to speake somewhat; and in this knowledge Pythagoras was said to haue farre surmounted all the Philosophers of the world, accor∣ding to that which Ouid the Poet writeth concerning him: Mente deos adij:, & (quae natura negauit Visibus humanis) oculis ea pectoris hausit. Being in effect thus much: By force of his mentall faculties hee did at∣taine a diuine knowledge, and with the eyes of his vnderstanding did perfectly comprehend that which was by nature concealed from mortall eyes. Geometrie likewise conuerseth in the magnitude and proportion of things, wherein the famous Mathematician Archiedes was so skilfull; and by the helpe of those Geometricall engines which hee did deuise, a long time re∣strained Marcellus the Romane Captaine from victorie, when hee besieged Plutar. in vit Marcelli. Sap. cp. 11. that citie. And hence is this saying of Salomon, How God did dispose of all  his creatures, according to number, measure, and weight. Musicke (according to the course whereof the Pythagoreans did imagine that the world was composed; and the Mythologicall poets, that deuised
nine Muses, because of the musicall consent of the eight coelestiall spheres,  and of that one great continent called Harmonie, which includeth the vermes of those other eight) is very profitable and pleasant. Howbeit, in my weake iudgement, it may be better spared in a Counsellor, than her other three sisters, seruing more for ornament, than gouernment; albeit we find, that it keepeth a proportion by notes to delight the mind. Astrologie (being the fourth and noblest Mathematicall sister) is bipartite, according to Isidorus: in part naturall (when it is limited by courses of the log. 3. p. 26. Sunne and Moone, or according to those certaine and infallible motions of the starres and times) or superstitious, Quam mathematici sequuntur, qui in illis angurantur, quique etiam duo decem coeli signa per singula animi vel corporis mem∣bra disponunt,  sidereoque cursu natiuitates hominum, & mores pradicare conantur, &c. In which the Mathematicians take delight: for from them they deriue their Auguries, disposing or placing through all the members of humane bo∣dies the twelue signes of heauen, and endeuouring to make knowne the na∣tiuities and conditions of people, by course of the starres. Both Diuines and Philosophers consent, that this inferiour world is (according to the discretion and disposition of God) gouerned by the heauens: so that these inferior bo∣dies are ruled and moued by power of the superior. And hence is that saying of Aristotle: Necessario mundum hunc inferiorem superioribus motibus esse conti∣guum, vt omnis eius virtus inde gubernetur: It must of necessitie be, that this in∣feriour  world neighboureth the superiour powers and motions, to the end, the force and vertue thereof might bee gouerned, and disposed from aboue. To confirme this also, S. Augustine holdeth opinion: Corpora haec grossiora regi atque moueri per corpora subtiliora: That these our grosler bodies bee ru∣led and mooued by force of those bodies which are more subtile. This art, as well for the rule of Nauigation (which proceedeth from knowledge of the celestiall bodies) as for those other secrets, issuing out of the mysticall indicials of the Mathematicians, is more precious to them that haue it, than any worldly felicitie: for so much as they commonly (which are possessed thereof) con∣temne all transitorie pleasures and glorie. Wherefore, that noble Poet Virgil  concerning that nature of the Planets, writeth thus: Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, . Atque metus omnes, & inexorabile fatum Subiecit pedibus. Being this in effect. Happie is he that comprehendeth the causes of things, and doth by diuine power subiect all feare and inexorable fate. Also Iuuenall the Satyrist (concerning the beneuolence of the ascendent towards certaine persons, at certaine times, vnder his subiection) writeth: Plus etenim fati valet hora benigni Qu site Veneris commendet epistola Marti.
For the good houre of a beneuolent fate auayleth more with all persons,  than the commendatorie letters of Venus could euer haue preuayled with Mars. Howbeit, those that will certainely iudge of ensuing chaunces (though they be most studious and learned in this mysticall part of Astrologie, which is called the superstitious or Metaphysicall a) bee many times deceiued in their owne curiositie; according to the saying of Thomas Aquine: Licet corpora coelestia habeant inclinationem, non tamen imponunt necessitatem: & licet home inclinetur secundum dispositionem corporis ad aliquod vitium, tamen per rationem arbitrij, potest aliud facere: Albeit the coelestiall bodies haue a kind of inclina∣tion to somewhat, yet they doe not impose a necessitie thereunto: and albeit persons encline (according to their corporeall disposition) to some vice, yet  may they by the rule of their owne will decline from it: which to me seemeth a Theologicall paradox. Hence was it that Socrates excused the Philosopher, which (according to Physiognomie) condemned him of incontinence. Not∣withstanding, sometimes they will (vpon their coniecturals) diuine very neere and oftentimes truly: for the confirmation whereof, I will cite one notable thing, which I did reade in Cassanans the Burgundian. To whome, beeing at In 10 parte Ca∣talogi glor. mun∣di consid. 52. supper with the Confallionere di guisticia in Milan (vpon occasion in discourse) it was for a meere truth by diuerse affirmed, That a famous Astrologer in that citie had presaged to Giouanni Galliaceo maria Viscomi, the fifth Duke of that State, how he should be mortally wounded by some vassale about him: wher∣upon  to the Duke, demaunding of his owne fate, his answere was: My death must be publicke, by the fall of a peece of timber. But the Duke willing to preiu∣dice or antiuert the fate (by some other suddaine death denounced against the Mathematician) gaue peremptorie sentence, That hee should loose his head, because he had entermeddled with the calculation of his natiuitie. And as he was conducted to the place of execution, from the port of a Tower vnder which he passed (called Le Dome) suddenly the top thereof fell downe, and he with a piece of timber had his braines crusht out: a multitude with the Con∣fallioniere, and other executioners in the companie, were by that ruine slaine also. Likewise, the Duke himselfe that same yeare vpon Saint Stephens day  in the great Church of San Stephano in Milan, was by one of his slaues bloudily and cruelly butchered in the presence of many Noblemen, and others. And now to conclude with the Morall force of Philosophie, which as Plato did esteeme, was the chiefest blessing in any Commonwealth; When Philoso∣phers were Kings, and Kings Philosophers: For it reacheth the difference betwixt vertues and vices, what are the extreames of good and euill, how to rule priuat families, what authorities and offices belong to fathers, husbands, and mai∣sters; the difference betwixt instruments, hauing life and liuelesse; the main∣tenance of priuate persons, the vertues and discipline of magistrates, the best  formes of gouernment, the true meanes and knowledge to sustaine cities, be∣ing in danger of subuersion, and how with excellent lawes to rectifie them: Hence is it, that Cicero doth (in admiration and great loue thereof) proclaime in his questions Tusculane. O Philosophie, the rule of life, the touch-stone of ver∣tue,
& antidote of vice? But hereof haue I spoken more at large in the morals of  these offices before. Wherfore he (which is fostered with that diuine Manna) sheweth himself the same in all parts of his life, contemning worldly treasures, Tacit. lib. 4. hist. abiding faithfull, appearing valiant in the Guard and loyall maintenance of truth, and armed with constanc, defieth feare; and these are the verie fruits of Phylosophy: such a man is not altered by time, deiected by necessitie, in∣fected with insolence, nor wearied with the bad dealings of reprobate per∣sons: such a counsellor doth liue well, and vnderstandeth well, which is a sure signe of sapience, he consulteth well, which is a principall point of prudence; and gladly would haue all well, which is a true token of iustice, adde here∣vnto his owne doing, which is a manifest marke of perseuerance. Such per∣sons  wholly relie vpon their owne vertues, yeelding honour to such as are in grace with the prince, yet not committing any priuate secrets to their know∣ledge and iudgements. In all things they shew themselues circumspect, mo∣derate, diligent, and discreet. There remaineth one speciall Caueat after all these obseruations for coun∣sellors (which through their worthinesse and vertues haue attained a singular loue & affiance of their Prince, to be credited and vsed in all the most serious & important causes of the Commonwealth) which is; that, neither the great grace of their princes, nor the multitudes of honors and superiorities heaped vpon them; neither any vaine gaping vpon the popular aire (after which men  growne insolent vpon their greatnesse commonly breathe) driue them into practises ambitious; which are through want of due pietie towards God and to their Soneraigne, without any season of iustice, or honestie commenced. Considering therefore first, what this pestilent and infernall fire is; because in many Commonwealths that hath oftentimes been the greatest enemie, which theirowne countries wombe, and breasts hath bred and fostered, I will in some principles discouer the detestable nature, members, and fruites of mon∣strous and ambitious persons, as they be liuely declared at large by diuers, which haue seene humane sacrifices, and sepulchres ouerflowing with ciuill blood, and haue shewed how their late tryumphant countries were sodaine∣ly  mangled, and betrayed through the wild-fire of vnnaturall wolues. This horrible and vnnaturall appetite, is called, Rabies quadam remerariae A vehement, and patheticall de∣hortation from all kindes of treason. ambitionis, sitiens immodicae gloria, prorsusque inflammata perpetua quadam & singulari  dominandi. A certaine woluish rage of rash ambition, im∣moderately thirsting after vndeserued glory, and violently flaming out in all partes, with a kinde of endlesse and singular greedinesse of domination and empire. Many noble natures (adulterated with this counterfeit of honour) haue been falsified and corrupted with diabolicall furies, which though that pdent Consull Salust, calleth Vitium virtuti propius, A vice cosen germane to e; Yet seemeth not sauing in hypocriticall sence, for somuch as that  qualitie teacheth men (as he faith) Aliud clausum in pectore, aliud promptum in  habere, To conceale his meaning close within his heart, and to deliuer a corary matter with his tongue. This pestilent feuer of the minde, procee∣deth from riches in great abundance allotted vnto men, Quibus neque
neque modestia cordi est. Which take no pleasure either in mediocritie, or mo∣destie.  For luxurie (when with pride & auarice it possesseth the spirits of in∣temperate & green-headed fooles) doth draw persons of immoderate & fierie stomacks into want of maintenāce, throgh their own negligence; & so by such their improuidence, into dangerous attempts against their owne persons, and against the whole bodie of the Commonwealth. Also these are they, which (hauing fallen from their former reputation by their owne misgouernance) waxe intollerable through that discontentment, which continually tosseth their fierie spirites with a most insatiable thrist, and ambitious desire of do∣mination & soueraigntie. These are they, which with the eyes of Basilisks peirce into the benefits of times, places, & persons, oftentimes poisoning and  deceiuing themselues: these are they which with a false iudgement, and opi∣nion had of their owne plots, actions, partisanes, & conspiracies (wherein they flatter their owne hearts) wilfully betray themselues to confusion and calami∣tie: these men hath God in his diuine power blinded, and depriued of those faculties by which men commonly discerne all apparant & grieuous punish∣ments, that are reserued against such firebrands by the lawes & equitie: these are they which continually violate iustice; and that (which is a most lamenta∣ble truth) such persons haue not any sunshine of reason lent vnto them, to see that foule turpitude and shame, which inseperably tanquàm vmbrae, like sha∣dowes waite vpon their dishonourable actions: their minds are deceitfull, sub∣til, variable, hypocriticall, and couetous of other mens goods, prodigall of  their owne, burning in lust, alwayes malicious, neuer quiet, more tongue then witte, more witte then wealth, more wealth then wisdome, more wise∣dome then honestie; and yet poore, imprudent, giddie-headed, talkatiue, a vaste minde, aspiring to degrees & dignities, beyond all iust opinion & mea∣sure. The seeds of sedition being vpon such plots, grounds, & natures sowne, sprout foorth into the blades of rebellion: first, when the noble sort of ma∣gistrates or peeres in a Commonwealth peruert their power into pride; and when the common people (whose licence is the viue embleme of confusion) turne their liberties into lust at which time all disordered persons catch, snatch and oppresse iustice. Their mother the Commonwealth like a woman viola∣ted,  prostituted, and defamed with her garments rent, her haires disheuel∣led and feltred, her face disfigured and blubbred, standing or rather falling betwixt them both in this mutinie, suffereth torture & distraction, the noble men depending vpon parties, and the multitude leaning to what factions they list, the chiefe heads and ringleaders of which commotions and sediti∣ous factions, falling from great, honor, & from their princes fauour through condigne disgrace into discontentment, presently trauaile their wits horribly to disturbe or diabolically roote vp the publike State; in whose sight for that time iustice & magistracie be held in great scorne and disdaine. Vnto them of this distemperature all foollish people, tag and ragge mixt of diuers qualities  (insenced with pouertie, lust, and couetousnesse, tossed & disturbed in consci∣ence with their impious, and nefarious deuises and practises, such as hold dis∣sention to be their sweetest ease, and garboyles their happiest peace; which
heape tumult vpon tumult, hurliment vpon burliment) are coparteners  and competitors in their ambition; such as being neither with glorie nor shame mooued, prepaire themselues to strangle that Common-wealth which gaue them life and light. The traps, the nets, the snares of cruell malice, of treasonable conspiracies, and of extreame wickednesse erected for slaugh∣ter of their best and most honest countrie men; pitched to make a spoyle of their wealth, and wouen against the common peace of their nation, are infi∣nite and ineffable: the Commonwealth it selfe as a bloody shambles of in∣famous ciuill murther, is by these means exposed to the slauish oppression of auaricious and barbarous strangers. These nefarious firebrands of malecon∣tentment, and meteors of ciuill mischiefe (studying nothing so much as to  become excellent, & beyond the comparatiue apprehension of malice, before their first charge or onset) will make all things in the most readinesse for such a miserable tide of calamitie. They therfore, euen as it is witten of Catiline, diue into the natures, humors, & inclinations of noble yong gentlemen, liberally and prodigally disposed; for some according to their delights they prouide whores, for some horses and dogges; armes for these of a more heroycall con∣dition, and haukes for those; vsing all vile means, and abusing their owne for∣tunes and modestie, that they might draw yong Gentlemen vnskilfull and of tractable natures, into their horrible actions, to ruine themselues in the op∣pression and confusion of their Countrey. Such was the nature of Coesar  Borgia (whom Nicholas Machiauell remembreth vpon the like termes) when he conspired against the Orsini and Colonnesi. Those therefore that would liue magnificently or delicately, with such as delight in hazard, & they that prefer warre before peace, are for these actions. The first action of conspiracie there∣fore commonly tendeth to the cutting off, and extirpation of those by whom the Commonwealth and publique peace is sustained: as Piso and Autronius, quiparabant in Capitolio Lucium Torquatum, & Lucium Coitam Coss. interficere. Which were prepared, and resolued to murther Lucius Torquatus, and Lucius Cotta the two Consuls in the Capitoll. So did Brutus and Cassius with others oppresse Caesar, with their short daggers in the Capitoll. So did the mutinous  Guysians deale with that noble Admirall of France, Gaspar de Coligni: An. 1572. In hist. gall. For the first signall or watche stroke to euery seditious commotion or insur∣rection, is the slaughter of some one notable good man in great authori∣tie; as Caius Cornelius, and Lucius Vargunteius noble patricians, villanous∣ly combined in that treasonable conspiracie with Catilyne. Constituere cum ar∣matis hominibus (sicuti salutatū) introire ad Ciceronē, ac de improuiso domi suae im∣paratum confodere: They were prouided with men in armes, to come into the chamber where Cicero was in his owne house, vnder the colour of salutation, and instantly to stabbe him before he could suspect them; Cethegus being ap∣pointed captaine of that guard, which should haue attended without the  doores of his house. I could giue more late & familiar examples, as he which readeth and conferreth these, may very well be brought to remember euen in the same nature, and of the like fashion: but I say with Cicero, Externa libenti∣ùs hac in re quam domestica recordor: In these cases I more willingly record for∣raine
then domesticall examples. For the conference of causes, and heads of  the like plots and conspiracies with their euents and issues will rub vpon their remembrance. After this the curioust marshalling, ordering, and disposing of their euill disposed and disordered complices; as places, streetes, and quar∣ters appointed to be spoyled, or guarded by this captaine, & that rebel for their pillage, and to be mantled and defaced with so many terrible traitours in armes: some to surprise such strong peeres, and noble persons; some to guarde places possessed and taken; others to spoile and make waste of all good things round about them. Their nefarious captaines impiously darting those vertues and graces (giuen vnto them by God, and headed with the venomous forkes of ambition and malice) vpon the naked breastes of their natiue contries; whose minds (incessantly troubled) breath fourth in pestilent sighes, in hor∣rible  execrations, in blasphemous oathes, and in vaineglorious menaces, a sudden death against all good men. For their hearts (being enraged, and as it were drunken with strange and violent wrath and feritie) eate, and hauocke vp the peace of their contrimen with incredible immanitie: they thirst ex∣tremely for ciuill blood; greedily gaping for a generall spoyle, menacing sword and fire without any mercy to the bodies and families of their owne fa∣thers and contrimen. The principall conspirator, and archtraitor (being like Sathan totally composed of craft and confusion (and so by nature able to con∣ciliate & aucupate the friendships & good willes of men; and being guilesul∣ly gotten, to deale with them as trecherously) seemeth very munificent and  prodigal of gifts and treasure; howbeit most rauenous in auarice of other mens possessions, present in counsell, and hatefull in all temeritie. These are they which open the prisons, letting loose the wolues, beares, and foxes, of the Commonwealth out of their chaines: which furiously reioyce and exult (as on the deuils feast day) to ransacke honest mens houses, and to keepe a bloody triumph in the defaced streetes. Before them their captaine (as vpon a tragicall stage made of murther and of dead bodies, a man resolute and stee∣led in thoughts and actions of spight, and smoaking slaughter of his owne con∣trimen) calleth, and commandeth some of his Canniballes to feede vpon the flesh, and to drinke the blood of such noble persons, and of others in the place  of high magistracie: some he commandeth vnto the spoyle and sacke of hou∣ses; many to set fire, and to lay waste such ports, bastilles, and noble fortresses, fenced against them: matrons, and wiues being torne from their husbands embracements become wofull subiects of their insatiate lustes; widowes left naked of all wealth and comfort, both of them lamentably subiected to their bloody weapons: young maidens, and daughters wrung from their parents bosomes, rauished, polluted, and violated with villanous abhomination: their most precious iewels openly carried in their sight away from them, which lie bound and pitteously wounded, without hope of any recouerie; round a∣bout  houses burning; and carcases some mortally wounded, diuerse breath∣lesse, and all wallowing in blood: others lying in the high-wayes and ditches, mantled ouer and staunched full with humane bodies; finally no noyse but of murthers woundes teares clashing of weapons, breaking vp of doores,
grones and outcries; with the mortall lamentations of fathers, men, old wiues, women, and children. Behold here the bloody scene of sedition, which euen nature abhorreth to behold, and reason shuddereth to consider; can any thing be more flagitious vpon earth, then to bestow that life which our owne con∣trey breathed into our bodies, by the sufferance of God vnto the ruine and ca∣lamitie thereof vtterly repugnant to the will of God? or can any thing bee thought of more abhominable, then to deuise the torture & seruitude of them whom the same lawes and fashions of life haue included within the same li∣mits, liberties, and houses with vs? Certaine it is therefore which Cicero no∣teth out of Dicaearchus the Peripatetike. Homines hominum impetu plures deleri; id est bellis & seditionibus &c. quam reliqua calamitate. More men by the vi∣olence  of men (which is by warre, seditions, and rebellious treasons) are wa∣sted, then with any other calamitie. And hence is that prouerbe. Homo homini lupus, homo homini Deus. A man is a wolfe amongst men: and a god vnto men. For in a noble and good action against forreine oppressors of our friends or of our liberties, it is a dutifull piety that contrimen combine in armes: howbeit to rise vp in rage one against another is more then brutish; & therfore Cicero con∣cludeth thus, homines hominibus plurimū prosunt, & obsunt. Men are very benefi∣ciall, and offensiue vnto men. If into any such impious & horrible practises, or coniurations (either by faction, feare, or affectiō) any noble counsellor should  be drawen; let him assure himselfe that the second punishment besides that fearefull danger of the first is most intollerable, & I had almost said inexpiable. Euery right noble and vertuous counsellor therefore will labour, (as Cicero writeth) to deliberate in such cases, whether they should wittingly become honest, in auoyding that which they know to be reasonable; or whether they should wilfully become wicked in the toppe of traytorie. For they be deemed impious and abhominable which make a question thereof: In ipsa namque du∣bitatione facinus inest etiamsi ad id non peruenerins. For in the combate or doubt Oc. 3. within a man whether he should commit treason or not, there is a foule sinne: although the plot thereof take not effect. And herein is the very thought of conceiued treason (though it be not put in practise) made hainous and dam∣nable,  A right noble and truely wise counsellor therefore, Non modo facere; sed ne cogitare quidem quicquid audebit, quod non audeat praedicare. Not onely dare not put in execution: but also dare not harbour a thought of such things, as stād not with his safetie to speak openly. For if he were possessed with that ring which Plato mentioneth, by which Gyges going invisible became king of Ly∣dia, hauing power to do what he list: yet wold his wisdom & honestie restraine him from all violence. And therefore Cicro vseth this sentence, Honesta bonis viris non occultapetuntur. Good men delight in open honestie, not in hidden practises. But I deeme how no truely-noble nature can be so farre debauched or corrupted, vnlesse by flatterers and malicious minyons, to whom for the  most part great spirits are most addicted. But those which are of such hot and violent natures, be grieuous dissemblers and temporizors, vntill such time as oppotunitie may fitly serue them, to the weltering and ouertuning of states: for let a Prince aduance to place of high dignitie men of those dispositions,
he shall presently finde their conditions: Magistratus namque virum indicat.  and according to Salust. Difficillimnm est illis in potestatibus temperare, qui per ambitionem sese probos simulauere. It is very difficult for men to beare good temper in authoritie, which (to further their ambition) haue counterfeited themselues honest. Diuers men of Nobily likewise haue through some melancholike suggesti∣on, by reading of of Hystories written to good purpose and example, falne into these extremities: Omnia namque mala exempla ex bonis initijs orta. For all bad examples are bred out of good beginnings. When wicked men (seeking to attaine soueraigntie by the oppression of good soueraignes) perueit the good example of true, renowned, and vertuous Princes; which more coue∣ting their countries libertie, then their priuate dignitie, did suppresse tyran∣nous  vsurpers. Howbeit, we may read of some noble Gentlemen, which haue been drawne into treason against their Prince and countrey, through consanguinitie, faction, or affection of parties; and some through a mortall lincke of amitie, which tieth or combineth them to the treason of some archtraitors, vpon some greiuous ground of discontentment conceiued a∣gainst the Prince, or against some of his neerest friends in counsell: yet if these Doues should chance to fall into those nets amongst Crows, it were great pit∣tie they should vndergo legall censure if they would be penitent and become loyall; hauing any specious tokens and apparance of good nature, desert & faculties to benefit their countries in aftertime; as hath appeared by manifold  examples of diuers gracious Princes; & amongst others by Henry du Bourbon, the French kings late pardon vnto the royall Bastard of Auergne, who was confederated in treason with the Marischall Byron: For to cut off many No∣bles together (after the head be taken away, when any good hope of ensuing grace remaineth by the rest aliue, as some men thinke) were merely snper∣fluous; but of this point I purpose to speake somewhat in my third Booke, as occasion will offer. Yet in these cases, Princes should proue very circum∣spect Philosophers, in sounding and measuring the natures and inclinations of their ministers, rewarding, cherishing, disgracing, and disliking those, and these as vpon good grounds to their wisedoms shall seeme most fit; and when  any such seditious and turbulent actions haue taken fire, then behooueth it them, and all other noble magistrates, Operam strenuè dare ne quidrespublica de∣trimenti capiat. Stoutly to labour, that the Commonwealth may not be by those meanes preiudiced. Whereas the very best way to crosse, and conuince all ambition and sedition is by their contraries, which are good artes, true ver∣tues, and apparant iustice: and these (if any noble Magistrate shall exer∣cise them) will clearely purge all those pestilent and contagious humours. It is written in the life of the Emperour Titus: how when diuers which did conspire his death, with the confusion of that Empire, were brought prisoners  vnto him; his speech vnto them was thus: Videtisné potestates fato dari? fr∣straque facinus tentari patrandi spe, vel amittendi metu? Perceiue you not now that principalities and powers are fatally distributed? and that mortall men, in vaine attempt hainous practises, either in some hope by the effecting of them;
or in a feare of failing or miscarrying in their ensignements? For sure it is, that traitors & seditious rebels, are prouided by Gods ordināce as his rods & scour∣ges of discipline and indignation, to worke out his will amongst many Nati∣ons and people; but more certaine it is that they cannot afflict, torture, or pre∣uaile more then is permitted by that hand which directeth them: but most sure, certaine, and true this is; that commonly these sharpe rods of rebellion, are made of thornes and brambles, destined to such ende as hangemen and condemned persons, which are made executioners of others. Needfull hath God in his wisedome seene, that there should be treasons, but woe be to those that execute them: it had been good for them, that they neuer had quickened in the seed of man. For no sooner hath the father punished his children with  those vngracious twigges, but in a tender compassion he casteth them into the fire, and some-times burneth the rod before it be vsed; because his wrath shall not continue still against his, which if a little while it might endure (after once it were kindled) what mortall man were able to brooke the smart thereof? There is one ambitious rule, which the Machiuilian politicks haue taught Vide cap. 17. princ. Nic. Ma∣chiauill. to colour their wickednesse, according to that saying out of Euripides cited by Cicero from the mouth of Caius Caesar: Nam si violandum est ius, reguandi gratia violandum est: alijs rebuspietatem colas. For if men wil violate iustice, the violati∣on therof ought to proceed from the hopes or fruition of soueraignetie, which may depend theron; in all other things (sauing in matters of Empire) let a man  declare pietie. But the wisest Philosophers teach vs, that it is base and vulgar to thirst after soueraigntie; meaning, that ambition cannot seaze vpon a verie no∣ble and magnanimious heart. Besides royall burthen is accompanied with a most seruile vexation, care, continuall feare, with treason, & perill. Hence was it that Aecius the Comoedian concluded how few princes were honest and faithfull, either because no princes in his time did beare any soueraignetie but tyrannes: or else because hee deemed in his vaine opinions, that without some sinister and crooked meanes, kings could not retaine their principalities; which Cicero to this effect distinguisheth, as if the Comoedian had onely ment Offic. 3. it by licencious, and tyrannous kings whose ends are commonly like their go∣uernements.  Such were the ancient tyrans of Greece that durst not come a∣broad out of their pallaces; least some good man in killing of them might emancipate the Commonwealth. And hence was it which we may read of Thales Melesius, who deemed it impossible, that tyrannes should liue vntill were old, according to this of the Poet Iuuenall. Ad generum Cereris siue caede & vulnere pauci, Descendunt reges, & sicca morte Tyanni. Few tyrannous kings end their liues naturally; but by slaughter, wounds,  or treason. Moreouer, it is most certeine, that a vertuous and honest spirit deemeth it a great burthen to be a king; the glorrie wherof cannot coūteruaile the tenth part of the miserie which adioyneth it: were it not therefore the imposition of God, & that they dare not withstand the diuine iniunction and
commission of the most highest; who iustly calleth many princes to sit vpon  his seate, and to iudge the people on earth, I perswade my selfe that diuers would haue refused or resigned their iust inheritances of kingdomes vpon such considerations. Howbeit many good men lawfully called (such as Nu∣ma Pompilius, & Heluius Pertinax haue voluntarily renounced and resigned vp their estates: according to that saying of Cicero, Multi sunt & fueruut qui tran∣quilitatem Offic. 1. expetentes a negotijs publicis se remouerunt; & in hijs nobilissimi Phi∣losophi, principes, hominesque seueri. Many great Philosophers, princes, and graue persons are and haue bene; which in their loue of tranquilitie, resigned all their publike reputations, and offices. But to proceed in my discourse, certaine it is as I said, that men naturally be so much the more ambitious or ready to take hold of that poyson, how much the more  they be fortunate: onely malicious flatterers, such as haue put vpon their hearts that vicious habite of speaking and soothing men vp in all things plausible vn∣to them; ytching their eares with painted hopes; kindling discontentment in them against other great persons & fellow counsellors neere their soueraigne, hatch ambition in the hands and hearts of them which haue alwayes bene busied in mightie matters; ministring some salt cause of vnsatiable heat and thirst of reuenge against their peeres; vpon some vnperfect grounds plotted and leuelled by their turbulent and malicious heads and hearts. And this out of their spightfull humours (tending intirely to the alteration, ruine, and spoyle of their countrimen) is set abroach, as in a late counsellour and peere  of this land too plainely was seene, which occasioned his ouerthrow. Credu∣litie before touched is a meane to moue these perturbations: which neuer can happen to that counsellor, whose actions and consultations are honorably di∣rected in the true feare of God, and of his prince: who will not permit any trust of such matters where the vulgar beareth standard, vpon whose force and faith relying diuers princes and potentates haue mainely miscaried with losse of their states and liues, and some also by pertaking with them in their vnper∣fect quarrels; which leaning vpon their succours aimed at such dignities as neither were preordained nor fit for them: for they be variable, giddie headed, Salust in b Iugurth. sedicious, full of discord, couetous of innovation, and enemies to peace and  tranquilitie. And therefore that most learned and noble poet Scalliger addeth his suffrage to this opinion very fitly in these words. Qui pendet ab errore & opinione vulgi Pendet magis, at que arbore qui pendet ab alta. He which dependeth vpon the error and opinion of the vulgar, holdeth more nicely then he which doth hang ready to fall from the highest branch of a tall tree. Most of which (being enraged with a lust of Innouation) would willingly strangle themselues in the throat ofthe Commonwealth: & though  they partake with traitors and highly fauour the treason, yet if they finde it once displayed and boulted out, (for their hearts are prone to tumult) then will they presently curse him that marshalled them in their treasons; shewing
themselues most forward in apprehension, and punishing of him and of his  follwers. And if their Arch-captaine in that commotion or sedition be ta∣ken, or if his practises be frustrated; it hath beene alwayes noted that they then begin most vehemently to commend him, which is & was his greatest aduer∣sarie, whom doubtlesly they would (had fortune otherwise turned) haue mi∣serably massacred and slaughtred: declaring (like apparant Camelions which turne colour with euery die) great gladnesse in their feasts, and bonefyers; as if they were deliuered from that seruitude, which like faint-hearted hypocrites and time seruitors they first desired, & hunted for. The like example was seen amongst those rabble of the Romanes which did partake with Catyline, so long as his treasons tooke good head: but when he grew weake and remediles;  then, Mutatamente Catylinae consilia execrari; Ciceronem ad caelum tollere cepe∣runt. The case being altered, they with execrations condemne the counsell of Catyline; extolling Cicero to the heauens. It is therefore found great weakenesse in wise men, to trust vnto the rude, ignorant, and vndisciplined multitude; and he which is instructed in morall Phylosophy, will neuer put affiance in them, vnlesse it be where their Captaine is the best man in field, and where they must either fight like men, or die like dogs without resistance. For by Phylosophy men are taught (as I said before) to know themselues, and how to measure and master their owne force. Example of this is recor∣ded of the Gracchi, & of Spurius Melius. For though it be (as was before said)  commendable and necessarie for vertuous counsellors to regard, and make sute for dignities and preferments at their princes hands, whose faithfulnesse, diligence, and generall good desert, worthily may require the same: so doth it without all doubt import the contrary, when they by wicked means would aspire to soueraigntie: which happeneth commonly through neglect of Gods worship, and contempt of their liege soueraigne: none of which as it is ge∣nerally found in all writers of Hystories or Chronicles, haue long enioyed that, which by such impious and vniust meanes hath been catched; and most of them perished in the beginnings and executions, which with some exam∣ples I thinke it a thing not impertinent to confirme. Agathocles the Sycilian,  sonne to a Potter, through his malicious quicknesse & subtilties, attained by fauour of the Syracusians, first to bee made their Pretor: and after (through helpe of his friend Amilchar, Generall of an armie which then serued in Sycill, with whom he conspired) hunting ambitiously for the soueraigne power of that State, at a signall giuen, diuers armed persons sodainly rushing out in a chamber, where the principals vnder the pretext of serious consultation were assembled, slaughtered the Citizens and Senators, wherby he became prince of that State. After that precedent, Olyuerotto di Fermo by treacherous mur∣ther of his Vncle Giouanni Fogliani, and of the Fermanes, became prince of Fermo: who by the Commande of Caesar Borgia, then Generall of his fa∣ther  Pope Alexander the sixt, his forces by traine vnder the like trust of consul∣tation with Orsino, Baglioni Prince of Perugia, & others was imprisoned and strangled. Lodovik Sforza Duke of Milane, by vsurpation hauing impoisoned his Nephew Giouanni Galliacio, did aspire to that principallitie which some
did suppose, was a great cause of the ruyne and seruitude of alie, with infi∣nite  other calamities: which as Francis Guicciardine writeth, happened vpon it in Christendome; whose whole race was extinct not long after. I will not omit that which is yet fsh late Chronicles; and hath been many times represented vnto the vulgar vpon our English Theaters, of Richard Plantaginet, third sonne to Richard Duke of  who (being el∣dest brother next suiuing to King Edward the fourth,  hee had ∣naturally made away his elder brother, George Duke of  ( he thought a grieuous eye sore betwixt him and the marke  which he leuelled) did vpon death of the King his brother, take vpon him protection of  Realme, vnder his two Nephewes left in his brotherly  both which  he caused at once to be smothered together, within : his Maiesties Tower, at London: which ominous bad lodging in memoriall thereof, is to this day knowne, and called by name of th dly Tower▪ Hereupon, this odious Vncle vsurped the crowne, but within lile  two yeeres was deposed, & confounded in the Battell at Bosworth in Leycester shire: 1485. by King Henry the seuenth, sent by God to make resti of the peoples li∣berties; and after so long and hble a shre of ciuill blood,  send a gol∣den sun-shine of peace, closed vp in the pely leuies of that sweet, & mo∣dest Rose of Lancaster which being woe in the  bosome of La∣dy. Elizabeth the daughter of King Edward, (late mentioned of the Family of Yorke) dispersed those seditious cloudes of warre which had a long time ob∣scured  our firmament of peace, banishing that sulphurous smoke of the new∣ly deuised Cannon, with the diuine odour of that blessed inoculation of Ro∣ses: yeelding by their sacred vnion the Lady Margaret, the firstflower of that coniunction; and great Grand-mother (as I declared) to our Soueraignes Maiestie, in these happy bodyes raigning ouer vs: whose blessed raigne, I be∣seech God to lengthen as the dayes of heauen. Henry Duke of Guyse, father to this yong Duke now liuing in France, as∣piring couertly to that greatnesse, which neither his birth nor conscience (al∣beit well guarded by the Church of Rome) could assure him; fell in the very bowels of his ambition vnder that guard, which if he could, should haue been  spectators of their Soueraignes tragoedie. Charles du Lorreyne, likewise ike du Mayne, and brother to that Duke of Guyse (after that he had many yeeres waged warre against his naturall Soueraigne Henry of Burbo, now the fourth French King of that name; and had vsurped the titles, coynes, crowne, and royalties of that Realme, which he then miserably tortured, holding his liege Lord at the pikes point in most hostile defiance, was at length shamefully put to flight: in restoring of which vngratefull Duke to his office of Le grad Chambellane du France (though it was done by mightie means and mediation) the king liuing hath declared much clemencie, The late successe of Maris∣chall Byron in France, for practizing against the crowne and life of his Souc∣raigne,  with the faction of Spaine, being sofresh in our memories by the ran∣some of that capitall treason (with his head, which payd it) need not to be much stood vpon.
Neither those ambitious conspiracies of the Earle Gourey in Scotland, a∣gainst  his Highnesse sacred life, miraculously protected and preserued by God for the weale and gouernment of his people. Adde herevnto the late practi∣ses of our vnworthy Gentlemen of England, against his annoynted Maiestie; whosemercy doth yet appeare much great, as were their treasons. By these and other examples, infinite of that nature appeareth how needfull it is, that Magistrates in such place haue great care and feare of falles, when they seeke to scale flipperie promotions beyond their reach: which are onely bestow∣ed by diuine prouidence, and not any wayes disposed by humane policie: This also did the diuine Scalliger obserue in his aduise to such ambicious fire∣brands, which after th'eruption of a fewe turbulent sparkes, soone and on a  sudden ende in cold, and dead embers. Certo   & tua metire probando: Ne scande Locos equibus inde sit vuendum. By good proofe and experience learne to moderate thy selfe: seeke not to clime vnto such places from whence thou must haue a fall. Beware therefore of this fearefull elation of the spirit, towards corporall promotions and benefits: and if griefe or discontentment vpon good ground seaze vpon vs, let vs arme our selues with constancie to beare and to conuert  all wrongs and tribulations, into the practise and vse of vertues: by which meanes we shall so charme all dolours and perturbations, that they can haue no power to brande or torture vs. Adde hereunto this precept of Master Francis Guycciardine, that counsellors in weigtie matters shew deliberation and slownesse of tongue and foote: the cnstome of their seruice fed with the bit∣ter hearbe patience (which bringeth peace at the last) should so farre preuaile with them in most causes; that the more wrongs they receiue at their Princes hands, the more patience and dutie they should declare. This, least I become more tedious then pleasant or profitable to the Rea∣der, I thinke sufficient concerning the principal qualities and offices in a coun∣sellor:  many more seuerally might be recounted, howbeit as adiuncts or de∣pendances vnto these before specified. And some fewe which herein are ex∣expressed, will make a man honourable, and esteemed according to that say∣ing of Salust, Multa varique sunt artes animi quibus summa claritudo compara∣tur: Herein, not presumptuously nor ouer weaningly, to limit men in wise∣dome and authoritie, so far beyond my censure and aboue my degree, to such things which proceed from my weake and vnripe opinions; but to giue a me∣thodicall taste of my iudgement, grounded vpon the sound opinions of men prudent and very learned, consorting in sweete Harmonie, with the Lawgi∣uers, Commonwealths-masters, and prudent Philosphers of former ages. In  them for my part resting well satiffied: & yet with such due respect as by sub∣mitting my selfe in all reuerence and humiltie to the sounder iudgements ap∣proued wisedomes, and gentler corrections of men learned and experienced in offices of state with a decent obedience and readinesse, I doe desire to bee
both instructed better, and reformed in any point, which their wisedomes shall deeme expedient herein. To conclude therefore in opposition to them  that haue violently and sodainly, fallen from the throne of soueraigntie by their ambition; with such as merely by their vertues haue been aduanced, and established kingdoms in their long succeeding posteritie, through many gene∣rations. I will speake somewhat as well for their encouragement which are ve∣rely noble; as for the reformation of those that are proude, abiect, & ambiti∣ous. Hee which deserueth well, and laboureth in the common cause of his Countrey with iustice and sinceritie, may worthily seeke for condigne prefe∣ment at the Prince his hands: for if euery laborer meriteth wages, what doth he which incessantly busieth himselfe in procuring, ayding, and maintaining the peace and riches of the Common-wealth? Magnae namquè curae magna  merces est: The reward is great which appertaineth to a great charge: as Salust in his Oration to Caesar. This care and zealous desire to dignifie that Nation which gaue the first light to his life, is the perfectest token of a good Counsel∣lors vertue. Virtutique perfectae nonfiet condignus honor; Perfect vertue can∣not be sufficiently honoured; saith Aristotle. And according to Patricius; Ethicor. 8. Lib. 3. de insti. repub. Virtus semper secum comitem habet honorem; velut corpus vmbram, laudataquè crescit: Vertue is continually accompanied with honor; as the body is with a shadow, and florisheth by good fame. Nay, the most kindely milke which nourisheth vertue is honor. And as Aristotle writeth in another place; Homines dij dicuntur propter virtutum excellentiam &c: Men (in respect of their  vertues excellencie) be called Gods. What then? shall we study therefore to become honourable, nay, rather monstrous and abhominable, by the cor∣ruption and brutish appetite of vice and confusion? For euen as it is written, that he which killeth with the sword, shall perish therwith: (which is meant by murtheres▪ that either fall vnder the spirituall or ciuill sword of Gods iustice, or of the Kings) so certaine is it, that he which studieth innouation, disorder, and confusion (through the secret rage of his owne ambitious malice and greedinesse) shall vtterly be confounded. If therefore we should endeuour to recount the numbers of them, that in this fious spirit of Lucifer haue perished; it were infinite, and vnpossible.  In contrary, let vs call to remembrance such vertuous men, as from meane estate (through their owne honesties) haue attained great dignities, and prin∣cipallities: we shall finde their number exceede any common Register. How∣beit, one hundred vicious and ambitious persons, haue in all Ages appeared by proportion (if a man may so terme it) for one halfe of a vertuous man. Vertue was it which first aduauced Saul fró keeping of Asses, to be king in Is∣rael. Regnū 1. cap. 9. What was it which raised Dauid the yongest of Iesses eight children, from keeping of sheepe to sit vpon King Saul his throne? was it not his verruous disposition and inclination; as it appeared when God spake to Samuel: saying,  that he had found a man after his owne heart: commanding the Prophet to raise Vide Ioseph lib. 6 Antiq. Tit. Lyuiu▪ hist. lib. primus. & Val. lib. 3. himselfe and annoint Dauid, for that was he? By verue Tullus Hostilius, a poore Neat-heard, of obscure and vnknowne parentage, raigned ouer the Romans. By such vertue Ventidius Bassus (in high fauour with Cayus Caesaer) who was a
poore mans sonne, and had bene a muletter was first made Tribune of the peo∣ple, after that Pretor, then Archbishop, & lastly Consull: wherupon that libell was cast out in spight of vertue (which hath alwaies many persecutors) mulos qui fricabat, consul factus est; in my iudgement wholy tending to the honour Gellius lib. 15. cap. 4. of Bassus; and vnto the perpetuall glory of those noble Romanes which (with out any superficiall respect vnto the shadow) precisely looke into the sub∣stance. So did Telephantes, first a wheelewright become king of the Lydians. Petrus Bergo usis lib. 14 Cr. &c. Tamerlane of a neat-heard made in short time Emperour of the Turkes and Persians. Valentinianus (whose father was a ropemaker) elected Emperour of the Romanes: semblably Darius, Archilaus, with others infinite priuate persons and Philosophers were in regard of their vertues preferred to king∣domes  & principalities. Let therefore vertue be the pure substance of our acti∣ons and consultations; for it commaundeth by the force of a more then worldly spirit, all earthly promotions and blessings: considering how sapi∣ence and vertue be called the grounds by which man is resembled vnto God. It resteth now that I declare the bodily tokens and complections which are obserued by some special writers in choise of a counsellor: for as in al weighty matters, it is euident amongst wise men, that great iudgement and obseruati∣on is vsed; so should it appeare much rather in a matter of such speciall impor∣tance as this is; for so much as vpon these counsellors the wealth and health of princes and principalities depend. By these exterior properties, much may be  gathered of the interior faculties before declared (as Ceriolano thinketh) albe∣it they doe not hold generally certaine; for coniecturals are as notes or signes, which may sometimes deceiue; and yet not to be reiected neither: For (as Aristotle and other Philosophers write) their are markes and accidents or signes in mens bodies figuring their priuate affections. In some beautifull persons, there is a kind of venerable maiestie. A comely countenance and pleasing face, greatly graceth a counsellor; yeelding good correspondence to his dignitie. Hence was it that Socrates did preferre before all others beauti∣full persons to the studies of Philosophie; supposing that this outward pul∣chritude did represent to life the picture of diuine beautie. And albeit some∣times  within a sower countenance, a most beautifull nature is planted, and a right excellent knowledge, mind, and iudgement within a bodie not absolute in composition and membrature; yet is it very rare to be seene: and how∣much the more rarely such persons are found, so much more excellent and rare, are their interior vertues & perfections, if we compare them with others in their natures, being intended here to that beautie, which Cicero doth ascribe vnto dignitie and not to comely colour: considering how the true pulchri∣tude is interior; whereas in effeminate and affected beautie nothing is abso∣lute. For if we consider it, Nature her selfe being prouided of a competent force, placeth her most arte and studies in fashioning of the braine, which (as I  said) is the principall seate of our reasonable soule. And hence it is, that some men which in other members seeme foule and deformed, yet prooue to bee most prudent and of admirable fine wits. It was written by diuers Hystorians, that amongst barbarous and wilde people, the visible beautie was had in much
admiration and honour: and therefore was great Alexander despised by the Queene of Amazons, because in so puisant a prince she found not so pleasing  a comelinesses, as in her fantasie was thought that a man of such a famous and exceeding valor and victories should haue, the report of which moued her to visite him, as Queene Saba did Salomon, who was angellicall both in exterior and interior pulchritude. The complection therefore of such a magistrate should be temperate, either sanguine, or chollericke: for such persons com∣monly be sharpe witted; of a sound iudgement, and durable quicke memorie: they be iust, affable, faithfull, beneficent, magnificent, magnanimious, strong, valiant, & well attempered with alacritie, agilitie, and health of bodie; if their natures be not with bad custome depraued or corrupted. The spirits of per∣sons melancholike are dried vp, and earthie; rude, heauie, vaine, detesting  honorable thoughts; malicious, supersticious, suspitious, enuious, ful of sorow, vexation, and contumely; how much more in age, so much lesse in know∣ledge. Neither are flegmatike persons eligible by the course of nature; being vicious, and vnapt for learning, by the rule of Philosophie. The stature of them therefore which are ordained, should be meane; the whole corporall membrature, iust, and proportionable; a visage liberall and ingenuous, elo∣quently conciliating beneuolence and authoritie. For the reasonable soule (being gathered into a narrow roome) hath more force to worke; then as the sappe in a long slender tree which extending vnto the top and hight of many tall branches produceth lesse store of fruit by much; then it would haue done  in a brushie, short well knitted, and tenderly branched tree, whose radicall hu∣mour worketh in much lesse compasse. Howbeit I denie not but in the purest and best attempred complections, according with the iudgements of diuerse excellent naturallists and Philosophers, the power concupiscenciall will great∣ly predominate and incite men to sinne. Yet if persons of those cleare consti∣tutions and complections shall moderate their mentall perturbations and car∣nall appetites; no men of other complections can haue power to come neare vnto them in vertues; if they set their hearts vpon righteousnesse, and call vp∣on the name of the most highest. For vnto this precious gift of temperance their nature is most neare; because their braines are lesse prouoked by the  distemperature of their inferior irascible and concupiscentiall parts. The com∣plection therfore most eligible is sanguine, aubourne haire, of a meane stature; vertuously instructed, healthfull and long liued. And these (vnlesse some o∣ther defect or violence against nature peruert the same) are for the most part endowed with much wisedome and wit: of which excellent kind we read in the bookes of the Kings, that king Dauid was; as, faire and ruddie with a come∣ly countenance, & body well shaped; & of a meane stature. Howbeit, we find that he many times through those concupiscenciall motions was excited to sinne: yet had God so blessed him that he did not loose that habite of vertue  which was put vpon him with that blessing, when choise was first made of him to be the seruant of God, and vicegerent to rule his chosen people. In ele∣ction of counsellors, (according to Pliny) it was obserued that no man vnder thirtie yeeres of age should be permitted to consult in principall causes of the
Commonwealth, nor men very aged, as after the terme of sixtie yeeres accor∣ding  to Vrro. Which Seneca likewise confirmeth, limiting the seruice of sol∣diers to fiftie yeeres, and of Senators to sixtie: Per legem annariam. For accor∣ding to that Law, the Romanes well knew when they might in respect of their yeeres sue to be Tribunes, Quaestors, Dictators, Consuls, or in other offices, as it was limited appearing by this of the Poet Ovid. Finit aque certis Legibus est atas; vnde petatur honos. That age, (by which men may sue for honors, or promotions) is confined  within certaine Lawes. For if in respect of their experience by many yeeres old men be regarded, it must be respected that by course of nature they be timerous, suspicious, in∣credulous, couetous, and so much more froward and fearefull as they bee more wasted in yeeres; impatient of labour and paine, obliuious (by which defect diuers occasions are neglected) talkatiue, & obstinate in opinion, their vnderstanding dull, their heate (which is the spurre of action) wasted. Yong men are likewise void of experience, much subiect to vicious affections and pleasures of nature; to passions and perturbations of minde, so distracted with heat of youth, heedlesse temeritie, and surcuidrie that they cannot obserue a∣ny  temper in grauitie; neither will the people cleaue vnto their counsells. And as that excellent Morallist Seneca writte: Iuuenile vitium est, regere non posse impetum. It is a vice naturally graffed in youth, not sufficiently to bridle I Troade. appetite. Men therefore of middle age are to be chosen, whose humours are plausible and temperate; whose inward affections are delayed with some ex∣perience and discretion; which can dispose, remember, and execute matters with a proportionable strength, courage, and grauitie; whose memorie will richly serue them for things past, whose vnderstanding to iudge of things pre∣sent according to truth, and whose imagination participating of them both, can presage or prouide things to come; such men are importuned with  thronging multitudes for counsell; and are to be chosen (as I set downe be∣fore) by the prince himselfe vpon good experience had of their sufficiencies. Yong men admitted to that place are fitly called abortiue counsellors, and cer∣taine of thē like summer fruits of the first season soone ripe, & fit for the admi∣nistration of weightie matters, but naturally decay quickly: some long before they be come to be sound in iudgment but hauing attained perfection in knowledge are the men indeed fitt for aucthoritie most excellent aboue o∣thers, their wisdome continuing long with them, & yeelding a faire and com∣mendable light euen to the last spiracle of their naturall life; so long as the least droppe of oyle is remaining in their earthly lampes. As that most reuerende  Father in Christ, Iohn Whytgift, late Archbishop of Canterbury; and the right sage, and euer-worthy Lord Treasurer, William Cecill declared long after the terme of sixtie yeeres, euen to the last period of their breath. Such yong to∣wardly plants as are like by the gifts of nature, and pleasantnesse of their wit
to proue fit in time for such seruice, must first be diligenly taught in Schooles,  and Vniuersities: after good knowledge in arts, commended with honest and faithfull Tutors, attending them into forreine countries, there to note and learne good fashions of people with their Languages, and such things as I spoke of before in peregrination: and then towardes the three or foure and twentieth yere of their age (when firmer strength may beare it) exercised and practised some-deale in the warres, which is a great glory to noble yong spirits, and groundeth them in the loue of vertue, when armes are exercised with a perfect heroicall resolution, and to good purposes (as Cicero wri∣teth: Prima est adolescenti commendatio ad gloriam, si qua ex bellicis rebus compa∣ari potest. Oic. 2. The best honour of a yong man, proceedeth from his perfection  in armes. And according to Plato, Liberum hominem maxinè decet armorū disci∣plina Lib. 21. Tac de fordu. & equitatio &c. Martiall discipline and horseman-ship, most honoureth a Gentleman. By these meanes hauing well broken the inordinate heate of youth, with some manly moderation and experience, they may be chosen (if the Prince thinke it fit) into counsell; imployed in publike affares of poli∣cie till sixtie yeeres be past, and then let them take leaue of their Prince, re∣turning to their quiet: for the better purifying and rectifying of their consci∣ences, seeking after their soules health; studying how to die a blessed death, and hauing their honors and reuenues enlarged (by the Princes great bene ficence) towards them. The Soueraigne (which is the fountaine of these counsels) needeth not  any rules concerning his apport or carriage, in administration of graue and weightie businesses of his kingdomes and state: for so much as it should bee presupposed that all the wise consultations and actions of his immediate mini∣sters issue from him, as being the fountaine or Loadstarre of their direction: in whom all glorie (which is attained by the mature deliberations and serui∣ces of them that attend his counsels) remaineth. And therefore I craue par∣don herein, if vnhapily some shall imagine me so foolishly presumptuous, as to prescribe rules of policie for any princes, not hauing sufficient in my selfe to serue those priuate purposes, that are required in a single man of meane condition: for well I know Quā difficile atque asperū sit consiliū regi aut impera∣tori  Sal in . ad c . dare, postremo cuiquam mort alium cuius opes in excelso sunt: quippe cum & illi consultorū copia sunt: I know that it is difficult and harsh, to minister counsell vnto a King, or Emperor, or to any mortall man, whose riches are huge and honorable: because such persons are plentifully furnished with choise of counsellors. Onely this in briefe, the respects importing his princely care are these. First a ripe demurrer in weightie causes: wherein is required his circumspection that he trifle not away the time of his action in vnprofitable delayes; or waste the dayes of his busines in vaine words: next that he lend a iudicious care without pertinacie to them that consult vpon any serious mat∣ter concerning his weale: hearing all their opinions beneuolently, but wari∣ly  concealing his owne mind within himselfe, or imparting it (albeit vpon ne∣cessitie) to very few, iudging and pondering euery mans censure according to the weight of prudence. Tunc demū elucet regia maiestas, cum potest qua cuius{que}
sententia in senatu melior, non numero sed pondere dijudicare. Royall maiestie  then most luculently disperseth her glorie, when it hath power to ponder eue∣ry Senator his opinion according to the sound substance of reason, and not perswaded by the multitude of voices, Lastly but most needefully that his grace admit a generall libertie for his Counsellors franckly to declare their minds without restraint of any thing which may concerne the subiect of their consultations: for miserable is that prince which willfully, but more sluggishly rather occasioneth his owne wretchednesse by prohibition or punition of that libertie which openeth vnto him th'impostumes or dangers of his present state, in disposing of which kinde of causes he should decline from any taste of partialitie: which herein is expressed, when he neither rewardeth them that  aduise him soundly to the best, nor punisheth those which ministred counsell to the worst sence. And this is one principle, or caueat rather to euery wise prince, which (as I should thinke) is a good member of his true fortitude; that he gouerne of himselfe, & be not gouerned entirely by the counsels and opini∣ons of others; as if he should fearefully distrust his owne priuate wisedome, in any publike matters of the commonwealth: Nihil est  in imperio perni∣cious, quàm ex alio sapere. And as Tilius writeth in his Commentaries of Lib. 1. in Chyl∣derici primi vit. France: Videant principes ne munera sua egligant: sed procurent ea ex mandato dei, nec incumbant toti in alienam fidem. Princes should haue a most vigilant and circumspect care vnto their offices: which they should execute according  to the commandement of God; and not entirely repose their trust in others. It is likewise very behoofull, that euery Prince take open notice and vnder∣standing, of the singular good vertues and demerites of such valiant and ex∣cellent persons as haue highly worthied his Highnesse, honoured the Com∣monwealth; or benefited any speciall members thereof. Tam etiam beneficij quam iniurae memor esse debet: He must remember a benefit as presently, as a wrong done vnto him. Semblably, true munificence (as I said before in my first Booke) is most worthy the royall Maiestie: Armis nempè regem, quàm mu∣nificentia vinci minus flagitiosum: The dishonor of a king is not so great which is gotten by his ouerthrowe in warres, as by his want of due munificence.  To that prince likewise, that tempereth his raigne with benignitie and cle∣mencie, all things seeme ioyfull & pleasant; Etiam & hostes huic aequiores quàm alijs ciues sunt: Euen enemies are more fauorable to such princes, then subiects are to those of a contrary condition. Which that morall Tragoedian witnes∣seth in many places; though his Scholler would neuer learne that Lesson. Qui vult amari, languida regnet manu: He (that would be beloued amongst his people) must punish with a langui∣shing Seneca in Theb. hand. Moreouer, euery wise prince will haue his Court furnished with store of reuerend Byshops, and Noble-men of port; aswell for his owne more fame  and honour in forreine places, as for the maiestie of his State at home: by which meanes if any matters happen amisse, either in the Church, amongst the nobility, or in the Commonwealth; he may sagely communicate, consult, and worke out (with their forces about) him towards a generall or particular
pacification, and tranquilitie. The reputation and ancient offices of a prince  amongst the Romaines was to summon a Parliament, senate, or counsell; to Spartianus in vita Antonini & Casiodorus lib. 6. giue directions vnto the Senators: to deliuer the law, to constitute guardians, for wards and orphanes in pupilage; to make free men of seruants: to dispose and bestow the publike tribute. His meanes to conciliate the peoples loue is the fame & opinion of libertie, beneficence, iustice, faith, and of other qualities apperteining his royall apport in manners and facilitie: for in iust and good princes (in and from whom no deceits nor iniuries appeare, nor proceede) the people franckely repose all their fortunes, wiues, liues, & children: as they did here in your most excellent Maiestie, vpon the decease of our late deare Soue∣raigne Elizabeth: which how firme a kingdome that is, cannot but be with much comfort knowne vnto your highnesse: Cum multo tutius sit volentibus  Salust in orat. ad Cas. quam coactis imperitare. Considering that it is a fafer course to beare rule ouer such as are voluntarily, then those that by constraint are subiected. This hapi∣nesse hath iustice and prudence wrought in and for your grace, that no people can be more franke hearted in loyall alleageance, and reuerend affection to∣wards their Soueraigne; then your subiects of England. For as we find that men for many reasons subiect themselues voluntarily to princes (some vpon a good opinion conceiued of their iustice and prudence; others in hope of be∣nefit to be gotten at their royall hands; some for honor, a multitude for other preferments of diuers natures; & peraduenture not a few which stand in feare of some disaduantage if they should not subiect themselues vnder thē, whose  true right and inheritance void of any the least colour of exception doth com∣mand and inioine them) so nothing can be more specious, then your maiesties excellent vertues and knowledge, wherewithall God hath admirably blessed you; nothing more liuely declared then your true royall munificence and bounty: nothing equiualent with your kingly beneficence in honoring & pre∣ferring vertuous persons: & (that which is most apparant & cleare as the sunne in his purestlight) your maiesties royall right of inheritance & vndoubted line∣all discent vnto these crownes & kingdomes vnder your Scepter imperiously by right commandeth it. But one thing more then all the rest (to the vnspeake∣able comfort of your highnes vnder God) there is; which mainly conquereth  & preserueth all Empire; being a zealous & vnfained loue of your people to∣wards your grace, so that in these three pointes your maiesties glories are with most renowne emblazoned: First with the peoples loue: secondly by the confidence reposed in their prince through his vertues: and lastly, through the reuerence, & dutifull obedience exhibited vnto him. Parua namque res tantum ingenium atting ere nequit. For such a mightie wit is not apprehensible of small matters. Such infinite blessings hath the God of righteousnesse powred into your graces head and heart; hauing girded, impaled, and fastened th'one in constancie with those graces of wisedome, within your royall crowne:  and of sacred vnderstanding within those noble vertues which haue circled the other. Herein (being so manifest a trueth which euery reasonable subiect knoweth and acknowledgeth) I cannot incurre the note of Adulation: so that
it may be verified in this (which was spoken vnto Caius Caesar) Prius defessi  fuerint homines laudando facta tua, quā tu laude digna facienda, &c. Men shall first grow wearie with speaking of your glorious and prayseworthie deeds, before you desist from doing such things, as most highly deserue commendation. Thus hath your Maiestie giuen vnto vs a golden and a blessed kingdome, not onely by adding vnto your inheritance of England the crowne of Scotland, but by bringing in with you as your inseperable cōpanions, peace, prudence, magnificence, iustice, clemencie, with diuers other princely vertues amongst vs, for our imitation; which (by the true meede of honor) propagate all domi∣nion and soueraigntie, confirming that golden sentence of Seneca: Habere regnum casus est, virtus dare. The possession of a crowne is the gift of fortune, the gift of a crowne is the In Thyeste. meede of vertue. So that in after times the like may be recorded of your grace which the Romaines left engrauen in perpetuall honor of their Empe∣rour Heluius; who (being constrained by the Senate and people to take vpon him the empire) was therefore called Pertinax. Pertinace imperanti securivixi∣mus, Hist. August, in vita Helui Pertinaci. nemine timuimus: patri pio senatus, patri omniū bonorū, &c. During the Em∣pire of Pertinax, we liued in securitie, fearelesse of any mortall man: this there∣fore we consecrate to the godly father of the senate, to the father of all good  men. What then remaineth further (after all these blessings in your maiestie lent vnto vs) but that in our zealous prayers, we with a cheerefull vnanimitie, beseech almightie God that all those your highnesse actions and consultati∣ons (which are and shall be) may stand with his good pleasure, and end in all prosperitie. The best meanes of acquisition and preseruation of soueraignetie being declared (as my fashion is) I deeme it needefull to shew by what courses it is suddenly subuerted. In opposition therefore to the peoples loue standeth their hatred and feare of their prince his feueritie. Malus etenim custo diutur∣nit Offic. 2. atis metus: quem etenim metuunt oderunt: quem quisque od perijsse expetir.  For feare is no good treasurer of a mans life: because men hate such persons as retaine them in feare: and it is expedient that he should perish, whom eue∣ry man hateth: Saith Ennius in Cicero. It is therefore impossible for him to raigne long amongst those people whom he doth oppresse with violence and tyrannie, consenting with the sage Morallist. Violenta nemo imperia continuit diù, Moderata durant, Seneca in Troade. Quoquè fortuna altius euexit ac leuauit humanas opes, Hoc se magis supprimere foelicem decet, Variosque casus cernere metuentem deos Nimium fauentes.
No king can rule long time with violence, But princes temperate raigne many yeeres. For wise men which by fortune are aduanc'd, Their power and passions so much more will curbe, And they that feare bad fruits of too good fortunes, Can perfectly discerne the choise of chance. He likewise is not rightly called a king that feareth any subiect, as Seneca writeth in Thyeste. Rex est qui metuit nihil. He is a true king which doth not stand in feare of any thing: and in another  place to this point thus: Quos cogit metus Laudare, eosdem reddit inimicos metus. Such people as in feare constrain'd loue kings, By the same feare are made their enemies. Nay true kings (as I said before) whose true firmament, is onely iustice) are knowen by two speciall things by which they retaine their kingdomes in  peace and happinesse; that is by their zealous worshippe of God, and In Thyeste. their voluntarie subiection of themselues vnto the lawes by which they gouerne the nations on earth. Hence was it that Caelius did write of a graue, a iust, and a learned, prince which answered a certaine hypocriticall and dangerous flatterer (who did affirme that all the meanes and proceedings of princes concerning their estates generally were iust and honest) on this Lib. antiq lect. 12. cap. 46. fashion: Omnia per Iouem non sunt honesta, & iusta, sed barbaris tantum. Nobis vero ea honesta quae honesta, & iusta quae iusta; & illud possumus, quod de iure possumus. I call Iupiter to witnesse, that all things are not honest and iust, but amongst barbarous kings and saluages. But of vs those things (which  are verely honest) are esteemed honest; and all such things iust, which are iust indeed; and that is in our power to doe, which we may lawfully doe. Moreouer this is a most reasonable position, and established in the ciuill lawes. Neminem dici posse, se posse aliquid quod honestè non potest & salua dignitate. It cannot be sayd of any man, that he may doe anything, which impug∣neth Text in leg. ne∣pos  de verborū & serū signif. his reputation or honestie. Tyrannes likewise are knowen in two spe∣ciall things: by which (according to the obseruation of some curious heades) they be noted to preserue a tyrannie. But in my iudgement the members of those two meanes are the likeliest to demolish any state whatsoeuer: the first kind barbarous, and the second craftie. Vpon the first expendeth the cutting off and extinguishing of the mightie ones, the abolishing of conuiuiall meetings and good fellowship in enter∣course
amongst neighbours, the subuersion of Churches, hospitals, schooles,  & accademies, bestowing the lands with which they formerly were endowed vpon greedy flatterers, & enemies of honestie: the taking away of fayres, mar∣kets and other meanes wherby contrimen become strange one towards ano∣ther the admittance of strangers into the publike corporations, ciuill societies, and other popular assemblies that they might snarle and entangle people in their words & actions by which their priuiledges & possessions may come to be seazed profisco. The dispersing through all places of the Commonwealth priuie whisperers & informers, for the secret groping and mining into the peo∣pels hearts; and to supplant the states of priuat gentlemen and persons of good qualitie: the sowing of factions, sedicious slaunders, and discentions amongst  noblemen, rich men, and the commoners; by whose ruine his coffers may bee loaden: the driuing of poore folkes into mere miserie, feare, and pusil∣lanimitie: the leuying and vndertaking of vniust war abroad, that he may make all sure at home. The diffidence, and not crediting of friends; the cherishing, preferring, and benefiting of wiues, whoores, parasites, seruants, fidlers, ras∣cals, cookes, panders, daudes, players, taylors, and Buffons. Vpon the second meanes consisteth a counterfeit and hypocriticall care, or pretence to cherish the Commonwealth: th'exaction of tributes vnder the pretext of necessarie warres; and of oeconomicall occasions: to counterfeit a reuerende graee and plausible maiestie, both in person and countenance: to  wound no man with open iniurie, but priuily to bite him to the bone: to re∣taine but one wife in open sight: admirably to dissemble sobrietie, vigilancie, the feare of God, and care of religion; and sometimes in specious apparance, to reward honest men vnder the pretext of vertue. And these haue beene no∣ted as eminent qualities in malicious Tyrants, such as Caligula, Domitian, and Maximus: which being continually wounded, stabbed, and tormented with the bodkins, and furies of their mischieuous and impious actions and deuises; as Nero was, who (neither sleeping nor waking could rest alone, from horrible and fatall visions and apparitions; and being in companie stood in seare of e∣uery man about him) liued in a most miserable hell amongst men. The like  was written of King Richard the third amongst vs, whose nefarious practises, and bloodie crymes were vnspeakable. Whereas if we should in contrary compare them with those vertuous and blessed Princes, whose gracious eyes inspired peace and plentie to the Commonwealth where they gouerned: it shall appeare, that like Angels vpon earth (with a comfortable remembrance and motion of their goodnesse and beneficence generally dispersed) they see∣med in comparison of those other tryranous diuels. But I doubt least, I rest vpon this point more then fitteth, and therefore I will be so short, as I can in the rest. First therefore, a good and wise Prince may not maintaine any combate  with fortune: as in contending to blow stronger then the windes, or to rore lowder then the Seaes; but to yeeld with warie vigilancie to her wrath, vntill prudent occasion bring her (in another bodie then before she was) well
managed, and taught to turne at hand furnished fit for his seruice, with saddle  and bridle, that being brauely mounted at length vpon his old metamorpho∣sed mistresse, with a paire of golden spurres on his hecles, he may ride like the great Greeke Monarch Alexander, when vpon his great headed horse Buce∣phalus, all the kings of the world saluted him as their mightie soueraigne. And lastly, let that serenitie which should shine from the diuine temples of a true prince, so generally dispose it self amongst all people, that nothing repugnant to prudence, iustice, fortitude, and temperance, appeare in his actions and consultations: for they should be th'inseperable counsellors and companions of all crownes. Now to conculde in the foot of my second Booke, with the Prince, who is  both top & root of this Counsell, being therefore called, Consilium priuatum (as Vincentius Lupanus writeth) Quasi secretius, interius, selectius, & sanctius dixeris: As if you should say the most secret, inward, choise, and holy counsell. Which kinde of counsell we finde was instituted amongst the Athenians in their Commonwealth: Sine cuius consilio quicquam decerni, Solonis lege prohibitum erat. Without the aduice of which Senate it was cautioned by the Lawes of Solon, that not any thing of moment in the Athenian Common-wealth should be discerned. I therefore say, that to bee a Prince is the great gift of God: for somuch as he is chosen Gods Vice-gerent or Steward, either good or bad for the weale or punishment of his people: but that prince which stu∣dieth,  and faithfully prouideth for the chiefest good and peace of his people both in soule and body, (proposing that blessing for the whole scope of his gouernment) hath that grace diuinely infused, & it meerely proceedeth from his owne bountifull and blessed nature. Est enim illud imperium diuturnum, & immobile; quod fulcitur gloria, & beneuolentia popularis societatis: For that Em∣pire is durable and constant, which is supported by the report and beneuo∣lence of the popular societie. Which made our late deare Soueraigne, that most conspicious, auspicious and peace-breathing bright Planet of Christen∣dome, so sacred in her domination to that heart-breaking wonder of her ene∣mies: which (hauing spightfully belched out in her life time the vomite of  their impoysoned and malicious calumnies against her vnreproucable con∣uersation and gouernement) were since her death, in remorse of consci∣ence forced to acknowledge the miraculous blessings of the Almightie in her redispensed distributed and imparted to the neighbours and princes of Christendome during her raigne: which more then exemplarie blessing hath answerably giuen courage to the people subiected in obedience vnto the Brittaine crownes; hauing declared their loues and loyalties vn∣to your highnesse, being our happie soueraigne which succeedeth her. And this is it which hath made your gracious Maiestie out of your sa∣cred disposition, and right royall lenitie; not onely to promise, but to  performe so much on your princely part as they did expect, and as your highnesse presupposeth of their desert: by which you shall attaine much
more honour then euer Octauius, Antoninus Pius, Pertinax, Titus, Traiane, or  S ad C. Cas∣. any prince that euer raigned in most happinesse: considering that sage sen∣tence. Imperium facile ijs artibus retinetur quibus initio partum est. It is easie to retaine a kingdome by the same meanes, through which it was attained. Being now maintained (euen as it was gotten) in ioy, iustice, loue and lenitie: which are the true tokens, and infallible affections indeed of a very blessed Soueraigne. For according to Fr. Guicciardine the sweet name of a iust prince is as dearely tendered amongst all louing people as the remembrance of a tyranne odious, abiect,  and contemptible. Finis libri secundi.
The third Booke.  Office of Iudges. WHen that most glorious and euer-renouned Emperour,  Flauius Iustinianus, had (through his incomparable ver∣tues, and trauels indefatigable) subiected the stubborne necks of sauage Barbarians, vnder the victorious yoake of his farre stretching dominions: and with maine power (in much dust and bloody smoake) had forced all Afrike, being victoriously seconded with numberles Prouinces of other nations, in homage and tributarie seruice with feare and trembling, to make remonstrance of her obedience vnder his conquering sword. After  all these tumults, bloody sweats and slaughters; and vpon all his pompous tryumphes for those victories ascribed to th'incomprehensible strength and goodnesse of Almightie God, then did he prudently call to remembrance the blessed serenitie, which eternally shineth from the smiling forhead of gracious peace, after it hath bin first deerly purchased with the violent confusion of vn∣partiall war. Wherfore that he might be magnified aswell by th'oliue of peace, as eternized in the Laurell of martiall victorie, he resolued to become as religi∣ous in establishing of Lawes for the preseruation of his peace and people, as he before had been famous in the propagation, subiection, and conseruation of th'empire: according to that opinion of the sage Tragoedian. Pacem reduci velle victori expedit. Seneca in Here. Fur. It is expedient for the Victor, to studie the restitution of peace. In which beneuolent purpose with all humblenesse, vnder the propitious assistance of God (to which he did with most zealous sinceritie first appeale) by the stu∣dious care of Tribonianus Theophilus and Dorotheus men (of most excelling prudence, neerest him of his secret Counsels, and the learnedest Sages of the  Lawes in that time happily, pithely, and compendiously reduced the fiftie Volumes of Pandects out of Caius his Commentaries, and others, into foure Bookes of Institutions. Which that sacred Emperour (great honours and re∣ueneues being proposed to the Proficients in those studyes) did by his impe∣riall Edicts warranting the promulgation of that Booke, cause to be generally
read in all his dominions for the better establishment of his many kingdoms,  and people in publick weale and tranquilitie. According to whose sage me∣thod and forme of Lawes (being much more excellent and conspicuous then all other ciuill institution (by which any principalities were euer gouerned) I purpose by Gods assistance, to inuest this Counsell; not maiestically roabed in scarlet and purpure according to the reuerence and dignitie thereof: yet in the verie best which my slender faculties can afford; hauing neuer attained any fruitfull substance out of that paradise of diuine and humane knowledge equally combined by the perfection and fulnesse of Gods grace. First therefore iustice (being as Cicero calleth her) Omnium virtutum do∣mina & Regina: The Lady and Queene of all othervertues. By the imperiall  Iusticia Ci 3. Offic. institutions is thus defined; Perpetua & constans voluntas, suum cuique tribuens: A perpetuall and assured will to giue euery man his due. And deriued as I suppose from Ius, which is right, tanquam Ius stans, & immobile, veliuris statio: As a sure, immoueable, or implanted right being the same in effect with the definition of iustice. Iuris prudentia (which I call the knowledge how to discerne of any cause a∣right.) Iurisprudentia. Est diuinarum humanarumque rerum notitia, iusti atque iniusti scientia: A notice of diuine and humane affaires: a science which maketh a true diffe∣rence betweene right and wrong: Comprehending Sapience, which by Philosophers is defined to bee the science of diuine and humane matters:  Spientia. and therefore Iudges and Interpreters of the Lawes, were antiently called Prudentes and Sages. Hence proceedeth it that Ius, by the difference that I can make in our vulgar is termed, euery thing that is thought and done aright. For Iuris definiti. according to Master Bodine, it differeth a lege; Quoniam sine ispect at ad id In Repub. quod aquum & bonum est: lex autem ad imperantis maiestatem pertinet. Because it (without motion or coaction) is wholy imployed in righteousnes and good∣nesse: whereas Lawes haue reference to the Magistrates maiestie. The sub∣stance of iustice is compounded (as it were of three principall elements of the Iustitia partes. Probitas Innocentia. tas. minde: of honestie, which is a plaine and cleanly perfection of the minde; constantly: conuersing in iust dealing and decencie: of Innocencie, which com∣prehendeth  our pietie towards God▪ and our zealous obedience vnto the lawes of his holy Scriptures: with the perfect duties & true charitie which euery well-affected person exhibiteth towards all sorts of people in their degrees: and of Equitie, which in my iudgement is (as it were) a perfect Law truely written in our heartes with the penne of godly reason. Or as it is otherwise defined; Equitas virtus est, qua quis recté legem in multis instantijs deficientem corrigit & moderatur: Equitie is avertue by which the law (failing, or wanting in many principall, vehement, and vrgent points) is corrected and moderated. This is the same lawe which ruleth in his Maiesties Courtes of Chauncerie, where the bitter censure and Cia Cancella∣ria & oequitat. rugged Letter of the Statute is qualefied mitigated or rectified by the merci∣full  interpretation or discretion of the Iudge or Chancellor, being Legis Cu∣stos: & quem penes est am cancellatio, quàm interpretatio & modificatio sententi∣m velrerum in legibus aqu magis acerbarum: The Treasurer of the Lawes; in whose power it resteth: to cancell, interpret, or qualifie sentences, and
causes somewhat sharply censured by the strict Letter of the Lawes. And this  doubtlesly seemeth to be that diuine and superexcellent grace, which giueth glorie with vigor to iustice: or rather as I may fitly call it Equitas est quasi cor Iustici: Equitie is as the heart of iustice. The first of these concerneth our owne persons in particular; the second belongeth our neighbours in speciall; and the third respecteth all degrees of people in generall. Ius, which I call right (being a percept or prescript of the King, tending vnto Ius publicum & prtum. the weale of his subiects, committed to promulgation and administration, and for∣med according to precise reason and vpright conscience) is two fold, being either publicke as appertaining the whole Commonwealth & state, or priuate con∣cerning euery peculiar person in Commoditie. Priuate right, is either that which is by nature: Qualege omnes vbique terra Ius atum est aut natural aut natione. rum principes obligati sunt: By which Law all princes whatsoeuer vpon earth stand bound & obliged; being common to all creatures liuing. From whence the coniunction of male and female, wedlocke, procreation and education of children proceed (as I touched in oeconomie before) Or that which is natio∣nall, and generally belongeth all people: for in such case (vpon constraint) nations made lawes; wherevpon warres, captiuities, and slaueries ensued, re∣pugnant vnto the right of nature, which hath made all persons free. From which nationall right all contracts and bargaines, comerce, or entercourse of Marchants from one place to another, location or the letting of any chattels, goods, or commodities for hier, conduction or the vndertaking of any worke  for wages, people in association or societie, Emption, as when men receiue any thing of others for a price agreed vpon betwixt them that deliuer and those that receiue, selling, borrowing, and lending with such like haue issued. Ciuill right is that by which euery Commonwealth is gouerned. Euen as those ancient laws which King Pharamonde and Gombaldus king of Burgundie made, which were said to be the ciuill Lawes of France. One of them being that kinde of masculine law which they terme Salique; first written in the Germanetongue, and instituted Anno Christi. 422. So called of the people of Salij, dwelling in Franconia neere the riuer Rhyne, to which lists at that time the borders of the French Empire stretched. And the other called Gombet,  comprehending diuers necessarie statutes peculiar to that nation. Semblably these our Parliamentall Lawes in England, which we call the Statute Lawes as of the Commonwealth (from whence the modification & gouernment of the peoples natures and of the Commonwealth proceedeth) is the same in and to all effects and purposes, with that which is called the Ciuill law, re∣specting this Realme and Commonwealth generally. And such were the lawes of Solon and Draco, vnto which the people of Athens (that had du∣ring the Greeke monarchie been a free State, and royall Commonwealth) were subiected in particular. For as these our Statute Lawes of England, are  only made & established by the popular consent and vnanimitie; wherevpon they take title of commonwealthes Laws: so were the ciuill Laws of all free Cities, deuised and established for the generall behoofe of those peculiar
States, by consent of all the free Citizens, and therevpon called ciuill Lawes.  For being by the generall Suffragation and consent of the people, put in force and established, they must needfully Legem pati, quam tulerant: Vnder∣goe their owne Lawes. So that no man hath power in himselfe, to appeale from the Lawes of his owne natiue Countrey: because it is presupposed that each Commonners vote (vpon sound and deepe deliberation and consulta∣tion) hath already passed in Parliament. And this is the very reason which includeth euery good Prince also within the limits of his owne Lawes; being Per necessitatis legem ligatus: Bound by the Lawes of necessitie, to make good his owne act; least through his refusall hee giue the first scope and light vnto the vulgar, to contemne Iustice and magistracie. Hence was it, that Xenophon  produced Cambises, speaking; Nonne statuunt imperatorem; ad omnia tolleran∣tiorem & legibus magis astrictum quā subditos? is it not decreed that he which is Emperor should tollerate more difficulties, and be more straigtly bound vnto the Lawes then his owne subiects? For sure it is, that he laboureth to make a Tyrant of him, which would exempt any king from obedience vnto his owne Lawes. The right of Nations differeth from the Ciuill in this, that it is generall Ius gentiū. and obserued traditionally by naturall reason amongst all persons: whereas  the other is priuate and tyed vnto the necessitie of that Commonwealth which requireth the same. Ciuill Right, is either written, or by prescription. That which is written Ius ciuile. doth consist in Lawes, in Folkemots, in the Senators Institutions; in the Prince his Plees, in Edicts of Maiestrates, and in sage sentences. Law which is, summae potestatis iussum: The precept or commandement of the highest power. Or rather as I deeme: Summum ius. Extreame right. Lex. Because many things were more seuerely committed to the Lawes letter, then by the Law-sages and reuerend Iudges did seeme needfull with extremitie to be executed (and some prudent sentences also deliuered in such misticall Ora∣cles, as might be wrested, mollified, or hardened, as should be thought most fit  in the Iudge his discretion by conscience and equitie; onely to terrifie men from hainous sinnes) is called the Rule of Reason, the Empire of the prince, and dutie of the subiects. For all the Lawes both diuine and humane, haue re∣ference vnto the true worship of God, and to the sincere and perfect concord of people amongst themselues: the vertue whereof appeareth in comman∣ding, prohibiting, permitting and punishing of matters and persons. Iambli∣cus calleth the Law Rectamrationē & reginam omnium, quaerecta & iusta iubet, vetatque contraria: The true reason and Queene of all causes; commanding persons to doe right, and iustice, and prohibiting the contrarie: Which is in effect the same with Iustum, being that, Quod cuiquam secundum praeceptum & prscriptum domini fit: Which is done to euery man according to the king or  Prince his precept and prescription. For it is to be presupposed that the prince dealeth merely with right and equitie towardes all men: whereas if Iustice be the scope or precinct of the Lawes; and if those Lawes vpon commande∣ment
of the prince be put in execution; (which prince representeth vnto the people the liuely figure of Almightie God in his royall person) it must of ne∣cessitie  follow, that the prince his lawes should haue a taste and resemblance of Gods lawes also: and hence is it which I deriue as a position sure & infallible; that they which feare to offend the lawes of God stand not in any feare of the punishment which is by the laws of man limited: because they wil not offend either through impietie, or through the want of natiue iustice and charitie. Those also which in feare to loose their present liues or liberties, & those which in loue of this world, and those which in vsing this world as though they should alwayes vse it, withdraw themselues from open offences, are for the most part Epicures, Atheists, Hypocrites, or wicked persons, not performing any good thing out of their owne francke wils and honest consciences, but by  constraint and feare. Onely they that out of their owne toward natures and in meere loue to vertue, feare the transgression of lawes and iustice are hono∣rably to be respected and cherished according to that saying of the Poet. Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore, Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Good men stand in feare to commit offences, through that loue which by diuine grace they beare to vertue: wicked men are loath to doe wickedly be∣cause they stand in feare of that punishment which is limited by the lawes. Moreouer mans only feare of the lawes cannot purge his conscience cleane from sinne; but merely taketh away from him the licence by which he doth offend. Leges enim possunt delicta punire, conscientiam munire non possunt. For the lawes may punish offences, but haue no power to corroborate or munite the Conscience. And so much in briefe concerning Lex generally: which was instituted likewise (euen as in those places aforesaid) amongst the Ro∣manes of ancient ages past, at Rome vpon the request of a magistrate Senatori∣all being (as it were) Proconsul for that time. Plebiscitum which I call Folkemot (because this word hath beene ancient in Plebiscitum. Folkemot. our lawes) was that which the magistrate or mouth of the Commons, vpon  motion and suit, as bearing office of their speaker and Tribune did get ratefied by the Romane Consuls and Senators on their behalfe. Howbeit Folkemot as it might be taken by th'interpretation of that ancient Saxon word impor∣teth some base assemblie or conuention of the meaner sort of people, making and instituting lawes after their owne lustes: for in my iudgement that might be called a Folkemot where the base commoners and inhabitants in any bad ordered Commonwealth (as not acknowledging any lords or superiors) should make lawes or choose magistrates vpon their owne improper opini∣ons, and indiscretions; as I touched in the morals of my second booke, in∣treating  of the worst popular estate called Anarchie. And such was it (which in my iudgement might be called a Folkemot) that happened in the dayes of King Henrie the third after the conquest: when a multitude of the baser Com∣moners assembled at Oxford; where those blockheads of that time exempted
the king with his nobles and all others that had knowledge to reade and  write from hauing any place or vote in their parliament, sauing such as were to recorde their ridiculous and vnlawfull actions. Such orders likewise as the baser sort in villages, hamlets, and poore townes doe make amongst them selues concerning their societies: asin matters of their parishes, of commons of pasture, of moore, or of any consultation concerning the common priuiledge of that towneship, hundred, rape, or wapentake where they liue, being now called Bierlawes; and not retaining any force of written lawes, but by custo∣marie prescription within mans memorie retained; as I thinke) may be pro∣perly called Plebiscita, and Folkemot. Hereof (being so well knowen to diuers professors and students of our commonlawes in this Realme) I will not speake  any more: onely the difference whereupon I bring in that vnusiall terme Folkemot (according to my translation) is by the imperial institutions thus dis∣cerned. This word Plebs or Folke to the baser commons; and vnto priuate persons of meane condition is onely proper: whereas Populus or people in∣cludeth Pls & Pop∣lus. nobles and all others their inferiors generally. Plees of Princes, or such mandates as onely proceed from the kings will and pleasure (to whom the people haue ascribed all soueraignetie) consist in let∣ters,  Princi∣p. mandatorie, missiue, or in writs of diuers natures: as in the priuiledge of our princes according to forme of our commonlawes of this Realme: or by decrees awarded vpon his highnesses owne knowledge; or out of any of his  highnesses courts, for the processe and aduancement of iustice; betwixt partie and partie: or in that which is most neare vnto the legall meaning and inter∣pretation of Placita principum in our common lawes of this realme in cases of treasons and felonies of diuers natures being called Placitacoron, Plees of the crowne: or by the kings proclamations and edicts bearing the same force that lawes parliamentall haue, which by the Romanes were called consttiu∣tions. Anno 3. Hen. 8. chap. 8. Edicts of magistrates were called the lawes of honour, because by those no∣ble patritians and honorable magistrates which made and caused them to be Edict magi∣stratuum. publikely proclaimed that title was by the Lawfathers and Consuls permitted  and assigned vnto them by speciall priuiledge retaining the like vigor with their ciuill lawes generally receiued and ratified. To such edicts may those orders, warrants, precepts, inhibitions, and actes of the like nature (awarded and subscribed by the secret counsellors of our princes in these dayes) be fitly resembled: semblably those metropolitical and piscopall mandates and promulgations within their seuerall prouinces and diocesse concerning Church discipline; as all other writs and precepts pro∣ceeding from other speciall magistrates of the commonwealth of what nature soeuer as from iustices in th'eclesiasticall and ciuill commissions; either for causes criminall or for the peace, and from Maiors, Deanes, and Chapters,  Archdeacons, and other head officers of towns corporate, colledges, & lord∣ships with such like within their seuerall liberties awarranted by the statute lawes of this realme; and retaining someforce of those lawes as being medi∣ate meanes legally limited, and ordained towards the readier and more com∣modious
aduancemēt of iustice) are not improperly called Edict a magistratuū.  Setenti p∣dentum. Sentences of prudent persons, were opinions of certaine Sages of the Laws chosen to decide weightie matters in controuersie betwixt parties. And these Law-fathers or Iudges did enucleate diuers difficult points thereof, by rea∣son and conscience. These through permission of the Emperor did interpret all the Lawes, and were called Iurisprudentes; or the learned in the Lawes: from whose opinion being once confirmed, no Iudges might in any Cases haue appealed. Like vnto them is our reportes of Lawcases, and the iuridicall sentences of our learned Iudges in matters of long suspence and ambiguitie; which haue depended many yeeres in sute at our Commonlawes of this Realme, betwixt persons in certaine cases of right; and at length haue been finally determined, after infinite proofe and long discussion by the full con∣sent  of all our learned Iudges. Howbeit, these reports and finall sentences in such Cases, cannot binde the Iudges of after-times in the same Cases, to giue sentence accordingly: which argueth that amongst vs those reports or finall sentences of Iudges haue not such legall force; as those Sensetiae prudentum (being th'opinions of men learned in the Lawes) had formerly. Howbeit, they be vehement motiues, inductions, and guides vnto Iudges in such Cases, to leane vnto the like opinions. For considering that it hath beene diuers times seene in a case contrauertible after it hath been commended vnto legall tryall, that the Iudges of the Kings bench of the Common plees, and of the Exchequer, haue all of them differed and dissented in their opinions, deliuered  of one and the same case amongst themselues: euery Court yeelding reasons probable for the maintenance and corroboration of their diuers sentences.) It should therefore seeme to stand with great right and reason, that such sen∣tences of reuerend and learned Iudges in our Common-lawes formerly gi∣uen and past, should not necessarily binde all other Iudges after them: which grounded vpon good and probable reason with equitie) may percase in some pointes vary from those former. Notwithstanding, if all the learned Iudges of this Realme assemble in the Exchequer or els-where, to conclude vpon any weightie case (ambiguously depending in the Courts, either for the Prince, or for any subiect of what condition soeuer) should with a francke consent  and vnanimitie giue opinion according to their priuate consciences, and sin∣cere interpretation of the Law: without question it must of force moue the Iudges in succession (which handle the like cases) to dispatch them, by that precedent, and with expedition accordingly. Ciuill right vnwritten or customarie (being approued with long vse and Iu scrip▪ & non scrip. consent of the people imbracing it) retaineth equall force with the Lawes. The Lacedemonians vsed those customarie Lawes altogether; and the Athe∣nians from whence certaine learned in Antiquities suppose the ground of our English common-lawes to be deriued, and brought hether, first in the Greeke  tongue: euen as the Egyptian lawes were by Orpheus out of Egypt into Greece: Did. Sicul lib. . .  which are said to be the true grounds of all nationall and ciuill-lawes at this day through the world. And these Lawes were all of them written and pre∣serued as Records in Bookes.
This is the difference betwixt the right of nature, and of ciuill right; that  the naturall is firme and immutable, the ciuill is changed and and abrogated, by consent of persons at any time: As when in a present Parliament such a Statute happeneth to be repealed, annullated, or antiquated, which had been enacted, instituted, and established in other Parliaments before. Finally, the whole scope of all iustice and law whatsoeuer, with the grounds wherevpon Ius personarum & . all crimes and trespasses be perpetrated, punished, and redressed in Iustice and equitie, concerneth either persons or goods. The course of our English lawes holdeth in erection of Courtes, which Ceriolano termeth Counsels; and these are either Ecclesiasticall or ciuill. The great Court of Parliament consisting of both; deuiseth laws most behoofefull  for the time, not to the Prince or any particular person onely; but for the Commonwealth; as those ancient Law-makers Zaleuchus, Charndas, Ono∣macritus, Philolaus, Draco, Pittacus, Androdomas did before: most of whose Hystories are extant, adding vnto them Lycurgus and Solon; eternally famous for teaching methods of excellent gouernment. These our Parliament lawes like liuely blood dispersed through the mem∣bers and prouinces of our whole Common-wealth are executed in time, and vpon needfull occasion as is fit; ministring matter for all other inferior courts, which haue iurisdiction ouer all causes needing present succour. No lawes are in force against these Parliamentall acts or institutions. The causes there hand∣led  being either Ecclesiasticall or ciuill binde all persons of this kingdom, for∣somuch as the whole substance of this Commonwealth, high and low, rich and poore, is supposed to be there. If therefore any thing passe in those hou∣ses of Parliament by generall consent, concerning the publicke weale or gene∣rall good or euill, it behooueth first that they soundly and maturely deliberate and consult vpon any thing important; sifting out the circumstances which may tend to the most benefit or praeiudice, and (conscionably pondering each point in the ballance of reason) may condiscend to that which will least pre∣iudice the maine: for when the billes of those houses are once exhibited, past, and inacted, they cannot be repealed without another Parliament, by gene∣rall  consent of the Prince and of all persons. In this high court, all Iudge∣ments (issuing out of the Kings bench, the Chauncerie, Common plees, the Exchequer, the court of Wardes, and that which proceedeth out of the court of Parliament it selfe) may bee reuersed by writ of Error. There are likewise other courts Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill: Ecclesiasticall, as the whole Conuocation of our Clergie assembled with our States of Parliament, con∣sisting of Deanes and Chapiters, Archdeacons, Procters of Cathedrall Churches, and Deligates, which are the generall; with prouinciall Synods of Canterbury and Yorke, vnto whom all the Byshopricks of England and Wales suffragate. In speciall such generall courts as answere to this Synod are the  Consistorie, the Arches for appeales, court of the Chancelor or Audience, Commissaries court, or the Prerogatiue for probate of Testaments, with the court of Faculties for dispensations: the courts held at Canterbury by the Chancellor for the Diocesse, the court of peculiar Deaneries appertaining
th'Archbishop, and yet belonging vnto diuers Bishoprickes, vnto which  other Byshops are also subiect. Euery priuate Bishop or Soueragaine haue courts also within their seuerall Diocesse to themselues peculiar; their cours of Chancellers, Archdeacons or Officials. Ciuill courts hold plees either in cases of right dealing, or in ciuill causes betwixt the prince and his tenants. But of the Exchequer, where those cau∣ses betwixt the Prince and his tenants are decyded, I did speake somewhat in my first Booke. The Dutchie of Lancaster by grant from King Edward the third, to Iohn of Gaunt was exstinct by vnion of Possession, with the crowne in person of King Henrie the fourth, by whom it was seuered; and so continued the  whole times of King Henrie the fift, and King Henry the sixth: then vnited by Edward the fourth, which being seperated againe by King Henrie the seuenth, remaineth yet accordingly. The Court of Chancerie wherein ought to bee the seate of equitie, which mitigateth or morderateth the Law; or as Aristotle calleth it,  Tanquā sine fuco, without guile or subtile hypocrysie, should seeme to distri∣bute and execute the Lawe of nature and conscience, being corrected by reason, but confirmed by Religion. It is that  of the soule, or that naturall facultie with perswadeth the good, and diswadeth that which is euill: and therefore (as I sayd elsewhere) Equitie should seeme to bee that  Balme, which modefieth and molefieth the rigorous Letter and rugged fore∣head of Law, graciously smoothing the same with a blessed serenitie. For when the Law by seuere interpretation is drawne to inconuenient kinds of Lambert. facts, and by colourable arguments mooued to frustrate the good meaning of the Statute; then our recourse in England is made vnto the Chancerie, be∣ing so notable and common, that in other Courts through the corrupt levine and couetous malice of some Lawyers, right is many times peruerted. For diuers wylie Sophysters arguing with subtile insinuations, and heaping vp au∣thorities enforce the Letter of our Statutes, that they may bee thereby ac∣comodated to their owne corrupt purposes: so that the violence done by  such a Counsellor, is much more then that which is offered by the wrong dealing plaintiffe or defendant, against the innocent grieued. Hence is this in∣iquitie thus enforced by the smoothe tongue of a subtile Lawyer, which of∣ten times vrgeth and procureth a seuere or sinister sentence: from whence ap∣peale is made vnto this Court of equitie, which is the Kings iust mercie seat, from whence is dispensed that which is vulgarly called aequum & bonum, aequum & iustum, aequum iustum: Intimating righteousnesse and goodnesse, right and iustice, and indifferent iustice: for euen the lawes themselues re∣quire that they may be gouerned by trueth, Et vt leni, facili, ac benig na inter∣pretatione Lambert. temperentur: veréque dicitur, nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio:  To be qualified with a gentle, milde, and fauourable interpretation: And it is a true saying; Let no man depart from the Court of Chancerie without remedie. The iudgements deliuered in this Court of honourable grace cannot be (but 4. Hen. 7. 4. by the Court Parliament) reuersed: the speciall proceedings in Chancerie are
by petitions, trauerses, and shewing of right. In this Court the Lord Chaun∣cello  Monstranle drt. is iudge with the master of Rolles: next vnder them the masters of the Chauncerie, the sixe Clerkes, and cursitors. Adioyning these is the court of requests. All those ciuill courts prementioned hold plee betwixt subiect and subiect either in triall of land causes, as the kings Bench, so farre at it dealeth in matters of debt, assumption, actions vpon the case properly belonging to the court of the Common plees; or in the Common plees begun by king Henrie the 3. Likewise in the matters of Marshallsea within the virge, limi∣ted  9. Act. 21 to twelue miles neere to the kings house and no more: where the steward and Marshall are iudges, or in marine causes determinable in the Admiraltie; which court was erected by king Edward the third: all of them being generall  courts. Those which are speciall and peculier to some one prouince, people, or seignorie subiect to the state of this crowne doe follow. The Constables court in Wales, wherein the President and counsell with the Secretarie and examiner, the Clarke of the counsell, and keeper of the billes doe sit. In the North part of England also, where, at Yorke a President and counsell is esta∣blished: both which counsels are fashioned according to the forme of Parlia∣ments in France. Likewise the Chauncellers court in the Exchequer, which hath a Seale, the writs vnder which are more antient then the Register or Pre∣rogatiue. There are also diuers base courts, which (as it should seeme) were first of any that we can read begunne by Moses, who did establish Iudges: These ruled Tribes, Hundreds; Fifties, tenths; to whom he referred the decision of small causes, reseruing to himselfe matters of most importance. These courts Vid Dt. 1. cap. & Exd. 18. Nb. 11. cap. were continued amongst vs in example by king Alfred the Saxon and a Chri∣stian king, who deuided his realme, First into lathes, rapes, ridings; and them into wapentakes, hundreds; and those into leets, court Barons, ti∣things, piepouders. Secondly, into Sherifes turnes, and hundreds. King Henry the second deuided this realme into sixe parts, vnto each of which he did as∣signe three iustices, called Itinerants by Bracton and iustices in eire by Britton,  whose circuits Roger Houeden describeth to be like our iuridicall circuits at this day: and so much in generall touching the formes and nature of our Ecclesia∣sticall and ciuill courts in this realme, which master William Camden our most learned Brittaine Antiquarie did very commendably set forth in the last editi∣on of his booke. Now somewhat concerning the lawes, but in speciall tou∣ching our owne nation. It is said, that Brutus (vpon his settling in this Iland) did write a booke of lawes in the Greeke tongue collected out of the Troiane lawes 1103. yeres be∣fore Christs birth, which Greeke lawes the Druides first administred in this land being solemnly by vowes inhibited to promulgate them to vulgar vnder∣standing. From these Druides (according to Caesar) being found out amongst  vs, a colonie was deducted into Galle for the instruction of that people. The Lib. 6.  gallici▪ frequent and reciprocall commerce and trafique betwixt the Galles and Brit∣taines in those times, like to be by couenant or deeds ratified according to those Greeke lawes, by which both the nations were gouerned, should seeme
(as Strbo thinketh) to confirme so much. Molmutius Donwallo instituted two  bookes of lawes in this land called municipiall and iudiciarie▪ importing the Lib. 4 Geog▪ statute lawes and the common lawes. After him Mercia Proba the wife of king Guinteline, another booke called Merciaes lawes. King Afred also gathered di∣uers which (being into one volume compiled) he named a breuiarie drawen from diuers lawes of the Troians, Greeks, Brittaines, Saxons and Danes. Also Sigibert king of the East Angles published a booke called the Institutes of Lawes. Edward the Confessor next king before William the first, amongst the diuinest and worthiest lawyers may be registred, which out of those infi∣nite volumes of Brittish, Romaine, Danish, and English lawes made a choise Rapsodie which he did intitle the common law: as by the wordes of diuers diligent and faithfull Antiquaries appeareth. After these princes king William  the first (vpon his great victories and militarie trauels in subduing the rebelli∣ous violence of the borderers impaling this land) instituted diuers excellent and commodious lawes, abolished since then, abrogating others which were not so necessarie for those times, as Geruas of Tilbury writeth. After whom his sonne H. the first surnamed Henry Beauclerke (of whom Henrie of Huntington, who liued in his dayes recordeth much) being a very learned and politike prince abolished certaine of them, restoring diuers of the former, which hee thought were more behousefull for those times. And Henrie the second a prince of much mildnesse and humanitie compiled another volume diuided into the laws of this Commonwealth & the statutes royall intituled. But in  this point I referre my selfe with the reader, to the large & very learned Epistle of S. Edward Coke to those bookes of Lawcases by him lately compiled. And so much briefly touching the precise care and studies of former princes in or∣deining & collecting the laws: the necessity wherof being so vulgarly knowen, needeth no confirmation by further example, considering how fresh it sprin∣geth in our memories (omitting the most sage & prudent prouisiō of that Nu∣ma of England king Henry the seuenth for the Commonwealth by good and politike institution & administration of lawes) that our late sacred soueraigne Elizab. (whose very name imprinteth a reuerend remembrance in my heart) instituted many diuine laws, by which the miraculous peace of this Cōmon∣wealth  vnder the mercifull prouidence of God was amplified, conserued, & eternised. And here may not I with modestie passe or post ouer his Maiesties royall prudence, knowledge, and high paines in compiling and publishing the lawes of Stotland imprinted in one volume; not doubting but that God of his great and inestimable loue to this nation vnder his blessed scepter also shall so worke by iustice in his princely spirit, that this realme may becomein shorttime of a garden, wherein his highnesse found some weeds, a diuine paradise of most ciuill humanitie. This hath bene the great care which did formerly with such vehement force worke in the brains & hearts of al prudent kings & empe∣rours, to make their people blessed & this (which amongst many more excellent  vertues and honors attributed and ascribed formerly to Augustus Caesar) made him so great and eternall in the golden memorials of time so that for the cor∣rection and promulgation of lawes in his owne name, and for his sumptuous
and many buildings, it was truely and triumphantly spoken of himselfe, Vr∣bem  latericiam reperi, relinquo marmoream. These were the bulwarkes which protected the peace and honour of his Empire: and those by which the su∣perabounding tranquilitie of this Nation hath beene so long cherished and conserued, It was recorded in the Romane Annals and memorials, as a notable hap∣pines in Antoninus Pius, that through his iustice, prudence, and fortitude, there arose not any warres amongst the Romanes for 23. yeeres together: which happeneth generally by the due distribution and execution of iustice and equitie. What then may be said in our Chronicles of that our late graci∣ous and auspicious planet of Christendome Queene Elizabeth; whose beams  yet after the dissolution of her mortalitie so diuinely shine amongst vs, in those Lawes established and taught vnto vs whilst she raigned ouer vs; who (sauing some fewe moneths) doubled those yeeres of happinesse vpon her people in admirable honor, peace and plentie? It is sooth, and well answereth to the lore of wisedome, that all policies States, or Common-weales are most corrupt, wherein there be many lawes established: forsomuch as it is presupposed that where multitudes of crimes and vices predominate of strange and diuers qualities, diuers vnusuall and  strange lawes are necessarily made to restraine them; or if they be preordained to correct or prohibit vices which are not & yet may happen, then it is as dan∣gerous in regard of that expressed in this poeticall sentence, Gens humana ruit in vetitum nefas: For Adams children naturally lust after the forbidden fruit. Not many Bookes which confound mens memorie with heapes of words and matter, but few substantiall and necessarie: referring all pettie things, not being nefarious, to the censure of venerable magistrates (which will not suffer a sparke to make a flame) and not to the written Letter of Poenall Lawes; con∣sidering how the meane ministers and executioners of them which search out, inquire, and informe of such offences, doe commonly more preiudice then benefit and honestie to the Commonwealth: For wee know that by Gods  finger all the lawes both diuine and humane were within a paire of marble Tables comprised in a compendious Decalogue. The reports and causes of our common-lawes and iudgements haue appeared in two points that the former Kings of this Realme, as king Edward the third, Henrie the fourth, Henrie the fift, Henrie the sixt, Edward the fourth, Richard the third, Henry the seuenth with prudent inspection found that necessitie, which required a luculent interpretation of the difficult points in our Common-lawes: wherevpon they by the faithfull conference of foure most reuerend and learned Iudges in the Lawes, following the sage example of that most wise and victorious Emperor Iustinianus before mentioned, did each of them in their seuerall raignes cause the genuine and very sence by  specious enucleation of all intricate or equiuocall points and cases to be cl∣red & explained; to the end that all other Iudges or Iustices which exceeded in administration of them, might at the first sight with commendable perspi∣cuitie deliuer the faithfull substance of all, as occasion was offered for the peo∣ples
good; hauing digested them into nine Volumes of the Lawes, wherin the  whole essence of all by those reuerend Law-fathers was most methodically couched. For as the difference of all creatures by nature proceedeth from vnitie, resembling many flowers sprouting from one roote: euen so doe sun∣drie needfull and most beneuolent Lawes receiue life and nature from the precious wisedom of God; the blessed and all-healing fountaine of whose knowledge he with ineffable grace and diuine beneficence openeth to them all that are studious of righteousnesse, and in tender loue with respect vnto man, being the choise operation of his handes doth retaine him by the due feare and loue of iustice and saluation, in eternall tranquilitie. The generall benefit calmely and plentifully redounding from those Bookes, iudgements, reports and Law-cases by the enucleation of those learned law-men (as is be∣fore  expressed) includeth the second point. Forsomuch as concerneth humane Lawes which are ordained by na∣ture, and published by the prince (which by them gouerneth the Common∣wealth to relieue and rectifie the same) they must be iust and possible, needfull and profitable, plaine, prescribed not to priuate but to publike vse and bene∣fit, consenting with time and place, according to the nature and custome of the Countrey which should be moderated by them: such as are our statute∣lawes of England. Vpon these thus ordained and prouided against faultes, a knowledge shewing the difference of crimes and vices dependeth: As whe∣ther the nature of thē consist in impietie by violation of the first table of Gods  lawes through foolish prophanation, or derrogation of or from his omnipo∣tent power and maiestie; or if it be flagitious and repugnant to the second, im∣porting impietie towards parents and magistrates, the defamation or contu∣melies of neighbours, the concupiscence and losse of liuelihoods and liues, wherevpon parricides and horrible slaughters are bred. Towards which le∣gall office or ministerie, three speciall things generally would be required in a Iudge: the first of which is in his head to retaine a firme and venerable graui∣tie, confirmed in his countenance with some serious kinde of awfull maiestie, through his continuall meditation vpon the iust iudgements of God with the charge vpon him imposed; which by the diuine gift of heauenly iustice must  be fostered in his heart, that all proceedings drawne from thence may be sea∣soned with the grauitie of his cogitations, which in excellent discretion will point out to him the time, person, and place, when, to whom, and where hee should shew iustice naked, or inuested with mercie. So that by the iustice of of his heart, which ministreth wisedome and grauitie to his head; and by the seuere and precise prudence of his head, which inblazoned in a stedfast coun∣tenance a stout maiestie withall; and by the comely grace of his counte∣nance which admirably shadoweth all in a decent austeritie, there may be due reuerence and feare drawne to the person of a Iudge on euery side about him;  infusing horror to the malicious and wicked, with loue and reuerence to good and iust persons, hauing his tong so sanctified and seared with zealous praier, and with a liuely cole taken from the blessed Altar by the sacred Cherubine, that it may become th'oracle of Gods iustice, and the iust herauld of a sincere
heart. For if grauitie should not appeare in all his iudgements, then shall he  be suspected of a partiall & foolish lentitude: which opinion (when it is once vulgarly conceiued) will preiudice him either in his reputation, or in admi∣nistration of the Lawes. This reputation or authoritie likewise is by the first three properties delineated to life; the restraint whereof will disaduantage him in his honour, which by such demeanor will be blemished with some misprizion or suspect of corruption. There is likewise in euery wise Iudge expedient a mature experience in sutes and variances, by defect whereof his ignorance deepely woundeth, or rather maimeth him. Lastly, the mindes constancie corroborateth him in the perfection of all, declaring that in the whole course of all his iudgements, iustice alone without priuate affection  preuaileth. Neither is it meete but most vnfit, that any man should sit on throne of iudgement or giue sentence when his owne cause is heard or dis∣cussed: least affection vsurpe vpon, and defile the tongue of magistracie, least the reuerend custome of iudgement be violated, least that maiestie whereof I spoke (which is meete for the sage tribunall and court of equitie) be dimi∣nished, least a mischieuous example corrupting the people be drawne on with it, and finally least a contempt of the Lawes and equitie do succced it. Now somewhat concerning that abilitie which strengthneth Iudges, and iuridicall magistrates in the administration of publike causes. It is therefore principally to be considered, that they (which sit vpon this  honourable throne of iudgement, and take place, to giue place vnto the due distribution of right, and are firmely planted for the sure supplantation of those contageous vices, which being but a little licenced would disperse and spread through all parts of the Common-weales most beautifull bodie, defi∣ling it with a foule and virulent leprosie) stand deeply bound in a double re∣cognisance of soule and bodie to be studious and industrious in the science and iudiciall practise of that wholesome physicke, which must be frequently ministred to the diseased members of that State: In which (their iudgements being credited) may be by the Prince allowed and iustified also: for if they doe not yeeld euen law and execution of right to all subiects rich and poore,  without hauing regard to any person, and without letting to doe right for any letters or commandement which may come to them from the prince or king, or from any other by any other cause, then are they by our Lawes thus censured worthily: Their bodies, lands and goods to rest at the kings pleasure, Cap. 1. Anno eg. regis Edw. 3. 15. who shall otherwise giue iudgement or sentence of and against them. The King himself also which is head and iudge of the Lawes, sheweth great good∣nesse & equitie through the world, in shewing his royall assent and content∣ment that these iudges substituted vnder him shall giue sentence according to  the Cannon and true meaning of iustice, euen against himselfe directly, if he through negligence be driuen vniustly to maintaine any sute with a priuate person, which will not beare euen in the ballance of equitie; in which that kingly sentence is verified, that therein differt a rege Tyrannus: for nothing more then this doth to life expresse a true kings glorie. The kings of our na∣tion to confirme this perfect honor of a iust prince, in one act of Parliament
ordained in the second yeere of king Edward the third, are limited: That al∣though  Cap. 8. they commaund by their great, or priute seales to delay any cause in iudiciall dependance proceeding by course of law; yet shall the iudges proceede with mature expedition according to iustice, notwistanding any precept from them directed. For what can be said more to the disgracing and disrobing of any king, then that which Freigius in the latter end of his politicall questions citeth out of a cer∣taine oration of Scattaius against tyrannie. Tu iusticiam imperabis & interim tamen iniuriam alijs facies? tu officium commendabis & ab officij religione de∣flectes? As if he should say: Why wouldest thou be king to command men to deale iustly, giuing in proper person example of wrong done to others? How canst thou commend men for doing of their dueties and offices, when thou thy selfe transgressest thy functions and dueties? Thus if princes or iudges should preuaricat but a little, thē their laws (which ought to be the iudges of euery iust prince) will restraine and reforme them. And if those lawes be dissonant to the spirit of charitie, trueth and equitie; thē the diuine power & sapience of God (which are the very iudges of all laws, princes, & iudges on earth) wil correct & punish them with their ministers. Let therefore no partiall respect of power, neither priuate affection, nor vnex∣cusable ignorance of those laws which any iudge stewardeth, blemish his iudg∣ments. For if he be partiall let him consider with himselfe that it proceedeth from affection or corruption which both are incorporate; & that it cannot be hidden from many men amongst infinite which behold and heare him from  so conspicuous a place, where all mens eyes are fixed vpon his maiestie▪ and therefore (according to Salust) aequos bonosque fauere debet vt eius benefacta rei∣pub. Bell Iugurt procedant, he must fauour men which are iust and good, that he may de∣clare himselfe beneficent towards the Commonwealth. And if he be led by affection, let him consider how fallacious a passion it is, oftentimes opposite to reason euen in the men of honestest natures and constitutions, shewing a kind of charitie for the most part, where it falsefieth the vertue, pulling downe of a mountaine to raise a molehill; and to satisfie his affected, commonly to deiect and make ruinous such aduersaries which percase euen in a worse case descrue much more affection. Lastly, but specially let him haue a speciall care  to be skilfull in those lawes which he deliuereth and administreth: for other∣wise his honor is onerous and insupportable. For if he shall with all graue and profound prudence consider how chargeable and iust accompt will be requi∣red at his hands, that hauing much committed to his trust his accompts will arise to great summes, not of monies and pounds, but of men and people; the noblest worke of diuine nature, the creature in whom so soone as he was created the creator himselfe exceedingly reioyced, and tooke so great pleasure, that, when through his owne preuarication he was taken captiue to sinne, hell, and death, he ransomed him in the tender and vnspeakeable loue of his ho∣ly  spirit, in the most precious blood of his deare sonne Christ Iesus the righte∣ous sacrifice of his vnrighteousnesse. If therefore he counterpoise in equall scales of diuine reason, the sacred allegeance in which he liueth spiritually bound vnto God; the faithfull obedience wherein he standeth bodily subie∣cted
to his prince; the zealous duetie which doth by nature inuite him to stu∣die  the weale of his countrey, pondering these with his naked conscience hee will not only refuse those honors and dignities to sit in iudgement vpon Gods beloued people vnworthily, or vnskilfully, but rather will choose a death ac∣companied with the languishing sting of infinite tortures. Albeit as Salust thinketh. Plerosque non ijsdem artibus imperiū petere & postquā adepti sunt gere∣re; primo industrios, supplices, modicos esse, dehinc per ignauiam & superbiam at atem agere: That many princes differ in their acquisition and gouernement of a kingdome: because vpon the first they shew themselues industrious sup∣pliant and temperate, afterward in sloth, idlenesse and pride passe their liues. Euery king, iudge, and ruler of the people therefore, ought to ponder with  himselfe how great a part of the Commonweales hope dependeth vpon him, which he should with his vertues and innocencie protect, whereas all other meanes are forcelesse. Yea verely the iudge representeth in himselfe the person of that Commonwealth, where he ministreth: wherefore he should sustaine the state and honor thereof by conseruation and administration of iustice bea∣ring in carefull remembrance, the trust of those things which are reposed in him. A iudge is as it were an eye fixed in the kings scepter, a priest of diuine iustice and equitie, a moderator of the lawes, the life of righteousnesse, whose voyce is the pronouncer and preseruer of life and death, a publike interpreter of the lawes; vnto whom as to a common sanctuarie, all persons oppressed with  dammages & iniuries repaire and refuge themselues to be relieued in equity. And euen as iust iudgement is fitly defined to be the ballance of equitie, the voyce of lawes, and consummation of all strife and variance, so is the iudge properly called th'interpreter of those lawes, the steward of equitie, and ora∣cle of the Commonwealth. They therefore that are fit and worthy to sit vpon the throne of equitie, ought sincerely to be good men, seuere, incorrupt, obdurate against flatterers, impatient of smooth tales, and secret detraction, vnmercifull to them that are remedilesse, inexorable in waightie causes of iudgement, and such as will not transgresse the precincts of iustice in any case: for according to the discre∣tion  of Aulus Gellius they must distribute to the king and begger equall mea∣sure without inclination or passion towards any mans estate or person: as it Lib. 10. cap. 4. was most diuinely shadowed in that misticall order of the Areopagites being a counsell in Athens, consisting of sixtie citizens which successiuely through all offices and degrees of honor at length attained place vpon the seate of iustice to deale in affaires of state, and in tempestuous times to prouide that the Cōmonwealth should endure no preiudice. These in the darkest season of the night would decide causes in iudgement, at such time as they might heare and  not see the parties appealed. Hence it is that Cicero saith, Vir bonus ponit personā amici cum induit iudicis: A good man layeth apart the person of a friend when Offic. 3. he taketh upon him the place of a iudge. And therefore iudges, as saith that most reuerend Emperour Iustinianus must sacrifice pure and vncorrupt hands to God, to the kind, and to the law: least that curse fall vpon them which our Sauiour Christ denounced against the Pharises; Woe be to you interpreters of
the Lwe, for you haue taken away the key of knowledge, you did not enter in your  Luke 5. selues; and them that would haue entred you forbad. Amongst other politicke Lawes in Deutronomie, deliuered from Gods mouth to the sacred prince his seruant Moses, it was commanded that in all the partes of their people and nations assembled, Iudges should be constitu∣ted which might iustly iudge the people, poising the ballance of equitie with euen hand and briblesse; for somuch as bribes bleare the sights of sage men, making contreseit the words of iust magistrates. And hence was that prohibition either of acceptation or exception for or against any sorts of persons. It is a notable sentence left vnto Iudges by that most religious and honest king Iosophat high∣ly worth the consideration; Looke vnto it you that are Iudges, for you do not execute  the lawes of men, but of God, and according to your innocencie & equitie so shall your iudgements be rewarded. For these and such indifferent respects, Iustice is fitly resembled to the helme in a shippe which being misguided, endangereth the vessel, pilote, officers, and sailers; representing the realme, prince, magistrates, and people. Vpon this misrule, or misguidance of the Common-wealth by corrupt iudgement or iniquitie, whereupon the deuouring tempests of iniuries, con∣tumelies, and deceits arise, Kingdomes (by Gods iust iudgement and indig∣nation) are translated from one nation to another, roiall families extinguished, and the prince with his people oftentimes subuerted, as is verily frequent vnto  them that with diligence read histories in example. I will now speake somewhat touching their administration of Iustice in ci∣uill matters, which is either declared in causes litigious brought before them, for the tryall of lands and goods; or in penall cases for transgressing Lawes in some one of the three parts of iustice which they violate: wherein the con∣science of the Iudge with the causes of equitie, should make the true ballance of right. Penall cases for priuate transgressions be semblably referred in forme (though not altogether in substance) to the Iudges discreet conscience. This onely should remaine euer greene in his memorie, that all iudgements in ci∣uill causes be well attempered with a mercifull benignitie, if the nature and qualities of the faults and delinquent permit. First therfore it is to be weighed,  that all offences either respect the contumelies of persons comprehending in∣iuries; th'expence or losse of goods including damages; and offences or hurts done to people, including maymes and slaughters. Iniuries therefore are harmes proceeding from a voluntarie and malicious heart, thirsting or hun∣ting after hurt of others. Damages include losse procured by the delinquent, either through vniust molestation by sutes vniustly commenced of any na∣ture, where the innocent is impouerished; or by violent rapine, theft, or ex∣tortion. Offences and hurtes are of diuers natures, either by riots, affrayes, conspiracies, or murthers of themselues, as principals, or by subornate persons  and assistants, as accessaries, acted, & executed. And herein is to be considered, that all maner of wrongs and iniustice, proceed either from election and will, perturbation and appetite, ignorance and vnderstanding, euen as in contrary those actions which are iust, are operations, or proceedings deriued from
the fountaine or habite of iustice. For the iudgement of all iust ad iust  actions rest in them according to that of Salust, Quibus pro magnitudine perij, Bell. iugureth. ius & iniurias omnes curae esse deces: To whose care (according to the limits of their Commission or circuit) all rights and wrongs are referred. Which right and wrong is twofold according to the Lawes, consisting vpon accusa∣tion and defension; which last depending vpon lawfull maintenance is thought by the Law-men to be more laudable then the other. These principles thus considered with the qualities of the persons and offences, the reuerend Iudge shall finde it engrauen with the true penne of di∣nine iudgement and reason in his owne conscience in what sort, to whom, and when to shew clemencie. Certaine it is, that mercy most graceth the  person and mouth of a Iudge, if it be modefied with good prudence, and grounded vpon a discreet charitie: for he that hath mercie is blessed saith Salo∣mon. Prou. 14. And in the 19. Chapter of the same, the Lord will exchange his mercie for his; intimating also that he will haue mercie, and not sacrifice: Forasmuch as his mercie reacheth from generation to generation of those that feare him. If Luk 1. therefore Iudges will graciously consider the forme and glorious fashion of Gods mercie-seat (which besides many gorgeous and most specious orna∣ments, was by Gods speciall direction and commandement, compassed with a most precious crowne of finest gold) it shall be comfortably shewed vnto  them how much he respected the throne of his mercie, which was many de∣grees Exod. 25. & 36. exalted aboue his seat of iudgement. They should therefore shew mer∣cie with cheerefulnesse, as Saint Paul counselleth the Romanes, For he which watereth shall be refreshed with raine: according to Salomon, Nothing so much Chap. 12. beautifieth the grauity, person, and maiestie of a Iudge, as when his seuere iustice is Prou. 11. delayed with clemencie. Which Vulcatius Gallicus calleth a kingly qualitie: and he which would conciliate peace, loue, and obedience amongst men, must gouerne with a languishing or vnwilling hand to strike home, as grieuing or repining at the punishment. Hence is that saying of Cicero; Nihil quod crudele vtile: est Offic. 3. enim hominum naturae (quam maximè sequi debemus) maximè inimica a crudelitas; Nothing cruell can be profitable: for the greatest enemie to nature (which  we should especially follow) is crueltie. Such was that renouned and pru∣dent Consull his speech (whom in other places I cited before) in one Oration to Caius Caesar: Neque quisquam te ad crudeles pnas aut acerba iudicia invocet, quibus ciuitas vastatur magis quàm corrigitur; sed vt prauas artes, malasque libidi∣nes Salust. ad Caes. de repub. ord. ab iuuentute prohibeas: Let no man prouoke thee to inflict cruell, or award ouer seuere sentences, which rather confoundeth then correcteth any Com∣monwealth; but only to restraine Youth from wicked courses & lusts. Iudges therfore should so punish, Vt metus absit, charit as retineatur: To keepe out feare, & retaine loue. And therfore those Iudges & rulers of the people which pinch and gird them extreamly, sequestring or abrogating their liberties, with more  then a competent seueritie stand themselues in most danger: for their hearts cannot be so lowly depressed but that they will finde a time to peepe vp a∣gaine. Whereupon Cicero most sagely censureth of that point, Acriores sunt morsus intermissae libertatis quāretentae. A libertie intermitted biteth neerer the Offic. 2.
bone then a restrained libertie. It behoueth them therfore in their iudgements  to bridle their wrath: because men in rage for the time doe nothing, neither consider of any thing as is right. Antoninus Pius the Emperor vsed to say that mercie was it which adopted Coesar into fellowship of the gods, & onely mercie which consecrated Augustus amongst men. Howbeit, I doe not in any case wrest vnto that excesse of lenitie, which the Phylosophers call Lentitude, being a vice of the minde which breedeth an exceeding securitie with dissolute manners and behauiour in men. For he that vpon the former considerations would seuerely punish some vices in certaine persons, should not admit when times are dangerous a small fault to escape vnpunished; but prouide so that it may be with moderation and clemencie chastised, punishing nefarious and hai∣nous crimes with due serueritie for examples. And so much concerning mer∣cie  by discreet mitigation of punishment. In other places, where seueritie should take force, as occasion shall offer. It is not permitted that a Iudge should command and prohibite what he list himselfe without legall warrant, albeit it might rest in his arbitrament: yet whereas all articles cannot be seuerally comprised in the Lawes, and for∣somuch as many circumstances breed doubts, in such cases men are referred to the conscience and religion of the Iudge, neerly to determine by course of iustice according to sinceritie: further scope then this is not permitted vnto any, being by that benefit freed from perill of punishment though he giue sentence against the Law: for the case not being throughly discussed yeeldeth  him some colour for excuse; excepting alwayes in litigious cases that it rest∣eth not in his power to giue away the goods proper of any man, beyond the limits of reason and equitie. That kinde of iustecying which is said to bee common amongst the Turkes, is in my iudgement very tollerable and soone ended: for the Iudge closing his eyes giueth eare, pondereth, pronounceth, and dispatcheth the most part of causes very commendably, freeing and re∣leasing the sutors from expence of time and monie: both which incon∣ueniences happen vpon the processe of our Lawes in Christendome. For it had beene oftentimes better that he which hath iustice to guard his good  cause, should in commencement thereof haue let his sute fall; then after a long and litigious dependance buy the iudgement of it with more chardge then the maine was worth, being onely referred to the credite of iust victorie for his meede. Moreouer by such dilatory meanes it often happeneth that white is died into blacke, either through deceit, corruption, or ignorance of the Iudge, and elsewhere by the rigor and false interpretation of the Lawes. Howbeit to noble minded men, which are able to forbeare (if the sute pro∣ceede from misprision or some misconstruction, and not from any litigi∣ous humour of the aduersarie) I deeme it a principall tipe of their honours, and much auaylable (as Cicero saith) Paulum nonnunquam de suo iure dece∣dere.  Lib. Offic. 2. In administration of ciuill causes also, there is one most commendable part requisite in a iudge, that he withdraw his hands from the rewards of priuate or poore persons, which would gladly giue somewhat for fauour in their iust
and honest causes. For iudges of that nature are blinded with auarice whose  fashion is to make a gaine of all causes both honest and dishonest: hence was it that iudges lege Clodia were prohibited to take any rewards of persons in suite. In speciall all such rewards and gratifications as are giuen either to fur∣ther a good or a bad cause (sauing the fees lawfully limited to the iudges and pleaders, in regard of their salaries and paines) are dissalowable; and if any be tollerable then onely such as are taken by them of great princes which reward their paines in aduancement of iustice onely: For such as sell iustice and truth are abhominable, and so bethose also which take gifts of any man to further a faultie: for in that false participation if he further him, then doth he manifest  violence to iustice; and if not, then doth he deceiue the briber of his money, both which are abiect and contemptible: these may well be called mercenarie iudges and corrupt hirelings. Now somewhat so short as I can, concerning the knowledge and studies re∣quired in iudges & iudiciall magistrates. The due reuerence and feare of Gods omnipotent vertue which illuminateth his vnderstanding, perfecteth his wisdome, amplifieth his maiestie, refresheth his spirits, & corroborateth all his iudgements, must aboue all things before and after iudgement, and continu∣ally with a zealous and effectuall prayer from a soule blessedly breathing after spirituall consolation, be principally retained. And therefore it is written by  Moyses, that iudges should be men of courage, fearing God, dealing truely, loa∣thing auarice. And for this cause the Prophet Dauid calleth them Gods say∣ing, Exod. 18. that all the children of the most high doe right and iustice vnto the fatherlesse, poore, and needie. His ordinarie studies therfore for pleasure and ornament are Psal. 82. best approued in the sweete concord of morall Philosophie which will enable and confirme him in his profession and conuersation: this teacheth him how iustice is a vertue yeelding euery man what is his owne, and willing all men to dis∣charge their dueties. Cicero calleth her the Queene and mistresse of all the o∣ther vertues; because she taketh perfection from the rest being as it were a  concordance or harmonie of all the parts when appetite subiecteth it selfe to reason. It is also an affection of the mind iustecying all men beneuolently, and cherishing humaine societie; this is also called equitie which in euen ballance pondreth euery mans right answerable to desert and dignitie. Aristotle ter∣meth it an affection of mind enabling men to doe iustly which kinaleth in them a zeale or feruent desire of equitie. It is according to M. Bodine a kind of Geome∣trie, Lib. 5. Ethicorū. which being disanulled drowneth the concorde and societies of cities: it tea∣cheth Lib. 6. cap. 6. the difference betwixt honesties and their contraries, it pointeth out the ex∣treames of good and euill, it directeth how to rule priuate families, it sheweth what authorities and offices are proper to fathers, husbands, and masters, it declareth the maintenance of a priuate state, it instructeth persons in the vertues and discipline  of a magistrate, it describeth the forme of a Commonwealth, it prescribeth the true meanes and knowledge to susteine cities which are in danger of subuersion, it deui∣seth excellent lawes and statutes to rectifie them; conclusiuely the surest and firmest foundations of Empire are good lawes moderating and measuring out all liberall sciences and good arts. Which good lawes (as Freigius calleth
them) are the mistresses of vertue commanding people in their liuing to de∣meane  themselues honestly and profitably with a restraint or prohibition of things bad, and the contrary. Iustice according to some learned moralists is knowen by these attributes or qualities: first she will not challenge any thing which is not her owne; then she doth neglect her owne priuate lucre in respect if she may thereby fur∣ther the common equitie. There be sixe kindes of Iustice according to some very learned philosophers, and they should seeme to be very certaine: one iustice is legall, being a kind of voluntarie affection to doe and desire iust things; and by this legall iustice are men wholie bentand inclined for the be∣nefit of their contrey. The second a morall iustice which I prementioned out of th'imperiall institutions being a constant and perpetuall will, yeelding each  man his owne. The third a kind of exchanging or commutuall iustice keeping a precise and religious equalitie of things amongst men. The fourth is a iustice distributiue by which euery man is out of the common charge of his contrey rewarded and relieued according to demerite. The fifth is a coniunctiue iustice, appliable to persons and causes tyed together in any termes of iustice. And the sixt is disiunctiue, alluding to causes and persons which are not by any meanes of equitie compared or knit together. This vertue principally respecteth the benefit of others more then her owne, which as Aristotle saith is not so specious in her fellow vertues. According to Valerius and some other Philosophers, there are two parts of iustice: the first  obedience, which is generall, by which th'inferior offices of the soule are sub∣iected vnto reason being imployed in keeping a proportion amongst popular societies, respecting the commonweale, & instructing persons in the reuerence and loue of iustice and equitie: the second part is priuate, restoring right to all men; which is also twofold. One part thereof holdeth a simetrie in contracts and negotiations amongst men; th'other being distributiue imparteth rewards proportionable to their demerites. And this distributiue part of iustice is cal∣led equalitie being the companion of peace and concord: Quae in tribuendis honoribus & rerūinter ciues communium aequa diuisione seruatur: Which equali∣tie is kept in distribution of honors, and in equall diuision of things amongst  citizens & countrimen, &c. Cicero defineth the law which is deriued from iustice to be reason graffed in humane nature: vnto this all lawes and institu∣tions, customes, edicts, estatutes (which further the conseruation of Com∣monwealths) haue reference: And in obseruation and violation of them iustice & iniustice are opened. There is no diuersitie betwixt law and vertue, sauing that vertue by words and promises benignely perswadeth whereas law commaundeth, compelleth, and inhibiteth. The distributiue part of priuate iustice cheefely concerneth magistrates, consisting in rewards, punishments, iust gouernement, teaching all sorts of people to know their offices, places,  dignities and degrees in the Commonweales, to take good notice of them∣selues without ostentation or insolence. This vertue Philosophers conferre with geometrie because it is vniforme. Iniustice is either generall or particu∣lar: that (which I terme generall and illegitimate) is a kind of habite of the
minde depraued and corrupted, by means whereof men in dignitie and ma∣gistracie  digresse from the sincere and sacred gubernation of the Lawes, per∣mitting those that are vnder their authoritie to be defiled and infected with contagious vices. The particular iniustice is that iniquitie by which any man taketh or giueth, from or vnto persons more or lesse then standeth with reason or desert. Out of the whole substance of iustice (according to Cicero) these bran∣ches or properties are obserued and found; Religion, pietie, duetie, veritie, vindication, graticude, mercie, liberalitie, magnificence, friendship: all which fasten themselues to the lists of reason. And herein are three sortes of Lawes com∣prised: one naturall, not deriued from opinion, but from a certaine force in  vs innated; another customarie, which hath by consent of nations and people without written law, tradicionally continued in force a long time; the third legitimate, which are recorded in bookes written and knowne, according to my diuision out of the ciuill institutions mentioned before. This law is two∣fold, as either in the most needfull respect in vs, which should intimate the most zealous inuocation & adoration of Gods blessed maiestie, being both in holy writ, & all sanctions of men vehemently imposed vpon vs: the other relyeth vpon humane societie which is called equitie; from whence that Phi∣losophicall definition of Law was drawne, which calleth it the art of equitie and goodnesse. All morall parts of iustice, whereof this booke of Counsell  intreateth, are therefore comprised in true religion, which is the iust and vn∣fained seruice of God. In pietie, which exhibiteth a iust respect of persons our superiors in degrees & offices. In veritie, being the iustice of our tongues con∣sounding with a true heart, which is the diuine treasure of faith. In vindicatiō, which is a iust and lawfull defence, or offence against open violence. In gra∣titude, which is a iust remuneration of benefits answerable to mens faculties. In mercie, which is a principall part of diuine and naturall iustice towardes our brethren depressed with afflictions. In liberalitie, which is a iust dispen∣sation of necessarie reliefe to certaine persons according to reason. In mag∣nificence, which is a iust largesse imployed to vertuous and godly purposes.  And in friendship, which is of it selfe a naturall iustice due to vertue. The opposites of which are accordingly called the branches of Iniustice: Since therefore all vertues seeme most specious when they be conferred with op∣posites, I will define their contraries. Therefore against true religion, I plant hypocritiall superstition, with pre∣cise curiositie, being the vaine & vnprofitable seruice of God, fashioned after the newfangled humors and schismaticall fancies of nice greene heads: From whence floweth that detestable plague, impious prophanation of Gods sa∣cred  power, contempt or disestimation of others and religion, the blasphe∣mies of damned persons, Epicures and Athiests, which deeply roote impie∣tie, sacriledge, infidelitie, and periurie. Against pietie stubbornly marcheth fourth impietie, being a want of due beneuolence, obedience, or charitie towardes magistrates: as when we con∣temne or calumniate rulers, which is prohibited by Moses. A singular of ex∣ample 22. Eod.
of which hainous contempts or contumelies, remaineth to vs in the per∣son  of blessed Paul the Apostle, who being appealed before the high Priest Ananias for his diuine and most eloquent exordium of his Apologie Vi∣ua voce, saying that hee had to that day serued God, was maliced or emula∣ted rather by the Iudge; which hauing dispiteously interrupted his pe∣riod, commanded a souldier then present to strike him, who did accordingly buffet his face: whereupon Paul in anguish of spirit moued, said to the high Priest; God will smite thee, thou painted wall: for thou sittest to iudge me according to the Law, and commandest thou me to be smitten contrary to the Law? then cer∣taine that stood by told him that he did not well to reuile the high Priest; which he presently acknowledging in ignorance, as not hauing considered what magistrate he was, said: It is written, thou shalt not raile vpon the Iudges  Actes 23. nor speake euill of the ruler of the people. From hence matureth the disobedi∣ence of children and people towardes parents, magistrates, and towards their Countrie: from whence, issue scornfulnesse, contempt of reuerence and dutie. Principall actors in this Scaene of diuels, are parricides, traitors to their So∣ueraignes and countrie, murtherers, and trecherors vnto their masters, with others, such as are of the venemous spirit of Cayne. Dutie being by disobedience confronted, herein looseth his prerogatiue, that stubbornnesse (which taketh root in pride) contumeliously reiecteth it. Hence is that sottish selfe-doting, louing and ouer-pleasing of men, with hypocriticall obedience exhibited vnto true vertues, and a readie wil∣lingnesse  to commit idolatrie by the service of profane and dishonest af∣fections. Immanitie with lenitie combate against iust vindication, specified in these two properties: when the correction is greater then the fault, and there∣fore is the Prouerbe, Cupido & irapessimi sunt consultores: Lust and wrath are the worst counsellors: and specially wrath is to be vehemently suppressed in a Iudge, least he staine his hands in innocent blood, which is a thing so odi∣ous in the sight of God and man, as nothing can be more abhominable: Hence was that saying of the noble morall Tragoedian; Iudex futurus sangui∣ne humano Senec in Horc. furen. abstine: If thou wilt be a Iudge, abstaine from humane blood.  Lenitie then appeareth in a Iudge, when by pardoning of wicked persons he suffereth a mischiefe to fall vpon good men, and therefore this lentitude is so great a sinne, as immanitie: neither should any Iudge in the case of his coun∣trey, giue any sentence vpon father, countrey-men, or brethren contratie to iustice; least a dangerous example and scandall be taken. Lyes, calumnies, fraud, hypocrisie, dissimulation, and arrogancie stand at defiance with veritie; what enemies these be vnto the soule of man, and vnto publike gouernement, I referre to mens priuate consciences. For calumnie praiseth vice, rebuketh vertue: hypocrisie doth foolishly, maliciously, and  fraudulently dispraise those in their absence whom in presence she commen∣deth; and in like case the rest. There is one most pemicious disease ingendred of these humors, which being very rise in some princes courts I may not for∣get. The condition is in killing, imprisoning and vndoing certaine persons,
and some of good desert, which in the politicke Courtier of Duro di pascolo,  seemeth commonly to be bent against noble Gentlemen, of greatest respect, honest, innocent, and vnconuicted: these being brought vnto the pits brinck, are many times charged and surcharged with treasonable or nefarious accu∣sations, wherein they perish; as Petro de Vineis, Aluaro de Luna, Giacobo Corde, Christophoro Colombo, Philip de Comynes, with other very wise and honourable Counsellors, euen of our fathers times and of our memories, which did in such cases miscary: neither is it safe or behoofefull that I particularize. This is a kinde of iniustice and close malice, necessarily to be sisted being wholy composed of diabolicall wilynesse. Wherefore they cannot be very noble, that foster in their rancorous hearts such maliciousnesse: and if there rest in  any heroycall spirits, the least spiracle which should seeme to taste of that con∣tagious humour it is emulation onely: for we finde in Cicero, that Nobiles si∣virtute valent magis aemuli quam inuidi bonorum sunt: Noblemen which are pos∣sessed of vertue, doe rather emulate then maligne good men. And albeit this Offic. 2. vice of emulation resteth amongst Nobles & Paladynes which is most glori∣ous being applied to vertuous and honourable purposes, as in contending to become most iust, valiant, temperate, learned, actiue, or excellent in any such manly qualities then the rest; yet to maligne others for their perfections and better properties should seeme most vnnaturall, base, and brutish: and therefore elegantly Cicero citing the same out of Crisippus resembleth them, to  such as runne together in one race for a wager, in these wordes; Qui stadium currit eniti & contendere debet quàm maximè possit vt vincat: supplant are cum quocum certat aut cubito deppellere nullo modo debet. Sic in vita sibi quemque pe∣tere quod pertineat ad vsum non iniqum est; deripere ius non est. Hee that run∣neth a race, ought to worke and contend with all possible meanes to winne the wager: hee may not in any case supplant him with whom he contendeth, or strike him backe with his elbow. Semblaby, that is not vnfit which a man necessarily craueth for the sustinance or support of his life, but forceably to take away from men that which is theirs, is meere iniquitie. There is a Lesson which Cicero vehemently mooueth and vrgeth, and in  this case fit to be considered vpon, by learned and graue Iudges; not to sum∣mon or appeale any man in causes criminall, if he finde in his heart the par∣ties innocencie so slandered or indited: because it cannot bee done without great charge and torture of conscience. For what can be found more rigorous and vnmanly then to peruert that eloquence (which God, with nature hath giuen for the comfort and conseruation of men) vnto the shame and ruine of honest persons? Which charitable equabilitie hath bin obserued in some wor∣thy Law-fathers of this land: and amongst others manie times in one princi∣pall  minister of his Maiesties pleadings of whom vnnamed, I may speake a * truth without adulation, that it hath seemed doubtfull to wise-men, whether he were in Proborum defensitationibus, quam in sceleratorum accusationibu magis acer: more vehement in his Apologies for good and honest men in their good causes, or earnest in his inuectiues or informations against nefari∣ous and wicked persons. For such ought to be the care of iust Iudges as Cice∣ro
writeth, Vt iuris & iudiciorum aequitate suum quisque teneat: That through  the equitie of iustice and iudgement, euery man may retaine his right. I speake this as a necessarie caueat or monition against calumnies and enuy, which hath bene the deuouring caterpiller of so many vertuous and gallant princes and Commonwealthes men, that haue thereby perished, because that restlesse hagge malice commonly doth more mischiefe then fortune: and ther∣fore if men which are set vpon the stage of honour and reputation can finde out a soueraigne preseruatiue against her venime; then doe they shew great wisedome possessing this world in quiet. For sure it is that Viuos interdum for∣tuna, saepe inuidia fatigat. Fortune some times toyleth liuing creatures, but enuy vexeth them often. Gratitude being another branch of iustice is vngraciously wounded with vnthankefulnesse: nothing vanisheth sooner then the remembrance of bene∣fites receiued; for if you multiply them, they shall be retributed and retribled to you with infinite malefices, considering that he which neither hath heart Fr. Gulc. Italia. in vita Alex. 6. pont. nor facultie to requite commonly forgetteth or vnderualueth your munifi∣cence; disdayning in himselfe the very remembrance of that necessitie, which being either with your mercie mitigated or delayed in case of iustice, or by your charitie supplied in compassion of his pouerty, should haue enioyned him to thankefull requitall for such a benefit, which people commonly so soone forget as taste. This haue I found by good experience both in particu∣lar, and by some priuate respects of my selfe and others most neere vnto me;  not doubting but that it is a vulgar proofe, wherein this worlds aged maligni∣tie through diuelish continuance hath increased it from a wily serpent to a sub∣tile, malicious, and murthering old dragon; like that which is spoken of, in the Reuelation of the blessed Euangelist Iohn, being now set free from fetters to∣wards the last times; and amongst wise men so detestable and odious, that by their often repetion it became a prouerbe generally deliuered, if you call me vn∣thankefull, call me what you will: for nothing can be more disgracefull or infa∣mous. And as it is vsed to men of that vnthankfull nature, an vnthankefull dogge: for as it is odious in a dogge, a snake, or any wild beast, which is che∣rished  or fedde at your table, to bite or maligne their fosterers, which is a thing very rarely to be seene: howmuch more lothesome and contemptible is it in a man to whom God hath giuen heart and reason of gratification. Mercie confounded is with hardnesse of heart, vncharitablenesse, vnconscio∣nable actions, strangenesse amongst brethren and societies, being both perni∣cious to the soule of people, and contagious to the peace and vnions of all ciuill states and policies. Liberality perishethin these extreamities, in auarice which cannot endure the thought of giuing, and in prodigalitie dishabling the power thereof. These are guarded with infinite vices, of which two mischiefes, prodigalitie more helpeth in repayring many, whereas couetousnesse will not relieue any. Vaine ostentation being vndecently slubbered vp, and neighbouring aua∣rice, is opposite to magnificence: there is likewise a proud immoderate and vn∣seasonable kinde of riotous magnificence accompanied with excesse: the
daungers, of both are much like to the perils issuing from the extreames of  liberalitie: but of auarice, ostentation & prodigalitie, I haue more at large spo∣ken in the morals of my first booke of offices. Friendship being the nauell or vp-shot of all iustice, Etiam & habitus ve∣rè & perfectè diligendi alterum proper similitudinem morum: Which is a habite of perfect and true loue betwixt men, resembling one another in conditions and manners by naturall sympathie, shall take place in the bottome, base and groundworke of the rest, and it is thwarted with enmity which worketh in mens hearts crueltie with hatred; whereupon patricides and homicides in∣gender. It is a common saying, that such a man hath betrayed or deceiued  his friend; because the practise and example seemeth very frequent amongst vs in this age, according to that saying of Salust, Per maximam amicitiam maxi∣ma est fallendi copia; that where greatest friendship harboreth, there hath deceit most power and force to practise; but I am not of that opinion how true friendship (if it be mutuall and reciprocall) hath any port which can open vn∣to the heart that could entertaine falshood against friends: considering that true friendship is naked, pure and immaculate according to the, definition be∣fore expressed. Howbeit there is a similitude of wicked natures, which com∣bineth men in a kinde of fraternitie which me seemeth may not be called so properly friendship, being brethren in euill sacramentally tyed, and periuri∣ously  vntyed at pleasure, to succour, loue, deceiue and betray one another. This in like opposition with the former is the very seede of all disunion and in∣iustice. From hence distractions, seditions, factions, oppressions, and diuers sutes arise which neuer haue end nor will, but by conspiracies; vpon which the prince is many times forced to staine his hands with blood, or to loose his soueraignetie. Many men neglect this, not looking into the danger which dayly stealeth out of it: and yet it is easily found, if they consider how the seed∣time of each yeere present occasioneth the next yeeres haruest; ministring store of matter to gorge vp the couetous bags of some ambicious Lawmen, Aduocats  and Atturneyes. Now somewhat concerning that abilitie which strengthe∣neth iudges and iuridicall magistrates in th'administration of publike affaires. To the perfection of knowledge herein it is right behoouefull that they which iudge, be soundly read and practised in all the lawes Ciuill, Cannon, and prouinciall consenting with the lawes of those nations where men liue, and also the lawes of all neighbouring Commonweales politickely gouerned, whether they be Christian or pagane, conferring them with the ground of all good laws deliuered first by God to the sacred prince Moyses his seruant in the decalogue: as also that he studiously peruse all the bookes of Moyses, wherein the politicke statutes and ordinances deriued from the fountaine of his vn∣serchable wisedome are touched; as in the bookes of Exodus, Detronomie,  Numbers: likewise in the Iudges and Kings. Nay let him peruse the whole vo∣lumes of the new Testament; wherein he shall find the true formes and trea∣sure of all good lawes and iudgements. Likewise let him conuerse with the lawes of the ancient Egyptians which (as Diodorus recordeth them) are like in Lib. 2. cap. 3. lib. hist. nature to these our Brittaine lawes; from whence together with the secret mi∣steries
of their gods, those ordinances were by Orpheus translated into Greece:  also the Troiane and Greeke laws, from whenceour Nation (as I before decla∣red) did receiue their first orders of gouernment: the lawes of Saxons and Danes when they did inhabite vs; conferring them seuerally together, & pon∣dering which neerest cohere in precepts & vniformitie with the sacred Deca∣logue. It is also most commendable, and would adde infinite riches to his iudg∣ement, if he can by diligent reading attaine the Lawes of all principall States and Kingdomes in this age established as in Spaine, France, Portugall, the free States of Italie, the Empire of Germany, the Cantons of Swizzer-land, the Kingdomes of Poleland, Hungaria, Prussia, Moscouia, with such like: most of  which although they be gouerned by the lawes imperiall, haue not withstan∣ding Edicts, & customarie prescriptions retaining legall force, which are most fit and worthy to be knowne. Also the Lawes of the Turkes, of the Persians, and of any strange heathens in the world, which are partakers and be gouer∣ned by rule of reason. This Science with the riches of that knowledge, which may be gotten by the same together with the iudicious conference of one with another, I cannot sufficiently declare nor commend: neither, if it were possible for a man, all other means being wanting thervnto to liue vntill he had visited those nations, and had soiourned in each particular countrey, till he were acquain∣ted  with their seuerall Lawes and orders, could his paines answere the least part of benefit which that knowledge will dispense. In publicke iudgements (which according to th'imperiall Institutions are so called, because the execution of them is referred to any of the people) it much importeth him to be very skilfull, cōferring them to the benefit of his priuate iudgement with the publicke iudgements, as in cases criminall of his owne nation. Of these some being capitall and the rest not capitall: those which are, doe punish with death or perpetuall exile; as it was called by the Romans, Interdiction from fire and water, by which was intended an exclusi∣on from all other benefit, or comfort of his natiue Countrey. Such were  those  as Freigius defineth; being persons cast out, or banished Quest. politic. from all ciuill societie: and they were called deportati or relegati, by the Ro∣mans, to whom was this interdiction of fire and water, or the prescription and abdication of people. Other iudgements vpon defamation proceed with pe∣cuniary mulct, which are also publicke and not capitall. Howbeit publicke iudgements principally proceed in matters of maie∣stie, touching traytors against the King or Common-wealth, punished with Ad legem Iul. maiestatis. losse of life, and extirpation of their remembrance after their death in at∣tainder of blood, and destruction of their houses which should be demoli∣shed. All criminall causes according to the forme of our Lawes, are either treasons or felonies; and those courts in England which are ordained for tryall of them that stand appealed for such crimes, are the Kingsbench, or Gaole deliueryes. Which iudgements are through all Counties of this Realme, once each
yeere at the least (and in some oftner) according to the greatnesse of the shire;  and of that necessitie which may happen vpon the manifold offences, tryable where the factes were committed, if it bee not otherwise determined by the Kings priuie Counsell. Treasons according to the lawes of our Nation are crymes of such hei∣nous nature, as either concerne the Prince in his life or State. As when a man compasseth or imagineth the Kings, the Queenes, or their eldest son his death; the violation or constupration of the Queene, or of the kings eldest daughter vnmaried, or of the Prince his wife the levying of war against the King, in his Realme, or abroad; the counterfeiting of his great or priuy Seale, or of his mo∣neys;  th'importation of false money counterfeit to the stampe of his Realmes, and knowing it to be false: to kill the Ghancellor, Treasurer, or Iudges of the Kings bench, or of the common plees, or the Iustices in Eire, the Iustices of assise, or any Iustices of Oyer, & derminer, doing their offices there is another petit treason when a seruant slayeth his Master, and a wife her husband; a man secular or religious, any Prelate to whom he oweth faith and obedience. Moreouer if any thing should happen vnnamed, respite must bee graun∣ted till by Parliament it be adiudged and ordayned treason or felonie. Edw. 3. An. 25. cap. 2. Paricides, such as kill their parents openly or closely, and such as are either accessaries or abettours, punished with extreame torture of death,  Ad leg. Pompei. de Paricidijs. according to th'imperiall Lawes. Howbeit, such as kill their kinsfolke or allyes, vndergoe the law prouided against murtherers. Felonies are of diuers natures, including any capitall iniustice, as in life, or liuing towards diuers persons: of which, some be murtherers; others in theft and robberies; and some in deceit appendant to that nature; but in a more ve∣nemous degree. Murtherers therefore, which with artificiall instruments, poy∣sons, Ad leg. Iul. de de Sycarijs. or sorceries take away the liues of people, according to th'imperiall lawes are punished with death. Theeues secretly stealing and purloyning publicke treasure, or sacrilegious persons: yea, Iudges themselues if hauing charge of  Ad leg. Iul. de V priuat. any common treasure they should imbezill the same; with all assistants, recep∣tors, and abbettors are condemnable to death. Other thefts not of such hey∣nous condition are satisfied with exile. The rapes of widowes, wiues, or virgines are comprehended herein by the same punishment. Falsifying or counterfeiting of written Chartiers, Euidences, Records, Ad leg. Cornel. de falsis. Leases, or counterfeiting of seales, with such like of the same nature punished with death. Publicke violence which is done with weapon, or artificiall instrument; finable to the the third part of his goods which offendeth. Pettie thefts sometimes with losse of life, and in certaine cases with lighter Ad leg. Iul. peculatus. punishment, at the Iudges discretion. The lawes of ambition, of requiring a restitution of goods taken away, Ad leg. Iul. Annooe, amb. terum repet. with those that concerne victuall; &c. are all handled in the publike iudge∣ments, expressed in th'imperiall Institutions. For as much as concerneth the studies and readie knowledge of our owne Lawes, I haue sufficiently spo∣ken before.
In iudgements criminall, generally requiring the deepest and soundest  discretion of Iudges, there is one question which I haue heard controuerted: Whether in them it be better and more expedient to shew mercie then rigor? but it is by the stronger part of opinions confirmed, that in the gouernment of a multitude (where the crimes are treasonable or infectious) seuere pu∣nishment much more auaileth then lenitie. Which Tacitus no lesse sagely (though liuing in a tyrannous Empire) doth confirme. Yet forsomuch as it is no part of my profession (but in somewhat impertinent) to declare the sub∣stance of all these causes criminall according to their natures; I will pretermit and handle only such things, as are required of a Iudge in his general decision or execution of them. Punishments therefore are either frequent, or rare: mitigate punish∣ments  of multitudes together with frequent practize of them. And he which hastily proceedeth to sentence of condemnation, will be generally said and condemned to haue done it willingly. If occasion so require, that for a gene∣nerall good and quiet, a multitude must vndergoe punishment; make speci∣ous demonstration, that it is onely done to preuent further offence, and not in regard of the fault: shew neither wrath nor gladnesse in punishing; inflict not any strange or extreame punishments: for they be dangerous, & the Iudges which punish after new fashions are vndoubtedly cruell. Be not partiall in punishing, as in dealing more seuerely with some, then with others whose faults are of equall qualitie. Neither be present spectators at the execution of  malefactors: which violent & irous appearance, hath drowned many princes in the blood of their Tyrannie. And whereas it doth happen frequently; that many persons and some of the best estate and qualitie, cannot be puni∣shed with death, but with the great danger and hatred of the Iudge; which he should wholy neglect, honourably respecting the person of veritie, repre∣sented in himselfe; it is required, that in heinous causes all the heads be cut off together, and that not leasurely one by one: For often reiteration of blood giueth suspition of mercilesse truculencie, stirring malice in many men and pleasing few: onely the due respect of seueritie bent against them (whose pardons are full of perill) presently washing out the note or malice of that se∣ueritie,  with remission and indulgence of other offendors, whose crimes being of a more humble nature, include not much danger in them. Hauing and retaining alwayes a precise respect of the natures and qualities of the per∣sons offending, and of their offences: according with that rule in Salust, Vos sceleratissimis hominibus quiaciues sunt ignosere aequo animo paterer ni mise∣recordia Bell. Iugurth. in perniciē casura esset: I could be contented that great offendors shold be pardoned, were it not that such mercie would turne to mischiefe. Onely this should be regarded, that amongst many persons combined in offence a few of the principals be cut off. Necem etenim paucorū aut vnius hominis calami∣tati  Porti  in Catil. publicae maiores nostri semper anteponendam esse putauerunt: Our fathers al∣wayes thought it expedient to preferre the death of some few persons, or of one man; rather then to permit a generall calamitie by the effusion of much blood. It hath been anciently customed (but I will not prescribe such dange∣rous
phisicke) to wash away the enuie of blood-shed, with shedding the blood  of certaine vile persons, as sacrifices piacular against publike hatred (as I no∣ted in my first booke) by the example of Sir Richard Emson, and Master Dud∣ley, in the second yeere of King Henry the eight. To great offences therefore either presumptuously, or bloodily committed by great persons of note, ap∣ply notable and exemplary punishments; that meaner folke in beholding their executions, may be discouraged from the like attempts. Which rule hath beene narrowly kept by that right noble, reuerende and politicke Iudge, Sir Iohn Popham, by whose iustice and seuere integritie (thunder-blasting des∣perate offences) many grieuous and contagious malefactors haue been often∣times repressed. If therefore a mans life insist vpon it, let him not feare to giue  sentence according to conscionable euidence and equitie: whereas he shall finde it euident and fit, that by so iudging, iustice is not scandalized. Moreouer, it must not appeare to be done either in priuate, as by cor∣rupt bribes, violently to diuert the current of iustice out of his true channel, or any malice or enuie to parties, which is a kinde of disease of the minde, which greuously repineth at the good successe or qualities of others. And ma∣ny men wil sooner pardon the slaughter of their parents, then the losse of their liuings vniustly. Seueritie therefore in necessarie punishments, addeth a maie∣stie to the magistrate: for otherwise it happeneth oftentimes, that the Prince may rebuke his foolish lentitude, in such termes as were obiected by Quintus  Fab. Maximus in the Romane Senate against Scipio, whose souldiors through his exceeding licence and lenitie reuolted from him; that he should haue corrupted the state of ciuil gouernment, as Scipio did the Romane militarie dis∣cipline: vpon which reprehension, Scipio reformed himselfe with great repu∣tation; whereas in regard of his former mildnesse, the first examples of his se∣ueritie were not imputed to his owne nature. It is not meant here by the ex∣ample of Draco, who did write all his lawes in blood for the Athenians, to punish euery small offence with death: but such as are either traiterous and se∣dicious paricides, homicides, or others of like condition according to the qualities of their offences. There is a kinde of grace and and mercie decla∣red  in executing or interpreting the very Letter of the Law precisely: which I referre in the religion thereof vnto the Iudges conscience, as by a common and familiar example. Zaluchus (hauing made a Law to the Locrensians, that any persons of that common-wealth, if they were taken in adulterie, should loose both their eyes) was forced to giue sentence against his owne sonne, which stood in that case appealed before him: & notwithstanding that earnest intercession made by the people for his pardon; yet in satisfaction of the Law, he caused one of  his owne and another of his sonnes eyes to be done out. In what ought a Iudge to declare more constant veritie, then in iuridicall sentences? in what more zeale then in execution of the Lawes? in what place more maiestie then on the venerable throne of iustice? I will confirme this with a familiar example of common record in our Eng∣lish Chronicles. Henrie of Monmuth sonne to king Henrie the fourth (who
did afterwards succeede his father) rushed vnto the Kings Bench (the Lord  chiefe Iustice of England sitting in iudgement vpon life and death of one of that princes seruants, then in case of felonie brought vnto the bar before him) and with his sword drawen made offer to rescue the prisoner without further triall: the people astonished at such vnusuall behauiour, were afraid. The iudge himselfe, or rather Gods spirit directing, wisely weighing his owne con∣dition, and looking into trueth and authoritie, banisheth all suddaine feare, and stoutly with a reuerend maiestie rebuketh the prince in this sort. Come hether furious yongman, wound this old carcase with thy sword wherewith thou menacest me; strike, strike I say, rather will I die then endure such ex∣ample. This place which thou doest violate is thy fathers tribunall, the iudge whō thou threatnest representeth thy father, the law which thou contemnest,  adiudgeth thee guiltie for it; and without any respect that thou art sonne to the king, on behalfe of thy father, and being assisted and supported with the Commonweales authoritie, I doe commit thee to prison. At which reue∣rend and constant iudgement of the magistrate, the prince abashed presently let fall his sword, and willingly submitted himselfe to prison. The king vpon this tragaecomedie reported, burst with teares into these speeches: happie am I in so iust & sincere a iudge, & in so good and obedient a sonne. Which gallant prince succeeding his sather in the gouernement so much esteemed of that iudge, as (when he departed England with his forces towards France for that conquest which he there purchased) he committed the tuition and gouerne∣ment  of his whole realme, during that his absence to him: the historie is true though common, and yet not so vulgar as notable. Sedition and malice being two pestilent and contagious diseases in a Com∣monwealth should be seuerely punished in the beginnings without remission, yet with such discretion handled, as it might seeme rather to proceede from a mind very loath, and grieuing to punish, but that constraint and the com∣mon cause enforceth it. Howbeit, somewhat must alwayes be done for ex∣amples sake considering the sentence, Panarum fructus omnium maximus perti∣net ad exemplum. The most fruit and profit which issueth from punishments grow∣eth vpon example. There is great daunger in ministring a more vehement medecine, then ei∣ther the nature or strength of the disease or diseased doth require. Applie not any corrosiues but vpon extremities and causes otherwise remedilesse. He which hatcheth vengeance in his heart, may not punish hastely but expect a fit occasion for his owne satisfaction, which will vndoubtedly fall without any combustion, note, or imputation of reuenge. Those iudges therefore I deeme wel worthie commendation, which seldome vsing seueritie can attaine and keepe the name of terrible magistrates: for by much exercise of bloodie  iustice as I said before, more harme then good ensueth to the prince; for not onely the persons fauourers of the parties punished, but the peoples hearts in generall will storme at it: and admit you can remoue some of the first which stirre in it; yet in a case of crueltie the peoples indignation may fitly be com∣pared to wild-fire, which being once kindled will encrease and burne more
vehemently. If therefore a Iudge extend seueritie, let it be manifested espe∣cially,  when matters of blood and violation of humane charitie requireth it: when violence vpon impious passion or perturbation of the minde, to satisfie priuate malice is exercised vpon persons; which no man being moderated by the Law of nature will commit: as Cicero writeth; hominem naturae obedien∣tem Offic. 3. homini nocere non posse: That not any man which is obedient to nature will hurt another man. Neither can any thing expresse the prudence of a magistrate more to life, then the iust conseruation and maintenance of a mans life; nothing decipher his crueltie more, then slaughter and effusion of blood. How odious is the very name of homicide, by whose violence man which is the goodliest artifice of nature is dissolued? Nothing therefore should in a  ciuill societie be more seuerely sifted, nothing feele more extreame punish∣ment then murtherers. A iust Iudge therefore sitting in iudgement vpon ho∣micides, should in his right hand hold a Iasper stone, to stanch the blood of in∣nocents; & in the left a sword to strike bloody murtherers and slaughterers: so that the sword be not more forcible then the stone, least his wrath conquer clemencie when he reuengeth blood. Next vnto murther is that vlcerous and vnsatiable wolfe vsurie, which like a cancor consumeth the flesh and bones of Prince and people. It is the extreamest stincking plague of any common-wealth. And hence was it, that Marcus Cato said, How murther and vsurie were correlatiue. Which leprous botch (for I cannot giue it a terme bad enough) the Romans punished more  seuerely then felonie. And Salust likewise aduising Caesar in one of his Ora∣tions saith; Tollendus foenerator vt suas quisque res curemus: Vsurers must be banished, that euery man may the better follow his priuate businesse. Inti∣mating those lets and obstacles which happen to the common-wealth; where diuers principall persons are consumed and eaten vp with vsurie. Saying moreouer, that all things would haue good successe in the common-wealth, Sipecuniae (quae maxima omnium pernicies est) vsum atque dedecus dempserit: If he would so practise, that the vse and disgrace of selling and lending of mo∣ney Ad. Cas. de rep. ordinanda. (which he termeth the greatest of all harmes) may be taken away. There yet remaineth one principall respect and consideration for Magi∣strates and Iudges, which specially concerneth the common-wealth: to take  such carefull heed and circumspection as may be, that all men and persons, yong and old, of all trades and professions in all townes and cities, doe follow with diligence and commendable industrie their seuerall functions and vo∣cations, which is the readiest meane both to magnifie and amplifie the com∣mon-wealth. And therefore Francis Patricius, in his booke De institutione Lib. 1. tit. 8. reipub. writeth that they should Otij magis quam negotij rationem exigere: To take more precise account of idle fellowes then of labourers: which those na∣ked Gymnosophists that liued in India, did with all industrie; for they were of o∣pinion that nothing could be more odious in any societies, states, or Cities,  then sloath and idlenesse. For the Gymnosophists did alwayes before meat exa∣mine their youth, how they had imployed that part of the day, and onely permitted such to receiue meate whose exercises they did approue, thrusting
such out of doores as had been found idle or loyterers, that they might seeke  their food by labour, where they could gaine it. Hence was that law amongst the Egyptians which Diodorus mentioneth Lib. 1. bib. lst. that all the people were enioyned to make strict accompt vnto the presedents of euery prouince, how they bestowed their times, & what arts they did pro∣fesse; each mans particular name and profession being entred into a booke: so that if any was found to giue vp a false accompt of his labours, or was knowen to haue loytered out his time, he receiued punishment of death; and this was one of Dracoes bloodie lawes: for honest exercise and studies are a meane to reduce, exorbitate, & prodigall affections to frugalitie: for sloathfull and idle persons as Valerius writeth, Mag is oneri quàm honori sunt reipub: Impose  more burthen then afford ornament to the Commonwealth. And therefore Lib. de tes. cap. 2 idle fellowes anciently amongst the Athenians were violently trayled into the market place to receiue punishment as grieuous offenders. The like inquisiti∣on was amongst the sage iuridicall Areopagites, which is in effect expressed by Valrius lib. 2. tit. de instit. antiq. blessed Paul in one of his Epistles, that he which will not worke, shall not eate. These Areopagites whose offices were not vnlike to the Romane Censors tooke such care, that idle fellowes should giue strict accompt of their time and profession imployed and exercised. And this accompt of idlenesse was so Valerius lib. 16. great amongst our forefathers of former ages past, that they did not esteeme of any thing more shamefull then idlenesse. For this cause therefore the Phi∣losopher Cleanthes caried water to get him bread: and this was it which made  Plantus that noble Comaedian to bake bread. Furthermore Soln enacted it that the sonne was exempted from duetie towards his father, if he by the fa∣thers meanes had not attained instruction in some science. The fruits or to∣kens rather of this idle leprosie which drowneth, or rather as it were insensa∣teth the members of any Commonwealth, are luculently described by Salust in these wordes: Dormire prias quam somni cupido est, non famem, non sitim, ne{que} frigus opperiri, sed ea omnia luxu anticapere: haec iuntutem (vbi familiares opes Coniur. Catil. defecerant) adfacinora incendebant: To sleepe before a mans eyes were heauy, not to tarry till he were hungry, thirstie, or cold; but to preuent all luxuriously: These disordered fashions when their owne priuate wealth was wasted, in∣censed,  and prouoked youngmen to take in hand wicked courses. If this be not too common a vice in our Commonwealth then were we most fortunate. And hence it is that in detestation thereof, Salust in one other place saith, Vbi socordiae te ignauiaeque tradider is nequidquam deos implores, irati infestique sunt▪ It is in vaine that sloathfull and idle persons inuoke the gods, for they will bee wrathfull and punish them. Wherefore all such vagrant and idle persons, as our statutes haue most prudently pointed out, are fittest for the gallies or ba∣nishment. Nulla namque re alia improbi ab iniurio sa facinoro saque vit a magis pro∣hibentur quàm prescriptionis mei; quaeliberos ad egestatem perduca: nam malè meritus publico exemplo ad terrorem malefactorum ppertate laborare cogitur:  For wicked persons are not by any meanes so soone restrained from iniurious and sinfull courses, as by the terror of banishment, which bringeth their chil∣dren to beggerie: ot by publike example all such as deserue euill (to terrifie
malefactors) are driuen through extreame pouertie to labour. Hence was it that the noble Tragaedian writ, venit ad pigros canasenectus. Neither is it fit that  In Her. fur. any idle fellowes should liue vpon the common-wealths labours, vnlesse their labors be imployed for the commonwealth; which euen the course of nature in little Bees teacheth vs, which will not suffer any Drone, or idle Bee that bringeth in no honie, either to eat out of their labours, or to liue within their wax. I will not insist vpon more obseruations, concerning the knowledge and practise of Iudges: desiring them that read this, not to impute my paines to arrogancie in dealing with studies beyond my weake element, neither to any other wants (which are manifold in it) considering that I haue with cheer∣fulnesse  done my best for the yong Readers benefit. The noble. Iudges and Lawyers which haue left vnto vs the know∣ledge of our Common-lawes, hauing taken great paines for the comfort and benefit of this Common-wealth, as is manifest by their written Bookes, and reports of the Law, be Master Glanvile, Littleton, Fitzherbert, Brooke, Dyer, Plowdon, and that right worthy Lawyer of our time, Sir Edw. Cooke, the Kings Atturney generall. The reuerend Fathers and Iudges in the Lawes of our time, were Wray, Bacon, Harper, Bromley, Manwood, Anderson, Egerton, and Popham: whose ex∣cellent  gifts of knowledge and wisedome, haue bene plentifully powred out, to the generall benefit of this Nation. Diuers excellent men of great prudence, learning & hope for our own laws, residing and studious in our houses of court, and otherwise dispersed through his Maiesties dominions, adorne and beautifie this Realme; whose names fit me not here to insinuate. So that this Nation vnder Gods gouernment, du∣ring good Queene Elizabeth her raigne, was inriched and roabed with the gold and purpure of fortune and wisedome auspiciously combined toge∣ther. And since her time with his Maiesties high prudence, alwayes stu∣dying  and inclyning to the peace and happinesse of his people, graciously begun, and very like blessedly to continue to his Highnesse high comfort, so long as it shall stand with Gods high pleasure, his Maiesties honour, and with the speciall weale of his Kingdomes. The Lawes before King Edward the third his raigne (as Glanvile and Bracton record) and some which were established in the dayes of his father Edward of Carnarvan, and of King Richard the second were written in La∣tine: but in the first of King Edward the third his raigne, who had, as it is knowne generally, good and lawfull right to the crowne of France, and did retaine diuers of those Prouinces in possession, were all of them written in French. Howbeit soone after, to the ende that the people might the better  vnderstand what was spoken for & against them, the Lawyers which before lately pleaded in French, vpon such inconuenience found, were enioyned by one act of Parliament, that all their pleadings in all courts & place within the Anno 36. Reg. Edw. 3. cap. 15. realme should be made in English, but entred and enrolled in Latine. And so∣much in briefe concerning the Legall counsell or court of Iudges. Finis libri tertij.
The fourth Booke  of Offices. IT is commonly seene in the depraued condition of hu∣mane nature, that diuers persons doe vehemently desire to be reputed skilfull, and excellently learned in some commendable arts which they neuer attained. A vicious bindnesse proceeding (as I deeme) from pride innated, and from a certaine dishonest kinde of sluggishnesse; when any man shall thinke, that he can buy the credit and  falsed opinion of diuine treasures, with meere idlenesse; in whose loathsome and vnsauory kennell, the ragged, blind, barbarous, and misbeliuing idoll ig∣norance, filthily wallowing holdeth a perpetuall slouens right, and doth in very foolish arrogancy vpon meere earthly presumption, euerlastingly ble∣mish all other laudable perfections, which can be quoated in the faire and true carde of mans diuine nature and industrie. The scandall of which disho∣nest imputation, that I might crush to death in the head, me seemeth it in con∣science expedient, and a chiefe branch of my duetie to confesse a trueth: how much it exceedeth the weake bounders of my naked iudgement, to furnish fit in compleat armes of proofe, with all sutable habiliments of honour this  right noble counsell of warre; which though it be last in place, yet is it first in procession, and not lowest in profession, considering that it putteth the titles of all right, and iust honour in execution. It is the noble corrector of all prodigall states, a skilfull bloodletter against all dangerous obstructions and plurasies of peace, the most soueraigne purgation of all superfluous and sprea∣ding humours or leprosies, which can breed in any generall politicke body. Necessity which importuneth a fourth placein my booke doth vrge me to that which my dishabilities towards the seruice of so serious a subiect shuld other∣wise inhibit: my practise in warres hath bene very little, my knowledge in bookes and histories, slender in such respects: and (as it is the generall fault of youthfull temeritie) when I first entred the martiall lists, negligently did I  restraine my selfe from those needfull obseruations, which should haue beene the very scope proposed to my whole time of seruice in armes, through the vaine weakenesse of my greene and vnstayed head: therefore I most humbly
craue pardon for such omissions as will be found in this treatise frequently;  recommending it vnto the best and honorable iudgements which cannot ca∣lumniate; with a generall exception and protestation against the vulgar in their bitternesse without discretion, from which kinde of spirits I desire ear∣nestly that my trauels may be concealed. The matter is of it sele most ample; and many things may be required, which I know cannot be (without some irkesomenesse to the reader) inserted: points of more moment ouershooting the scope of my knowledge I referre to my masters in armes, that haue by much valour and long experience attained the martiall girland of iust honour, and can famously from the golden trumpet of farre sounding victorie clang  out aloud with heroicall cheere and alacritie, the true flourish and euerliuing bruit of bloodie sweats and battailes. Warre being vpon honorable grounds and with due deliberation vnder∣taken, is the constant and inestimable base of a blessed peace, rectifying, com∣posing Office of military Gouernors. and perfecting all iniuries, disorders, and imperfections in euery state; hence was it that sage Heraclitus did call warre the father, king, and soueraigne of all creatures, reprouing Homer for his ignorance, because he prayed against  de   variance, and debate amongst gods, and men; holding opinion that the blind Poet did (by so praying) curse the generation of all creatures, which accor∣ding to the grounds of our Philosophicall reason doth subsist of fighting and  antipathie. It is vulgar how the foundations of all Empires are framed out of good lawes and good armes: But good lawes are of small force, vnlesse they be maintained by needfull skill and practise of weapons. Howbeit in all pla∣ces of the ciuill and imperiall lawes where there is any mention made of wars Lib. 1. In princ. cod ustiniani & in pro. instit. and lawes together, armes haue the first place. Moreouer, note it positiuely, that where militarie science and exercise is frequent, there good lawes are in most force and honour: for it maintaineth and magnifieth euery Commonwealth and state; without it, none haue long flourished or continued: and according to Thucydides, he that will not in tran∣quilitie  leuie necessarie warre standeth in the very doore of daunger: and this Lib. 1. Conc. Corih. of Tacitus. Sapientes pacis causa bellum gerunt; laborem spe otij ustentant: nisi il∣lam firmam efficis, vinci, an vicisse quid retulit &c. Wise men to purchase peace leuie warre; they labour in hope of future ease: vnlesse your peace be firme, what auaileth it you to conquer or to be conquered. Warre is therefore a multitude combined and assembled together in armes in one cause vnited with a noble and needefull resolution to resist and defeate all violence which is opposed or vrged against any king, kingdome, or their confederates. Wherein first must be considered generally that which Salust writeth. Omne ll▪ Iugurth. bellum facilè sumi, caeterum gerrime desinere; non in eiusdem potestate initium eius & finem esse: incipere cuiuis etiam ignauo licet; deponere vero cum victores velint.  All warres are easily begun, but with great difficultie finished, it is not in one mans power, both to beginne and end the warre: euery dastardly coward may begin; but it resteth in the pleasure of him that vanquisheth to make an end thereof. The foote or end of warre therefore must be precisely looked vpon, with
the toppe and occasion. For example, when it is soundly warranted by the  Lawes of nations; as in lawfull levying of armes either in the cause of God Godly warres. which is principal being moued & assisted by diuine spirit, against his enemies: such as you shal finde in ages not long past, which by the Emperor (being con∣federated and vnited in force with the princes of Christendome) were au∣spiciously stirred vp ingenerall against the Turke, and against other blasphe∣mous opposites of Christ, and of his people: or in defence of the Common∣wealth, Necssarie war. against all forraine inuasions or impeachments of their naturall liber∣ties. As it was in my remembrance prouided by the dearly remembred nr∣rice of this Nation, Queene Elizabeth Pro aris & focis, against the puisant Armado of Spaine; which purposed a conquest of this Nation, and was confounded by the spirit of God, mouing in the windes and waters, against  those forraine ships vnder the propitious and euer-admired valor of Gods hand-maiden; whose apport & carriage in those difficulties are worthy to be recorded, with a pen of finest gold in hardest marble, or in that (if any thing be more durable) which is most permanent and diuine vpon earth. For being then amongst her souldiors heroically mounted, she promised with many comfortable words of encouragement, to share with them in fortunes, if the Spaniard durst shew his face aland. Such and so marueilous was her natiue fortitude and true pietie, published in her Campe at Tilburie, vpon the zeale and motherly loue of Gods cause, and of the safegard of his chosen people vnder her scepter, as is euerlastingly registred already with her soule aboue  the starres. Out of this brancheth a lawfull kinde of inuasion vpon forraine states, in case of some honor or right which is vniustly detained by violent hand, after Lawfull wars. that restitution hath beene peaceably demanded. As that which the right wise and most renowned Prince, the beautifull president of peace, and the deuouring thunder-bolt of warre, King Edward the third (your Maiesties most worthy Progenitor) breathed out against France: which martiall light∣tening was so terrible that it deuoured the disobedience of that people, and established him in his right: which first was wonne with the weight of most honourable battell. And those warres which the valorous French King  maintained, a long time after the venemous murther of his predecessor, & bro∣ther in Law, King Henry the third of France and Poleland, against the Duke Du Mayne, great Chamberlaine of France, with the Duke of Parma and o∣thers; that resisted him in his hereditarie dominions, vntill the Pope had re∣stored him to the crowne. There is likewise a iust warre grounded vpon charitie, which vnderta∣keth Iust warres. the protection of our friends or confederates. Such were they, which our prementioned soueraigne Lady lately levyed to succor the Free-states of base  Germanie thereby to protect them from the rigorous and vnspeakeable serui∣tude of Spaine and Castille: whose approoued faithfulnesse of old to this Realme, is many times noted in our Chronicles. Onely such warre as is vn∣dertaken for amplification of dominion and Empire, and that which ambiti∣on marshalleth, with such iniurious quarrels as are scandalously picked out of Vnlawfull warr▪
counterfeit grounds, and heads more fit for Turkes, Infidels, or traytors, then  for sacred and royall minded princes; may not bee fummoned to this throne of heroicall iustice, but vnrespected or reiected vtterly. Vnto the performance of these warres thus iustly to be commenced and raised the choise of sol∣diors is first required, as well Captaines as ordinarie seruitors, including sol∣diors for fight, and labourers for worke. Of these in their particular offices and degrees successiuely. The first and highest place of power and reputation in the field, the Prince himselfe vpon some principall causes in his owne person houldeth; vnder whom all other Generals and Captaines are waged, and beare office. But forsomuch as at this day few princes are seene militant in forraine coun∣tries,  vnlesse they stand appealed to such battels forcibly, through some forci∣ble iniustice of others, either vpon detinew of due tributes or territories (the custome and possession whereof hath beene of most ancient memorie con∣tinued in his antecessors by discreet succession, to the very point of his own raigne) and also because fewe Princes are personally seene in battels of our dayes vpon their ownesoyle, vnlesse against assailants or tirannous vsurpers; such as were expected (of which I spake before) by our soueraigne Elizabeth, and prouided against the inuasion of King Philip Anno 1588. and for some other particular reasons, I will passe ouer the particulars of his highest place in martiall Campe, referring my selfe to his commission; by vertue whereof, vpon ordinary tearmes of warre, the Prince or Emperor deputeth his Lieute∣nant  generall to supply the place and office of maiestie; hauing sometimes certaine priuate and princely directions not expressed, by which in dearest trust to him by his soueraigne committed he must shape his course. In all out∣ward apparance, he must cape according to the strict tenor of his instructi∣ons, in commission vnder the Prince his great seale deliuered. The least silla∣ble in sence being expressed therein, he may not without high danger to him∣selfe transgresse; vnlesse the soueraignes aduice and opinion be first had and knowne, or after vpon more firme reconsideration deliuered. The princes deepe Iudgement and discretion in electing of his Leiute∣nant generall, ought to be principally grounded vpon good aduice, and sure notice taken of his sufficiencie for such a place. First he should be a man of  able, strong, and actiue bodie, well knit, of a durable complexion, neither too much brent, nor drowned (as I sayd in the secret councellor) hard and at defi∣ance with tendernesse, delighting in paines and practise of Armes: and in him fiue principall things are required. The first is fidelitie, rebounding from his dignities and noble education; opposite to which standeth infidelitie issuing from auarice and malice: for such as are couetous and malicious be faithlesse; and therefore by the lawes imperiall not eligible to the place of Princes or Generals of Armies. Science,  ind. vers. pro p. colum. 6. the second garbe of a noble Commander, conuerseth in the knowledge of  Topographie both by the Carde and Mappe, as by practise in much trauell. By this he discerneth what Marches are competent for the souldiers, answe∣rable vnto their bodies strength, & vnto the present need which the seruice in
hand shall impose. By this he disposeth of all aduantages, which the places,  times and seasons shall offer; as by the benefit of hils, valleys, lanes, riuers, marshes, woodes with all the sunnes and windes of the compasse: also such obseruations & attributes of that nature, as appertaineth militarie profession. This science is attained by the ingenuous exercise, vigilancy, assiduitie, painfull & frequent trauell in places, by the contemplatiue direction of military books and indefatigable practise with a delight had in war. To discerne whether he which may be thought fit for the office of a Generall be possessed of this sci∣ence; the Prince therfore (as I said) considereth of his age, of his time imployed in seruice, of those wars wherin he did serue; of the masters and commanders vnder whom he was disciplined & exercised, of his nation, his discretion, & of the place where he should serue. Valor, which is the third and principall ver∣tue  contained in his heart (whereof I purpose to speake more at large in the Morals of my fourth Booke) standeth in the middest of these fiue properties: issuing from his sapience in aduise, from his counsell in prouision, from his feruencie in action, from expedition in execution, from his sagacitie with wili∣nesse in stratagemes, and from his patience in trauell. Out of these qualities the temperature of good health, magnanimitie, fortitude, contempt of pi∣rill, and faithfulnesse proceed. Adiunct to them according to Coepola, be mo∣destie, clemencie, courtesie, uauitie, facilitie, temperance in all actions ac∣companied with trueth, innocencie, iustice, and liberalitie. These honorable qualities amongst all soldiers conciliate vnto the L. generall reputation or au∣thoritie,  which is when his bhests are with all diligence, willingnesse and ex∣pedition executed by the souldiers: but specially these haue most force in mi∣litary masters, when they be with beautie, power, riches, honour, and nobilitie made absolute. Vpon this dependeth likewise his felicitie which in a soul∣dier is most glorious and should seeme principally to proceed from fortitude: for certaine it is, that he which in fight sheweth courage and excellent alacri∣tie, combined with prudence in all extreamities, doth in fauour of himselfe forcibly moue malicious and raging fortune, being conquered with his for∣titude and patience, to take his parts for very shame of her selfe: and hence is it that Aeneas hateneth his souldiers languishing in their extremities after  escape from Naufrage. Durate & vosmet rebus seruate secundis. Intimating to them, that patience ingendreth prosperitie, which (being the Aenead. 1. companion of counsell and reason, a precious gift of God, & the true cogni∣zance of diuine fauour; and not proceeding in any meane from humane industrie) may well suffragate with other giftes to the election of a Ge∣nerall. Besides all these, he must be knowne firme to the Prince and quarrel com∣mitted to his decision: likewise he should retaine that vertue in himselfe to giue life and courage to his battels, by the example of Valerius Coruinus, cap∣taine of the Romane forces, then ready to ioyne in conflict against the Sam∣tes:
who wished them in his oration to repose euery man in his owne valor,  and to follow him in feits of armes to the vttermost of their foroe: or like that heroicall speech which the noble Romane rebell Catiline breathed vpon his souldiers and companions (fainting in their former resolutions) thus. None but conquerers will exchange war for peace: it were madnes in you to thinke that you can saue your liues by sheathing those swords which should defend you from the violence of such enemies, as pursue you with slaughter; they which are in most feare stand in deepest daunger: whereas boldnesse is a bra∣sen bulwarke. But when I ponder your former actions and resolutions (my braue souldiers) then doe I make sure accompt of certaine victorie, which is visibly presented to my spirit from your spirits, ages, and honours proportio∣nably: Adde hereunto that present necessitie which coyneth courage out of  cowards. And in another place that which infuseth valour into catiue carca∣ses. Cae ne inuli animam amittatis, neu captipotius sicuti pecora trucidemini; quàm virorum mod pugnantes, cruentam, at que luctuosam vtctoriam hostibus re∣quatis: Haue a care that you loose not your liues vnreuenged, neither be taken prisoners like beastes destined to the slaughter; but that fighting like va∣lorous men you may leaue vnto your enemies such a dolorous and lamentable spoyle and victorie, as may be bought to their cost. Such a kind of adhortati∣on, or vehement & impulsiue persuasion doth marueilously moue and spurre forward the spirits of forlome souldiers vpon desperate aduentures: or as that noble saying of Marius; animating his fellowes in armes. Egomet in agmine,  in pr consultor idem, & socius periculi vobiscum adero; me vosque in omnibus rebus iuxtageram. I my selfe (in the shock, and in the battell) will be readie both to giue you my best directions and aduise, and to partake with you fel∣lowlike in all perils, and in all prosperous or desastous accidents, I will per∣sonally share fortunes with you. Moreouer it well sitteth with the grace and good fortune of a Generall (after some good successe, & victories attained by his souldiers which will vndoubtedly giue great hartinesse and hopes to men in armes, although their enemies much exceede them in number) to spurre them forward to noble battaile by good example of that priest, by whose per∣suasion the Israelites were set on fire with fortitude; and to banish feare, faint∣nesse, and astonishment: For asmuch as the Lord went with them to fight against  their enemies, and to protect them. Howbeit the prowesse of a Generall, may not Deutron: 20. onely consist in gallant adhortation, fierie speeches, verball blowes, and fierce menaces onely; for such take more delight in the plausible volubilitie of their tongues, then in th'immortall valour of their hearts: but his iudgement also must be sound, and ripe, his valour noble, and perfect, his wisedome diuine, and vigilant; his assiduitie skilfull, and profitable; his heart franke and hono∣rable, heroically despising earthly riches, as the very corruption of all blessed mindes on earth, and whatsoeuer tasteth of this base and humble putrifaction or mortalitie. For Generals which are blotted with couetousnesse can neuer  attaine the true faith and loue of their souldiers; as by manifold example and experience is found: they should therefore consider what the conditions of some speciall gallant captaines in former ages haue bene in that case; and
they shall find Alexander munificent, Caesar magnificent, Cirus bountifull; and  amongst priuate Generals and Captaines that Scipio Africanus was a man that onely protested against the desire of money, and treasure, when (after his conquest of all Afrike which he made tributarie to the Romanes) he could not shew any spoiles or booties of that warre vpon his returne, but onely the bare title of Africanus, which enlarged and famoused his name. Good gene∣rals and captaines therefore should imitate such honour, as those two no∣ble brethren Publius, and Lucius Scipio, which were called the two thunder∣boults of warre: for they protested that neither the treasures of Carthage nor of all Asia could make them auaricions; but that the riches (of which they were possessed, and had got from others) did wholie consist vpon emu∣lation,  and enuy; not vpon money. A worthie precedent amongst many more remaineth liuing in the legend of Phocion, that noble generall of A∣thens surnamed Bonus Pauper, honorably recorded in Plutarches histories: whose condition was to contemne riches so farre, that when certaine Em∣bassadors from Philip King of Macedonia did present vnto him huge heapes of treasure, and kingly giftes, hee did peremptorily refuse them: the reguard of his owne desert, nor the benefit of his children (both which they did ac∣knowledge vnto him) would not enduce Phocion to receaue them: but out of his singular magnificence and magnanimitie (dismissing the legates loaden as the came) answered them on this fashion. If my sonnes follow their fathers ex∣ample, this little land in my possession (which maintained me in martiall ser∣uice  vntill I was promoted to this dignitie) may competently serue them: But if they degenerate, I doe not purpose with my gaines or gettings to main∣taine their riot. Many such obseruations remaine to captaines in the memori∣als of Cirus, Alexander, & of other princes and commanders. In like sort Marcus Curius after his triumphs ouer Pyrrhus had presented vnto him (sitting then to the fire) a great masse of gold, sent from the Samnites: but his answere was, Cic. i Cat. maior. Non aurum habere praeclarum est, sed illis (qui aurum possident) imperitare. It is not a glorious thing to be possessed of huge heapes of gold; but it is most ex∣cellent to be lord ouer them which haue it in possession. Marius likewise gaue all his spoyles gotten at Vtica amongst his souldiers:  for that noble captaine was of opinion, that abundance of riches would effe∣minate the minds of gallant souldiers; whereupon his saying was as Salust ci∣teth it. Exparente meo & ex alijs sanctis viris accepi, munditias mulieribus, viris laborem conuenire: omnibusque bonis opportere plus gloriae, quam diuitiarum esse; arma non supellectilem decori esse. I haue learned this lesson of my father, and of other holy men; that curious and neate fashions are fit for women, and that labour and hardenesse becommeth men: moreouer that all good men should take more delight in glorie then in riches; that armour and not houshold fur∣niture most decoreth and graceth a man. Likewise a generall must be constant  in all well resolued actions, and at hostile defiance against all feare of man; skilfull in all actiue practise of armes, hauing wonne his place by desert of ho∣nour in the field; a man fortunate vpon attempts, and assaults, one that will stand like a stedfast trophie in the bodie and heart of his battell, Lyon-like de∣meaning
himselfe in eager fight with incomparable valiancie; leading, tray∣ning,  instructing, disciplyning, and incouraging his battailes, with a more then humane spirit and prudence, pricking their hearts forward to the field of victorie, with the golden spurre of his vertues. The states and liues of princes and of their people may not be commited to men exalted by birth or other desert and fauour in those degrees onely: but vnto men approued in these & such like heroical conditions. The knowledge (which he must of necessitie with all carefull diligence & affection embrace) is attayned in iudicious hearing, and obseruing of actions, from the true relation of accomplished souldiers in their attempts, escairmoches, defences, charges, formes of battels, assaults, countermynings, sodaine, close, and vnexpected ca∣misadoes,  in their secret treaties, priuie confederaies, articles of truice or sur∣render; and such ingenuous and noble choise of hidden stratagems, as haue best suited with the time, the place, and persons in opposition. For (vpon such his curious obseruation) to declare the singular quicknesse or ingenuous sa∣gacitie and perspicuitie of his wit and iudgement; he shall be stirred vp (in hope of endlesse honor) to deuise snares, sleights, and labyrinths to blinde and intangle his enemies after some other new forme vnheard or thought of: which (by how much the more strange it is) maketh the securitie for the ac∣complishment thereof so much the readier when time for execution shall serue: herein his indefatigable industrie, his bodies abilitie, his mindes alacritie,  shall best to life appeare. Reading of hystories (which I before commended in a secret counsellor) will furnish and illuminate his knowledge and vnder∣standing specially: for certaine it is, that it best behooueth Generals to attaine knowledge by reading before they begin to practise: because such are other∣wis preposterous that practise before they know how to doe. For after some excercise and insight into the warres, his owne experience will bee the best guide vnto himselfe if he be wise, obseruing, and industrous, as well for the order, and instruction of his battailes, and armies; as in the care, and intricate cunning, of premeditating and deciphering his enemies plots, purposes, and  attempts, bfore they can happen; how to auoid and frustrate their deuices in execution of them; what wayes and meanes remaine to turne their actions, once commenced vpon their owne heades; and lastly, how to whistle them forward with a faire and negligent semblance bearing a perfect colour to their aduantage, vntill such time as being once entred their estates be distressed, mi∣serable and remediiesse. All which (with infinite of that nature, to a wit which is wise and honourable, still working and alwayes exercised in glorious cogi∣tations) will diuinely spring by studious knowledge of Histories. To this adioyne the eady meanes and reasons of hastening, and lingring warre, the causes exciting in him present hope, or feare of happie chaunce, or calamitie Which should not moue or discourage him (as I spoke before in the ciuill  counsellor) for it is vulgar that no wise man can be dismaied, or ouer-houen there with: euen (in time of peace) he must giue sure apparance of his exte∣rior fortitude and assiduitie, by carefull exercising, & incouraging of the peo∣ple and veteranes ordained for seruice in their marches, counter-marches; di∣uers
fashions and ready formes of drawing themselues into squares, or cubes,  cylinders, or lozanges, triquits, and pyramids vpon a sudden, as they shall be commanded or directed to serue, with most aduantage against the enemies: alwayes yeelding a renouned example of his labour and painfulnesse in busi∣nesse, of valor and fortitude in danger, of diligence and vehemencie in acti∣ons, and of expedition in execution, after perfect maturitie in delibera∣tion. The interior goodnesse and bountie (which accompanieth him) is decent∣ly garnished with temperance, innocencie, faithfulnesse, gentlenesse, huma∣nitie, prudence, and foresight; requiring a vertuous circumspection and doubt, as in not committing any thing to the wheele of fortune, but vpon in∣euitable necessitie, least his actions be racked vpon it, as hath beene found in  diuers captaines, which by the like temeritie fell downe, when they with all their forces leaned vpon her wheele. For they that in rage and crueltie charge their enemies (whom they rather contemne then take heed of) are not well ad∣uised, because faults in fight are not easily redressed: as Lamachus (who go∣uerning an Armie) replyed; that warre might not permit one fault twise. Te∣meritie therefore in martiall actions, is both foolish and vnfortunate: howbe∣it, the General should alwayes bestow himselfe in some needfull businesse be∣ing wholy gouerned in all his impreses by reason, without any respect of fortune. For it is not in strength and audaciousnesse onely, whence victorie must be deriued, but in true courage and nobilitie: considering that Omnis  Offic. 1. vs nostrain animo, & corpore sit a est: alterum nobis cum dijs, alterum cum bel∣luis cōmune: All humane force is planted in the minde, and in the body: by the mentall force we be fitly resembled vnto the gods, by corporall strength onely to brute beasts: and you shall note it certainely, that those which put most affi∣ance in corporall strength, repose most in fortune and good lucke, and nothing in prudence. And hence was it that sapience is accounted as one inseparable companion and captaine ouer euery Generall which directeth him: for those which trust in other force then that which is marshalled by sapience, be like vnto those of whom the Prophet Baruch speaketh: And those Gyants whom Cap. 3. the Lord hath not chosen perished, because they wanted wisdome. Wherevpon  Trogus Pompeius saith, Alexander victoriam obtinuit qui consilio gubernauit ex∣ercitum: Lib. 11. Alexander was a conquerer, because he gouerned his Armies by counsell. And that excellent wise Poet Horace. Vim temperatam dij quoque provehunt. Lib. 3. Ode 4▪ And hence is it likewise, that the noble and true-sighted Poet Homer, in the Lib. 2. Illid. person of Agamemnon saith; that he could with ease haue sacked Troy, hauing but  ten such as Nestor, whose wisedome was the discipline of his warre: Considering how by sapience and prudent fore-sight, wise captaines may with a few hand∣fuls tryumph ouer many legions, & worke out their honors in despight of for∣tunes malignitie: which accordeth well with those common Prouerbes: Sa∣piens sibi fortunam fingit & dominabitur astris: A wise man will shape out his
owne fortune, as he would haue it, and will antiuert the fatall influence of his  starres. Authoritie befitteth also, which includeth the true loue and reue∣rence of souldiers vnto their leaders: this is none of the small respects to∣wards his administration of warre. Adde vnto these seueritie which doth purchase this benefit in a Commander, when no man in Campe nor Garison offending, can expect more fauour then is limited by the Lawes of Armes. For soldiers (albeit they delight in lenitie) contemne milde captaines such as Scipio was, whom Fabius therefore accused to the Senate, as a corruptor of the Romane militarie discipline. Austeritie therefore procureth obedience to∣wards Generals (although their seueritie be disliked) which being well attem∣pered with courteous behauiour, winneth grace and loue. This by the Leiu∣tenant  generall his bodily paines and exercise amongst his souldiers is soonest attained, by his apparell and other corporall ornaments, little differing in forme and substance from some of theirs, by his charitie, which together with punishment for their faults, is planted in a mercifull care and consideration how to relieue the poore distressed and wounded souldier, with clothes, food, and chirurgerie. In all which actions meddled (as I said) with a competent se∣ueritie the Generall winneth of his souldiers a fatherly reuerence, and filiall feare with all conformable obedience. Such a worthy precedent to Generals was giuen in the person of Anniball (which Liuie recordeth) when his soul∣diers in pursuit of the Numidians, had passed the great riuer Trebia, and being  come to land their ioynts and members were so starke (what with the could 2. belli Puni lib. 1. . 3. wind which then in winter bet vpon them, and partly with the water which tooke them vp to the brest) that at night before euery Tent Anniball caused a great fire to be made, and sent oyle vnto his souldiers to molifie their bodies being aggealed with cold extreamely: by which meanes, and presently with good victuals refreshed and cherished (as it is generally noted throughout in the care and prudence of Anniball) the next morning they became forward, seruiceable, and eager of battell. His tendernesse towardes them wanne that loue in their hearts, as being otherwise a man of seuere discipline amongst  his souldiers, the loue of his care equalled in them the feare of his disci∣pline. There is a needfull kinde of discipline required in generals and chieftaines, which punisheth priuate wrongs in their souldiers mutually done amongst themselues: for otherwise they would fall to quarrels, disgraces, factions, and mutinies. Insomuch as if they be well disciplined (what with experience, and partly by good example grounded therevpon, namely when the Lawes of Armes are seuerely distributed, and executed vpon such with death, with corporall punishment, or pecuniarie mulct, according to the qualities of their faults which either shall shewe disobedience towards those Officers vnder whose charge they serue, or shal fight in Campe or within the precincts there∣of,  leauing their colours without licence had before of the Generall or Ma∣rischall, onely to satisfie some priuate reuenge intended vpon malice or ran∣cor) then will they grow ciuill and carefull how to preserue the common peace of their Campe amongst themselues.
Infinite of these examples in my knowledge & such as are vulgarly knowen  to souldiers, I pretermit in this point; only this is a certaine trueth, that if a pri∣uate souldier or other person not priuate being grieuously disgraced or iniu∣red at his fellowes hands, cannot vpon complaint made vnto the magistrate & commander find redresse, it is full of perill to them that should order the same. For men in grieuous wronges are naturally couetous and eager of vengeance, which some stubborne and implacable hearts will prosecute with all violence to the preiudice & confusion of their contrey, rather then faile: for wrath hath no power to retaine either reason or mediocritie, when it is once vnquencha∣bly kindled with the wild fire of vengeance; but outrageously tyrannizeth in extreames, negligently, but more fiercely rather rushing and encountring with the ruine of it selfe, & the confusion of all things next it, which it eagerly  deuoureth: and they that are of that fierie metall, take glory like Diogenes, to beate the schoolemaster for a fault in the scholler, as Pausanias did, who being a very beautifull youth in the court of Philip K. of Macedon great Alexanders father did suffer, or was forced with violence of Attalus one of the king his mi∣nions for the bastly staunching of his vnnaturall lust: of which filthinesse ha∣uing made hanious complaint vnto the king (who did not onely neglect the punishment▪ but did afterwards aduance that preposterous villaine to the place of a presedent ouer some prouince) Pausanias gathering with indignation dai∣ly more and more poyson of strong despight vpon such apparant iniustice, at the mariage of King Philips daughter with the prince of Epirus, before the  bridegrome and his sonne Alexander amongst a thousand armed persons of the guard he desperately murthered him. Souldiers therefore as I said before, will through the captaines industrie become seruiceable and valiant. Such therefore as propose honor for the meed of their trauels are cold, reso∣lute, of a quiet and vnbroken spirit, knitting vp all their vertues in that action to which the whole force of mind & bodie must be bent: not fighting to winne the girland for others, but principally proposing the wagers honour for them∣selues: & hence happeneth that mercenaries cannot combat with that true cou∣rage and martiall-alacritie which natiue contrimen will: for they fight only for a little wages; and such venture of life, and hazard of themselues will not serue  in time of neede, vnlesse it be very wonderfully seconded with frequent, and those gallant succours, knowing how many noble princes haue miscarried in reposing vpon such hollow valours. Moreouer natiue souldiers both by the causes necessity, and in hope of a glorious conquest wherin the largest portion of iust reputation happeneth to themselues, wil put to their most excellent and best approued force; to such men feare and difficulties are contemptible: the cause of this their excellent valor proceedeth from the goodnesse of a true pa∣rent in person of their prince, who will share his honors & commodities with them, and from the noble worthinesse of their commaunders and leaders be∣ing natiue contrimen and engraffed to their societies. Tullus Hostilius succes∣sor  of Numa, notwithstanding the fourtie yeeres intermission from warre did onely choose his souldiers out of his owne cities reiecting all auxiliaies of the Samnites and Tuscanes which had beene well disciplined, trayning his owne
people; and through them attained conquest. Likewise king Henrie of Mon∣mouth  the fift of that name, from the conquerour king William the first, for his right in the Crowne of France, vsed his owne English souldiers, and retur∣ning loaden with triumphes and victories obteined by them, that during all the dayes of his father, and for thirtie yeeres space before had not worne any warlike furniture: whereas in contrary, the French had bene exercised in con∣tinuall warre against the Italians, and assisted or oppressed rather with those hirelings of Swizzerland. The best forme of fighting in warre was in making of great battailes, being composed of the most approued men in field for va∣lour, placed in the maine battaile or middle bodie of the hoast: for men which being vnited fight together in multitudes, be much more valiant by nature then in small companies or handfuls. Also the speciall thing which hangeth vpon the discipline and honour of the Generall, is that the souldiers be duely paid their wages, and relieued with victuals, which winneth in them a dutifull kind of reuerence and awfull re∣spect of their gouernours. This loue in them exceedeth the force of gold, and the power of all opportunities and occasions, which can happen by times or places. For that which maintaineth wars commonly proceedeth from contri∣bution of the people towards the common defence against forren violence; and this lasteth no longer then they can be defended. Likewise all places na∣turally munited and fortified are nothing without the willing aide of men valiant to defend them by force: considering that treasure is wonne by the  sword, and not the swords vertue by treasure. These foure points in the Gene∣rall, therefore make excellent souldiers, and confirme Empire: Industrious and due discipline, strong armes and sufficient for the fight, iust paiment of wages, and a competent prouision of victuals; adde hereunto the fift (which is the roote, mother, and perfection of all noble seruice and conquest) being the firme loue & hearty reuerence of the souldiers. These points which haue beene formerly noted by the politicke Florentine Secretarie to Petro de Medici to conserue and augment, th'empire which he would haue had him haue sought for, consist in manning of the strong cities with souldiers, borne in the same prouinces, in conciliating the friendship and societies of neighbours, in planting colonies for defence vpon the skirts of their newly subdued pro∣uinces,  in the spoiles of enemies, in forraging and hauocking vpon their har∣uest and husbandrie, in choosing rather to draw them together for battell in Campe, then to besiege them within their cities, in studious respect of the common cause and profit onely, in th'instructing and disciplining of souldi∣ers, in the knowledge and vse of armes; which eight points, if the prince or lieuetenant neglect, hee may percase deuise notwithstanding other meanes for the conseruation of his owne, but neuer for the amplification of Empire; which augmentation if it should happen by lawfull meanes, as by the meere prouidence, suggestion, and disposition of God doth not impugne  Christian religion, but is most noble and loueable. For some princes might vnder counterfeit pretext force men to defend their owne, pretending a right in some things not belonging vnto them:
The maintennce whereof may giue occasion vnto them, which execute  Gods punishments vpon ambitious vsurpers, by diuine inigation to diuest them of all: forsomuch as they will not leaue any thing which their vnsatiate auarice hath appetite to deuoure; for euery man is permitted to loue honour, and prote his countrie: and the reason why so fewe free people and States are in comparison of former times, and such a defect of uue louers and of valiant champions of liberties in comparison of former ages (as a wily Com∣monwealths man hath noted) is, that people in hope of beatitude, and towards the fruition of a second comfortable life, deuise in these dayes how to tolle∣rate and not to reuenge iniuries: as if that no saluation could come from a∣boue, but by keeping of their swordes and armes rustely sheathed and cased, when a vehement necessitie doth importune the contrarie; whilst they sot∣tishly  nuzzling themselues in sluggish securitie, vtterly condemne the lawfull meanes and courses of warre, restoring that needfully by force of swords; which no law nor charmes of perswasiue words can accomplish. There yet appendeth this discipline of souldiers, one principall respect of the captaines, that neither they crush nor excoriate the poore husband-man, which I partly touched in the Morals of my second Booke: for if it may be said vnto fraudulent merchāts (whose consciences are blasted with a couetous lethargie) Whether O yee fooles shall your soules trauell? What then may be spoken of such soldiers, that neither being contented with their stipend, or wages, nor with meat & drinke when they be faint with marching long iour∣neies  vnder the languishing weight of their armour, which by poore hus∣band-men is dayly ministred vnto them, in a kinde of fearefull charitie? For these like the bastards and counterfeits of honour, rauenously spoyle and take away the goods of those which entertaine them; shewing all cruell ingrati∣tude towards them as vnto slaues in meede of their hospitalitie with grieuous stripes, terrible menaces, and torturing those poore labouring catiues vpon the strappado of their vnsatiable couetousnesse euen to the last tester, which these siely creatures do pittifully lay downe at their feet to be rid of that feare∣full tēpest, which those vnthankfull & barbarous guests raise in their cottages. For the preseruation of the weale, and securitie of Armies from feare and  dangers of enemies, all deuises ought to be followed; as in the faithfull pro∣mises of the aduersaries, of confederates, of friends, and of their assured suc∣cours; but the speciall assurance is grounded in the generals person, who may by prudent direction so fashion out his estate, that he preuent his enemies of all wayes and meanes tending to his preiudice: whose principall happinesse is to force them into such a difficult strait, as without his clemencie no reliefe may seeme to remaine vnto them. Hee should also concerning auxiliaries and power of confderates, repose surest trust in succours of them, that reciprocally stand in most need of his helpe, or of him that either in respect  of priuate profite or detriment is interessed in depth of the cause, not building in any case vppon those whom hee hath benefitted, least hee remedilesly exclaime against ingratitude, by the example of Demetrius Po∣liorcetes, who hauing been a great friend and faithfull anchor of the Atheni∣ans,
yet (being vnfortunately vanquished by his enemies) Athens that vngrate∣full  citie, would neither receiue nor protect him, comming thither for refuge, where he was the shield-herne before: whereat Demetrius was more vexed then for the losse of his whole estate. And likewise Pompey being vanquished by Caesar, fled to Ptolemie king of Egypt, whom he some yeeres before had restored, and planted in his kingdome: but for such his goodnesse towardes him, Ptolemie tooke away his life. Which if ingratitude may doe, Princes, and Generals should not thinke but that in truces, leagues, confederacies, and pactions (which are but temporary, conuentions, or accords, without any sufficient hostages, sureties, cautions, or pledges deliuered) if daunger and losse of the whole armie depend thereupon, little hope will remaine of kee∣ping  league or friendship with most Princes, or opposite Commanders in warre. But if it were admitted that any Prince should partake with the for∣ces of some more puisant than himselfe, as his friend assistant, let him assured∣ly perswade himselfe that it is either because he findeth by reasons good, and more then probable, that his helpe can restore him: or else because he like∣wise hateth those parties against which he ioyneth in armes, so much as can∣not be with any meanes pacefied. And hence it is that vpon due deliberati∣on (after the example of the Romanes) first had the Generall with huge force and in short tim, should doe his designe. For they comming with multitudes of men to the field, presently decided the cause with their swords. To the  conquered they granted conditions of peace, and lawes, or deducted colonies of souldiers for tuition of their purchase, so that in short time they finished their warres, and without any great expence of treasure: For the Romanes would not trifle, or waste away the time of their businesse, in idle or vnneces∣sarie parliance; and yet so truely noble, that they more respecting the name of conquest, then the couetous nature of conditions offered, would immediate∣ly when the field was wonne, out of their natiue heroycall customes and in∣clinations graunt vnto the vanquished all fauourable libertie, declaing more then matchable magnificence in that; according to that saying in Salust a∣gainst  Catiline, Vict is nihil praeter iniuriae licentiam eripiebant Romani: The Ro∣manes tooke nothing from them whom they subdued, but a licence or power to doe them harme. If any spoyles were gotten, them they brought into the publike treasurie for maintaining of the souldiers, and casing of the peoples tributes; so that the Romanes were inriched and bettered by their warres. Neither was it permitted that any Consull (albeit he had in sundry noble bat∣tels and victories amplyfied the Empire) should passe in pompe and triumph thorough the Citie, vnlesse he brought with him into the common treasurie infinite spoyles of gold and siluer also. How souldiors ought to be resolued in battell, and to demeane themselues by direction of their captaines, is spoken of sufficiently before: onely this must  be narrowly respected, which is most forcible to the stirring vp, or cooling of their maruall courages in fight, or vpon the point of charge: that sodaine spee∣ches and reports bee dispersed, with warinesse and ready circumspection through the battels, as Quinctius the Consull vsed in his battels against the
Volscians. For he finding his souldiers incline in the vaward, cryed vnto them  amayne; Why turne you faces in the front (my good souldiers) considering that they which fight in the reare haue got the victorie. Remember my good fellowes your honour which is layd vp (as you know) in the bosomes of your enemies, from whence you must eagerly winne it with your weapons. This sodaine speech of his did adde such courage to them, that with a valiant resolution vniting and knit∣ting vp all their forces together, they became Lords of the field. In the Citie Perugia there was a faction, betwixt the families of the Od∣di Ni Macch. lib. 3. ded. scorsi sopraed. Tlo. Ly. and Baglioni, in opposition mortally diuided; but the Oadi being more weake, were banished by that State: howbeit in the night-time, by meanes of certaine their friends within the towne, they got enterance priuily, purposing with their forces to possesse the market place; and to that ende had one to goe  before them with a great mallet of yron to breake the locks of those chaynes which barricadoed the streetes in euery place, to the great hinderance of their horses as they should passe: they therfore hauing marched vnto the last chaine, and being readie to possesse the place where they purposed to make a parado, fitting themselues for that exploit in hande, the souldiers pressed so farre and fast vpon him that should haue broken the chayne, that he was forced to call for more roome, and to bid them giue backe: they therefore bing in a troupe confused and close together, receiued the word by the sound of Eccho from the first to the last: And those which stood in the reare, not knowing the mea∣ning thereof did turne faces, and so were occasion of their generall sub∣uersion. In such sort Iugurth seeing the state of his battels desperate, vpon the com∣ming in of Bocchus, strooke terror into the hearts of his enemies, by speaking in the Latin tongue (which Language he had learned at Numantia) that the field was his, that to resist his forces was in vaine, that a little before he had slaine Marius with his owne hands, and therewithall pretending that it was brought from the slaughter of Marius, shewed his sword yet smoking and dy∣ed Salust. Bellugurth. with blood. Moreouer, this ought specially to be noted in fight, that he which can patiently susteine the first charge, and yeeld with calme temper to the rage of his enemies (though they betwise in number so many) may spend  all their forces, by warie lingring and catching of occasions wilily watched for. He should also (which commandeth them) giue good respect in his figh∣ting, to the aduantages of ground, winde, and sunne; and with fresh handfulls for his better seconding and reliefe march gallantly forward. Neither can it be spoken what incouragement it addeth to the souldier, faint and wearied with blood and conflict, when hee seeth new succours freshly charging and participating of their trauels with martiall alacritie. Neither is it a small terror to the enemies, weakened, alayed and surrounded with the stubborne blowes of their enemies to finde and feele fresh gallants proudly marching, and come  to tyrannize ouer the bodyes and spirits of their aduersaries, already wearied and halfe dead which grew faint and feeble with continuance in fight, leauing not any member of the opposite battels free from blood and wounds. Likewise if the souldiers be discouraged in fight, either by some negligence
or other occasion loose the field: it is great wisdome in the General religiously  to let them know that their neglect, or contempt of Gods feare and seruice hath driuen them into the feare and seruitude of men, and also prophetically with a vehement maiestie to threaten vnto them the iudgements of God in their slackenesse, encouraging such in their eager sharpenesse & iolly resoluti∣onseither by some valorous example in himselfe, as that victorious Emperour Iulius Caesar did in his warres against the Galles, when he from a faint thearted souldier that doubted of victorie, did snatch a shield, where withall couering  himselfe, he did most eagerly fight, infusing a liuely fortitude and stedfast reso∣lution to his desparing souldiers, by that notable example in himselfe, which drew them into the field of victorie: or by some other diuine meanes and promises when they shall find it most fit; as the Romanes which at the long siege of Veij growing wearie, and coueting to returne vnto their houshold∣gods at Rome, their captaines wished them to persist in honorable valor vnder a religious pretext; signifying that the lake Albanus ouerflowing, pretended the subuersion of that citie the same yeere, according to th'oracle. The Pro∣phet (by whose prediction it happened) for to confirme the souldiers more in those his presages was left captiue at Rome, vntill th'oracle was accompli∣shed. And hence was it that the souldiers recouering more spirits in heart did continue their assiege, and within that yeeres limite possessed the towne. The like was seene in Beleses a Babilonian, skilfull of the Caldean auguries and di∣uination, who by the starres presaged a subuersion of the Assyrian monar∣chie▪  encouraging Arbaces and his souldiers (after that Sardanapalus had thrise vanquished him in battailes before) to persist and continue force against him with fresh supplies: which he did, happening according to the soothsayers prediction; but more as me seemeth through pusillanimitie which deiected the prince being then fortified within Niniue, who feared an old oracle, which hee thought was fulfilled in falling of some part of the cities wall. And certaine it is that the force of religion will vehemently moue souldiers to con∣tinue valiant in assurance of victorie, by diuers examples out of Liuie, when their estates were most desperate and remedilesse; yeelding a diuine force and light vnto their actions, if the captaines can by stratagemmes to themselues onely knowen, harden their resolutions to performe what they shall deuise,  not making them acquainted with any thing sauing execution. It is likewise a principall part of the Generals duetie, that (before the battell, and eue∣ry morning, when they be brought by troupes into the plaine, to be reduced into rankes or Battagliaes, likewise at euening after their marches before their comming into the quarter; moreouer during the fight, and after the slaugh∣ter) his speciall care tend, that diuers Chaplaines, Priests and Preachers make deuoute prayers, intercessions, and spirituall exhortations through his whole hoast, which hath alwayes beene most auaileable. For from heauen commeth fortitude and as it is written in the Machabees: Ionathan rent his rayment, and  Lib. 1. cap. 11. hauing be smeared his head and face with earth, fell to prayer, and then returned vn∣to the battels of his armies, and put his foes to flight. And as it is written likewise in Exodus: When Moyses lifted vp his hands and prayed, Israel had the better ouer Cap. 17.
his enemies. And they (which after such sacred preparations and resolutions  by fighting in a good and honourable cause loose their liues) be said proper∣ly to die in the bed of honour. A memorable example of such pietie with happie successe ensuing it, may be taken from the sacred legend of Iudas Mac∣chabeus, which all the nations of the world from those to these dayes, euen to the dissolution of this vniuersall nature natured, shall most honorably recom∣mend and remember. For the beleaguriag, surprizing, taking in, and fortifying of townes, bulwarkes, castles, fortresses, sconces, and other defences, I referre it like∣wise to the knowledge of captaines and souldiers experienced. Onely this for that we reade it from the wisedome and sacred institution of God in Deutro∣nomie: Cap. 20. that at sh'assiege of any citie captaines should first offer peace; and  if they that be distressed make peaceable offers, or offer peaceable conditions they should haue peace graunted vnto them, and bee made tributaries and seruants vnto their conquerers: but if they should in obstinate heart continue warre, then should the aduersarie maintaine his siege: For saith he, God will deliuer them into thyhands; then put all the male children to sword, reseruing the women and all other goods for thy seruice and commoditie. Cut not downe any fruit trees, for they shall serue for thy comfort and sustenance; but of all other trees which are fit to further the assiege and serue for fortification, to make bridges, or to staunche moates and dit∣ches. The Romanes in surprisall or taking in of citties, would not endure the  needlesse charge of long sieges; and therefore they wonne all townes, either by force apparant, or stratagemme. By force, as either with sudden and vn∣expected assaults, by scaling ladders and multitudes of souldiers seconding one another in their scaladoes; and that was commonly performed with one dayes seruice, as Scipio tooke in Carthage: or if with more time then they did vse Vide Liuiū 26. Vide Liuium lib. 5. rammes, engines, vnderminings; as the citie Veij was wonne by raising vp of wooden frames or turrets higher then the walles from whence the souldier might wound and distresse with diuers darts, arrowes, slinges, crossebowes and other weapons, such as kept within the walles for defence and mainte∣nance of the citie: insomuch as the walles being battered with rammes, the  citisens relieued themselues; as other townes and peeces at this day doe, when they repaire the breaches of cannons, by retiring or filling and refotifying after the breach. Their pyoners likewise countermining against their opposite minings, as in this age is vsuall resisting them in issue with pikes and such wea∣pons as serue fittest. They did also staunch vp their enemies minings with strawe, brimestone, oyle, feathers, or such filth: which being set on fire within the close and dampish earth would choke, vp ordriue them backe with grosse smoke and noisome sauour. The course of winning such places (as before I noted) is by mixt force or stratagemme; as also by secret conspiracies or confederacies, as in corrup∣ting  certaine the principall gouernors, or captaines of those townes or pee∣ces: and yet there is danger in reposing trust or credite in such mercenarie faith, which is not commonly current. For the whole state of an Armie,
(which is indeed the carcasse of a kingdome) may not onely be grieuously  wounded, but irreuocably broken by that meanes: or it may percase be laid open by some accident or other. As it of late dayes happened when Vlissingen should haue beene taken in, Sir Robert Sidney Vicount Lysle Gouernour, ha∣uing had notice of the trecherie by very strange meanes and vnexpected, by which the plots may be confounded. Certaine places may bee wonne by traine vnder trust: as Amiens was taken by the stratagemme of carts, about nine yeeres sithence. To stand longer vpon such deuises being so frequent and well knowne to militarie gouernours and masters, were intirely needlesse, referring them to Caesar, Thucydides and Liuie, whose Hystories are fully fur∣nished with mater of that nature. In the assiege of any Towne or Peece whatsoeuer being strongly muni∣ted, the principall course is to begin with all violence, and to take away from the besieged all future meanes and hopes of lingring and protracting suc∣cours. For the procrastination or protraction of one day, or houre in such seruices (whereby the distressed Citizens or souldiers might haue beene re∣lieued in the delay) may draw with it sufficient opposition to remoue the assiege, and to deliuer the places from all danger. It is also most perilous in contrary to the defence and fortification of any Towne (being vehemently beleaguered by force) to linger out in hope of succours, vntill they come to the very centre of all extremitie; for then remedies and meanes of all sortes  are altogether fruitlesse, and vnprofitable to people in such a lamentable case, being inuironed and neere oppressed with their enemies, when the poyson hath already dispersed it selfe through the heart veines. In th'assiege of Zama, the Romanes vnder Marius (as Salust writeth) vsed Bell. Iugurth. this kinde of fight (wherein is viuely set forth the true manner of those anci∣ent Romanes in scaling of cities, or castles walles, and in defence of them) Pars eminus glande aut lapidibus pugnare, alij succedere, ac murum modò suffode∣re, modò scalis aggredi, cupere praelium manibus facere. Contra oppidani in proxi∣mos saxa voluere, sudes, pilas: praetereà picem & sulphure taedam mistam ardenti  mittere; plero squeiaculis, tormentis, rebusque manu emissis vulnerabant: Some of them from farre fighting did throw from their engins bullets or gun-stones, others succeeded, and sometimes vndermined the walles, and otherwhiles at∣tempted to scale them with ladders, desiring to haue them brought to battell at hand. In contrary those that were within the towne, did throw stones vp∣on them that were neerest within their reach; likewise they did cast sharpe stakes or billets, and darts; likewise balles of burning pitch, and torches dip∣ped in brimstone: diuers persons they did wound and hurt with arrowes, en∣gynes, and other things throne by strength of arme. In the conquest and surprisall of Kingdomes, Prouinces, Cities, or Castles, the true touch of a noble Generall is seen, in his prohibiting and cohibiting  of all violence vsed against women, punishing with death according to marti∣all lawes, the rapes & constuprations of matrons and virgines, emblasoning in his whole apport vpon the victory, with all heroycall humiliation & modesty, that honor which so mightily magnified Scipio Africanus vpon his surprisall
of Carthage. For (hauing at the sacke thereof a captiue virgin of incompa∣rable  beautie, presented vnto him by certaine of his captaines which had ta∣ken her) he with most singular and gracious humanitie, preciously valuing and prising her honour as his owne, did not onely with great gifts and iewels which he bestowed vpon her, but without any blemish or assiege laid vnto her maiden-head gloriously dismisse her with a conuoy. Which that noble (though vnfortunate) Lord Robert Deuereux late Earle of Essex, Anno 1596. declared at Cadiz: where like a true Scipto both in valour and discipline, hee left the spoyles of that towne in speciall to his souldiers reseruing for himselfe as his owne share inualuable, a right renouned and infinite bruit of his victo∣ries, which vpon that felicitie like a cannon shot suddenly battered and made a breach in the rebated spirits of Spaine: the report of which noble peece  was heard farre beyond the extremest confines of Christendome; insomuch that the Mahemitane Monarch hearing of that sudden braue, seconded the scoffe (which his Predecessor had darted at king Philip the second An. 1588.) with another harsh taunt more bitterly relished. By which meanes the fame of that noble warrior grew so great, that our Soueraigne (which had not beene knowne to diuers Potentates of this world) was by the bruit of his valour and victories made famous, and immortall also. I cannot sufficiently set downe what in my iudgement, and by the relation of very iust and wise men of his secrets I haue considered and conceiued of that noble warrior: Howbeit thus much as the least of my iust obsequies to so renoūed a Lord, he  neuer was heard (that euer I could heare) to haue gloried or boasted of his victories, or fortunate seruices: but in all his actions ciuile or military did re∣ferre all with ioyfull humblenesse and thanks-giuing to God, and to the spe∣ciall wisedom and direction of his Prince, as a seruant and minister of theirs. And thus by specious declaration of his vertue in obedience, and of his mo∣destie in speech, he still liued free from malice; and yet as a royall Deere al∣wayes pasturing within the golden pale of glorie. Howbeit (to his owne so∣daine dissolution, and to the dolorous downe fall and heauinesse of his many friends which fell with him, and which lamented for him long after him) hee found it and left it which was by Tacitus written as a position infallible to bee  pondered amongst all ambitious and aspiring subiects or other great ones, which cannot set limits to their owne appeties, Quam formidolosum sit pri∣uati hominis gloriam supraprincipis attolli: Which might be verified also by the example of Dauid, who (though protected by the great prouidence of God) being but a shepheard (as I touched in my second Booke) to raigne in Israel; yet was (notwithstanding all his vertues, and honour in marrying king Saul his daughter) in danger to loose his life, by many trecherous conspiracies and attempts of his vnthankfull father in law. But that I may speake some∣what  of him according to true iudgement and indifferencie: because parad∣uenture some haue either maleuolently with exceeding bitternesse abused his honorable ashes contumeliously; and others percase which haue as blindly in the contrary sanctified him as one more then a man beyonde his deserts, and the measure of his nature: both which are most odious to the true taste of
all noble natures: I say thus much, which they (that wisely did know him)  will acknowledge also. His minde was incomprehensible: by nature, a man much addicted to pleasures, but much more to glorie. If he were at any time luxurious (which some very impudently haue thrust vpon his dead coffin, a∣gainst all truth and modestie) it was very little, and that when hee was idle, which was very sildome: howbeit neuer could any delicacies or corporall comforts drawe him (since he was imployed in the publike counsels of his Prince and countrey) to neglect any serious businesse. He was eloquent, and well knew the guilefull trappes & insidious treacheries of this world, by good experience and much reading. He was affable and soone any mans friend,  that was either by friendes commended vnto him, or had any specious appa∣rance of good qualities in him. The loftinesse of his wit (as I may most pro∣perly terme it) was most quick, present and incredible: in dissembling with counterfeit friends, and in concealing of any matter and businesse of impor∣tance, beyond expectation. He was bountifull, magnificent and liberall in all the course of his life, hauing commended multitudes of people vnto liuings, pensions, preferments, & great sums of money, as appeared both by the land of his owne, which he sould and ingaged to maintaine the same; and by the large dispensation of his Soueraignes treasure committed to his trust and dis∣cretion. And which I may speake in truth most boldly, his fortune was al∣wayes  good before, as appeared in France and Cadiz; but much inferior to his valorous industrie (which with the great and weightie hammer of his rea∣son and engine, did strike diuine beames and noble sparkes from the anuile of glorie) vntill his late vnfortunate voyage in Anno 1597. and that his other pestilent and inauspicious expedition for Ireland: before which times it was difficult to be discerned, whether his valour or fortune were more. I my selfe a Boy, haue seene him in the French-warres to communicate in sports and sometimes in serious matters with men of meane condition and place, their fortunes and parentage valued; to bee delighted and exercised in labouring with the mattock in trenches, fosses, and in other workes amongst his battels;  to be busied in setting of watches, in making of barricadoes at his quarter, and in often walking the round. Also that vice (which contagious ambition much affecteth) could neuer be noted in him; which was to detract from the credite and good fame of any his fellowes in her Maiesties counsell, they be∣ing absent, or of any other man: only this it went neere him and laie heauie to his heart, that any of them should be thought more wise or valiant then him∣selfe, being scarce a vice, but emulation rather proceeding from the mighti∣nesse of his spirit; and (without doubt) he did exceed many of them in ma∣ny things. By which meanes, euen as Salust describeth Sylla, so did he be∣come precious in presence of his souldiers. From his child-hood hee was hardened with exercise, taking pleasure and some trauaile and labours which other men for the most part would haue reputed miseries and calamities.  His apprehension and prudence was admirable, by which he would and ma∣ny times did preuent and turne the mischiefes and fallacies of his enemies vp∣on their owne heads; he was circumspect in all matters appertaining his owne
office and charge; and would not endure, if by any meanes, counsell, or engine  he could deuise, to leaue any safe euasions or munitions offensiue or defensiue with his enemies. And that which was most rare in so great a captaine (though in discipline of warre, he declared himselfe seuere as was fit, meeke and honourable towards his captaines which had well deserued) neither did his mildnesse and facilitie withdraw from his reputation, nor his seueritie de∣minish the loue of his souldiers: onely this to conclude of him in the per∣son of a Generall. The end of his life was much lamented by the better and no∣bler part of his countrimen, it was very grieuous to them that were his friends and louers, it was pitied and repined against with a certaine kinde of regret by forrenners and strangers, which had heard of his valour, and those enemies or emulators rather of his heroicall vertues in Spaine and France, which had  felt the weight of his valour, reioyced not vpon report of his death. I would if it had so pleased God, that he might haue died in the warres vpon the ene∣mies of his countrey, that I might heroically with good cheere haue registred his death in these offices: to conclude with his discription of body briefly being the same, with that which Tacitus did write of Iulius Agricola: decentior quam sublimior fuit, nihil metus in vultu, gratia oris supererat, bonum virum facile credideres, magnū libentèr. He was tall and in authoritie, yet was he more come∣ly then loftie: in his forehead and countenance much valour and boldnesse were imprinted and expressed, his lookes were very gratious; they that had iudiciously beheld him, would haue easily beleeued that he was a very good  man, and would haue bene very glad to haue knowen him a mightie man: and that which was most rare and admirable in men of our age, in his distresse and calamities, his mind was not onely great and noble like his blood and and place, but much loftier and firmer, then in his most firme honours, and prosperitie. And so much in briefe, so neere as I could, haue I done to life, the morall qualities and perfections of that heroicall Generall without adulation or partialitie. Now because I would be short, I will speake somewhat of some other respects and obseruations required in the person of a Lieutenant Gene∣rall. First therefore let all conditions of peace or truce with any people besie∣ging  or besieged (if they be cleare from any suspition of concealed daunger, yeelding meanes of quiet without more perill of further expense in future) be generally liked and embraced: but if they breede any buds or tokens of the contrarie, let a wise captaine or gouernour shew speciall circumspection, least a pernicious and bloodie warre lurke vnder such insidious and perfidious pre∣text of peace, and some pestilent poyson be ministred in steede of wholesome phisicke. In all wounds, extreamities, and miseries he must repute of death as of the consummation of all calamities, and not as a vexation, that death dis∣solueth  all mortall perturbations: otherwise there cannot any place be left for griefe or ioy. He must therefore to be short be partaker of prudence as I said before; because all aduantages in fight are attained thereby: for by that vertue, neither feare nor furie can dazell his vnderstanding. And therefore Salomon saith that in warre prudence is principally to bee required. And
Vergetius, he that can shew many martiall scarres and vertuous markes of ho∣nour  Lib. 1. cap. 2. in . in his bodie, seemeth gratious and acceptable in sight of them that are truely noble. It is likewise written, that Antipater of Idumaea which had ser∣ued hist. Scolast. in a captaines place long, during the warres of king Herods father was ac∣cused of treason against th'emperours person, and being appealed before him to make answere, opened a loose garment (wherewith he was then arayed) discouering the skarres of diuers grieuous wounds receiued in and vpon his bodie with these speeches. I will not with verball excuses cleere my selfe great Emperour, but in steede of wordes let these wounds, whose mouthes are extant, and now closed, by signes declare my loue and alleageance to∣wards  you. Whereupon Caesar receiued him to grace, and would not any fur∣ther proceeding against his honor: and without doubt there is no such glorie to the renowne of a souldier, as honorable skarres & atchieuements of many battels, according to that noble saying of Marius: Non possum fidei causa imagi∣nes neque triumphos aut consulatus maiorum ostentare, at sires postulat hastas, vex∣illum, phaleras, alia militaria dona, praeterea cicatrices aduerso corpare. Hae sunt meae imagines, haec mea nobilitas non haereditate relicta, vt illa illis, sed quae ego plurimis meis laboribus & periculis quaesiui; doctus sum hostem ferire, praesidia agitare, nihil metuere praeter turpem famā: hyemem & aestatem iuxta pati, humi requiescere, eodem temporeinopiam & laborem tollerare: hijs ego praeceptis milites hortabor; neque il∣los  arctè colam, me opulentér, neque gloriam meam laborem illorum faciam: hoc est vtile, hoc ciuile imperium. I cannot make true declaration of the images, tri∣umphes and consulships of my progenitors: but if neede require I can bring forth launces, and ensignes, caparisons, and other martiall honours bestowed vpon me for my deserts in warre, and wounds which I receiued vpon my bodie in conflict with enemies. These are my images, this is my nobilitie not left by inheritance as other men haue had their honours; but these my dig∣nities haue I with my many labours and perils sought & attained: I haue lear∣ned how to wound mine aduersarie, to raise Garrisons, to stand in feare of no∣thing but of bad report: to beare with patience, cold and heat alike, to sleepe  and rest my wearie car case vpon the ground, at one time to tollerate hunger, thirst, and labour: with these perils will I persuade my souldiers; neither will I straiten them or see them euill intreated, when I haue plentie my selfe; nei∣will I make their labours my glory: this is a profitable and ciuill Empire. And these obseruations by the patterne of noble Marius will hearten and encou∣rage Generals and captaines vnto true discipline and vertues. These and such qualities of the like heroicall nature made the Romanes victorious, inciting and pricking vp their souldiers to paines and valour. Nei∣ther would these renouned Romane Generals (as I haue partly noted else∣where) oppresse or deale extremely with any people whom they conquered, but they did repute it to be their greatest maiesty to prohibit iniuries, and not  to suffer any man by wicked meanes to dilate his Empire. Besides, for disci∣pline (because it is one speciall thing which should be remembred) and I haue in diuers places mentioned the same, being a thing so necessary to be cō∣sidered, that without it the fight or battels where euill instructed souldiers are
is more like to Latrociny then true warre. Horsemen in confused troupes with∣out  order or true direction of their Guydes & Cornets: foot-men interming∣led with them not knowing how to draw themselues into rankes, and fyles, by due forme & order of battell, but many times at vnawares wounding, slaugh∣tering, and mayming one another, striking their enemies behind their backes, without honourable respect like brute beasts and sauages, and finally leauing themselues a spoyle and shame to their enemies, their children and posteritie slaues to forreners, their Countrey the inheritance of ambitious and vnsa∣tiable vsurpers, besides a perpetuall record of shame in all Hystories insuing. How needfull therefore it is for Captaines to see their souldiers well armed, well practized in vse of Armes, and well disciplined, concerning their beha∣uiour in the warres, is most apparant, when after a field by such negligence  and confusion lost, they shall see their virgins and daughters rauished and deflowred, their male-children captiued or murdered, some of them vio∣lently torne from the bosomes & imbracements of their parents, the mothers of children and of Families in presence of their owne husbands violently ex∣posed and prostituted to the reasonlesse wills and lustes of the Conquerers, their Churches, holy things, houses, and treasures to bee spoyled and borne away before their eyes, murther and fire to rage euery where in their desolate townes and cities; lastly, no place of their countrey to be free from Armes, dead corpses, blood and lamentation euery where scattered. Which things being so certaine and well considered, how needfull it is to discipline, instruct  and incourage souldiers in the loue and ready practise of armes and of true valour is most euident, and ought to be the principall care of all heroycall Captaines, which should neuer cease either meditating or practising to make their souldiors vnder their charge so perfect, resolute, obedient and valiant, as nothing may be thought to them on earth impregnable. And albeit the fortune of war consisteth alwayes vpon difficult and vncer∣taine termes, yet most certaine it is that true valour mingled with absolute dis∣cipline in souldiers, maketh a tryumphant Monarchie. For what more excel∣lent spectacle can there be to them that are Lordes and conquerors, through their good disposition and gouernment, then in the open fieldes to pursue  their enemies in slight? to wound, slaughter, and captiuate them? to see their horses with the riders distressed? to see many of them which haue receiued wounds neither to find chirurgerie, nor meanes of escape? some of them des∣parately to resist, and presently to fall downe? lastly to see the whole Campe couered with weapons, armor, and dead bodies, and the ground dyed into purple with their enemies blood? All which noble obiects and incourage∣ments come onely by good discipline. But for somuch as true fortitude, which is lincked in the golden armelet of other Morall vertues, and participateth with the rest is one and the noblest Counsellor, and executioner of all the worthie designes of a prudent Gene∣rall:  I will therefore deliuer the members of that principle in moralitie. Fortitude is an affection or habite of the minde, which vndergoing all honorable dangers, labours, and mischieous hazards considerately, represseth
feare and wrath: the corporall enemies of it are sicknesse and pouertie, men∣tall  opposites, disgrace, iniurie, rebuke: it holdeth at defiance death, dolour and feare. He therefore that is truely valiant sheweth himselfe to be more than a man, as Seneca seemeth to witnesse. Quemcunque miserum videris hominem scias, Seneca in Herc. furent. Quemcunque fortem videris miserum neges. Those that are vext with miseries are men: They that are valiant feele no miseries. The extreames of fortitude are temeritie and timerousnesse: rashnesse at∣tempteth  perils inconsiderately, which without mature consultation and in a blind force not respecting abilitie to performe rusheth into dangerous actions, either through ignorance, pride, desperation, stupiditie, pusillanimitie, or some foolish ambition of vaine glory, which mancipateth the minde: where∣as feare contrarily being vtterly voyd of reason or counsell, will bee so∣dainly peirced with the terrible bruit and vnexpected noyse of any thing, vp∣on which true valor ought to giue charge; and folke of such a leaden temper inclyning so much to the blinde loue of their owne liues, are not possessed of that hardnesse of true mettall which should oppresse such brutish turpitude  and disgrace. Horace the Poet excellently counselleth in this case. Rebus angustis animosus atque Fortis appare: sapientèr idem Contrahes vento nimium secundo Turgida vela: Let courage and true strength appeare in troubles: if in thy shippes sterne, a stiffe gale blow prosperously skanten thy sailes. Herein prudence is fitly ioy∣ned  with courage, restrayning men from inconsiderate attempts, least like beasts they seeme to build more vpon a violent affection of minde, by pro∣fuse aduenture of their bodies, then accordeth with reason. There is a forti∣tude in men (as Aristotle defineth) depending vpon fortune, when peo∣ple Lib. 3. ad Ni∣chom. become fearelesse through want of a due fore-sight and precaution of pe∣rils, which sort of persons are ignorantly valiant: some there are which armed in the strength and goodnesse of their cause and conscience doe shew good valour; certaine which heartened in a kinde of fortitude by their skill, and vse in ready practise of weapons; others imboldened vnto valorous exploits in hope of victorie, by their naturall strength and artificiall agilitie; many that in regard of their often aduentures and escapes are hardened; but very valour  is seen in scornefull contempt of ineuitable death; and in the cheerefull em∣bracements of hazards and dangerous aduentures, without any feare in all honorable causes surely grounded and preconsulted. Stoutnesse and magnanimitie which vndertaketh and endureth all difficul∣ties
with patience and perseuetance, being the substance and essence thereof,  is incorporate to fortitude. Stoutnesse is a stedfast confidence of minde, armed with assured trust and hope in great and honourable actions. Audaciousnes contrarieth it with∣out consideration, iudgement, and respect of honestie, violently and rashly precipitating it selfe into perils: whereas stoutnesse attempted with reason, warie respect, great boldnesse and moderation of the minde being inseperate∣ly fastned vnto vertue nobly worketh in the turbulent seas of danger. Pusil∣lanimitie which is a base deiection or rather desperation of the mind opposeth it, yet commonly pursuing temeritie, by the example of Philip late King of Spaine, which (amongst other his vnaduised attempts, wherein the salt of warie premeditation was forgotten) luculently, to Gods vnspeakable glorie  did appeare in his militarie businesse vndertaken against this nation (as I tou∣ched before) immaturely leuying armes not being soundly resolued how that action of such difficult and weightie consequence should bee managed or finished, wholy leaning vpon the fickle wheele of fortune, immesurably mounting in the pompe of his victories had in other places before, and one∣ly through want of knowledge how to guide the gorgeous bridles of his prosperous tryumphes: but when the certaine successe of his shattered fleet (which inwardly daunced before, threatning the Brittaine seaes and shores, in foolish confidence of vndoubted conquest) had like a musket shaft peireed through his credulous eares to his trembling heart and late ambitious liuer,  where it was deeply fixed; then as a weake and sraile woman impatiently throwing from him all royall and princely thoughts and courage, passionatly did he teare off his owne beard, beating his forehead and breast impatiently, torturing himselfe with teares and lamentations in publike and priuat: vp∣on which his disperation, waxing fearelesse of any tokens or care in himselfe to conserue his owne Realms (which had so fouldly mist in seeking to master ours) made such apparance of his basenesse and viletie, playing the lowly part of a weake and feeble woman (which he prouided for our diuine Soue∣raigne Lady) that wise men did very iudiciously consider vpon it by cer∣taine circumstances, how Queene Elizabeth might in the terror of that ouer∣throw  which thundred in Spaine amongst the Castillian courages, haue ea∣sily with a small power subiected that nation thereupon. Magnanimitie being the greatnesse of a mind inuincible and mightie, the noble strength and stedfastnesse in execution of great and waightie mat∣ters, doth support and corroborate stoutnesse. Know therefore that heart to be noblest and most honourable in quest of all vertues, which is open, simple, without hypocrisie, graue, modest, repressing pride, meerely great, forgetfull of iniuries done to it selfe, gentle, aiming at eternitie, contemning terrestrial benefits, readier to giue then to receiue, more studious of iust praise then pro∣fit. For this kind of nobilitie, contemneth that greatnesse which the profane  vulgar admireth so much, conuersing in the restraint of all perturbations, in victorious resistance of all ambition, auarice, and fleshly desires; that it may with more constancie resist other calamities. This is seene in both prosperous
and aduerse chaunces when a man is not altered through either, but endureth  constant and the same in all. Haughtinesse aspiring from a stubborne and fastidious spirit, and heart swolne vp with the poyson of pride, which violently rauisheth humane reason, and base abiection being the vilenesse and filth of mind are daungerous out∣lawes, trangressing beyond the borders of magnanimitie. From the first mar∣cheth braggerie, foolish boasting and ostentation which issueth from fole blinded in louing conceit and admiration of some worthinesse which they misconceiue in themselues; being a most ridiculous vice to be represented in enterlude by the person of Thraso, wholie repugnant to goodnesse and mode∣stie, hatefull in the thoughts of all honest men, and acceptable to parasites  onely. Tke second being a foule abiection, and beastly downefall of mind eschewing labour, and neglecting matters of most moment, in feare of some griefe and care which accompaineth it, is altogether sopped and steeped in sluggishnesse: such brutish people faint and languish in the quest of honoura∣ble and important affaires as Sardanapalus and Heliog abalus did. Vnto these alreadie mentioned, adde a desire of good fame; opposite to which is ambiti∣on, and neglect of honest report, of impudencie: but a moderate desire of ho∣nour which is placed betwixt ambition and the contempt of dignitie meerely proceeding from a mind that aspireth to the reward of her vertues, is in my iudgement laudable and ambicious: if I dare make a maxim positiuely of  that which Aristotle holdeth ambiguously for a paradox. But to conclude with this vertue magnanimitic, Philosophers thinke it to be the rule how to desire and seeke for honour by due desert, moderating and directing humane appetite in the acquisition of great and mightie matters: her sisters accompa∣ning are humilitie, patience, magnificence, and mansuetude, which is a calme spirit interset betwixt wrath and indulgence: the meanes to restraine wrath and hatred are, not to be couetous of vengeance, seldome though sometimes vpon iust cause to be angry, to wrong and vexe no man, for enuie dependeth vpon wrath. Securitie and licence of sinne followeth excessiue indulgence:  and I am perswaded that no man which is truely valiant, can truely be said en∣uious though most of them are emulous: Patience which is a vertue, fencing and preparing a souldiers mind against all wounds inflicted in fight, teacheth a Generall, and all sorts of souldiers, how to strengthen, exercise, and encourage themselues in all commendable hardnesse & difficulties; as noble Cato of Vtica did in Africke instruct his soul∣diers, how to beare themselues amongst a swarme of mortall stings, & how to suffer heat, hunger, & thirst, sickenesse; for this vertue fenceth and prepareth his mind against all wounds inflicted in fight: and Quintus Fabius likewise whom I mentioned in my second booke. That Generall therefore which is verely valiant, will in the effusion and smoking current of his owne blood (that  from him washeth away all spots of shame and deformities) fight most eager∣ly, considering that his most grace and highest commendation in conflict is to stand stedfast foote to foote, without giuing any ground, or turning his face away from the aduersarie, vnlesse good aduantages and opportunities require
the same. He likewise that can with most ingenious fortitude discouer, a∣uoyd,  and turne, the fallacies, engines, and mischiefes of his enemies vpon their owne heads: and he semblably who being wounded, rewounded, and surrewounded vpon the face, will not shrinke nor yeeld himselfe, but holding a secret combat betwixt dolor and glory fighteth in blood, sweate, and dust vnto the last spiracle of his life, not doubling his body, nor faintly staggering vnder the weight of his enemies arme, neither touching the ground during the combat with hands or knees. It is likewise honorably noted in the com∣battant that shall wound his foes vpon their heads, foreheads, or other nobler members: which obseruations Vegetius specially requireth in the fanteries: if therefore this be considered, Vtifortem animū gerant, quantoque sibi in praelio minus pepercissent tanto tutiores fore: that they beare a valiant spirit, and that  they shall better and more safely defend their bodies and honours, by how much more earnest and lesse sparing they be of themselues: then will this no∣ble vertue of patience and true fortitude, victoriously flourish in the hearts of all good souldiers. This vertue doth (as Cicero defineth) consist in suffering continuall and voluntarie toyle, and hardnesse vpon honest profitable termes, which is a firme and constant toleration of humane affaires, when with a mind and spirit vnbroken, we beare all calamities which may happen: this long sufferance of griefe and trauaile must be grounded vpon some honest cause: for if vnder the reuerend and demure roabes thereof, hatred, wealth or honour, being riotous and ruffionlike companious be concealed, then is  it not any branch of fortitude, but the extreamitie thereof, importing a sauage and reasonlesse hardinesse. Patience consisteth in suffering iniuries, and in cheerefull bearing all the crosses of fortune; herein is the Prouerbe compleat, that Patience is victorie: for in repressing his owne affection, a man both sub∣dueth himselfe and his aduersarie; whereas in contrary being subiected and made a vassall vnto the scourge of his owne appetites, he wilfully submitteth himselfe to that brutish yoake, being prouoked by wrath and desire: onely let vs neglect wrong, and it is easily vanquished leauing vengeance to the be∣nefit of time, and to the powerfull iudgement of the great iudge and a∣venger. For according to blessed Paul, In hauing patience we doe the will of  Hebr. 10. God, by which we receiue the promise of saluation. And Salomon that oracle of wisedome, confirming it in a parable, or wise concealed sentence, saith, That he which is slow to wrath, is better then the mightie man, and he that ruleth the mind Prou. 16. exceedeth a conqueror of cities. Moreouer God himselfe, when he discended in a cloud to Moses, proclai∣med his mercie manifested in patience, when he cryed before his face. The Lord, the Lord is strong, mercifull, and gratious, slow to anger, and full of goodnesse and trueth, reseruing mercie for thousands; forgiuing sinne and iniquitie. And  Exod. 34. thence is it that holy Paul calleth him the God of patience and consolation, which ensueth it, admonishing the Thessalonians in another place to be patient to∣wards Rom. 15. Chap. 5. all sorts of men. Patience therefore being a principall member of for∣titude giueth vs a conquest and possession of our owne soules in peace, and comfort: pouertie, exile, losse of parents, friends, children, sorow, reproch,
contempt, seruitude, grieuous sicknesse, blindnesse with all the miserable de∣fects  and mischiefes of nature and fortune (if a man ponder that his life is by course of mortalitie full of vexation and heauinesse) are nothing: and there∣fore iust honor inuiteth him to combate or wrestle willingly with all calami∣ties, that he may purchase a glorious and renounced victorie ouer them, rather then like a foolish coward wilfully to trust himselfe without courageous resi∣stance into the iawes of ineuitable troubles, as by some dastardly mancipation of himselfe: that though he be broken by it, yet it may be said that he was not subdued, but as it were voluntarily sacrificed vnto it: for no man is said to feele griefe but he that complaineth of it. Them that in desperate causes as in  respect of pouertie, disgrace, captiuitie, or in amorous passion, should kill or cast away themselues (for such persons Aristotle termeth effeminate) I cannot hold to be verely valiant; whereas it is the part of true valor to beare in equall ballance of minde mhiefe, and prosperitie; a sure token of cowardize and idlenesse also, to distrust, faint, or filthily to be deiected in troubles. Impaci∣ence (which is the softnesse of a minde echewing labour, and the tolleration of dolor) opposeth it: such as are afraid to take paines and to be grieued (think∣ing sorrowes vnsufferable, which patience teacheth vs to tollerate) are in this opposition: and such likewise as cannot beare honours and prosperitie with moderation (but become insolent without measure) are in as much  fault or more. Perseuerance likewise is another branch of fortitude, being a constant, per∣petuall, and considerate apprehension of reason conuersing in the former per∣fections, repressing their contraries, and yoaking them to discretion: for with∣out constancie & equabilitie (which is the geometricall proportion, from the centre to the iust circumference of fortitude) no man can be called truely va∣liant. Lenitie with a giddy disposition of humane affaires withstandeth it: this either through effeminacie doth vnaduisedly yeeld it selfe prisoner to troubles, and cannot indure the burthen of them; or with pertinacitie (when reason ought to change it) doth arrogantly and contumaciously persist in a  friuolous opinion: and so much for the morall knowledge of Chieftaines, fit for euery worthy souldior to learne and exercise. Casar extolleth this noble gift of perseuerance in a souldior, whereas in con∣trary, Caes lib. 8. cm. belli Gallic. G. Bened. in rep. the coward and he which forsaketh his colours is punished with death. Also mutuall loue and charitie should be dispersed amongst them, so that as they partake in paines and passion they should likewise perseuere, declaring themselues companions in consolation; according to the saying of blessed Paul. Militarie charitie dependeth vpon two speciall points; vpon the ayding Corinth. 1. and seconding of our fellow-souldiers in extremities, and vpon constant per∣seuerance in maintenance thereof, when truth and equitie stande with their quarrels.  Lucas de Penna in L. fortissimi col. prim. There be certaine of the liberall Sciences likewise most needfull, towardes the knowledge of all martiall Gouernours: namely, the studies of Arithme∣tick and Geometrie. The first intreateth of discreet numbers, and quantities very behoofull for a Captaine; and so requisite, as no merchants or treasurers
of Princes can in their places haue more vse of supputation then this requi∣red  in a martiall Leader. It is that art which Pithagoras (more then all other Philosophers) wondered at so much, placing it in the minde of the mightiest God, when he fitted himselfe first to the structure of those miraculous and incomprehensible workes in the creation of heauen and earth: he did veri∣ly beleeue and confirmed men in that his opinion; how all creatures were made of numbers, shewing many strange things by mysticall and hidden arts, which consisted vpon th' accrescence and decrescence of numbers. Our fathers thought that, onely man (all other creatures excepted) was capable of number, for that he was wisest of all. This art consisteth in conference of pari∣tie with imparitie, in euen and odde, the numbers either equall or vnequall together, or equall by separation, also superfluous deminished and perfect.  And so much least I be too tedious, seruing for the most present and perfect instruction of battels, by addition, substraction, and diminution of souldiors for seuerall formes: how many drawne out of thus many ranks in fyle of a square battell of 2000. will by proportion fashion a crescent: how many su∣peradded to that battell again wil make a Cilinder; euery battell answering to the most aduantage against his enemies battels, as they shal be skilfully formed and instructed vpon the sodaine for all aduantages. But hereof I spake some∣what in my second Booke; referring my selfe with the rest to Livy, Caesar, Thu∣cydides, Polibius, Plutarch, Euclides, Vegetius, Frontinus, with such others as lear∣nedly can explaine and discourse of these with sound iudgement, and better  experience more at large. Geometrie likewise ordereth and proportioneth formes, bodyes, and their dimensions by discreet lines: out of lines, the superficies or outward faces; and from thē these bodies which are called cubes. This art by measuring of heauen and earth, leaueth nothing vnsearched which humane reason can apprehend in that facultie: to this art are referred all linearie demonstrations, the cohe∣rence or knitting together of elements, whether trianguler, quadranguler, multanguler, or aspiring in piramidicall fashion. Hence was it that the Egypti∣ans did reuerence as diuine idols, the formes of Cubes and Circles, in their superstitious ceremonies performed to those profane gods Osiris and Isis.  Moreouer Plato caused this inscription to be set vpon the gate of that Acade∣mie where he professed: that, No man ignorant of Geometrie should enter there∣in. And in all the best and ancientest Schooles of the Greekes and Romanes the nobler sort of youth and children after their first milke weare studiously taught in the science of Arithmeticke and Geometrie, by which the learned fathers of former ages did illustrate and giue light to all most difficult obscuri∣ties and hidden reasons of causes: for by considering how this art doth from a point or centre being indivisible, extend and draw foorth lines circumfe∣rent,  bowing, iacent, perpendiculer, oblique, and equall in angles; narrow, large, trilaterall, quadrilaterall, multilaterall, and in them equilaterall: right angles, blunt angles, sharpe angles, and such as extend more on one side then from another, with Rhombus, Rhomboydes, Piramides, Spheres, and other strange formes in diuers analogies. They did finde how needfully this art ser∣ved
in fit proportion of harmonie, for vniting, fashioning and ordering of all  sorts of battels, squares, squadrons, wings cornets and such like; as in rearing, deuising, working, measuring, digging and fashioning bulwarkes, engines, vn∣derminings, trenches, ditches: likewise for the raysing, leuelling and squa∣ring of rampiers, rauelings, casaates, and other necessarie plats and defen∣ces against enemies, with all sort of Instruments and engines appertaining warre which are infinite, being so behoofull for the knowledge of a Gene∣rall, as without it I doubt whether warre may bee called an art: for it e∣qualleth such members as are like in proportion & harmonious consent with members vnlike, making a concord out of discordes. But least (I search too  faire into the concealed treasure of hidden Phylosophy, wherein I might ei∣ther vnhappily showe some token of arrogancie, or rather of hierogliphicall mysteries, and other rare apprehensions of sage Phylosophers, exceeding the precincts of my weake reason & capacitie, wronging some sciences of which I cannot skill) here will I set vp my rest vnder pardon: onely this (which many wise and will experienced souldiors, and others of sound wisedome approue) it should be required in a Generall to be so studious in these professions, that by much practise and paines he may deuise new formes of embattailing, figh∣ting, eskairmouching, strange kindes of curious retiring, and vnexpected meanes of distressing his enemies by noble stratagems newely stamped, & ne∣uer  heard of before. And albeit (according to Clitarchus) audaciousnesse is an excesse beyond the measure of humane strength and reason; yet he which prudently respecteth his owne ende, will vpon honorable grounds volunta∣rily pursue perils, as I said before. If therefore the Generall would haue his souldiors ambitious of honour, and victorie, he must worke out their resolution, and with vertuous example in himselfe apparant encourage their actions. For if he will industriously consider, and declare his true force (which is in most high reputation fixed) he shall finde it very possible for him to infuse power sufficient to his soldiers, for performance of any reasonable action in their charge, working first confi∣dence  in them, which onely proceedeth from good militarie discipline: let him therfore with great grace and wisedome endeuour to make his name and honor, reuerende, and precious throughout his whole armies, which he shall purchase as (I say before) by mingling of charitie with discipline; as in ta∣king care that he surbate not his footemen with long and grieuous hard mar∣ches, forsomuch as warriors of best iudgement and experience haue alwayes esteemed them more seruiceable then the horse: which hath beene found as∣well amongst the battels of the Greekes and Romanes, as in ours of these la∣ter times in Christendome: for vpon vrgent causes it may bee that by fast troupes and marches or with long fight and escairmouches they may become wearie: whereupon it will be most conuenient to relieue them with the hor∣ses of those Caualliers that ride, the whiles they for their more ease in con∣trary  refresh themselues with marching on foote in their places interchange∣ably as the Romanes Ad lacum regilum, did in their warres against the La∣tines, and by that means attayned victorie: for the footmen are apt and readie
for any straitor sinuous place into which their horses cannot haue passage:  they can also stretch forth and straiten their ranckes, which vpon a necessitie they can breake againe, reducing themselues into forme and order forth with as place and space shall serue them: whereas horsemen being once broken re∣maine long confused. And as there is a difference in comparison of men va∣liant and well disciplined with weake and faint hearted souldiers; so likewise fareth amongst horses; some full of stomach and courage, others reastie, dull and stubbore: but the souldiers being all of them participant, or capable of reason may be brought into forme, and kept in order when horses cannot, for diuers inconueniences impending. Also cowards may ride vpon bold and seruiceable horses; whereas men of valour vnhappelie may bee mounted vpon ides; and this is daungerous: for by such meanes he which is well  mounted, may draw backe in feare, and he which would aduance forth and declare some heroicall tokens of his princely spirit and courage cannot possi∣bly stirre vp courage in his iade: then which at such a time I would not wish a more heart breaking plague to my valiant enemie. Lucullus with a small battell of foote ouerthrew 40000. horsemen of Tigranes; whereof diuers were cataphracts, which as me seemeth happened more by default of the beasts, thē of the riders, though both miscarried: and yet want of skill and iudgement in the rider is the next fault (in my iudgement) to cowardice. The fauteries there of being in principal place of seruice are to be cheerefully cherished and disciplined aboue others. There is also required in the Generall, one speciall point towards the cor∣roboration of his souldiers hearts. First to shew religion in the obseruing and performing articles and promises: secondly that vpon the point of seruice he declare vnto his souldiers in honest and familiar wordes of comfort, the readi∣est and easiest meanes of victorie, wherein it behoueth him to conceale all im∣pediments; or (if they be pregnant) then to extenuate them by some cheere∣full and ingeniou excuse, which hath in it a strong taste of a true fortitude. These with some other heads, such as before and after are expressed (as occa∣sion offereth) will generally renowne the Generall, and further the victorie. There are some souldiers which haue a vertuous boldnesse and ferocitie  mixt with martiall instruction and seueritie, from which skill and perfection that fiercenesse and confidence in the souldier is vttered: the like was in those ancient Romane armies, when they by such auspicious meanes, came home vnder their victorious ensignes, alwayes loaden with rich spoyles & triumphs. There is another kind of extreame ferocitie brazed with boldnesse, void of all skilfull discipline in war, & such in that age of the Romane Monarchie Csar with Tacitus and Liuie haue noted in the nature & battels of the Galles, being merely foolish and vnprofitable. The third sort is of those which are not pos∣sessed either of order, discipline, or authority; of that kinde are those Indians at this day, which answere in subiection to the King of Castille: for it were im∣possible  that armies of such catiue condition (vnlesse their enemies turne face without cause) should euer beare away victorie. This weakenesse in souldiers proceedeth from pusillanimitie, being a base
abiection of the mind, or a foolish and faint deection of the will in ying  from honourable courses and attempts; but of this I will speake more at large intreating of militarie discipline, which specially proceedeth from the pru∣dence and true force of a Generall, and is peculia to men indeed subsisting and composed of reason intirely; by vertue whereof Lions and Elephants are tamed and fettered in the wildernesse, which bridleth & abateth the fierie sto∣maches of stubborne horses, which measureth the the circumference of hea∣uen and earth with their orbes. Such a force best befitteth Hercules, and in this force are humane labours nourished. This teacheth a Generall what the state and condition of his enemies, and how to catch them: which Epami∣nondas the Thebane reputed the greatest honour in a captaine, by winning  prenotion of the deliberations, counsels and resolutions of aduersaries, and being most hard and difficult, requireth deepe iudgement with high wise∣dome in him that beareth it: and not of their counsels onely, but of their acti∣ons also which fathome deepe into the apprehension of reason; considering it did many times happen that in a battell which hath continued a great part of the night, the victor thought himselfe vanquished, and he that was defea∣ted misdeemed that he was conquerour: whereupon counsels infued most pernicious to them that consulted, as it happened vnto Brutus & Cassius in the like case; these did not looke vnto th'euent of their battell before it came to triall: for Cassius misconceiuing that Brutus had beene ouerthrowne, and  put to flight with his whole regiment (who then was vndoubtedly sure of victorie) desperately broached his breast vpon his owne sword. By the inesti∣mable benefit of this reason, which deepely groundeth it selfe in knowledge and continuall search of hidden treasures, the Generall becommeth iust, skil∣full and industrious: in it are rooted all his present resolutions which happen vpon extremities during the fight, and seasoned with that good fortune, with that prudent and quicke apprehension, which like the sudden flash of a light∣ning, not so quicke as diuine giueth a sweete fire to the true touch of his rea∣son; when mature deliberations want space of admittance, and onely fortu∣nate  executions are importuned and instantly. From this florisheth out his diligence, patience, prudence, mildnesse, sterne∣nesse, subtiltie, simplicitie, warinesse, promptnesse, liberalitie, with many more branches of true vertue springing together, out of that one most boun∣tifull roote. This also teacheth him his knowledge concerning the istructi∣ons of battels of all fashions; for euen as stones, tiles, beames, and rafters of woode are by good order and disposition of the workeman, knit, confirmed and kept from putrifaction, in such case are armies. By this is he taught bold∣nesse against enemies, fauour towards friendes, and reason with counsell in oppotunitie. This maketh a wise Captaine to meditate with Philopoemon Prince of the Achaeans, who did exercise himselfe in warlike practise, specially  when nothing but peace was present and round about him. And this caused Ephicrates to raise a rampier composed with a vaste moate, when no daun∣ger or enemie could be feared, saying that it was a disgracefull thing in a Generall (when neede should suddenly require a defence) to say, these acci∣dents
which are, were not premeditated. But amongst all noble exercises in times peaceable (of most profit, pleasure, and honour, and seemely befitting a prince) the knowledge of places and countries is most requisite, which cheifly and most readily is got by practise of hunting: for in following of the wilde bore, the stagge, the foxe, the hare and such like beasts of game, certaine martiall accidents are resembled in many things, according as Xenophon in the life of Cyrus (at that time when hee should hauel euied forces against the king of Armenia) describeth him, rea∣soning and arguing with his companions of that seruice which hee was to performe, and of all things accommodated thereunto; by resembling of them which take refuge vpon the mountaines, to those that pitched toyles & snares for wilde beastes, comparing them that eskairmouched vpon the plaines, with  those which rouzed the game from their dennes or formes, driuing them vnto those nets, & with such like resemblance of that partie. Besides, that the perfect knowledge of countries, fennes, marshes, and riuers, for marching, incamp∣ing, wading, fortifying, imbattelling, and such like by such practise of hunting, shall be with sport and in short time attained: also the benefit happening to their bodies in confirming of their strength and health which vse it. For by this countries Topographie, a perfit knowledge and discretion (of the nature, condition and soyle of other countries) is attained with facilitie: for all re∣gions haue some resemblance one of another. In such sort Salust (writing somewhat concerning the exercise which Iugurth did vse) commendeth him  after a fashion for his exercise of hunting in these words; Non se luxui nequè in∣ertiae corrumpendūdedit sed (vti mos gentis illius est) equitare, iaculari, cursu cum ae∣qualibus certare: & cum omnes gloria antecelleret omnibus tamen charus esse. Ad hoc pleraque tempora in venando agere, leonem atque ali feras primus aut impri∣mis ferire, plurimum facere, & minimum ipse de se loqui: He did not giue him∣selfe ouer to be corrupted with lust or sluggishnesse, but as the fashion is of that countrie, to ride, to shoote, to runne in race with his equals, and albeit he did exceed all of them in glorie, yet euery one of them did loue him. Moreouer he bestowed much time in hunting, he would be the first man or the surest man which gored, wounded, or paunched the Lion and other wild  beasts: his fashion was to do very much, & to make small brags of it. In which generous exercise & recreation of hunting, your highnesse (soone after your first milke in the tendernesse of your gracious spring) industriously & to great good end delighted hauing proposed it as a recreation destined to most noble and heroicall purposes, when time and occasion should summon your migh∣tinesse, to make specious demonstration thereof. And that care and wise∣dome is exceeding great, which answereth to the choosing of a Generall; as∣well for his reason experience, and valour, as for his bodilie strength and agili∣tie: for that cause the people of Rome (hauing decreed by the consent of the Senate, to moue warre against any Nation) made choise of their Generals  and Dictators out of the prudentest Consuls: vnto whom they graunted a large Commission to deale in all causes (concerning the seruice in their trust) according to their sound discretions. And verely (whereas both the life and
honor of peace and warre resteth in his person) the wise iudgement of a  Prince (as I thinke) cannot bee so certainly in substitution and deputation of any vicegerent or seruaunt whatsoeuer, as in the prudent election of a Generall. For certainely those noble parts and perfections (which are need∣fully required in him) stand in more force and valour of all inferiour soul∣diers vnder him: as Philip great Alexanders father said, That a battell of Ly∣ons which were gouerned by a Stagge, could not be so good as an hoast of stagges vnder the conduct of a Lyon: for of Cowards (hauing able bodies) a gallant Generall may with some conuenient paines and good discipline make victo∣rious warriours; as Epaminondas and Pelopidas did of the Thebanes, by whom  they were enfranchised from the Spartans; and albeit in regard of their long slauerie some deemed them vnfit for militarie seruice, yet did these Captaines so labour in disciplyning of them, as they did proue soone after able, and vanquishers ouer them, that so tyrannized ouer them before. In honour of which nation, and vpon their good successe it was written, how not onely the Lacedemonians but euen all other sorts of people would become gallant fellowes and victorious through good martiall instruction & practise, which ought to proceed at all times both in peace and warre. For men which are skilfull in the practise and exercise of Armes, will not stand in awe of their enemies, because no man feareth to doe that, wherein he knoweth himselfe  skilfully practized. It is also common in nature, that in laudable qualities (especially where multitudes may be witnesses of their excellent readinesse and resolution) men loftily will performe the parts of their cunning with great hope, whereas the rude and vnexercised souldior is like a sheepe exposed to slaughter. Hence is it that Vegetius sayeth, that vse in warre auaileth more then sength and ar∣mour. 1 cap. lib. de re mulitari. The speciall companions of martiall discipline and vetue which ad∣minister honor and reputation to Captaines and souldiers, are labour in busi∣nesse, fortitude in perils, temperance in desires, industie in doing, celeri∣ie in dispatching, counsell in prouiding. The greatest benefit in a Generall  towards the performance hereof is in time of peace, as fitting and preparing himselfe for warre when there is no danger, and in  times also, to seeme and beare himselfe vnto such souldiors (if wants and negligence require it) like an enemie when he disciplineth, and with his enemies in contrary to dissemble himself a friend. Menander, that he which is not experienced in mili∣tarie discipline hauing command of armies doth bring oorth thousands of men for a sacrifice to their enemies: if therefore the souldiors bee negligent, idle, or vnexperienced in their seruice and vse of weapons, or in keeping of their rankes, marches, or formes, discipline is required with comptent seueri∣tie, awell towards inferior Captaines in their priuate transgrssions, by assie∣ring them of their charge (which is to some noble spirits much more great dis∣grace,  then the paine of death) driuing them to the priuate souldiors march on foote, vntill such time as they by their seruice and industrie (which they should very well know before they be chosen to gouerne) haue practised how to remerite in a common soldiers place, the reputation of a captaine, recouer∣ing
and reforming that losse and omission: and if they be slack in discipline  towards their souldiors which serue vnder their colours and ensignes (when duetie bindeth that they should instruct) yet if it so happe that some of those Captaines, or others of greatest place in the field, haue in monitions and perswasions been milde and gentle before, and that such lenitie cannot pre∣vaile: then is it not expedient that he growe seuere vpon the sodaine, least his purpose of extremitie be discouered, and the stubborne heartes of his field∣men become mutinous; but by little and little with wary gradation and vpon sure occasion conceale his purpose, vntill time bring to perfection his defence, before offence bee done: which is by conciliation of the more part out of the best, and those of the more conformable sort, so neere as may be found, or taken with courteous encouragement and wily familiaritie, win∣ning  some with benefits, & others with the right gylt of beneuolence & leni∣tie; pretending towards the benefited his great respect vnto their dueties and diligence declared: which course (being well entred) openeth safely the se∣cure path of seueritie cōcerning others: but let him beware in any case that he doe not neglect this; as in sodaine changing his mildnesse into seueritie, for it will indanger his confusion when he wanteth ayde and countenance of some their better fellowes in his discipline to keepe them if occasion require. And in all his apport amongst the souldiers of his ensignes that austere kinde of fa∣cilitie should appeare in him: that like as of the noble Romane Galba, so spee∣ches & Prouerbs may passe currāt of him in those armies where he gouerneth  Disce milis are miles, Galba est, non Getulicus▪ which kinde of austeritie was no small honor to the noble Anniball, in exercising & instructing of his soldiers: whom Liuy discribeth the worthy patterne of a right renouned Generall, to this effect. Anniball serued vnder Asdruball in the warres three yeeres, and there liued not a man whom Asdruball so much desired, for his worth to beare command vnder him in martiall affaires, if any thing valorous & of force was to be put in ex∣ecution: neither would the souldiers of his armies credite any man so soone, or shewe such excellent courage vnder any Captaine, as at his command. He was very bold in giuing charge vpon perils, very wise, and full of reaching consultation if he were distressed, in danger most patient and indefatigable, contemning paines and trauels,  of courage vndaunted, carelesse of extreame heate or cold, temperate in diet, mode∣rate in sleepe, vigilant and vsing his body to lodge hardly, many times hath he beene found laid vpon the cold ground couered with his mantle, which he did vsually weare amongst his watches and Centrenells, or at his corps dugard. In any seruice vpon horseback, or foot, he was the first that gaue charge, and last that left the field: yet as there are not any vertues of such excellencie but are accompained, with some vices, so was he possessed of some souldier-like faults. Thus farre in effect Liuie, where∣in behold the true description of a right carefull and noble Generall seruing for a copie to the best Captaines that euer did or shall succeed him. I will adde hereunto, because it is memorable one example of discipline in a Gene∣all,  which Liuie likewise recordeth. Titus Manlius being Consull, and Leiutenant Generall of the Romane forces against the Latines, when his owne sonne had aduaunced forth (albe∣it
vpon most honourable termes) in single duell to combat with a daring La∣tine,  whom hee most valorously vanquished, vpon which combat th victories of either armies for safegard of their souldiers liues were mu∣tually wagered; yet for breaking of his ranke to set forward to performe the challenge, and because he did not first aske leaue of the Consull, contrarie to the prescribed ancient forme of the Romane discipline, in the presence of the noble armie caused his head exemplarily to be strooke off; a euere or violent reward of his honour: and Decius the other Consull according to the religi∣ous custome of the Romanes in some extreamities obserued, after the perfor∣mance of certain ceremonies which may be read in Liuy, did (by rushing alone  on horsebacke at the full speede with all violence amongst the Latines a good space before the battels ioyned) voluntarily sacrifice himselfe to the infernals, for the whole armies safetie: the Latines were in such ort appalled, and his fellow souldiers encouraged at this his so confident and noble resolution, that they became lordes of the field thereupon: I will hereunto knit one other ex∣ample, Papyrius the Dictator gaue expresse commandement against Fabius Rutilius Generall of the Romane horse (who with good successe and great valour had encountred, and ouerthrowne diues troupes of the enemies) to be beaten with rods; a strange and ignominious punishment worse then death, denoun∣ced  against so noble a souldier, onely because he tooke not aduise and dire∣ction of the great magistrate, when, where, and in what sort to giue charge: howbeit Rutilius seeking to stop the shame of that punishment, by secret meanes escaped to Rome, whom the vehement dictator pursued in such furie, that (vntill not onely Rutilius had vpon both his knees besought pardon for the same, and that the whole Senate and people of Rome had inexorably mediated for him) the seuere Dictator could not be mooued to repeale the sentence and execution, but would haue had his head cut off also. Another kinde of discipline is semblably requisite against captaines and fellowes in armes which is for a certaine vaine stubbornnesse and proud emu∣lation  in them being very daungerous to the present state and seruice in hand: this ought with great care & seueritie to be searched and reformed, by the ex∣ample of Sergius and Verginius, when they did assiege the Veyans; Sergius holding his quarter vpon one side of the citie, and Verginius vpon the other, it happened that Sergius (vpon some aduantage found) was suddenly char∣ged by the Phaliscians, taking in high scorne, though his forces were much weaker to requireaideo. Verginius, hereupon being forced to flie with disgrace (though he might with very good ease haue rescued and repaired his honor) yet would not Verginius sucour him, vnlesse Sergius had first humbly required and sued vnto him for it; which fault few wise princes or Generals, but would haue punished with death: howbeit the Senate (which sustained the most  losse) onely fined them with a pecuniary mulct, prudently foreseeing, that such as had armies in charge, ought to be enfranchised from all feare, and to draw the counsels of all their actions from the principals and heads of occasions.
Hauing partly touched the discipline concerning captaines and souldi∣ers,  it we requisite that I declared the formes of disposing, arraying and em∣battelling souldiers; but forsomuch as neither my knowledge in that art is so sure as I dare aduent vpon it, neither if I could, would it be needfull consi∣dering euery priuate captaines studies, and at that art, which I by mistaking though in a particle, might worthily be reprehended of arrogant folly, I will here in forbeare, onely wishing a darefull ingenious and industrious practise of that skill in euery priuate captaine and able gentleman of honour, aswell in times of peace as of wre: and because I haue heard it somtimes commen∣ded by ctaine wise & expert souldiers, as thesure ground and true plan of all excellent embattaile, I will set downe according to Liuie the true forme of the Romane hoasts as they were ordered for present fight, and diuided into bat∣tels.  The first was composed of gallant Romane youthes in space of ranks and files indifferently distant, and armed with pikes: the second battell equall and like the first, sauing that the spaces betwixt them in ranks and files were more large; these men were of ripe age and fire strength, whom they called prin∣cipals: the third and last battell in the eare contained so many men as both the former, consisting of well approued veteranes and tried souldiers, whom they called Triarij; these likewise tooke larger space in ranks and files, then either the first or second, being so fashioned, that one battelle might for more strength and aduantage draw it selfe into another, when oddes or any neces∣sitie did constraine, without disorder or confusion: to each of which three  battels were assigned certaine cornets of horse, which like winges guarded the right and left flancke of each battell; onely the first battell of pikes stan∣ding nearer then the rest in ranckes and files (as our battels of forelorne hope at this day) were so perfectly taught and instructed, that they might the bet∣ter endure the first brunt or charge when it should come to their turne for fight; the second battell of those principals and strong men which followed, being larger in space to receiue the pikes vpon occasion by retire, and the Triarij so large as would admit them both vpon necessitie to their ranckes without confusion: but when the Triarij haue both receiued the pikes and principals into their battels, then they forthwith close their ranckes and with  most resolute and victorious courage endure and surrechardge vpon their e∣nemies in a terrible fashion; which finding a new battell stronger and more puisant then both the first (vniting them that were driuen backe) are frustra∣ted of all hope and courage. And this in my iudgement must of necessitie be both sure and honourable, when the whole force is not ventured at the first, but hath meanes (if neede require) left for a succour when two charges are al∣ready passed. Now for asmuch as it behoueth to reason a little of martiall stratagems seruing for campe or any place fortified, I will take occasion in this place to  discourse somewhat. Subtilties though in priuate actions they be detestable, yet are in militarie seruices very commendable, and commonly more worthi∣ed then open force is against enemies: howbeit fraud in the violation of faith or breach of conditions (amongst men in armes) is excepted. For these dis∣honesties,
may percase augment Empire with assured losse of honour much  more precious. The subtilties of which I speake, are the substance of stra∣tagems by subduing of professed enemies, and by diffidence had of their opposits: such (as for instance) Anniball ad lacum Perusinum vsed by turning face from the Romanes his enemies, that the Consull and his hoast by pur∣sute, might be brought into places full of danger. And hereupon note by the way, that if thine aduersarie turne his backe towards you, pursue not in further heat and greedinesse of victorie, but rather according to the Prouerbe, Make him a siluer bridge to be gone: least being constrained to fight vpon neces∣sitie they become desperate, of which there is infinite example of diuers be∣ing pursued after the fight, which haue vpon that example finished in much  effusion of blood, and victorious conquest had of them that followed. Soul∣diors therefore should neither be too slowe nor hastie, but keepe a prudent moderation; which temperature will guide them to many fortunate aduan∣tages and executions: least that be verified vpon them which Iohn Basilides the Rushian Tyrant spake of the Moscouites and Polonians: that these were too forward, and those ouer backward, which hee by long experience found in his armies. Another excellent example of lawfull stratagem in the Captaine Annibal to secure himselfe and his armies is recorded, by tying matches and firebrands to the hornes of cattell driuing them by night a contrary way, to misguide  his enemies, that in the meane while he might prouide for the safe allodge∣ment of his owne forces. The like commendable kinde of stratagem, Cymon a Captaine of the Athenians (which both Plutarch, and Diodorus Siculus re∣cord) Pl. in vica C. Diodo: lib. 11. put in practise, he perceiuing that the Persian fleet houered too and againe neere the Coast of Cyprus, with 250. ships of his Nauie, gaue fight to 340. of the aduerse; of which hee through his good successe and valour grappled 100. the rest being sore shattered and broken in fight recouered Cyprus; which glad of such harbor left their ships vnarmed, marching a cer∣taine of leagues into the land a foote. Hereupon Cymon possessed himselfe of  the whole remainder of the Persian fleet, furnishing diuers of those his ene∣mies shippes with souldiors drawne out of his owne▪ and vpon the riuer Eu∣ribas where his enemies were incamped brought in the Nauie, his souldiors being attyred in Persian habit with sur-coates and turribants found aboard them: their enemies by this meanes mistaking the Athenians for their owne soldiers, & knowing the sleet, supposed them to be returned which had lately losed anchor from them before, & so with quietnes gaue them leaue to come in with their fleet into the Hauens mouth. Cymon therfore at the dead time of night, landing himselfewith his soldiers in that falsed habit, slewe them all which met him, and made spoyle of his enemies Tents; giuing to Pheridates the Persian Generall a mortall camisado, besides the losse of his and many  more Persian liues, with a bloody destruction and hauocke of others; so that such error and horror was amongst the Persians in this dead darke season, that they knew not what nation it was which did inuade them. So terrible and so∣daine a charge went beyond their present reason. Likewise amongst the
Athenians with such another cunning aduantage, Clearchus surprised Bi∣zantium.  Diuers martiall slights are recorded of Pontius Captaine of the Samnites, Portius Cato, Miltiades, Themistocles, and others (of which Thu∣cydides and Diodorus make mention) but these shall suffice for copie. There is yet another adiunct of wylinesse sometimes vsed in warre, which resteth in taking occasion vpon good aduantages to fight with confederates, and then the meane to worke it, is quarrelling or martially moouing against some other friend being with his confederate in confederacie; so that he must be forced in honesty to partake and breake truce with him that cunningly seeketh it, he giuing the first signall to Battell, or declare himselfe false or perfi∣dious towardes his friend and Client. Also there is a certaine oblique pru∣dence (if a mā may so terme it) of another nature, yet not vnlike the former af∣ter  the example of the Campanians; which (sithence their exceeding weaknes would not otherwise admit, but that they must necessarily fall into the danger of those enemies vpon whom they breathed defiance) presently put thēselues into the protection of some mightie prince of more force, to defend them and their liberties: and this rule is generally certaine that such people (as stand in feare of oppression or tiranny, by some great Prince) will offer & send volun∣tary succors with any comfort to the best of their power, to some other more puisant prince, which may when good time shal serue collaterally protect and assist them in their extremities against all violence and oppression of others: as may be read in the Romane Hystories of the Massilians, Rhodians, Hiero  king of Siracuse, Massinissa, Eumenes with others, which had in the same case ai∣ded the Romanes in their warres. And as in our late English expeditions Anno 1596. and in Anno 1597. was sent vnto vs by the States of base Ger∣manie vpon our taking of Cales accosting Andalusia; and towards that seruice intended but vnfortunately crossed, when our Generals after ominous be∣ginnings reconducted vs to the Ilands, Tercaere, where they made very small proofe, and farre short in fathome of their expectation. What I haue spoken here in particular respecting the office of a Leiutenant generall, may serue for other inferiour Captaines and Officers of warre also: Yet considering that it were semblably behoofull for me to declare what the  places of most reputation are in the field, according to the seruice of our Eng∣lish warres; the brute, and ioyous rebounding honour of which battels haue formerly sounded aloud from their drums & trumpets in the most flourishing parts of Christendome, I will brieflly touch them so neere in the sequell as I can gather. Next vnto the L. Leiutenant Generall, which absolutely representeth and vseth (for the time) the person and dignities of the Prince are these principall persons of honor, seruing as counsellors and assistants immediate and vnder  his Excellencie. The first place is assigned to the Lord Marischal; adioyning him the Coro∣nell generall of foote, and he seconded with the Coronell generall of horse; ensuing them the Captaine or Coronell of euery Regiment or battell: after these the Campe-master, next him the master of the Ordinance: suc∣cessiuely
the Treasurer of the whole hoast; and lastly the Sergeant maior ge∣nerall  in field: these be principals and of counsell to the L. Leiutenant Ge∣nerall. There are Offices also deputing vnto the former, and some others which are not of such speciall reputation: as the Leiutenant to the Coronell of foote, Leiutenant of the Coronell of horse, the Prouost Marischall, the Muster-master generall, the Corporals of foote and horse, the Sergeants ma∣iors of euery battell or Regiment, the Scout-master, the Trench-master, the forrage-master, the prouant master, the captaine of the carriages, & the cap∣taine of the Pyoners; most of which are in office and degree superior to pri∣uate captaines of Companies. The Lord high Marischalls office (vpon which the whole charge of an Armie dependeth) is very noble, and commonly taketh the second place of honor in the field: it importeth him therefore of necessitie to know through what manner of ground the whole armie must passe; if in Champion, how the wayes open for rancks in cōpanyes, or for battels; if in vallyes or lanes, how they be straitned for troupes and confused marches, hauing soundly conside∣red of all meanes which may giue aduantage against the enemie, by march∣ing, incamping, and disposing or ordering of his forces, noting with iudici∣ous and well experienced obseruation all the disabilities which his enemies must haue in meeting with him; eskairmouching or giuing present charge  vpon his armies, here, there, or in any place in his way with such meanes as may be deuised how to redresse and recouer them from all dangers and disad∣uantages of land, hill, or riuer in the way, making a safe and sure audite of the best & worst of all which can happen, prouiding remedies against dangers if they chaunce, and redinesse with expedition towards the imbracement of all fortunate occasions. In him likewise is required perfectly to know the extreme force of his Prince for the present, and likewise the power of his enemies, what horse, what foote, what yong, what old instructed souldiers, what lea∣ders of note, experience, and valour, comparing one with another, and work∣ing  out to the best aduantage, the renowne of his Princes armies, he must also take notice of the strength which his enemies attaine by confederates, how much they make with the mercenaries, and auxiliaries of others: hee should consider and conferre by iudicious reading, the warres and battels of his Princes Progenitors and Predecessors, wherefore they were leuied, how performed and fought, vpon what conditions ordered, and the meanes mo∣uing either partie to the taking or offering of those Articles, with such speci∣all instructions, as I partly noted before in the Leiutenant generall. When therefore he knoweth and is well instructed through what manner of ground the Armie must passe, then he presently giueth notice and warning to the Co∣ronells of horse and foot, in what formes they should order their troupes and  battels, for their more present and commodious passage; narrowly respecting that euery Commander doe with diligence respect his charge, without inter∣meddling further in matters beyond his office, or short of it. Hee therefore causeth first in audince of the whole Armies a pro∣clamation
to be made, aduertising what time the Lord Lieutenant Generall  purposeth to march forward into the field, that they may sutably be prepared: and the same day that his excellencie shall set forth, the Lord Marischals trumpet soundeth and giues warning of a remouall; after him all other trum∣pets follow, that vpon the third flourish, euery captaine, souldier, and seruant may be readie to performe their offices in each degree for that seruice. The scoutmaster therefore is first set forth to dispose of his scurriers for espiall, that he may for the armies more safety certifie, whether the countrey round about be cleare: after him the master of the Ordinance setteth forward with his Artillerie furnished of all needfull instructions, for the dispatch of any thing which resteth in his charge: after them the treasurer seconded with the pro∣uaunt master with victuall: and lastly the carriages which by directions of the  captaine or master of them take their places in marching. When these offices are thus fitted, and that the Coronels and captaines by their directions haue out of troupes ordered their armies, then the Lord Marischall seeth the footmen march; vpon which there are guides attending to direct them in the sure and readiest way, which guides the Lord Marischall seeth prouided; one to wait vpon the Lord Leiutenant, another vpon the Coronel of foot, another vpon the Coronell of horse: in like case seuerall guides for the master of the Ordinance, to point out the surest and most conuenient way for the conuay∣ance of his Artillerie: for the master of the carriages one, for the Sergeant maior, and for the scoutmaster attending the auaunt curriers each of them  one. This being orderly disposed, there are (by the Lord Marischals di∣rection to the captaine of the pioners) a certaine number of labourers atten∣ding the Ordinance, which may mend the wayes for the better passage there∣of. After this the Lord Marischall taketh with him certaine of his horse, and foote to view the ground where the forces should lodge or encampe. Like∣wise the Campemaster, the prouost Marischall, and harbinger with the foure quartermasters, when he shall come to the place, his foresight is what forrage, water, and other needements for the armies are there abouts: and (when this is seene into) the Campe-master, with the prouost marischall quarter out the ground according to the seuerall regiments, making the middle space within  the quarters so large, that the regiments vpon a sudden allarme, may presently meet, and be set in array for the present seruice. The Marischall also noteth what number shall out of euery priuat companie walke the round, and keepe centrenell, with the places where they shall abide: he giueth watch word which the clerke of the watch doth write by his direction, deliuering to euery counsellor of the field, to the scout-master, and to euery priuate cap∣taine a note thereof: if the L. Marischall see cause, he may change the watch∣word at his pleasure. Hee declareth his opinion to the Leiutenant vpon any  enterprise, what number of horse and foot are competent therefore that they may be by the Coronels chosen out for the execution of any designe: the the Lord Leiutenant giuing direction who shall haue the generall charge of such seruice. All intelligence brought by the scurriers or pyoners taken in espi∣all or neere the campe, are first brought vnto the Lord high Marischall and by
him made knowen vnto the Lord Leiutenant: and (that the Lord Marischall  may be the readier found out) one of his pages beareth before him a corone of his armes or deuise. It resteth in his iudgement, to determine of all prisoners taken; which are forfeited forthwith vnto him, if they (that surprise them) do not presently present them to his Lordship, which likewise are punished at his discretion: the third part of all booties got, is his by right of that office. He likewise prouideth that the slaughters of beasts and other easements of the souldiers be not made to the annoyance of the Campe, seeing that euery souldier pay for his victuals that he taketh, looking that all such prisoners as are committed to the Marischalsie be well vsed, punishing quarrellous or mu∣tinous persons, theeuish souldiers, & treasons according to the lawes of armes  in that case prouided: which are (by direction from him) faire written in ar∣ticles, and fixed vpon the Marischalsies gate, or on some other more conspi∣cuous place in the campe or quarter, so that they may be generally published. From him proceed all proclamations by voyce of Herauld with a trumpet in the Lord Leiutenants name. He seeth the watches, as captaines, rounders, centrenels, to stay their due times, vntill their drums or triumpets discharge their watches: he looketh that quietnesse and silence be kept in the campe, vp∣on setting of the great watch after the warning peece be discharged: through him are all honourable and dishonorable actions and exploits of persons (to their immortall shame or good fame) recorded in perpetuall historie for ex∣ample:  he likewise (accompaned with the Coronels, Generall of horse, and foote, with the master of the Ordinance, and Sergeant maior) vieweth the ground, where most aduantage in their discreet iudgements may be found, for placing or abiding with their troupes on horse and foot, and for the most a∣uaileable planting of their Artillerie, with such cunning lures as may bring forward the enemies being neere to that place of aduantage. In time of bat∣tell he serueth on foot with the Sergeant maior: when the campe shall moue, his trumpet giueth the summons; by notice thereof all other trumpets soone after sound a flourish at the L. Leiutenants lodging to the discharge. He like∣wise  towards the assieging of any cities or forts appointeth what strength of men and munition, what numbers of horse & foot are required: for he taketh first a perfect view of the place and then prescribeth a forme how to plant the campe with most aduantage against it, setting downe where the trenches must be made; hauing acquainted first the Lord Leiutenant therewith. He directeth the campe-master in his forme and order of encamping, and what number of campes should bee made in euery quarter; instructing likewise the trench-master in the maner, breadth, and depth of his trenches, for the most safetie towards battery by night or otherwise: considering what flancks or buttresses may conueniently be taken away; and (if they be flanked) where they may soonest and safest approach: what course best serueth (in case they  cannot get entrance by plaine meanes) to distresse their flanckes, by minings, or counterminings, if the ground will serue, if not so, then by scaladoes, or stra∣tagems of strange & excellent deuise, with other meanes, which haue been, or may be done with most commendation, and securitie for such a purpose.
Beatus Rhenanus thinketh that Mariscallus is called of Marca, an old word  signifying a horse: Budaeus calleth them Marischals, quasi maiores, Iudges sitting on horse-back. The office of Marischals according to Vincentius Lupanus is De mag. Fran. castris locum eligere, ac milites in officio continere, in quos vitae & necis potestatem habent: To choose a place for lodging of the Armie, to keepe the souldiers in order and office, ouer whose liues and deaths they haue power. The know∣ledge and persecution of militarie crymes; likewise the doome of punish∣ment of out-lawes, and of such souldiors as without honest and lawfull leaue depart the Campe, and are not present at musters, and times limited vnto them; also the defaults of scoutes, escurriers, espials, traytors, fugitiues, watch breakers, such as forsake the spoyle, sacke, hauocke, with all actions personall of souldiors in priuate quarrels, are censured by the Marischal in our warres:  as in France by the Constable, who hath caryed before him a sword with a Vinc. Lupan. de mag. Franc. point fashioned like a Lillie. The office of the Coronell generall on foote, disposeth his Armies by di∣rection from the Lord Leiutenant into competent battels according to the grosse number: he directeth the Captaines in their charge, what, and how many long or short weapons in euery Band or Companie they should haue, in what forme & order the armies must march, which the sergeant maior (by direction from him) seeth performed. From him is a scroll sent to the gouer∣nours of euery battell containing their seuerall charges: hee certifieth the re∣mouals of Campes vnto them for the more readinesse of souldiers by the  sound of drums or trumpets: all armies (being distributed into Regiments of Battels) are with their Coronels vnder his command. Vpon any seruice he ioyneth in directions with the L. Marischall in choise of the ground: and his place of seruice is in the middest of the battell with the L. Generall. Ouer all our English battels there are Gouernors appointed which are at command vnder the Coronell generall, or his Leiutenant. These Gouernours appoint euery captaine to send his Harbenger vnto the Campe-master, to take notice of the place and order of their quartering: or (if in Campe) of their Tent∣pitching; declaring where, & how the souldiers should make Cabbines, fore∣seeing withall that they doe not hastily nor confusedly come into their quar∣ters,  but take their places orderly and ciuilly, being directed by their Harbin∣gers. His Leiutenant looketh to the Captaines of the watch, the Rounders, and the Centrenels, to fit themselues to their dueties, by direction from the Lord Marischall. If any foot-spiall be taken by them, him they bring to the L. Marischall, to the Coronell Generall, or to the L. Leiutenant himself. The Leiutenant Coronell (vpon seruice) taketh place in the vaward with the Ser∣geant maior. His speciall care (which bindeth him in the same termes with the L. Leiutenant generall) is to see, that his souldiers vnder his charge proue not effeminate, impatient of paines and perill, that they shew not more valour in  words then weapons, that they spoyle not their owne fellowes in Armes, that they leaue not themselues open for a praie to the enemie without discipline, order, gouernment, & modestie; that they set & keepe their watches like good souldiors after the course of warre, that they neither forsake, nor withdraw
themselues from their colours without leaue: that the stragglers, boyes, suls,  and slaues attempt not to march or intermingle the rancks, troupes, or bat∣tels confusedly by night, or day: that the souldiors waste not notread down the corne lands, and meadowes, if they may be benefitted thereby: that they be not suffered negligently to driue heards and flocks of cattell, and prisoners before them disorderly, but that they keepe in the reare with the carriages: that they doe not exchange them with merchants & victuallers of the campe for money, to buy bread and wine dayly: that they suffer no shame of sloath and luxurie to dishonor their Armies: these are the speciall means for euery Coronell generall to reforme bad souldiors. Likewise it is his office careful∣ly  to prouide skilfull and painfull Chirurgions for his wounded souldiors and hurt men; to reward and giue honor to men of worth and desert in the warres, according to the custome of warre: after the field fought (by som∣mons of his dumme maior) to assemble the remainder of his Armie, and there in open assembly with very good tearmes and cheerefull behauiour, to giue thankes and commendation to them that had fought the field, to exhort them that they beare themselues alwayes of a valiant spirit, well affected one towards another, and that the glorie of that dayes seruice should maintaine a continuall courage in them, for any battell whensoeuer oportunitie should require; that they should willingly receiue the spoyles of their enemies  according to the discretion and direction of the Lord Leiutenant in all equ∣litie; and that he did onely looke for labour in steed of his reward. The Coronell generall of horse, receiueth from the L. Leiutenant a roll of all the seruiceable horse in field. His office is to direct and distribute the Lances, light horses, Argolitiers, pistoliers, carbins, and such like into troupes ordered for battell; he signifieth to the Corne of euery troupe when any remouall is, which after the flourish of Trumpets, auance foorth to march when he commandeth; such of them as watch the first night, are first placed in Campe, or Quarter. It is in him to send foorth auant curriers for aduer∣tisement; hee placeth a strong troupe of horse in the reare of all the battels,  to see there be not stragglers, or carriages left behinde for a praie to the ene∣mies; and that those his Caualliers dismount not till the Campe be lodged or quartered. By consent of the L. Leiutenant hee setteth forth what number of the horse is fit vpon any present seruice: he seeth the scoutes foorth before night, the scurriers placed in the day time vpon the mountaines, and at night in the valleys for their better sight at all times: these in darke nights (if the winde be so great that they cannot either heare, or see) doe dismount, and ma∣king holes in the ground, listen if they can heare the beating of horse hoofes; which (if any be neere) they shall soone perceiue, and vpon notice doe giue warning to the foote Centrenels, which with allarme giuen to the Campe, set all in readinesse. His Lieutenants office is to take care, how all such as are  destined to watch, giue attendance vnto the L. Marischall, or to his prouost for directiōs. He seeth in the morning that no man leaue his watch vpon paine of death before the scurriers be returned to the Campe, & receiued their pla∣ces. In time of battell he prouideth to answer troupe for troupe of the enemies,
and to fit himselfe by proportion against them all, and if percase his power  be to weake, then doth he succour his horses by wood, strait, hill, water, or neighbouring villages, for his more reliefe and refuge. He determineth what number shall giue charge vpon the enemie; where, and how many soldiers to place in time of need for their rescue. Euery Coronell doth (as he willeth) at∣tend the Campe-master, for his quarter, and for decent and orderly comming thereto: his place is vpon seruice in front to the pikes of his chiefe battell. The Campe-master receiueth a roule of the whole armies horse and foot: and by the L. Marischals consent prouideth & limiteth the Campe according to the multitude, deuiding the ground into so many regiments or battels of foot and horse, as is requisite, betwixt euery battell making a large street or space of 80. feet breadth at the least. Hee placeth euery Generall of each regi∣ment  according to his degree in the middest of his regiment; so that the porch of his tent may open into the place of assembly, euery captaine hauing his souldiers cabbines so seated and limited vpon the backeside of his owne tent in little lanes and streets, not aboue eight foot breadth, and in forme of a citie; so that they may readily find recourse into the great street or place of assembly when allarmes are giuen. He deuiseth a great open court or spacious square within which the L. Lieutenants tent is pitched, with all his officers about him: vpon the right hand thereof the L. Marischals tent, the Coronell ge∣nerall on the left, with other counsellors according to their degrees & places, all opening into the place of assembly; where the master of the ordinance  with all his carriages and Artillerie remaineth. Neere to this there must a place of necessitie be intrenched forthwith for preseruation of the powder, aswell from danckenesse, as from all daunger of fire. Also the prouant and carriage∣masters with all their victuals & carriages haue places there. Within the virge of the Campe, he doth appoint what ground of aduantage shall serue for planting the Ordinance, and that all carriages which shall come in, may make their repaire to the precincts for the Campes defence; the precinct or virge of the Campe, being distended seuenscore foot at least from all tents and cabbines. He seeth vpon euery remoueall that such watches as must serue for that night be first placed for their ease, making themselues ready for the re∣moue,  and in like sort all the horse. A spacious street of seuenscore foot at the least must deuide the horse quarter from the foot, through which their horses may with ease passe to watering and forrage. A place of assembly likewise (euen as in the foot quarter) should be made there; that the troupes may with ease come forth vpon present seruice. He likewise appointeth what number of horses must attend euery foot battell according to their places, with other Gouerners euen as the foote were, sauing that the small streets in their horse quarter: must be twentie foure foot wide at the least: the Coronell generall  hauing chief place in the midst as before; & his tent opening semblably to the place of assembly. Neere him the Scoutmaster, next to the Coronell of horse; forsomuch as their offices require a reciprocall vicinitie; their carriages fen∣cing or impailing the Campe together with the footcarts as aforesaid: all the captained likewise with the Cornets of horse receiue their billets or places of
the Campe-master, as the foote captaines doe; the Campe-master himselfe is  to be lodged neere the Lord Leiutenant amongst the counsellers; besides him the quarter-masters or harbingers of the field: annext to the L. Marischall his prouost, with the prison of Marischall-sea; betwixt which and the Maris∣chals tent, the prouost is placed. At all assieges the Campe-master accom∣panieth the Lord Marischall to view the ground, that they may know thereby to distribute it into competent Campes & quarters accordingly, with the cer∣taine number of souldiers apportioned, and destined to their places in euery Campe: the greatest number enuironeth the L. Leiutenant, where the place of assembly should be so large, that (vpon allarme giuen) the whole forces may reunite in present forme of battell, being well instructed and readie: he  likewise prouideth that euery Campe be well entrenched, sauing where the entries of euery street are, seruing for issue to & fro. And so much because it is one speciall place of seruice in the field, haue I spoken at large of the Campe-master: I will be briefe in the rest for so much as they depend for the most part vpon the former. The master of the Ordinance (after his charge receiued) must be prouided of all necessaries thereunto: first vnder him in office are a Leiutenant of the Artillerie, certaine Clerks, a Master groome and his Mate, all of them in pay, with all sorts of artificers needfull, as Cannoniers for great Ordinance, serui∣tors and labourers only for the Cannon, Armorers, Sawyers, Smithes, Pistol∣menders,  & of other peeces, Enginers, Cutlers, Carpenters, Collermakers Wheelewrights, Basketters, Coopers: the munition appertaining his office are Lances, Halberts, Partisanes, Billes, Dagges, Pistols, and Pistollets, Corselets with their Burganets, and Pikes, Armonish for horsemen, Lighthorsemens staues, Muskets with their rests, and Bandaleirs, Harquebusies furnished, and also for other necessaries belonging Ordinance, as Serpentine & cornepowder for the Cannon, and other shot of all sorts and quantities, Scaling ladders and bridges, match and plate for ladles, platesheers, gabions for defence of the Cannoniers, okeham, and haire, hatchets, and hedgebilles, forges for smithes,  with their implements, hammers, iron and steele, leade for small shot, moulds, stuffe for cartages and fireworkes, priming powder, with pinnes, rests, wormes, wyers, ramming staues, ladles, flasks, squares, rules, and other Geome∣tricall instruments for planting, leuying, and leuelling of the Cannon. It is not to be thought that the Romanes could haue so boldly borne away many victories, with dayly triumph, if the deuise of Cannon and gunpowder had beene knowne vnto them: for these be grieuous and almost dastardish impediments to mens valours, which onely by violence of those ensignes are taken away before they can haue space and opportunitie, to make noble ac∣count of their heroycall vertues; which example hath been and is so gene∣rall and common, as that it need not be specified. The best vse of them is for  offence, as at the batteries of townes, castels, sconces, bulwarks and such like; for they will beat downe the grossest walles, staunching the ditches, and moats vnder them with grauell and rubbish: but to bring them for battell into field (vnlesse your battels be strong and very well instructed) is thought by di∣uers
wise Captaines, vaine, and difficult at execution: by good example of  the Swizzers, which about 88. yeares since in a battell against the French neere Narre, in a very so daine and stiffe resolution charged them in the fierie mouthes of their ordinance, being very many principall peeces of brasse; dri∣uing thē from their Tents & munition, which they recouering became Lords of that dayes seruice also. Such artillery must of force be well armed, either with walles, rampiers, gabions, and such like defences, least a resolute enemie seaze vpon them. Some say that the brasen artillerie was knowne and inuen∣ted many ages since, which Vinntius Lupanus citeth out of Robertus Vulturius▪ but more certaine it is that a chisticall Monck deuised the same in Germa∣nie. The Venetians were said to haue the first vse of them in their warres a∣gainst the Genoueses Ann. 1380. To which peeces of Ordinance, diuers  names of birds and serpents were giuen; as Fulcons, Sacars, Muskets, Haukes, Basalisks, Crocodiles, Salamanders, Lizards, &c. The Treasurers office in Campe being so well knowne (as at home) nee∣deth not to be stood vpon; onely this he keepeth a muster-booke of the prin∣ces forces, pensions, and allowances, distributing to the seuerall offices and places in the field according to their stipends which execute them; which I sayd in the peaceable Treasurer before, must be well husbanded and stored; so that the souldior in seruice (whether hee praie vpon his enemies spoiles or not) be not wanting of his wages, nor pray payment at the Treasu∣rer for which he serueth, being so deerly bought with continuall hazard of  life, which he so nobly doth aduenture. The Generall likewise (respecting his princes honor) should satisfie himselfe with a little, that he may gratifie, re∣ward, and ayde the iust souldier in more. And hence happeneth it that the Prince militant shall haue great occasion to moue his people in the common cause: for the reason well reacheth, that such as in peace till their grounds at home, should for the preseruation thereof, and of their owne wiues, liues, and children sleeping at ease, contribute to their noble and true hearted countrey-men; whose able mindes and bodies are vigilantly devowed, and pcularly sacrificed for their generall safeties in the field. Concerning the Sergeant maior of the whole armie, who disposeth accor∣ding  to the directions of the Lord Marischall and Coronell generall, all the formes of instructing, and marching of the battels, it weare altogether super∣fluous, and might rather increase autologies, then profit the Reader. And these aboue recited offices are all of counsell with the L. Leiutenant generall, all the rest being inferior, and by deputation subiect to them. In the watch-Captaines, scouts, escurriers, rounders, and centrenels; like∣wise in all sorts of priuate souldiors and militarie Commanders, vigilancie is principally needfull. How many surprisals of townes, castles, peeces, houses;  how many camisadoes in Campes, sodaine eskairmouches, violent and bloo∣dy allies and tryumphs haue been shewed, to the continuall shame of negli∣gent and slouthfull souldiors. And therefore it is a parable or similitude from the spirit of God deliuered in the Gospel, Vigilate & esto parati; ignoratis eni qu subi rit fris aduentus: For enemies may fitly be resembled vnto
theeues, which by wilie meanes and hidden stratagemmes against all othes,  treagues, and promises, will many times infringe and violate their faith and honesties: as Macrobius captaine of the Carthagenians vsed the Assirians his enemies, whom (being drunke with wine, and mandragoras) he most insi∣diously slaughtered: for had not that aduantage encountred them, it would haue bene very doubtfull of the victorie. And therefore as it is the captaines dutie to direct and vigilantly to looke vnto the charge of his watches; so doth the soldier shew no lesse honour in carefull obedience for his owne securitie, next after the state of his prince and countrey; which (if the captaines doe neglect) ought to be with due seueritie punished in them. We read that Moyses (who was a carefull warrior against the Egyptians) did send out souts,  centrenels, and escurriers: and that Iosua that diuine and triumphant captaine (purposing the destruction of Ierico) sent espials which were lodged in Rha∣habs Ios chap. 20. house. When Saul had pitched in Hachilah before Ieshimon, Dauid sent S. 1. chap. 26. espials out of the wildernesse, which brought tidings of his approach. There is a kind of souldiers which are chiefe men of the nobler sort vsed amongst the Frenchmen, which in that Realme are by common and ancient custome in time of speciall seruice, to maintaine themselues, and seruants in those warres three moneths; the Frenchmen call them Banne, and Retrobanne. Which as Procopius saith, Romani bannum, signum dixerunt, & bandoferum, ducis Lib. 4. bel. andal. belli signum ferentem: the Romanes did call this word bannum, that which  we call ensigne, and Bandoferus him which beareth the captaines ensigne▪ & from thence should seeme that anciently the name of ensignes were called banners; wherein certaine emblemes and armorie of the noble leaders and captaines were knowen and distinguished from others: also when any pub∣like edict was diuulged or proclaimed it was called Bannire, & in bannum soluere, which signifieth as much, as to set it to the view and knowledge of the whole hoast. Likewise the creation of knights according to their deserts af∣ter the warres, being many and of diuers orders, I will not insist vpon because they be so well known. The creation of knights, bannerets (which is vnder the  princes standard, being displayed) is the most honorable knighthood in the field: for they be called equies redubitati, twise knighted, for their martiall pro∣wesse: & such as in honor of warre, and for their noble atchieuments by mili∣tarie worthinesse, attaine knighthoods of collers, such as the Cheualliers sans proch, deuised by Lewis the eleuenth at Ambois 1469. of the first Institution being thirtie sixe Nobles of the Realme, and since more according to the Kings pleasure, and such Noble men his friendes of other nations, as for their valour in seruing him in his warres are invested to that honor at this day: Likewise the order of Saint George, instituted by King Edward the third: the ceremonies whereof being so well knowne and celebrated at Windsor, I let passe; with that Order of the golden Fleece, which Philip Duke of Burgun∣die  instituted at Dijoun in France, which King Philip of Spaine and the Em∣peror Randolph, by right of the Emperor Charles the fift (whose mother was heire of that Dutchie) at this day retaine, as their order of honorable Knight∣hood: and all these noble Orders with diuers of like fashion first deuised as a
reward and md of their militarie vertues: and in that respect, the Ro∣manes  did bestow vpon their worthiest captaines and militarie comman∣ders, horse and furniture, with rich caparisons, bracelets, chaines, girdles, and crownes of pure gold, lanes, with other warlike habilimen, and armorie: such as Cicinius Dentatus receiued of thē for his fortitude shewed in their waes, which were golden spurres and a sword, with the kings per∣sonall embrace▪ as our  of honour are created at this day. The most famous and best renowned souldiers that in our times haue bene noted, were Ambrose Dudley the old Earle of Warwike, Thomas Ratcliffe Earle of Sussex, the three brethren of that honourable race of Ricot, the two noble and vnfortunate Earles of Essex, both deceased, the father and  sonne, the Lord Willoughbie late Gouernour of Barwicke, Sir Roger Williams, Sir Philip Sydney, who singeth in heauen crowned both with martiall and ciuill girlands, Sir Thomas Morgan: but there haue bene so manie, and yet are of gallant heroicall spirits aliue amongst vs; that it were infinite to reckon, and would rather bring one into suspition of that fault (for which I detest to conuerse in the houses of great princes) then any ways answere to the worthinesse, of them whom I com∣memorate. And heere least I might vnhappilie seeme too curious or tedious, will I knit vp my labours, satisfying my selfe with a little taste of some principles  in euery counsell: forasmuch as (if I should write all that ought in these discourses to be set downe) it would be both infinite in regard of the mat∣ter, and needelesse if your Grace respect the learneder writings of others: not crauing more then beneuolence for my voluntarie liberalitie, which is the best treasure that a double pouertie proceeding from my single for∣tunes in ward, and exterior affordeth. From the profane multitude full of error and confusion (whose opinions distand from veritie so farre as England (according to  tables) is diuided from the Indies) I will appeale by protestation: that, they which leane vpon vaine hope and idle counsels, which threaten and disdaine sea-stormes, slouthful∣ly wallowing in their warme beddes at land, and which in tempestu∣ous  times are immeasurably blasted with ignominious feare and pu∣sillanimitie may not bee taken for equall iudges of my studies. How meane my matter is, how naked my sentences, how little my trauels, how bare my knowledge, I must acknowledge, that I know; neither is it written in arrogancie; and it is well spoken, that nothing can be spo∣ken, which hath not beene first spoken: and I will pray that my stu∣dies (being published) may not be forespoken with ienomed tongues, swolne too great for their mouthes; but to them that are iust and true∣ly  noble, I will simply submit them, such as they bee with all modesty, heartily loathing (as I still professe) without and within, all ostentation and hypocrisie.
All Glorie be to the blessed seede of all, in all im∣mortall perfection of incomprehensible goodnesse, euer∣lastingly raigning in that vnconceiueable power of sal∣uation by miraculous faith inanimate, in the true charitable roote of the ineffable Tri∣nitie, mistically reueiled in om∣nipotent vnitie. FINIS. Imprinted at London by Adam Islip. 1606.
