16627 22128141 9175
THE PRACTICE OF POLICY. Written by Lodowike Lloyd, Esquire. Qui foueam fodit, incidet in eam: & qui laqueum ponit, peribit in illo, Eccle. 27. Qui dissipat sepem, mordebit eum Coluber. Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwel∣ling in Hosier lane, neere Smithfield. 1604.
❧ To the most high and mighty Prince, James, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, Fraunce and Ireland, &c. CRATERVS contending with Ephestion (most gracious Prince) which of them two loued Alexāder best, appealed to the king for iudgement, who iudged that Cra∣terus loued the king, and Ephestion loued Alexander: but both alike loued Alexan∣der the king. So the Brytaynes and the English loue your Maiesty in like sort, that you can hardly iudge which of them loues you best, vnlesse you do as Alex∣ander did, to iudge the English as Craterus, & the Brytaynes as Ephestion. but both Brytaines & English with equall loue and loyalty loue King lames alike, that all hauing the like cause of ioy, all should so reioyce to enioy such a Iewell, that in one day enriched England & Ireland with a king, and the whole Empire of Brytayne with a Prince, to whome it was reserued and continued from Brutus the first King, to your Maiesty the second King, not as to a stranger, but to a iust & a lawfull king of the stocke and linage of Brutus, to succeed and sit on Brutus seat 2800. yeeres after Brutus, where your Maiesty may better say then Caesar, Veni, vidi, vici, for that you haue conquered Time, came to your owne kingdomes, and may see in your selfe such a succession, that neyther the Macedonians, who much bragged of their Hercules, whose lyne ended in Alexander: neyther the Romanes, who much gloried of Gens Iulia, whose stocke extincted in Nero: nor any nation vnder heauen (which can boast of their antiqui∣ties most) can say so much. The Scythians with their Acornes in their heads, and the Athenians with their Grassehoppers in their haires, may wel bragge of their Acornes and Grassehoppers, but not of the like Empires: for as Anaxagoras sayd to Pericles of the Em∣pire
of Greece, so Cratippus spake to Pompey of the Romane Empire, that periods of times are limited. Embrace you therefore (most mighty Prince) the great blessings of God, which so embraced your Maiesty, & elec∣ted you King, to gouerne his people, and to maintayne his lawes, without which, neither king nor kingdome can stand, for that is the rich Tablet, which Moses brought from Mount Sinay, to set about Israels neck. It is that long ladder, which Iacob saw in his dreame at Bethel, that reached frō the earth into heauen: and it is that bright-shining Starre, which guyded the kings from the East, vnto Christ at Bethlehem. The only Pearle that we should buy, and the only Iewel that wee should weare, not as gards on our garments, or frontiers on our forheads, as the Iewes wore Phylacterium, but rather printed in our hearts, where we ought to giue thanks for our King, which for 50. yeeres haue bene without either King or Prince, and now wee enioy a King, a Queene, a Prince, and Princes, with no lesse blessings by the comming of your Maiesty ouer the riuer Tweede, from Scotland to England, to incorporate both to the ancient name of great Brytaine, then by the comming of Israel from Mesopota∣mia, ouer the riuer Iordan, to alter the name of Canaan into Iuda; whose posterity, as they were wrought on Aarons garment, to remember Israel, so your princely progeny may bee sure set on the vnseamed coate of Christ, to remember the house of Iacob. Your Maiesties most bounden and dutyfull seruant, Lodowike Lloyd.
THE PRACTICE OF POLICY. THeodoricus, King of the Gothes, began Theodori∣cus. his letter, to the Senators of Rome, with a sentence of Plato, That Nature might sooner erre, then a Prince to frame a Common wealth vnlike to himselfe. It is most true, Imperium ostendit virum, for such as the Magistrates are, such are the people: such as the Prince is, so are his subiects: and that was the cause, why Cyrus, King of Persia, was Cyrus. so much honoured among the Persians, for his wise lawes, graue gouernment, and great policy, in enlar∣ging the Monarchy of Persia, in so much, that hee that resembled Cyrus, if it were in any part of his body, or had but a crooked nose, like Cyrus, hee was so esteemed and made much of, in all Persia, as hee should haue fa∣uour Leuin. li. 1 cap 15. shewed him in any place, and in euery company. And so hee that had but a long head, like Pericles, in Pericles. Athens, his cause should be heard before the Iudges of Areopagites, or before any Magistrates, in the Court Prytaneon, free, & before other. Such was the law and fauour of the people towardes Pericles in Athens, and towardes Cyrus in Persia, that the Midwiues, and Nur∣ses, both in Asia, and in Greece, had in charge giuen them by the parents, to do their best indeuor to frame
and to mould their young infants, like Cyrus in Persia, and like Pericles in Athens: yet few (though the Nurses did their indeuours) were found in Athēs, like Pericles, vnlesse it were with a long head: and fewe, or none, were found in Persia, like Cyrus, vnlesse it were with a Cyrus. Val. max. l. 9. ca. 14. Plin. li. 7. cap. 12. crooked nose. This kind of likenesse is found in many. So was Artenon like to Antiochus the great: and Me∣nagenis, a Cooke, like to Strabo Pomp. And therefore that noble Roman, Pompey, being yet but a very young man, (heating by common re∣port, that he much resembled Alexander the great, in countenance, gestures, and outward behauiours, but specially likened to Alexander, for the growing of his hayres vpwardes vpon his forehead: in which some write, that Alexander, Hector, and Pompey, much resem∣bled Alex. Hect. and Pomp. O∣pisthocomae one the other:) this noble Captaine, I say, estee∣med little to be like Alexander in externall forme and frame of his body, but he exercised, how he might imi∣tate Alexander, to be like to him in qualities, and acti∣ons of the minde, Non ex apparatu, sed ex animo reges: so that he imitated Alexander in valour and magnanimitie of minde, and not in forme of his body. By such meanes, Pompey became afterward to bee compared, and was called Pompey the Great, after hee Pompey. had subdued Sertorius in Affrica, as Alexander the great was called in Persia, after he had subdued Darius. This was a more laudable imitation in Pompey, then in the great men and Captaynes of Macedonia, who would wish nothing more then to bee called Opistho∣comae, for so the Grecians called Alexander, for that his haires vpon his forhead grew vpward: but good Cap∣taynes must not be like the Macedonian Captaynes,
following onely Alexander, to be called Opisthocomae: but like Pompey, imitating Alexander in greatnesse and valour of minde. There were many Opisthocomae in Macedonia, & yet not one like Alexander: many croo∣ked noses in Persia, but not one like Cyrus & many that had long heads in Athens, and yet not one like Pericles. Aristotle the Philosopher writ vnto his M. the great , &c. Arist. prs. ad Alex, Plut. in Demet. Alexāder, of another likenes that should be in a Prince; that it was more Princely for a King, to haue a noble mynde endued with noble vertues, then a gallant body furnished with gay Garments, like Demetrius, who had more care of his Astrologicall cloake, then of his King∣dome, to hang the world on his backe, then to thinke in his minde of his people: Like Nero, who ware no Garment twise, but dayly new-inuented Garments. Or like Caligula, who ware Sacras Deorum Vestes, to set foorth the greatnesse of his Authority. These were Reges ex Vestibus, non ex Virtutibus: For the most part of Heathen kings, studying how to please the people with outward shew and pompe, would paint their faces and anoynt their eyes, to seeme to bee of greater Maiestie with their Subiects. So the Kings and Peeres of Ethiopia, were wont to bee anoynted with Vermillion, that they might seeme young and fayre, to be amiable vnto the people. The Kings of Assiria vsed to anoynt their eyes and Alex. lib. 6. cap. 6. to paint their faces, with like policy, to entise blind and cōmon people to esteeme them rather gods then men, according to king Cyrus Decree, for that they held their Crownes vnder Cyrus: For then the Persians had all other kings vnder their obeisance, as the Romanes had afterward: And therfore Cyrus made a Lawe, that the
great Kings of Persia, in any Feast or Triumph, should anoynt their faces adipe Leonino, that they might seeme more manly and more Princely, to allure the people to accept their greatnesse, and to ad nyre the Maiestie of their presence. They write, that Augustus Caesar was instructed with Augustus Caesar. Cyrus Lawes, for in his third Tryumph he vsed the like: whether it was for loue or for feare, his countenance terrified the Army of M. Antonius in the Battayle of Actium. And yet among these Heathens, there were many that despised those externall shewes and pompe. Such a one was Agesilaus, among the Lacedemo∣nians: Epaminondas, among the Thebanes: and Fabri∣cius, among the Romanes. It is historied, that Germanicus the Emperour was so amiable and louing in sight, because in sight he seemed Germani∣cus. so plaine a Prince in Apparrell, so plausible & so gentle in speache, for that hee was a singular wise Prince, that they that saw him and heard him, were so addicted vn∣to him; that he was so beloued of his Subiects, so mag∣nified of his Nobles, that it was neuer heard, that Ger∣manicus was eyther hated of the one, or enuied of the other: Such is the force of Vertue, Si cerni potuit oculis, sayth Plato, that it would mooue much affection and loue in men by looking: the like sayth Cicero: the Report of vertuous men whom wee neuersaw, doeth Cic. de nat. Deo. li. 1. breed such affection, that good men are desirous to see them. The presence of a good and a godly Prince is great, and so great, that the Prayer and presence of king Abia 2. Chron. . 13. 14 ouerthrew 500000. Israelites: The Prayer and pre∣sence
of king Asa, ouerthrew Zerath the Ethiopian king , Plat. in Apophth. with his great Army of ten hundreth thousand: and therefore Antigonus, hearing one of his Lieutenants and Captaynes saying, that the enemies (king Ptolomey his Army) were more in number then they, Antigonus seemed to bee angry and said, How many doest thou number me for? Alexander was euer wont to say in any danger, by Sea or by Land to his Souldiers: Alexander is heere: Habetis Alexandrum. So often would Caesar say in any peril, Ye haue Caesar & his fortunes with you: so he said to Amyclas his pilot. It was an vsuall speache of the people of Sparta, to aske where the enemyes were? and not to aske, how many they were? But we leaue those Princes to Fortune, Qui plura Fortunae quàm virtuti tribuunt. The greatest praise and commendations of Christian Princes must not be at∣tributed to the Actions of Fortune, as the Heathen Princes doo, but to the benfites of Vertue, who by the greatnesse of their wisdome and vertue, haue their au∣thority from God. For the Crowne, the Scepter, and the Kingdome it selfe is from God, who made them so great, that he called them Goddes, saying: Ye are Gods on earth: but how? Pietate et iustitia, saith Augustine. And so in Plato, a King is called, Deus quispiam huma∣nus; and yet in Homer, a King is called but Pastor populi: . and the King of Kings, is called the great Shepheard: for a king ought to haue as great care ouer his people, as a shepherd ouer his sheep. Adrian the Emperor said, Rempub. non esse suam, sed se Reip. For as without a King, neither towne, city, country or kingdome can stand:
so ought a King to gouerne and rule his subiects, that he may deserue the name of a King, & not of a Tyrant: : Xenoph. ped. 9. for it is fit, saith Cyrus, that a Gouernour must farre ex∣cell those whom he gouerneth in vertue & wisdome. Such as Caleb was with Iosua, and such as Iethro was with Moses, and such as Nathan was with Dauid: If such wise Counsellers attend vpon Kings in Court, that Court shall flourish, and that Common-wealth shall prosper. Wise men in Court with Princes, are as Preserua∣tiues kept for a sicke body. That made Salomon to aske for wisdome onely to gouerne his people. That made Vlisses to crie out in Homer to Minerua, Si te Diua Mi∣nerua  &c. Odyss. vtar: If I can haue thy company, O Goddesse, I esteeme not who wil be against me. That made Pericles to forsake his youthfull companies, & to haue sage and wise men about him, whē he in Athens succeeded The∣mistocles in publike gouernmēt of the Athenians: And that made Dion to speak of Plato, hauing had proofe of Dions speach of Plato. Platoes wisdom & counsell, Mallem vnum Platonem, quā mille Antimachos: For Plato gaue such counsell to Dion, not to please, but to profit Dion. Such coūsel gaue Solon to the Athenians, Non quae suauissima, sed quae optima. But good counsel is often reiected. Ieremy gaue good 3. Reg. cap. 12. Good coū∣sell. counsell to King Zedechias, but hee reiected it. Lot gaue good counsell to the Sodomites, but they regar∣ded it not. The Elders of Israel gaue good counsell to Rehoboam, but hee esteemed it not. Wisdome crieth out in the streets, & offreth her seruice free vnto Prin∣ces, and yet some Princes regard her not: But truely that Prince is happy, where wisdome may say, Habito in consilijs: That wisdom guided Noah in the Arke: that
wisdome instructed the Patriarkes before the Law, to liue vnder the Law. Iephtha shewed himselfe a wise man, and gaue wise Iephtha. counsel to his Captaines, how they might find out the false Ephramites from the true Israelites, by pronoun∣cing of the letter Shiboleth; and that before the Ephra∣mites Iud. 12. should passe ouer Iorden, lest they should gather head against the Israelites againe. Great wisdome it is to looke in time to such, and to cut off the heads of them that would willingly haue many heads like Hidra. I wish there were no heads of Hidra yet lurking in any English Laerna. Thus was Iephtha called from the land of Tob, and Gedeon from the Barne-threshing, to kill and destroy Gedeon. these wicked Madianites, and false Ephramites, which were scattered and dispersed into all partes of the world. Was not Dauid called frō a Shepheard, to be anoyn∣ted Dauid, a Shepheard king in Israel by Samuel, while yet Saul liued, for the sinnes of Saul, and to ouerthrow the house of Saul, for all the practice and policy of Saul to the contrary? Was not Ieroboam, the seruant of Salomon, called & Ieroboam, a seruant. anoynted king in Israel, by the Prophet Ahias, in the time of Salomon & of his sonne Rehoboam, and to take ten of the twelue Tribes from Salomon? And was not Iehu, from a soldier, called and anoynted king by Eli∣zeus Iehu, a soldier. seruant, while Achab yet reigned in Israel, to de∣stroy Achab and all his posterity, for the Idolatry of Achab? The iust iudgement of God against wicked Princes. And so in other like practisers, that seek by po∣licy to ouerthrow kingdomes. Saul, with all his policy, with his sonnes, his seruants,
and his daughter that he maried to Dauid, onely to de∣ceiue Dauid, could not preuent Dauid of the kingdom. It was the purpose of God. Salomon, for all his wisedome and royalty, and his friends, could not hinder Ieroboam his seruant from the kingdome. It was so determined. Achab, with all his gods and Idols, could not pre∣uent Iehu, nor take reuenge vpon Elizeus, no more thē Benhadad, king of Syria could feed his wrath vpon Eli∣zeus: no policy, no practice, no coūsel against the Lord. Elizeus, looking in the face of Hazael, said, that hee should be king after Benhadad in Syria, & withall wept, knowing how he would strangle his master Benhadad, the king, and how Tyrant-like he would plague Israel, during the time of his cruell gouernment. Many had cause to weepe, if men knewe, as Elizeus did, what po∣licies are practised in many mens hearts. And therefore had olde Osiris, king of Egypt, the Osiris his scepter. likenes of a mans eye in the vpper end of his Scepter, to signifie, that kings should be circumspect and wise, to see vnto the policy and practice of wicked men: for against such wise and godly Princes, no policy can pre∣uaile, no more then a little cloud can darken the bright∣nes of the Sunne. And as the Sunne with his brightnes lighteneth all the Sky, so doth a vertuous Prince with his wisdome, his subiects: for so Aristotle sayth, Vni∣ca . 3. Polit. & sola virtus Principis, prudentia: The only vertue of a Prince, is to become wise, & to chuse such Wise Coun∣sellers, as Moyses did of graue & godly wise men (which counsell was called, synadrion) to help & to ayd him in the gouernmēt of 600000. men, & that in a wildernes. By counsel, Commonwealths & Kingdomes stand:
So in Salust it is sayd vnto Caesar, Quò magis Imperium, cò maior cura: So long shal kingdoms prosper, while good Counsel gouernes: Dum apud eos vera consilia valuerūt: For (sayd Plato) All good and godly Counsayles are . sacred, according to that which Christ sayd: Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I a∣mong them. It is neyther, sayd Scipio to Micipsa, strong armies, treasures, nor goldē Scepters that vphold king∣doms, but truth, wisedome, and Counsayle. So A∣ristotle Pro. 20. sayth vnto the great Alexander; that Counsel is : Arist. Rhet. ad Alex. Suet. cap. 25. Augustus saying. most diuine in matters of states: for that hee was euer careful to haue Alexander gouerned by counsaile, kno∣wing well the greatnesse of his minde, & the conquest which he took in hand: Many perish for want of coun∣sayle, and many more for not accepting of counsell. Wise counsayle and the reward thereof, was more giuen in Sparta to the Captayne that subdu∣ed the enemyes by policy and counsell, then by the sword: for that attempt, sayd Augustus, is not to bee en∣terprised, where more feare is in losing, then hope in getting the victory. The Carthagineans so esteemed wise counsel, that if any of their Captains had done any thing but by wise counsel, though they had obteyned great victories, the law in Carthage was, that they should die. Great Cap∣taynes wanne more by counsaile, then by the Sword: Pluraconsilio, quàm vi magnos Duces perfecisse. Wise Princes must be like Ianus, looking backward as well as Tacit. 11. Ann. . forward. It was Sertorius saying to Pompey the great: Quod re∣spicere magis, quàm prospicere oporteat Ducem. That a wise Gouernor looketh backward as well as forward: But
Ambition sayth Seneca, neuer looketh backe, but for∣ward, Plut. in Serto. how hee may enterteyne factious and seditious men to hold him vp. They neuer thinke of their owne liues, when they imagine to preuent others of their liues: Sedition therfore is as dangerous to Kings in their kingdomes, as to Commaunders in Field in the Army. For so Seneca said, Idem ius habet aduersus imperia, at{que} aduersus imperantes. Sectio. 2. SERVIVS GALBA, vnder pre∣tence Oros. lib. 5 cap. 21. of doing of some great good vn∣to the Lusitanians, assēbled the chiefest men, & the gallantest Youths of three great Cities, to the nomber of seuen thousand, whome hee most treche∣rously and falsly slewe: which mooued great Sedition and tumult in Spaine against the Romanes. Hastrubal, intending, vnder the colour of hunting, to inuade Numidia, being resisted by the Numidians, told them hee came but to hunt Elephants. By the like policy of hunting, Hanibal got Tarentū. Such a hunter was Nymrod, that hunted kings and kingdomes, and therefore he was called, The mighty Gen. 10. Hunter. Ninus was a great hunter of kingdoms & countries. So may it be said of Cyrus and of Alexander: so great hunters were they, that they died in their hunting out of their kingdomes. Hunting is a military exercise, which made Sertorius Plut. in Serto.
to vse hunting, and to trauaile the hard rockes of Af∣frica; and that he and his soldiers thereby might better indure labour and payne against the Romanes, hee ac∣quainted them so much with hunting, that they were able to sustayne any hardnesse. The cause therefore why Brasidas compared hun∣ting to warre, was, for that the like stratagems are often inuented and executed in warres against soldiers, as the Hunter doeth against diuers kindes of beasts, specially in Venatione Circensi, at Rome; or in hunting of Ele∣phants, Lyons, Tigers, and such other wilde beastes, where the policy and stratagems of the Hunter, as the force and courage of the soldiers, must be. Mithridates, King of Pontus, to auoyd the snares Iust. li. 37. & dangers of the enemy, gaue himselfe so to hunting, that hee neither vsed City, Towne, or any houses for seuen yeres together, so that by such paynefull exercise he held tack with the Romanes for forty yeres. That was the cause why Cato preferred hunters and laborers Cato de re rust. lib. 1. fit for warres, Ex venatoribus & agricolis milites strenui gignuntur. We read in Xenophon, that young Gentlemen were brought vp, first in hunting, to make them more strong and more able to indure the warres. Plato maketh mention of three kindes of hunting, Pla. de leg. Aquatilia, volatilia, ac terrestria; but he much commen∣deth the last, Quadrupedia venari. This kind of hunting, Adrian the Emperor so loued in his youth, that hee could spare no time about his owne businesse, vntill he was better perswaded by his counsell. So lawdable was this excercise, and very necessary
to souldiers, that Maximinus the Emperour vsed Ro∣mane Legions to hunting. Domitianus a great Hunter, is much praised in Sue∣tonius, and for nothing else, but for hunting; and yet he Suet. in Dom. ca. 4. hunted in Rome, as Hastrubal did in Numidia, that all Rome might be his Fermors & Tenants, and so to bee called Colonia Domitiana: that was the secret practice of Domitianus hunting. Probus the Emperour, is reported to cause his soldi∣ers to plucke vp yong Okes by the roote, and to make the Theaters so large and wide, set and compassed with branches and boughes, that it seemed rather a Forrest, or a Parke, then a Theater, that sometime a thousand Estriches, a thousand Harts, a thousand Lyons, a hun∣dred Stagges, & such other fierce beasts of Libia, were there hunted: so that such hunting was called, Circen∣ces venationes, & often vsed of the Emperors of Romes Suet. in Oct. ca. 4. 5 insomuch as they made Theaters round before, to see playes: and afterward, the Romans made them Amphi∣theaters long & wyde, to see hunting; that by hunting with beasts, they might the more bolder, and with lesse feare, fight with the enemy. Xenophon wrote a whole Booke in praise of Hun∣ting, wherin he named the greatest Kings and warriers of the world, as Achilles, Cyrus, Alexander, and others. But many of late, practised the like policy, not one∣ly to hunt Elephants, but Lions and Vnicornes. In Mount Parthenius, there was a Temple dedica∣ted to Pan, and therein was a place named Aula, as it were a Sanctuary to all kinde of Beastes being hunted eyther by Lyons, Beares, or Wolues: if they could re∣couer this place AVLA, they were safe: and no fur∣ther
might they be folowed by those Lyons, Beares, or Wolues. Such credit had they in their god Pan, that he could saue all Beastes that fled for succour thyther, whether they came from Spaine, Italy, or from any where else. In Aetolia, there was a Wood consecrated to Diana, Alex. lib. 4. cap. 2. that Dogges hunting after any Beast, when they came ad lucum Dianae, the sacred wood of Diana, they staid and could hunt no further. Aristotle writes of the lyke place in the Mountaine, which the Greekes call Menalus, to which place if any wilde Beastes were hunted by Dogges, and could reco∣uer ▪ this moūtaine, they were safe as though they were in Sanctuary; the Dogges neyther could nor would follow any further. Some kinde of Dogges there are more bloudy, that will so follow their game, that neither the Temple of Pan, nor the sacred wood of Diana, nor the mountayne Menalus, nor yet Aula Regia, can stop their eagernes, like the Dogges of Actaeon, that wil deuoure their owne Master. These be the seede of Caligula, that seeke not onely to cut off the necke of Rome at one blowe, as Caligula wished, but the necke and head of England, Scotland, and Ireland. These be the broode of Centaures, that dippe their weapons in the bloud of Nessus: These are they that conceiue mischiefe, and bring soorth iniquity. These be they (sayth the Prophet) that hatch Coc∣katrice Esay 59. egges, and hee that eateth of their egges, dyeth, and that which is trodden vpon, breaketh out vnto a Serpent, and becommeth a more deadly Serpent, then
the Serpents of Arabia or Affrica, whatsoeuer is come from them, is poyson, and bringeth death. These wicked ones, are like the raging seas that can not rest, whose waues cast vp nothing but myre and Esay 59. durt. These wicked men be they that weaue the Spiders webbe, and yet shall not they couer themselues with garments of their owne labour. Their Lawes, their peace, their fayre words, & their fowle hearts, are nothing els but Ius sine Iure in Armis: and therfore, it was the wish of Apollonius Thianae∣us, to know good men and to auoyde euyll men, who can not change their accustomed wickednes, no more then the Blacke-more can change his skynne, or the Leopard his spottes. Iorem. 13. Next Hunting is Swimming, accounted for a Mili∣tary exercise, both to swymme to the enemy, as also to escape from the enemy by swymming, as Caesar did in Vig. lib. 1. cap. 10. Diodor. lib. 17. the Watres at Alexādria, whē he followed after Pompey. Alexander, at the Riuer Acinases, when there was no hope of helpe to saue his life, put off his Armour vnto his shirt, and made himselfe ready to saue his life by swymming. Great ouerthrowes haue bene giuen to those that could not swymme; as Niceas the Generall of the A∣thenians, at the Riuer Asinarus, where many of his souldiers, for want of skill to swimme, were slayne in the Ryuer by the Siracusans. And this want of skill in swymming, often hindered Cyrus and his souldiers in many enterprises, as Xenophon sayth.
Sectio 3. PVBLIVS SCIPIO in Lidia, after con∣tynuall fowle weather day and night, and Antiochus, when he thought to relieue his wearied and wet souldiours, were then set vpon and ouerthrowen by Scipio and his Army. We read that Hanibal, after that he was dryuen out Vid. Hani∣bal lib 1. cap 5. of Affrica vnto Asia by the Romanes, taught the kings of Asia all policyes and stratagems, and counsayled Antiochus the great, in his Counselles against the Ro∣manes, to throw great vesselles full of quicke Vipers into the ships of the enemyes, that the Romanes, being frighted with these Vipers, might be hindered of their fight, and daunted of their courage. So did Antiochus, who imitated Hanibals counsel, but to no effect. So did Prusias king of Bythinia, but to no effect; for victory commeth from the Lord. I commend both Antiochus and Prusias, in follo∣wing Hanibals directions against the Romanes, being their enemies: for these were lawfull stratagems to bee vsed against enemies: but to throw these Vipers into the faces of our friends, yea, into the faces of Kings & Princes, vnto the destruction of our country, this is the practise of Sathan and of his souldiers, who euer haue bene most seditious in all good common wealths, farre worse then the Snakes of Syria, which will not bite The snakes of Syria. their countrymen in Syria, though they find them out sleeping: but better & fitter to be likened to the Scor∣pions in the mountaine Altenius in Caria, who are per∣nitious & most perillous to their countrymen, sparing
none, yet to straungers neuer hurtfull. As in Alexandria, between the Iewes and the Grae∣cians, Sedition betweene the Iewes, and the Grecians in Alex∣andria. such seditions grewe first by priuate men, that it came to publike warres after. Between the Samaritans and the Galileans grew such sedition, for that the Sa∣maritans wold not suffer the Galileās to passe through their territories vnto the feast at Ierusalem, according to the custome of the Iewes. Such slaughter and mur∣ther grew between the Iewes and the Samaritans, that neither Camaus the Romane President, neither Numi∣dius Quadratus the President of Syria, might quēch this furious rage & sedition between the Iewes and the Sa∣maritans. One sparkle of fire burneth a whole Citie: & one seditious man is dangerous in a cōmonwealth. And therfore, the Athenians vsed lawfull policy, to preuent their enemyes the Lacedemonians, arming a certen nomber of men in Garments like women, vpon a solemne feast day which the Athenians kept to Mi∣nerua, out of Athens: the Lacedemonians supposing to find them for their slaughter, were preuented with this stratagē, for women, they found men, armed with wea∣pons, Front. lib. 4. cap. 7. vnder the forme and shape of women, and were thereby ouerthrowen by the Athenians, and forced to returne with strokes to Lacedemon. A lawfull prac∣tice of policy to preuent knowen enemyes. God taught the Israelites a stratagem, after they were ouerthrowne twise, the third time to ouerthrow the Iud. 20. Beniamites. So with the like policy, was Sempronius Gracchus with his Romane Legion by Vaccei, a people in Spaine, put to flight, by putting the most valiantest men they had, in womens apparell, in Chariots and Coaches; the
Romanes imagining them to be women, supposing to haue a great prey thereby, came as though they should easely take thē away into their campe: but the Romans were forced to retyre to their Campe with losse, & not with gayne, which they looked to haue. Such practises are often vsed, & often preuēted by the enemies: but to practise any policy against our coūtry, was euer odious. Phocion, a man of good estate, & of best desert among the Athenians, who had bin in times past Generall for the Athenians, yet being condemned of some suspec∣ted treason, might not bee buryed in Athens, but was carryed out of Attica terra to be buryed. It was not hard in Greece to finde out such practisers, for that all Val. lib. 5. cap. 3. the Cities in Greece were so enuious one vnto ano∣ther, that they practised nothing else, but to destroy one another. Milciade, the Athenian, who wan such great fame by killing many thousand Persiās at the battel of Marathō, yet being dead in prison, suspected of treason, his sonne Cymon, that renowned Grecian, became most willingly a prisoner for his father, to haue his buriall in Athens: of which, Cymon would often brag, that he obtained his fathers Patrimony, Carcerem et Catenas: for there was a Law in Athens, that if there were any, Qui de Repub. malè meriti sunt, which might not bee found true vnto their Countrey, they should dye in Athens, but not be buried (according to the Law) at Athens. So horrible is treason, and so odious were Traytors in Athens. Such a Law was in Egypt against their kings, that if they should offend in any great capitall cryme against the publike state, they should giue accompt before the thirty Iudges of Egypt, before they should bee
buried in Pyramides: which was the most odious thing in Egypt, for their Kings to want burial, and therefore, Simandius, an ancient king, had a rich Tablet hangd vpō his brest, whereon was set the picture of Iustice; which Diod. lib. 2. cap. 1. Monument, after his time, Simandius left to his posteri∣ty, the kings of Egypt, that they might be put in mind, by looking vpon the picture of Iustice, to do iustice. Wicked Ishmael, practising treason, came to Godolia, whom the king of Babylon made Gouernour ouer the Cities of Iuda, and Ishmael did eate, and was feasted at ere. 40. Godolias table, and after slewe him with the sword, and al the Iewes that were with Godolia at Mispha, of meere enuy, which is the cause of all reuenge. So the two Porters of king Ahashuerosh, that kept his gate, conspired against their Master, and both con∣sented Hester 2. to kill the king, had not Mardocheus the Iew pre∣uented it. Haman, so enuying Mardocheus, that he could not a∣bide the sight of him, practised policy, first with the king, against the Iewes, and after, he consulted with his wife, how he might destroy Mardocheus. Caesar, with the like enuy, after long doubting of his marching in armes as an enemy vnto Rome, his owne countrey, yet at length being ouercome with desire of reuenge, sayd, Iacta est alea, being resolued to reuenge his malice against Pompey, to plague Rome, and to pu∣nish his Countrey. A man (sayth Salomon) deuiseth Pro. 16. a way in his heart: but it is the Lord that ordereth his doings: the lottes are cast into the lappe: but the or∣dering thereof standeth in the Lord.
Sectio 4. WHen Achior had said, that great was the power of the God of Israel, Ho∣lophernes Iudeth 5. and his Captaynes would haue slayne him, like the Scribes and Pharisees, who fretted and fumed to heare the people cry, Hosanna to the Math. 21. King of kings the Sonne of God. But the Lord findeth out the policy & practice of such wicked men: for so he found out the practice & policy of Cain (who vnder co∣lour Gen. 4. of walking vnto the field, did kill his brother Abel) by asking a question: Where is thy brother Abel? The Lord also found out the practice and policy of Esau towards his brother Iacob, who said in his heart: Occidam fratrem meum Iacob. Gen. 27. Ioseph, demaunding of his brethren, what became of their other two brethren, made Ruben confesse to his brethren, that the Lord had found out their wicked practice. What treason, what murther, though long kept se∣cret by men, but was eyther by Byrdes of the ayre, or Stones of the streete found out and described? Achilles, very craftily practising policy to hide himself in a womans garment in Greece, lest he should go with Agamemnon to the warres in Phrygia, was foūd out by the policie and craft of Vlisses. Vlisses likewise fayning himselfe mad (through the like policy to stay in Ithaca, with his fayre wife Pene∣lope) his practice was found out by Palamedes. Sic Ars deluditur arte among men. If practices of men by men are found out, where
shall the Traytour or the murtherer hide his practice & wicked policy from the knowledge of God? Adam could not hide it in Paradise, nor Lucifer in Heauen, nor Ionas in the bottome of the Sea: Where shall a man flye from the presence of God, that is of a guilty Conscience? Gen. 4.  1.It made Cain to say: Omnis qui inuenerit me, occidet me. It made Ionas to say to the Saylers to Tharsis: Tollite & mittite me in mare: And it made Iudas to say, Tradidi sanguinem iustum, and to hang himselfe. It makes a number to hang, to drowne, and to kill thēselues, prouoked therto by a tormented conscience. For we reade both in Diuine and prophane Hysto∣ries, that more lewd and wicked men come from good men, then good men from the wicked: So that, of one Cateline, being a wicked man in Rome, became so ma∣ny wicked Catelines, that Rome had too many Catelines, so full of spite and enuy vnto Rome, that they were (as Salust saith) Impuri animi Dijs hominibus{que} infesti. And so likewise, in Athens, of one hatefull Tymon, surnamed Misantropos, grew so many odious Tymons, that there were too many Tymōs in Athēs. But we leaue these Ca∣telines in Rome, & these Tymons in Athens, and we wish that there were neither Catelines nor Tymons in Englād. There were at Rome in S. Ieromes time, certayne S. Ieromes saying of English∣men in Rome. Englishmen, of good constitution and faire complexi∣on: whom when S. Ierom saw, he said, Isti Angli Angeli dici possunt. How strange is it, that of that Nation, then called in Rome Angels, by St. Ierome, there should be now some in England, which might be called Deuils, in whome are such wicked practices, and such lewd polycies, as neyther Philip of Macedon, against
the Graecians, nor Hannibal of Carthage, against the Romanes, could exceede them with their Military stratagems, which was lawfull against forreigne ene∣myes? The cause, sayth Lactantius, of such rebellious minds in such men, was, Non nosce supremum numen, & Lact. lib. 3 lust. li. 30. illud non venerari. Therefore, the chiefest care of a good Prince, ought to bee first vigilant about Gods Seruice. So could Aristotle, the Heathen Phylosopher say, Res . Arist. 5. Polit. c. 11 diuinas, &c. For as Cicero sayeth, The Romans euer sup∣posed the seruing of their gods, to be rather the cause of their Victories and Tryumphes ouer Affrica and Asia, then their strength and courage: and therefore, Maecenas wrote to Augustus the Emperor, to keepe and defend the Romane Religion, and the sacred Cere∣monies of their countrey to their gods, and not to imi∣tate the Egyptians, Qui variam et mixtam religionem co∣luerunt, which accept of al kind of Religion, and neuer cōsent in one: for saith Cicero, Maiorū instituta tueri, &c. It is wisedome to defend the Lawes and decrees of the Elders, and the Religion of their Countrey: which to neglect, is sacrilege. The Egyptians, though most superstitious and ido∣latrous people, yet had they in their Temples in Greek written vpon the walles, Deus est quae sunt, et quae non sunt, . Her. in Pom. 5. not much disagreeing with the saying of the Apostle, Rom. 11. that God was he, by whom all things were done, and in whome, and from whom all good things proceed, and without him, nothing. It is not the Iuory Maces of the Romanes, nor the Ebony maces of the Indians, nor the Lyons & Beares
of the Babylonian, neyther the Dragons and Serpents of the Egyptian maces, that hold vp a kingdome: but the Scepter of Iustice. (Per me Reges regnant, sayth the Lord.) . The Ethiopian Kings had their Scepter made in ancient time, in forme like a plough, in signe of hus∣bandry, which ought to be maintayned by the king vn∣to his people: for their kings were put in mind by their Scepters, to be carefull of their subiects, which are the strength of the king. And so the old Persian kings had their maces made Diodor. li. 4. cap. 1. like a spade, as the Ethiopians the plough, to put their kings in memory, that the plough & the spade are the two onely Instruments most necessary in a common-wealth to enrich a king. Some other Heathen kings had vpon the tops of their maces, the figure of a Storke, to signifie piety and lenity in a Prince to be necessary; and vpon the nether end of the mace, the likenesse of Hippopotamus, that a Hippopo∣tamus, a Sea-horse. Plut. in Alex. Prince should auoid fiercenes and wrath. Which had Alexander lookt vnto, as the History sayth, Nec Lysima∣chus Leoni obiectus, nec Clytus hasta traiectus, nec Calis∣thenes mori iussus. These three great murthers dimmed and obscured his three great victories ouer Asia, Eu∣rope, and Affricke, not then thinking of Cassanders draught. For when Alexander would know of Calanus, the In∣dian Philosopher, at his death, what hee would haue Alexander to do for him? Nothing, sayd Calanus: and answered him, as the shaddow of Samuel answered Phetonissa for Saul, I shall shortly see you. So in Homer, doth Hector say, that Achilles should be the next of the
Greeke Captains that should follow him. To be igno∣rant therefore in things to come, sayd Cicero, is much better then to know them. Alexander would haue bene most sorrowfull, after he had wonne so many kingdomes, if he had knowne that he should haue bene poysoned in Babylon, before he had come to Macedonia. Achilles had no cause to reioyce, after his victories in Troy, if he had knowne, that he should dye in Troy, and not in Greece. Ney∣ther Caesar, after hee had subdued Pompey, if hee had knowen that he should be slayne before the Image of Pompey in Rome. Cicero being banished from Rome, by M. Antonius, & Cicero his dreame. De diui. lib. 1. being very pensiue & sad, the Image of C. Marius with the Sergeants before him, appeared as he was, whē he was last Consull, enquiring of Cicero why he was so sad, & how he did. Cicero told Marius, for that he was forced to forsake Rome, by meanes of M. Antonius. The I∣mage tooke Cicero by the right hand, & deliuered him to one of the Sergeants, and willed him to bring Cicero to his tombe, & sayd, that there he should be comfor∣ted and relieued with great welcome. These drea∣ming Practisers, are often instructed by dreames, visi∣ons, and Idolatrous seruing of Images, which some haue in their houses in England, as Alexander Seuerus Alex. lib. 6. cap. 13 had in his gallery at Rome, the Images of Orpheus, of Apollonius, of Abraham, and of Christ: and yet these I∣mages profit nothing, but to bring such men to Ma∣rius graue. Tyberius, perceiuing that the whole Empire of Rome was weary of his life, hauing children of his owne, fearing his tyranny (by his conscience moued)
should be the cause, that none of them should succeed him in the Empire, consulted with auguratiō, wherin himselfe was welseene, & made supplication to his coū∣trey gods, as the maner & rites of the Romans were, to giue him some certein signe, who shuld succeed him in the Empire: being aduertised, that the first that would come and salute him the next morning, should succeed him in the Empire, caused presently Euodus his Cham∣berlain to cal all his sonnes to come in to him, to preuēt others: but as Euodus went out of the chamber, came in Caeius, the sonne of Germanicus his brother, and saluted the Emperour: whereby he knew, that his diuination Tiberlus deceiued by his di∣uination. failed him, that none of his children should succeede, but Caius, his brothers sonne, according to Salomons saying, Man determineth, God disposeth. Many in this age would faineknow the successions of Empyres & kingdoms: but they are not of wise mens opinions: Animi morbus est de his quaerere: That which is onely in God to know, is not fit for man to search: for Hermes. . ambitious men want no boughs to clime. Hannibal, perswading king Prusias to commence warre against the Romanes, answered Hannibal, that hee would enterprise nothing, before hee had con∣sulted with a Sooth-sayer. To whome (said Hanni∣bal) Carunculae vitulinae mauis, quàm veteri Imperatori cre∣dere? De diui. lib. 2. Canst thou beleeue, king Prusias, rather the lyuer of a beast, or the flying of a Fowle, then beleeue an olde Captaine, who had bin Generall against the Romanes 17. yeeres, who (to my losse) haue learned to be a Sol∣diour, & can better counsell thee, then the Soothsayer? The likesaying is tepbrted of king Mithridates, that in spite of fortune, after she had done what she could,
sayd, I can counsel others not to trust Fortune, though it be often true, Rara est Virtus, quam Fortuna non gu∣bernat. But what is it but Superstition wil do? Which made Cato to say and to wonder,Lib. 2. de Diui. Quod non rideret Aruspex, Aruspicem cum videret, that one Soothsayer would not laugh when he saw another. Pub. Claudius, in the first Punicke watre, iesting at so many Augurers, commaunded some Chickens that would eate nothing out of their Cage or Coupe, to be drowned in water, for that they might drinke, because they would not eat, in contempt of their Diuination: but he was condemned to death by the people, for not esteeming Auguration. Lib. 2. de nat. Deo.For the like cause, his fellow Consull Lu. Iunius, to escape the danger and wrath of the people, slew him selfe. Athens more superstitious then Rome, where Diagoras, was banished, Socrates poysoned, and Ti∣magoras imprisoned. Such Augurations and Soothsayings had bene in honor and worship in old time, and of such credit, that it was death among the Romanes and the Persians, to iest at it for their Magicke among the Persians, and Au∣guration among the Romanes, without which their kings could not be in times past elected. Scipio and Figulus, because they were elected & be∣came Magistrates, and not allowed by the Augurers 2. Diuin. Lawes, being wrongfully created, they both refused & forsooke their Offices, and were also reiected of the people. Paul and Barnabas, after the restoring of an impo∣tent cripple, being so borne of his mother, the people Acts 3. in Lystra cryed out, that Gods are come downe in
the likenesse of men. And they called Paul, Mereu∣rius, and Barnabas, Iupiter; and the Priests of Iupiter brought Bulles trymmed with Flowers and Garlands vnto the gates, where Paul and Barnabas lodged, and there would haue sacrificed with the people. In like maner, one Demetrius, a Syluer-Smyth vnto Diana, stirred vp sedition among the superstitious peo∣ple, saying, that Paul perswaded the people, not onely Acts 19. at Ephesus, but throughout all Asia, that they bee not Gods which are made with hands: so that the Temple of the great Goddesse Diana, and the Image that came downe from Iupiter, should be nothing esteemed, and that her magnificence, which all Asia and the whole world worshipped, should be destroyed. In Ierusalem, their superstitious Idolatry was the onely cause of the ouerthrow of both the kingdomes of Iudah and of Israel, euery one worshipping seuerall gods of strange nations. And therefore the Prophet sayd, That the Plummet of the house of Ahab, & the Line of Samaria, should be stretched ouer Ierusalem, that as Samaria was destroyed with her Idols, so shuld Ierusalem with her Images. Cicero doth report of certeine Chaldean Phyloso∣phers, being in his time at Rome, who shewed their cū∣ning Cic. de Diuin. 2. vpon three of the greatest men of Rome, of equall fortune and greatnes, and therfore, one enuying the o∣ther, much doubting one of another, cōsulted with cer∣tein Chaldeans then at Rome, by whom they were cer∣tified in the presence of Cicero, that eche one of these 3. viz, Crassus, Pompey, & Caesar, should liue to be very old, they should dye in their houses, & should with honor and fame accomplish all their actions, wheras in truth,
they dyed afterwards otherwise, and that out of their countrey: Crasius first was slaine among the Parthians, and his head sent by Surena to Pacorus, king of the Par∣thians. Pompey was slaine in Egypt, and his head sent by Ptolomy to Caesar: And lastly, Caesar was slaine in the Senate house, among the Senators. Their dumme stratagems must be preuented, as Iehu did by the messenger of King Ioram, who came to Iehu, 4. Reg. 9. saying, Thus saith the king: Is it peace, Iehu? What hast thou to do with peace, sayth Iehu? come behind me & follow me. What peace should be, when factious and seditious men bearesway? or what peace can be, sayd Iehu to king Iorā, whiles the whoredome of thy mother Iezabel, & her witchcrafts are yet in great nomber; whē Iuda & Israel agree not in one religion? When Achab and Baeals priests rule Israel, they must bee preuented, as Philip of Macedon did the Embassadors of the Etoliās, Front. lib. 1. cap. 4. who comming to entreat for peace, were kept in talking of peace, vntill king Philip had won Thermopyla, and placed his garrison there. These rebellious Practitioners haue, and also had their Embassadours alwayes abroade, to knowe if it bee peace, for them to come there, if they fayled of their purpose, which should more feare God in their countrey, then feare their enemies out of their coun∣trey. But as Benhadad coūsayled Iehoram, that he should make streets in Damasco for him & his people to dwel, 3. Reg 20 as his father made streets in Samaria for the Assyrians to dwel, saying, My people shal be thy people: So Re∣belles were promised Townes and Citties to dwell in, and therfore said they: Litet, silibet, to practise treason, murther and sacriledge.
There were many Antigonies in Greece: one Antigo∣nus Many An∣tigonies in Greece. surnamed Gonatus, for that one knee was bigger thē another: all his care was to make both his knees of e∣quall proportion, that it might seeme vnto the people but of one quantitie. Another Antigonus, surnamed Polyorcetes, for that he was alwayes practised busily to ouerthrow townes and cities, and to triumph in his tyranny: hee would euer boast and bragge what euill hee had done, reioycing , &c. much in titles of violence and of his conquests, as ma∣ny of the Greekes were wont to do, but none of equi∣ty and iustice, but onely Aristides. Another Antigonus, surnamed Dosan, for that he wold promise any thing, but as Plutarch sayth, would per∣forme nothing. This Antigonus left more heires be∣hinde him in Courts and in Countreyes. And there was another Antigonus, surnamed Euarge∣tes, for that he was a beneficiall Prince & a benefactor in all Greece, and therfore his Statue was carried at A∣thens in the Banner of Peplon, with the Statues of Iu∣piter and Mars, in memorie of his benefits to the Gre∣cians. Such is the continuance of a good Prince for vertues sake, and the decay of euyll Princes for their wickednes. Cyrus, being relieued of the rude and barbarous nati∣on, Diodor. lib. 17. called Arimaspi, being in much want and great ex∣tremytie of victualles, for their friendship & liberality, chāged the name of Arimaspi, & called them Euargetes. Among many Emperours of Rome, called Anto∣nines, one onely Antoninus, surnamed Pius, for his zeale and loue towards his coūtry, in banishing of Vsury, & punishing Vsurers in Rome: one Alexander, called
Seuerus, for his vertuous seuerity. The rest, as Helio∣gabalus, Comodus, Caracalla & others, were rather Mon∣sters, then good Emperours. So much might bee spoken of the kings of Egypt, a∣mong Many Pto∣lomies in Egypt. so many Ptolomies, fewe good, sauing Ptolo▪ sur∣named Euargetes, a benefactor to his countrey, and Ptol. Philodelphos, for his singular loue & zeale to his Coun∣trey, in prouiding the Bible to bee translated from He∣brew to Greek: yet had the other kings of Egypt, of such louing names, one surnamed Ptol. Philopater, another Philometor, as though they should reuerence and loue their parents, when in trueth, they were no otherwise but paracides and murtherers of their parents, and de∣stroyers of their Countreyes. The old kings of Egypt, which were in nomber 330. were called Pharaones, whose names, Herodot doth not recite, because they were all called Pharaones, which in the Egyptian tongue, are called kings, frō Mineus time that builded Memphis, vntil Salomons time: for his father in lawe was the last Pharao in Egypt. Then reigned Nicaule, the Q. of Egypt and Ethio∣pia, Ioseph. lib. 8. cap. 2. How long the name of Pha∣raoes con∣tinued. who came to Ierusalem to heare & to see Salomon, with Camelles laden with gold, siluer and precious stones. After this Queene, the name of Pharaoes ended; which had continued 1300. yeres, from the first vnto the last, whose daughter, Salomon maried. Sectio. 5. ANaxarchus, the Philosopher, flattered A∣lexander The flatte∣ry of An∣axarchus. the great, when he saw him make much mourning for Clytus, whom in his
fury he slue. Art thou ignorant, Alexander, said Anax∣archus, that anciēt wise men haue placed the Image of Iustice hard by Iupiter, that whatsoeuer Iupiter doeth, that Iustice doeth alwayes allowe? A small matter for Diodor. lib. 17. Gel. lib. 3. cap. 8. Alexander the great, to kil Clitus, Parmenio, and Philotas his sonne; when other meaner men then Alexander, do practise their policy, not onely to kill, but also to poy∣son kings & princes: so was Alexander, that killed so ma∣ny kings & princes, poysoned by his seruant Cassander. So should Pyrrhus haue bin, by his Phisicion & seruant Timochares, who offered Fabritius to poyson Pirrhus, if Fabritius would. But the Romane Consull sent word to Pirrhus, Vrbem nostram a filio Martis conditam, non ve∣nenis, Cic. 3. Offic. sed armis bellum gerere: That Rome was builded by Mars his sonne, to wat with weapons, and not with poyson; concealing the name of Timochares, and yet warned Pirrhus to looke better to himselfe. Antiochus the great had a Parasite in court, named Minio, who flattering Antiochus, as Anaxarchus did A∣lexander, counselled him to moue warres against the Romanes, as Hanibal did before him, whereby he lost the name of Antiochus the great, in Asia and in Syria, Antiochus the great. and was driuen by the Romanes, to liue within the pre∣cinct of mount Taurus: so that the Romane Scipio wan Asia frō Antiochus, and was named Scipio Asiati∣cus, and not Magnus: for the Romanes could not a∣bide the name of Magnus: So that by following of ill coūsel, Antiochus the Great lost his Greatnesse in Asia: and Alexander the Great lost his life in Babylon. The like is historied of one Alexander Acarnan, that contrarywise, neuer tooke counsell to take warres in hand, for that he neuer doubted of the victory, but cō∣sulted
where & how he might haue money, by practi∣sing of policy. Liui. 33.Many do imitate this rash felow, who to accomplish their trecherous purpose, make more haste then good speed, without regard of that which doth follow: for de∣layes are dangerous for seditious men to practise Poli∣cy. Malum nascens, facile opprimitur. Rebelles may not delay as Fab. Maximus did to weary Hanibal. Sedition is Tacit. 11. full of feare, one fearing another, lest the one bee be∣trayed by the other: all the practises of the seditious is to sowe Discord, no hope resteth vnto them, but by discord: and therefore said Cicero against that sedi∣tious Romane Cateline, Qui honores quieta Repub. despe∣rant, perturbata se consequi posse arbitrantur. Many Cate∣lines were in Rome, which, vnder pretence of liberty, practised all the policyes they could, to ouerthrow the Commonwealth: Tumultum ex tumultu, et bellum ex bel∣lo serunt. Neuer quiet, vntil they see the state of a king∣dome vnquiet: and many say in their hearts, as Cate∣line spake of Rome, Aut incendio aut ruina extinguam. Attilius Regulus was a man of great credit and au∣thority, and of more truth and fayth towards his coun∣trey, Front. lib. 4. cap. 3. then Cateline: hauing runne ouer so many great Offices in Rome and out of Rome, that at his death he wrote nothing to the Senators, but de Successore, of a Successor, which was hard for the Senators to find in Rome, the like to succeed him. So iust and faythfull a man was Attilius found in Rome. The like is historied of Luc. Mummius, after he had subdued many townes and Cities; but especially Co∣rinthus, Luc. Mum∣mius. the richest and chiefest City in all Greece, that he filled all Italy with Tablets, Statues, and Images, &
all other rich ornaments: and though Mummius might haue bin Lord of Corinthus, yet had he rather dye a poore man in his countrey at Rome. Attalus, surnamed Philometor, had great delight to plant venemous hearbs, as Hemlocke, Wolfeband, E∣leborum, & others: and being required of one of his Nobles, why he planted such venemous hearbs, he an∣swered, To practise policy. Such policy practised Dalila against Samson: Pha∣raoes daughter against Salomon: & Tullia, Tarquins wife Iudg. 14. 3. Reg. 11. practised such policy against the king Seruius Tullus, her father. Some plow with Samsons heyfar, to their owne ouerthrow: and some with Minoes Cowe, to breed many monstrous Minotaures, to deuoure their country. And too many plow against the law of Moses, with an Oxe and an Asse; and all this to practise policy. Sectio 6. IN Greece were two generall facti∣ons, the Doreans, and Ionians: the Lacedemonians tooke part with the Doreans; and the Athenians, with the Ionians. From these two Factions Two gene∣rall factiōs in Greece. grew in Greece, such seditions, that the Boetians, the Argiues, Elians, Mantineans, and others, some affecting the Doreans with the Lacede∣monians, some affecting the Ionians with the Atheni∣ans, that it brake out into ciuil warres, which continu∣ed 27. yeres, to the destructiō of the Empire of Greece, which somtyme gaue so many ouerthrowes to the Persians, so many victories at Marathō, at Artimesium,
at Salamina, & other-where, that now, by meanes of their factions & seditions, Philip of Macedon saw such oportunity to subdue the Graecians, which hee long thirsted for, that he ouercame Greece with Greekes; for so it is written, Graeci Graecorum manibus mactabantur, by meanes chiefly of their ciuil seditions and factions: he wan more townes in Greece by Greeks, then by the Macedonians. The like of the ciuill warres among the Romanes: the Danes thought it the fittest time to winne Rome Front. lib. 1. cap. 10 Scorylo. in such a seditious time, as Philip did Greece: yet Sco∣rylo their Generall at that time appoynted, doubting much of this enterprise, caused two great mastiue dogs to fight eagerly before the people, that both were wel wearied: then Scorylo brought in a Wolfe in the sight of these mastiue dogs, & straight wayes both the dogs left off fighting, & both of them ran fiercely, & fought egerly with the Wolfe. The fierce ciuill warres and fighting of the Romanes at home, sayd Scorylo, will e∣uen so do, when they see a Wolfe, I meane, a forrayne enemy, to commence warre against them. There was also in Athens, two factions, Pericles being the authour of one, and Cymon, the sonne of Mil∣ciades Two facti∣ons in A∣thens. the other. Pericles affected the cōmon people; and Cimon preferred the Nobility, and fauoured their proceedings, in such sort, that Athens was neuer quiet, but when it was disquieted with it selfe by meanes of factions, which do nourish seditions, hauing their bu∣sie-brayned Oratours to force the Athenians to fight with their tongues, consilio, calamis, & linguâ: for it was , &c. Aristoph. the disposition of that City, neuer to consult, as De∣mosthenes sayd, but too late: euery towne in Greece, was
so factious, that the glory of Greece, by meanes of factions and seditions, continued but 50. yeeres, and some odde in any greatnesse. And in Sparta, for all Lycurgus care, and his lawes, he could not free Sparta from factions; and yet he deuided Two facti∣ons in Spartae. Obas and Philas. them all into 2. factions, whom Lycurgus himselfe na∣med Obas & Philas: which lawes & decrees of Lycurgus were so kept for 500. yeres without violating them, for none in Greece durst breake Lycurgus lawes, but Age∣silaus, and that but once vpon great necessity, to punish seditions. In Carthage also they had two factions, the one fac∣tion followed Hamilcar, Hanibals father, and after him his son Hanibals the other followed Hanno & his friēds: so that in kingdoms and coūtries, factious men moued such sedition, wherby no greater harmes happened to kingdomes and countries, then by practising seditions and factions. Hamilcar, Hannibals father so hated the Romans, that hauing 4. young youthes to his sonnes, sayd, that hee would haue 4. Lion whelps nourished & brought vp with his 4. sonnes, as mortall enemies to the Romanes; and sware Hannibal his eldest son, being of 9. yeres old, Polib. 2. to continue an enemy to the Romanes during his life: and further, to shew his malice & enuy towards the Ro∣manes, he raised vp the dust frō the earth with his foot, and said, that then should be the end of the warres be∣tween Rome & Carthage, when one of both those Ci∣ties should be brought to nothing but such dust. In Rome, before Fab. Max. time, they had but foure Foure fac∣tions in Rome. factions, which were deuided by Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome, and by him named Palatina, Coli∣na,
Exquilina, and Suburrana, after the name of the foure gates of Rome, at that time being the Infancy of Rome: But after, it grew from foure factions to be fiue and thirty Tribes, that euery Tribe was full of diuers factions, and the Romane Empire waxed so mighty, that Fabius Maximus, when he was Censor in Rome, for that he brought all forraine factions within Rome, to be one of these foure, which Seruius Tullus named Fab. na∣med Max. Vrbanas factiones, was so gratefull to the Citizens of Rome, that they named him Fabius Maximus, which was the first time that he was called Maximus, for abridging the multitude of factions, that then would haue growen in Rome, vnto infinite numbers, if Fabius had not brought them vnder one of these foure. But in the time of Sylla and Marius, factions began so to multiply in Rome, as it did in Greece, that likewise The ciuill wartes of the Romās. it brake out into ciuill warres, which continued from Sillaes time, vnto the last ouerthrow of Mar. Antonius, welnigh fourty yeeres, to the destruction of the whole Empire, some following the fury of Marius, as Ser∣torius, Cynna, Carbo: and others followers of Sylla, as Metellus, Pompey, and others, that none might dwell in Rome, but those that eyther should bee on Marius side, or on Syllaes. Thus was the Empire deuided by factions, from Sylla to Caesar, from Caesar to Augustus, sometime run∣ning from Caesar to Pompey, and from Pompey to Caesar, vntill they and their factions were slayn by the sword, and their countrey welnigh destroyed. Of all miseries, ciuill warres is most miserable, and a very Ocean sea of all miseries, in which, Nobilitas cum plebe perit, wherof Homer exclaimed, & said, Let him be
cursed as an vnnatural monster & no man, that seeketh  &c. Iliad. 1. Cic. Phil. 12. his countries harme. And Cicero in like sort cryed out vpon him, Quem caedes ciuium, quem bellum ciuile delectat, and wished such to be cast out of the society of men, and to weed them out of the bounds of nature. Factions among great men, are more dangerous & hard to be quenched, for that these potentates draw the people and moue them, which are compared to the sea vnmoueable, vntill a tempest rise: and therfore Plato thought good to ioyne Aristides, surnamed the iust, for his iustice, trueth and constancy, with Themis∣tocles, being haughty and somewhat ambitious. And Lycurgus much commended the policy of Agamemnon, Lycurgus. to put Vlisses forward to clayme Achilles armour, as wel as Aiax, who iudged himselfe most worthy, in respect of his valor, to be next Achilles, throughout al Greece. This discord was tempred by Agamemnon, by giuing Achilles armour to Vlisses, that wise and politike men might be estemed as well for counsell, as valiant men for valour. Augustus the Emperour, was written vnto by his deare friend Maecenas, that if hee would haue a quiet Empire, and his subiects to loue him, he should cut off faction, the chiefe cause of sedition, and that the name of factions, or any other new name, tending to moue quarrels and debate, might be quite excluded out of Rome. And so doth Aristotle exhort, that Magistratu∣um & potentum contentiones, the beginning of brawles Arist. pol. 5. and contentions, should be stayed and stopt by lawes: if not by lawes, by the sword, Adulta seditio melioribus consilijs flectetur, sayth Cicero. What slaughter came of the cynders and ashes of Pompey the great, of Cato, of Scipio, and of others, to
reuenge their death vpon Caesar and his friends? What murther, what warre, was, to reuenge the murthering of Caesar, vpon Brutus, Cassius, and others? The Lawe of Thrasybulus, which curbed the thirty Tyrants in A∣thens, could doe no good in Rome, though Cicero did what he could, in perswading Thrasybulus law to take  place with the people: For then euery man in Rome seemed as a Serpent one to another, ready in armes one to kill another. Orosius hereupon induceth a Fa∣ble of Medea, of a Serpent slayne, of whose teeth set in Oros. li. 6. cap. 17. the ground by Medea, grew so many armed men, who presently fought so within themselues, that one destroi∣ed another. Such was the slaughter by the ciuill warres at Rome. Sectio. 7. THeopompus being demaunded, why did Sparta flourish? Is it for that their kings gouerne their subiects wisely, or that their subiects obey their kings faithfully? Theopompus answered, We practise in Sparta, but to indure labour Theopom. saying of Sparta. No seditiō in Sparta. to ouercome our enemies, and to obey our kings, how∣soeuer kings gouerne, the commaundement is giuen to subiects frō God, to vse their shield, & not the sword. The law in Sparta was therefore, that the souldier that lost his shield in the field among the enemies, should dye for it. The sword is put into the hands of princes, to punish offendors, and to cut off disobedient and seditious subiects. Chirurgians cut off rotten & pu∣trified members, from the sound members; which may
be well likened to Gangraena, which must of necessity be cut off, lest the whole body perish. God vsed to shew such seuerity to those factious Rebells the Iewes, for their disobedience, that fire came from heauen a∣boue and burned them, and the earth belowe swallo∣vved them for their factious disobedience, which of all other Nations were most factious to Moses in the wil∣dernesse, to Iosua at Iericho, and from time to time, to the Iudges in Israel. It was euer the wonted practice of policy among the seditious and factious people, to taunt Magistrates, or to speake some whispering speech against a prince, to feele and to heare, who will ioyne with them to moue seditiō. These be the Vipers that bite men priuily: these be the domesticall Serpents, the secret brue-bates of . Commonwealths, in whō there is no fayth found, nor othes to be beleeued, as Aristophanes sayth. Augustus Caesar hearing that a slaunderous fellow, one Elianus, spake vnreuerent words of the Emperour, the Magistrates willing to punish him; Augustus commaun∣ded Suet. in Aug. those that accused him, to goe and tell Elianus, Sciat Elianus, Augustum habere linguam, that Augustus had also a tongue, both to punish and to pardon. Philip of Macedon, in like sort to his friends that perswaded him to banish the like lewd fellowes, for their speach, out of his court and countrey, sayd, God Plut. in A∣potheg. forbid, lest they should speake of mee more in another Country then in Macedonia. But these were dilatory plees to looke further vnto thē, & to find more fellowes of the like practice. The example of Raymerus is much more commen∣ded, which looked vnto the disposition of his Noble men, and saw them vntractable, little waying the care
and loue the king had vnto them, contemning & despi∣sing both him and his lawes, giuing eare to seditious men, vntill the king saw their practice, waxed angry, perceiuing that they esteemed him not as their king, caused 11. of these, whom he saw most contentious, to Lips. lib. 3 be put to the sword in the City of Osca, giuing them this taunt withall, Nescit Vulpecula cum quo ludat. A ca∣ueat, not to pluck haires from Lions, as the prouerb is, Lecnem vellicare. To serue a king, saith Brasidas, consi∣steth in three precepts: Velle, obedire, & vereri. Brasida precepts. A certayne king in Persia, vsed in like sort as Rai∣merus did in Spayne, but of meaner persons, which for some reprochfull taunting wordes, that they spake of the king, he caused those scoffers nostrils, quite on both sides to be cut off, saying, Ecce sigillum Regis in conuitia∣tores, Behold the kings seale against scoffers. This seue∣rity is more commended in these princes, then the cle∣mency of Philip or of Augustus. What became of the taunt which the Egyptiās gaue to Ochus K. of Persia, naming the K. the Asse of Persia? King O∣chus taunt to the E∣gyptians. said Ochus, Faciam vt hic asinus vestrū bouem depascat. I wil make the Asse of Persia eate your Oxe of Egypt: for the Egyptians worshipped an Oxe, which they called Apis, as one of their chiefe gods, which within a while after, Ochus, surnamed Artaxerxes, marched with a great Oros. li. 3. cap. 7. army and subdued Egypt, and sacrificed their Oxe and their god Apis, according to his promise. Cotis, a Thracian K. answered one, that said his seuere gouernmēt was rather fury then clemency towards his Cotis. subiects. Yea, said Cotis, hic furor meus sanos reddit subdi∣tós. Clemency must be ioyned with seuerity. This my seuerity, said Cotis, shall make my subiects both to loue me and to feare me: Nimia clementia nocet.
Had Artabanus obserued the rule of Raymerus, or the seuerity of Cotis, he needed not to haue fled secret∣ly Artaba∣nus. from Parthia to king Izetes, beyond Armenia, a far meaner king then himselfe; neither to feare the snares and trappes of his subiects, being so great a king, called the king of kings; for so the kings of Parthia are called; but hee was restored to his kingdome, by this meane king Izetes. A thousand mishaps may happen to princes, which subiects are free of. Examples may be found of Iugurth king of Numidia, and of Persius, king of Persia, who were taken Captiues in their owne kingdomes, and dyed prisoners in Rome. Charles, surnamed sapiens, the French king, saw the king his father taken captiue in his owne kingdome, and caried into England; and the whole kingdome of Fraunce possest of Englishmen. The Romane Histories are full of these horrible ex∣amples, that by seditions and factions, the whole Em∣pire was welnigh destroyed, that I need not declare of Tomoembeus, the great Soldan of Egypt and Affricke, king and Lord of so many Nations, in his owne king∣dome Tomoem∣beus. Lip. lib. 2. how cruelly and strangely he was both depri∣ued of his kingdome and of his life: And how the great king, de nouo orbe, Mexicanus, after infinite good Mexicanus successe of great fame and fortune, lost suddenly both fame and fortune. I need not confirme these histories with authority, as of Achab, Zedechias, & other, who felt the iust Iudgemēt of God; neyther of Manasses and Nabuchadnezar, one 2. Reg. 10 confessing the Lord to bee God, being a king among beastes; the other a captiue and a prisoner out of his
owne kingdome, of whom the Greeke Prouerbe is ve∣rified, . Misery, captiuity and want, make kings to know thēselues. It is a true saying, Miseria bona mater prudētiae. Augustus Caesar would know of his friend Asinius Pollio, if he would come with him to the battell of Ac∣tium, betweene Mar. Antonius and him. He answe∣red the Emperour, In ciuil warre I wil take no part, but Vell. 11. I will rest and be a pray to the Conquerour. Tit. At∣ticus, though Pompey by a Decree pronounced him a Rebel that would forsake his Senators, the Consuls and the state of the Common-wealth in so troublesome a time, yet Atticus was of the like opiniō as Q. Hortensius Hortensius saying. was, who often vsed to brag that he had neuer byn in a∣ny ciuill warres. Cicero wrote his Epistle to them being his deere frends, that scattered cattel wil come to their flocke: how much more should such wise men be a cō∣fort Cic. ad Att. to their afflicted countrey and follow the best sort, seing Cato himselfe, Viua virtutis Imago, was a Captaine in these warres. Obserue the nature of factions in the best men. Cicero and Cato went out of Rome, as men determyned and resolute to take part with the best men, and with the state of the Empyre to abide what so euer came of it. Pomp. Atticus, & Q. Hortensius, men of no lesse iudge∣ment and credit in Rome then they were, forsooke to be factious or to take part with eyther Pompey or Caesar: at that time spake Cato to Pompey to strike the ground according to his promise, yet Solon in Athens, decreed a law, that they which would be neuters in ciuil warres, Gel. li. 11. cap. 12. and seperate themselues in their Countries calamities, they should be banished igne & aqua. The Prophet Elizeus spake to Ioas king of Israel being
in such distresse as Rome was, and bade Ioas smite the ground with his foot: and Ioas smote the ground three times and ceased. Elizeus was angry and sayd, Thou shouldest haue smitten fiue, sixe, or seuen times, and so 4. Reg. 13. many victories shouldest thou haue had ouer the Assy∣rians, as thou strookest the ground. So Pompey also sayd to Cato, If he should but strike the ground of Italy with his foot, hee should want no men Plut. in Pomp. on his side to fight against Caesar: But Pompey could not keepe promise with Cato, as Elizeus did with Ioas. Many promise more then they can performe, and doe deceiue themselues and others. I could well compare these seditious people to Balaam, who being sent for by king Balac, promising him great rewardes to come and curse Israel: as Ba∣laam rode on his iorney, an Angel with a drawen sword in his hand stood in his way, which the Asse sawe and started, but Balaam sawe not the Angell, vntill his Asse spake to him, and asked Balaam why he strake him? These Asses cary some false Balaam or other, not on their backs, but in their bellyes, that had rather go with Balaam to Balak to curse Israel, and to conspire against their owne natiue countrey, and if they can not pre∣uaile Num. 22. by cursing & banning, they will practise another way by policy and counsell, as Balaam did to deceiue Israel. But these practisers doe as Benhadad did, when hee was ouerthrowen in the mountaines, he said, that the The blas∣phemy of Benhadad. 3. Reg. 20. Gods of the mountaynes were against him, and ther∣fore Benhadad would haue a battell in the Valley with the Israelites: so these Balaams Asses euer haue done and will do, if they faile of their practice in the moun∣taine,
they wil practize in the valley: if they fayle in the valley, they will practise their policy in Kings Courts. Rebelles haue their snares layd downe, how trea∣son may be wrought, and their places appointed where their treason may be performed, and their time when to execute their treason: So did Pausanias kill Philip of Pausanias. Chaerea. Macedon at a Marriage: So did Chaerea kill Claudius the Emperour going to the Theaters: So did the fryer of Fraunce murther the King at his confession. What dare not practisers of policy do, if they dare kill Empe∣rours, Kings and princes? Claudius Nero sound no better way to feare Hanni∣bal his great enemy, then to throw Hasdrubals head in∣to the Tent of his brother Hannibal, which so amazed Hannibal and his army, that they made haste from Car∣thage to Italy. That Hanibal had nothing to comfort him, but to nippe the Romanes of so many heads of Senators, of Consuls, of Praetors, and of Romane Magistrates at the battell of Canna, of Trebeia, and of Thrasimena, that requited his brothers head. But these nippes were be∣tweene Hanibal and Scipio. For it was Sillaes practice, to put Italy in fright, and to make Rome amazed at his tyranny against his coun∣trey, that Cato wondred much to see so many heads of Magistrates and of Roman Citizens vpon poles, hang∣ed Plut. in Caton. Oros. li. 5. cap. 21. on euery gate at Rome, about the Capitoll, and in the market place, and that no Romane for Romes sake, had killed Silla. When Golias head was caried by Dauid to Saul, the Philistines fled, and they were followed vnto Geth, and vnto Acaron, and the slaughter was
great of the Philistians, and their terrour was more to see their Captaine Golias without a head, and therefore was the Sword of Golias hanged in the Temple at Ieru∣salē as a Trophey of victorie, as the picture of the Sun 1. Reg. 17 was vpon Ioshuas Tombe for his victory at Gibeon. When Holophernes head was brought frō the campe to Bethulia, by Iudyth, a womā, the slaughter was great of the Assyrians, and much more were they astonished Inaith 14 and ashamed, to find their General Holophernes without a head, and that by a woman. It was great policy in Alexander the great, to com∣maund all his souldiers to shoote their pieces and their arrowes together toward king Perus, in India, percey∣uing Ore. lib. 3. cap. 19. Dioder. lib. 17. that the soldiers would fly if the king were slaine. And therefore diuers great Captaines did practise such policy afterward to their soldiers: as Leuinus the Con∣sul perswaded his souldiers, and shewed them a naked bloudy sword in his hand, saying, that hee had killed Pirrhus. The like policy practised Iugurth, saying to his Numidian soldiers, that hee had slayne Caius Marius with his owne hand. It is the onely marke, that euery trecherous soldier in the field, and euery seditious subiect in the country shoot at, I meane, the head: for if the head be off, the body must needs fall. These be the very home-Vipers and secret Serpents that deuoure their natiue soyle. These practising Vipers are often troubled with the like monstrous Image which Hanibal saw & was asto∣nished in his dreame, & asking what he was, the Image Cic. de diuinat. 1. said: Vastitas Italiae. These Vipers see nothing waking nor sleeping, but the image of Hanibal, vastitatem patria, the spoyle of their countrey.
Sectio. 8. THeophrastus the Philosopher, and the successour of Aristotle his master, in Athens, faith, that the playing vpon a Harp, Lute, or any other instrument, doth heale the biting of some Vipers; Alex. lib. 2. cap. 17. which Asclepiades the Phisician doth confirme, that frantike people that are not well settled in their wittes, can by no meanes better recouer their health, quàm symphonia & vocum consensu, then by the consent of harmony and the voyce of a man: for Isme∣nias the Theban healed many Boetians his country mē, that were troubled with phrensie and madnesse, with symphony and harmony of musike. It is to bee beleeued, that Ismenias with his Flute could ease the Boetians, and Asclepiades with his phi∣sike heale the frantike. Such practises were necessary to be in many places, to preuent lunatike policies. Dauid with his Harpe did often mitigate the fury of king Saul, & asswaged oftentimes the phrenetical spirit 4. Reg. ca. 3. of Saul. Againe, Elizeus, whē both Iehosaphat K. of Iuda, and Ieboram king of Israel, would know the euent of the warres betweene them and Mesa, king of Moab, Elizeus called for a Minstrel, & whē the Minstrel plaid, the hand of the Lord came vpon Elizeus, and then he told the kings of the victory they should haue ouer Moab. Harmony, saith Cicero, doth incitare languentes, et lan∣guefacere Cic. de leg. 2. excitates, nothing quickneth mans mind more the such musike: & I doubt, such frantik men be likewise in many places abroad, ready like Saul with their speares
in their hands, that neyther Dauid with his Harpe, nor Elizeus with his Minstreles can heale these men of their frenzy. These be the Vipers that sting their friendes worse in England, then Hanibals Vipers stinged the Romans their enemies in Italy. These Vipers are so ful of poysō, that if they might kill with their sight, like the Cockatrice: or if they might infect with their breath, as the Viper of Affricke doth; and as they say of some kind of wolues, which if they come within their breath, they would kill some men both with sight and breath. And therefore we haue a Caueat to take heed of such infected wolues that haue daungerous and stinking breath, and be in sheepes clo∣thing, which liue as wolues, & dye as swine, they liue in all common-wealths, & they dwel together in cities, in towns, and in houses: we must be as subtill as Serpents against Serpents. Yet the Egiptians think themselues most happy and fortunate, and in great fauour with their gods, when The su∣perstition of Egypt. they are bitten with Serpents, Vipers and Crocadiles, because they worship those kind of Serpents as their gods; and truly fit gods for such a superstitious nation, for that they worshipped no other gods, but Serpents and beasts: wherein they were reprehended of the su∣perstitious Grecians: for you shall not read, that Cro∣cadiles, Cic. lib. 1. de Natur. Cats, and Dogs, and for that Wolues are like Dogs, and such other like, were slayn or kild in Egypt; for they haue such beasts in reuerence, and worship them as gods. So superstitious were they in Egypt, that it was coū∣ted an abomination among them to eate with the He∣brewes: Can. 43.
for the nature of superstition is, to condemne all other men in respect of themselues. So Ioseph vsed the Hebrewes his brethren by themselues. So did the Samaritans hate the Iewes, that they might not eate or conuerse with the lewes: for so did the woman of Samaria take vp Christ at Iacobs Well, Ioh. 4. hee being a Iewe, to aske water at a Samaritans hand: but wee haue Iewes, and Samaritans, Hebrues, and Egyptians, so mingled, that wee know not one a∣nother. What will not blinde superstition cause to doo? It made Nabuchadnezar and all Babel to say and con∣fesse: Great art thou God Bel. Dar. 14. It made the Ephesians say: Great art thou Diana a∣mong the Ephesians. Acts. 19. It made Charles the se uenth, the French king, with the consent of all his Counsell, to beleeue the super∣stitious speech of Ioanna Lotharinga, a woman, that shee was sent from God, to driue the Englishmen Ioseph. lib. 18. cap. 4 out of Fraunce, in the great Warres betweene Eng∣land and Fraunce. It is thus historied, Arma gerebat, viris preibat: But shee was taken by Englishmen, and burned at Rhotomagium. It made Pallina, the onely fayrest and chaste Gentle∣woman of Rome, to refuse two hundred thousand Drachmes of Decius Mundus, a yong Romane knight, for one nights lodging, and yet shee came most ioyfully with the consent of all her friendes and of her husband Saturninus, to lye with God Anubis in the Temple of Isis, for nothing, by the meanes of Isis Priests.
But this practize being found out by Pallina, she cō∣playned to her husband Saturninus, and her husband to the Emperour Tiberius, who first caused the priests of Isis to be slaine with the sword, the Idoll of Isis to be drownd in Tyber, the great God Anubis to be burned with fire, and Decius Mundus the yong knight for euer to bee banished from Rome. Nabuchadnezar destroyed the priests of Baal in Ba∣bylon, as Tiberius destroyed the priests of Isis in Rome: And so God stirred vp Iehu, to destroy the house of A∣chab in Israel. All dangerous and rebellious seditions grow of I∣dolatrous superstition: therefore the Lord reprehen∣ded Ochosia, because he maried the daughter of Achab. So Iehosaphat was reprehended of the Prophet Elize∣us, & in danger of his life, for that he ioyned in friend∣ship 4. Reg. 1. with the same Idolatrous Achab. Salomon, by growing in friendship with Pharaoes daughter, lost his kingdome: and Sampson, by marying 3. Reg. 11 with Dalila a Philistine, lost his life. Sara complayned vnto Abraham, that Ismael should not be in one house with Isaac her sonne; which words though they were grieuous vnto Abraham, yet God commaunded him to doe what Sara sayd; for in Isaac Gen. 21. shall thy seed be blessed. We must not only auoyd euill mens company, but also depart from the place where they bee, and where they dwell. For God commaunded Abraham to de∣part from Vt, his owne countrey, being an Idolatrous Gen. 12. place. So God commaunded Iacob to shun Mesopota∣mia Gen. 31. & the company of his brother Esau, a wicked man. Whilestany of the seditious house of Saul liued a∣mongst
the Iewes, the plague neuer ceased in Israel: but when at the request and petition of the Gibio∣nites, 2. Sam. 21. Dauid hanged them vp, the Plague ceased. The like is historyed of Phinees, that, for killing of Numb. 25 Zymri and Cosbi for their whoredome in the camp, the Plague ceased. Elizeus being asked of Hazael why he wept? I weep, said the Prophet, knowing the euill thou shalt do to the children of Israel, in burning their houses and Cities, 4. Reg. 8. slaying their yong men with the sword, & in that thou shalt dash out the braines of their sucking children, and all to teare their women with child. Such factious and seditious men, qui ex fraude, fal∣laciis et mendaciis, &c. as sayth Cicero, haue diuers tymes the like intent, as Hazael had to Israel. A seditious per∣son seeketh mischiefe in his heart. Pro. 17. There was a letter writtē vnto Caesar, climing for the Empire of Rome, raging in his fury against his coun∣trey, willing him not to giue too much care to such as are greedy seditious men, & desirous of slaughters, and neuer satisfied with bloud, who coūselled Caesar to that purpose, that the City of Rome being taken, they might take rape and spoyle, and vse their lust for a Law. Against these & such like, the Prophet Ezechiel doth pronounce famyne, plague, warre & deuouring beasts, Ezech. 7. to try (if it be possible) whether ill and wicked people wil mend and become seruants to God, and subiects to their King: for (sayth Salomon of such men) if they had Pro. 1. . called for knowledge, and sought for wisdome, as they sought after money; or had they digged for celestial wisdome, as they did for earthly treasure: then should they vnderstand the feare of the Lord, and finde the
knowledge of God: but such seeke spoyles and prayes, they onely muse how they might come by money, vita et sanguis eorum pecunia. Yet Dionisins, after hee had robbed the Temple of Proserpina among the Locresians, and robbed Iupiter Olympius of his golden Garment in Peloponesus, and robbed Aesculapius of his golden beard in Epidau∣rus, Cic. lib. 3. de Natur. without any resisting of him, for that the people thought that he should be punished as Xerxes was once in Greece, that eyther Proserpina would haue plucked out his eyes, or Iupiter would haue kild him with thun∣derbolts, or Esculapius would haue tortured him with plagues and long sickenes, supposing Dionisius should not haue so escaped free for his sacriledge, no more thē Xerxes, who for burning their gods and their Temples in Greece, their gods haue so plagued him, that three hundred thousand Persians were slaine in Greece, and Cic. de leg. 3. Xerxes himselfe murthered by his Nephew Artabanus, and therfore went they to the Temple of Eumenides, which were Vltrices et vindices facinorum et scelerum, to yeeld thankes to these Furyes for the reuenging of the violating of their Temples, their Altars & their gods. Sectio 9. THEAGINES leading an Army a∣gainst the Magarians, his army would know of him whē he would put them to martch in order of battell. Theagines answered, at Megara, and in the mean season, sent secretly certein Horsmen,
like the enemyes to set vpon them on the sodaine and to assault the Athenians: which being done, Theagines marked how euery souldier was forward & took place to fight. I promised you, said Theagines, this morning to put you in array at Megara; march now forward, and be as ready for the enemy at al times as now, and seeke not to know the secret purpose of your Captaine, but be ready at a becke: for as Clearchus the Lacedemoni∣an said: good Souldiers ought to be more carefull of their Captaine then of their enemies. Now Theagines did this, to finde out false and seditious Souldiers from the true. Licinius Crassus, being asked when he would remoue his Tents, answered: Doest thou meane to sleepe, that thou wouldst know whē they remoue? Vereris ne tubam Front. lib. 1. cap. 1. exaudeas? So Metellus answered the like question, being asked what he thought to do the next morning: I wold burne my Coate, sayd Metellus, if I thought my Coate could tell it. How many thinke you are of Metellus mind, which would that none should know their policy, neither the time of their practise? they will not onely burne their coates and their shyrts, but their skinnes and their flesh, and yet often times their practises are descryed. In Egipt, such seditious and trecherous men, for their secret practise, doe worship and also sacrifice vnto the dumbe Image of Harpocrates, that all secret practises might be kept close. In Rome they do sacrifice vnto Angerona, whose finger is alwayes on her mouth, in token of silence. In Persia, they offer also sacrifice vnto that Image of silence, whose lippe is sealed vp with a signet, with the
which the Persiās vse at the chusing of any of the kings Counsell, to lay the kings signet on their lips. But to whom doe they sacrifice their tongue? To the dumbe Deuill that stoppeth their tongues from praying vn∣to So did Alex. to Ephestion. God: and to the deafe Deuill they sacrifice their eares, because they will not heare the Word of God; for thereby should their policy and practice bee knowne. The Romanes, to preuent these secret practisers, brought vp Dogges, which are quicke of sent, in high Arneb. li. 6. aduers. gentes. Towers, & fed Geese in the Capitoll, which are quicke of hearing, that by the barking of the Dogges, warning might be giuen of the enemies comming, and by the gaggling of the geese, men might be waked out of their sleepe, as Manlius was, to saue both Rome and the Ca∣pitoll from the Gaules. So did Masinissa, king of Nu∣midia, bind great dogges in his bed-chamber, to watch practisers. But Christ gaue vs a better lesson, and a sounder watch, Vigilate & orate, Watch and pray: the Deuill is that Dogge that commeth in through the windowe. Our Sentinel is our conscience, which should bee a brydle to curbe wicked men from trechery, from se∣dition, and from conspiracy. The seditious man, sayth Cicero, Panam semper ante eculos versari vidit. Paulus Emilius commaunded his soldiers to be vnar∣med in their watch, for that they should not sleepe, and be more carefull of their watch. Xenoph, in Paed. So Cyrus would not haue his soldiers to be idle, lest they should become quarrellous and seditious. I may not omit a rare example, of Manlius the fa∣ther,
to correct his yong sonne Manlius, who fought a battell against the enemies with good successe of vic∣tory, yet against his fathers rule, and therfore was to be Front. li. 4 cap. 1. punished with stripes, and by his father to be slaine ac∣cording to the military discipline, vntill the souldiers tooke part with young Manlius against the father. Se∣dition grew hereby in the eampe, that young Manlius, to auoyd this sedition, made meanes to the army that he might be punished, to satisfy the law and his fathers commaundement. This was a rare example: but we speake of such as neither esteemed parents nor Prince, neither King nor countrey: such a one was Iudas Galilaeus, so seditious, Iudea pla∣gued by sedition. that he brought a multitude of the Iewes, like himself, to follow him, and promised them that the Romanes should be by him fully vanquished. But Felix the Ro∣mane President made ready certayne Romane soldiers to ouerthrow them, and put them all to the sword in the wildernes. Straight after this ouerthrow, another seditious prophet came from Egypt to Ierusalem, professing the name of a Prophet, promising the people, if they would follow him to moūt Oliuet, fiue furlongs from the City, they should see the walles of Ierusalem, at his commaundement to fall downe, as the walles of Iericho did at the blowing of Rammes hornes, by the Iosh. 6. commaundement of Iosua, that thereby they might easily enter the City. These were such priuate seditious men, as Aton∣ges, a Shepheard, and after him Barcosbe, who kept the people in hand, and made the Rabbins themselues to beleeue, that by his policy and practice, they would
make an end of the Romane warres. Thus from one seditious man to another, the mul∣titude was led like a Flocke of sheepe to the slaughter, that when Festus succeeded Felix, he found all Iudaea full of such Robbers, Cooseners, Magicians, yea Con∣iurers and deceyuers of the people, that Festus cut them off by degrees, as Felix did before Festus, who met with Ioseph. lib. 20. cap. 6. this Egyptian and his fellowes, & slew foure hundred and tooke foure hundred aliue, yet these being destroy∣ed and cut off, like Hydraes head they still multiplyed: so seditious were the Iewes. In the time of Antiochus, many wicked men went out of Ierusalem, and moued much people, saying: Eamus et disponamus testamentum Gentibus: Let vs go & make couenant with the Heathen. This practise plea∣sed the people well, so that at Ierusalem was an open Schole of the Heathen, against whom Amos the Pro∣phet cryed, Vae qui opulenti estis in Sion, et considitis in Amos. 6. montibus Samariae: Wo be vnto you which are rich in Sion, and trust to the mountaines of Samaria: wo be vnto them that depart from Bethel to Bethauen, from God to the Deuill, from their friends to their foes. Another Magician named Theudas, professed him selfe to be a Prophet, and for proofe therof willed the Iewes to follow him to Iordan, & they should see him do as much with a word at Iordan, as either Elizeus did with Elias mantle, or as Moyses did with a white sticke at the red Sea, that as the red sea deuided it selfe and gaue place to Moyses to passe through dry, so should Iordan do to Theudas. But Festus the Roman President, hauing knowledge of Theudas practice, armed certein Romanes, slue the seditious, and brought Theudas head
vpon a long pole from Iordan to Ierusalem. Such seditious men and the like euer practised po∣licy, to mooue the people to tumults & mutinyes, they are neuer quiet but when they practise such policies, then they thinke they haue Gyges ring in their hands, that no men see them, and they suppose them selues as fortunate, if they effect their purpose, as Polycrates did of his Ring that hee threw into the sea and found it againe: yet Polycrates fortune was to hang afterward, as Iudas and Theudas were slaine. There is another kind of politike practisers, euen with kings in Court, called Syrenes aulae, much made of and esteemed: but they also practise in a glasse, so fickle, that slattery endureth no longer then the glasse wherein it is practised; for when the glasse of any wicked practice is broken, the practicer is also be∣trayed. But Cicero gaue a caueat to the Senators, that they should bee carefull whome to beleeue, Nihil subito cre∣dendo, sed semper omnia cauendo, and so writes to his friēd Atticus, Take heede whome you beleeue, Nisi vultu & fronte. Another cryeth out aloud from Greece, that no∣thing is more profitable to many men then diffidence, as sayth Euripides, Few can be excused, if accusation  will serue: Auris non fides prabenda, said Maecenas to Augustus. It is written of the Emperour Constantine, amongst Constant. many vertues, hee had this fault, that hee permitted pickthanks alwayes to haue accesse vnto him. Of such men Nero was called Princeps delatorum, who allowed the fourth part of the goods of thē that were accused,
to the accusers, and therfore were these accusers called in scorne, Quadruplateres. Tyberius the Emperor, when the Senators thought good to abrogate these great rewards graunted to ac∣cusers, Tiberius his saying. sayd, Iurasubuerti, si custodes legum amouerentur. So did Vitellius punish certain Mathematicians with death, by meanes of such secret & dangerous accusers, without licence to answere the accusers. Domitianus gaue attentiue eare to such as would ac∣cuse secret faults of men, being true or otherwise; in∣somuch as one accuser accused another, being so ma∣ny, that Rome was full of these pickthanks, while these . Arist poli. 5. cap. 15. Emperours reigned; no better then Dionisius the Ty∣rant, who appoynted certaine men, whom he himselfe named Sagogidas, to inform him what euery man spake and did. Benhadad the king of Syria was much vexed in his mind, and suspected some of his chiefe seruants, & sayd vnto them, Who betrayeth mee to the king of Israel? It was answered by one of his chamber, that king Ben∣hadad could neither speake nor doe any thing in his 4. Reg. 6. priuy chamber, but Elizeus the man of God knew it at Dothan. It is a true saying, that he that is God and Man, doth he are our wicked blasphemies, and seeth our treche∣rous practises: which if he say, Quis decipiet Achab vt cadat? there shall want no lying spirits to practise policy and to deceiue such. 3. Reg. 22 But againe to pick-thanks. Vespasianus, and after him his son, Titus, so hated such Promoters, that they cau∣sed these fellowes to be scourged and whipped round about the Theaters in the sight of the people.
Antonius, surnamed Pius, decreed that priuy and secret accusers that could not prooue euidently their accusa∣tion to be true, should dye for it, and if their accusation were prooued, they had what the law permitted them, and so dismissed them cum ignominia. The like is sayd of the Emperour Opilius Macrinus, that he could not abide to heare the name of a Pick. Alex. lib. 4 cap. 22. thanke. Such busy secret accusers are like Crates the Theban, who was surnamed, the Dore-opener, for that hee would rush into euery mans company to heare what was sayd, and to see what was done: Many such are both in Courts and Countreyes. Placida loquentes, praua struentes, such haue ouerthrowne many kings and princes. It had bene better for Alexander to haue Epicharmus sentence euery where in his mouth, Memento diffidere, then to haue Darius signet vpon his finger in Babylon. And it had bin better for Caesar to haue followed Cice∣roes counsel before he came to Pharsalia, then to weare Pompeyes Ring vpon his finger in Affricke. But such is the force of flattery in Courts and Countreyes, that the flatterer carries the earth vpon his backe, as Atlas (as Poets faigne) carries the heauens vpon his shoul∣ders. The Persiās and the Medes were such flatterers, & that not only to their kings, whom they adore & worship as The flatte∣ry of the Persians. gods, but in saluting one another, they would bend & bow them selues vnto the ground: Alexander the great was contented in Macedonia, to be the sonne of his fa∣ther king Philip, but in Persia they made him the sonne of Iupiter. His father Philip in like sort was in Macedonia, but
when he came & conquered Greece, in any great assē∣bly whē they elected new Magistrates, they prayed vn∣to Iupiter, Apollo and Hercules, to giue good successe to these Officers and Magistrates: the Argiues so flattered Philip, that they wrote his name, & named him next after Hercules, to be the fourth in their petition and supplication to their gods. The people so flattered Herod a wicked king, after he had slaine Iames, and imprisoned Peter, that at his last Oration which he made to the Iewes, the people cried out: Vox dei, non hominis, but Herod presently fel down Acts 12. dead and was eaten with wormes. So the false Prophets flattered the king of Israel A∣chab, that he should haue victory ouer the Syriās: these flattering prophets so practised with such strāge spirits, that Achab was slaine by the Syrians, & was brought 3. Reg. 22 dead to be buryed in Samatia. The Atheniās so flattered Demetrius, that his Image was caryed and borne with Iupiter, Minerua & Mars Demetrius much slat∣tered in Athens. in the Banner of Peplon, and Demetrius was the fourth, but he died in prison. The Athenians lodged and entertained strangers to see, to heare, and to learne some newes; any lying flatterer might be welcome to Athens. But others loue not to be so flattered, as Octauius Au∣gustus and Alexander Seuerus, who so hated Flatterers, that they had spies abroad, to finde them out: and if Elattery hated of Augustus. any seemed eyther with words or outward behauiour to be like Flatterers, they should bee streight banished the Courts of these two Emperours. Cassander, saluted of all men as a king, and so called, hee loued not to be flattered, nor to vsurpe the name
of a king, and though he was written vnto by the name of a king, yet he refused to be so called. Neyther would Porus. Diodor. lib. 17. Porus K. of India, after he was conquered by Alexander the great, suffer any man to cal him king. This seemed to be great modesty, to refuse the names of kings being offred thē. Yet many Tyrants vsurp the names of kings, and many make meanes to become kings, Emperours, and Princes, practising many policyes by trecherie, by murther, by poysoning and killing: & many prac∣tise meanes to become Officers and Magistrates, and yet would not be seene practisers therein. Sectio 10. IN Rome such polycies were practised, such sutes were made to become ey∣ther The elec∣tion of Magistrats in Rome.  Thucid. lib. 3. Consull, Pretor, Tribune, Censor or Aedile, that the 35. Tribes were so flattered and followed in Martius field with money, with friends, and with all meanes possi∣ble to become Magistrates and officers within the Ci∣ty of Rome, and at that time the Arte of Flattery was there to bee taught and learned. There, they that were to be elected, stood before the Senators and Consuls, clothed all in white garments, without gownes, for that was a garment suspicious, and not at any time to be suffred by the law, lest they might eary some rewards to corrupt the people vnder them; and after they were thus chosen, they were accompa∣nyed from Martius field, when they had flattered the Alex. lib. 4. cap. 3. people with thankes for their election: then they went vnto the Capitoll, and from the Capitoll they were brought vnto their houses.
This kinde of election continued but a short time, yet flattery endured longer, and was practised at any change of Magistrates or Officers, yet Lu. Crassus could not be brought before Q. Scauola to giue thankes vnto the people, lest hee should seeme to haue the name of a flatterer. Paulus Aemilius, when he was chosen Consul to goe with an army into Persia, and was for to come vnto Paul. Ae∣milius saying. the Capitoll to thank the people, according to the Ro∣mane custome, he refused, & sayd, If they could find a fitter man to go against king Perseus, he was wel contē∣ted to yeeld againe his new Consulship vnto the peo∣ple, and to make their election of another: he thought it not fit to flatter the people with faire wordes. Such was Phocion in Athens, hee would make no meanes vnto the people, neither would Phocion be pre∣sent at any time of election of newe Officers or Magi∣strates: he would neyther send nor speake for any Of∣fice Phocion. in Athens: the Athenians vsed so often to cor∣rupt people for Offices and Honors to become Magi∣strates, that Demosthenes cryed out, that Populus et pecu∣nia were the Monsters of Athens, as Capitolium and Fo∣rum were in Rome. Such was Aristides, a man most iust and most quiet among the Athenians: but these were rare men to bee found. But Clisophus could halt in Macedonia with king Philip, & said, he had also the Gowt aswel as King Philip. Cleo could better please Alexander with his flattery, thē Calisthenes could do with his philosophy. That Prince Cleo, a great flat∣terer. ought not to be called a Prince, where trueth dare not be spoken, & in whose Court men are often consumed more by flatterers in the time of peace, then by the
enemies in the warres: so Q. Curtius saith, Regum opes sae∣pius assentatio, quàm hostis euertit. There is a people in some parte of Ethiopia, called Diodor. li. 4. cap. 1. Cathaei, that if their king do halt or be lame in any part of his body, his houshold seruants must likewise halt and be lame in the selfesame place where the King is lame. Alcamenes was much praised in Athens, for that he made the halting Image of Vulcan to stand vpright in such garments that hid the deformity of his halting; And yet for all the skill of Alcamenes, sayd Cicero, Clau∣dum Cic. de diuinat. 2. habebant deum, the Athenians had but a lame god. I feare, that many beside the Athenians, with Vulcans garments, would fayne hide their halting, and would seeme to goe vpright, though they halt with Vulcan for all Alcamenes skill. Pilate had a better garment that hid his faults before Tib. Caesar; for, being accused that he put an innocent man to death, which was Christ, hee put on Christes vnseamed coate before he came to Caesar: to whō when Math. Westmin. Pilate came, Caesar so imbraced him, that men mused much thereat; but after Pilate departed out of Caesars sight, Caesar being as before incensed against him, sent in haste for him againe, and he hauing Christs coat on, was in like sort embraced and entertayned of the Em∣perour as before: for he could finde no fault in Pilate while Christes coat was on him: a farre better garment then Vulcans garment: yet more seek Vulcans Garment to hide their halting, then do seeke Christes coate to learne to go vpright: but these Practisers, if they may not be helped with Vulcans garment, they will vse Ti∣mantes policy.
At the sacrificing of Iphigenia, Timantes practised his best skill to paint the lamentation of Menelaus, the sadnes of Vlisses, the sobbes and sighes of Aiax, but such was the extreme passion and pensiuenesse of Agamem∣non Plin. 35. cap. 10. for his daughter, that Timantes could not set it downe in colours, but was forced to throw a Veile o∣uer Agamemnons head, to excuse the defect of his skill in so tragicall a sight. Many do practise the like policy, Vel. lib. 8. cap. 11. that if they can not effect their skill to their purpose, then they practise how they may hide their defect, and couer it as Timantes did couer Agamemnons head. There be many sicke of the sickenes called Tarantu∣la which if men would looke vpon them, they seemed Alex. lib 2. cap. 17 as men halfe dead. No remedy was found for this Ta∣rātula in Apulia, but such as was in Greece vsed against phrensie and lunacie, which was the playing of Min∣strels. Many are sicke of this sicknes Tarantula. Sectio. 11. SALOMON, a man indued with singular wisdome, taught how mē should be cured that were possessed with Deuils, and taught also how Deuils might bee driuen away, which the Iewes for a long time vsed after Salomon: Deuils ad∣iured be∣fore Ves∣pasian. Ioseph. li. 8 cap. 2. This is that which Iosephus saw being in place himselfe, one Eleazarus healing diuers that were violently tor∣mented and vexed with euill spirits in presence of Ves∣pasian the Emperour and his sonne Titus, Tribunes, and diuers Captaines, by laying vnto the nostrilles of the man possessed a Ring, hauing in the signet of the Ring a roote which Salomon shewed, that by the smell
of that roote, the euill spirit should come out through the sicke mans nose, whom the Iew Eleazarus adiured neuer to returne to that man againe, making mention of Salomons name vnto the spirit. And for that the Emperor Vespasian being then pre∣sent with his souldiers, might know that these men tor∣mented in this sort were healed, Eleazarus set a Bason full of water in their sight, and charged the euill spirit at his departing out from the man, to shewe a certeine signe in the water to the beholders, that by the sight thereof, they might beleeue the Arte of Eleazarus. The like is written in Tobias, of the spirit Asmodeus, Tob. 8. which was commaunded to come out of Sara Raguels daughter, by the Lyuer of a Fish. So diuers are vexed with deuils, that some carry do∣uils in their pokes in glasses, some in Images in their chambers, and some haue them in their Temples wor∣shipped and adored, and vse to aske counsell of them: for they are possest with deuils, that aske counsell of deuils. To such went Achab, when he went for counsell to Baals Prophets, to know the euents of his warres be∣tweene 3. Reg. 22 him and Mesa king of Moab. To such went Saul, when he went to Phaetonissa the witch at Endor, to aske counsel for the like purpose, as 1. Sam. 18 Ahab did, to know how hee should speed against the Philistines. And to such went Ahazia, when he went to Beelze∣bub the god of Accaron, to know if he might recouer 4. Reg. 1. his health. Many goe to Beelzebub the god of Accaron, and to Baals, Prophets and the like, to learne how they may practise policy, as Hazael did when he went to Elizeus,
pretending to knowe if king Benhadad his Master should recouer his health: but Hazael practised such polycies, besides the strangling of the king his Master, that it made Elizeus to weep, knowing the tyranny that Hazael would practise against Israel. Many such seditious persons practise the like mischief in their hearts, as Hazael did, which if men might see in∣to, as Elizeus did, or might open their hearts & make an Anatomy of their bodies, as the Athenians did by Aris∣thomenes the Messenian, which being taken captiue by the Athenians, they bowelled him, and found his heart full of hayres, Cer pilosum (as Plinie sayth) no doubt, many would bee found to haue cordapilosa, as Aristho∣menes Plin. 11. cap. 37. was among the Athenians. Some Emperours of Rome had the Image of For∣tune made of glasse, & placed it in their gallery, which The image of fortune made of glasse. stood alwayes there from one Emperour to another, to signifie the vncertaynety of mans life, and to put them in remembrance how frayle and fickle mans state is. And therefore one of the Emperors hauing a glasse in his hand, after hee dranke, threw the glasse against the walles, and said, This resembleth the state of an Em∣perour in Rome. Such was the continuance of the Emperors of Rome, that some were slaine in the fields, some in the towne, some in their chambers, and some in their beds: Such was their practice to come to the Empire, and such was the policy vsed in like maner, to destroy and to murther them in their Empires. Of these and such like men Diogenes the Cinick said, that they were thrice most miserable men, to aske coū∣sell . of deuils, and go to the glasse of Iannes and Iambres the Sorcerers of Egypt.
Others there bee, that practise their policy in the glasse of vsury, much frequēted amongst Citizens; for it is a maxime with them, Nihil turpe cum lucro, any kind of gayne is good with the vsurer, they loue it as they . loue themselues, Sanguis, vita & eorum anima pecunia, It is as deare vnto them as the bloud of their bodies, or the life of their soules, whose heauen is the world, like Vlisses, who preferred his country of Ithaca before e∣ternity, whose bellie is their god with the Epicure, and whose harts are so hardned, that neither the late plague, nor the Pestilence, nor any punishment which God doth inflict vpon them, can mollify their stony hearts. Vsurers were banished from Athens by the Law of Solon, and their Tables of Vsurie burned in Athens, . which was the purest fire that euer Agesilaus saw, as he him selfe said. And in Sparta, by the Lawe of Licurgus, no V∣surer might dwell within the Confines of Lacedemo∣nia. Such Vsurers and Monopolies were also banished from all Asia, by Lucullus: and for that the name of an Vsurer should not be named within Asia, hee vsed the lawe of Amnestia by Thrasibulus made in Athens. . So did Cate then Consull, cleare all Sicilia from V∣surers and Monopolies: these be Sorices Reip. the Rats of a Common wealth: these be the Moths that eate mens clothes on their backs: these be the Wormes that breed in the Bee-hiues, that deuoure all the hony. There be others that be ambitious practisers, more dangerous, which hunt for to become Magistrates and Officers: against these, the law of Ostracismos was put  in execution in Athens, and the law Petalismes in Syra∣cusa, and euery where such were banished Igne & aqua;
these be clymers and practisers how to be mighty, and to be aduaunced vnto greatnes: these were of the mon∣sters of Athens, Noctua, populus, & Draco, of whom De∣mosthenes speaketh. In the time of Alexander the great, none would he suffer great besides himselfe in all the earth. In the time of Antiochus, none great in all Asia but hee. And a∣mongst the Romanes, none but one Pompey the great. . But in these dayes many practise their policy to be∣come great, against the rule of the Philosopher, who saith, Neminem vnum magnum facere, &c. The Lawyers also haue their glasse, where they may see Balaam ryding on his Asse: Balac attended on The Ima∣ges of kīgs of Iudges, and of Iustice. with Moabites & Madianites, with bribes and rewards in their hands to haue Balaams counsell, which might put them in remembrance of corrupt Iudges, and greedy Lawyers. In this glasse, they shall see also Moloc with a reaching hand: But there is a better sight in this Glasse, the Images of Iudges without hands: the Ima∣ges of Kings, without eyes: and Iustice it selfe pictured without a head, to signify, that Kings should be without affection, and Iudges without corruption: Ne gratia,  precio, odio vel timore eludi possit Iustitia. The vse of Glasses were made to this purpose, to reforme and to instruct men of outward and inward faults. Such a Glasse had Plato, to reforme Drunkards, and furious hasty men, that by beholding of them∣selues Platoes glasse. in Platoes Glasse, they might see how they were depryued of all their sences, and left without any humane part that should be in reasonable men, and that by looking in this Glasse, they might re∣forme
themselues: Ad hoc vtile est nobis Speculum: A Glasse is necessary herein. Such a Glasse had Socrates to shew his Schollers, that they which were most beautifull and goodly, , &c. Plu, in Timokon. wanting no comely forme of body, might learne by Socrates Glasse, not to deface that Beauty, or deforme that body with any foule vice, or filthy fault of the minde: And if they were lame, crooked, or any way deformed, in the same Glasse, Socrates taught them how to amend and to counteruaile the deformity of the body, with wisdome, knowledge, and vertue of the mind: Ingenii cultu morum{que} probi∣tate pensarent. This was the vse of the Glasse, sayd Seneca, to amend faults, and not to learne faults; not to learne Idolatry, as Nestorius did, to make Mirrors of men; or like Narcissus, to flatter our selues. Narcissus glasse. Archimedes Glasse was much more commen∣ded in Syracusa to deceiue the Romanes his enemyes by his Glasse, then we by our owne Glasses to de∣ceyue Archime∣des glasse. our selues. It was lawfull for Archimedes to practise policy, to burne Townes, Cyties and Shippes by his Glasse, to destroy the enemyes of Syracusa. Next this Glasse of flattery, commeth in the practi∣sing Glasse of Idolatry. If Nestorius and Narcissus deceiued themselues & o∣thers, what wonder is it that Zeuxes painted a Bitch on a Table so liuely, that Dogges at the sight thereof barked? Or that Parrhasius painted a Mare in such sort, that Horses neighed at the lookng on it?
Neither of that picture which Praxiteles made, which was the Image of a beautifull comely woman of Mar∣ble, to stand in a Temple at Gnydos, that some youth Aelian. 2. de var. hist Plin. li. 36 cap. 5. of that citie supposed the Image to bee no lesse a wo∣man, then the Dogges that barked at Xeuxes Bitch, or the Horses that neighed at Parrhasius Mare, or the Bull that lowed at the brasen cow in Syracusa: but I thinke not so of the woodden Cow of Creet, the mother of Monsters. But these are things naturall and easie to be beleeued in Beasts, because they are beasts: but for people of rea∣son and vnderstanding, to loue Images and pictures, & to honour & worship them, is more beastly then beasts them selues, because they should not be beasts. Rome, of all kingdoms and countries, was beholden to Images: for when Camillus had ouercome the Vei∣ents, Plut. in Camil. one of Camillus Soldiers asked Iunoes image, Vis migrare Romam? Who answered, Libenter velo. So the Image of Fortune in Coriolianus time, at the dedication of her Temple, gaue great thankes vnto Plut. in Camil. the Matrones of Rome, and sayd, Recte me dedicastis Matronae. The citie of Rome being vexed with a long plague, was admonished by Sybillaes books, to send to Epidau∣rus for Aesculapius image, who followed the Ambassa∣dours Oro. lib. 3. cap. 22. in forma Serpentis, from Epidaurus to Rome, and healed the Romane plague, so that Rome was so full of Images, that Cicero sayd, Quot linguae hominum Romae, tot nomina Deorum. In Athens were but fewe lesse in number then in Rome, they had as many Images in Athens, as they had Poets to faine thē, or Painters to paint them, they
had so many Images, that they had an Altar ignoto deo, that some Philosophers thought good to banish all Poets and Painters out of Athens. In Egypt, the mother of Idolatry, were the Images of all kinde of Beasts, of Serpents, of Fowles & of fishes worshipped as gods, O seculum Daemoniorum, non De∣orum! And therefore Iehu vsing this stratagem to destroy these Idols, fayned a day of great solemnity and sacri∣fice The stra∣tagem of Iehu. 4. Reg. 10 to Baal, and called al the prophets, priests & frends of king Achab to this solemnity, saying, that he would, as Achab had done before, sacrifice to Baal: and hauing them all within the Temple, commaunded certayne soldiers to inuade and kill them. So God taught Moses such stratagems in Egipt against Pharao, and to Iosua at Iericho, and at Ai, to destroy the enemies of God. Ergamenes, king of Ethiope, vsing the like policy as Iehu did, to make an end of all the priests of Ethiope, who by their Lawe had authority to elect a King, so Dioder.  4. cap. 1. long to raigne as pleased those priests to suffer him, dis∣sembled the like policy as Iehu did, to solemnize a sa∣crifice to their gods, where he slue them euery one. So is dissimulation lawfull in such and like actions. So Chusa dissembled with Absolom, and said, God saue 2. Sam. 17 King Absolom, as though he had refused and forsaken king Dauid, and was become an obedient seruant to Absolom. By this meanes he ouerthrew Achitophel and his counsell, and afterward Absolom. Samuel dissembled his comming to Bethlehem to a∣noynt Dauid king ouer Israel, pretending that he came 1. Sam. 16 to do sacrifice, as the Lord commaunded.
So Dauid fayned himselfe madde, lest he should go 1. Sam. 21 with king Achish to fight against Israel. Dissimulation therefore may be vsed, yea euen in . Plat. de Rep. 5. Courts, as Plato sayd, that Princes may dissemble, to preuent greater harmes to their subiects, and may vse such policies as the Phisician doeth to his patients, to put poyson in his drugges, to heale his patients. Yet I remember Augustines saying of dissimulation, that there be many kinds of dissimulatiō, & in some of these saith Augustin, Non magna culpa, non tamen sine culpa. Aug. in 5. Psal. Likewise Licurgus held it necessary, that both dissi∣mulation and ambition should be sometimes vsed to offend in the least Iustice, to performe a greater Iu∣stice, . &c. Plu. in Pol. and yet not allowing that, but palliata Iustitia, and that for necessities sake. So Cato dissembled and suffred sedition in his house among his seruants. Where the Lyons skin, saith Lysander, reacheth not, . Plu. in Cat. it must be sowed to the Fox skyn: So that Princes must be of the nature of the Lyon, and yet be as wise and as wary as the Fox. So Hanibal, by a flattering stratagem said, that those that would go to the enemyes to learne and to know Front. lib. 3. cap. 3. the counsell and seruice of the enemyes, were not to be called Traytors, but the onely expert Soldiers, & most worthy to be esteemed. Then were they more bold, and went the next night as they had appointed. The Romanes hauing often times vnderstanding of the sub∣tilty of Hanibal, tooke them and cut off their hands, and sent them to Hannibal without hands. Diodorus hauing a garryson in Amphipolis, suspec∣ting Diodorus garrison at Amphip. two thousand Thracians which were seditious in
the towne, fearing some conspiracy against Amphy∣polis, fayned that certayne ships of the enemy sayled at the next shore, which should be a great spoyle to the Thracians, and most easie to obtayne. The Thracians being greedy and seditious Souldiers, gathered their company together, and set out of Amphipolis with great hope of a good pray, who as soone as they were out of the City, the Captain commaunded the Gates to be shut and kept them out, & so they cleered Am∣phypolis: Such policyes must be vsed against false sedi∣tious people, to finde them out, to ryd and cleere them from honest people. By such dissimulation through sedition, Hanibal got Tarentum. So Marcellus, by corrupting of Sosistra∣tus, wanne Syracusa. So Philip of Macedon, by the Cic. do diuinat. 2 like, got Samos of Apollonius. He could so Philip∣pizin with Pythia, as Demostenes sayth, that none might haue accesse to Apollo, but Philip of Macedon. But Philip being admonished by the selfe same Py∣thia, to take heed and to looke to Quadriga, though hee Cic. de Fate. caused streight all the Coaches, waggons, and Chari∣ottes within Macedonia, to be taken asunder, and with all care shunned & auoyded the place in Booetia, called Quadriga, yet Philip could not auoyd that Quadriga, which was written vpon the hylt of Pausanias sword, with the which Philip was slayne. Iulius Caesar practised no such policy, for he quieted a Legion of seditious Souldiers with one word, Num vos pudeat, Quirites? Are ye not ashamed, you Romans, of your seditious practice? They suspecting that Cae∣sar had intelligence of their practice, they were pre∣sently reconciled and pacified with that word, & with the sight of Caesar.
With the like word, Demades an Orator of Athens, being taken captiue by Philip of Macedon, with many more poore captiue Greekes, ouer which Philip so try∣umphed, daūcing & feasting with Garlands & Crowns and taunting them with spitefull words, Demades spake boldly vnto him: Nonne te pudeat Philippe, cùm fortuna tuate Agamemnonem fecit, tein tuis opprobriis esse Thar∣sitem? The saying of Demae∣des. Art not thou ashamed, king Philip, whom For∣tune made equall with Agamemnon, thou to make thy selfe in scoffing equall to Tharsites? Vpon which words, Philip dismissed the poore Captiues, and entred in league with the Athenians. But Alex, Seuerus clean contrary to Caesar, perceiuing as Caesar did, many seditious souldiers conspyring to∣gether, dismissed them out of the Army, cleered his Campe, and said, Discedite Quirites, deponite arma: for he was as glad to be ryd of such Souldiers, as they were glad to be ryd of so seuere a Captaine. Cornelius Gracchus, a very eloquent Romane, but al∣wayes so factious & so seditious, that he was euer wont to haue secretly behind him, one of his seruants, a Mu∣sician with an Iuory Flute, to mooue, to stirre, and to Cic. de Orat. . &c. Plat. de leg. giue life to his Masters speach to mooue sedition. This Gracchus little esteemed Platoes lawes, who iudged eue∣ry way a seditious man worthy of death, as the law was: Si quis priuatim pacem bellumue fecerit, capitale esto: yet had Gracchus rather be slain among seditious men, him selfe being chiefe seditious, then to liue in peace, and to mayntaine peace in his country at Rome. How much better was Egesias a Phylosopher in Cy∣raena, who not onely perswaded against factious and seditious men, but also inueyed againstal wickednes of
life, exhorting to abhorre vice and to loue vertue. Such counsell gaue Egesias to the Cyraenians, as So∣lon gaue to the Athenians, whose precept was alwaies  Laere.  Sole. Consule quae optima, non quae suauissima. By which perswasion, he so mortified the Cyraenians that they thought it better to dye, then to lyue. But that good practise of this Phylosopher, was by Ptholo∣mei king of Egypt put to silence, lest too many became honest and vertuous. Such a Phylosopher to perswade, and such a Prea∣cher to teach mortification, were wel worthy of a gol∣den Laert. in Aristip. Image, were it not that som kind of people would esteeme more of the Image then of the man, as Dioni∣sius made more of Iupiters golden Garment, then of . Iupiter, more of Aesculepius golden beard, then of Aesculapius: It was euer his speach for money. Seditious men euer esteemed the golde of the Temple, more then the Temple; the gold of the Altar, more then the Altar: they be like the Moabites, alwaies 4. Reg. 3. ready for the spoyle. These bee they which Iohn Baptist calles Prognies Math. 3 Viperarum. It may be sayd of these wicked Practisers, that they know not of what spirit they are, as Christ sayd to Iames and Iohn, when they would haue fire from heauen to burne Samaria. Nescitis cuius Spiritus estis. Luc. 9. Many practise such policyes with such furyes as the Syrians that went from Damasco with two eyes to kyll Elizeus at Dothan, but they were brought blinde 4. Reg. 6. from Dothan to Samaria among their enemies. Others practise the like policy with Gehezi, and run after Naaman the Syrian for gifts & rewards, vntill the 4. Reg. 5.
leprosy of Naaman come vpon them and their houses for euer. Some trusting to their strength, put their hands to many dangers, like Milo Cretoniates, who drew a great yron wedge out of a strong clouē oake with one hand, Gel. li. 15. cap. 16. & thrust the other hand into the cleft where the wedge was, but the oake fastned vpon his hand, and held him vntill wild beasts came to deuoure him. Hermes the Egyptian sayd, that vngodlines is a very ▪ Hermes. cap. 12. heauy sicknes to the soule of man, who is neuer quiet, nor resteth, but in actions of vngodlines. Antiochus was so vngodly a king, that he was wont to say, that he would make Ierusalem a graue to bury the Iewes. 2. Mac. 9. Benhadad would bragge, that the dust of Samaria would not suffice, that euery one of his soldiers should 3. Reg. 20 haue a handfull. Sennacherib was wont to bragge of king Ezechias, that neyther God nor man might deliuer him out of 4. Reg. 19 his hands. Dripetine, Mithidrates daughter, Queene of Laodicea, had double teeth set in a rowe, one row beside another, in such deformed sort, that it loathed any man to looke vpon her: and yet not so lothsome to behold, as to heare the brags and blasphemies of these blasphemers. The Greekes yeelded diuine honours to them that would kill a Tyrant, neyther can it bee a greater sacri∣fice Alawe a∣gainst Ty∣rants in Greece. to the gods, saith Seneca, then the death of a Ty∣rant, Spolia opima Ioui, A rich spoyle vnto Iupiter. Wherefore Hermodius and Aristogiton, two Citi∣zens
of Athens, for killing of Pisistratus the Tyrant, had graunted them for honour, that no man should e∣uer be called after their names in Athens, for that they were much plagued by Tyrants. In Greece, a Lawe was made, that Tyrannorum filii conscii parentum sceleris, haud secus morte et exilio mulcten∣tur: that Tyrants Children should be banyshed or dye with their parents. Sectio. 12. DARIVS Signet vpon Alexanders hand mooued much the Macedonians to doubt Darius Signet. of their kings fauour. Pompeyes Signet vpon Caesars finger, much spited the Romanes that were Pompeyes friends. The Signet of Marcellus the Consull vpon Hanibals finger, being slain in an ambush, so astonished the Ar∣my, Marcellus Signet. that Crispinus in great haste sent Letters to Salapia and to other ports and townes about Apulia, that they should not giue credit vnto Hanibals Letters, though they were sealed with Marcellus Signet. It was the maner of Alexander, after hee had conquered Darius, when hee wrote his Leters to Per∣sia, to seale them with the Signet of Darius, and when he wrote to Macedonia, he vsed his owne Signet. So Iulius Caesar (after king Mithridates was sub∣dued by Pompey,) soone vanquished king Pharnaces, Mithridates sonne, without any great warres, but by yeelding of his Crown and his Signet vnto Caesar: so he
wrote to his friend Anitus to Rome, but these three words, Veni, vidi, vici: No Nation resisted Caesar after he had conquered the Gaules, but his owne nation the Romanes. Diuisions ouerthrew kingdomes and Empyres, so was Greece by Graecians, and not by Philip of Mace∣don: so were the Israelites after their diuision into two kingdomes, ouerthrowen within them selues by their owne nation the Israelites. The Romanes, though not equall in number to the Spaniards, nor in strength to the French men, nor in subtilty to the Affricans, nor in knowledge to the Gre∣cians, yet in time the Romanes mastered all these, and many more nations, Armis et viribus, sayth Vigetius, Pietate et religione, sayth Cicero: but most writers af∣firme, Viget. lib. 1. cap. 28 that the Romanes became Conquerours Huma∣nitate et vnitate: which is the onely cause of all Con∣quests. Cotys of Thracia seemed herein to imitate the Romanes, who was certified that the Athenians had graunted him to bee free Denizin of Athens: and I will (sayd Cotys) make all the Athenians free in Thra∣cia, Val. Max. li. 3. cap. 7 and wil make Athens and Thracia all one, Sic Thra∣ciam Athenis aequauit Cotys. The sower of all discord is Sathan the Serpent, that soweth Tares amongst good Wheat, while we sleepe, Math. 13. We haue no helpe against this Serpent, but watching and praying. The Hebrues that were bitten by Serpents in the wildernes, were healed by looking vpon the brazen Numb. 21 Serpent in that wildernes. The Egyptians could saue themselues from Ser∣pents
of Ethiopia, by their Birds Ibides. The Arabians had remedies against their venemous red Serpents, by eating of an Arabiā fruit, where those Diodor. Serpents bred. The Graecians by the counsell of Theophrastus, and practice of Ismenias, had their remedies against the stinging of Vipers. The Apulians had their salue to saue them from the Alex. li. 2. cap. 17 biting of Tarantula, by musike. The Romans found meanes to mitigate the plague in Rome, as you haue heard clauo fixo. But a greater plague ceased in Israel by Iaels knocking Iud. 4. a great naile into Siseraes temples. Yet against the Serpents teeth which Medea sowed, whence sprang armed men out of the earth, who de∣uoured one another, no helpe, no remedy, was found against these Serpents. The viperous biting of seditious treacherous men that bite a great way off, that no man shall see them, nor know them before they haue bitten, Non prius intelligas proditorem, quàm proditus sis, sayth Seneca. How then shal we preuēt such with all the wisdom we haue, or punish . such with all the Lawes wee haue? For sayth Cicero, Crimen conceptum aut cogitatum, paenam non meretur. Faultes conceyued and thought on, which no man knoweth but God himselfe, ought not to be punished: for (sayth Cato) Voluntates non sunt legibus obnoxiae: A mans thought is vnder no law, but vnder Gods lawe. But yet in another place Cicero vrged before the Se∣nators, that Clodius seruant, for that he thought to kyll Pompey the great, being then a sole Consull of Rome, which was the father of the countrey, and as a king of
the Romans, thought no lesse in his heart, then Caligu∣la did, that wished Rome to haue but one neck, because he might cut it off with one stroke: but that stroke fell vpon Caligulas necke: so such cruell Tygers are often Curt. lib. 7 made foode to feede fowles. Nothing is so strong (saith Curtius) but sometime the weakest may ouerthrowe it. We see the long & great trees, that long were in grow∣ing, in one howre to be cut downe. All Countreyes ought to bee purged and purifyed of these factious and seditious men, not as Naaman the Syrian was purifyed by washing in I ordan: ney∣ther as Ezechias purifyed the Temple of Ierusalem, but by a Militaty purification, and to sacrifice such fellowes by decimation, as Tamberlaine and Xerxes did. It is in Homer written of three kindes of purification: the one by fire, the other by water, the third by ayre: where mention is made of Vlisses, how hee commaun∣ded Odess. 21. that offences and great faultes should bee purified with Brimstone and fire, and with the slaughter of hogges, for a sacrifice to the Gods. The like is of Orestes, who, after hee slew his mother Clitemnestra, was so vexed with furies, that hee wan∣dred like a madde man, vntill he was purified with wa∣ter sent for from the Tracenians, and had from seuen seuerall riuers, and being put all together into a vessell and washed ouer his body with that water, to purifie & clense him, ex materna caede, of his mothers murthering. It should seeme that Homer was acquainted with the cleansing of Naaman the Syrian, in the floud Iordan, of his leprosie; for they liued almost in one age. In purification and purging of false, deceitfull, and seditious Souldiers, the Generall, the Coronelles, the
Captaines, and all the souldiers, all crowned with Lau∣rell, The pur∣ging of Campes. should in Martius field make such supplications & sacrifices, as Ser. Tullius the third King of Rome had then constituted, which was a sheepe, a Goate, a Sowe, and a Bull, at which time the Army should haue a cer∣taine portion of corne, pro cuiusque contubernio, for euery tenne Souldiers being of one company, and euery one should haue a peece of money, called Drachma, with other such military rewards, as were fit for euery com∣pany to offer ioyntly their oblation & sacrifice for the purifying of their Army. In like sort, if any great earthquake, lightning or thū∣dring were, for the purifying & purging of their Coun∣tries from seditious and mutinous people, either in the field amongst Soldiers, or in their Cities amongst Citi∣zens, or in their Nauies vpon the Sea, they vsed many ceremonies. The banishing and purging of such trecherous and seditious people, in Nauies on Seas, differed nothing, The puri∣fying of Sea-Soul∣diers. but in some ceremonies, which was, that many altars should be made vpon the shore, and that altar which the water of the Sea had sprinkled, the Priestes vpon that altar should sacrifice the offenders: then part of the sacrifice should be throwne into the Sea, the other bur∣ned vpon the shore: this was the olde maner of the Romans in purifying and purging of wicked false men, from good men. They were so carefull, or rather superstitious, that if either an Owle, or a Wolfe had bin within the Tēple of Iupiter in the Capitoll, sacrificium peculare should bee vsed. Many such night-Owles, and many day-walking Wolues, come not onely into our Temples, but into our houses.
Scipio Emilianus, at what time hee was Censor, made Scipio E∣milianus. no other supplication to the gods, but only for the pro∣sperity of the city of Rome, and for purging of sediti∣ous men out of the city of Rome. But Nero in his sactifice & supplication to the gods, made only mention of himselfe and of the people, but not of the Senators and Magistrates. Too many are Nero. of Neroes nature, which would faine feed the peoples humours, to moue sedition and mutinies, but generally they haue the like end as Nero had. Supplications and prayers were made amongst the Pagans, for any victories or good successe to any king∣dome Alex. lib. 5. cap. 27 or countrey. A decree was made in Rome, that the Citizens for fifteene dayes should offer sacrifice and supplications to the gods for the good successe, that Iulius Caesar had in his warres against the Gaules. So did Cicero being then Consull, cause all the Se∣nators, Patricians, Tribes, with all the Citizens of Rome, Matrons, wiues, young and old, by themselues crowned, to offer supplications and sactifices in their The purifi∣cation of good suc∣cesse and victories. Temples, celebrating solemne feastes, in token of great ioy and triumph, that the conspiracy of Cateline was found out by Cicero, and his confederats vanqui∣shed by Luc. Antonius, then Consull with Cicero. The like did Cicero for the victories and happy suc∣cesse of Oct. Caesar. So did Dec. Brutus for the ioy and gladnes of the ouerthrow of Marc. Antonius at the bat∣tell at Mutina. The Grecians commonly neuer vsed supplication for any happines or fortunate successe, but playes and feasts, but if it were some great victory ouer the enemy, or sauing of their city from the enemy, thē they would
with great pompe & solemnity in their Temples offer sacrifice and oblations, sing Hymnes and Meeters, in yeelding thankes to their gods. The Athenians had also, saith Theopompus, euery fifth yere, as the Romans had their L, so had they their The ∣ro of i  in Athens. Panegyrys, their meeting in a Session to giue thankes to their gods, with one cōsent, for the defending of Athēs against the enemy: at which time, they made supplica∣tion for the people of Platea, their next neighbors, and of Chios, to the gods, to maintain the prosperous estate of their countrey, with banning and cursing of Philip and all his countrey Macedonia, with supplications to destroy his Nauies on the sea, his Army vpon the land, Alex . 5. cap. 77 his children and his family, as most detestable enemies vnto Greece: See the cate and loue the Heathens had of their countrey. The Greekes had also instructions of Epimenides, to purify their Cities in this sort; to let two sheepe, the one blacke, the other white, out of the townes end, and some man appointed to follow them, and where they would stay or lye, there would the Greekes offer obla∣tions and sacrifice to their gods: this was their care for their countrey, and such should be the care of all good men towards their Countrey, to purge, to purify, and to weed all trecherous and seditious men as are neuer well, but either inuenting or doing some euill to their Country; not much vnlike to the purification of Mo∣ses, which you shall read hereafter. When the old Gaules purified or cleansed their Cyties or Townes, their custome was to feed one man Of purifi∣cation a∣mong the Gaules. most daintily for one whole yeere, and being full sed
and fat, they led him round about the Citie or Towne vpon a solemne feast day, and after brought him with∣out the City, and stoned him with stones to death, as a sacrifice to purify their people. Such a custome, as it seemeth, had the Iewes, when Pilate would haue had Christ deliuered, and let Bar∣rabas the murtherer dye according to their Lawes, the Iewes cried, Crucify Christ: they had rather haue Bar∣rabas a murtherer, then Christ a Sauiour. It seemed by Xerxes, which by lot of Decimation slue that Souldier, and deuided his bodie vnto two parts, to purify the army, that the Persians vsed that kind of purging and cleansing of their people which the Gaules did, and the Macedonians. The like law obserued the Iewes, that one yeerely should dye, to purify the people, as it seemed by Pilates speach, when Barrabas was set free, and Christ died. So Elizeus the Prophet willed Naaman the Assyrian to goe and wash himselfe seuen times in the riuer Ior∣dan, Elizeus. and so he should be clensed of his Leprosy: but some practise with Gehezi, to deceyue their masters. What shalbe their reward? The reward of Gehezi, the leprosy of Naaman for euer. Moyses was commanded from God, to put his owne sister Miriam out of the host for seuen dayes, vnul she Moyses. was purifyed by the Lawe, before she should be recei∣ued againe into the army. In another place Moyses was commaunded, that the Israelites should abstayne frō their wines, their clothes washed, before they should approach neere the hill. So Christ in the new Testament willed the ten Lepers
to goe and shew themselues vnto the Priest, according to the law of Moses: but as they went, they were healed, and one came only to giue thanks vnto Christ. I doubt much, that neither Elizeus, Moyses, nor Christ himselfe can heale a nomber of their leprosy, where men are so false, that they can neither be true to their Prince, nor to their Country. Where shall men finde faith? What fire, what water can do good, when the fyre of heauen can not purify, and the water of life can not wash them? The maner of purification by Moses, was to kill a liue Moses pu∣rification. Sparrow ouer a fountaine of water, & the Priest should take Caedar wood, a Scarlet lace and Hyssop, & should dip them with the liuing Sparrow in the bloud of the slaine Sparrow, and sprinkle vpon him that was vn∣cleane, and so to bee purified. He that was cleansed and purified by Moses Law, should wash his clothes, and shaue off al his haire of his head, of his beard, and of his browes, and wash himselfe in water, and wash his clothes, and be kept seuen dayes from the Camp. But concerning purification by the Law of Moses, of blacke spottes, scabbes, and vncleane issues, you may read the Leuiticall Lawes, how God would haue his people cleane, pure and sound, both outward and in∣ward. Leuit. 14. The Heathen were so superstitious in their ceremo∣nies of purifycation & purging, that if any great earth∣quake, thunder, lightnings, or any monstrous kind of births of men or of beasts were in Rome, they should be throwne into Tyber, or should be slaine to be sacri∣ficed, to appease their countrey gods.
There are many monstrous births in diuers places and countries, that might be as well throwne into their owne country Riuers, as the Romanes did into Tiber, and ought farre better to bee drowned in their owne countryes, then the children of the Hebrues out of their countrie, by the Egyptians in Nylus. Where I leaue, vntill I haue further time to write. FINIS.
