6998 S109789 99845434 10332
A MANIFES∣TATION OF THE MOTIVES, Whereupon the most Reuerend Father, MARCVS ANTONIVS De Dominis, Archbishop of SPALATO, (in the Territorie of VENICE) Vndertooke his departure thence. ¶ Englished out of his Latine Copy. AT LONDON Printed by IOHN BILL, ANNO 1616.
MARCVS ANTONIVS DE DOMINIS, Archbishop of SPALATO, thus declareth the Motiues of his departure from thence. LEst this my depar∣ture, howsoeuer in it selfe grounded vpon well-weighed reasons, and being in trueth the ful-ripe fruite of ten yeeres deliberation at the least, yet being in the apprehension of others, sudden and vn∣expected, should by my silence be ly∣able,
not onely to I know not what wonderment of those among whom I haue bene brought vp, but also to the misconstructions of those that taste not the motiues thereof; I hold it necessary, by way of seasonable preuention, to publish to the world the true causes and grounds of this my, not heady, nor hasty, but duely forethought secession. At the first insight whereinto I can∣not but foresee, that I am like to open the mouthes of detractors, and backbi∣ters, more then a good many, who out of this my departure will picke occasi∣ons of declaiming, and exclaiming a∣gainst me, and deuising slanders of me, as is too vsuall in such cases. But with the smoke of such vaine calumniations, I professe to GOD and the world, I am not ouermuch affected. To mee, as to S. Paul, it is a very small thing to bee iudged of men. Let mee for CHRISTS cause, let me be a foole, let me be base, let me be buffeted, reuiled persecuted, de∣famed; let me be accompted the dregs,
and off-scowrings of the world; let me be euen accursed; may I the while do my duety to my Lord CHRIST IE∣SVS, and become vsefull to my bre∣thren in the Ministery of CHRIST, I may, I must trample on all these re∣proches. For this is my boasting, euen the testimony of my conscience; that in singlenesse of heart, and godly sinceri∣tie, not in carnall wisedome, but by the grace of GOD I leaue my owne Coun∣trey, and passe into another. It is my part, to approue my selfe as the Minister of GOD, in much patience, in afflicti∣ons, in necessities, in distresses, in la∣bours, through honour, and dishonour, through good report and ill report. For I seeke not my selfe, nor mine owne, but the things of CHRIST. This rather troubleth and perplexeth me, that, if I should not step forth boldly, and meete with slanders and calumnies, the bene∣fit which might accrue vnto many by taking notice of my intentions, would be hindered; and many perhaps still re∣mayning
vnacquainted with my cour∣ses, might, in stead of edification, be ta∣ken vnawares in the snare of some scan∣dall and misdeeming of mee. For the helping of such mens infirmitie espe∣cially, are the motiues and meaning of this my departure thus brought vnto light, and set foorth to the view of all men. That this my voluntary remouall is suggested to mee by no humane, but euen diuine vocation, I am fully resol∣ued, nor may once doubt of it. Certes I know that euery spirit is not ouer-easily to be credited: but the spirits are to bee tryed, whether they be of GOD, or no; as wee are taught by Iohn the beloued Disciple of CHRIST. In these trials, be∣sides my often presenting my selfe vnto the FATHER of lights, in such maner as my SAVIOVR hath instructed mee, and thus continuing in the diligent search of the Trueth for the space of ten yeres, as I sayd, other helpe of resort had I none: No mans (I call GOD, and my
conscience to witnesse) no mans per∣suasions of any kinde, did once come to mine eares: no man cast foorth any bayte to allure me: no man suggested any arguments to instruct me: I vsed no mans counsaile: I conferred not in this businesse with any man liuing. Nor let any man surmise, that I drew my strength from such Bookes, as are fra∣med against the doctrine of the Church of Rome. He that knoweth all things is a witnesse vnto mee, that I haue vtter∣ly abhorred medling with such prohi∣bited ware: and if euer any Prelate, the most dutifull obseruant of the Court of Rome, hath detested those bookes, sure∣ly (in the scare-bug feares, which from my tender yeeres haue possessed mee) I haue held them detestable aboue mea∣sure. And yet now, me thinkes, I am no babe, who hauing seene almost threescore yeeres, should be plyable to any mans bent, to be perswaded to what hee please without sufficient argument. My vnderstanding and iudgement
hath neuer bene directed by any rules, other then those, which the Spirit of God hath prescribed to the holy Church in the Scriptures, and by guidance whereof, the holy Orthodoxe Fathers, most renowmed and reuerenced in the Catholike Church, haue instructed the faithfull flocke of Christ. And these sa∣cred Fathers onely (together with the inward motions of the holy Spirit) haue beene the sufficient authors of this my resolution. Why therefore should I sus∣pect this to be the suggestion of a wic∣ked spirit? From such suspition I am further freed, because I perfectly know, and auouch before God, that searcheth the heart and reines, that I in all this my deliberation, neuer cast mine eye to hu∣mane and temporall ends. I thirsted not after Ecclesiasticall promotions, though they might well seeme sutable to my condition. For I was already a Bishop, and that not of the lowest rank, but chiefe of the Prouince wherein I was borne, namely, Arch-bishop of
SPALATO (formerly styled of SA∣LONA) and Primate of the two king∣domes DALMATIA and CROATIA; A Prelacie (why should I blush to say it?) of as great esteeme as any in our Prouinces and Churches. And if I had longed after any of the Romane digni∣ties, there was a faire way open for mee toward them: But the distast, which I tooke against the corruptions of the Court of Rome, made me still to abhor it. And yet the See of Rome in their most weighty and publike affaires em∣ployed my paines to the Emperour and Archdukes; whereof, the Popes Briefs, and the letters of the Emperor & Arch∣dukes, which I haue yet to shew, are suf∣ficient witnesses. The good offices also performed by mee toward the renow∣med State of VENICE, (whose borne subiect I am) haue purchased their espe∣ciall fauour towards mee: Whereby I might expect to raise my fortunes higher, if I had gaped after any greater and more transcendent Dignities. Nei∣ther
was I greedy of worldly pelfe, ha∣uing already that competencie of ri∣ches, which might abundantly content a moderate mind; such as GOD by his grace hath vouchsafed to endue mee withall: whereas in this my change of place, I most willingly embrace the losse both of riches, and dignities. For, as I sayd, I seeke not mine owne, but the things that pertaine to CHRIST. Therefore not any humane proiect, not any headie passion, not any worldly ne∣cessitie, not any disastrous chaunce, not any preposterous motiue, wherewith men vse to bee transported violently, hath made me to quit that place, where∣in I sate warme enough: but what was the true cause thereof, I wil now declare plainely and ingenuously. I haue from my very childhood been brought vp in the studie of Diuinitie, and that most-what among the Iesuites, and haue kept my selfe to the current of the Schoolemen, alwayes bending to the determinations of the Church of
Rome; not for strength of argument, but reuerence of authority, with the tin∣cture whereof, my minde was so deepe∣ly dyed, and my vnderstanding so capti∣uated, that I resolued rather to leaue my life, then to let goe my hold. For I was so fast bound with the chaine of religi∣ous awfulnesse, that I deemed it vnexpi∣able sacriledge, once to admit into my heart, any thought of contrary asserti∣on; or of so much, as doubtfull waue∣ring about those points. And if at any time I were ouertaken with any thought of opposition, or in my search into holy Writt, did light vpon any thing that stumbled me, straightwayes I curbed my selfe (deeming that I was bound so to doe in point of Faith) and either forced my iudgement to leape ouer all obstacles, or else diuerted my meditations out of that roade, lest I should make or finde any flawe in the composure of that Religion, which we, silly younglings, take vpon trust, with generall warrantie from our masters.
I cannot but confesse that euery while I felt the sparkes of GODS spirit kind∣ling within me, which I still striued to quench, but could no more then smo∣ther: they left alwayes such a restlesse anxiety in my minde, accompanyed with deepe impressions of suspition, which so stuck to me, and grew vp to∣gether with my studyes in Diuinity, that I could neuer shake them off. This my inueterate suspition tooke deepe roote by the distast I had of that extreme cautelousnesse, and rigorous prohibition, wherein all forces, both Romane abroad, and Iesuiticall at home are streined to the highest; all eyes are o∣pen, all doores are shut for the debar∣ring vs the reading, or hauing any ma∣ner of bookes sauoring of opposition against the doctrine of the Church of Rome. As for the common people, defectiue for the most part in discerning, and de∣termining such controuersies, I hold it not vnfit that some restraint be made of
lawlesse libertie in that kinde, lest in stead of instruction, they should sucke the poyson of erroneous opinions out of dangerous discourses. But that lear∣ned men wel affected to the Catholique faith, and eminent for the soundnesse of their Doctrine, that such olde souldiers should not bee suffered to view the na∣ked face of their enemie, my minde al∣wayes told mee (and good reason for it) that somewhat was in the wind, which was lothe to bee traced out. If young nouices ought thus to be hood-winked, yet those that haue runne through the whole course of Diuinitie, that haue ta∣ken Degrees in that sacred profession, that haue bin aduanced to the Episcopal chayre, must wee still bee kept in this pupillage vnder the rodde of the Ro∣mane Court, as not fit to digest, and iudge of what we reade? When from the Bishoppes chaire I looked into the Schooles of the Professours, there I founde also that, which encreased my suspition; the Doctors, and publique
Professors in their solemne readings and writings of the Controuersies, put∣ting vs to take on their owne word whatsoeuer they alleadge, as a passage, or opinion of the aduersaries, and de∣barring their auditors, vnder payne of excommunication, from reading with their owne eyes the treatises thus quo∣ted to them: for the hyding, suppressing, and totall defacing of which kinde of bookes there would not be such double diligence vsed, were there not some∣what in them stronger then our cham∣pions are, vpon euen termes, able to en∣counter. As for my selfe, I haue alwayes had an inborne desire (which euer since my admittance into the Clergy I haue che∣rished) to see all the seuerall parts of Christendome consenting, and vnited together. The distraction of the West from the East, of the South from the North (in matters of faith) as I neuer could brooke, so I neuer left searching into the causes of so lamentable a di∣uorce,
and sounding whether any meanes might be found for the recom∣bining, and reducing them to their an∣cient vnion. And the more I longed to see this happy coniunction, the greater was my inward griefe, to beholde the manifold diuisions among the Profes∣sors of Christianitie, the bitter hatred, and vnquenchable broyles betweene the most renowmed Churches, the shamefull cutting, and tearing of the seamlesse garment of our SAVIOVR. This consideration, this compassion, so iust, so necessary▪ hath in deepe measure seized vpon mee, possessing my heart with no small anxietie, and ceaseth not daily yet more and more to grow vp∣on mee. But (to returne to my narration) I being aboue twentie yeeres since pre∣ferred to be a Gouernor in the Church, and made Bishop of SEGNIA, my Fa∣thers the Iesuits did not take it very wel, as knowing me to be no doe-naught, or droane, vnprofitable for their So∣cietie
(wherof I neither boast, nor now passe any whit at all, hauing learned to set a lowe price on all humane reputa∣tion, other then that, which auaileth for the aduancing of GODS seruice) but yet, that both hopefull, and helpefull they found, and acknowledged me, it appeareth, in that, when I was very young, and the halfe of my time of probation yet vnexpired, they employ∣ed me to reade the publicke Humanitie Lecture in the Schooles at VERONA. Before my entrance into the Order of Priesthood I was by them made the publicke Reader of the Mathematique Lecture at PADVA; where I receiued good encouragement by the fulnesse of my Auditory. At BRESSIA they made me Professor first of Rhetorique, then of Logique, and lastly of Philoso∣phie. In the Churches they many times put mee forward to preach on the solemne Feast dayes. More then once they layd vpon mee the managing of their priuate affaires of no small impor∣tance.
In a word, in these, and all other employments any wayes belonging to the Societie, they had me alwayes an A∣gent prest, and at hand for the publike seruice. In which regard well might they looke awry at my being plucked from them by aduancement to a Bi∣shopricke: Which calling mee abroade vnto Ecclesiasticall function, was the first meanes of my descending, from the most sublimated and aëreall disputes of the Schoolemen, downe into the lower region of practicall application, and re∣ducing my studies to the cure of soules, and ouersight of the Church. And be∣cause I held preaching to be an insepara∣rable part of the office of a Bishop, I did, as our Preachers are wont, employ some paynes in turning ouer such Po∣stillers, and Lenten-homelists, as are most current amongst vs. But it was not long, ere my stomach loathed that course and vnholesome feed: I found in them (and that without long search) such a world of foule abuses, the Scrip∣tures
wryed and strained to idle, fruit∣lesse, impertinent, nay pernicious con∣structions; Discourses stuffed with Apocryphall Stories, ridiculous tales, and fabulous Legends; the poore peo∣ple miserably gulled by picke-purse tricks, and tyrannous yoakes put vpon them vnder the visour of Piery, and name of Catholike Doctrine, where∣with their fearefull consciences are o∣uer-awed and ensnared in Superstition. These enormities I sawe, and starting backe with amazement, and detestati∣on of them, I found it was high time for mee to leaue those muddy puddles, and to betake my selfe to the cleare foun∣taines of the holy and ancient Fathers of the Church. Out of their Tractates I furnished my felfe for preaching, and out of the sacred Canons for Church∣gouernement: In both I found mine owne content; in both, the profitt of others. From these lampes, mee thought, a new and strange light darted forth vp∣on
me, the beames whereof, though vn∣willing, and shutting mine eyes, I could not but perceiue. As for dogmaticall points in Diuinity, I found in the Fa∣thers many passages diuers wayes re∣pugnant to the common Tenets of the Schoolemen, in whom I was formerly lessoned: and those authorities were by our new Masters either slily omit∣ted, or corruptly alleadged, or vnsuffi∣ciently explained, or purposely miscon∣strued. And as for Church-discipline, I saw, and wondered to see the spirituall gouernement of these times so far wide and different from the ancient. Where∣upon my former suspitions of foule play got more footing in me, and now, me thought, I espyed afarre off some vnderhand dealing in our setting forth the Christian Doctrine, and managing the affaires of the Church: inasmuch as the body of our professed Theologie is rather patched together of subtile spe∣culations, Philosophicall quiddities, and winding inferences, then soundly
grounded vpon the Oracles of the holy Scriptures, diligently examined, and sincerely expounded, whereof indeede, there is little newes stirring amongst vs. Beeing from this Bishopricke aduan∣ced to an Archbishopricke, thence was giuen mee a new, and more earnest oc∣casion of repeating my former course of studies, and bestirring my selfe the more laboriously. For beeing now en∣combred with the incident affaires of the Bishops of my Prouince; but much more being borne downe with the vast omnipotencie of the Court of Rome daily encroaching, and eating vpon my Metropoliticall rights, it behooued mee to digge to the bottome, and to feele for the very foundation of all Ec∣clesiasticall degrees, powers, functi∣ons, offices, and dignities; in speciall to search the Records, to finde by what Tenure the Papacie holdeth. Not long after this, commeth forth the Interdict denounced by the Pope against the Re∣nowned State of VENICE, during
which thunderclap, the Romanizing pamphlets flie abroad, and cry alowd a∣gainst the whole rabble of the master∣lesse Bishops of the Venetian dominions, rayling and raging against vs, for bru∣tish monsters of men, voyd of all reue∣rence, science, conscience. Then I, poore worme, thus trampled on beginne to turne againe, and to vse the weapon of iust defence, and on this occasion am anew, and more sharply whetted to search out the true estate, and grounds of that memorable controuersie. For that purpose I turne my bookes, and trauaile through the whole extent of the sacred Canons, Orthodoxall Coun∣cels, venerable discipline, and laudable current customs of the ancient Catho∣like Church. To say in short that which I sought long, by these, and none but these I receiued satisfaction, in these I found that which I sought for, I found it in full and ouerflowing measure. And now mine eyes being thus ope∣ned, I could easily by that day-light per∣ceiue,
that the doctrines of those many Churches which (because Rome holds them for enemies) we are bound to be∣spatter with inuectiues, & our doctors to batter with arguments, doth indeed little or nothing swerue from the most ancient faith of the purest times: and that the same is at Rome, and here a∣mong vs rather beaten out of doores, and banished with spitefull detestation, then condemned vpon any lawfull cōuiction; finding this hard entertein∣ment, not as being vpon triall proued a bastard impe of heresie, but because it cannot beare construction with the Popes Cabale, nor consort with the in∣famous corruptions of the Court of Rome, wholly degenerated into a tem∣porall Monarchie. I now plainely per∣ceiued, that at Rome a Mint is set vp, which dayly goeth, for the coyning new Articles of Faith sans number. Which prerogatiue both wanteth law∣full Patent, hauing no other plea then intrusion and forcible vsurpation, and
is employed vpon too base a mettall, namely such positions as conteine, not onely no matter of Faith, but also ma∣nifest falsehood: yet such base alloy as this, they thrust, for current, vpon the Christian world; and are so farre from suffering it to come to the touchstone of due and free consultation of the Church, or to the balance of disputa∣tion, that they reply with fire and sword vpon all that dare but whisper against them. This Rome hath long since by ouerbearing and crushing the sacred Councels, put out the eyes of our holy Mother the Church, who now hauing lost her sight, her strength, and her libertie, like captiue Samson, vndergoeth the scorne of her surpri∣sers, and groaneth, poore soule, vnder the mill of these Philistines. There was a time when this went for an article of Faith, that the Vniuersall Church dis∣persed vpon the face of the earth, is that Catholique Church of CHRIST, to which he promised his perpetuall as∣sistance, and which S. Paul calleth the
pillar and ground of the Trueth. Now adayes our Masters at Rome haue shrunke this Article into a narrower compasse; so that now by the Catho∣lique Church must be vnderstood the Court of Rome; Now we must with∣out wauering beleeue, that in this Consistorie, and no where else, nay in the breast of the Pope there is erected the Monopolie of the Spirit of our Sauiour. And whatsoeuer priuiledges, and honourable titles haue in elder times beene duely afforded to the Vni∣uersall Church of CHRIST, now must with might and maine bee trans∣lated ouer, and appropriated to the Church of Rome, though with wrong∣ing and robbing the publique. Now the stampe of an Article of Faith is set vpon many new deuised fancies, whereof our SAVIOVR neuer was the ordeiner, and whereby Christian soules are pitifully deceiued; and so the blinde flockes, with their blinde guides both together, runne headlong
into the pit of perdition. These and other like considerations haue for di∣uers yeeres afflicted my carefull soule, and doe yet encompasse my heart with incredible sorrowes. I spare here to insert out of mine owne obseruations, a bead-roule of the numberlesse nouelties, and pestilent errors broached, and mainteined by the sayd Court of Rome, whereby ma∣ny, and many soules suffer shipwracke, the arme of Church-discipline is bro∣ken, the reforming and spreading a∣broad the true Christian Faith is em∣peached, the Church is burthened with infinite scandalls, the peace of Christendome is interrupted, iarres and warres are kindled amongst vs, whole kingdoms turned topsy-turuey, famous Churches rent one from an∣other with horrible schismes, and the world ouer runne with other vnsuffe∣rable calamities. On which particu∣lars I shall not need here to insist, ha∣uing fully prosecuted them in my
booke concerning the Ecclesiastique Com∣mon-wealth. Which worke I haue al∣ready finished, and prepared for the Presse, intending to publish it as soone as I can light vpon a conuenient Prin∣ter. The whole body of this my worke, consisteth of ten seuerall parts or Bookes. 1 IN the first whereof, I make en∣quirie into the forme of this po∣litie, or gouernment, determi∣ning, that, in respect of CHRIST the head, the Church is gouerned in the most perfect forme of Monarchie. But as for CHRISTS Ministers here vpon earth, that they haue no resem∣blance, or conformitie with an exter∣nall, and visible Monarchie, but are to gouerne the Church according to CHRISTS ordinance in an Aristo∣cratical forme, not without some spice also of a Democratie. And so conse∣quently I demonstrate, that the sup∣posed Primacie of power in S. Peter, and the Papacie pretending therefrom,
doe no whit agree with the Gospel, nor with our SAVIOVRS Institution. 2 In my second booke I take a view of the Gouernours, and Mini∣sters of this Church-weale, who they are, how they succeed to the Apostles; of what institution Bishopricke is, how it differeth from Priesthood, who are the inferiour Ministers, and what is the power of holy Orders in this Body. 3 In my third, I set foorth the Hie∣rarchie of the Bishops and Rectors of this Common-weale, and shew that by the Law of GOD, there is no distin∣ction of prelation or subiection be∣tweene one Bishop and another; but that all disparity in their Sees is groun∣ded on Ecclesiasticall constitution one∣ly. Thence I passe to entreate of the electing, confirming, consecrating, or ordeining of Bishops, and of the rights of Metropolitans, Primates, and Pa∣triarches. 4 In my fourth, I examine the pri∣uiledges
of the Church of Rome; and proue, that that Church, neither in it selfe, nor in her Bishop, nor in her Clergie euer receiued from CHRIST any preheminence ouer other Chur∣ches; but if it hath, or had any at all, the same was conferred by the volunta∣rie act of humane permission, or con∣cession. 5 In my fifth, I make search, what is the naturall and proper power of the Church, and proue it to bee meerely spirituall, still remouing all coactiue Iurisdiction from the Church. After∣ward, I discourse of the power, and operation of the Sacraments, as also of Church-censures. 6 In my sixt, I make a comparison betweene the Powers Laicall and Ec∣clesiasticall, that limits may bee set downe, for distinction of the Church-weale from the Ciuill: Wherein I de∣monstrate, that Christian Princes haue to do with the Church in many things; but as for the Church, that it hath no∣thing
at all to doe with disposing of Temporalls, least of all to intermeddle with Kings about them. In summe, I intreat of the temporaall kingdome of CHRIST: of the Laicall power, whence it is deriued, what extent it hath, as al∣so of the Franchises of the Church and Churchmen, of Inuestitures, and of the kingdome of SICILY, and such like. 7 In my seuenth, I looke into the internall direction of the Church, which is by Faith, and make enquirie what is the true rule of Faith, and so dispute of the Word of GOD, of the authority of the Church, and Pope about it; of Councels, of Heresie, Schisme, and such like. 8 In my eighth, I take a suruey of the externall gouernement of the Church by Lawes, Canons, and Iudi∣cature. There I handle the obligato∣rie power of Canons, the qualitie of Dispensations, iniunctions of Fastes, Prayers, and the like.
9 In the ninth, I descend to the temporall goods of the Church, de∣claring at large, what maner of maintenance is due to the Ministers thereof, whence it ariseth, and in what sort Church goods are to be dis∣posed. Thereupon, I write of Tithes, Benefices, of propriety in Church-goods, of the vse and abuse of Church reuenewes, of pensions, and Com∣menda's, and of the Testaments of Clergy-men. 10 Finally, in the tenth, I vnder∣take to shew, what is Ecclesiasticall li∣berty, that it may appeare in what ma∣ner the Church-weale may be sayd to be free; and thereupon I discourse of Priuiledges, and priuiledged men, of abuse of Priuiledges, of Exemptions, and exempt persons, of the subiection of Monkes, and others of that sort. This hath beene the end and fruite of my studies. For whilest vpon my fore-named occasions, I betooke my selfe to the diligent and earnest rea∣ding
of the holy Scriptures, the Or∣thodoxe Fathers, the sacred Canons, and Volumes of the Councels, the veile beeing now withdrawen from mine eyes, and my heart being kindled with ardent zeale both of finding out the trueth for mine owne satisfaction, and of imparting it for the edification of others, I could doe no other, but commit to writing those things, which I found worthy obseruation. Out of which my copiouse collecti∣ons, hath beene bred that my ten-fold issue, which now I called foorth by their names in order. By weighing therefore and applying these particu∣lars, I plainely perceiued our Chur∣ches to haue wandered far wide from the right way, not onely in Disci∣pline, but also in Doctrine. What then should I doe tarying any longer in the midst of a crooked and peruerse nation? If I should haue resolued to mannage mine owne Church, as was fit, according to the
auncient Catholique Discipline, if I would endeuour to teach, and aduance the true Catholique Doctrine, I must needes haue drawen downe vpon mine own head all the hideous stormes, tempests, and thunderbolts, which the Romish Capitoll could dart foorth vp∣on him, ouer whom that tyranni∣zing Faction did already cary, both an heauie hand, and iealous eye; as ha∣uing by some meanes smelt out my priuate labours in writing, though se∣cretly, against the current of their do∣ctrine and desseignes; as I well might vnderstand, by beeing diuers times conuented before the Popes Nuncio, residing at VENICE, and checked by him vpon some such surmise. It was my best therefore to take the wings of a Doue, and by a farre flight to retire my selfe into the wildernesse; where I might expect his helping hand, that would be ready to saue me from the stormie winde and tempest, rather then that my selfe remayning in
wilfull blindnesse, should together with other blind guides leade the blind to destruction. For what, alas, are Bishops now adayes, that are yo∣ked vnder the Potencie of Rome? In regard of their Temporalties (where their Reuenues are great, and boulste∣red out with secular dignities) they are goodly Potentates, they are Grande's, they are Princes; but Bi∣shops they cannot bee called, but e∣quiuocally. Verely all others, beside the Bishop of Rome, haue lost all their Episcopall power. For the go∣uernement of euery particular Church and Diocesse is fled from home, and wafted ouer to the seuen-hilld Citie. The Bishoppes themselues what are they, but (and scarce that) Vicars, and Seruitours to our good Lord and Ma∣ster the Pope; subiect, abiect, vile, ser∣uile, ouer-awed, ouer-trampled wret∣ches, still at the deuotion and becke, not onely of the grandmasters Ho∣linesse, but also of such, and such
Cardinals; of so, and so many Con∣gregations set vp at Rome to curbe them, of this Legate à latere, of that Apostolique Nuncio, of these Inquisi∣tors, of those Visitors, and in fine, of the infinite rabble of the Regular Or∣ders, and of euery Companion of those Brotherhoods, which start vp with their Apostolique Priuiledges, not onely to stand on euen ground with the Bishops, but to checke, and coope them vp in their owne walke of Church-Regiment; nay, to swal∣low vp all their Episcopall Iurisdicti∣on. So in effect, the Church vnder the Romish head is no more a Church, but a certaine humane Bodie-poli∣tique, vnder the meete temporall Mo∣narchie of the Papacie. The Church is indeed a Vineyard; but employed onely for the making our father Noah drunke. It is a flocke; but prouided onely for this Shepheards profitt, to squeese out the milke, till the very blood come; to sheare their fleeces;
nay, to shaue them to the quicke; nay, to flay, and slay, and deuoure the poore sheepe at his pleasure. Why should not I then remoue from hence, lest I become a spectator; nay, a parta∣ker of these impieties and mischiefes? The great Shepheard my SAVIOVR, hath appointed mee to be a dogge in his flocke; I must barke; I cannot be a dumbe dogge, as all the Bishops vn∣der the Romane are; who, some for hope of preferment, othersome for feare of afterclaps, are vtterly mute, applying themselues to the times, and sayling with the winde, though in that common streame, they, with their Leader, runne on the rocke, and suf∣fer wrack. And because (as the worlds by-word goes) Obsequium amicos, &c. The flatterer gaines friends, and the tel-troth gets enemies, now that my conscience debarreth me from betray∣ing the Trueth, it both became, and behoued mee to step out of the reach of that despitefull hatred, which en∣uironned
mee, vnlesse I would daily expose my life to the hazard of poy∣son, or offer my throate to the poig∣nard of an Assassine, the ordinarie meanes now adayes to silence con∣trouersies: Whereof the Church of Rome hath found out a most com∣pendious meane, by referring the de∣cision and maintenance of their Do∣ctrine, not (as our simple forefathers were wont) to learned Diuines, and free Councels, but to tormentors, to hangmen, to hireling stabbers, cut∣throats, and bloody parricides. As on the right-hand these spiri∣tuall motions did strongly incite mee to enterprise this departure, so on the left, I confesse, I often found and heard a busie disswader, the bond-mayd Ha∣gar, with her Ismael, the wisedome of the flesh disputing against the spirit, and pressing me on this maner, what, and whither wilt thou? A Prelacie thou hast here (vnder the Popes protection) of large procinct, and faire reuenue,
not without further hopes of greater titles, if your eye looke that way. Thus much you haue in possession, of this you are ascerteined, what otherwhere will betide you, GOD knowes, not you. And can you thus forsake your Countrey, your kindred, your friends? Can you thus take your farewell of all these, without hope of euer reuisiting them? Why make you your selfe wiser than your fellow-Bishops? They (cha∣ritable men) endure all things, beare with all things, excuse any thing. Why doe not you draw in the same line with them? Are you among so many, you onely sharpe-sighted? are all the rest moale-blind? If you bee thus wise, why respect you not your owne reputation? Perceiue you not that, assoone as your backe is turned, the most infamous and monstrous criminations, that can bee deuised, shalbe let flie after you? At Rome first, and thence all about the world you are sure to be branded with the odious name of an Heretique.
These and such like suggestions did my shrewd and troublesome Hagar whisper into mine eares: whereupon hot conflicts were raised in the inmost cabin of my heart, betweene her on the one side, and my spirit and conui∣cted conscience on the other. At length the Spirit of GOD making a more powerfull and conquering as∣sault, brake off these disputes, and de∣layes, and called me foorth with that voice of power and efficacie, saying to me (as sometimes to Abraham,) Get thee out of thine owne Countrey, and from thy kindred, and from thy fa∣thers house, and come into that land, which I shall shew thee: And so was I drawne to put in practise that most famous precept long since deliuered by the wise men, SEQVERE DEVM, Follow GOD when hee calleth: euen as the blessed Patriarch Abraham (as S. Ambrose elegantly obserueth lib. 1. de Abra cap. 2.) did by way of pre∣uention acte that which the Sages of
Greece did afterward recommend to the world for a precept. By which fact of Abraham I receiued great en∣couragement, considering how plen∣tifully GOD did reward his readie obedience, by preseruing his honour in the speciall protection of his beau∣tifull wife Sarah's chastitie endange∣red by Pharaoh. Here Ambrose affor∣deth me yet more comfort; inferring, that, because Abraham for GODS cause set light by all he had, therefore GOD mul∣tiplied to him all hee had. But the first re∣ward that GOD gaue him, was the preser∣uation of his wiues chastitie, which hee knew to be most acceptable to him being her husband. Ambrose here proceedeth ex∣cellently; He that followeth GOD, stands alwayes on sure ground. We must therefore preferre GOD before all things: and nei∣ther in regard of our natiue soile, nor for loue of our parents, our children, or wife, be withdrawne from performance of what∣soeuer GOD commandeth, forasmuch as GOD is the giuer of all these blessings,
and is able to make good, and preserue whatsoeuer he bestoweth. Hereby I am put in good hope, that GOD will in the first place of recompense of my, though slow, yet setled obedience vn∣to his call, vouchsafe mee a protection of my good name and reputation: so that the beautie thereof (how meane soeuer) shall not be deflowred, or ble∣mished, though I leaue it behind mee in the barbarous handes of those, that are like to make bold ynough with it; but rather that it shall bee preserued in its prime and integritie, free from all scandall, and fruitfull to others edifica∣tion. This confidence hath heartened mee, this calling hath ouer-ruled mee, these dangers haue armed mee to aban∣don all, and cheerefully to vndertake this iourney. But, aboue all, the loue of my SAVI∣OVR hyeth mee forward to this pil∣grimage. I were surely of base and groueling thoughts, if I should leaue that my function, with intent to lay
mee downe and rest, or hide my head in a corner, that I might rid my selfe of such conflicts as belong to my cal∣ling, and so grow stiffe with ease and idlenesse. It is the cause of CHRIST I haue in hand, which challengeth mee wholly, and all mine endeuours: I heare that voyce still thundering in mine eares, CLAMA, Cry alowd, and charging mee to ioyne in cry with them, that haue not bowed their knee to Baal: and that my voyce may, with theirs, bee the better heard, to climbe vp to the top of an high mountaine, to preach to SION. This voyce I readily obey: and therefore I hie mee vp into some safe place, where the true Catholique Religion holdeth vp her head, and taketh free breath. From so fitt a stand, wheresoeuer I shall finde it, I meane, as my duetie bindes, and as my strength affoards, to display and publish that trueth which I haue learned, and to lay forth the wayes for remoueall of Schismes,
and reducing of the Church to vnity. It shall not bee long ere the Church shall heare my voyce; I will speake vnto the heart of Ierusalem, and will call vpon her. I cannot bee wanting in this my dutie, beeing a Bishop in the Church of Christ. Now to euery Bishop his owne proper Diocesse is so committed, that hee is withall to know, that the vniuersall Church al∣so is by our SAVIOVR commended to his care, as neede shall require. To e∣uery of vs Bishops, Saint Paul leaueth this lesson: Take heed to your selues, and to the whole flocke, in which the holy Ghost hath made you ouer∣seers, to feede the Church of God, which hee hath purchased with his owne blood. To the same purpose are those wordes, which passe vnder the name of Eleutherius, a very ancient Bi∣shop of Rome, speaking to other Bi∣shops: For this cause the vniuersall Church is by CHRIST IESVS com∣mitted to you, that your paines may bee
employed for all; and that you should bee forward, in affoarding your helpe to euery man. And the blessed Martyr Cy∣prian, in his thirde Booke and thir∣teenth Epistle, auoucheth, that him∣selfe, (together with the Bishop of Rome) doeth hold the ballance of the go∣uernment of the Church: And more∣ouer addeth this: The bodie of the Priesthood consisteth of a great number, and is so combined together with the glew of mutuall concord, and bond of amitie, that if any of our Society shall attempt to rayse vp an Heresie or Faction, and to rent, and spoyle the flocke of Christ, the rest may put to their helping handes for reme∣die. So likewise the same Cyprian did not onely by aduice, but also by acti∣on more then once, affoard his helpe vnto distressed Churches, though si∣tuated without the procinct of A∣FRICKE, and sometimes euen to the Church of Rome, as in the second and fourth Bookes of my fore-men∣tioned Tractate of the Church-weale, I
specifie at large. So Polycarpus, Ireneus, Hosius of CORDVBA, Athanasius, Basi∣lius, both the Eusebij, the one of SA∣MOSATVM, the other of VERCELLA, Lucifer of CARALLI, Hilary of POI∣TIERS, Theophilus and Cyrillus both of ALEXANDRIA, Aurelius of CAR∣THAGE, and many other out of their Episcopall Office, tooke great paines to releeue the distresses of the vniuer∣sall Church; and stepping aside from their owne Churches, but in the meane while, prouiding for, and re∣commending them vnto others, did, out of their owne authoritie, betake themselues to succour other afflicted, and disturbed Churches. It is there∣fore agreeable with my Office; nay, it is my most proper duety to ende∣uour, to my power (as Cyprian teach∣eth mee) to worke a cure vpon the Court of Rome, which setteth vp and maintaineth a conspiring faction, ren∣ding and rauageing the flocke of CHRIST. Which my helping labours
are to bee performed, not by my ap∣proaching thither in person (for that were both dangerous to my selfe, and bootlesse for the cause) but, as I doe, by my most remote bodily absence from it. And as for my Diocesse and Prouince of SPALATO, it is my most earnest desire to haue continued the administring thereof, like as Hosius, Basil, the Eusebij, Hilary, and others euen now named by mee, did reteine still their owne Churches, and retur∣ned to them, when they had atchie∣ued the publique businesse of the vni∣uersall Church. But my Church, with many other, doeth groane vnder the Popes heauy yoake, who heartily ha∣teth reformation, and with tooth and naile opposeth it, both with his owne strength, and with the forces of such Princes, as adhere to the Papacie: so that hee hath, and dayly exerciseth a boundlesse power of life and death o∣uer any that shall lift vp a finger to∣wards the redresse of this his Tyran∣nie.
It was therefore necessarie for mee thus to withdraw my selfe from my Prouince, that hauing broken these bonds of seruilitie, and getting freer breath, I might haue opportuni∣tie to blaze abroad the trueth; and without controule deplore the ruines, which the insolencies of the Court of Rome, haue brought vpon the holy vniuersall Church. Verely there is in euery earthly King an awfull Maiestie; who, as Tertullian speaketh, is the next after GOD, and inferior to none but GOD; and aboue whom, as Optatus Mileui∣tanus sayeth, there is none but GOD alone. Therefore, when King Dauid was to vndergoe reprehension for a∣dulterie and murther committed by him, neither the high Priest, nor any other of the Priests, or Leuites, nor yet any of the Kings friends, or neere attendants, durst intrude into that of∣fice: but GOD himselfe employed his peculiar and extraordinarie messen∣gers,
and appointed Nathan the Pro∣phet to go to the King, and tell him his owne. But as for the Pope of Rome, he, for his turmoyling, scan∣dalizing, harrying, and oppressing the Church, is not to be dealt withall by extraordinary Commissioners: we are not to waite till GOD from heauen giue some immediate deputation, to select Ambassadours for that purpose. There is not in our Romane Bishop, there is not such a radiant Maiestie, that a man need to bee daunted with the lustre of it: Hee hath no glimpse of Maiestie, other then a forged puffe of temporall pride, and that vsurped, and a thing of very nothing. Pull off this visour, and then what is hee but our brother, our colleague, our fellow-Bishop, our fellow-seruant, our fellow-labourer in the worke of the Gospel? And surely, as Solomon teach∣eth vs in his Prouerbes, One brother helped by another, is like a fortified citie. Why then sleepe wee? why are
we possessed with a Lethargie of care∣lesnesse? Our brother goeth to wrack, and draweth the Church with him to ruine; and wee, that are his bre∣thren, sit still, and neither yeeld helpe for it, nor take care of it. Though all others remaine deafe, and dumbe, carelesse, and sencelesse, yet I (pettie whelpe) though least of all the troupe, I cannot couch, I must needes start vp, and make what yelping noyse I can, shrill enough perhaps to awaken stronger mastiues, as yet cast into a dead sleepe by the Popes enchanting morsels. These, if they awake, are like to barke lowder, and to driue away the Wolfe▪ and so, as their office is, to guard CHRISTS Sheep-fold. For the rowzing vp these lustier dogges, I meane not to spend mine owne sillie voyce, I will vse the voyce of the most High, and raise vp the whole Cry of the ancient Fathers, and sacred Councels, still redoubling the war∣ning-voyce of the holy Catholique Church.
Of my tenne forenamed Books of Church-weale (with conuenient speede to bee published) the principall ayme and intent is, that the errours of the Romane faction may bee layde open to the world, that the trueth and soundnesse of Catholique both Do∣ctrine, and Discipline, may bee decla∣red, that those many Churches, which the Church of Rome hath cast off, and kicked out, may be held for Ca∣tholique: Finally, that the way of v∣niting all the Churches of CHRIST may be afarre off designed and poin∣ted at, if not neerely demonstrated, if so be that by any meanes it may come to passe, that wee may all say and thinke one thing▪ that distractions and schismes may bee extinguished, and that Christian Princes may haue no such pretences, as vsually they nowadayes draw from diuersitie of Religion, to plot mutuall mischiefes one against another, and to trouble the common peace of Christendome
with causlesse, vnseasonable, and vn∣godly warres. But that they may ra∣ther bend their ioynt forces, for the restoring vnto their auncient libertie those Christian Churches, which long haue, and still are like to groane vn∣der the heauy yoake of miscreant Tyrants. For my particular, my intent and desire is, that this my, whether depar∣ture, or escape, or flight out of BA∣BYLON be so euen caried, that no iust imputation of schismaticall singularity may sticke vnto it. I forsake errors, I shunne abuses and corruptions; these, and nothing else I flie, lest I should partake with the sinnes, and conse∣quently with the plagues of BABY∣LON. Nathlesse, I doe not, neither wil disioyne my selfe from that com∣mon bond of charitie, wherein I am obliged to the holy Catholike Church, and to euery member of it; but, as much as in mee lyeth, I am ready to ioyne in perpetuall communion with
all Christians, as long as wee accord in the essentials of our Faith, and in profession of the Creeds of the aunci∣ent Church of CHRIST: But with this condition, that it may be free to vs on all sides, to reiect and abhorre all new-coyned Articles of Faith, ei∣ther flatt contrarie to the holy Scrip∣tures, or any way repugnant to the sayd generall Creeds: As also that we bee not bound to admitt, as Articles of Faith, such positions, as beeing in themselues indifferent, haue neuer yet bin sufficiently debated, and determi∣ned by the Church, vntill such time as they shall be fully resolued, or well prooued to haue bin already resolued. And finally, that we be not so hardy, as to damne for hereticall, any such controuerted points; vnlesse it ap∣peare, that the same haue bin already lawfully condemned by the Church, or vntill they shal hereafter be so con∣demned. In GODS Name, let each particular Church, in points indiffe∣rent,
and vndecided, enioy her liber∣tie both for matter of opinion, and for maner of practise. Let euery of them abound in their priuate iudge∣ment, vntill the Catholique Church, by the guidance and gouernement of the Spirit of CHRIST, shall make an end of the Controuersies, and with the winow seuer the chaffe from the solide graine. In the meane time let vs hold our selues to that famous rule of the re∣nowmed Father Saint Cyprian, which he vsed in the Councell of CAR∣THAGE. We iudge no man, sayeth he, neither doe wee, for diuersity of opinion, cut of any man from the right of commu∣nion with vs. For none of vs hath borne himselfe as Bishop of Bishops, nor by ty∣rannicall ouer-awing hath enforced his Colleagues to a necessity of obeying him. Forasmuch as euery Bishop, by the liber∣ty of his place and calling, hath his iudge∣ment and suffrage free to himselfe, so that, as he cannot iudge another, so hee cannot
bee iudged by another. But wee must all attend on the doome of our LORD IESVS CHRIST, who onely hath power, as to make vs gouernours in his Church, so to call vs to accompt for our behauiour in that office. The point then in que∣stion was about the baptising of He∣retiques, wherein Cyprian dissented from the Romane, nay in a maner from the whole Church, and stan∣ding stiffely in his opinion▪ did hold Stephen the Bishop of Rome, eagerly opposing him, and almost all the rest, to bee in a manifest errour. Yet Cyprian neuer went so farre, as to suffer the bond of Christian vnion, and Ecclesiasticall communion be∣tweene them to bee broken; least there should haue risen a rent and schisme betweene them, which is the most pernicious plague that can light vpon Christian Churches. And in this matter Cyprian to his great com∣mendation did temper and allay the not ouer-discreete zeale of Stephen▪
For whilest on the one side Stephen in his heate attempted a rent betweene those Churches by his excommuni∣cations, on the other side Cyprian with his patience, charity, and ex∣traordinary prudence quenched this flame, and defeated that imminent se∣peration. For which his sweet mode∣ration S. Augustine doth often and highly extoll him, and propoundeth those courses of his as a rule and Co∣py for the Church to follow. And the same Father entring into consideration of this contesting of Cyprian with Stephen, and of his milde behauiour therein, in his fift booke against the Donatists cap. 25 thus saith. The peace of CHRIST gatt the vpper hand within their hearts: so that in so hott a difference in opinions, yet there arose no mischieuous schisme betweene them. Surely Cyprian nothing doub∣ted, but that Stephen was in a very ma∣teriall errour, in readmitting He∣retiques to the Catholique Church,
and not rebaptizing them. And yet, rather then hee would teare asunder the bodie of the Church by schisme, hee was willing to communicate, not onely with Stephen himselfe, thus dif∣fering from him in opinion, and acti∣on, but euen with those lapsed offen∣dants, whom hee yet held altogether impure: and this association he affoar∣ded them, onely because Stephen had vouchsafed them the hand of felow∣ship. This example of Christian mo∣deration Saint Augustine in his owne times propoundeth for imitation to the Donatists, and now in ours to vs all. Let vs therefore, Holy father, and my reuerend Fathers, brethren, and Colleagues, let vs tread in the steps of S. Cyprian; and follow the aduice of S. Augustine, that aboue all things care may bee taken for the redresse of schismes, and distractions. Cyprian, we see, as Augustine obserueth, being full of the bowels of charitie, resolued that
those that goe in diuers wayes of pri∣uate iudgement, yet may and must walke the same way of charitable vni∣on. Let vs likewise take, and giue leaue to dissent in opinion one from ano∣ther, vntill a full and faire determina∣tion be made in such points, as yet de∣pend vndecided. But in the meane while, let vs remaine in vnitie. For if in any thing yee bee otherwise min∣ded, God will (as S. Paul admonisheth) reueale this also vnto you. Make not the distractions of the Church greater then indeed they are. Beware, lest with Stephen, by your importune Excom∣munications, you attempt to breake asunder the bond of Charitie. Take heed, lest by thus siding out into op∣posite parts, the mischiefe of Schisme, so warily fore-shunned by S. Augustine, gett head amongst vs, and preuaile a∣gainst vs. Renew peace, amitie, and vnitie among all Christian Churches, which professe the Fundamentalls of true Religion, and reteine the auncient
Confessions of the Christian Faith. Be yee assured that Schisme doeth the Church more hurt by disturbance, then Heresie by distemper. Bee ready to entertaine communion with all, not without mutuall freedome of opi∣nion in questionable problemes; and yet with ioynt forces against euident falsehood. Suffer the trueth to bee sifted out by free, and lawfull meanes, according to the faire cariage ancient∣ly vsed by the holy Church. By this meanes, I hope, and by the helpefull grace of CHRIST (who is not wont to hide himselfe from those that seeke him with sinceritie) it will shortly come to passe, that a compleat agree∣ment, and concord, so much wan∣ted, so much wished, will ensue in the whole Church, that wee all may mind the same thing, and walke by the same rule. Let vs kindle and set vp a∣mong vs, not the firebrands of facti∣on, hatred, and contradiction, but the lampes of Catholike Doctrine, and
religious instruction. Let the word of GOD be a lanterne to our feet: let vs tread in the footsteps of our holy Predecessors, who haue bin the lea∣ding-stars of the Church of CHRIST. Let vs be no longer obstinate, but en∣tertaine the light of the Gospel; and by it dispell the cloudes and mists of errour and falshood. Let vs depart from all those innouations, which haue almost extinguished the ancient Do∣ctrine and Discipline of the holy Ca∣tholike Church; that, as CHRIST is one, so his Church may bee one, fast combined together with the glew of perfect concord: and that in it wee may all with one minde and mouth, glorifie GOD, euen the FATHER of our Lord IESVS CHRIST. Amen. Giuen at VENICE the 20. day of September. 1616.
IMAGO Sti Petri Clauigeri. PP. Pauli 5. Insignia gentilitia. IMAGO Sti Pauli Ensiferi. DECRETVM Sacrae Congregation is Ill.morum S. R. E. Cardinalium, à S. D. N. PAVLO Papa V. Sancta{que} Sede Apostolica, ad In∣dicem Librorum, eorundemque permissionem, prohibitionem, expurgationem, & impressio∣nem, in vniuersa Republica Christiana specialiter deputatorum, vbi{que} publicandum. QVONIAM Ʋltra quam plurimos Li∣bros, tùm in Indice communi, cum in di∣uer sis particularibus Edictis, prohibitos, & damnatos; Ʋti multa temeraria, calumniosa, scandalosa, seditiosa, schismatica, erronea, & haeretica respectiuè
continentes. Adhuc in dies cum tam maxima catholicorum pernicie, alij consimiles, contra veritatem, & puritatem fidei Catholicae, multiplicentur, & prodeant. Ideò Sacra Congregatio Illustrissimorum S. R. E. Car∣dinalium ad Indicem deputatorum, volens pro eius vigilantia, & munere, de opportu∣no remedio prouidere; Ne ex eorum lectu∣ra, Christi fideles erroribus, atque haeresibus inficiantur, & deprauentur: illos quoque pro∣hibendos, atque damnandos esse censuit. In∣ter quos praecipuè, cum inspexerit, vti per∣niciosissimos, & innumeris haeresibus, erro∣ribus, blasphemijs, atque calumnijs scaten∣tes, in lucem prodijsse infrascriptos. Ne grauiora in dies damna, in tota Republica Christiana, ex ijs oriantur: eos omnes in specie omnino damnandos, atque prohiben∣dos esse voluit. Sicuti praesenti Decreto, penitus illos damnat, & prohibet, vbicun∣que, & quouis idiomate impressos, aut im∣primendos. Mandans, vt nullus deinceps cuiuscunque gradus, & conditionis, sub poe∣nis in Sacro Concilio Tridentino, & in In∣dice librorum prohibitorum contentis, eos
audeat imprimere, aut imprimi curare, vel quomodocunque apud se detinere, aut le∣gere. Necnon etiam sub ijsdem poenis praecipiens, vt quicunque nunc illos habent, vel habuerint in futurum, locorum Ordina∣rijs, seu Inquisitoribus, statim à praesentis diei notitia, exhibere teneantur. ¶ Libri autem sunt, videlicet COnclusionum ciuilium, de successione conuentionali, & anomala Classis prima, per Bartholomeum Musculum. Mercurij Gallobelgici Sleidano Succenturiati, siue rerum in Gallia, & Belgio potissi∣mum, Hispania quoque, Italia, Anglia, Germania, Vngaria, Transiluania, vici∣nis{que} locis, ab anno 1555. Ʋsque ad an∣num 1570. gestarum Historicae narra∣tionis continuatae, Auctore M. Gotardo Arthusio Dantiscano. Adami Theodori Siberi Dialexe Academi∣carum, quae sunt orationes, praefationes, dissertationes, epistolae, & carmina. Rogerij Widdringtoni Catholici Angli, ad
S. D. Paulum V. Pontificem Max. hu∣milis supplicatio. Sextum Renata, renouata, ac longè ornatius etiam quam vnquam antea exculta Sphinx Theologico-Philosophica. Rerum, & Vrbis Amstelodamensium Histo∣ria. Authore Ioh. Isacio Pontano. Discursus Historico-Politicus, in tres se∣ctiones distributus. Auctore Ericho Be∣ringero Philireo. Libellus, cui tit.s est, Marcus Antonius de Dominis Archiep.s Spalatensis, suae pro∣fectionis consilium exponit▪ In quo complures propositiones, forma∣liter haereticae, erroneae, schismaticae, sapientes haeresim, blasphemae, scanda∣losae, & contumeliosae in Ecclesiam Ca∣tholicam Romanam, respectiuè conti∣nentur. Et quia in praefato etiam libello, Author ait, opus quoddam De Republica Christia∣na, se breui editurum, quod decem libris complectetur, & singulorum librorum ma∣teriam, quam in eis tractat, proponit; in quo se docere expressà asserit plures propo∣sitiones:
quae cùm manifestè haereticae sint. Ideò praedictum quoque opus, vbique & quouis idiomate, siue iam impressum, siue imprimendum, praesenti Decreto pro∣hibetur. In quorum fidem, manu, & sigillo Illustrissi∣mi, & Reuerendissimi D. Cardinalis S. Ceciliae, Episcopi Albanen. praesens Decre∣tum signatum, & munitum fuit. Die duo∣decima Nouembris MDCXVI. P. Episc. Albanen. Card. S. Ceciliae. Registr. fol. 110. locus ✚ sigilli. F. Franciscus Magdalenus Capiferreus Ord. Praedic. Secretarius. ROMAE, Ex Typographia Camerae Apostolicae. MDCXVI.
¶ The same in English. The Image of S. Peter with his Keyes. The Armes of Pope Paul the fift. The Image of S. Paul with his sword. THE DECREE Of the sacred Congregation of the most Illustrious Cardinals of the holy Church of Rome, specially depu∣ted throughout the whole Christian Common∣wealth, by our most holy Lord Pope Paul the fift, and by the holy Apostolique See for com∣posing the Index of Bookes, and for the permit∣ting, prohibiting, purging and printing them; which Decree is to be published in all places. FOrasmuch as, besides very many Bookes already pro∣hibited, as well in the Or∣dinary Index, as in diuers speciall Edicts, and con∣demned, as respectiuely containing ma∣ny vnaduised calumnious, scandalous,
seditious, schismaticall, erroneous and hereti∣call points; there are neuerthelesse, other Bookes of the like sort dayly multiplyed and set foorth against the trueth and puritie of the Catholique Faith, and to the great mis∣chiefe of Catholiques: Therefore the sacred Congregation of the most Illustrious Cardi∣nals of the holy Church of Rome, deputed for the making and renewing the said Index or Catalogue, beeing in their vigilant care of their duety desirous to prouide a seasonable remedy hereof, lest faithful Christians should be infected and peruerted with errors & he∣resies, by reading of such bookes; hath thought fit to prohibite and condemne them also. Among which hauing specially obserued that there haue bene published certaine bookes, (the names whereof are here vnder speci∣fied) very pernicious, and full of innume∣rable heresies, errors, blasphemies, and slan∣ders: Lest greater mischiefe should by the vndernamed bookes redound vpon the whole Christian Common-wealth, the said Congre∣gation hath adiudged them in speciall to be condemned, and prohibited: And so by this
present Edict doeth downe right damne and prohibite them wheresoeuer, or in what Lan∣guage soeuer, either already printed, or here∣after to be Printed. And commandeth, that from hencefoorth no man, of what degree or state soeuer, bee so hardy as to imprint, or cause them to be imprinted, or in any wise to keepe them by him, or to read them, vnder the penalties mentioned on that behalfe in the holy Councell of Trent, as also in the Index of prohibited bookes. Enioyning likewise vnder the same penalties, that whosoeuer now hath, or hereafter shall haue the said bookes, doe foorthwith vpon notice of this present day yeeld them vp to the Locall Or∣dinaries or Inquisitors. ¶ Now the bookes are these that follow. THe first ranke of ciuill Conclusions con∣cerning conuentuall and irregular succes∣sion, made by Bartholomew Musculus. Mercurius Gallobelgicus seconding Sleidan. Or the continuing of the historicall narra∣tion
of occurrences in France, and the Low countreys especially, and also in Spaine, Italy, England, Germany, Hun∣gary, Transiluania, and other places ad∣ioyning, from the yeere 1555. vnto the yeere 1570. By Gotard Artus of Dantsk. Dialexeis Academicae, viz. Orations, Praefaces, Disputes, Epistles, and Verses, made by Adam Theodorus Siberus. The humble supplication of Roger Widdring∣ton an English Catholique, vnto our most holy Lord Pope Paul the V. Sphinx-Theologico-philosophica, now the sixt time newly reuiued and renewed, and more finely furnished then euer be∣fore. The History of the affaires and City of Am∣sterdam, written by Iohn Isacius Ponta∣nus. A politicall and historicall Discourse diui∣ded into three sections, by Henry▪ Berrin∣ger Philireus. A small Booke bearing this title, Marcus Antonius de Dominis Arch-bishop
of Spalato, declareth the motiues of his departure: in which Booke are respe∣ctiuely conteined very many propositions, formally hereticall, erroneous, schismati∣call, sauouring of heresie, blasphemous, scandalous, and contumelious against the Catholique Romane Church. And because in the aforesayd Booke, the Author professeth, that he will shortly set foorth a certaine Worke of his concerning the Christian Common-wealth, which he will comprise in tenne Bookes, and doeth there propound the matter, which hee handleth in euery of the sayde Bookes, in which hee expresly auoucheth, that hee teacheth diuers propositions: which, because they are manifestly hereti∣call, therefore by this present Decree his sayd Worke is forbidden in all places, and in all languages, whether already printed, or hereafter to be printed. In witnesse whereof to this present Decree, the most illustrious, and most reuerend Lord Cardinall of S. Cecile, Bishop of Alba hath set to his hand and Seale.
Giuen the 12. of Nouember. 1616. P. Episc. Albanen. Card. S. Ceciliae. Registr. fol. 110. the place of the ✚ Seale. Frier Francis Magdalenus Capiferreus, Of the Order of the Preachers, Secretary. Printed at ROME, in the Printing-house belonging to the Apostolique Chamber. 1616.
¶ A parcell of Obseruations vpon some considerable points in this Decree. THis damnatory Decree of the most venerable Congregation of Cardinalls, hauing taken the paines to flie ouer the Alpes, and now stooping so low, as in our owne Language to conuerse with vs (Tramontan's) rude Northerlings; an hard, and heauy case it were, if the good in∣tention thereof should be frustrated. Which for certaine would more or lesse betide it, if it should either incurre contempt among the many, who are bold enough, without∣booke to censure these Book-censurers, or on the otherside should be construed more rigorously, then it was meant, and so breed scandall in the minds of ouertender Roman-Catholiques. Very necessary therefore it is, by way of explanation, to demonstrate the laudable endeuours of our iudicious Index∣masters, who in managing this troublesome affaire, haue shewed their habilities, and kept on foote their ancient vertues of diligence, prudence, clemencie, and ingeniousnesse. 1. The first vertue (which ouerrunneth all the rest for haste) is their nimble dili∣gence,
and actiuitie, in present damming vp that wide breach, which was like to beare downe the bankes and rampiers of the Pa∣pacie. Surely men of the vulgar mould, if they had bene thus at once perplexed with a double passion, would haue bene stricken with the spirit of stupiditie, like him, who seeing his house on fire, stood stone-still ga∣zing at his owne misfortune, able neither to bring, nor call for helpe. But our wor∣thy champions of the Romane Court, be∣ing sensible enough of their deepe wound inflicted by this most Reuerend, and learned Archbishops relinquishment of their party, as also bestead with feare of a more mortall blow approching from his prepared forces, yet forget not betimes to bestirre, and be∣take themselues to their wonted remedies. Now the current cures of these maladies by the prescript of Romane-Licenciats, are performed in two methods, working vpon the aduersary, either by surprising his per∣son, or by calling in and hiding his weapons. In the first, the predominants are force and fraud, in the other, censure and authority. Here, I heare, slacknesse is obiected for omitting the apprehending of the principall (the Authour) and in stead thereof arraig∣ning and condemning the accessories (his Writings.) But in trueth the Romane Super∣uisors haue not herein come short of their
duetie, but of opportunitie. For the Reue∣rend Bishop of Spalato, hauing formerly se∣questred, and retyred himselfe from Dalma∣tia into the Citie of Venice, there could not either in that Citie, or in his Prouince, be any present misse of him vpon his departure out of Italy: so that the first noise, and notice of his disclaiming their partie, came to them from his owne voluntary act; first, by sending his certificatorie letters to the Senate of Venice, from Coyra a chiefe Citie of the Grisons: and shortly after, publishing in print at Heidelberg, this his Manifesto, which hee before had pri∣uately written at Venice: Which no sooner saw the light vpon the 23. of October, but presently it was transported (quadrigis albis) by poste to Venice; and thence by the Popes Nuncio there, sent away to Rome; where by the twelfth of the next moneth, it was nim∣bly doomed to silence by them, that whet∣ted their teeth to bite the stone, when they could not fasten vpon the hand that flung it. Yet this also was foorth with endeauoured, by beleaguering the passages through Ger∣many, and dispersing secret Warrants for his stay and apprehension. But these snares were set too late, and other incident dangers by sea, by land, by solitude, by company, by sicknesse, by discouery, were all ouercome by Gods ouer-ruling hand: so that the misse argueth not want of zeale in them, that vpon
the first alarme arose to pursue him, but ra∣ther want of regularitie in him, who tooke not his solemne leaue of the Popes Nuncio at Venice; of whom he should surely haue had authentique letters of passe, and perpetuall prouision of safer lodging, then he was like to finde in the villages and by-wayes, tho∣row which he passed vncouth and vnsaluted. 2. Next to their diligence, may wee be∣hold their prouidence, in not onely nipping the head and root of a weed already sprung, but also digging to kill the harmefull seedes of other, likely ere long to shoot foorth. Good wisedome it was to send foorth per∣cussorem contra praecursorem, to take off the head of this fore-running Manifesto, which proclaimed it selfe to be Vox clamantis in de∣serto, and to prepare the way for a greater comming after. But Herod is too coole a precedent in this, as also in his child-slaugh∣ter. Pharaoh comes neerer in his mandate to the midwiues. But the very case of this pro∣uident course is exemplified in those, to whom the Poet thus, Et nondum natis dira ve∣nena datis, who make the wombe the tombe, and depriue abortiues of that light, which they neuer enioyed. Some perhaps that dreame of that olde Sentence, , will call these courses, both cowardise, and crueltie: Others vnskil∣full in booke-quelling, will say, that it had
bin faire play to haue suffered this vnborne ten-fold brood, first to take breath, and then to grapple with euery of them seue∣rally. Alas, these nouices forget, that it is, not crueltie, but prouidence to crush in the shell such vipers: and therein this learned Consi∣storie vouchsafeth to take their lesson from the Pygmees, who betimes march foorth in troopes, to breake the egges of the Cranes; whose young, hauing once hard bills, would peck out their braines. Besides this example, they haue also a booke-case for it. Titius resoluing to contradict and beare downe Sempronius in a publique assembly, and bee∣ing ouertaken with a napp, was suddenly a∣waked, and told in meriment, that Sempronius had newly ended a large speach fraught with arguments against him. Titius instant∣ly starts vp, and lowdly sayth; Worthy Au∣ditors, I deny all that Sempronius hath now sayd: Foorthwith being told, that Sempronius had as yet sayd nothing; Then, quoth he, I deny all that he will say. Much more po∣werfully doe these much more watchfull contradictors refute their silent aduersary, resolutely denying and defying whatsoeuer shalbe said in those ten vnpublished Bookes; being forsooth so skilfull Prognosticators, that they can out of the very sound of the name, foretell their fortunes and distempe∣red complexion, that they will be no more
nor lesse then formally Hereticall: and there∣fore to be all at once swept away with one Damnamus. A faire winding vp of this bu∣sines: whereas to vndertake punctually to confute them, would proue both a tedious and hazardous conflict. But now by this meanes tuta sunt & muta omnia: All is hush and cocksure. 3. This sure and sharpe proceeding is yet wel tempered with compassion and modera∣tion; in that these Iudges would not haue the Spalatian Arch-bishop to stand vp single to this Indictment, but for the getting him some company to march with him to the dungeon of Suppression, they take the paines to ran∣sacke all blind corners for the making vp of a damned crew: whereto, rather then faile, out-dated Kalendars of Gallo-Belgicus, and other Pamphlets of small import must helpe to make vp number. This some misdeemers impute to their penury, as hauing no better in store: others to dissimulation and concealement of their griefe, lest they should seeme to ressent their losse, or to be stung with his writings: others to disdaine, as not vouchsafing that honour to their enemie to set foorth an Edict against him onely, but rather imitating the Hunts∣man, who bending his bow to strike a faire Stagge, puts forth towards the Standing, for shew, other raskall Deere with him. But cer∣tes
the true and onely motiue hereto was their gentlenesse and compassion, ready to yeeld Solamen miseris, &c. and therefore pro∣uiding for him the solace of society and part∣nership in misery: Wherein they yeeld him a second fauour, in ranking before him, as more capitall offenders, those, that had not so deepely transgressed as he; which was the greatest kindnesse that Polypheme could af∣ford Vlysses among the other Captiues in his Caue, to make the last bit of him. And howsoeuer it may seeme that the said worthy Arch-bishop was the onely marke here aymed at, as if all the rest were but painted posts, and Turkes of ten pence, to fill and adorne the shooting-field; yet surely that is not altogether true. For here stands vp a Roman-Catholike crouded into the midst, answering to the name of Roger Widdrington, by whom the oath of Allegeance hath bin so soundly defended, and the Popes temporall encrochments so stoutly rebated, that he de∣serueth to bee accounted no shadow in this muster. With good reason therefore doe they clap their hand vpon his mouth, and beat him backe from intruding with his sup∣plications to his Holinesse, and replies vpon the Schulking Cardinall. 4. Another vertue (among many yet behind vnsearched) is their ingenious sub∣tiltie in so framing this Edict, that in the
principall dint of it there is implied equiuo∣cally the force of an Indulgence, vnder the forme of a Restraint. For as for the ten-strong Volume supposed here to be banished (Lege & legionibus) by right and might out of all Catholike Dominions, these cautelous Fathers are so farre from displaying the ten heads of that body (a Spectacle hideous, and dangerous for Romanists to behold, lest it should presently dispapalize them) that they haue not so much as cited the totall by the right name expressed in the foredamned Ma∣nifesto. There the booke carrieth the name, which the true father gaue it from the Sub∣iect whereof it treateth, De Repub. Ecclesiastica. Here our Composers of the blacke bill haue new-christened and killed it vnder the name of De Repub. Christiana: differing as much, as the Vniuersall Church of CHRIST from the Gouernours and ouerseers thereof, to whom Ecclesiasticall Office and Function is appro∣priated. Some are so bold, as to attribute this ex∣change to furious haste, which, though it strike home, yet commonly misseth the ayme, and maketh the battery in the wrong place. But farre be it from vs, to liken these inspired Fathers to Saul, who, when the euill spirit troubled him, missed Dauid, and ranne his speare against the wall. Others, that their large deputation per vniuersam Remp. Christi∣anam
through the whole Christian common-weale (swelling in the title of this Decree, and repeated in the body thereof) did so ring in their eares, that they thought euery booke De Rep. did Eccho againe vnto them their Resp. Christiana: But sure the subsigning Cardinall, and Apostolique Printer, vse not so to slubber ouer such sacred businesse. The most probable coniecture in so diffi∣cult and mysterious a poynt is, that these pro∣uident priuy-counsailers vnto his Holinesse considering, that the ouer-strict prohibiting of Bookes was vnto their (now our) Reue∣rend Spalatensis a great cause of scandall, and reuolt, hereupon thought fit to take a middle course, and play on both sides concerning these ten expected, suspected bookes; so for∣bidding them, that the blindly obedient might follow the intention against the words, and still winke where the Tractates De Repub. Ecclesiastica shall lie open. But if any (as is the disposition of many) shall with such violent restraints be more whetted to runne in veti∣tum, and to eate of the forbidden fruit, then may they take the words, leauing the inten∣tion, and legally abate this Writ of Prohibi∣tion, by the Plea of Mesnomer, and finally so keeping their eyes pure from all Writings of Marc-Antony concerning the Christian Com∣mon-weale, may boldly reade his worke of the Ecclesiasticall Common-weale, when it
commeth foorth: Which I pray GOD they may to their better instruction, and imitation of the most Reuerend, Iudicious, and single-hearted Author, in finding out, professing and publishing the Trueth of GOD. Whose Name be glorified by them and vs all in the Catholique Church for euer.
A LETTER Lately written to the aforesaid most Reuerend Arch-bish. by the Honou∣rable George Lingelsheim Doctor of both the Lawes, and Counsailour of State to the right high and mighty Prince FRE∣DERICK the fift, Count Pala∣tine of Rheine, &c. ILLVSTRISSIMO ET REVERENDISSIMO VIRO, Domino MARCO ANTONIO De Dominis, Archiepiscopo Spalatensi, Domino meo colendo. Londinium. Illustrissime & Reuerendissime Domine, LITERAS tuas Hagae datas 23. Nou. rectè mihi reddidit Alber∣tus Mortonus, & iam antè acce∣peramus, saluum te Hagam per∣uenisse, & benignè acceptum ab il∣lustrissimo Principe Mauricio, na∣uem{que} bellicam suam praebitam, qua tutus in Britanniam traijceres. Quo nomine gaude∣mus ac gratulamur, ac porrò vota facimus, ut saluus plu∣rimum commodare rei Christianae possis. Scriptum tuum, uti iusseras hic recusum, & supra XL. exempla∣ria ego in omnes partes ad amicos meos misi, at{que} uti petis, exemplar istis adiungo. Exitus tuus è Babylone incen∣dit acriter hostes Veritatis, at{que} iam Romae ac Medio∣lani Edicto Scriptae tua prohibita, etiam futura; nam accuratè sibi cauent. Etiam Iesuitae Bruxellenses, quum
aliter nocere non possint, nomen tuum lacerant, & au∣ctoritatem eleuare laborant: frustra, quum etiam super∣stitiosissimi apud Venetos, testimonium tibi praebeant in∣culpate actae vitae. Deus suo sancto Spiritu tibi adsit, ut opus tuum absoluere, & plurimos iuuare, & in viam Ʋeritatis ducere queas. Serenissimus Elector cum magno gaudio nuncium accepit, de recuperata valetudine tua, & felici aduentu Hagam, & optat tibi secunda om∣nia, uti & Magnus Prafectus, caeteri{que} collegae mei; etiam Plessenius, qui dolet se abfuisse, quum haec transires, & sa∣lutem tibi plurimam dicit. Vale Illme Domine. Heidelberga 19. Decemb. 1616. Illmae Dignitati tuae addictiss. GEORG-MICHAEL LINGELSHEMIVM
¶ The same in English. TO THE MOST ILLVS∣TRIOVS AND MOST REVEREND MARC-ANTONY de Dominis, Arch-bish. of Spalato, my much respected Lord. Giue these at LONDON. Most Illustrious and most Reuerend, YOur Letters from the Hage, of the 23. of Nouember, were duly deliuered vnto me by Mr. Albert Morton. Before the receit wher∣of we otherwise vnderstood that you came safe to the Hage, and were very courteously entertai∣ned by Graue Maurice his Excellencie, whom it pleased to appoynt one of his Ships of warre to con∣uey you safely ouer into England. For which your good successe we are heartily glad, and doe congra∣tulate the same, continuing our prayers for your health and welfare, to the aduancement of the pub∣lique good of Christendome. Your Booke accor∣ding to your appointment hath bene here reprinted; And I haue dispersed among my friends in all parts aboue fourty of those Copies: of which our latter Impression I here send you one as you desired. Your departure out of Babylon hath deepely stung and incensed the enemies of the Trueth; So that now already both at Rome and Millaine Edicts are set foorth for the prohibiting of your writings, euen those which yet you haue not published: So prouident and cautelous is this generation. The
Iesuits of Brussels, because it lieth not within their reach to doe other mischiefe, make bolde to nibble at your good name, and labour to empaire the worth and weight of your authority. But all in vaine: For in Venice the most precise Papalin's doe yeeld you good testimonie of your blamelesse life. GOD assist you with his holy Spirit, and enable you to finish your intended worke, that you may reach forth your helping hand to many, and leade them into the way of trueth. Our most renowned Prince the Palsegraue was not a little ioyed, when notice was giuen to his Highnesse of the recouerie of your health, and of your prosperous arriuall at the Hage. His Highnes now recommendeth to you his best wishes of all good successe, as also the L. President of his High∣nesse Counsaile doth the like, and the rest of my fellow-Counsellers. In speciall Plessenius, who is sory that he was absent when you passed this way, and now doth heartily commend himselfe vnto you. Farewell most Illustrious Sr. From Heidelberg. this 19. of Decemb. 1616. Your Reuerences most deuoted GEORG-MICHAEL LINGELSHEIM.
