L638 L641 L639 R229316 13587622 100600
AYRES AND DIALOGUES, For One, Two, and Three Voyces. BY portrait of a man HENRY LAWES Servant to his late Matie: in his publick and private Musick. W Faitharne fecit The First Booke. LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John Playford, and are to be sold at his Shop, in the Inner Temple, near the Church door. 1653.
To the Right Honorable, The two most Excellent Sisters, ALICE Countesse of CARBERY, And MARY Lady HERBERT of Cherbury and Castle-Island, Daughters to the Right Honorable, John Earle of Bridgewater, Lord President of WALES, &c. I Need not tell Your Ladiships, that since my At∣tendance on His late MAJESTY (my most Gracious Master) I have neglected the exercise of my Profession. Yet, to debarr Idlenesse (which, without vanity I may say, I was never passionatly in love with) I have made some Compositions, which now I resolve to publish to the World. What Grounds and Motives lead me to this Publication, I conceive not so proper for your Ladiships notice, having else∣where told it to the Reader. But no sooner I thought of making these Publick, than of inscribing them to Your Ladiships, most of them being Composed when I was employed by Your ever Honour'd Pa∣rents to attend Your Ladishipp's Education in Musick; who (as in other Accom∣plishments fit for Persons of Your Quality) excell'd most Ladies, especially in Vocall Musick, wherin You were so absolute, that You gave Life and Honour to all I set and taught You; and that with more Vnderstanding than a new Ge∣neration pretending to Skil (I dare say) are Capable of. I could therefore do no∣thing more becomming my Gratitude than a Dedication of These (so much Your own) to both Your Ladiships; and to manifest that Honour I bear to the Memory of Your deceased Parents, whose Favors it is impossible should ever be forgotten by Your Ladiships most humbly devoted Servant, HENRY LAWES.
To all Understanders or Lovers of MUSICK. IT is easie to say I have been much importun'd, by Persons of Quality, to Publish my Compositions: But though I could plead it (and without vain Pretensions) yet now I shall wave it. Nor was I drawn to it by any little thoughts of private Gain; though men of my Relations (as the World now goes) are justly presum'd not to overflow; and perhaps the matter will not reach that value, let the Stationer look to that, who him∣selfe hath undergone the Charge and Trouble of the whole Impression; who yet (by his favour) hath lately made bold to print, in one Book, above twenty of my Songs, whereof I had no knowledge till his Book was in the Presse; and it seems he sound those so acceptable that he is ready for more. Therefore now the Question is not, whether or no my Composi∣tions shall be Publick, but whether they shall come forth from me, or from some other hand; and which of the two is likeliest to afford the true correct Copies, I leave others to judge. In this Book I reprint none that were publish'd in the former, or ever in print before. I could tell ye also, I have often found many of mine that have walkt abroad in other mens names: how they came to lose their Relations and be Anabaptiz'd, I think not worth examining. Only I shall say, that some who so adopted and owned my Songs had greater kindnesse for the Children than for the Father: else sure they had not bestow'd some other late Ayres (which themselves could not own) upon Forrainers and Strangers, because I compos'd them to Italian and Spanish words. I should think such an Inju∣ry an unseasonable piece of Injustice, since now we live in so sullen an Age, that our Profession it selfe hath lost its Incouragement. But Wise men have observ'd our Generation so giddy, that whatsoever is Native (be it never so excellent) must lose its taste, because themselves have lost theirs. For my part, I professe (and such as know me can bear me witnesse) I desire to render every man his due, whether Strangers or Natives. I acknowledge the Italians the greatest Masters of Musick, but yet not all. And (without depressing the Honour of other Countries) I may say our own Nation hath had and yet hath as able Musitians as any in Europe; and many now living (whose names I forbear) are excellent both for the Voyce and Instruments. But as in Musick the Unison and Diapason are the sweetest of all Chords, yet a Second and a Seventh, which stand next to them, are more Discordant from them than any other Notes in all the Scale: So to Musicians, a man's next Neighbour is the farthest from him, and none give so harsh a Report of the English as the English themselves. We should not think Musick any stranger to this Island, since our Ancestors tell us that the Britains had Musicians before they had Books; and the Romans  invaded us (who were not too forward to magnifie other Nations) confesse what power s and Bards had over the Peoples affections by recording in Songs the Deeds of Heroick heir very Laws and Religion being sung in Tunes, and so (without Letters) transmitted ity; wherein it seems they were so dexterous, that their Neighbours out of Gaul came hither n it. How their Successors held it up I know not: But King Henry the Eight did much ad∣e it, especially in the former part of his Reign, when his minde was more intent upon Arts and ences, at which time he invited all the greatest Masters out of Italy and other Countries, and Him∣ gave example by Composing with his own hand two intire Services, which were often sung in  Chappell, as the Lord Herbert of Cherbury (who writ his Life) hath left upon Record. Since hose time it prosper'd much in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and His late Maje∣ty. I confesse the Italian Language may have some advantage by being better smooth'd and vowell'd  Musick, which I found by many Songs which I set to Italian words: and our English seems a
little over-clogg'd with Consonants; but that's much the Composer's fault, who by judicious setting and right tuning the words may make it smooth enough. And since our palates are so much after Novelties, I desir'd to try the Greek, having never seen any thing Set in that Language by our own Musicians or Strangers; and (by Composing some of Anacreon's Odes) I found the Greek Tongue full as good as any for Musick, and in some particulars sweeter than the Latine, or these Moderne ones that descended from Latine. I never lov'd to Set or sing words which I do not understand; and where I cannot, I desir'd help of others who were able to interpret. But this present Generation is so sated with what's Native, that nothing takes their eare but what's sung in a Language which (commonly) they understand as little as they do the Musick. And to make them a little sensible of this ridiculous humour, I took a Table or Index of old Italian Songs (for one, two, and three Voyces) and this Index (which read together made a strange med∣ley of Non-sence) I set to a varyed Ayre, and gave out that it came from Italy, whereby it hath pas∣sed for a rare Italian Song. This very Song I have now here printed. And if this First Book shall find acceptance, I intend yearly to publish the like; for I confess I have a sufficient Stock lying by me (and shall compose more) having had the Honour to Set the Verses of the most and chiefest Poets of our Times. As for those Copies of Verses in this Book, I have rendred their Names who made them, from whose hands I received them. These Reasons (with some other not here mentioned) drew me forth to this Publication, which if receiv'd with the same heart that I offer it, will be further Encouragement for H. L.
To Mr. HENRY LAWES, who had then new∣ly set a Song of mine in the Year, 1635. VErse makes Heroick Vertue live, But you can life to Verses give: As when in open aire we blow The breath (though strain'd) sounds flat and low, But if a Trumpet take the blast, It lifts it high, and makes it last: So in your Ayres our Numbers drest Make a shrill sally from the Brest Of Nymphs, who singing what we pen'd, Our Passions to themselves commend, While Love Victorious with thy Art Governs at once their Voyce and Heart. You by the help of Tune and Time Can make that Song which was but Rime. NOY pleading, no man doubts the Cause, Or questions Verses set by LAWES. For as a window thick with paint Lets in a light but dim and faint, So others with Division hide The Light of Sense, the Poets Pride, But you alone may truly boast That not a syllable is lost; The Writer's and the Setter's skill At once the ravish't Eare do fill. Let those which only warble long, And gargle in their throats a Song, Content themselves with Ut, re, mi, Let words and sense be set by Thee, ED. WALLER, Esquire.
To his Honour'd F. Mr. HENRY LAWES, on his Ayres and Dialogues. THose happy few who apprehend thy flight, Ever above the Cloud, yet still in sight, Cannot by all their Numbers and Addresse Swell or advance thy praises, but confesse. For thou art fix'd beyond the Power of Fate, Since nothing that is Mortal can Create. And is it possible that thou should'st dye Who can'st bestow such Immortality? I have not sought the Rules by which yee try When a Chord's broke, or holds in Harmony; But I am sure Thou hast a Soul within As if created for a Cherubin; Brim full of Candour and wise Innocence, And is not Musick a Resultance thence? For sure the blunt-bill'd Swan's first fame to sing Sprung from the motion of her spotless Wing. But sole Integrity winns not the Cause, For then each honest man would be a LAWES: Thou hast deep Iudgement, Phansie, and high Sence, Old and new VVit, steady Experience; A Soul unbrib'd by any thing but Fame, Grsping to get nought but a good great Name. Hence all thy Ayres flow pure and unconfin'd, Blown by no Mercenary Lapland Wind, No stoln or plunder'd Phansies, but born free, And so transmitted to Posteritie, VVhich never shall their well-grown Honor blast, Since they have Thy, that's the best, Iudgement past. Yet Some, who forc'd t'admire Thee, must repine That all Theirs are out-done by thy Each Line; The Sence so humour'd, and those Humours hit, VVill call them acts of Fortune, not of Wit; Hoping their want of Skill may be thy Brand 'Cause they have not the Luck to Understand; Cry up the Words to cry Thee down, and sweare Thou sett'st more Sence then they can meet elsewhere, Concluding could themselves such Verses show They could produce such Compositions too. But is't thy fault if the great Witts whole Quire Before all Ohers still prefer Thy Lyre? They tasted All, and Thine among the rest, But then return'd to Thee, 'cause Best was Best. Bid such attach Thy Old Anacreon's Greek, Where the least Accent will cost Them a Week, Six Months a Verse, and that Verse tun'd and scann'd (Though short) twelve Years, an Age to Understand: But thy Lute, like th'last Trump, hath rais'd His Head, Who, er'e the Graecian Empire born, was dead. Then let all Poetts bring all Verse, which They May on thy Desk as on an Altar lay, Where kindled by that Touch thy Hand hath given, 'Twill climb (whence Musick first came down) to Heaven. FRANCIS FINCH, Esquire.
To the much honour'd Mr. HENRY LAVVES, on his Book of Ayres. THat Princes dye not, they to Poetts owe; Poetts themselves do owe their Lives to You; Whose Phansies soon would stifle, and declare They could not breath unlesse you lent them Ayre. 'Tis that inspires their Feet, which else but crawle As Judges walk th' old Measures round the Hall, Untill the feather'd heels of Youth advance And raise their dull pace up into a Dance: Your Art such Motion to our Verses brings We can but give them Feet, You give them Wings. WILL. BARKER. To his much honour'd F. Mr. HENRY LAWES, on his Book of Ayres. FAther of Numbers, who hast still thought fit To tune thy selfe, and then Set others Wit; Forgive my Zeale, who with my Sprig of Bayes Do crowd into the Chorus of thy Praise. For Silence were, when LAWES is nam'd, a wrong, The Subject and the Master of all Song: Who ne'r dost dive for Pebbles, undermine Mountains to make old rusty Iron shine: But hast made Great things Greater, do'st dispense Lustre to Wit, by adding Sence to Sence. For Passions are not Passions, 'till they be Rais'd to that height, which they expect from Thee; And all this is thy selfe; Thy Name's not grown Broader by putting on a Cap or Gown; Who like those Jockies that do often sell An old worn Jade, because he's saddled well: No; Thou can'st humour all that Wit can teach, Which those that are but Note-men cannot reach: Thou'rt all so fit, that some have pass'd their Votes, Thy Notes beget the Words, not Words thy Notes. T. NORTON.
To my ever honour'd Friend & Father, Mr. HENRY LAWES, on his Book of Ayres and Dialogues. FAther of Musick and Musitians too, And Father of the Muses, All's thy due: For not a drop that flows from Helicon But Ayr'd by thee grows streight into a Song. So as when Light about the World was spread, All kind of Colours, Black, White, Green, and Red, Soon mixt with Substances, and grew to be Plants, Grasse, and Flowrs, which All's but Harmony. Thou mak'st the Grave and Light together chime, Both joyntly dance, yet keep their own true time; The winning Dorick, that best loves the Harp; The Phrygian, thats as sweet, though far more sharp, The brisk Ionick, sober Lydian Mood, Which every eare sucks in, and cryes, 'tis good: Thou hitt'st them all; their Spirit, Tone, and Pause, Have all conspir'd to meet and honour LAWES. No pointing Comma, Colon, halfe so well Renders the Breath of Sense; they cannot tell The just Proportion how each word should go, To rise and fall, run swiftly or march slow; Thou shew'st 'tis Musick only must do this, Which as thou handlest it can never miss; All may be Sung or Read, which thou hast drest, Both are the same, save that the Singing's best. Thy Muse can make this sad, raise that to Life, Inflaming one, smoothing down th' others Strife, Meer Words, when measur'd best, are Words alone, Till quickned by their nearest Friend a Tone: And then, when Sense and perfect Concords meet, Though th' Story bitter be, Tunes make it sweet: Thy Ariadne's Grief's so fitly shown As bring's us Pleasure from her saddest Groan. And all this is thine own, thy true-born Heir; Nor stoln at home, nor Forrain far-fetcht Ware Made good by Mountebanks, who loud must cry Till some believe, and do as dearly buy; Which when they've try'd, not better nor yet more They find, than what does grow at their own door. For when such Mountains swell with mighty Birth, Wee find some poor small petty thing creep forth. But I'm too short to speak thee, I've no Praise To give, but what I gather from thy Bayes: My narrow Hive's supply'd from thy full Flow'r, Nor does thy Ocean Praise know Bank or Shoar: Yet this I dare attest, that who shall look And understand as well as read thy Book Must say that here both Wit and Musick meet; Like the great Giant's Riddle Strong and Sweet. JOHN COBB.
TO his Honour'd Friend, Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his Book of Ayres. MUsick thou Soul of Verse, gently inspire My untun'd Phansie with some sprightly Ayre, 'Tis fittest now that I thy ayd require While I to sing thee and thy Lawes prepare: For the high Raptures of a lofty strain Charm equall with the Bowr's Aonian, 'Twere in me rudeness, not to blazon forth (Father in Musick) thy deserved praise, Who oft have been, to witness thy rare worth, A ravish't hearer of thy skilfull Lay's. Thy Lay's that wont to lend a soaring wing, And to my tardy Muse fresh ardour bring. While brightest Dames, the splendour of the Court, Themselves a silent Musick to the Eye, Would oft to hear thy solemn Ayres resort, Making thereby a double Harmony: 'Tis hard to judge which adds the most delight, To th' Eare thy Charms, or theirs unto the Sight. But this is sure, had Strada's Nightingale Heard the soft murmurs of thy Ayry Lute, She doubting lest her own sweet voyce should fail To hear thy sweeter Ayres, had quite been mute. Such Vertue dwels in Harmony divine (Admired LAWES) and above all in thine. The Dorick Sage, and the mild Lydian, The sad Laconick unto Wars exciting, Th' Acolian Grave, the Phrygian mournfull strain, The smooth Jonick carelesly delighting, There calmly meet, and chearfully agree, Various themselves, to make one Symphony. If we long since could boast thy purest vain, More then old Greece the Rhodopsian Lyre, Or Latian Bowres of late Marenzo's strain, How much must our applause advance thee higher? When thy yet more harmonious birth shall bring To us new Joyes, new Pleasures to the Spring. The Woods wild Songsters, wonder will surprize Hearing the sweet Art of thy well tun'd Notes, What new unwonted chime? 'tis that outvies The Native sweetness of their liquid throats, Which while in vain they strive to aemulate Anothers Musick's Duell they'l create. Whether pure Anthem's fill the sacred Quire, Or Lady's Chambers the Lute's trembling voice, Or Rurall Song's the Country Swains admire, Thy large Invention still affords us choice; 'Tis to thy Skill, that we indebted are, What ever Musick hath of neat and rare. To thee the choycest Witts of England owe The Life of their fam'd Verse, that ne'r shall dye, For thou hast made their rich conceits to flow In streams more rich to lasting memory, Such Musick needs must steal our souls away, Where Voice and Verse do meet, where Love and Phansie play. EDWARD PHILLIPS.
To my Honour'd Friend, Mr. Henry Lawes, upon his Book of Ayres. TO calm the rugged Ocean, and asswage The horrid tempests in their highest rage, To tame the wildest Beasts, to still the Winds, And quell the fury of distemper'd minds, Making the Pensive merry, th' over jolly Composing to a sober Melancholy: These are th' effects of sacred harmonie; Which being an Art so well attain'd by thee, (Most Honour'd Laws) what can we lss then Thy Works with theirs who were the Ancients wo And give thee equall praise; but I forget; For we do owe thee a far greater debt, The charming sweetness of whose shorter Lay's, Not only we do hear with great amaze, But they have low descended to the deep, And wak'ned Theseus Queen from Stygian sleep; Who slighting Orpheus, comes to beg of thee To ayd her with thy pow'rfull harmonie, Knowing thy strains more truly can expresse Her sense of Theseus strange forgetfulnesse; Which makes us here to double thy Renown; Hereafter thou shalt wear fair Ariadne's Crown. JOHN PHILLIPS. To my Dear and Honour'd Friend, Mr. HENRY LAWES, upon his Incomparable Book of Songs. I Am no Poet, yet I will rehearse My Virgin Muse, though in unpolisht Verse. Perhaps the immature and lib'rall sence, (Yet better than those Ignorants commence, Who boldly dare their scandalous censures throw, And judge of things (I'le swear) they do not know) Will be to some unpleasing; but what then? Must they not know their wild pretensions, when Unnat'rally they'l raise a Forrain Name, And blast the Honour of their Native Fame? But stay; Will this reclaim them? No, th'are mad; Their Reason is infatuate, and clad In such a stupified ignorance: Nothing will please that is not come from France Or Italy; but let them have their will, Whilst we unto thy Noble Art and Skill Do sacrifice our admirations: The tribute's just, and other Nations Cannot but pay it too, when they shall see Their best of Labours thus outdone by Thee; Or else amaz'd to see thy English Ayre Past imitation; they will dispaire, And wonder we can surfeit with such meat, So rare, so rich, so pleasant, so compleat. Be happy then; Thou art above all hate; Thy great abil'ties have out-grown thy Fate. Thy Fortune soars aloft; thou art renown'd: Thy Fame's with Judgements approbation crown'd. And in this Verse, (as I disclaim all Wit) So 'twas thy worth, oblig'd my fancy t'it. JO. CARWARDEN
The TABLE, With the Names of those who were Authors of the Verses. ARiadne Pag. 1 - Mr. William Cartwright of Christ-Church Oxford. Am I dispis'd because you say Pag. 19 - Mr. Robert Herick. Amarantha sweet and fair Pag. 15 - Col. Richard Lovelace. Ask me why I send you here Pag. 24 - Mr. Herick. Be gone, be gone thou perjur'd man Pag. 35 - Henry Lawes. Careless of Love, and free from Fears Pag. 11 - Carew Raleigh, Esquire. Chloris your self you so excell Pag. 14 - Edmond Waller, Esquire. Caelia thy bright Angel's Face Pag. 17 - Thomas Earle of Winchilsea. Canst thou love me, and yet doubt Pag. 23 - William Earle of Pembrooke. Come my Lucasta Pag. 25 - Sir Charles Lucas. Come heavy Souls Pag. 28 - Dr. William Stroud, Oratour of the University of Oxford. Come, come thou glorious Object Pag. 30 - Sir William Killigrew, Come my Sweet whilst every strain Pag. 32 - Mr. Cartwright. Dearest do not now delay me Pag. 20 - Mr. Henry Harington, Son to Sir Henry Harington. Farewell fair Saint Pag. 10 - Mr, Tho. Gary, Son to the Earle of Monmouth, and of the Bedchamber to his late Majesty. Gaze not on Swann's Pag. 15 - Mr. Henry Noel, Son to the L. Viscount Cambden. Give me more Love or more Disdain Pag. 21 - Mr. Tho. Carew, Gentleman of the Privy Cham∣ber, and Sewer to his late Majesty. He that love's a Rosie Check Pag. 12 - Mr. Carew. I long to sing the Seidge of Troy Pag. 27 - Mr. John Berkenhead. If when the Sun at Noon Pag. 18 - Mr. Carew. It is not that I love you lesse Pag. 22 - Mr. Waller. Imbre lachrymarum largo Pag. 36 - Mr. Thomas Fuller, Batch. Divinity. Ladies who gild the glitt'ring Noon Pag. 35 - Mr. Francis Lenton. Lately on yonder swelling Bush Pag. 24 - Mr. Waller. Lovely Chloris though thine eyes Pag. 20 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. The Day's return'd Pag. 33 - Mr. Berkenhead. Till now I never did believe Pag. 16 - Sir Thomas Nevill. Till I beheld fair Caelia's Fac Pag. 25 - Francis Finch, Esquire. 'Tis true fair Caelia Pag. 29 - Mr. Henry Bathurst. Thou art so Fair and Yong Pag. 31 - Mr. Aurelian Tounshend. 'Tis Wine that inspir's Pag. 32 - Lord Broughall. Two hundred minutes are run down Pag. 34 - Mr. Berkenhead. Venus redress a wrong Pag. 7 - Mr. Cartwright. When thou poor Excommunicate Pag. 8 - Mr. Carew When on the Altar of my hand Pag. 9 - Mr. Carew. While I listen to thy Voyce Pag. 13 - Mr. Waller, Pag. 26 - Anacreon's Ode, call'd the Lute. Inquel gelato core (TAVOLA) Last Pag. in the Book - By divers and sundry Authors. Dialogues and Songs for two Voyces. DIstressed Pilgrim, A Dialogue betwixt Cor∣danus and an Amorest Pag. 1 - Col. Francis Lovelace. Aged man that mowes these Fields, A Dialogue betwixt Time and a Pilgrim Pag. 3 - Mr. Aurelian Townshend. As Caelia rested in the shde, A Dialogue be∣twixt Cleon and Caelia Pag. 5 - Mr. Tho. Carew. Bacehus Pacchus fill our brains Pag. 9 - Mr. Tounshend. Go thou Emblem of my heart Pag. 10 - Mr Harington. O the Fickle state of Lovers Pag. 12 - Mr. Francis Quarles. Musick thou Queen of Souls Pag. 14 - Mr. Tho. Randolph of Trinity Colledge Cambridge. Ayres and Songs for three Voyces. COme Chloris, hie we to the Bower Pag. 16 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. Though my Torment far exceeds Pag. 17 - Mr. Harington. If my Mistress fix her Eye Pag. 18 - Mr. Harington. Keep on your Vaile Pag. 19 - Dr. Stroud. Thou Shepheard whose intentive eye Pag. 20 - Mr. Townshend. O now the certain Cause I know Pag. 21 - Mr. Cartwright. Sing Fair Clorinda Pag. 22 - Sr. William Davenam. Grieve not Dear Love Pag. 24 - John Earle of Bristoll. Ladyes whose smooth and Dainty Skin. Pag. 26 - Mr. Harington.
The Story of Theseus and Ariadne, as much as concerns the en∣suing Relation, is this. THeseus going over into Creet to sight with the Minotaure, made his Father Aegeus this promise, that if he came off with Life and Victory, he would set up white sailes at his comming back, the Ship as he went out having black sailes in token of griefe: being come into Creet, Ariadne the Kings Daughter there fell in love with him, and gave him a Clew of thread, by which after he had slain the Minotaure he ex∣tricated himselfe out of that perplexed Labyrinth: having thus obtained the Victo∣ry, he carryed her along with him into the Island Naxos, where he tooke occasion to leave her as she was a sleep, and so hasting homeward, forgot to hoist the white sails; his Father Aegeus, therefore, who stood upon a Rock, expecting his return, as soon as he perceived the black sailes, cast himselfe head∣long into the Sea, from whom it was called the Aegean Sea. In this while, Ariadne complaining of Theseus his Infidelity, resolving to destroy her selfe, having made her own Epitaph, was comforted by Bacchus, who comming thither was enamoured of her Beauty, and took her to his protection. Ariadne sitting upon a Rock in the Island Naxos, deserted by Theseus, thus complains. Mr. Henry Law, THeseus, O Theseus, hark! but yet in vain; A╌las de╌ser╌ted I complain; it was some neighb'ring Rock, more soft then he, whose hollow bowels pitty'd me, and beating back that false & cruell name, did comfort and revenge my flame, then faithless whither wilt thou flye?
stones dare not harbour cruelty. Tell me ye Gods, who e're ye are, why, O why, made ye him so faire? & tell me wretch why thou mad'st not thy selfe more true? Beauty from him might copies take, & more majestick Heroes make, and falshood learn a wile from him too, to beguile: restore my Clue, 'tis here most due, for 'tis a Labrinth of more subtle Art, to have so faire a face, so fowle a heart: The rav'nous Vulter tear his breast, the row╌ling stone disturbe his rest; let him next feele Ix╌i╌ons wheel, & add one fable more to, cursing Poets store, & then yet rather let him live & twine his woof of
days with some thread stoln from mine; but if you'l torture him, how e're torture my heart you'l find him there: Till mine eyes drank up his, and his drank mine, I ne'r thought souls might kiss, & spirits joyne: Pictures till then, took me as much as men, Nature and Art move╌ing a╌like my heart; but his faire visage made me find pleasures and fears, hopes, sighs and tears, as severall seasons of the mind. Should thine Eye Venus on his dwell, thou wouldst invite him to thy shell, & caught by that live jet, ven∣ture the second net, and after all thy dangers faithlesse he; shouldst thou but slumber, would forsake ev'n thee.
The streams so court the yielding bankes, and gliding thence ne're pay their thankes, the winds so woo the flowers, whisp'ring among fresh bowers, and having rob'd them of their smels, flye thence perfum'd to other Cels; this is familiar hate, to smile, & kill, though nothing pleas thee, yet my ruine will: Death hover, hover, o're me then, waves let your christall womb, be both my fate and tomb, I'le sooner trust the sea then men. Yet for revenge to heav'n I'le call, and breath one curse be╌fore I fall; proud of two Conquests, Minotaure and me, that by my faith, this by thy perjurie.
May'st thou forget to wing thy ships with white, that the black sails may to the longing sight of thy gray Father tell thy fate, and he bequeath that sea his name, falling like me. Nature & Love thus brand thee, whilst I dye, 'cause thou forsak'st Aegeus, cause thou draw'st nigh. And ye O Nimphs below, who sit, in whose swift floods his vows he writ, snatch a sharp Diamond from your richer Mines, & in some Mirror grave these sadder lines; which let some God convey to him, that so he may in that both read at once, and see, those lookes that caus'd my de╌sti╌ny. Her Epitaph. In Thetis Armes, I A╌ri╌ad╌ne sleep,
drown'd: First in mine own tears, then in the deep: Twice banish'd, first by love, and then by hate, the life that I preserv'd became my fate, who leaving all was by him left alone, that from a Monster fre'd, himselfe prov'd one: Thus then I F╌ but looke, O mine eyes, be now true spies, yonder, yonder comes my dear, now my wonder, once my fear; see Satyrs dance along in a con╌fu╌sed throng, whilst horns and pipes rude noice, do mad their lusty joyes; Roses his forehead crown, & that re-crowns the flowers; where he walks up and down, he makes the Desarts Bowers; the I╌vy and the
Grape hide not, adorne his shape, and green leaves cloath his waving Rod, 'tis he; 'tis either Theseus, or some God. A Complaint against Cupid. VEnus, redress a wrong thats done by that yong sprightful boy thy son; he wounds, and then laughs at the sore, hatred it self could do no more; if I pursue, he's smal & light, both seen at once, and out of sight; if I do flye, he's wing'd, & then at the first step I'm caught again. Lest one day thou thy selfe may'st suffer so, or clip the wantons wings, or break his Bow.
To his Inconstant Mistris. Henry Lawes. WHen thou, poore Excommunicate from all the joyes of Love shalt see the full reward and glo╌ri╌ous fate, which my strong faith hath purchas'd me, then curse thine Owne Inconstancy: for thou shalt weepe, intreat, complaine to Love, as I did once to thee, when all thy teares, shall be as vaine as mine were then, for then shalt bee damn'd for thy false A╌po╌sta╌cy.
In the Person of a Lady to her inconstant servant. WHen on the Alt╌ar of my hand (bedew'd with many a kisse and teare,) thy now revolted heart did stand an humble Martyr, thou didst swear, thus, and the God of Love did hear; By those bright glances of thine eye, unlesse thou pitty me I dye. When first those perjur'd lips of thine, Bepal'd with blasting sighs, did seale Their violated faith on mine, From the bosome, that did heale Thee, thou my melting heart didst steale: My soule enflam'd with thy false breath, Poyson'd with kisses, suck't in death. Yet I nor hand nor lip will move, Revenge or Mercy to procure From the offended God of Love, My curse is fatall, and my pure Love shall beyond thy scorn endure, If I implore the Godds, they'l find Thee too ingratefull, me too kind.
To his Mistress going to Sea. enry Lawes. FArewell fair Saint, may not the sea and wind swell like the hearts and eyes you leave behind, but calme and gentle as the looks you beare, smile in your face and whisper in your eare: Let no bold Billow offer to arise, that it may never look upon your eyes, lest winde and wave, enamour'd of your Forme, should throng and crowd themselves into a storme: But if it be your Fate, vaste Seas, to love; of my becalmed breast learn how to move; move then, but in a gentle Lovers pace, no furrows nor no wrinkles in your face; and ye fierce
winds, see that you tell your tale in such a breath as may but fill her Sail: So whilst ye court her each your sev'rall way, ye may her safe╌ly to her Port convay; and lose but in a noble way of wooing, whilst both con╌tribute to your owne un╌do╌ing. The Surprise. CAreless of Love & free from Fears, I sate & gaz'd on Stel╌la's eyes, thinking my Rea╌son or my Years might keep me safe from all surprize. But Love, that hath been long despis'd, And made the Baud to others trust, Finding his Deity surpriz'd, And chang'd into degenerate Lust, Summon'd up all his strength and power, Making her face his Magazine, Where Virtue's grace, and Beauty's flowre He plac'd his Godhead to redeem. So that too late (alas) I finde No steeled Armour is of proof, Nor can the best resolved minde Resist her Beauty and her Youth. But yet the folly to untwist, That loving I deserve no blame; Were it not Atheisme to resist Where Godds themselves conspire her flame.
Disdaine returned. HE that love's a ro╌sie cheek, or a Corall lip admires; or from Star-like eyes doth seek fu╌ell to maintain his fires, as old time makes these de╌cay, so his flames must waste a╌way. But a smooth and steadfast minde, Gentle thoughts, and calme desires, Hearts with equall love combin'd, Kindle never-dying fires: Where these are not, I dispise Lovely Cheekes, or Lips, or Eyes. Caelia, now no tears can win My resolv'd heart to return; I have search'd thy soul within, And find nought but pride and scorn: I have learn'd those Arts, and now Can disdaine as much as thou. Some God in my revenge con╌vey that Love to her I cast a╌way.
To a Lady singing. WHile I list╌en to thy voyce, Chloris, I feele my life de╌cay, that pow'rfull noyse cal's my fleeting soul away; O suppress that magick sound, which de∣stroyes without a wound! peace! peace, Chloris, peace, or singing dye, that together thou and I to heav'n may go; for all we know of what the blessed doe above, is that they sing, and that they love.
To the same Lady, singing the former Song. CLoris your selfe you so excell, when you vouchsafe to breath my thought. that like a spirit with this spll of mine own teaching I am caught. That Eagle's Fate and mine is one, that on the shaft that made him dye, espy'd a Feather of his own, wherewith he wont to soare so high. Had Eccho with so swete a grace, Narcissus lowd complaints return'd, not for re∣flection of his face, but of his voyce the boy had mourn'd.
Beauties Excellency. GAze not on Swanns in whose soft brest, a full hatcht beau╌ty seems to nestnor snow which falling from the skye, hovers in it's virgini╌ty. Gaze not on Roses, though new blown, Grac'd with a fresh complexion, Nor Lillies which no subtle Bee Hath rob'd by kissing Chymistry. Gaze not on that pure milky way Where night uses splendor with the day, Nor Pearle whose silver wlls confine The Riches of an Indian Mine. For if my Emp'ress appears, Swanns moultring dye, snow melts to tears, Roses do blush and hang their heads, Pale Lillies shrink into their beds. The milky way Rides post, to shroud It's baffled glory in a Cloud, And Pearls do climb into her eare, To hang themselves for Envy there. So have I seen Stars bigg with light Prove Lanthorns to the Moon-ey'd night, Which when Sol's Rayes were once display'd, Sink in their Sockets, and decay'd. To Amarantha, To dishevell her haire. AMarantha sweet & fair, forbear to brade that shining hair, as my curious hand or eye, hov'ring round thee let it flye; let it flye as unconfin'd, as it's calm ravisher the wind, who ha's left his Darling the East, to wanton o're this spicy Nest. Ev'ry Tress must be confest, But neatly tangled at best, Like a clew of golden thread Most excellently ravelled; Do not then wind up that light In Ribbands, and o're-cloud in Night, Like the Sun in's early Ray, But shake your head and scattter Day.
The Reform'd Lover. TIll now I never did believe a man could love for vertues sake; nor thought the absence of one Love could grieve the man that freely might another take. But since mine eyes be╌troth'd my heart to you, I find both true, thine Innocence hath so my Love refin'd. I mourn thy body's absence for thy mind. Tell now I never made an Oath But with a purpose to forswear, For to be fix'd upon one face were sloath, When every Ladyes eye is Cupids sphear; But if she merits faith from every brest Who is the best Of woman-kind? how then can I be free To love another, having once lov'd thee? Such is the rare and happy pow'r Of Goodness, that it can dilate It selfe to make one vertuous in an houre, Who liv'd before, perhaps a reprobate; Then since on me this wonder thou hast done, Prithee work on Upon thy selfe, thy Sex doth want that grace My truth to love more then a better face.
The Caelestiall Mistress. CAElia, thy bright Angels face may be cal'd a heav'nly place: the whiteness of the starry way na╌ture did on thy forehead lay: but thine eyes have brightness woon, not from Stars, but from the Sun: the blushing of the Morn in thy Ro╌sie cheek is worn, the Musick of the heav'nly Sphears in thy soul's winning voyce appears: happy were I, had I (like Atlas) grace, so faire a heav'n within mine Arms t'imbrace.
Night and Day to his Mistress. IF when the Sun at Noon displayes his brighter rayes thou but appear; he then all pale with shame and fear, quencheth his light, and grows more dimne, compos'd to thee, then Stars to him. If thou but show thy face again, when darkness doth at midnight reign; darkness fly's, and light is hurl'd round about the silent world; so as a╌like thou driv'st away both light and darkness, night and day.
To his Mistress objecting his Age. AM I dispis'd because you say, and I believe, that I am gray? know, Lady, you have but your day, and night will come, when men will swear Time has spilt snow upon your hair: Then when in your glass you seek, bu fid no Rose╌bud in your cheek, no, nor the bed to give the shew, where such a rare Carnation grew; and such a smiling Tulip too. Ah, then, too late, close in your chamber keeping, it will be told, that you are old, by those true tears y'are weep ing.
To his Mistress upon his going to travell. DEarest do not now de╌lay me, since thou knowst I must be╌gone; Wind & Tyde 'tis thought doth stay me, but 'tis wind that must be blown from thy breath, whose na╌tive smell Indi╌an Odours doth ex╌cell. O then speak, my Dearest Fayre, Kill not him who vowes to serve thee, But perfume the Neighb'ring Ayre, For dumb silence else will starve me 'Tis a word is quickly spoken, Which restrain'd, a heart is broken. Love above Beauty. LOve╌ly Chloris though thine eyes far out shine the jewels of the skies; that grace which all admire in thee, no nor the beauties of thy brest, which far out-blaze the rest, might e're compared be to my fi╌de╌li╌ty. Those alluring smiles that place An eternall April on thy face; Such as no Sun did ever see, No, nor the Treasures of thy brest, Which far out-blaze the rest, Might e're compared be To my Fidelitie.
Mediocrity in Love rejected. GIve me more Love, or more Disdain, the Torrid or the Frozen Zone bring equall ease unto my pain, the Temperate affords me none; either extream of Love or Hate is sweeter then a calme Estate. Give me a storm, if it be Love, like Dana in that golden showre, I swim in pleasure; if it prove Disdain, that torrent will devoure my vulture hopes, and he's possest of Heav'n, that's but from hell releast; then Crown my joyes or Cure my pain, give me more Love or more Disdain.
The selfe Banished. IT is not that I love you lesse, then when before your feet I lay, but to pre╌vent the sad encrease of hopeless Love I keep away: In vain a╌las for ev'ry thing that I have known belong to you, your form dares to my fan╌cy bring, and make my old wounds bleed a╌new. But I have vow'd, and never must your banish'd ser╌vant trouble you for if he break you may distrust, the vow he made to love you too. Who in the Spring from the new Sun Already hath a Feaver got; Too late begins those shafts to shun Which Phabus through his veines hath shot, Too late he would the pains aswage, And to thick shadows does retire, About with him he bears the rage, And in his tainted bloud the fire. But I have vow'd, &c.
The Heart entire. CAnst thou love me and yet doubt so much Falshood in my heart, that a way I should find out to impart fragments of a broken Love to you, more then all b'ing lesse then due: O, no! Love must clear Distrust, or be eaten with that Rust; short Love liking may find Jarrs, the Love that lasteth knows no Warrs. There, Beliefe begets Delight, And so satisfies Desire, That in them it shines as Light No more Fire; All the burning Qualities appeas'd, Each in others joying pleas'd, Not a whisper, not a thought But 'twixt Both in comon's brought, Even to seem Two they are loath, Love being only Soul to both.
The Bud. LAtely on yonder swell╌ing Bush, big with many a comming Rose, this early Bud began to blush, and did but halfe it selfe disclose: I pluckt it though no bet╌ter Grow'n, yet now you see how full 'tis blow'n. Still as I did the Leaves Inspire With such a purple Light they shone, As if they had been made of fire, And spreading so would flame anon, All that was meant by Ayre, or Sun, To this yong Flow'r, my breath ha's done. If our loose Breath so much can do, What may the same in forms of Love? Of purest Love and Musik too, When Flavia it aspires to move: When that which livless Buds perswades To wax more soft, hr youth invades. The Primrose. ASke me why I send you here, this first╌ling of the Infant yeere; aske me why I send to you, this Primrose all be-pearl'd with dew, I must whisper to your Eares, the sweets of Love are wash'd with teares. Aske me why this Rose doth show All yellow, green, and sickly too? Aske me why the stalk is weak, And yielding each way, yet not break? I must tell you, these discover What doubts and fears, are in a Lover.
Coelia singing. Till I beheld fair Caelia's face, where perfect Beauty keeps her Court, a Lovers passion found no place in me, who counted Love a sport: I thought the whole world could not move a well re╌sol╌ved heart to love. Wounded by her I now adore Those pow's of Love I have defi'd, I court the fl mes I scorn'd before, And am repayd with Scorn and Pride: In such upitty'd Flames to dwell, Is not a Martyrdome, but Hell. Cupid can't hlp me, nor wound her, H'l rather prove my Rivall hence, Though blind he'l turn Idolater, For she hath Charms for ev'ry sence; Should he her voyce's musick heare, Soft Love would enter Love's own Eare. Love and Loyalty. COme my Luca╌sta heer's the Grove, where Nightingales perfume the Ayre; why dost tho start? O 'tis not Love, for perfect Lo╌vers dare not fear. No dangers in this Arbour ly, our courage keeps all others hence, ther's none shal dare approach but I, the strongest Love is best de╌fence. Here we'l discourse, and think, and smile, Let guilty men seek how to scape; He cannot love that can beguile, And none but Foes commit a Rape. This Evening's worth Ten Thousand yeere, Then let's resolve since thou must go, We'l meet again to morrow here, Would Kings and Queens might do so too.
Τῶν ἈΝΑΚΡΈΟΝΤΟΣ εἰς Λύραν. ά. ΘΈ╌λω λέγειν Ἀτρεί╌δας, Θέ╌λω δὲ Κάδμον ἄι╌δειν, Ἁ βάρβι╌τος δὲ χορ╌δαῖς Ἔρω╌τα μοῦ╌νον ἠ╌χεῖ. Ε╌γὼ δ' $χαιν νύη╌μα Ἅβου╌λον οὕκ ἐπεί╌θην. Ἤ╌μει╌ψα νεῦρα πρώ╌ην, Καὶ τὴν λύ╌ρην ἅ╌πα╌σαν. Κἀγὼ μὲν ἦι╌δον ἄθ╌λους Ἡρα╌κλέ╌ους, λύ╌ρη δέ Ἔ╌ρω╌τας ἀν╌τε╌φών╌ει. Καί╌ροι╌τε καί╌ροι╌τε λοιπὸν ἡ╌μῖν, Ἥ╌ρω╌ες. ἡ λύ╌ρη γάρ Μό╌νους ἔ╌ρω╌τας μό╌νους ἔ╌ρω╌τας μό╌νους ἔ╌ρω╌τας ἔ╌ρω╌τας ἔ╌ρω╌τας ἄι╌δει.
Anacreon's Ode, call'd, The Lute, Englished and to be sung by a Basse alone. I Long to sing the seidge of Troy; or Thebe's which Cadmus rear'd so high; but though with hand & voice I strove, my Lute will sound nothing but Love. I chang'd the strings, but 'twould not do't; at last I took an other Lute; & then I tri'd to sing the praise of All-performing Hercules. But when I sung Alcide's name, my Lute resounds Love, Love again. Then farewell all ye Graecian Peers, and all true Trojan Cavalleers: Nor Godds nor men my Lute can move; 'Tis dumb to all but Love, Love, Love.
Desperato's Banquet. For a Basscaon. COme hea╌vy Souls, oppressed with the weight of crimes, and pangs, or want of your delight; come drown in Lethes sleepy Lake, what ever makes you ake; drink healths from poys'ned bowls, breath out your cares together with your Souls; cool death's a salve that all may have, ther's no distinction in the Grave. Lay down your loads before death's Iron door; sigh, and sigh out, groan once, and groan no more.
To Caelia, inviting her to Marriage. TIs true (Fair Celia) that by thee I live, that every kisse, and every fond embrace form's a new Soul within me, and doth give a balsome to the wound made by thy face: Yet still me thinks I misse that blisse which Lovers dare not name, and only then described is, when flame doth meet with flame. Those favours which do blesse me every day, Are yet but Empty, and Platonicall. Think not to please your servants with halfe pay, Good Gamesters never stick to throw at all. Who can endure to misse That blisse Which Lovers dare not name, And only then described is, When flame doth meet with flame? If all those sweets within you must remaine Unknown, and ne'r enjoy'd, like hidden treasure, Nature, as well as I, will lose her name; And you, as well as I, your youthfull pleasure. We wrong our selves to misse That blisse Which Lovers dare not name, And only then described is, When flame doth meet with flame. Our Souls, which long have peep'd at one another Out of the narrow Casements of our Eyes, Shall now, by Love conducted, meet together In secret Cavern's, where all pleasure lyes. There, there we shall not misse That blisse Which Lovers dare not name, And only then described is, When flame doth meet with flame.
Beauty Paramont, COme, come, thou glorious object of my sight, O my Joy, my life, my only delight! may this glad miure be blest to e╌ter╌ni╌ty. See how the glim'ring Tapers of the sky do gaze and wonder at our constancy! how they crowd to behold what our Arms do enfold I how all do envy our fe╌li╌ci╌ty, and grudge the triumph of Selindras eyes! how Cinthia seeks to shrowd her crescent in yond cloud, where sad night puts her sble mantle on, thy light mistaking, hasteth to be gone her gloomy shades give way as at th' approach of day, and all the Planets shrink for fear to be ecclips'd by a brighter Dei╌ty.
Look, O look how the pale lights do fall & adore what before the Heavens have not shown, nor the God-head known, such a faith, such a love, as may move mighty Jove from above, to discend and re╌main among Mortals a╌gain. Youth and Beauty. THou art so fair, and yong withall, thou kindl'st yong desires in me, restore╌ing life to leaves that fall, and sight to Eyes that hard╌ly see, halfe those fresh Beauties bloom in thee. Those under sev'rall Hearbs and Flowr's Disguis'd, were all Medea gav, When she real'd Times flying howrs, And aged Aeson from his grave, For Beuty can both kill and sve. Youth it enflmes, but age it cheers, I wou'd go b ck, but not return, To twenty but to twce those yeers; Not blaz, but ever constant burn, For fear my Cradle prove my Urn.
Love and Musick. COme my Sweet, whilst ev'ry strain cals our souls in╌to the Eare, where the greedy listning fain would turn into the sound they heare; lest in desire to fill the quire themselves they tye to harmony, let's kiss & call them back a╌gain. Now let's orderly convey Our Souls into each other's Brest, Where enterchanged let hem stay Slumb'ring in a melting rest: Then with new fire Let them retire, And ill present Sweet fresh content Youthfull as the early day. Then let us a Tumult make, Shuffling so our souls, that we Caeless who did give or take, May not know in whom they be, Then let each smother And stifle the other, Tll we expire In gentle fire, Scorning the forgetfull Lake. The Excellency of Wine. TIs Wine that inspires, and quencheth Lov's fires, teaches fools how to rule a State, Myds ne'r did approve it, because those that love it dispise and laugh at their hate. The Drinkers of Beer Did ne'r yet appear In matters of any weight; 'Tis he whose designe Is quickn'd by Wine That raises things to their height. We then should it prize, For never black eyes Made wounds which this could not heale; Who then doth refuse To drink of this Juice, Is a Foe to the Common╌weale, FINIS.
An Anniversary on the Nuptials of John Earle of Bridgewater, July 22. 1652. THe Day's return'd, and so are we, to pay our Offering on this great Thanksgiving-day. 'Tis His, 'tis Her's, 'tis Both, 'tis All; Though now it rise, it ne'r did fall; Whose Honour shall as lasting prove, as our Devotion or Their Love: Then let's rejoyce, and by our Joy ap╌pear, In this one Day we offer all the Year. 2 See the bright Pair, how amiably kind, As if their Souls were but this Morning joyn'd: As the same Heart in Pulses cleft, This for the Right Arme, that the Left; So His and Her's in sever'd parts Are but two Pulses, not two Hearts: Then Let's, &c. 3 Let no bold Forraign noise their Peace remove, Since nothing's strong enough to shake their Love, Blesse Him in Her's, Her in His Arms, From suddain (true or fals) Alarms; Let ev'ry Year fill up a score, Born to be One, but to Make more: Then let's, &c. 4 This Day Ten years to Him and Her did grant What Angels joy, and Joyes which Angels want: Our Lady-Day, and our Lord's too, 'Twere sin to rob it of its due, 'Tis of both Genders, Her's and His, We stay'd twelve Months to welcome this. Then let's rejoyce, and by our Joy appear In this one Day we offer all the Year.
Staying in London after the Act for Banishment, and going to meet a Friend who sail'd the hour appoynted. TWo hundred minutes are run down, since I and all my Grief sate here; (Whom yet you will nor save nor drown) In a long Gasp 'twixt Hope and Fear: Thus Lucian's tortur'd Fool did cry, He could not live, and durst not dye. How full of Mischief is this Coast! Villains and Fooles peep every way; If once these Seekers find, I'm lost; I dare not go, I dare not stay: Here I am Rooted 'till the Sky Be hung as full of Clouds as I. All Islanders are prisoners Born, We, Slaves to Slaves, in Five-mile Chaines; I Theirs, and Yours, but most forlorn Where Purgatory Hell out-pain's: I'm in a new third Dungeon here, Shackles on Shackles who can wear? Sad and unseen I view the Rowt Which through this Street do ebb and slow; Some few have Business, most without; Their Pace this trundling Rithm does go: O tear me hence, for I am grow'n As empty-base as all this Town!
No Constancy in Man. BE gone, be gone thou perjur'd man, and never more re╌turn, For know tha  constancy hath chang'd my Love to Scorn: Thou hast awak'd me, and I can see cleerly ther's no Truth in Man. My Love to thee was chast and pure, As is the Mornng dew, And 'twas alone like to endure, Hadst thou not prov'd untrue; But I'm awak'd, and now I can See cleerly ther's no Truth in Man. Thou mayst perhaps prevaile upon Some other to believe thee, And since thou canst love more then one, Ne'r think that it shall grieve me; For th' hast awak'd me, and I can See cleerly ther's no Truth in Man. By thy Apostasie I find That Love is plac'd amiss, And can't continue in the mind Where Vertue wanting is: I'm now resolv'd, and know there can No constant Thought remain in Man. Beauties Eclyps'd. LAdies who gild the glit╌t'ring Noon, and by reflecti╌on mend it's Ray, whose lustre makes the spright╌full Sun to dance as on an East╌er Day: What are ye? what are ye now the Queen's a╌way? Couragious Eagles which have whet Your Eyes upon Majestick light, And thence deriv'd such martiall heat As still your Looks maintain'd the fight, What are ye since the King's good night. As an obstructed Fountain's head Cut's the Intaile off from the streams, All Brooks are Disinherited, Honour and Beauty are but Dreams, Since Charles & Mary lost their Beams.
An Eccho. IMbre lachrymarum largo Genas spargo, quavis au╌rorâ; De╌us citò tu ve╌ni╌to, nunc nunc sine morâ, Ora: Hoc non valet, semper o╌ro, semper plo╌ro, cor de╌fi╌cit do╌len╌do; Te te a╌mo, ad te cla╌mo, da╌to finem flen╌do En,╌do. Pecca╌to╌rum primus ego, hoc non nego, sateor ve╌ro: sed tu De╌us esto mew, in te solum spe╌ro, e╌ro: vox pergrata satìs, jam cedam fa╌tis; mor╌tu╌us; vivam tamen: Hìc cum mori╌or, caelo orior, magnum magnum hoc so╌la╌men. A╌men. FINIS.
PASTORALL DIALOGƲES. A Dialogue betwixt Cordanus and Amoret; on a Lost Heart. For two Trebles. Cord. DIstressed Pilgrim whose dark clouded eyes speaks thee a Martyr to Love's cruelties; whither away? Am. What pit╌tying voyce I hear cals back my flying steps? Cord. Prithee draw near. Am. I shall but say kind Swain what doth become of a lost heart, e're to E╌li╌zi╌um it wounded walks? Cord. First, it does free╌ly sly in╌to the pleasures of a Love╌ers eye, but once condemn'd to scorn, it fetter'd lies an ever bowing slave to tyranies. Am. I pit╌ty its sad Fate, since its of╌fence was but for Love, can't tears recall it thence? Cord. O no, such tears as do for pit╌ty call,
she proudly scorns, & glories at their fall. Am. Since neither sighs nor tears, kind Shepheard tell, will not a kisse prevaile? Cord. Thou may'st as well court Ec╌cho with a kisse. Am. Can no Art move a sacred vi╌olence to make her love? Cord. O no, 'tis on╌ly De╌sti╌ny and Fate fashions our Wils. Either to love or hate. Am. Then captive heart, since that no humane spell hath pow'r to graspe thee his fare∣well. Am. Farewell, farewell, farewell. Cho. Lost hearts like Lambs drove from their Folds by fears, farewell. Cord. Farewell, farewell. Cho. Lost hearts like Lambs drove from their Folds by fears,
may back returne by chance, may back returne, may back re╌turne by chance may back returne by chance, may back return by chance, may back returne by but ne'r by tears. chance, but ne'r by tears. A Dialogue betwixt Time and a Pilgrime. Pilgr. Aged man that moves these fields. Time. Pilgrime speak, what is thy will? Pilgr. Whose soile is this that such sweet Pasture yields? or who art thou whose Foot stands ne╌ver still? or where am I? Time. In love. Pilgr. His Lordship lies above. Time. Yes and below, and round about where
in all sorts of flow'rs are growing which as the early Spring puts out, Time fals as fast a mowing. Pilgr. If thou art Time, these Flow'rs have Lives, and then I fear, under some Lilly she I love may now be growing there. Time. And in some Thistle or some spyre of grasse, my syth thy stalk before hers come may passe. Pilgr. Wilt thou provide it may? Time. No. Pilgr. Alleage the cause. Time. Because Time cannot alter but obey Fates Laws. Cho. Then happy those whom Fate that is the stronger, together twist their threds, & yet draws hers the longer. Cho. Then happy those whom Fate that is the stronger, together twist their threds, & yet draws hers the longer.
A Pastorall Dialogue betwixt Cleon and Caelia. Cho. Caelia. AS Caelia rested in the shade with Cleon by her side, the Swain thus courted the Cho. Cleon. AS Caelia rested in the shade with Cleon by her side, the Swain thus courted the yong Mayd, and thus the Nimph reply'd. yong Mayd, and thus the Nimph reply'd. Cleon. Sweet let thy captive fetters wear made by thine arms & hands, 'till such as thraldome scorn, or fear, envy those happy bands. Caelia. Then thus my willing arms I wind about thee, and am so thy pris'ner, for my selfe I bind untill I let thee go. Cle. Happy that slave whom the fair foe ties in so soft a chain. Cael. Far happier I, but that I know thou
wilt break loose again. Cle. By thy immortall Beauties never. Cael. Fraile as thy Love's thine Oath. Cle. Though beauty faile my faith lasts ever. Cael. Time will destroy them both. Cle. I doat not on that snow-white skin. Cael. What then? Cle. Thy purer mind. Cael. It lov'd too soon. Cle. Thou hadst not been so fair, if not so kind. Cael. O strange vain fancy! Cle. But yet true. Cael. Prove it. Cle. Then make a Brade of those loose flames which circle you, my Sun's & yet your shade. Cael. 'Tis done. Cle. Now give it me. Cael. Thus thou shalt thine own errour find; if these were Beauties, I am now lesse fair, because
more kind. Cle. You shall confesse you erre, that hair, shall it not change the hew, or leave the golden Mountain barc? Cael. Aye me, it is too true. Cle. But this small wreath shall ever stay in the first native prime, and smiling when the rest decay, the Triumph sing of Time. Cael. Then let me cut from thy fair Grove one branch, and let that be an Emblem of Eternall Love, for such is mine to thee. Both together. Thus are vve both redeem'd from Time. Thus are vve both redeem'd from Time. Cle. I, by thy grace. Cael. And I, shall live in thy immortall Rimes untill the Muses dy. Cle. By Heav'n. Cael. Swear not, if I must weep, Jove shall not laugh at
me, this kisse, my heart, and thy faith keep. Cle. This breath's my soule to thee. Cho. Then forth the thicket Thirsis rusht, where he saw all the play, the Swain stood still, and smil'd, and Cho. Then forth the thicket Thirsis rusht, where he saw all the play, the Swain stood still, and smil'd, and blush'd, the Nimph fled fast a╌way. blush'd, the Nimph fled fast a╌way.
A Bacchanall. For one or two Voyces. BAcchus, I╌acchus, fill our Brains as well as Bowls with sprightly strains: Let Souldiers BAcchus, I╌acchus, fill our Brains as well as Bowls with sprightly strains: Let Souldiers fight for pay or praise, and mony be the Misers wish, poor Schollers stu╌dy all their dayes, fight for pay or praise, and mony be the Misers wish, poor Schollers stu╌dy all their dayes, and Gluttons glo╌ry in their dish: 'Tis wine, pure wine, revives sad souls, therefore give and Gluttons glo╌ry in their dish: 'Tis wine, pure wine revives sad souls, therefore give us the cheer in Bowls Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. us the cheer in Bowls. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. Let Minions Marshall ev'ry hair, Or in a Lovers lock delight, And Artificiall colours wear, We have the Native Red and White: 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. Take Phesant Poults, and calved Sammon, Or how to please your pallats think, Give us a salt West╌phalia Gammon, Not meat to eat, but meat to drink: 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. Some have the Ptisick, some the Rhume, Some have Palsie, some the Gout, Some swell with fat, and some consume, But they are sound that drink all out: 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. The backward spirit it makes brave, That forward which before was dull; Those grow good fellows that were grave, And kindness flows from cups brim full: 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c. Bacchus, I╌acchus, &c. Some men want Youth, and some want health, Some want a Wife, and some a Punke, Some men want wit, and some want wealth, But they want nothing that are drunke: 'Tis Wine, pure Wine, &c.
Ʋpon a Crown'd Heart sent to a Cruell Mistress. A. 2. voc. Basse. & Cant. GO thou Emblem of my heart, tell my Mistress whose thou art; if with Love she do re╌ceive thee, happy then, happy then, happy then thou art to leave me: But if she do chance to Frown, let her only spoyl that Crown, and all wounded home re∣turn thee, where no o╌ther flame shall burn thee; for em╌pa╌led in my brest, though thou break my peacefull rest; yet I vow in thy defence, Love no more shall fire thee hence, yet I vow in thy de╌fence, Love no more, no more shall fire thee hence.
On a Crown'd Heart sent to his Mistress. BASSUS. A. 2. voc. Basse & Cant. GO thou Emblem of my heart, tell my Mistress whose thou art, if with Love she do receive thee, happy then, happy then, happy then thou art to leave me: But if she do chance to Frown, let her on╌ly spoil that Crown, and all wounded, and all wounded home return thee, where no other flame shall burn thee; for em╌pa╌led in my brest, though thou break my peacefull rest; yet I vow in thy defence, Love no more shall fire thee hence, yet I vow in thy defence, Love no more, no more shall fire thee hence.
The fickle state of Lovers. A. 2. Voc. Basse & Cant. O The fickle state of Lovers, a heart perplext with hopes and fears; to day a world of Joy discover's, and to morrow's drown'd in tears: a Lovers state's like April's, like April's weather, Rain and Sun-shine, Rain and Sun-shine, Rain and Sun-shine both to╌gether: If his Mistress do but smile, a Heav'n of Joy is in his heart, if her Brow but frown a while, Hell can send no greater smart; in a Lovers brest doth dwell very Heav'n, very Heav'n, or very Hell.
BASSUS. The fickle state of Lovers. A. 2. voc. Basse & Cant. O The fickle state of Lovers! a heart perplext with Hopes and Fears; to day a world of Joy dis╌cover's, and tomorrow, & to morrow's drown'd in tears: a Lovers state's like April's weather, Rain and Sun-shine, Rain and Sun shine, Rain and Sun-shine both to╌gether: If his Mistress do but smile, a Heav'n of Joy is in his heart, if her Brow but frown a while, Hil can send no greater smart; in a Lovers brest doth dwell very Heav'n, or very Hell, very Heav'n, or very Hell.
The Power of Musick. A. 2. voc. Basse. & Cant. MUsick, Musick, thou Queen of souls, get up and string thy pow'rfull Lute, and some sad, some sad Requiem sing, 'till Mountains greet the Eccho's with a Groan, and the broken Rocks repeat the dul╌ler tone; then on a suddain with a nimble, with a nimble hand, Run — gently, run — gently o're the Cords, and so command the Pyne to dance, the Oake his Roots for╌go, the Holm and aged Elme to foot it too; Mirtles shall caper, lofty Cedars run, & call the courtly Palm to make up one; then in the
midst of all their jolly train, strike a sad note, and six them Trees a╌gain. The Power of Musick. BASSUS. A. 2. voc. Basse & Cant. MUsick, Musick, thou Queen of souls, get up, get up, and string thy pow'rfull Lute, and some sad Requiem sing, 'till Mountains greet the Eccho's with a Groan, and the broken Rocks repeat the duller tone; then on a suddain with a nimble, with a nimble hand Run — gently, Run — gently, gently o're the Cords, and so command the Pyne to dance, the Oake his Roots forgo, the Holme and A╌ged Elme to foot it too; Mirtles shall caper, lofty Cedars run, and call the courtly Palme to make up one; then in the midst of all their jolly Train, strike a sad note, and six them Trees a╌gain.
Heere beginneth short Ayres for one, two or three Voyces. Chloris taking the Ayre. COme Chloris hie we to the Bow'r to sport us e're the day be done; such is thy Pow'r, that ev'ry Flow'r will ope to thee as to the Sun. And if a Flow'r but chance to dye With my sighs blasts, or mine eyes raine, Thou can'st revive it with thine Eye, And with thy breath mak't sweet again. The wanton Suckling and the Vine Will strive for th' honour, who first may With their green Arms incircle thine To keep the burning Sun away. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. COme Chloris high we to the Bow'r to sport us e're the day be done; such is thy Pow'r, that ev'ry Flow'r will ope to thee as to the Sun. Bassus. a. 3. voc. COme Chloris hie we to the Bow'r, to sport us e're the day be done; such is thy Pow'r, that ev'ry Flow'r will ope to thee as to the Sun.
A Smile, or Frown. For one, two or three voyces. THough my torment far exceeds his whose heart the Vulture feeds, and my endless pains ex╌cell his that rowls the stone in Hell; If my Julia do but smile, I can laugh and sing the while. Though my Fortunes greater were Then the Macedonians Heire: Could I boast of greater glory Then the Scithians Shepheards story? If my Julia do but frown, All my Pompe were overthrown. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. THough my torment far exceeds his whose heart the Vulture feeds, and my endless pains ex∣cell his that rowls the stone in Hell: If my Julia do but smile, I can laugh — and sing the while. Bassus. a. 3. voc. THough my torment far exceeds his whose heart the Vulture feeds, and my endlesse pains excell his that rowls the stone in Hell: If my Julia do but smile, I can laugh and sing the while.
The Captive Lover. For one, two or three Voyces. IF my Mistress six her eye on these ruder lines of mine, let them tell her how I ly fetter'd by her looks divine: Tell her it is on╌ly she can re╌lease and set me free. Tell her yet 'tis my desire To remain her Captive still; Neither can I ayme at higher Hope or Fortune then her Will: So she will my thraldome pay But with one good looke a day. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. IF my Mistress six her eye on those ruder lines of mine, let them tell her how I lye fetter'd by her loks divine: Tell her is is only she can re╌lease, re╌lease, and set me free. Bassus. a. 3. voc. IF my Mistress fix her eye on these ruder lines of mine, let them tell her how I lye fetter'd by her looks divine: Tell her it is on╌ly she can re╌lease, and set me free.
To a Lady putting off her veile. For one, two or three voyces. KEep on your veile & hide your eye, for with behold ing you I dye, your fatal Beau╌ty Gorgon like, dead with a╌sto╌nishment will strike, your piercing eyes, if them I see, are worse then Ba╌si╌lisks to me. Hide from my sight those Hils of Snow, Their melting Vally do not show; Those Azure paths lead to dispair, O vex me not, forbear, forbear; For while I thus in torments dwell The sight of Heav'n is worse then Hell. Your dainty voice and warbling breath Sounds like a sentence past for death, Your dangling tresses are become Like Instruments of finall doome; O if an Angell torture so! When life is done, where shall I go: Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. KEep on your veile and hide your eye, for with behold╌ing you I dye, your fatall Beauty Gorgon like, dead with astonishment will strike, your piercing eyes, if them I see, are worse then Ba╌si╌lisks to me. Bassus. a. 3. voc. KEep on your veile and hide your eye, for with beholding you I dye, your fatall Beauty Gorgon like, dead with astonishment will strike your piercing eyes, if them I see, or worse then Ba╌si╌lisks to me.
In praise of his Mistress. For one, two or three voyces: THou Shepheard whose intentive eye, on ev'ry Lamb is such a spy, no wily Fox can make them lesse, where may I find my Shepheardess? A little pausing then sayd hee, How can that Jewell stray from thee In Summers heat, in Winters cold, I thought thy brest had been her fold? That is indeed the constant place Wherein my thoughts sll see her face, And print her Image in my heart, But yet my fond eyes crave a part. With that he smiling sayd, I might Of Chloris partly have a sight, And some of her perfections meet In ev'ry flow'r was fresh and sweet. The growing Lilly bears her skin, The Violet her blew veins within, The blushing Rose new blown, and spread Her sweeter cheek, her lips, the red. The Winds that wanton with the Spring, Such Odours as her breathing bring, But the resemblance of her eyes Was never found beneath the skies. Her charming voyce who strives to hit, His Object must be higher yet; For Heav'n and Earth, and all we see Dispierc'd, collected, is but shee. Amaz'd at this discourse, me thought Love both Ambition in me wrought, And made me covet to engrosse A Wealth would prove a Publick losse. With that I sigh'd asham'd to see Such worth in her, such want in mee; And closing both mine eyes, forbid The World my sight since she was hid. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. THou Shepheard whose intentive eye, on ev'ry Lamb is such a spy, no wily Fox can make them lesse, where may I find my Shepheardess? Bassus. a. 3. voc. THou Shepheard whose intentive eye, on ev'ry Lamb is such a spy, no wi╌ly Fox can make them lesse, where may I find my Shepheardess?
To a Lady weeping. For one, two or three Voyces. O Now the cer╌tain cause I know, whence the Rose and Lil╌ly grow in your fair cheeks, the often showr's, which you thus weep do breed those Flow'rs. If that the flouds could Venus bring, Or warlike Mars from Flowers spring; Why may not hence two Gods arise? This from your Cheeks, that from your Eyes. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. O Now the cer╌tain cause I know, whence the Rose and Liy grow, in your fair cheeks, the often showr's which you thus weep do breed those Flowr's. Bassus. a. 3. voc. O Now the cer╌tain cause I know, whence the Rose and Lilly grow, in your fair cheeks, the often showr's, which you thus weep to breed those Flowr's.
Cantus. a. 3. voc. SIng fair Clorinda, fair Clorinda sing, whilst you move those that attend the Throne, the Throne above, to leave their holy business there; shall so much harmony attend to think the sphears were made in vain? since heer's a voyce quickens the sloth of natures age, it comforts growth, it comforts growth in all her works, and can provoke a Lilly to out-live an Oake, and can provoke a Lilly, can provoke a Lilly to out-live an Oake.
Alius. a. 3. voc. SIng fair Clorin╌da, sing, sing, whilst you move those that attend the throne above, to leave their holy business there till each with his obedient eare shall so much harmony at╌tain, to think the sphears were made in vain: Since heer's a voyce quickens the sloth of natures age, it comforts growth, it comforts growth in all her works, & can provoke a Lilly, and can provoke a Lilly, and can provoke a Lilly, can provoke a Lilly, and can provoke a Lilly to out╌live an Oake. Bssus. a. 3. voc. SIng fair Clorinda, sing, sing, whilst you move those that attend the throne above, to leave their holy business there till each with his bedient eare shall so much har╌mo╌ny at╌tain to think the sphears were made in vain: Since heer's a voyce quickens the sloth of natures age, it com∣forts growth in all her works, and can provoke a Lil╌ly, and can provoke a Lil╌ly, and can pro∣voke a Lil╌ly to out-live an Oake.
Cantus. a. 3. voc. GRieve not, grieve not, dear Love, although we often part, but know that nature gently doth us sever, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up with tender Art, with tender Art to brook the day when we, when we must part for ever: For nature doubting we should be surpriz'd by that sad day, whose dread, whose dread, doth chiefly fear us, doth keep us dayly school'd and exercised, lest that the fright, lest that the fright, the fright thereof should over, over bear us.
Alius. a. 3. voc. GRieve not, grieve not dear Love, although we of╌ten part, but know that nature, know that nature gently doth us sever, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up by ten╌der Art to brook the day when we must part for ever: For nature doubting we shou'd be surpriz'd by that sad day, whose dread, doth chiefly fear us, doth keep us day╌ly school'd and exercised, lest that the fright, lest that the fright, lest that the fright thereof should o╌ver bear us. Bassus. a. 3. voc. GRieve not, grieve not dear Love, although we often part, but know that nature gently doth us sever, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up, thereby to train us up, to train us up, with tender Art, to brook the day when we must part for ever: For nature doubting we should be surpris'd by that sad day, whose dread, doth chiefly fear us, doth keep us day╌ly school'd & exercised, lest that the fright, lest that, lest that the fright thereof should o╌ver bear us.
A caution to faire Ladies. a. 3. voc. LAdies, you whose smooth and dainty Skin, ro╌sie Lips, ro╌sie Lips, or Cheeks or Chin, all that gaze upon you win, yet insut not, sparks within slow╌ly burn, sparks within slowly burn ere flames, ere slames be╌gin, and presumption still hath been held a most no╌torious sin.
Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. LAdies, you whose smooth and dainty skin, ro╌sie Lips, or Cheeks, or Chin, all that gaze upon you win, yet insult not, sparks within slowly burn, sparks within slowly burn, e're flames, e're flames begin, and presumption still hath been held a most, a most no╌tori╌ous sin. Bassus. a. 3. voc. LAdies, you whose dainty skin, ro╌sie Lips, or Cheeks, or Chin, all that gaze up╌on you win, yet insult not, sparks with╌in slowly burn, e're flames begin, and presumption still, hath been held a most no╌to╌rious sin.
Tavola. INquel gela╌to co╌re Inquel ge╌la╌to co╌re una vo╌ce; piagne ma╌do╌na segl'occhi vastri segl'occhi vastri a du╌e vo╌ce. O sempre equando, tudi salvar mi cirche, cer╌te escor╌no, mi╌se╌ra non cre╌da, ohi me de lu╌mi gia, macche squallido dalli palli╌da dalli pal╌li╌da labra Cosimia vita, cosimia vita, cosimia vita a tre voce, a tre vo╌ce. Musick Books Printed for John Playsord, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Inner Temple near the Church Doore. The first Set of Psalms for three Voyces, with a Thorough Basse for the Organ, or Thero Lute, Composed by Mr. Wiliam Child, late Organist of Windr, the which are Engraven upon Copper. Select Musicall Ayres and Dialogues in fol. for 1. 2. and 3. Voyces, Composed by Dr. John Wilson, Dr. Cales Colman, Mr. Henry Lwe, Mr.  Lanear, Mr. William Caesar, and others, newly re-printed with Large Additions. Musicks Recreation, or a choice Collection of Excellent Lessons for the Lyra Violl, containing 117. Lssn, Composed to severall new Tuings, by the most Eminent Masters now living  Also Dr Campian's Book of Ayes, for 2. 3 and 4. Voyces. The first Book of Ayres and Dialogues in fol. for 1. 2. and 3. Voyces, by Mr. Henry Lawes. Catch that Catch can, or an new Collection of Cacthes, Rounds, and Cannons, containing 150. Published by Mr. John Hilton Batchelor in Musick. Orlando Gibbons 3. Part Fantazies, for 2. Trebles and a Basse engraven uppon Copper. Mr. Michael East 17. Set of Fantazes for the Violls of 2. 3. and 4. Parts. The Dancing Master, or plain and easie Rules for the Dancing of Country Dances, with the Tunes before each Dance to play on the Teble V, con∣taining 112 Dances. A New Book of Lessons with Instructions for the Cithern and Gittern. Also all sorts of Rul'd Paper and Ruled Books ready bound up, are sold at his Shop. FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK OF AYRES, AND DIALOGUES, For One, Two, and Three Voyces. BY portrait of a man HENRY LAWES Servant to his late Matie: in his publick and private Musick. W. Faitharne fecit LONDON, Printed by T.H. for Jo. Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the Inner Temple. 16
To the Honourable, the Lady DERING, VVife to Sir Edward Dering of Surenden Dering, BARONET. MADAM, I Have consider'd, but could not find it lay in my power to offr this Book to any but to your La∣diship. Not only in regard of that honour and esteem you have for Musick, but because those Songs which fill this Book have receiv'd much lu∣stre by your excellent performance of them; and (which I confesse I rejoice to speak of) some which I esteem the best of these Ayres, were of your own Composition, after your Noble Husband was pleased to give the Words. For (although your Ladiship resolv'd to keep it private) I beg leave to declare, for my own honour, that you are not only excellent for the time you spent in the practise of what I Set, but are your self so good a Composer, that few of any sex have arriv'd to such perfection. So as this Book (at least a part of it) is not De∣dicated, but only brought home to your Ladiship. And here I would say (could I doe it without sadness) how precious to my thoughts is the memory of your excellent Mo∣ther (that great example of Prudence and Charity) whose pious Meditations were often advanced by hearing your Voyce. I wish all prosperity to your Ladiship, and to him who (like your selfe) is made up of Harmony, to say nothing of the rest of his high Accomplishments of Wisdome and Learning. May you both live long happy in each other's, when I am become Ashes, who while I am in this world shall be ever found, Madam, Your Ladiships humble Admirer and faithfull Servant, HENRY LAVVES.
To all Understanders or Lovers of MUSICK. IN my former you saw what Temptations I had to publish my Compositions: and now I had not repeated that Error (if it prove to be one) but upon the same grounds, back'd with a promise I made to the World. Though the civill Reception my last Bk found were sufficient invitation, for which I gladly here offer my Thanks; especially to those worthy and gratefull Strangers, who are far more candid and equall in their Cen∣sure, than some new Judges of our own Country, who (in spite of their Starrs) will sit and pronounce upon things they understand not. But this is the Fate of all mankind, to be render'd less at home then abroad. For my part I can say (and there are will beleeve me) that if any man have low thoughts of mee hee is of my opinion. Yet the way of Composition I chiefly profess (which is to shape Notes to the Words and Sense) is not hit by too many: and I ave been often sad to observe some (otherwise able) Musitians guil∣ty of such lapses and mistakes this way. And possibly this is it makes many of us hear so ill abroad; which works a Beleefe amongst our selves, that English words will not run well in Musick: this I have sayd and must ever avow, is one of the Errors of this Generation. I confesse I could wish that some of our words could spare a Consonant (which must not be stirr'd, for fear of removing those Landmarks in spelling which tell their Originall;) but those are very few, and seldome occur; and when they do, are manageable enough by giving each Syllable it's particular humour; provided the breath of the sense bee obser∣ved. And (I speak it freely once for all) that if English words which are fitted for Song do not run smooth enough, tis the fault either of the Composer or Singer. Our English is so stor'd with plenty of Monosyllables (which like small stones fill up the chinks) that it hath great priviledge over divers of its Neighbours, and in some particulars (with re∣verence be it spoken) above the very Latin, which Language we find overcharg'd with the letter S, especially in has and such hissing Terminations. But our new Criticks lodge not the fault in our words only; tis the Artist they tax as a man unspirited for forraign delights: which vanity so spreads, that those our productions they please to like, must be born beyond the Alpes, and fatherd upon strangers. And this is so notorious, that not long since some yong Gentlemen, who were not untraveld, hearing some Songs I had set to Italian words (publickly sung by excellent Voyces) concluded those Songs were begotten in Italy, and said (too loud) they would faine heare such Songs to bee made by an En∣glish man. Had they layd their Sceane a little nearer home, there had beene more co∣lour; for a short Ayre of mine (neare 20 yeares old) was lately reviv'd in our neigh∣bour Nation, and publikely Sung to words of their owne as a new borne peece, with∣out alteration of any one Note. 'Tis the Ayre to those words, Old Poets Hypocrene admire, &c. a sorry Trifle (a man would thinke) to be raised from the dead after 18 yeares bu∣riall. But (to meet with this humour of lusting after Nvelties) a friend of mine told sme of that company, that a rare new booke was come from Italy, which taught the reason why an Eighth was the sweetest of all Notes in Musick; because (said he) Jubal who was Founder of Musick was the Eighth man from Adam; and this went downe as currant as my songs came from Italy. I beg your pardon for instancing such particulars. But there are knowing persons, who have beene long bred in those worthily admired parts of Eu∣rope, who ascribe more to us than wee to our selves; and able Musicians returning from Travaile doe wonder to see us so thirsty after Forraigners. For they can tell us (if wee knew it not) that Musick is the same in England as in Italy; the Concords and Discords, the Passions, Spirits, Majesty, and Humours, are all the same they are in England; their maner of Composing is sufficiently knowne to us, their best Compositions being brought over hither by those who are able enough to choose. But wee must not here expect to find Musick at the highest, when all Arts and Sciences are at so low an ebbe. As for my selfe although I have lost my Fortunes with my Master (of ever blessed memory) I am not so low to bow for a subsistence to the follies of this Age; and to humor such as wil seem to understand our Art, better then we that have spent our lives in it; If any thing here bring you be∣nefit, or delight, I have my design. I have Printed the Greek in a Roman Character, for the ease of Musitians of both Sexes. Farewell. H. L.
To the much honoured Mr. HENRY LAWES, On his Excellent Compositions in Musick. NAture which is the vast Creation's Soule, That steady curious Agent in the whole, The Art of Heav'n, the Order of this Frame, Is only Musick in another name: And as some King conqu'ring what was his own, Hath choice of severall Titles to his Crown; So Harmony on this score now, That, then, Yet still is all that takes and governs Men. Beauty is but Composure; and we find Content is but the Concord of the mind; Friendship the Unison of well tun'd Hearts; Honour's the Chorus of the noblest parts: And all the World on which we can reflect, Musick to the Ear, or to the Intellect. If then each Man a little World must be, How many Worlds are coppy'd out in thee? Who art so richly furnish'd, so compleat, T' Epitomize all that is Good o Great; Whose Starrs this brave advantage did impart, Thy Nature's as Harmonious as thy Art: Thou dost above the Poets Prayses live, Who fetch from Thee th' Eernity th y give; And as true Reason triumph's over Sense, Yet is subjected to Intelligence; So Poets on the lower World look down, But LAVVES on them, his height is all his own: For (like Dvinity it selfe) his Lyre Reward's the Wit it did at first inspire: And thus by double right Poets allow Their and His Lawrells to adorn his brow. Live then (Great Soul of Nature) to asswage The savage dulness of this sullen Age; Charmus to sense; and though Experience fail, And Reason too, thy Numbers may prevail. Then (like those Ancients) strike, and so command All Nature to obey thy generous hand: None can resist, but such who needs will be More stupid than a Fish, a Stone, a Tree: Be it thy care our Age to new create, What built a World, may sure repair a State. KATHARINE PHILIPS.
To her most honoured Master, Mr. HENRY LAVVES, On his Second Book of Ayres. TO stop my Muse, Censure objects That I by this forget my Sex But Silence (even in me) were rude When it implies Ingratitude: Shall I from LAVVES his Magazin Harmonious Raptures steal unseen? If I have Art, it is from Thee: Others do teach, but (to be free) Experience told me thou art best, For I have learn'd of all the rest That Fame call's Masters, and have cause To sacrifice to none but LAVVES. 'Twere weakness to suppose my breath Could thy rich Ayres preserve from death; That Power is thine alone, the Press Make's happy our unhappiness. Thy Works in Print we need not fear Will feel Mortality; the Ear Judicious, ravisht, will admire Thy Chords when thou art in Heav'ns Quire. He that want's Phansie need's no further look, Ther's store to treasure any in this Book: To speak thy Noble skill is such a Theam Would thaw a frozen Wit into a stream. Thy spotless Heart the cozen'd World may see Hath plotted nought these times but Harmony; Discord ne'r reach't thy Breast, the God of Love Has kept thy soul in tune like those above. And now thou marchest forth, when Wars are fled, To metamorphose Griefe and Hearts of Lead; To mould our Chaos, and retune our Sphear, To rank and file our Hearts as once they were: For Musick these Felicities hath found; Then say how much we all to LAVVES are bound, That here present's us with such Gifts as these, You'l think they were (not his) dropt from the skies; But all's his own: let Criticks search and scan, They'l find this Book the Mind's Physitian. MARY KT.
To my beloved Friend and Fellow, Mr. HENRY LAWES, On his Book of Ayres. NOW I have view'd this Book of thine, And find sweet Language, Notes more fine, And see thy Fugues wrought in the Chime, Thy weaving far excel's the Rhyme; And still thy choice of lines are good, Not like to those who get their food As Beggars Raggs from Dunghills take, (Such as comes next) ill Songs to make; Who by a Witty blind pretense Take Words that creep half way to sense; Hippocrates or Galen's feet, And sing them too with Notes as meet; Songs as all th' way to Gam ut tend, But in F Fa ut make an end; With killing Notes, which ever must Coria.Squeez the Sphears, and intimate the Dust: These with their brave Chromaticks bring Noise to the Ear, but mean No╌thing: Yet These will censure, when indeed Shew Them good lines, They cannot read; Or read them so, that in the close You'll hardly judge them Rhyme from Prose. But why doe I write this to Thee? This is for shop sale Frippery; Thy richer store hath truly hit The whole Age for their want of Wit: Live freely, and thy Phansie please, We shall be censur'd by such Things as these. JOHN WILSON Doctor in Msick.
To my much honoured Friend Mr. HENRY LAWES, On his Second Book of Ayres. THings that are thus, thus excellently good, Are hardly prais'd, 'cause hardly understood: For though at the first hearing all admire, Yet when into the severalls men inquire, (Which make up the Composure) they are lost, Such Ayr, Wit, Spirit, Harmony engross'd In every Piece, as make's each piece the best, And yet (as good as 'tis) a Foyl to th' rest. How greedily do the best Judgements throng To hear the Repetition of thy Song? Which they still beg in vain; for when re-sung So much new Art and Excellence is flung Round thy Amirers (unobserv'd before) As make's the newly-ravisht ravish'd more: For comprehend thee fully none can doe Till like thy Musick th'are eternall too. 'Tis Thou hast honour'd Musick, done her right, Fitted her for a strong and usefull Flight; She droop'd and flaggd before, as Hauls complain Of the sick feathers in their Wing and Train: But thou hast imp'd the Wings she had before; Musick does owe Thee much, the Poet more; Thou lif'st him up, and dost new Nature bring, Thou giv'st his noblest Verse both Feet and Wing. Live then above our Prayse, immortall here, The Atlas, the support of Musick's spheare, To what a Darkness would our Art decline, Robb'd of thy glorious and diurnall Shine? These fixed Tapers cannot do Thee right, Nor fully speak thy Rayes which gave them Light, But as small starrs by night in consort met, Would only tell the World, our Sun is set. CHARLES COLMAN Doctor in Musick.
To the great Master of his Art my honoured F. Mr. HENRY LAWES on his Book of AYRES. ALL you that have, or ought to have, no Ears; Who (onely Snake or Goose) hiss at the Spheares; Souls that consist of Seavenths and Seconds, come (If ye can read) and be not deaf, but dumb. Behold a Man to tune an Angel by! Whose Phansy climbes higher than Poëtry! One that can raise dead Words, and strike forth Wit From Lines as low as ever W— writ: Who dwells not in lean Sounds, from Breath or Wyre, (The Chamleting or Crisping of the Ayer, The Art of Birds;) but Worded Sense pursues, Phansies which noble Mankind ought to chuse: Knowes the right Pulse of Wit, when it beats high, Feel's when it hit's, then calls in Harmony, Marryes them both, as if he would recall How God convers'd with Man before the Fall: Perfume's the Words, the Rise, the Turn, the Pawse, Strikes till he touch the Heart; Then, then 'tis LAWES. For Thou (Harmonious Soul, in Thousand Songs Taught'st us that Musick's more than Chords and Lungs: Who hast liv'd famous forty Summers, where What the best Wits have writ or spoke didst hear, And prov'd there is for Verse a Happiness, If it be roab'd in thy Chromatick Dress. Nor yet art tyr'd, still, still thy Phansy pours Faster than that great Glutton Time devours. So vast is that Exchequer of thy Brain, Out spends all others, yet does most retain. Thou scorn'st their foraign Aid, who must (for fear Of Plateasms) with Lisping mend the Air; Who plunder Thine, new Presents for their Prince, Which thou compos'dst full eighteen Harvests since. They'll vote thee cheap (now they can steal no more) And rob thy Fame, who stole thy Ayres before; For savage Felons never think they can Blot out the Theft till they have slain the Man.
But these secure thy Right by all their Wrongs, Proving thou mak'st Musicians, They but Songs They are thy Eccho: But when such compose, How meagre, how confessingly it goes! 'Tis seen quite through, as a thin Comedy Betrays at First what the Last Scene will be. Or else such scolding Notes the Sense confute, Notes fitter for a Tumbrell than a Lute; For though th'are twisted on Harmonious Chords, There's grinning Discord 'twixt the Ayre and Words. Thy melting Tones and Words so streaming run As Light and Heat flow joyntly from the Sun. No justling Noyse invades thy Symphony, So spann'd, that all is link'd, yet all is free. As on flat Maps a learn'd Geographer Plant's here America, and Africk there, Here Europe stands, there Asia is hurl'd, Not missing one hair's breadth all the Great World: So Thou on thy Composing-Card's broad face Sett'st Tenor, Counter-tenor, Treble, Base, With such a Masters han'd, such Symmetry, Thou prov'st the World consists of Harmony. Thou shew'st how high that Greece of Greece was grown, Which Rome's Dictator damn'd a Fisher Town, Reforming all to Cinders, whose best Notes Taught but two Arts, Speeching and Cutting Throats; When Sylla made learn'd Athens one red Blaze, Whose Fire and Blood met in his. Plut. in . unde color Syllaceus apud Agel∣lium. copper face. But thou reviv'st its Ashes, and dost show How Greeks rejoyc'd two thousand years ago. Not all the swelling Vowel-men with all Their Liquids, Mutes, their Dental, Labial, Lingual, and Guttural, new Genal too, Can half of that thy Sharps and Flats can do. Thou shoot'st into our Souls, thy Numbers tell The vastness of that Gulph 'twixt Heaven and Hell, (When pow'rfull Rapture in thy Anthem sloats) 'Tis Heaven hath Voyces, Hell hath clashing Votes. This made great Socrates his Gamut conn (As Cato Greek) when old and wisest grown, As if his reaching Head, e're Martyr crown'd, By Jacob's staff had Jacob's ladder found, Where Angels moving to and from Heav'ns Throne, Taught the great Scale of Musick up and down.
Then tell me (Bedlems) why th'audacious Drum Shook down the Choir, and strook the Organ dumb, Till the red Lattise lift's those Bellows up To kindle Healths, and celebrate each Cup; Where Smoke and Minstrelsy are dealt about To help their groats-worth of Church-Musick out. How would the Druid start, and backward fling, Though none but He that could not read did sing, When Rome thought Britain so despis'd a Clod, No Gentleman but scorn'd to be itsParum est quòd Templum in Britan∣nia habet Claudius, quòd hunc Barbari colunt, & ut Deum o∣tant. Sen.  God! Thou art unstain'd, no Brocage makes thine hit, Thou stick'st as close to Virtue as to Wit. Thy Art and Life are Unison'd, and do Conspire to call Thee Saint and Angel too. Thou hast strung David's Harp, as might have rouz'd A Legion out of Saul, though twelve years hous'd; Putt'st it as much in tune (if Man can do't) As Rous or Robert Wisdome put it out: And mad'st thy glorious Brother tune it too, (Whose Coffin is each Chest of Viols now:) O how our Passions interfere, to see All lost in Him, yet all preserv'd in Thee! As Jove's two Eagles flew from East and West, Cross'd the whole Globe, yet scorn'd to stoop or rest Till met at floating Delos: So you Two (Strong high wing'd Souls) with different Phansies flew Through the whole Sphear of Musick, till at last In this our floating Isle ye set all fast. Thy Brother then to Heaven's Great Confort fled, That Ayre (as Light and Power) might have one Head. Thus old Parnassus was your Type, and did Close its two tops for thy one Pyramid. Stand then, Great Master, shine as long, as far As Orpheus, whose Harp is now a Star. Thy Works (the Balsome of the Brain) request The Crown of Time, as oldest Lutes sound best: And twenty Ages hence, when Musick's driven (Like Kings and Bishops) banish'd home to Heaven; If Mortals then for Wit and Phansy look, Others may spell, and read, Thou mad'st the Book. IOHN BERKENHEAD.
The TABLE, with the names of those who were Authors of the Verses. ANd is this all? what one poor kiss? Pag. 24 - Sir Edward Dering Baronet. Away, away, Anacreon, Pag. 40 - Mr. John Berkenhead. Ah, the false fatal tale I read, Pag. 13 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. But that I knew before we met, 47 (aliàs) Pag. 27 - Francis Finch of the Inner Temple Esq; Be not proud, 'cause fair and trim, Pag. 10 - Mr. John Grange. Can so much Beauty, Pag. 5 - Sir James Palmer. Come my Lucasia since we see, 46 (aliàs) Pag. 26 - Mrs. Catherine Philips. Cupid who didst ne'r see light, Pag. 8 - Mr. William Cartwright. Cloris since first our calm of Peace, Pag. 16 - Edmund Waller Esq; Come Chloris leave thy wandring sheep, Pag. 23 - Dr. Henry Hughes. Dear, thy face is Heaven to me, Pag. 6 - Sir Christopher Nevill. Delicate Beauty. Pag. 20 - Mr. Aurelian Townshend. Elegie on Mrs. Sambrook. Pag. 28 - Mr. F. S. Go little winged Archer, Pag. 6 - Mr. I. C. Go lovely Rose. Pag. 9 - Edmund Waller Esq; Help, help, O help (a Sterme) Pag. 1 - Dr. Henry Hughes. How long shall I a Martyr be? Pag. 11 - Dr. Henry Hughes. I have been in Heaven I think, Pag. 21 - Mr. Aurelian Townshend. In vain fair Chloris you design. Pag. 25 - Sir Edw. Dering. Know Calia since thou art so proud. Pag. 18 - Tho. Carew Esq; Sewer to His late MAJESTY. Ladies, you that seem so nice, Pag. 14 - Mr. Henry Harrington. Let longing Lovers sit and pine, Pag. 22 - Dr. Henry Hughes. . Pag. 39 - Anacreon. Now, now, Lucasia, Pag. 3 - Mr. John Berkenhead. O how I hate thee now! Pag. 14 - Mr. John Berkenhead. O King of Heaven and Hell, last Mr. John Berkenhead. O turn a way those cruel eyes, Pag. 7 - Mr. Thomas Stanley. Old Poets Hippocrene admire, Pag. 29 - Mr. N. N. On this swelling bank. Pag. 15 - M. I. G. Such was the sorrow Chloris selt. Pag. 8 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. Take heed fair Chloris, Pag. 26 - Dr. Henry Hughes. Tell me no more 'tis Love, Pag. 10 - Sir John Mennes. 'Tis not i'th' power of all thy scorn. Pag. 22 - Mr. Mat. Clifford. When first I saw fair Doris' Eyes, Pag. 24 - Sir Edward Dering. Was it a Form, a Gate, a Grace, Pag. 20 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. When as Leander Pag. 12 - Mr. Robert Herrick. When we were parted. Pag. 19 - Mr. Aurelian Townshend. Yes, yes, 'tis Chloris sings. Pag. 16 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. DIALOGUES. Ah Choridonl, contentedly we tend Pag. 31 - Mr. S. B. Daphne, Shepherds if they knew Pag. 33 - James Harrington Esq; Weep not. Pag. 30 - Thomas Carew Esq; Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. Among Rose-buds slept a Bee, 36 (alias) Pag. 44 - Mr. John Berkenhead. A Lover once I did espie 35 (aliàs) Pag. 43 - Mr. John Grange. About the sweet-bag of a Bee. 40 (aliàs) Pag. 48 - Mr. Robert Hrrick. Beauties have yee seen a Toy, 41 (aliàs) Pag. 49 - Mr. Ben. Johnson. Call the Spring with all her flowers Pag. 46 - James Harrington Esq; Dear, let me now this evening, 42 (aliàs) Pag. 50 - Sir William Davenant. Fear not, dear love, Pag. 47 - Thomas Carew Esq; Hither we come into this world, Pag. 41 - Mr. John Fletcher. In the non-age of a Winters day, 37 (aliàs) Pag. 45 - Mr. I. M. View. Lesbia, view 34 (aliàs) Pag. 42 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. Why should great Beauties 43 (aliàs) Pag. 51 - Sir William Davenant. Hymnes to     God the Father 44 (aliàs) Pag. 52 - John Crofts Esq; Cup-bearer to his late MA∣JESTY. God the Son 45 (aliàs) Pag. 53 God the Holy Ghost 46 (aliàs) Pag. 54
A Storme: Cloris at sea, neer the land, is surprised by a storm, Amintor on the shore expecting her arivall, thus complains: HHelp, help, o helpe, Divini╌ty of Love, or Neptune will commit a Rape upon my Cloris, she's on his bosom and without a wonder cannot scape. See, see, the winds grow drunk with joy, and throng so fast to see Lov's Argo, and the wealth it bears, that now the tackling and the sails they to╌are, they fight, they sight, who shall convey Amintors Love into her Bay, and hurle whole seas at one another, as if they would the welkin smother. Hold Boreas, hold, he will not hear. The Rudder cracks, the Main-Mast falls, the Pilot swears, the Skipper bawls, a showr of
clouds in darknes fall, to put out Cloris light withall; ye Gods where are yee, where are yee, are ye all asleep, or drunk, with Nectar? why doe you not keepe a watch upon your Minist╌ers of Fate, tie up the winds, or they will blow the Seas to Heaven, and drowne your De╌i╌ties. A Calme, a Calme, Miracle of Love, the Sea-borne Queene that sits above, hath heard Amintors cryes, and Neptune now must lose his prize. Welcome, welcome, Cloris, to the shore, thou shalt goe to Sea no more: Wee to Tempes groves will goe, where the calmer winds doe blow, and embark
our hearts together, fearing neither rocks, nor weather, but out-ride the stormes of Love, and for ev╌er con╌stant prove. No Reprieve. NOW, now Lucatia, now make haste, if thou wilt see how strong thou art, there needs but one frown more, to waste the whole remainder of my heart. Alas undone, to Fate, I bow my head, ready to die, now die, and now, now, now, a dead. You looke to have an age of triall ere you a Lov╌er will repay, but my state brooks no more deniall: I cannot this one minute stay.
A╌las undone &c. Look in my wound, and see how cold, how pale and gasping my soule lyes, which nature strives in vaine to hold, whil'st wing'd with sighes a way it flies. Alasse undone &c. See, see, already Charons boat, who grimly asks why all this stay? Harke how the fatall Sisters shout, and now they call, away, a way. Alasse undone, to Fate I bow my head, ready to die, now die, and now oh now am dead.
Not to be altred from Affection. CAN so much Beauty own a mind? oreswayd by tyranny, as new afflicting wayes to finde, a doubtles faith to try, and all example to out-do, to scorn and make me jealous too; alasse! shee knowes my fires are too too great; and though shee bee, stone ice to mee, her thaw to others cannot quench my heat. (2) That Law which with such force o're ran The Armies of my heart, When no one thought I could out man, That durst once take my part. For by assault she did invade, No composition to be made: Then, since all must yeeld as well as I to stand in aw of Victors Law Ther's no prescribing in captivity. (3) That Love which loves for common ends, Is but selfe loving love, But nobler conversation tends Soule mysteries to prove. And since Love is a passive thing, It multiplies by suffering. Then, though she throw life to the waning Moon, on him her shine, the dark part mine, Yet I must love her still when all is done.
Parting. DEere thy face is heaven to mee, and the presence of thine eyes; Is like that same light wee see, which descendeth from the skies. O then since my heav'n thou art, and thine eyes my heav'nly light, doe but think what 'tis to part and to leave thy blessed sight. (2) If that Darknes still should maske The fair visage of the sun, Heav'n would tell us if we ask All things would to ruine run: O then since my heav'n &c. (3) Sun and you like influence have Which give light to things below, You likewise from death doe save, When you doe your beams but show: O then since my sun thou art, And thine eyes my heav'nly light, Doe but grieve that I did part, And was forc't to leave thy sight. Cupids Embassie. GOe little winged Archer and convey a flaming dart into her heart, then steal a∣way
as soone as thou hast set her all on fire, and left her burning in her chaste desire. (2) Thus teach her what it is to love, that she When that her eyes Doe tyrannize May pity me; And know the flame that hath my heart possest By the distemper of her scorched breast. (3) And when she burns if shee'l appease my flame With smiles which fly, Oft as her eye, I'le doe the same; So may we love, and burn, but ne'r expire, While we add fuell to each others fire. He would not be tempted. O Turn away those cruell eyes, the stars of my undoing, or death in such a bright disguise, may tempt a second wooing: punish their blind and impious pride, who dare contemne thy Glory, it was my fall that deifyde thy name, and seald thy story. (2) Yet no new suffering can prepare A higher praise to crown that, Though my first death proclaime thee fair, My second will unthrone thee. Lovers will doubt thou canst intice No other for thy fuell, And if thou turne one victim twice, Or thinke thee poor, or cruell.
A Prayer to Cupid. CƲpid who didst ne're see light, nor know'st the pleasure of the sight, but ever blind∣ed canst not say, now it is night, or now tis day: so captivate her sence, so blind her eye, that still she love me, though she know not why. (2) Thou that woundest with such art, We see no bloud drop from the heart, And subtly cruell leav'st no signe To tell the blow, or hand was thine: O gently, gently wound my favre, that she May hence beleeve the wound did come from thee. Parting. SUch was the sorrow Cloris felt at her Amintors parting, her heart the pain (a∣boad) so deal't (perhaps to ease the smarting) I saw what she essay'd to hide (rays'd by her griefs de∣vouring)
down from her yes a silver ride, tixt Pinks and Lillies powring. (2) Whilst Love (at fall of ev'ry tear, Weary perhaps with playing) Sat to refresh, and bath him there, His pointed wings displaying. But soon the stream her fayre hand dries, When straight you might espie him Into the sun shine of her eyes, Pearcht up to prune and dry him. The Rose. GOe lovely Rose, tell her that wasts her time and me, that now she knows when I resem∣ble her to thee, how sweet and fair she seems to be. Tell her thats yong and shuns to have her graces sp de, that hadst thou sprung in desarts where no men abide, thou must have uncommended dy'd. (2) Small is the worth Of beauty from the light retyr'd, Bd her come forth, Suffr her selfe to be desir'd, And not blush to be admir'd. Then die, that she The common Fate of all things rare May read in thee, How small a part of time they share, That are so wondrous sweet, and faire.
BEE not proud cause fair and trim, but let those lips be tasted, those eyes wil hollow prove and dim; that lip and bow be wasted, and to love whole be perswaded, sullied slowr's or beau╌ty faded. O thou art soft as is the ayre, or the words that court the faire, then let those flames by Lovers felt, that scorch'd my heart, make thine to mlt. TEll me no more tis love your passions move in a phantasticke sphear, and only there, thus you confine what is divine, when love hath power & can dispence sufficient to the soul & sence Tis Love the sence informs And cold bloud warms, Nr gives the soule a Throne To us alone, But bids them bend Both to one end, And then tis Love when thus design'd, They make another of their kind,
Loves Martyr. HOw long shall I a Martyr be, to love and womans cru╌el╌ty? Or why doth sullen Fate confine my heart to one that is not mine: had I ere lov'd as others doe, but only for an houre or two then there had store of reason bin, why I should suffer for my sin. (2) But love thou knowest with what a flame I have ador'd my mistris name: How I neer offered other fires, But such as rose from chaste desires: Nor have I ere prophaned thy shrine With an inconstant fickle minde; Yet thou combining with my Fate, Hath forc't my love and her to hate. (3) O Love if her supremacy Have not a greater power then thee For pities sake then once be kinde, And throw a dart to change her minde; Thy deity we shall suspect, If our reward must be neglect. Then make her love or let me bee Inspir'd with scorne as well as she.
Leander Drownd. WHen as Leander (yong) was Drown'd, no heart by love receiv'd a wound, but on Rck himselfe sat by, there weeping superabundantly His head upon his hand he layd, and ighing ( py) thus he sayd: Ah cruell Fat: I and looking on't, wpt as hee'd drown the Helle∣spont. A d sure his tongue had more exprest, had not his tears, had not his tears forbad the rest.
Betrayd, by Beleefe. AH, ah! the false fatall tae I read, when my heart heedlesse and unwise, first studied, and false commented on the un╌known text of thy lov'd eyes, when thy glib-running lavish tongue showr'd down more oaths thy faith t'avow, then morning dews on flowr's are hung. or blossoms on the Summer bough: so was my silly truth betrayd, by a smooth tongue and winning eye, poysons by which ther's many a mayd has perisht sure as well as I.
O How I hate thee now and my selfe too, for loving such a false, false thing as thee! who o ly canst depart from heart, to heart, to take nw ha bour as thou didst in me; but when the world shall spi, and know thy shifts as well as I, they'l shut their harts and take thee in no more; he that can dwell with none, must out of door. (2) Thy pride hath overgrown All this great Town Which stoops, and bowes, as low as I to you; Thy falshood might support All the new Court Which shifts, and turne, almost as oft as thou. But to expresse thee by, Ther's not an objct low, or high, Fr 'twill be found, when ere the measures tride, Nothing can read thy falshood, but thy pride. Disswation from Presumption. LAdies, you that seeme so nice, and as cold in shew as Ice, and perhaps have
held out thrice, doe not think but in a trice, one or other may entice, and at last by some device, set your honours at a price. (2) You whose smooth and dainty skin, Rosie lips, or cheeks, or chin, All that gaze upon you win; Yet insult not, sparks within, Slowly burn er flames bgin, And presumpion still hah bin Held a most noorus sin. A Remembrance. ON this swel╌ling bank (once proud of its burthen) Clo╌ris lay: heer she smis'd, and did uncloud those bright suns ec╌clips the day. (2) Heere we sate, and with kind art She about me twin'd her arms, Claspd in hers my hand and heart Fetter'd by those pleasing charms. (3) Heer my love and joyes she crownd Whil'st the hours stood still before me, With a killing glance did wound And a melting kisse restore me. (4) On the down of eyther breast Whil'st with joy my soule retir'd, My resigning heart did rest Till her lips new life inspir'd. (5) The renewing of these sights, Doth with griefe and pleasure fill me, And the thought of those delights Both at once revive and kill me.
To a Lady, more affable since the war began. CLoris, since first our calme of peace was frighted hence, this good wee finde, your fvurs with your fears increase, and growing mischiefe makes you kinde; so the fayre tree. (which still preserves her fruit and state when no winde blows) in stormes, from that uprightnesse swerv's, and the glad Earth about her strowes with treasure, with treasure from her yeelding boughs. Cloris Singing. YEs, yes, 'tis Cloris sings, 'tis she; Mark how the Nymphs and Shepheards all flock
to her: so the Master Bee the swarm leads with his awfull call; so to the Thracian Lyre the floods re∣sorted, and the listning woods: so shoa's of Dolphins on the green wav's spring, when Doris or her Sea-born daughters sing. and so her Notes ther hearts benum: one looks pale, others eyes ore flow with tears of pleasure, perhaps some, distill from sad hearts, teares of woe; but as if fetter'd in a cain to soft their passions flt no paine, shee stops no sooner, but th'inchanted throng straight cry, sweet Cloris sing an other song.
KNow Celia, since thou art so proud, 'twas I that gave thee thy renown, thou hadst in the forgotten crowd of common beauties liv'd unknown, had not my verse exhal'd thy name, and with it imp'd the wings of Fme. That killing pow'r is none of thine, I gave it to thy voyce and eyes, thy sweets, thy graces all are mine, thou art my star, shin'st in my skies, then dart not from thy borrow'd spheare, lighting on him that fixt thee there. Tempt me with such af∣frights no more, lest what I made, I uncreate: Let fooles thy mysticke forms adore, Ile know thee
in thy mortall state; wise Poets that wrapp'd truth in tales, knew her themselves through all her vyles. WHen we were parted, though but for a while, from my brest started a post ev'ry mile: but I feare, none were directed from your bosome to me; for a beauty so affected, looks for Love custome free. (2) Tis then no marveill My state should decay, Brought to be servil And kept from my pay. But ingratefull to the giver, Know the Se as your King, Can as well exhaust a river, As you suck up a spring. (3) And though triumphing You rowle to the Main Small steams are something And prt of your train. Use me gently then that follow Made by custome so tame, I am silent whilest you swallow Both my tears, and my name.
Sufferance. DElicate Beauty, why shold you disdaine with pity at least, to lessen my pain? Yet if you purpose to render no cause, Will and not Reason is Judge of those Lawes. (2) Suffer in silence I can with delight Courting your Anger to live in your sight, Inwardly languish, and like my disease, Alwaies provided my sufferance please. (3) Take all my comforts in present away, Let all but the hope of your favour decay, Rich in reversion Ile live as content, As he to whom Fortune her sore-lock hath lent. WAS it a forme, a gate, a grace, was it their sweetnes, meerely? was it the Hav'n of a bright face, that made me love so deerly? was it a skin of silk and snow, that soule and sences wounded? was't any of these, or all of these, whereon my faith was founded? ah no! 'twas a
far deeper part then all the rest that won me; 'twas a fair cloath'd, but feigning heart, I lov'd, and has undone me. On his hearing her Majesty sing. I Have beene in Heav'n, I thinke, for I heard an Angell sing, Notes my thirsty ears did drinke, never any earth╌ly thing sung so true, so sweet, so cleere, I was then in Heav'n, not heere. (2) But the blessed feele no change, So I may mistake the place, But mine eyes would think it strange Should that be no Angels face; Powr's above, it seems, designe Me still Mortall, her Divine. (3) Till I tread the Milky way, And I lose my sences quite, All I wish is that I may Hear that voice, and see that sight, Then in types and outward show, I shall have a heav'n below.
TIs not 'ith' po'r of all thy scorne or un╌relenting bate, to quench my flames, or make them burne with heat more temperate: still doe I struggle with dispaire, and ever court disdain; and though you ne're prove lesse severe, Ile doat upon my paine. (2) Yet meaner beauties cannot claime In Love this tyranny, They must pretend an equall flame, Or else our passions die: You fair Clarinda you alone Are priz'd at such a rate To have a Votary of one Whom you doe reprobate. LET longing Lovers fit and pine, and the forsaken Willow wear, Love shall not blast this heart of mine, with ling'ring hope or killing feare: Ile never love till I injoy, or lose
my time on her that's coy. (2) If Ladies call us to the field, And all their colours there display, Alasse, they needs must to us yeeld, Since we are better arm'd then they; Tis folly then to beg or whine For us that are born Masculine. (3) Then Lovers learn your strength to know, And you may overcome with ease, Your enemy fights with a Bow That cannot wound unlesse you please, And he that pines because shee's coy, Wants wit, or courage, women say. COme Cloris, leave thy wandring sheep, thou shalt more amorous creatures keep, and be the only envi'd dame, that moves upon this grassie frame: for thou shalt heards of Cupids have, and love and I will be thy slave. (2) Nymphs, Satyrs, and the Sylvian Fawns, Shall leave the woods and narrow Lawns, To wait on Cloris, and adore Their Cytherea, now no more The name of Cloris shall create A servitude in every state. (3) In yonder Mertill grove wee'le dwell With more content then tongue can tell, Where hungry Moules shall not afright Thy tender Lambs, or thee by night: There we the wanton theeves will play, And steale each others hearts away.
The Lady Deerings Composing. WHen first I saw fair Doris eyes, cheering like rising day our plains. not envying others wealthier flocks, I thought my selfe the happiest swain. (2) More blessed yet when my rude eare Heard her harmonious numbers flow, No more a swain, I felt the joyes Only victorious Princes know. (3) Since which alowd, on thy free lip To story out my hopes, and love, Immortall grown, I held aloft The mansion of dethroned Jove. (4) But when rul'd by my kinder starres, Thy namelesse treasures crown, my paine, Jove and his empty joyes despis'd, I Shepheard turn'd on earth again. Gods, take your own, sayd I vain altars now, I chuse a happy fate with her below. The Lady Deerings Composing. AND is this all? what one poor kisse? Thinkst thou my heart contented is with this gratuity? no Cloris, no: Or give me all, that Lovers love, and pleasure call, or by a free and full de∣ny, permit me to despair, and so despairing die.
A false designe to be cruell. The Lady Deerings Composing. IN vaine, faire Cloris, you designe, to be cruell, to be kind; for we know with all your arts, you never hold but willing hearts; men are too wise grown to expire, with broken shafts, and painted fire. (2) And if among a thousand swains Some one of Love, or fate complains, And all the stars in heav'n defie, With Clora's lip, or Celia's eye: 'Tis not their love the youth would chuse, But the glory to refuse. (3) Then wisely make your prize of those Want wit, or courage to oppose, But tempt not me that can discover What will redeeme the fondest Lover, And flie the list, lest it appear, Your pow'r is measur'd by our fear. (4) So the rude wave securely shocks The yeelding Bark, but the stiffe rocks If it attempt, how soon again Broke and dissolv'd it fills the Main: It foams and roars, but we dride Alike its weakness, and its pride.
Mutuall Affection betweene Orinda and Lucatia. COme, my Lucatia, since wee see that miracles mens faith do move by wonder and by prodi╌ gy: to the fierce ang╌ry world let's prove, ther's a Religi╌on in our Love. (2) For though we were design'd t'agree, That Fate no liberty destroyes, But our Election is as free As Angels, who with greedy choice Are yet determin'd to their joyes. (3) Our hearts are doubled by their losse, Heer mixture is addition grown, We both defuse, and both ingrosse, And we whose minds are so much one, Never, yet ever are alone. (4) We court our owne captivity, Then Thrones more great and innocent, T'were banishment to be set free, When we wear fetters whose intent Not bondage is, but ornament. (5) Divided joyes are tedious found, And griefs united easier grow, We are our selves but by rebound, And all our titles shuffl'd so, Both Princes, and both Subjects too. (6) Our hearts are mutuall victims layd, Which they (such pow'r in friendship lies) Are Altars, Priests, and Offrings made, And each heart which thus kindly dies, Graces deathlesse by the sacrifice. Disdaine. TAke heed fair Chloris, how you tame (with your disdain) Amintor's flame. A noble
heart, when once delpis'd, swels unto such a height of pride, 'twill rather burst then deigne to bee a worshipper of cruel╌ty. (2) You may use common shepherds so, My flames at last to storms will grow, And blow such scorn upon thy pride, Will blast all I have magnifi'd: You are not fair when Love you lack, Ingratitude makes all things black. (3) O doe not for a flock of sheep, A golden showr when as you sleep, Or for the tales ambition tells, Forsake the house wher honor dwels In Damons palace you'l nee'r shine, So bright as in these arms of mine. Parting. BUt that I knew before we met, the howre would come that we must part, and so had fortifi'd my heart, I hardly could escape the net, my Passions for my Reason set. (2) But why should Reason hope to win A Victory that's so unkind, And so unwelcome to my mind, To yeeld is neyther shame nor sin. Besieg'd without, betray'd within. (3) But Friends ne're part (to speak aright) For who's but going is not gone; Friends like the Sun must still move on, And when they seem most out of sight, Their absence makes at most but night? (4) And though that night be ne're so long, In it they eyther sleep or wake, And eyther way enjoyments take, In Dreams or Visions which belong Those to the old, these to the yong. (5) I'm old when going, gone 'tis night, My Parting then shall be a Dreame, And last till the auspicious Beame Of our next meeting gives new light, And the best Vision that's your sight.
An Elegiack Song, On the Death of Mrs. Elizabeth Sambroke, who Died at Salisbury, April 11. 1655. TEll not me my Caelia's dead, and that (as she) our love is sled: Love (as the Soul) no change comes nigh, 'tis immortall, ne'r can die. Her love abides, though mounted high'r, (for slames ascending do'nt expire;) and my flame (like the light) which does releeve the night of the dark sepulchre, (gilding the shadowes there) shall ever wake and to my Calia burn, constant to the cold Marble, and the Urne.
On a Pint of Sack. For two V. yees. OLd Poets Hipocrin admire, and pray to water to inspire their wit and Muse Old Poets Hipocrin admire, and pray to water to inspire their wit and Muse with heav'nly fire; had they this heav'nly fountain seen, Sacke both their well and Muse had beene, with heav'nly fire, had they this heav'nly fountaine seene, Sacke both their well and Muse had been, and this pint-pot their Hipocrin. and this pint-pot their Hipocrin. (2) Had they truly discoverd it They had like me thought it unfit To pray to water for their wit, And had ador'd Sack as divine, And made a Poet God of Wine, And this pint-pot had been a shrine. (3) Sck unto them had been in stead Of Nector, and their heav'nly bread, And ev'ry boy a Ganmed; Or had they made a God of it, Or stil'd it patron of their wit, This pot had been a temple fit. (4) Well then Companions is't not fit, Since to this Jemme we ow our wit, That we should prayse the Cabonet, And drink a health to this divine And bounteous pallace of our wine; Die he with thirst that doth repine.
A Dialogue betwene a Lover and Reason. Love. WEepe not, nor backward turne your beames, fond eyes; sad sighes, locke in your breath, lest on this winde, or in those streams, my griev'd soule flie, or saile to death, Fortune destroys me if I stay, Love kils me if I goe away; since Love and Fortune both are blind, com Reason and re∣solve my doubtfull mind. Reason. Fly, fly, and blind Fortune be thy guide, and gainst the blinder God rebell; thy love sick heart shall not reside where scorn and selfe-wild Error dwell, where entrance unto truth is barr'd, where love and faith finde no reward; for my just hand my sometimes move the wheele of
Fortune, not the sphere of Loue. Cho: Fly, fly, and blind Fortune bee thy guide, and gainst the Cho: Fly, and blind Fortune bee thy guide, and gainst the blinder God rebell, thy love-sick heart shall not reside where scorn and selfe-willd Error dwell. blinder God rebell, thy love-sick heart shall not reside where scorn and selfe-wild Error dwell. A Dialogue between Phillida and Coridon. Phil. AH, Coridon, contentedly we tend our bleating flocs, but think not of our end Coridon. Faire Phillida, our life that's innocent, cannot be guilty of an ill event: 'tis true, but yet me thinks diseas'd old age, should make us weary of our pilgrimage: our age points to our end; in this we're
blest, that after all our pains, w'are neer our rest. Cho: In this w'are blest, that after all our pains, w'are Cho In this w'are blest, that after all our pains, w'are neere our rest. But wher's our rest? must we not fight with death, and gainst him lose our life for neere our rest. want of breath; Death hasts us to our graves, if well we die we shall have heav'n, we shall have heav'n in change for misery. Cho▪ Then welcome death, obey, obey our destiny, And change our Cho. Then welcom death, obey, obey our destiny, And change our frailty our frail╌ty for eternity, frail╌ty for eter╌ni╌ty.
A Pastorall Dialogue between two Nymphs Amarillis and Daphne. For 2. Tebles or Tenors. DAphne, Shepheards if they knew their happines would not be Kings; Daphne. Ther's nothing Then Daphne tune thine Oen in the world more true then that which Amarilis sings Reed, and let us know this onely strife, whether thy Pipe or mine exceed in singing of a Shepheards life. Upon our huts of Tufe without the grasse within the Ivie's sprout, the hills yeeld
sedge and rusnes store to thack the roose and stre╌w the floore. The angry Thistles shed us Down to Lambkins bequeath us when they die, the blankets warm wherein we lie, make our bed. The morning but lights us early through the bushes, where Philomel amongst the Roses, sunne at sluggards blushes, where Philomel amongst the Roses her sweet, her sweet melody discloses; and whilest we wash our eyes and hands in basons of some her sweet, sweet melody discloses.
Fountaine pure, with melting Notes poore heart shee stands, as if shee held the weeping Ewe Hence with dvotion as we go t'unfold our flocks the fields we strow, till pierced clouds t Hnc with devotion as we go t'unfold our flocks the fields we strow till pierced clouds till pierced c pression feele, and tuft the Cushion, and tuft the Cushion where we kneel. Then th'impression feele, and tuft the Cushion where wee kneele, where we kneele. grate of hayle wands wherein our bleating Prisoners stand. The Wether Rings for joy h
whilst from their pound the Ewes doe bound at the sound of the merry peale. The pretty Lambe Nor are our pipes mute but new awake, bridles in her pretty chin, and stretches our her curled back. as they passe to nibble up the three leav'd grasse, and straine such rufts of greene as these, into their and strain such turfs of greene as these into their milke and silver fleece, when the high mountaines give no shade, milke and silver fleece the woods and fountains lend their
where harmles swains doe joine their mirth, their bottles and their bags with ours, ayd. As on the whil'st Phoebus rages, Pan asswages, to whose table of the Earth wee feast and sport it in the bowt's to whose ayd we sing; upon the Downs we make a Ring, then our fancies ayd we sing: and when the heat makes us retreat, upon the Downs we make a Ring, show in Dances. Then folde our flockes, change and chances incident to every thing and to our
and with the Lambe wee goe to bed. Cho: Ye purple Robes, and Crowned heads, upon this shed, and with the Lamb we go to bed. Cho: Ye purple Robes, and Crowned heads, upon this Cho: life the shepheard leads, could you without ambition looke you'd change your life the shepheard leads, could you without ambition looke, you'd change your Scepter, your Scepter, your Scepter for his Crook; you'd change your Scepter for his Crooke. Scepter for his Crooke, you'd change your Scepter, your Scepter for his Crooke.
. ANACREONS Ode concerning himselfe. LEgousin hai gunaikes, Anacreon, geron ei; labon e soptron athres, komas men ouket ousas, psilon de seu metopon. Ego de tas komas men, eit' eisin, eit' hapelthon, ouk oida: touto d' oida; hos to geronti mallon prepei ta terpna paizein, ho so pe∣las ta moires.
ANACREONS Ode Englished. AWay, away, Anacreon, (now women say) thou'rt old and done; Read thine owne glasse, and there thoul't see, not one haire left to credit thee: That head of thine (stript of its Robe) look's like a bald unwritten Globe. Whether my hayre doe come or goe, I cannot tell; but this I know, an old man more should cheere his heart, as hee drawes neerer to depart; That his last breath be crown'd and blest, not in a sigh, but with a jest.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voices. HIther we come into this world of woe, and feeling to what end wee come, wee cry, i'th morning of our age like flowrs we blow, and like Gods figures seeme too good to die: but let affliction touch us, and like clay we fall to what we are, and end the day. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. HIther we come into this world of woe, and feeling to what end we come, we cry, i'th morning of our age like flowrs we blow, and like Gods figures seeem too good to die; but let affliction touch us, and like clay we fall to what we are, and end the day. Bassus. a. 3. voc. HIther we come into this world of woe, and feeling to what end wee come, wee cry, i'th morning of our age, like flowrs we blow, and like Gods figures seeme too good to die: but let affliction touch us, and like clay we fall to what we are, and end the day.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. VIew Lesbia view, view Lesbia view, how my various cares doe grow, I burne and from that fire does water flow. I Nilus and I Aetna am; restrain, Oh Love, my tears, or else tears quench my flame. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. VIew Lesbia view, view Lesbia view, how my various cares doe grow, I burne and from that fire does water flow. I Nilus and I Aetna am; restrain, Oh Love, my teare, or else tears quench my flame. Bassus. a. 3. voc. VIew Lesbia view, view Lesbia view, how my various cares doe grow, I burn, and from that fire does water flow. I Nilus and I Aetna am; restrain, Oh Love, my tears, or else tears quench my flame.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. A Lover nee I did espie, with bleeding heart and weeping eye; he sigh'd and sayd, how great's his paine that lives in Love, not lov'd again? Can there (saith he) no cure be found, But by the hand that gve the wound? Then let me dye, which ile endure, Since she wants charity to cure. Yet let her one day feele the paine, To wish sh' had lov'd but wish in vaine, For withered cheekes may chance recover Some sparks of Love, but not a Lover. Cantus Secundus. a. . voc. A Lover once I did espie, with bleeding heart and weeping eye; he sigh'd and said, how great's his pain that lives in Love, that lives in Love, not lov'd again? Bassus. a. 3. voc. A Lover once I did espie, with bleeding heart and weeping eye; he sigh'd and sayd, how great's his paine that lives in Love, not lov'd, not lov'd again?
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voices. AMong Rose buds slept a Bee, wak'd by Love who could not see: His soft finger that was stung, then away poore Cupid flung, First hee ran, then flew about, and to Ven╌us thus cry'd out; Help, Mother help, oh! I'm undone, a Scorpi╌on hath stung your son. 'Twas a Serpent, it could flie, For't had wings as well as I; Country swains call this a Bee But oh this hath murthred me. Sonne, sayd Venus, if the sting Of a Flie such torment bring, Think, O think, on all those hearts Pierced by thy burning darts. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. AMong Rose buds slept a Bee wak'd by Love who could not see; His soft finger that was stung, then away poore Cupid flung. First he ran, then flew about, and to Venus thus cry'd out Help Mother, help, Oh! I'm undone, a Scorpion hath stung your sonne. B ssus. a. 3. voc. AMong Rose buds slept a Bee, wak'd by Love who could not see; His soft finger that was stung, then away poore Cupid flung. First he ran, then flew about and to Venus thus cry'd out, Help, Mother, help, Oh! I'm undone, a Scorpi╌on hath stung your son.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. IN the non-age of a winters day, Lavinia glorious as May, to give the morn an easier birth, pac'd a league of crusted earth, where ev'ry place by which she came, from her veins conceivd a Flame. Lavinia stood amaz'd to see Things of yeerly constancy Thus to rebell against their season, And though a stranger to the reason, Back returning quench'd the heat And winter kept its former seat. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. IN the non-age of a winters day, Lavinia glorious as May, to give the morn an easier birth, pac'd a league of crusted earth, when ev'ry place by which she came, from her veins conceiv'd a Flame. Bassus. a. 3. voc. IN the non-age of a winters day, Lavinia glorious as May, to give the morn an easier birth, pac'd a league of crusted earth, where ev'ry place by which shee came, from her veines conceiv'd a Flame.
CAll the spring with all her Flowrs, bid the winged Syrens sing, let Loves keen Arrows from the Bowrs be shot by ev'╌ry warbling string. M Amaillis never drew Her shining dart and sounding Bow, But then as many graces flew, And yet she is a fiel'd of snow. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. CAll the Spring with all her Flowrs, bid the winged Syrens sing, let Loves keene Arrows from the Bowrs be shot by ev╌'ry warbling string. Bassus. a. 3. voc. CAll the Spring with all her Flowrs, bid the winged Syrens sing, let Loves keen Arrows from the Bowrs be shot by ev'ry warbling string.
FEar not, dear Love, that I'le reveal those howrs of pleasure we two steal, no eye shall see nor yet the sun, descry what thou and I have done. (2) No ear shall hear our Love, but we As silent as the night will be, The God of Love himselfe, (whose dart Did first wound mine, and then thy heart.) () Shall never know that we can tell. What sweets in stoln embraces dwell; This only means may find it out, If when I die, Physitians doubt. (4) What caus'd my death, and then to view Of all their judgements which was true; Rip up my heart, O then I fear The world will see thy picture there. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. FEar not, dear Love, that I'le reveale those hours of pleasure we two steal, no eye shall see, nor yet the sun, descry what thou and I have done. Bassus. a. 3. voc. FEar not, deare Love, that I'le reveale those hours of pleasure we two steal, no eye shall see, nor yet the sun, descry what thou and I have done.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. ABout the sweet bag of a Bee, two Cupids fell at odds, and whose the pretty prize should be; they which Venus hearing thither came; and for their boldnes stript them, and taking thence from each his vow'd to aske the Gods: flame, with rods of Mirtle whipt them. Which done, to still their wanton cryes, and quiet grown sh' had seen them, she kist and dri'd their dovelike eyes, and gave the bag between them. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. ABout the sweet bagge of a Bee two Cupids fell at oddes, and whose the pretty prize should which Venus hearing hither came & for their boldnes stript thē, & taking thence frō each his flame be, they vow to aske the Gods: with rods of Mirtles whipt them. Which done, to still their wanton cries and quiet grown sh'had seen them, she kistt and dry'd their dove like eyes, and gave the bag between them. Bassus. ABout the sweet bagge of a Bee two Cupids fell at oddes, and whose the pretty prize should which Venus hearing thither came; & for their boldnes stript thē, & taking thence frō each his flame be, they vow'd to ask the Gods, with rods of Mirtle whipt them. Which done, to still their wanton cries and quiet growne sh' had seen them, she kist and dry'd their dove like eyes, and gave the bag between them.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. BEauties, have ye seene a Toy, called Love, a little Boy? almost naked, wanton, blind, cruell now, and then as kind: If he be amongst you, say, he is Venus run a way. (2) She tht will but now d scover Where this winged wag deth hover, Shall to night receive a kisse, How, or where her selfe would wish; But who brings him to his mother, hall have that kisse and another. (3) Mark he hath about him plenty, You shall know him among twenty, All his body is a fire, And his breath a flame entire, That brings shot (like lightning) in Wounds the heart, but not the skin. (4) Wings he hath which though ye clip, He will leap from lip to lip, Over liver, lips, and heart, But nee'r stay in any part: And if chance his arrow misses, He will shoot himselfe in kisses. (5) He doth beare a golden bow, And a quiver hanging low, Full of Arrowes that outbrave Dian shfts; what if he have Any head more sharp then other? With that kisse he strikes his mother. (6) Still the fairest are his fuell, When his daies are to be cruell, Lovers hearts are all his food, And his baths their warmest blood, Nought but wounds his hands doth season, And he hates none like to reason. (7) Trust him not, his words though sweet, Seldom with his heart do meet, All his practise is deceit, Ev'ry gift it is a bait, Not a kisse but poyson bears, And most treason in his tears. (8) Idle minutes are his reigne, Them the stragler makes his game, By presenting Mayds with toyes. And would have ye think 'em joyes; 'Tis th'ambition of the Elft, To have all childsh as himselfe. (9) If by these ye please to know him, Beuties be not nice, but show him, Though ye had a will to hide him, Now I hope yee'l not abide him: Since ye hear his falset play, And that hee's Venus run away. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. BEauties, have ye seene a Toy, called Love, a little Boy, almost naked? wanton, blind, cruell now, & then as kind; if he be amongst ye, say, he is Venus run away. Bssus. a. 3. voc. BEauties, have ye seen a Toy called Love, a little Boy? almost naked, wanton, blind, cruell now, and then as kind: If he be amongst ye, say, he is Venus run away.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. DEare, let mee now this Ev'ning die; O smile not to prevent it, but use this opportunity, or we shall both repent it. (2) Frown quickly then and break my heart, That so my way of dying May (though my life were full of smart) Be worth the worlds envying. (3) And now thou frownst, and now I die, My Corps by Lovers follow'd, Which shall by dead Lovers lie. For that grounds only hallow'd. (4) If Priests tak't ill I have grave, My death not well approving, The Poets my Estate shall have To teach them th'Art of Loving. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. DEar, let me now this Ev'ning die; O smile not to prevent it, but use this opportunity, or we shall both repent it. Bassus. a. 3. voc. DEar, let me now this Ev'ning die; O smile not to prevent it, but use this oportunity, or we shall both repent it.
Short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. WHy should great Beauties vertuous Fame desire, since vertue cannot Fame pro∣tect? Ev'n he that seems your Beauty to admire, your vertue gadly would suspect. (2) Men having little vertue of their owne; U ge reason for their jealousie, That women weaker themselves have none, So each Admirer is a spie. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. voc. WHy should great Beauties vertuous Fame desire, since vertue cannot Fame pro∣tect? ev'n he that seems your Beauties to admire, your vertue gladly would suspect Bassus. a. 3. voc. WHy should great Bauties vertuous Fame desire, since vertue cannot Fame protect? Ev'n he that seem's your Beauty to admire, your vertue gladly would suspect.
Hymns to the Holy Trinity. To God the Father. THou God the Father, hid from mortall sight, that cloath'st thy self with circumfused light; thou King Eternall, with thy quickning raies, give life to my dead soul: clear all my daies with thy bright presence, my weak spirit fill with pow'r not subject to the Tempters will; Give mee a filiall, not a servile fear, let ev'ry sin be ransom'd with a tear; forbid me to despair, or to presume, lest too much fear should my best hopes consume; and when my body in the grave shall rest, may my cleans'd soul in Martyrs robes be drest.
To God the Sonne. THou God the Son, fountain of endles rest, with whose rare birth a Virgins wombe was blest; thou Prince of Peace, restore me with thy blood, and wash my stains in that pure crimson flood; my deep-dy'd soul make white, as unsmutch'd snow, with those mix't streams which from thy side did slow; let those sharp nayles that pierc'd thy hands and feet, thy Crown of Thorns in my Redemption meet; my sins are all by imputation thine, thy suffrings too are by translation mine; then let thy passion, death, and buriall be pledges of everlasting life to me.
To God the Holy Ghost. THou God the Holy Ghost, that spread'st thy wings o're wounded spirits. Bath me in the springs of thy defusive joyes; and still impart fresh Oyle of Gilead to my bleeding heart; when I am folded in the armes of Death, drop down, drop down thy dew on my expiring breath; let hot a doubt of one uncancel'd sin, dare to distub my seet repose within; all clouds of fear, let thy bright beames expell, that in my thoughts a serene calme may dwell: so shall my Rock of Faith unshaken stand in full assurance of the promis'd Land.
ORPHEƲS Hymn to GOD. . O King of Heav'n and Hell, of Sea and Earth; Who shak'st the World when thou shout'st Thun╌der forth; Whom Devils dread, and Hosts of Heaven prayse; Whom Fate (which master's all things else) obeys; Eternall Cause! who on the winds dost ride; And Nature's face with thick dark Clouds dost hide: Cleaving the Ayre with Balls of dreadfull Fire; Guidng the Strrs, which run, & never tire: About thy Throne bright Angels stand & bow, to bee dispatcht to
Mortalls heer below. Thy early spring in purple Robes comes fort: Thy Summers South does conquer all the North: And though thy Winter freeze the Hearts of Men, Glad wine, Glad wine from Autumn cheers them up agn. Musick Books lately Printed for John Playford, at his Shop in the Inner Temple. MR. William Childs Set of Psalms for 3 Voyces, after the Italian way, with a thorough Basse Ingraven upon Copper. A Book of Select Ayes and Dialogues for 1, 2, and 3 Voyces to sing to the Theorbo or Basse Violl, Composed by Dr. Wilson, Dr. Colman, Mr. Henry, and Mr. William Lawes, and o∣ther excellent Masters in Musick First Book of Ayres and Dialogues for 1, 2, and 3 Voyces, by Mr. Henry Lawes. Second Book of Ayres and Dialogues, for 1, 2, and 3 Voyces, by Mr. Henry Lawes. A Banquet of Musick, set forth in three severall varieties of Musick: first, Lssons for the Lyra Violl: the second, Ayres and Jiggs for the Violin: the third, Runds and Cacnes, all which are fitted to the capacity of yong Practitioners in Musick. A Book of Catches, Rounds, and Canons, Collected and Published by Mr. John Hilton. Musicks Recreation, or choice Lessons for the Lyra Violl, to severall new tunings, Composed by severall excellent Masters. A new Book of Lessons and Instructions for the Cythern and Gittern. A new Book, Intituled, The Dancing Master, or plaine and easie Rules for the Dancing of Country Dne s, with the Tunes to each Dance, to be playd on the Treble Violin. To which is ad∣ded the tunes of the French Dances. Court Ayres, of 2 Parts, containing Pavans, Almains, Ayrs, Corants, and Sarabands, for a Treble and Basse Viol or Violin, to be performed in consort to the Theorbo, Lute or Virginall. An Introduction to the skill of Musick for Song and Violl; To which is added a Second Part, Entituled, The Art of Setting or Composing of Musick in Parts, &c. Aso all sorts of Rul'd Paper, and Rul'd Paper Books ready bound up.
AYRES, AND DIALOGUES, For One, Two, and Three VOYCES. BY portrait of a man HENRY LAWES Servant to his late Matie: in his publick and private Musick. W: Faitharne fecit THE THIRD BOOK. LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for John Playford, at his Shop in the Inner Temple, neer the Church dore. M.DC.LVIII.
To the Right Honourable The LORD COLRANE. MY LORD, I Had some thoughts to forbear in this kind any far∣ther Publication: but though my Reasons were strong enough for my self, they were not able to conquer others; who (for all I could say) expect my Promise to give them yet more of my Composi∣tions. I confess I have no fear of being exhausted: but though I am not tired, it became me to doubt I might tire others; whereof since I find there is less danger, I shall thankfully comply with the Publick Desire. And I wish those, who so warmly pretend the Common Benefit, would tread the same path, and not take upon them to mend the World, till they have some Call to it. This my Profession (as well as others) may fairly complain of; for none judge so sowerly on us and our labours, as they who were never born to be Musicians. For my own part, I send not these abroad to get a Name; Were that my Designe, I have other Compositions, fitter for such as are Masters in our Art, when the Season calls for them. My poor Talent never lay in a Napkin; nor make I any precarious use of this Publication; they were first begotten to gratifie my friends, and are now as freely con∣ferr'd upon Strangers. But were all this otherwise, my chief and main Design would go on, which is a Thirst I have to tell the World how absolute a Votary I am to your Lordship. And were I a perfect stranger to your favours, I could do no less, since your excellent Un∣derstanding and great affection to this, as well as all other Arts and Sciences, would claim it from mee. Therefore I intended to offer unto your Lordship some of your own Conce∣ptions tun'd by my Notes: as also some others written by that rare Gentleman Mr. Henry Hare, your Lordship's most hopefull Son, who eminently expresses both your Lordship and your Brother Mr. Nicholas Hare, whose Memory is still precious among all ingenuous Souls. But those I preserve for a fairer opportunity, and in this Book present you with Others Poetry, especially of Doctor Hughes, who was Author of all these Single Ayres, and of many others, stoln into the Press without my Consent as well as his. Such as they are I humbly bring them before your Lordship, as a small but Gratefull Testimony of (MY LORD) Your Lordships most humble and most faithful Servant HENRY LAVVES.
To his Honoured Friend Mr. HENRY LAWES, Upon his Annual Book of AYRES. BRave LAVVES! Thou art Return'd again: the Sun And You do thus your Emulous Courses Run. And whiles you both in different Orbes appear, He onely Makes, but Thou dost Crown the Year. That if the Old Philosophy were true, What his Spent Fires could not, thy Lyre would doe; Make old Time Vigorous still, confessing more Thy Fam'd Layes now, then all his Beams before. Nature her self should thus thy Learn'd Aid crave, From whose Stockt Brain all that we have, we have. Whose Yearly Spendings Shew, not wast thy Store, Who after Numerous Births can yet give more. Still whole, Unspent that when the Year doth cease (As Aegypt Nile's) We wait thy Next Encrease. Then High, and Rich as He Thou Flow'st: We see What all else cannot, and what Thou can'st be. And till We pass the Spheres, must still attend, To know what Height Musick hath yet t' ascend. For Thou Grasp'st all; We the rude Matter give, Thou into Verse breath'st Soul, and bid'st it Live. Endu'st it with that Plastick Pow'r to Spring What Thou would'st have it, This, That, any Thing. Dost in thy Mould our Wit new Shape, and Cast, Giv'st it New Salt, the Haut Goust, and Rich Tast. It Lives with us, doth Flourish in thy Ayre, Born from our Brains, but Educated there. Things that from us flat and insipid flow, Voic d once by Thee, straight into Raptures grow. When from her Mine Invention Fancy brings, Thy composition a New Fancy springs. Thus whiles all comes Exact, Watch'd, Humour'd, Hit, Thy Ayre's Ingenuous, and makes Musick Wit. Nor dost Thou, Narrow, only dwell among The Easie Rhimes of thine own Time, and Tongue: Thy Reaching, Vent'ring Soul doth Wit pursue Setting of Anacreon's Odes.Thorough all Languages, and all times too; That which some Twenty Ages since first grew, Thou Retriv'st now, and we admire as New. Compar'st and tri'st how th' Ancient Pipes will sound, Mak'st Old wit stronger by the New Rebound: Who are, and who are not, Obliged bee, Poet, and Poetry it self to thee. What She suggests comes a mishapen Birth, Till Thou step'st in, and thence strik'st Musick forth. Admired LAVVES! thy Happy Ayres have knit Eternall Leagues 'twixt Harmony and wit:
Which none but those thy Richer Robes will know, When she keeps State, or would in Triumph go. We drink in Thousand Pleasures from One Song, Which Charms us all, the Learned and the Throng. We are Transported, Lost! thy Notes betray, Drop on the Sense, and melt us quite away. And when we're Extasy'd, Expiring, then Thy Next Note Wooes, and calls us back agen. At once Thou Steal'st, and can'st invade us too, Straight Rouze those pow'rs which were all Lodg'd but now. Thou like some Mighty Monarch dost controul, Dispence, Rule, Work, and Reign o're all the Soul. Thou shoot'st New Beings: For we are no more, When we hear Thee, that which we were before. But as that Begger who in's Raving Fits, Got Crowns and Scepters when he lost his Wits; Cur'd, and himself again, Griev'd straight to pass Into that poor, shrunk Nothing that he was: So when thy Strains Feast our low Fancies high, We Trample Earth, and Mounting, Knock the Sky. But when They cease, All Mourn that we have lost Those Tow'ring Thoughts our then Rapt Souls engross'd. Thou, like a Generall Influence, Sway'st in All, Dost Touch the Mind, and her glad Motions call. Whiles We our Constant Acclamations bring To the still New choice Graces that You Sing. Thus dost Thou Govern all (Harmonious Soul!) And through the Great whole Orbe of Musick Rowl. Break'st from thy Self, Scatt'ring Day every where, Not leaving one Dark Part in all the Sphere. All Native, Genuine, and Unborrow'd streams, The Sun and LAVVES know not to Owe their Beams. Who on the Wings Thou Imp'st Verse with, hast Spread Thy Fame far as the Roman Eagle fled. Those Judging Few who can Compare, admire, And find Thine Match the best Italian Lyre; Thou still Stand'st High; thy Rules so True, Severe! All by thy Card, Thou by thine Own dost steere. Like the First Mover, Uncontrol'd dost Move, (He which makes peace, Turnes, and Tunes all Above.) Even, and Just as he: whiles all doth shew What Harmony, that is, what LAVVES can do. And such! so Full! so Mighty is thy Vein, Thou hast scarce Thought when all slowes from thy Brain. As Things first met in the Creation, All, Doth of it self straight into Concord fall; Which issuing free as Springing Light from th' Morn, Shews Thee Musician, like the Poet Born. You Two do Wing it still in Noble Flights, Strive, Stretch, Mount, Soar, Match, and vie Heights with Heights. And we the while Admiring, doubtfull stand, Which shall at last the Bravest Place command.
With Words and Ayres our Ears are doubly fed, What e're thou set'st is at once Sung and sed. Thou dost still Apt, Complying Notes dispense, True to the Words, but truer to the sense. The Tunes Rehearse: no Crowd of Graces throng, And Justle all the Words out of the Song. But are so scatter'd here, and there, so sowne, It hath them all, and yet is vex'd with None. Thy Jewels with such Art are plac'd and worne, That they ne'r Cloud the part they should adorne. Thus doth thy Equall Skill not more delight, To do thy Self, then do the Poet Right. Thou Maim'st not him to come forth Conquerour, Thine, Steales none o'th Bullion when it adds the Coin. No tedious, long, deviding tricks betray His sense; and vapour all his Words away. Yet when a Word comes fit t' Espouze a Grace. Thou marri'st both, and know'st the Rites, and place. Then Fancy humour'd shews the guilded Beam, That Glitt ring Plays, and Quavers on the stream. Both Close, and Kind as Life and Spirit sit, Thy Ayres still Quicken, never stifle Wit. And as One Dram of Gold can ne'r be lost, Though in a Thousand Fires Try'd, Vex d, and Forc'd, Dissolv'd, mix'd with all Elements, we see, Expans'd to Infinite, what was will Bee. So with the same Entireness Numbers do, From all thy Artfull Compositions flow. Which though through all thy Flats and Sharps express'd In thy Rich Notes, and various humours dress'd. Are still the same: if any Change appear, Stamp'd now by Thee, they'r better than they were. Where Words, Sense, Tunes Embrace, so Kiss, Twist Hit, Thy whole Age hath not lost One Grain of Wit. Go on Great Master of thy Art! Strike dumb, And with thy Tones Calm the Tempestuous Drum. Tune, Recollect, Please, and reform us; Thine, Come at once Musick too, and Discipline. Let thy soft Notes invite us, slide, and Steal, Rock this Frow'rd Age, and with their Balsam Heal. Shew all the Miracles thy voice can do, Our Orpheus and our Aesculapius too. And when these Revolutions make thy Shine Compleat, and Thou hast woave thy great Designe: Hush'd all our Noise, spread Calms made all serene, And with thy Ayres at last shut up the Scene: All Done, Thou shalt (though late, we hope) Remove, And change thy Musick here for that Above. Where thou shalt here how Saints their Anthems sing, And shalt thy Self another Anthem bring. Thou who did'st Tune the World, whiles Thou wert here, Shall take an Angels place, and Tune a Sphere. HORATIO MOORE.
Cloris landing at Berlington. Amintor. SEE, see! my Chloris, my Chloris comes in yonder Bark: Blow gently winds, for if ye sink that Ark, you'l drown the world with tears, and at one breath, give to us all a universal death: Hark, hark how Arion on a Dolphin playes, to my sweet Sheepherdess his roundelayes: See how the Sirens flock to wait upon her, as Queen of Love, and they her Maids of honor. Behold, Great Neptune's risen from the deep with all his Tritons, and be∣gins to sweep the rugged waves into a smoother form, not leaving one small wrinkle of a storm:
Mark how the winds stand still, and on her gaze; See how her beauty doth the fish amaze; the Whales have begg'd this boon of wind and weather, that on their backs they may con∣vey her hither; And see she Lands just like the rising Sun, that leaves the Brynie Lake when night is done: Fly, fly Amintor to thy Envi'd bliss, and let not th' Earth, rob thee of her greeting kiss.
Constancy protested. OFt have I swore, I'de love no more; yet when I think on thee, alass I cannot give it o're but mu thy captive be; so many sweets and graces dwel about thy lips and eyes, that whosoever once is caught must ever be thy prize. (2) Sure thou hast got some cunning net Made by the god of Fire, That doth not only catch mens hearts But fixeth their desire. For I have laboured to get loose Some dozen years and more, And when I think to be releas'd I'me faster than before. (3) Then welcome sweet captivity, I see there's no relief, Yet though she steal my liberty, I'le honor still the theife And when I cannot hope to see Thee Mistris of my pain, My comfort is that I do love Where I am lov'd again.
Counsel to a Maid. CHloris, when e're you do intend to venture at a Bosome-friend, be sure you know your Servant well, before your liberty you fell; for Love's a feaver in young, or old, that's sometimes hot, and sometimes cold; and men you know when e're they please can soon be sick of this disease. (2) Then wisely chuse a Friend that may Last for an age, not for a day; Who loves thee not for Lip or Eye, But from a mutual Simpathie: To such a Friend this heart ingage, For he will court the in old age, And kiss thy shallow, wrinkl'd brow, Whith as much Ioy, as he now.
Love despis'd. IN love? Away, You do me wrong, I hope I ha' not liv'd so long free from the treach'ry of your Eyes, now to be caught and made a prize: No, Lady, 'tis not all your Art can make me and my freedome part. II. In Love! 'tis true, with Spanish wine, Or the French juice Incarnadine, But truly not with your sweet face, This dimple, or that hidden grace; Ther's far more sweetnesse in pure wine, Then in those lips or eyes of thine. III. Your god you say can shoot so right Hee'l wound a heart i'th darkest night; Pray let him throw away a dart, And try if he can hit my heart: No Cupid, if I shall be thine, Turn Ganimed, and fill us wine. COme fil's a cup of Sherry, and let us be merry, there shall nought but pure wine, make us love-sick or pine; wee'l hug the cup and kiss it, wee'l sigh when e're we miss it, for 'tis that that makes us jolly, and sing Hy trolly lolly.
Hopelesse love cur'd by derision. WHat? wilt thou pine, or fall away, because thy Daphne says thee nay? Wilt cross thine arms, or willow wear, because that Shee is so severe? Fye Shepherd, Fye, this must not bee, thy Daphne then will laugh at thee. (2) No, if She needs will be unkind, On somewhat else divert thy mind: Go sport with wanton Amarillis, And dance with lovely nut-brown Philli: For Love's a shadow will deny To follow thee, until thou sly. (3) Then Choridon, do not despair For Daphne, whom we all know fair; Let no proud Beauty on our Plains Destroy thy youth with her disdains: But if thou find her scorning thee, Think thus, She was not born for mee.
A young Maids Resolution. GOe young man, let my heart alone, 'twil be a pri'ner unto none; nor will I Cupids shackles wear, since Lovers laws are so severe: Love is my slave, while I de∣spise; but once conent, hee'l ty╌ran╌nise. II. 'Tis onely Beauty you admire, And that's the object of Desire, Which by degrees burns to a flame, And hence Love first receiv'd its name. Then young man give me leave to doubt Since Love's a fire, and sires will out. Cupid no god. I Prethee Love take heed or else I shall blaspheme, and swear that thy great deity is nothing but a dream. II. How cant thou be a god When subtle womens hearts Are grown so wise To blind thine eyes And rob thee of thy darts. III. See where a Lady stands With Quivers in her Eyes, And swears that shee Hath conquer'd thee, And sold thee for a prize. IV. If thou be Womans prize, Alass, then what are wee Who borrow light From thy blind sight, And know not what we see.
Inconstancy return'd. DId I once say that thou wert fair, and swear thy breath perfum'd the air? Did I commit I╌do╌la╌try, and court thee as a deity? Ah Caelia! sure then I was blind, or else it was when thou wert kind. II. Did I once beg a wanton kiss, And thought there was no higher bliss? Did I all other objects slye To live i'th sun-shine of thine eye? 'Tis true I did, but Caelia then Return'd as much to me agen. III. Now Caelia's chang'd and so am I, Love feeds upon variety; My constant thoughts could never find The pleasures of a Fickle mind, Till thy example did invite My appetite to new delight. His Rivals danger. TAke h ed bold Lover, do not look upon my Chlori Eyes, for every dart is tipp'd with death that from her glances flyes. II. Nor do not think to save thy self From danger, or from harmes, By any virtue in her smiles, Or other secret charmes. III. Love hath commanded her to cure No other heart but mine, There is no hope that Shee can be So merciful to thine. IV. For though her Eyes be Murderers, She hath reserv'd for me, A Balsam in her Coral lips That gives Eternitie.
To his Platonick Mistris. BEauty once blasted with the frost of Age or Sickness, is quite lost; he who loves that, and on it can, dote till he be no longer Man, hath neither Intellect or Eyes to judge where womans beauty lies: No, let him court your better part, your virtues and your loyal heart. II. If nought but beauty in you be, Your Picture seems as fair to me; He that admires your red and white, Is Traytor to his own delight; And with those shadows growes so blind He never can your sweetnesse find. Then let me court your better part, Your vertues, and your loyall heart. III. Yet do I never hope to see Goodnesse lodg'd in deformitie; Though devils oft take shapes divine, Angels take none but such as thine; This made me make my choice of thee The emblem of divinitie; That I might court your better part, Your vertues, and your loyal heart.
Amintors welladay. CHlori: now thou art fled away, Amintor's shep are gon astray; and all the joy he took to see, his pretty Lambs run after thee, is gon is gon, and he alone, sings nothing now but welladay, welladay. II. His Oaten pipe that in thy praise Was wont to play such roundelays, Is thrown away, and not a swain Dares pipe, or sing, within his plain; 'Tis death for any now to say One word to him but welladay. II. The Maypole where thy little feet So roundly did in measures meet, Is broken down, and no content Comes near Amintor since you went. All that I ever heard him say Was Chloris, Chloris, welladay. IV. Upon those Banks you us'd to tread He ever since hath laid his head, And whisper'd there such pining woe, As not a blade of grass will grow; O Chloris! Chloris! come away, And hear Amintor's welladay.
Affection for a Lady he never saw. O Now I find 'tis nought but Fate that makes us either love or hate; yet I have heard the wiser tell, Love onely doth with Beauty dwell; and that the Eye the thief mut play, to steal each others heart away. But 'tis not so I find with me, for I love one I ne're did see. II. There's a Divinity in Love, That doth inspire us from above; Which needs no tutoring from the eyes, To make our hearts to Sympathize. Such Noble and Platonick fires, Will know no Object for deires: But Love's the good that dwels with thee, Although thy self they ne're did see. III. Thy soul, not this, or t'other part, Hath sent her Cupids to my heart; And there like little Angels tell, What hidden vertues in thee dwell, Prompting my reason to suppose Thy Shape's Angelicall like those; Which I shall pray I ne're may see, Lest I should more distracted be.
Freedome from Charmes. GO, fair Inchantress! charm no more, but give thy fascina╌tions o're; since I have found a pow'rful Spel, that doth thy cunning Art excel; for when I think of thy dis∣dain, I'm free from witchcraft, or from pain. II. When I was young and unbetray'd, All then was Oracle you said; So innocent I was of guile, I thought love dwelt in every smile: But now that cloud of youth is spent, I find you'r all but complement. III. I'le love no more, I'le learn to hate, I'le study to equivocate, And all my pleasures now shall be To cozen those would cozen me; For Loves best musick runs (I find) On fickle changes of the mind.
Future Hope. WHen shal I see my Captive heart that lies in Chloris brest? or, when will Love again restore those joys I once possest? Yet, 'tis a blessing I confess, when Fate is thus se∣vere, not to be barr'd of future hopes to mitigate our fear. II. The Tyrant Love would be depos'd, And from this Empire thrown, Were not his subjects fool'd with hope That mercy would be shown. Then Captive heart contented lye, And banish all despaire, Since there is hope that she may be As kind as she is faire.
On a Black Ribbon. BLack as thy lovely Eyes and Hair, this Ribbon for thy sake I wear, to tye rebellious passions in, lest they on other objects sin; thus I Love's pris'ner am, and may expect my sentence ev'ry day; my heart fore-tells me now that I am doom'd a slave to constancy. II. How easie 'tis for to confine An am'rous and a willing minde! Soft Silk from your fair hands I feel Bindes faster far than chains of Steel: O let me still thy Bond-man be! I'le nevet sue for libertie; Let others boast that freedome have, 'Tis my content to be thy slave.
A Resolution to love no more. LEt me alone, I'le love no more, nor will I that fond God adore; all your perfections cannot move one am'rous thought in me to love: yet I'me not old, nor yet dis╌eas'd, but onely with your Sex displeas'd; not that I e're was scorn'd by any, but because you can love too many. II. Alas, where lies that great delight Men fancy in your red and white? The common Lilly and the Rose Are far more beautifull then those; And many objects in the Skies Outshine the lustre of your Eyes, Though Poets please sometimes to say Your Eyes are brighter than the Day. What wonder is there then in thee, when thou hast lost thy constancie?
Cupids Artillery. ALas poor Cupid! Art thou blind? Canst not thy Bow and Arrows find? Thy Mother sure the Wanton playes, and layes 'em up for Holydayes. II. Then Cupid mark how kind I'le be, Because thou once werr so to me; I'le arm thee with such powerful darts, Shall make thee once more god of hearts. III. My Chloris Armes shall be thy bow, Which none but Love can bend you know; Her precious Haires shall make the String, Which of themselves wound every thing. THen take but Arrows from her Eyes, nnd all you shoot at surely dyes.
A Lady to a young Courtier. LOve thee! Good Sooth, Not I; I've somewhat else to doe: A∣las! you must go learn to talk, before you learn to wooe: Nay fie, stand off, go too, go too. II. Because you'r in the fashion, And newly come to Court, D'ye think your Clothes are Orators T'invite us to the Sport? Ha ha, who will not jeer thee for't! III. Ne'r look so sweetly Youth, Nor fiddle with your Band, We know you trimme your borrow'd Curles To shew your pretty Hand; But 'tis too young for to command. IV. Go practise how to jeer, And think each word a Jest, That's the Court wit: Alas! you'r out To think when finely drest, You please me or the Ladies best. V. And why so confident! Because that lately we Have brought another lofty word Unto our pedegree? Your inside seems the worse to me. VI. Mark how Sir Whacham fols; I marry there's a Wit Who cares not what he sayes or swears So Ladies laugh at it; Who can deny such blades a bi?
Falshood discovered. FOnd woman, thou mistak'st thy mark; thy reason guides thee in the dark: and though thy Cupids cannot see, mine have too many eyes for thee. Alas, I read in ev'ry smile, the Arts you use when you beguile. II. What though you swear to me, you love With passions equal to the Dove; And that your flames are blown no higher Than to the Sphere of chaste desire? Forgive me if I needs must say This is the common womans way. III. Your Eyes like Suns I know can be As warm to any as to me, And yet you blush not oft to say You love but the Platonick way; Love how you will, and when you please, My heart shall sleep and take it's ease.
Liberty. THough thou hast Wit and Beauty too, enough to make a Hermit wooe; and though you swear your heart is mine, yet all this will not make me thine; my Cupids now are full of eyes, and that's the reason they'r so wise. Then Ladies wonder not at me, if I desire my libertie. II. 'Tis time to call my passions in, That have so long in darkness bin; For now I see you only play To win a heart and so away; She that can number all her store Of servants, now is very poor: Then Ladies wonder not, &c. III. Spring-garden is the Market-place Where men are brought up for a face; Some with their hands, some with their eyes, Catch any new thing for a prize; That Lady now grows poor and pines, Who wants her slaves to dig her mines. Then Ladies wonder not, &c.
A Pot of Flowers presented to Chloris. SEe Chloris, see, how Nature brings all what she owes to thee that springs; these Roses ftom your Cheeks did grow, those Lillies from your Bosomes snow; this various Tulip from your Eyes, from whence it bears so rich a prize. II. Those purple streams in Azure set, Gave being to this Violet; These sprigs of Bayes we ne'r did see Till you taught Shepherds Poetrie: And all these flowers of purest red Sprung up where once your finger bled. III. These Pansyes which so low do creep, Grew up one Night where you did sleep: So did these Poppyes, and from thence They have their sleepy influence; And all their leaves became thus green In hope by you they should be seen. IV. And here I bring them in an Urn Of water, which themselves did mourn, Fearing to wyther and grow drye By too much Sun-shine of your Eye: For if your Beams the World inflame, Poor things, they needs must feel the same.
A doubt resolv'd. FAin would I love but that I fear, I quickly should the willow wear; Fain would I marry, but men say, when Love is ty'd, he will away: Then tell me Love, what shall I doe, to cure these Fears when e're I wooe? II. The Fair one she's a mark to all; The Brown one each doth Lovely call; The Black's a pearl in Fair mens Eyes; The rest will stoop to any prize. Then tell me love, &c. III. Reply. Young Lover, know it is not I That wound with Fear or iealousie; Nor do men ever feel those smarts Until they have confin'd their hearts: Then if you'l cure your Fears, you shall Love neither Fair, Black, Brown, but all.
To the first object of Content. WHy up so early in the world, and fondly led about from place to place to seek Content and could not find thee out? Alas! 'tis plain I was abus'd, I did mistake the light which quickneth ev'ry Lovers eye, and gives a perfect sight. II. Thou art the only Star that can Direct us where to find The way which I so long have sought To ease a troubled mind; Each limb of thine's so full of grace They ravish ev'ry Eye, And all the Musick that we know Is from their Harmony. III. 'Tis You alone that do create The Beauties of the Spring, Those Shadows which from You reflect Adorneth ev'ry thing; Philosophers may govern Fools, But shall not tutor mee, For now I find that I was blind Until I found out thee.
A Recantation. FOrgive me Love what have I done! Abus'd the Stars, Eclips'd the Sun; and rashly call'd a Wandring sight the Star whence true love borrows light: Yet mark the jest, She thinks that I speak truth, and dote; Love knows I lie. II. Will you not give men leave to sport, Alas, my heart commands a sort, Whence all the artillery of your Eyes Can make no breach, much lesse a prize: How subtle Ladies now are grown! Yet caught in Engines of their own. III. My heart's no Coward, you shall see, To yield, because you shot at mee; A man o're come so quickly may Be taken pris'ner every day: Then Lady boast not of your prize, My heart still in his castle lyes.
A description of Chloris. HAve you e're seen the morning Sun from fair Aurora's bosome run? Or have you seen on Flora's Bed, the Essences of White and Red? Then you may boast, for you have seen my Fairer Chloris, Beauties Queen. II. Have you e're pleas'd your skilful eares With the sweet Musick of the Spheres? Have you e're heard the Syrens sing, Or Orpheus play to Hels black King? If so, be happy and rejoyce, For thou hast heard my Chloris voyce. III. Have you e're smelt what Chymick skill From Rose or Amber doth distill? Have you been near that sacrifice The Phoenix makes before she dies? Then you can tell (I do presume) My Chloris is the worlds perfume. IV. Have you e're tasted what the Bee Steals from each fragrant Flower or Tree? Or did you ever taste that meat Which Poets say the Gods did eat? O then I will no longer doubt But you have found my Chloris out.
Chloris a constant comfort. STay, stay ye greedy Merchants stay, send not your ships so fast away, to trade for Jems or precious Ore, for now they'l be esteem'd no more; sayl to the Indies of my Chloris Eyes, Cheeks, Hair, and Lips, there perfect treasure lies. II. Come here Loves Hereticks that can Beleive ther's no true joy for man, See what refined pleasure flyes From ev'ry motion of her eyes; Gaze on my Chloris freely, then go tell To all the world where true Content doth dwell. III. Forgive me Heavens if I adore Your Sun, or Moon, or Stars no more; Those often are eclips'd, and can As soon destroy as cherish man: But Chloris like a constant comfort shines, Not only to our Bodies but our Mindes.
Inconstancy. O Tell me Love! O tell me Fate! or tell some other pow'r; who did Inconstancy create, that changeth ev'ry houre? Why should one creature seem this day the object of Content, to Morrow lose that new-born joy, and prove a punishment? II. Fair Shapes and guilded Honours raise Rebellion in our hearts; Then blame not Cupid if he shoot Such sev'rall sorts of darts: Such sullen miseries as these Will wait on fickle Love; Be thou a Saint it is decreed She must inconstant prove.
Amintor's Dream. AS sad Amintor in a Medow lay slumbring upon a bed of new-made Hy a Dream, a fatal Dream unlock'd his eyes, whereat he wakes, and thus Amintor cryes; Chloris, where art thou Chloris? Oh! she's fled, and left Amintor to a loathed Bed. II. Heark how the Winds conspire with storm and rain To stop her course, and beat her back again: Heark how the heavens chide her in her way For robbing poor Amintor of his joy: And yet she comes not. Chloris, O! she's fled, And left Amintor to a loathed bed. III. Come Chloris come, see where Amintor lies, Just as you left him, but with sadder Eyes; Bring back that heart which thou hast stoln from me, That Lovers may record thy Constancie: O no she will not. Chloris, O she's fled! And left Amintor, &c. IV. O lend me (Love) thy wings that I may flye Into her bosome, take my leave, and dye: What comfort have I now ith' world since she That was my world of joy is gone from me, My Love, my Chloris: Chloris, O she's fled And left Amintor to, &c. V. Awake Amintor from this dream, for she Hath too much goodnesse to be false to thee: Think on her Oathes, her Vows, her Sighes, her Tears, And those will quickly satisfie thy fears. No no, Amintor, Chloris is not fled, But will return into thy longing Bed.
Chloris dead, lamented by Amintor. MOurn, mourn with me, all true Enamour'd hearts, and Shepherds throw your pipes away: Cupid go burn thy Arrows and thy Darts, let Night for e╌ver smother Day: for Chloris our bright Sun is dead, and with her all our joys are fled. II. Love is with grief congeal'd into a Stone, And o're my Chloris grave she lies, Where round about the Graces sit and moan, Neglecting other Deities: The valleys where her flocks she fed Are drown'd with tears since she is fled. III. Then follow me, where comfort never shin'd; Down, down into some darker Cell; There see Amintor weep, till he grow blind And comfortless for ever dwell: The Gods I fear will soon repent This universall punishment. Here Endeth the AYRES for One Voyce to the Theorboe-Lute or Bass-Viol.
A Dialogue on a KISSE. For two Trebles. Question. AMong thy Fancies tell me this, What is the thing we call a Kiss? Resol. I shall olve you what it is: It is a creature born and bred betwixt the lips all cherry-red, by love and warm and warm desires fed; [Chorus both together.] And makes more sweet, and make; more sweet, and makes more And makes more sweet, and makes more sweet, and makes more sweet the Bridal bed. It is an active flame that flyes first to the Babies of the Eyes, and sweet the Bridal bed.
charms it there, and charms it there, with lulla lulla-byes, lulla lulla lulla lulla lulla lulla byes. and charms it there, and charms it there, with lulla lulla byes, with lulla lulla lulla lulla lulla byes. Chorus. And stills the Bride, and stills the Bride, and stills the Bride too when she crye. And stills the Bride, and stills the Bride, and still the Bride too when she cryes. the Cheek, it frisks, now here, 'tis now far off, Then to the Chin, the Ear, it flyes now there, and now 'tis neer: Chorus. 'Tis here and there, 'tis here and there, 'tis here and there and ev'ry where. Tis here and there tis here and there tis here and there and ev'ry where.
Yes, do you but this, part your ioy'nd lips then speaks the kiss: Has it a voycing vertue? How speaks it then? Chorus. And this Love sweet, and this Loves sweet, and this Loves sweetest language is. And this Loves sweet, and this Loves sweet, and this Loves sweetest language is. I, and wings, with thousand various co╌lourings, and as it flyes it sweetly sweetly sings, Has it a Body? and as it flyes it sweetly sings, Love hony yields but never stings! Chorus. And as it flyes it sweetly sings, Love hony yields but never stings. Love hony yields but never stings! And as it flyes it sweetly sings, Love hony yields but never stings.
A Dialogue between a LOVER and his FRIEND. For two Trebles. Lover. I Love a Nymph. Friend. A lack a day! Lover. But dare not say I love her. Friend. Perhaps she may thy love repay; speak then thy thoughts, and prove her. Lover. If I reveal, and she re∣ject my love, I'm quite undone. Friend. Weomen when we do least expect, we see are often wonne. Lover. True, but her state great flocks requires, mine are but poor and small. Friend. Peace Fool, love onely love desires, and nothing else at all. [Chorus for three together.] They who do love for private gain, may suffer shipwrack may They who do love for private gain, may suffer They who do love for private gain, may suffer shipwrack
suffer shipwrack, may suffer shipwrack in the Main. shipwrack in the Main, may suffer shipwrack in the Main. in the Main, may suffer shipwrack in the Main. A Dialogue. STREPHON — AMARYLLIS. [For a Bass and Treble.] Streph. COme come Ama╌ryl╌lis, I am ty'd by oath, which now I must fulfill; let Fate my Soul from Earth divide, if Damon be not contant still: and the poor Swain, sits under yonder tree, with sighs bewailing your seve╌ritie. Amar. There let him sit sighing his fill, and take his labour for his hire; or piping go from hill to hill, till Sun-beam: his false pipe do fire:
It moves not me, this this I onely grieve, I e're did him, and cannot you believe. Streph. Are apples gather'd from a tree, and put into fair Chloris hand, symptomes of his Inconstancie? Is this a breaking of Loves band? No, no, he ne'r lov'd Chloris, heark, heark he cryes, Come Amaryllis, come Amaryllis, or your Damon dyes. Amar. Ah Strephon, could I but be sure, that this unfeignedly were true, and that the tears he sheds were pure, I then could pity, I could pity more than you, and enter∣tain the Eccho of his cryes, Come Damon come, Come Damon come, or Amaryllis dy.
Chorus. Thus Amaryllis to her Damon turn'd, whose Life was almost into Ciners burn'd: Thus Amaryllis to her Damon turn'd, whose Life was almost into Cinders burn'd: the gods will Lovers crown, though sooner we can kindle love, can kindle love, than the gods will Lovers crown, though sooner we can kindle love, then quench love quench loves jea╌lou╌sie. jea╌lou╌sie.
A Dialogue. CLEANDER — FLORAMELL. or a Tenor and Treble.] Clea. AWake, awake, fair Floramell. Flor. I doe. Clea. But who freed thee from is inchanted spell? Flor. 'Twas you, such heav'nly Chymistry you taught, from earth sublim'd my  purer thoughts. Chorus both together. Happy, thrice happy those who govern Fate, Happy, thrice happy those who govern who govern Fate, subjecting sub∣jecting greater Mindes to meaner State. Clean. cting greater Mindes to meaner State. Clean. And how appears Earths glories now? y'r gone. Clean. Then on, fly, lest they once more da╌zel thee. Flor. I R╌un and undi∣sturb'd
my flocks He find, there guide them with a quiet mind. Chorus. Happy, thrice happy Happy, thrice happy those can those can see and try the worlds fond glories so, and pass them by. see can see and try the worlds fond glories glories so, and pass them by. Clean. But tell me, Canst thou thus retire? Flor. I can. Clean. But when? VVill not those hasty vows expire? Fond man, 'tis now the Souls affections more Aetherial flames, diviner love. Chorus. Happy thrice happy Soul that ravish'd so, en╌joys a second Heaven here below. Happy thrice happy Soul that ravish'd that ravish'd so, enjoys a second a second Heaven here below.
Short AYRES for One, Two, or Three VOYCES. Cantus Primus. ONce Venus Cheeks that sham'd the Morn, her hew let fall; her Lips that Winter had out-born, in June in June look'd pale; her Heat grew cold, her Nectar dry, no Dew she had but in her Eye, the wonted fire and flames to mortifie. When was this so dismal sight? When Adonis, Adonis bad Good-night.
Cantus Secundus. a 3. Voc. ONce Venus Cheeks that sham'd the Morn, her hew let fall; her Lips that Winter had out-born, in June in June look'd pale; her Heat grew cold, her Nectar dry, no Dew she had but in her Eye, the wonted fire and flames to mortifie. When was this so dismal sight? When Adonis Adonis bad Good-night. Bassus. a 3. Voc. ONce Venus Cheeks that sham'd the Morn, her hew let fall; her Lips that Winter had out-born, in June in June look'd pale; her Heat grew cold, her Nectar dry, no Dew she had but in her Eye, the wonted fire and flames to mortifie. When was this so dismal sight? When Adonis Adonis bad Good-night.
Cantus Primus. A 1. 2. or 3. Voc. I Have prais'd with all my skill each curious limb a╌bout thee, so often, and yet do so still, that now each Swain can flout mee; and with nimble taunts can say, Sure this is some Bird of May. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. I Have prais'd with all my skill each curious limb a╌bout thee, so often, and yet do so still, that now each Swain can flout mee; and with nimble taunts taunts can say, Sure this is some Bird of May. Bassus. a. 3. Voc. I Have prais'd with all my skil each curious limb a╌bout thee, so often, and yet do so still, that now each Swain can flout mee; and with nimble taunts taunts can say, Sure this is some Bird of May.
Cantus Primus. A 1. 2. or 3. Voc. WHen doth Love set forth Desire? In prime of Youth, men say. And when doth that again retire? When Beauty fades away! Then you in youth in youth that think on this, taste what the sweets, the sweets of Beauty is. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. WHen doth Love set forth Desire? In prime of Youth, men say. And when doth that again retire? When Beauty fades away. Then you in youth in youth that think think on this, taste what the sweets, the sweets of Beauty is. Bassus. a 3. Voc. WHen doth Love set forth Desire? In prime of Youth men, say. And when doth that again retire? When Beauty fades away! Then you in youth in youth that think on this, taste what the sweets, the sweets of Beauty is.
Cantus primus. TRust the Form of Ayrie things, or a Syren when she sings: Trust the slye Hyenna's voyce; or of all, Distrust make choyce. And believe these sooner then Truth in Women, Faith in Men. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. TRust the Form of Ayrie things, or a Syren when she sings: Trust the slye Hyenna's voyce; or of all, Distrust make choyce. And believe these sooner then Truth in Women, Faith in Men. Bassus. a. 3. Voc. TRust the Form of Ayrie things, or the Syren when she sings: Trust the slye Hyenna's voyce; or of all, Distrust make choyce. And believe these sooner then Faith in Women, Truth in Men.
Cantus Primus. DEer, throw that Flatt'ring Glass away, I have two truer for your turn; these Eyes I mean, wherein you may see how you blaze, and how I burn. II. Ah! could you but as plainly there My Faith as your owne Face descry, You'ld gaze your self no other where, And burn (perhaps) as well as I. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. DEer, throw that Flatt'ring Glass away, I have two truer for your turn; these Eyes I mean, wherein you may see how I blaze, and how you burn. Bassus. a 3. Voc. DEer, throw that Flatt'ring Glass away, I have two truer for your turn; these Eyes I mean, wherein you may see how you blaze, and how I burn.
Cantus Primus. DO not delay me, though you have the pow'r ages to stay me, O do't in an hour. Then do not slight me, O do not reject me! Say not what might be, since thus I affect thee. II. No bodies stirring, O none that can hear thee! Then leave demurring, since I am so near thee. This is the season each Bird is a building, You that have reason, O be not unwilling! Cantus Secundus. a 3. Voc. DO not delay me though you have the pow'r, ages to stay me, O do't in an hour. Then do not slight me, O do not reject me! Say not what might be, since thus I affect thee. Bassus. a. 3. Voc. DO not delay me though you have the pow'r, ages to stay me, O do't in an hour. Then do not slight me, O do not reject me. Say not what might be, since thus I affect thee.
Cantus Primus. A 1. 2. or 3. Voc. IF you can find a heart (Sweet Love) to kill, yet grant me this, to read my latest Will: May all things smile on you, may nothing cross your wish or will, who e╌ver bears the loss. II. May Fortunes wheel be ever in your hand, That you may never Sue, but still Command; And to these blessings, may your Beauty still Be fresh, and pow'rfull, both to save, and kill. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. IF you can find a heart (Sweet Love) to kill, yet grant me this, to read my latest Will: May all things smile on you, may nothing cross your wish or will, who ever bears the loss. Bassus. a 3. Voc. IF you can find a heart (Sweet Love) to kill, yet grant me this, to read my latest Will: May all things smile on you, may nothing cross your wish or will, who ever bears the loss.
Cantus primus. SUre thou framed wert by Art purposely to take my Heart for such looks were e╌ver made onely for that Catching trade. II. All thy Oathes and folded Armes, Sighing Blasts, bewitching Charms; Ev'ry Thought thou tend'st that way Was only lent me to betray. III. False (alass) they are that swear, All Loves bargains are not dear. Know then Flatterer that I must Hear no more than I dare trust. IV. You may promise, swear, and say, What perhaps you mean to day; But e're Morrows Sun be set, You another Love will get. V. Had'st thou left me then untide Thou had'st never been denide, And I wish (for Maidens sake) None e're better bargain make. Cantus Secundus. a 3. Voc. SUre thou framed wert by Art purposely to take my Heart for such looks were ever made onely for that Catching trade. Bassus. a. 3. Voc. SUre thou framed wert by Art purposely to take my Heart for such looks were ever made onely for that Catching trade.
Cantus Primus. A 1. 2. or 3. Voc. GO Phoebus, cleer thy face, collect thy rayes; and from those Stars which to thee Tribute payes, draw back thy light, and in thy greatest pride view my Love, a Star, a Star not yet deifide. Cantus Secundus. a. 3. Voc. GO Phoebus, cleer thy face, collect thy rayes; and from those Stars which to thee Tribute payes, draw back thy light, and in thy greatest pride view my Love, a Star, a Star not yet deifide. Bassus. a 3. Voc. GO Phoebus, cleer thy face, collect thy rayes; and from those Stars which to thee Tribute payes, draw back thy light, and in thy greatest pride view my Love, a Star, a Star not yet deifide.
Cantus primus. I Prethee send me back my heart, since I cannot have thine; for if from yours you will not part, why then should you keep mine? II. Yet now I think on't, let it lye, To send it me were vain, For th' hast a thief in either eye Will steal it back again. Cantus Secundus. a 3. Voc. I Prethee send me back my heart, since I cannot have thine; for if from yours you will not part, why then should you keep mine? Bassus. a. 3. Voc. I Prethee send me back my heart, since I cannot have thine; for if from yours you will not part, why then should you keep mine? FINIS
A Table of the Ayres and Dialogues contained in this Book: With the Names of the Authors of the Words. AS sad Amintor in a Medow lay, 27 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Alas poor Cupid! art thou blind? 16 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Beauty once blasted with the frost, 9 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Black as thy lovely Eye or Hair, 14 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Chloris when e're you do intend, 4 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Chloris now thou art fled away, 10 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Did I once say that thou wert fair, 8 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Fond woman thou mistak'st the marke, 18 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Fain would I love but that I fear, 21 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Forgive me love what I have done, 23 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Go young man let my heart alone, 7 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Go fair Enchantress, 12 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Have you e're seen the morning Sun,; 24 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. In love, away, you do me wrong, 5 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. I prethee Love take heed, 7 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Let me alone, Ile love no more, 15 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Love thee? Goodsooth not I, 17 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Mourn, mourn with me all true, &c. 28 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Oft have I sworn Id'e love no more, 3 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. O now I find tis nought but fate, 11 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. O tell me love, O tell me fate, 26 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. See, see my Chloris, (on the Queens land∣ing at Burlington,) 1 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. See Chloris, see how Nature brings, 20 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Stay ye greedy Merchants, stay, 25 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Take heed bold lover, do not look 8 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Though thou hast Wit and Beauty, 19 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. What wilt thou pine or fall away? 6 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. When shall I see my Captive Heart? 13 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. Why up so early in the World? 22 Dr. HENRY HƲGHES. A Table of the DIALOGUES. Among the Fancies tell me this, 26 - Mr. Robert Herrick. Awake fair Floramell, 36 - Sir. Iohn Mennes Knight. Come Amaryllis I am ty'd by Oath, 33 - Thomas Porter Esquire. I love a Nymph, 32 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. A Table of the short Ayres for 1. 2. or 3. Voyces. Dear, throw that flattering glasse away, 43 - Mr. Henry Reynolds. Do not delay though, 44 - Mr. Henry Harrington. Go Phoebus clear thy face, 47 - Dr. Henry Hughes. I have prays'd with all my skill, 40 - Mr. Henry Harrington. If you can find a heart sweet Love, 45 - Sir. Patrick Abercromy. I prethee send me back my heart, 48 - Dr. Henry Hughes. Once Venus Cheeks, 38 - Dr. William Stroud. Sure thou framed wert by Art, 46 - Mr. John Grange. Trust the Forme of Ayre things, 42 - Mr. Henry Harrington. When doth love set forth desire, 41 - Mr. N. D.
A Catalogue of MUSICK Books sold by John Playford at his Shop in the Temple. Books for Vocal MUSICK. 1. Mr. Wilby's Madrigals of 3, 4, 5, and 6 Voyces. 2. Orlando Gibon's Madrigals of 5 Voc. 3. Dr. Champian's Ayres for 1, 2, or 3 Voc. 4. Mr. Walter Porter's first set of Ayres and Mardrigals for 2, 3, 4, and 5 Voyces, with a Through Bass; for the Organ or Theorbo Lute the Italian way, print. 1639. 5. Mr. Walter Porter's second Set of Psalms or Anthems for two voyces to the Organ or Theorbo Lute: Printed 1657. 6. Mr. William Child. (late organist of his Majesties Chapple at Wind for) his Psalms for three voyces, after the Italian way, to be sung to the Organ, the which are Engraven on Copper plates: Printed 1656. 7. Select Ayres & Diologues by D. Wilson Dr. Coleman, Mr. Henry Lawes, and o∣thers: Printed 1652. 8. Ayres & Dialogues by Mr Henry Lawes, viz. his First Book fol. printed 1653. Second Book fol. printed 1655. Third Book fol. printed 1658. 9. Mr. John Gamble his book of Ayres and Dialogues, printed 1657. 10. A Book of Catches collected and published by J. Hilton, 1651. and now with large ad∣ditions by J. P. printed 1658. 11. An Introduction to the Skill of Musick, Vocal & Instrumental, by J. Playford, the second Edition with additions printed 1658. 12. The Art of Descant or composing Musick in parts, written by Dr. Champian, and enlar∣ged by Mr Christopher Sympson, pr. 1655 Books for Instrumental MUSICK 1. Mr. East Set of Fancies for Viols, contain∣ning 6 Fantazies for two Bass-Viols, 9 Fantazies for two Trebles and a Bass, and 12 Fantazies of 4 parts. 2. Court Ayres, of two parts, Bass and Treble Viols or Violins, containing 245 Ayres Corants and Sarabands, Composed by Dr. Coleman, Mr. William Lawes, Mr. John Jenkins, Mr. Ben. Rogers of Windsor; Mr. Christopher Sympson, and others printed: 1656. 3. Mr. Matthew Lock his Little Consort of Three parts for Two Trebles and a Bass, for Viols or Violins, printed 1657. 4. Musicks Recreation on the Lyra Viol, Containing 100 Ayres, Corants, and Sara∣bands, for the Lone Lyra Viol, with In∣structions for beginners, printed 1656. 5. Cithren & Gittern Lessons, with Plain & easie Instructions for Beginners thereon. 6. The Dancing Master, containing 132 New and choice and Country Dances, Direct∣ing the Learner the manner how to under∣stand the several Figures and Movements thereof; Also the Tunes set over each Dance very useful to such as Practise on the Treble Violin; In which Book is added 42 French Corants, and other Tunes to he plaid on the Treble Violin, printed 1657. All sorts of Rul'd Paper for Musick ready Ruled, also Books of several Sizes ready bound up of very good Ruled Paper; Also very good Inke to prick Musick. Other Books sold at the same place worth Buying. King Charles his Tryal, with his speech on the Scaffold, to which is added severall other Speeches; viz. E. Straffords, Ep. Can∣terbury, Dr. Hamilton, E. Holland, Lord Capels, and severall others, in 8. The Messiah already come, or proofs of Christianity, made good against all unbelieving Jews and Atheists, writtten in the year 1610. by Dr. Harrison in Barbery when he lived there among the Jews, and now newly reprinted 1657. by the last Edition, thereof, printed at Amsterdam, 1636. in 12. Drexclius His Right Use of Inventions, in Eng. 12. — Sir George Sands Paraphrase on the Song of Solomon 4
