12010.5 39960707 150481
HEAVENS SPEEDIE Hue and Cry sent after Lust and Murther. Manifested upon the suddaine apprehending of Thomas Shearwood, and Elizabeth Evans, whose manner of Lives, Death, and free Confessions, are heere expressed. Also some new Additions, concerning the man that was tide to the Gibbeit, with a discovery of those places where such kindof lude people haunt and resort unto, and by what signes and tokens you may discover them: disclosed by this Sherwood a little before his death. Who were Executed the one upon the 14. and the other on the 17. of this Moneth of April 1635. neere to the place where the facts were committed, and he now hangeth in chaines at Ring-Crosse. Written by H. G. their daily Uisiter, at the time of their Imprisonment, and severall dayes of Execution. Published by Authority. LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Okes, dwelling in Well-yard in lit∣tle St. Bartholmews, neare unto the Lame Hospitall gate, 1635.
IF one smite another with an Instrument of Iron, that hee Dye, hee is a Murderer, and the Murderer shall dye the Death. Or if hee smite him with an hand-weapon of wood whereby hee may be slayne, if hee dye, hee is a Murderer, and the Murderer shall dye the Death. Numb. 35. v. 16. two figures hanging off gallows poles Countrey-Tom. Canberry Besse. weapon The forme of the instrument of wood and iron that he used to hurt with.
The Preface. I Haveresumed my Pen which I resolved in this Nature for ever to be silent: But the Common good, and preservation of my Countries welfare, incites me unto this officious ser∣vice. As one that standeth Centinell in the Night unto whom Fidelity and Trust is reposed, and the safety of the whole Army dependeth: (Even so am I) to discover the private and suddaine approaching of the Enemies. Like a Watchman to ob∣serve all commers in and out, into the Gates of the City, to un∣vaile pernicious passengers, which dayes and nights uncessantly passe through the Streets, and in the secret corners of the same privily lurke, and watch an opportunity to cozen, rob, and murther. I presume not to instruct the prudent and wise, that were absurde and ridiculous: But the Levell of my intention is to make the vulgar Ignorants so wise, as to walke warily and circumspectly; which plaine path they may knowingly see, and discerne by this sequent discovery of such notorious offenders, that live upon the spoyles of such Passengers, and Travellers re∣sorting up unto London upon their necessary affaires. A new kind of invented wickednesse, and fearefull mischiefe, but I hope by Gods mercy, and the late exemplary Justice, strangled in the birth, is the Narration of Country Tom, and Besse of Can∣berry, so termed by those of their base disposition. A woman, Oh shame unto her modest tender Sexe! to become a setter, or set on such a brazen face, that upon a man unknowne unto her, shee seazeth in the open Streets, and with her deceitfull smiles, and salutes, so inchants, and incaptivates, and leads him unto slaugh∣ter. Like a decoy Ducke, shee is alone going abroad, but not a∣lone returning, associated with multitudes homeward: The bar∣gaine shee strikes up, and goeth before, to a secret appointed place, upon whom unawares, to the seduced person, attendeth a mercilesse strong Theefe, and most barbarous cruell Murthe∣rer, that at once strikes and slayes: of whose cunning practices, secret snares, and subtil wiles I labour to give all people a light and true insight; God Almighty give it a blessing unto his good pleasure and thy benefit, unto whom I am thy true professed friend during the time of my mortality. H. G.
Certaine pregnant inducements, out of the Holy Scripture against murder and Man-slaughter THe first is, the direct words of Gods Commandements, thou shalt not kill. Exod. 20. WHo so sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For in the image of God hath hee made Man. Gen. 9. 6. HE also that killeth any Man, he shall surely bee put to Death. Leviticus 24. 17. YEE are of your Father the Divell, and the lusts of your father you will doe: He hath been a Murderer from the beginning, &c. Ioh. 8. IF any kill with the sword, hee must bee killed by the sword: Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints. And therefore, LEt all bitternesse, and anger, wrath, and evill spea∣king be put away from you, with all maliciousnesse.
THE EXAMINATION AND Confession of Thomas Sher wood, and Elizabeth Evans. BEFORE I enter into the listes of the en∣suing Relation, there are of these two most miserable Catifes, remarkeable Observations in their severall lives: (lives did I say?) to say so I doe grosly mistake; for al∣though they were living, yet then dead they were in most foule and abhominable sins, and clamorous crimes, that sent hot pursuit after them at all times, and in all places without intermission, to sweepe them from off the face of the earth. The Observations. 1.Note. First, what a viperous brood of Sinnes were in∣gendred, conceived, and brought forth by these Monsters Male and Female: what a Chaine of sins is heere linked, and twisted one to each other. 2. Secondly, the Stygmaticall marke that Heaven did set upon them both in their two severall names. 1. First, Idlenesse the indulgent Mother, cannot she is so indigent of her selfe, be able to give bread, or cloathing to her pampered and poysoned little ones in youth with Sloth, but like a curst Step-mother sends them out of doores, to seeke bread in desolate places. 2.The Origi∣nall of all vi∣ces. Secondly, Sloth or Idlenesse scornes to worke, especially with the hands, for that is not gentilelike: yet worke they see they must for necessities sake, & and a master they have at hand, (the Devill) that safely as they suppose, setteth them on worke. 3. Thirdly, from Sloth springeth forbidden Theft.
4. Fourthly, frō Theft springeth beastly Lust. 5. Fiftly, from filthy Lust they lanch out into the deepe, to Blood-shed and Murder. 6. Finally, thus by degrees they finish their destruction, and the full Cup of Gods heavy wrath and displeasure, forcibly they drinke up. 2. Observation. On both their Names, behold what a Brand is set on them by Heaven: high scorne and derifion; perishing before they perished, forgotten before they were dead: For by the Names of Countrey-Tom, and Canberry∣Besse, they were knowne unto the World: The honest Stocke, and Parents from which they descended, forgetting, and denying. Scripture saith, The memoriall of the wicked shal perish: Let him be wiped out of the Booke of Re∣membrance, and that, because his minde was not to doe good. Thus with them. of God. No feare No thought No care No love And therefore for them, No memory, No losse, No place of Buriall, No mourning, to say, Alas my Brother, or alas my Sister.
The narration of the manner of the course of their lives. AS they confessed, their Names were Thomas Sherwood, and Elizabeth Evans, the one borne in Stafford-shire, there brought up by his Parents, a laborious Husbandman: The other borne in Shropshire, of a very good parentage descended, who carefully for her good education, and future preferment, sent her up unto London, to some friends, who setled her in a good service, as shee confessed at her Death: But unfortunately it happened, that shee grew acquainted with a young man in London, who tempted her unto folly, and by that ungodly act her suddain ruine insued. By reason of such her folly, her Friends failed, and frowned on her: Oh unnaturall blemish! thus to forsake, cast off, and for∣get their owne deare flesh, all meanes of live∣lyhood failing, her left thus destitute, and out of all, credit, friends, money, apparrell, and service: A base loose course of life shee resolves on, and therein as shee freely con∣fessed, continued the space of 4. yeares, un∣till at last shee unhappily happened to get in∣to familiarity and acquaintance with this Countrey-Tom, otherwise Thomas Sherwood; with whom she constantly accompanied day
and night for the terme of a yeare, or there a∣bouts. And having obtained such a mate fit for his owne humour and inclination, secret∣ly these two combin'd, resolv'd, and put in practice their new invented mysterie of Ini∣quity, as followeth. Whensoever they went forth out of their Lodgings, they severed not themselves, but kept within sight one of another alwayes, both hunting for one prey; and frequenting and watching such places, and houses, for persons fitted for their occasion, and to make use of. The places they resorted unto, 1 To Play-houses. 2 To Tavernes. 3 To Innes. 4 To Ale-houses. 5 To the open Streetes. 6 To the Fields. If by chance they did meete with one that had beene that day too busie with the Pot, such an one was fish for their Net: then the brazen-face Strumpet presently claimes ac∣quaintance, that she knew him of long time, whose face she never saw before; and so far∣ther into familiar discourse, and complements they proceed, that further courtesies are desi∣red, and promised in some secret place, to passe betweene them. This new guest, and
acquaintance thus taken up in the way by her, away she hastens with her prize, and carries him unto the Chambers of death: As wit∣nesse the Murthering by such her slights, these Gentlemen of great Note, and good quality, Eminent in place and substance, Master Row∣land Holt a Merchant, and Cittizen of London, whom they murthered in Clarkenwell fields, in Ianuary last past: Likewise Master Thomas Claxton Gentleman, a Lieutenant, in Grayes Inne-fields, the first of this instant April, 1635. Also to another Gentleman, whom they rob∣bed of his Cloake and Hat, by name Master Michael Lowe, at the pitch of the Hill going downe to Hockley Hole in Clarkenwell Parish, at which place they gave him his Deaths wound, and had not ayde upon his out-cry hastily come upon them, they had without doubt slaine him; but within one quarter of a yeare afterwards Master Michael Lowe dyed of the same wound in his Head then by Coun∣trey Tom, so forcibly strooke, that Master Low did then very narrowly escape bleeding to death. The free Confession of Thomas Sherwood, after the time of his apprehending. TWo Moneths, and two Weekes were compleatly expired, before it could bee
knowne what barbarous hand had acted that acinorous Fact on the body of Master Row and Holt found dead, and with blowes very much bruised. This Hound of Hell, that did this cruell mur∣ther, flesht thus, greedily seeketh for more Mans flesh, and thirsteth afresh after more blood. He thought, that in that little space God, and the People had forgotten Mr. Holts blood, as himselfe had; who securely againe starts out, and he with his constant mischie∣vous Companion, to their damnable former resolutions in all Impieties, putteth on the habit, that now to kill a man, (tush) it is not worth the talking of, or taking of notice as so it may be conjectured of them; who in so short a space, to the first murder added the second, the places both of them being with in the sight of each other, which might de∣terre them from such their unnaturall and un∣godly intention and determination, from the shedding of more innocent blood. Upon Wednesday at Night, in Easter weeke last past, 1635. about the houre of Nine, these two inhumane Creatures did meete about the Kings Gate which is by Blomesberry, a pproper costly apparrelled Gentleman, Ma∣ster Thomas Claxton, a Souldier, and Lieute∣nant, who that day and time that this Mon∣ster of her Sexe interchanged discourse, and
with familiar complements (oh lamentable to speake) had drunke to much,The form his weapon which lay se∣cretly in his breeches. as these two vild wretches confessed. Words past betwixt Master Claxton and that Harlot Besse of Canberry, together those two goe, but who followed them both, the poore Gentleman was altogether ignorant, and little suspected; After them both Coun∣trey Tom hasteneth, with a short Trunchin, or Bastinado under his cloake, and findes com∣panying together his Harlot with Master Claxton, whom she had treacherously tray∣ned into Grayes Inne fields, a stones cast wide from the High-way, where what they did, I so charitably am opinionated of the decea∣sed Gentleman, that to their slanderous ca∣lumniations, and traducings concerning him, I give not the least credence. For those to beleeve, whose hands were so foully stained with blood, their breath unworthy to blast the good name, or brand the good that the world conceived of the reputation of such a Gentleman as Mr. Claxton was. Inhumanely with a short Trunchin of Iron which Sher∣wood carried under his cloake by his bloody polluted hands, with this weapon he instant∣ly deprived master Claxton of life, and after that done, they both fell to rishing the poc∣kets, and uncivilly strip, (all humanity laying a side) the body bare and naked, and in that
manner left it, and so fled away. When he had recollected his distracted thoughts and throbbing hard heart, within two houres after, (as he sayd) hee return'd unto the place, to behold that sad spectacle of master Claxtons slaughtered bo∣dy, who (as he said) was not slaine out-right, for he heard him sleepe and snore, and that he had turned himselfe on his Belly after he left him; and had not the winde taken his wounds, he might very well have beene recovered unto health. But perceiving life was extinct in him, flight is become the chiefest comfort, and refuge: Shee flyeth to her old acquainted lodg∣ing, at St. Giles in the fields, and he taketh his course another way. The Morning ensuing, betimes hee dispatcheth a speedy messenger unto his Copartner in mischiefe, appointing his matchlesse Mate to meete with him forthwith in Moore-fields, which according unto his appointment, she did at the place, and time by him prefixed. And observe how thither hee commeth with his understanding so infatuated by the irefull Judge of Heaven, that with the apparrell he commeth on his backe that morning, of the Gentlemans whom he slew the Night before, and waite was layd for such fashioned apparrell, which he wore, and profered to sell in Houndsditch so inconsiderately, suddainly was apprehended. Preparation he was making to travell downe into the Countrey: For he bought a new Pe∣ticoate for her that dearely earned it; and he profe∣red unto Sale the Apparrell which hee never bought, nor paid for; to put himselfe into money like wise, to beare both their charges for their intended journey. But as Equity and Iustice commanded, they both
together were apprehended, and by the Authority of Magistracy presently sent unto Newgate, unto whom thither an industrious, judicious, and discreet Gentleman Master Long, a Commissioner of the Peace, in the County of Middlesex, frequently re∣sorted, and tooke there their severall Examinati∣ons so carefully, punctually, and truely, that both the Malefactors out of their owne mouthes, against themselves confessed the same, totally iust: I touch here but briefly upon them; for I intended not at all omention much of their confessions, for feare my brevity should wrong, or intrench upon his prudent discussion and politicke insinuations into them, by which forcibly he discovered all their Villanies, and made the truth apparant. There was a great Rumour spread, that this Sher∣wood had slaine divers persons else, besides Mr. Clax∣ton, and Mr. Holt, as the woman at Lambeth, that was slaine in her house the last Winter, a Child also; for which two were executed, all these are but flying Tales. To give therefore the World satisfaction, I have here set downe his free and voluntary confessi∣on of such persons he slew, which he confirmed at his Death: besides many great Robberies he was guilty of, whereof master Long hath his free confession. The day of his conviction, I heard it in the Sessions yard reported, that Sherwood had slaine a Gentleman master Michael Low, whose Father was sometimes Lord Maior of London, and himselfe of late collated into the place of Secondary in the Counter of Wood∣streete. I was entreated by master Lowes friends to be in∣stant with Sherwood, to discover if he could, the per∣son
that robbed and wounded him. His Answer con∣cerning that unto me, was thus; that he knew the par∣ties that did it, and if I would at Night repaire unto to him, he would really make them knowne unto me. Hereupon I addressed my selfe unto master Long, and acquainted him what I had done, and that, as I suspected by my discourse with Sherwood, that hee could not be guiltlesse of the Robbing of master Low. That very Evening although late, master Long went to Sherwood to Newgate, where, there as at his death, he sayd, hee with Elizabeth Evans Robbed master Lowe of his Hat and Cloake by the Lady Hattons wall about Michaelmas Terme last: and further said, hee thought that the wounds hee then gave him in his Head with this Instrument, or the like, was the cause of his death: which generally is so voted, because he died within a quarter of a yeare with an Impostu∣mation in his Head, the wound being cured, but in∣wardly rankl'd and festred. For money, he said, hee tooke none at all from him, for that day a little be∣fore he had delivered up all his money unto his Ser∣vant. Freely he confessed the muthering of Master Row∣land Holt in Clarkenwell fields: The murthering of Master Thomas Claxton in Grayes Inne fields, and rob∣bing and wounding of Master Michael Lowe by the Lady Hattons wall: Besides, guilty of many Notori∣ous Felonies and Robberies, committed in Middle∣sex, to a great number. Further, discovering many base persons of his condition, and the dispersed pla∣ces of secret harbouring such unprofitable obnoxi∣ous members unto a State and Common-wealth.
At the place of his Execution, and what he there said, the Relation. THere was no profite at all in his life time to his Countrie, but in his Discoverie and Death, I hope some use, and good service unto the Countrie may redound. His associates, I hope, shall be bani∣shed, which he hath branded, and with them, their Receivers and Harbourers. His Death and hanging up now in chaines, an example to deterie others not so to offend, which I pray God give such a blessing to all the people. Amen Being brought unto the place of his Death, he there minded nothing else, but how to dye, desiring of the people that they would not presse him unto further con∣fessions, to debarre his Soule of better meditations, but to rest satisfied with his confessions, which he had made unto Master Long and my selfe, and nothing else but truth conteined in them, confirmed by a serious asseve∣ration proceeding then out of his mouth. This done hee turned himselfe towards the people, speaking unto them, and praying for them very hartily, withall ad∣monishing all that did see him that day, to beware of Whores, for they were the worst Company in the World, wishing all to beware by his fall, and not to bee seduced, or blind-fold led, as hee was by such be∣witching Creatures, to irrevocable ruine. In the Posture of his Body, hee expressed true Humility, for all the time of Prayer, he prayed kneeling. In his Prayers unto God, he expressed an unexpected ferven∣cy by these words, and short eiaculations unto Hea∣vens mercy seat, sensibly feeling the heavy Burden of
his Sinnes, most hartily implored, at the hands of Almighty God, his mercy and forgivenesse for them I will doe him this right, to expresse the Ardency of his Soule, when the word Mercy was uttered: this Eia∣culation from his owne mouth proceeded, the hearing of the word Mercy, was sweet and savory unto his sorrow full Soule, for in the great anguish of Soule he prayed, and onely relyed saying thus: O Lord my sinnes are so haynous, great and many, if thy Mercy helpe me not, what will become hereafter of my poore Soule. To that I flye unto, and onely trust thy mercy did save the whole World of sinners, and Lord I hope my great sins cannot exceed thy great mercies. After these speeches hee returnes with Hearty requests unto God to for∣give him his harnous sinnes: Hee beseeched all the People that were there present, all to forgive him, whom he had offended, and to ioyne with him in harty prayes unto the Almighty in his behalfe, to forgive him, and to receive his Soule to mercy. After these holy exercises accomplished, the first part of the 51. Psalme was sung, and after that by his request was sung the Lamentation of a sinner. That ended, I asked him if hee was willing to dye, to which hee made answere, most welcome death was unto him; for all the while he lived, his life was as a kinde of Hell unto him, and most uncomfortable. But his death he ioyfully embraced, and mortall life cheer∣fully did surrender up, and sent his soule out of his Body flying, calling on the name of the Lord Iesus to receive him. And all the people speaking to God for him, likewise with their lowd voyces, and strong ac∣clamations, Lord Jesu take mercy on him, sweete Jesu forgive his sinnes, and save his Soule.
Hereendeth the Narration of Thomas Sherwood, who now hangeth in Chaines at Battle-bridge, neare Pancras Church. A briefe observation for all persons, both in Citty and Countrey, to know lewd tempting persons lurking in the Streets and High-wayes, by these tokens following. FIrst, if they be Cheaters, looke if they bee not Gentile-like cloathed: then if they intice you to play at Cards or Dice for a Pot of Beere, or Pint of Wine, beware of such, and if by such tricks you chance to be deluded, take notice of that house. Secondly, if a Woman in the day time comple∣ments with you, and sends after you, a messenger to say, that one would speake with you, beware of such. Thirdly, take heed of such as boldly stand at their doores to intice you, or say, some Friend is in their houses that would speake with you: that is a true to∣ken of some ensuing mischiefe, to picke your poc∣ket, and to bring you unto an Harlot. Fourthly, if any Woman meete you late in the eve∣ning, to aske of you what time of the Night it is, then watch over your purse and person, that your pocket be not pick't. Fiftly, if a Woman come unto you alone, with in∣ticing faire promises of Curtezan courtesies, to meete you in the Fields, or some other private remote pla∣ces, remember the case of Mr. Claxton, and Mr. Holt. Sixtly, remember the Suburbian places, where these abhominable Creatures attend their prey, by day and night. This hath beene often confessed by those who haue used the same course, and dyed for some of these facts.
An intimation of such places, in, and about the City of London, that Harlots watch their op∣portunities to surprise men, confessed by this Malefactor. FIrst, at West Smithfield within the Railes, and Duck-lane end. Second, and thirdly, by the Tavernes in Smithfield, and Cookes shops in Pye-corner, and Cloath-faire, a great harbor for such. Fourthly, by Smithfield Pond, and sheepe-pens. Fiftly, by the little conduit in Cheapside in the evening Sixtly, St. Antholins Church when the shops are shut up. Seventh, and lastly, remember London-bridge, o∣ver which you must necessarily travell into the Sou∣therne parts: Beware you goe not by Night with a cloak-bag, but in your hand, nor behind you on hors∣backe, lest you be iustled against the wall by a cut∣purse in the habite of a Gentleman and so lose it: Be∣ware likewise of your Hat and Purse in a fray stirred up purposely in the streete, to allure people into con∣cursions, in plaine to speake, Pick-pockets deceite, and cosenage. In Middl. towards Pancras Church, in the fields: At Cow-crosse towards the Butchers, at Bloomesberry in St. Giles in the fields, beware of such like offenders; and so much of my advertisment unto all passengers comming in, and going out of the Sub∣urbs of the Citty of London. Likewise at this Sessions, there were executed for coyning of Six-pences, and Shillings, two French-men and an English∣man, who were drawne and hanged for that fact of Treason; a iust reward for such wicked persons, that usurpe the Kings Roy∣all prerogative.
Now to the particular Narration of Elizabeth Evans the impious Fellow-mate of Thomas Sherwood. COncerning her, I have very little matter offered to dilate; I found this Sherwood and her so different in their severall confessions unto me, that I wonderfully admired, that two alwaies unseparable in such prosecu∣tions of euill, should be so contradictory one unto each other. But I easily reconciled the doubt, in the particu∣lar observation in their two severall manners of dying. A Woman she was that died, for whose weake and ti∣merous Sexe sake, something must bee allowed tollera∣ble: Yet something I found in her worthy of note, at the time of her confession, a perfect hate, and excla∣mation against all Theeves, which caused her destructi∣on. And furthermore in signe of such her detestation, of such unholy courses, proceeded from her mouth a most serious request unto all then present assembled, advising all poore simple women to marry an honest man, though but a Ragge-gatherer, rather then a lewd man or a Theefe, rendring the reason of such her earnest admo∣nition, because an honestman may make an evil woman turne from her evill waies, but it was hard for an euill man, to make a wicked woman good, with divers other admonitions to the wonder of the slanders by, considering what a life shee had lived in.
Concerning what shee said at the place of Execution. ONe thing shee here expressed very remarkable, concerning her old Companion in Mischiefe, Thomas Shearwood; who on Candlemas day last pressed amongst the Jurers, at the Christopher Taverne in Turnmill Street alias Turnebull Street to view the dead Corps of Master Rowland Holt, by him murthered, Sherwoods Nose immediatly gushed out with such issues of blood, that he feared there by to be discovered, and re∣turning unto her said, I have suffered such a thing this day about Master Holt, wee must of necessity, leave of this course of life. I found her with the feares of Death very much perplexed and amazed, distractively casting her eyes here, and there, at last shee espies the high Elmes neere which place Master Claxton was slaine, and fetcht a deepe sigh and said, would to God I had never seene that place. I found both Shear∣woods, and her Confession to agree both in the Murthering of Master Holt, Master Claxton, and Master Low, onely they differed, in the striping of Master Claxton; for Shear∣wood in the receiving of the blessed Body and Blood of Jesus Christ with her, then affirmed to her face, that she helped him, for to take Master Claxtons cloathes off, she there confidently, denyed the same, and confirmed at her Death, whereunto as also unto other base aspersions on the dead, I give no credence, thus of her who died very penitent, and after her execution was conveied to Barber Surgions Hal for a Skele∣ton having her bones reserved in a perfect forme of her body which is to beseene, and now remaines in the aforesaid Hall; of whom I hope, God did take mercy.
A generall Admonition. DEare Countrey men, what I have heere done, is intended for a generall good, Cautionary for all. 1. Parents. 2. Children. 3. Masters. 4. Servants. 1 Parents, cast not off your Children, neither leave them to shift in the wilde world in their Youth, knowing how subiect Youth is unto temptation, and to be seduced in the times of necessitie, and extreame want. 2 Children, obey your earthly Parents: unto such as obey, God hath promised his two-fold blessing: first, Life tempo∣rall: Secondly, Life eternall. 3 Masters terrestriall, be good to your earthly Servants, knowing yee have all one Master, which is Christ in Heaven, that shall one day judge you for the good and evill yee have done. 4 Servants, obey your earthly Masters, and the Masters autho∣rity is knowne by obedience to their Commandments: Who∣soever resisteth, receiveth the greater condemnation. One thing more I will commend unto you, the mo∣desty of a milke-woman, in finding him naked cove∣reth him with her approne. CONCLUSION. Thy God feare to offend, To him doe dayly pray, He will thee send an happy end, And live with him for aye.
The Habeas corpus, or Remove of Countrey Tom into the Countrey. GOod Reader, to the preceedent, give leave to adde these succeeding true Relations: Since the exe∣cution of the horrid and unheard of paire of Murde∣rers, the Coy-duck, or divellish allurer to sinne and confusion, was dissected, and her dryed Carkase or Sceleton of Bones and Gristles is reserv'd, in propor∣tion to be seene in Barber Surgeons Hall. As for the dismall accomplisher of her damned plots, hee was hang'd in Chaines neere Pancras Church, being a iust reward for his vile attempts. One thing of note I here speake of; Two Gentle∣men comming early in a Morning that way, were a∣stonished at a sad obiect, committed by a company of villaines: Oh pitty! still running on to more mis∣chiefe, having such a fearefull spectacle before their eyes as Countrey Tom, which should rather have frighted and hindred them from doing this bold and insolent act upon a Butcher comming that way, though late; who said only thus, that it was no matter if all such rogues were serv'd so, which words when these lurking villaines heard, presently seized on him, and tooke his cloathes, and bound him na∣ked to the Gibbet with a gagge in his mouth, bid∣ding him watch the Coarse: but as this poore man said, he lost no money; because he had a little be∣fore bestowed it other wayes; and thus he was ham∣per'd by a cursed crue, who lurked there-abouts for their prey.
But this was not the reason of his remoove; for the adjoyning Inhabitants much damnified and an∣noyed by his hanging there, laboured and obtained the same. And indeed the chiefest cause, was the spoile and depopulating the growing fields there a∣bouts, stript of all fences; and the grasse trodden downe, and made levell by the infinite confluence of all sexes from all parts, which caused the Farmer and those that tooke grounds, to petition to the King and Councell for redresse, who out of pitty and compassion, graciously granted the Habeas cor∣pus, and remove of the said murdering Monster which (to avoid confusion of Spectators) they per∣formed in the Night, carrying the hated spectacle to the place assigned them, to the Ring-crosse be∣yond Islington: where those that are not yet satisfi∣ed, may see Country Tom got farther into the Coun∣trey. Thrice remov'd, first to Grayes Inne-fields, next neere Pancras, last, to Ring-crosse, to paralell his base inhumane Murders in divers distinct places. —Nec enim lex iustior ulla, Quam necis artifices arte perire suâ. Sceletos, quasi cadaver assicatum, est ossium corporis humani invicem cohoerentium universarum univer∣sa compactio. FINIS.
