12913 99900585 132216
PHILADELPHVS, OR A Defence of Brutes, and the Brutans History. Written by R. H. Imprinted at London by Iohn Wolfe. 1593.
TO THE MOST NOBLE LORD, the Lord Robert Deuoreux, Earle of Essex, of her Maiesties priuie Counsell, Knight of the Princely Order of the Garter. RIght Noble, my verie especiall good Lord, I present nowe vnto your Lordship, this historicall Essay, in print, which I offered before in wri∣ting, eyther because I am vrged to this dutie by your most honoura∣ble munificence toward me, or be∣cause I cannot prouide my other exercises written of greater and grauer matters. Yet I take the defence of mediocritie for a matter of some weight, both in this historie of Brute, which is made litigious, and in any other position of much lesse importance, euen of haire it selfe; insomuch as mediocritie cannot be disa∣lowed. It is manifest, that some haue written more of Brute then behoued them, but some haue behaued themselues vnkindly against Brutans, and done lesse for them, then they should. They are on both partes, too learned for me, I am not worthy to be their moderator, in this question of Brute: howbeit, as they haue freely deliuered their opinions with out any stop, so would I shew the good will I beare to the one part, without any hatred to the other. God forbid,
that diuersitie of studies, should bring forth a diuorce∣ment of heartes among neighbours and friendes: it were better no bookes at all were written, then to a breake the bond of vnitie, and loosen the yoke of obedience by them, seeing wee may liue better without them, men without these. I hope, I am cleane from any abuse in this present trea∣tise, I will euer honour strangers, for their good qualities of learning and life: but I must not hold my hand and pen still, when I see them too busie, in tossing our histories and actes, at their owne pleasure, which appertaine not vnto them: they cannot stay mee from my studie, more then I kept them from this practise. I fauour the historie of Brute, without regard of their disfauour, as they dislike it, without respect of other mens liking. I cannot in loyaltie defend euery Brute, but I may without any breach of du∣tie, defend this great Brute of Brutanie. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your most excel∣lent good Lordship, to accept of this mightie Captaines present defence, euen as your worthy honour, vseth to al∣lowe the reasonable sutes of approued men, which are like to do God good seruice, and this kingdome. Thus trusting to your Lordships magnificent, & sweete fauour heerein, I most heartily commend your true re∣nowmed honour, to the blessed estate of immortalitie. Your Lordships in all thankfull dutie. Richard Haruey.
A DEFENCE OF BRVTES HISTORIE. MAster Buchanan, though some call you the trumpet of Scotland, and some the noble Scholler, yet I will be so bold, as answere your larum, touching the history of mighty Brute: because your inuec∣tiue treatise, is in trueth, more fac∣tious, then effectuall. You and such hotbraines, haue deuised a faction, and diuorce∣ment of opinions, (I dare say) without fruit, and I be∣leeue, without cause: For my part, your deniall is not able once to moue me, and your reasons against Brutes historie, shall neuer perswade any sufficient reader, to agree with you, and remoue the markes and circuites, that Geffry Monmouth hath set downe. Yet by reading your allegations and probations, we may best areede, who is most credible, he or you, a Monmouth or a Scot, a Moonke or a Trauailer, and if neither barrell be better her∣ring, then by their wordes they shalbe saued from blame, and by their wordes they shalbe damned, sayth the wise Iudge: wherefore I take you of your worde, and I say: that We seeke no Noilitie, from Brute, we count not of our forefathers noblenesse, but of our owne. Nobilitie I can tell you, goeth not by byrth and riches in Brutany,
but by vertue: it standeth not vpon antiquitie, but vp∣on right: we euer say, that noblenesse is a superioritie or dominion in vertuous actes, and that other thinges without vertue are but minoritie and subiection, and colours, and naught worth. We cannot thinke that Brute was atricide: let them that iudge him so, proue him so. I passe not for that he hath done aforetime in other landes, but I onely respect his Actiōs in this Iland. Yet, if he were in that huge and maine fault, hee may well enter into Sanc∣tuarie, till you and yours haue proued the deede volun∣tary. Mishap is not rashnesse, chaunce is not counsell, there is a folly in meeting an arrowe, there is no sinne in shooting it at a beast in the forrest. We compare not Brutus with Romulus, no more then we compare your Chronicle now with this that shall write one 200. or 300. yeares heereafter: but this is your florish, to no other purpose, then to shew reading, where it doth no good, and may do some little hurt to a young Reader; who by your wordes will go nigh to say, that Brute and Romulus are much of a time, because you set them together in a Chronicle, which should re∣port that is past, or record that is present onely. We are not Brittons, we are Brutans: we account not Brute our authour & founder, seeing here dwelt as Noble men afore Brute as euer since that time. No good coun∣try or bad, hath been without noble men from the be∣ginning, and to let go all Histories, I dare say this word, That nature hath made as auncient a genera∣tion of men vpon the earth, as of other creatures, and of chiefe men in their companies at first, aswell as of o∣ther chiefe creatures in their kindes and their heardes
at first, yea and much rather of men, because of more go∣uernment and order. We speake not of Brutes wealth and language, be∣fore he came hither, neither can you proue, that hee had not wealth inough to serue his vses, or tongue enough in euery place of his trauell. Cannot an Egle flie from place to place, and take heere a lambe, there a kid, here a goose, there a swanne, vnlesse hee can speake the lan∣guage of lambes, and kids and geese and swannes? what traffique should a venturer haue with any peo∣ple, when he hath set all the earth or one part therof be∣fore him, to make himselfe king in some place or other? He will not aske, what price beareth your marchaun∣dise? but a Brute will haue it for taking: hee will be a∣boue your commercies, and throw you into the mar∣shes, if you giue him not whatsoeuer you would not, whensoeuer he will. What if the Romans coulde scarsely set foote in this I∣land, when they were in their greatest fortune and strength? could not Brute therefore possibly get into it? how know you, whether his natiuitie, or his good hap, or his maner of entering, were not better or happier then Caesars? If one company cannot enter by force, cannot ano∣ther company enter by wit and fairer meanes? It is not number, nor money that make a Conquerour, it is good successe, which commeth of a good forecast, that is in a Grecian more then in a Roman, and why not in Brute more then in Caesar? If Brutes Chronicles had been preserued aswell as Caesars, I doubt not of this matter and of Brutes immortalitie in all writinges, then Caesar had beene halfe a Brute.
We haue not any thing heere for Italians, till wee be serued our selues, we are onely in Brutanie and among Brutans. Let other men haue leaue to speake of Saturne and Latium, of Ianus and Ianiculum, and other thinges before Brute, who might be among his neighbours, as singular and fortunate a man for foresight, as Noah was among the men of former times. It is no reason that Brute coulde not be giuen to trauell, because the Italians were not giuen to trauelling, among whome you say hee dwelt afore. So you may deny almost eue∣ry actors Actes, that hath liued admirably in the worlde. It may bee, that Brute and is fellowes swornemen were worth all the rest in liuely and manly action abroad, as Abraham and his company were singular among the Assyrians, and proued the rare man of the world. Wee say not, that Brute walked on the Sea, or came hither by land, and therefore your Alpes, and your Her∣cules haue no present vse, but as table talke to passe time, and make a noyse. Yet men hauing liued more then 2800. yeares from Adam to Hercules vppon the earth, and Comer the sonne of Lamech, and Cham and Sabati, and other great men lying in Italy before Hercu∣les was borne, and seeking out the partes of the earth euery way, we can beleeue reasonably, that they pas∣sed ouer the Alpes before him. Or if Hercules must needes be the onely man, what a single reason is it? that Brute might not follow him that way, because Hercules onely had gone before. I had rather conclude thus: Hercules made a way through the Alpes so easily, that any hardy trauailer might followe him that way. Since Brutes time the Alpes haue been passable enough, and the
Gaules haue ouerrunned them; and other people trode on them, your Adhuc alienis is somwhat vnskilfully writ∣ten of you. Truely I would Tamerlane were euen now here, to answere your Ocean argument: hee could tell you, that his multitude of rude Scythians and shepheardes could do more Actes then all the fine gay troopes and rankes of Baiazete, that it is no good consequent which you bring forth, as if the Albane shepheardes and clownes might not be as valiant in vanquishing the Alpes, as the Carthagi∣nian souldiers: vnlesse it be an infallible Item, that the iolliest men are euer greatest actors by sea and land: your argument à maiori is easily set à minori in this ma∣ner: The lightheaded Grecians and such other haue pas∣sed the Ocean, much more is it probable, that the manly and most hardy Albanes haue done the same thing, ha∣uing neither lesse wit by comparison of their Actes, nor lesse courage in any point. The actions of one doe not proue any thing of another, but of that one pro or contra: or else howe should we haue argumentes of contradic∣tories, of vnequals, of vnlikes, of diuisions? or if your reason be an historie, I see no cause, why mine historie of Brute, may not be credited aswell as yours of the Mas∣silians, who were long enough after Noahs Arke and o∣ther shippes of other men, I beleeue, to haue some aunce∣stors in shipmastry and many fellowes. He that goeth aspying goeth aspeeding: opportunitie maketh men doe straunge workes: haue you neuer heard of players and iesters, that by deuises of games and pastimes haue obtained very great victories? Remember man, I say, the famous and strong name of Brute, and consider the nature of warly trauailers, and neuer stand so stiffly
in your naked coniecture. How knoweth Buchanan, that there was no such re∣nowmed Brute in the world before the bannishment of the Tar∣quines in Rome? might there not be another Brute 500. yeares before this counterfeit Brute of Rome? or was there none such, are you sure, because the Roman and Greeke Historians of other nations, forsooth, haue made no such record? It is no sufficient reason, to carry Bru∣tans from their owne old Registers by the wordes and silence of outlandish writers. You knowe and I am sure, there are no meane matters left out of prophane Histories, which are in ecclesiasticall Histories, and ne∣uerthelesse allowed. The more they leaue out the glo∣rie of our land, the more I presume by the nature of for∣raine countries, that our land was enuied, because it was most glorious. I tell you I cannot thinke it ne∣cessarie, that he which is named Brute in our Chronicle must bee so named in other Chronicles: the same man may haue diuers names seuerally set downe in seueral bookes of seuerall languages, and as for this most No∣ble Brute, it is like enough, he chaunged his name, as he chaunged his habitation. You may easily say, A Moonke was the deuiser of this Brute, you will say, that he played the Poet, that hee carued & painted him in this maner: but you cannot yet proue in this hast, that the Moonke or student had not good proofe in his readings of this Brute, that he had not his Authour for them. It is out of question, that manie books haue been written but once, and that many such singular bookes haue been lost for want of coppies, and it is probable, that this Moonke had some olde monu∣ment or booke, which may bee in Cambry to this day,
though Buchanan and Liuy neuer heard of it, and may be as true of Brute, as their olde Scottish Thinges and Ro∣mish Decades are accounted true by their fauourers and countrimen. If the historie of Brute be not true, be∣cause they haue not seene the proofe thereof, no more is their historie true, because we haue not seene the proofe thereof, which was acted so many yeares ere we were borne: thus it is as lawfull to coniecture for Brute as a∣gainst him, seeing he is but denied onely by coniectures and probabilities. But what is this you say? are mens mouthes stopped with a maske and shewe of Religion? cannot men tell what to say against A shewe and appearance? doe men that name the heathenish religion account it religion in Chri∣stendome? I warrant you, the Moonke was so far from purposing, to stop mens mouthes with the idolatry of Diana, that he neuer esteemed halfe the tenth part so much of her, as Demetrius did for his profite in Ephesus, and I dare say, that the Religious Authour thought it no reli∣gion, or imagined, that the Brutanes would so esteeme it, but onely named Diana, as Castor and Pollux are named of S. Luke the Euangelist. Your Synchronisme of Faunus, of Sybilla and Praene∣stine is to no purpose: it seemeth by this History of Brute, that Dianaes Oracle was not vnknowne, as you seeme to a∣uouch. But heere you will take the Moonke at a dead lift, as you suppose, and yet I tell you me-thinkes you and very bookishly and literally wise, not reasonably and discoursiuely. Must Diana needes speake latine, be∣cause this Historian reporteth her Oracle in latine? Are you not aduised, how many things are writtē in Greek and Latine of the Beginning of the world, though there
were neither Greeke nor Latine 2000. yeares and more after the Creation of heauen and earth? and such a rea∣son might partly be brought against your selfe in your first king Fergusius, if I would follow so needlesse a cause, in comparing his time with the times of the latine tongue, wherein you write of him. You might haue done well, to proue that the Moonke saith, howe Brute receiued his answere of Diana, and asked her Counsell in latine speach, which because you haue not proued, your Horatius and your Saliare carmen, and your Numa, and your wordes are but winde. Cannot an Historian report the Orati∣ons of the Indians, of the Germans, of the Numidians in la∣tine, vnlesse the Numidians & Germans and Indians spake latine? were the Orations in your Chronicles, Master Buchanan, spoken first in latine? So your Penitus obliti and ne tenue quidem, and other bootlesse words are vain and little, or nought worth in this present question. Tis not euer true that hath a quidem. I cannot certainly say, that the Brutans language was vsed in Italy in the dayes of Brute: but I may well say, notwithstanding your trifling mycterisme, that if the Oracles and men had spo∣ken it, they had been neuer the worse, nor the language neuer the better. But you were in a running thought and supposed your selfe subtle enough, when you had brought your inuention to a disiunctiue proposition, with much effect, I promise you, when it tendeth hi∣therto, euen to proue, that the Brutan speach then was not the same our Brutans vse now in Cambry. Yet by your leaue, Buchanan, it is no proofe against this language, in that many tongues appeare in it in your time, seeing Brutanisme might at first bee as full of diuerse tongues by reason of much trauell as it is nowe, and then
your argument hath nor vse nor force in your question: and in trueth, though Scots be called generally false, yet Buchanan may be true: so Moonks may dreame dreames, and yet Geffry Monmouth write a trueth. Why should not a Moonke be as credible as a Paedanty? or a solitarie student vnderstand that he readeth as much as a busie schoole∣master? or a Cambrian read Chronicles which a Scot ne∣uer saw? or Geffry be as plaine and verifiable as Bucha∣nan, being not so deep ouer head and eares in verses and Poetry as he? yet now at last the George confesseth, that his owne reasons are but minims, and minute persecuti∣ons and slender thinges, and is faine to say, that the Moonke himselfe seemeth to acknowledge his fiction, though it appeareth not so by the Moonkes wordes. Thus it can∣not be proued euidently, that the history of Brute is a fai∣ned and poeticall narration, vnlesse it be first proued, that there were no more Intelligences and Registers in the life of Geffrey then of George, and that Geffrey had no Au∣thours for his defence, because George cannot knowe them. If nothing be true in one country which hath not suffragees from another Countrey, I cannot tell what historie may stand irrefragably by this determination, no not when we read the auncientest partes and primi∣tiue recordes of best historiographers. Was there not an Apostle Paul vnder Nero, because Suetonius and Taci∣tus name none such? much Iustine teach the Iewes howe to thinke of the deliuery of Israel? But I omit those in∣stances which might be giuē against you, because in a question I regard the argument more then the illustra∣tion thereof, and so should you too by your leaue, for all your 24. yeares trauell. Are they malè callidi, and is vanitie in them that call
Diana an huntresse and say, that in the time of Brute Diana was accounted a Goddesse? I confesse, I cānot see, how they are lewdly and fraudulently vaine that write thus: then it remaineth, that you make these words good, if you can: The chast body the painfull bodie, but labour and conti∣nencie in mans body breede a kinde of diuinitie in man. I pray, when you in your Psalmes, as they call them yours, deuise the most kindes of verses that you can, do you confesse, that Dauid made them at first in so many sortes of verses as you haue written them? surely you will denie it. Iwis, it is not necessarie, that Brute and Diana should speake verses, because Geffry Monmouth recordeth their wordes in verses. But, let be, suppose they did speake in these or in other verses, then he, doubtlesse, or some other for him translated their words into hexameters and pentameters, as you see. What vanitie or falshood is on either side? neuer thinke to carry it away with threed∣bare wordes, or to leade your Readers where you list. A wise perswader are you: is Diana called Loxias in your bookes? or if Apollo be oblique and crooked, and in∣tricate in his answeres, must Diana needes be so? or if Dianaes Priest be commonly obscure & foulded vp in speach, cannot it be, that hee should be perspicuous at anie one time? are you to appoint him how to speake so manie yeares after his death? I pray, if Pythia be euer doubtfull, and oblique, because shee is so for the most part, what doubtfulnesse or obliquitie is in this aunswere? You are come to my rich temples, Lycurgus beloued of God and of all that inhabite the heauenly houses, I am in doubt whe∣ther I should call thee a mon or a God, but I much rather beleeue, that thou art a God, Lycurgus, as Herodotus hath recorded in his Clio: and what ambiguitie is in that An∣swere
which Pythia gaue vnto Craesus in the same booke of Herodotus? what saye to Aristodocus in the same booke, who neither asked in verse nor was answered in verse? what saye to them of Marea and Apia, which asked Ham∣mons Oracle in prose, and were answered in prose? as it appeareth in Euterpe. What saye to the Doue of Dodo∣na, or the Oracle of the cittie Butis giuen to Pheron that spake in prose? in the same booke: to let passe such an∣sweres a good manie giuen without verse or ambiguitie: Or if they were giuen in verse being nowe written o∣therwise with allowance of Readers, what hath the Moonke done amisse in the maner of these verses? he may aswell register prose in verse, as they register verse in prose. As for your Opinor, this may bee well answered in your verball manner, O pinor narras? non rectè accipis: you know the maker Terentius. I that am young may as∣well bestowe my labour to answere you, as you being olde may obiect so vnfruitfully. Howe is that proued a manifest fiction that this Iland at Brutes comming was a wil∣dernesse, being yet so this daie still in manie places? Can two Gyantes and their two families, or so manie Giantes as make an Armie, so fill this countrie, that it shall not rightly be called a desart? when they are all in one shire, the other shires are verie desarts: when they being so few, are scattered into so manie shires betweene the Orcades and the Ile of Wight, how can they so fill it, that it may not be well named of Diana a desart? in comparison of the Cities and Kingdomes in other landes, where she abode most. The name of Gogmagog is no more monstrous then the name of Onosconcoleros, nor Tentagol more vast and strange
then Nabuchodonozor, neither shall those Names preiudice the Historie more with vs then these Names haue done with other in the Historie of the Assyrians. Thus I may verie iustly and reasonably maintaine and vphold the historie of Brute, for anie thing that master Buchanan hath said against it. Concerning Dioclesian and his daughters, I haue willingly lost all that delight of reading and answering, although I see euidently, that this Historie which you account a tale may be defen∣ded for ought you haue alledged. Yet master Buchanan taketh much vpon him and chargeth some bodie with impudencie and a lye, and plaieth the Terrible schoolema∣ster, and yet when he hath done his best and his worst, it is not proued, that 24. yeares were not sufficient for Brutes retinue, and the inhabitantes of this land, togi∣ther with other of their kindred that resorted hither and remained here, to replenish the Country with men of War, to erect three kingdomes, to accomplish great Actes by sea and land. Let him looke into the kingdomes of Grecia in olde time, and he shall finde fewer men in a kingdome then Brute alone with his companie might raise in 24. yeares: let him remember the huge kingdomes of three men, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet: let him consider, that mightie Actions are not done by money and number, but by industry and vertue: let him proue, eyther that this Generation of Brute cannot possibly be true, or else cease to spend his time with opinions and likelihoodes, that may be repelled with the like againe: rusty Antiquities more reuerend then scou∣red Nouelties. Yet, we are not desirous, that Brute should be our Conquerour, we wish not subiection to him, or anie other outlandish Nobleman: we had rather winne the land that this Brute came from, and subdue it vnder
our feete: but when Brutans haue published an Historie and allowed it a long time, we would not haue a Scot so presumptuous, as to controll it, much lesse to reiect it, as this one Scot hath done very rawly and vnaduisedly. So I leaue you, master Buchanan, and wishe you to sacrifice vnto the wiser dimi-goddesse Palinodia. TO HIS MOST LOVING BRO∣ther, Master Gabriell Haruey, Doctor of Lawes. WHen I saw, both how iestingly, and serious∣ly our Historie of Brute was reiected of some auncient and newe bookmen, I tried their maruellous iestes and reasons, and felt them too weake to moue me. Now my Answere is on foot with their Reply, I may iustly hold mine owne, and stand on Brutes side against all challengers that are or will come. I saye, Puissant Brute is no fabulous Prince, but a true example, no counterfeit man, but a corporall possessor of this Iland; let them saye what they can. With this minde I haue here ta∣ken one Essay of our Chronicles in the best historicall Me∣thode that I could make out of the best Historiognomers. I am sure, any Historie is easier for memorie, and readier for vse this way, then any other way, which I haue hither∣to seene in other mens Collections, Tables, Directories, or any such other inuentions: yet as it is proofe, so ap∣proue
it, or reproue it; I am not wedded to myselfe, nor tyed to any sect in the world, but heartily wish euery man to take euerie thing as it is, not as it is made of this and that scribler or pratler, which can tell better, howe to play the mocking Ape, then the iust controller. Almightie God defend you dayly, and amend them one day: you know my minde in all my matters, and that I would those petite Momes had better manners: the schollers head without moderation is like the merchantes purse pennilesse with∣out all credite: I desire that euerie student may smell as the Lillies of Salomon, and that euerie wilde Lilly may be set in his Gardens. I saye, out Hemlocke, out Bramble, out Weedes, and let the bloud of furious Aiax himselfe, saith Ouid, be turned into a pleasant herbe. I write not this, to flatter any that should seeke after me, but to follow you, good Brother, in your last Letters, in whose Example I euer yet dwelt, and am like to dwell, euen till my Soule shall dwell in the Commonwealth of Heauen. I cannot bid you farewell in a better minde, and in this respect I set me rest here, I remember your counsell, and beginne my Essaye. 1592. the 14. of Iune. Your louing brother R.H.
AN ESSAY, OR TASTE OF THE first part of our Brutan Chronicles. The Histo∣ry of Brute and Bru∣tans set∣teth forth. Principal∣ly and an∣tecedently their per∣sons, & in them shew¦eth the geneallogy or issue which they had. artes which they studied. actes which they did. This part of History is na∣med Anthropo∣logy. Accessori∣ly and con∣sequently the times when they beganne to Rule. How long they ruled. This part of History is na¦med Chrono∣logy. places in the Iland, of Brutany; This part of History is named Topography out of the I∣land of Brutany; This part of History is named Topography When a man is borne into the world, he learneth some thing or other: by learning he is brought to do somwhat: but as all deeds are done in the compasse of a place, so are they bounded with their beginning and ending.
THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE of Brute. BRute the first begat three sonnes of Inno∣gen: the first was Locrine the second Camber, the third Albanact. Locrine the eldest sonne begat Madian of Guendolin and Habren of Elstrid which had a skinne as cleere and white as I∣uory, or Lillies, or Snow it selfe. Madian begat Memprise, Memprise begat Ebranke, Ebranke a very goodly person among thousands and strong, begat Brute the second, and nineteene sonnes and thirtie daughters: these fiftie children were borne vnto him of twentie women. Brute the second begat Leyl, Leyl begat Hurdibras, Hurdibras begat Bladud, Bladud begat Leyr, Leyr begat three daughters, the first was Gonorill, the second Ragan, the third Cordeil, but left no sonne behind him. Cordeil the youngest daughter, as it came to passe succeeded hir father, but Morgan and Conedag her two nephewes deposed her: Conedag the sonne of Ragan be∣ing prouoked by Morgan the sonne of Gonoril his coosin german slew him in battell and ruled alone, and begat Riuall, Riuall begat Gurgust, and Sisill Gurgusts brother succeeded Gurgust, and Iago Sisils next kinsman succee∣ded
Sisill, and Kymer, Iagoes brother succeeded Iago, and begat Gorbodug, Gorbodug begat Ferrex and Porrex of Wy∣den, whose generations and issues are vnknown to vs, as the issues of Ebranks nine and fortie children are not knowne very well, nor the generations of Camber, of Al∣banact, of Morgan, of Gurgust, of Sisill and of Iago. Thus the eighteene Rulers that came of Brute the first are come to an end, as a tale that is tolde in sport, or as a tree that is digged vp in earnest. Yet neyther seuen Polydores more, nor ten Buchanans shall perswade me, that this Genealogy is a fabulous Tale. Let Poly∣dore get him to Vrbin in Italy, and Buchanan hye him to Buchany in Scotland: it becommeth not these outlandish intruders to vsurpe the censure of the Brutan Histories: if they looke well about them they haue enough to doe at home: we neede none of their gossiping cups: but they are dead, and their historicall iudgementes are in∣terred with them: if any man will raise them from the graue, who will beleeue their mortified Ghosts? A Bru∣tan may iustly except against the witnesse of an Italian, or a Scot: Ielousie and malignity are two blinde guids: Then hold your owne, ye braue Brutans, and guide your selues, your owne heades are fittest for your owne bo∣dies.
THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Brute, and his Brutans were in their Vertues and Vices. Their ver∣tue and Tempe∣rance ap∣peared in Friend∣ship and commu∣nion Betweene man & wife in marriage. Locrine mar∣ried Guendolin: Leyr married his two eldest daughters with two Dukes: Cordeil was married to Aganip Duke of the Gaules for her womanly vertues, and vertuous woman∣hoode. Talke and con¦ference, Betweene superiour and inferiour, the ruler and the subiect. Guendolin after her husbandes death liued contentedly and louingly with her kindred and acquaintance in Cornewall till shee dyed. Brute the second carried euer a greene shield with him, to signifie, what a minde he did carry withall, euen a mind and desire, to haue all thinges grow and florish like the fruitfull fieldes vnto a ioyful haruest: whereupon hee was named Greeneshield, a Prince gentle toward all men, and merciful to the needie. Leyl liued peaceably in his young dayes. Hurdibras allayed the factions and quarrels that hee found among his peo∣ple, and of vnquiet men made them very quiet. Leyr liued moderately with his sub∣iectes. Cordeil behaued her selfe so louingly and paciently, that she would not punish the two sonnes of Maglan and Hennine for their fathers: she thought it no reason, to plaister one bodie for an other bodies sores, to beate
one for anothers fault. Riual liued quietly. Gurgustus kept his countrey in rest and weal∣thy peace by some learned counsell. Betweene the father and the childe: Cordeil be∣ing euer modestly and maydenly shamefa∣ced, either would not or could not flatter her father Leyr with needlesse phrases and vain othes, but answered him mildly and simply without ostentation or deceite, that she loued him as her naturall father with an obedient euer and thankfull hearth vnfainedly. Betweene two coosins: When Conedag was in∣formed by his olde trustie friendes, and tolde from his mortall ennemies, that Morgan be∣gan roundly to make open warre agaynst him, he himselfe desired peace by letters, and sought it with all good meanes otherwise by Embassadours, he was so vnwilling to shed bloud, if he might chuse, or euen to carry armour against his kinsman.
THIS WAS THEIR TEMPERANCE in Deedes and Wordes. Their vice and Intem¦perance ap¦peared in Wordes: First, Gonoril told Leyr, she loued him more then her owne soule: then Ragan sayd, she loued him vnspeakably. Leuity: When Locrin saw Elstrid, he would haue re∣iected Guendolin: Memprise liued loosely, and spent most of his time in pastime and licentious games. Drinke: Gurgust by some naturall infirmitie of braine was dronken once a day: this dronkennesse neither shortened his life, nor hindered his actions, as it seemeth by the yeares of his gouernement and life. Discord: Madian was subiect to much impatience and tyrannie. Memprise, procured the death of those great men whom hee feared for their vertue and therefore hated for his owne guiltie life. Venery: Locrine kept Elstrid his captiue for his Concubine, and accompanied her a long time, too long by sixe yeares and twelue monethes. Memprise solde himselfe to adultery, he gaue his body to bug∣gery and beastly loue, which was loue, sauing your reuerence. Ebrank had twentie wiues, some saye, but I think nineteene of them were huswifes, as we commonly saye, and she his wife onely that married him and knew him first: A right line is betweene two, to go aside is to go amisse.
Their ver∣tue, or wis∣dome is seene in Discipline or desire of knowledge: Madian, though he were borne a mortall Prince or earthly God, was in his childhood sent into Cornewall to his most valiant grandsir Corin, that he might learne of him all expe∣rienced manhood fit for a soueraigne Ruler. Bladud in his young yeares was sent otherwise and carried ouer seas to Athenes, that hee might, forsooth, be taught the wisedome of the Grecians: this Athenian English Prince at his returne brought home with him no lesse then foure great Philosophers, to teach the Brutans, and either found or founded Schooles for them at Stamford or Stanefoda after the smoothest and Atticall Idiome. Artes, both Geometry, and Astrology: Brute presently vpon his Arriuall searched this Iland optically and throughly, he and his surueyed it quantitatiuely and queintly to the purpose. Hurdibras taking in his head and hand, to build the cittie, or woodworke & stone∣worke of Caerpalladour, called for the iudiciall aduise & deuise of Aquila his Astrologer in laying the foun∣dations of that starry and elementary Citty, that the worlde might better esteeme it. Philosophy, both naturall and morall: the foure wise∣men of Athens, that taught some of the Brutans, euen as Bladud the king appointed them, had many times for their variable and strange voices a wonderfull great audience, and those wisemens schollers succee∣ded them and continued orderly about the times of fourteene hundred yeares after with great glorie, but but how good, I knowe not. Bladud found the hote
Bathes in this Iland by his Geomanticall and Hy∣dromanticall skill and subtiltie. Brute the first made many good politicke laws for the benefit & direction of himselfe and his subiectes. Guendolin ministred true iudgement to the people well and wisely, at last, fea∣ring by reason or inspiration that the king Madian her sonne would scarsely vse her Honourably, as the son should vse his mother, went her way and dwelt far enough ought of sight in Cornewall among them that were glad euer of her daily company. Ebranke for his sonnes sake and his owne, sent his thirtie daughters to Siluius an Italian Duke, that they might be mar∣ried with their owne bloud, the old Troian bloud, and thereby get their father many friendes or welwillers abroad, to strengthen him in his neede, if nede were. Wordes of counsell: Cordeil tolde her father in a me∣lancholicke vaine, That as his riches were more or lesse, so he should be loued and feared more and lesse. This was their Prudence in teaching and learning.
Their vice or folly is seene in Deceite by bulding: Locrine for want of better con∣ueiance built a caue for his Concubine, and made some few men of his priuy Counsell, but tolde other men, that it was a secret place for praier and sacrifice in the maner of his owne outlandish religion: when he heard and knew of Corins death, he crowned El∣strid queene and reiected Guendolin, whom he seemed to loue hitherto for feare of Corin, and not for liking. Deceit by weapons: Memprise slewe his manly bro∣ther Manlius by faithlesse craft, to be out of his emu∣latiue danger and dangerous emulation. Magicals: Bladud dedicated his Bathes to Minerua a dead woman: he taught Necromancy in all parts of his country: he vndertooke to flie aloft in the ayre with deuised winges and meanes artificially, and so fell downe inartificially and died sensibly, neither could he become admirable this way, as he hoped. Wordes: Leyr forgetting his Honour asked his three daughters a fond needlesse question, as some vse to dally with young children, and would forsooth, heare of them that were women grown, How much they loued him: they might haue shewed on their finger. Ignorance: the Gyantes of this Iland being one∣ly strong, and wild men without any great forecast, were subdued for want of arte and gouernment. Si∣sill let all matters go and runne at auenture. Iago had the same vile fault, and died of a frensie, as he liued with a megrim. Their ver∣tue & for∣titude is known by their Acts in
Peace, These honourable Rulers approoued their Princely magnificence, and Philoti∣my in a braue maner. Brute the first named this Iland Brutanie of his owne Noble and famous Name: He built a fortunate Cittie by the Tems, and called it Troy-new in perpetuall honour of his owne Coun∣trey. Ebranke built a faire Cittie in hys land Northward, which he called Caer∣branke after his owne name: He built ano∣ther Cittie with a Castle in Albany, and called it Edenbrough, in regard of his daugh¦ters. Leyl built a Citie in this land North∣ward, which he called Caerleyl by his own name. Leyr built a Citie in the midst of his land, and called it Caerleyr in respect of his owne name. Thus they purchased their Glorie with heroicall expences, and pub∣licke actions profitably. Then the vertuous subiectes shewed their excellent magnanimitie in good sorte: They suffered not Madian to rule ouer them, till hee was able to carry armour in the Field, and lead an armie. Duke Corin went to king Locrin with his ordinary bat∣tle Axe in his hand, and behaued himselfe so manly, and plainly with the king, that he would not or durst not reiect Guendolin his spouse, as he before had purposed. Good warly rhetoricke.
Warre at home Those Dukes Maglan and Hennine suffred not their wiues king Leyrs two eldest daugh∣ters to be kept frō the Crowne by Cordeil the youngest daugh∣ter. Locrin fought with Hum∣ber and flewe him in battle, be∣cause he had slaine his younger brother Albanact the Prince and ruler of Albany. Conedag and Morgan the sons of those two Dukes deposed euen Cordeil their aunt from hir vsurpation and royall gouern∣ment. Conedag defended his land against Morgan, and put him to flight, and slewe him, and ioyned Morgans kingdome to his owne. Guendolin the queene gathered an army against her husband Locrin the king, and in their conflict he was slaine with an arrow. abroad. Ebranke got great victories, and rich spoiles both in strange countries far off, & neere hand, & then returned home with his mony and men in safety & ioy: it is no lesse courage, to get out of troble, then to go through it. This was their Fortitude, in doing for their friends, and vndoing their foes.
Their vice or extream fortitude is knowen by Couetous ambition: Manly warred with his elder brother Memprise to depriue him of the kingdome, accounting it his owne, if he could win it. Leyrs two sons in law Maglane and Hennine expelled him out of his land, and vsurped his place a while, no time to count of. Morgan raised war against Conedag his coosin german, with whom he liued neighbourly a∣foretime, but now he aspired to Conedags king¦dome. Porrex made sodaine war vpon Ferrex his brother, and put him to flight, and slewe him, to be ruler himselfe alone. Audacious anger: When the people might do what they would in the raigne of Sisill, they being naturally giuen to fighting, fell to ciuil war among themselues, and spilt much innocent bloud. Rage is blinde: villanes somtime turne wars to their vile vses. Pusillanimity or base idlenesse: Leyl for want of a good heart coulde not rule his subiectes when he was olde. Cordeyl being at her wits end despaired of her libertie, and murdered her selfe in prison. Gorbodug liued without a∣ny memorable act, like an idiote or a verie swaine. Sisill by continuall ease fell into ma∣ny colde and phlegmaticke diseases, and at last a lethargy made an end of him: as hee sowed, so hee reaped: of a lasie life, came a lothsome death.
Their ver∣tue or Iu∣stice is proued in Diuiding in the generations of the eighteene kings the Crown is euer iustly possessed, either by the sons, or by the brethren, or by the next of the kings bloud, except the next to king Leyr. Brute the first deuided Brutany among his three sonnes, the eldest had the best third, the youngest the worst part, the middle sonne the meane part, not so good as the best, nor so ill as the worst. Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbrank and appoyn∣ted an archflamin to ouersee it. Leyl built a Temple in Caerleyl and ordained a flamin to rule ouer it. Hurdi∣bras built Caerkent, Caeruin and Caerpalladour, for the benefit of the countrey, and in euery of them he made a Temple. Bladud built a Temple in his Citie Caerba∣don, which was made by him for theyr vse that kept the Bathes or came to them. Conedag and Morgan the sonnes of two sisters par∣ted Brutany betweene them, and liued quietly: So did Ferrex and Porrex two brethren for a time: but the comedie became a tragedie. Rewarding: Brute the first gaue Cornewall to Corin his fellowsouldier for ouercomming Gogmagog the Gyant in wrastling. Locrin bestowed the spoyles of Humbers armies vpō the souldiers that woon them in battell. Cordeil welcomed her father Leyr most re∣uerently when he fled vnto her for succour, and resto∣red him to his kingdom. Kymar kept his land in right frame and order, by giuing all braue men that they truely deserued: the chiefe pollicy with good natures. Challenging: Corin seeing changeable affecti∣ons of Locrin charged him with a promise and con∣tract
made betweene him and Guendolin, and vrged him so straitly and seuerely, that hee made him con∣tent to stand to his word, the rather for that good ser∣uice which Corin did his father Brute. Reuenging: Locrin reuenged the death of Albanact his brother with the death of Humber. Guendolin fought against her owne husband, to plague him for his whoredome and other iniuries, and prouided so well for her selfe, that in the triall of their Cause hee was slaine, and his whore drowned with her base daughter, the fiery and deceitfull roote Baaras with the leafe. Conedag and Morgan deposed Cordeil from the kingdom which she held from them a long time with some title by her father though insufficient, seeing these were the sonnes of her eldest sisters. Wyden with her waiting women chopped her sonne Porrex in pee∣ces by night, for killing his brother Ferrex without any iust cause. Punishing: Gurgust was abhorred of the Brutans for his daily dronkennesse, but suffered to be king for his birthrightes sake. Madian and Memprise were ha∣ted of good men and feared of wicked men for theyr extreame and beastly crueltie: so betweene both they were secretly forsaken in time of hunting and the wild beastes suffered to destroy them. Here we may very fitly consider, how the Power from heauen pu∣nished the people of Brutanie with raining bloud three dayes, and vexing them with infinite swarms of ve∣nimous strange flies, that stung their king Riual and many other to death. See, what life is that flies may take away, euen litle flies with their little stings. This was their Iustice in Religion and Pollicy.
Their vice or Iniu∣stice is proued in Diuiding: Locrin crowned Elstrid his concubine queene, when Guendolin his true wife liued. Ebranke dedicated the Temple of his Cittie to a liuing name and dead carcasse Diana, that coulde not defend it or him. Leyr gaue halfe his goodes to his two eldest daughters at their marriage, and made them migh∣tier then himselfe, for speaking to him fairely or paintedly, but he gaue nothing with Cordeil to her dowry, because she told him an open truth without anie forgerie. Rewarding: Leyr at his death, gaue his halfe king∣dome to Cordeyl, for defending him in trouble: the people made her queene by common consent, and thereby hindered the right of her two Nephewes the very next apparant heires. THE CHRONOLOGY OF Brutes offspring. BRute the first began to rule in the yeare of the world, 2855. and ruled 24. yeares, about the time of Samuell the mightie Prophet in Israel. Locrin began in the yeare 2879. and rule 20. yeares, in which time hee kept Elstrid seuen yeares, about the time of Saul the first king of Israel.
Guendolin began in the yeare 2899. and ruled 15. yeares, about the time of Dauid the kingly Prophet in Israel. Madian beganne in the yeare 2914. and ruled 40. yeares, about the time of faire Absolons fame in Is∣rael. Memprise began in the yeare 2954. and ruled 20. yeares, about the time of Salomons magnificent buil∣dings in Israel. Ebranke began in the yeare 2974. and ruled 60. yeares, in the 23. yeare of his raigne he built Caerbrank, about this time the fierie Prophet Elias of Israel began to teach. Brute the second began in the yeare 3034. and ruled 12. yeares: about this time Baals Prophets were slain at the brooke Kison by the commaundement of Elias the Prophet of God. Leyl beganne in the yeare 3046. and raigned 25. yeares: about this time Eliseus the great Prophet be∣ganne to worke wonders in Israel. Hurdibras began in the yeare 3071. and raigned 30. yeares: now Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-maker flo∣rished. Bladud began in the yeare 3101. and raigned 21. yeares: now Hesiodus the Poet was famous, now Ho∣mer liued. Leyr beganne in the yeare 3122. and raigned 40. yeares: now Sardanapalus the last king of Assiria was in his pride and sensualitie. Cordeyl began in the yeare 3162. and ruled 5. yeares: nowe Esaias the Prophet began to prophesie among the Iewes.
Conedag began in the yeare 3167. and raigned 33. yeares: now Romulus and Remus were borne: now the Olimpiades began. Riuall began in the yeare 3200. and raigned 46. yeares: now Roome was builded: now Sennacheribs army was destroied by an Angel of God in one night. Gurgust began in the yeare 3246. and raigned 38. yeares: now Gyges got the kingdom of Lydia and Numa of Roome: heereaboutes Herodotus beginneth his hi∣stories, which containe 230. yeares. Sisill beganne in the yeare 3284. and raigned 49. yeares: nowe Tullus ruled in Roome, and Ieremias the Prophet began to prophesie. Iago began in the yeare 3333. and raigned 25. years: now Ancus Martius ruled in Roome and Nabuchodono∣sor in Babilon. Kymar began in the yeare 3358. and raigned 54. yeares: now Daniel and Ezechiel the Prophets began to prophesie: nowe the seuen wisemen of Greece were famous. Gorbodug began in the yeare 3412. and raigned 64. yeares: now Tarquinius was expelled out of Roome: now Pythagoras liued: now Cyrus the great, was in his glorie. Ferrex and Porrex beganne in the yeare 3475. and raigned 5. yeares: now Xerxes beganne his Greeke wars: now Anaxagoras the Teacher of Pericles, Socra∣tes and Thucydides was famous and somwhat singular. Thus Brute and his offspring seeme to ende in the yeare of the world 3480. and to haue continued in the Gouernment of Brutanie 735. yeares. There is a time
of life, and a time of death, a time to arise, and a time to fall, a time for one stock and a time for another. Yet in∣finite be that time, which is predestinated for the name of Brute and his Brutans, euerlasting be that honor which is due to the branches of such a Tree as groweth with∣out withering, is strong without decay, and may best serue euen for the Phenix of all men, and Vna of all the women in the earth. The Topography set downe in the Historie of Brutes generation. The places mentio∣ned in this Iland are vniuersall More: Locry the south part of Brutanie, Cambry the west part, Albany the north part so named, of Locrin & Camber and Albanact the sonnes of Brute. All the kings that succeeded Locrin raigned in Locry, and Conedag ruled it as his heritage. Morgan fled into Cambry from Conedags armie: he was ruler in Albany, which was assigned him for his portion. One of Leyrs sonnes in law was Duke of Albany. Lesse: Cornewall so called of Corin, is in the boundes of Locry: there Guendolin wrought her chiefe practises: there Madian was brought vp: one of Leyrs sonnes in law was Duke thereof. Glamorgan is in the limits of Cambry, there Morgan was slaine, and his Armie ouerthrowne, of whom that part had the name.
Other pla¦ces ar lesse particular. In the water: Brute built Troynew by the Riuer Tems. Locry and Albany are deuided by the riuer Humber, where Locrin vanquished the Duke of the Albans called Humber, of whome that riuer had the name. Cambry is parted from Locry by the riuer Seuerne, called otherwise Habren, in which Elstrid and her daughter Habren were drowned by Guendolins com∣mandement, and of that daughter the Riuer had the name. In the land: Brute landed at Totnes Hauen. Troynew built by Brute: heere Locrin made Elstrids caue: heere Bladud, Conedag and Gorbodug were buried. Caerkent the Cittie of Kent or Canterbury, Caerwin or Winchester, Caerpalladour or Shaftsbury built by Hurdibras. Caerba∣don or the Citty Bathe, and Stamford built by Bladud. Caerleyr or the Cittie of Leyr or Leecester built by Leyr. There hee was buried: there Cordeyl was buried: These are in Locry: Caerbranke, or the cittie of Ebrank, or Yorke, and Edenbrough, or the cittie of Maides, built by Ebranke. Caerleyl the cittie of Leyl: these are in Al∣bany. Places more par∣ticular are Temples and religious houses: Ebranke built a Tem∣ple in Caerbranke, and there he was buried: there was Riuall buried, there Iago was buried. Leil built a Tem∣ple in Caerleyl, and there was he buried. Hurdibras built three Temples in his three Citties,
and in the Temple of Caerwin was he buried. Bladud built a Temple in Caerbadon: there Sisill was buried. Bladud fell downe vpon the aultar of Apollo, when his flying failed him. Prophane places: Ebranke built a Castle in Eden∣brough. The Caue of Elstrid built by Locrin. The bel∣lies of beastes were the toombers of Madian and Mem∣prise. Places out of this Iland men∣tioned are Neerer vs: Germany: thence Elstrid was brought by Humber: thence Ebranke brought great spoyles. Gallia whence Ebranke got many riches: there Aganip the husband of Cordeil was Ruler: Leyr and Ferrex in their neede fled thither. Farder from vs: Latium in Italy: whether Ebranke sent his 30. daughters. Athens in Greece, where Bladud was taught and schooled. For the trauailes of Brute before hee came to vs pertaine not to vs in respect of the places or o∣therwise. Till hee was of our Commonwealth, he was not with vs, but against vs.
THE GENEALOGY OR IS∣SVE OF CLOTO. CLoto Duke of Cornwall descending from Corin, Great Brutes nephew began the second family of the Brutan kinges, and begat Mulmucie, Mulmucie begat two sonnes of Conwen his wife, the first was Belin, the second was Brenne, a verie personable man, yet hee left no knowne seede be∣hinde him. Belin begat Gurguint. Gurguint begat Guintelin. Guintelin begat Sisill, the second of Martia his wife. Sisill begat Kymar the second. Kymar begat Elane. Elane begat Morind of his concubine Tanguestela. Morind begat 5. sonnes, the first Gorboman, the se∣cond Archigall, the third Elidure, the fourth Vigeny the fift Peridure, which died without any naturall issue, onely Elidure begat Gorboman the second. These are the 14. Generations of Cloto in the king∣dome of Locry, which 14. onely are well registred, and acknowledged as true heires in the succession of the Brutan Crowne. There are differences of Houses aswel for number as for time: but opinion destroieth nature often, or else some families would last euer, the force of education is mightie.
THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Cloto, and the Clotoans, are in their Vertues and Vices. Their ver∣tue or Iu∣stice appea¦reth in Diuiding: Mulmucy of all the kings was first crow∣ned with gold: hee founded the Temple of Troynew. Belin the first brother possessed the first part, and Bren the second inherited the second: after that Bren fled out of this Iland and left no children, Belin tooke his kingdome for his owne. Elidure being a younger bro∣ther to Archigall, gaue ouer the kingdome vnto him, accounting it rightly Archigals good for his life time. Peridure after the death of his elder brother Vigeny tooke the kingdome into his handes, because Vigeny died without issue, and ioyned his owne kingdome and this in one. Rewarding: Mulmucy made of his Temples priui∣ledged sanctuaries, that none should die or suffer any violence in them: his lawes which he writ approue his righteousnesse. Belin repaired the olde Citties which other kinges had built aforetime: hee offered sacrifices and giftes freely to the Gods, and most so∣lemnly thanked them for the victorie he got against Brenne and his Norwaies. He ordained three arch∣flamins in three Citties, hee confirmed his fathers lawes. Martia was generally allowed for Ruler and king of the realme, euen in the dayes of her hus∣band and her sonne, because her gift in iudgement was most singular, and vnmacheable. Gorboman re∣paired all the Temples in his whole kingdome throughout. Elidure was chosen king three sundry
times for his vpright dealing in all cases. That con∣stant vertue is happy that findeth her friendes con∣stant like herselfe. Punishing: Belin would not restore Brens kingdome vnto him, because hee had lost it by falshoode, and in triall of warre. Belin would not deliuer Guilthdake the Danish intruder out of prison, and send him home to his kingdome in Denmarke, vntill hee had taken a most sure order for a yearely tribute in consideration of his present deliuery to bee payd to Belin and his heires for euer. Gurguint, when the Dane denyed hys yearely tribute, plagued the Dane incessantly by fire and sword, till hee agreed to pay him the yearely tri∣bute, which was lawfully due to the king of Brutanie. Archigall was depriued of the kingdome by his sub∣iectes for his wicked life. When Morind had ouer∣throwne the Mores that inuaded his land, hee burnt them before his face, because they had burnt in some partes of this Countrey. Heere wee may well consi∣der the Iustice of Heauen, which slewe many of Brens souldiers, and wounded him to death, when hee had spoyled a Temple. Their Vice or Iniu∣stice appea¦red in Diuiding: Archigall sought by all meanes, to ad∣uaunce base men and rude vassals, whom hee fauou∣red most, and to pull downe the great and rich men, whom hee liked not so much as them. Like will to like: tyranny respecteth onely herselfe. Peredure and Vigeny enuying the grace and glory of their brother Elidure, made warre against him and tooke him pri∣soner, and kept him in hold while they liued, without
any other reason, but the vnreasonable power of for∣cible entry. Punishing: Kymar the second being hated of some vngratious and desperate subiectes was slaine by them most wrongfully: the more vnhappy man hee that coulde not foresee. Morind was of so violent and boisterous a nature, that whosoeuer offended him should surely dye for his fault, though it were but a small trespasse, because hee was displeased. E∣uery offence is not deadly: no man liueth without of∣fences: but a Prince without patience doth euer most mischiefe. Their Ver∣tue or for∣titude, is seene in Peace at home: Mulmucy built Blackwell Hall and Malmesbury: hee beganne to cut and lay out 4. High∣waies vniuersall to this Land: he restored chiualry. Belin built those 4. waies, and finished them: he built a Citie and a Hauen with faire gates in Troynew and a Tower. Guintelin built a Cittie: Gorboman the first, built two Citties. Peace abroad: Bren built some Citties in Italy and repayred some. Warre at home: Mulmucy vanquished 4. great Dukes, which warred with him for the crowne of this kingdome. Belin ouerthrew Brens armies twise, he took Guilthdake prisoner, and those ships that were sent against the Land. Morind slewe an Irish Sea Monster: he destroyed a Duke of the Mores and hys men, that arriued in this Iland to destroy it. Warre abroad: Belin and Bren sayled together with both their forces into Gallia and subdued it.
Bren sought afterward newe kingdomes abroad, he vanquished great partes of Italy, and sacked Rome it selfe: he got infinite spoyles in Macedonia. Gurguint sayled into Denmarke, and forced the king there in his owne Land to yeald vnto him. Reuenging: Bren gathered himselfe an Army in Norway, to recouer his kingdom of Belin thereby. So he prouided for himselfe afterward in Armoricke a∣gainst Belin vppon the same cause, and for the like purpose. Their Vice or extreme Fortitude is in Ambition: Bren arose with all his powers against Belin, to take from him his right Dominion, if hee could. Vigeny and Peredure conspired against Elidure, and tooke his kingdome from him by open force. Rage: Bren threatned Belin with wordes of great defiance, if he had not his kingdome of him againe. He spoyled the Temple of Macedonia in despite of all gouernment. Pusillanimitie: Elidure was content to bee taken and prisoned, rather then giue any cause of bloudshed among his people by meanes of warre. Their Ver∣tue or Prudence is set forth in Writinges: Mulmucy made many positiue lawes in his natiue language, and caused them to be pub∣lished, that all men might read them for their directi∣on and better aduisement. Marcia a queene made many statutes, to teach the subiects aright and easie way of morall life. Right in respect of the crooked way, and easie in respect of the loose and carelesse way which breedeth sorrowes.
Doinges: Mulmucie fauoured all learned men of all kindes, being minded to vse euery one in his mistery. Belin fortified the late kingdome of his brother, and now his owne kingdome, with his owne souldiers, and put out all Brens men for his sake, and his owne safetie: hee allowed his fathers lawes for his time, lesse any man should obiectiuely quarrell with him. Archigall seeing by dayly experience, the dayly mise∣ries of a wicked and inconsiderate life, learned a new lesson, and led his life orderly euer after. Bren know∣ing his owne bodily beautie applied himselfe to that vaine, and got goodwill by marrying great women in forraine Landes, when he could not stay at home. Belin was more carefull of his owne land, then for outlandish goodes, and returned from Gallia to Bru∣tanie, where his greatest charge was. Their vice or folly is in Conceite or opinion: Mulmucy dedicated a Temple to Apollo, as if the dead man were wise and migh∣tie. Ignoraunce: Elane ruled fondly and vnrulily. Presumption: Morind fought with a Sea monster, and made no man of his counsell herein. Improuidence: Kymar was slaine by his enemies in time of hunting, where they tooke him alone at a dead vantage. The best Remedie against Follies Wichery is, a tryall of all causes, which belong to any effect. Hee that can follow this Rule infallibly, cannot be foyled in his Actions.
Their Ver∣tue or Tē∣perance is known by Liberalitie: Mulmucy, accounting the Cittie, and the Countrey two pillars of his kingdome, priuiled∣ged the waies which went to Citties, and which were for plowes, that the Cittizens and husband∣men of the land might be loued the more, and better vsed for their immunities among themselues, and with souldiers. Bren gaue much treasure to his No∣ble Lordes in little Brutanie, to winne their goodwill, and wage battell with their helpe against Belin. A man alone is but halfe himselfe. Marriage: Bren married the Duke Elfinges daugh∣ter in Norway: he married the dukes onely daughter of little Brutany, and thereby was mightie in both places for fauour and power: but I cannot tell cer∣tainly, what became of his first wife: he was an od man of wit and practise. Concord: Conwen the mother of Belin, and Bren ioyned her two sonnes in one, yea euen them two, which was somewhat strange: but what may not wordes do, if they be well tempered, and seasoned with true modestie? when they were readie with their armies to ioyne in battell, insomuch that strait∣waies they ruled their former rages, and went bro∣therly together against the common enemy. Gurguint liued peaceably: so did Guintelin: so did Sisill the se∣cond: so did Kymar the second: so did Gorboman the se∣cond. A sober heart maketh peace, a drunken head, strife. Mercie: Gurguint meeting with a Nauy of 30.
strange shippes in the Scottish Seas, and seeing plainly their extreame neede, and hearing withall their pittifull Supplication, gaue them his goodwill to dwell in Ireland, and assured them of his good fa∣uour, so long as they liued well and neighbourly. E∣lidure for his notable mildnesse, and mercifull nature was named Meeke: he heartily lamented his brother Archigals poore and wretched estate, therefore he fay∣ned himselfe sicke, that by these meanes all his No∣blemen, and Lordes might come and visite him, and at their being with him, hee sued to them, as it had been for his life, That he might resigne his kingdom vnto Archigall. Their Vice or Intem∣perance is known by Anger: Morind was outragious alwaies and in∣tollerable in his heate. Maleuolence: Archigall gaue himselfe to breede quarrels chiefly against his Noblemen and Rich∣men. Incontinency: Bren being wounded to death in a tempest sent from the cloudes, slew himselfe in a de∣sperate rage. Who can saue him whom God hateth? It was wonderous, that the Heauens should fight for Apollo. I may thinke the Sprite of the Ayre was suffered, to play this part, to vpholde Apol∣lonisme.
THE CHRONOLOGY OF Clotos offspring. AFter the yeare of the worldes Creation, 3480. there was ciuill Warre continu∣ally in this Iland for the space of 50. yeares: in which time vainglorious Xer∣xes was weakened of the Greekes, both by Sea and Land: then the 12. Tables of Lawes were brought to Roome: then Euripides was born: then Esdras began to restore the Temple at Ierusalem. Mulmucy began in the yeare 3530. and raigned 40. yeares: in which time Bellum Peloponnesiacum began and ended: then Socrates died violently by poyson & malice. Belin began in the yeare 3570. & raigned 26. yeares: in the first fiue yeares he and his brother Bren liued qui∣etly together: in this time Roome was taken of the Gauls: now Aristotle was borne, may the world be glad thereof? Gurguint began in the yeare 3596. and raigned 19. yeares: in this time Xenophons greeke History is en∣ded: now Alexander the great is borne, to begin a peece of a new world. Guintelin beganne, 3615. and ruled 26. yeares: in which time Plato dyed, the more the pitie: then Isocrates and Demosthenes plaied their partes with Philip: then the Greeke Monarchy began to go on foote: hereabout Buchanan begins his Scottish kinges, 330. yeares be∣fore Christes Natiuitie. Sisill began, 3641. and ruled 7. yeares: in this time Alexanders kingdoms were deuided betweene his wor∣thies. Kymar the second began, 3648. and ruled 3. yeares: in this time Cassander restoreth the Cittie Thebes the 20. yeare after Alexander destroyed it.
Elane began, 3651. and raigned 9. yeares: in this time Seleucus beganne his raigne in Syria, and Demetrius deliuered Athens from the Macedonian yoke. Morind began 3660. and raigned 8. yeares: in this time Flauius a Secretary published the Ciuill Lawe, which the high Priest onely knew aforetime. Gorboman began, 3668. and raigned 11. yeares: in which time Decius the sonne deuoted himself to death for his Country Rome in the wars of the Samnites. Archigall began, 3679. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time the Consul T. Coruncanus began first to professe the Ciuill Law: now Pirrhus the Epyrote made warre with the Romans. Elidure began, 3684. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time Ptolomeus Philadelphus entertained many learned and wise men. Archigal began again, 3689. and ruled 10. yeares. Elidure began againe, 3699. and ruled 2. yeares. Vigeny and Peredure began, 3701. and ruled 9. years: in this time the 70. translated the Bible into greeke: in this time the first Punick war beganne: now Phalereus the Rhetorician, now Theocritus the Poet, now Euclides the Geometrician, now Aratus the Astrologian liued. Elidure began again, 3710. and raigned 4. yeares. Gorboman the second began in the yeare of the world, 3714. and raigned 10. yeares: in this time the people created T. Coruncanus the high Bishop in Roome. Thus the Time of Clotoes offspring seemeeh to end in the yeare of the word, 3724. and to haue endured 194. yeares in the Rule of Bru∣tany: a verie little time of continuance for so many kings: but all plantes haue not roote alike: some are rooted broadway, as Elmes, and fall quickly: some are rooted downward, as Okes, and stand in the mids of the windes, euen till the violent axe or verie age ouer∣turne them.
THE TOPOGRAPHY MENTIO∣ned in Clotoes Offspring. The places named are in the I∣land general Cambry, where Rudank ruled in the conflict of Mulmcy. Locry, where Pinnor ruled in that conflict. Belin and his succes∣sors ruled there. Vigeny ruled ther. Albany, where Statery was Ru∣ler in that time of conflict. Bren and Peredure raigned there. Northumberland, there Yeuan ruled in the time of the conflict: here Belin prepared an Army a∣gainst Brens comming. speciall, More burials, Mulmucy buried in Troynew Tēple: so was Gurguint: Belin at Be∣linsgate: Guintelin in the Temple: Archigall at Grantam: Elidure at Caerleyl. Lesse, ci∣ties and the foure high∣wais. &c Warwicke built by Guintelin: Cambridge & Grantam built by Gor∣boman: Caerusk built by Belin, here he ordained an archflamin. Troy∣new, where Belin con∣sulted with his Lords and with Bren. Other places not so generall are these: the Tower of Troynew built by Be∣lin: there Elidure was imprisoned. Belinsgate built by Belin: Black∣well Hall, an Malmesbury, and Pauls founded by Mulmucy: Bristo by Bren: Calater a wood neere Caerbranke, where Bren was discomfited
in his first and second wars against Belin: there Elidure met Archigal. Caerbranke the place where Belin counselled with his Lordes about Guilthdake: there hee ordained an archflamin: there Elidure restored Archigall by the assent of his Lordes. The places named out of the I∣land general Ireland: there Gurguint placed the 30. sayle of shippes that he met on the Sea. Orcades: there he met those ships wādring. Norway: Bren fled thither from Belin, and there he gathered his second army a∣gainst him. Armorica or litle Brutany, where Bren pre∣pared his third Army. Denmark, from that countrey Guilthdake, came in armes against this Iland. Gur∣guint sayled thither, to fight for his owne goodes. Gallia: there Bren ruled, & repaired some Cities. Italy: here Bren became most victorious. Macedony: here Bren spoiled himself & all. Mauritany: Morind ouercame an Army of Mores, which came against this Iland. speciall Roome: here Bren made hauocke of all. Capitoll: Bren besieged it, and for one thousand poundes of gold, brake vp and departed. Millan, Pauy, Bergomum, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Tridentum, Vincentia, and other Ci∣ties built or repaired by Bren the raue∣nous and magnificent Prince. Thus one Generation of men passeth, and another commeth, but the vertues of men are euerlasting, yea & their bodies by traduction are immortall: So a vertuous man shall be a mortall God, if his minde or body haue their issues.
THE THIRD GENERATION or rather succession of Brutan Kings. THe death of Gorboman the second begat a poli∣ticke body in this Iland without an head. This Acephalia begat Vnrulinesse in the lower partes. Vnrulinesse begat Strife, among the Nobles and Commons, Strife begat Trouble on both partes. Trouble begat Wearinesse and Weaknesse, Weaknesse begat Desire of rest, Desire of rest begat Election, and Election begat Morgan, and made him Ruler. Morgan begat Goodwill in his subiectes, Goodwill for his sake begat Emerian his brother, who died as the other did without issue, his death let Ambition a traytor out of prison, Ambition begat Sedition, Sedition begat Confusion, Confusion begat Vnquietnesse, Vnquietnesse begat Desire of order, Desire of order begat Deliberation, and Deliberation begat Iual and made him king. The death of Iuall begat Emulation, Emulation begat Wit and Inuention. Inuention begat Friendship, Frendship begat Rimo, and made him Ruler. When he was dead his companion Geruncie was made king
in respect of that familiaritie which he had with Rimo. Then Cathel so handled hys matters in pleasing the chiefe men by hys liberall behauiour, that hee raigned next and dyed. Then Coil ouercame mens hearts with hys vertuous actiuitie, and was annointed king, and dyed: then Porrex the second wrought many good works, and was next king to him, and dyed. Then Cheryn fed all the mad fellowes humours in the realme that he could heare of, and by voices got the kingdome. Cheryn begat a sonne, and called hym Fulgen, who dyed without issue: then Eldrid by faire and large pro∣mises got the Crowne and dyed: then Androgy outwent hym in all kinds of allurement, and succeeded him and begat Vrian that dyed without issue. Then Eliud by his misticall artes did extraordinary and admirable acts, and thereby was made king. After him Merian by inuenting newe practises for warres, and occupations was so honoured generally, that he was Ruler. Then Bladune arose from priuate desertes to publicke fauours, and at length hee was king: the same kinde of nature begat Capene, and next hym Ouine, and euen such a pacificatory mind preferred Sily. After hym Bledgabrede by hys pleasant demeanour and merrimentes, pleased all the Nobles, and became theyr Ruler. Then Redargy arose next him in such a sort, and so did Samuly: But Penisell being vnmachable in strength succeeded hym: then Pirrhy for his strange swiftnesse, and incomparable dexteritie in all feates of manhood, was ruler of his brethren. In those dayes publicke actions made kings. These are the 24. rulers, which succeeded Gorboman
the second, & make a line of succession rather then of ge∣nealogy. Yet wee may call this a politicke genera∣tion rightly in the whole body of the realme, though it be not a naturall generation in theyr owne proper bo∣dyes from Morgan to Pirrhy. All men haue not the gift of children: of all these Rulers here are but two sons, and their two fathers, the other seeme to haue left no seede behinde them. Sometime the imperfection is in the wife, sometime in the husband: there are watry loynes, and rotten thighes in both sexes. Some men are barren naturally, some are barren artificially, some are barren by olde age, some make themselues barren with preternaturall dyet, some are made of other men by chirurgicall incisions. Or if they had children and were not barren, the more vnhappy they that coulde not continue as they began. Some families are ta∣ken away by sicknesse, some by wars, some by mischan∣ces in theyr dyet and exercise, some are put from theyr owne, and are euer in thraldome, and are neuer againe heard of in the worlde. God almighty knoweth all thinges from the first to the last: but if a man shoulde sucke the stars, or be sucked himselfe as they say, of the king of Fayries, he should not finde a perfite History of this time of these Kinges. Yet such as it is, I beleeue, a reader may go farther and speed worse: the most mo∣rals the best Historie, but a man may insert phisicall obseruations vpon occasion to good vse and purpose, so long as History is an example of life in both wayes of Action.
THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are set downe in their Vertues and Vices. Their Ver∣tue or Iu∣stice was approued in Diuiding: Emerean succeeded Morgan, because hee was his brother: for brethren are twigs of the same branch, fingers of one hand, partes of the same bo∣dy. If one twig fall off, the sap of the tree must feed the other twig which standeth on. If some of the fin∣gers be cut off, the vaines must serue the fingers that remaine: if one arme be rotted of, the other arme must be in stead of both armes. Fulgan succeeded his father Cherin, and Vrian his father Androgy. For the sonnes body is the fathers body deriued and conti∣nued: it is the old body made young againe: the sons and fathers body are as the same body of one tree in right length: the seedes of trees bring forth all theyr owne kindes: in which respect Morind is a true king by Natures law. Rewarding: Iual among the Noblemen was cho∣sen the king for his moderate vertues, and equall iudgementes that appeared euer in all his wordes and works. A rare instance of worthinesse worthily considered, and may of it selfe deserue a Treatise to proue the Ciuilitie of olde Brutanie, which many dis∣grace for malice, and more for ignorance, and most for company.
Their ver∣tue or pru∣dence was shewed In the art of Musicke: Bledgabrede both studied and practised musicke: hee was very famous: and I thinke, in respect of his charge and gouernment, ve∣ry wonderfull. A monasticall liuer, and much more an oeconomicall hath no partes of time for such young childish studies, if he looke wel about him: and how can a king that is the keeper of all other men haue any time for such vaine insignificant voices? Yet the circular wisdome of this king had such a ca∣pacitie by some myraculous infusion from heauen, that hee was fit both for the grauest and the lightest studies, either to learne them by contemplation, or to vse and teach them by action. He saw by his instru∣mentes, how to tune and string his kingdome: he could preuent and pacifie tumultes with his musick: he might perhaps allay the waues of the Sea, and breake the thunders aloft with his diuine melodie: he coulde keepe himselfe from wearinesse by his mu∣sicke: he could mitigate the violence of diseases with his sweete voices: musicke was his prosody, his pro∣nunciation, his disposition, his instrument of instru∣ment, and the life of his life. Their ver∣tue or Tempe∣rance ap∣peared in Behauiour: Coil liued all his time quietly without a∣ny war and tumult: A contented mind is not conten∣tious. Porrex the 2. behaued himselfe, either fatherly toward his youngers, or brotherly toward his e∣quals, or gently toward all men. By this meane he was more happie with the helpe of the Graces, then the first Porrex, whome the Furies destroied. The Graces are moderate Vertues, the Furies are im∣moderate Vices.
Their vice or Intem∣perance was in Diet: Cheryn was a drunkard, a cupleache, a bel∣lygod, a water rat, he had been well vsed if hee had been punished with abasement, and turned out of his throne into a wineseller, and of a winebibber, made a winedrawer. Manners: Vrian was nothing but a carnall man, his wit was carnall, his bodie was carnall his life was sensuall, he was without anie diuine or humane excellencie. What should such a man haue an ex∣cellent place in the commonwealth? why may the Heauenly Power abide so vnholy a beast, to repre∣sent his inuisible king in so holy a Seat as the impe∣riall Seate of a Prince? a singular place, a singular incumbent. The other kinges that are not once noted with any vertuous or vicious actes might as good haue not been borne: they are certainly miserable men that leaue no memorable act behinde them: but are onely named, as a man may giue a name for distinctions sake to a tree, or a hill, or a house, or a field, or a stone, or anie dead thing, without any father account, or regard of them. The greatest Name maketh and sheweth the greatest man, the least name, the least man: the greatest name springeth from the greatest actions, it is not the num∣ber of Actes which beget a great Name. All goodes that a man hath within and without him, all are giuen and lent him to doe good: the Pillars of the life are Health, Wisedome and Riches, yet some men are fa∣mous for their sicknesse, folly and beggery: A memora∣ble man euen with these three plagues is happier then
an obscure man with those three blessings: al the goods we haue serue for the life, and yet the life consisteth not in the possessions which wee haue: Riches serue for Health, and Health serueth for Wisedome, and the ac∣tions which belong vnto her, Wisdome serueth for life, and to keepe vs from the pathes of destruction & death. Life serueth to get a Name by doing good. I would reioyce more in this, to haue my name written in hea∣uen, where it may euer be in sight and remembrance, then be all these 24. kinges fortunati infoelices, whose renowne is layd in Hell, and deuoured of the Graue. A liuing Cynick, more happy then a dying Caesar. A liuing dogge better then a dead Lyon. Yet let go vainglory and bannish selfewill: A name without true vertue de∣serueth no memorie: Many are recorded that are not worthy of a register: now there is no remedie: or else it might haue probably been wished, that no obiect or vile examples of base men had been written. For my part, I cannot thinke, that so many kinges could liue and die without some glorious actions, howsoeuer mishap, or enuie, or the Deuill hath blotted them out from our eye-sight. The Times of these Kinges. MOrgan began to raign in the yeare of the world. 3724. and ruled 14. yeares: now the Pana∣reton of Syracides was written, and then the
Panareton of Brutanie fell into a dead sleepe, wherein it lay still aboue 100. yeares. Emerian began in the yeare, 3738. and raigned seuen yeares: now was Ennius the Poet borne: now Archi∣mides the Mathematician liued with admiration. Iual beganne, 3745. and raigned 20. yeares: now Naeuius and Plautus flourished: now Hanniball began the second Punick warre. Rimo began▪ 3765. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Hanniball fled to Antiochus for succour. Geruncy began, 3781. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time Antiochus raged in Iewry. Cathel began▪ 3801. and ruled 10. yeares: nowe the Macabees bestirred them like Bees: now Terence the Poet flourished. Coil began, 3811. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time the third Punick Warres began. Porrex the 2. began, 3831. and ruled 4. yeares: now the Citty of Numantia in Spaine was rased. Cherin raigned one yeare: Fulgen two yeares. Eldred ruled one yeare: Androgy one yeare. Vrian raigned 3. yeares: Eliud 5. yeares. Merian ruled two yeares: Bladune two yeares. Capen ruled 3. yeares: Ouine two yeares. Sily raigned 2. yeares, eleuen kinges in 24. yeares: About this time the Saduces and Pharisees beganne their sects in Iewry: now the warre of Iurguth began and en∣ded: nowe Tully was borne in the yeare of the world. 3859, an hundred and three yeares before Christ. Bledgabrede began, 3860. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time was Pompei borne into the world. Redargy began, 3880. and ruled 3. yeares: in this
time was I. Caesar borne into the world. Samuly ruled two yeares? Penisell three yeares. Pirry raigned 2. yeares, foure kinges in 10. yeares, and ended in the yeare of the worlde, 3890: in which time Antony and Crassus the Oratours of Roome, and in Q.M. Scaeuola the Lawyer liued: So these 24. kinges continued 166. yeares in the Go∣uernment of Brutanie. Heere is no Topography, heere is no place named: they were now I may well say kinges Abstracts: that they did it no where, either incomprehēsibly like Gods, or metaphisically like strange men. The musicke of Bledgabred and the actions of the rest were, belike, in no place of any great account. Yet because they were kinges and enioyed their kingdomes, theyr doomes must needes be giuen somewhere, and their cunning must needes be shewed in some place, and that was euen the generall Land of Brutany, without any parti∣cular nomination of lesse places. Right Soueraignes and perfit kings, whose Actes were vniuersall & com∣mon to the whole realme, not appropriate or fancied to any one Region therein. If the head moue and guide the body it doth more then if it moue or guide one part thereof. A generall praise is greatest, and this was these kinges speciall glory aboue others, to rule all pla∣ces, to rule the Land. The best vse of one commenda∣tion or other is, to encounter some one dispraise or other that hath been or may be, but they that do all thinges well, haue no neede themselues of particular History. If Sily ruled 2. yeares, suppose in reason, hee was no silly one. If the other kinges were kinges, that was all in
all. A king cannot possibly be without his excellencies, and memorials. Now I diuine modestly, heere were actors with∣out recorders of their actions, patrons of learning, but no learned men: or, they were of both sortes, but their studies came to no effect, by some force: or, they were very old when they came to the Crown, and could do nothing: or, the furies and helhoundes raged so ex∣treamely, that the Muses and Graces coulde not bee quiet for them: or, their actes were wrought in needle∣worke onely, and so worne out: or, the senses, and sens∣lesse desires so ruled them, that theyr liues were not so short as their actes: or, the Histories were written in some strange kind of polygraphy and steganography, and coulde neuer yet be read, but remaine in some ob∣scure place: or, they made little account of writers, and these set as light by them: or, they that take most pains at their booke, were not most regarded: and thereupon studied to themselues: or, some infortunate and male∣uolent configuration of mouable skies and starres, and spirites remoued all Histories out of the way: or, the Kinges and People agreed among themselues, to bee remembred by being not remembred, wishing to haue their time called The vnknowe Regiment, adiudging secrecie greatest wisedome: or, our Countrimen li∣stened so much after other Noble Actors in the earth, that they had no leisure, to doe any thing themselues: or, they disdained to haue them theyr iudges after their death, whom they would scorne to haue their iudges in their life: or, some outlandish enuy destroyed the rowles and registers of our Histories, to make vs seem barbarous: or, the Vniuersitie men of Stamford had by
some Priuiledge got them wiues, and so forth: and had no leisure to do any thing but liue: or, before the kings were crowned, they were worthy men, and after theyr coronations they fell to make books of nothing: or they could tell, how to get a Soueraigntie, but they knewe not, how to keepe it: or, they writ their Chronicle hie∣roglyphically, and set the pictures of other creatures in the places of their kinges, and by the ignorance of some carelesse men were esteemed as gaies, and not other∣wise regarded: or, it was not thus, or so: perhaps, neither this, nor that, but some other way, I cannot tell howe, nor I care not greatly, for feare I may bee thought neither idle, nor well occupied. Now, good Reader, albeit I ioyne a morall genealogy with a na∣turall, and seeme to breake the stile of history, yet, be∣cause affections rule otherwhile asmuch as kinges, I may truely say, my deuise is allowable in itselfe. Where issue wanteth in the Prince, there the issue of the people is considered, seeing some Princes are begotten of the people, as some are of their parents: these are heires by the law of particular nature, and they by the reason of vniuersall nature and of grace. As for the other partes of this third Offspring, I hope, they are seemely and fit enough for this place. It is lawfull to make the best vse and most gaine that wee can honestly, of anie thing that we read or write: probable additions, and reaso∣nable collections are neuer amisse: it is better, of the two extreames, to make more then wee neede of our Countreimen, rather than make lesse of them then wee should: superfluitie is not best, nor scarcitie: that history is most worth which doth a man most good.
THE FOVRTH GENEALOGY or issue of Capor. LAbour the sonne of Parsimony the daughter of Queene Temperance, made Capor a man of infinite wealth: then Order, the sonne of Rea∣son, the daughter of the Empresse Truth, made him a man of greatest fauour in this Land: by these two meanes ioyned with his royall bloud, he became Ruler of Brutany, and begat Dinel, Dinel begat Hely, Hely begat three sonnes: the first Lud, the second Cas∣siuelan, the third Stenny. Lud begat 2. sonnes: the first Androgy, the second Te∣nancy. Then came Death, and tooke away Lud and hys brother Stenny, while his two sonnes were children, and Age made Cassiuelan Ruler: then came Discontent and begat Rage in the minde of Androgy, that hee went a∣way: then arose Parentage, and created Tenancy for the king. Tenancy begat Cimbelin, Cimbelin begat 2. sonnes, the first Guinder, the second Aruirage: then came Deceite, and slew Guinder: then Deuise set forth Aruirage, and made him right king. Aruirage begat Marius of his wife Senissa, the daugh∣ter of Claudius the Emperour. Marius begat Coil the 2. Coil begat Lucy, which dyed without issue. These are the 11. heires males and successors of Capor in his kingdom: for the Generation of Cassiuelan, of Stenny, of Androgy and of Guinder, are vnknown, the more is the pity, seeing they were very singular men in their kinds. Albran∣ches of a tree prosper not, euer some are withered & rotten.
The Arts and Actes of Capor, and the Caporites are seene by their Vertues and Vices. Their Ver∣tue or Iu∣stice is in Defending and regarding: Lud and Stenny were at great variance betweene themselues, because Lud would haue the City of Troy new called Caerlud by his owne name, but Stenny would haue it keepe the olde name in honour of the predecessors, and Troians from whom he came. It is iustice, both to respect our auncestors, and iustice to consider our own glory: This were a pretty question for discourse, which name ought to take place, and stand in force, if it were well handled. Diuiding and deposing: Cassiuelan the 2. sonne of Hely, was the Protectour and Gouernour of the Realme in the minoritie and nonage of Luds two sonnes, hys two nephewes. Kingdomes are too heauy for chil∣drens shoulders. Cassiuelan ordained a common sa∣crifice to God that gaue him the victory against the Romanes, and a publicke feast to his Nobles that helped him in the battels, & deuised many pastimes, in honour of God and men. Tenancy was made king by the treasonable absence of his elder brother Androgy. Euery one of these kings hath his right succession, except Cassiuelan which v∣surpeth. Punishing and correcting: Cassiuelan summoned Eue∣line to appeare before him & the Councell, to answere for the death of Hirelda. When he could not preuaile with Androgy by faire meanes, he made warre vpon him, to plague him for his stubbornesse. Ought An∣drogy
to bee at his call? a disputable matter of great vse. Nature preferreth the kings son to the Crowne before the kings brother, but Pollicie preferred Cas∣siuelan before Androgy, a good man before a bad. Their Vice or Iniu∣stice is in Diuiding: Cassiuelan appointed vnto Androgy the eldest sonne of Lud the Citty of Caerlud, and the land of Kent, and to Tenancy the younger sonne the Land of Cornewall, and kept the kingdome from them, though they were his elder brothers true sons, and vsurped it himselfe by force. He is not fit to be a Pro∣tector that is ambitious: it is a wofull thing, to be a childe among our enimies, or amongst the enuious sectaries. Reuenging: Androgy being vnable of himselfe to withstand Cassiuelan sent letters to I. Caesar in Gallia, and certified him, that if he would come into Brutany he should be welcome: when hee had gotten Caesars Army to set vppon Cassiuelan in the valley of Dorober∣nia or Canterbury, and the fight had endured till both partes were almost weary, he came vpon Cassiuelan with a fresh reply, and put him to flight: and thus he displeased the whole realme to please himself, yet his owne hurt was neuer the lesse for making the misery of his Country greater. But when Cassiuelan thought to punish Androgy, he punished himselfe as much as him, he did euen put fire to Brimstone, and flaxe to the flame. It was traiterously done of him, to warre against his legitimate king, and of Androgy, to make his natiue Country subiect to outlandish Powers.
Their Ver∣tue or Pru¦dence is in Order: Cassiuelan brought vp Androgy and Tenancy, Princes sonnes, princely in all points. Cassiuelan con∣sidering, that the two victories which he had gotten of the Romans, concerned himselfe, and all his No∣blemen most specially, caused an assembly of them to be made, that in a generall meeting, there might bee a generall thankesgiuing to God almighty, and to one another for their seruices and actes done in the Field. Nothing teacheth men more courage then a beleefe of heauenly assistance, with an honourable remembrance of their vertues: this way of harting men is chiefest. Desire of knowledge: Lucy seeking al means to make his people true and louing among themselues, and hearing that Christians were without hatred and falshood, desired to heare their religion and receiue their doctrine, and sent two Noble schollers, Eluane and Meduine to Eleuthery Bishop of Roome with let∣ters, desiring to be taught Christianitie. Reformacion: Lucy changed the three Archflamins, and the 28. Flamins into three Archbishops, and 28. Bishops: he destroyed the Temple of Apollo in the Ile Thorney, and made a Temple in honour of the Almighty God, which we now call Westminster. Discipline: Lucy seeing that men were executed for disobeying the law, because heerein they disobeyed God, and that the kings pardon was not so much to be esteemed as a pardon from God, and perceiuing the heartie and vnfained repentance of some offen∣ders, and knowing that God forgaue such men,
thought it no reason, that such Penitents should be put to death, but reserued to a better vse: wherefore he ordained, that if any man did offend by mischance and repent him, or any one were oppressed, and could not otherwise escape oppression then by appealing to Gods word, that such men should get them into the Temple of God, and ther approue themselues to be true godly men, and so be safe both body and goods. Their vice or folly is in Permission: the Brutans forgetting the true title that Luds two sonnes had to the kingdom of their father, and feeling the liberall gifts of Cassiuelan an vsurper, suffered him to keep the Rule & Key of all the Land, and taught one another, to disinherit one another by causelesse and deceitfull popularitie and flattery. Hatred: the Brutans could not agree vpon a king, no not in fifteene yeares space when Lucy was dead, though euery countrey must needs see one nearer the Crowne then another, if they could aduise thēselues & marke euery family in good māer. They could not foresee the miseries of forrain Dominion, they were blinded with malice, & selfewill among themselues. Improuidence: Cymbelin was brought vp in Roome, both in contempt of all his own countrey learning, & in slauery to outlandish with. Coil the second was brought vp in Roome, as if hee were borne to serue Roome, and not to serue Brutany. Of the two ex∣treames, it is safer to haue our men vplandish, then outlandish, plain then perilous. Deceit: the Brutans set great long sharp stakes close∣ly in the bankes where the Romanes should arriue, and so troubled them extreamely in theyr landing: a poore and pittifull inuention to slay and Host.
Their ver∣tue or tem¦perance, is in Behauiour: Lud was bountifull in housekeeping, and by that means beloued generally. Cimbelin with the moderate vsage of himselfe, so pleased the Empe∣rour, that he loued him greatly, and receiued manie good words and gifts from him: if this were not in∣temperance, to please an enemy. Aruirage got into such fauour with Claudius the Emperor, that he mar∣ried his daughter Genissa: if this were not inconti∣nence, to be linked with outlandish, that was migh∣tier then himselfe. He was beloued of his subiectes for his vsage toward them in all cases. Marius was of honourable demeanour euery way. He accepted the pitition of the vanquished Pictes, he allotted to them the fardest part of Albany: afterward he gaue himselfe to the wealth of the realme. Lucy was loued of all his subiectes for his good life: hys loynes were in the cloudes, and hys seed among the starres: he had rather be a father in Morals, then in Naturals: such was his abstinence. It may be, Ga∣laxias the milky & bright way in heauen was made in honour of such men as Lucy was, no meaner then a Saint. Marriage: the Brutans would not in any case ioyne their daughters in wedlocke with the Pictes, whom they knew to be barbarous Scythians by discent of bo∣dies, and consent of mindes, and very vnfaithfull. Their vice or intem∣perance is in Rashnesse: Hirelda and Eueline two knightes in ga∣ming fell to wrastling, and in heate fell to wordes, and in anger fell to blowes, & in rage fell to wounds,
and Hirelda was slaine in the tumult that arose by these meanes. A gaming not so profitable as the death of a good knight is hurtfull in a realme. Disobedience: Eueline being sent for by the Protec∣tor Cassiuelan and the Councell departed from the Court with Androgy his kinsman, and tooke no leaue of them: Will is it selfe witlesse: a stomacke with∣out a heart, maketh a man a swine. Reuenge: Aruirage vsed such meanes, that he got Hammon the Romane, who siue his brother Guinder guilefully, and when he had him in his handes he caused him to be cut in peeces, and threw him peece by peece into the Sea at South-hampton, satisfying herein his insaciable anger for his brothers death and supposing vainly and madly, that he killed Ha∣mon so many times as he had peeces of him. Their ver∣tue or for∣titude is in Glorious desire: Hely called the Ile of Ely after hys name, that he might be famous for euer. Marius set vp a Colosse in remembrance of the victory he had of the Picts, with Marij Victoria grauen in it: a warly Register. Magnificence: Lud repaired olde Temples and Ci∣ties and built new. He made walles about Troynew, and called the West gate Ludgate in honour of hys owne name, and then dwelt most there because he had built most there. Aruirage road about the realme, to renew the decayed Cities which the Romans de∣faced: he built a Castle at Douer to strengthen that
part of the Land against forraigne Powers. Wordes: When the Romanes thought to terrifie the Brutans by their letters, these sent them word, that as they must, so they would defend their Coun∣trey from all forces. Aruirage being for his Noble∣nesse made the Emperours sonne in law, and wish∣ing to haue a memoriall of Claudius his queenes and wiues owne father, called the Cittie where he mar∣ried Claudiocestria or Glocester, the rather, to be free frō tribute in respect of his wife, though he were free of himselfe by his vertue. Victories: Cassiuelan made the Romans flie to their ships at their first battell, and at the second: beware the third. Desertes: Cymbelin in his youth led so manly a life in Roome, that the Emperour Augustus made him a knight there in his order of knightes. Exercise: Hirelda and Eueline two braue knightes wrastled openly at the Feast which was made after the victories against the Romanes. Warre: Guinder denied to pay tribute to the Ro∣mans, & chose rather to sight with them then yeald otherwise. Aruirage did the like, and when they came against him; he made them flie from the southeast part of this Iland to the southwest, there he draue them from Excester and Totnes, & within seuen daies made all well. Marius staied the fire and sword of the Picts in Albany and slew their armies.
Deuise: Aruirage seeing his brother Guinder dead, took on him presently his armour and Princely cog∣nisāce, that the Brutans might not suspect their kings death and be discomforted: then hee continued the battel so stedfastly and heartily, that the Brutans were stirred vp to fight valiantly by his liuely example, till they ouerthrew the Romans. Their vice or extreme fortitude is in Bold rashnesse: Stenny Cassiuelans brother in the wars against the Romans canne to I. Caesar and puld hys sword out of his hand, and slew Labienus a tribune of the Romans therewith, and was slaine. Obscure glory: When Stenny was dead, he was bu∣ried at Caerlud: and the sword which he puld from Caesar with his deaths wound was buried with him, that it might be a remembrance of one venturous action euen in a hole. Abasement: Cassiuelan was tributary to Roome nine yeares. Tenancy was too deligent in paying tri∣bute to Rome, euen 3000. pounds in gold. Cimbelin hauing choice to pay or not to pay tribute, forgat the slauery of the act and payd it. Aruirage was perswa∣ded by his wife to pay tribute when he had resisted the Romanes valiantly. He should haue sent such a wife for the tribute vnto Roome from whence she came, and kept the mony in his cofers for warres. Coil saw in his poreblinde eyes, that it was best to yeald to Roome, and agreed to pay tribute. Androgy departed to Roome with Caesar: a mad and fickle courage.
THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS. CApor began his raigne in the yeare of the world, 3894. and raigned two yeares: now Mithridates raised warres in Asia, and Lucullus was sent against him. Dinel began in the yeare, 3894. and rule 4. yeares: in this time Verres spoiled Sicilia three yeares together: now Vergill the Poet was borne. Hely beganne, 3898. and raigned one yeare: in this time Hortentius the Oratour flourished in Roome. Lud began, 3899. and rule 11. yeares: in this time the Poet Horace was borne, the conspiracie of Catiline was detected, Ierusalem was taken of Pompey, Caesar entered the wars in Gallia. Cassiuelan began, 3910. and rule 19. yeares: in this time M. Crassus spoyled the Temple of Ierusalem, the ci∣uill wars began betweene Caesar and Pompey, Caesar cor∣rected the Roman yeare, Ouid the Poet was borne. Tenancy began, 3929. and raigned 23. yeares: in this time Mecaenas liued, the patrone of Horace, Vergill, and o∣ther learned men, and gouerned Roome and Italy in the absence of Caesar Augustus so named for that reue∣rence was giuen him in a diuine maner: now Vergill dyed. Cymbelin began, 3952. and raigned 35. yeares: now Horace died: the Angel Gabriel was sent to Zachary and Mary: Christ was borne the 13. yeare of his raigne, O∣nid and Liuy dyed.
Guinder began, 3987. and ruled 28. yeares: nowe Iohn-baptist preached and was slaine, Christ taught the Iewes, Paul was conuerted, Iames was slaine, Seneca was made Neroes teacher. Aruirage began, 4015. and ruled 30. yeares: in this time Paul did most of his Actes, Iames the lesse was sto∣ned, 70000. Romanes were slaine of the Brutans. Paul was beheaded, Peter crucified, Seneca and Lucan bled to death. Marius began, 4045. and raigned 52. yeares: in this time Iohn euangelist writ his Reuelation, Plutark and Tacitus liued, Timothy was stoned, Dyonisius slaine with the sword. Coil began, 4097. and raigned 54. yeares: now Ptolony and Galen liued, the Christians by their praier got a strange victory of the Marcomanni, and obtained a mighty great raigne from heauen: now Lent was ap∣pointed by Telesphorus. Lucy began; 4151. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Gospel was first preached in Brutany by Fugacius and Damianus: Commodus would be called Hercules and Deus, but was strangled of his owne man in Vestilians house. So this Generation of Capor, and the 11. Caporites ended in the yeare of the world, 4163. and seeme to haue endured the times of 274. yeares in the kingdome of Brutanie.
THE PLACES IN THIS HISTORY. The places are at home more vniuersal Albany the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerbrank or Yorke, Cambry the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerusk. Locry the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerlud or London. lesse vniuersal Kent, Cornewal. VVestmaria named of Marius, the Ile of Ely. more particular Ludgate: the Temple of A∣pollo: the bankes where the Romanes landed in Cassiue∣lans time: the Northgate of Caerlud where Stenny was buried: Hamons hauen: Douer Castell: the hauens of Sandwich and Totnes. lesse particular Caerlud, there Tenancy and Cymbelin where buried. Dorobernia or Cantorbury: the valley there. Caerbrank, there Cassiuelan and Coil were buried. Claudiocaer or Glocester, there was Aruirage buried. Excester, the Towne vnder the Wood. Caerliel, there was Marius buried. abroad Gallia. Roome.
The reasonable metaphors of this fourth genealogy may well be allowed, because they stand vpon reasona∣ble causes. The morals which follow them might be more sententious and effectuall by much then they are, if I might speake no more then good reasons fitly vsed: but all wordes are not fit personally which are most fit really, and so I let them go for this time, perhaps look∣ing for a better conuenience of time and place to vtter them. The Synchronisme which followeth is right, if the chronology be right, which neuerthelesse agreeth with one writer, though it differeth from another: that is worth the labour which is materiall: the quantities of times teach vs no qualities of good life: Mathema∣ticks haue not the rules of moralities: the heart of histo∣ries is the actions of men: the life of the actions is the vertue of the actors. If the phrase be not exquisit, or the obseruation not singular, or the method not exact and perfit, it is but one part of an Essaye among the rest, it is but a tryall of that may be done, it is but the token of a good minde to this businesse. Yet take me euen as I am, and I know that my Essaye is not behinde any other writer in this theame, whome I haue seene for those vses, which are required in a History: euen take me as ye finde me, not as any momes feigne vpon me. The Genealogy of the Romano-Brutans. BRutany by meanes of much trouble, bred doubt∣fulnesse in it selfe, and hereof grew Resistance, till Resolution held with Kindred, and tooke
the sonne of a Brutan before the child of a Romane: thus Basianus Caracalla was for his good mothers sake made king, but his elder brother Geta was refused. Busines sent Caracalla to his Romane Empire: Fauour made Carasse the Viceroy for a time, and Flattery with Per∣swasion and Vsurpation made him Ruler: War ouer∣threw him: Victory created Alectus a Roman the king of Brutany: Displeasure puld him downe, and Compa∣rison set vp Asclepiodate, Duke of Cornewall: yet Coil the Earle of Colechester brought the peoples goodwill into such a wheele, and so turned it to himselfeward, that he slew Asclepiodate, and was the third of that name king next him: then Feare amazed Coil, till Marri∣age ioined Constantius a Roman Duke with his daugh∣ter Helen, the fayrest mayd aliue: then Contentment setled them both in the kingdome, and Loue brought them foorth into the world Constantine the first, whom Excellency lifted vp to the Roman Empire: but Agree∣ment appointed Octauy Duke of Cambry the ruler of this Iland: then Enuy flew from Roome, and brought Traherne on his winges against Octauy, and made him fly abroad for a time, but Strength and Hope carried him home againe, and Prouidence counselled him to marry his daughter with Maximinian one of Helens kin∣dred, and him Conueyance made king against Conans minde: then Superioritie remoued Maximinian to Roome, and Gracian by grace and desert supplyed hys roume in Brutany: but Crueltie so alienated the people from him, that Force destroyed him as an vngratious Ruler: then ill Neighbourhood in Albany made the Bru∣tans to seeke vppon Roome, and Submission obteined help of the Romans two times, but varietie of Wars
made Roome leaue Brutany at this time, and good Neighbourhood in little Brutanie caused their king Al∣droene to assist the great Brutans, but yet dangers held them without a Ruler many yeares. When Romanes raigne as much as Brutans, I must not make long account of them both, and in this respect I call them Romanobrutans or Brutanoromans, which you will: their Genealogy is so mingled and put together, that a Grammarian Doctor might make a great questi∣on of the name, and shew much conceit. I had rather point at such slight and needlesse questions, then in∣treate of them more or lesse: and partly vppon such a cause I containe Topography, at this time in the morall Tables of Vertues and Vices, and would chuse to ioyne the places with the actions hereafter, rather then diuide them, and set them seuerally, as I did before with more reason then I can now. One day telleth an other, and one night certifieth another: new and old names are diuersly considered. Their Arts and Acts are in their Vertues and Vices. Their Ver∣tue or Iu∣stice is in Diuiding: the Brutans knowing, that Bassian the se∣cond sonne of Seuerus the Emperour was borne of a Brutan woman, and that the first sonne Geta was borne of a Romane, iudged that a Brutan had more to do in Brutanie then a Roman: and therefore ioyned with Bassian against Geta and made him king, but Geta was slaine: Consanguinitie is more valuable then Primogeniture, the part then the adiunct, life then time.
Correcting: the Brutans feeling, how Alectus brought in many exactions cruelly vpon them, forsooke hym and chose Asclepiodate a Brutan for their king, and pursued the Romans from place to place, til they had slaine their captaine Alectus by Caerlud for his cruel∣tie. Asclepiodate threw Liuius Gallus a Roman captain into the Brooke which ranne from More-field into the Tems, and drowned him for his rebellion: in re∣membrance of this iustice, hee called the riuer Gal∣brooke, or Walbrooke to this day, that other outlan∣dish might euer learne, to be quiet with our Princes in their owne Countries and Kingdomes. Obeying: the Brutans seeing, how Gracian held hys Rule onely by force of armes against all right and reason, arose against him, and slew the Romane by force, and rid himselfe from his enforcementes. Conan Meriadock being commanded from Octauy his Prince, to be quiet, and not once seeme to hinder the com∣ming of Maximinian into this Land whome he sent for, obeyed his Princes rather then his owne will, layd away his armour, suffered him to enter, and do euen as Octauy would. What should a subiect striue against his Soueraigne? a stranger may come into the land if he be sent for. Rewarding: When Maximinian had ouercome the Gauls in Armorica, the Brutans and Romans his soul∣diers proclaimed him Emperour in the field for hys glorious Act. See what it is to please good subiects: A Princes chief treasure. Seuerus buried at Caerbrank, so was Constantius: Alectus in Caerlud, Coel at Colchester, Carasse in the field: Octauy in Caerusk: Asclepiodate where Coil slew him.
Their vice or Iniu∣stice is in Persecuting: Maximinian liuing quietly and honou∣rably, both because he was a chosen Prince, & mar∣ried a Brutan kings daughter, was not content with the Brutans due reuerence toward him, but he sought meanes to destroy them, yea the most honest and in∣nocent men among them, euen the good Christians which were like harmelesse lambes in the Land, whom he persecuted vnrighteously vpon the opinion of his owne heathenish religion more then any right iudgement. A true christian neuer deserueth death, he is so moderate and reasonable in al points, so that he is most vniust that will trouble such a man. Hee that aforetime was iniurious to a Philosopher was accounted a tyrant, but he that tormenteth a true Christian, which is a true Philosopher, and a perfite wise man, is worthy to be iudged a deuill incarnate, a bloudsuccour, a monstrous man. Such a man was Maximinian, and may well be chronicled the king with the hellish heart and bloudy hand. Their ver∣tue or tem¦perance is in Marriage: Helen the daughter of Coil the third mar∣ried Constantius, a Roman by the agreemēt of the Bru∣tans, not on her owne head, lesse she should seeme in∣continent: she was but a part of hir countrey, not a∣boue it, or out of it. Octauy married his daughter to Maximinian a Roman, by the consent of his Lordes, lesse he should seeme to make more of his owne will then the benefite of all other men: a publicke matter must be allowed publikly of them whom it concern∣eth most. Dionote Duke of Cornwall sent his daugh∣ter Vrsula and 11000. Virgins with her to Conan a Brutan the king of Armorica, that he should not ioyne
himselfe and his knightes, and men with strange bloud, but with very right Brutans. Conan desired this, and Dionote perfourmed it, both constant and prouident to auoide confusion of nati∣ons, which causeth all Tragedies and Rages in the end. Wordes and liberalitie: Constantius was a man of spe∣ciall affabilitie, & familiaritie with all his men, which propertie if he had not at Roome, he learned in Bruta∣nie, where the people are generally of freest heartes, fardest from bondage, and must bee well vsed in speach, of all thinges: he was of a singular liberalitie, he cared more for his subiects goodes then his owne: his saying was, That wealth doth more good in many handes then in few or none, or in the Princes Treasure house: a saying farre enough from tyranny. Octauy so behaued himselfe toward the Brutans of all sortes in the time of his Royal Lieuetenantship, that all men for the moste part fauoured, and furthered him greatly, euen to the attainement of the king∣dome it selfe: the chiefest wonders and noblest acts, and famous thinges haue euer commonly begunne and ended with the power of wordes: the ordering of wordes maketh a man aboue beastes, and that man a king of men that can order them best of all o∣ther. Maximinian gaue the country of Armorica to Conan a Brutan, to hold it from him and his heires for euer, and to content him for missing the kingdome of great Brutany: by this meanes they were good friendes at the last, and forgat old enmities. Toleration: Constantine the sonne of Helen suffered
the Brutans, to vse their religion: he was no tyrant in forcing them against their consciences, as other had been, although he were a Pagan, because he desired chiefly to keep them in peace. See what a good mother doth otherwhile in time of neede: I beleeue, Helen played the Princely Oratour for Christians, and defended them before her sonne for good men and good subiects, and was their best friend in Brutany next the inuisible and im∣mortall defence that came from heauen, and bred a desire of peace in Constantines minde, by besetting him with businesse on euery side. Their vice or intem∣perance is in Flattery: Carasse being vnable to ouerthrow the Picts, and louing them somwhat for helping him against the Romanes, stoode in a maze betweene hope and feare, and gaue them a part of Albany for their pos∣sessions, that they might be quiet, and not stirre vp warre against him: liberalitie or courtesie shewed to a barbarous nature, is a weapon turned vpon your selfe: Bores and Bares cannot vnderstand fayre wordes and deedes: neuer hold vp a candle to the diuell. Rusticitie: Constantius was of so vile prouision in housekeeping, though he were a king, that on festi∣uall dayes hee borrowed plate of his friendes to fur∣nish his tables and cupbordes therewith: It is an vnseemly thing for any man, to set forth himself with other mens goodes: it is small credite for a scholler to seeke credite by vsing that oration or sermon that is not his owne: among all men a Prince must be
sufficient of himselfe for all matters that pertaine vnto him, if he be deficient, his grace is lost, his maie∣stie diminishyd, and hee euen rurified like a priuate subiect. Let not the beastes eate mans flesh in anie case, lesse they loue it. Their ver∣tue or pru∣dence is in Discerning: Helen in her virginitie was learned in all points of true morall wisedome: afterward, ey∣ther by some diuine inspiration, or by some humane information at Hierusalem, shee found the Crosse whereon Christ was crucified, and the three nayles wherewith he was nayled: they that seeke in zeale shall finde in ioy. Constantine vsed to haue the booke of God, which is the Spirite and Rule of Regi∣ment, carried before him wheresoeuer he want: he caused the Bible to be copyed out, and sent into the partes of his kingdome: he sawe by a vision a crosse in heauen with these wordes vpon it, In this signe is victory. Such are the heauenly fruites of a heauen∣ly minde: so we shall reape euer as we sowe. Prouiding: Octauy being restored to his kingdome, gathered together infinite riches, to be better able then he was aforetime, to wage warre against the ambitious and laborious Romanes: Souldiers run to the greatest pay. He sent for Maximinian coosin german to Constantine the Emperor, and offered him his daughter in his life time, lesse hee should be mar∣red with ill Counsell, and married to another after his death, which he perceiued to be at hand: guide them that cannot guide themselues. Maximinian made his sonne Victor fellow with the Emperour of
Roome, that he might strengthen himselfe on both sides, both at home and abroad: it is surer standing on two legges then on one: surer holding with two handes then with one. Their vice or impru∣dence is in Murder: An Earle of Brutany that fauoured Octauy much, seeing how wofully he was fled into Norway for feare of Traherne and the Romanes, which ouer∣came him in Westmerland, & considering in his hot wit, that Traherne being Helens vncle and a Brutan, ought not to haue done such wrong for the Romans sakes to the king of Brutany, but haue rather fought for him, neither vndermined him one way nor other, but with a butcherly wisedome layd violent handes vpon him, and slewe him, that Octauy might returne safely into the realme againe: Defect of inuention turneth a man into a bloudy beast. Improuidence: Maximinian gathered his riches so vnauisedly, that with them he gathered the ilwill of the Brutans. To haue is not the rule, but to get well: a mans glo∣rie is not in mony, but the glory of mony is in a man. Their ver∣tue or for∣titude is in Victories: Bassian and the Brutans slew Geta, and the Romanes by night. Maximinian ouerranne great partes of Gallia and Germania. Octauy ouerthrew Tra∣herne and the Romanes three legions neere Winche∣ster, and made them flie euen into Albany, and pur∣sued them into Westmerland. Gracian being sent in∣to the field from Maximinian, ouercame Guany the Duke of the Huns, and Melga the Duke of the Pictes,
and kept this Land from their furor by the helpe of the Brutans. Coil Earle of Colchester, which hee built rose against Asclepiodate, and slew him and was made king. Battels: Bassian was able to endure all the pains of war: a right Emperour for the campe. The Brutans seeing the valiant wit of Carasse, made him their king in spite of the Romans, & rather then they would yeeld to Roome they dyed in battell: Death is better then slauery among enemies. Constantine the first armed himselfe with the Brutans, and fought against Max∣entius: did he not good among them to doe them the more mischiefe, as the Philistines suspected Dauid who was a true saint of God? Conan Meriadocke made war with Maximinian at diuers times, because hee was a Roman: O it is an hard bone to digest Rome which counteth all birdes dawes besides her owne chickens: the man that hath another maister beside himselfe in his owne house is beside himselfe, or else I beleeue, he shalbe set beside his cushion at the last. Magnanimitie: Maximinian called Armorica Litle Brutany in honour of Brutans, because they conquered it: that a man winneth is his owne: a man may call his owne possession by what name it pleaseth him: new Lordes will haue newe names for their newe landes. Octauy being appointed king in the absence of Constantine, and hearing that Constantine was then made Emperor of Rome, thought verily, that he had enough to do in Roome, though hee medled not with Brutany, and tooke the Crowne to himselfe, and cha∣sed
the Romanes vp and downe in the land, and played Rex with them at all handes, to redeeme his Countrey from thraldome as hee counted it. Home is for the homeborne. Their vice or extreme fortitude is in Ambition: Carasse a Brutan of lowe birth, of a high heart, but a venturous man, a very hardydardy in deede as euer liued, keeping the Hauens, and play∣ing the Sea captaine, aspired to the kingdome and got it, both by greater promises then hee coulde per∣performe, and by gathering more bankrupts & ruffi∣ans to his side then he could keepe, and contemning all noble and great men in the Land: there was but one way with him, and that was in his head onely: all was one with him, so that one might be all: selfe-loue was selfewill, and both were for himselfe. Abiection of minde: When Coil the third saw, that Constantius was come from Roome with a great ar∣mie, he feared and graunted him tribute and peace, and euery thing els, to be out of danger, yet the most danger and damage in graunting these: A babies wit in a kings estate. The Brutans being afflicted by the Picts two times promised the Romanes a tribute to helpe them: then they submitted themselues to Aldroene of little Brutany, that he might succour them. O Heauens: where was olde Brutanie now? where, but in the Sea as a dead sea Whale?
THE TIMES OF THESE Romano-Brutans. AFter there had been a king for 15. yeares space, (in which time Clemens Alexandri∣nus liued: the Prophets were translated into Greeke) Bassian began his Raigne in the yeare of the world, 4179. and raig∣ned 6. yeares: in this time Papinian the great Ciuilian Chauncellor to Seuerus flourished. Carasse began in the yeare, 4185, and ruled 8. years: in this time Origen began to shew himselfe: Tertullian flourished. Alectus beganne in the yeare, 4193. and raigned sixe yeares: about this time Zephirine chaunged the Com∣munion cuppe into glasse for more decency, which had been of wood commonly. Asclepiodate began, 4199. and ruled 30. yeares: now Calistus appointed the 4. Ember weekes for the 4. quar∣ters: Vrban ordained that diuine vessels should be gold or siluer. Coil the third began, 4238. and raigned 27. yeares: now Philip was the first christened Emperour: Cyprian was martyred. Decius the persecuter was swallowed of a quagmire: Paul the first Hermite liued. Constantius began, 4265. and ruled 30. yeares: in his time Eutychian bishop of Roome buried 300. martyrs with his owne hands: Carus the Emperour was killed with lightning: the Citty Spira in Germany was built.
Constantine the first began, 4295. and raigned ten yeares: nowe 20000. Christians were burnt in a Church on Christmas day at night: Arnobius was fa∣mous. Octauy beganne, 4305. and ruled 54. yeares: now Siluester refused to weare a golden Crowne, which great Constantine offered him: the great Nicene Coun∣cell was held: Lactantius and Hilary were famous: Moonkes beganne in Antonie the Hermite, and Nuns in Marcella and Sophronia: Constantinople was built. Maximinian began in the yeare, 4359. and raigned 8. yeares: about this time Athanasius and Basilius flou∣rished: the Thalmud of the Iewes was compiled by Rabbi Iohanan: Iulian the Apostata and Libanius raged. Gracian began, 4367. and ruled 4. yeares: now E∣piphanius wrote against heretickes: Vphila found out the Gotes Letters, or a b c: about this time Gregory Nazian∣zene and Ambrose flourished. So the Gouernement of these Brutanoromans continued for the space of 183. yeares: but heere was no cer∣taine Ruler in Brutany for 36. yeares after. THE SIXT GENEALOGY OF Brutan Kinges. THe Brutans chose Constantine the second, the sonne of Aldroene king of litle Brutany for their king, and he raigned ouer them and begat three sonnes, the first was Constancie, the se∣cond Aurely, the third Vter, but then Credulity slew him.
Constancie the eldest son succeeded his father, but died without issue: for Doltishnesse and Treason slewe him, and Force lifted vp Vortiger to the kingdome, but Self-will sharpned him so, that the people hated him, and by plaine might created his sonne Vortimer their king: then Wichery puld him downe, and Insinuation restored Vortiger: yet Right and Vengeance at last destroyed him: then Common Consent made Aurely the second son of Constantine the second a king, but the diuels Art slew him, and he dyed without issue: so Vter the third son of Constantine succeeded him in the kingdome, and begat vppon Igerne his wife, or rather concubine Arthur the king, who raigned and left no seede behind him: then Constantine the third, the sonne of Cador a Cornish Duke Arthurs coosin was made king, but lasted not, for Conan his kinsman slew him and became king, & begat Vorti∣pory, who liued and dyed without issue: then Malgo the nephew of Conan raigned as king: hee was of sta∣ture and personage the goodliest among all men of his time, but left no Royall seede behinde him: thus Ca∣rency got the kingdome by the goodwill of Brutans, and lost it by his quarrellous nature: so Cadwan was chosen king, and hee begat Cadwallin the king, who died and left no seed behinde him: then Cadwallader by his No∣blenesse and manhood together obtained the Crowne and dyed without issue, and was the last king of the Brutans in the seate of Locrine. But, who can tell the ge∣nealogies of Camber? how happy is hee in his dwelling places, which no man taketh from him? His loynes are like a springing well: he runneth within his bankes, and is not stopped: surely his Riuer is one of Gods Ri∣uers: his Hils are the mountaines of Safety. Locrine
lay more open to the windes then Camber: hys braun∣ches are dryed vp with the Northeast windes, and the boysterous stormes haue broken them, but Camber had the fauourable Westwindes euer in his borders. The waters of Camber grow full of soothsaying reedes, the pens of Writers haue set him in more honour then hys brethren, he alone vpholdeth his fathers house. The great God of the world keepe him euermore with his inuincible right hand and stretched out arme, make his naule whole, and fil his bones with marrow and heat, giue him plentie of the fruites of the earth, and increase his cattle without number: leade forth hys sonnes in Triumphs and his daughters to the marriages of the mightiest, make hym blessed among all the nations of men, and raise vp the meanest of his people to renowne and glory: exalt thy frendes and conuert thy foes, fill thy coasts with all earthly and heauenly ioyes that be or may be. THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are in their Vertues and Vices. Their ver∣tue or pru∣dence is in Discipline: When Constantine the second saw, that his eldest sonne Constancy was slow of wit, and giuen to be solitary, he made him a moonke in the Abbey of Saint Swithune in Caerguent, and committed his o∣ther two sonnes to Guetheline Archbishop of Caerlud to be taught. If children be set into that way which they haue most minde vnto, they will prooue best in that way. A yoong Prince cannot bee brought vp better vnder any, then vnder a reuerend & Princely
churchman, seeing they are both pastors of the peo∣ple, and bishops of men. Prouidence: the two sonnes of Constantine being vn∣able to get the Crowne by might of arms, and fear∣ing, that treason should be wrought against them as it was against their eldest brother, looked to the safe∣tie of their liues, and fled into little Brutanie. If we cannot do that is right and due, the best way is to saue the principall that is most worth. It is no shame to flie, when resisting is wilful death. Bruciuall saued 50. moonks of Bangor by flying from Ethelfride duke of Northumbeland, when 1200. had been slaine by him. The Bishops of Caerlud and Caerbranke in Ca∣rencies time fled to Rome for feare of the cruel Sax∣ons, and dealt so wisely with Pope Gregory, that they were saued from bloudy handes. Doctrine: Aurely desiring to teach the Brutans, to be∣ware of outlandish friendship, which had in his days so intrapped and infected them, caused Merlin by his Art Soueraigne, to fetch the great stones out of Ireland, which are now vpon Salsbury plain, and set them neere the place where Hengist and the Sax∣ons against their Oath did murder hundreds of the best Brutans with kniues secretly prouided for the pur∣pose, and tooke Vortiger their king prisoner, and ran∣somed him at their pleasure, That when they should see those stones or heare of them, they might remem∣ber the stony heartes of outlandish friendes, the hy∣pocrisie of Saxons, the vntrueth of strangers, and either appoint them true ouerseers, or els away with them out of the Land. Gouernement: Vter after hys brother Aurelius death
ruled the Realme so orderly and circumspectly, both in respect of trecherous flatteries, and trusty friend∣ship, and all matters both common and extraordina∣rie, that he was surnamed Pendragon, A Prince as mightie and subtle among men, as the Dragon is a∣mong the beastes of the field. A good name is a trea∣sure, but why do men commend a man, which ought to be the phrase onely of dispraise? Hee that can shut his handes from straungers, as Vter did, shall pre∣uent many woes. Arthur disposed all things in or∣der, sailed into Gallia, left his nephew Mordred for king, and wrought great myracles abroad. It had been more wisedome, to haue wrought them at home, if they were good, to do his owne people good: or if they were deceites, to haue practised them priui∣ly, that his name might not be blotted and dimini∣shed. Their vice or impru∣dence is in Credulitie: Constantine the second fauoured a Pict so much, that he might haue accesse to him at all times, euen into his bed chamber, though hee had been the greatest enemy that the Picts had in Brutanie manie yeares: this Pict knewe it too well, and wayted his time: and at last tooke him alone, and slew him in his bed chamber. Straungers cannot be true friendes, if they and we haue at any time been at ods. Thy desire to pleasure vs with their seruice, to serue vs such a turne, as the Fox doth the simple Kid or Lambe. Vortiger entertained Hengist the second time for this daughters sake, that is one foe for ano∣ther foes sake: he neuer imagined, that Hengist was his foe, though Vortimer his son had chafed him, and
chased him out of the land: he met him on Salsbury plaine, to intreate of peace that should be betweene them, & came peaceably with his men, as the agree∣ment was, without weapons, but presuming chil∣dishly, that all was well, when nothing could possi∣bly be safe in any reason: hee searched not Hengistes company, to see if they carried any weapons vnder their long gowns, and by this babish credulitie spoi∣led himselfe of his libertie, and 460. noblemen Bru∣tans of their liues. When Aurely lay sick in his bed, his friends that wer about him, being as sick in their wits as he was in his body, suffered a Saxon to be hys Phisition, & to minister vnto him, till he poisoned him. If the Bru∣tans knew not, that he was a Saxon, they were vn∣reasonable to take they knew not whō, if they knew him, and yet trusted in his helpe, they were senselesse and vtterly out of their wits. Cadwallin ioyned in friendship with Penda a Saxon, but afterward hee neuer thriued in any wars which hee tooke in hand as he did aforetime: hee that could not see, that the Saxon would onely vndermine him, was vnwise: he that would trust him at all, was not wise, seeing he might liue well inough without his help. Dissimulation: Vortiger Duke of Cornewall proui∣ded king Constance the Sheep a gard of 100 Wolues or Picts, and then vsed all means to please them with words and gifts: when he had made them dronken, hee complained to them of his pouertie euen with teares: anon they deuised such an helpe for him as they could, he so pierced their headlesse heartes, and heartlesse heades, that assoone as he was gone from
them in sorrow, they followed him with the head of Constance: he lamented for ioy of his death, and lesse he might be suspected of the fact, hee caused the 100. Picts to be executed after the law, and of all men was most against them, yet so, that some men perceiued his shites. He that hath any lawfull title in any pos∣session is wisest, if he seeke it lawfully, or els, he may be put iustly from his owne. The Duke of Cornwall had more right to the Crown then the Dukes sonne of little Brutanie, but was it not extreame folly to cha∣lenge it in so villanous a maner? and was not Con∣stance a most improuident creature, to be garded with them which scarsely regarded him so much as a countriman doth his beast? Surely God was an∣gry with Brutans, when hee suffered their Rulers to liue so rudely without the Rule of wisedome. O yee Heauens blesse ye our Nobles, and al other Regents on the earth, or els they will be without Regiment in their liues and end basely with vile death. Con∣stance had been fit to be a poore mans Sowe in a sty, which is content with any vsage, so the trough be ful and the bones at rest: lay a logge into a cloyster, and it will come out all worme eaten, and fit onely to be burnt. Their ver∣tue of for∣titude is in Magnificence and Magnanimitie: When Vortimer saw that he must die, hee called his souldiers before hym, and gaue all that he had among them, and exhorted them, euer to hold their owne against the Saxons, and all forraine enemies. A true heart is vertuous to the last gaspe. Ambrius built the Abbey of Ams∣bruy, Arthur built the castle of Windsor, and founded
the order of knightes of the round table: Artgall the first Eare of Warwicke, one of Arthurs knights chose a Beare for his beast, because Arth in that language signified a Beare, in remembrance of his name a∣mong all his posteritie. Quicheline gaue seuen myles compasse of land to Berine Bishop of Winchester, to build his See there, and Kenwalke his sonne finished it. Saint Osuald gaue his daughter Elfleda xii. Lord∣ships, to build xii. Monasteries with them, vi. in Bernicia, and vi. in Deyra. When Cadwallader had conquered the Saxons in Kent, and in the Ile of Might, hee gaue the fourth part of the Ile, that is, 300. households to Wilfride in honour of religion and of his owne name. Victories: Edolf Earle of Chester seeing how Hen∣gist slew the Brutans with secret kniues, got him to a hedge, and defended himselfe with a stake, and slew of the Saxons 70. men and escaped. Vortimer the sonne of Vortiger hated the Saxons more then hys father loued them: hee pursued them and gaue them battell at the riuer of Darwent, and ouerthrew them, at Epyford he ouercame them, hee chased them by the sea side into the Ile of Might, he vanquished them at Cole More, he turmoyled them in Norfolk, in Essex, in Kent, he put them out of their possessions, he droue them to the Ile of Tenet, there he besieged them by water and by land, and neuer left them till they fled out of the land. Aurely with the aid of the king of little Brutany tooke Caerbranke from Octa and tooke him prisoner: he sought with Hengist at Crekinford, and slewe 4000. souldiers and 4. Dukes of the Saxons: he droue them out of Lo∣cry
euery where, except Kent: hee quitted himselfe from Ella and Porth, two mightie Saxons. Vter in the time of his brothers sicknesse put to flight Pascenty the sonne of Vortiger with his army of Germans, and afterward slew him, and Guillioman the Irish Prince at S. Dauids in Cambry, and Cossa and Octa the Sax∣ons. Arthur fought 12. battels with the Saxons, and euery time ouerthrew them: he made them pay him tribute: when hee was in Gallia, and heard of Mordreds treason, he returned and fought with him at Sandwich and ouercame him, and againe hee o∣uerthrew him at Winchester, and at Bathe he slew him. Constantine the third vanquished the two sons of Mordred and put them to flight when they rose a∣gainst him and chalenged the Crowne by theyr fa∣thers title. Vortipory the son of Conan discomfited the Saxons in many battels and got the vpper hand of them alwaies. Malgo subdued the Saxons in all his wars, he conquered Ireland, Scotland, Iseland, Norway, Denmarke, the Orcades, and possessed them. Arthur slew in one day an hundred and fortie Saxons with his owne hand. Cadwallader slew Lo∣thary Prince of Kent, and Athelwald king of Southsex, and possessed those landes. Cadwallin droue the Sax∣ons all along to Middlesex and made Penda pay him tribute. Now armies stay in Saxony, and paper∣men flye from those coastes: these do more harme in many places then those old armies did: these will be sauced as they were, and hunted out of the land by order of discipline: none so busie as they, and yet none more slight then they: there is an Arthur in paper∣worke against their inuasions, which may in all
right and equitie giue them twelue disgraces at the least, and perhaps twelue times twelue: let the triall proue all, or let that labour be lost, if they can recouer there 12 losses of this newe Arthur. Their vice or extreme fortitude is in Ambition: Vortiger tooke Constance out of a Mona∣sterie to be king, that he might do what he list in the kingdome vnder such an innocent and milksop, and make his simplicitie a meanes for himselfe to get the Crowne, as it proued afterward. Mordred Arthurs kinsman being appointed Vicegerent in his royalty, gaue great giftes and castels more then his owne to Cerdrick a Saxon, and agreed with him to be crow∣ned at Winchester with his goodwill, so that himself might be crowned at Caerlud by his liking. The two sonnes of Mordred the vsurper rebelled against Con∣stantine the third for the kingdome and lost it. No right or trueth can stay an aspyring humour. Pusillanimitie: Arthur gaue two Shyres to Cer∣drick Duke of the Westsaxons, to the end hee might be quiet: those two shyres could do Brutans more good then Arthurs peregrination: an enemie must not giue or take any thing, but winne all by might or sleight. When Cadwallader had raigned 12. yeares, hee for∣sooke all his princely attyre, and went to Roome, and led a monasticall life euer after: he preferd rest before riches, the hood aboue the Crowne. Rage or crueltie: The Pictes to please their captaine Vortiger slew Constance their king, and presented hys head to Vortiger, imagining they had done the best act that coulde be, to redresse his poore estate, wher∣of he had complained to them. Renowne the daugh∣ter
of Hengist, the concubine of Vortiger, seeing what Vortimer had done in spight of the Saxons her coun∣treymen and friends, how he had taken away their possessions, howe he reedified Churches which they destroyed, howe hee was like to destroy them all, if he liued a while, sought out witches and magicians, to charme or charactize him to death by some prac∣tise, but when they could not worke vpon him, she in∣sinuated her selfe to one of his neerest men, and so corrupted his minde and sense with wordes & gifts, that he consented to poyson his Lord, and so hee did. Conan loued quarrellours aboue other men, he made away his owne vncle that should haue bin king, and slew his two sonnes. Ethelfride Duke of Northum∣berland massacred 1200. moonks of Bangor in a beastly immanitie, to please Ethelbert king of Kent, which had offered praiers to God against him. Caren∣cie was so giuen to ciuill warres, that he loued them aboue all other acts, wherby he fell into such hatred, that hee was not able to stand against the Saxons. Out of all question, it is extreame madnesse, to admit any strangers into our countrey, that are eyther more militar or more politick then the commonaltie, vnlesse it be for a time, and then away with them, or they be kept in their boundes with certaine compa∣nie, and neither see nor heare more then belongeth to strangers: what shuld strangers but be vsed strange∣ly? they pretend pouertie, but they intend to weaken our land: they flie for religion, but they foster here∣sies: draffe is their errand, but drinke they would: either they are diuels in their owne likenesse: or else they are Angels with the entrals of Diuels: foolish
pitty destroyeth the Cittie: prouide for the weakest, the strongest can saue it selfe: the malignant hand will spoyle the impotent people, when it cannot spill the bloud of Nobles: but if Hares wurry Hounds, and Harts be wounded of Ferrets, then is the world turnd vpside downe, the Hunters are vile keepers, and the keepers are vilest men: Let Brutans be fedde and taught as is meete for them, and let my life go, if they make not their ennemies round about them like Hares and Ferrets, which euer auoyd the pre∣sence of men. Their ver∣tue or tem¦perance is in Life and maners: the Clergy in the time of Cadwallin behaued themselues so soberly and fatherly in all points, that they were honoured of most men, inso∣much, that as they went too and fro in the streetes and other places, the people would kneele downe to them, and aske them their blessing, and gaue them whatsoeuer they demanded. Wordes: Berine Bishop of Dorchester conuerted Kingelist the king of the Westsaxons, and christened him, which he could neuer haue done without most temperate and well seasoned speech: by the like mo∣deration Pauline conuerted Edwine king of Northum∣berland to the christian faith. Melite Bishop of Caer∣lud conuerted Sebert king of Essex to Christian religi∣on. The Clergy of Kent delt so with their king Er∣combert, that he puld downe the Temples of his false Gods, and kept the Lent fast, and became a Chri∣stian. When the Brutan Bishops saw, that Austin took vpon him as their soueraigne, they would not resist him presently, but stayd a while, to see his life and be∣hauiour,
and then to vse them therafter, either frend∣ly or aduersly. Liberalitie: When Ethelfride had put away his wife being great with childe, Cadwan receiued her into his Court, and kept her honourably till shee was deliue∣red, and so long after as shee would. Osuald Duke of Bernicia liked so wel of Cedda Bishop of Winchester, that hee gaue him land to build and Abbey thereon. The more is giuen for the promotion of Gods Ma∣iesty, the more he giueth to our benefite. Their vice or intem∣perance is in Loue: When Ronowen had saluted Vortiger with a golden cup of wine, and desired him to drinke of it, he beheld her bewtie, and was presently so inamored of her, that he could not be quiet, till he had put away his owne wife, by whom he had three sons and mar∣ried her, and for her sake loued Saxons more then Brutans: he lay with his owne daughter to haue issue of her, but in vaine. Vter fell in loue with Igerne the wife of Gorleis Duke of Cornewall, and slewe him at his castell Tintagel, and tooke her to wife. Malgo fel into the sinne of Sodom, and lost all that he had gotten aforetime: let not sense rule reason. Liberalitie: Vortiger entertained Hengist, and Hor∣sus with their three ships, he gaue them ye hire of soul∣diers, he bestowed the Ile of Tenet vpon them: hee graunted Hengist so much ground as hee could com∣passe with a buls hide: he took away the Earldom of Kent from Garangon, and gaue it him. Anger: Constantine the third siue one of Mordreds sonnes for rebelling against him euen in the Minster of Winchester: the other for the same cause in the
temple at Caerlud. Dionote Abbot of Bangor would not yeeld to Austin, because he was of another Pro∣uince, neither would he preach to the Saxons, be∣cause they spoyled the land, do Ethelbert king of Kent what he could vnto him. The ver∣tue or iu∣stice is in Rewarding: Constantine the second receiued the crowne and rule of Brutanie by a couenant that hee made with the Brutans, when he deliuered them from the tyranny of the Picts. When Aurely remembred, how fast the Brutans resorted vnto him, and Vter at their landing at Totnes, and how truely they serued him in his warres, did them one good turne for ano∣ther, and repaired their temples and houses, which the Saxons destroyed, and restored their religion to them againe. Deuiding: In the time of Carency it was determi∣ned at Worcester by a Councell of the chiefest men, That the goodes of the Church should be bestowed on the Bishops, their Clergy, the Churches the poore people, and then Gregory the great, appointed the two Archbishops of Brutany at Caerbrank, and Caerkent. The Archbishop of S. Dauids had vnder thim these 7. Bishops. Hereford, Cardiff, Landaff, Bangor, S. Asaph, Worcester, Morgan. Punishing: The Pictes to reuenge the death of the 100. Picts that garded Constance, made war agaynst Vortiger: the friends of Constance deuised to ouerthrow him for the death of their Prince: thus he was tossed vp and downe the land, that hee could not be safe. The Brutans seeing Vortigers extreame affection to∣ward the Saxons, deposed him: when hee was ta∣ken
prisoner by Hengist, they forsooke him: Aurely and Vter burnt him to ashes in his Castle. The Bishops refused Austin by the aduise of an old Anchorite, who iudged him no man of God which vsed his brethren like his seruants. Cadwan slew Edwine and Osricke and Eufricke Saxon kinges for the bloud of the Brutans which they had poured out like water on euery side of the Realme. Burials: Vortimer was buried solemnly at Caerlud. Aurely & Vter were buried at Stoneheng in Sals∣bury plaine. Arthur was buried in the valley of Gla∣scenbury. Constantine the third at Stoneheng. Vorti∣pory, Vortiger, Malgo, and Carency were not orderly bu∣ried for their vile liues. Cadwan died in war, and was buried accordingly. Constance deserued his faire bu∣riall. Their vice or iniu∣stice is in Couetousnesse: Vortiger forgetting his loyaltie to his Prince abused him intollerably, and got him by his own consent the strongest Castels, and best trea∣sure that he had: he euer defended the 100. Pictes what naughtinesse soeuer they committed in the Court. Vnthankfulnesse: the Brutans being desired by Vorti∣mer on his death bed, to bury his body at the hauen where the Saxons vsed to land, in a sepulchre of brasse spire like, to put them in feare with the remem∣brance of him and his acts, eyther neglected his will or forgat it. O vniust men that take such a farewell of their friends. Vter died by force of poyson at Veru∣lam in Hertfordshire neere S. Albons. Constantine and Constance, the father and his sonne were not buried after the maner of Princes.
I haue not that peculiar regard of places nowe, which I had before, partly by reason of forenamed cau∣ses, and partly in that they are sufficiently set foorth in these morall tables. I desire heerein and euer a quiet iudgement, and then I doubt not of any censurer, but he will speake fairely. Yet I must leaue euery man to himselfe, to doe as he is caused in his deliberatiue and considerate insight. If I omit some histories of Sax∣ons, I do but my duetie: what haue I to do with them, vnlesse it were to make them tributary to Brutans? o∣therwise, let their owne men commend them if they wil, I owe them no seruice by writing or speaking. Yet I haue named some of the Saxons, though I doe it more for their sakes with whome they dwelt, then for any merite of their owne. Let them lye in dead forget∣fulnesse like stones, that haue desired, or doe desire the trouble of Brutanie: let their names be cleane put out, and not come among the righteous. When men play the parts of beasts, let them go among the numbers of cattell in Zoography and keepe their fit place. An ape must not come among Churchmen, Serpentes must not dwell in chambers of Counsell, make bates are not in case to cōuerse in the dwellings of peaceable Lords, who can abide, to haue a deformed mocker with hys distorted mouthes, a venimous hisser with his noysom breath, a rayling stage player with his trifling actions for his companion? Arise ye sonnes of Ebranke, and yee kinsmen of true auncient Brutans, and make those stone∣hearted creatures know, that they are made to be your seruants and drudges: let not any double forked toong perswade you, that Brutanie is vnder any part of the earth.
THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS. BEtweene the death of Gracian, and the raigne of Constantine the second, were a∣bout 36. yeares passed ouer in Brutanie without a Ruler. In this time Theodo∣sius was excommunicated by Ambrose for murder: Ierome and Austin and Gouldmouth flouri∣shed: Claudian the Poet was famous: Siricius Bishop of Roome forbad Priests to marry. Constantine the second began to raigne in the yeare of the world, 4407. and raigned ten yeares: in this time the Goths and Hunnes inuaded Italy, and possessed it: the Vandals entred into Spaine and spoiled it: the first Councell was set against Pelagius the heretick a Brutan. Constancy began in the yeare 4417. & ruled 5. yeares. In this time Ierome died: S. Alban was martired at Moguntia: Saluian the teacher of Bishops flourished in Massilia: Burgundians were conuerted to christian religion. Vortiger began to rule, 4422. and ruled 16. yeares: Then Vortimer beganne 4438. and ruled 7. yeares. In this time Austin died: Cyrill, S. Patricke and Cassian flourished: Theodosius founded a generall Schoole at Bononia: Attila with 500000. souldiers spoyled the Romans horribly, and all partes where he went. Clo∣doue the first famous king of Fraunce liued. Vortiger began to rule again, 4445. & ruled 9. years: Aurely began, 4454. and raigned 19. yeares: in this
time Genserick with the Vandals subdued Roome: the Venetians began to dwell in their Ilands where they dwell now: Mamertus a Bishop inuented Letanies: Hilary of Roome adorned Churches with gold & siluer. Vter began, 4473. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Honorick the son of Genserick banished 334. Bishops and Priestes out of Africke, and slew many thousand chri∣stians, but at last he was eaten vp of wormes: Fulgen¦tius the Bishop of Hispalis flourished: Theodoricke the king of Gothes did many noble and vertuous acts in Italy, and builded decayed places. Arthur began 4489. and raigned 26. yeares: in which time S. Patricke dyed in Scotland being 62. yeares old: Theodorick would not suffer the Romans to practise any feates of war, or to haue any weapons, for feare they should rebell: Cassiodore of a Senatour be∣came a Moonke. Constantine the third, began, 4515. and ruled 3. years: at this time Gildas the Brutan liued, surnamed Sapiens, Boethius the Christian Philosopher liued and was mar∣tired. Conan beganne 4518. and raigned 3. yeares: in this time Symmachus the Roman prelate tooke vpon him to be supreme ruler and iudge of all Councels in Christen∣dome. Vortipory beganne 4521. and ruled 4. yeares: now Clodoue the French king vowed christianisme and was baptised: Olympius an Arrian, for blaspheming the Tri∣nitie was slame with lightning from heauen. Malgo began, 4525. and raigned 35. yeares: now Iustinus the Emperour was first crowned by the Ro∣man Bishop: Iustinianus made the Codex of the ciuill
law: Tribonianus disposed the Digests of the same law: S. Benedict and his sister Scholastica wrought woonders. Priscian liued. Carency began, 4560. and ruled 3. yeares: but after his death the Brutans had no king for 24. yeares space, till Cadwan was made king: now Totilas the tyrant of the Gothes raged in Italy, and Narses sent from the Emperour slew him: the nation of the Hunnes was almost vtterly extinguished in Greece, by the Emperor: Armenij receiued Christian faith. Cadwan began 4587. and raigned 22. yeares: in this time S. Brigit the Scot was famous: Gregory of Roome called himselfe Seruaunt of Seruauntes: the Latine toong was not vsed in Roome, because all men conuer∣sed there. Cadwallin began 4609. and ruled 48. yeares: now Heraclius slew Phocas and got the Empire, and married his sisters daughter: the Arabians receiued the law of Mahomet, and were called Saracens: Isidore Bishop of Hispalis liued: Sabinianus Bishop of Roome appointed bels to distinguish the times of the day: Honorius spoiled the Temple of Romulus to build the Temple of Saint Peter. Cadwallader began 4657. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Saracens got great part of Africk. Mar∣tin of Roome constituted that his Clergy should vowe chastitie, or loose their liuings. Thus these kinges raigned 238: yeares. I omit the inter∣raignes, before Constantine the second, and Cadwan: one was 36. yeares, the other 24. yeares.
THREE SVPPOSES OF A STV∣dent concerning Historie. The first Suppose. A Nobleman or Captaine of men despiseth common matters in his own person: he de∣sireth to find in himselfe the commendable singularities of singular men in all ages: he would be loquent as Mithridates, that could speake 22. languages: he would be eloquent as Orpheus, that could perswade the Diuels and men as he listed: hee would be logicall as Ramus, that coulde iudge euerie mans writings and not be deluded by any writer: he would be arithmeticall as Pythagoras that was admi∣rable by the knowledge of Numbers: he would be geo∣metricall as Arithimedes that compassed many great matters by the misterie of proportions: he would be a∣strologicall in all questions, as Stoflerinus was in one, who foresaw and foretold the fall of monasteries: hee would be effectually musicall, as Timotheus that coulde either inflame, or quench Alexanders spirites with hys melody: in a word, he would be a right noble Artist in all these seuen Arts, or in some of them. Now I am sure, that all the historicall Recordes, which I haue yet seene, and I beleeue are commonly to be seene of Mithridates, Orpheus, Ramus, Pythagoras, Ar∣thimedes,
Stoflerinus and Timotheus, are not able by the hundred part to make any student as renowned an Artist as they were, though the be read and perused most exquisitly. Another Nobleman or Captaine of men, desireth to be Honourable by Nauigation as Vespusius was: de∣lighteth to search the secretes of warfare as Hanniball did: wisheth to rise from an obscure Countrey life, to a Princely seat as Numa did: could be glad of such a me∣dicinal facultie as Aesculapius had in raising a dead man to life: he wisheth to himself the spirit of Moses in making lawes and working myracles: in a word, He studieth to purchase himselfe a glorious Name, both for his life time, and after his death, as these men haue done afore∣time. Now I dare say vppon sufficient reading, that the Histories which are written of Vespusius, Hanniball, Nu∣ma, Aesculapius and Moses, are not able to beget such a man, as euery of them was in his kind, neither can the causes that serued them, according to their registers, serue other men for effecting of like actions. I cannot of a Man be made a Bee, and gather hony out of all sweet flowers and herbes, but if God will I may be a Collector of the wisdome of all ancient books, & make Ambrosia rather then hony out of them. I haue need of these men once, to see what they did, as young∣lings do: and againe I read them, to see if their Histo∣ries can instruct me to do the like: and now I must de∣pend vppon the proofe of other Artes, then are compre∣hended in Histories: these giue but a light in the way, which I would walke in: I must haue eyes in my head ere I come to that way, and feete and strength to
beare me through it: els the way is not for me, but for them that can go in it, what make I there? I heare much of it, and when I would go in it, I want eyes and feet to bring me thither, and am driuen to say, That God which giueth eyes to the blind, and walkes to the lame, had neede giue me more then Histories haue in them, or els I shal neuer be that I would be in one Art or other. Then seeing Histories breed onely desires and wishes and expectations in the hearts of students & no∣thing but affections, seeing they neuer create any habit or perfection in them: I omit the verball and talkatiue vses of histories, which other men stand vpon, and con∣ceiue in my mind this Idaea of one that would be a man of men, as God is named the Lord of Lords. The second Suppose. A Man that is borne of healthful and strong pa∣rents, that are vnder thirtie years and aboue twentie, is commonly in good health, and of great strength: for sound timber must needes make a strong building, if aduised workemen haue the framing of it. He that is brought vp in all kindes of labour from his childhood will indure any paines in his manhood: for custome is a second nature, as those armes of an oke or other tree, are strongest ordinarily which are toward the North. A man will not feed aboundantly for pleasure, but necessarily for health: for he hath seene, that a body nei∣ther full nor empty is seldome or neuer distempered and sicke.
He will not be idle at any time, but either studying, or practising great and small matters for himselfe and his friendes continually: for the more good we thinke and do, the neerer we are to God almightie. A man wil not reiect the speech and face of any man on the earth, but he will onely haue vse of them that are like himselfe in disposition and action: for the hatred of any man is hurtfull, and where all agree in one, there is happiest successe. He doth not respect, how they liued and apparelled and emploied themselues that are dead, but what good soeuer he can do, he doth it with all his minde & might, and neuer ceaseth from his work till it be finished in the best maner: for commonly men may doe greater actes then they doe, if they measure not themselues by other men, seeing he that trieth his owne parts most, is euer most glorious. A man will be skilfull in all thinges which prolong life or shorten it, that hee may preserue himselfe and hys friends, and destroy his and their enemies: for in death al Noble Acts are cut off, and the ouerthrow of contra∣ries is the generation of concord, and multiplication of consent. He will beleeue that he knoweth himself by triall, he hath an eye in his hand and heart that neuer sleepeth: for he that trusteth other mens words and deeds with∣out proofe of them, is carried euery way with euery fac∣tion and fiction of the world. A man will so arme his body with moderate anti∣dotes, that no poyson shall easily ouercome him: for hee prouideth for the worst, and remembreth withall, that the best can saue it selfe.
He is prepared for all changes and chances that may come vpon him in this life, & considereth rather what may happen vnto him then peruse the fortunes of other men. Thus I haue written generally, but I may not tell my tale and idee particularly in euery poynt, till I be a few yeares elder. The third Suppose. TWo noblemen that partly by nature, and part∣ly by art, could make their bodies indefatiga∣ble for euery attempt and exploit agreed be∣tweene themselues to try, whether books of historie, or deuises of their own would make the more braue man. He that followed books, desired onely to be like the best Worthies of other ages: he that relyed vpon his owne deuise was not content with the examples of bookes, but inuented the means to excel the best that euer was: the bookman putting his felicitie in imitation, came short of those patterns, and yet was glad whē he came neere them: the deuiser setting his mind on emulation, searched the causes of auncient excellencies, and by ad∣ding to the causes added to the effectes, and went be∣yond them all in what case he would. The bookman saith, giue me the life of Alexander, the life of Caesar, the life of Sanderbeg, and then thinketh he hath gotten the spoyles of the East and West, and all patterns of glory that may be gotten: the deuiser saith, let me see the cau∣ses that made those three men so eminent aboue other men: so I shall perceiue a defect of these causes in Hi∣storians: then I must supply them, and excell those
three in mine own person, or in ruling others: the most od and speciall acts that euer they did, may not onely be matched, saith he, but also ouermatched wel enough, I beleeue, and to be plaine, I see nothing euen in Vlis∣ses or Achilles, but it may be seen, I hope, in another, vn∣lesse these books will giue me leaue to trie, whether I may surmount their Nobilities, I will be so bold in reason as to say, that books were made to keep men vnder a certain height, and within a certain compasse, and to make men half the men that they might be, and as it were very woodcocks in comparison of that they should proue, by trying all and trusting none, but which they find certainly, and experimentally true. Thus the bookman is a gallant man with an eare mark and chains of bondage about his necke, but the deuiser him∣selfe is a soueraigne authour of manhood, hauing no cognisance of subiection about him besides the mortali∣tie of his flesh, which notwithstanding he maketh in some sort immortall, eyther in leauing the life therof in his succession, or in spending the might of it in contem∣platiue assaults and atchiuements: for study spendeth the outward man more then action. The Deuiser saith, that men of chiefest note haue euer been of his mind: they haue not beleeued that old bookish rule, Oporter discentem credere, for then they had neuer been better then other mens schollers, whereas by the meanes a∣foresaid they are become captaines in their kind: yet if they had neuer been borne I am sure, saith he, that I had been of this mind, Mundus est omnes libri, this rule is manly, Oporter discentem dubitare, vnlesse he will be deceiued, and runne on the head halfe his life time: in a word, it appeareth plainly, that many men which can∣not
read in bookes vse daily the same or better meanes to try out maysteries then the graundest bookmen: if my iudgement be an error, I would know, from what cause the first Doctors had their Artes before bookes were made: the sworde makes not the warrior: no help is equall with the principall: nature is mightier then Art: the actor more worthy man then his scribe. Wherefore in respect of the premises, and such other considerations, I haue rather taken an Essay in our Brutan history, then made a Worke. If I be faultie in writing too much, I confesse I knowe no method of writing briefly: If I be blamed in writing too litle, I wil not deny, that the old Brutans deserue a large Chro∣nicle: if I haue kept in the midst of both, it agreeth most with my desire. But why should I doubt of this or that? of friend or foe? Let euery one speake and write freely, not licentiously, in honour of his owne Countrey, that is, not against his kindred and him∣selfe, which are partes thereof. It is a dangerous position to refuse the offspring of Brute, both in regard of all reuerend antiquities of historie, and in respect of our owne Countreimen and neighbours, to whome I wishe all concord and agreement among themselues and against their enemies for euer. FINIS.
