22919.2 99899076 150758
A most delicate, pleasant, amorous, new Song, made by a Gentleman that enioyes his Loue, shewing the worth and happi∣nesse of Content, and the effects of loue, calle, All louers Ioy. To the tune of New Paradise. SIng, O sing, the day is cleare. sad misfortunes are estranged, Kinder Planets rule the Spheare, what was ill, to good is changed: My more froward hope remoue, And I now liue where I loue. No more ioy to man can happen, then a creature so diuine, As my loue, Each part is shapen like to Venus in her prime, No delight so true doth proue, As the sweet contents of loue. Cynthya, when she kist Endimion, vpon towering Latmos mount, By each free and wise opinion, was not of so deare account. In no age was knowne to moue, Fairer then my fairest Loue. Hellen in those wrinckled dayes, was accounted beauties mirrour, My sweet Ladies glistering rayes, now approue that Ages errour. Hellen far her selfe's aboue, Neuer liu'd a fairer Loue. Had Paris, when from Troy he parted, seene in Ida my rich Fleece, Spartas Queene had not orestarted, neither her true Lord nor Greece. Paris ne're had crost the flood, To this day faire Troy had stood. Iason left his natiue Greece, and vnto Cholchis toyling went, At his returne, his Golden Fleece equal'd not this ornament: Ancient Authors doe approue Mine the Queene of truest loue, The Second Part. To the same Tune. PRincely Theseus neuer knew, nor the wandring Prince of Troy, A beauty so diuine and true, all their times could not enioy. All their fortunes mine is aboue, To enioy so true a Loue. Happier I then tongue can vtter, to possesse so faire a Faire, Euery sense for ioy doth mutter, to my ioyes none can compare: Sweeter pleasures cannot moue, Then to liue where one doth loue. Powerfull loue, the worlds knight mar∣shall, I will sacrifice to thee, My true honours shall be vnpartiall, that thou shalt-receiue from me. All the gods thou art aboue, Let me still liue where I loue. None doth win a happier prize the content (in mine opinion) All the consurers of the wise, grant it is the best dominion: For the wisest doth approue, Kings can but liue where they loue. Silly Swaines that pipe on bankes, (turn'd poore Shepheards for their liuing Giue to loue as many thankes, as in Court great Lords are giuing. Trust, content doth euer moue, In that place where resteth loue. Strangest god of Homers number, I will euer thee adore. Thou art onely earths great wonder Cupid, I they aide implore. As to serue thee stil I stroue, Grant me still life where I loue. Pleasure now such scope possesseth, all my ioy is in the prime, No sad thought my mind opresseth, comfort is so truely mine. All delights doe in me moue, Because I liue where I loue. Come, O come and sing with me, at my Feasts and Banquetings Louers all, that speeders be, come reioyce like petty kings: All our songs shall still approue, All content doth liue with loue. Finis. Printed at London for H. G.
