4115.5 99900443 173173
A true and perfecte Discourse of the ouerthrow of certaine companies of Burgonions both horse & foot men at Villefranche, a towne scituate on the borders of Champaigne, vpon the riuer of Meuze, be∣tweene Sunday at night & Munday morning being the 4. day of August 1597. together with the certaine number of how many are slaine and taken prisoners. Translated out of French into English, By W.P. printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by E. Allde for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be solde at his shop vnder the Royall Exchange.
A true and perfect discourse of the o∣uerthrow of certaine companies of Burgoi∣nions both horse and foote men, at Villefranche, a towne scituated on the borders of Champaigne, vpon the riuer of Meuze, between Sunday at night & Munday morning be∣ing the 4. day of August, 1597. together with the certaine number of how many are slaine and taken prisoners. IT is not in fewe but in many places that the hatred and se∣cret enuy of the King of Spaine doth dayly and hour∣ly shew it self against the coun∣try of France, or rather the great desire he hath to possesse the Crowne and Diadem therof, as being the fairest peece of grounde in all Europe: But God, that vntil this time, hath kept and preserued the same, will still defende & main∣taine it: yea, & restore it, vnto the pristinate glory and splendor therof: wherof he faileth not to put vs stil in comfort, by diuers and sundry effectes, and those in many places, as now lately at Ville∣franche a small towne scituate vppon the riuer of
Meuze, between Astehay and Dun, towns belong∣ing to Monsieur de Corraine, and about seauen small miles distant from the Towne of Sedan. This towne is verie little, and was in time past built by King Francis the first, in forme foure square like a sconce, seeming rather a small Forte to holde a court of Guard then a towne, which he caused to be made only to hinder the incursions of the Burgonions into the Country of Cham∣paigne. In the last Ciuiil wars, it was taken by the Duke of Lorraine, & since that time by certain composition & agreement made, deliuered vp a∣gaine vnto the King of France, the gouernor ther∣of at this present is one Monsieur de Tremelet a Gentleman of that Country, whose valor and fi∣delite is much renowmed, through the seruices by him done & accomplished for his Maiestie, du∣ring his warres: namely vnder the Regiment of Monsiur the Duc de Neuers. The Garrison hee hath vnder him within the town, is three compa∣nies of foot & one of horsmē. The Burgonians (for so all that serue ye king of Spaine in those parts are called, namly those of the Duchie of Luxemburg,) which of long time haue desired to set foote in the country of Champaigne, wherin they make daily incursions, adressing all their intents & Forts a∣gainst the townes scituate on the riuer of Meuze, as Meziers, Seda, Mouzon, Villefranche, or rather Rocroy & Maubert fontaine, which are not far frō them, as yet could neuer attaine vnto their pur∣pose, through the diligent watch and prouident care, by the gouernors thereof dayly had & main∣tained.
And perceiuing that by policie and armes they could not preuaile, they thought to proue if treason would worke anie better effect: which likewise in ye end returned vpon thēselues. Of late they haue stil aymed at Villefranche, as a most fit place for their entrance into Champaigne: & for the same cause addressed thēselues to certain soldiers of ye garrison, with manie Spanish pro∣mises to make them rich for euer, if they wold de∣liuer the towne into their hands. Those soldiers seemed to yeeld to their request, but imparted it to Monsieur de Tremelet their Gouernor: who con∣sidering what good might follow for the Kings seruice, together with the counsel of other Gouer∣nors neere him, commaunded those soldiers that had mooued it vnto him, to go forward with Cap∣taine Gauchet, (being the man on the Burgonians behalf that laid the plot). This Gauchet is an ad∣uenturous soldier, yet within these ten yeres that he hath vsed warres, it hath been his fortune to attaine to the reputation of a Captaine, & at this time serueth vnder the K. of spaine, although by birth either a Frenchman or a Lorraine. On this commandement of Tremelets the soldiers agreed with Gauchet both of the time, hower & meanes, when and how they would deliuer the towne, re∣ceiuing of him some readie money, with promise of more vpon the obtaining the same. The time appointed was vpon Sunday night being the 3. of August, and Munday morning folowing. In the meane time Monsieur de Tremelet slept not,
but sent vnto the Gouernors of the townes about him for some of their soldiers to helpe in a case so needfull. Which Monsieur le Conte de grandpre, Monsieur de Rumesnil, and Monsieur De Estingue Gouernors of the townes of Mouzon, Maubert & sedan willingly agreed vnto, some lending him their owne persons, and some their soldiers. For Monsieur de Rumesnil an old yet valiant Gentle∣man, tooke the charge to lead the troopes of the neighbouring garrisons, and comming to sedan the 3. of August, departed in the Euening from thence towards Villefranche, sending certayne footmen into the towne, and ambushed with the rest of his foote and horse about halfe a mile off, on the same side where Gauchet and his troops must passe. The signe giuen by the souldiers of Ville∣franche vnto Gauchet, whereby hee should know when to enter the towne, was a cannon shot: & the like to Monsieur de Rumesnil to issue out of his Ambuscado. Now when the time drew on that the thing must bee effected, euerie man prepared himselfe. Gauchet caused all his horsmen to a light a quarter of a mile from Villefranche, to conduct them vnto the Ditches, and from thence by the souldiers meanes into the towne. And Monsieur de Rumesnil prepared to charge them behind. To conclude, the signes were giuen, and all Gauchets men that entred the towne or the ditches, were slaine or sent flying into the ayre by certaine In∣struments of wild fire made for the same purpose,
or drowned in the ditches. Mean while Gauchet that made hast to folow those that had entred the towne, was much amazed that he and his troops were charged behinde: and had it not been that one led his horse after him (whether it were done by policie or good fortune it is not knowen) hee had likewise staied behinde: but he got on horse∣backe, and saued himselfe by flying. At this ouer∣throw there was slain to the number of 300 and 120. taken prisoners. All the Leaders and Cap∣taines except Gauchet were slaine, and all theyr horses taken: so that of betweene fiue or sixe hun∣dred men that the said Gauchet broght thether, there escaped not aboue fiftie, which saued them∣selues by the fauor of the night. A most happie o∣uerthrow for his Maiesties seruice, beeing done without the losse of anie man: which will pro∣cure great peace, quietnes and meanes vnto the Countrey to gather in their haruest with more se∣curitie about the Frontiers of Champaigne. In this sort doo all the enemies both of God and the Countrey of France perish and decay: but such as loue God and publike peace, are like the Sun when it is in greatest force. FINIS.
