7384.5 39960754 150462
A sweet and pleasant Sonet, entituled: My minde to me a kingdome is. To the tune of, In Creet, &c, My minde to me a Kingdome is, such perfect ioyes therein I find, It farre excéeds all earthly blisse, that world affords, or growes by kind: Though much I want that most men haue, Yet doth my mind forbid me craue. Content I liue, this is my stay, I séeke no more then may suffice, I presse to beare no haughty sway, looke what I lacke my minde supplies: Loe, thus I triumph like a King. Content with that my mind doth bring. I sée how plenty surfets oft, and hasty climbers oft doe fall, I sée how those that sit aloft, mishap doth threaten most of all, They get, they toyle, they spend with care, Such care my mind could neuer beare. I laugh not at anothers losse, I grudge not at anothers gaine, No wordly waue my minde can tosse, I brooke that is anothers bane: I feare no foe, I scorne no friend, I dread no death, I feare no end. Some haue too much, yet still they craue, I little haue, yet séeke no more, They are but poore, though much they haue, And I am rich with little store, They poore, I rich, they beg, I giue, They lacke, I lend, they pine, I liue. My wealth is health and perfect ease, my conscience cleare, my chiefe defence▪ I neuer seeke by bribes to please, nor by desert to giue offence: Loe thus I liue, thus will I die, Would all did so as well as I. No princely pompe, no wealthy store, no force to get the victory, No wily wit to salue a sore, no shape to win a Louers eye, To none of these I yéeld as thrall, For why my mind despiseth all. I ioy not at an earthly blisse, I weigh not Cresus wealth a straw, For Care, I care not what it is, I feare not Fortunes fatall law: My mind is such as may not moue, For beauty bright or force of loue: I wish not what I haue at will, I wander not to séeke for more, I like the plaine, I clime no hill, in greatest storme I sit on shore, And laugh at those that toile in vaine, To get that must be lost againe. I kisse not were I wish to kill, I faine no loue where most I hate, I breake no sléepe to winne my will, I waite not at the mighties gate, I scorne no poore, I feare no rich, I féele no want, nor haue too much. The Court, ne Cart, I like, ne loath, extreames are counted worst of all, The golden meane betwixt them both, both farest sit, and feares no fall: This is my choyce, for why I finde, No wealth is like a quiet minde. FINIS. Printed at London for H.G.
