8798 99900333 150852
BY THE KING. A Proclamation for making currant certaine French Coyne. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Maiestie for the Portion of his deare Consort the Queene, hath lately receiued some good summes of mony of the Coyne of France, which His Maiesty gaue order should haue beene new stamped and coyned in his Highnes Mynt within the Tower of Lon∣don, but by reason of the infection of the Plague in and about the City of London, which hath also taken hold of many of the Workemen in the Myat, the same cannot be so speedily performed as His Maiesties most publique and pressing occasions, especially the furnishing of His Royall Fleete and Army doe require. His Maiestie vpon mature deliberation with His Privy Councell, hath found it necessary to make vse of the said Coyne in Specie as he receiued it from his good Brother the French King. And to that end and purpose doth hereby publish and declare, That the siluer Coyne of France called the Cardecue shalbe from henceforth currant within His Maiesties Domi∣nions at the value of Nineteene pence halfe peny, being the selfe-same value at which it is currant in the Country of France. Neuerthelesse for auoyding of such inconvenience as might ensue to his Highnes and his louing Subiects by bringing in and vttering light Coyne, His Maiestie doth straightly forbid, That no person or persons doe at any time hereafter im∣port into this Realme, or any His Maiesties Dominions any of the said Coyne called Carde∣cues vpon paine of confiscation of the coyne so to be imported: the one moity thereof to His Maiestie, & the other moity to him that shall seize the same. And doth also straightly charge all Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, and other Officers of His Highnes Ports, to make diligent search and seizure of all such Coyne as shall be imported contrary to His Maiesties Royall Proclamation. Giuen at the Court at Tichfeld the fourth day of September, in the first yeare of His Maiesties Raigne of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland. God saue the King. Printed at Oxford by I.L. and W.T. for Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. 1625.
