A3583 E137_18 99859519 156501
THE APPREHENDING of Captayne BVTLER At Portchmouth in the County of Southampton and his followers, who were bound with bullets and ammunition for Ireland, in the Shipp called the Olive. As also The true relation of a terrible Sea fight by the States of Holland, against a Fleet of the Spannish being furnished with men and ammonition for assistance to the Rebels in Irland Wherein was taken 23 sayle of their Ships, as also their Vice-admirall Don Eaustans sonne to Cardinall Saint Low the King of Spaines Nephew. With a coppy of their Commission against the Pro∣testants, signed unto by the greet Signet. With the names of the Rebells now in Newgate. London Printed for F.C. and T.B. 1641.
depiction of a sinking ship
The true and reall discrip∣tion of the apprehending of Cap∣taine Butler and his followers, be∣ing bound for assistance to the Re∣bells in Ireland. THe Papists have often made bould adven∣tures to shew their malicious and spleniall intents, towards the Protestants, but al∣wayes covering them with a vayle, that their trea∣cheries might be concealed, and not appeare, whereby they might incurre the punishment due to their politicall designes, but the all seeing eye of the Almighty knowes the hearts, and he dis∣cryes the ill meaning adversary unto his people, as will appeare by the Sequell. On the six and twenteth of February last, the wind and weather being extreame foule there was beaten in upon the the Roads of Tarmouth divers shipps loaden with wines, amongest the rest one of them was a French shipp called the Olive bow which was heavie laden and the men therof seem∣ing rather Soldiers, then sea men which giveing iust occation of suspition to the countrie, they forth with offered to search the Shipp but being denyed the ame with out a Commission to that effect, it was left undone for that time, with in two dayes after the said Shipp set to Sea, which
gave the more suspition of feare, insomuch as in∣teligence being given to one of his maiesties Shippes called the Rambow, who set forward af∣ter them but could not close with the said shipp, untill they cam eto Porchmouth where they found the Sipp Ballast with bullets and Ammunition and and their Commission as bound for Ireland, thus being discovered they were forth with brovght to London and commicted to Newgate till it should be further determined by the Parliament. Their names are as followeth. Captaine Butler. Captaine Iohn Ryant. Adam Gould merchant. Thomas Levalen. merchant. Daniell Daily master. servants. Morgan Quirke Garret Foy. Iohn Ryaut. Nich Baggot. Darby Ryaut. David Galloway. Iohn Williams. Patricke Furlong. Iohn Dym. Richard Gallaway. Thomas Mattach. Iohn Butler. The Ship lies at Portmouth in Hampshire, and was bound for Corke.
THE True relation of a terrible Sea-fight by the States of Holland against a Fleet of Spanish being furnished with men, munition, for assistance to the Rebels in Ireland. THe griefes and troubles of a diseased Kingdome, does not alwayes consist invy domestick or civill commotions, neither doe the distrsses thereof appeare in all places alike, the friends of a state if perpetually, nourisht in it's breast must needs incurre the feare and iust appre∣hension of forraigne dangers, without some freind∣ly informations. I must confesse that the viperous brood of Malignants, are so superfluously plenti∣full, that it would be no news to nominate thou∣sands, on whom such a deserved aspersion, might iustly be imposed, nay how is the world of late termed to such a relictancy from united opinions that their cannot be a motion though never so good and beneficiall to a King or State, but soone it finds many both malivolent and potent enemies to suppresse their good endeavours. The Master
must be beholding to his servant for the perfor∣mance of his bounden duty, the tenant will not pay his Landlord rent (though due) without ob∣sequious consideration nay there be subiects, that deny their King his power and legall authority, by open and playne rebellions, as that of Ireland, who have not onely usurped his Maiesties authority but shewed themselves utter and professed ene∣mies to him, their damnable bloody murders committed, and dayly prosecuted against his loy∣all Subiects, as also by denying his supremacy a∣mongst them, making religion a cloake to uphold them, as blamelesse in these their pernitious de∣signes, inviting forraigne nations as assistants for their defence against him, turning his former love into open emnity, such are the contents of the newes, I meane to treate on as followeth. The manner of the meet∣ting of both Fleets, the Battell, and issue thereof. THe States-men of warre having dayly intelli∣gence of the Spanish intentions, for the ayding of the Irish Rebells, and being chary of the wel∣farre, safety, and honour of the English There was Order given that fifty of their principall Ships should be provided as a guard or victory to over∣see and watch upon the coast of Flanders (to repell such forces if any were) of which Collonell Royston
went cheife commander which continued quote∣dially scouring those scas to conceive where any danger might be, for the space of six weeks, all that time the Spanish fearing the worst made no appa∣rition for their intended, But being (as it afterward appeared) continually egged on & perswaded for∣ward by the Rebells to take their enterprise of asi∣stance in hand, they set sayle from Mourney neere Maligo, with the number of 70. Saile of Shipping, having with them Don Luctrese Admirall, and Don Eausteans Son to Cardinall Saint Low Viceadmirall of their fleet, their shipps wherein they rowed carrying with them, one Saucie Marie Delphos. two Leptulcule, both shipps of great note, and therefore most fit for such great personages. They steered their course as for the West Indyes passing by Malligo Garvier, Landsip, delos Cater, Ligeurud, Ma∣nustrell partes and had almost past Planders, but be∣ing discryed by the dutch men of ware, they hoysed faile to meete them, and sume tenn leagues beyond the Channell, begune the encounter, the Spaniards proffering parly and divers excuses to prolonge the time from battell, which was granted, by the which meanes Don leocotrese with tenn shipps more stole away by night, to the great displeasure of the Holander, who perceiving their Cowardise plyed them so soundly with bullets that staied behind that many of them weare sunke others is boorded by the duch as the Le Petriscula, where in was Don Eaustance the Viceadmirall with twentie three more of their ships, the men where∣of they tooke prisoners, who upon examination
confessed their intended Iorney for Ireland, as also they received their Commission, granted to Don Eaustance, the contents wherof following. The coppy of the Com∣mission granted to Don Eaustans, for his forces to be transported into Ireland. Where as we haveing received divers petitions from the Roman Catho∣lick; concerning their present dan∣ger by the Protestant partie now growing stronge against them, desireing ayde and assistance against them, we out of our princly Clemencie, have and doe in the presence of my present counsell, give power and authoritie unto our kinseman Don Eau∣stans to bersecute and trouble all Protestants in Ireland, according as he shall see good reserveing to himselfe from the Irish, (for his so deserveing service) such honours as shall be thought conveni∣ent. Given under our hands Malligo this tenth of Ianuary 1642. FINIS.
