B535 E325_9 99861324 113457
THE ORDINANCE OF Excommunication Rightly stated and vindicated From severall false Opinions concerning it. By a Lover of TRUTH and PEACE. Feb. 17. 1645. Imprimatur. John Downame. THere hath been much debate about the Ordinance of Excommu∣nication: some say there is no such thing, others say, it is a humane Ordinance, and to be executed by the Magistrate; o∣thers hold it to be a divine Ordinance, and yet all the Mem∣bers of the Church must have equall power in the execu∣tion of it: others say it belongeth onely to the Eldership, yet not to be done without the consent of the Church, that they may the better preserve the unitie of it: and some say, they are to be cast out from all the publike Ordinnances: Others say, they are to be cast out only from some of them: And some say, they are to be cast out for ignorance, or at least suspended from the Lords Supper: others say, none but only for scandall. These divisions have hindred our expectation of a setled govern∣ment; we have waited long, and still Reformation sticks in the place of brea∣king forth of children, Hos. 13.13. and the meane time the soule of the Church (like the Shunamite) is vexed and grieved within her, and all the Prophets seeme to say, Let her alone, for the Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told it me; 2 King 4.27. They speak not, then I said, I will shew mine opinion, the Spirit with∣in me constraineth me, Job. 22.16, 17. because the child of Reformation is come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth, Isa. 37.3. therefore we mourne and humble our selves, that scandalous persons might be taken from among us, 1 Cor. 5.2. and the Ordinances of Christ kept from pollution, that we might offer unto the Lord a pure offering, Mal. 1.11. that the Lord might smell a sa∣vour
of est, and that the glorie of the Lord might dwell in our Land, Isa. 8.59. The Ordinance of Excommunication may be thus defined, It is a divine cen∣sure, inflicted by the Eership being Church-Officers) in a egall a, upon scan∣dalous persons, that ither by the leaven of false Doctrine undermine h Truths o the Gospell, or by the leaven of Prophannesse, trample it under foot, and the extent of it is to debarre them from all the publike Ordinances of Christ, till they be asha∣med, and upon Reformation and satisfaction to the Church they may here-admitted in againe. The two first branches of the definition I shall put together, because the pro∣ving of one proves the other. First, Excommunication is a divine Censure, because both the keyes were given to the Ministry, the key of Doctrine, and the key of Discipline: It is not said to the Church, that they shall have the keyes, but saith Christ to Peter, I will give thee the keyes; Mat. 16.19. and whatsoever the Ministry, or Church-Offi∣cers shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what they loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; Chap. 18.17, 18. and, what sins ye remit, shall be re∣mitted, and what sins ye retaine shall be retained, Joh. 20.23. Secondly, it is a divine Censure, because it was inflicted only by Church-Offi∣cers: Paul saith, I have judged, and do not yee judge those that are within: cast out therefore that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.12 13. and saith Paul, he that troubleth you, shall have his judgment, whoever he be, Gal. 5.10. and he received of the Lord that which he delivered to them, 1 Cor. 11.23. it was not done by the Minister alone, nor by all the Church, but it was inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. and this was the Eldership or Church-Officers, because, Thirdly, If this divine Censure be not done, the Church-Officers only are blamed for it, the Lord said unto the Angell or Ministrie of the Church of Thya∣tyra, I have some thing against thee, because thou sufferest Iezabell to seduce my servants, and the Lord hath somthing against the Angell or Ministrie of the Church of Pergamus, because they had some among them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, Revel. 2.14, 20. Fourthly, Excommunication is a divine Censure, and not a humane Ordinance, because it was in the Christian Church before they had either humane Lawes or Magistrates in it: and afterwards, when they had Kings and Einperours in the Church, they have submitted themselves to this Ordinance. Fifthly, It is a divine Censure, because the Church is commanded to obey them that have the rule over them, who also have spoken unto them the Word of God, and they watch for their soules, as they that must give an account, Heb. 13.7, 17. as they rule in their family, so they must rule in the Church; for both must obey them, 1 Tim. 3 4 5. Then this is contrary to their now Modell, who utterly deny that there is a∣ny such Ordinance, and would have the Magistrate to rule in the, Church with re∣gall power, as they rule in the State, but this is to dethrone. Christ of his Kingly
Office in the Church, who placed them to rule so in the State onely, and not in the Church, by the positive Lawes of the Land. But Ministers rule Ministerially by the Word only, and in obedience to Christ and not to men. Secondly, This is contrarie to them who hold that all the Congregation must rule, judge and censure, but if all should be rulers, who should they rule? and if all should judge and censure, who should they judge and censure? it was the A∣postles and Elders, those Church-Officers in that Synod at Jerusalem that made Decrees to be kept, & laid it upon them, they concluded and passed sentence, Acts 15 19, 28, 16, 4, 21, 25 this Censure of Excommunication was not infli∣cted by all, but by many; see 2 Cor. 2.45, 6. Thirdly, This is contrarie to those that would have this divine Censure to be but a humane Ordinance, and to be inflicted by the Magistrate saying tell the Church, is to tell the Magistrate, Mat. 18.17 but sure Christ did never intend that brethren should go to law for every small private offence, but rather tell the Offi∣cers of the Church, and they would admonish them better: then the true meaning of Christ is this; There was a private offence which one neighbour had done to another, which should have been decided by two swords, but could not; hereupon it was brought to the Eldership, and being a private offence they could not punish him that did the wrong by Excommunicating him, although he was desperate and was neither sorrie for what he had done, neither would make satis∣faction for the wrong now the Eldership could onely admonish him privately, and if that would not reclaime him that did the wrong, from private injuries, the partie wronged was to refraine his company, and to esteeme of him as a hea∣then or a Publican, but neither the Church, nor other men must, so esteem of him, till they have the same experience of his injurious dealing with them: for the Church doth not say, we will so esteem of him, but let him be so to thee, then this could not be a civill Court of Judicatorie, for they had more power in their hands then to admonish him by words, although the offence was private, they might imprison, fine, or correct him for his private offence, in regard he would be neither sorrie for his wrong, nor make satisfaction, see Luk. 12.58, 29. Mat. 5.25, 26. but the Eldership could only admonish for a private offence, although they might cast him out for a publike scandall, having the consent of the Church, then Excommunication is not a humane Ordinance to be executed by the Civill Magistrate, then this doth directly suit with the Presbyteriall way of Govern∣ment, who referre matters to the Eldership (as the Kingdom doth to the Parlia∣ment) and that Government in this point more agrees with the Word of God, then anie of the other. The next thing in the definition is, that they ought to be legally excommunica∣ted, if a man go on in a way of error, so that he undermines the truth of Doctrine, or Discipline, or by prophannesse trample it under foot, then the Minister ought not of himselfe to keep back such a man from anie publike Ordinance of Christ; for if this power were in one mans brest it were as bad as the Pope, or any Pre∣late
in his Diocesse, it must be inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. then the people must not urge their Minister no do it, nor be offended with him if he do it not; for he hath no power to keep them back from anie Ordinance, nor to keep the Ordi∣nance from them, for necessity is laid upon them, and wee be unto them if they preach not the Gospell, 1 Cor. 9.16. and this necessity lies upon them to dispence all the Ordinances of Christ to all in the Church, till they be legally cast out. Now the legall way of Excommunication is this; First, there must be a law∣full conviction of the party that is to be cast out, by witnesses before the Elder∣ship, how this man by errour undermines the truth of the Gospell, or by pro∣phanenesse tramples it under foot, then the Eldership must admonish him to leave that wicked course of life: this it may be will make him at least promise amend∣ment or Reformation; then they must wait a while upon tryall, and it may be he may leave his errour, or prophane life, but if not, they must call him before them againe, and urge him of his promise, and tell him also, if he do not reforme, they must proceed to cast him out; this it may be will make him promise more seriously to leave that sinfull course, then they ought to forbeare, and try him a∣gain, to shew themselves loth to cut off a member, if it be possible to heale it. But if he have passed the first and second admonition without Reformation, they must proceed against him, and conclude that he deserves to be cast out, as Paul saith, A man that is an heretike alter the first and second admonition, reject, Tit. 3.10. yet although they have passed their private censure among themselves, that he deserves to be cast out, rather then the Ordinance of Christ should be pol∣luted, as Paul did; and it is likely there was more with him when he said, I have judged already though absent, that he who hath done this deed may be taken from a∣mong you, 1 Cor. 5.2, 3. yet he was not to be actually and solemnly cast out, till they were gathered together in the Name of Christ, and with the power of the Lord Iesus Christ, Vers. 4. and to keep the unitie of the Church, they must informe them how they have proceeded against this man by way of admonition, and still hee goes on in his scandalous life, either undermining, or trampling the Ordinances of Christ under feet, and if the Church be willing they shall proceed to censure and cast him out: but in case there be more in the Church against it then for it, then for the peace of the Church they must forbeare and try him againe by admo∣nition, and if he go on still, make it again known to the whole Church, and it may be they will consent to have him cast out; but if they will not, the Elder∣ship must forbeare upon further tryall by admonition, lest they make a breach in the Church, and so the remedie will be worse then the disease. Thus using the meanes of admonition, no doubt in time the man will either be re∣claimed, or the Church will give consent to cast him out, and the peace of it still preserved. The next thing in the Definition is, to shew who must be excommunicated. I answer: Only scandalous persons, and they are of two sorts; either such as by the leaven of false doctrine undermine the truths of the Gospell: Or se∣condly,
such as by the leaven of a prophane life trample the Gospell under foot, both these must be kept out of the Christian Church, or they will be the mine of it. First, if any man shall broach and maintaine any errour, or heresie, against the truths of Chirst, and by that meanes seek to destroy the doctrine, or discipline of the Christian Religion, this is the leaven of the Pharisies and Sadduces, Matth. 16.10, 11. and so long as they hold such errours, John would not admit them in∣to the Christian Church, because like Vipers they would have eaten out the bewels of the Christian Church: See Mat. 3 7. And for such errors (saith Paul) they must becast out; for a little of this leaven will leaven the whole lump: therefore (saith he) I have confidence in you, in the Lord Jesus Christ, that you will be none otherwise minded; but he that troubleth you shall have his judgement, whose ever he be, Galat. 5.9 10. If any cause griefe to the Church, sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many. 2 Cor. 2.6. Secondly, this divine censure must be inflicted upon such as have the leaven of a prophane life, else they will make the Lords people abhor the offerings of the Lord, 1 Sam. 2.17, 22, 24. And Paul hearing of the incestuous man, judgeth him worthy to be cast out, and saith; Do not yee judge those that are within, purge out therefore the old leaven, that you may be a new lump; and if that man will not repent, refraine his company; and if that will not reclaime him, cast out from among your selves that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. For as the leaven of errour will eat out both the truth of Doctrine and Discipline, like a canker, as did the words of Hi∣mineus and Phileus, 2 Tim. 3.17. so prophanenesse casts filth upon Religion, and the Professours of it, and makes both to be despised. But some would have ignorance to be a sufficient cause of casting out, or at least to keep them from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; but I can find no such Text, for all came to the Passover without exception, unlesse they were le∣gally uncleane, and so cast out; and all those young Converts came to the Lords Supper without any exception, Acts 2.46. and 20.7. If they were baptized, they were not debarred the other Sacrament; and they baptized multitudes toge∣ther, Matth. 3. and some of them knew not that there was any Holy Ghost, nei∣ther did they know Jesus Christ, till Paul had taught them, Acts 19.1, 2, 3, 4. Yet here is no encouragement for ignorant persons to rush upon the holy things of God, for they sin fearfully, unlesse they know God in his names and Attributes, his works of Creation, works of Grace and Providence, and Jesus Christ as Me∣diatour in his two Natures, and his Offices, and himselfe in the state of innocen∣cie, and in the state of corruption, and restored by Christ to grace here, and to glo∣rie in the soule after death, and in the body after the day of judgement; for, the sinle without knowledge is not good, Prov. 19.2. See the danger of it, Isa. 5.13. Hos. 4.1. 2 Thess. 1 8. not discerning the Lords body, they drink judgement: Mark. not the Minister, but to himselfe, 1 Cor. 11.29. Then if a faithfull Minister hath shewed them the danger, in coming without knowledge, and laboured to teach
them, and still they are willingly ignorant, he may say, Though Israel be not ga, thered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, for my work is with my God Isa. 49.4, 5. Here is a sweet savour to Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor. 2.15. This (I say) may comfort him, when they will neither learne knowledge, nor yet abstaine from the Sacrament, and the Church hath no power to keep them back, nor cast them out, unlesse they oppose the Truth by prophanenesse or errour. The next thing in the Definition, is the extent of it, from what must they be excommunicated? I answer: From all the publike Ordinances of Christ in the Church, Miriam for sedition against Moses was smitten with leprosie, and the Lord commanded to shut her out from the camp seven days, Num. 12.8.14. And Vzza for burning in∣cense, was smitten with leprosie, and dwelt in a severall house till the day of his death, he was cut off from the house of the Lord 2 Chron. 26.19 21. And saith Paul, Put away from among your selves that wicked person; and saith he, I would they were even cut off which trouble you, Gal. 5.12. By this it is plaine, that they were cut off from all publike Ordinances, which is contrarie to those that would have them debarred from the Lords Supper only, and yet freely enjoy all other Ordinances, which is no excommunication at all, neither can any sound reason be given, why they should be kept from one ordinance, when as they may freely enjoy all the rest. The last thing in the Definition is, the time how long they are to stand excom∣municated? I answer: Till they be ashamed, and by repentance and reformation give satisfaction to the Church, and then they may againe be re-admitted: the Lord said, that she may be ashamed, shut her out of the camp seven dayes, and after that receive her in again, Numb. 12 14. And saith Paul, Have no company with him that he may be ashamed, 2 Thess. 3.14. But although Miriam being a good woman, was ashamed, and repented, yet Vzziah was cut off from the house of the Lord all the dayes of his life, because hee repented not, to give the Church sa∣tisfaction, they are cast out of the Churches protection into Satans hands, to cor∣rect them with shame and sorrow, using the verie Devill for the health of the the soule, as Physitians use poyson for the health of the body; but when they (through griefe and sorrow) are ashamed, and repent, and promise reformation, they ought to be againe admitted, lest Satan get advantage, and lest they be swal∣lowed up of overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.6.7.11. for their end must be, when they deliver them to Satan to be corrected, that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Neither doth excommunication cut off their right to the Ordinances altogether, only for the present their soules are desperately sick, and no easie physick will cure them: saith Paul, Himineus and Alexander I have delivered to Satan, that they may learne not to blaspheme, 1 Tim. 1.20 I suppose there was more with Paul, when hee did this, although they are not expressed; but they were not given into Satans to dispose of them at his pleasure; but as the Lord delivered Job into his hands to correct him, to humble him for his good, so
doth the Church deliver them to Satan for shame and sorrow, to make them leave blaspheming, that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; but they have not cast them out of their prayers, admonitions, exhortations, 2 Thess. 3.14. And it was to keep the Ordinances from pollution, both for theirs and the Chur∣ches good; but then, if after all this, he shall upon selfe malice oppose Christ and the Gospell, as Julian the Emperour did, and the Church discerne him to commit that unpardonable fin, they may declare this, and so leave him to his finall estate, and cease to pray for him, being a sin unto death, and not to be prayed for, 1 Joh. 5.16. and rather pray for justice upon him, than for any mercie to him, as Paul did for Alexander the Copper-smith, when he did him much evill, 2 Tim. 4.14. If they beare malicious hatred to the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema ma∣ranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. And if in malice to Christ, they teach any other Gospell, let them be accursed; yea, I say, let them be accursed, Gal. 1.7.8, 9. If they bla∣spheme against the Holy Ghost, they shall never be forgiven, because they say he hath an uncleane spirit, Mark. 3.29, 30. Such as tread under foot the bloud of the Co∣venant, whereby they should be sanctified, and do despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Such as these indeed the Church is to rid their hands of, and leave them to their finall estate; but such a case as this wee heare of none but Julian since the Apostles dayes; but yet the Ordinance of Excommunication may be in∣flicted in much mercie to the soule of him that is cast out, and in love to the Ordinances of Christ, when they seek to keep them from pollution. And this was the cause why this Ordinance was given to the Church, to keep the Ordi∣nances from pollution by heretikes and prophane persons, the Church having no humane power to defend it from pollution by the enemies of it in Doctrine and Discipline: But now whole Kingdomes have received the Christian Faith, and Kings and Magistrates do assist it, and they make such positive Lawes, as may suppresse both error and prophanenesse, and they are as a Guard about the Church, although they may not rule as Kings in it, yet they are to see their owne Lawes observed for the good of the Church, as nursing fathers to it, and to punish the disturbers of it, Ezra 7.25, 26. And when Church-Officers declare to them, how errour eats out the Truth, and prophanenesse makes it to be despised, and the Magistrates will not punish it according to their positive Law, then the Church hath this power to cast them out from the Ordinances of Christ, and not suffer them to be undermined by heretikes, nor trampled upon by prophane persons. But in case the Magistrates be faithfull in their places, to punish errour and prophanenesse, when it is discovered and complained of, according to their posi∣tive Lawes; then the Church-Officers need not to excommunicate any for many yeares together; for this remedy was given to the Church when they had nei∣ther humane Lawes nor Magistrates in it, to keep the Ordinances of Christ from pollution, and it is still to be used, in case the Magistrates be negligent in their places: As the greater Presbyterie is in little use in the Church, it the lesser El∣dership
be well governed; but in case that be negligent, the greater Presbyt hath the more trouble: For if Magistrates be faithfull, they will much ease them both. But in case they be nor, then (I say) God hath provided this help for the Church, to keep his Ordinances from pollution. Now that Church-Officers may be able to discover errour and prophanenesse, the Officers must all be proved before they be put into ani office, 1 Tim. 3.10. If Deacons must be so proved, much more should ruling and teaching Elders, they must be knowne to have discerning eyes, to fore-see the first rise of errour, and of a holy life, to contradict prophanenesse; when as the chiefe Magistrate comes to his place by inheritance, and sometimes is a woman, a child, or weak in wits, if not prophane and carelesse; and subordinate Magistrates sometimes are igno∣rant or carelesse, and must have Lawyers to make knowne, who offend against the Lawes of the Land: So the Church had need to have those that are well skilled in Gods Law, to make knowne who offends against it, and to judge of those of∣fences, and will labour to have them redressed, or their persons punished, that un∣dermine Gods Law by errour, or heresie, or that trample upon it by prophane∣nesse. Now if prophane or erroneous persons shall excommunicate themselves from the publike Ordinances of Christ, either by negligence, or going a whoring after any Sects, or Schismes, and say their conscience must be free to do so, then the Magistrate by his positive Lawes, must fetch them in, and command obedience to those publike Ordinances in the Church, as the Kings of Judah did, 2 Chro. 17.6, 19, 10, 11, 31, 4, 35, 16. and if they will not obey the Law of God and the Law of the King, let judgement be speedily executed upon them, either to death or ba∣nishment, confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, Ezra 7.26. and for their consci∣ence it may be as free as they will to the publike Ordinances of Christ, and the command of man cannot hinder it, unlesse they despise obedience to God, for the very hatred they bear to the Magistrate for commanding it: but by this it ap∣pears, that they labour onlie to have their consciences free to evill, for they may be free to as much good as they will, and none will hinder them. THOMAS BAKEVVELL. Printed for Henry Shepheard at the Bible in Tower Street, and William Ley at Pauls Chaine near Doctors Commons. 1646.
