C1784A R205737 99899812 135389
THE Most Humble Remonstrances PRESENTED To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, and Bur∣gesses of the HOUSE of COMMONS, in Parliament Assembled. 1. COncerning the Proofs, whereby the French Gentlemen Commissioners, appointed for the Distribution of the Charity bestowed upon the Poor French Protestants that are come for Re∣fuge into England; may be convinced, that in their Hands, there are still remaining great Summs of Money, arising from the said Charity, and a Revenue more than sufficient for all the Poor Refuges Maintenance. 2. Concerning the Means, whereby all the aforesaid great Summs of Money may be discovered, and the afore∣said French Gentlemen Commissioners compelled to give an exact account of them, which compelling (if it please God) shall be, as a triumphing Sword Cutting, with one Blow, the Gordian Knot of the said French Commissioners. 3. Concerning the Motives, that may induce the afore∣said Honourable House of Commons to use the aforesaid means; which Motives are the Concerns of the King and
State in general, and in particular of all the Poor amongst the said Refuges. By John Chabbert Minister and Refuge. You the Honourable House of Commons are intreated by the aforesaid John Chabbert, to approve, that he may now declare to your Honours, the love he hath and ever had for Justice and Truth; and on the contrary, how he abhorreth Injustice, Cheating Tricks, and Lies: But in a particular manner, how much he longs for the advan∣tage and prosperity of the King, State, and Church of England, not only for the Publick's, but also for the Pri∣vate's sake; as he longs also for the satisfaction of the En∣glish Poor, as well as of them which are amongst the Re∣fuges; and that in making bold humbly to shew, by par∣ticulars, all the Contents of the three Heads contained in the Title of his Undertaking. To keep the order set in the said Title; the aforesaid John Chabbert beginning with the aforesaid Proofs humbly sheweth, 1. That the aforesaid French Commissioners have receiv∣ed great Summs of Money, upon three several Letters Pat∣rents heretofore granted by Royal Authority, for the afore∣said Poor Refuges sake; especially upon the first and second Letters Pattents, the first granted in the Year 1686. and the second granted in the Year 1688. That after that the said two Letters Pattents were effectually published, and the Tenor of the same declared unto the Nation, in all and every Church and Chappel in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, &c. The whole Nation was touched with so deep a sense and tender Commiseration of the Ca∣lamities and woful Sufferings of the said Poor Refuges, in the cause of their Religion, and of the urgent necessity, which so many of them were lying under, that, not only,
all the Nobility, Gentry, and every Rich Man, of what∣ever Degree and Character soever he was; But even the greatest part of all the Tradesmen and Servants, as every body knows, did so generously and chearfully contribute, by their extraordinary and large Charities, to the subsi∣stance of the said  amongst the Refuges; and that from those generous, free, and large Charitable Contri∣butions, which have been made for the relief of the said poor Refuges, it must needs be inferred, that great Sums of Money were then Collected. 2. That the aforesaid French Commissioners and the Ministers, and Church-wardens, or Elders, as they call them, of the French Church in the Savoy, or of the Wa∣loon Church in the City of London, have received great Summs of Money, from the large Charities of particular Collections, often bestowed, by a great many Charitable Persons, upon the aforesaid Poor Refuges behalf, from the beginning of the Year 1685. to this very day of the Year 1696. Since that time a great number of Poor Refuges have been seen in England. 3. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church-wardens of the aforesaid two Churches, very often, and at least, during the space of Ten Years, have received great Summs of Money, arising from a great ma∣ny Legacies, the most part of them made by some English pious Persons, and some of them by some French, to be distributed in a very short time, after their Decease to the said Poor Refuges: But that it is to be feared, the said French Commissioners, have distributed nothing of the most part of the said Legacies, or at least, but the use, or interest of some of them, to the said Poor Refuges; so that, when this third Proof, as well as the second before is duly reflected upon; it plainly appears by the said two
Proofs, that they must needs have in their own, or others Hands a great Fund of Money for the  support of the poor Refuges. 4. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, by their own Confession, and as every body knows, have received, during the space of many Years  Twelve Thousand Pounds per annum, bestowed liberally, chearfully and charitably, by His excellent Majesty our gracious King William, upon the said Poor Refuges, to relieve them in their urgent necessities, and comfort them in their trou∣bles. That it is most certain, that upon the said Royal Bounty, the said French Commissioners, during the space of the many Years aforesaid, were able to supply all the wants of the said Poor Refuges, if they had very well managed the said Twelve Thousand Pounds per Annum, or if they had not kept back some of them, or put them into Bankers Hands, or imployed some of them in Trading and Traffick. 5. That the aforesaid French Commissioners were pub∣lickly Accused, by some of the said French Refuges, Poor Gentlemen, Ministers and others, for having embezzelled, or mis-imployed a considerable Summ of the aforesaid Twelve Thousand Pounds Per Annum: And that the said French Commissioners have done their utmost endeavours to secure themselves from the said Accusation, or rather, that their Accusers should be silent, and desist from their Accusation; And for all that, the said French Commissio∣ners have let neither the Publick, nor their Accusers know their Innocence, in all its Circumstances; and in keeping the Formalities of Justice, although they were bound so to do for the securing of their own Repu∣tation.
6. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, have re∣ceived some considerable Summs of Money, by the way of many Subscriptions and private Collections, made in the City of London and its Suburbs, for the aforesaid French Refuges Poor, yet for all that, it doth not appear, that, at least, the greatest part of the aforesaid French Refuges Poor, was the more relieved, by the said French Commis∣sioners, than they were before the said Subscriptions and private Collections. 7. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, doubtless, have received, and do still receive, a great many private Charities of particular Persons, for the maintenance of many Charity-houses, which Charity-houses imperceptibly and cunningly have been set up, by the same Commis∣sioners in the Suburbs of the aforesaid City of London, ma∣ny Years ago, upon four accounts. 1. To procure, as many Charities as could be possible, and to move all the charitable Persons, who live in the said City of London, and other Cities and Towns of this King∣dom, to put into their hands, all the Charities they had de∣signed for all the Poor amongst the Refuges, which are a∣shamed to beg, and which were never partakers of the said Charities, bestowed upon the said Charity-houses, although they may be in great want. 2. To have a Lawful Cause, at least, in appearance, to beg either themselves, or move their Friends and Crea∣tures so to do, every where, and of every Person, whoso∣ever they believed to be the most favourable to their Cha∣rity-houses. 3. To have a pretence, continually to declare openly, as they have done already, that they had received but very few private Charities for the support of their Charity∣houses, and that they were obliged sometimes, to turn
out many of the said Poor Refuges from the said Charity∣houses, and to deprive many more of the Soup or Broth distributed therein, or to maintain them both with a Fund designed for paying of the Pensions to the French Poor Gen∣tlemen, Ministers, and other Persons of what Age soever, and of both Sexes; the Pensions, of some of which said Persons, the said French Commissioners lessened upon seve∣ral occasions; although the said French Commissioners were persuaded, that before they had lessened the said Pen∣sions of the said Poor Gentlemen, Ministers, and other Re∣fuges, the said Pensions were not sufficient for their main∣tenance. And besides, although the said French Commis∣sioners were persuaded, that the said Poor Gentlemen, Mi∣nisters, and other Refuges, cannot live by any other means. 4. To cast a mist before the whole English Nation's Eyes, and to hide from the Publick, the said most considerable Fund, they have in their Hands, arising from the aforesaid very large Charities, they have received for the said French Refuges Poor's support, and for no other use whatsoever. 8. That the aforesaid French Commissioners have saved very much of the aforesaid large Charities, they have re∣ceived, by the aforesaid several ways: And that the said French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church-Wardens of the French Church in the Savoy, and Walloon-Church in the City of London, have saved very much of the afore∣said great Summs of Money, by six ways, well known, to the greatest part of the French Refuges. 1. In keeping some of the said French Refuges, lying then under a great necessity, from the least Relief, which the tender hearted, and generous English Nation had af∣forded to them, as well as to the rest of the Refuges, who were then, or are still relieved, by which means some of the said French Commissioners, as themselves, together
with all the Refuges know very well, were very near receiving an affront from some of those said necessitous Refuges, yet kept notwithstanding from the said Relief. Moreover, by this means a great many of the same Re∣fuges, Poor and Helpless Creatures, were dispersed all over England, and went a Begging up and down the said Kingdom. 2. In giving once for all to some others of the said Re∣fuges a little Money, nay, and to some of the same more than to others, not according to every one's Desert or Ne∣cessities, but according to their own Will and Pleasure, against all Equity and Reason. 3. In giving to the smallest Number of the said Poor Refuges a little Pension, and that sometimes only, for a little while, to those who have no Friends amongst them, or a powerful Protector who hath the Right to Command them: As for example, a Yearly Pension of Seven Pounds, allowed to the Ministers then under Fif∣ty years of Age, during the space, at least, of one Year and a half, is an evident Proof of the said little Pension, as well 56 l. 18 s. that every one of the said Ministers have received of the Royal Charity for their own and their Families Subsistance, during the space of Nine years, as may be seen in a printed Paper delivered unto the King's Majesty, the last  January, by all the poor Mi∣nisters Refuges. 4. In paying the Pension, as usually they have payed it to the aforesaid Poor Refuges; sometimes Five, some∣times Six, Seven, Eight, Nine; nay and sometimes even Ten Months, after the Time appointed for the Pay∣ment of the said Pention, instead of paying it Quarter∣ly, and even before hand; as it was in their Power so to do, having ever had, since their Commission a suffi∣cient
Fund for that purpose, whatever Asseverations they have made, to make the Publick, and the said Poor Re∣fuges believe the contrary. And the said French Com∣missioners, in paying Quarterly the said Pension, would have saved the said Refuges from being so Poor, and a great many Troubles and Tears. 5. In utterly debarring the said Poor Refuges from their own Pension, during the space of about Two Years, unjustly pretending, they had no Fund at all to pay it them; wherefore, many of the said helpless Refuges, have contracted many Debts that they cannot pay off, without an Extraordinary Relief. 6. By the Decease of a great many of the said Poor Refuges, of all Ages whatsoever, of both Sexes, and of all Characters: That by these Six Ways and Means, the said French Commissioners undoubtedly have saved very much of the said very large Charitys they have received for the said French Refuges Support. But nevertheless, the said first Five Ways are Unlawful, and against the Rules of the Holy Gospel; seeing by the said Five Ways, a great many Poor Refuges, have been brought to Po∣verty, to Hunger, and to Divers Temptations, and ma∣ny of them have sunk under them, as may easily be proved, by a great many Eye-Witnesses; and that the said French Commissioners themselves, every where have Published, and often Declared to the Supreme Powers, that the said Refugees have lain under great Poverty and Sufferings; the said French Commissioners, making a show of being troubled at the said Poor Refuges Calamities. 9. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, have ve∣ry much increased the said Summs, arising from the ve∣ry large Charitys aforementioned, and they have increas∣ed
the said Summs, either by all their following ways or by others, such as these are. 1. Either in putting a good part of the said Summs into a Bankers Hands, since the beginning of their Com∣mission, till this time. 2. Or in imploying another part of the said Summs, in Trading, making the best of it by Sea and Land; either in this, or in Foreign Country's. 3. Or in erecting some Manufactures, to help off with another part of the said Summs, coming from the afore∣said very large Charity's, bestowed upon the said Poor Re∣fuges; or in imploying it in some sort of Commodities, that are the most a la mode, and do take the best. 10. That Mr. Daillon a French Minister Refuge, now one of the best Friends, that the said French Commissioners may have, cannot deny; but that formerly, he undertook to oblige the same Gentlemen, French Commissioners, to give an Account of all the Summs of Money, or a part of them, arising from the Large General and Particular Cha∣rity's, upon all the Poor amongst the Refuges; which said Summs, came all into the Hands of the said French Com∣missioners, from the beginning of the Year 1696. Seeing that Undertaking was known by the Publick. I mean, by the most part of the French Refuges. And that the said Mr. Daillon, undoubtedly, hath not forgotten; that on July the 10th, 1696. He Writ a Letter against the French Commissioners, to the Meeting of French Ministers sitting then, in the French Church, at Hungerford-Market, against the said French Commissioners; by which said Letter, he plainly shewed, that the said Erench Commissioners, were making the best of the Money, accruing from the Charity's, bestowed to the said Poor, amongst the Refuges; either by putting it out into the Goldsmiths, or Bankers Hands; or
in Trading with it by Sea; and that only for themselves. And that the same Commissioners did pay, by the said Mo∣ney, accruing from the said Charity's, all their own Ser∣vants, their Sallary, &c. Again, that the said Mr. Daillon, durst not make Oath, that he hath not said and done, what is aforementioned. Now if he had so bad a Con∣science, he would be Convicted of Perjury, by many Eye-Witnesses, who particularly knew his Undertaking, against the French Commissioners; and who heard the Contents of the said Letter, when it was Read before the said French Ministers met together; in whose Meeting, was President, Mr. Betoule, an Ancient Minister, amongst the Refuges, one of the best Friends of the said French Commissioners, who kept the said Letter, and who is now dead. 11. That the aforesaid French Commissioners, would not part with their Commission, and leave the Sole Care of the said Refuges Poor's Maintenance, to the City of London, or to the Clergy of the said City, who would have taken the said Care upon themselves. That it is a Convincing Proof, that the said French Commissioners feared thereby, that the great Summs of Money, they have in their Hands, should be discovered, and in such a Case, they feared the losing forever, the Administration of the said great Summs, and withall, the hope of being the Owners of them probably, not remembring, that the aforesaid Summs, coming from Bountiful Charity's, bestowed upon the said Resuges Poor, are a Devoted and Holy Thing, committed to their Trust; and that they in Conscience, are bound to give a strict Ac∣count of it, to God and Man, both in this World, and in the World to come, whatsoever they may think, say, or do about it. 12. That, assoon, as the French Commissioners, shall be Commanded by You the Honourable House of Commons;
either openly to Confess, that they have in their own Hands, the said great Summs, or to shew the contrary, by the Justifying Papers, Writings, and Deeds, &c. If the said French Commissioners, do not perform, whatever they are commanded. Moreover, if by the said Papers, Writings, and Deeds, &c. It doth not appear clearly, that the said French Commissioners, have distributed, (not to the Rich French Refuges) but only to the Poor, all the said Summs, accruing from all the aforesaid Charity's and Legacies. More∣over, if instead of justifying themselves thereby, the said French Commissioners, rather make this Objection: That they could not give an exact Account of the said Summs, seeing that a great many Refuges, of both Sexes, cannot Write, and besides, they have not set down all the Relie∣ved Refuges Names. It must be inferred from thence; that the said French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church∣wardens, of the aforesaid two Churches, have not acted Faithfully, and Righteously, but that they acted against their own Conscience, to Desraud the said Poor Refuges, of the greatest part of the said Charity's, and to deceive the Lords Commissioners; by whom, all their said Ac∣counts were to be Examined. And that therefore, it is certain, they have still in their Hands, the aforesaid great Summs, whereof they must be forced, to give a particular and exact Account. 13. That if it may please You, the Honourable House of Commons, to examine all the Proofs, given before, there is no doubt, but it will be plainly seen, that there must needs be remaining in the said French Commissioners Hands, a very considerable Fund, accruing from the said General and Particular large Charity's, often bestowed. That there is left a very considerable Fund, accruing from the good Husbandry, and from the said great Summs of
Money, whereof the said French Commissioners have made use. Again, if it may please You, the Honourable House so Commons, after Your Honours have examined, all the said Evidences, to proceed against the said French Commis∣sioners, and against the Ministers and Church-Wardens of the aforesaid two Churches, to force them to confess, ei∣ther that they have the said Fund in their own Hands, or that they have put it into other Mens Hands, or to Convict them of the same, by other more easie and demonstrative, better and shorter Ways and Means, if such ones may be found. The aforesaid John Chabbert, shall make bold still, Humbly to shew Your Honors, all these following Means, which he believeth the most proper for his Project. He therefore sheweth, 1. That if it may please You, the Honourable House of Commons, to take notice of all the aforesaid Summs of Money, arising from the said Charity's, bestowed upon the said Poor Refuges, which said Summs, and Charitys, are come to the said French Commissioners Hands, or to the said Ministers and Church-Wardens of the aforesaid two Churches Hands, from the beginning of the Year 1681. to this very Day of this Month of the Year, 1696. And again, if it may please You, the Honourable House of Commons, to order the said French Commissioners, Mi∣nisters, and Church Wardens, &c. Presently to prepare themselves to give an exact Account, by Particulars, of all the said Summs, come to their Hands, from the beginning of the said Year, 1685. to this very day of the said Year, 1696. The said French Commissioners, will not dare to Disobey Your Honors Command. This first Means, there∣fore, must needs be put into Practice. That the Publick, and the said Poor Refuges may hope, that the said French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church-Wardens of the
said to Churches, will be infallibly convinced, that they have in their own Hands, or in those of their Friends, a great Fund, and more than sufficient, to maintain the said Poor Refuges. 2. That, if it may please You, the Honourable House of Commons, to chuse such a Number of English Gentlemen, as Your Honors shall please, such as shall be, all of an Ex∣emplary Goodness, and Piety, Gentlemen, who love Ju∣stice, and suffer not themselves to be corrupted with Bribes, Gentlemen, who are mindful of the Publick Concerns, and of those of the Poor's. And if it may please Your Ho∣ners, to appoint for Commissioners, such deserving Gen∣tlemen, to examine the Accounts, that must be given, by Particulars, and the Acquittances, Catalogues, and other Papers, that must be brought to them, by the said French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church-Wardens of the said two Churches. Undoubtedly, this second means will be very useful, to find out the aforesaid great Fund, accru∣ing from the aforesaid large Charitty's bestowed for the said Poor Refuges Maintenance. 3. That, if it may please You, the Honourable House of Commons; to Order Mr. Daillon, Mr. Gmmarc, Mr. Ba∣ron, and Mr. Forent French Ministers Refuges, to appear in their own Persons, before the aforesaid Honourable Com∣missioners; and order the said four Ministers Refuges, to deliver to them, their Memories and other Papers, they have, making mention of all, or of some part of the Summs of Money, accruing from the aforesaid Charity's, and whereby it plainly, or but darkly appears, that the said French Commissioenrs, Ministers, and Church Wardens of the said two Churches, have Maliciously, and Unrigh∣teously managed, the said great Summs of Money, and alienated some of them, or at least, deprived the said Poor
Resuges, of them. And again, if it may please Your Ho∣nors, to make the said Poor Ministers Refuges, Swear, and Declare by word of Mouth, before the said Honourable Commissioners, whatever they know of the said great Summs of Money, accruing from the aforesaid Charities and Legacies, and whatever may be fit and proper any way to Convict the said French Commissioners, and the said Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Chur∣ches of having in their Hands the aforesaid great Fund, arising from the said Charities and Legacies. 4. That, if it may please you, The Honourable House of Commons, to oblige the same French Commissioners, Ministers, and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, to give up their Accounts, and presently to produce, be∣fore the aforesaid Honourable Commissioners, all the Ac∣quittances, all the Catalogues, and other Papers, wherein are written the Names of all the aforesaid Poor Refuges, who received any thing of the said great Summs, put into the Hands of the said French Commissioners, Mini∣sters and Church-wardens, to be distributed to all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, from the beginning of the Year 1685 to this very Day 26 of this Month no 6 of this Year 1696. It will plainly appear by this fourth means, that the said French Commissioners, &c. have still in their Hands a great Fund, and more than sufficient, for the support of the Poor amongst the Re∣fuges. 5. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, not to give Ear to any kind of Reason, whereby the aforesaid French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, either can, nor dare pretend to dispense themselves from giving an Account of the aforesaid great Summs; But rather,
if it may please your Honours to shut your Ears to any that can, or may, be spoken in the said French Com∣missioners, Ministers, &c. behalf, till the same have gi∣ven in, and justified all their Accounts before the afore∣said Honourable Commissioner. 'Tis certain, that by this fifth means, the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches will be put to a non-plus, and forced to confess, that they have a ve∣ry considerable Fund, accruing from the aforesaid great Summs, and large Charities and Legacies, in spite of the best endeavours they have used, to make all the supreme Powers of this Kingdom, together with the Publick, be∣lieve, that they never had a Fund, that, at least, would be sufficient for the said Poor Refuges maintainance, as it can be proved, by the troublesome Petitions oftentimes presented to the said supreme Powers, by the said French Commissioners. 6. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, after the aforesaid French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches Accounts had been given up, and the aforesaid Acquit∣tances, the aforesaid Catalogue, and other Papers, where∣in the Names of all the Poor Relieved Refuges are writ∣ten down, examined by the aforesaid Honourable Com∣missioners: If, I say, it may please your Honours, to Sum∣mon in, to appear before the said Honourable Commis∣sioners, all the said French Refuges, whose Name, or Hand may be seen in the said Acquittances, Catalogues, and other Papers; that the said Honourable Commissio∣ners may take notice, if it be true, that all the said Poor Refuges, have been so much, and so often relieved, and after that manner as is said by the said French Commis∣sioners, and the said Ministers and Church-wardens of the
said two Churches: It will appear by this sixth means, that there is still a great Fund remaining in the said French Commissioners Hands, and in the Hands of such; who are favourers of their Party. 7. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons to make the same French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the aforesaid two Chur∣ches, Swear to every thing they shall say as true, for their Justification, or for denying all the aforesaid Fund, or a part of it; And to make them Swear besides, to all the circumstances of every thing, that they had said, and will say. That the said French Commissioners, Ministers, &c. seeing they are followed so close, by this seventh means, without doubt, will confess, that they have still in their own Hands, or in the Hands of others, at least, a good part of the said Fund, fearing to be declared per∣jured and utterly ruined in their Reputation, if they should be Convicted of perjury, as might befal them, if they had so bad a Conscience, whatsoever mental Refer∣vations they may use. 8. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, First to command to seize unawares, not only, all the aforesaid Acquittances, Catalogues and other Papers, but even all the Contracts and other Papers, wherein all the aforesaid great Summs of Money, or a part thereof may be mentioned; which said Acquittances, Catalogues, Contracts and other Papers, may be found, either in the Consistorial Chambers, or other places of the aforesaid two Churches; or in each House, Chamber, Closet, or other places of the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, especially in the Houses, Chambers, Closets, and other places belonging to Sir John Chardin, Mr. Lecoc, Mr.
Blancard, Mr. La Sale Monginot, Mr. Renu Both, Mr. Frontin, Mr. Louvigny, Mr. Dugas, Mr. Braguier Secretary, Mr. Satur, Brocas, Lamote, Primerose, and Piosett, which said Gentlemen were all formerly, or still are, the chief of the said French Commissioners, or some of the grea∣test favourers of their Party: In all probability, by this eighth means, the aforesaid great Fund will be more easily discovered, in Case the said Gentlemen have not been forewarned of it, as they have been of several things contained in these humble Remonstrances. 6. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to Command Mr. Canche, formerly Sir John Chardin's Secretary; Mr. Gallissard now Mr. Blan∣card's Secretary, and all other the said former French Commissioners, or present Secretaries, to appear in Per∣son before the aforesaid Honourable Commissioners, and and being put to their Oath declare whatever they may know about all the Summs of Money that are in the French Commissioners Hands, and belong to the said Poor Refuges, that they know off: There is no doubt but the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid great Fund, will be made very speedily by this ninth means. 10. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to order all the Bankers and Merchants, both English and French, which are in the City of Lon∣don, or in the Suburbs thereof, and in all other Trading Towns of this Kingdom, to reveal before the aforesaid Honourable Commissioners, all the Summs of Money given to them, or others, that they know off, by the said French Commissioners, or by the said Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, or by their Agents: This tenth means certainly will produce a
wonderful good Effect, in Relation to the aforesaid Dis∣covery of the aforesaid Fund. 11. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to publish, that every Person or Persons who will Discover and Reveal any Summs, either great or small of the aforesaid Fund, arising from the afore∣said Charities and Legacies, bestowed upon the aforesaid Poor amongst the Refuges, and put into the said French Commissioners Hands, &c. shall Receive such a Summ of Money as your Honours shall please to allot to such a Person, or Persons, for his or for their Discovery and Re∣vealing of such a Summ of the aforesaid Fund: This eleventh means will be one of the most Effectual ones, whereby the said great Fund will be found out. 12. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to Reward every Person or Persons, who through his or their great Care, and strict search, shall have discovered, and evidently, proved that that said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, have upon the said great Fund set∣tled in the aforesaid City of London, or in some other Towns of this Kingdom, any Manufactures, or given some part of the said Fund to any Shop-keepers to make the best of it, or made any other use of it: This twelfth means also seems a very fit expedient to make appear that the said French Commissioners, and the said Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, have still the said great Fund in their own Hands, or in the Hands of other Men. 13. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to Force the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, presently to give, to the aforesaid Honourable Commissio∣ners,
an exact Catalogue of all the French Refuges who have received something of the said Charities; which said Refuges went from England, or are Dead, or imployed in the said England; precisely telling when the said Poor Refuges went from England, or when they Dyed, or where imployed in the said Kingdom, or at least, telling how long it is since the said Poor Refuges were not Re∣lieved at all: You, the Honourable House of Commons, by this thirteenth means will be sure, that the said French Commissioners, &c. have not always well discharged their Duty, nor their Commission; And besides, they have in their Hands a considerable Fund, coming from the aforesaid Charities, bestowed upon the Poor French Refuges. 14. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to Order some French Refuges that came from several parts of France, of whatever Degree and Character they may be, presently to appear before the aforesaid Honourable Commissioners, and candidly De∣clare that they Know, or do not Know, all the aforesaid French Refuges, to whom the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches, say they have given something of the aforesaid Charities: To Order again, all the said French Refuges that came from several parts of France, of whatever Degree and Character, freely to Declare, they Know, or do not Know the said Poor Refuges, to whom the said French Com∣missioners, pretend to be sure, they have given some Relief, are gone out of England, or are Dead, or have been imployed in the said Kingdom, at the same time told by the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches: And to Or∣der moreover, that the said French Refuges, who came
from several parts of France, of whatever Degree and character they may be, to make with all speed, a more strict inquiry about the said Poor Refuges, departed out of England, or Dead, or imployed in the said Kingdom; and about what time when they departed from England, and when they Dyed, or where imployed in the said Kingdom: And to make also a strict inquiry about the said Fund, and all things that concerns it: And to Or∣der them to make a true Relation of all those premises, to the aforesaid Honourable Commissioners: This four∣teenth means will be a Touch-Stone to try Truth, or Untruth, that hath been, or shall be told, by the said French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens in their Answer, and will shew, as all other means before∣mentioned may do, a great Fund, come from the afore∣said Charities, into the Hands of the said French Com∣missioners, Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches. 15. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to let the Publick understand, it is a very material Thing, that every Person or Persons, of what Degree or Character soever, he or they may be, who be∣stowed any private Charities, and payed any Legacies to the said French Commissioners, or to the said Ministers and Church-wardens of the said two Churches should de∣clare, some ways or other, what Summs of Money their said private Charities and Legacies did amount to, when and to whom the same were bestowed and payed: That this fifteenth means wonderfully will Force the said French Commissioners, Ministers, &c. to give an account of a good part of the aforesaid great Summs; And to convince even the same French Commissioners, Ministers and Church-wardens, &c. to have in their Hands a grea∣ter
Fund than is necessary for the aforesaid Poor Refu∣ges Maintainance. 16. That if it may please You the Honourable House of Commons, to know, who are the Tellers of all the Summs, gathered upon the aforesaid three Briefs, and received by the aforesaid French Commissioners, and to command, the said Tellers of the said Summs of Money, to declare and shew by all necessary circumstances, how many Summs they have told, and when, and to whom of the said French Commissioners, they have told the said Summs. Again, if it may please You the Honoura∣ble House of Commons, to understand more particu∣larly, all the Summs of Money, gathered upon the said three Briefs, and call the chief Receivers to an account for the same. That this sixteenth means, will wonder∣fully serve for the discovery of the aforesaid Fund, and will sorce the said French Commissioners, to give a more strict account of it. 17. That, if it may please You the Honourable House of Commons, to order all the aforesaid French Commis∣sioners, to give up an exact account of the Fifteen Thou∣sand Pounds lately granted by your Honours, to the aforesaid Poor, which are amongst the Refuges, forth∣with to deliver to the aforesaid Honourable Commis∣sioners, all the Catalogues of Ministers, Gentlemen, Bur∣gesses, and other Poor, which are amongst the French Refuges, to whom the said Fifteen Thousand Pounds, have been, or shall be distributed. And to order, at the same time, all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, who shall be, or can be in this City, or its Suburbs, to appear in Person, every one, according to his Qua∣lity and Character, before the Honourable Commissioners, and all those, of the same Refuges who shall be in the
Country presently to write a Letter, to the same Ho∣nourable Commissioners: That by that means, it may clearly appear, whither the said Catalogues are exact, or no. Again to order every one, in particular, of the said Poor amongst the Refuges, to declare, to the said Ho∣nourable Commissioners, the number of the Persons of his Family, his employments, or the way he hath to maintain himself and his Family, his Rents, or his Wants, his Age, his Infirmities, and those of his Fami∣ly. And to order, that all in general, should declare, upon their Conscience and charitably, what they know, concerning the Summs of Money, or Revenues, what concerning the Poverty and Wants of others which are, or should be more or less relieved; That by that way it may clearly appear, whether the said French Commis∣sioners, (the most cunning men, amongst the Re∣fuges) have wronged some of the Poor Refuges, or no, in some thing, or other. And moreover, if the said French Commissioners are found guilty of any wrong, to order, that all of them, appear, before your Honours, together with all those, who had been wronged; That the same French Commissioners may be convinced for ever, before your Honours, that they have acted unrighteously. That you the Honourable House of Commons wonder∣fully will perceive, by this seventeenth means, whether, upon this occasion, the said French Commissioners, have rather followed the maxims of the World, than the E∣vangelical Rules; and whether they have not acted, according to the King's Will, and your Honours intent, or no. 18. That, if it may please you, the Honourable House of Commons, to use all the foregoing means, or some others like those, or some others better than those, and
to second them with all your Honours power; it will certainly come to pass, that all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, will be in a way of living contentedly, all their life-time, and by their Demands and Petitions, will trouble no more the Supreme Powers of this Kingdom, neither the Nation, publickly, nor privately: So that the said John Chabbert, hoping he may see in a short time, the said Poor Refuges, in a better condition, and the said Supreme Powers, the Church and the Kingdom of England, will reap many advantages from the better condition, wherein the said Poor amongst the Refuges, will be, God willing; He shall make bold still, to propose to your Honours, these following Motives, and humbly sheweth. 1. That the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much the King, upon three several Accounts; 1. Upon His Sacred Person, 2. Upon His Revenues, 3. Upon His Armies. 1. Upon the King's Sacred Person, who by the said Discovery of the said Fund, happily, and for ever, will be deliver'd from a great many troublesome Petitions, that oftentimes may be presented to His Majesty, by the said French Commissioners, under Colour of a great Poverty of a great many French Refuges, as was done heretofore, which Poverty, without doubt, the said French Commissioners, very Maliciously, Barbarously, Covetously and Proudly occasioned, and do still occasion. And again, the King's Sacred Person, by the said Discovery of the said Fund, hereafter will be free from the Care, that His Majesty hath taken, so Tenderly and Piously to Relieve the Poor which were, and still are, amongst the French Refuges in their urgent necessities, for which Poor the French Commissioners were continually a Begging; But
to whom after they received the said Relief from His Majesty, and from this generous Nation, publickly and privately, the said French Commissioners have given but a very small matter, in comparison of the aforesaid great Summs, come to their Hands, causing them to live in Poverty, to have always a need to Begg for the said Poor amongst the Refuges, and by that unlawful way, increase the aforesaid Fund (I do not know for what;) And all those shall be proved, by the Discovery of the said Fund. 2. Upon the Account of the King's Revenues, some whereof, bestowed upon the said Poor amongst the Re∣fuges, during the space of many Years, will be hereafter spared for ever, by means of the said Discovery, of the said Fund, fit to maintain all the said Poor, all their Life time. 3. Upon the Account of the King's Armies, where∣into, by the means of the said Discovery, of the said Fund, many French Gentlemen, both young, or, at least, Stout, and not being past bearing Arms, to whom, without doubt, the said French Commissioners, have for∣merly allowed, and do still allow, very good yearly Pen∣sions, as clearly will be seen by means of the said Dis∣covery, of the said Fund, will be foreced to chuse to go into the Armies, if a good part of their said Pensions, as it must be taken away from them, which said part of the said Pensions, in all appearance, causeth the said young and stout French Gentlemen Refuges to forbear taking up Arms, by that means, the young and stout French Gentlemen Refuges, not only do not serve the King nor the State at all; But even are burdensome to both. Again, the said young and stout French Gen∣tlemen Refuges, unhappily to spend their time, either in
Idleness, or in Divertisement, in Playing, sometimes in Slandering and Evil-speaking, or in some kind of Riot and Debauchery. Moreover to which said Armies, many of the French Refuges of whatever Degree, will also be easily induc'd to chuse to go, if some part of the pro∣duct of the said Fund, when it shall be discovered, be bestowed to maintain well all their Life time the Officers and Souldiers, who have been, or hereafter shall be mai∣med in the King's Service, in the said Armies. 2. That the said Discovery of the aforesaid Fund ve∣ry much concerns this State of England, in general and particular. 1. In general, because the said State, in general, by the said Discovery of the said Fund, every Year, not only may save a considerable Summ of Money, Charita∣bly and Piously granted to the said Poor amongst the Refuges, by your Honours; But also, may imploy the said Summ in paying some of the Taxes, laid upon the Peo∣ple, and granted to the King for the maintainance of his Armies by Sea and Land, and by this, or other means, ease all the People. 2. In particular, because many Persons, Members of the said State of England, having been very often Solli∣cited, either by the troublesome Demands of the said French Commissioners, or by the earnest Requests of the said Poor themselves, to spare something for them, and the said Persons, thereby moved to spare something for the said Poor Refuges hereafter will be no more obliged to spare any thing for them, when the said Fund shall be discovered, whereof the product, undoubtedly, will be sufficient continually to maintain all the said Poor Refuges,
3. That the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, which is in the French Commissioners Hands, concerns very much the Church of the aforesaid State, in general and particular. 1. In general, because 'tis certain, by the Discove∣ry of the said Fund, the whole Body of the Church of England will be partaker of the Prerogatives, Conveni∣encies and Benefits, which without doubt will be gran∣ted to the Inhabitants of some Hamlets, Villages and lit∣tle Towns in the said State of England, which said Inha∣bitants have no means to keep a Minister Resident in their Hamlet, &c. when some French Ministers, Refuges who are already, or may be in time, very well acquain∣ted with the English Tongue, shall be granted to the said Inhabitants of the said Hamlets, &c. which said French Ministers, all their Life time, will be maintained with the product of the aforesaid Fund, in exercising their Ministry in the said Hamlets, Villages and Little Towns, under the aforesaid Church of England Disci∣pline. 2. In particular, because the aforesaid Inhabitants, of the Hamlets, &c. the Church of England's Members, which have no means to keep a Mini∣ster Resident in the said Hamlets, &c. by the afore∣said Discovery of the great Fund, will take posses∣sion of one of the greatest Advantages in this World; if some French Ministers, Refuges, maintained by the product of the aforesaid Fund, are granted to the In∣habitants of the said Hamlets, &c. by the Discovery of the said Fund, and the conveniency to enjoy the Mi∣nistry of some French Ministers, making their Residence in the said Hamlets, &c. and being maintained with
the product of the said Fund, will have no more the trouble to be exposed to many grievous mischances. 1. Often to be exposed, to be a long while, without they can make their Children be Christened, and some∣times to see them dye, before they can be Baptized, for want of convenient time of doing it. 2. Upon many occasions, to be exposed, to the hav∣ing no comfort, when they are lying Sick, sometimes when they are dying, and at a great many other oppor∣tunities, whereof the Comforts and Prayers, said by a Minister are of great importance. 3. To be exposed, to a great many fatigues, especially in the Winter time, when publickly to call upon God, and be instructed about their Religion, or to make their Children be Christened, or to desire the Prayers of the holy Congregations, for their sick Persons, the said In∣habitants of the aforesaid Hamlets, Villages, and little Towns, must go to other Towns and Places from their Habitations, one, two, three, nay, and sometimes four Miles, and sometimes farther, when it rains, snows, freezeth, and the wind bloweth very hard, which said Toils may dishearten oftentimes the said Inhabitants of the said Hamlets, &c. and keep them from their publick Christian Duty. 4. That the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, particularly concerns very much, many French Ministers, Refuges, which were not in Orders in France; but which have received Holy Orders, from the Hands of the Right Reverend Fathers in God, and Lords, Bishops of the Ho∣ly Church of England; because the said Ministers, having now no settlement at all, or having but an inconstant one, shall have one, or one durable, upon the account of the said Discovery of the said Fund, a part of the pro∣duct
whereof, must, according to the Rules of Justice, be be∣stowed upon the said Ministers, as well as upon all other Ministers, Refuges maintainance, which were admitted into Orders in France, seeing that the said French Mini∣sters, Refuges, who have received Holy Orders from the Hands of the said Right Reverend Fathers in God, and Lords, Bishops of the said Holy Church of England, at least, are Ministers and Refuges, by as good a Title, as all the said other French Ministers admitted into Orders in France can have, especially when the said Ministers, admitted into Holy Orders in England, by God's As∣sistance, and that of the supreme Powers of this Kingdom, and Heads of the said Holy Church of England appro∣bation, will be settled in the said Hamlets, Villages and little Towns, whereof the Inhabitants cannot maintain a Minister, to exercise their Holy Ministry, and reside there all their Life-time. 5. That the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much, many particular English Ministers, and that upon two Accounts. 1. Because hereafter, when all the French Ministers Refuges shall be no longer in this World, or in England, the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Hamlets, Villages, and Little Towns, who cannot maintain a Mi∣nister, wherein the aforesaid Minister's Refuges, and ex∣ercised their Ministry, for a yearly allowance, taken out of the said Fund, hereafter, for ever may enjoy the pri∣vilege of having, either an English Minister, or a Mini∣ster, come from French Parents, born in England, to whom allowance taken out of the product of the aforesaid Fund, being granted; because there is not any part of a Civil Law, more just than that which prescribes, that, if the Done deceaseth before his giver,
the Gift must be given again to the said giver: So that, then the aforesaid French Ministers, and all other French People fled for Refuge into England, who are here the Dones, being deceased, or being no more look'd upon, as surviving all his Dones, after that, they may bestow their Beneficence upon whomsoever they please. 2. Because it being possible, that the aforesaid Fund every day might be increas'd, if the said Fund was put into the hands of some laborious, diligent, and ingenious Persons, who besides, may be very zealous for the Pro∣testant Religion in general, and in particular, for the Holy Church of England's Interests. In time, God wil∣ling, some English Ministers, maintained with some part of the aforesaid product, taken from the said increased Fund, may be granted to the Inhabitants of all the Ham∣lets, Villages, and little Towns of the aforesaid State of England, who for want of competent means to main∣tain a Minister Resident in their said Hamlets, &c. may have one, and in all likelyhood could never have had any, but by the aforesaid ways. 6. That, the aforesaid Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, concerns very much, all the Poor amongst the French Refuges; but especially, all the Poor maimed Soldiers, all the Old Poor Persons, all the Grave, Modest Widows, all the Poor Orphans, all the Infirm and Weak Persons, and all the Poor Persons of whatsoever Age, Degree, and Rank they may be off, if by their own means, they cannot maintain themselves, neither their Families; and that upon five Arguments. 1. Because, by the Discovery, of the aforesaid Fund, More Revenue than is requisite, for all the said Poor amongst the Refuges, will be found out.
2. Because, without doubt, to some of the said Poor Refuges, a durable, instead of an inconstant allowance, will be granted, and to some others, a competent one too. 3. Because, those of the said Refuges, who never can obtain, either any allowance at all, or but a competent one, from the aforesaid French Commissioners, which being inexorable, upon every occasion, have protested some∣times, they had no Fund at all, and sometimes that they had one, but very small and scanty, scarce capable to supply all the said Poor Refuges, with any relief, or but even with a competent relief: And all that very ambi∣guously, and by way of amphilology. 4. Because by the said Discovery of the said Fund, it will appear, that the said French Commissioners, have allowed, and do allow great Pensions, to many of the aforesaid Refuges of both Sexes, which will come to be, either utterly, or partly deprived of the said great Pen∣sions. They will come to be deprived of them. 1. Ut∣terly, if the said Refuges are convinced, to have other competent Revenues besides, for their Maintenance, or some means, whereby, it is clearly demonstrated, that they may supply all their own wants, or especially, if it appears, that the said Refuges, of both Sexes, have spent, or doth still spend, a good part of their Pensions in Luxury, both of Cloths and Diet, in Playing, and in any excess, or if it appears, that the said great Pen∣sions cause the said Refuges, to live in Idleness and mis∣spending their time, and they become unprofitable Members to the Publick, and to the Private: The said Refuges, will come, but in part to be deprived of the said great Pensions, if they can prove they want relief: So that the said Refuges being utterly, or in part deprived of
the great Pensions, as occasion serves, and as it shall be thought fit, the aforesaid Poor Refuges, may be more relieved, than they were before the said Discovery of the said Fund. 5. Because, by the Discovery of the aforesaid Fund, well managed and improved, many Poor Per∣sons, of both Sexes, who want imployment, and look for some, to maintain themselves and their distressed Fa∣milies, may be put upon Business, and in a way of living with their Families. 6. That the Discovery, of the aforesaid great Fund, concerns very much the English Poor; Because the aforesaid French Poor Refuges, Living upon the product of the aforesaid Fund, found out; and so being no more relieved by the Persons of Quality, and Rich People of this Kingdom, the said English Poor will Receive some Charities a great deal more from the said Persons of Quality, and Rich People. And moreover, that all English, as well as French Poor, may be put upon Business and live with their Families, upon the account of the said great Fund, well managed, and several ways increased; Is what the afore∣said John Chabbert heartily wisheth to the said English and French Poor, and continually offers up his Vows to the Om∣nipotent God; that it may please His Wise Providence to prosper his undertaking, for His Eternal Glory; For the Furtherance and Strengthening of the Kingdom of His belo∣ved Son, Jesus Christ; For the Immortal Memory of the Honourable House of Commons; For all good Peoples Edi∣fication; And for all the aforesaid French Commissioners, &c. Conviction, Shame and Confusion, So be it. Hîc opus hîc Labor est, sed Labyrinthus non est. FINIS.
