C2648 669.f.5[31] 99869363 160744
CR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation forbidding all His Majesties Subjects belonging to the Trained Bands or Militia of this Kingdom, to Rise, March, Muster, or Eye cise by vertue of any Order or Ordinance of one, or both Houses of Parliament, without Consent or War∣rant from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the Laws. WHereas by the Statute made in the seventh Year of King Edward the first, the Prelates. Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm affirmed in Parliament, That to the King it belongeth, and His part it is by his Royall Séigni∣ority, straitly to defend wearing of Armour, and all other Force against the Peace, at all times when it shall please Him, and to punish them which shall do contrary, according to the Laws and Vsages of the Realm; and hereunto all subjects are bound to aid the King, as their Soveraign Lord, at all seasons, when need shall be. And whereas Wee under∣stand, That expresly contrary to the said Statute, and other good Laws of this Our Kingdom, under colour and pretence of an Ordinance of Parliament, without Our Consent, or any Commission or War∣rant from Us, The Trained Bands, and Militia of this Kingdom have been lately, and are intended to be put in Arms, and drawn into Companies in a war-like manner, whereby the Peace and Quiet of Our Subjects is, or may be disturbed: We being desirous by all gracious and fair Admonitions to prevent, That some malignant Persons in this Our Kingdom, do not by degrees seduce Our good Subjects from their due Obedience to Us, and the Laws of this Our King∣dom, subtilly endeavouring, by a generall Combustion or Confusion, to hide their mischievous Designes and Intentions against the Peace of this Our Kingdom, and under a specious pretence of putting Our Trained Bands into a Posture, draw and engage Our good Subjects in a warlike Opposition against Us, as Our Town of Hull is already, by the Treason of Sir Iohn Hotham, who at first pretended to put a Garrison into the same, onely for Our Security and Service. We do therefore by this Our Proclamation expresly Charge and Command all Our Sheriffs, and all Colonells, Lieute∣nant-Colonels, Serjeant Majors, Captains, Officers, and Souldiers belonging to the Trained Bands of this Our Kingdom, and likewise all High and Petty-Constables, and other Our Officers and Subjects what soever, upon their Allegiance, and as they tender the Peace of this Our Kingdom, Not to Muster, Leavy, Raise, or March, or to Summon, or Warn upon any Warrant, Order, or Ordinance from one, or both Our Houses of Parliament (whereto We have not, or shall not give Our expresse Consent) any of Our Trained Bands, or other Forces, to Rise, Muster, March, or Exercise, without expresse War∣rant under our Hand, or Warrant from Our Sheriff of the County, grounded upon a particular Writ to that purpose under Our great Seal. And in case any of our Trained Bands shall Rise, or gather together, contrary to this Our Command, We shall then call them in due time to a strict Account, and proceed Legally against them as Violaters of the Laws, and Disturb∣ers of the Peace of the Kingdom. Given at Our Court at York the seven and twentieth day of May, 1642. ❧ By the King. OUr Will and Pleasure is, That the Ministers, Free-holders, Farmers, and substantiall Copy-hold∣ers of this Our County of York, do assemble and meet together at Heworth Moor, neer Our City of York, upon Friday in VVhitson week (according to former Summons) by nine of the Clock in the Morning. For that VVe are informed there are divers Fayrs to be kept in this Our County the day following, at which time many of them may have necessary occa∣sion to be absent: And therefore, out of Our tendernesse and care of Our good Subjects, VVe have thought fit to give this early Notice, to the end the said Inhabitants may be put to as little Prejudice as may be. And this Our Pleasure VVe require to be forthwith Printed, and Copies thereof to be speedily pub∣lished and dispersed by the Sheriff of this County: For which this shall be sufficient VVarrant. Given at Our Court at York, the seven and twentieth day of May, 1642. Imprinted first at York, and now Re-printed at London for Edward Husbands, May 31. 1642.
