C3019 669.f.26[24] 99869579 163906
CR DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms HIS MAJESTIES GRACIOUS LETTER, DIRECTED TO THE PRESBYTERY OF EDINBURGH, And by them to be Communicated to the rest of the PRESBYTERIES of this KIRK. Received the Third of September, 1660. CHARLES R. TRusty and well beloved, We greet you well: By the Letter you sent to Us, with this bearer, Mr. James Sharp, and by the account he gave of the State of Our Church there, We have received full Information of your sense of our Sufferings, and of your constant Affection and Loyalty to Our Person and Authority. And therefore We will detain him here no longer, (of whose good ser∣vices We are very sensible) nor will We delay to let you know by him Our gracious acceptance of your Address, and how well We are satissfied with your carriages, and with the generality of the Ministers of Scot∣land, in this time of trial, whilst some, under specious pretences, swerved from that Duty and Allegiance they owe to Us. And because such, who, by the countenance of Usurpers, have disturbed the Peace of that Our Church, may also labour to create Jealousies in the mindes of well meaning people; We have thought fit by This, to assure you, that, by the grace of God, VVe do resolve to discountenance Profanity, and all Contem∣ners and Opposers of the Ordinances of the GOSPEL. VVe do also resolve to Protect and Preserve the Govern∣ment of the Church of Scotland, as it is setled by Law, without violation; and to countenance, in the due ex∣ercise of their Functions, all such Ministers who shall behave themselves dutifully and peaceably, as becomes men of their Calling. VVe will also take care, that the Authority and Acts of the General Assembly at St. Andrews and Dundee, in the year, 1651. be owned and stand in force, untill VVe shall call another General Assembly (which We purpose to do assoon as Our Affairs will permit) And VVe do intend to send for Mr. Robert Dow∣glasse, and some other Ministers, that We may speak with them in what may further concern the Affairs of that Church. And as We are very well satisfied with your resolution not to meddle without your Sphere; So We do expect, that Church-judicatories in Scotland, and Ministers there, will keep within the compass of their Stati∣on, meddling only with matters Ecclesiastick, and promoting Our Authority and lnterest with Our Subjects a∣gainst all Opposers; And that they will take special notice of all such, who, by preaching, or private Conventi∣cles, or any other way, transgress the limits of their Calling, by endeavoring to corrupt the people, or sow seeds of disaffection to Us, or Our Government. This you shall make known to the several Presbyteries within that Our Kingdom: And as We do give assurance of Our favor and encouragement to you, and to all honest deser∣ving Ministers there; So We earnestly recommend it to you all, that you be earnest in your Prayers, publick and private, to Almighty God who is Our Rock and Our Deliverer, both for Us and for Our Government, That We may have fresh and constant supplies of his Grace, and the right improvement of all his Mercies and Deliverances, To the honour of his great Name, and the peace, safety and benefit of all Our Kingdoms: And so We bid you heartily farewell. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 10. of August, 1660. and of Our Reign the Twelfth year. By His Majesties Command. LAƲDERDAIL. Printed at Edinburgh, and Reprinted for George Calvert, at the sign of the Half-Moon, near the little North door in St. Pauls Church-Yard, 1660.
