c4188id 99896393 154121
PRAYERS To be Used during the QUEENS SICKNESS, In the Cities of London and Westminster. By His Majesties Special Command. DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceas'd; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties. 1694.
PRAYERS To be used During the Queens Sickness, in the Cities of London and Westminster. ¶ This Prayer shall be used, when the Litany is not said, after the Prayer for the King and Queens Majesties; when it is said, then after the Collect for the Day. O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort, our only help in time of need; We flie unto thee for succour in behalf of thy Servant our Sovereign Lady the Queen, lying now under thy hand on the bed of Sickness. Comfort her with thy Salvation, support her with thy holy Spirit, enable her to bear whatso∣ever thou shalt lay upon her, with Patience and Resignation to thy Will. Give a Blessing to the Means used for her Recovery, Restore her to her former Health in thy good time, and conti∣nue her long, together with his Sacred Majesty, to be the blessed Instruments of advancing thy Glo∣ry, and establishing true Religion, and Righte∣ousness, and Peace in these Kingdoms. We con∣fess that, by our manifold sins, we have deserved
the severest of thy Iudgments; yet we humbly beseech thee, upon our true Repentance, to par∣don all our Offences, to turn away thy Anger from us, and to hear the Prayers that we now offer up to thee: So we that are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee Thanks for ever, and will always be shewing forth thy Praise from generation to generation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ When the Litany is not said, these following Collects, taken out of the Office of the Visitation of the Sick, shall be used after the Prayer for All Conditions of Men. O Lord, look down from heaven, behold, visit and relieve thy Servant, and our most gracious Sovereign Lady the Queen; Look upon her with the eyes of thy Mercy, give her Comfort, and sure Confidence in thee, defend her from the danger of the enemy, and keep her in perpetual Peace and Safety, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. HEar us, Almighty and most merciful God and Saviour; Extend thy accustomed good∣ness to this thy Servant who is grieved with Sickness. Sanctifie, we beseech thee, this thy fa∣therly Correction to her; that the sense of her weakness may add strength to her Faith, and se∣riousness to her Repentance. That if it shall be thy good pleasure to restore her to her former Health, she may lead the residue of her Life at th fear, and to thy glory: or else giue her grace so to take th Visitation, that after this painful life ended, she may dwell with thee in life everlasting, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ When the Litany is said, then these two Collects shall be used after the Prayer, We humbly beseech thee, O Fa∣ther, &c. FINIS.
