C437 E564_9 R206100 99865285 117524
The Discoverer. Being an Answer to a Book entituled, ENGLANDS NEW CHAIN, The Second Part, Discovered. SHEWING In what part the sayd Book is false, scandalous, and reproachfull; in what destructive to the present Government; in what particulars it tends to divi∣sion and mutiny in the Army, and the raysing of a new Warre; ad wherein it hinders the re∣leife of Ireland, and continuing of free-Quarter; according to the Parliaments censure upon the sayd Booke. Also the Generall Officers of the Army are here clea∣red from sundry Falshoods, and Slanders charged upon them: With a further Discovery of many dangerous and destructve Dsignes still carryed on by he Levelling Party, a∣gainst the peace, safety, and freedome of the people. The Second Part. PRO. 18.6, 7. & 19.19. A Fooles lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for stripes, A Fooles mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soule. A false witnesse shall not be unpunished, and be that speaketh lyes shall perish. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1649.
TO The Right Honourable, the Com∣mons of England, assembled IN PARLIAMENT. SIRS, SINCE the Imprisonment of Mr. Lil∣burne, and the other three; There is published a Book under Mr. Walwins Name, wherein he manifesteth a great desire, that the Parliament had been pleased for the satisfaction of all those their faithfull Friends who are concerned in it, and of the whole Nation in generall, to have expresly applyed each part of the Book to each censure upon it, as to have shewed in what part it was false, scandalous, and reproachfull, in what destructive to the present Go∣vernment, also to have shewed what part, sentence, or matter therein rended to division and mutiny in the Army, and the raysing of a new Warre in the Com∣mon wealth; or wherein to hinder the reliefe of Ire∣land, and continuing of Free-Quarter. For what end he writes thus, it may easily be conjectur'd: And therefore to wipe of the aspersion and reproach from your Honourable House, we have undertaken the Justi∣fication of your Censure upon that Booke and according to the severest crimes and guilt Expressed in your Act, have here manifested the sayd Booke to deserve no lesse in every particular. Now from this answer, we are occasioned to put you in minde, how dangerous and destructive to all formes and
kinds of Government, are Trayterous, Mutinous, and Re∣proachfull Libels, and Pasquils, In truth the wisest of the Gentiles understood so much, and accordingly prescribed and provided remedies against it in their republicks. We have also observed the wisedome and singular care of Magi∣strates in forraine parts: For howsoever there are persons amongst them, as ill affected to their State as any herewith us, yet they know how, and doe, stop the passage and prevent the danger of such things by the due execution of good lawes. It is true, in our Lawes there are helps provided: not∣withstanding the mischeif and miserie remaines. And why? As foolish Birds frighted a little at first with the Husband∣mans Scarerow, and after a while observing that it stirre not, are bold to sit it upon it and defile it. So when Authority either revives some former statute or makes a new act against the aspersers of the present Government, at first the Libel∣lers and Raylers are a little frighted: But seeing there is not that mooving, acting, prosecuting as they fear at first, they take so much boldnesse as to come neere you, even to your very faces, set upon you, and defile you, and not onely in your reputation and name, but your power and Government and in the vilest and basest manner as ever was known in any Common-wealth, (Sirs) we speake this out of a tender res∣pect unto you, and to shew how much we desire that the Facs of our Elders may be honoured, and their Authoritie not blasted by such a base Generation of men. Neither truely know we any cause why such Pests and Plagues in a common∣wealth may not as well be suppressed in England as in other parts, If the like strict and exact course be taken here as  elsewhere. Now the Lord give you that wisedome, both in this and other things, as may be for the Nations prosperity, peace, libertie: and your own comfort Crown and honour.
TO His EXCELLENCY the Lord FAIRFAX, &c. AND To the Right Honourable, LEIVT: GENERALL CROMWEL, &c. My Lords, THE reason why wee have here mentioned Your Honourable Names, is in regard the matter contained in Our DISCO∣VERER, is your deserved Vin∣dication, from many vile asper∣sions raysed up against you by some malitious and seditious tongues. You hnow in War, the Generall and cheife Commanders are sought after by every one, more then the common Souldiers. Envy is like certaine Flyes called Cantharides, who light specially upon the fairest Wheat, and most blown roses. That you are singled out by some men, and made now the subject of their falsehood and slan∣der, it is no marvaile; for it hath been so from the beginning; men evermore of best deserving, and greatest worth, have most felt the scourge of tongues. M. Cato Major a Pop. Rom. prudens vp∣pellatus
maximis Romarum odijs exercitus est. Qua∣dragies enim series reus causam dixit, semperque absol∣tus est. Sabel l. 1. c. 6. Elias layd this downe as a reason, why he was willing to die, I am no better then my Fathers. The like reason may move you to be patient, content∣ed, comforted: you are not worse used then David was, yea Christ himselfe, your Lord and Master was serv'd so. When an Artificer hath before his eyes a famous patterne of his worke, on which he look∣eth, he perfecteth his owne much the better. Tak the Prophets which were before you for an example of suf∣fering, men eminent for grace, gifts and Office. Quis emim paulo majori anime non malt in bello cum periclo cum his proficisci, qui in precio sunt, quam domi cum is in ocio desidere qui contempti habentur; maxime si rex ipse ad Pralium eat? Cartwright: historia Christi. Lib. 1. p 375. Besides it must needs be a matter of singular joy unto you, to consider, how the godly every where love you, honour you, carrie you in their Bosome, and on their hearts, as the Jewels, and Treasure of the people. So that as light is loved (and men will love it) though Batts and Owles reject it: so are you under God, esteemed as two great lights of the Nation; neither doth the splendour and brightnesse of your persons appeare the lesse lovely, sweet and
beautifull to them, for that some Night-birds can∣not without vexation and envy looke thereon: And to say the truth, the godly every where have the more cause to love and honour you, considering it is for their sake, and the truths sake, and for the advancement thereof, that you are aspers'd; and so much we have in this Treatise manifested. And howsoever for your owne particulars, there needed not this Vindication: for inward peace and a good conscience is enough for a mans owne sa∣tisfaction. superat conscientia, quicquid ma finxerit lingua as Seneca saith, Epist: lib: de mor: and as Ti∣berius sayd to Rhscuporis; si frans abesses, poss eam innocentiae fider. T Annal: 2. Neverthelesse finding their accusation to be false, scandalous, and seditious, we thought it our dutie to step in and so to manifest as much respect and love unto your persons, in maintaining the honour and inocencie of your names, and justnesse of your cause; as o∣thers shew their malignitie and hatred, in seeking by calumniation and slander, to blast you, and your righteous proceedings. Charles the fift had for his devise a Ball with two Balloones, with this motto, percussus clevor, the harder I am stricken the higher I mount. Hitherto you have made this true, and we hope it shall still be so, as that in after Generations it shall be sayd, the enemies raysd
you and by their stroaks you won honour and fame. The searcher of all hearts knowes, how desirously we desire; that as the Lord hath wonderfully blest your undertakings and Crown'd you with many glori∣ous victories; so you, even you (we say) may be THE MEN and the Instruments in Gods hand to make England and Ireland fully happy, and of you that may be sayd, and fulfilled in you, . And likewise that, Nec tarda senectus Debilitet vires animi, mutetque virorem. Neither have we taken this worke in hand, without sitting down first and counting the cost: we have indeed considered the charge, and doe ex∣pect Bitter words, but we are not thereby discour∣aged at all: you have often been in the mid'st of Swords, Speares, and other Instruments of death, for us, and therefore it's the least we can doe, to suffer the Speares, Swords and Arrowes of evill Tongues for so just and Honourable a cause as this is. Therefore according to our engagement, so we shall (God willing) goe forward to stop the mouth of absurd and unreasonable men.
The Discoverer. Being an Answer to a BOOKE, ENTITULED, ENGLANDS New Chaines, The Second Part. Wherein is shewed in what part the sayd BOOKE is False, Scandalous, and Reproachfull; in what, Destructive to the pre∣sent Government; in what particulars it tends to Division and Mutiny in the Army, and the raising of a new Warre in the Com∣mon wealth; and wherein, to hinder the Reliefe of Ireland, and conti∣nuing of Free-Quarter. THE SECOND PART. WEE see men are more curious what they put into a new Vessell, then into a Vessell well seasoned; and what mould they lay about a young plant, then about a plant corroborate: If some men were not , with∣out understanding, without naturall affection, unmercifull; they would not manifest such
outrage and violent opposition against our present State, considering the same as yet, is new, tender, not thorowly and fast set and setled. But where the Building is greene and not dry, things are the sooner put out of order, so many peo∣ple doe purposly waite for the opportunitie; that is, while things are setling in the Common wealth, take the advantage of the time to obstruct the work. And as former Ages yeeld usPessimus quis∣que in occasio∣nem praeduram, Vulgus, ut mos est cujusque mo∣tus novi cupi∣dum. Tacit. Hist. l. 1. p. 370. many examples this way, so we have at this time sad and sensible expe∣rience among our selves, by the dayly practice of sundry restlesse people, whose continuall study and endeavour is to hinder our Builders, to the generall prejudice and hurt of the whole Nation: Some∣thing we have alreadyWe much desire, whoso∣ever hath not seen the First part, that he inquire after it, because by reading it, he shall the bet∣ter under∣stand many things in this Second part. published to undeceive the people, touching the reall plots and stratagems of these men, and the severall seditious wayes and miles a long time practised by them, to accomplish and effect the same: And at this time wee shall (by the good hand of God assisting us) make a further Discovery, that so we may performe our former promise, and satisfie the Readers expectation. For the method, we are here beholding to Mr. VValwin in writing thus,The Foun∣taine of slaun∣der discover∣ed. p. 18. I wished with all my heart, the Parliament had beene pleased for the satisfaction of all those their. Arist. apud Laert. Amicus non subito est publi∣cè objurgandus, donec ex turba∣tione recenti ad∣buc est inquie∣tior, aeger. Pet. Blesen. in li∣bello de ama∣cnis. faithfull Friends who are concerned in it, and of the whole Nation in generall, to have expres∣ly applyed each part of the Booke to each censure upon it, as to have shewed in what part it was fls, scandalous, and reproachfull, in what destructive to the present Go∣vernment; also to have shewed what part, sentence, or matter, therein, tended to Division and Mutiny in the Army, and the raising of a new VVarre in the Common
wealth, or wherein to hinder the reliefe of Ireland, and continuing of Free Quarter. Now howsoever wee know it is their worke to prove the Charge, neither should they have set downe any accusation (especially notSimler. on Exod. 22.2. hath these words. There is here no punish∣ment set down for him that should rayle on the Magistrate; but seeing he that rayled on his Father and Mother w to dye for it, Exod. 21.17. Much more worthy of death was he which should curse the Fa∣thers of the Countrey. reviled the Rulers of the people) without producing at the same time most pregnant and cleare testimony for it; Neverthelesse seeing it is not their use to prove any thing they say, but to say any thing they please (besides having wrapt themselves together in the guilt of falshood and slander, their testimony (as theParticipes criminis  s idi  in prehd crimin C. . de testibus. l. 6. & C. 1. de Confess. Law saith) is invalid) we shall speak to each particular, and so helpe Mr. Walwin to his wish and hearts desire: And first of the things which are false, scandalous, and reproachfull in the Book. First, It is there sayd, thatEds  Chaine, Second part. p. 8. All who have mani∣fested any sense of Common right, have beene styled Le∣vellers. Answ. But what c be spoken more untrue: For first, there are many thousands in the Land, who have not only manifested a sense of Common right, but have cordially acted these many yeares for the publique good, and clearly shewed themselves self∣denying men, never received any thing for their service from the Stae, but have cheerfully contri∣buted beyond their abilities, as occasion hath been, and yet never styled Lvellers. Secondly, What a Leveller is, we have described in ourThe Discove∣rer, pag. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. former Book; neither is the Name ordinarily given unto any, ex∣cept they are such as hold dangerous and destructive Principles, tending to the ruine of Church and Common-wealth. Thirdly, No man hath been sty∣led a Leveller, for any sense of Common right, but be∣cause
under this colour and cloak, they have carryed on pernicious Plots and Designes, to the great de∣triment and dammage of the Nation. Plato seeing Diogenes with a Coat of holes, sayd, he could see his Pride thorow the holes of his Coat. Howsoe∣ver Treason and Sedition doe use to cloath them∣selves with the habits of Common right,Auctor tumul∣tus, T. Curti∣fius quondam Pretoriae cohor∣tis Miles. Pri∣mo caetibus clandestinis, a∣pud Brundisium & circumje∣cta opida; moae, positis propalam libellis, & li∣bertatem voca∣bat agrestia per longinquos sal∣tus & ferocia servitia. Et e∣rat ijsdem re∣gionibus, Cur∣tius Lupus Questor, cui provincia vete∣re ex more Ca∣les evenerat. Is disposita clussia∣riorum copia, captantem tum maxime conju∣rationem dis∣jecit. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. p. 125. Liberty, Safety, that under those Liveries they may get coun∣tenance, and finde the more accesse in the World; yet the movings thereof are not so covert and hid, but judicious and discerning men can easily observe the same. Secondly, It is no lesse false, in charging the Councell of Warre withEnglands new Chaine, p. 7. as much arbitrarinesse as ever was in the world, sentencing some to death, others to disgracefull punishments, restraining and releasing at pleasure. &c. Answ. 1. What, as ever was in the World? Ne∣ver worse done by Jew nor Gentile before? Reader, it is worth thy observation, how their accusations are alwayes framed thus, either our Magistrates are matched with the vilest Tyrants that everThe Disco∣verer, p. 5. were, or the greatest Oppressours on Earth are not halfe as bad as they. But secondly, How tender the Ruling part of the Army hath beene in taking away life by Martiall Law, is evident by that true Report whichThe Justice of the Army, p. 1. one hath lately given thereof, there having beene not a∣bove seven or eight executed, since the Generall had bis Commission:Qui vult a∣mari, languida regnet manu. Senec. Tragic. Non quidquid Nocens. reus pati mereretur id egregio sub principe. Tac. l. 14. Annal. p. 275. an unparallel'd example. Phillip King
of Macedon was wont to say, That the reproaches and injuries of the Athenian Orators caused him to order his words and deeds so, that themselves should be proved Lyars: The moderation and clemency of his Excellency and Councell of VVarre, hath been such, as their Enemies have been found false accu∣sers in all their seditious Papers and Pamphlets a∣gainst them. Thirdly, For the persons there mentioned, and the cause wherefore censured, we shall speake there∣of in another place; here we shall onely acquaint the Reader, how it hath been ordinarily the practice of Conspirators, when they have sought to destroy the present Government, and thereby to advance themselves, to asperse the Officers and Comman∣ders of the Army, with pride, tyranny, dominion, lust, &c. as a weapon of meer advantage, the better to effect their selfe-seeking ends. 3. The Book tels us, thatEngland new Ch p. 3. their Generall Coun∣cels according to their engagements, ought to consist one∣ly of two select Commission Officers, and two private Souldiers chosen by every Regiment with such Gene∣rall Officers as assented to the Engagement, and no o∣ther. Answ. The dissolution of the Agitators is much complained of, and made one main ground of great division and mutiny in the Army, but the truth in, thatSee Mr. H D Booke called, The Levellers De∣signe, p. 4, 5. where th thing a lgly handd. same power by which they had their consti∣tution, made a dissolution and nul thereof: And this was done by a Petition to the Generall, from most of the Regiments of Horse and Foot, where∣in they humbly desired that their Agitators might be sent back to their respective Regiments, and that
they would have the Councell of Warre to be in the same manner it was before, professing their sub∣jection and obedience thereunto; and according to their Petition (by a mutuall and joynt consent of all parties publiquely declared) the Councell of A∣gitators was dissolved: So that it is false, that the Generall Councell should consist of any Commission Of∣cers, or private Souldiers, chosen by every Regiment: Neither can the Ruling part of the Armie be charg∣ed with Violation of that Engagement, nor doth there remaine any obligation on them to have re∣vived, or continued any such Councell, much lesse is it warrantable in the Souldiery of the Army, to assume any such power, as to act thereby. 4. It is an accusation grounded upon a lye, to say that thoseEnglands new Chaine, p. 3. Officers and Souldiers were sleighted and discountenanced, who first engaged against the de∣structive Votes of Parliament, and stood firme to their engagement at New Market, and Triploe-heath: For first, such men are not onely still in place, and mat∣ters of the greatest trust reposed in them, but also have ever shewed their dislike against the Levelling Faction: Secondly, if any Officers or Souldiers have been checked and controuled, it wasIf a Servant run away from his Master, will not hee speake evill of the Family? Who will ad∣mire when men are pun∣ished for sedi∣tion, to heare them com∣plaine after∣wards against their Judges? for some ap∣parent miscarriages, and not for well-doing. And here wee shall Discover unto the Reader, a prety devise of these men; which is, to relate how some of their Party have been sleighted, discounte∣nanced, sentenced, &c. and withall report what good services they have done; concealing in the meane time the justNote, Thou shalt never finde in any of their Pa∣pers, the rea∣son truely set downe where∣fore any of their Faction have suffered, onely their manner is to name the suf∣ferers, and what they suf∣fered, and where; but the cause they durst never speake of: Judge there∣fore the Tree by the fruits. cause, wherefore they suffered, to the end ignorant and simple people may thinke, they were punished unjustly: To omit many ex∣amples,
there is one VVilliam Thomson, often men∣tioned in their Bookes, now who in reading their fad Representation of him, would imagine? that a man so cryed up, and styled by Mr. Lilburne,The peoples Prerogative. p. 42. the honest Nounsubstantive Souldier, was first questioned at a Court-Marshall, for his prophane and scanda∣lous life: Namely, for drunkennesse, gameing,The Justice of the Army, p. 7, 8, 9. quarrelling, for breaking up a mans House in the dead of the night, where he wounded three or four persons, layd fellony to the charge of the Mistresse of the house, for robbing him of twenty pound of Gold and Silver, and afterwards confessed, hee had lost none; much more of the like wicked and base doings were proved against him; whereupon he wasMr. Lilburne saith, he was a Corporall in Colonell Wh∣leys Regiment, and was ca∣shiered at the head thereof, but he is very carefull not to shew where∣fore it was, for that would have spoyl'd the Levelling Faction The peoples Prerogative, p. 44. justly Cashiered by the Councell of warre, and after∣ward to revenge himselfe, sought to make division in the Army, and by hisThis Trea∣son and Sedi∣tion Mr. Lil∣burne cals, the honesty of the Man, ibid. seditious and trayterous practices, became a chiefe man, and a Ringleader a∣mong the Levellers. 5. They say,Englands new Chaine, p. 13. They blast us with all the scandals and false reports, their wit or malice could invent against us; and so monstrously wicked have they been in this par∣ticular, that they have pry'd into all our actions, made use of all our acquaintances and friendly intimacie, and in conclusion have onely produced such scandals, when stand and examined, containe both contrariety in themselves, and have not the least ground of truthes con∣cerning us. Answ. But is there any truth here? For first, have their acquaintances and friendly intimacies ever told them so? What all? Not one exempted? A∣gaine, 'tis much that the Gentlemen at VVestminster should know all their acquaintances, and had such
leasure, and so little to doe as to pry into all their actions: Thirdly, we had not thought the Authors and Promoters of this Booke had beene such consi∣derable men, as that the Parliament, Councell of State, or the Chiefe Commanders of the Army, would have fallen so farre below themselves, as to have acted a∣ny thing in such a way: Fourthly, if all their actions have been pry'd into, it is much that no more is pub∣lished; for there are things concerning some of them, which are most base and scandalous, and wee know them to be true, but being personall, doe pur∣posely conceale them: But fifthly, that their names are blasted, and that they have lot the hearts of good men every where, we beleeve it: For the Lord usually punisheth men in the same kinde and way wherein they have offended: It hath been their stu∣dy and practice a long time, to blast some precious men with all the scandals and false reports, that their wit or malice could invent against them; and behold hereIt is indeed very remarka∣ble, as they would have done, so God hath requited them; For to what other purpose is their Englands New Chaine, both parts, but to blast some precious men, a meere thirsting after their blood: Thus like some suttle Fish, whiles they are lay∣ing Gins and snares for o∣ther Fish, themselves are taken. Gods righteous administration:Pro. 11.8. The righ∣teous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked commeth in his stead: As he that moves the weik of a burn∣ing Candle with his finger, blacks it, and burnes it, and causeth the light to burne more cleare; so thePro. 21.18. wicked shall bee a ransome for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright:Pro. 26.27. Who so diggeth a pit shall fall therein. Like the Witch that had the disease passe into her, that had bewitched another: Thus the Lyes and false reports which Daniels enemies raysed against him, and so the calumniations and slanders malitiously devised by Haman against the Jewes, fell like sharpe Arrowes upon their owne head, and by such wicked doings, they had their
faces covered with shame: Whereas Daniel and the Jewes came to greater honor and advancement, the Lord doing them good for the others cursing. Sixthly, For theIf the Rea∣der desire to informe him∣selfe touching those scandals let him in∣quire for a Book entitu∣led Walwins Wyles. scandals which they speak of, containing contrarieties, and have not the least ground of truth; As we know not what they meane, so we shall not inquire after it: our Discoverer tends one∣ly to what is publique and generall, and here wee can certainly say, without contrarieties, and upon a ground of truth, that in their Booke, are few passa∣ges, but what are either false, scandalous, or sedi∣tious. 6. A little after they say, They have already lost the affections of all people, and are onely supported by their present strength, but when once those good men that hold them up shall perceive how instrumentall they are made, contrary to their intentions, in advancing a few lofty and imperious mens designes, &c. they will lament that they have been so long out of the way, &c. Answ. Here are as many lyes as lines, and thus we prove it: First, how soever it werePejor est de∣tractio in ma∣ni nominis viris quam in plebeii Aug. lib. 3. Cont. Peril. no wonder if a good mans Name and Honour should be muchPro. 16.28. Ziba by his falshood cau∣sed David to have an ill o∣pinion of ho∣nest Mephibo∣sheth, 2. Sam. 16.34. Nulli aque mo∣res Deo exocra∣biles sunt, ac sannigerratoris qui ex obscuro vulnus insligit, ignavissimus e∣nim quum sit maxima infert mala. Synes. Epist. 44. empaired by such false and slanderous tongues, yet the truth is, as Nazianzen speakes of a Plant being cut it flourisheth, lives by dying; so the Lord in the way of his providence disposeth, that by their ca∣lumniations and vile aspersions, the others are the better thought of, and the more precious in the eyes of the godly: And thus, as a man that casteth an empty hand having neither stick nor stone to sting, or like an Arrow which being wrong levelled, fal∣leth wydest, when shot in the strongest Bow; so their lying lipps and deceitfull tongues effect no∣thing,
but whatsoever they say or doe, the same pre∣sently vanisheth away like smoake: But secondly, wherefore is this wordDifficile est peccati nsue∣tudinm vine∣re; pavus u∣sus vi abole∣tur: assidua nsuetudo vi∣tium in natu∣a conver∣ Animus seribus at∣ctus, vix ab eis ill po∣test. Isid. lib. 1. Suio∣m. ALL so often used? doth it not alwayes argue an impudent lying? For what knowledge have they of the affections of all People? They thinke suchThere is no∣thing but empty words in what they say, as for reason and proofe, it is not the man∣ner to men∣tion such things. big words will serve to further their seditious designes; but judicious and know∣ing men meeting with such palpable and notorious false expressions, will soon perceive that there is neither Honestie nor Conscience in the speakers. 3. Was there ever heard before so grosse a con∣tradiction, that with one breath it should be sayd, They have lost the affections of all people, and yet pre∣sently, Good men hold them up; if they are held up by good men, then they have not lost the affections of all people, and so much in the words following is plainely expressed. Walwyn saith,The Foun∣taine of slan∣der discover∣ed, pag. 25. As their Father is sayd not to be able to hide his cloven foot, so neither can these hide their double dealing, doe but never so little watch them, and you shall finde they are made up of con∣tradiction: The Law saith,Confessio supe∣raomne pro∣bationis genus, Bar. in L. si Confessus de Cst. reorum. Confession is beyond all o∣ther kinde of proofe: Now of whom he speakes we know not, but this we know (and have in our for∣mer Booke largely shewed) that to say and unsay, is their usuall practice, neither needs there much watching to find them out this way. 4. For the advise which they give here, to those good men, not to be instruments to advance a few lofty and imperious mens designes, but to convert their abili∣tyes and power, to better and more Common ends: As no man better knowes their meaning then them∣selves, so they have since told us what their meaning is, namely,Picture of the Councell of State, p. 14. A Declaration of the Free Commoners of England. Souldiers as well as others to ryse up against
the Parliament, as so many professed Traytors, Theeves, Robbers, and high way men, and to apprehend, secure, and bring them to justice in a new Representative; this they call, A comming into the way, and setting them∣selves with the utmost courage and resolution to fr their distressed Country from the feares and captivity it now groanes under. And that the way may be cleare for this worke, they have already declared, that the Parliament is no Parliament; but a dead stinking Carkasse; a factious company of men treacherously combi∣ned together, to subdue the Lawes, Liberty, and Freedome of England. So that all their votes, orders, ordinances, and acts, or that hereafter they shall passe, are not binding to the People. And the like they say, of the Coun∣cell of State, and the Councell of War, both unlawfull, illegall, and they know them not: So that there is nothing now to doe but that those good men will act the Treason which these Conspirators have plotted against the Common-wealth. But we hope all good men hereafter, will take heed how they make any tumult or mutiny, having seene an example so late of Gods revenging hand uponObserve what the sad and heavy hearted Prisoners say in their Peti∣tion to his Excellency, subscribed by 340. Your Petitio∣ners are very sensible of the odiousnesse of their fact, how lyable it renders them to the wrath and dis∣pleasure of God, how destructive the same might have beene to the Being of the Nation, and the good and welfare of the other two, and therefore can∣not but acknow∣ledge the sen∣tence of death pas'd upon by your Excellency and the Coun∣cell of Warre, very just and equall. And a little after, It will very much magnifie your Excellencies, Christian temper, in receiving such detestable Offenders to mercy. Incendiaries. — Raro antecendentem scelstum deseruit pede paena Claudo. Seldome Revenge, though slow of pace, Leaves ill foregoing men to trace. 7. It is also false, when they say, These knowne truths which yet ring in every mans eares through the Land. For first, their accusations and charges are to many people of the Land as yet unknowne. Se∣condly,
many men of their owne knowledge, know their whole relation to be false, and upon all occa∣sions declare so much. Thirdly, unlesse they are men of their owne faction, the judicious and peaceable every where doe observe them, because they see they are things maliciously devised, and tending on∣ly to division and further blood-shed. Fourthly, They ring indeed, and not onely through the Land, but also in other Kingdomes; for theIn France the Cavileirs speake great things of the Levellers, and take them for their chiefe Friends, and the considera∣blest party they have in this Land: When they heard the Souldiers re∣volted, there was great try∣umph amongst them, but when newes was brought them, that they were sup∣prest, it made them all to hang downe the head. Malignants abroad, rejoyce at their doings, and have great hope to effect their designes by the trayterous act∣ings of these men; so that the boasting and try∣umph in Forraine parts, is now beyond measure, that they have such notable instruments here at home to blow up the Coales of sedition and Rebel∣lion amongst our selves. Fifthly, howsoever it be true, some areAd accipienda credendaque omnia va cum tristia sunt. Tacit. Hist. l. 1. p. 342. ready to admit and beleeve all newes, when they are evill: Neverthelesse as the same Au∣thor saith,Veritos visu & mora, falsa, festinatione & incertis vales∣cunt. Tacit. Annal. l. 2. p. 57. Time and the eye tryed out truth, and fals∣hood winneth credit on a sudden and by uncertainties: So that we are confident, the Reader shall find here in our Discoverer so much clearenesse of truth, force of reason, and fulnesse of proofe, as he will easily see their lyes and falshoods, unlesse he purposely shut his eyes, and choose rather to be deceived: and thus much for the first particular, now we come to what is scandalous in the Book. And first of the matter in relation toEnglands new Chaine, p. 10. 11. Colonell Rains borough; here we may say in their own words, So monstrously wicked have they been in this particular, as they have heap'd up many scandals together: For first, he was not withdrawne from the Army, for op∣posing the proceedings of any, but partly for his fitnes
for Sea service; and partly through his owne desire, the Office being more honourable andThe place was better then two Co¦lonel ships on Land. profitable then the place wherein he was before: Secondly, The straitnesse of his Commission, was not occasioned by any Officer in the Army, but it is a base and scan∣dalous aspersion of their owne framing: Neither thirdly, was hee put upon that dangerous and unhappy service before Pomfret, because the Ruling Officers found him inflexible to their ends, but this is another most vile and malicious slander: Fourthly, that he went thither with reluctancy and discontent, we canWhat wee here affirme we have good proofe for, and they are ready to testi∣fie it whenso∣ever there is a just occasion ma∣nifest to the contrary: For being met on the way by another Colonell, who perswaded him not to goe, and gave him some reasons for it, he would not by any meanes alter his resolution, but manifested a great desire, willingnesse, and chearfulnesse unto that service. 5. It is no lesse scandalously and trayterously spoken, that hisWe could speake much more to this particular, if it were need∣full, to shew that they care not what they say, so they may scanda∣lize other men. brother should receive no furthe∣rance, but rather discouragement, in searching after, and prosecuting the causers of that so bloody and inhu∣mane a butchery, for he had all the assistance that hee ever desired, and of himselfe without any discou∣ragement from the Ruling Officers, gave the thing o∣ver. Lastly, whereas they speake of giving cause of griefe and suspect to his friends; here lyes the maine of the scandall, namely,It is repor∣ted of one Perinnis, that he sought by false report to have many wealthy and Noble Citi∣zens put to death, that he might have their goods. a close and home accusa∣tion against the Ruling Officers, as to be accessary to that horrid and cruell murder: And indeed, the whole relation tends onely to this, that for oppo∣sing their unjust proceedings, they secretly made him away. Now the Law of God, speaking of a false wit∣nesse,
saith,Deut. 19.1. You shall doe unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother. The Hebrews explaine it thus,Maimny, Treat of wit∣ness. Chap. 18. Sect. 1. 2. 5 If they have testified falsly of a transgresion, for which men are guilty of stoning to death, they are all to be stoned: If of burning, they are to be burnt; and so forNote, They who are false witnesses in o∣ther things beside mur∣der; as they thought to have done to others, so it must be done to them, if they have fals∣ly accused o∣thers of Trea∣son, they must suffer then as Traytors, if of tyranny, oppession, &c. suffer ac∣cordingly. other deaths. And if they testifie of crimes worthy beat∣ing, every one of them is to be beaten. 2. In their Relation about the Lilburns, there are sundry scandalous things: First, Leivetenant Co∣lonell Henry Lilburn was never solicited, by the great men in the the Army, to asperse his brother John, but whatsoever he spake concerning an intent to murd the Ling, it was without being wrought by any one of them so to doe, neither knew they the carriages and passages between them two, but what was abroad and commonly reported: Secondly, It is also a slander to say, that the Officers would never suffer th asperser to be brought forth to the proofe, for they never did any thing in way of opposition, but left the thing wholly to themselves, and their Friends, to do there∣in what they would: Thirdly, That he should be ad∣vanced to the Government of Tinmouth Castle for that perfidious service, it is as false a thing as ever mouth uttered: We could declare if need were the rea∣son and cause wherefore he was appointed to that place, but it is sufficient, the Reader take notice that what they report is not true, such a thing was never thought nor spoken, neither have they any proofe or Author for it, but maliciously forged it out of their owne heads. 4. What forehead would not blush to say, theAs they charged the Ruling Offi∣cers before, with murder so here with Treason. General Officers inclined him to this revolt themselves, as well by their example as by countenancing him in the
beginning thereof: HereCaute si non caste: Afranij simulans. Cic. pro Sextio. Machiavel, or a Jesuite would smile at so uncovert and naked a Lye; for any thing rather, and with more probability and likelyhood might be charged upon the Generall Of∣ficers, then that they should give an example or coun∣tenance to Treason against the Common wealth: Never have they to this day betrayd their trust, or given up any Fort or Castle to the Enemie: As Blae∣sus sayd,Mea potius caede imbuite manus; leviore flagitio legatum interficietis quam a Reipub. desciscitis, Ta∣cit. Annal. lib. 1 pag. 11. In my blood rather imbrue your hands, for it is a lesser offence to slay the Levtenant, then fall from the obedience of the State: So much fidelity, truth, and constancy have they alwayes shewed to the Na∣tion, that they have all along preferred the welfare and safety thereof, before their owne lives: Fifthly whereas they say, His Father and kindred have beene aspersed with the fact, by the Officers and their Associats; this also is a slander, according to the best intelli∣gence we have, howsoever the thing is of no pub∣lique concernment: Here  a fit place to remem∣ber Mr. WalwinsThe foun∣tain of slander discovered, p. 3. words, If all stories (saith he) be scarcht into, it will be found, that unjust, cruell, cove∣tous, or ambitious men, such as were ingaged in corrupt interest, or in some wicked designe, were ever the asper∣sers, and honest, just, and publique spirited men aspersed. Is this witnesse true? One of themselves, even aIf Walwyn be here a true Prophet, the Authors and Promoters of that Booke, are unjust, cruell, &c. the aspersers, ho∣nest, just, &c. for if all sto∣ries be searche into it will, be found that in two sheets of paper are more false, scandalous, and seditions aspersions, then most I∣lip volumes doe containe, let them choose what one Booke they will. Prophet of their own:Job. 15.6. Then thine owne mouth con∣demneth thee and not I; yea, thine owne lips testifie a∣gainst thee. 3. Now what next;Englands new Chaine, p. 5. Then they fall to worke again about the Kig, and send the Propositions of Newcastle to him, which they knew, and were agreed he should not signe. Answ. When the Spider hath emptied even her
very bowels to make one slender Web, one puffe of winde blowes all away; so it is here with these men, having vented all the rancour and poyson of their hearts, one word is sufficient to refute whatsoever they have sayd: But that we purposly forbeare a large discourse, otherwise we could in many parti∣culars shew their monstrous basenesse here, that the senders of those Propositions knew before they sent, and had agreed among themselves, that the King should not signe them, it is another devise of their owne head, and they might fasten the scandall and slander as well, and with as much reason and truth, upon a∣ny other men, as upon the Ruling Officers; for they neither knew what the King would doe, nor mov'd him to any refusall, neither agreed before hand that he should not signe what they sent him, neither to speake directly to the thing, did the Army Officers send the Propositions to him.Pro. 12 19. The lip of truth shall he established for ever; but a lying tongue is but forAccording to the common saying among the Je  Menda dibut a sunt, Lyes have their feet cut off, so that they can∣not stand. a moment. 4. Now to that which they speake concerningEnglands new Chaine, pag. 9.10. a serious repentance, the whole matter as they have set it downe is a scandall and a lye: For first, It was ne∣ver acknowledged with the greatest expressions of sorrow (nor yet expressed at all) that they had walked by cor∣rupt politick Principles: No such words were then spoken by theReader, take notice, wee have relation here to what was done publikely by the Generall Officers, so that if any thing hath been private∣ly whispered by any parti∣cular man it nothing con∣cerns this matter. Ruling Officers, but they have devised them of their owne head: Secondly, Neither was it sayd, If ever the Nation be happy, it must be by a con∣junction in the Levellers Principles. For is it proba∣ble or possible, that they should so speak, who know the Levellers Principles (properly so cal'd) are most destructive and dangerous, as tending to the subver∣sion
of Church and State; as for other Principles bottomed upon Religion, Law, Reason, they never tooke them for Levellers Principles, much lesse ever stil'd them by that name: Thirdly, It is also false, that it should be acknowledged, that they had discoun∣tenanced honest men, and set up a party; What was ac∣knowledged then, it was only in relation to the King, as some oversight or miscarriage that way; so that the truth is, what was said at the same timeIt was not without some crft, that they forbore to relate what was confessed for had they done so, they could not so handsomely have reported many things which they have done concerning the King, howbeit not as ely in any one, as wee shall shew in its place. they have left out, and brought in other things, which were never spoken nor thought of. 5. They say,Englands new Chaine, pag. 15. It hath been by their procurement that the Judges, their creatures, have a thousand pound a yeare allowed to every one of them, above the ordinarie Fees, which were ever esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves. Answ.Senex tardus est ad audien∣dum, velx ad loquendum, vi∣tuperat moder∣nos, commen∣dat praeterita, quia omnia membra in sene deficiunt, ex∣ceptâ linguâ, qua nunquam in ipso quiescit. Wolfang. Franzius. hist. Animal. tract. 4. Cap. 2. p. 726. 727. The Aspe in her old age hath all her members to decay, onely her tongue is as bad as e∣ver: We shall find in those men no abatement of scandall and reproach, their tongues are still their owne, although Reason and Proofe for what they say, they never produce any. But to answer, First, To call the reverend Judges of the Land, their crea∣tures, is not onely a disgracefull aspersion put upon them, but a dishonour and blot on the Parliament: Secondly, whatsoever hath been done this way, the Army Officers procur'd it not, neither have they spo∣ken any thing therein, but as their place and calling gave occasion to deliver their own opinion: Third∣ly, there is nothing procured for them but what hath been allowed unto Judges formerlie, and well known to be fit and necessary, and therefore the scandall is the greater, to publish to the World as if
the Parliament brought in some new burden and charge upon the Land: Fourthly, That their ordi∣nary Fees are esteemed a heavy oppression in themselves, it may be so to some, for such as would haveDiscoverer, p. 12.14. no Termes or Lawes, no Judge or Justice of Peace, no May∣ors, Bayliffs, Aldermen, Common-Councell men, no Cor∣porations, Patents, Charters, Records, no buying nor sel∣ling, nor any civill trading at all; no man to call any thing his, nor any man to be put to death for murder, or any unrighteous crime whatsoever; (as theIt is not likely, the Ru∣ling Officers should say, That if ever the Nation be happy, it must be by a conjun∣ction in the Levellers Prin∣ciples. Levellers Principles are:) No marvaile if they complaine a∣gainst such Fees, and esteeme them a heavy oppression. But for others who hold the Principles of Reason ad Justice, never thought them so; for they know their ordinary Fees amount not to so much, as they got by their practice, before they were Judges; Even a Foole when hee holdeth his peace is counted wise. 6. They complaine against the Councell of Warre forEnglands new Chaine, p. 8. sentencing Master William Thomson to deat at Whitehall. Of this man we have spoken something already, but because he was a None such among that party, we shall give the Reader some further account of him, and so wipe off their reproach and scandall from the Army: After hee had received severall Orders to depart the Quarters for his lewd and vi∣cious life; he in a peremptory manner refused to submit; whereupon there was a new charge exhi∣bited against him, for mutinous words, and deliver∣ing seditious Papers to the Souldiers, some in wri∣ting, others Printe, unto which he pressed them to subscribe, and laboured what he could to make divi∣sion
between the Officers and the Souldiers; this and much more being proved against him, he was apprehended, and brought Prisoner to Windsor, from whence (contrary to his promise) he made an es∣cape, and being afterward apprehended at Westmin∣ster, and sent Prisoner to VVhite Hall, he there made an escape theNote, that before this se∣cond escape, he had the sentence of death pro∣nounced a∣gainst him, & that accord∣ing to Law: But the Ge∣nerall was pleased to shew him mercy, and reprieved him from the pre∣sent executi∣on, yet so as to continue in Prison ce: Sd Book entitu∣led, The Ju∣stice of the Ar∣my, p. 8, 9. second time; and within a while af∣terWithout a∣ny Order, or Commission. gathered a company of men in armes, whom he Quartered upon the Countrey, calling them his Troop, and they him Captaine; with these he mar∣ched to a Gentlemans house in Essex, who had a Suit depending in Law with another about a Title of Land, whom he by force and violence dispossest, taking his Tenants and Servants prisoners, driving them before him in the night, through mire and dirt, and pricking them forward with his Swords point in a most inhumane and barbarousHe was for this brought Prisoner to White Hall, and by the Court Mar∣shall sent to the Civill Ma∣gistrate, who for his appea∣rance at the Assises, tooke bayl. man∣ner. After this he stab'd one Master Heyden with his Dagger, without any cause or provocation, of which wound he is since dead; and within a few dayes af∣ter this, was againeHe was at this time likewise brought Prisoner to White Hall, and from thence sent againe to the Civill Magistrate, but bayled by Leivtenant Colonell John Lilburne. taken on the Road, with other men whom he had drawne to his wicked courses, and there was found about him, a great black Peri∣wig, and a false Beard; for the rest of his actions, and hisAs a Tray∣tor he dyed in his blood; Thus the wicked shall fall by his owne wickednesse, Prov. 11.5. end, the same are so notorious, as the me∣mory of him is hatefull, and his name rots: As for such as turne aside to their crooked wayes, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: Loe this i the man that made not God his strength.
7. To goe on:Englands new Chaine, p. 8. Their next worke was to new mould the City, and make it theirs, for which purpose they brought, &c. Answ. As the grating of a Saw sets the teeth an edge, so their calumniations are irkesome and di∣stastfull to us; here are heapes upon heapes: But first, It is not true, that the Ruling Officers brought Soul∣diers to white hall and the Mews, to the and they might make the Cittie theirs: for they had no such purpose nor thought; but what they did was by the appoint∣ment and order of the Parliament; and there was great reason and cause it should be so; both for the preservation of the House,When the Prentises rose and expected the Water∣men to joyne with them, honest men then would have suffered not a little, had not the Souldiers sea∣sonably come into the City and supprest them. and toWitnesse the comming of many to the house from Essex, Surrey, &c. with Petitions, had not the Souldiers been there, it is probable the Parliament would have been abused. prevent severall inconveniences: Secondly, To the extreme discon∣tent of the Cittie, say they; the which also is false: unlesse by Cittie they mean Malignants and Incen∣diaries, for to our knowledge, the wel-affected eve∣ry where were exceedingly glad thereof, and indeed well they might, for they were a wall unto them both by day and night, and under God, a meanes of their safety and preservation. Thirdly, Would not the Commanders of the Army admit the Lord Maior and the Aldermen to a legall triall so they say; but to use their owne words, what notorious dissimulation is this? for they know otherwise, that they moved often that the things charged against them might be prosecuted to the full: Fourthly, Was there e∣ver any thing spoken more falsely, then to impute their releasment without any tryall to the OfficersIt is storied of Cardinall Wolsies Foole, that whosoe∣ver did the fault, he would alwayes beat Will: Sommers for it; just so do these men use the Army. who never consented to it, but alwayes manifested a great dislike thereof. 5. That their end was not the terrour of the Cittie, is manifest by the carriage and behaviour of the Sol∣diers
which was so inoffensive and harmlesse as they were lov'd and not fear'd. 6. Whereas they speake of changing the Ma∣gistrates, thereby to flatter the Malignants and to creep into their favour: it is to be observed that none were more violent this way then they: Note it well, to have the Lord Maior and Aldermen dis∣placed, the busiest and forwardst men that acted for it were that partie, heare what Mr Lilburne saithThe Juglers discovered, pag. 11. Therefore say I, immediately presse vigorously for the to∣tall purging the House of all that sate with Mr Pel∣lam, that so there may be way made for the exemplarie punishing of the Lord Maier of London, and all the cheife ring-leaders, actors in the late desperate and trai∣terous ingagement, this he speaks to the private Soul∣diers, and calls it hisIf the Lord Maior and the rest have act∣ed so despe∣rately and trayterously, why was not this thing ex∣pressed in their Sad Re∣presentation, and Justice required, is this to bee Semper idem. Advice; But see how they wheel about, to scandalize the Army and to com∣ply with Cavaleirs, they complain against the chang∣ing of the Magistrates, saying it was to serve there de∣signes: as if they would say, there was no just cause of their Imprisonment, but done onely for some base and by end, not regarding in the meane time what they themselves have spoken against the same persons, as to be cheif ring-leaders actors in the late desperate and trayterous ingagement, and to have ex∣emplary punishment for it, if they should finde but halfe such flattery, dissimulation, contradiction, a∣postacie, in other men, they would make Bookes of it, and set over head, THE JUGLERS DIS∣COVERED: HOCUS POCUS: but some People are like Lamia in the Poet, who put on her eyes when she went abroad, but layd them aside when shee came home, or like a foolish man that
runs to quench another mans house whiles his owne flames about his eares. 7. Pliny saith of theSi quis alest audu lusiniae pius animus quam cantus deficiet, l. 10. c. 29. Nightingale if any will give her the hearing, she will sooner sing her selfe out of breath then out of tune, we are resolved to hear them out, yet so, as takeing no delight at all either in their tune or song many reproachfull and scandalous passages they have of some powerfull and ver ruling influences in the Army.Englands new Chaine, pag 4. As First, That they labour by all possible meanes to convert the honest indeavours of good men in the Ar∣my and elsewhere and the happy successe God had blessed them withall to the advantage of their lusts, pride and domination. Ans. Mr Walwin tels usThe Foun∣taine of slan∣der discover∣ed, pag. 2. when Art and sophistry will not seem to vanish truth and reason, aspertion generally wil do the deed; howsoever in some cases there is no∣thing like to this speaking by experience, yet here it will not doe the deed: for bothCalumniato∣res fratrum & detractores in∣faines censen∣tur: Caus. 6. Qu. 1. C. In∣fames. the Law,Pro. 25.23. Psal. 101.5, 7. and com∣mandement of God forbid us to receive the testi∣monie of slanderous tongues. As for that which they speake, they have quite mistooke the thing, for they should have sayd they have converted the hon∣est indeavours of good men, &c. (leaving out sts pride domination) to the suppressing of Incencidia∣ries, and therby preseru'd the nation from ruine and destruction, and speaking so, they had sayd the truth, as is well known, and we blesse God for it. Againe, for such as areAmbitiosi ali∣quot homines qui privatim de∣generes, in pub∣licum exitiosi, per discordias habent. Lips. Polit. l. 6. c. 4 p. 266. ambitious and would be great (being otherwise obscure and of no worth) to asperce well deserving men, and such as have ser∣ved the State best, and are in authority, thinking by false reports to worke themselves into the affection and favour of the people; is anMachiavels discourses, l. 1. c. 8. old stratagem and so
well knowne now to us, as it will neverDetractor & libens auditor, uter{que} diabolū in portat lingua: Si pauper es, vilem & ab∣jectum te repu∣tat: Si dives ambitiosum, avarum & cu∣pidum: Si af∣fabilis, dissolu∣tum: si prae∣dicator vel do∣ctor, honoris & humani favoris quasitorem: si tacens inuti∣lem: si Jeju∣nus hypocritam, si comedens vo∣ratorem, Ber. in Ser. doe the deed. 8. But what followes; As time came on, it more and more appeared, that they intended meerly the esta∣blishment of themselves in power and greatnes, without a∣ny regard to the performance of their promises and en∣gagements, or any respect to the faith and credit of the Army, or to the peace or prosperity of the common-wealth, and that they walked by no rules or principles either of honesty or conscience. Answ. There is a kinde of Serpent, the nature of whose venome is such, that if it enter into the body, it provokes to vomit, and causeth the person to bring up whatsoever is in the stomack, in thick and filthy fleame; The Serpents sting being entred into these mens toungs no marvaile they vomit; but First, we finde not any where in their papers of any just and lawfull promise from which they are de∣parted but stand to it, and doe indeavour to per∣forme the same so farre as it is in their power. But if there have beene any promises or engagements for∣merly made, which in themselves wereVota inconsi∣derate suscepta, non modo nihil obligant, sed necessario sunt rescindenda. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 13. Sect. 20. unlawfull, or not in the engagereTyrannicum est ad res im∣prossibiles alior adstringere. Pareus Com∣ment. in Gen. 24. ver. 8. Si factum sit jura∣mentum de Re∣bus quae non sunt nostrae po∣testatis nullam prisus habet vim obligandi. Asted. Theolog. Cas. Cap. 15. pag. 288. power to performe, or which cannot afterward be perform'd but to theNon est servandum juramentum cujus executio cum salute publica, &c. Pugnafet. Rivet. Ex. licat. Decalog. 3. Prae. pag. 90. publick damage and prejudice of the Nation, in this cause such promises and engagements are not binding, ney∣ther may they be kept, but broken. And the con∣sideration of this thing, would be usefull many times, when promises and engagements (without di∣stinction)
are hotly prest: to examine then whether they were justlie made, whether in the promiss power to performe them: and whether the prosecu∣ting of such engagements would not be against the welfare, safety and peace of the common wealth. 2. For the credit of the Army: here we cannot speake without greife: how honourable they have ever been in the eyes of otherViros naios militiae, factis magnos, ad ver∣borū linguaeque rtamina, Liv. 9. Nations, belov'd of freinds, admired of enemies, not onely for the good successe God hath blest them withall, but for there justnesse, piety, obedience, patience, &c. till of late through the conspiraces and sedition of some bad Instruments, a part was occasioned to make an un∣happy and scandalous revoult. As for the General Officers the Fountaine of slander can not blast theirVirtutes im∣peratoris praeci∣pae, labor in ne∣gorijs, fortitu∣do in periculis, industria in a∣gendo, celeritos in conficiendo, concilium in providendo, Cic. proleg. Manil. reputation and name, the Lord hath made them so eminent for worth, parts, and excellencie as they are the Crowne and Ornament of the souldirie. 3. To let passe that expression withoutTheir accu∣sations are like the ruins of Babel which a farre off seem high and great, but neere by ap∣peare other∣wise, so theirs upon exami∣nation will be found onely rude and va∣nity. ANY regard at all, what regard they have had to the peace and prosperity of the common-wealth their owne workes praise them in the gates: And at this time their love and watchfulnesse is largely shewed in ta∣king care to prevent the destructive and dangerous designes of those men: It is true, they cannot effect that good they would, and desire to doe for the Na∣tion, because this party (with others joyning with them) hath been and still is, a barre and let in their way. 4. Whereas they say, They walked by no Rules or Principles, either of honesty or conscience; here is a defect, or want of words, and to be supplyed thus, They walked by no levelling Principles; that is, the one
(to wit the Generall Officers of the Army) will have Order and Government in the Land, the other an Anarchy and confusion; the one are for a setling of Religion, and to advance the glory of God in the practice of Gospell-worship, the other for letting in all blasphemy, heresie, atheisme; the one will have Law, Courts, Freedome, peace, propriety, the other not; walking by no such Rules or Principles of honesty or conscience. 3. It followes, ButMeere Po¦titians, and wayting upo Providence are inconsi∣stent. as meer Polititians were go∣verned altogether by occasion, and as they saw a possibili∣ty of making progresse to their designes, which course of theirs theyBe sure to make good measure, pres∣sed down, and running away. ever tearmed, a waiting upon Providence, that with colour of Religion they might deceive the more securely. Answ. First, if we take notice of their accusations all along, we shall find, that the designes here spoken against, are such, as have tended to publique good, and whereby their seditious designes have been bro∣ken, to the great safety of the Common wealth: Secondly, howsoever waiting upon Providence be not their Principle, and therefore the practice is here jeer'd at: neverthelesse good men will observe it, as knowing it is the way to have their actions. Ni∣ceph. Greg. lib. 7. blest, when the other shall find themAs hasty and forward Children get many knocks and falls, so rash and heady men attempting things before a fit opportunity is offered, bring shame and dishonour on their owne heads. Temeritas, praterquam quod stulta est, etiam infelix, hostibus iquidem opportum, nia vero maxinne amicis, Liv. 22. curst under their hands: Thirdly, for deceiving with colour of Rligion, it is a fault (we confesse) which they are not guilty of, and therfore they may the more free∣ly apply it home to others, as knowing the like can∣not
be returned back upon their heads, or layd to their charge: And thus much of the second parti∣cular, from what is false and scandalous; we come now to things reproachfull. First, We shall take notice how they say,Englands new Chaine, p. 1. What was more incredible then that a Parliament trusted by the people, to deliver them from all kinds of oppression, and who made so liberall effusion of their blood, and waste of their estates (upon pretense of doing thereof) which yet as soon as they were in power, oppresse with the same kind of oppressions. Answ. First, howsoever in their Pamphlet they usually asperse a Faction of Officers, and hope that the Parliament will conscionably performe that supreme trust, which is really and essentially residing in them, and free the betrayed and enslaved Common-wealth, &c. Yet here, not the Officers, but the Parliament it selfe is charged with the Crimes and Abuses; the which is not onely a Reproach, but grosse dissimulation, as one while to insinuate, as if some few, and onely a par∣ty, were the Tyrants, Traytors, Oppressors, &c. and at another time to take off the aspersion from those few andH ever ; would ke division between the Parliament & Ay, by ai∣sing false re∣p, against th Generall Officers, yet i it be well obsved, they doe as much asperse the Parliament as the others, & seeke alike, o ruine both. lay it upon the whole Parliament. 2. That the Parliament hath been so liberall in shedding blood, it is a most reproachful expression: a practice indeed more beseeming Canibals then Chri∣stians, yea beasts rather then men: & to say the truth, there is noIn all Histo∣ries where Tyrants are described, this is set downe as a speciall Character of one, namely, Liberall effu¦sn of b: See S Walter Halighs of Hen. 8. in his ill. p. 1. fairer marke of a Tyranous, unrighteous and cruel State, then to make liberall effusion of blood: but the falsehood of this reproach and slander is well knowne; to wit, that the Parliament hath not beene liberall but sparing this way, and we challenge all na∣tions, and histories, to shew the like care, tender∣nesse
compassion, wisdome, patience, preventi∣on, &c. as our Magistrates and Generall Officers have done, and to this end, that there mightThat Colche∣ster was not sooner taken, it was to spare blood. not be made a liberall effusion of blood. False witnesses did rise up, they layd to my charge things that I know not. 3. It will not satisfie these men, to reproach the Parliament with a liberall effusion of blood, but to give good measure, they say, this so liberall effusion of blood hath beene upon pretence of doing good. Thus the matter is blood, the manner blood, and so blood touch∣eth blood. To be liberall is great cruelty, a crying sin, but to be liberall in effussion of blood upon pretence of doing good and no otherwise, (as these affirme) is the very quintessence of the greatest Tyrants & op∣pressours: No marvaile they say the Parliament areDij odere vi∣ros omne nefas animo moven∣tes, Hor. l. 3. Od. 4. God hates with just displeasure such as strive, in cankred hearts black mischiefe to contrive. the greatest traytors that ever were in this nation, greater Tyrants then ever the King was, or that cruell Tyrant Duke D. Alva; and that bloody Queen Marie was a Saint in comparison to them: For if these things were true which they report, they are as bad if not worse: But their actions have shew'd the contrarie, for they have already delivered the People from many kindes of oppressions, and we question not their care and faithfulnesse, but they will effectal∣ly doe the restMany things which remain and are bur∣dens, cannot yet be taken away, as our present condi∣tion is; there may be no fault in the Physick, nor Physitian, and yet the Pa∣tient longer sick, then he desires to be. for the Nation, with what speed they can. 4. What oppressions soever at present lye on the people, they are not the same kinds of oppressions which were in the time of Hollis, Stapleton, the King, and Bi∣shops: But this is another reproach and calumnia∣tion; for there are none now persecuted for the truths sake, as cast into Prison, forced into Forrain Countries, hindred from the free exercise of Reli∣gion;
the which thing heretofore, hath been thought the greatest, sorest, and deepest oppression, as for Purse suffering, the godly have ever held it nothing (comparatively) to that of the conscience. 2. If followes some few lines after, But it is now evident, that it is possible for our Physitians to bring us into a more dangerous condition then they found us. Answ. The blind Bayard rusheth into the Bat∣tle, which way he should goe he sees not, he ctes not, save onely his Rider spurreth him: So it is with those men, they regard not what they speake, not how, nor of whom, but as their malice and pas∣sion deads them. Observe, . This again is spoken of the Parliament, and howsoever not in words, yet in effect, is the sme which they speak,Picture of the Councell f State, se∣c dition, pg 1. 1. else where; as to be Traytors, Tyrants, Oppressors, &c. Physitians of no value: But secondly, What worse then before? Worse then whenJug  red Those grand Trayterous fellowes and Ty∣rants were at Westminster, whom Mr. Lilburne without feare or dread, or any scruple of conscience, could have destroyed with his owne hand, as so many VVeasels and Poulcats: What worse then we were then? So theyThe Malig∣na say to  say. But 3. suppose it wereNot hat it i so, for  thing dy  was . It is r∣ f the Mn, that at st it w sweet ad ve∣ry delight∣e, bt af∣tward, through the unthankfulnes and murmur∣ing of the people, it ei∣ther had no saour, or it was bitter in taste: Even so if our pre∣sent publique mercies be ot sweet to some mens taste, it is just upon them in regard of their ingratitude and discon∣tent. so, that our condition is worse, how doth it appeare, that this Parliament hath brought us into a more dangerous condition then they found us? Here againe is one thing set downe for another, Ille for Ego; For wheras our condition is no better, we may thank them, in seeking to make division between the Parliament and the people, the Officers and the Souldiers, the Generall and the Officers, the Parliament and the Army, betweene Souldier and Souldier, applying themselves (as we
haveDiscover. from p. 16. to 25. elsewhere proved) to all parties in attemp∣ting to raise sedition, and fill all places with uproar and commotion. After Nero had occasioned much mischiefe and misery to the Common-wealth, he wrote to theAd Senatum literas misit, de caede Syllae Plautique hand con∣fessus: verum utriusque turbi∣dum ingenium esse, & sibi in∣columitatem Reip. magna cura haberi: Imo canctas si∣bi curas amore patriae leviores dictitans, a∣disse Civium maestos vultus. audire secretas querimonias. T. cit. Annal. l. 14. p. 280. l. 15. 298. Senate (as these men did to the Parliament) accu∣sing some persons whom he had murdered, to be turbulent and factious men, and that he had a marvellous care for the peoples safety; yea, all the cares were nothing in re∣gard of his love to the Countrey, and that he had seen the sad countenances of the Citizens, heard their secret com∣plaints, &c. The like is the practice of these men, having with their false tongues slaine some persons of worth, they write to our Senate what ambitious and dangerous men they are, making a sad Repre∣sentation of their love and care to their Countrey, how deeply affected they are with the sad counte∣nances of the people, and their secret complaints, concealing in the meane time (as he did) the mur∣der of Sylla and Plautus, and that by their meanes the Nation suffers extreamly. 3. Neither can there be a more reproachful speech,Englands new Chaine, pag. 14. and indeede no lesse seditious, then when they sayEnglands new Chaine, pag. 16. As for the prosperity of the Nation, what one thing hath been done that tendeth to it? Nay, hath any thing been done since they were in power? But what increaseth the rancor, hatred, and malice which our late unhappy differences have begotten amongst us, as if they had pla∣ced their happinesse and security in the totall division of the people, nothing being offered by them that hath any face of reconcilement in it, nothing of cheerfulnesse or generall satisfaction, the mother of Trade and Plenty, that might take away the private remembrances and di∣stinction
of parties; nothing indeed but what tende to implacable bitternesse of spirit, the mother of confu∣sion, penury, and beggery: So much wee have from them at once. Answ. Those who are accustomed to take poy∣son in small quantities, doe inable their stomacks to disgest more, till by long custome and increa∣sing the quantitie by degrees, it becometh so fa∣miliar to their stomacks that instead of poysoning them, they areSo Galen writes of a Mayd called Napella, that poyson did her no harm, but turned to her nourish∣ment. nourished thereby. The poyson of Asps under those mens tongus: it weakens them not, but through customing themselves to it; they are strenghthened in the course of slander. 1. Besides liberty of conscience, freedome of the Gospell, a generall peace through the Land, withWe are not like Children, who being de∣nyed of some things they would have, cast away in rage whatsoe∣ver is in their hands; though we have not, every thing we wish for, yet we desire to make a comfortable use of what we have. many other publick and private blessings which the Lord by them asAnd for those very men whom they most ac∣cuse hath the Lord made special instru∣ments for the good of this Nation. Qui∣dam quo plus debent magis oderunt, Sen. Epist. 48. Instruments and meanes hath brought over to us: this is one, tend∣ing to the prosperity of the Nation, namely, that they have often suppressed severall conspiracies, plotted by the Levelling partie against the wellfare and safetie of the Common-wealth. Secondly, That evill men wax worse and worse, and that their rancor, hatred and malice should encrease, it is no marvaile, it hath alwayes been so, even when the best, wisest and ablest men have governed; and yet were not the Governours then in fault, nor any way the causer thereof. Thirdly, It is no new thing to heare men, (Tac. Hist. lib. 12. pag. 395. suum quisque flagitium aliis objectantes) to lay their own faultsSo Ahab charged Elias to be the Trouble of Israel, whereas the Prophet was innocent, and it was he and his Fathers house had done that thing. upon others: to cry stop the theife
stop the theife, being in the meane time the one∣ly robbers. There is not any thing which with lesse colour or shew of truth, can be charged upon the Officers of the Army, then the division of the People; no such thing this way hath ever been noted or sus∣pected of them: whereas the practice of the other, is notorious, and as easie may the Blackmore wash himselfe white as they wipe of the staine and spot thereof. 4. For the matter of reconcilement, here they are like1 Sam. 11.1, 2. Nahash the Ammonite, who would not make a covenant with Jabesh Giliad, but on this condi∣tion, that he might thrust out all their right eyes: Even so, unlesse we will agree that they shall pluck out the right eyes of our Nation, asBy moving Souldiers as well as others to rise up a∣gainst the Par∣liament men, and to appre∣hend, secure, and bring them, as so many profes∣sed Traytors, Thieves, Rob∣bers, &c. to Justice in a new Repre∣sentative. Picture of the Councell of State, pag. 14. break the Parlia∣ment,Englands new Chaine, first part, pag. 12. dissolve this present Councell of State,Ibid. take a∣way the law Marshall from the Army, andThe same Book, pag. 11. persons in the highest Command of Military power, there is no∣thing offered (as they say) that hath any face of re∣concilement in it, nothing of cheerfulnesse, &c. But as (we use to say) A man may buy Gold too ear, even so, howsoever wee should desire peace with all men, notwithstanding (provided alwayes) as it may stand with thePax ea fit, non pax servi∣tutis Cic. Phil. 12. Pax vera est, concordiam habere cum mo∣ribus probis & litigare cum vi∣tijs Css. su∣per Psal. prosperity and safety of the Com∣mon wealth; and so farre a reconcilement hath been offered still, to all parties without distinction. 5. That any thing is offered, tending to implacable bitternesse of spirit, it is the Fountaine of slander that speakes it; for it is neither so nor so: But we per∣ceive well enough where they are, and the worke they are doing; it is to provoke the people to more discontent against the Parliament; here they would perswade men to thinke that our Governours are
Pharoahs, keep them forceably in bondage, and lay burdens upon them purposely to make their live bitter; and is there not so much in their very word, for if there be nothing offered the people, but what tends to bitternesse of spirit, to confusion, penury, beggery, What worse could Pharoah doe? Nay by their ag∣gravating it, nothing indeed; they make them worse then he: And it is worth the observing, how this (Nothing) is over and over repeated: Nothing that hath any face of reconcilement, &c. Nothing of cheer∣fulnesse, &c. Nothing but what tendeth to bitternesse of spirit, &c. An accusation of the highest Tyranny and oppression that was ever charged upon Magi∣strates; theWe desire the Reader to observe, that there are bur∣dens and grie∣vances upon the people, it is not denyed, but whether they may (spe∣cially many of them) be taken off as yet, that is to be considered; and indeed, if things were duely consi∣dered, at the present it is not possible; and therefore we should be∣ware that we make not the remedies worse then the disease. falshood whereof is such, as the ex∣pression is conviction sufficient; Thou lovest all de∣vouring words, O thou deceitfull tongue. 4. Now what else? Against all those delusions and perfidious stratagems layd by those men to betray and en∣slave the Common wealth to their owne Pride. Ambition, Lusts, Coveteousnesse, and Dominion, if not Dukeship, or Kingship; their Creatures discoursing of late that the power must be reduced to one, what their meaning is, time (if not hindered) will manifest. Amongst the Virginians, they use to dye them∣selves with the juice of diverse Hearbs, and he is held the gallantest man, that is most monstrous to behold: No doubt these men doe take themselves (and so others of that party) to be gallant men in using their tongues to such false, scandalous, and re∣proachfull speeches; howsoever in the eyes of all so∣ber, judiciall, and rationall people, the practice makes them most monstrous and hatefull. For answer, First, what they call delusions and per∣fidious
stratagems are accusations without proofe;And the Reader shall observe many of this kind: things where∣in they never acted nor had any relation unto. some things wherein these men are not concerned, others, in themselvesSo here, they usually con∣demne that for a crime, which was in it selfe very good; onely it was not ac∣cording to their Princi∣ple. lawfull and just, and soWe dare a∣vouch it, and shall make it good, that there is not in the Booke, one thing true as they have set it downe. none true as they report them: Secondly. So farre have they been from enslaving or betraying the Common∣wealth, &c. as by the blessing of God upon their en∣deavours, they have been the men whereby the Com∣mon wealth is freed from the bondage and slavery they speake of; which shewes their malice, un∣thankfulnesse, and blindnesse, to be the greater. Be∣cause Agesilau, was beloved of the Citizens for his good life, and the great service he had done them, the Ephori would fine him for it; So these men would have some to be fin'd and worse too, because they have won the hearts and love of the people by their valour and sufferings for them;Pro. 17.13. Who so re∣wardeth evill for good,Respurt dato∣rem, qui datum deserit, negat bencium qui beneficium non honorat. Ter∣tull. Paeuleen. c. 5. evill shall not depart from his house. 3. To let passe the tearme (Creature) being the usuall language of men disaffected to the State; that there should be any such discourse they speake of, we are confident it is false, a meere devise of their owne head: But howsoever, as they here have brought it in, most reproachfull: to insinuate a thing of such a high nature against any man in authority, from other mens discourse. 4. For that Parenthesis (if they be not hindered) there is something in it though nothing for what it is brought. Treason indeed should be hindered; there is all the reason in the World for it, yea andInitio sedicio∣num, quampri∣mū apparueri comprmantur, Clem. Templ. Polit. lib. 4. c. 7. p 424. timely to, whiles it is in the Cradle hatching like the Cockatrice Egges, that it may not breake forth. And it is the wisedome of all States to be carefull
herein, for as one well sayth,Indulgentia & lenitas Ma∣gistratus nimia, seditionis an∣sam praebet; quia dum qui∣escere Magi∣stratus officia plebs videt, millisque legum se coercere re∣pagulis animad∣vertit, ipsa sibi rapere guber∣nacula & quid∣vis andere in∣cipit, contempto Magistratu vel impunitatis con∣cepta, Frid. Wendellin. Instit. Polit. l. 3. c. 2. p. 492. The too much indul∣gence and lenity of the Magistrate gives occasion many times of sedition: for whiles the common srt see himTherefore one says well, A Magistrate who hath disco∣vered a Con∣spiracy, and seemes fearefull to remedy it is an faulty as the Conspirator himselfe. quiet and not to suppresse it at first, they take boldnesse thereupon and so out of contempt of the Magistrate, and hope of impunity seeke at last to wring the Government and sword out of his hand. 5. From the same poysoned Fountain issues this bitter water.Englands new Chaine, pag. 9. Thus the most hopefull opportunity that ever England had for recovery of our Freedome was spent and consumed in such their uncertaine staggering mo∣tions, and arbitrary irrationall proceedings; whereby all parties become extreamely exasperated, as people that had been meerely mockt and cheated by fair promises and un∣der the most religious pretences &c. For answer to this and the rest following first, A bold affirmation is noThe Law saith, Proba∣tiones debent esse hace clario∣res, L. Sciant. c. proofe, and with the more reason to be rejected when it comes (as this doth) from a malicious enimy. Alexander of Hales a Schoolman, is called Irrefragabilis, that is the Doctor ungain-saying. it seemes these men had some such opinion of themselves, that if they should let it downe thus, their uncertaine, stagger∣ing, arbitrary, irrationall, &c. whosoever reading it, would beleeve it, and soIt was the Principle of a certaine Atheist, that if a man had an  he should asperse him; for though all would not beleeve it, yet some would. no matter, what they sayd whether true or false. Secondly, It is a reproach and a lye to say thatIt is much, men should be so audacious as to affirme that which they know they cannot prove. all parties were exasperated in re∣ference to the proceedings of the Generall Officers; for the honest and well affected party, who still close
with them, did ever take them to be reall and sin∣cere, and knew they would have done more for the Nation had not many things unhappily fallen out in their way. Neither to say the truth were there a∣ny parties exasperated against them, saving such men as would not have the present Government esta∣blished. 3. To say the people were 1. mockt and cheat∣ed and 2. by fair promises 3. under most religious pr∣tences, these are chips of the old block all falsehoods and slanders: forThey have not any where shewed wher∣in the Com∣manders are departed from any law∣full promise, or wherein they doe not performe a just promise formerly made, being now in their power to per∣forme it. whatsoever was promised they have continually endeavoured to performe, neither have they given us any cause to doubt but what fur∣ther they can doe for the good of the Nation, the same likewise they will effect, by improving all the interests and relations they have: As in a house of smoake, a man shall sooner be stifled and blinded, then warmed: so their reports tend meerelie to a∣buse and deceive the Reader, and not at all to give him any true or right informations of things. 4. That the Army should be made a by-word, a his∣sing and reproach to theNoe still how they can∣not avoyd to spee that which they know is false. whole Nation, and ready to be stoned inMarke their words. all places where they come, and by those who loved them before, &c. This is another knowne un∣truth and slander: Neither have those (if there be any such) who thought nothing too precious for them in hope of their large good promises and protests in their Declarations, declined in their affections for any un∣faithfulnesse, or unjust actings of the Commanders. Siba by his false and scandalous tongue, may occa∣sion honest David to fall off in his affection from harmelesse Mephibosheth, but it is an offence taken, and not given: so it is possible through the calumni∣ation
of such men, tht wel-meaning people mayI have read somewhere of an Apparior, hving given out a false ac∣cusation a∣ginst two ho∣nest persons, and others re∣porting it af∣ter him, came within a little while and summoned them to their Court, for a Fame, the which he him∣self had onely raysed. Much like to this is their practice, first, they de∣vise things, and then o∣thers speake them after them; then afterward they come a∣bout againe (like the Summoner) & asperse the Commanders and Army for lying under such Reproa∣ches, which they before had invented. not thinke so honourably of the Officers as they have done, and yet not for any just cause which they have given them; but because Whisperers have sepa∣rated chiefe Friends. 5. The generall Rising and Revolt is imputed to these men, to their unjust, partiall, and perfidious deal∣ings, as the proper issue of such horrid delusions. As for big words wee are not Children to be frighted with scare-crowes: If they should tell us that Ze∣dekiah rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, as moved thereto by Jeremiah, howsoever the Prophet ad∣monished him to the contrary, would we receive it for a truth? As little reason or ground have they for the other. That some might be provoked to Rise by the distemper which that faction had made in the Army, it is possible; but that the Comman∣ders should give any occasion, or encouragement that way, it shewes that their malice is risen from the heart into their eyes, and blinds them: to raise a Reproach so clearely against all reason, and the most certaine knowledge and experience which ge∣nerally men have of the contrary: And this shall suffice for what is False, Scandalous, and Reproach∣full. Now we come, In what destructive to the present Government: First they say,Englands new Chaine, pag. 13. Their onelySeditious men are alwayes rather seated then loved: Caesar more feared Brutus Treason, then Pompeys Valour. Non virtute sed proditione victum fremebat. Tac. Hist. lib. 2. pag. 325. feares re∣maine upon our discoveries, to prevent which, they use meanes that either we might not have opportunities to
lay open their Treacheries and Hypocrisies, orEasie credu∣lity is plaine simplicity: we live not now in such an age, of which it is sayd, A Deo sanctae erat illis temporibus fides, ut fallere aliquos posse non crederetur. Ambros. de offic. l. 3. c. 10. For now, Plu∣res saepe mag∣num noen fal∣sis vulgi opinio∣nibus abstule∣runt. Boët. 3. de Consolatio∣ne. not be∣leeved if we did it: In order to the first, they strictly stop the Presse. Answ. 1. The Camelion having taken in the ayre, af∣terwards his belly swels; if these men were not ful of winde and vanity, such selfe-boasting would not be expressed. But secondly, see their craft; they have the State at such an advantage, as they thinke now it must be broken one way or other; for if they are suffered to speake and write what they please, they make no question, but under the colour, of discovering Trea¦cheries, and Hypocrisies, the Magistrates by their Tongues and Pens shall be made so odious, as the people no where will obey them. Againe, if hinde∣red by stopping the Presse, as much danger then this way, because the discontents of their patty will be such as they will not beare it; thus we are mae fast, and no door open to escape. 3. Neither doe these step aside from the way of former Incenaiaries; but as they carry on the same designe, so in practice are alike: Mortimer a Ken∣tish Rebell (falsly naming himselfe Jack Cade)William Mar∣tin his H story of England, Henr. 6. pag. 197. by Messengers informed the King, that he intended not a∣ny hurt against his Royall Person, but would displace, and punish some of his evill Counsellours, who were his Flatterers, and partiall to their owne Friends, bitter to their enemies, enrichers of themselves, oppressours of the Common people, greedy of too much Honour, and who for rewards corruptly ordered (or rather disordered) all things as they pleased: So these men (speaking the same, even word for word) pretend they intend not any hurt against the Common wealth: but because a
Faction of Officers have betrayed and slaved the Na∣tion, therefore they seeke to raise up the Souldiers and people in all places, to an insurrection and revolt: and the same pretext had theNec desti∣tuerint de Magistrati∣bus tyrannide paratragaeliare, & inculcare plebi, omnia na∣tura libera esse & Communia: extiendum esse principum aque ac Ponti∣ficis Romani Juum; & quia illi blandis mo∣nitis haud qua∣quam cedent sed bona & capita sub∣ditorum libidi∣ni suae vectiga∣lia esse velint, justissimis armis id omnibus vin∣diandum esse, quod omnium esse Deus volu∣crit. Munst Revellers, nei∣ther indeed have any former Conspirators (for the most part) gon to wore any other way. 4. How destructive to the present government their words here are, may appeare in this, in cal∣ling such things Treacheries and hypocrysies which in a speciall manner tend to the safetie and wellfare of the People. Is not the errecting of the Councell of State, the late proceedings against the King and Lords, the peace of the Army, the suppressing of mutin a∣mong the Souldiers, the continuing of Excese, marshall Law, and persons in the highest command of a military power, the prohibiting of false and scandalous Bookes, takeing away sedition in all places &c. for the upholding of the present Government? or can it posiblie stand, if such things were not so? never∣thelesse (and note it well good Reader) against all these in particular doe they object, asper∣sing them, as the Treacheries and Hypocrisies of some men. 2. They say,Englands new Chaine, pag. 5. which advice proceeded as well from our respect; to the Citty and neighbur-places, as upon feares of what we know to be the practice ofHaud ignarus summa scelera incipi cum peri∣culo, perigi cum praemio. Tac. Annal. l. 12. p. 224. other Ty∣rants, (and therefore doubted would be exercised by those) namelie the garrisoning of great Towns, thereby to keepe the People as well in povertie as in continuall aw and subjection. Answ, 1. Can any thing be spoken more destruct∣ive to the present Government, then to call such men
By the Sta∣tute Law, if any have con∣spired to de∣stroy any Lord, Coun∣cellour, or great Officer, and be found guilty by con∣fession, or o∣therwise, that the sayd of∣fence be judg∣ed Felony; and they to have judge∣ment and ex∣ecution as Fe∣lons attainted ought to have by the Com∣mon Law. 3. Henr. 7.14. Coke li. pl. fol. 482. Qu. If certain pesons ac∣cue a man falsly of Tr∣son, whether it be not a conspiring to kill him. Tyrants as are in authoritie, and for no other r∣son but because they yeild speciall ayd and assistance to the state. Secondly, Here were enough (if beleeved) to rayse up the people in all places a∣gainst the Army, and not to suffer them in the least to come among them; for if their intent be (as these men insinuate) to enslave them and make them poore, by Garrisons: who would not oppose and resist their entrance in such a case? Thirdly, The treacherie of these men is the more seen and intollerable, in that the whole Army (specially the Generall Officers) have given from time to time such reall proofe and large experience to the Nation of their fidelity, love, care; so that there was not any cause at all of such a suspition or doubt; but clearlie the contrarie: and therefore the feare which they mention in relation to the practice of other Tyrant, was onely brought in as a stratagem of purpose to beget a Jealousie in the People, whereas they knew there was no reason for it. 4. The ground or matter from whence they take occasion to match the Commanders, with former Ty∣rants, and to set the People against the Souldiers ads much to the evill of it. It was (proposed (say they) by the Agitators friends of London, Southwarke, and the places adjacent, that the Tower, Citty and Bu∣rough might be secured by the well-affected inhabitants and not by Souldiers. It is true some thing to this purpose was spoken at Kingstons; and upon debate, it was found no way fit, and many reasons were given to shew how unsafe dangerous and incon∣venient it was to have it so, whereupon some of the proposers yeelded, and were satisfyed in the thing:
wee could set downe the reasons here what they were, if it were usefull and no doubt every rationall man (if he heard them) would say they were forceable and strong and necessary to be followed. Now let the Reader judge, if these men had not just cause, to call the Commanders Tyrants, and to publish to the World such horrid and per∣fidious things: For thus it was in regard of ma∣ny desperate plots and designes known then to be working against the State, and the unfitnesse of the Inhabitants, having there Trades and other things to looke after, and the capacitie the Souldi∣ers were in, to mannage the thing better, it was or∣dered for the present that the keeping of some places should be by Souldiers, for the more safetie and security thereof: And this is all theNoe, that it is false which they speake of dismissing the Proposers with Reproaches; some were blamed for medling too much in things, which as it little concerned them, so they understood them lesse; and withall for being in∣temperate in their spee∣ches. matter, for which so much faction and treachery is exprest. The law of Retaliation is wel known, both theExod. 21.24. Levit. 24.20. Deu. 29 11. Scrip∣tures, andCic. Pro. Caec. Justin. Instit. l. 4. Tit. 4 pag. 364. Humane Writers mention it, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth; but to take away a mans goodHere is more then taking a good Name away; it is to take the life away, that they conspire about. name and reputation, is more then the losse of an eye, or tooth, and therefore such wrongfull doers de∣serve the greater punishment. 3. We come now to a more large discourse, and thus it begins, And as before, upon their first great suc∣cesse against the City, when now againe it justly was ex∣pected they should have made use of so notable and unex∣pected blessings, to the benefit and advantage of the Com∣mon wealth (as their late repentances, promises and pre∣tences gave men cause to hope) the event proved they intended another use thereof, for (having now subdued all their enemies) they proceed with greater confidence to their former purposes of making themselves absolute Masters of the Common wealth.
It is the wisedome of Souldiers, to learne with what weapon and strength their enemies will come against them, and accordingly to provide themselve we are by this time wel acquainted with these mens Weapons: reasons and proofe they bring none, nei∣ther is the same to be expected from them, they having none: so that if we provide our selves against their spears and arrows of a fals tongue it isNote, that there is one who stiles himselfe Lapis a State, or ra∣ther a Black. the simplician undertakes to discover the Discoverer; but speakes never a word to the matter, nor under∣stands it: For whereas the Levelling fa∣ction hath as∣persed the Parliament, Councell of State, and Councell of Warre: the Discoverer de∣nies the things layd to their change. Now  std of proving them, whih hee should have done, underting the justificati∣on of them, the ck speakes a par∣cell of non∣sce, but for their aussa∣tions he meddles not withall, although, had he not beene as senslesse as a Stone, hee might have soon it was the e thing he had  doe. suffient; and we shall doe well enough. It was not without cause that the Parliament vo∣ted their Booke seditious and destructive to the pre∣sent Government; for what can be more? For first, So farre are our Governours from being absolute Masters as that the Common-wealth never enjoy∣ed the likeWn had Gods people, in this Land the like freedome to serve God, as now they have? Had our Fore-fathers lived  ch Magistrates, they would not have thought them Tyrants, absolute Masters, &c. But as he sayth, , Hom. Odyss s. libertie thes many hundred Yeares: As for taxes and rates, they are not with as any point of bondage, but rather as a preservative and meanes to keepe us from it, and to uphold the just freedome and rights of the Nation. Secondly, For the late repentances and promises they speake of: what they report we know is untrue, but what is true, we know the accomplishment of them, by them to be dayly made good: neither can it be justly imputed unto them, that other things are not likewise per∣formed. 3. Concerning the agreement of the People, a short answer will serve to their many words: first, It is false that they employed their Agents to get met∣ings and Treaties, thereby to keepe quiet the busie
watchfull partie, whilst they went on with other peices of their worke: For herein they can appeale to God who is the searcher of all hearts, as they spake of Union and reconciliation: so they would gladly have seen it, and doe still desirouslie desire anPax optima rerum Quas homini novisse, datum est: pax una triumphis innumeris potior pax custodite salutem, & ci∣ves aequare po∣tens, Silius I∣talic. lib. 11. Be Pun. Agree∣ment, not onely with this busie partie, but with all other parties: provided it may not be prejudiciall and hurtfull to the Nation: Secondly, we take no∣tice of their words (busie watchfull party) now in truth, as fitlie spoken, and well applied as a thing could be; some write of a stone called Siderites, if it be brought amongst a people already at variance, it will occasion a continuance and increase of con∣tention, and strife between them: so did this busie partie, by their unseasonable, prepostorous, rash and heady proceedings (asOr, the fire Fly that leaps and skips in the fire. flys in the sore) they made the wound worse, and the difference wider and greater then before: How doth it appeare that the thing before they left it, was so obscurd and perplext in the sence, so short of what was intended, and so corrupted &c. thatIt would be inquired, who are meant by Those we sup∣pose none but the Busie par∣ty. those most loathed it that most desired it. It seems this must be true because they say it, but others of better judgement say otherwise; and we could ea∣sily make itSee a Booke entituled, The Agreement of the people, not that subscrib∣ed by the four Prisoners, but another. so appear: but not being proper to this place, we let it passe; onely, whereas they turne a∣gaine to their former vomit of false accusing, say∣ing, whilst they had fixt good mens eyes and thoughts upon that worke, they secretly and swiftly prosecute their other designes: We answer, As we know of no de∣signe prosecuted since by them either swiftly or slow∣ly, but what hath been honourable, just, lawfull; so, for the particular things which themselves set
downe a little after, as to bee theirThe Icte∣ricks, who have the Jaun∣desse in their eyes, see no∣thing which seemeth not to carry the same colour; so these men, such things which others doe (though in themselves very good) are designes and plots a∣gainst the Land, because their eyes and hearts are fil∣led therewith. designe, wee are sure tended to the welfare and good of the Na∣tion. 4. Their next is, Of those extraordinary sudden, and violent courses lately taken: And here to shew how wel affected they are to the present Government, or rather howAt Sampson meant when he took hold of the two middle pillars that the house should fall, and the Lords and people theron be de∣stroyed: So what lesse can they intend by their seek∣ing to pull downe the Parliament & Councell of State, but to destroy this present Government, and such as are upheld by it. trcacherously they conspire to de∣stroy it: They complaine forEnglands new Chaine, pag. 12.13.17. bringing the Army to the City, breaking the House in Peices, removing the King by such an extra-judiciall proceedings and Court of Justice, as done for no other end but to make way for their owne absolute domination: And further, The ta∣king away the House of Lords, the erecting the Councell of State, the voting of the people the Supreame power, and this House the Supreame Authority; all these par∣ticulars, &c. as they have managed them, are of sole con∣ducement to their ends and intents, either by removing such as stand in the way betweene them and the power, wealth, or command of the Common wealth, or by actually possessing and investing them in the same. A man shooting at aIf by Statute Lawes, such as did kill the Kings Deere, were grievously to be punish∣ed, 9. Hen. 3.10. 1 Edw. 3.8. Stat. 1. Hen. 7.7. what punishment doe they deserve who shoot the arrows of Treason against the State, thereby to destroy it. Deare to kill her out of hand, will not ayme at the leggs or feet, but at the heart, knowing if he hit her there, she falls, and is his own; hitherto for the most part, they have shot their Arrowes of bitter words, at the leggs and feet of the State; but seeing there followed no successe that way, now they Levell (as right Levellers indeed) at the Heart, where if they hitt home, there is no doubt butPundamento deficiente omnia ruunt. downe comes the present Government as
a prey (or Venison) for their teeth. For answer, First, whatsoever hath been done in those particulars; as in bringing the Army to the City, purging the House, removing the King, the same hath beenee M. Jn  Bks, Right and might well , and his Answer to M. Geace. Also, Justice advan∣ced: The Te∣nure of Kings. The Case of King Charles. proved Lawfull, and therefore it shews their greater presumption, that knowing the things which they speak against, are justified by Scripture, Law, and Reason, without either answering others, or proving any thing themselves, they should dare so speake; for doe they think the English Nation to be such Simplicians, as to prefer what they bare∣ly say, before what isIn dubijs sunt attendenda ea quae conveniunt naturae negotij & verijutilia. C. licet causam, de proba: & L. Ob. Car∣nem §. fi. A. Test. facit. proved and made as cleare as the Sun at the Noon day by others? 2. To shoot through the heart of the State, our present Governours, are not onely accused in those particulars; but also (and marke it well) as done for no other end but to make way for their absolute dami∣nation. What?But howsoe∣ver it be thus sayd, yet the persons accu∣sed may in the words of their Accusers say, We shall take no hme at all by their malice, but make them lick up the poyson they have vo∣mited; and that all men shall see their snare broken, & the harmelesse birds escaped. The silken Independents Snare broken, pag. 2. FOR NO OTHER END? And FOR THEIR OWNE ABSO∣LUTE DOMINATION? Not halfe and halfe a parting of stakes? some think for the publick good, and some think for private ends: at least a lit∣tle for their Countrey, and a great deale for them∣selves: Not so, but all respect of common good is cast aside: and this is, for Absolute Domination: not only to be Lords & Masters, butLa le like thinkes us so contemtible and meane bred, or such senslesse stones (as himselfe) that we cannot decline Treason: yes, and could hae found out sense too in his Book, if there had been any: It will be the best wit the Block hath, if he have the wit to conceale his Name. ABSOLUTE: None to Reigne and beare Rule but themselves on∣ly, as for all the rest, of what name or title soever, to be subordinate and under their power and com∣mand.
It is no marvell they say, We shall not doubt (though the ParliamentQui peccan∣tur coram om∣nibus, corā om∣nibus corripien∣da ss, ut m∣nes timni August. de verbis Domi∣ni. sayle us) but that what wee have here presented and published, will open the eyes and rayse the hearts of so considerable a number of the Souldiery and People in all places, and make them so sensible of the bondage and danger threatned, as that these men, this fa∣ction of Officers shall never be able to goe through with their wicked intentions: For how could they thinke lesse, having possessed the people that they had bro∣ken the Parliament, unjustly proceeded against the King and others, illegally erected high Courts of Justice; and withall done all this for no other end, but to become Tyrants, and the people made slaves; but the Soul∣diery and people in all places would rise up against them. It is reported of Timotheus, Alexanders Harper, when his Master was at a Banquet, he played an A∣larum or Assault, so to the life, as the King was oc∣casioned, to rise from the Table and take his Ar∣mour, so that his spirits remaining vanquished and overcome, was constrained to obey the harmony that proceeded from the Instrument: What eare e∣ver heard anHeare what Lis saith, Th Sycho hath invented wicked thoughts which never entred their guiltlesse soules. Poore heares, Lai qu to la v, el Di∣ablo e Capill. Alarm more moving to Rebellion, it is no wonder that some people have their spirits o∣vercome, and are in a manner up, and taking their Weapons; alas! what cannot such Har and Instruments doe in this case, specially where re isSuch is one Lapis appeare to be: Ne boni intellectus, neque moli cu∣ra sed increede alutur, mini∣stri seleribus, Tac. An. l. 16. pag. 171. Pronus ad ∣vas res, scelere in super Nym∣phidij Sahani, praefecti impe∣rium sibi in li∣entis agituntur, Tac. H st. l. 1. p 335. a weake spirit and a busie head to worke on: But Hor. Opod. 7.Quò, quò Scelosti ruit i? aut cur dexteris Aptantur enses condita? Parumne Campis, atque Neptono super, Fusum est Britanni sanguinis?
Ah wretches! Whither hast you, to what end, Doe your right hands to sheathed Swords descend? Is there so little, yet of English blood, Powr'd on the Champian fields, or Ocean flood? Never was there an ac∣cusation of higher inju∣stice & grea∣ter Tyranny charged upon any State. Geese, if they chance to catch hold of any root with their bill, they will bite and pull so hard, to have it, that many times they breake their owne necks withall, before they leave their hold.3. Neither is it lesse destructive to the present Government to say that the Erecting their Councel of State, the voting the People the supreame power, and this House the supreame Authority, all these par∣ticulars are SOLE Conducements to their ends and intents &c. Can the heart devise, or mouth speake more Trayterously against the present Go∣vernment? A thing in it selfe unlawful, may be done with a good intention, and to a wel meaning end, & so in part excusable: but to do a thing in it selfe e∣vill, and to an evill end, it is the fulnesse of evill, and further in wickednesse men cannot go. Again how∣soever they would seem somtimes, to spare the Par∣liament and let the scourge of their tongue fall on∣ly upon a faction of Officers, yet herein theirCustome & use make those fashions which at fist seemed very ugly, and a∣bominable, to to be in ac∣count very good and commendable hypo∣crisie often breaks out: so here, for who have e∣rected the Councell of state, voted the people &c. not the Generall Officers, but the Parliament, neverthelesse these things are sayd to be done, to as evill an end and bad intent as can be imagined.Pro. 18.6. Sermones uni∣versi vecordis non nisi verbis contentiosis & jurgiis constant. Rab. Salom. in hunc Vers. A Fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for stroakes. 5. Neither have they yet done, but as destructive to the present Government are these words,Englands new Chaine, pag. 18. and for the. Theophr. truth of our Judgements herein: we should with gladnesse submit to the determination of this Honourable
House, were not theirYet their tongue is higher, Ʋt nctua aves in∣aspcata noctu gementes (nam hac illis vox est) mortalium invident quieti: ita virulentia lingua semper aliquid spargit, quo concordiam hominum di∣sturbet. Plin. l. 11. c. 25. high hand as yet held over you. And therefore we are enforced to appeale to a new repre∣sentative, equally chosen as is exprest in our serious ap∣prehensions lately presented unto you. Answ. The streame and violence of Rivers is much more swift and violent neere the Ocean then hard by the Fountaine: every naturall motion is swifter in the end, then in the begining, because the neerer it comes to its proper place where it must rest the more it desireth the place in which it may rest: that those men are here so firce and high in termes it shewes that they are come now nere the. Euripid. end, and therefore no wonder if somewhat vio∣lenter then before. But first, Are not these men in∣genuous that after so much falsehood, scandal, reprocah conspiracie &c. uttered: will not submitt unto the de∣termination of the Parliament: for who would suffer for his faultPublicam u∣tilitatem priva∣torū commodis praeferendam, Authent. res∣quae C. Commu. de Legat. l. Paria delicta mutuo Compen∣sari. if he could escape it? But Secondly, There hath been a late example of one more con∣siderable then they all: he likewise refused to submit &c. and appealed elsewhere; but yet wasViro in fi. Solut. Matr. pro∣ceeded against, according to the crimes and evi∣dence they had against him. Thirdly, we know no such high hand as they speake of, but have aWhen the King and Lords were part of the Parliament, the House of Commons had not the liberty and freedome to Act as now they have. freer Parliament then ever, and in a capacity to doe more good for the Land then heretofore: But we know their meaning, the Parliament not being now for theirThis High hand they would well like if it were a helping hand for them. turne, they would have it broken, and to bring this to passe, asperse it, as unfree, under the power of the Sword, &c. A stratagem cunningly de∣vised, for they know the Malignants these many
yeares have sayd as much, and therefore taking p their Principle, the others cannot doe lesse in poa of civility then to take them into their, Qua, and so to be no more two, butTheeves have private differences yet all agree together to rob and steal. one party. 4. To Appeale, what is that? It is as much to say, there is noO that I were made Judge in the Land. expectation of justice or right  this present Government; the Parliament is as if o Parliament, the Supreame Authority, hath no Au∣thority, and so rather a crosse, a curse to the Ni∣on, then a blessing; hence they cry out,Harken to the Harpat. Moee & quatere qu∣quid usquam egrum foret aggreditur. A Declaration of the Fee Commoners of England. Ob wret∣ched England, that seeth and yet suffereth such intollera∣ble Masters: as if they should say, wherefore takest thou not an example from us to appeale from tha and to make no more addresses to them? Why do thou not declare and protest (asIf Lapis have spit out that sinck of filth, which lyes in his mouth, p. 9. and wip'd it, he will be able to speake something here about Wee. we have done) that all their Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations, and Acts, and that hereafter they shall passe, are not bind∣ing to the people? For doing thus, and following our steps, this present Government would be broken. Howsoever Absolom by disgracing his Fathers Go∣vernment, sought to draw away the hearts of the people from the King, yet he had not this  teach them to Appeale, for howsoever the designe heAut Caesar, aut nullus. desperate, yet if itIf not . Incidit extre∣mam in noxam vox improba tandem. take, there is nothing like it for to ruine and destroy the State. 5. Neither doe they Appeale to a new Representa∣tive, but such a one, as is u exprest in their ser ap∣prehensions, lately presented to the House: Now is not this to betray and enslave the Common-wealth to their owne Pride, Ambition, Lusts, Covetousnesse, Domina∣tion: For wherefore to be chosen in such like manner as they prescribe it, who put them in authority to demand any such thing; much lesse to lay it downe
as a Rule for the Nation: Are not we English men,comming forth about their Mdel and Pali of Government, and what a bel they would make, but indeed a Bab of clo is enough to please Chil∣dren. and so in a legall capacity to claime the utmost Ptitie, benefit, and priviledge, that the Lawes and liberties of England will allow to any man in the whole Nation. Why thou must it be as a few factions inconsidera∣ble, and busie headed men doe expresse? But the truth is, here we see their inside, they would be theMa vale ser cabeca de R∣ton,  la, de La. Lords and Masters, lay downe Models, platforme, and agreements for the People, and because their way and course is justlyIn A∣phels hanging of himselfe, a man may see what a vexa∣tion  Conspirator when his se∣dition Coun∣sell is reject∣ed. rejected, they make all the di∣sturbance and trouble they can in the Common∣wealth: And this hath been the constant practice of former Conspirators (as Historic are full of examples) when they could not attaine their am∣bitious ends, out of hatred then to the present Go∣vernment, and envying theMacr in∣vidia,  illum esse p∣tentem, illum aspectari, clr qui incedit ho∣nore; Ipsi inte∣nebris volus c∣noue ∣tur Lucre. Governours, by distur∣bing the one, and aspersing the other, to seeke the overthrow and ruine of both: And this shall serve in what destructive to the present Government. Now we come to the particulars tending to Muti∣ny and division in the Army: Whiles the River rune entire withall his waer in one bed, his oent is the swifter, and his force the greater, and dauteth the most hardy to adventure passage; but being divided into severall streames, it proves so slow and shallow as it may with safety and ease be waded over: This party is not ignorant how much the agreement of the Souldiary, and their fastnesse together, is for the safety of the Land; neither have they any hope to see their designes effected, unlesse there be a dis∣juncture and breach among them; the which thing (besides severall other seditious wayesHere Lis mores like himselfe; in p. 6. he re∣peats some words of the Discoverer, Viz. How they have been busie to rayse Sedi∣tion and Muti∣ny amongst the Souldiers, and speakes not a wise word to it: But that the young man might not be discou∣raged, other wise, we would aske him, whe∣ther hee were not entised to step in be∣tween us and the Levellers, through read∣ing the Story, how the Asse tooke upon him to judge betweene the Cuckow and the Nighting∣ale, now of all others the Asse might worse doe it. shewed elsewhere) they have strangely attempted by raysing
many false and scandalous reports against the Ge∣nerall, Officers, and Councell of War. As 1.Englands new Chaine. pag. 8. Upon pretence of easing the charge of the com∣mon-wealth the lifeguard must be disbanded; because con∣sisting of discerning men, faithfull to their Countrey, and former promises, and many others of like principles were. Philemon. pickt out of every Regiment, the designe being by weed∣ing the choisest and best resolved men to make the AryIn the words of Lapis; Now Reader, recollect thy thoughts, and seriously consider, whether they who are so vaine, so false in their tongue, and so notorious make bates may be heard, and not answered, reproved, pag. 20. But he will say, if hee keep his Logick, We have not proved this. wholly mercinary and slavish and the Executioners of a few mens lusts and lawlesse pleasures. Answ. 1, It was no pretense, but a thing truely meant and done; wherein the Generall shewed the largenesse of his love and affection to the Land, and how farre he could deny himselfe in point of ho∣nour and other respects for the peoplesWe could give the Reader many other reasons wherefore the Life-Guard was Disbanded. ease and accommodation. Secondly, It is not true that ei∣ther they, or any others were disbanded because faith∣full to their Countrey &c. For it is well knowne it hath beene their care and practice from the begin∣ing to this day, to promote such upon all occasions, and commit matters of greatest trust to them. 3. It is likewise false, that there were any pickt out of every Regiment, for eyther they were dismis'd upon their owne desire, or what else was don, it was in such an impartiall way; as there was no cause gi∣ven at any time for such a base aspersion. Fourthly, No lesse is it a falsehood and slander to say, it was done, to make the Army wholly mercinary, &c. the con∣ditionQuae tanta insonia cives? creditis avectos ho∣steis? aut ulla putatis dona carere doli Danaum? sic notus Ʋlisses? Virg. Aeneld. l. 12.
and behaviour of the Army ever since, is sufficient to prove their accusation to be most fals. But Fifthly, we know their meaning well enough, disceraing men, faithfull to their Countrey, and many o∣thers of like Principles: that is,Pellicalam veterem reti∣nens, & fron politus, estutam vid servans su pectore vul∣pem. Perus. Satyr. 5. busie seditious, and mutinous as they are temselves. The Turkes call their converts from Christianity,There is more of Christ and righteousnesse in the Turks Alcoran then in the Level∣lers Creed. musul manem servati, as if they were fav'd then & not before even o, unlesse the Souldiers turn Levellers, resist autho∣ritie, rayse mutine in the Army, reproach the Of∣ficers: they are wholly mercinary, slavish, and the execu∣tioners of a few mens lusts and lawlesse pleasures.Gregarius miles, procan lingua, like Thomson. But let them Trne Turkes, Musulmanim, then they are deserving men, honest and worthy Souldiers, the good men in the Army,Nam etiam tum Legato à centurionibus, & optimo qo∣que manipula∣rium parebatur. Tac. Annal. l. 1. p. 12. men most conscientious and cordially acting for common good &c. But as one saith of the rebellion caused by Percennius amongst the Souldiers in Pan∣nony, even then the Centurions, and the better sort of the Souldiers, were obedient to the Lievtenant.Ducis in con∣cilio, posita est virtus miitum, Valer. Max. lib. 4. So it hath ever been with us. 2. To make division in the Army, they say; At the first Randezvous neere Ware, they shot a Souldier to death, forLondon Prin∣ted in the grand yeare of hypocriticall and abominable dissimulation. It very wel fits as to that Book where the words are, so, with their Englands New Chaine. pursuing the ends of the engagement at New-market, and for insisting upon the agreement of the Peo∣ple: unworthily abused Maior Skott a Member of this House, sent him up a Prisoner, and accused him and Col. Rainsborough for appearing in behalfe of the agreement, and therewithall sent Col. Ayres, Major Cobbat, Cap∣taine Bray and many others after Prisoners, to Windsor. Mr, Lilburne in a Booke lately published speak∣ing ofThe Legall fundamentall Liberties of the people of Eng∣land, pag. 74. the first and second part of Englands New
Chains discovered, saith; the truth of every line of which (for all its declared treasonable) I will seale with my heart blood. But (good Sir) doe you not know, it is not the suffering but th1 Pet. 2.20. and 4.15. cause of the suffering that makesThe Jesuits doctrine is, that he dyes a Martyr that dyes for his Conspiracie and Treason against the State. a Martyr: now as in the rest, so here what is reported is most ntrue. We find in their writings the shooting of the Souldier to death as Ware, is much spoken of, as an act of greatThus did one Vibulenus cause a muti∣ny among the Souldis, by accusing falsly the Lievte∣nant that he had murdered his Brother, and sought to murder him. Nulhem ob sce∣lus, sed quia u∣tilitati leginum confidebamus. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1. p. 13. cruelty & inju∣stice, but have never mentioned the cause truly why he suffered: and therefore to wipe of their falsehood and slander from the Army, we shall give the Read∣er here a true account how it was. The Souldier who was shot to death at the Rn∣devouze neere Hartford was named Arnold, of whose miscariages and outrages (with some others at the same time) Captaine Bray in a writing delivered to the Generall and Councell of War (subscribed by him) hath thus reported. The Regiment being ordered to march to New-Castle, when they came at St Albanes, had there read unto them, the paper called,It is no mar∣vaile that in all Common-wealths great care hath been taken to suppresse sedi∣tious Books, considering how dange¦rous they are. The case of the Army stated: whereupon they resolved unanimously not to march; and howsoever according to the orders he had received, the next day caused the Drums to beat, yet few or none appeared, butDictator signiferum cunctantem signum ut jussus erat inferre, occidit. Liv. 4. seized upon the Collours and set them in the waggons, placeing a strong guard about them: and this they did all∣though he had used all the arguments of perswasion he could to the contrarie. So at a Councell of warre held at Hockley, having given his vote for their marching as a thing fit and
We might shew that as it was, rea∣sonable, they should obey the ll; so there was at that time great cause wherefore the Generall gave them order to march thither. reasonable, and being returned from the Councell to them, used againe many perswasive arguments, but all in vaine, for their combination and murmur∣ing much increased insomuch that they ca into his quarters the same night after, and demanded the Colours of him, the which he refusing and giving many reasons for it, they went into his Chamber and carried them away, telling him they could not beleeve any of their Officers, nay that they could not beleeve any of their owne fathers. Being come to Olney he againe commanded the Drums to beat, and intended to goe forward ac∣cording to his orders, but they came together and resolved not to march, and when he had propound∣ed unto them all the arguments of obedience and reason he could, professing withall to be an enemie toCannot La∣pis see this to be Regular? irregularity, howsoever a freind to all just de∣sires, resolutions, and mutuall ingagements, they be∣gan to be suspitious of him. About the same time there being come more Collours from Northamp∣tonshire, they grew higher, and more refractorie, and as he was pressing them to their duty, aIt was no doubt, a ma∣lignant design to distemper the Army, thereby to put the King∣dome into a new flme. Cavalier affronted him, and swore by God, they must not beleeve any of their Officers, but should fight now against the Independents. Upon this they marched back according to their determinations to Dunstable, with many of the Horse, full of the like distemper: and their recei∣ved a Letter, the substance whereof was, that they should stand to theirDecipios ali verbis vultuqu benig: Nam mihi jam no dissimlator e∣ris, Martial.  4. Epigram. honest ingagements &c. and the Party that brought the Letter told them, that the Generall and Letenant GenerallAn usual pra∣ctice amongst them to rayse up false re∣ports of what encourage∣ments they have, thereby to more the credulous and s mple the sooner to re∣belion. See a Declaration of his Excellency, concerning the revolted Souldiers, pag. 16, would not op∣pose
them, the which report made the Souldiers more and more Exorable. Much more in that Narration is shewed of their insolencies, and high disobedience; notwithstand∣ing he mentionethBeing very much suspect∣ed to be an a better, or at least a favou∣rer of the Mu∣tiny. not their barbarous and most inhumane carriage to their Officers and the Coun∣trey, which was so vile and horribly wicked, that all the Felons which have suffered at Tyburne these twelve months, were not, wee are confident, guilty of so manyFor this they are cal∣led, Honest and worthy Soul∣diers, the god men in the Ar∣my, men most consciencious & cordially acting for common good. horrid outrages as they com∣mitted: Not any of their Officers, except Captain Bray, the Quartermaster, and one more, durst cole neer them; some theyFollowing Walwyns Do∣ctrine, To fre themselves out of the hands of Tyrants: The bloody Pro∣ject. p. 14. pursued many miles, and swore as they followed them, they would be reven∣ged on them; and in this pursuit of their Officers,Here the Craftsmans craft wil hard∣ly finde so much craft, as to clear them of theft. theevishly tooke away many Horses in the Coun∣trey, pretending their Officers were run away with their money, whereas they were forc't to flie, or otherwise had been cruelly murdered by their owne Souldiers: Neither were their Officers thus basely abused, but their rage and cruelty was as much exer∣cised on others; and not against Malignants, but their manner was, where ever they came in their march, to inquire if there were anyHonest and wrthy Soul∣diers, cordially acting for com∣mon good Lapis hath one stone left yet to fling at the Discoverer, for finding fault with them for this. Round heads in the Towne, and where they found such, they would be sure to abuse them the more. Insomuch that ma∣ny honest men have since complained that the Ca∣valiers never dealt so cruelly with them, and had not Bray and the Quarter-master beene with them, they had been certainely Plundered o all, If notHave they not sufficiently prov'd the Parliament mn to be Trayts and England in Chains; in regard when the five cordiall Citizens required Justice for the  of the Souldier that was sht at Ware, they could not be heard. O Cromwel, O Fairfax, O Iret, O Hasletig, &c. But peace John, a new Representative will do the deed. murdered.
In this insolent distemper they come to the Ra∣dezvouz, where the General, and Officers, inquiring who had been the principall Leaders and Actors of this mutiny, eight or nine were singled out, and be∣ing all found at a Court Marshall guilty of many notorious facts in this businesse, were adjudged by the Lawes and Ordinances of Warre to dye: Ne∣verthelesse afterward all pardoned butHee that knowes what belongs to the Government and discipline of all Army, and considers their miscarri∣ages and out∣rages, would rather won∣der that every tenth man of them had not suffered then asperse the Councell with cruelty and unjustice. one, and this referred to a Lot, which fell upon Arnold; one who had been (as some Officers of that Regiment report) more notoriously guilty then any other in that wicked Conspiracy. We have spoken the more largely of this parti∣cular, to shew the dissimulation and treachery of those men: For who would thinke to heare them say, We doe in the behalfe of our selves, and all well min∣ded people, here before this honourable House, as in the presence of Almighty God, protest against the shooting of the Souldier to death at Ware; and bow five cordiall Ci∣tizensWee have seen their Pe∣tition, but there was not one word in it, of pursuing their Officers, stealing Hor∣ses, plunder∣ing &c. It was cordially done, and so not Libellus famosus, as La∣pis, no contemp∣tible mean bred decayed Parson, learnedly La∣tins it. required justice for his blood: that he suffered for such horrible and vile misdemeanours: Could any Machiavillian or Jesuite hide Mutiny, Theft, Murder, Cruelty, and the very height of Rebellion (like a dunghill under Snow) so handsomely? The Romans in Warre had an Engine which they nam'd Musculus, the nature of it was to hide their Soul∣diers, so that they could (unseene) come to the Walls of a City and undermine it; thisHere wee shl leave La∣pis a while, and take no∣tice of H. B. who seemes to have some sense: Now if he will shew his Craft let him not spend so much time about that which is not in question; but if he can shew us, that re∣bellion, theft, murder oppression. &c Is justifiable, if mn say it is for mmon good, he shall be reputed to have the Crafts mans Craft. Engine they use oft, under a colour of pursuing the ends of en∣gagements, and acting for common good, approach the
walls of our State, and unseen sat least as they th there work the ruine and overthrow thereof. 2. For others whom they name, what the Co¦cell of Warre did to them, there was reason a cause for it, the distemper among the Souldiers ¦ing so great, and many ill-affected people now wa¦ing an opportunity, through a breach and division  the Army, to destroy both Army and Kingdome, it was necessary, that such as appeared to countenance so dangerous a designe (though happily intending no evill) should be prevented, the which could not be, without removing them as they did, and securing their persons. Hor. l. 2. Od. 13.Quid quisque vitet nunquam homine satis Cautum est. What daily by us should avoyded be, We cannot with sufficient heed foresee. 3. They aske,Englands new Chaine, pag. 14. what freedome is their left whereQuid verba aum, cum facta videam. Cic. 3. Tus. honest and worthy Souldiers are sentenc'd and enforc'd to ride the Horse with their faces reverst, and their swords broken over their heads, for but Petitioning and present∣ing a letter in justification of their liberty therein; if this be not a new way of breaking the spirits of the english which Strafford and Canterburie never dreame of;  know no difference of things. Answ. 1. It is a false conclusion and seditiously applied, to insinuate, that there is no freedome left  when honest and worthy &c. as if all our libertie and safetie consisted in the actings of foure or five mean Souldiers, and because they rode the Horse, it is now quite lost and we in Chaines. But 2. That which they call Justification of their Liberty, was a thing most scandalous to the Parliament,
Councell of State, Court of Justice and tending to breed mutinie in the Army, and so much was then shewed and proved to them: In some feny Countries where People are troubled with Gnats, they use to hang up dung in the mid'st of the roome, as a bait for the Gnats to fly to, and so catch them, as being a net or snare provided for the purpose; there is no snare (and this partieJohn Lilburne knowes, the Malignants would ot give a farthing for his Booke, nor read it, if it were not for his raysing at the present Government; it is not his non-sence a∣bout the lawes, nor his vaporings, that they re∣gard, but the dung of his foule mouth they flye at. knowes it well) like the dung of Sedition: hang up a Pamphlet or Libel stuft with falsehoods and raylings against Magest∣rates and Goverment, let it be sayd,The legall fundamentall Liberties, &c. pag. 74. O perfidious Cruell Tyrants O Apostatiz'd Tyrants, a company of bloody and inhumane butcherers of man, The most perjurd, perfidious, false faith and trust-breakers, and Tyrants that ever lived in the World.Ibid. 5. a pack of dissembling jug∣ling knaves:Ibid. 38. Corah, Dathan and Abiram were neverThe Bird Taurus is very little, yet hath a voice like a Bull: John hath a roaring Bulls voyce, its well his hornes are little. such Rebels against Authority as the Generall and his Councell are, nor the Anabaptists at Munster withYou might have forborne your Name-sake. John of Leyden and Nper Dullion, were never more contem∣ners of Authoritie; norTurpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Jack Straw, nor Wt Tiler, nor all those famous men mentioned with a black pen in our histories, and called Rebels and Traytors can never be put in any scale of equal ballance, for all manner of re∣bellions and Treasons against all sorts and kinds of Ma∣gistracie, with the Generall and his Councell: Let this be the Dung for the Trapp andJohn, may a man (and not he rayl'd at) whisper a word in your eare: You speake much agai st so men of carrying on designes, and their owne Interest: Now in this thing many take no∣tice of you, how by slandering the Government, and rayling at good men, you cunningly drive on your own Interest; that is, gull the simple people out of their meae, for had you followed your first trade which was honest, you had not gotten so mu, as by this latter, which is base; namely, Rayling. Lilburne can speake by experience, there shall not beQuilibet natura fertur ad si sile. Astnus Asino pul∣cherimus, sus vero sui, Equi equis similes, boves vero bobus. a Gnat, not a se∣cret
conspirator, a false hearted traytor, a close mu∣tineer, and one that seekes to Levell Church and State but he will sticke at it. And to the end the stinck may not choake them, they shall see it written in great Capital-letters theMr. Lilbunes Title of his last Book. legall fundamentall LIBERTIES of the People of England Revived asserted and vindicated, or as here, in justification of their liberty. 3. There may be some truth here pickt out a new way which Strafford and Canterburie never dreampt of, it was so indeed, they never went this way to worke, for their manner was to breake the spirits of the peaceable, and people bet affected to the common∣wealth: whereas the Councell of Warre on the con∣trarie hath still endeavoured to suppresse the un∣quiet, restlesse, seditious, as all know and will ac∣knowledge; except men of the same distemper and faction. 4. They have another storie, as thus:Englands new Chaine, pag. 10. No sooner had they (through Gods blessing and the assistance of their reconciled freinds) finished their worke at Col∣chester, but presently they cald to Question certaine per∣sons that bad, appeared at St. Albans in the behalfe of Captaine Reynalds, chusing rather to forsake the service then to be commanded by Captains that had been violent against them, that had drunke the Kings health upon their knees, and profest they could rather fight against the Levellers then Cavaliers, and these (according to their old wont) they sentenc'd to death and soon after releast them, as finding or supposeing this kind of discipline most essentiall to the breaking and debasing the spirits of the English. Answ. A man that hath false ware to put off, cares
not how bad the light is: the matter which they here so darkely and covertlie report, was indeed a worke of darkenesse. As for the cause of that sentence it is not at allHere Reader thou are desi∣red to take notice of their falshoods in relation of things, and to give thee a further in∣stance, where∣as Lilburne re∣ports of large proffers he had from Mr. Hunt; the man hath professed since to us, that what hee spake to him was of him∣selfe, not pro∣cured there∣unto by any one, and it was upon his Complaints, whereupon he as a friend advised him to moderation, and a peacea∣ble carriage, which he told him would gaine the love of men, which he would ne∣ver doe by bitter and in∣vective spee∣ches, and no doubt the ad∣vise of Mr. Holland, and Mr. Rigby was the like, though he basely abuse them for their good Counsell. related, but some other things which before were never heard of. For 1. That there should be Captaines which dranke the Kings health, or any such words spoken as they report, they are things as yet not onely to proove, but pretences which themselves in their owne defence used not. But 2. Had such a thing been done, or the words spoken, yet would not this excuse their horrid and vile disobedience: for they made no complaint thereof before they mutined, where they might have had redresse if any fault had been committed. 3. But that these Libels are Printed in the grand Yeare of hypocriticall and abominable dissimulation, other∣wise it were impossible that they should thus still conceale the truth: The matter here is in effect the same with Arnolds: they having order to march North-ward with many reproachfull speeches re∣fused so to doe, and thereby caused a great division in the companie, yea their insolencies and outrages were such that unlesse the same had been seasonably prevented, much danger to the Kingdome would cer∣tainly have followed: for it did evidently appeare, that their plot was to make a Generall disturbance and hurliburlie through the Land, as making full account that others, in other parts, by their seditious example would doe the like, and so the Malig∣nants taking the opportunity (as a door opened by them) might destroy the honest partie, and
the easier effect their designes. 4. For the distinction betweene Leveller and Ca∣valeer it is now byLike Corneli∣us Fuscus, ha∣ving by his se∣dcious cari∣age made himselfe un∣capable of the Princes favor and pardon Is inclementer in Vitellium in∣vehi solitus, ni∣hil spei sibi in∣ter adversa reli¦querat. Tac. Hist. lib. 3. pag. 423. Lilburne taken off, and Jack hath ventured his neck to make LEVELLING CAVALEER one person; but it would vex his fowle heart to heare, what Malignants say, that he is aHowsoever he cals other men Apostates, neverthelesse a greater then hmselfe is not knowne, as his owne Writings ma∣nifest. Turn-Coat knave and howsoever they are content to make use of Incendiaries and Traytors, yet they thinke hanging is a reward too good for him, that holds sometime with one party, otherwhile with another, and all to destroy and ruin the Nation.Pro. 14.14. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his owne wayes: andJob 8.13. the hypocrites hope shall perish. 5. That they were afterward released, and soon too, it shewed the great clemencie and favour of the General; which Testimoney from their own mouth, is sufficient to prove the greatest part of their Booke to be most false. But observe theSaepe summa ingenia in oc∣culio latent. Plautus in Captivis. wit of these men,Qui en malen na, sacalos pane tuerios. who can from an act of large mercie conclude Tyrany and oppression against the doer. 6. They make a large narration of some pro∣ceedings in the North, the reading whereof gives us an occasion to minde Sollomons wordsEccl. 10 13. He that would take pines and have the patience to read over Lil∣burnes last Book, should find this say∣ing fulfilled. The begin∣ing of the words of his mouth is foolishnesse, and the end of his talk mischeivous madnesse. But 1. That the Le∣vellers were taken into the bosome, and the necessities be∣ing over, fell into greater odium and contempt then ever, it is denyed: for honest and deserving men have alwayes been countenanced, and still are, and if any have fallen into disgrace, it hath been through their owne miscariages, or otherwise if they have suffer∣ed any thing it hath not been any way occasioned
by theThat many honest men, Souldiers nd others, have been sufferers In the Coun∣trey, we be∣leeve, but that this thing is of the Army-Officers, tho∣row their Tyranny, and oppression (as these asperse them) that we deny. Generall Officers. Is it not possible for the sonne or servant to doe amisse, and yet the Father or Master to be blamlesse? 2. It is also false, that diverse Souldiers were rated and threatned to have their skuls broken, &c. for Peti∣tioning in the behalfe of Major Reinolds: For what∣soever was spoken or done herein, it was not forThere is a Story of one who having kild his neigh∣bour, and be∣ing presently apprehended, to excuse, himself, shew∣ed them a lit∣tle spright had in his hand, which could not doe any hurt; but spake not a word of the bloody knife that was in his sleeve: Ob∣serve it well, and you shall finde the car∣riage of these men alwayes so; they tell us of Petitioning, but never she the bloody Knife, speake not one word of the treachery and sediion contained in their Petitions; neither of the mutiny and divi∣sion which they sought to make in the Army under the colour of Petitioning. Petitioning, but for their incivilities and high mis∣carriages, as no way becomming Souldiers. Such a∣mong the Turks are in high veneration, as have lost their wits, and are become Idiots; there is little reason why these men should expect admiration from others, unlesse it be for their sottishnesse and absurdity, for every understanding Reader must needs perceive the froth and emptinesse of their talke; but you shall seldome see mallice and matter together. 3. For Major Cobit and Major White, that the Ge∣nerall was pleased to conferre such places upon o∣thers which some desired they might have had, we know nothing unjust that he did therein, but this we know to bee a slander and reproach that Major VVhite was refused the Leivtenant Colonelship, because a constant man to his promises. The Law sayth,C l. 3. Com. de pr. & L. ob Car. F. de Test. Testi∣bus deponentibus verisailiora magis creditur: And there is reason for it, for who knowes a mans thoughts, words, and actions, better then himselfe, and therefore his Excellency denying it, is rather to be beleived then they. He that drinkes much of the
juice of Coriander seed, they say is either dumbe af∣terward, or if he speake it will be naughtily; these men have taken in some such liquor; for there is hardly oe thing which they speake, but isNihil est An∣tiph, Quin in the na sit deprav∣. Tu quod  est excepis  ud ma est. Terent. in Phorm false, and tending to sedition. 5. They say further, And this was the usage not onely to these Gentlemen, but to all others, whether Offi∣cers or souldiers in North, or South (for their Counsels were one in both) that did retaine a sense and resolution to prosecute those good things intimated in their former ingagemen. Tame Foxes if they break loose, and turne wild, will doe ten times more mischiefe then those which were wild from te beginning: Experience shewes it in these men, when Independents turne Ma∣lignants, Parliamenteers, Cavaliers, Royalists, and of freinds, become foes to the Gospell, they proove theThe Jew wte that Rabshekh was an Apostae from their Church, and by his rayling it seemes it was so: Now let any pru∣dentiall man read Lilbur last Book, and he cannot but conclude (though ig∣noran of his Apstacy) that it was an Aptates wk for the tone and diaect is proper to one that is Apo∣staed from Church and State. sorest and greatest enemies that the Church and State ever had. To this slander we have given already a full answer, In conclusion therefore of this particular, we shall desire the Reader from the premises to obsrve, the severall wayes and wyles which they have used to make division and mutiny in the Amy. 1. As they know the Army cannot be without some distemper, so they are diligent whether in the North or South, to makeThey have had their sp and E ya∣tes in several parts, to take knowledge of distempers, and accordingly applyed themselves to highten and blow them up. inquirie after it, that they may by casting Oyle into the fire increase and continue the same. 2. That the Officers may be unserviceable, and the Souldiers thereby occa∣sioned to revolt, they seeke byWitnesse this Booke. falsehood and
slander, to make them odious. 3. Whensoever a∣ny mutiny or division is raysed in the Army, their manner alwayes is toMr. Lilburne saith, that Rich. Arnold, was wilfully and of set ma∣lice murdered. But John, when you write next, be more sober, and let us ave more reason and lesse rayling from you. justifie the Conspirators, thereby to harden them in their wickednesse, and provoke others to the like sedition. 4. Such things as are good in themselves, and done upon just ground, they will scandalouslyThe Law saith, In re du∣bia benigniorem semper fieri in∣terpretationem, L. Prox. 4. C. de his quae in∣test de. interpret, as done to a bad intention. 5. They asperse the Souldiers as to be mercinary and slavish, and why? but because they should either leave the service, or refuse duty. 6. That no private Souldier may yeeld assistance to his Commander, in punishing his fellow Souldier (be the cause never so just) they are told if they doe so, that they are theBut the Souldier bet∣ter knowes hs duty: Mancipii uni∣us audacia, im∣mature subven∣tum fret, dis∣cordiis, armis∣que civilibus Remp. percu∣lisset. Tac. An. l. 2. p. 57. Executioners of a few mens lusts, and lawlesse pleasures. 7. They possesse the Soul∣diers, that it is of their Officers that many Taxes and burdens are not taken away, and things better setled; although they are not in fault, neither can they helpe it. 8. To enrage the Souldiers, they cry out against their Commanders, for breaking their Co∣venants, Protestations, Engagements, howsoever in the meane time, there is no promise which former¦ly they haveWe could wish that there might be some thing considered about the justnesse of promises, as pressing the keeping, how∣soever made. justly made, and can performe, but they are willing and carefull to keep the same. 9. Their Officers are suchThey who are hungry, seeing others eate, are thereby provoked to the greater appetite: Men that hunger and thirst after greatnesse, seeing others possesse it, are the more greedy of it, and by calling them Tyrants (as Lilburne uses to doe) make account to have them outed, and come the sooner into he places. Tyrants, as that the better the Souldiers are, and the more faithfull, the worse they will use them. 10. The use which the Generall Commanders make of the Souldiers, is (Innocent esse nemo poterit si accusasse sufficiet. they say)
onely this, namely to betray and enslave the Com∣mon wealth, and enrich themselves: and so much of this point. It followes next in that particulars it tends to the raysing of a new warre in e Common-wealth. say they for peace, whilst the supream Officers of the Army are supreame in your House, in the Councell of State, and all in all, in the generall councel of the Army, when the mar∣tiall power is indee supreame to the civill authority, what peace can be expected? we professe weBlind men are mutinous and cholerick. see no coun∣sells tending to it, but hereof mighty and vast sums of money to be taxed upon the People per mensem; as if W were become the oely Trade, or as if People were bound to maintaine Armyes, whether they have Trade or no, yea whether they have bread or no. Answ, The Wolfe by tickling the Asse and rub∣bing him softlie about the Neck and under the bel∣ly, brings the Asse asleepe and then presentlie de∣vours him, Such Asses they would make the People, byFor there is no faithfulnesse in their mouth, their inward part is very wickednesse, the throat is an open Sepul∣chre, ther flat∣ter with thir tongues. Psal. 9.5. flattery and fair pretenses perswade them they desire peace, and seeke to have greviances and bur∣dens remooved, whereas the truth is (and so much we shall here further demonstrate) like the Wolfe this tickling and soft rubbing, is but a Levelling de∣signe, of meer advantage to destroy them. We know not of any superioritie that one per∣son takes above another either in Parliament or Councell of State, but as equals in respect of place, so are their actings all alike in point of power. 2. For Marshall power it never tooke any thing from the Civil, nor hth it at any time beene exercised, but in matters proper and peculiar thereunto. 3. That they doe not see any counsells tending to peace, it may
well be so: for a man that is blinde or shuts his eyes: sees not the brightnesse and beautie of the sun shining at noone day. Nicomachus in Plutarch very fitlie answered an Jdeot that could see no beautie in the famous Helena Painted by Zeuxis: take my eyes sayd Nichomachus and you shall thinke her to be a Goddesse. If this partie had the eyes of sober, discreete, peaceable, honest and wel affected people, they would see in our high Court and great Councell, someting don every day tending to peace, but beeingProtinus in∣vidia nigra salentia tabo tecta perit, do∣mus est imis in vallibus antri abdita, sole ca∣rens non ulli pervia vento, tristis & ignavi plenissima fri∣goris, & quae igne vacet sem∣per, caligine semper abundet. Ovid. lib. 2. Metamorph. blinded through mallice, pride, prejudice selfe-seeking &c. no wonder like Batts or Owles they see nothing in the light. 4. to insinuate as if the supreame Officers of the Army would make Warr their trade, is a base aspersion, their former actions have ever testifyed the contrarie. But observe the craft of these men, they would make the people beleeve that the Officers continue the War, whereas them∣selves, by trayterous designes andMany have thought, long agone, that Lilburn would at last shew himselfe a professed Ma∣lignant; which is now come to passe: so that how his pretences of freedome and liberty will deceive ho∣nest people no more; and truly we must acknowledge it as a singular mercy of God, that so dangerous a Person to the Common wealth should with his owne mouth discover himselfe as he hath done. closing with the greatest enymies that the Nation hath, are still seek∣ing toOf such persons the Law saith, Reus est laesae majestatis, qui seditionem in Rep. concitat, eam hostibus patri∣ave Religionem aut Resp. hostibus nomen dat, aut aliud quidvis ad Reip. statum evertendum molitur, L. 1. 10. 11. Hic L. 5. eod. vult Althus. D. locis Vid. Damhoud. C. 63. diss ali∣qui per. l. 25. §. 1. de Cap. & Postl. And how Conspirators against the publique pace, ought to be punished, the Law likewise sets it downe. Frequentius vivi sectione in partes emi¦nentioribus locis suspendendus. Glar. d. Num 8. Damhoud C. 62. Againe, Transfugas etiam & proditores, perduellium instar a quovis impune occidi posse. Argum. l. 234. de V. 5. l. 3. §. ult. ad L. Corn. de siccar. Gothost ad l. 7. hic Clar. d. loc. in fin. Cujar. Observ. 33. rayse commotions, and so necessarilie con∣straine the State to keep up their forces, for to sup∣presse their conspiracies. 2. We finde them propounding many Questions to which wee shall breifly answer. 1. Touching
their charge against the excluded Members, there hath something already been done herein, and what is further to doe, as there shalbe opportunity and a fit occasion for it, so they will proceede. 2. For Offices conferred upon their creatures and relations, whatsoever hath been done this way, there was just cause for it, and no more but according to the me∣rits of the receivers. 3. It will be time enough to discountenance those who have betrayed the trust of feo∣fees for Bishops and delinquents lands; or have unjustly purchased it themselves when the offence is known and prov'd. 4. That the Lord chiefe Justice and Lord cheife Barron should keepe their places, conferd up∣on them, it was fit and requisite, being men of great worth and well deserving, and continually faithfull to the common-wealth. 5. When those perfidious persons that have made no conscience of breaking the selfe-denying Ordinance, are found out, and known to be such, there wil be that done no doubt, which shall be just and satisfactorie: But to what end are those demands? you shal know in the words following. Oh wretched England, that seeth and yet suffereth such intollerable Masters? what can be expected from such Officers who frequently manifest a thirst after the blood of the People and Souldiers, as are most active for the common freedome peace and prosperity of the common∣wealth, and against whom they have nothing else to ob∣ject? or what can be expected from such a councell in the Army as shallLilburne re∣ports that he had gotten di∣verse thousands of hands to this Pamphlet. Legall funda∣mentall, &c. pag. 74. If this be true (but we much question it for we know his vapouring) observe what a generation of men those were, to set their hands to such things, as they know not what they were, was it not a sin and a shame to them, to owne that under their hands, of which they were altoge∣ther ignorant. These were like his Te∣nants who would say, What is it Ma∣ster? Say, and we will sweare it. agree that the supreame authoritie should be moved to make a law that the councell of Officers may have power to put to death all such persons though not of the Army as they should judg were disturbers of the Army. There are certaine Idolators in India when they
sacrifice to their Zemes, or Idol, that their Offring may be the more acceptable, thrust a stick into their throat, even to their weasel, and so bring up what∣soever lieth in their stomack: These men have ta∣ken some paines here and streined hard to bring all this up at once, if Satan therefore like it not, what will he have? as for sedition, treason, false∣hood, what more can be uttered, vomitted? But 1. Are yee in earnest, would yee not have the people remaine any longer under the present Government, but raise a new warr? we beleeve you: you mean as you speake, those Masters yee would willinglie have out, and be your selves theNec decrant qui crederent, utramque sèdi∣tionem fraude Antonii captum ut solus bello frueretur. Tac. Hist. l. 3. p. 47 tyrants which so often you speake of: and then we should have cause enough to say Oh wretched England. Hor. Epod. 16.Barbarus beu cineres insistit victor et urbem Eques sonante verberabit ungula. The victor rude upon our Grave doth tread, Our Cittie is with trampling Horse or'e layd 2. In speaking so often that theAs true as that, 1 Sam. 22.8. Officers thirst af∣ter such people and Souldiers blood as are most active for common good &c. Herein you shew your selves to be like the Serpent called Porphirius, which is ful of poy∣son, but being toothlesse, hurteth none but himselfe: your mallice and venome is so grosse and noto∣riously false, as it kills onely your selves, whilesThat Lapis may not take exception at this No body, it looking so like himselfe, we doe there∣fore here ex∣mpt him. no body will receive it from you. As for the peace free∣dome and prosperity you mention, Lilburne hath now declard what it is, And howsoever some have thought heretofore better of you, then yee deser∣ved,
yet finding him now to plead for theHis words are these, Prine Charles heir apparent to his Fathers Crowne and Throne. The most hee speaks in this page are words put in∣to his mouth, and he speaks them as did the Asse, not understanding what hee speakes. But Jhn, let us tell you this, To be a free people there can be no heir to Crownes and Thrones; pure reason which you sometimes talke of, ad∣mits of no heir to a Crowne: A Crowne title is contrary to the principles of reason and nature. But indeed we ne∣ver tooke you or a man to ave the Principles of reason; onely a smattering in some old dusty Statutes, the Cob∣ebs whereof are so gotten into your eyes, as what is pure reason you see not. Princes Title, and condemning the Parliaments proceeding against the King, and Lords, with much other base malignitie, they are satisfied, and hope the Parlia∣ment will be carefull to prevent the mischeife which he manifesteth against the Common good, peace, and prosperity of the common wealth. 3. Where shall we finde a lye told with lesse col∣lour of truth then here: The councell in the Army mov'd to have power to put to death al such persons though not of the Army as they should judge were disturbers of the Army. We appeale to any man that hath sence, whether such a thing be probable, or possible? what no other course but death? and all to death? and for every desturbance of the Army? here we may (changing the names) say O Lilburne, O Walyn, O Prince, O Overton, will ye Seale the truth of every Line with your hearts blood? truelie that which you speake in this place is not onely false in it selfe, but soThe w saith, Absurdum intellectum ab omni dispositione rejiciendum: L. Nam absurdum Debon. ertor l. 1. §. unde quaritur de publica. absurd and groundlesse, as no rationall man can possiblie beleive it. But further, it is also anHow needfull therefore is that Counsell, Nihil edendo{que} omnia cavendo. Cic. Orat. Post. redit. in Sen. untruth that the Coun∣cell of the Army did moue the supreame authoritie in any such thing at all. For whatsoever was spoken, it was onely an occasionall speech of one particular person (or two at most) not mov'd by the Councell, nor any agreement made by them in the least, Yea more, for putting to death,Quum quisque pessime fecit, n maxime tutus est. Salust. it was not insisted upon,
but what was sayd in effect was onely thus, thatProvisa mi∣nus lat: And the Law saith, Contra vim atque inju∣riam licitam esse defensio∣nem. l. ut vim de just. & jur l. scientiam §. qui cum ad l. Aquil. see∣ing there were sundrie seditious people, who sought to make division and mutinee in the Army, there might be some course taken with the Parliament, to impower the Councell of Warre, whereby to pre∣serve both Officers and Souldiers from their dan∣gerous and destructive designes. 3. They say, certainely these things cannot but ma∣nifest unto you their very hearts, their inward purposes and intentions representing visibly before you and all the World the most dangerous condition that ever yet this Nation hath been in. Answ, 1. So much you have manifested here and in other papers and actings, of your inward pur∣poses and intentions to the Parliament, Councell of State, Councell of Warre, the Army and whole Na∣tion, as by this time theyEx ungue Le∣onem. And as a corrupt Tree is knowne by corrupt fruit. know you well; that is, know you to be theBut being now knowne to be such, there is hope they will doe the lesse hurt. most dangerous and trayte∣rous enemies the Land hath, being indeed the spe∣ciall Instruments and Agents of our Enemies, both at home and abroad, to carry forth the black and bloody worke for them, they being not able nor so fit to appeare themselves in such a way, nor can so notably dissemble, and so artificially deceive the people, under a cloak of Liberty, Peace, Freedome, asQuicquid ho∣stis facit, jure belli agit ac suscipit, & liceb turpiter saepe facit quod sit hostis, tamen cum hostis sit turpiter non bel∣lum gerit. Arg. l. 4. S. sed quod D de Con. obrump. Caus. These men till of late, have ac∣knowledged our present Government, and so no pro∣fest enemies to the State; yet the worst enemies that the State hath, ecause under a pretence of Friends, have sought the overthrow of it. you can doe. And to the end the Nation may clearely under∣stand what for persons you are, we shall here truly relate some passages in a Letter sent from one Wil∣liam Bennet, and found with Needam, who hath a long time stil'd himselfe Pragmaticus, the Libeller,
dated at Antwerpe, June 1. After some Salutation and account given of their affaires beyond the Seas, he expresseth his great sorrow to heare that the Ia∣vellers were subdued, and desires kindly to be un∣membred unto Mr. Lilburne, Mr. Overton, and the rest, being his antient Friends, and great acquain∣tance, and what helpe he and others are willing to afford them, expecting the like from them, accor∣ding to their power, and as occasion shall be offer∣ed. Here we shall desire the Reader to observe, first, that this Benet is not onely a profest enemy to our State, but as by the Letter appeares, a notable Spy, and one that gives intelligence of things unto such persons as are imployed in speciall designes against the safety of this Common wealth; and this man hath beene one of their Intimacies and familiar Friends. Secondly, The rising lately of the Souldi∣ers was an action well lik'd of, and in regard it pro∣spered not, the Cavaliers every where, are much grieved for it. Thirdly, That Pragg: must be the man, and the messenger of the salutations and kind∣nesse, what should this meane? unlesse there be an accord between them, and an intercourse of writing each to other. Fourthly, Howsoever we cannot di∣rectly say what assistance it is, that Royallists would willingly afford them, yet what they expect from the other is well knowne, even a prosecuting of the worke begun; that is, to asperse the present Go∣vernment, make division in the Army, hinder the releife of Ireland, &c. 2. Will not people move for a new Warre, to heare them say, The most dangerous condition that ever
yet this Nation hath been in: And in another place, The vilest and basest bondage that ever English men groaned under: Doth not this Trumpet of Rebellion sound loud enough? Thou seest Reader, the peo∣ple are not closly or tacitiy stir'd up to mutiny, but Viva voce, boldly, openly, and because they doe notBut let peo∣ple in all pla∣ces take heed lest they be served as an Impostor of Creet did the Jewes in the Reigne of Theodosius the Emperour, who perswa∣ded them he was Moses sent to lead them into their own Countrey through the Sea, whereup∣on he brought them unto a rock, com∣manded them∣selves to leap into the Sea, warranting them safety a∣gainst all dan∣ger, and such as did so were drown'd im∣mediately: So those Im∣postors, in mo∣ving men to an insurrecti∣on, pretend∣ing it is for their delive∣rance from bondage, will certainly oc∣casion the rui of as many as shall follow their pernici∣ous Counsell. so, it is, Oh wretched England, that seeth and yet suffereth such intollerable Masters. And howsoever their good Friends which set them at worke, make full account (by their trea∣chery, and the peoples credulity) to establish Mo∣narchy and Tyranny againe; erect Altars, Courts, Canons, Masse, Mattens, &c. Neverthelesse here the Leveller must be silent, and play the cunning Pi∣rats part, having changes of colours to bring in the honest man and his goods, hang out a false one, namely, the Colour of LIBERTY, a thing easily done by those men, it being their Genius, and pro∣per to their Trade. 3. As we have in other places noted their impu∣dence and horrid boldnesse, so here the same againe appeares, If there be any conscience towards God or man to be found amongst you, &c. it is impossible but it must worke upon all amongst you that are not Co partners with them in their designes. Answ. 1. You measure it seemes, other mens con∣sciences by your owne, and therefore think, because your selves make no conscience of lying, sedition, treason, rayling, &c. that others will countenance such things, and so make as little conscience of their wayes, as you of yours. But secondly, you might well say, It is impossible but it must work upon all amongst you: For poyson is operative and work∣ing;
and you knew, more deadly poyson could not be devised, then what you had presented, and for the quantitie, enough to poyson three Nations. Thirdly,Sane lentus in suo dolore eset: Reip in∣jurias ne largi∣retur. Tacit. Anal. l. 3. p. 19. For this working amongst the Parliament men, it is fitt and necessarie that your sad represent∣ation should be minded: far as one well sayth, How∣soever the Magistrate may be as sloe as he pleaseth in punishing injuries committed against his owne person, yet he ought not to pardon such as are done against the common wealth. The Children of Allexandria in the dayes of Ptolemeus Philopater, when the huge and great An∣cor of the Ship Thalmegos was layd out upon the shore, the Children did ride upon the stalke, and crept through the ring of the Ancor, as if it had been made for the pastime of Children: but wise Ship-men knew it was appointed for a better use, namely to stable and make sure that great Vessel in great and tempestuous stormes. Just so, doe some men serve the Law, if the execution thereof lies still, they are ready to ride upon it, and run thorow it, as if it were made onely for sport: But wise Statesmen know it was appointed for better use, namely, when incendiaries and conspirators rayse commotions and hurliburlies in the com∣mon-wealth to preserve then in such a storme, the great Vessel, by a due and carefull proceeding a∣gainst them. Se theFoolish birds frighted a little at first with the hus∣bandmans Scar-crow, & after a while observing that it stirs not, are bold to fit upon it, and defile it: So Libellers and Raylers at the State, see∣ing nothing put in execu∣tion are bold to write any thing. note in the margin. Our next particular is to shew wherein it hinders the releife of Ireland; now thus we prove it. 1. They say, we did forbeare to interpose our Judge∣ments, or to oppose those mens designes untill they had made a large progresse toward our bondage and endea∣voured
to grasp the power of the Army into their hands thereby to enforce their tyranny upon us. Answ. 1. What their forbearance hath been is well knowne, and we have shewed it in our former Discoverie, they have forborne indeed, but what? to walke according to Rules, of Charitie, Truth, Peace, Justice, but not practice the contrarie; such a for∣bearance is against their Genius and spirit. 2. What they mean by a large progresse, may be plainly gathered by their severall falsehoods and scandals alreadie spoken unto: The prosperitie of the Ar∣my over the common enemies, and breaking still the snares which they have layd in the way to hin∣der the worke is a progresse towards our bondage. But what is their drift here? it is thus, they would not have either Parliament or People, yeeld any ayd & assistance to the Generall Officers, for theThey have in some Books counselled the Souldiers not to engage for Ireland. releife of Ireland or any other necessarie service whatsoever. 3. What seditious head can rayse a more perniti∣ous designe then to asperse such men, who under God are employed in the greatest trust and service for the State, that they grasp the power of the Army into their hands thereby to enforce their tyrany upon us.It is worth the Readers observing, that the per∣sons whom they oppose are such, as under God, are our spe∣ciall prote∣ctors; so that they know, if they could re∣move them; not onely Ire∣land were quite lost, but a passage and way open for their Friend Bet and his company to come hither. should this be received, (as their trayterous hands have published) not onely would Ireland be lost but this common-wealth likewise be endangered, if not undone. 2. For the matter which they mention in relati∣on to the King, howsoever it be like a dead body, subject to putrefaction, though it should be touch'd of none, yet of it selfe would come to nothing; ne∣verthelesse that it was their intent in the publishing of it, to disable the Army from all further service,
and thereby to carry on the enemies designe, it is apparent and thus to prove it. 1. Seeing theyWe have not seene a piece of slan∣der more arti∣ficially contri∣ved; for as they know not any per∣son guilty of the things here set down so they doe not name any particular person; and therefore who can bring an action of slan∣der against them. know not the persons upon whom to fasten their accusations, therefore their aspersions are still generall: and so to bring a dis∣honour and blot upon all the Officers, a notable trick, for thereby at once, they thinke to make the whole Army unserviceable. Besides no particular person beeing mentioned, it is the more difficult to detect their Treachery and Falsehood, and so making use and advantage of time, they can the easi∣er effect their wicked intentions. Secondly, In their whole discourse you shall not finde one word of theThe Army in some of their Remon∣strances, and Declarations, had spoken so much about the King, as if considered, would justifie their comply∣ance with him. reasons and grounds which moved the Of∣ficers to act as they did; neither the causes of their changeable proceedings, and herein they were wise in their Generation: for they knew wel enough, if this had been done, and a true relation given, the Commanders had been quitted, at least there had been no pretence or colour for them, to reproach them as they have done. Thirdly, In the businesse about the King, this in short may be gathered from their proceedings first and last compar'd together, that when the Officers seemd to be any way for him they were against him, and when they did other∣wise, therein they oppos'd them likewise: so that it is cleare, their desire hath not been for peace andRisus abest, nisi quem visi movere dolores. Successus homi∣num, carpitque & carpitur u∣na: Supplicium∣que suum est. Ovid. Metam. lib. 2. settlement, but to have all sides wearied and wast∣ed, thereby at last to come to their owne designes. Fourthly, It is very remarkeable, that were the things true as they relate (which are not) yet would they not prove their aspersions; which shews though they wanted matter, yet not mallice, from
their accusations they thus conclude. And so vanisht away all their glorious flattery of the King and his partie, and their notorious dissimulation appeared, abusing thereby the faith of the Army, and making it cleare to all discerning men, that such as could breake with one sort of men will make no conscience of keeping faith with another, And a little after, by all which tis evident that according to the Maximes of politians they Judge themselves loose where other men are bound: and all obligations are to them transitorie and ceremoniall, and that indeed every thing is good and just onely as it is conducing to their corrupt and ambiti∣ous interests For their proof, we shal presently examine it, on∣ly by the way take notice that it is not possible for men to be worse or viler then the Officers are here set forth: for if they make no conscience of keeping faith with any, they are not fit for Church or com∣mon-wealth: much lesse to beThey serve the Officers, as the Priests did the Hugo∣nos in France, who reported they were Monsters, had Lyons heads, Beares feet, &c. The vul∣gar people hearing them to say so, would cry out Oh for the Love of God, kill them, kill them, so saith this party, the Commanders make no con∣science, &c. they are Ly∣ons, Beares, Ty∣rants, &c. Now such people as heare this, & know them not, will sure∣ly (they thinke) cry out, kill them, kill them. trusted, either with civil or militarie things. Againe they doe not say they may breake their promise with others but WIL MAKE NO CONSCIENCE; &c. possitively concluding, that there must be no confiding in them either for Ireland or any other place, but presently removed and no further use and triall made of them. But what have they done? The first is for some civilities towards the King, as to Court him, kisse his Hand, visiting him them∣selves, and permitting thousands of the people dayly to visit &c. Answ. We read of one. Aglataidus, that he was never better pleased then when he displeased others nor ever relished any dish better, then what was
distasted by others: In this there is nothing but anThere is a people neere China, whose manner is, to Salute by ta∣king off their Shooes, be∣cause others doe it with the Hat; there be some men take delight in crosnesse; and will be a∣gainst the things which others doe (be they ne∣ver so honest and commen∣dabe) be∣cause they doe them. Ishmaels crosnesse, which shewes they delight in War and to be wronging and contending, whether there be any cause or matter or no.Prov. 20.3. It is an honour for a man to cease from strife, but every Foole will be med∣ling. 2. Were it true which they say (but cannot prove it) that their Proposals were not onely received but corrected and amended by the King, before they were sent to the House: Neverthelesse this will not con∣clude any glorious flattery,It is their constant pra∣ctice to con∣clude thus; If there be a fault commit∣ted as they imagine: to infer (with∣out consider∣ing the nature and quality of the fact) that it is notorious, no conscience, &c. notorious dissimulation, making no conscience of keeping faith with any: For a man doing a thing conscientiously, and according to his present apprehension, lawfull; if afterward seeing himselfe mistaken in it, leave it and doe o∣therwise, there is no dishonour or blot will be im∣puted to him, by such as are wise and fearing God, knowing how common a thing it is for the best men so to doe. 3. If likewise that were true (which is not, and we desire the reader to note it as another falshood) that they were moved to impatience towards any that spake a word against their traffique and entercourse with him, and concluded an agreement with the opposing Ci∣tizens of London, without so much as calling the Agi∣tators to advise thereupon: Here is nothing in all this but what they might well doe. For first, being perswaded, the matter which they had in hand was just and good, they had reason (as being true, to their principle) to prevent all obstructions. 2. If the Agitators were not cald, no marvaile, for they were not concern'd in the thing, and therefore whatsoever was done, it was duely done by such
as had a full Authoritie and power to doe it. 4. When the House complyed not with their purposes in all hast it was to be purged, &c. Answ, 1. Whatsoever the Army hath either desired or done this way, it hath been upon neces∣sarie and just grounds, and prov'd still to beNo men have more ju∣stified the Ar∣my in purg∣ing the House then these, nor any more urged and pret for it. law∣full in point of law and conscience. 2. Whereas they say but the House complying &c. They make no∣thing of their former resolution whats this for a thing? should not the Army rest being satisfyed? It seems this course is against their Principle, though they should be complyed with, yet not rest, but prosecute their formerHowsoever Lilburn makes a large dis∣course about the Agreement, yet so farre were they complyed with, that had not their Re∣solution been to continue troubles a∣mongst us, they would have rested. Resolutions, let come on the common-wealth what mischeife and ruine soever. 3. That the House was no whit changed in respect of its cor∣ruption and yet complyed with the Army, it seemes to beWe had al∣most forgot∣ten Lapis, here is a worke fits his Genius its to find out a Contradiction. a contradiction. But 4. To let that passe, note here their glorious flattery and notorious dissimu∣lation, because the Officers went not forward with their resolution to purge the House, they are reproach∣ed for that: and when they doe purge the House from its corruptions, they shalbe likewise rayld on for that: so that whether they doe the thing, or not, all is one, the scourge of their tongue cannot be avoyded. 5. They so wrought the King by deep promises and hopes of restauration, as that he inclined much to counte∣nance the Army, &c. In lieu thereof the great ones of the Army endeavoured the revivall of a Treaty, &c. Answ 1. But is this brought in, as a reproach? Wherefore then have they perswaded the chiefe Officers in the Army to doe this very thing: Lil∣burne in a Letter toWhom he stiles in that paper The man whom God hath honoured, and wil honour, &c. Neither will the Lord the lesse honour him now, be∣cause he as∣perseth him. Leivtenant Generall Cromwell, writes thus,Jonahs cry out of the Whales belly, pag. 8. If I were with you, upon my life I durst
dispute against you all, that as things stand, both in point of policy, honesty, and conscience, you must apply to the King, without which, the peace of the Kingdome can ne∣ver be setled: Would any man be so impudent as to write thus? and afterwardThe Empe∣rour of Russia provoked his ch ef Officers to pill and ransack the the Common sort of people but to no o∣ther end, but that he him∣selfe might af∣terward, when he saw good, call them into question for it: So they serve the Com∣manders, coun∣sell them to apply unto the King, but it seemes for no other end, but that afterward when they should have an occasion, they might reproach and slander them for it. revile the persons, be∣cause they had done according to his owne counsel and advise. But as we sayd just now, the reproach of their mouth is not to be avoyded. 2. For the Personall Treaty and addresses, &c. that some have had variable thoughts therein, it is no marvell, neither did the alteration of their minds, denote any ill affection to the Common wealth. And therefore to asperfe men, because they were for the Treaty, and afterward upon better considera∣tion changed their opinion, it shewes by what spirit such people are led; for rather then they will for∣beare calumniation, they will cast off the rule of love, wisedome, justice, yea, humanity, and reason it selfe. But thirdly, here they make account their Charge is proud, The farre greater number of Officers would not by any meanes indure to heare of the Armies com∣plyance with the King, &c. An Agreement of the peo∣ple is produced, &c. The great Officers very much oppose it a while, &c. But seeing the same takes with the Army, professe though at the present their judgements could not so farre close with it, as to act for it, yet they would never oppose it. Answ.Ecc. 10.8, 9. His mischiefe shall returne upon his owne head, and his violent dealing shall come upon his owe pate. First, they hereThe Hulke which the Flemins filled with sagots, pitch, rosin, salt-peter, brimstone, and oyle, having set it on fire, let it floate with the tide, that it might fall among the French and Hollanders ships, but the wind turn∣ing, was carryed back in midst of their owne; So the thing which they have hve frmed against the Offi ers hurts them not, but falls upon their owne head. acquit the Officers, both of
flattery and dissimulation; for if they opposed it (as 'tis confest) they did as much as lay in their power, and more they could not doe.. 2. It shewed an ex∣cellent temper and great moderation in the Com∣manders, that howbeit they could not actIn alio positum non alia sapere, dicile est. Bern. in E∣pist. yet they would not make any disturbance. It was some ad∣dition to Davids victorie over the Philistim that he cut off his head with his owne Sword. If their words here be well observed they are clearlie against them∣selves: for to this effect they say. The Officers ha∣ving given the King hopes of restauration, would wil∣lingly had it so, & did what they could that it might be so: but meeting with too strong a partie it could not be: neverthelesse they signified their dislike, and gave their reasons for it, and having thus dis∣charged their owne dutie and conscience, concern∣ing all promises and engagements in behalfe of the King, they rested, as being unwilling to make di∣sturbance in the Army or elsewhere. Now where is thisAll that they can make of it, is this, they complyed with the King and promised him their as∣sistance, the which they made good so farre as they were able, and tended to the safety of the Nation. glorious flatterie and notorious dissimulation, e∣ven our enemyes themselves beeing Judges. We come now to the last Generall head, namely, continuing of free Quarter. They say,Englands new Chaine, pag 17. it being an infinite shame that they should beSuch fire∣brands were Alorns and Sacrovir, and to move the people to rebellion, spake to the same purpose. Igitur per conciliabula & caetus seditiosa disserebant, de continuatione tributo∣rum, gravitate fenoris, saevitia ac superbia praesidentium & egregium resu mendae libertati tempus. Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. pag 97. suffered to proceed so farr therein as they have done there having beene no partie hitherto so inexcusa∣ble, &c. So that the intentions and indavours of these men to enslave the common-wealth or their continuing of burdens without any remorse at the dearenesse of food and the utter losse of trade exceeds in the nature and
measure of it all the wickednesse of both other parties pt together. Answ. 1. This is spoken (as may be gathered from the foregoing matter) in speciall to the people of the Land, as being to blame that they contribute towards the maintainance of the Army, but rather rise and resist to increase and continue their burdens and taxes: and 2. That they may set forward the soon∣er in rebellion, they are told that the King and Hollis were not so bad, nor exercised the oppression and tiranny put both toge∣ther that these men doe. 3. They will make bold with Gods prerogative,La coz de la yegua no haze mal al potro search the heart affirming theirThough La∣pis writes nonsence, and Lilburne Trea∣son, yet it may be a question whether their intentions were to doe so. intentions are to enslave the Commonwealth: And lastlie so farr are our Govern∣ours from compassion or fellow-feeling, as they regard not what misery, hardnesse, or hardship others suffer. The Coun∣trey People at Charons Cave near Naples, for sports sake, pu their Doggs into a hole, where they are choake, with the sul∣pherous vapours comming forth. Into such a hole these men would gladly bring the People, choake them with treason: But we hope they will be better advis'd and beare some things which for the present cannot be remedied, rather then become the sport and merriment of a few Incendiari by undoing themselves. Thus we have done with our Second Part: Other things the Reader may expect from us speedily, as in Answer to their A∣greement of the people, Mr.Mr. Lilburne promiseth to shew the false∣nesse and ma∣lignity of our former Disco∣verer, in fa∣thering upon him the er∣rours of the Diggers; now we beleeve he can better shift that off then the trea∣son and sedi∣tion contained in his Englands new Chaine, though he sayth he will Seale the truth of every line with his heart blood. Lilburnes last Book, &c. FINIS.
