C614 E1711_1 R209576 99868444 170295
THE Deputy Divinity OR, Inferiour Deity AND Subordinate God in the World, Conscience, I say, 1 Cor. 10.29. A Discourse of Conscience, Being the substance of Two Sermons, delivered: One of them at the Temple-church in London: The other in the Countrey. By HENRY CARPENTER, Minister of the Gospel at Steeple-Ashton in Wilts. London, Printed for N. Webb, & W. Grantham at the Bear over-against the little North-door in Pauls Church-yard, 1657.
To the Truly RELIGIOUS AND Right Noble Lady, THE LADY Dorothy Pakington: The Promises of both lives. Madam, MY Gratefull Purposes long since engaged to your Ladyships service, were never yet so Advantaged by op∣portunity, as to make
the World the wit∣nesse of their since∣rity. Difficult and per∣plexed times, occasi∣on too much neglect of duty, and make place for pardon. This little Book, and small Comment upon one of the greatest Books in the world, (where∣of I humbly present you with the Dedi∣cation) hath nothing to commend it up so
high as your hands, but the weight of the Subject, and the sim∣ple integrity of the Author, obliged not more to the memory of your dear Father (my very good Lord and Patron, of unde∣filed hands) then to your own merits and excellencies, whereof I had once the ho∣nour to be an unwor∣thy Servant, and have still the duty to be an
observer and admi∣rer. As for my self I must know who I am, but for this thing here in hand, I may wish it laid to heart, for a Jewel is a Jewel though wrapt up in plain leather, or in brown paper. Now that the God whom you serve in your spirit and Fami∣ly, would in blessing
blesse you in all your Relations; and that the same God who hath so begun to glorifie you in those graces wherewith he hath enriched your soule, (making you an eminent and un∣feigned example of Goodnesse, even in this Age) will also Perfect and Crowne these graces with Glory: Is the
Prayer of, Madam, Your Ladiships Humble, Faithful Servant, For Jesus and Conscience-sake. H. CARPENTER.
To the Reader. Christian Reader, THat which one spake of his lear∣ned Tractates, Justus Lipsius Politicks B. King on Jonas. Nihil egi∣sine The∣seis. Et nihil no∣strum & omnia. and a∣nother (from him) of his rich Lectures, may the lesse mis-become me of this plain poor piece of mine, That I have done little herein without good guides. And though in one sense all may be mine
own; yet in another, not much more then no∣thing.] For where I liked the waters of o∣ther mens wells I drank deep, and elswhere I did but sip: And (as one observes of Ruth) I have sometime but stood to glean, Rab. Solom. and sometime sitten down. Here it is (such as it is) presented to thy good acceptance; if here and there it give thee any new lesson,
blesse God for thy In∣structor; And where it doth but rub up the old, despise not thy Re∣membrancer: who hurts none by these but him∣self, in the danger of the attempt, changing Tongue into Pen, and eares into eyes; (The severer of the two.) But that which dis∣courageth many provo∣keth me, of purpose to shew how hardy I dare seem, rather then be un∣gratefull
to those my many friends, who have required this at my hands, for thy good, which if thou finde, re∣member God in thy praise, and me in thy prayers. H. C.
THE Deputy-Divinity OR, Inferiour Deity AND Subordinate God in the world. 1 Cor. 10.29. Conscience, I say. WHAT one said well of Lawes [That many good Laws were made, but there wanted one Law to make us put all
those Laws in execution] The like may we say of Books and Sermons, [Ma∣ny good Books are writ∣ten, and many good Ser∣mons preached, but there wanteth one Book, one Sermon to make us put all the other in practise, and that were good in∣deed, worthy of the reading and hearing. And I know none more likely, through God, to do this thing, than upon this subject of Conscience, (I may commend the Text, though not the Sermon) which being good, (as one said of Justice) is a Synopsis and
Epitomy of all vertues, a medicine to cure all soul-diseases, and to de∣ject all book-surfeitings. Conscience it self is a Book, Rev. 20.12. one of those Books to be opened at the last day, to which all men shal be put, and by which they shall be tried and judged, (viz.) The Book of the Creatures, The Book of the Scriptures, The Book of the Conscience. A Book of Books, for the Informing and Reform∣ing whereof all other books should be Printed, and Sermons Preached; for indeed what should all Divinity-books, and
Law-books be but glosses and Comments upon this Text? Maledicta Glossa quae cor∣rumpit Textum. And cursed be that Gloss which doth corrupt the Text, viz. Goe against Conscience. The wise man makes as if all other books and studies without this, Eccle. 12.12, 13. and in comparison of this were vain and endlesse [of making many books there is no end] True (saith the Gloss upon it) [Of books that are writ∣ten to no end.] There are great out∣cries made against places, times, and the World, for being naught and bad: But alas! All places
naturally are equal, being but several parcels of the same common Earth and Air; and all times natu∣rally are equal, being di∣stinguished by the same constant and uniforme motion of the Heavens; what aile places, or times, or the world? They were all good, if men were so; and men were all good, if their Consciences were so; nothing maketh bad times, but bad men; and nothing maketh bad men but bad Consciences; Ill Consciences are the springs and pipes from whence come all the evils that spoyl places, times, Mat. 15.18, 19. and world.
And I know no remedy to that of Elisha's curing the naughty waters of Jerico, for the cry there was for sound much the same [The waters are naught, 2 King. 2.19, 21, 22. &c.] [He cast salt into the spring, and healed the waters.] The water-spring of all our actions (good or evil) is Conscience; Prov. 4.23. and as mens Consciences are, so are their actions; as the spring is, so is the issue; [The issues of life and death are out of the heart and Conscience] The spring of all, [O that God would cast salt into the spring] heale and
mend Conscience, and all will be mended; For good Consciences make good men; and good men will make good places, times, and World: Conscience, I say. Here I find Conscience as in common and in ge∣neral, therefore shall not trouble you with parti∣cular context here, where is intended no longer stay than while we have to do with Conscience in gene∣rall: [Conscience, I say.] Wherein I propose unto my self and your atten∣tion (for order sake) this Method. 1. The Truth of it; That
there is such a thing, Though the Text be not divided by parts; Yet the Discourse should be limited by bounds. which is so called. 2. The Nature of it, What this thing is which is so called. 3. The Original and con∣dition, Whence and what manner of thing it is, so called. 4. The place and Situa∣tion of it, Where this thing resides which is so called. 5. The subject of it, whose and with whom this thing it, which is so called. 6. The ground and reason, Why there is at all such a thing, which is so called. Conscience, I say.
1. The Truth of it. That there is such a thing in the general which is so called, 1. Quod sit. seemeth past all question, not only by the writings of holy men of God, inspired by the holy Ghost, Dr. Ham∣mond. both in the New Testament, two and thirty times under the particular expresse term of Conscience, (so frequent among the Evangelists and Apostles) and in the Old Testament (though but once by the Greek Translators under that notion, Eccle. 10.20. Eccles. 7.22. Dan. 7. yet) often under the general terms of
Heart, Rom. 2.15. Rom. 8.16. 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 John 3.21. Soul, Spirit, and Thought] and so the He∣brew ever; you can hard∣ly find the term Consci∣ence with them, but com∣monly one of these: As St. John, who so much abounded with Hebrew∣ismes, [If our Heart con∣demn us, &c.] meaning our Conscience. Thus not only upon sacred Re∣cord, but also by human writers, Their Paedago∣gus, their Genius, their Guardant Angel, and the like, meaning Conscience. Yea, by very Heathen themselves, in whom this light of Law and Nature is conserved;
there being no People so barbarous, but that part of Conscience which is called Synteresis, keepeth in them some sparks of the knowledge of good and evil, which the most prophane man that ever was cannot (though he would) get utterly ex∣tinct and suffocate. The Dictates of Con∣science have apparent impressions in the most Miscreants on Earth, Dictamen Conscien∣tiae. in whom Nature it selfe shrinks and sighs when it hath done ill; joyes and elevates it self when it hath done well. And what is all this but the
act of Consc. their Ma∣ster-Phylosophers make the soul a building, consi∣sting of many rooms, some higher, some lower, whereof the highest is the Ʋnderstanding; and this again is either Speculative, containing some general Notions and Principles of Truth: Or Practical, containing the like Prin∣ciples and Axiomes of good things, which at first were and still are (in part) left in the soul of man; and this even in their judgement is called Conscience. And now if the Testi∣mony of an Adversary
be strong for an Ad∣versary, Why may not this Theological Truth get some advantage by consent from Heathens, in whom so much light of Nature and Law is re∣served? Who shall que∣stion a Deity, if the very Heathens acknowledge it? and who can deny a Conscience, if the very Pagans confesse it? Nay by unreasonable creatures themselves; An irra∣tional ani∣mal Con∣science. Dr. Ham∣mond. for there is some shadow of this in a beast, as there is of reason, (some shadow I say) whose secret in∣stinct of nature, (which answers to the Heathens
Dictamen, Jer. 8.7. whereby [the Stork, Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, &c] are incli∣ned to do that which up∣braids man) is to them in place of that which is called Conscience to man; And thus for the Truth of it, That there is such a thing which is so called. 2. 2. Quid sit. The nature of it. What in the general this thing is which is so called Conscience; for we may with the Israelites ask [what is it?] Exod. 16.15. being a kind of Manna too: But let no man ask here of Conscience, as Pilate did
there of Truth, John 18.38. [what is it? and go out] but stay and attend a while. For it is a word of great Latitude, and of Infinit Dispute; and it is a thing much talked of, little known, and less practised then understood; Mllaem ut me repre∣hendant Gramm∣tici, quam ut non in∣telligant populi. There∣fore herein the best learn∣ing is to be most plain; and so I may be profita∣ble, I care the less to seem artificial, in regard of that we have in hand: Consci∣ence, I say. And note we now both Name & Thing. For things as well as men should be known by their name.
The name of it; which according to the Etymo∣logy of the word, 1. Quid no∣minis. both in Greek and Latine is A joynt knowing or seeing to∣gether: Syneidesis Conscien∣tia. Diversly to be ta∣ken-subjectively (if I may so speak) anothers know∣ledge joyned with ours; the joynt knowledge of two persons together, two Secretaries, Records and witnesses; one on Earth, the other in Hea∣ven; Job's (witnesse in Heaven, Job 16.19. and Record on high) so that man can know nothing himselfe alone; there must be ano∣ther besides man's selfe, and this other is God: And
therefore God and man are so joyned together in Conscience, 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 John 3.20. Rom. 9.1. which God hath deputed to give witnes and sentence with him and before him; mans joynt knowledge with God's: Conscience, I say. — Objectively; of one thing and another; the joynt knowledge of two things together; A Rule and an Act at once; Science is of one simple object; Conscience is of two laid together, and then with one Act of the intellect apprehended joyntly; whence (likely) it came by the name of Conscience, I say.
— Actively also, Scientia cum alia Bernard. two joynt knowledges toge∣ther, both one and ano∣ther, &c. And thus for the name, Conscience, I say. The thing and nature of it (though better felt than described, 2. Quid Rei. yet) may be thus conceived: [Con∣science is a Divine thing, a standing power in the soul of Man; there set and appointed by God to take knowledge and give notice of its spiritu∣al state and condition, in what terms it standeth with God] Or thus, Con∣science is the judgement of man upon himself as
he is subject to the judge∣ment of God. [Judge I pray betwixt me and my vineyard] [Judge our selves] that is, In our Conscience. Isa. 5.3. 1 Cor. 11.31. Di∣vines do usually expresse it by a practical syllo∣gism (as they call it) Pro and Con: Whereof —The Major and propo∣sition is made by Synte∣resis; that is, some know∣ledge of a Rule (what we should do) in the word. —The Minor and assump∣tion, is made by Syneide∣sis; that is, the knowledge of some Act in life, what we have done.
—The Conclusion by the act and office of Consci∣ence, with us or against us, excusing or accusing, absolving or condemn∣ing, comforting or tor∣menting. As for instance. — [To be carnally minded is death.] Rom. 8.6. —But I am carnally min∣ded.-Therefore I am in a state of death. And so on the contrary; — As many as are led by the Spirit of God, Rom. 8.4. they are the Sons of God: this is from knowledge of the word of God. —But I am led by the Spirit of God; this is from knowledge of a mans heart and life.
—Therefore I am the child of God. Thus Conscience is very rational and logical; it can hold and urge an argument well in right mood and figure; though Scholars only are artifi∣cial, yet Conscience in∣lightened is a good natu∣ral Logitian. As the Apostle told the Christians at Rome (who were scarce ever at A∣thens) that they had Lo∣gick enough to argue themselves [Dead unto sin, and alive unto God, Rom. 6.11. through Jesus Christ our Lord] The original word means thus, [Exercise so
much Logick in your selves, and like good Lo∣gitians prove your selves, &c.] And thus for the nature of it in general, what this thing is which is so called. 3. 3. Quale sit. The original Quality and condition of it in general. Whence and what manner of thing it is; Conscience is of God (and things only excellent are so termed) of God, Psal. 36.6. Psal. 51.17. I say; A spiritual thing, very sacred and divine, much like God, as in other re∣spects, so in this, not easily
comprehended: A sub∣ordinate God. Nay some good-natu∣red Atheists have so Re∣vered and Defined it, as the only Deity in the world; and in propor∣tion fancied nothing but God-like of it: Nothing indeed more God like and Divine, as seeming to partake of the Immen∣sity, Infinitenesse, and Om∣nipresence of God. To illustrate the Qua∣lity and Condition of it, the Holy learned of old time as well as new, have many sayings and simili∣tudes: For transcendent things need many words
for their conveyance unto common apprehen∣sions. One calleth Consci∣ence [A just and impartial Ʋmpire betwixt God and man] speaking the truth and right. Ʋmpire. Another terms it [An Authentick and Divine Eccho both of the Mercy and the Judgement-seat] saying as God saith [If it condemn, Eccho. 1 John 3.20, 21. much more will God who is greater; [And if not, neither doth God.] One of the Greek Fa∣thers styls it [The Souls Lanthorn] by it to see her self and her sins: Lanthorn. But as
spirits (say some) first make the lights to burn blew, and at the last to go quite out; So the Divel with his blast would blow [this Candle of the Lord in the belly] (as Solomon calleth it) out, Prov. 20.27. that the soul should see nothing by it. Another calleth it [The Stomach of the Soul] That whereas sin, Stomach. like the book in the Revelation, which St. John was bid to eat [sweet in the mouth, Rev. 10.10. but bitter in the belly] goeth glibly down, as smooth as Oyl; Conscience dis∣daineth and loatheth it, Fatum Infectum. and fain would cast it up
again, (but that a thing done, cannot be undone) yet it yeoxeth and reach∣eth, and exhaleth many loathsome savors; it up∣braids the sinner. One calleth it [A secon∣dary Law or Bible, Book. Bernard Chrysost. hodex ani∣mae. a living and walking Book] annex∣ed to the soul of man, consisting of two parts or volumes; The Law-book of Statutes; And the Chro∣nicle-booke of works; one for Rule, the other for Acts. Another calleth it [A School-Master] Monitor and Corrector of the soul, Origen Paedago∣gus animae. mind, thoughts and ways; and indeed they fare
much alike at the unwor∣thy hands of the mis∣deeming World; for though a good School Master be one of the best members in Church and Common-wealth, Quem Ju∣piter odit, hunc Pae∣dagogum facit. yet hated and despised even to a Proverb, not caring to be troubled with them; So with Consci∣ence. It is styled by one [The House of the Soul] be∣cause there, if anywhere, House. men may be properly said to be at home; Pro. 23.7. and at home men are (though not abroad) what they are; [As he thinketh in his heart and Conscience,
so is he:] As when we receive Summons from Superiors, the Messengers follow us not to our ideling places abroad, but come to our houses (sup∣posing every man to be at home) and there fasten their Scripts upon the door: So God's Ministers and Messengers look for us with their Summons at the houses of our Consci∣ences; And oh how many Scripts have they fixed upon our doors! And is it not pity that this our sumptuous house should lie waste, ruined and de∣cayed? And by another [God's
Secretary and Apparater, His Commissary and Mi∣nister, Preacher. God's Preacher in our Bosomes: And it is a most certain Rule, That that man that will not regard the Preacher in the Bosome, will hardly regard the Preacher in the Pulpit: And the reason of the ones pro∣siting so little, is because the other is neglected so much. And [The Souls Looking-glasse] clearer then Cristal, Glasse. Speculo Similis. wherein by reflection we may see all of our selves; and therefore the Con∣science is called Anima reflexa, [The Soul reflecting
and recoyling upon it self] As St. 1 Cor. 4.4. Paul did, [to know by it self] or, A reflexive Knowledge: Scientia Reflexiva. First the mind thinketh or knoweth a thing which is either good or bad—Then it reflecteth by thinking and knowing againe, knowing that we know it to be good or bad: As men say vulgarly [I know what I know.] 1 Kings 2.44. And as the King to Shimei [Thou knowest all that thine heart knoweth, &c.] And this is the Act of Conscience, this joyning of the second knowledge to the first, giveth it the name of Conscience.
Resemblance of this we have in the eye, that can see all visible objects, all things that are to be seen, and yet seeth not it self but by reflexion, & the help of a Looking-glasse: So the mind of man that can look upon and into all creatures, yet cannot behold it self but by Conscience, which is [The whole Soul with its eyes inward.] Forerun∣ner of the last Judge∣ment. Another calleth it [The Forerunner of the last Judgement] the private before the publique Judgement day, Praejudi∣cium ex∣tremi Ju∣dicii. as your Sessions before Assizes: even the truest Almanack
in our own brests and bosomes, Tertullian. foreshewing the weather of the future world, and what shall be∣come of us at the last day. And thus for the qua∣lity of Conscience in ge∣neral, whence and what manner of thing it is. 4. 4. Ʋbi sit. The proper Place and Seat of it. And here as between Christ and two of John's Disciples [Master, John 1.38. where dwellest thou? Come and see] the habitation is not the Body, but the Soul; not in the Face; 1 Cor. 2.11. no other man can know it; not in
the Speech; no hypocrisie or dissimulation of man can thrall it, to justisie his words and deeds, although a thousand times alledged. It is the Deputy of God in the soul of man; Ames. and yet here all do not accord about it: —Some give it as belong∣ing only to the will, Barlow. for the agent and working power of it, as onely practick. —Some to the Mind for the understanding power of it, as only Theorick. Actus ra∣tionis ap∣plicans scientiam ad opus. Aquin. —Some to Reason, for the discoursing power of it, driving to issue by dis∣course.
Some call it an Habit; others an Act; others a Faculty; with their seve∣ral arguments Pro and Con: [This is that I told you before) Men hardly know what to make of it, it is so divine. But I decline the Ca∣suists and School-men (who speake most herein to mens heads) of purpose to speak unto your Consciences; [Con∣sciences, I say.] Sure I am that the Apostle distinguisheth it both from the Mind and from the Will, Tit. 1.15. 1 Tim. 1.5. as a diffe∣rent and distinct thing, and that for good Rea∣sons.
1. Because the mind dealeth most in generals and universals; but Conscience medleth all in a mans own particular proprieties, of thoughts, words and deeds. 2. Because Conscience is so far from being one of both, or both in one, that it sitteth in the soul as a controler over them both, in their Acts of thoughts and desires. 3. Because there is secret Jealousie, and open Hostility between them; the other powers of the soul taking Conscience to be but a Spie, do what they can to sculk, evade
and hide from it; to delude and deceive it; to oppose or depose it: Conscience on the other side, striveth to keep its ground, and to hold its own, Self-rea∣sonings, conferen∣ces, mu∣tual Apo∣logies and excepti∣ons. Rom. 2. till it be blinded or bribed, proceeding in its office (in despite of all opposition) cites all the powers of nature, sitteth upon them, examineth, witnesseth, and judgeth, even to execution. So that the proper seat of Conscience is the whole Soul, there placed next under God over all men. Their ground seemeth too weak, and their room too narrow, that would
confine Conscience to any part (one or other) of the soul. It is in the soul of man, Anima est indivisa tota in tota. not as a part of a part (for it is indivisible) but as whole in the whole, and in every part. Not in the understanding alone, or will alone, or reason alone, nor in memory or affections alone, but it hath place, office and acts, in all and every part of the soul, as the soul hath in every part of the body; exercising seeing in the eye, hearing in the ears, &c. — In the understanding it sitteth as Judge. —In the Reason as Accuser.
—In the Memory, as Witness and Register. —In the Will and Affections as Gaoler and Executi∣oner, Accusing or Excu∣sing, Absolving or Con∣demning; Comforting or tormenting. And yet one of our Countrey-men hath appropriated unto each part of the soul a distinct Court or Office; —To the Sensitive part, The Court of Common-Pleas. —To the Intellectual part, The Court of Kings-Bench. —To the spiritual part, The Court of Chancelry: In this Court all causes are handled, but still with special reference to God;
Here sits the Conscience as Lord-Chanceller, and Synterests as Master of the Roles: To this Court all the powers of man owe and pay homage, what ever it be, whether Act or Faculty; whether of the practical understand∣ing or judgement; it is placed in the soul of most absolute power, next under God over all in man. And thus for the proper place and seat of it. 5. The Subject of it. 5. Quibus sit. Whose and with whom it is, which generally considered, is a general
thing, common to Angels, Divels, and Men. —To Angels, as appears by the Angel's speech to John, when he would have worshipped him [See thou do it not] The Angel had something within him that told him he was John's Fellow-Servant; Rev. 19.10. and therefore not to assume divine Worship to himself, and that was His Conscience. —To Divels, by the Divels speech to our Sa∣viour dispossessing them, [Art thou come to tor∣ment us before the time? Mat. 8.29.] even they had something within them that told them, They had a time
of greater torment to come, and that was their Consciences. —To Men more properly, to all Men generally: There is in every man a Conscience, such as it is, good or bad. —A Conscience in the very Heathens [bearing them witnesse, Rom. 2.15. accusing or excusing.] —A Conscience in Hy∣pocrites, John 8.9. Scribes and Pha∣risees [being convicted in their Consciences.] —A Conscience in good Men, 2 Cor. 1.12. as Paul had [The testimony of his own Conscience.] —A Conscience in bad Men, Tit. 1.15. [Their Minds and
Conscience being defiled] Thus of the subject of it in general, a common thing. 6. 6. Quare sit. The Grounds and Reasons of it. God hath appointed this standing power in the soul of man, for two spe∣cial Reasons above many. 1. For the honour of his Justice; To shew how righteous a Judge the Lord is; Psal. 51.4. [That he might be justified when he speaketh, and cleared when he judgeth.] He commanded Earthly Judges not to judge without witnesse; and
himself will not, (though he might:) He does no∣thing without witnesse, Acts 25.16. Mat. 22.12. but [brings the Accusers face to face] as Festus told Agrippa, which much convinceth, silenceth, and confoundeth, [To be judged out of its own mouth] like the wicked servant; Job 15.6. Luke 19.22. and as Eliphaz told Job: Therefore God for the honour of his righteousness in all his ju∣dicial proceedings [hath not left himself without witnesse] in any soul, Act. 14.17. but placed a Conscience in every brest to bring in evidence, Pro or Con, be∣fore God, so just cleare and righteous a Judge
is the Lord— For the honour of his Mercy; to shew how good and how gracious a Father our God is; in matching us with so neer a Friend, so true a Coun∣sellor; in not leaving mans wonderful forget∣fulnesse of God and him∣self, and his own soul, without a secret Monitor and Remembrancer, a word and a voice behind him upon all occasions. In all his omissions and commissions, he cannot omit a duty, Isa. 30.21. or commit a sin, but his Ear shall hear a word behind him, when his Eye doth not see his Teacher; Job 4.16. He shall
hear a voice in silence, his Conscience shall tell him of it; remembring our mindlesness, and spurring up our dulnesse against sinful omissions; and [Hedging up our way with thorns] putting some thorny threat or other in every path of sin, Hos. 2.6. against sinful commissi∣ons; making us say to Conscience, as David did to Abigail, 1 Sam. 25.32, 33. [Blessed be thou of the Lord, that thou hast met me this day, and blessed be thy advice, &c. And blessed be the Lord God who sent thee.] For (believe it) 'tis not the severest and supream∣est
power of Magistrates, and their highest Courts of Justice and Judgement∣seats; 'tis not Justices, Judges, Kings, Parlia∣ments; 'tis not all the saddest and bloodiest instruments of execution, of death and vengeance, Swords, Guns, Blocks, Halters, nor any nor all of these that can keep men in order, and the world in awe, were it not for this mighty thing of God, Rom. 13.5. [subject for Con∣science sake.] called Conscience, without which the whole world would tumble into disorder and confusion, become a Chaos again, and lose the form of a world. [Conscience, I say.]
And thus for the do∣ctrinal part in the six points of Conscience in general. Now because all Scrip∣ture given by Inspiration of God, 2 Tim. 3.16. is profitable not only for doctrine, but also for reproof, corre∣ction, and instruction, &c. So let this be used. 1. For reproof. Of three Errors in opinion. 1. 1. Error. That Conscience in general is not common to all, as if some men had no Consciences; whereas it is as possible for fire to be without heat, as for any man to be without a
Conscience: The vulgar saying is, [Such a man hath no Conscience, &c.] But the meaning is, He hath no good Conscience; for as good none, as none good. But every man hath a Conscience, one or other, such as it is, good or bad: For it is a stand∣ing Power, created by God; and unmoveably set in the soul of man, abiding for ever with him whether he be on Earth, in Heaven, or Hell. 2. 2. Error. That Conscience is nothing but a sad mood, or melancholy sit, or heavy damp and dumps on the spirit of a man,
&c. Erroneously mista∣king the effect of the cause: Whereas Consci∣ence is a standard chained to man, ever remaining with him, when all his moods and fits of heats and colds, of fears and joyes, and jollities, are over and gone. Let Hypocrites and Epicures slabber it with their jol∣lity, and daub it with their formality, yet their Consciences will be sure one time or other, if not in the midst of their drunken carouses, and riotousexcesses (like those singers of a mans hand on Belshazzar's wall) get in the end and bottome) Dan 5.5.
to sadden, soure, and spoyl all, Prov. 14.13. yea even in their best services, (as in Cain's Sacrifice, when his coun∣tenance was dijected) there will be something (if not in the midst, Gen. 4.5. yet) in the end, to tell them That both their Acts and Persons are reje∣cted. That Conscience is hanged or drowned, 3. Error. dead and gone a great while a go, &c. But alas, these are idle, addle opinions, Atheistical Proverbs, and sottish imaginations; had it been no more then this, That [Conscience hath lain long bedrid and speechlesse, &c.] it had
been enough, yet it might be raised and recovered; But that he is dead, yea so shamefully and accur∣sedly dead, 'Tis petty Atheism to say and think so. No, no: Ahitophel can tell you That though a man hang himself, 2 Sam. 17.23. yet he cannot hang his Conscience. Saul can tell you, 1 Sam. 31.4. That though a man kill him∣self, yet he cannot kill his Conscience, which is as immortal as his soul— Judas could tell you, Mat. 27.4. That no force or violence can suppresse or curb it; for it made him carry back the price, and decry his sin, saying, [I have sinned.]
Pharaoh could tell you, That no earthly might or majesty can bash or dash it, but that one time or other it will stare and flie in the sinners face; for it did in his, (as great a King as he was) and made him say [I have now sinned; The Lord is righ∣teous, Exod. 9.27. but I and my peo∣ple are wicked.] Saul again could tell you, That no Mirth or Musick can Charme or Conjure the evill spirit of it; 1 Sam. 16.14, 16. for his bad Conscience plaied the Divel with his wretched soul. And Joseph's Brethren could tell you, That time and years cannot ex∣punge
the writings, nor obliterate or eat out the ingravings of it; for twenty years after (when there was no other Pur∣suer or Remembrancer) it accused them, Gen. 42.21, 22. and made them look wistly upon one another, and accuse themselves of their cruel unnaturall usage of him, Nullum tempus oc∣currit Re∣gi. [And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concern∣ing our Brother, &c. Therefore is this distresse come upon us, and his blood required of us.] And now having men∣tioned twenty years, 'tis the lesse notable to speak of Pharaoh's Butler's Con∣science
remembring him about one year after, Gen. 40.23. Gen. 41.9. [I do now remember my faults this day.] And ve∣rily so it is, That as many in youthful vanity and vain-glory, do such vio∣lent wrongs in bulges and bruises to their bodies, as forty or fifty years after they sadly remember in the Aches and Ailings of pained old Age: So do many bear out insen∣sibly for a time the bulges and bruises they have given their souls, it may be thirty, forty, fifty years, till the hand of the Lord be upon them, ei∣ther in some heavy crosse and sharp affliction, or a
Death-bed, and then commonly Conscience remembers them; For Conscience will keep a grudge a long time, and is not so soon pacified as offended; though it doth not always shew remorse, yet it always keeps re∣membrance; though in many men it sleep in re∣gard of motion, yet it never sleeps in regard of notice and observation: And though not always speaking, yet it is always writing, taking Notes, preparing Bills and Items against that day to come. Nay death it self, that dissolves all worldly knots, and parts the
neerest on Earth [Man and Wife] cannot part Conscience and Sinner; but it remains in him as a worm that never dies; Mar. 9.44. and as a fire that never goes out; Isa. 66.24. not on Earth, no nor in Hell. And thus for reproof of three errors and false opinions. 2. For Correction. Of three practical Errors and Misbehaviours of the World in point of Con∣science. 1. 1. Miscar∣riage. In wrapping up Goliah's sword in a fair cloth behind the Ephod; In hiding the monstrous
miscarriages, prodigious impieties, and divelish practises of the World, under that Religious name, and specious mask of Conscience. One man is of an er∣roneous opinion, and He∣trodox judgement, holds some false doctrine, by means either of the au∣thority of the Teacher, or of the dignity of some eminent follower (as having mens persons in admiration, Jam. 2.1. Jude 16. and having the faith of Christ in re∣spect of persons) or of prejudice and preposses∣sion, sticking to his first perswasion, pride and obstinacy, denying place
for retractation, or truer information, and this he calls his Conscience. —Another is of an irre∣fractory inclination, of an heady headstrong humour and propension, his senses not exercised to discern between his natural and spiritual dis∣position, Heb. 5.24. the motion of his sensitive appetite, and his diviner principle, his lower and his upper soul; and the former common∣ly is more obstreperous, importunate and clamo∣rous for satisfaction then the latter; whereby a man thinks himselfe bound to do whatsoever he hath a strong mind,
will and humour to do; and this he calls his Con∣science. —Another is of a strong strange imagination and phantasie, which is a kind of irrational animal con∣science; having the same relation to sensitive re∣presentations [those Laws in the members] which Conscience hath to intel∣lectual (those Laws of the mind.) Rom. 7.23. Aristotle. And as phantasie supplieth the place of reason in unreasonable creatures; so it doth of Conscience in unconsci∣onable, when a man is directed by his own con∣ceit; and this he calls his Conscience.
—Another is abundant in passions, fears, and animosities, with all their crosse counsels and com∣mands; yea and ignorant zeal, which (though of God) yet may be ranked with passion, Rom. 10.2. if without knowledge; and this he calls his Conscience too. —Another is possest with satanical suggesti∣ons, diabolical delusions, enthusiasmes and infusi∣ons of that black infernal spirit, as upon trial of spirits will appear, by the symptomes, 1 John 4.1. fruits and products of flesh and Divel [Adulteries, Ido∣latries, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Strifes, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Mur∣thers,
&c.] And even these he calls his Consci∣ence also. And thus, as Paul said of false gods in the world [For though there be that are called gods (as there be gods many, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. and lords many) but unto us there is but one God:] So may we say of Consci∣ences, [There be that are called Consciences, many falsly so called. But oh! that ever so sacred a thing, and so divine a name as Consci∣ence, even among Chri∣stians, should be prosti∣tuted and forced to yield favour, respect, and shel∣ter to the vilest things,
as the errors, humours, phantasies, passions, and satanical delusions of men; this is one of the worlds practical errors and misbehaviours, which falls first under this cor∣rection. And there is a second not inferiour to it, 2. Miscar∣riage. which the world is guilty of, in three degrees of ill beha∣viour towards Consci∣ence. 1. One is by strange neglecting and slighting Conscience often in its offices of rebukes and Counsels, and so estrang∣ing it, that it takes it un∣kindly, neglects its office, and speaks faintly, or not
at all, like that disregar∣ded Prophetesse, This good Cassandra will speak no more. Conscience one while may be heard speaking to a man, Judg. 9.7. Psal. 34.11. as Jotham to the men of Shechem [Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto you:] And as David to the little chil∣dren [Come and hearken unto me, and I will teach you, &c.] But if they will not come and hear∣ken, then another while conscience thus negle∣cted, despised and estran∣ged, will sit down as discontented, see and hear all, and hold its peace, and for a long time speak no more.
2. Another is by stub∣born resisting and oppo∣sing Conscience, in all its motions of perswasions, directions, and cautions, by crosse contrary and contradicting practises, still setting against Con∣science, in every thing, at every turn. And this Conscience takes very indignly; as Moses, when Pharaoh resisted so obsti∣nately all his motions and mediums, saying [Get thee from me, take heed to thy self, see my face no more, Exod. 10.28, 29. &c.] Moses then answered [Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.] Sembleably men may so
long resist and outface their Consciences by ob∣duracy impenitency, and custome in sin, that Con∣science may sit down as abused and opposed, look a long time on other way, as if it had vowed to see a mans face again no more. 3. Another is by Ma∣lignant impudent baffling decrying, and beating down of Conscience in all its offices, acts and ope∣rations of rebukes and admonitions, by out ragi∣ous affronts and interrup∣tions; that the voice of Conscience may be drow∣ned (be it never so shrill) by louder out-cries, and
sounds of Drums, Trum∣pets, and Bells (as in those bloody sacrifices of Mo∣lech, to drown the cries of the children) of vain pleasures, carnal com∣pany, worldly jollity, and riotous excesses, wine & Musick; whereby even an importunate loud-speaking Conscience, may be for a time as put out of countenance unto silence; and this Consci∣ence takes most hainously to be thus affronted, abu∣sed and baffled, and so seems to sit down as offended, and seeing and hearing all, and saying nothing; 2 Cor. 2.11. A divelish de∣vise of Satan, and dam∣nable
practice of the world; and this is ano∣ther of the worlds pra∣ctical errors and misbeha∣viours in those three de∣grees which falls in the second place under this correction. And a third which comes not far behind it, 3. Miscar∣riage. is the worlds abominable and odious, mad and ri∣diculous practice of mis∣behaviour against Con∣science, endevouring to suppresse and banish, shut out and shake off Con∣science, as thinking to make away with it; But 'tis like that Heathen∣rage against God's Son, Furious and vain: Psa 2.1, 3
A vain thing indeed in two respects: 1. Because it is a thing impossible to be done totally & finally; though the acts may be intermit∣ted, and the degrees may be remitted for a time, as if [Conscience were put away] yet it sticks so close, 1 Tim. 1.19. that a man may as soon part with himself as his Conscience; 1 Cor. 11.13, 28. for Con∣science is a mans self in Scripture-sense; [Judge in your selves] that is, In your Consciences: Men may shift clothes, places, companies, but not Con∣sciences; for a mans Conscience is most bold and familiar in his most
private retirednesse; like Ehud to King Eglon; Judg. 3.20, 21. it hath oft times a secret errand and message from God to a man, when silence must be kept, and all that stand by must go out, and then it thrusts a dagger into the belly (blade, haft and all) hard∣ly pluckt out againe. Though Conscience since the fall of man, be grieve∣ously corrupted and ob∣scured, yet it cannot be quite ejected and de∣stroyed: The vilest A∣theists, basest Wretches, and most hellish Miscre∣ants in the world, 1 Tim. 4.2. though they may seem to choak and smother, or blinde,
or bribe it, obdurate or sear it, by vicious practi∣ses, and riotous out-rages, as desirous to make away with it; yet their fury is all vain: Be men as sense∣lesse and secure, as sleepy and benummed, as blind∣ed and hardned in Con∣science as the Divel and their own corrupt hearts can possibly make them for the present; yet that Lion that lies at the door will be rouzed, and that Sampson will be awakened, to break in, and pull down first or last [in due time:] As it is said of evil men [Their feet shall slide in due time] either here or here∣after
Conscience will be known and found, Deut. 32.35. and the things that shall come upon them make haste. If not in the day of life, then to be sure at the day of death, or of judge∣ment, when the heavy weights of sin shall be hung upon those lines, then I say shall the ham∣mer of Conscience strike thick and indistinctly with terror. For as they say of Witches, That their fa∣miliar spirits leaves them at the Gaol, and will serve them then no longer. So the Divel that hath charmed the Con∣science, all the life time,
that it could not do its office and perform its function well, removes his spell at the approach of death, to drive the sinner to despair, by speaking all at once; men were better hear Consci∣ence when it would speak now a little, and then a little, as they can bear, rather then by misbeha∣viours toward it, to force it unto such long silence, that at last it must speak all at once, which who can bear? Oh, 'tis heavy hearing all at once; as falling all at once, once for all; when Conscience shall take up those words in Isaiah [I have long Isa. 42.14.
time holden my peace, I have been still, and re∣frained my self; now will I cry and destroy, and devour at once.] And as it was in the Fable of the blinde Woman and the Physitian, coming often to her house to cure her, never departed emp∣ty, but still carried away a portion of her best good; so that by that time that her sight was recovered, all her choisest goods were gone. So this blinded charmed Conscience sees not the ransacking of the soul, and spoyling of graces, till it be left empty, and then it sees and cries
(with Esau) too late for a blessing: And therefore though some wretched men by their wicked commissions of evils, omissions of good, and procrastinations of their repentance and conver∣sions to God, seem as de∣stitute and void of Con∣science, as the very beasts that perish; yet Consci∣ence will stand forth and appear in due time, and shew plainly that it was present with them every moment of their lives, and privy to all their evil acts, Psa. 50.21. thoughts and ways, by reproving and setting them in order before their eyes; and making
them say with David [O Lord, Conscience, Psal. 139.1, 2, 3. thou hast searched me, and known me; thou know∣est my down lying, and mine uprising, and under∣standest my thoughts: Thou compassest or win∣nowest my paths, and art acquainted with all my ways:] And as Jesus to Nathanael [before that Philip called thee, John 1.48. when thou wast under the fig∣tree I saw thee:] So will Conscience at last say to those ungodly men, [Be∣fore I now speak to you, I saw you;] At such and such a time, in such and such a place, with such and such company, about
such and such ungodly deeds I saw you— And all to shew it an impossible, and therefore a vain thing, to attempt the nulling or avoiding of Con∣science. 2. Because it were a thing unprofitable and distructive to man, Hos. 4.17. to be let alone without this Monitor and Corrector; Psal. 81.11, 12. Prov. 20.27. Prov. 4.19. to be given up to the treachery of a beloved sin, or to the tyranny of a raging lust, without this controller; to have this candle of the Lord put out, which should search all the hidden parts of the belly; to
have a mans way as darknesse, and not to know whereat he stum∣bles; this were one of God's heaviest judge∣ments on man on this side Hell: Like a Body with∣out a Pulse; a City with∣out Ward or Walls; and an Army without a Watch— Such or worse were a mans case without Con∣science, if it were possi∣ble; but that divelish rage and practice is vain, because impossible and un∣profitable: And thus for correction of three evil practises.
3. For Instruction. In a pure and precious point of righteousnesse about Conscience, Prov. 4.23. [To keep it with all dili∣gence] or with all keep∣ing, as men would keep their treasures, their honours, their lives. This prime Christian Jewel, (as Instar omnium) is to be sought with all seek∣ing, and to be kept with all keeping; [That it may be good and void of offence, toward God and men] in all actions spiri∣tual, Act. 23.1. Act. 24.16. moral, civil, natural, after St. Paul's example, making it our special bu∣sinesse,
and dayly exer∣cise to have and to hold, and to use a good Con∣science. And that upon this consideration, because Conscience is a thing in∣separably annexed unto the soul of man, there set and appointed by God, never to leave him. And now here I crave leave for a little digressi∣on, to take some view of the sundry kinds & sorts of Conscience, as of lines drawn from the centre, to declinate the several climates and regions of Conscience: Which of old were thought to be wittily distributed into Four: Bernard.
— 1. Good, but not Quiet. — 2. Quiet, but not Good. — 3. Both Good and Quiet. — 4. Neither Good nor Quiet. 1. An evill unquiet Conscience is bad, but hopeful, because some life is in it. 2. An evil quiet Con∣science is worst of all; the most hopelesse tem∣per that can be; better to have a tormenting Tophet in the soul, than a Fools paradise there; It was better with Peter when he wept, Mat. 26.5. than when he presumed.
3. A good unquiet Conscience is good, (not simply, but) respectively, of tendernesse and fear∣fulnesse to offend God. 4. A good and quiet Conscience is best of all; a paradise upon Earth, a pregustation and preli∣bation of Heaven, Heaven before the time; Juge con∣vivium. Prov. 15.15. Heb. 1.14. Rev. 3.20. Rom. 14.17. Phil. 4.7. A man∣sion for the blessed Tri∣nity to dwell in; a con∣tinual feast, at which the Servitors are Angels; the prime guest God himself: The cheer, joy in the holy Ghost; the Musick, peace with the creatures, with our Neighbours, and with our selves; yea and such peace with God in
Christ, as passeth all un∣derstanding. The two good Con∣sciences belong properly to the godly; And the two bad to the ungodly: Whose Consciences are -Either too quiet, (be∣ing blinded or benum∣med, or seared) and so like a becalmed Ocean to famished Sea-men, that kills with kindnesse, and destroys with fair wea∣ther; Perituros lactans Judg. 5.25. and like dissembling Jael, offering Milk and Butter (means of life) but bringing Hammer and Nail (instruments of death.) -Or too unquiet (being wounded, enraged, tor∣mented)
and so like the troubled Sea that cannot rest. So that [Good and Bad] comprehend all Consciences, without more words and terms; for rest and trouble are not essential, but acci∣dental to Conscience. Now in the general, a good Conscience is [The seeing of an act according with the rule:] And in particular it is -either legal, -or evangelical; ac∣cording to the rules of each. A legal good Consci∣ence compleat is [A see∣ing of all our actions, according with all the rules of the Law exactly]
And requires two things: 1. A distinct and uni∣versal knowledge of eve∣ry branch of the Law. 2. A constant and uni∣versal obedience to every precept of the Law. For he who is ignorant of the least tittle, Jam. 2.10. and delinquent in any particle is guilty of all; and so consequently hath not a compleat legall good Conscience. But what is this to us? this is none of ours (as our case now stands) therefore we may say and do with it, as did the Tribes with Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.16. saying, [What portion have we in David? &c.
And so departed.] For the compleat legal good Conscience is unto us, as Saul's Armour was unto David, [Too heavy for him to bear:] & therefore our surest & safest way is (denying and disclaiming all pretensions to com∣pleat legal good Consci∣ence) to depart unto the Evangelical, that we may be justified and saved: Gal. 2.16. Heb. 7.19. [these be your only Tents O Israel;] for if the Law, as the case now stands with us) be sufficient to give life, then Christ's death was in vain. Now therefore, Act. 25.12. as Festus to Paul, about appealing to Cesar, so may I say to
the Christian appealing to the Gospel, [Hast thou appealed unto Gospel? unto Gospel shalt thou go.] And an evangelicall good Conscience, is a seeing of an act according with the rule of the Gospel. And now since we have left the common rode of Conscience in general, and betaken our selves to a good Conscience in particular; note we, that Conscience is called good, for a two-fold goodness. 1. An old natural and essential goodnesse of veracity; and so much good may be in a bad
mans Conscience, (not∣withstanding his depra∣vation and corruption by the Fall) as to know something of the true rule, and to speak truth according to its know∣ledge: The cursed Scribes and Pharisees, John 8.9. Hypocrites even their Consciences were so good as to deal plainly and honestly with them, and to tell them the truth of their state to their conviction [con∣victed by their owne Consciences.] It is in∣deed the best thing a wicked man hath, better then his Mind, Heart, Will or Affection; there is more goodnesse in a
wicked mans Conscience (I speak not of primitive spiritual but of essential goodnesse) than in any other of the powers of his soul besides; hardlier seduced then any part in man; his Consci∣ence stands and speaks more for God, his Ser∣vants, Truth, and Name, then himself doth or will. And therfore S. Paul durst appeal even unto their Consciences, though not unto their speeches; [commending our selves to every mans Conscience in the sight of God;] 2 Cor. 4.2. And this is one goodnesse for which Conscience is called good.
2. A renewed spiritual goodnesse of Conscience; for if a man be renewed all the man is renewed, all his mind, Eph. 4.23. the spirit of his mind, the most pure and spiritual part of his soul is renewed also: The mind and the Conscience go together, Tit. 1.15. in their soylings and washings, in their cor∣ruptings and renewings. And here might be di∣stinguished again and again of this renewed good Conscience, -Either perfect, (not in degrees, but in parts) and conditions of goodnesse. -Or defective, 1 Cor 8.7. failing in some condition of
goodnesse [weake and apt to be defiled and seduced.] The conditions of this goodnesse are principally two: -One Formal, respecting its constitution. -Another Effective, for execution, whereby it is fitted and qualified for its proper acts and uses. As that Clock may be called good, which is made well, and goes well. Now to the constitu∣tion and execution of a good Conscience, Amesius. Honeste bona. Rom. 14.17. Facate bona. two specialties are required. 1. Integrity and up∣rightnesse. 2. Serenity and peace.
And here also might be discoursed of the several offices and properties, acts and aspects of Conscience upon practice; but that I am in a digression, and must return to my point of instruction; For the keeping of Conscience with all keeping, that it may be good. Therefore take we up and contract unto this e∣vangelical good Consci∣ence. Three things are ne∣cessary. 1. Rom. 2.15. The light of knowledge -Of God, his will and rule, both Law and Gospel; what is good, and bidden us; what bad and for∣bidden us, -of our selves,
whether we be such as God's rules require, yea or no: Both David's and Achan's Conscience had this light to walk by; Psal. 18.23. Josh. 7.20. some knowledge of God and of themselves; by this light is all the work cut out that Conscience hath to do: No being or work∣ing for Conscience, with∣out knowledge of God and our selves. 1. No work for Con∣science without some knowledge of God's re∣vealed will, (the only rule and bond of Con∣science) which makes it to be what it is, and to do what it does: Men
might swear, lye, kill, Rom. 7.7. steal, prophane, blasphem remorslesly, without this light of knowledge. 2. No work for Con∣science without some knowledge of our selves; for the knowledge of the rule doth but as tell Nathan's tale of two men and a sheep, without the knowledge of our selves, which doth as say [Thou art the man] Men might crucifie the Lord of glory, Luke 23.34. 1 Cor. 2.8. and Conscience say and do nothing without this knowledge. O say we then with Solomon [That the soul be without knowledge, Prov 19.2 it is not good;] The igno∣rant
soul cannot have a good Conscience, for if Conscience be not truly informed and rightly principled, it will be either idle or ill imployed (as working in the dark) either nothing, or all things lawful; working falsly and erroneously; And oh! Isa. 5.20. Act. 26.9. Joh. 16.2. what a potent instrument for Satan is an erroneous and misguided Conscience? That will make a man even kill his Brother, his Father, nay God's dearest Servants, and perswade him that he doth God service. Therefore beg we God the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. through the true Light,
to lighten our darknesse, & (being our own natural lights are waxed dim, John 1.9. and burn blew) to set up another, The light of his Word; and another, The light of his Spirit: That the candle of the Lord within it may give light enough to search the inward parts of the belly: Prov. 20.27. For the world is fuller of dangerous downfals, than the valley of Siddim was full of slime-pits, Gen. 14.10. wherein the Kings of Sodom and Gomorah fled and fell; Here is desperate fearful going in the dark [not knowing whither he goeth] especially neer such horrible Precipices. John 12.35.
Therefore pray, and again I say pray for in∣lightned Consciences; for though some may go to Hell with it, yet none can go to Heaven without it; therefore labour to get it, and be not without it for a world; beseech God as he hath given us Con∣sciences, that we may not want guides; so that he would give our con∣sciences light, Mat. 15.14. that our guides may not want eyes, lest the blind lead the blind, and both fall into the ditch: Mat. 6.23. For if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darknesse? Another ingredient to this
evangelical good Consci∣ence. The life of new obedi∣ence; no good Conscience without universal, con∣stant & sincere obedience; knowledge & obedience cannot be separated in a good Conscience; there∣fore called The life of obe∣dience: For what is know∣ledge without obedience, but as a model without a building, Act. 24.16. and a cypher without a figure, which stands for nothing? there∣fore the Apostle, who is upon sacred record the pattern of a good Con∣science, made it his dayly exercise to have and to hold, and to use a good Conscience in all obedi∣ence;
the lack whereof (in daring to act against God's rule, or without God's warrant) causeth [shipwrack of Faith, 1 Tim. 1.19. and of all good Conscience;] As in Hymeneus and Alex∣ander. Who hath more science than the Divel? yet none worse Consciences for lack of obedience: And obedience in Christian ears should not sound as old and legal, Rom. 3.27. 2 Thes. 1.8. but rather as new and evangelical: For there is [a law of Faith] and a vengeance on the [disobedience to the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ;] Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. yea there is [a yoak of Christ] and
which is more admirable [a yoake that easeth: O mirus reficiendi modus. But whither run we out into particulars? there is one comprehensive com∣pendious thing, most eminently and transcen∣dently necessary to an evangelical good Consci∣ence, as all in all. Namely 3. The Spirit of Faith in the blood of Jesus: 2 Cor. 4.13. No good Conscience without Faith; as it seems by their fast frequent conjunction to∣gether, 1 Tim. 1.4, 18, 19. so obvious in holy Scripture [Faith and a good Conscience;] 1 Tim. 3.9. yet not that poor livelesse, fruitless faith which may be found in apostate men Jam. 2.15.
and Divels, Rom. 1.17. Rom. 5.1. Act. 15.9. 1 John 5.4. Eph. 2.8. who are said [to believe and trem∣ble.] But that Faith which verisies and justifies, and purifies, and pacifies, and conquereth, and saveth: This, this is the Faith— For the image of God wherein man was first created, was not more necessary to the attaining of a legal good Conscience, than this Faith so inve∣sted, with such gracious properties, is to the ac∣complishing of an evan∣gelical. For what availeth the knowledge of Law and Gospel, and so much Faith as to give credence to the truth of the pre∣cepts
and promises, and threats, without that personal, peculiar, proper Faith, whereby Christ is applied in particular, with all his benefits to each believing soul. So that without Faith no evangelical good Con∣science. Whence here is the difference betwixt the compleatnesse of a legal and evangelical good Conscience: That requireth many acts to perfect it, Deut. 26.27. Jam. 2.10. one sinful commission or omission is enough to wrack and spoyl it. This requires but one only to compleat it; one act of believing uniteth
to Christ, by which union man is made partaker of the all-sufficient obedi∣ence of Christ, which is the sole and absolute object matter of an evan∣gelical good Conscience: For as one act of Adam brake the whole Deca∣logue; so one act of faith in Christ, will perfectly fulfil it. But not the habit with∣out the act, nor the act without the object, maketh an evangelical good Conscience, and justifies: For the whole obedience of Christ, typified by the whole Lamb to be eaten and accounted for, Exod. 12.4, 10. is it that
satisfies the justice of the Law, which (when by faith we are conjoyned to him) is made all ours? And therefore Faith and Christ's blood, Christ's Blood. are here conjoyned in one, as to an evangelical good Con∣science. -As no good Conscience without faith: So No good Conscience without Christ's blood. A good Conscience is most beholding unto the blood of Christ for its goodness, as the only price of it, the material and meritorious cause of it; yea and of our redemption, the graces fore-mentioned are the means of appli∣cation.
There sticketh to the Conscience of every man naturally a great deal of guile and filth, which defileth and obscureth, and hardens it; and it hath contracted so much guilt and foulnesse, that there is no room for peace, till it be refined and cleansed, Heb. 9.14. Act. 15.9. Rom. 5.1. and molli∣fied; which can no way be done without saith in Christ's blood; Heb. 9.18, 22. which is all in all. For as in the old Law, all dedications and purgings, and re∣missions were by blood: So in the new Law of Faith, in the Gospel, no good done about Consci∣ence without blood: It
is Purged, & Purified, & Pa∣cified; & all by this blood. Consci∣ence is 1. 1 Joh. 1.7. Purged and Cleansed.-From the corruption of sin, by the efficacy of Christ's blood— From the guilt of sin, by the merit of Christs blood. 2 Tim. 1.3. 2. Purified and Sanctified from the stain of sin, 1 Pet. 3.21. by the purity of Christs blood 3. Pacified from the unquietness of sin, Col. 1.20. by the attonement of Christ's blood.
In sin unrepented, Isa. 57.20, 21. un∣pardoned, unpurged, un∣reformed, there is no peace, but like the troub∣led Sea, it cannot rest: A good Conscience may be like the troubled Air, sometime disquieted; but when the wind is still, the Air can rest; when the occasion is over, the Conscience is quiet: But a bad Conscience is like the troubled Sea, that cannot rest, through the inconstancy of its own natural motions, fluxing and refluxing, and the restlesnesse of its own waves, as well as the boysterousnesse of exter∣nal storms and winds, so
that the Sea remains un∣quiet, when the storm is ended; so do evil mens bad Consciences, when the outward occasion of affliction is ceased, and that trouble ended, yet they have that with∣in which denies their rest. Such indeed is the guilt and filth of sin to the Conscience, as Jonah to the Mariners, and Achan to the Souldiers, (a dangerous and accur∣sed thing;) or like an arrow-head, and corrupt coar in a wound, no safety or blessing, ease or healing, till out and gone.
And this can never be done but by the blood of Jesus: Heb. 12.24. Oh that purg∣ing, purifying, pacifying blood of his [that blood of sprinkling;] so called in allusion to that blood in the bason of the Passe∣over, Exod. 12.22. wherewith the Lintel and the two side∣posts were sprinkled, and whereby this blood was prefigured: Now although about the two side-posts, some Inter∣preters are but little di∣vided; yet about the transome or lintel lesse, most applying it to Con∣science; For the resem∣blance, in ancient build∣ings
of those Countreys, contriving in or just over the lintel, a place to look out at, for the discovery of all that knock at door. And such a thing indeed is Conscience, through which we should look out upon all occurrences and occasions, before we admit or open: And this Lintel we must strike with the bunch of Hysop dipped in the blood of the Bason; Conscience must be struck with faith in Christ's blood, the blood of sprinkling, [which speaketh better things then that of Abel] —Better to God—and
better to Conscience; Mark 4.39. and the voice which it speaks is [peace and be still;] and that not because blood, but because his blood, who can quiet Consciences as well as Seas and Winds, and that not without faith; for no goodnesse or purity or peace to the Consci∣ence without blood; and no such blood for the Conscience without faith: Therefore the unbelie∣ving Conscience, is a de∣filed Conscience; and the defiled Conscience is a disturbed Conscience; and the disturbed Con∣science, no compleat good
Conscience; Tit. 1.15. [defiled and unbelieving] are in conjunction, by the holy Ghost. Therefore as we love to have and to hold, and to use a good Conscience, in all our beggings beg we this faith of God in this blood: For what can a man do with an old natural Conscience, without a new inlight∣ned one? And what with an inlightned one, with∣out a purified and paci∣fied one, without a san∣ctified and saved one, by the blood of Jesus? O plead this blood, but first beg it with more
then Rachell's earnestnesse for children, Gen. 30.1. [Lord give it me or else I die.] And when we have gotten this good enlight∣ned, purified and pacified Conscience, we were best keep it with all diligence; keep the peace of it, and not willingly offend it for a thousand worlds: And that upon these conside∣rations; 1. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, Isa. 65.3. Ezek. 2.4. is [to pro∣voke God to his face] (like impudent children) in the holy Prophets ac∣count; for an illuminated Conscience, is as the face
of God in the soul of man, where a man even sees God looking upon him, commanding or for∣bidding. 2. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, is to draw upon a mans soul the horrible guilt of Herod's aggravation and huge addition unto all his sins and evils, Luke 3.20. [He added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison;] John 5.35. [John was a burning and a shining light:] And such is an illuminated Conscience; therefore to go against the burning and shining light thereof,
is to add yet this above all other evils, to shut up our John in prison. 3. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, offends Gods deputy in the soul, and provokes him oft times to stab the heart, dead all duty, discountenance faith and hope, and dis∣courage confidence in prayer, [If our heart condemn us not, 1 John 3.20, 21. Mat. 5.23. then have we confidence to∣wards God, and what we ask, we receive, &c.] But if it doth condemn us— we may hold our peace; for it is of greater dan∣ger then in case of an
offended and irrecon∣ciled brother; [If thou bring thy prayer into God's presence, and there remembrest that thine offended irreconciled Conscience hath ought against thee, first go and (by faith in Christ's blood, and resolution of new obedience) be re∣conciled unto thy Con∣science, and then come and pray;] for an irre∣conciled Conscience doth ever way-lay, undermine and enter caveats against prayers; Psal. 66.18. no offering will be accepted till Consci∣ence be satisfied; be it for our selves or others,
bad Consciences much hinder prayer; [If I have a bad Conscience, God will not heare my prayers] saith David; [ye have good Consciences, Heb. 13.18. therefore God will hear your prayers for us] said Paul. 4. That Conscience is ever to abide and dwell with us, never to leave a man; therefore to be kept with all diligence, that it may be good and void of offence: Two that were born and bred, and must inseparably live together, should take heed of offending one the other; there is a parting
time for all but a man and his Conscience; there are none on Earth with whom we shall always live, without any separa∣tion but our Consciences; not always with Hus∣bands or Wives, with Parents or Children, with Masters or Servants, &c. But with our Consci∣ences ever; therefore make you much of it. In one of the Fathers we read a Parable to this purpose, Greg. Mor. of a Man that had three friends, two of whom he loved very intirely, and the third but indifferently; this Man being called in question
for his life, craved aid of his friends; — The first would only accompany him some part of the way and bring him going, and no more; — The second would onely lend him some means, and accom∣modate him for his jour∣ney, and no more; —But the third, whom he least expected and regarded, would go all the way, abide and appeare ever with him, speak and plead for him, and never leave him. Now we are the man; Flesh, World and Con∣science, are our three friends:
And when death shall summon us to Judge∣ment, —Our fleshly friends will bring us to our graves and decent buri∣als, so far going, and there leave us. —Our worldly goods may help us to Shrouds, Coffins, Tombs, (and at most) Epitaphs, and there leave us. —But well fare a good Conscience; this will live and die with us, or rather live when we are dead, awaiting our rising again, to appear with us, and stand for us before God at his judgement-seat.
And when neither of our other friends can do us good, then a good Con∣science will stand us in high and eternal stead. Conscience, I say. FINIS.
