C6246 669.f.20[37] 99870536 163454
The PROTESTANT's Warning-Piece: Or, The humble Remonstrance of Ieffery Corbet Citizen and Grocer of London, composed for the view of his Highness, the Parliament, and all the good People in England, Scotland and Jreland; and published to frustrate the Designes of the Incendiaries employed by the Pope, and the King of Spain, who have severall yeares contrived to fire the City of London in a 100 places at once, and then proceed to their long intended Massacre. Sheweth, THat about the yeare, 1639. The Pope and his Councell sent William Oconner, an Irish Jesuit unto the King of Spain and the rest of the Catholick Princes for their contribution of Money, Arms and Amunition to carry on the Mas∣sacre of all the Protestants in the 3. Nations. And for that end the said Oconner came over into England about Iuly, 1640. And went daily in the garbe of a Courtier attending upon the Queen Mother. About 1. Septemb. 1640. the said Oconnee did boast unto an Jrish convert that he was the chief contriver of that intended Massacre, and that there were 7000. men in private pay for the Massacre in London. And that the L. Cottington was to be Lieutenant of the Tower, and had 500. Irish Papists sent out of Flanders to guard the Tower under him. And that the Queene was to goe beyond Sea, and pawne the jewels of the Crowne for that purpose. And that the Money, Arms, and Amunition which the King of Spain had sent over was secured at the Spanish Ambassadors house in London, and was disposed of amongst the Papists by one Garrat Dillon an Irish Ie∣suit, who had his Residence at the Spanish Ambassadors. That upon discovery of the Massacre the said O conner was apprehended, and committed to the Gate-hoase, 3. Septemb. 1640. But divers persons in and about the City of London, and West minster, caused the said O conner to be protected from Iustice above 4. years and then to be released, contrary to the Law of God, and the laws of the Land. And though the said O conner was so time∣ly apprehended that the Massacre was prevented here, yet because Iustice was not speedily executed upon him that others might heare & feare, and do no more so wickedly. Therefore the hearts of his Confederates were fully set in them to do evill. Inso∣much that above 100000 Protestants in Ireland were barbarously murdered in cold blood severall moneths after the said O con∣ner was apprehended. Moreover those persons did not only prevaile, that the bloody Massacre was not at all discovered to the Protestants in Ireland to fore-warn and arme them to fight for their lives; but they improved such an Interest here, that the Po∣pish party who had a hand in the Massacre intended in England were never searched out. Yea those persons wittingly and wil∣fully suffered the Queen to goe beyond Sea to pawne the Jewels of the Crowne for laying the foundation of the late warres here to carry on the Popes hellish Interest. That those Persons have from time to time, Protected the Popes Agents from Iustice, when they were apprehended by his High∣ness, and others during the wars, and sent to the Parliament, to be tryed for their lives as Trayterous Incendiaries. Insomuch, that the Pope & his Conclave finding such encouragement they sent over 300 chosen Jesuits into England to make factions, and parties amongst Professors, and so preach us into Confusion as they have boasted. Moreover the Pope caused his Buls to be han∣ged up on the Church doores at Antwerp and other places, in 1643. and 1644. giving dispensations to all Priests, and Iesuits to come into England and to transforme themselves into the various formes of Religion amongst us, the better to divide the People and carry on their bloudy Designes under a form of Godliness. And by that stratagem they have all along exasperated the spi∣rits of Professors differing in Iudgement and made them bite, and endeavour to devour one another. Mean while the Popes in∣terest hath gone on unsuspected. And under this colour they have conspired divers yeares to set the City of London on fire in a hundred places at once, and then fall to Massacre, and cut off the root and branch of all the Protestants in these Nations. Yea, they have boasted that they are in constant readiness, and watch only for the remove of the Army as they did in 1648. upon the Scots Invasion, and the Insurrection in Kent Wales, &c. And the Captain Generall for that bloody worke had his constant resi∣dent at the Spanish Ambassadours house till hee removed from London. That the aforesaid Persons have from time to time dammed up Justice against the Discoverers of those horrid Conspiracies, and all others who have appeared on their behalfe. And have caused them and their friends to bee defrauded of Estates above 40000. pounds in value. Mean while they have caused divers friends to those discoverers to goe with sorrow to their Graves, and others to lead languishing lives in disgrace and repreach. Upon which account the foresaid Persons being subtle secret Ene∣mies did improve such an Interest in the three last Parliaments, that no Law was made to remedy such abhominable obstructi∣ons of Iustice whereby the Agents for the Pope, and the King of Spaine, and the King of Scots have been encouraged, and pro∣tected in their barbarous Conspiracies, and the friends of the Common-wealth exposed to ruine. Onely the good hand of Pro∣vidence hath preserved those Discoverers, and many of their friends even to Admiration for to make good the fore-going parti∣culars on behalfe of this divided, and wel-nigh distracted Common-wealth. That the King of Scots hath many yeares since engaged to the Pope to set up Popery in these Nations upon the Popes engage∣ment to improve his Interest to settle him in his Throne. And from that mutuall Ingagement, The Presbyterians in Scotland, and here may gather that their making a party to bring in the K. of Scots for the Establishing of Presbytery was to strengthen the hands of the Popes party to murder them, and their posterities. And the Protestant Cavalier may likewise observe that if they should have conquered the Parliaments party, yet all the advantage they would have gained thereby would have been on∣ly this to have been last destroyed. For the Popes bloody Monsters would have given them no more quarter then they did the 100000. in Ireland, which they murdered in cold blood. That the Spine saith. No Prophesie of Scripture is of any private Interpretation. And because thou hast let goe out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, thy life shall goe for his life, and thy People for his People. And neglect to strengthen the hands of the poore and needy, was one of the sins of Sodom, And God abhorres solemne Fasts, and other duties where Iudge∣ment and Righteousness are neglected, (2 Pet. 1. 20. 1 King. 20. 42. Ezek. 16. 49. Isa 1. 11. to 18. Amos, 5. 21.) From whence it doth appeare that the unparalell'd mercies which God hath bestowed upon these Nations have been hitherto intermixed with dreadfull Iudgements threatning utter desolation. Because! The Popes bloody Monsters have been let goe from time to time by the aforesaid secret Enemies. And, because men of knowne Integrity, fearing God, and of a good conversation are not appoin∣ted for Commissioners to bring these secret Enemies unto speedy publick Justice, and to breake the heavie yoke of oppression by delivering the spoyled from their oppressors and strengthen the hands of the poore and needy, which is the faft that God hath chosen, and promised a speciall blessing unto. In tender consideration of the premisses J doe earnestly beseech all Protestants under what forme whatsoever, specially in, and about the City of London, and West minster (as they will answer it at the great day of Account, and desire to be free from the blood of themselves, and their Wives, Children and friends.) That they would unite as one man, and improve their utmost In∣terest in the Parliament by Petition and otherwise, for the obtaining of such Cōmissioners, to the end the Innocent blood which hath been spilt by the Trechery of those secret Enemies may be expiated, and the Pope's bloody Designes now on foot may bee defeated. And that the complainings in our Streets may cease by setting the oppressed free from the obstructions of Iustice which they have long groaned under. And I doe hereby engage my Life to make good the aforesaid particulars before such Commis∣sioners, and do professe before God and men that J am moved to declare these things out of no self-end or by-respect whatsoe∣ver, but out of a desire to discharge a good Conscience and a zeale to promote the good and welfare of these Nations; being fully convinced that the appointment of such Commissioners would soone root out the Popes Incendiaries, and undeceive many thousands of deluded dissenters, and reconcile this divided People and open an effectuall doore for judgement, & righteousness to run downe like a mighty streame, and would give the People cause to blesse the Lord, for raising and Spiriting his Highness, and this Parliament, to be Repairers of our Breaches, and the Restorers of paths to dwell in. Prov. 14. 34. Isa. 32. 17. Iustice exalts a Nation. And the worke of Righteousness shall be Peace. Prov. 3. 27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the Power of thy hand to doe it. Iudges, 5 23. Curse yee Meroz because they came not to the helpe of the Lord against the Mighty. 8. Novemb. 1656. JEFFERY CORBET.
