c6713 e364_1 99861766 113911
AN APPENDIX, TO A CONFESSION of FAITH, OR A more full Declaration of the Faith and Judgement of Baptized Beleevers. Occasioned by the inquiry of some w-affected and godly persons in the Country. Written by BENIAMIN COX, a Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Published for the further clearing of Truth, and discovery of their mistake who have imagined a dissent in fun∣damentals where there is none. MATH. 10.27.28. What I tel you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what yee hear in the ear, that preach yee upon the house-tops. And fear not &c. LONDON, Printed in the year 1646.
A more full DECLARATION OF THE FAITH and JuDGEMENT OF Baptized Beleevers: BE ready alwayes, saith the Apostle Peter, to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknesse and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15. It is therefore our duty in meeknesse and love to give an answer to those godly persons, which desire to be fully infor∣med of our judgement concerning Religion and the wayes of our God: To those therefore that have expressed a desire to be so informed, I thus answer. In a book lately reprinted, entituled, A Confession of faith of seven Congregations or Churches of Christ in London, &c. is a plain and sincere expression of our judgement in the things therein spoken of, in 52 Articles: And if our judgement tou∣ching some particulars, wherein we seem, or are supposed, to dissent from some others, do not appear cleerly enough in that confession, I hope the same shall somewhat more eleerly appear in this ensuing Appendix.
1. We beleeve that the punishment due to Adam for his first re∣bellion, and due to all men for their sin in Adam, and for al their sins against the Law, was not a lying of the whole person of man in the dust, or grave, eternally without life or sense; for then the punishment of man that sinned, should not have differ∣ed from the punishment of the brute beast that sinned not. But the punishment due to man, as aforesaid, was indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish; and that eternall: And conse∣quently the Redemption which we have by Christ from the curse of the Law, is a Redemption from eternal misery and torment: this we learn from these places of Scripture compared together; Rom. 2.8, 9. Jude 7. Gal. 3.13. Hebr. 9.12. 2. We beleeve that the eternity of the punishment of the vessels of wrath, is an absolute eternity, knowing no end; as wel as the eternity of the life of the Saints: Mat. 25.46. This we main∣tain against those that affirm that all men shal be saved at the last. 3. Although all the power of the creature to act be from the Cre∣ator, and there is a providence of God always extended to eve∣ry creature, and to every action of the creature; yet wee judge that the sinful corruption of the creature, and the sinfulness of the creature's action, is from the creature, and not from God: and that it is a great sin to say that God is the author of sin: Eccles. 7.29. Habak. 1.13. Iames 1.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 14.33. 1 Ioh. 2.16. As touching that place which is here objected against us, viz: Amos 3.6. Shal there be evil in a City, &c. We conceive that it is either to be rendred according to the last Translation in the
margin; Shal there be evil in a City, and shal not the Lord do some∣what? or else that it is to be understood only of the evil of punish∣ment, and not of the evil of sin. 4. We teach that they only do, or can beleeve in Jesus Christ, to whom it is given to beleeve in him by a special, gracious, and powerful work of his Spirit: and that this is (and shal be) given to the Elect in the time appointed of God for their effectual cal∣ling; and to none but the Elect: Ioh. 6 64, 65. Philip. 1.29. Ierem. 31.33, 34. Ezek. 36.26. Rom. 8.29, 30. Ioh. 10.26. This we hold against those that do maintain a freewil and suffi∣cient ability in all men to beleeve; and do deny Election. 5. We affirm, that as Jesus Christ never intended to give remissi∣on of sins and eternal life unto any but his sheep; (Ioh. 10.15. Ioh. 17.2. Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. Revel. 5.9.) so these sheep on∣ly have their sins washed away in the blood of Christ: The ves∣sels of wrath, as they are none of Christs sheep, nor ever do be∣leeve in him, so they have not the blood of Christ sprinkled up∣on them, neither are partakers of him: and therefore have all their sins remaining upon them, and are not saved by Christ from any of them under any consideration whatsoever; but must lie under the intolerable burthen of them eternally. The truth of this appears unto us by the light of these Scriptures compared together, Hebr. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1, 2. Hebr. 3.14. Math. 7.23. Eph. 5.6. 1 Tim. 1.9. Ioh. 8.24. 6. Though some of our opposers do affirm, that by this doctrine we leave no Gospel to be preached to sinners for their conversi∣on; yet through the goodness of God we know and preach to
sinners this precious Gospel; God so loved the world, (that is, hath been so loving to mankind) that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever beleeveth in him, should not perish, but have ever∣lasting life; Joh. 3.16. and this faithful saying, worthy of all acceptation, That Iesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Tim. 1.15. viz. all those sinners (how vile and grievous soe∣ver) not only which already do, but also which hereafter shall beleeve on him to life everlasting, 1 Tim. 1.16. and that to Christ all the Prophets give witnesse, that through his name, whosoever beleeveth in him, shal receive remission of sins. Acts 10.43. And this is called The Word of the Gospel; Acts 15.7. This is the Gospel which Christ and his Apostles preached, which we have received, and by which we have been converted unto Christ. And we desire to mind what Paul saith in Galat. 1.9. If any man preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be anathema. 7. Though we confesse that no man doth attain unto faith by his own good wil; Ioh. 1.13. yet we judge and know that the Spirit of God doth not compel a man to beleeve against his will, but doth powerfully and sweetly create in a man a new heart, and so make him to beleeve and obey willingly, Ezek. 36.26. Psal. 110.3. God thus working in us both to wil and to do, of his good pleasure; Philip. 2.13. 8. Though all our workings for life be in vain, irregular, and not accepted of God, (Jesus Christ being our life, who is freely gi∣ven to us of God,) yet we beleeve and know that being made partakers of Jesus Christ, we do, and shal, and must, through him, and walking in him, bring forth the fruit of good works, serving God (in true obedience, and love, and thankfulness unto him) in holiness and righteousness, being his workmanship, crea∣ted
in Christ Iesus unto good works, which he hath before ordained that we should walk in them; Ephes. 2.10. Luke 1.74, 75. 9. Though we that beleeve in Christ, be not under the law, but under grace; Rom. 6.14. yet we know that we are not lawless, or left to live without a rule; not without law to God, but under law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a law, or commanding rule unto us; whereby, and in obedience whereunto, we are taught to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; Titus 2.11, 12. the directions of Christ in his Evangelical word guiding us unto, and in this sober, righ∣teous, and godly walking, 1 Tim. 1.10, 11. 10. Though we be not now sent to the Law as it was in the hand of Moses, to be commanded thereby, yet Christ in his Gospel teacheth and commandeth us to walk in the same way of righte∣ousness and holyness that God by Moses did command the Isra∣elites to walk in, all the Commandments of the second Table being stil delivered unto us by Chist, and all the Commande∣ments of the first Table also (as touching the life and spirit of them) in this epitome or brief sum, Thou shal love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, &c. Math. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. Rom. 13.8, 9.10. 11. Though no sin be imputed to those that beleeve in Christ, nor any sinn do totally or fully reign over them, or in them; yet in them the flesh lusteth against the spirit; Galat. 5.17. and in many things they all offend; Iames 3.2. where the Apostle speaks of offences that one beleever may take notice of in another. Thus there is not a just man upon earth, that doth good, and sinneth not,
Eccles. 7.20. and if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 Ioh. 1.8. 12. Though there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, yet are they taught, and that effectually, to be ashamed of their sins Rom. 6.21. and to be sorry for them after a godly sort, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. yea to loath themselves for them; Ezek. 36.31. Because that sin is an evil and a filthy thing, and in its own nature tends to the provoking and dishonoring of God, being dis∣obedience against God, and a thing which the most holy GOD declares himself to loath and abhor; so that nothing but the blood of Christ could purge us from our sins, and reconcile us to God, whom by sin we had offended. Therefore the Saints both are, and must be grieved, and must iudge themselves, because they have sinned against their holy and glorious God, and merci∣ful and loving Father, 1 Cor. 11.31. 13. Though nothing be hid from God, and God imputeth not ini∣quity to any beleever, yet ought we to confess our sins unto God, and to beseech him to deal with us according to his own pro∣mise; viz. to be stil gracious and merciful unto us though wee have sinned against him, not being wroth with us, nor rebuking us, nor ceasing to do good unto us because we have sinned, Isa. 54.9. Hebr. 8.12. Dan. 9.18, 19, 20. Psal. 32.5. Psal. 25.7. Ezek. 36.37. Iames 5.15. Thus according to Christs directi∣on, we pray unto God o forgive us our sins; Luke 11.4. yet stil we are to look upon God as our Father; Luke 11.2. and conse∣quently upon our selves as his children; and so not short of justi∣fication, or under wrath, but washed in Christs blood from all our sins. In such confession and petitions we shew obedience to God, and do also exercise faith towards God, and repentance,
or godly sorrow for sin by which we see and confess that we for our parts have deserved wrath. 14. Though they which are once really engraffed into Christ, shal certainly be kept by the power of God through faith unto salvati∣on; 1 Pet. 1.5. yet ought they to beware, lest being led away with the error of the wicked, they fal from their own stedfastnesse; 2 Pet. 3.17. They ought therefore to seek continual support from God. Yea they ought to seek at Gods hand (in prayer, and in the right use and study of his Word, and in the right use of his Ordi∣nances) not only continuance, but also growth in grace; 2 Pet. 3.18. First, because this is Gods Command. Secondly, because God who wil establish them, wil do it in this way; viz: giving them grace to be obedient to this his Command, and blessing them in this obedience. 15. As we mind that our whole salvation is given unto us of the Father by Jesus Christ, and for his sake; so we likewise mind, that the Fathers giving Jesus Christ for us, and to us, and so sa∣ving us in him, and for his sake, is the acting and manifesting of that free love of his towards us, which was in himself from all eternity, Iohn 17.23. Ephes. 1.4, 5. 16. Although a true beleever, whether baptized, or unbaptized, be in the state of salvation, and shal certainly be saved: yet in obe∣dience to the Command of Christ every beleever ought to de∣sire Baptism, and to yeeld himself to be baptized according to the rule of Christ in his Word: And where this obedience is in faith performed, there Christ makes this his Ordinance a meane of unspeakable benefit to the beleeving soul, Acts 2.38. Acts
22.16. Rom. 6.3, 4. 1 Pet. 3.21. And a true beleever that here sees the command of Christ lying upon him, cannot allow him∣self in disobedience thereunto, Acts 24.16. 17. Beleevers baptized ought to agree and joyn together in a con∣stant profession of the same doctrine of the Gospel, and in pro∣fessed obedience thereunto, and also in fellowship, and in brea∣king of bread, and in prayers, Acts. 2.42. And a company of baptized beleevers so agreeing and joyning together, are a Church or Congregation of Christ, Acts 2.47. 18. As the preaching of the Gospel, both for the conversion of sinners, and the edifying of those that are converted; so also the right use of Baptisme, and of the Lords Supper, ought to be till the end of the world, Matt. 28.19.20. 1 Cor. 11.26. 19. A disciple gifted and enabled by the spirit of Christ to preach the Gospel, and stirred up to this service by the same spirit, bring∣ing home to his soule the command of Christ in his word for the doing of this worke, is a man authorised and sent by Christ to preach the Gospel, see Luke 19.12. &c. Mark. 16.15. and Matt. 28.19. compared with Acts 8.4. Philip. 1.14.3. Ioh. 7. And those gifted disciples which thus preach Jesus Christ who came in the flesh, are to be looked upon as men sent and given of the Lord, 1 Ioh. 4.2. Rom. 10.15. Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. And they which are converted from unbelife and false-worship, and so brought into Church-fellowship by such Preachers according to the will of Christ, are a feale of their ministry, 1 Cor. 9.2. And such preachers of the Gospel may not only lawfully admi∣nister Baptisme unto beleevers, and guide the action of a Church
in the use of the Supper, (Matth. 28.19. Acts 8.5-12. 1 Cor. 10.16.) but may also call upon the Churches, and ad∣vise them to choose fit men for officers, and may settle such of∣ficers so chosen by a Church, in the places or offices to which they are chosen, by imposition of hands and prayer, Act. 6.3-6. Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5. 20 Though a beleevers right to the use of the Lords Supper doe immediatly flow from Jesus Christ apprehended and received by fth; yet in as much as all things ought to be done not onely decently, but also in order; 1 Cor. 4.40. and the word holds forth this order, that disciples should be baptized, Matth. 28.9, Acts 2.38. and then be taught to observe all things (that is to say, all other things) that Christ commanded the Apostles, Matth. 28.20. and accordingly the Apostles first baptize disei∣ples, and then admited them to the use of the Supper; Acts 2.4.42. we therefore doe not admit any to the use of the Supper, no communicate with any in the use of this ordinance, but dis∣ciples baptized, lest we should have followship with them in their doing contrary to order. 21. Although we know that in some things we are yet very dark, and in all things as yet we know but in part, and doe therefore waite upon God for further light; yet we beleeve that we ought in our practise to obey, and serve, and glorifie God in the use of that light which he hath given us; and not neglect the good using of that light which God hath already given us, under pre∣tence of waiting for more, 1 Cor. 13.9. Acts 18.25. 22. As Christ doth not teach, nor allow that we should be with∣out
natural affection, or unsociable; (see Rom. 1.31.) so our be∣ing made partakers of Christ, doth not discharge us from the du∣ties of our relations. Beleeving servants must perform the duties of servants towards their masters though unbeleeving; 1 Tim. 6.. So beleeving children must perform the duties of children towards their parents; Coloss. 3.20. beleeving wives, the du∣ties of wives towards their hu bands; 1 Pet. 3.1. and beleeving subjects must be subject to principalities and powers, and obey Magistrates, Rom. 13.1, &c. Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. But stil they must remember that their fear toward God must not be taught by the precept of men; Isaiah 29.13. that they ought to obey God rather then men, Acts 5.29. and that the submission that must be given to men, must be given to them for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2, 14. Thus I conclude with the Apostles words (in 2 Tim. 2.7.) a little varyed, but not misapplyed; Consider what we teach: and the Lord give you understanding in all things. FINIS.
