C780B E664_1 R206830 99865935 118191
THE Moderator: Endeavouring A full Composure and quiet Settlement of those many Differences both in Doctrine and Discipline, which have so long di∣sturbed the Peace and welfare of this COMMON-WEALTH. Intended (especially at this time) to beget a Brotherly Love and Unity amongst the Ministers and People of all the three Nations; the Parlia∣ment having now appointed a Committee for receiving Proposals for the Propagation of the Gospel. Brotherly Unity amongst all Christians, especially amongst the Ministers of Christ, being in it self so excellent and comely at all times, and (considering the danger and sad consequences of our present Divisions) so desirable and necessary at this time: I conceive all Overtures and Counsels having a true tendency thereunto, worthy the publike light, and do therefore approve the publication of this ensuing discourse. Joseph Caryl. LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his shop at the three golden Lions in Cornhil, neer the Royal Exchange. 1652.
A PREFACE To the ensuing Discourse: Shewing, I. How the means of Christian Peace, both Civil and Ecclesiastical ought to be followed, and may be found. II. What the Lets of Reconciliation are, and the causes of Divisions, and how to be remedied. Section. I. BEing acquainted with the resolutions of some of our leading men, emi∣nent in the prevailing side, to mo∣derate matters, and compose our dif∣ferences. Happy had this Church and State been if that aime had been car∣ried all along from the beginning in the Counsels and endeavours ofThe occasion and scope of this letter. those, who have been intrusted with the management of affairs; and if it be not now too late to quench this flame, or if it can be hoped that in the midst of so great fears, so many jealousies▪ so different practises, and so loud clamours, and so sensible injuries, mens spirits can be brought to mutual confidence and made susceptible of temperate thoughts towards one another, I would advise all, but chiefly such as have power in the Parliament, in the City, in the Army, and most of all, the General and the Lieutenant. Ge∣neral, on whom the eyes of most men are fixed, to proceed after this manner, and lead as in this way. First, let our aime be (as in the sight of God who tryeth the Reines) to purge our heart from a designe to serve the interests
of one side, mainly to crosse another. For he that looks upon hisWhat ought to be the ight aime of those that trea. for peace. Brother with the eye of a party, hath put out the eye of a Chri∣stian. A Christian doth not take notice of men after the flesh, he looks upon the new creature in every one, and he that doth not walk after this Rule, there can be nothing but misery and de∣struction in his wayes, for the way of peace and truth he hath not known. Secondly, then if we can cleare our aimes from partiality, our Counsels may be free from prejudice, and if this be, we will not shunne the light, but desire to shew that our works are wrought in God; and will be ready to declare to all in publike the true Rules and Maximes, by which our conscience is guided; by which we intend to walk, and by which we desire to be judg∣edHom they should mani∣fest their aime. by all, in our proceedings; but if we either have no such rules, or are not willing to declare them; we shunne the light, we love darknesse, and let us not deceive our selves, there is no truth nor love to peace in us. And what although hitherto perhaps we have not minded conscionably the equitable and charitable affections which the Spirit of Christ doth suggest; yet now being put in minde thereof, if henceforth the motions of his Spirit be not re∣jected, but sincerely entertained, openly professed, and effectu∣ally followed, who doth not know but that yet a happy compo∣sure of our differences may be effected? Thirdly, Declarations of the truth that is in us, are good; but however they are no more but words; except then reall actions answer them, and speak the truth of justice and peace∣ablenesseHow they should prose∣cut their aime in our proceedings, there can be nothing but bitter∣nesse in the end. For nothing can prevent the crosse workings of mens spirits against us, but that which is able to beget and settle a confidence in their minds towards us; and to beget this confidence, and allay these jealousies which cause mens spirits boyle up to a disturbance of those proceedings wherein we mean well: I would suggest to our leading men these impartiall con∣siderations. 1. That they ought to lay to heart the causes which hinder o∣thersThe parts of this discourse. to confide in us, to remove the same. 2. That they ought to seek and finde out the persons which are most capable of receiving good impressions of us and from us, that the same may be given them, and by them propagated unto all.
3 That they should make use of the proper meanes by▪ which confidence is bred in honest mindes towards us, that the same may bee set a working. 4 That they should observe the method and manner of pro∣ceeding requisite in doing this, that the attempt may bee effectu∣all, and not miscarry. Of these foure heads I shall suggest somewhat tending to the advancement of peace and truth as briefly as I can. First, concerning the causes hindering others to confide in us, and begetting feares in them against us, let me say this: He that doth not confide in his neighbours, doth hinder themThe causes of mistrust and feare. to confide in him, and hee that doth feare others, doth beget in them causes of feare against himselfe; if then wee would have others to confide in us and not feare us, wee must also confide in them and not feare them. For if I cannot bring my spirit to trust my neighbour, how can I expect that his spirit should bee brought to trust me? and if I thinke that hee doth not trust me, I will readily suspect him: if I suspect him; I will either arme my selfe to oppose him, or weaken him lest hee oppose mee; and if I give way to these thoughts, I am at warre with him in my heart, and the affection of Christian love and ingenuitie, which onely can-beget confidence, is lost between us; love being lost, the fruits of emulation, envie and passion will bee found, and break forth in our nature. I finde the sequele of matters in our nature to lie thus: Where I doe not love, I cannot confide; where I confide not, I will finde cause to mistrust; where I finde cause to mistrust, I will fortifie my selfe against the same; and if I fortifie my selfe against my neighbour, I must expect that hee will doe the like against mee (for what cause hath hee to trust mee more then I doe him?) therefore as long as I manifest no love, nor trust, but force onely, there can bee no confidence expected from any towards mee. The maine hinderance then of confidence and cause of feare is the endeavour of force; and if I once be∣gin to endeavour force, I seeke not onely security to my selfe, but the conquest of that which I thinke is mine op∣posit; because I cannot naturally rest secure as long as that which I count an enemy is not subdued; and whatsoever I doe not trust, I am apt to account an enemy; therefore whilst I make nothing my friend but mine owne force, I am apt to trust
to nothing else but it. From all which this doth follow, that as soone as I forsake the simplicitie of my love, I beget naturally feares within my selfe; and when I take a course to secure my selfe from my feares by force, I multiply feares in others, and give them cause to mistrust me. Let me then cure mine owne feares first which I have of others, and then I shall bee able to cure the feares which others have of me: if I take the beame out of mine owne eye, I shall see cleer to take the moat out of my neighbours. But the question will be, How shall I cure mine owne feares? Truely to answer this, I know none other way but to follow  Isa. . 12. 13. Gods counsell by the Prophet Isaiah. Say ye not (saith the Lord) A confederacie to all them to whom this people shall say A confederacie; neither feare ye their feare nor be afraid, sanctifie the Lord of hosts himselfe, and let him bee your feare, and let him bee your dread. It isThe cure of our owne fears. then nothing else but the base feare of men upon politick con∣siderations, and the want of the true feare of God upon divine Principles, which troubles mee, and drives mee to courses which make others afraid of mee; but if I did not at all looke to men, but unto God alone, if I did not confide in mine owne force, but in the Almighty, others would finde cause to con∣fide in mee. As I behave my selfe towards God, so I must ex∣pect that others will behave themselves towards mee; if I mean from my heart well towards others in God, God will move others to meane so also towards me. And who is he (saith the1 Pet. 3. 13, 14. Apostle) that will harme you, if ye bee follwers of that which is good? if I mind nothing but that which is good to every one; what cause have I to think that any will mind harme or evill against me? But suppose I suffer wrong whiles I minde that which is good and righteous; the Apostle saith that I am happy; and if I am happy, I need not bee afraid of men nor troubled at my suffering. But what if I bee afraid and troubled? is it not be∣cause I am not willing to suffer in doing good? if then I to avoyd suffering for righteousnesse will secure my selfe by force, and make others afraid of mee; it is evident that I doe not commit my selfe and my cause to God in well doing, but I take it in mine owne hand, to manage it by mine owne strength, and how this will prosper I need not to mention. But now you will perhaps say, How should I become a con∣stant  follower of that which is good?
To answer this, the Doctrin and Rule of Christ is without all   Matth. 7. 11. exception. Whatsoever you would have others to doe to you, doe you to them also; the meaning is, doe you it first unto them, for we are commanded, to consider one another to provoke each other to love and to good workes. If I must consider to provoke, then hee that is to bee provoked to love, hath not yet applyed himself untoThe way to follow that which is good. the dutie, but I am obliged to goe before him in the way there∣of, and therefore I must expresse my love to him first, although hee hath not done his dutie to mee. If then I would have ano∣ther to trust me, it is cleere by this rule, that I must first shew that I doe trust him, but if I shew not this, then I provoke him to the contrary, namely, not to trust mee. And if but the Law, which the Gentiles by common nature knew, were heeded in this case, it would take away the causes of our differences and jea∣lousies, and teach us to follow that which is good. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri nefeceris, What thou wouldest not have done to thy self, doe not thou to any. Is it that thou wouldest not have any feare thee, or suspect thee, or arme himselfe against thee? then doe not thou feare and suspect him, or arme thy selfe against him. Wouldst thou not have all thy faults ript up, and all advantages taken against thee, to bring thee into discre∣dit, then rip not up the faults of others, and take no advanta∣ges against them to discredit them? Wouldst thou not be judg∣ed, condemned and disarmed? doe not judge, condemne and endeavour to disarme others; For with what judgement thou judg∣est,Matth. 7. 2. thou shalt be judged, and with what measure thou dost mete, it shall bee measured unto thee againe; and if thou wilt disarme others and keepe them as captives under thy power, thou must expectRev. 13. 10. Esa. 33. 1. to bee disarmed and led captive under the power of others, for God doth render to every one according to his workes. Wilt thou then follow that which is good? doe not make thy selfe terrible unto any, because thou wouldest have none to be terri∣ble unto thee; cure thine owne distempers, meane well towards others, and as thou hast opportunitie, make the power which thou hast in thine hand serviceable unto others for good; for hee that hath power to doe good to those that are under his power and doth it not, is foolish and weake; and by not using his power to the end for which it is given, doth overthrow him∣selfe by it. Summisque negatum stare diu, things at the height stand not long. Therefore if a man hath not learned of Christ
to deny himselfe in the use of his power, hee must fall under the weight of it; now the weight of it is nothing else but the jea∣lousie of State which it begets in others that are equalls or infe∣riors. I have done with the causes hindering others to confide in us. The second thing to bee considered is, How wee shall finde out2. The way to finde out such as we ought to deale withall is, those that are fittest to entertaine and receive the good which wee doe follow, and in case of aversion from us, how to make them susceptible of better impressions. For to conquer the world, it is not enough to meane well, and to doe that which in it selfe is good, but the good which is done, must bee well placed also. A good seed should be sowen in fruitfull ground, else how will it multiply? Now to doe this, let me offer these thoughts. 1 No man is able exactly to discerne his owne, farre lesse1. To free our selves from prejudice to∣wards all. other mens hearts; our prejudicate opinions deceive us no where more then in the thoughts of persons, the imaginations which wee frame to our selves of others and of their principles insnare our affections, and shut us up from that freedome of spirit towards them which might bee a meanes either to gaine or to discover them to us; for they byas our proceedings and corrupt that ingenuitie, without which wee are darkned, and neither can discerne others, nor be discerned by them in truth. For when wee apply our selves to one this way, and to another that way, and doe not walke equally by the plain Rule of the new creature towards all, wee must needs be intangled, and lose our strength; which is upheld by nothing so much, as by that plainnesse wherein it is alwayes like it selfe. Our various pre∣sumptions of men, and of their different designes, cause us to be with child, and when they have put us in pain, they make us bring forth as it were wind; nor can wee at all worke any deli∣verance in the earth by them to our selves or others, because we bring nothing but earthly wisedome with us, to subdue the spi∣rits of men, before which the inhabitants of the world will ne∣ver fall. Therefore if wee would seeke out and find those that are fit to receive the good which wee would offer to them, let us never take upon us to judge determinately of any man this or that way according to appearances; but leaving him to God and himselfe, let us judge righteous judgement; as wee desire
others to judge and presume of us by the Rules of Charity, so let us apply our thoughts unto them, for this will keep us in a frame of freedome within our selves and ingenuity towards them, without which no safe addresse can bee made unto any. 2 To discover then such as are capable of the good which wee2. To addresse our selves to all by one rule, & observe by whom the good which is offered is resented. doe follow, wee must addresse our selves unto all alike by one and the same Rule of sincerity and truth; and where wee finde that the good which wee have prosecuted is resented, there we should apply our selves more particularly to multiply the mani∣festation thereof unto them, and to fix more deeply the sense thereof into their apprehensions: For where wee see that God doth cause the seed which is sowen to take root, there wee may hope that being watered it will fructifie by his blessing. 3 And although our addresses should bee thus towards all,3. To make a more speciall application to those that are of note. yet this must not hinder a more speciall application of our selfe to some, who are likely to bee more capable then others of good motions: such then as are of good report for piety and parts, such as are noted for temper and moderation from humane passions, and such as are apparently zealous for the workes of Reformation, ought to bee lookt upon with a speciall eye and sought out. They ought to be dealt withall more plainly and more fully, for the setting of their judgements aright and the clearing of doubts which they may have concerning our wayes and principles: and then wee ought also to put an edge upon their affections to concurre with us towards a progresse in pub∣like workes; that the righteousnesse which doth reach alike unto the edification of all, may bee advanced for the complea∣ting of the work of our reformation. 4 And as publick and private reports are not altogether to4. Not to be much swayed with good or evill reports concerning any, but to measure all by the true stan∣dard, the life of Christ in the Spirit. bee slighted for the finding out of men, so are they not either way easily and much to bee credited: for they are carried for the most part by interests, and a man of judgement that doth set a rule unto himselfe in all his wayes, will both on this side and on that side arme himselfe against the strong impressions of evill and good reports. Against the evill ones hee will have in store charitable constructions of things that may bee well taken, lest his spirit be rashly byased to a wrongfull affection against him that deserveth it not; and against the largenesse of the good ones hee will ballance himselfe with discretion and prudence,
lest hee bee swayed through too much credulity to a ground∣lesse confidence in one that may deceive him; and thus keeping himselfe both wayes free, in an equall temper, neither too high nor too low in his apprehensions, to rise and fall with the blasts of reports, hee will bee able to steer an even course in his cari∣age towards all; measuring himselfe and all other men in his and their actions by one and the same rule, which is the life of Christ in the Spirit: for that is the onely standard by which all are to bee measured, that is the onely touchstone by which all spirits are to bee tryed whether they bee true gold or not. In this search and discoverie of persons, although none are to bee excluded of what qualitie and condition soever, yet those that are called Divines are chiefly to bee sought after, because they have a great influence upon the spirits both of the multi∣tude, and also of the ordinary sort of stayed men to sway their affections. Except then wee deale with these men according to these rules to gaine them to our ayme, wee shall finde the wayes of peace and union mainely obstructed, and the gall of bitter∣nesse now stirred and overflowing in many, almost impossible to be allayed. I have done with the discovery of persons fit to bee dealt withall. The third point is concerning the means by which confidence may bee begotten in these towards us, and set a working to∣wards all, for the composure of differences. This meanes I con∣ceive is none other but a free and orderly Treatie to be set a foot between some of us and some of their side. And to the end thatThe meanes to beget confi∣dence is a trea∣tie, of which the requisites are briefly no∣ted. by this meanes mutuall confidence may bee begotten, equall power to propose matters to bee taken into consideration, and equall freedome from awfull prescriptions must bee assured unto all, and an equall engagement must bee conscionably laid upon all alike to meet; to meet I say constantly and never to leave off the Treatie, till the end for which it shall bee undertaken be at∣tained, or at least the course which therein should bee followed shall be brought to a full period. The disagreement was originally about the frame and consti∣tutionThe subject thereof is two∣fold. of Churches, but now it is about the power of setling the government of the Kingdome; the first controversie hath still an influence upon the latter, so that this will never bee
well agreed, without some determination of that. The treaty concerning Civill government, can bee no where1. Concerning civill govern∣ment to bee transacted in the Parlia∣ment. set a foot but in the Parliament. The Parliament is there, where by the Kings authority according to the constitution of the Kingdome, the bodies of Peeres and Commons are met, to or∣der the affaires of the Kingdome intrusted to their care: Onely now for matter of order, it is to bee wished, that the things henceforth to bee debated and voted should looke rather for∣ward then backward: that is, that the Houses should rather determine things tending to our settlement in time to come; then alter or unsettle things present, or call things past into question before our settlement bee in view, or the foundation thereof established. If an Act of Oblivion were past on all sides, for things done in the heat of strife since the parties were for∣med, and positive Counsels entertained for preventing of breaches hereafter; wee might hope to see better dayes shortly, then otherwise wee are like to enjoy in this generation. But I shall leave the civill Treaties to those to whom they are intrusted by the Kingdome, and beseeching the Lord to give them one mind in his feare, to make them all faithfull to their publick trust without selfe-seeking, and interests of parties, I shall speake of a Treatie which may relate unto the settlement of the Churches. This Ecclesiasticall Treatie is of absolute necessitie, that in∣genuous2. Concerning Church mat∣ters. To advance which, men may not mistake one another, as for the most part in these differences they doe; for it is cleer that matters are misunderstood on both sides; and being misrepresented hainously to the simple multitude by many, and no body la∣bouring effectually to rectifie mistakes, our divisions must needs1 Railing is to be restrained on all sides. bee multiplied, and our breaches made greater. If then the free∣dome which hitherto hath been taken and abused on both sides, to traduce each other in the Presse and Pulpit, can neither by authoritie nor by perswasion bee restrained, wee are never like to gaine any advantage for the composure of mens affections by a Treatie, though never so faire, never so orderly, never so peaceable and effectuall in it selfe; for it will never become so unto others; because as long as the windes blow fiercely, the Seas will bee stormie; as long as railing accusations continue, passions will bee raised; and whiles passions rule, conscience is asleepe, judgement is darkned, and men are not capable of rati∣onall
and good proposals. For this Reason also, the men to be chosen for the Treatie on both sides, must not onely be consci∣onable, judicious and learned, but moreover free from all pre∣ingagement and passion. Then the Treatie it selfe although for2. The coun∣tenance of au∣thoritie is to be had to set it afoot. the same cause it may not bee publick (for then it must have publick authoritie, whereupon a thousand inconveniences will follow to make it fruitlesse) yet it must not bee altogether pri∣vate, but should have the foreknowledge and countenance of au∣thoritie to beget it, lest it be wholly slighted and inconsiderable: So then let some of the peaceable and chiefe leading States-men of both sides (being thereto either deputed or allowed by the rest of each side) order and direct the Treatie in a course which shall bee wholly free from partialitie, and let a jealousie be rai∣sed against the intent and purpose of such a Treatie, let it bee declared that it shall not bee to conclude any thing (for that cannot bee done without the full knowledge and consent of parties) but onely to try what hopes there may bee of finding a sure way to procure an accommodation, either by the meanes of a reconcilement, or by the meanes of a mutuall forbearance of inoffensive differences. Such a Treatie of three or at the3. The persons are not to bee many who treat. most of foure chiefe Divines on each side, who should be whol∣ly set apart from all other imployments to apply themselves day and night to this worke, and who should have the free∣dome, at all times severally and joytly without the formalitie of an ordinary Committee to meet, may by Gods blessing be∣come a meanes to lay the ground of a confidence betweene the parties; if onely the fit method and manner of proceeding first in the Treatie it selfe, and then in the communication of that which they shall agree upon can bee observed. The Reasons why I would have no more but three or at the most foure on each side to treat are these. 1 Three or foure truely moderate and quiet spirited men, will bee sooner found, easier spared from other taskes, and be able to meet more frequently, and constantly then a greater number on each side. 2 This smaller number will bee lesse subject to distraction and disagreement within it selfe then a greater number. 3 This number will bee sufficient to make a tryall, and to discover the way towards an Accommodation which without prejudice to either side may bee tendered to all. But if a great
number should bee engaged on each side, they might beget a new division if the parties should not consent unto their results. 4 The way and method of Treating, which is onely saf, and wherein lyeth a secret inforcement towards an agreement in Christianitie cannot be followed by many so well as by few. And to make this good, Let us now speake of the last point which is the method and4. The method and manner of proceeding in the treaty. manner of proceeding both in the Treatie it selfe, and in the communication of the results thereof to gaine the assent of parties. In this method and manner of proceeding, something there must bee preliminary to make the worke more sad and serious to those that goe about it, and these that goe about the work, more pious and conscientious in it. Something there must bee also decretorily observed to make the worke more orderly and effectuall towards the end for which it is to bee set afoot. As for the preliminary or preparatory worke, I would have1. For the preliminaries. the Divines that shall bee chosen and those that doe choose them to meete alone, to set a day privately apart amongst themselves, to seeke Gods face with Fasting and Prayer, that they may re∣ceive his direction in the worke which they shall take in hand. At this time of their humiliation I would have them to be ex∣ercised not onely in Prayers and mutuall exhortations to pro∣voke each other to the duties of fervent love and of sinceritie; but also in conferences whereby they should (as in the pre∣sence of God calling upon him at the proposall of every new matter) deliberate upon three points. First, of the distinct and particular end which they should set before their eyes in their future Treatie to determine it. Secondly, of the speciall and appropriate meanes to reach that end in righteousnesse accor∣ding to the will of God. Thirdly, of the orderly course which should be followed in the prosecution of these meanes by their Treatie amongst themselves. Of which three heads a Note should be made in writing for a memoriall and rule of procee∣ding to bee faithfully observed. Herein all should declare their willingnesse to be engaged towards each other as in the feare and presence of God, and that the engagement may bee more effectually binding, and not liable to doubts in time to come, at the end of the day and of their conference they should attest
and solemnize their mutuall engagement by the subscription of their hands unto an Act or instument which afterward should bee laid up in the Reposiorie where all their other Acts are to bee kept as the ground of their suture proceeding. And I would advise that amongst other things to be mentioned in that Wri∣ting or Instrument, they would oblige themselves expresly un∣to these clauses. 1. That they shall not onely doe all things conscionably and sincerely between God and themselves, but also that they shall deale openly and clearely one toward ano∣ther, without all mentall Reservations, in all points of their Treatie. 2. That they shall looke to nothing in all their con∣sultations but to the prosecution of clear and undeniable duties of Christianitie, without any respect to outward interests to their relations unto parties, or to any humane concernments whatsoever. 3. That none shall secretly divulge or openly publish any thing which in their Treatie shall be agreed upon as an Act, neither by word of mouth or otherwise directly or in∣directly to any; without foreknowledge, leave and full consent of all that are joyned in the Treatie. 4. That nothing in the world shall retard or stop them from endeavouring to proceed constantly towards the Period of their Treatie which they shall have agreed upon to prosecute. And for the better observation of these clauses I would ad∣vise the States-men themselves by whose authority they should bee called and appointed to meet; not to desire to know any of the results of their Treatie, before it bee brought to a full Period, and they of themselves thinke it fit to impart the same unto them. I have pregnant reasons for this, which I need not here to mention. It will bee absolutely most expedient, that immediatly after the first meeting (wherein the States-men should be with them to enter them upon their work) they should whol∣ly leave them unto themselves; except onely to call upon them now and then from time to time to encourage them to proceed constantly without interruption. And thus much for the preparative ingagements, now I come2. For the worke it self and the way to proceed there∣in. to the work of the meeting to give advice concerning the matter, the manner, and the circumstances thereof, to make it orderly within it self, and without all prejudice effectuall towards others, which will bee if the right way of communicating their results be taken and followed.
In these things I shall bee brief, because the particular deter∣mination of all things of this nature, doth belong properly to those that are appointed to meet; yet because generalls may give without all prejudice some overtures to advance their ne∣gotiation; I shall offer these following thoughts to their con∣sideration. First▪ then I conceive that all their meetings to treat should begin and end with prayers, and that by turnes one of each side should preside and lead their actions, so that every time by course a new man should have the chaire. Secondly, he that doth preside or lead the action shall gather the results and put them to paper; and after the Treatie they shall be registred in the booke of their Acts, and at the end of every meeting subscribed by all. Thirdly, there shall bee two books kept, one containing the Diurnall or brief Narrative of the daily proceedings of each Mee∣ting: another containing nothing else but the results of each trea∣tie, or the advices which shall be agreed upon, to advance the ac∣commodation of differences▪ 4 To keepe these two bookes there shall be a peculiar Trunk or Chest or Box, with two severall lockes fixed to the meeting place, and every one of the one side shall have a key for the one locke, and every one of the other side a key for the other lock, so that none of either side alone shall bee able to open the Chest, but any two of both sides shall have power to doe it; and to make use of their Registers as they shall think good. 5 The times of their meetings should bee constantly appoin∣ted once for all, and inviolably observed, because they are wholly to bee set apart to attend the worke without inter∣ruption. 6 If at any time by reason of some invincible impediment, as of sicknesse or some other unavoidable accident, one of the number be absent, the meeting shall not bee void; yet the Acts thereof shall not be Registred, till he that was absent hath seen them and approved of them. 7 Nothing shall bee carried by the major part of voices, what is not consented unto by all shall not bee any Act. 8 The matter of the Treatie shall not bee concerning doctri∣nall truths, because it is supposed that there is no materiall diffe∣rence
therein between the parties: but concerning practicall du∣ties relating either to the constitution or to the government of the Churches, or to the exercise of Religious worship, in a pri∣vate or publick way. 9 The manner of their Treaty shall not proceed by way of debate and dispute to argue what is right or wrong, in respect of the particular practises of parties, but it shall proceed in the way of positive Declarations and Answers unto certaine Que∣stions, which shall bee proposed as cases of conscience, to be re∣solved from the Word of God, and the undeniable principles of Christianitie. 10. He then that sitteth in the chaire shall aske of every one what matter he would have taken into consideration; what shall be offered by every one shall be noted in a memoriall by it self; then the question shall be in what order the things offered shall be thought upon, and when that which is to be first in order shall be determined, a question shall bee framed thereof, as a case of conscience to be resolved by the word; from which every one shall gather his Answer, and bring it in against the next meeting in writing, and when the writings are compared, that wherein they all doe agree, shall onely be taken as a result of their Trea∣tie; and that wherein they differ shall be left untouched, except some proposall be made which doth take with all, for the re∣concilement of the difference. 11. In bringing in their answers they shall avoid large discour∣ses, and set downe that which they shall deliver, upon the point to be resolved, in short Aphorismes and Propositions per thesim & Antithesim: and to facilitate the matter, each side should contract their severall answers into one summe, containing that in which they all doe agree; that so at their meeting together, the com∣parison may be made onely between two writings, out of which the agreement is to be extracted, as a common result upon the Question which was proposed. 12. When the resolutions of all profitable questions tending to an accommodation of our differences, shall be thus gathered without contradictory debates into cleer and distinct propositi∣ons, which shall be taken from Gods Word, to be offered as an advice unto the dissenting parties towards an agreement; then they shall be put into some order and ranked under their proper
heads of matters, to be communicated unto the rest of each side. 13. The way of communicating matters I conceive may be this: First, let the prelimitary determinations of the Treaty be pub∣lished3. For the communica∣tion of that which shall be concluded. by setting forth the Art and Instrument of the mutuall engagement of those that are called to the Treaty, and let this be done immediately after the Treaty is begun, to the end that the rest of both sides may know the end of the Treaty, and be desired to recommend the effect thereof to God in their publike and private Prayers. Secondly, when the Treaty is at an end, let there be a brief Narrative published of the order and method of proceeding used in the Treaty, to let all see how equally and amiably matters have been carried. Thirdly, when this is done towards all indifferently, then let the results of all the deliberations upon all the questions be prin∣ted, but not made common to all; onely first to the States-men who set the Treaty afoot a certain number of copies are to be im∣parted, that they may distribute and send the same to the most peaceable and moderate spirits of each side, to engage them to declare how farre they give their assent thereunto, and when the chief shall have declared their sense thereof, and it doth appeare that the advise is not rejected; the Houses of Parliament may be moved to move the Assembly of Divines to declare their sense and approbation of the same; which being done, the Houses should concurre with their authority not onely to permit, but to recommend the practise thereof unto all. Thus I have done for the present with these suggestions rather to satisfie your desire, and discharge mine owne conscience, then that I have any great hope they will be laid to heart; yet who knoweth where this seed may fall, and what God may do with it? I know assuredly that he will do good to Israel to those that are ofPsal. 73. 1. Matth. 5. 9. Jam. 3. 18. a cleane heart: I know that the peace-makers are pronounced blessed and called the Sonnes of God, and that the fruit of righteousnesse is sowen in peace of them that make peace.
What are the Lets of Reconciliation, And the Causes of DIVISIONS, And how to be remedied. Sect II. YOu know what hopes you gave me, that some effectual course would be followed to reconcile our differences about matters of Religion. I did thereupon impart un∣to you very freely my thoughts concerning the whole businesse, how it might be ad∣vanced as I conceived. Since that time being here at London, theThe Treaty of an accommo∣dation begun at London. hopes which you gave me were confirmed by the zeale and for∣wardnesse of those, who in the City gave occasion to the best af∣fected to meet at several conferences, whereof the aime was very laudable and necessary, viz. to prevent both in Church and State the imminent dangers of Tyranny on the one hand, and of Anarchie on the other: and to finde out and set on foot the meanes of brotherly unity and amiable concurrence in carrying on the work of our present Reformation. What the particular causes are wherefore the motions thenBut without effect left off. made were not effectual, and the conferences of this kinde have since been left off: I shall not at all mention, for you know them well enough; and we all have just cause to mourne for this, that in our outward profession of the Gospel, there is so little true spiritual zeale for necessary duties of Communion, and so much for private concernments; and that our disease if
wee continue long in these distempers, is like to prove reme∣dilesse. As for me; although I cannot but lay this sadly to heart, yet I doe not suffer the discouragements which cause most men de∣spaire to worke upon my spirit any fainting impressions: but have rather given way to a charitable inclination, which I love to entertaine within my self, which is, to hope for a possibilitie of our reconcilement, notwithstanding all the backwardnesse which is apparent in the leading men of both side. I have (I say) kept up my spirits, in a resolution to proceed in these mo∣tions partly upon this hope, partly upon other principles, thenThe false Prin∣ciples of some men in spiri∣tuall enterpri∣ses. I perceive most men doe walke by: for most men move onely as they finde cause by outward appearances to expect the successe of their enterprises, and some are so very tender of their repute of being engaged, that except they bee sure of gaining what they pretend to seeke, they will not hazzard their labour, nor seeme forward in any thing, although in it self never so answerable un∣to the way of God in the Gospell. But I have beene otherwise taught to look upon my self: I shall never value my credit a∣mongst men, or my paines above my duty; I shall never bee afraid to be counted a foole to the prudent of this age, and to lose my labour for the Gospels sake. Hee that cannot freely venture the reputation of his prudencie upon the ground of a dutie, without consulting the appearances of flesh and blood, is not yet instructed to walke by Faith and above sense, and hee that is not willing to serve Christ without successe, is not worthy to bee imployed by him. Therefore I conceive that in this bu∣sinesse of seeking peace and ensuing it, which God doth command me to doe, Psal. 34. 14. and of maintaining peace, if it bee possible, and as much as in me lyeth, which in like manner is commanded, Rom. 12. 18. (I say in this businesse thus injoyned and bound up∣onWhat the re∣solution ought to be of him that seeketh peace accor∣ding to Gods will. my conscience) I conceive that I owe to God an implicit obe∣dience; that is to say, an obedientiall resolution, and an attempt to doe what I can towards the effect, although I see no appea∣rance of successe: for he that commands me to bunt peace, doth presuppose that it will flee from me, and when it is fled, hee that doth bid me overtake it, and if I overtake it, to hold it fast if it bee possible, and as much as in me lyeth, doth not therefore give me any assurance that I shall overtake it, and bee able to hold it; but
this onely hee requireth, that I should do my utmost endeavors. Now if I demurre upon the matter, and will not do this except I can perceive that I shall bee able to doe it, as I pretend for myWhat the lets of such a reso∣lution are. credit: in this case I serve not the will of him that commands me, but mine owne: for I walke not in the obedience of Faith, but in the dictates of my phansie: for now I leane to mine owne understanding, and suffer the pride of my heart to bee my coun∣sellour, which being unwillling to be foiled in any undertaking, doth make me quit the worke, because I thinke I shall not have the credit of it. But if for some other reasons, I demurre upon the dutie and suspend mine action, as perhaps, because I see not I can gaine this or that benefit by it; or because I thinke it not seasonable to appeare till matters of State bee so and so contri∣ved; that such and such a businesse may come in at such a time for such a designe, &c. (although in matters meerely humane, ar∣bitrary and externall, I doe not blame this prudentiall contri∣vance; yet I say) if any such consideration should by as my re∣solution towards the performance of that which in it self is a dutie, and of a spirituall nature, (as I feare it doth with many) then I walke no more by the grace of God in simplicitie, but by the wisedome of men in the world; then my aime is not to serve Christ, but rather to make use of Christ and his kingdome, and of my interest in the work of the Gospel to serve either mine own turne or the turnes of other earthly men out of it; and if I doe so, it is cleer that I doe the worke of the Lord deceitfully, and the reward of an hypocrite will be given to me. Upon these grounds I have laid aside all such hidden things of darknesse, which I have seen sway with some in the works of this nature; and therefore I am perswaded I have herein a good conscience towards God, which doth give mee confidence to cast my selfe upon him, hoping for a blessing upon these endea∣vours, because I looke to nothing but the doing of his will therein. Although then I may ingenuously confesse that I cannot ra∣tionallyMotives disswading the publication of the ensuing Treatie. foresee, as the times now are, and as most men stand affected to each other, that these motions will bee entertained (for they will sute no ends of parties) but am rather apt to con∣ceive that some who thinke themselves wise, will laugh at mee, and at this discourse; that most will not relish the motions, as
being somewhat out of the common way; that many will mis∣take my meaning, misconstrue my aime, and fall foul upon me perhaps for what they have misconstrued and mistaken. And finally that few or none that seeme to bee Pillars, will heartily joyne and help to advance either these or other impartiall wayesMotives indu∣cing there∣unto. of peace. (I say) although this may bee confessed; yet I cannot forbeare to offer these thoughts unto you, both that I may discharge my conscience towards God in the vow which I have made to prosecute Peace and Truth, by walking in the light (whatsoever some may or doe thinke of mee) and also that they may stand not onely for mee as a witnesse, that I have sought without partialitie the wayes as well of Truth as of Peace amongst Brethren: but also rise up in judgement (if you thinke good to publish them) against those, who for worldly ends and selfe will (lest they should seeme to lose ground) keep us at a distance, and ma∣king our divisions irreconciliable weaken our hands in the Go∣spel. Here I desire not to bee mistaken, for I say not that anyWhy some do keep up our differences & what guilt they draw upon themselves thereby. doe purposely intend (except they be the Emissaries of Jesuits, of which too many are crept in amongst us, in this dissolution of all order) to make our divisions irreconciliable; and to wea∣ken our hands in the Gospel: God forbid that any professing the Gospel should bee thought so maliciously partiall. But this I I meane to say freely; that all such as by the management or composure of these differences seeke any way rather to please themselves, then in the spirit of meeknesse to please others to their edification; I say of these, that they keepe us at a distance, that they widen our breaches, that they make our divisions by little and little irreconciliable, and so they weaken both their owne, and their Brethrens hands in the Gospel, and herein they not taking heed to themselves, principally serve no bodies turne but Satans; and become his instruments most effectually to hin∣der the power and prevalencie of the Truth. For it is Satans maine interest, above all others to set and keep the Ministers ofWhat Satans interest is in the differenc of Ministers. the Gospel at variance amongst themselves, and disagreeing in the way of their testimonie. For as long as they are kept so, he is sure that the world, the wickednesse and greatnesse there∣of, and the height of men will not fall before the throne of Jesus Christ by their meanes. For if wee will look upon Satans
kingdome, and consider the wayes by which hee doth set up, and settle the Mystery of iniquity in opposition to the king∣dome of God among men; wee shall perceive that one of them is this. That hee being the Prince of this world, doth establish the government thereof by meere power and deceiving Policie. This government hee endeavoureth alwayes to put in theHow Satan doth prosecute his interest. hands of such men, who intend to make use thereof onely for their owne ends, which commonly are none other but greatnesse and glory: for this cannot be denyed, that as the way of self∣deniall and humilitie is proper to Christ and his Kingdome: So the practises of men in seeking themselves by power and policie are the works of Satans spirit, and of their owne corruption in order to his designes. And as the end of naturall men in the world, is onely to maintaine and inlarge themselves, according to their owne will by their owne wayes; so the end of Satan in teaching them to manage their affaires, rather by power and policie, with an absolute command, then by loving perswasions and convictions of the mind, with the evidence and demonstra∣tion of the Truth, is onely to oppose in the soules of men the kingdome of Christ which is the light of Truth and the life of righteousnesse and holinesse. For by these Christ is the King and Conquerour of soules; for by the light of Truth he ruleth in the understanding, and by the power of righteousnesse and holinesse he ruleth in the will and affections of his subjects: if then Satan can gaine the opportunitie to set his ministers a worke, who by the outward meanes of power and policie for their owne temporall ends, draw away mens minds from the at∣tention unto, and the apprehension of Truth; and put out of their affections, the frame of meeknesse, love and humility, wherein the life of righteousnesse and holinesse doth stand; if (I say) he can get such instruments, which hee can act either directly or indi∣rectly to draw mens windes from the way of Christ by this way of his owne creating; then he hath clearely gained his end; be∣cause he will be able to keepe mens understandings in darknesse; that is, in ignorance or doubt of the truth; and their will and affections in confusion and disorder, that is, in a frame oppositThe direct meanes of erecting Satans kingdome. to the Law of God and his righteousnesse. Now Satan will bee able to doe this directly by his instru∣ments, when hee can cause the profession of ignorance to be ad∣vanced,
set up and commended by authority, or commanded by a Law, or when hee can cause the knowledge and practise of any thing; besides that which is setled by meer humane authority for certain ends of State to be made a crime punishable by death, by infamie or by any other penaltie, and when he can cause the whole frame and profession of Religion to bee fitted onely to establish that greatnesse, wherein the glory of the outward state and the authority of his instruments doth consist. All which Satan doth with a high hand grosly in the Mahumetan, but with more subtiltie, and most compleatly in the Papall state; and this hee is able to doe every where else in some competent measure wheresoever the maximes of absolute dominion are maintained, and where the great Idoll of Politicians, which is called the reason or interest of State is onely worshipped; and the true reason and interest of Conscience and Religion is laid aside and comparatively not at all regarded: I say wheresoever this course is followed, there Satan is able to oppose the king∣dome of Christ directly. But where hee cannot attaine to this hee taketh the neerestThe indirect means where∣by Satan sets up his king∣dome. way hee can to gaine the same purpose indirectly, which is done by making all doctrines of Truth doubtfull, and all Gospel Or∣dinances full of confusion. Now to make all Truths doubtfull, hee raiseth disputes, and doth find out wayes to make them undecidable: and this he doth chiefly by the meanes of those that should bee the unanimous witnesses of that Truth, which is called into question, when they are disunited amongst themselves. And to confound the Ordinances, he setteth every one promiscuously upon the ad∣ministration thereof in his owne way; not onely by giving a freedome unto all both to doe without controule what they please in such matters, and to condemne and oppose every one that is not of their way; but also by disanulling the authoritie by which all order should bee setled in Church and Common∣wealth. And to bring all this to passe, his main endeavour is to cause the Ministers of the Gospel, either to bee subordinate unto his ministers in all things at their will; or by variance of judgement amongst themselves, and difference of practises from each other to lose their way; to neglect the rules of unitie and forbearance which the Word prescribeth to uphold the com∣munion▪
of Saints, which is their strength; to breake the bonds of love and peace; and having ingaged them into quarrels, to bring them within the compasse of his reach, that is, to move them to act their controverties, by the wayes of the power and policie of his kingdome for self aimes: For if hee once can cor∣rupt the simplicitie of their mindes so, that they minde not true∣ly the dutie of being conformable to the Word in every thing, and to the spirituall aime of Christs walking in the world; and if he can ingage them into worldly designes to advance the same in a worldly way, hee hath gotten them cleerly within his reach; where he will endeavour to the utmost, first to cause them utterly forget and lay aside the aime of their spirituall cal∣ling. Secondly, to allure them unto, and affect them with the appearance and glory of his dominion. Thirdly, to act them by the principles of outward feares and hopes to that which hee would have them doe; and when hee hath once gotten them thus farre under the power of this snare, he will be able with∣out resistance to carry them headlong amongst themselves to more and more uncharitablenesse and unconscionablenesse of conversation, whereby breaches will bee multiplied and made irreconciliable. For although a difference arise but from a very small and circumstantiall matter amongst them (as it doth na∣turally fall out amongst other men;) yet Satan aiming at them above all others, to get advantages against them, if he doth find them in such a case; either without brotherly and charitable affections, or inclined to please themselves; hee will bee able to worke upon them first jealousies, and by jealousies mistakes, and by mistakes a distance and strangenesse, by reason of worldly aimes differently carried on; and when plots and passi∣ons are come to some maturitie, crosse courses and mutuall pro∣vocations will bee set on foot, reall injuries will bee offered; complaints and clamours will break forth, which in continuance make the divisions of hearts past all remedy, and irreconcilia∣ble: because it is not possible that men who aime at worldly matters, should deny themselves either the use of their wit and passions in the prosecution of their designe, or neglect the strength which they have in hand, when they thinke it can serve their turne. For if they should doe so, they should seeme to quit their designes, and so lose at once both the credit and
profit thereof, which to men that make use of their reason onely to compasse their owne will; and to that effect can employ both power and policie, is a thing altogether insufferable, as being no lesse contemptible then folly, and as hatefull as death. This I conceive to bee one of the mysteries of iniquity, by which Satan doth prevaile against the Ministers of the Gospel even against many men that are otherwise godly and able, but are not sufficiently aware of his wiles, by which they are drawn from their owne and ensnared in his way, by which meanes their hands being weakned in their work, hee gaineth his end at least indirectly by their infirmities and miscarriages. Therefore all such as are conscionably sensible of their own frailties and of those dangers, should bee wakened from securi∣tie to become watchfull over their owne souls in these times of temptation: for amongst the Protestant Churches, where, with the increase of knowledge, a true sense of Christian libertie is begotten in the minds of professors; Satan hath none other way to fit to erect his kingdome as this is, of dividing the Ministers: for which cause as wee see their divisions daily in∣creased, so the remedies should be the more earnestly thought upon, and offereed with freedome and tendernesse unto all in∣differently, but chiefly to those who are neerest in principles, and have least cause to walke asunder and b at a distance. These remedies can bee none other, but the helpes to holyThe remedy against Satans way of corrup∣ting the mini∣stery. communion amongst Ministers in the prosecution of spiritu∣all aimes, tending to the advancement of Truth and Peace. For the unitie of their spirits in the simplicitie of Truth is their strength: and the evidence of grace without worldly wisedome in their walking, will make them not onely invincible, but even irresistible: because the power of the Word of life, which is a two-edged Sword; and the armour of righteousnesse on the right hand and on the left (when they are handled in sinceritie without all mixture of humane policie) will bee prevalent to2 Cor. 2. 1. make them triumph in Christ, and to cause the inhabitants of the world to fall in due time before them; that in the day of Christs power (which wee hope is approaching) all the strong holds of Satan may be surrendred unto him. This ensuing discourse then concerning unitie and forbea∣rance,
to shew the ground, termes, and motives thereof, was byThe end of the ensuing dis∣course, and the occasion of putting it to paper. me conceived, as a proposall of matters belonging properly to the consideration of the Orthodox▪ Ministers of this king∣dome, who dissent onely from each other in the way of go∣vernment; that if our private or publique conferences had con∣tinued as they were begun in simplicitie, the heads thereof might have been a subject of further deliberation amongst us; For to that effect they were put to paper at the desire of some, but seeing the motions tending to a reconcilement of our Religious differences seeme to be obstructed so, that there is little or no hope to gaine any further meetings and conferences in this kind, and for this aime; therefore I have enlarged them a little andAnd of enlar∣ging and pub∣lishing the same. altered the frame thereof somewhat, and now shall leave them to you to bee disposed of as God shall direct you for the pub∣lick good to make use of them. For whether the obstruction of these thoughts of reconcilement, arise from the unwilling∣nesse of some, who perhaps thinke it not wisedome to ven∣ture their paines in such a way, or from the State contrive∣ments, or preingagements; and combinations of others, who by any of these meanes, thinke themselves strong enough to gain their own desires another way. Whether (I say) from any, or from all of those causes, the obstruction doth arise, it is to mee a matter of no discouragement, but rather an occasion to bee willing to appeare so as I am, in the presence of God free from interests, and before men, without all pretence to wise∣dome, strength and authoritie: That so farre as those moti∣ons shall be found agreeable to the will of God, and sutable to the conscience of those, whose wisedome, strength and au∣thoritie is the obedience of Faith in performing their dutie, they may be entertained with singlenesse of heart, and if so many of us as have freed our spirits from the bondage of feares and hopes in respect of outward matters, and have given our selves upto walke openly, by knowne and undeniable rules, and by the Law of unprejudicate love to bee without offence towards all, should but resolve upon this provocation, to lay the mat∣ter of dutie represented therein, more seriously to heart then hitherto wee have done, and to ripen further thoughts con∣cerning the same; who knoweth what God may work there∣by? It is not impossible for him to blow upon the dead bones
of our scattered affections, from the wayes of peace and com∣munion, to bring them to a concurrence in the acknowledge∣ment of some rules which shall relate to nothing but his owne will; and if any such spirit of life be breathed but in a few of us, we may hope that it will not be without effect towards others; but that some resolutions may ensue, which God will blesse with successefulnesse in the prosecution. However I am resolved without all appearance of successe to cast this bread up∣on the waters, and commending my self unto his providence, leave these papers to you to be disposed of, as you shall think fit in your discretion, which with your self is recommended to the grace of God.
THE Moderator: Endeavouring A full Composure and quiet Settlement of those many Differences both in Doctrine and Discipline, which have so long di∣sturbed the Peace and welfare of this COMMON-WEALTH. CHAP. I. The Introduction, shewing the Scope and Matter of the Discourse. ALthough the case is doleful, and highly to be lamented, that there is no where in the world so much strife and division apparent, as amongst those that are named Christians, nor that amongst any Christians greater a∣nimosities do break forth, then sometimes amongst those that are the Ministers of the Gospel: yet this is a most certaine and undeniable Truth, and worthy of all acceptation, That the Doctrine of Christiani∣ty in it self, is nothing else but the glad tidings of everlasting
peace; that therein Christ is revealed to bee the Prince of love and peace; that none but his followers are capable of peace and unitie with God; and that amongst men the true directions to live in love and peace one with another, are no where to bee found, but in his kingdome. Which being so, it will follow (notwithstanding all these divisions) that none should more willingly undertake, nor can more profitably entertaine the thoughts of peace and unitie, for the composure of differences and ending of strife amongst men, then they whom God hath called to bee Preachers of his Gospel, and whom hee hath ap∣pointed to bee witnesses of the Covenant of his grace and peace. And seeing all they to whom this Covenant is tendred, and by whom it is received through Faith; are bound to live in the unitie of Faith and Love, as being all one in Christ, and con∣federates one to another by vertue of that Covenant; There∣fore I shall offer my selfe in the way of the heavenly calling (as one to whom the Gospell is revealed, and to whom the testimo∣ny of Jesus in the Covenant of peace is committed) unto those that are my Brethren in the same Ministery, humbly intreating them all, but chiefly such as are most conscionably wise in loo∣king rather to the will of God in the duties of their Ministeriall function, then to the interests of a partie amongst men, to ob∣serve and consider with me, concerning the wayes of Unitie and Forbearance which they ought to mind amongst themselves, and acquaint their hearers withall, these three assertions. First, that the ground wherefore they ought to professe and practise Ʋnitie and Forbearance one towards another, is the undeniable Law of Christian Brotherhood. Secondly, that the Termes of Ʋnitie whereunto they have already at∣tained, are full and satisfactory, and that the termes of the Forbea∣rance which they should intend to practise are plain and easie to be ac∣knowledged and setled amongst them. Thirdly, that the Motives which should induce them to the acknow∣ledgement, profession, practise; and setlement thereof; are as strong as unavoydable necessitie, and the highest relation unto dutie can make them. And to make good these three Assertions, I shall with as much brevitie as I can declare my sense thereof distinctly and plainly,
without any great inlargements, as intending chiefly to speak to men of understanding. CHAP. II. Of the first Assertion. Concerning the Law of Christian Brotherhood, what it is, and whereunto to hinds us. THe undeniable Law of Christian Brotherhood is this, That all such who are begotten of the same heavenly Father, by the same Word of Truth, in the some wombe of the free woman, the Jerusalem which is above, are children of God, and truely brethren one to another in Christ, and having the same sense of their relation one to another in Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious profession, the same rules to walke by, in the houshold of faith, they are bound to acknowledge each other to be Brethren, and as Brethren to walk together in holy Com∣munion for the administration and observation of Christs Ordinances in that whereunto they have attained, and to beare with one another in that whereunto they have not yet attained. Now so it is, that such as are acknowledged to bee Orthodox and godly Ministers in this Kingdome of England, are begot∣ten of the same heavenly Father, by the same Word of Truth, (which is the doctrine of Faith revealed in the Scriptures) in the same wombe of the true Church, and have the same sense of their relation unto Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious profession have the same Rules to walke by. Therefore it followeth undeniably, that they are truely Bre∣thren one to another in Christ, and that they are bound in conscience to acknowledge each other to bee Brethren, and as Brethren to walke together in Holy Communion, for the ad∣ministration and observation of Christs Ordinances in that whereunto they have attained, and to beare with one another in that whereunto they have not yet attained. And lest any should make a doubt of this Truth; the first pro∣position expressing the Law of Brotherhood, shall bee shewed from cleer places of Scripture, and the second containing an
application thereof unto the Ministery of this kingdome, shall bee verified of them by a more speciall deduction of the particu∣lars expressed therein. The places of Scripture wherein the Law of Brotherhood is cleerly manifested, are amongst many others these. Christ saith to his Disciples. Matth. 23. 8. All yee (namely, my Disciples) are Brethren. Rom. 8. 29. Whom hee (viz. the Father) did foreknow be also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Sonne, that he might bee the firstborne amongst many Brethren. Ergo, they are made all brethren unto Christ, and so Brethren to each other. Jam. 1. 18. Of his owne will, hee (viz. the Father) begot us (viz. beleevers) by the Word of Truth. Ergo they all being chil∣dren of the same Father and begotten of the same seed, are Bre∣thren to each other. Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him (viz. Christ) to them hee gave power to become the Sonnes of God, even to them that beleeve in his name. Ergo, those that receive Christ the same way, are alike Sonnes of God, and a like his Brethren. Heb. 2. 12. I will declare (saith Christ) thy name unto my Brethren. Ergo, if Christ doth owne beleevers before God as his Brethren, shall they not own one another as such? 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit wee are all Baptized into one Body. Ergo, those that have received the same Spirit are bound to be∣come one body, and consequently to bee united together as members one of another. Ephes. 4. 4, 5, 6. There is one body and one Spirit, one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all. If all these are one and the same in and to all beleevers, then all beleevers are united unto each other by them, and woe bee to such that by their divisions give the world cause to beleeve, that there is not one body, but many, nor one spirit, but many, nor one hope, nor one Lord, nor one Faith, nor one Baptisme, but many, nor one God, but many. Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem which is above, is free, the mother of us all. If we are of one Father and Mother, then undeniably Brethren to each other. Phil. 2. 1, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, fulfill yee
my joy, that ye bee like minded, having the same love, being of one ac∣cord, of one mind. Ergo, such as are in Christ and made partakers of the same spirit, are bound to have fellowship one with ano∣ther, and in their fellowship to impart to each other matters of full joy, by mutuall consolation and comfort, by mutuall bowels and mercies; and to bee able to doe all this, they must studie unitie amongst themselves, in the same mind and in the same love. Phil. 3. 16. Whereunto wee have attained already, let us walke by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Ergo, Brethren, though not agreed in all things, yet are bound to professe so farre as they are agreed. Ephes. 4. 1, 2, 3. Walke worthy of the vocation wherewith yee are called, with all lowlinesse and meeknesse, with long suffering, for bea∣ring one another in love; endeavouring to keepe the unitie of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ergo, it is a part of our calling wherewith wee are called, to practise mutuall Forbearance; to the end, that Unitie and peace may bee preserved, and such as mind not the dutie of Forbearance, have therein renounced their calling. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing you have purified your soules in obeying the Truth through the Spirit unto unfained love of the Brethren; see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently. Ergo, one of the ends for which the Spirit is given to make us obedient to the Truth for the san∣ctification of our soules, is this; that we should affectionately expresse our love unto the Brethren. In these places wee see what the ground of the Law of Brotherhood is amongst true Christians, and what the duties thereof are. But if neither this Law, nor the duties thereof bee at all regar∣ded by those that pretend to bee the chief of Christians, is it not either a testimony against them, that they indeed are not what they pretend to be true, and faithfull Ministers of the Gospel of peace? or if they needs will be counted such; is it not then before the world a testimony against the Gospel it self and Chri∣stianitie, that it is not amongst us what it is said to bee, viz. the way of true love and peace? Therefore the great Character of true Christians is to bee laid to heart seriously in these times of universall strife, wherein all pretend more then others unto Christ, namely this which Christ hath given us himself, Joh. 13. 35. Hereby shall all men know that yee are my Disciples if ye have
love one to another. From whence must needs follow, that if yee have no love one to another, by this all men shall know, that ye are not his Disciples. Therefore let us not deceive our selves, it is not the bare dogmaticall knowing of the truth that will ap∣prove us to be Christs Disciples, there must bee a reall practise of it, and this practise is nothing else but to walke in love, as Christ hath loved us: For herein wee shall approve our selves to be deareEphes. 5, 1, 2. children and followers of God, because the new commandements which Christ hath given us, John 13. 34. is this, That yee love one ano∣ther, as I have loved you, that yee also love one another. And John his beloved Disciple tells us, that wee know that wee have passed from death unto life, because wee love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. from whence hee doth in the same place inferre this consequence: hee that loveth not his brother abideth in death. Let therefore no man flatter himselfe with a vaine shew of the Truth of Christianitie; this is an infallible Rule; None is a Christian indeed and truth but hee that loveth the Brethren. If then we can make it appeare that the Ministers of this kingdome are to esteeme one another truely Brethren because fully united unto Christ, and that by the Law of Christian Brotherhood they are bound to make profession of that unitie, and to behave them∣selves one towards another, as it becommeth the Brethren of Jesus Christ, and the brethren of each other in Christ; if (I say) wee can make these things appeare to bee an undoubted dutie, then wee may hope, that on the one hand such as pre∣tend to be Christians, and yet minde not at all this distin∣guishing dutie, but continuing to walke offensively in strife with every one, dishonour their profession, will bee discovered to bee voyd of truth; and on the other hand such as are sincere will bee stirred up to shew themselves zealous in the way of Truth, for the effectuall performance of the duties of Brotherly Uni∣tie and Forbearance towards all those whom they are bound to acknowledge to belong to Jesus Christ no lesse them∣selves.
CHAP. III. Of the second Assertion. Concerning the Termes of Ʋnitie and Forbearance in generall. BY Vnitie wee meane the concurrence of mens judgments, affections and actions about the same thing in one and the same way, and for the same end. By Forbearance wee meane the refraining from uncharitable and unkindly affections and behaviours towards another in some things, although there bee some difference between us and him in judgement and in the way of acting about these things. By the termes of Ʋnitie and Forbearance wee understand all those things, which determine the judgement and conscience of a Christian to the profession and practise of these duties, as hee oweth them unto Christ and his members. As then the profession and practise of Ʋnitie is grounded upon the Law of Brotherhood according to that of Abraham unto Let: Let there be no strife between me and thee, I pray thee, for weeGen. 13. 8. bee Brethren: So the profession and practise of Forbearance must bee grounded upon the Termes of some Unitie: for where there is no Unitie at all, if ever the disunited parties come within the reach of one another, there no Forbearance can be expected; but where there is some Unitie, because there also will be some concurrence, therefore there will needs follow thereupon some restraint of strife, which is a Forbearance: for the affections of men are to bee answerable to the natures of things; as then things wholly opposit, cannot possibly agree to beare one with another, in that wherein their opposition doth lie, when they are are to act upon the same subject; no more then things agreeing can intend to oppose and destroy each other in that wherein their agreement doth lie: So it is with the Motions of mens spirits, both in the way of opposition and agreement, when either of these is fundamentall. For as in case of oppositi∣on the Apostle doth argue thus, 2 Cor. 6. 14. What fellowship hath righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse? what communion hath light with darknesse? and what concord hath Christ with Balial? So in case of
agreement he argueth in like manner thus, 1 Cor. 12. 21. 26. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor againe the head to the feet, I have no need of you. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honoured, all the members rejoyce with it. So then all Forbearance from strife and opposition, must proceed from the presupposall of some Unitie; and where no Unitie is presupposed, there can be no such Forbearance: There∣fore before wee can speake of the termes of Forbearance, wee must consider first the termes of our agreement, to see how full and satisfactory these will be found. CHAP. IV. Concerning the termes of Vnitie by themselves what they are, why not regarded, and wherefore they ought to bee regarded. THe thing whereof wee are to make enquiry at this time is this, Whether yea or no the termes of Ʋnitie whereunto the Mi∣nisters of this Kingdome which are counted Orthodox and godly have already attained, are not full and satisfactory to make them acknow∣ledge one another to be Brethren? If it can bee made out that the termes of their Unitie are such, then it may bee inferred that they ought to behave themselves each to other as it becommeth brethren, which to the grief of many is very slightly, or not at all performed. Now to resolve the question, let us consider that which maketh men fully and satisfactorily brethren in Christ; whether it bee not truely found in them, although by many of them not at all regarded. Wee shall say then, that which formerly hath been asserted; If such as are acknowledged to bee godly and Orthodox MinistersWhat the termes of bro∣therly unitie are. in this kingdome are begotten of the same heavenly Father, by the same Word of Truth, in the same true Church; and have the same sense of their relation unto Christ, and in all the chief Acts of their Religious profession have the same rules to walke by; then they have attained alrea∣dy unto that unitie, which is full and satisfactory to make them ac∣knowledge one another to bee Brethren. But so it is, that they are thus beten, that they have this sense of their Relation to Christ, and
these Rules to walke by in their Religious profession. Therefore the Vnitie whereunto they have already attained is full and satisfactory, to make them acknowledge one another to be Brethren. To these three heads then the particular termes of their Vnitie are to bee re∣ferred, viz. 1. To the doctrine of Truth, which is the seed of the heaven∣ly Father begetting them to himself. 2. To the sense of their Re∣lation unto Christ in the Church. 3. And to the Rules of their religi∣ous walking; that if in every one of these the Unitie whereunto they have already attained bee found fully satisfactory to oblige them to a mutuall acknowledgment of Brotherhood; then the publick profession thereof, may not any longer bee held in un∣righteousnesse, as it is done by many to the great dishonour of their Ministery, and of Christianitie it self. For it is a very sad thing and extreamly destructive to the honour of true Christianitie, to see those men, that in all main things are fully agreed, and cannot bee otherwise esteemed as to men, then truely sincere and godly in their walking, not onely toThe cause why brotherhood is so little regar∣ded. drive opposit designes and courses one to another in Religious matters, without just cause, but even hatefully, to seeme willing to destroy one another onely through want of charitie in them∣selves, and for meer infirmities and incivilities in others, which the fundamentall Lawes and aimes of Christianity oblige them to beare withall. And the more holy and heavenly these men seeme to bee in the wayes wherein they agree with their Bre∣thren; the more destructive and pernicious is the consequence of their failing, in this kind, unto the Brotherhood of Christi∣anitie; because it causeth every small matter of difference to bee heightned so in the mindes of their followers, that all the grounds of Unitie, of Love, of Forbearance and of mutuall edification, are not onely weakned, but directly cast off and disregarded. This doth put me in mind of the failing of John and JamesSet forth in the example of Iames and Iohns disciples. which is mentioned, Luke 9. ver. 53. till 57. Christ was going with them towards Jerusalem, in his way hee passeth by a Vil∣lage of the Samaritans, and they perceiving that his face was towards Jerusalem would not receive him, and give him civill entertainment: whereat James and John were so highly offen∣ded, that they would have revenged this injury, with their ut∣ter destruction by fire from heaven: but Christ did rebu them,
and told them two things; first, ye know not (saith hee) what manner of spirits ye are of. Secondly, The Sonne of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. As if hee had said, Your spirit is distempered, and you discerne not that Satan hath caught you in his snare, and you remember not, that my aime is to save mens lives; and not with vengeance to right my selfe against them to their utter destruction. From this Historie wee may observe these Truths. 1. That it is incident even to godly men to bee transported with zea∣lous distempers wherein Satan doth take hold of them. For it cannot bee denyed but that James and John were truely godly and faithfull Disciples of Christ; and that here they are transpor∣ted with a zeal, which is not godly, but devillish, is altogether also undeniable. 2. That the devillish zeale of godly men, may arise in them from their love to the Truth, and from a sense of the indignities done unto it, which they cannot brooke at the hands of unworthy men: for it is cleer that nothing could occasion this excesse in James and John so much as their great love and high esteeme of Christs worth, and the injurie which they thought was done to him and themselves by such men as they thought Samaritanes to bee; viz. men of corrupt Principles in Religion, Schismaticks and unworthy of their societie: For the Iewes had no dealings with the Sama∣ritans.Iohn 4. 9. 3. That this love to the Truth and sense of the indignities done to it by unworthy men, may bee mixed with the spirit of self-love, which is indiscernible unto them that are led thereby. For it may bee conje∣ctured, that although the Disciples loved their Master sincerely, and thought him highly affronted by the Samaritanes, that would not give him lodging-roome; yet that they should not have been sensible at all of their owne inconveniencie of not being refreshed with meat when they were hungry, and of the affront done to themselves, not to bee civilly entertained when they were wearie, is not at all likely, but it may bee pro∣bably gathered from circumstances, that the disappointment of their expectation (messengers being sent before to make ready for them) when they were weary & hungry, did heighten both their discontent, and the sense of the injury done unto their Master.
4 That even godly men, when they are insnared into passions occasi∣oned by injuries, will for small matters of private concernment, be sometimes set upon thoughts of revenge, take up destructive resolutions, and thereby forget the maine end of their profession; for wee see all this in the Apostles, and by Christs reproof of them, and his reason taken from the end of his Ministery, whereunto all his and their actions were to bee subordinate, it appeares that they are put in minde of what they had forgotten. Now as it was with Iames and Iohn in this case, so it is with many godly men in like cases. For in these times of contro∣versie, wherein divisions are heightned to the utmost, it doth often fall out, that men being of different parties, for farre lesser causes then Jewes and Samaritanes were divided; yet look upon one another with no lesse animositie then did the Jewes upon the Samaritanes, and the Samaritanes upon the Jewes; that is, with so much prejudice, that if they find a man but loo∣king towards that partie to which they have set themselves in opposition, as the Samaritanes found Christs face set towards Ierusalem, they will bee ready to deale with him as the Sa∣maritans dealt with Christ, and his Disciples, refuse him ci∣vilitie, use him inhumanely, and perhaps offer injuries both in deeds and words. These injuries will sometimes bee taken as reflecting upon the Truth of the profession; some∣times upon the justice of the cause and the innocencie of the partie which we favour; and if withall (as oft-times it falleth out) some private concernment of our owne is mixed with the publick interest; that will mainly heighten the sense of those injuries, and transport us unto some excesse of zeale: For when any degree of passion for self concernment doth meet in our affection with any object of true zeale, and a ground of publick interest, to mixe withall and raise it self upon; then it becom∣meth a mightie one, and a giant-like passion; as when in the first world, the Sonnes of God came in into the fairest of the daughtersGen. 6. 2, 3, 4. of men, and those bore children unto them, they were mighty ones and men of renoune: so it falleth out here, that in the Spirits of men, mighty resolutions and purposes of high revenge are begotten upon such occasions: and when Satan doth finde us in any such distemper, hee hath a fit opportunitie to infuse his poyson into our aimes to cause us forget the end of our spirituall calling which is not to destroy but to save the lives of men, by rectify∣ing
them and building them up in the Spirit of meeknesse and of love, with all long-suffering and Forbearance. Thus wee may see by daily experience, that when humane parties are for∣med, (for in Christianitie there is none) and when inhumane injuries are mutually offered about religious concernments, it is one of the hardest things in the world, to prevent or to recti∣fie the distempers which arise from thence; but yet wee must say in this case what Christ saith in another; With men this isMatth. 19. 26. impossible, but with God all things are possible. Therefore I beleeve that God is able both to prevent and rectifie such excesses of pas∣sion, two wayes. First, by wakening our consciences effectually towards himself in min∣dingThe remedy of these distem∣pers. us of the end and way of our ministeriall function, as it is in Christ: that is to say, to teach us to aime at nothing but to bee conformable unto Christ, by minding the same thing which he did mind towards God, and by walking in the same way, wherein hee is gone before us, to glorifie his Father in his Mi∣nistery. Secondly, by setting a spirituall edge upon our affections towards men; not to consider them after the flesh, but after the spirit, as they are, or may be in Christ Iesus our Brethren. That is to say, to walke in all things towards them, by the Law of Christian Brotherhood, and make the positive rules thereof beare the onely sway in all our resolutions. For by these principles, and by these alone, wee shall bee enabled both to free our selves from the trouble which otherwise will fall upon us for small and inconsidera∣ble matters of difference in judgement and practise, and also to cause all outward concernments fall flat before the Majestie of Gods will in the duties of peace and Brotherhood, but with∣out these wee shall bee found void of all strength to doe any such thing, and every little trifle will make us fall from our own stedfastnesse. Whence it is, that because these principles and duties have been and are disrespected in our work of reformati∣on amongst those that undeniably are Brethren; therefore the scandalls which are given to the weak, and observed by the wic∣ked, to discredit our proceedings, are multiplied, to the sadding of the hearts of all that are godly; nor is there any other way imaginable as I conceive, relating to conscience, fit to remove them, and to heale the breaches which follow thereupon, but
this, to manifest unto those that are faithfull to their principles and conscionable in the Ministery, that the relation wherein God hath set them one towards another, is a brotherly Unitie, which in it self is so full and satisfactory, and by his comman∣dement is so strict and obligatory, that whosoever doth not take up the profession thereof, and endeavour to observe the duties belonging thereunto, shall not only be found a transgres∣sour, but even inexcusable and unworthy of the name of a Christian. For this cause I have laid to heart this subject of Brotherly Unitie and Forbearance, that if God permit, it may cleerly, though briefly bee laid open to some of the Ministery, that seeme wholly to neglect the consideration thereof. For my scope is onely to name the chief heads of their agreement, to shew how ful & satisfactory it is in my opinion to settle the pro∣fession and practise of a Christian Brotherhood between them: (offering this, that if any shall make a scruple of the Truth of that, which shall bee asserted concerning this matter in brief; that a large deduction and demonstration in due time shall bee made thereof) to the end that such who heighten matters of strise amongst Brethren, that multiply controversies unadvisedly, for small matters; and that walke by dividing Principles rather then by the spirit of Unitie in the Gospel of Peace, may have cause to reflect upon themselves; to consider seriously of the errour of their way, and shape their course otherwise then hitherto they have done, lest happily they bee found guilty of that contentiousnesse and disobedience unto the Truth, whereunto the Apostle hath sadly threatned a heavie judgement of wrath and indignation, of Anguish and Tribulation, in the Epistle to the Rom. Cap. 2. v. 8, 9. from which I beseech the Lord to grant unto us all, the seale of our deliverance, and the effectuall evidences thereof in a conversation which is holy and blamelesse in love.
CHAP. V. Concerning the particular termes of Vnitie, whereunto the Ministers of this kingdome have attained, in the doctrine of Faith, and in their relation to Christ and his Church. FOrasmuch as I am very confident, that the Ministers of both sides are fully convicted of each others Orthodoxy in all those Truths which containe not onely the substance and Funda∣mentals of Christianitie, but also all profitable matters unto edifica∣tion; therefore I shall assert the fulnesse and satisfactorinesse of this Unitie briefly in a few propositions, which I am sure doe containe much more as to the agreement in doctrinals; and no lesse as to the agreement in their relation unto Christ and his Church, then is requisite to make up a Brotherly Vnitie. First then, it is undeniably evident, that they all acknow∣ledge and receive the same holy Scriptures of the Old and New Te∣stament, to bee the onely Word of God, outwardly given both to the Church in generall, and to all men in particular, as the onely rule of Faith and Obedience, which in it selfe and to all beleevers is cleer and sufficient for the attainement of salva∣tion, and for their direction in all good workes. Secondly, they all agree that in doubtfull places of Scrip∣ture, the Interpretation thereof is to bee taken from the undoubted analogie (that is, the proportion) of Faith, which is in other cleer places of Scripture, and from the right Analysis, (that is, the resolution or division) of the context of the same place. Thirdly, it is evident, that they all beleeve unanimously, that in these holy Scriptures is revealed unto us, that there are three bearing witnesse in heaven, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, and that these three are one, and the onely true and living God, of whom the true knowledge is life eternall. Fourthly, they all agree to professe and teach that wee have hope to bee justified and saved by Faith onely in God through Iesus Christ alone; who according to the Scriptures is the Messias pro∣mised to the Fathers, and sent into the world; and who being the onely begotten Sonne of the Father from eternitie, was in time made flesh, a true man, like unto us (sinne excepted) in all things; and becomming a Mediator between God and us, suffe∣red
our punishment, and paid the ransome for our sinnes to sa∣tisfie Gods justice, and doth still make intercession for us in heaven. Fifthly, they all agree fully in this, That there hath been al∣wayes, that now there is, and ever shall bee unto the end of the world amongst men a true Church, wherein God is worshipped according to his will in spirit and truth, by the Ordinances of his owne appointment. That unto this Church the promises of perpe∣tuall assistance by the spirit and word of protection against the gates of hell and of remission of sinnes, are made in and through the Covenant of grace: and that such as live in this Covenant the life of repentance and faith here, shall in the resurrection of the just hereafter partake of the life of eternall glory with Christ, when all the wicked shall bee punished with the everlasting judgement of being cast out of his presence into utter darknesse and endlesse torment. Sixtly, besides these necessary truths (which I confesse to bee suffici∣ent to oblige me to acknowledge every one a true Brother in the Faith of Christ, as to the Doctrinall part, who doth beleeve the same.) I say, be∣sides these Fundamentalls they all agree with the reformed Chur∣ches in the other Doctrines of Faith, contained in their Confessions and publick writings, such namely as concerne, 1. The Creation of the world and of man. 2. The decrees of God and his provi∣dence. 3. The fall of man, his sinne originall and actuall, and the freedome of his will. 4. The restitution of mans fall by Christ. 5. Christs person, offices, natures and works of redemp∣tion, and the application thereof. 6. The Law and the Gospel. 7. The use of good workes and their rewards. 8. The nature of Faith and Repentance. 9. The state of regeneration, justifi∣cation, sanctification and perseverance in conversion. 10. The universall Church and markes of a true particular Church. 11. The worship of God. 12. The Ministers of the Church and their calling. 13. The true and false Ordinances. 14. The Sacraments of the Lords Supper and Baptisme, and such like; wherein over and above necessary truths, most things that are profitable and expedient for edification are fully expressed, and by all assented unto, so that the unity of Faith in this kinde is without all doubt very abundantly full and satisfactory. Seventhly, seeing the bare theorie of truths dogmatically assented
unto, is not all that is requisite to makeup a Brotherly unitie between Christ and our owne soules; but there is also a subsistence and evidence of our interest in, and relation unto him necessary to compleat this uni∣on. Therefore in like manner to compleat a full and satisfactory ui∣tie, in our Christian brotherhood one towards another, there ought to bee some evidence of this subsistence of our relation unto him manifested unto each other. And hereunto all the godly and orthodox Mini∣sters of this kingdome will heartily agree; That none are to bee counted true members of Iesus Christ and belonging unto his mysticall bo∣dy, but such as by faith embracing fiducially with their heart the funda∣mental and saving truths of Christianitie, make confession thereof with their mouth, and endeavour in their life and conversation to walke in ho∣linesse answerable thereunto; that is, not after the flesh, but after the spi∣rit, in love towards one another, as God loved us. CHAP. VI. Concerning the termes of unitie in the chief Acts of our Religious pro∣fession. OUr Religious profession is here taken notice of, as it is publick, and doth oblige us to stand in some relation to∣wards others through the communion of Saints. The chief Acts thereof are foure: The first is, of professors as they stand single by themselves in refe∣rence to the worship of God in publick. The second is, of professors as they stand united unto a congregation, in reference to the visible constitution and government thereof. The third is, of severall Congregations in reference to their mu∣tuall association The fourth is, of the Officers and Rulers of these severall Congre∣gations, in reference to their interest in each other, and the joynt administration of their publick charges. If then in all these acts, the fundamentall rules whereby they are to be directed and managed, are fully and satisfactorily the same, and not unknowne but rather acknowledged by the professors of both sides; it will follow, that both sides ought to look upon each other therein as upon Brethren, and practise the duties of
Brotherhood one to another which are answerable unto this acknowledgment. But if notwithstanding this unitie and agree∣ment in these rules, and in the acknowledgment thereof, the du∣ties are neglected, then the sentence of the Apostle Iames 4. 16. is to be laid to heart; To him that knoweth to doe good and deth it not, to him it is sinne. And that of our Saviour which is more full and plain, Luke 12. 47. The servant which knew his Lords will and pre∣pared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Now that in these Acts of the profession, the sun∣damentall rules obliging us unto holy Communion are acknow∣ledged on both sides to bee the same, will appeare in these fol∣lowing particulars. Sect. I. Of single Professors. VVHen wee looke upon Professors (such namely as wee have already described to bee beleevers of the doctrin forenamed; and to have that relation unto Christ and his bo∣dy which hath been formerly mentioned;) when I say we look upon these Professours as single, that is, as standing by them∣selves, and not embodied into any particular societie; yet we in∣tend not to exempt them by this notion from either a visibilitie of their profession, or a compliance in that wherein they ought to concurre with other Christians. For they are to bee counted single; not as if they might take up a single and singular way of professing Christ by themselves alone, which is neither common nor per∣ceptible unto other Christians, but they are to bee counted single onely as they are men, not engaged as yet, unto any particular Congre∣gation to bee members thereof professedly. Suppose then a man to be a true Christian and a meere stranger to all the men and Chur∣ches of a Nation, where he findeth the name of Christ known and publikely professed by some, and not at all known and pro∣fessed by others, the question may bee concerning him, three∣fold. 1. Whether hee should make himselfe known to bee a professor yea or no? 2. How he should manifest his Profession? viz. Whe∣ther yea or no hee should not joyne with others in the Acts of publick worship? And 3. What the Acts of publick service and worship are, whereunto he should joyne, if he should apply himself to other Pro∣fessors?
Now in the answer to these three questions I suppose that both sides will fully agree upon these rules as a directory for him to walk by, in such a case, and to the first the answer is this. 1. Although a man stand single, and is not embodied into any par∣ticular society; yet he ought to make it appeare unto the world and to other Professors, that he is a Christian, that is, be ought to appeare in publick as a Professor of Christianitie. The grounds of this Rule are these commandements. Matth. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good workes and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. Phil. 2. 15, 16. Shine yee as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life. Ephes. 5. 7. Walke as children of light. Vers. 10. Prove what is acceptable unto the Lord. Vers. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darke∣nesse; but rather reprove them. Phil. 1. 27. Let your conversation bee as it becommeth the Gospel of Christ. Mark. 8. 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of Mee and my Word in this adulterous and sinfull generation, of him also shall the Sonne of man bee ashamed, when he commeth in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels. 2. To the second question, whether yea or no, hee should not joyne with others in the Acts of publick worship? the answer will be affirmative thus. Hee that should appeare in publick as a Professor of Christianitie, ought to assemble himself together to call upon the name of God in Christ, with such as meet to that effect. The grounds of this rule are these places of Scripture. Heb. 10. 24, 25. Consider one another to provoke to love and to good workes. Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the man∣ner of some is. Act. 3. 1. Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the houre of Prayer, the ninth houre. Act. 16. 13. And on the Sabbath wee went out of the City by a river side where Prayer was wont to bee made, and wee sate down, and spake unto the woman which resorted thither. Act. 17. 1, 2. Where was a Synagogue of the Jewes, and Paul as his manner was went in unto them, and three Sabbath dayes reasoned with them out of the Scripture.
3. To the third question, What the Acts of the Profession are in the publick service and worship whereunto hee should joyne, if he should apply himselfe unto other Professors. The answer will bee twofold. The first is concerning the Acts of service, belonging unto the com∣munion of Saints, wherein all Christians are bound to joyn to∣gether as Christians without respect of persons, or societies grounded upon particular interests; and it is that which the Apostle doth command, Timoth. 2. Ephes. 2. 22. To follow righ∣teousnesse, faith, charitie and peace, with all such as call upon the Lord out of a pure heart. The second concerning the publick Acts of divine worship in the assemblies, whereunto Professors should refort; of which these positions will be acknowledged by all. 1. That the main and principall Acts of publick worship are the preaching and publishing of the Word of God, and the offering up of Prayers and thanksgivings unto God: which will bee found a truth in these places of Scripture; Act. 6 4. Rom. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 14. per totum, and 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Chap. 4. 11. 16. Col. 3. 16. Heb. 13. 15. 2. That these Acts should not bee ordinarily performed by every one that will put himself forward to speake, but by some that are knowne to have the gift of prophecying, and are approved, set apart, and called to that dutie. Which will be evidenced in these places of Scrip∣ture; Rom. 10. 15. and Chap. 12. 6, 7, 8. and 1 Cor. 12. 18. 27, 28, 29. and Chap. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 40. Ephes. 4. 8. 11, 12. and 1 Tim. 3. 1, 2. 10. and Chap. 5. 22. Tit. 1. 5, 6. 10, 11. Hel. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 1 Pet. 4. 10. 17. 3. That those Acts should bee both fr the matter and manner answe∣rable to the Oracles of God, and the rules of the word, and done by those that performe them, not formally and by rote, but understandingly in spirit and truth: as is clear by these places; Rom 12. 6. and 1 Pet. 4. 11. 1 Tim. 1. 13. and 2. 15. and 1 Cor. 14. 19, 20. John 4. 23. 24. 4. That although it is not in the power of any men to prescribe unto, or impose upon, the Churches and Ministery of Jesus Christ, any set formes of publick worship, otherwise then Christ hath ordained: yet that the Ministers of the Gospel may and ought without prejudice to their libertie in Christ, agree amongst themselves, to observe some rules
of uniformitie in their publick wayes, to the end that the occasions of diffnancie and confusion may bee avoyded, and the fruit of publique edification by all spirituall meanes and helpes to decencie and orderli∣nesse in the Acts of solemne worship, may be advanced, will be ga∣thered from these Scriptures; Gal. 1. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 1 Cor. 11. 1. 23. and Chap. 7. 23. and Chap. 14. 37. Matth. 15. 9. Col. 2. 6, 7, 8. and 1 Cor. 14. 40. and 1 Cor. 11. 16. Col. 2. 5. Sect. II. Of Professors united to a Congregation. ALthough it is acknowledged by all, that Professors whiles they stand single, if they walke orderly, and behave them∣selves as it becommeth the Gospel, doe partake of the spirituall communion of all Saints, and have an interest in the pub∣lique Ordinances, with all the Churches, wheresoever they conveniently meet with them, whiles they are unseled. And although this their interest is never lost, after their setlement in a particular Congregation, so long as they remaine faithfull and obedient to Christ, no more then they who are made free and partake of the priviledges of a particular company in Lon∣don, do thereby abridge themselves of their common rights and priviledges belonging to them as they are naturally freeborne, or naturalized in the nation, so long as they fall not from their allegiance. Although I say, this is agreed by all to bee so; yet it is also acknowledged on both sides; that Professors ought not to stand single, but should be united in and to a body rightly constituted, and governed according to the will of Christ, which being cleer from these Scriptures, Rom. 12. 4, 5. and 16. 17, 18. and 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12. Ephes. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. and 4. 16. Phil. 1. 27. Col. 2. 5. 19. Gal. 6. 10. doth give a ground to these following Rules, concerning the constitution and government of particular Congregations, wherein both sides, if they will understand one another rightly, I am confident are fully agreed. 1. That such persons as have by their professed subjection unto the Gospel of Iesus Christ, made it apparent that they are united unto him as the head by Faith, and to all his members by love, may and ought to bee united together in one Church-fellowship, which is called a particular Congregation; according to the sense of these Scriptures, 2 Cor. . 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and chap. 9. 13. Ephes. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. and chap. 2. vers. 19, 20, 21, 22. and 1 Cor. 12. 27. Phil.
1. 27. and chap. 2. 1, 2. and 1 Thes. 4. 9, 10. Act. 2. 41, 42. 2. That the particular Congregations thus constituted ought to bee governed by Elders and Deacons, whereof the first are overseers of the wayes and state of the flock: the second servants of their necessities, both are Officers thereof, walking as Brethren, as servants and as members of each other in their administrations by a Brotherly equalitie; whereby all usurpation of Lordly power in any of these over the inheritance of Christ is made void, and all affectations of humane titles tending thereunto, is acknowledged to bee utterly unlawfull in the household of Faith, according to the truth revealed in these Scriptures, 1 Tim. 3. per totum, Acts 6. Vers. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6. Tit. 1. per totum, Heb. 13. 17. 1 Tim. 5. per totum, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 12. per totum; Matth. 20. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and chap. 23. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ephes. 4. 11. 16. 3. That the particular Congregations thus governed have power within themselves, to eercise all Christs Ordinances necessary and usefull for their owne edification and preservation from sinne and disorder, which power doth originally proceed from their obligation to bee obedient unto his will, according to these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. and 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. and chap. 4. 8. and chap. 5. per totum, and chap. 6. per totum, Heb. 3. 6, 7, 8 compared with Heb. 2. 1, 2. 5. Matth. 17. 5. and 1 Cor. 7. 19. 4. That the Officers of every Congregation may bee chosen and called by the Congregations themselves; of such persons as being competently gifted and tryed for the exercise of their charges shall bee ordained thereunto, according to the rule of Gods Word, by the imposition of the hands of a Presbytery; according to these Scriptures, Act. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 Tim. 3. 10. and chap. 4. 14. and 5. 21, 22. Act. 14. 23. Sect. III. Of severall Congregations, as they are or ought to bee associated. THat there ought to bee an association of those Churches which professe to walke by the same rules, is granted on all sides; onely in the way to settle and maintaine this association, and to determine emergent differences thereby, the difficultie doth lie; out if that wherein there is a full agreement were made use of, for the increasing of love, I am perswaded that the of∣fences which occasion all our breaches might bee taken out of
the way. Therefore those termes of unitie, which in this kind are undeniably consonant to the principles of Brotherly Com∣munion, and some others, which upon some friendly confe∣rences have been assented unto by some leading men of both sides, shall here bee offered towards the manifestation of the grounds of this association, in these Propositions follow∣ing. 1. The association of Churches should arise and bee entertained freely upon the ground and motive of Brotherly care onely, and not by any ties of meere humane Authoritie: This doth follow from the propertie of co-membership, and the ends thereof mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 25. 2. That brotherly equalitie wherein Christ hath set every Congre∣gation in respect of another, is to be upheld by the association, and not at all to bee diminished, according to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12. vers. 13. till 25. and 1 Pet. 5. 5. Rom. 15. vers. 1. till 8. 3. So far as the severall Churches do finde themselves obliged and for mutuall edification thinke it most expedient to entertaine their associa∣tion either consultatively or judicially, they ought to enter into it, without prejudice, and make use of the neerenesse whereunto God hath brought them, to his glory and their mutuall comfort. 4. Although every severall Congregation hath power within it self to administer all Christs Ordinances; yet no Congregation may lawful∣ly intend by the use of those Ordinances to stand and walk by it self, as divided and separate from other Congregations professing the same Faith and obedience towards Christ. The reason of this is cleer: First, from the commandements which enjoyne the studie of unitie amongst all Christians, such as these, Ephes. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, 15. 21. and 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. Secondly, from the nature of divisions, or intentions to di∣vision, amongst Brethren, which the Apostle doth condemne as the fruit of a carnall mind. 1 Cor. 3. 3. Rom. 16. 17, 18. Thirdly, because this intention is contrary to the request of Christ in his prayer unto the Father, where hee desires that all beleevers may bee made perfect in one, John 17. 23. and if all beleevers, then all Congregations of beleevers. 5. If severall Congregations may not intend to stand, as by themselves, and walke as separate from one another, in the administration of Christs Ordinances, which they have received by a common rule, and are to pre∣fesse
before the world in publick as one body in Christ, then it will follow cleerly, that it is farre lesse lawfull unto them in the prosecu∣tion of matters tending to mutuall edification, in ordinary or in extraor∣dinary and weighty matters, of common and necessary concernment; to stand and walke by themselves alone without a due respect unto their Brethren, and some tie of association towards their neighbour Congre∣gations. So that I take this to bee an undeniable principle and maxime of Brotherly association in Churches. That nothing which with conveniencie, and to the benefit of the Gospel it selfe, or to the edification of others therein, can bee done unitedly and joyntly, ought to bee done dividedly and separately. For when Christ doth pray for a perfect union of all beleevers which may worke up∣on the world a beleef that the Father hath sent him; I cannotIoh. 17. 23. conceive that hee doth meane any thing lesse, then such an asso∣ciation which may reach unto all the Acts of his worship, and the visible administration of all duties and ordinances belong∣ing to his Kingdome. For nothing, but such an union profes∣sedly maintained in his name, is able to convince the world finally, that hee is come from the Father. Thus farre then, or rather thus neer, the Congregations ought to bee associated if it bee possible; and that it is possible and will bee effected in due time, is certaine, because Christ hath prayed that it should bee, for the manifestation of his name unto the world; and the Father cannot deny him this request. Hitherto I have insisted upon that which I conceive is, or will bee assented unto by all, upon the undeniable grounds of brotherly communion. Now I shall offer the other Propositions which for a more particu∣lar accommodation of differences have been assented unto, See also the papers of the Divines of the Assembly given to the Com∣mittee for ac∣commodation lely publish∣ed, Pag. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 & p. 29. 30, 31. and elsewhere. and are agreed upon by some leading men of both sides as followeth. 6. All professors, whether single or in a body, are bound in consci∣ence to give n account of their wayes to their Brethren, or to any that shall require it of them, and that not arbitrarily but as a dutie ap∣pointed by God to bee observed. Mr. Burroughs Irenium, pag. 43. 7. Concerning the admission of members, which come from one Congregation into another, to bee thereunto distinctly associated, because this doth reflect commonly upon some par∣ticular interests of men, wherein the rules of holy communion are not taken notice of, therefore offences are frequently given
and taken up in this matter, which to prevent these agreements have been offered as a remedie thereunto. 1 That no Congregation should bee gathered and made up of the Members of other setled Congregations, except they bee in are orderly way dismissed by these with whom they were associated. 2 That no member comming from another Church with which wee are in brotherly Communion, shall be admitted to become a distinct mem∣ber of our societie, till the Church from which hee commeth bee made ac∣quainted with his purpose to associate with us. 3 That none who is said to belong to that neighbourhood or associa∣tion, which is called a Parish, (though hee doth not professe himselfe a member in that way) shall bee received as a member of any distinct Congregation, untill the Officers thereof have enquired concerning his life and conversation of those that are Rulers of the said neighbourhood, and of the Congregations neerest unto his habitation, to whom it is like∣ly, hee may have had some relation, or which may have taken notice of his wayes and profession. One of the chief mysteries and originall causes of our mani∣fold divisions doth lie in this outward circumstantiall manner of the association of members into a Congregation, and the reason hereof as I take it, is, partly because men naturally sek rather to please themselves in the satisfaction of some humors of their owne, then to edifie others, partly because the true use of Christian libertie, and the relation wherein all true professors stand one to another in Christ, is either not understood, or not minded; in comparison of some circumstantials of our owne coining to our selves, upon any one of which wee use to lay more weight then upon all the fundamentalls of Christs appointment. And till his grace and good spirit discover and worke out this self pleasing humour, wee cannot hope for peace and unitie al∣most in any thing, although our agreement be never so funda∣mentall in all things. Sect. IV. Of the Officers and Rulers of severall Congregations, and their association. THe Officers of every Congregation are under a twofold re∣lation of unitie to each other: First, as they are Professors:
Secondly, as they are Officers, that is, specially intrusted with a charge in the profession: As they are Professors, they are neerer in Bro∣therhood then as they are Officers. For their profession doth give them an immediate interest into Christ, and to one ano∣ther in him: but their Office doth give them no interest either in him or in each other, further then they are true to the professi∣on: whence it followeth that except they bee associated in the mysticall body of Christ, they cannot be associated in the mini∣stery thereof. It followeth also further, that the relation where∣in they stand to each other as Christians, being the onely foun∣dation of their Brotherhood; all the other relations, which are ministeriall, must yeeld and bee subordinate thereunto So that all the bonds, which may settle their association in the ministe∣ry, must be intended no further then they serve to advance and confirme the brotherhood and association, which is setled upon the truth of Christianitie. For if any combination of Mini∣sters bee framed otherwise, or to any other end, then to streng∣then the fundamentalls of Faith, and to increase the fruits of true Christianitie in holinesse and love▪ it will beget nothing else but a Papacie, because the root of the Papall Hierarchie, and the foundation whereupon that mystery of iniquitie was raised in the Church, was nothing else but the aime of an asso∣ciation of Church Officers subordinating the profession to their places, and making use of the fundamentals of truth, to set up themselves above others: for it may bee evidenced that all the superstitious devi∣ces and politick practises of Popery to blind men, and by an implicit faith to keepe them in subjection, resolve themselves at last into this principle and aime, of setting up themselves above Christianitie in the hearts of men, which is properly the Tem∣ple of God. Therefore it cannot bee denied, that they spring originally from hence, seeing every thing is ultimately resolved into that, whereof it was first begotten. From all which I draw this conclusion in brief, that all associations of Church-Officers or of any other publick Officers of what kind soever, who subordinate not themselves, and the interest which they have in each other by their Offi∣ces and by their associations, unto the ends of Christianitie, to exalt the unitie thereof, that Christ may bee seene above all therein; but seeke to make the way of Christianitie, or the association of Christians subor∣dinate to the advantage of their places above others, are Papall and An∣tichristian.
Let then all parties looke to their aimes in their associations, whether they bee called Independent or Presbyteriall Associati∣ons, and whether they bee setled upon Episcopall or Erastian principles; and let all Magistrates looke to their interests and wayes of prosecuting the same by their associations▪ whither they hee Democraticall, Aristocraticall, Parliamentary or Mo∣narchicall, whatsoever their character, frame, or modell is, as to the matter of circumstantials, which is all that ordinarily men as men looke after: Let (I say) all these Officers of each kind, or such as out of the mixt multitude, upon the ruines of others, doe thrust themselves into places of trust and profit, and seeke to strengthen themselves by combinations of their owne framing; (I say againe) let all these looke well to it, every one in his particular association, if their whole aime and the frame of their society bee not, to subordinate themselves and their combinations and confederacies to the setting up of that union, which is essentiall unto the profession of Christianity, and which alone shall last eternally; they shall bee utterly bro∣ken to pieces without all remedy. For the Word of God by the Prophet Isaiah cannot faile, Isa. 8, 9, 10. which saith, Associate your selves ye people, and ye shall bee broken in peeces, gird yur selves and ye shall bee broken in pieces, gird your selves and ye shall bee broken in pieces: take counsell together and it shall come to nought, speake the word and it shall not stand. For God is with us. Here the Prophet speaking in the name of the Church doth provoke the whole world, and bids the people thereof a defi∣ance, that though they joyne all in one, and gird themselves with all their strength and all their counsells and resolutions bee brought to full maturitie, yet that they shall be without effect, that they shall bee broken to pieces in their associations, and disappointed in their counsels, and resolutions, because God is with his Church, as the head of their association. Thus wee see that the Spirit of God doth blow upon all the designes of men so farre as they are not subordinate unto God: for where∣in men are not subordinate, they are opposit unto him, and hee will certainly be stronger then his opposits. And if the Question bee made concerning the Church, and those that belong thereunto, what their dutie is in times of trouble and feare when all the world is providing for their
safetie, with confederacies, strength and counsell? (I say) if such a question bee made, the answer will bee found in the following words of the Prophet from vers. 11. till the end of the Chapter, whereof this is the summe. First, that they should take heed lest they bee drawne and en∣gaged into worldly confederacies, for humane feares; but that they should sanctifie God alone in their hearts, and make him their feare, vers. 11, 12, 13. because the Lord will bee to all those that doe so, a sanctuary, but to others a rock of offence, vers. 14, 15. Secondly, that they should bind up the testimony and seale the Law amongst the Disciples of the Lord; that is to say, that they who are taught of God (for these are his Disciples) should make the testimony of Jesus the onely bond of their unitie, and that the seale of this bond should bee their obedientiall submis∣sion unto the Law of God, vers. 16. Thirdly, that they should arme themselves with patience to waite for the Lords comming, who is hid from the eyes of the world, and with resolution to appeare before him, although the world doth wonder at them, vers. 17. 18. Fourthly and lastly, when in cases of difficultie men shall bee destitute of counsell, and not know what to doe; then to con∣sult onely with the Law and the Testimony, and not to be take themselves to any other Oracle, vers. 19, 20. and whosoever doth not follow this advice shall bee driven into tler despaire, vers. 21, 22. Thus wee see what the counsell of God is concerning humane associations; what the issues thereof will bee, and what the way is to preserve our soules from that despaire which doth attend those that forsake God, and subordinate not their counsels and associations to his will. This then will bee our wisedome to take this warning, whe∣ther wee bee Professors or Officers: but chiefly this must bee the ground of the ministeriall association, in reference to their charges; to make use thereof onely for the furtherance of holy Communion in the profession of Christianitie. And although I cannot say that it is so amongst the Combinations which now are on foot, yet I am sure that these grounds will bee assented unto by all that are taught of God; and that their practise may bee answerable thereunto, I shall offer that whereunto both sides doe agree, and which without contradiction will be suffici∣ent
to enter them upon a Ministeriall correspondencie both for the advancement of true Brotherhood in Christianity amongst themselves, as also for the preservation of themselves and of their flocks, from partaking of other mens sinnes. For to these two heads, the matters of agreement in the point of association may be referred. Of the first I shall offer these Propositions. 1 The Officers of Sister Churches, making profession of their bro∣therhood in Christ, should desire to advance each other to perfection; and to that effect should have frequent meetings for brotherly conferences, 2 Cor. 13. 9. Malach. 3. 16. 2 The chief ends of their metings and conferences should bee, to main∣taine the unitie of the Spirit whereunto they have attained; to make it more compleat in love, and to gaine others to concurre with them by the truth therein. 3 They should for these ends set themselves in a way to make their con∣ferences effectually conscionable, constant, without interruption and dis∣orderlinesse; which way may bee setled upon these grounds. First, upon a voluntary engagement, freely entered into, which should containe these heads: that seeing they acknowledge one another fellow-members of the body of Christ, and fellow-ser∣vants of the same Master, in the same houshold of Faith, for the accomplishment of his will; that therefore they are resol∣vedGal. 2. ver. 1-11. to give to each other the right hand of fellowship in doing the worke of their Ministery, that they will entertaine bro∣therly meetings and conferences to that end: and that they will never suffer any circumstantiall differences of opinions or pra∣ctises, to breake their association or hinder their ordinarily ap∣pointed meetings and conferences. Secondly, upon some rules and orders which in like manner every one should assent unto freely, and expresly, so farre as hee doth finde himself convicted of the justice and equitie thereof, the substance of which orders may bee this. That in their conferences confusion shall bee avoyded, that an equall and orderly freedome of speech shall bee yeelded unto all, and that a libertie of dissenting unpartially upon reasons alledged shall bee given unto every one. Thirdly, upon the meanes of some correspondency betweene severall associations: for seeing all that are willing to associate, cannot
possibly meet at the same conferences, by reason of the distan∣ces of places and mens different occasions, therefore severall knots and companies of associats will arise, and lest they being unacquainted with one anothers wayes, take disagreeing reso∣lutions and mistake one anothers meanings therein; for this cause, some meanes of correspondencie between distant associati∣ons, is to bee agreed upon for the communication of matters be∣longing to the advancement of truth in love between them. Hitherto wee have looked upon the first head wherein there is an agreement in the Rules by which the association is to be framed for mutuall edification; now follow the matters of agreement be∣longing to the second head, which is the use of their association for the preservation of themselves and of their flocks from partaking in other mens sinnes. Of which I shall set downe almost▪ word by word that which I finde granted by Mr. Burroughs in his Irencum or Heart Divisions, pag. 43. which I conceive the Brethren of the other side will fully assent unto, and ought to lay as a sufficient ground of associating in a brotherly way: His words are these. 1 They (viz. the dissenting Brethren) acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers and Elders about them, are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for the hlping of the Church against Errors, Schisines and Scandals. 2 That these Synods may by the power they have from Christ admonish men or Churches in his name, when they see evills continuing in or grow∣ing upon the Church, and their admonitions carry with them the autho∣rity of Jesus Christ. 3 As there shall be cause they may declare men or Churches to be sub∣vrters of the Faith; or otherwise according to the nature of the offence; to shame them before all the Churches about them. 4 They may by a solemne act in the name of Jesus Christ, refuse any further communion with them till they repent. 5 They may declare, and that also in the name of Christ, that these erring people or Churches, are not to bee received into followship with any the Churches of Christ; nor to have communion one with another in the Ordinances of Christ. To these Propositions, if a full assent bee given, as by many no doubt there is; I cannot imagine what should hinder, or may obstruct the profession of their unitie and a concurrence to settle their associations for a joynt and mutuall assistance in the
worke of brotherly preservation of each other, from the guilt of other mens sinnes. Thus then wee see that the termes of our brotherly unity are full and satisfactory in all these respects, and if notwithstan∣ding all this we are divided in our wayes, and in our affections unwilling to practise any thing joyntly, which is sutable to these acknowledged principles; are wee not guilty before God and men of the neglect of a fundamentall dutie in Christianitie, and that inexcusably? surely wee will be found so, if wee set not our selves in another way then hitherto wee have walked in one towards another. CHAP. VII. Concerning the termes of forbearance, that therein is, and may bee found an agreement. HAving shewed how full and satisfactory the unitie is, whereunto wee have attained, and which ought to be pro∣fessedly acknowledged and put in practise; it remaineth now that wee speak also of mutuall forbearance, in that whereunto wee have not yet attained. For if it be made apparent, that wee are not onely thus farre agreed, but that wee have also the same sense of the termes, that is, of the Principles and Rules whereby a forbearance may be setled in that wherein wee are not yet agreed; then I cannot see what in conscience or reason should keep us still at this distance: But I am confident it may bee made unde∣niably apparent that wee have the same sense of the termes, that is, of the principles, rules and conditions, whereby a forbea∣rance may bee setled amongst us; therefore there is nothing in conscience or reason, that can keepe us at this distance. Now if the Question bee, what then the causes are that keep us from joyning in a forbearance? and what the difficulties are to pra∣ctise that wherein wee are of one mind? My answer is, that I am very willing to confesse my ignorance of these causes and diffi∣culties, rather then to reflect upon the jealousies, upon the de∣signes, upon the passions and distempers of either side, and to lay open the uncharitable failings, and the unfriendly procee∣dings
of both sides against each other. I shall onely say that the chief difficultie concerning the termes of setling a Christian forbearance amongst us in my opinion hath been this; that this matter hath never been prosecuted in that way of simplicitie, which becommeth the Gospel, nor upon the termes, wherein ei∣ther there is undeniably, or there may bee found infallibly, a full and satisfactory agreement; and whether yea or no any course will be taken to prosecute it otherwise hereafter, I know not, but I shall in the meane time endeavour to acquit my con∣science, by shewing my sense of the principles and rules there∣of, whereunto I am perswaded none will bee dissenters, who doe lay to heart without prejudice their dutie, in the profession of Christianitie. CHAP. VIII. Concerning the principles of mutuall toleration wherein there is a full agreement. THere bee two maine principles of a Toleration whereof both sides have the same sense to the full. The first is con∣cerning the necessitie; the second concerning the limits and bounds of a Toleration amongst Christians. Concerning the necessitie of some forbearance amongst Brethren in Christianitie, all will undeniably acknowledge these two Propositions. First, that God hath commanded his children and servants both to beare one anothers burthens, and to beare with one anothers infirmities, and to forbeare one another in love, as appeareth in these places of Scripture, Gal. 6. 1, 2. Ephes. 4. 2. Colos. 3. 12, 13. and 1 Thess. 5. 14. Rom. 14. 1. Secondly, that this dutie is not onely necessary (necessitate praecepti) because God hath commanded it, but it is also necessary (necessitate medii) as a meanes of mutuall edification; which cannot possibly bee advanced without the observation thereof. And the reason hereof is evident, because in many cases of humane failings, and in some of different opinions and practises, if there should bee no for∣bearance at all, debates would bee sharpe and endlesse, about
every small matter, and for every trifle; the affections of love would bee lost, the peace of the Churches disturbed, Schismes made unavoidable, and the healing or preventing of breaches become altogether impossible, Rom. 14. 13. and 15. 1, 2, 3. Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. And concerning the bounds and limits of this forbearance, all will undeniably acknowledge, that it ought not to bee exten∣ded indifferently unto all persons, opinions and practises, but that these foure propositions are agreeable to the truth of Chri∣stianitie. First, that it is not the mind of Iesus Christ that his servants should agree to beare one with another in that which they know to bee evill and contrary to his will, but that their dutie is in such cases to endevour the removing of evill, by zeale and brotherly admonitions, as will appeare in these places of Scripture, Rev. 2. 2. and 1 Thes. 5. 14, 15. and 2 Thes. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. and 1 Cor. 5. 2. 7. 11. 13. Secondly, that it is not the mind of Christ that any of his servants should professe themselves willing, or obliged, to beare with any person which doth endeavour, and with any doctrine or practise which doth tend to overthrow the saith in his name, which is delivered to the Saints Iude 3., or to destroy the life and power of godlinesse either in the private or publick profession of Religion Tit. 1. 10. 11. 2 Tim. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Gal. 5. 7. til 13., or to dissolve the bonds of holy com∣munion amongst Christian brethren Phil. 3. 2. Iud. 19. Rom. 16. 17. 18., or to abolish the orderly rela∣tions and obligations naturall and morall, without which humane so∣cieties cannot stand 1 Tim. 5. 8. Mat. 15. 4, 5, 6. 1 Tim. 4. 3., or to put downe the authoritie which God hath set up in and over humane sucieties for the Administration of justice therein 2 Pet. 2. 10. Rom. 13. 1. till 8.. Thirdly, it is the mind of Jesus Christ that his servants in all mat∣ters merly circumstantiall by him not determined should be left free to follow their owne light, as it may be offered, or arise unto them, from the generall rules of edification and not constrained by an implicit faith to follow the dictates of other men; and although it may sometime fall out, that in things of this nature their wayes may be different from the wayes of their brethren; yet that ought not to make any breach of love amongst them, but they should esteeme all crosse and partiall practises about them, utterly unlawfull; because they beget disputes and jea∣lousies, and tending to divisions, bring forth hatred and mu∣tuall persecutions. Rom. 14. per totum, Gal. 5. 13, 14, 26. Phil. 2. 3, 4. 14, 15.
Fourthly, that in matters of greater weight, which are not meerely circumstantiall, but are conceived to bee determined by the word, yet so, as that it is diffrently understood: in this case the mind of Christ is, that the rules of Christian charitie and mutuall edification, be in∣violably observed with all long suffering and forbearance. And this course ought to be continued so long, either as there is hope to gaine the ad∣vantage of loving conferences, whereby differences may be reconciled, and mistakes and scandals prevented and taken out of the way; or so long as there is cause to thinke that God may reveale his profitable truths to such as erre not wilfully, but through weakenesse of judgement and harme∣lesly, Phil. 3. 15, 16. and 2 Tim. 2. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. CHAP. IX. Concerning the way how to settle and proscute a mutuall Toleration, by rules wherein there is an agreement. HItherto in this matter of forbearance wee have looke upon the principles of our dutie, which wee conceive both ides will fully assent unto, if now wee can also from thence gather, and from other undeniable and knowne truths, find out some rules which may direct us in a way, how to settle and pro∣secute to a full period of practise the duties of this forbearance; and if these rules being found out can bee applied to the case in hand between the parties, by some transaction so fully and or∣derly, that none who doth assent unto the principles and the rules, can except against the proceedings therein; if (I say) these rules can be thus found out and applied, then we shall be able convincingly to conclude that all such as follow not the practise thereof, walke neither answerable to the light which they have received, nor to the vocation wherewith they are cal∣led in the profession of Christianitie, and consequently, that as they are not upright in their way, so they shall bee frustrate of the felicitie promised thereunto, and receive the reward of hypocrites: for in this case that which Christ said unto his Di∣sciples, is to bee said unto th inistery, and to the professors of this kingdome, John 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are yee if yee e them.
But if you know them not, you cannot bee happy in doing them; and if knowing them, you doe them not, your profession shall be found vaine, and your end eternall misery; for not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heaven, butMatth. . 21. hee onely who doth the will of God, who is in heaven. From all which wee must gather this conclusion, that if wee know that there is a forbearance, which is necessary, it will not be enough for us to know what the principles thereof are, but the way how to practise the duties must also bee sought after, and regularly followed. Let us then doe this, and endeavour to find the rules of such a transaction as will beget between the parties a settle∣ment of that toleration, whereof wee have seene and allowed the principles. And to this effect if any Treatie or conference be intended (for without some such thing nothing can bee setled) there must be▪ before all other things, an agreement found in the aime of the transaction, and in the meanes to bring it to passe. For if these two be not determined by common consent, and a resolution fixed to proceed according to that determination, nothing will take effect or be successefull in the transaction. The aime then of the transaction should not bee to settle a forbearance which should leave the parties or confirme them in the distance, whereinto they are unhappily fallen: But both sides should expresly declare that the Treatie is to bee set afoot, and professedly intended for these two ends. First, that a dore may bee kept open and enlarged, to further a more perfect unitie then as yet the parties have attained unto. Secondly, that a path and course to maintaine the further unitie, which will be attained by Gods blessing, may bee prepared and made more plaine and easie then hitherto it hath been. If this aime bee sincerely taken up, the meanes to bring it to passe will neither be difficult to be found, nor without successe, when they are set a worke amongst true Christians▪ I shall offer therefore at them. First then, the meanes to open a dore to advance the parties to a more perfect unitie, then as yet they have attained unto, is to find out, and settle rules of mutuall condescension. Secondly, the meanes to make the path plaine and easie to maintaine and walke in the unitie which shall bee setled, is, to re∣move
by common consent and upon conscionable motives all the causes of disaffection and of breaches. For if both sides cannot onely yeeld and stoop to embrace each other in love, but also remove all that which may occasion the dissolving of that embracement, we may bee sure that peace and unitie will bee setled without in∣terruption. Therefore in hope that either now or hereafter this may bee laid to heart, and followed to produce a necessa∣ry toleration, I shall offer my thoughts of these two meanes. CHAP. X. Of the rules of condescension, how they may bee found out. VVEe have formerly seene that some toleration amongst Christians is necessary; if so, then undoubtedly some condescension also towards one another, because without some yeelding it is not imaginable that any mutuall forbearance can bee setled or transacted amongst parties, that are at variance; and although this might suffice to satisfie the scruples of some, who perhaps will boile at the matter of condescension, as pre∣judiciall to the truth of the holy profession, yet I shall adde a word to shew the lawfulnesse of such a course, as being a dutie recommended unto us by God, and necessary for edification. The Apostle Rom. 15. 1, 2. saith that we ought not to please our selves, but that every one of us should please his neighbour for his good to edification. Now in this case every one is supposed to be strong, and the neighbour, whom hee ought to please, is by the Apo∣stle supposed to be weake. Therefore wee are all bound to yeeld unto each other, as supposing others to be weake that wee may be able to edifie each other. And to presse this home as a dutie to the conscience of all, hee doth give us Christs example, as a patterne thereof in this particular, that he did not seek to please himselfe, but condescended even to beare reproaches, that wee might bee edified by that which is written of him, vers. 3. and 4. And then to make an application of this unto the end for which he doth prescribe it as a dutie; hee first prayeth to God for us, and secondly exhorts us to the imitation of Christs example. His prayer is, that God would grant us to be like minded one towards
another according to Christ Jesus, that wee may glorifie God with me mind and mouth: where he intimates two things, which are in this matter very considerable. First, that except wee have this grace to bee so minded unto each others as Christ was to us, wee cannot bee at unitie amongst our selves. Secondly, that ex∣cept wee be united with one mind and one mouth in our pro∣fession of Christ, God cannot be glorified by us, vers▪ 5▪ & 6. Then his exhortation is a consequence inferred upon these premises thus, ver. 7. Wherefore receive yee one another as Christ also received us to the glory of God. Now Christ received us to the glo∣ry of God (that is, to the participation of Gods love and good∣nesse) by a great condescension unto our weaknesse, studying not to please himselfe but us to our good; therefore wee are all bound to yeeld unto each other in like manner: so then some condescension is both lawfull and requisite. Compare with this, that which is further to this purpose delivered concerning Christ, Phil. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7▪ and 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23. But to presse further the point which in this dutie is to be hee∣ded, let us consider the precept given by the Apostle, Rom. 12. 16. and his owne practise, which hee sets before us elsewhere to bee followed as an example of that rule. The precept is this, Be of the same mind one wards another, mind not high things, but condescend to mn of low estate (or to mean things) bee not wise in your own conoits. As if he had said, it is your du∣tie to bee like minded towards each other in love, and that you may not bee taken off from performing this, take heed to your thoughts, that you neither affect high matters, wherein natu∣rally men use to please themselves, nor that you bee in love with your owne wisedome, but studie rather to make your mindes pliable, and bring your selves to condescend to men and mat∣ters, that are meane and low, for except you all resolve upon this, you can never bee of the same mind one towards another: So then wee see that some condescension is not onely lawfull, but wholly requisite to maintaine love and unitie and resist pride and self-love, whence strife and confusion doth proceed. Answerable unto this rule was the Apostles own practise, men∣tioned 1 Cor. 9. for our imitation, for there from the first verse till the 19th. he sheweth that although hee had a full right to take maintenance from the Church of Corinth, for his service
done to them, yet he would not doe it, but condescended ra∣ther for their weakenesse sake, to make the Gospel of Christ without charge unto them, lest hee might bee thought to abuse his power in the Gospel. So then to prevent an inconveniencie hee did condescend to quit his right to a benefit and a conveni∣encie, which he might otherwise have lawfully enjoyed. But then from vers. 19. till the end of the Chapter, hee speakes of a∣nother kind of condescension wherein hee did exercise himself, and which hee relates that hee might therein bee imitated by others: which was this, that although hee was free from all men, ye hee made himselfe a servant to all, that hee might gaine the more. Vers. 19. To the Jewes he became as a Jew, to them that are under the Law as under the Law.▪ Vers. 20. To them that are without Law,  without Law (though hee was not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ). Vers. 21. To the weake he became as weake, and he made himselfe (by way of condescension) all things unto all men that h might by all meanes save some, Vers. 22. And the reason why hee exercised himselfe in this dutie, was not onely for the good of others, but for his owne good also in three things. First, that he might partake of the Gospel with every one in every condition, Vers. 23. Secondly, that hee might keepe himselfe in a fit temper of spirit, so  in his calling, as to receive the prize, and so to fight as not to  the aire, Vers. 24, 25, 26. And thirdly, that hee might bee master of his own body, lest if hee neglected the dutie of bringing it into subjection, hee might bee sound himselfe a reprobate af∣ter all his paines in preaching the Gospel unto others, Vers. 27. Thus wee see that the Apostle doth make this not onely a dutie which is lawfull, but in some sort necessary to the faithfull discharge of the ministeriall function, even so farre that without the per∣formance of it, a man can neither gaine all sorts of people to the Gospel, no partake fully of the Gospel himselfe, nor ee in a temper so to runne and strive as to gaine his incorruptible crowne before others, nor at last escape the danger of being a castaway, although hee hath painefully preached the Gospel unto others. From all which wee must conclude, that the studie of condescension, chiefly in a Minister, with whom I am now dealing, is not a matter of indifferencie, but a dutie of very great importance. And if so, then wee are obliged in consci∣ence, not onely to resolve upon the practise, but to seeke out
the rules by which our conversation in this matter may bee or∣dered aright: for seeing in every dutie, there are some rules, and in this of condescension (because none do set themselves to the practise thereof) the rules are not lookt into. Seeing also none ought in any thing to presume to prescribe rules unto others, but all should rather in all humilitie search after the discovery thereof in the holy Scriptures, and then hold forth in simpli∣citie that which God doth teach them, and they find profitable for the edification of others, therefore we shall apply our selves unto this search, and offer that which wee suppose neither side will except against; and yet may prove a sufficient directo∣ry for the practise of condescension, and the transaction of a forbearance in the cases of our divisions. Wee shall say then, that to find out without difficultie the rules of condescension towards a forbearance, three things should bee reflected upon. 1 That wherein there can bee no yeelding. 2 That wherein there may bee and ought to bee a voluntary yeel∣ding. 3 That which may draw forth, and oblige the spirits of men, to dis∣cover the things whereunto they shall bee willing of themselves to yeeld. Concerning the first, there can bee nor condescension proposed which should oblige any to make profession of any thing otherwise then it is in his heart. For no man can with a good conscience yeeld to pro∣fesse any untruth, or transact to relinquish his sense and opi∣nion of any thing which hee doth esteeme a point of truth or of right, I say no man can condescend to relinquish his opini∣on, or his challenge of a right to a priviledge: because the matters of truth and right can edifie no man, but disedifie both our selves and others, if they bee denyed and professedly given up. A man may dispense with a truth so farre as not to speak of it, to all sorts of persons, or at all times, because they cannot beare it, nor is it seasonable for edification to speake all truths at all times: as wee may see by Christs example, John 16. 12. and the Apostles practise, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. and the rules, Matth. 7. 6. and Rom. 14. 1. And concerning a point of right a man may dispense with the use of it, as wee see the Apostle doth, 1 Cor. 9. But no man ought to yeeld himselfe obliged to deny any truth, or not to beare witnesse to it when it is opposed, or
not to challenge his right to a priviledge, when it is called in question, for to do so were to betray truth and righteousnesse, which cannot stand with a good conscience: therefore no con∣descension may bee intended to suppresse the profession of these things, but rather a transaction is to be intended to this purpose, that both sides shall beare with one another in such a profession without offence, and grant a freedome to each other to declare the truth, as it is in their hearts, for this is the dutie and one of the commendable characters of those, that shall abide in the ta∣bernacle of God and dwell in his holy hill, Psal. 15. 1, 2. Concerning the second, namely that wherein there may and ght to bee a voluntary yeelding on all sides; I shall not take upon me to specifie any rules (for that is to bee referred to the trans∣action of the forbearance it self) but I shall onely mention the heads of matters, whereof rules may bee determined and ga∣thered from the Word. As first, there may and ought to bee a mutuall condescension towards the setling of wayes and expedients of different sorts, of order∣ly proceedings at severall places and times in publick meetings, for the confirmation of the unitie of the spirits of brethren, in the common pro∣fession, and for the avoiding of confusion. As for example, at the publick meetings in some places they have no Assessors adjoy∣ned to him that is the Prolocutor, in other places they have; in some places the Prolocutor or Mediator of the meeting is perpetually the same, in other places▪ he is continually chan∣ged; and that either by a new election through the pluralitie of votes, or without any election by a vicissitudinary successi∣on of one after another, into the office of presiding over the mee∣ting: in some places nothing is determined without the con∣sent of all, in other places it is otherwise: and where the con∣sent of all is required, in some places the Preses of the action is obliged to aske every mans vote distinctly and in order; in other places that custome is not precisely observed, but it is free for any one to speak when hee can get a turne, and if matters goe against his sense, to enter his dissent; and elsewhere, who doth not give his consent, is not obliged to the determination. In all such wayes of orderly proceedings, if those that entertain the meetings for their mutuall edification do alter their consti¦tutions according to circumstances of times, places, persons, and
affaires upon grounds which they think valid for the end for which they meet, (I say) in all such wayes a condescension may and ought to bee mutually intended; and there ought not to bee any breach of unitie and affection for the difference of opi∣nions amongst Brethren in matters of this nature. Onely a care is to be had, that the generall rules of order and decency bee ob∣served according to the Apostles commandement; 1 Cor. 14. 40. Secondly, there may and ought to be a voluntary condescen∣sion o all the meanes which are thought by those, who are of repute, fit and expedient to give just satisfaction to any that are possessed with pre∣judices against us, or to cleer mistakes, or to prevent the evill effects of sinister reports, or to take away all inconveniencies and scandals of that nature: (I say) there ought to bee a yeelding to all motions in that kind which do not prejudicate the truth: because all things that are commendable and of good report are to bee followed; and all the occasions of murmurings, of jealousies and of dis∣contents are to bee avoided. In such a case as this, Peter con∣descended to make an Apologie for himself to those of the circumcision who contended with him for his going unto Cor∣nelius, Act. 11. 2, 3, 4. till 19. and Paul at the advice of James and the Elders of Jerusalem went into the Temple and conde∣scended to observe the customes of the ceremoniall Law to take away the prejudice which many had against him, Acts 21. vers. 18. till 28. Another time Paul of his owne accord did circum∣cise Timothy by way of condescension to the Jewes, who were weake and would have been offended if that had not been done, Act. 18. 1, 2, 3. but when the cause was altered, and by condescending to circumcise Titus the libertie of the Gospel would have been prejudged towards the Gentiles, he would not at all yeeld unto it, Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, there ought to bee a condescension in matters of in∣differencie, such as the Apostle doth mention, Rom. 14. through∣out, to beare with the weake: item, in matters of offence, which may bee foreseen, wee are bound to prevent the same by yeel∣ding unto the weake and ignorant, lest either our good bee evill spoken of, or our Brother be grieved at what wee doe, or his conscience bee emboldod by our example (whiles it wanteth light, to discerne its owne libertie) to sinne, Rom. 14. 15, 16. and 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and chap. 10. vers. 23. till the end.
Fourthly and lastly, there ought to bee a condescension to beare with all men in that whereunto they have not yet attained; that by the things whereunto they have attained, and our friendly converse with them, according to the rules of edification, they may bee gained. Concerning this way of condescension towards others, these places are considerable, Matth. 12. 18, 19, 20. and 1 Cor. 9. 19. till the end, Gas. 4. 12. and 6. 1. 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25, 26, and 1 Th. 5. 14, 15. 20, 21. Phil. 3. 15, 16. And all things which flow from the principles of Charitie, Gentlenesse, meeknesse, and humi∣litie, with prudency and discretion, for the good of those that erre, and are ignorant, may bee called a condescension, and ought to bee practised in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, from whom the rules of forbearance are to bee learned, Col. 3. 13. Concerning the third which is the way to draw forth the spirits of men, to discover the things whereunto they shal be willing of themselves to condescend unto others; I shall offer an expedient which I sup∣pose none who desireth to walke in the light will thinke unrea∣sonable or unconscionable, and that is this. That all such as would be borne withall in any thing by others, should offer first unto those from whom they expect a brotherly forbearance, all that condescension which they intend touse, and the rules of forbearance by which they pur∣pose to walke towards them: for this is according to Christs fun∣damentall rule of justice, Matth. 7. 12. Whatsoever things you would have men e to you, doe yee even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. If this one rule were rightly applyed and fol∣lowed, there would bee no great difficultie in transacting this matter; chiefly if wee take up the practise of it, not upon the grounds of humane policie, but of Christian obedience to the dutie which is commanded, Heb. 3. 12. Exhort one another daily whes it is called to day, and Heb. 10. 24. Let us consider one ano∣ther to provoke unto love and to good workes, and Phil. 2. 15, 16. Bee ye blamelesse and harmelesse, the sonnes of God, without rebuke, shine as lights in the world; hold forth the word of life. From all which this expedient will follow towards the finding out of the rules of condescension; that every one who doth delight to goe before others in good workes, and walke in the light, ought (in obedi∣ence to the will of God revealed in these commandements) of his owne accord to offer unto his neighbour, with whom hee
doth desire to walke in peace and unitie, a full discovery of those principles and rules, by which hee doth find himselfe obliged in conscience, according to Gods will, to walke towards every one in the wayes of condescension. If every one would doe this freely and fully, it would bee ea∣sie, without any danger of disagreement or of debates about particular interests (which continually trouble the wayes of our profession) to set downe the rules of condescension and forbearance, for that might bee taken as a rule to bind every one, which hee should offer freely, and acknowledge to bee an obligation upon his conscience; or which being offered unto him by others, should by the Law of love bind him to practise the like unto them. For I conceive this to be equall, that what another doth yeeld unto mee (supposing the matter in it selfe to be lawfull) I should yeeld unto him in like manner, even as I would have him yeeld unto mee that which I offer unto him; as then I would not have any to presse upon mee any thing of a Religious concernment, further then my light from the Word doth lead mee to embrace it: so I ought not to intend to presse upon others any thing of that nature fur∣ther then their light doth lead them, but as I would bee born withall, so I should beare with another, till God give in more light to either of us, by private meditations or regular conse∣rences. In the meane time let that which is yeelded on all sides bee setled as a rule of agreement to walke by, and improved to the best advantage of peace and unitie. Thus wee see, that if every one would but hold forth his principles of light and life unto others, and would bind himselfe as in the presence of God, to walke answerable thereunto; wee might easily come to the settlement and observation of the rules of condescension. CHAP. XI. Concerning the causes of disaffection and of breaches, how they should bee removed by common consent. THe first and originall causes of disaffection and of breaches are for the most part not taken notice of, and hardly dis∣cerned
by many, even then when they are discovered, because they lie very close to our nature, for they are commonly no∣thing else, but the neglect of charitable inclinations and duties; and the unadvised admitting of prejudices, and entertaining of evill surmises, which not being observed and cured, fester in the mind, and first breed a shinesse or warinesse of him, against whom they are conceived, then a distance from him, after∣wards a strangenesse to his wayes; and lastly a breach of unitie with opposition. The causes of prejudice are very many in all sorts of men; those which the ungodly and naturall man doth entertaine, against a conscionable and religious walking with God, I need not here to meddle withall (Viz R. Juni∣us, in two Treatises, the one called The cure of Preju∣dice, the other, The cure of Misprision. another hath hand∣led that subject profitably at large, and shewed the cure thereof) but those which godly and religious men, through humane frailtie entertaine one against another, are the matter which here is to bee considered, to make the way of unitie and for∣bearance plaine and easie, and I shall now onely name them, and point at the cure thereof in a word or two; because I doe intend to speak to men of understanding onely, to whom God hath committed the charge of soules, and my aime to∣wards them is, not to dictate any thing, but onely to disco∣ver the possibility of a cure of this disease; first in themselves, and then in their hearers, by the removall of the chiefe causes of all our prejudices; which I shall reduce to two heads, whereof the one is openly, the other is secretly offensive. That which doth openly offend, and causeth prejudices to rise in the mindes of men, who are otherwise godly, and against men who are truely godly and their Brethren, is the irregulari∣tie of disputes and debates about matters of Religion, which is main∣ly twofold, some irregularitie there is, in respect of the matter, some there is, in respect of the manner of disputing. In respect of the matter prejudices are raised, when men strive about needlesse matters, and contend for words, and this the Apo∣stle doth often warne Timothy to avoid, as a thing whereunto the Ministers were and would bee much subject, 1 Tim. 1. 4, 5, 6. and chap. 4. 7. and chap. 6. 4, 5. 20. and 2 Tim. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 23. In respect of the manner of debating matters which are necessary and profitable; prejudices are raised divers wayes, but that
which is the most common and hurtfull, is that, of passionate and provoking expressions against a mans person and his opinions to make him odious, and his errours thought to bee extreame dangerous in that wherein hee dissents from us; these railing accusations, and all other injurious and insolent proceedings, breed averse affecti∣ons, and stirring up mens spirits to strife and contradictions, augment prejudices extreamly, and fill the Churches with di∣sturbance and confusion. That which doth offend more secretly and doth beget much prejudice, is the perverse and uncharitable observation of mens failings, when they are construed suspiciously to the worse sense, and then whispe∣red in the eares of others, that are leading men, under the pre∣tence of a caution, or warning given unto them, to take heed of this or of that, for the strengthning of their hands in par∣tiall designes, and the promoting of particular interests. This darke malicious devill, who covers himselfe oft-times with a cloke of light and a zeale for holinesse and truth, is exceeding busie in our dayes, and hurtfull to our affaires, and doth work his mischiefe, not onely against him, who is blasted in his re∣putation, to make all the good which his talents may produce unprofitable unto others; but also against the Authors of such whisperings themselves, to make them the ring-leaders of divi∣sion and of evill intelligence amongst brethren. These are in brief the chief causes of our prejudices, these must needs bee removed; else the way of a lawfull condescen∣sion and forbearance will never bee plaine and easie in the set∣tlement, nor lasting in the continuance; it will then bee of absolute necessitie that some course bee taken to remedy the same. Therefore I shall for the present onely advise, that when a brotherly transaction of matters, towards a mutuall forbearance shall bee intended, then some rules should bee thought upon, debated, and by common consent setled, concer∣ning three things. First, how needlesse disputes and multiplicitie of new controversies, breaking forth in the Presse and Pulpit may be prevented. Secondly, how the injuriousnesse of censures and of proceeding, which men of partiall dispositions and of high thoughts runne into, may bee rectified; when disputes are necessary: And Thirdly, how the secret mischief of suspicious whisperings and tale∣bearing
amongst Brethren may bee prevented, and being discovered sa∣tisfactorily corrected. And that some rules of righteousnesse may bee found in the Word to remedie these evills, and may bee raised from the nature of Christian charitie, equitie, ingenuitie, pietie, discretion, and prudencie: I suppose none will deny, who doth beleeve that the holy Scriptures with and by the spirit of God, which is promised to the children of God are able to make the man of God perfect, and throughly furnished unto every good word and worke. Thus I have made out (as briefly and as distinctly as this occa∣sion seemeth to require) the truth of the first and second asser∣tion of this discourse, namely that the Ministery of this king∣dome is undeniably obliged in conscience to the mutuall pro∣fession of Brotherhood; and that the termes of their unitie and forbearance, are both in themselves full and satisfactory, and may bee setled reciprocally amongst them, in a plaine and easie way, if the men that lead others, were but willing to looke to God more then to men, and to conscience more then to outward interests. CHAP. XII. The third Assertion. Concerning the motions which should induce us to make profession of this unitie and forbearance: Why these are requisite, and what they are. BUt now although these things are evidently thus demon∣strable, and by all that which hitherto hath been alledged; it may be manifestly apparent, that these who are the leaders of the flockes, should not onely stand united, and walk by one rule in that whereunto they have attained; but also, that their differences may and ought to bee composed in love by amiable meetings, by orderly conferences, and by the settlement of a necessary and lawfull forbearance of each other: although (I say) all this is so, yet wee see to the great dishonour of God, the lamentable disadvantage of the truth, and the extreame griefe of many godly soules, that this hath not hitherto, either
beene done or effectually prosecuted and intended by thse that are in the worke of the Ministery, or if it hath been intended by some, yet not so as it ought to have been, that is, upon the grounds which are proper unto their vocation. What the causes of this neglect may bee, wee shall not now particularly search into; onely in generall, wee may take no∣tice that all such failings in dutie may proceed from two main causes; either that men (otherwise knowing and godly, yet) consider not the necessitie of this dutie in respect of the evills that follow upon the neglect thereof, or that the excellencie, commendablenesse and worth thereof is either not known, or if not unknown, yet not laid to heart. Now then in this our present sad condition if any thing can be suggested which may be a helpe to remove these causes of our failing in this kind, it may bee hoped, that godly and con∣scionable men will bee more carefull of the performance, and more fearefull of the neglect thereof, then hitherto they have been. Therefore it will not bee amisse but may bee of very great use, to offer some motives and inducements to incline them without partialitie to these resolutions, and this wee shall intend to doe if God permit. CHAP. XIII. Concerning the necessitie of Brotherly unitie in the Ministery. IF then we should take into consideration the absolute necessi∣tie of this dutie, it will appeare that the present evills where∣into these Churches, and the state of this kingdome are fallen, and which threaten all with unavoydable ruine, are mainely brought upon us through the neglect of that ministeriall unitie and correspondencie, which is sutable unto Christianitie. For whosoever in the feare of God shall lay to heart the wo∣full condition of the Churches of Christ in this land, will per∣ceive that amongst the manifold causes of our miserable breachesThe cause of all our mise∣ries. and sinfull distractions, the originall and consequently the grea∣test of all the rest is this; That such as are called to bee the Ministers of the Gospel, who by their owne confession are Brethren and fellow-labourers in the same imployment, doe
not maintaine those duties of Brotherly love, fellowship and communion, which by the nature of their work, and by the appointment of their Lord and Master are made necessary for the manifestation of his glory, and for their own mutuall edi∣fication. For seeing by that which hath been hitherto shewed, it must needs be acknowledged, that they ought to stand toge∣ther and looke upon each other as Brethren begotten of the same Father, as fellow-souldiers in the same fight and warfare, and as fellow-members in the same body of Christ: Seeing (I say) this is confessed and cannot bee denied to bee so, it will follow also undeniably, that they ought in conscience to dis∣charge the duties belonging to these relations, which are not onely to professe a Brotherhood, but to bee knit together in fervent love, to have the same care one for another, and joynt∣ly to communicate in things belonging to the kingdome of Christ. But that these duties, notwithstanding all these relati∣ons, are neither really thought upon, nor at all prosecured to any purpose almost by any, is no lesse undeniable, and must needs (although to our great shame) be plainly and ingenuously confessed. Seeing then the guilt of this their fault is so great and so apparent, that no colour of excuse can bee pretended to extenuate it, therefore the judgement is ripe for them, and the punishment hath now in the sight of all the world most justly overtaken them: For whereas they were lately in a capacitie to bee as happy within themselves, and as profitable to the King∣dome of Christ abroad, as any of all the Ministers on earth if they had continued in their unitie, now they are like to bee more unsetled and more miserable within themselves, and lesse respected by others, and lesse usefull both at home and abroad towards the cause of Christ, then any that are elsewhere in all the Churches, & this onely, because they have suffered themselves in their profession to bee divided, and have not regarded nor doe they yet regard the duties of their Christian BrotherhoodThe guilt of the Ministery. so much as outward concernments. For by this meanes they have corrupted the Covenant, and are become partiall in the Law, and caused many to stumble at the Law, and therefore the LordMal. 2. 8, 9. hath made them contemptible, and caused all their adversaries to prevaile against them, so that they have just cause to give▪ glory unto him, to lay their hands upon their mouths, to be sensible
of their guiltinesse, and to accept of the punishment of their transgressions. For if the very vocation wherewith all the pro∣fessorsEphe. 4. 1, 2, 3. of the Gospel are called unto God, doth oblige them to keepe the unitie of the spirit in the bond of peace one with another; farre more doth it oblige the Ministers, to intend before others this great and fundamentall dutie in the vocation wherewith they are called. And if all the members of the mysticall body of Christ are by Gods appointment fitly joyned together, and ought to bee compacted in their stations to make the increase of the body unto the edifying of it selfe in love, by that which every joynt supplieth, then it must needs also be granted, that the chief joynts of these members are more especially appointed by God, and obliged in conscience to bee united in their re∣lations, and compacted in the duties of their ministeriall im∣ployments. But how farre they are not onely distant from this conjunction, but have even an aversion unto it, I need not at all to mention (the thing is cleere as the Sunne at noone day) nor shall I search at whose dore the fault doth principally lie, whether here or there (for I know that every one will justifie his owne proceedings). But this I shall freely say, and I say it with grief of heart; and therefore I hope without offence to either side; that this is the great sinne of the Ministery, and the misery of this Nation, that at this time, when a concurrence of affections and of endeavours, is so absolutely necessary for the preservation of the truth in the very fundamentals thereof, andThe sinfull mi∣sery following upon this guilt. when we all are called forth to fight in the same cause as it were for our life, that (I say) at this time there is so much of ani∣mositie prevailing, and so small a sense of Christianitie in com∣mon duties and of imminent dangers found in mens hearts, that it is almost impossible to move any to compassionate one ano∣thers calamities; farre lesse to draw any to rise up and stand united, for each others conservation, that (I say againe) it is so with us at such a time, this is the great sinne of the Ministery and the misery of this Nation. For where is the man to bee found that doth truely mourne, and not rejoyce rather at his opposites parties failings and miscarriages; and yet wee know that charitie doth not rejoyce at iniquitie? where is hee that doth1 Cor. 13. 6. seeke to heale breaches upon common principles and without a particular interest? and yet wee all know that charitie doth1 Cor. 13. 5.
not seeke it selfe; and who is hee that doth blow a retrait from the battell and seeke for a cessation from needlesse and injuri∣ous controversies? who is hee that doth endeavour a through and unprejudicate reconciliation? and who dare owne a Trea∣tie for mutuall condescension, without a feare of being cast off, or fallen upon by his Brethren? and yet wee all know, that wee are seriously exhorted, even because the Lord is at hand, to let our moderation bee known to all men; and that wee arePhil. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 9. 22. Rom. 12. 18. expresly commanded to seeke peace and follow after it; and that it i our dutie to become all things unto every one for their edifications sake; and, if it bee possible and so farre as in us lyeth, to have peace with all men. What shall wee say then to these things? shall wee still justifie our selves notwithstanding the manifest transgression of all these rules? No surely, for to cover or to excuse this fault would ag∣gravate the guilt thereof; and to discover or condemne it, is the way to gaine pardon for it; but to reforme and remove the causes thereof, is that onely which in this case will make us happy: for it will availe nothing to confesse our sinne, except it bee forsaken. Let us then looke upon it so, as to resolve ef∣fectually upon a course of reformation. Our sinne, in a word, is this breach of Christian unitie. The chief causes thereof are carnall self-seeking, disorderly controversies, and the want of true brotherly inclinations, notwithstanding the manifold bonds, and the name of brotherhood taken up amongst us. The remedies of these causes are, that wee should learne self∣deniall from Christ, that we should not strive nor cry, nor let our voice bee heard in the streets, nor quench the smoaking flax, norMatth. 12. 19, 20. breake the bruised reed, but that wee should in truth and sincerity, as in the presence of God, consider one another, to exhortHeb. 10. 24. and provoke each other unto love and to good workes. Now to move us effectually hereunto (next unto the expresse and known will of God, which is before all others the greatest of inducements) I know nothing that should bee more powerfull with us, then the discovery of the dolefull and pernicious effects of our divi∣sionsThe dolefull effects of our divisions as punishments of the sinne. Upon all in genrall. and distempers. For whilst wee are thus at a distance for points of outward order, the inward substance of the professi∣on is not regarded. Whilst wee contend for circumstantials, concerning the wayes of going about our worke, the maine of
the worke is lest undone; and whilst for temporall jealousies about small matters, Brethren uphold no spirituall correspon∣dency, Satan in matters of the greatest concernments hath gotten this advantage against us, that the whole doctrine of truth is become doubtfull unto very many; and the Gospel it self, and in it the wayes of peace (the chief object of comfort) are made a matter of strife and contradiction unto all. And if wee will observe particulars, wee shall perceive that amongst other things by this way of strife and contradiction, hee hath prevailed chiefly in this, that the very being of an orderly Ministery is called in question, and opposed most universally: For to abolish the work, and the office of the ordinary ministery, is that about which under severall pretences all his agents on all hands, are most earnestly imployed, and by their meanes all the fundamen∣tals of order and ordinances in the Church are already unset∣led, and all the grounds of authoritie in the State are almost quite overthrown: For by and upon some principles of that, which is called a new light, it is free for every one to doe what seemeth good in his owne eyes without controule, or giving account thereof unto any. This licentious freedome doth leade them that follow it to the fulfilling of all their fleshly desires, and doth confirme them in all manner of confusion, wherein the spirit of railing, of bitternesse, of envy, of contradiction and of uncharitablenesse in opposing and censuring others, doth increase strife and hatred, and multiplieth scandals infinitely, all which bring forth the woes that lie upon us. For to raile and calumniate without shame is become the very trade of many; nor is there any way left almost either in Church or Common∣wealth to redresse the injuries of this kind, though never so grosse and palpable. All this breaketh the hearts of the godly, staggereth the weake, gladdeth the adversaries, openeth a dore to all profanenesse, and causeth the Name of God to bee blas∣phemed, and the way of truth to bee evill spoken of in the world, at which Atheists and Papists triumph and exult with joy, expecting in the end, that the effect of all this will bee the utter ruine and desolation of all Protestants. Hee that cannot see these evills to rise originally from the misbehaviours of Brethren in the Ministery of the Gospel about their differences, is wholly blind; hee that doth not feele the in∣conveniences
thereof is senselesse, and hee that cannot grieve for the same, is hardned in sinfulned. Now because all these inconveniencies reach unto all the Pro∣fessors in some sort alike, therefore every one (though chiefly the Ministers, as chief of the Professors) should bee moved thereby to contribute their whole strength towards the speedy removall thereof. But besides these common evils, there is in this neglect (whereof the Ministery is most of all guiltie) something which doth more especially reflect, (and that justly) upon them∣selves,More especi∣ally upon the Ministery. more then others, and from them upon their Mini∣steriall function, as tending to make void the authoritie, and wholly frustrate the end of their ordinary vocation. For al∣though personal faults ought not to prejudice the vocation & the credit of the function; yet because it is very naturall to all men to make a consequence from the one to the other, therefore the Apostle will have even the meanest of the profession to behave themselves so, as it may not suffer any disesteeme for their sakes. For speaking of servants professing Christianitie to Titus and toTit. 2. 10. Timothy, he will have them to shew all good fidelitie unto their masters, that they may adorne the doctrine of Christ our Saviour in1 Tim. 6. all things, and to honour their masters, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed, through their misbehaviour. If then Christianitie it self will suffer in the opinions of men, and bee discredited by the faults of the meanest that take the name thereof upon them, how shall it not bee discredited by the mis∣carriages of those that are the chiefest of the profession? and how shall the credit of the ministery be upheld in mens opini∣ons and affections, if those to whom the charge thereof is com∣mitted, dishonour their administration? and how can they bee thought to honour their administration, if they walke not an∣swerable unto the end thereof? Now there is nothing more op∣posit unto the true end of the Ministeriall calling, then this ve∣ry neglect of dutie, whereof they are at this time found guilty: For the end, use and effect of the Ministeriall worke is, to reform the world; To perfect the Saints, and to edifie the body of Christ,Ephes. 4. 12, 13. till we all come in the unitie of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man; but this effect must needs be made void, and this end frustrate, as long as the Ministers maintaine no
Brotherly communion one with another, but stand at their di∣stances, and are single by themselves; so as to have no familiari∣tie of concurrence about their Masters worke, even although he hath therein strictly commanded them to bee united. For how can they reforme others, that are not reformed themselves? How can they bee thought fit to perfect the Saints so long as they seek not one anothers perfection? how can they be said to advance the unitie of Faith who doe all things belonging to the professi∣on of faith within themselves dividedly? How can they in the work of the Ministery be able joyntly to build up the same bo∣dy of Christ, who in that work maintain no communion one with another in reference unto his body; but rather set themselves to make up every one a separate body for himselfe? and how can they be able to bring all unto the unitie of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man through love, whose imperfection in love is such; that they doe value no common relations unto Christ and his service further then these se up some private inte∣rests; nor do mind the unitie of the spirit through the love of Christ which is common unto all, so much as to entertain either commembership, or ministeriall fellowship, or true Gospel-work∣acquaintance with any, that are not either setled in the circum∣stantiall courses of their way, or willing to come up unto them therein? Wee see then upon these grounds, that except this neg∣lect of dutie be reformed, and the true end of the Ministeriall work without humane aimes, be heartily entertained by those to whom it is intrusted, the effects thereof will never prosper in their hands; but Satan (as hitherto he hath done since they were divided) will continually prevaile against them all, till hee hath brought them unto finall destruction and irrecovera∣ble desolation. This then is the danger whereinto wee are fallen, and to lay this to heart is that matter of absolute necessitie, which by all should be apprehended, but chiefly by those that are called to the Ministery, that they in doing their principall dutie, which is to studie unitie in the truth in Christianity, may uphold the holy profession, and thereby intend their mutuall preservation. For without all doubt their very being in this kingdome, if they take not this course, will be very shortly in a most desperat condi∣tion; because as it is undeniably apparent, that hitherto nothing but their own disunion about matters extrafundamentall, hath
made Satan and their enemies to prevaile against them. So it isThe applica∣tion to exhort to unitie. cleerly manifest that hence forth nothing but their mutuall uni∣on will bee effectuall to maintain what they yet hold, or restore what they have lost in the minds of men, and of their standing in the profession; hee then that doth decline to concurre in the wayes of spirituall unitie with those that offer and sue for the same unto him, and being convicted of this danger doth not endeavour to prevent it, shall bee found guilty of all the evils that follow upon our breaches, of all the ruine that befalleth unto these Churches, of all the confusions that from thence arise unto the Commonwealth, of all the dishonor done to the name of Christ for want of order in his house, and of all the shame and reproach which this Nation is either now aspersed withall abroad amongst their Neighbours, or will in after ages cleave unto it. If then there is any love to the Fundamentall truths of the Gospel, if there is any zeale for righteousnesse and against damnable heresies, if there is any just hatred due to Blasphemies, and to the wayes of profanenesse and licencious∣nesse, whereby the kingdome of Satan is erected, and setled upon the ruines of Christs kingdome amongst us; and if there is any faithfulnesse and constancie to bee expected from those that professing Christianitie, have entred into solemne prote∣stations, vowes and covenants to stand united according to the will of God, for the advancement of a common-reformation, and the settlement of our union therein: if I say there bee any such thing as love to truth, zeale for righteousnesse and faith∣fulnesse of Christian Covenants, I may adjure such as pre∣tend thereunto, to shew themselves at this time therein, for their owne and their Brethrens preservation, that by the duties of Brotherly unitie in the holy profession, they may bee found to keepe faith and a good conscience without blame. For as it is not possible, that the Faith once given to the Saints can bee maintained by any, without a good conscience, so the integritie of a good conscience cannot bee kept without obser∣ving the end of the holy Commandement, which is the practise of love out of a pure heart. Now this practise amongst Mini∣nisters in their Ministeriall charges, can bee none other but a conscionable concurrence of their spirits in that aime, wherein the all relate unto Christ, to strengthen one anothers hands
in the works of his service. For their unity and love to each other can have no truth, but as it relates unto him, nor can it relate o∣therwise unto him, then by fulfilling his will, in doing the works of his service; and if this aime be lost in any, let them pretend what they will, their conscience is not sound, their performance is not acceptable, nor will their indeavours be for ever established; hence it is, that because many have left off to aime sincerely at this (who either delight to stand wholly by themselves, and give way to dividing principles and practises; or thinke it more ex∣pedient to stand wholly associated, but give way to the meanes of humane power to trust more thereunto then to the duties of Christian love and serviceablenesse) therefore it is just with God to withdraw from such of both sides that walke in these wayes, and from their undertakings, the blessing of his presence. So that by reason of the want of his strength to goe along, and conduct, to guide them, all their hands are weakned, nothing which is undertaken doth prosper, the service of Christs house is not advanced, the stewards thereof are either divided by them∣selves, or scattered by others, and generally they are as men without a heart, afraid one of another: and through these their breaches, a whole deluge of damnable errors, and a full cur∣rent of all unrighteous, wicked and scandalous practises, hath overwhelmed and almost drowned the Churches; so that the very floodgates of hell seeme to bee opened upon us, and have covered us with the proud waves of all licenciousnesse. And although it cannot bee denied, but that it is just with God, to suffer Satan thus farre to prevaile against all for the sinnes of all, and to make this breach upon the Leaders for theirA doubt an∣swered con∣cerning the office of the Ministery. failing in the Ministery; yet it is farre from mee to thinke, (as some doe) that the promise of God is failed in this our age; at if there were neither true Church nor Ministery any more amongst us, or any where in this world, but that the gates of hell, having prevailed against the Church, which Christ did once institute by his Apostles; a new mission must be expected, and a new foundation laid for the erecting of his kingdome. I say God forbid that I should thinke so. Yea, let God bee true but every man a liar: for I beleeve that heaven and earth shall passeRom. 3. 4. Matth. 24. 3. Matth. 16. 16, 17, 18, 19. away, but the word that is gone out of Christs mouth shall not passe away. Now Christ upon a speciall occasion said distinctly unto
his Disciples three things, which are these. 1 That his Church should bee built upon the rock of that truth, whereof the Apostles made confession, which was, that Jesus was the Christ, the sonne of the living God. 2 That the gates of hell should not prevaile against that Church. 3 And lastly, That the keyes of the kingdome of heaven with autho∣ritie to bind and loose on earth, whatever should be bound and loosened in heaven, shall be given to this Church. These promises I beleeve to bee so sure that they shall never faile: Therefore I must conclude, that neither the foundation of the Church, nor the Church which is builded thereupon, nor the Ministeriall authoritie of the keyes given to that Church, shall faile so long as this world doth last. Forwhat although some doe not beleeve, and are disobedient to the will of God; shall their unbelief and diso∣bedience make the faith and truth of God without effect? God forbid, yea all men are to bee found liars, that God may bee found true; for he hath concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: therefore in his sayings he shall be justifi∣fied, and when he is judged overcome. Wee must therefore ac∣knowledge that by our unrighteousnesse the righteousnesse of God is to be commended; and that although we of this Nation should utterly faile him, and bee no more worthy to be coun∣ted his Church, yet that he will never faile to doe what hee hath said unto the seed of Christ amongst men, and never recall the word which hee hath spoken concerning his Church. ButIsa. 59. 21. this we are bound to beleeve, that wheresoever there is a socie∣tie of men beleeving with their heart, and with their mouth making openly profession of this truth, that Jesus is the Christ the Sonne of the living God, there is a Church existent; and wheresoever a Church is existent, there the authoritie of the keyes is not wanting; because Christ hath said that the gates of hell shall not prevaile against it. I shall then confidently con∣clude from these premises two things, first, seeing there are so∣cieties of beleevers which are here existent and known to bee built upon that truth, which is the foundation, that therefore notwithstanding all these failings in particular duties, whereof they are guiltie, that yet Gods promise for the main will never be wanting to them, as to his Church. Secondly, I may infer this also, that notwithstanding all the advantages which Satan
seemeth to have gotten, both against the Ministery of this Church, and against their administrations therein (whereby hee doth blast them, and the fruit of their labours) yet wee may bee sure, that he shall never prevaile so farre as to make void the pri∣viledge of the Church, which is to have a right to the keyes of the kingdome of heaven, and thereby to the administration of all Christs Ordinances. Now then although indeed it is very sad and lamentable, that the Buildrs themselves should be so far wanting to their dutie, as by their divisions to give such an advantage unto Satan, that hee should bee able, visibly to pull down more then they are able to build up: yet we know that all things, even these same and such like failings, will worke together for the best towardsThe comfort of beleevers against these evils. Psal. 76. 10. those that love God, and that all the advantages which Satan hath gotten against the kingdome of Christ, will tend together to Gods greater glory and Satans owne overthrow at last. For as the wrath of man shall surely praise the Lord, so the plots of Satan and all his prevailing upon the infirmities of his Saints, when he shall have mercy upon Zion, will redound exceedingly to the increase of his glory, by the manifestation of the riches of his grace, and of the stabilitie of his purposes, in setting up the kingdome of Jesus Christ through a finall and totall destru∣ction of all the enemies thereof. Seeing then I have cause to hope for such an issue of this warfare, I shall not feare that the discovery of this failing in the Ministery will bee taken as a re∣proach to discredit them towards others in their function (which I acknowledge in its own way and degree to be of God & not of man) but rather as an admonition of love to show to those that are conscionable the necessity of laying their owne condi∣tion to heart, and of seeking the remedy thereof, in that way wherein it may bee found. And that I may not bee wantingThe necessitie of unitie fur∣ther pressed. unto this designe, I shall adde one thing more, for the demon∣stration of the necessitie of this dutie of brotherly unitie, which is so much neglected amongst us, that afterwards I may come to speake more fully of the usefulnesse and excellency thereof. In the profession of Christianitie the Apostle saith, that nei∣therGal. 6. 15, 16. circumcision availeth any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new crea∣ture. And as many as walke by this rule, Peace (saith hee will) bee upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Here then wee
see that the fruits of Peace and of mercy are Gods blessings upon the life of the new Creature; and where these fruits are not at all apparent, but on the contrary a spirit of strife, of bitternesse, of hatred and of mercilesse affection doth prevaile, there wee needs must say, that the old creature is still alive, because theIam. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. wisedome which is earthly, sensuall and devillish; which is the old mans rule, brings forth such effects. Now it is the proper worke of the true Ministers of the Gospel, to perswade all men to live the life of the new Creature, and to mortifie the membersCol. 3. 5. 8. of the old man, which are upon the earth, whereof these are a part. But if through the spirit of division and variance, the Mini∣sters themselves are intangled in these passions, and that even one against another; so that they doe not shew forth all meeknesse with all long-suffering and forbearance, wherein they ought to receive each other to the glory of God, as Christ received us, how can they performe this worke? how can they perswade others to walke by a rule which they mind not, and wherein they themselves are not exercised? It is cleer then, that to doe the proper worke of their Ministery, it is necessary for them to intend the dutie of brotherly love and unitie. Moreover it is said here, that neither circumcision nor uncir∣cumcision doth availe any thing in Christ Jesus, and if this is so, then the division and distraction, which is amongst us for things of such a kind is sinfull and necessary to bee left off; for I am sure that circumcision to the Jewes, and uncir∣cumcision to the Gentile was a matter of greater concern∣ment, then any thing about which wee at this time are di∣vided. And if that ought not to have made a breach be∣tween them, farre lesse these things amongst us. Now thatGal. 5. 6. which by the new Creature is available in Christ Jesus, is faith onely which worketh by love. If then the Ministers of the Gospel are appointed by God to beget faith and love in their hearers (that is, to perswade the unbeleevers thereunto, and to build up and confirme and increase the beleevers therein) by the testimo∣ny of Jesus, and by their unitie and love amongst them∣selves, how shall they bee able to doe this, except they bee first agreed to hold forth the same testimony, and except there be some amiable concurrence amongst them in the workes of their Ministery? Therefore as faith and love are inseparably necessary
to make a true Christian: so the testimony of Jesus, and the spirit of unitie are inseparably requisite for the worke of the Ministery. For as there is an absolute necessitie lying upon the Ministery to beare witnesse unto the truth, towards the mani∣festation thereof, for the saving of their own soules: So they are also no lesse necessitated to maintain the profession of their uni∣tie, for the edification of their hearers. For without this pro∣fession, that manifestation will never in reason be found a truth fit to convict the world, which otherwise it may be; because as it is just, that when witnesses doe not agree, their testimony should not be received, so it is equitable that when they doe a∣gree, their testimony should not be rejected. And if by this one∣ly default, they make their testimony without effect, it is evi∣dent, that to establish the truth and not to discredit it, to up∣hold the Ministery and not to make it contemptible, to buildup the Churches and not to ruine them, and to confirme the faith of the Professors and not to stagger them, the profession and practise of Brotherly unitie amongst the Ministers of the Gospel, is absolutely necessary. For all may see, that are not blind and senselesse; that originally nothing but the neglect of this dutie, hath deprived us of all our hopes and blessings, and brought us under the yoake of all these miseries. Upon all which this consequence doth manifestly follow; that the onely way to preserve the remnant which is left entire, to restore that which is not utterly decaied in the Church, and to helpe this distracted State unto some settlement (if there be any possibility of attaining it) is this. That the Ministers of the Gospel should set themselves to concurre and correspond toge∣ther, that they may hold forth unto the world in the testimony of Jesus Christ, the lovelinesse, the peaceablenesse, the meeknesse and the unitie of his spirit, to the end that both they and their hearers may follow therein his footsteps, as hee is gone before us to leave us an example. For this is a path of the new and the living way, which hee hath consecrated for us; and out of this way no man can come unto the Father, it is therefore absolute∣ly necessary, that such as will enter into the holiest, become followers of God as deare children, and walke in love as Christ also hath loved us, and made himselfe as one of us, even our Brother, to gaine us unto God.
CHAP. XIV. Concerning the usefulnesse and commendablenesse of brotherly unitie in the worke of the Ministery. Sect. I. What the communion and correspondency is, wherein our unitie is to be setled. HItherto wee have reflected upon that which doth make the studie of brotherly love and unitie amongst us absolutely necessary to avoid the danger of ruine and destruction, and the guilt of hindering the progresse of the Gospel in the world; now wee shall reflect also upon the usefulnesse and commendablenesse of the dutie in reference unto the work of the Ministery. It is no generous disposition to be drawn by meer necessitie and feare unto a dutie, but to bee moved thereunto by the lovelinesse of grace, and by that which is excellent therein, is praise worthy and argueth a noble and vertuous inclination. Therefore wee shall set our selves to worke upon this inclination, and indea∣vour to waken it in every one that hath ingenuitie. And my aime shall bee rather to deale with the understandings of all (able to consider of their wayes) to demonstrate that which I conceive to bee a dutie; then with the affections of any, to perswade them unto a performance, before they are convicted of that, which is the will of God therein. For I shall speak to Ministers, and such as I must suppose to bee conscionable; and to those I knew nothing so effectuall to perswade, as to evi∣dence unto them, that a matter is conformable unto the will of God, for nothing but this doth interest conscience into action. Now lest I should bee mistaken in that which I shall desire to offer as a dutie of the Ministery, I shall contract all, which for the present I have to say, to one assertion; which having opened, I shall endeavour to make good. The assertion is this. That although there were no danger of any outward enemies, or ofAct. 20. 28, 29, 30. Phil. 1. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, inward breaches and divisions in the Church (for the preventing of which, to study the unitie of the spirit is wholly necessary) yet that for
the true (1) Ministers of the Gospel, in the duties (2) of their mini∣steriall charge, nothing is more conscionable, (3) nothing more profi∣table, (4) nothing more commendable, (5) and nothing more sutable to the glory of God, (6) and the perfecting (7) of the Saints, then to (8) maintain a Brotherly communion (9) and correspondency one with another, and that such as lay not this dutie to heart, but love ra∣ther to stand and walke by (10) themselves, and to maintaine the principles (11) of a singular distance from their brethren in the Mi∣nistery, will not bee able in the end to approve their consciences unto God, that they walke worthy of the calling wherewith they are called. This assertion is somewhat large, therefore to open the parts there∣of, that my meaning may bee the better understood, I shall say of the severall heads thereof thus. 1 That by the true Ministers of the Gospel are meant none but such persons as are authorized by an ordinary and regular way of calling to administer the publick ordinances of Christ in his Church. 2 That by the duties of their Ministeriall charge are meant the workes which in and towards the Church are to bee per∣formed as an office, and such are, To labour in the word and prayer, to have the care of gathering and constituting the Church, to rule and govern the Saints committed to their charge as one body in Christ, to dispense the seales of the Covenant to those that belong unto it, and to exercise Church discipline over those that are liable to it. All which they are bound to attend as occasion is offered, and the edification of the Church doth require. 3 That when I say a thing is conscionable, I meane that it is prescribed by God in his word as a dutie which cannot be neg∣lected without contracting of guilt unto the conscience. 4 When I say, that a thing is profitable, I meane that it doth yeeld in its owne kind some benefit to him that useth it. 5 When I say, that a thing is commendable, I meane that it hath qualities for which it is to bee esteemed and embraced by all. 6 By brotherly communion and correspondency I mean not a bare name and profession of brotherhood, but a reall con∣junction of the thoughts, of the desires and affections, and of the endeavours of men, proceeding from this principle, that they acknowledge one another to be the children of the same Father,
or at least the servants of the same master: for as a master is a father to servants, so fellow-servants are brethren in service. 7 By the meaning of the communion and correspondency, I meane a constant following of the duties thereof, through the acknowledgment of some professed engagement obliging there∣unto. 8 By the glory of God in this dutie to bee aimed at, I mean besides the generall praise due to him for all his goodnes, a more speciall manifestation of the unitie of his Name in all his Saints. 9 By the perfection of the Saints in this dutie to be advan∣ced, I meane three things. 1 The building of them up into one body, by the onenesse of the Name of God, as Christ and the Father are one, that theyIoh. 17. 22, 23 may be perfect in one. 2 The strengthning of them with might by the Spirit in the in∣ner man, that being knit together in love, they may be comforted untoEphes. 3. 16. all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledg∣ment of the Ministery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ.Col. 2. 2. 3 The powerfull propagating of the Gospel of truth in the world, to be a testimony thereunto to convict it that Christ is sent of the Father, and a means to call in all the elect of God, toIohn 17. 23. the communion of Saints out of it. 10. By the standing and walking by ones selfe. I meane not the distinction of charges (as if none might stand or walke in a distinct office, wherein another hath no right to intermeddle) or the maintaining of the particular rights, be∣longing to particular Congregations, (for I hold that every Church hath within it selfe a right to all Christs ordinances, in respect that it is built upon the foundation) but I meane the disjoynting of mens practises, and the dividing of their affecti∣ons and purposes in the exercise of their distinct charges, whereby as parties in opposition to one another, they set up markes of distinction and separation between themselves and others, whom they cannot deny to belong to Jesus Christ and to be built upon the same foundation with themselves. 11 By the maintaining of principles of a singular distance, I meane such a plea for the rights and priviledges of particular associations of professors, as doth make void the fit joynting and compacting of themselves together with others that stand
upon the same foundation, that according to the purpose of God the whole building may bee fitly framed together and grow unto anEphes. 2. 21. holy temple in the Lord. For all are called unto the unitie of the same body by God; and the ministeriall worke is appointed to bring all to the1 Cor. 12, 13. Col. 3. 15. Ephes. 4. 13. unitie of the same faith and knowledge of the Sonne of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. If therfore any plea bee taken up for a singular distance which is grounded upon disjoynting principles; this will not suit with the purpose of God, which is to make up the whole body of Christ into one, that by the compacting of the members there∣of, there may bee an effectuall working in the measure of every part, toEphes. 4. 16. make the increase of the body, for the building of it self up in love. What principle then soever doth overthrow this compacting of the whole, for this end to bee fulfilled in and by every part; is destructive to the glory of Christ, and the happinesse of his members. If then the principle of Christian libertie and the plea for it, and for the particular rights of distinct Congregati∣ons, is made, by the subtiltie of Satan, the chief instrument of our divisions and distractions at this time, and in this kind, it must bee qualified by the principle of holy communion, and the plea for the unitie of the members of Christ, and for the common rights of the profession of Christianitie. For the Apo∣stolicall rule is cleer, that wee are indeed called unto libertie, onely weeGal. 5. 13, 14. must neither use libertie, nor plead for it, that it may give an occa∣sion to the flesh, but wee are commanded by love to serve one another, because the whole Law is fulfilled in this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe. And if this Law bee not observed, it is cleer that weeRom. 13. 9. walke not worthy of the calling wherewith wee are called, what ever the truth of our principle, or the justice of our plea may bee in it selfe. For it is not the Theoreticall upholding of a truth that will save us, but the doing of the will of God: woe be then unto us, if by our disputes for that which wee think to bee truth and righteousnesse, Satan doth insnare us; and by the practise of a singular distance, doth so far lead us out of the way, as to make us his instruments to divide and dis∣joynt the spirits and the practises of professors; that the essen∣tiall unitie of the whole, and the visible conjunction of the mem∣bers, being put out of the thoughts and aimes of common professors, all societies may bee broken to pieces, and all rela∣tions
to common duties made void, according to the will and fansie of every one, that will pretend to bee a Saint in such or such a degree above his neighbour; that so by our singular di∣stances through strife (for selfe-interests) scandals may bee mul∣tiplied, and the honour of Gods Name in the holy profession blasphemed in the world. Therefore to avoid all this, nothing is so fit or more necessary and usefull, then to maintaine this communion and correspondency, which we plead for, which is nothing else but a free and voluntary concurrence of spirituall counsels and endeavours, which God as the Father of Spirits and King of Saints doth require in his children and Office-bea∣rers, for the advancement of the kingdome of his Son, that it may appear unto the world, that the Church is his house, that hee is the ruler of it by his Word and Spirit, and that the Mi∣nisters thereof depend unanimously upon him, as his childen and servants; and that in their mutuall relations they stand uni∣ted to each other, not by a rule of their owne chusing and trans∣acting; from which they may exclude one way or other whom∣soever they please, but by the common rule which is his love, whereby they are bound to each other as Brethren, and as his servants, that is, fellow-members of the same body of Christ; for al the members of every body, are but servants to the head in the whole & to to each other for the heads sake, and for the good of the whole. Although then every member hath a facultie of life, and a right through that facultie to act in and by it self, the worke of its owne office; and hath immediatly from the head its direction what to doe; and is not under the command of any particular fellow-member yet in the use of this facultie, and in the exercise of this right, every member is directed by the head to subordinate it selfe to the service of the whole, and to de∣pend upon the unitie thereof, and not to stand or act by it self: for the Apostle saith, that the eye cannot say to the hand I have no need of thee; nor the head (though head, and over all the rest) to the feet (though but feet, and under all the rest) I have no need of you, but even the weakest and the most unseemly members are the most necessary, and every one of them in the performance of their duties towards the whole (for none of them are allowed to doe any thing for themselves alone) are made to depend upon each other. If this doctrine were laid to heart, and applied practically (without disputing) to particu∣lar
matters now in dispute, and if our braines were lesse, and our consciences more exercised in looking herein to that which is (without all dispute) the known will of God, wee should not need to be troubled with the nicities (though wee might conferre about them) of the proper seat of right to power and government, and with the nationall debates of the prioritie of the universall, and of the rights and priviledges of the particu∣lar Churches, upon which rocks our affections being now split, all the duties of necessary communion, correspondency, and concurrence are neglected amongst us, notwithstanding all the known excellencie, commendablenesse and usefulnes thereof. Therefore my purpose is to set before the consciences of those that seek life, the lovelinesse of this dutie whereunto we have al∣ready attained; if so be we will but put forth our hand unto it, as to the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, and not feed upon the Theory of disputable opinions concerning par∣ticular rights and priviledges; which are to us a tree of the knowledge of good and evill, whereof the fruit doth worke nothing but death and enmitie between God and us: and be∣tween man and man nothing but strife and distances, by reason of our pride wherewith our knowledge doth puffe us up, to ap∣peare somewhat more then others in all our undertakings. Sect. II. Of the excellency of unitie and of the fountaine thereof, Charitie. THe holy Ghost hath set himself of purpose to commend Unitie and Charitie unto us, (which now I am to speak of) in two severall places of Scripture, which I shall make the matter of this Section, to represent onely the heads thereof in brief unto such as are conscionable, that by themselves they may lay the thing to heart and weigh it consideratly, that God may perswade their affections to the practise thereof. The excellencies of brotherly unitie are set forth in the 133. Psal. where first by way of preface and proposition the holy Ghost doth call upon us, and invites us to contemplate and ob∣serve the same with admiration in the twofold propertie there∣of, viz. the goodnesse and the pleasantnesse which is in it. Be∣hold
how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in unitie, Vers. 1. Then secondly, by way of proof and demonstration he doth shew wherein that goodnesse and pleasantnesse doth consist, and whence it doth proceed. The goodnesse and pleasantnesse of brotherly unitie doth consist in this, that it doth bring with it to those that maintain it, all manner of blessings in great plentie. The blessings are both spirituall and bodily, the first in the Church, the second in the Common-wealth. The spirituall blessings bestowed in the Church, are the graces of the holy anointing, it is like the oyntment, whose excellencies are 1. in their worth, the precious oyntment; 2. in their use and application, which is to consecrate and make men Priests unto God, by the vertues conferred upon their principall faculties; upon the head, the beard, Aarons beard; 3. in their abundance and fruitfull proceeding from the head to all the inferiour parts, it ran down upon the beard, went down upon the skirts of his gar∣ment, Vers. 2. The bodily blessings bestowed in the Common-wealth are the fruits of the earth in the highest parts thereof both farre from the Church, and neer unto the same. As the dew of Hermon (a hill and land farre from Jerusalem neer Jordan) and the dew that descendeth upon the mountaines of Zion, Vers. 3. All this goodnesse and pleasantnesse doth accompany bro∣therly unitie, because the Lord hath commanded the blessing to bee there (viz. where unitie is) and the blessing which he hath com∣manded is, even life for evermore, Vers. 3. and consequently all the meanes of life, and if of life eternall, then of temporall also, for wee have the promise, that if wee seek the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse all other things shall bee added unto us, Matth. 6. 33. Now from all this which is the cleer doctrine of the holy Ghost, I shall make this inference onely, that if these promises are made to brotherly unitie, by reason of the blessing of God upon those that maintain it in Church and Common-wealth, then we may denounce the contrary threatnings unto those that maintain it not, for the wrath of God is upon those that are conten∣tiousRom. 2. 8, 9. and obey not the truth. Hitherto of unitie. The ground of it is love, as may bee gathered from 1 Cor. 12. 25. where the same care of members one for another (which is the effect of
their love) is the cause why there is no rent in the body, and consequently why unitie is preserved: For where that loving care is not, unitie is not, but a rent will bee, as wee may daily perceive in our dolefull estate. Therefore all the excellencies that belong to brotherly unitie are first and originally to be at∣tributed unto charity. But then there are yet other excellencies, which▪ are more immediatly attributed unto it by the holy Ghost, in 1 Cor. 13. where the Apostle having in the foregoing Chapter, from the beginning, reckoned up the spirituall gifts, which are given to the Saints in the Church to profit withall in the unitie of the body, (as is cleer from Vers. 7. compared with Vers. 12, 13. of Chap. 12.) he commeth in the conclusion of that Chapter to exhort the Saints to covet earnestly the best gifts; and to encourage them unto this dutie, he promiseth to shew them the way which is () most excellent. Which is that which immediatly in the following 13th. Chapter he begins to describe. From whence this inference doth offer it selfe, that as the chief and most excellent meanes to attaine to all spirituall gifts, is the practise and exercise of love, so the neglect of that dutie is the chief cause of the decay and losse of all spirituall gifts. Now the Apostle in the description of this way doth shew a Threefold excellencie, and usefulnesse of love. The first is, that without it no spirituall talents or good workes are profitable to the Church, or to our owne salvation, Vers. 1, 2, 3. The second is, that in it and by it all vertues tending to make a man perfect, are wrought in us, Vers. 4, 5, 6, 7. The third is, that above all other graces, it is the onely durable and lasting unto eterni∣tie, Vers. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Which doctrine being referred to the foregoing proposition in the last verse of Chap. 12. will pro∣duce this argument, or demonstration concerning the excellen∣cie of love. That vertue without which no gifts nor good workes are usefull unto any, and by which all vertues are wrought in us, and which alone lasteth unto eternitie, is the most excellent way to spirituall gifts. But so it is, that charitie is that vertue; Ergo, it is of all others the most excellent way to spirituall gifts. The Minor or the Assumption of this argument is made good concerning charitie, in the three severall parts thereof forementioned.
First then, that without it no spirituall talents and outward good workes are usefull; the Apostle doth make out in many particulars. For he first mentioned the gift of utterance, suppose a man could speake with the tongues of men and Angels, yet if hee want charitie, he is to his auditory but as sounding brasse, or a tinkling Cymbale, Vers. 1. Afterwards the gifts of prophesie, of understanding all mysteries, of all knowledge, of all faith to doe mira∣cles, yet if there be no charitie, he declareth that all this is of no use and vertue neither to the Church nor to him that hath it, Ver. 2. Then concerning good workes, he supposeth the largest and most compassionate relief of the poore; and the greatest constancy in martyrdome for the truth, even that a man should give his body to bee burnt; yet if there be no charity, all these workes will availe him nothing, Vers. 3. Charitie then is more excellent then these gifts, and is to bee counted the life, and as it were the soule of them all. Secondly, that by charitie all vertues are wrought in us, the Apostle doth in like manner declare in many particulars. For the vertues which make us perfect, for our behaviour towards persons in actions and about things, they all proceed from cha∣ritie. For our behaviour towards persons: if others bee crosse and froward, it teacheth long-suffering. If they bee good and vertu∣ous, it teacheth kindnesse; if they are in glory and prosperity, it doth not envie their condition; if wee in respect of our selves find some excellencies or eminencies in our own condition which others have not, it doth not suffer us to vaunt thereof towards others, nor to be puffed up thereby within our selves, Vers. 4. For our behaviour in actions whether they bee our own or other mens, whether evill or good, charity doth teach the vertues which are to bee exercised in them. In our own actions in respect of the forme, charity doth not be∣have it selfe unseemly; in respect of the end, it seeketh not her own. In the actions of others, if they bee evill, it is not provoked easily to wrath, or sharpnesse by them, if they bee good, it doth not thinke evill of them, Vers. 5. its own proper action is joy; where∣of the object is not iniquitie but truth, whether in our selves or others, Vers. 6. For our behaviour about things, if the things are indifferent and present as done by others, it beareth with them;
if the things are good, and said or promised by others, it belee∣veth them; or absent and expected from others, it hopeth for them; if the things are evill, it endureth them, Vers. 7. Thus in all respects it doth make a man compleat in all vertues: So that it is not without cause, that the Apostle doth call it, the bond of perfect∣nesse, and in that respect doth exhort us above all other endea∣vours to exercise our selves therein, Coloss. 3. 14. Above all these things put on charitie which is the bond of perfectnesse. Thirdly, that of all other graces necessary to make us perfect unto salvation, charitie is alone the permanent vertue, the Apo∣stle doth shew. First, by declaring that it never faileth. Second∣ly, by comparing it with Prophecies, with Tongues and with know∣ledge, which all shall faile and vanish away, Vers. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And thirdly, by exalting it above Faith and Hope, as the greatest of these graces, Vers. 13. And if to all this wee should adde the commendations which the Apostle John in his first Epistle doth give unto this vertue, as the chief meanes of our communion with God, of comfort within our selves, and of our inoffensivenesse towards our neighbour, wee might bee very large upon this subject; but to such as in their Ministery have any conscionable respect unto the expresse will of God, and who can discerne the things that are excellent; this will suffice at this time, to commend uni∣tie and charitie considered in themselves as they are good, plea∣sant, lovely and desirable. Sect. III. Of the common rules of Christianitie, as they are more especially obligatory unto Ministers in the duties of their calling. BEsides the lovelinesse and excellency of these vertues which doth commend to all the practise thereof in a common way, there are three speciall considerations, which ought to induce Ministers of the Gospell to entertaine in the workes of their Ministery one with another, the duties of brotherly communion and correspondency following thereupon. The first is taken from the rules, which are common to all professors, without which none can bee answerable unto the calling, wherewith hee is called unto Christianity it selfe. The second is taken from the laudable practise of those who
are set before them, as infallible examples in the Ministery. And the third is taken from the consideration of those things, which God doth peculiarly require of them as they are Ministers. So that none who neglecteth these duties will bee able to approve him∣selfe in the beautie of holinesse, either a true Christian by the common profession; or an upright follower of Christ and his Apostles in the Ministery; or a faithfull servant to the trust com∣mitted unto him in his charge; but in the day of accounts must expect to receive, not the praise due to the good and faithfull, but the reproof to be given to the wicked and slthfull servant, toge∣therMatth. 25. 21. 23. 26. with his reward. As for the duties of the common profession, wherein profes∣sors are obliged to relate to one another, and which to that ef∣fect are mainly pressed upon the consciences of all againe and again & commended unto us in the Scriptures as matters, which to uphold the integritie of the profession before the world, are most of all necessary, they are nothing else, but the effects of unitie and love in truth and holinesse. For truth and holinesse are the fundamentalls of a single profession; but without the effects of love and unitie in these, there can bee no common profession, or publick manifestation of the life of Christ unto the world by a body of Professors. And for this cause Christ hath made the fundamentall law of the profession in common, and the badge of his disciples unto the world to bee this, that they should love one another as hee hath loved them Iohn 13. 34, 35. A new commandement I give unto you, that yee love one another as I have lo∣ved you, that yee also love one another: by this shall all men know that yee are my disciples, if yee have love one to another. Now if this Law is common to all as they are Christians, so that the transgres∣sours thereof doe forfeit their right in Christianitie and are not to bee acknowledged Christs Disciples if they persevere in this fault, then it is evident that such of the Ministery as ob∣serve it not in their Ministeriall relation one towards another, are farre more guiltie then others, because their charge in the common profession doth oblige them more to this dutie then o∣thers, in as much as they are more bound thereby to uphold the truth of the profession then others are; for they are the joynts of the body, and the instruments of the communion between the members; which if they through want of love to each
other, do either breake or not advance, they are not onely guiltie of their owne disunion from their fellow labourers in the Ministery, but also of the disjoynting of all other professors and members of Christ, one from another in the way of the common calling. And this is so much the more to be heeded, by how much the Scripture is more frequent and earnest in pressing this dutie and the effects thereof; then any other thing requi∣site in the obedience of Faith. To reckon up all the particular commandements and strong motives which are in the New Te∣stament, to enforce the practise of this dutie, is not my pur∣pose at this time; but I would onely remonstrate unto those that intend to bee faithfull unto God and conscionable in their ministery, that as the fundamentall Lawes of the common pro∣fession, which are the practise of love and unitie, belong more unto them in respect of each other, then unto single members, in respect of one another, (because mutuall love and unitie in the Ministers entertained or not entertained doth beget or de∣stroy the same in common professors) so the effects, meanes and consequents of those duties are more eminently the concern∣ment of their calling then of any others. Therefore I shall briefly point at some places of Scripture wherein the chief ef∣fects and meanes of those fundamentals are earnestly recommen∣ded unto all, that the Ministery of this age may see therein the rule of their comportment, and how far wee are strayed from it. Wee are then all commanded, and that as a dutie wherein wee are to walke worthy of the vocation wherewith wee are called, to study the unitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace, because all our funda∣mentall relations to all the meanes, and to Christ and God the Authors of our salvation, are one and the same, Ephes. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6. and 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. and 2 Cor. 13. 11. Col. 3. 13, 14, 15. Therefore wee are commanded againe and againe to be of the same mind each towards another, Rom. 12. 16. Phil. 2. 2. to have the same love, and to be of one accord, Phil. 2. 2. and 1 Pet. 3. 8. and 1 John 4. 7, 8. 11, 12. & 5. 1. and 2 John 5, 6. and 1 Pet. 1. 22. and the measure and hight of this love is, that we are bound in imitation of Christ to lay downe our lives for our brethren, 1 John 3. 16. and Joh. 15. 12, 13. far more then ought wee to deny our selves in lesser things. The effects of these graces and the meanes to honour the holy
profession by the practise thereof, are of two sorts; the one po∣sitive, the other negative. The positive effects of the spirit of love and unitie, are the ex∣pressions of all good will towards others in the common pro∣fession, and the use of all the meanes whereby the integritie thereof may be upheld in every one. These are chiefly, 1 Mutuall care to build up each other, to pray for each other, to keep each other in the love of God, Jud. 20. 21. and to this effect. 2 To looke to each others things, and not to our owne things alone, Phil. 2. 4. and 1 Cor. 10. 24. 3 To serve each other in love, Gal. 5. 13. 4 To please our neighbour for good to his edification, Rom. 15. 2. 5 To provoke one another to love and good workes, Heb. 10. 24. and to follow the good whereunto we are provoked, Hebr. 12. 14. 6 To exhort and admonish one another, Heb. 3. 13. Rom. 15. 14. 7 To preferre others to our selves in love and by humility, Rom. 12. 10. Phil. 2. 3. 8 To have compassion on each other in cases of infirmitie, considering our owne condition, lest wee also be tempted, Jud. 22. Gal. 6. 1. 9 To beare one anothers burdens, and in the spirit of meeknesse sup∣porting the weake, to restore one another, Gal. 6. 1, 2. and 1 Thes. 5. 14. Rom. 15. 1. 10 To make a difference of faults, and to save some as pulling them out of the fire, Jud. 22, 23. The negative effects of this spirit are the inclinations and in∣deavours whereby all evills which may occasion the breach of unitie or love are avoided. And to this effect wee are commanded, 1 Not to seeke or to please our selves, Rom. 15. 1. 3. Phil. 2. 4. 6, 7, 8. 2 Not to have any evill will or hatred against any, 1 Pet. 2. 1. and 1 John 2. 9, 10, 11. 3 Not to bee vaine-glorious, to provoke any, or to envie one another, Gal. 5. 26. 4 Not to revenge or recompense evill with evill, Rom. 12. 17. 19. 21. and 1 Thes. 5. 15. but to forbeare and to forgive one another in cases of offence, Ephes. 4. 2. Col. 3. 13. 5 Not to murmur nor dispute, nor to give offence unto any, Phil. 2. 14, 15, 16. and 1 Cor. 10. 32.
6 Not to strive, nor to fight, nor to beat our fellow servants, Matth. 24. 49. and to avoid this it is especially required in the Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25. Of all which and such like duties, whereof the Scriptures are full, and which tend to perfect the Saints in their holy commu∣nion, and to direct brethren in the common profession of Chri∣stianitie to advance truth and holinesse in themselves, and others, wee must say this, that they oblige Ministers in a threefold respect above others. For they are not one∣ly bound to observe these rules in all their wayes as they are Christians, but they are moreover bound to observe them, First, towards all more eminently then other com∣mon professors, because they are appointed to bee the Salt of the earth, and the light of the world, and as a City built upon a hill that cannot bee hid, Matth. 5. 13, 14. Secondly, towards their fel∣low Ministers more especially and distinctly then towards o∣thers, because they are bound to them by a double tie of follow∣ship, viz. by that of Christianitie, and that of the Ministery. And thirdly, they are bound to observe these rules towards the workes and in the performances of their Ministeriall administrations more exactly then in and towards other common duties; because those workes and performan∣ces are of a more important nature, then other workes, as being more universail and more leading in their kind, and such as more neerly concerne the glory of God, and reflect upon the soules of men in order to him, so that a small failing in any of these is more hurtfull to the profession then a greater fault in any other kind. So that wee must forcibly conclude, that because all the common rules of Christianitie, are more obli∣gatory unto Ministers towards one another in the duties of their calling then unto common professors; that therefore the chief and most fundamentall rules of the holy profession which con∣cerne love and unitie, communion and correspondency, are more binding towards them, chiefly in the workes of their Ministeri∣all administration, then towards any others: and consequently that the neglect of the least of these duties, in any of them, is a greater guilt and lesse excusable, then in any others, the com∣mission of a grosse misdemenour. A little moat in the eye will trouble the whole body more, then a great handfull of dirt and
dust cast upon any other part of the face, and the least prick that may bee in the heart or in the pia mater of the braine (as Physi∣tians say) will kill a man infallibly; but a great wound in the flesh, nay a stab through the whole body may be cured. A thorne in a small joynt will indanger a gangrene to the whole body, whereas a great impostume in a part of the flesh will be without danger &, may be a means (though with some trouble) to purge the whole of many evill humours. Thus a little sparke of dis∣affection in one Minister against another, or breach of unitie in the least dutie of their charge, may prove infinitely more hurt∣full to the whole Church of God, then great and grosse ho∣stilities in common professors for matters of outward concern∣ment. Now amongst all the faults and defaults of Ministers in their charge, that of the want of mutuall love, and of care to main∣taine the unitie of the spirit in the profession of Christianitie; together with a delight to stand at a distance by themselves, is to me one of the greatest, because it doth directly crosse the chief end of their Ministeriall function, which is to gather the beleevers into one visible body, and to bring that body to the perfection of spirituall unitie (which may bee cleerly gathered from John 17. 21, 22, 23. compared with Ephes. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.) And if this bee the chiefe end of their Ministery, then the maine neglect of the meanes by which this end may bee obtained, and without which it cannot bee prosecuted, must needs bee their greatest guilt; whence it will cleerly follow, that to maintain no communion in spirituall things one with another is one of their greatest faults, because most directly crosse to the end of their administration. So the, if to main∣taine spirituall communion is a dutie in this respect fundamen∣tall and necessary, then it followeth that the engagements un∣to a concurrence, and the lawfull wayes of spirituall corre∣spondency are also fundamentall and necessary to the work of the Ministery, and must bee entertained, because without these the dutie of holy Communion cannot bee maintained, nor the unities of the Church brought to any visible perfection, but rather visibly dissolved. Thus then upon this consideration it is an undeniable Scrip∣turall truth, That for the Ministers of the Gospel, in the
duties of their Ministeriall charge, nothing is more conscio∣nable, nothing more commendable, nothing more profitable, and nothing more sutable to the glory of God, and the per∣fecting of the Saints, then that they should maintaine a bro∣therly communion and correspondency one with another, and such as neglect it, walke not worthy of the calling wherewith they are called in the common profession of Christianitie. Sect: IV. Of the practise of those that are set before us as infallible examples in the Ministery. ALthough the mediatory actions of Jesus Christ in the flesh, as hee is our Saviour, are not imitable, nor were they per∣formed to bee imitated by any, for hee alone is the onely Me∣diatour between God and man; yet his relations unto us, asHeb. 2. 11. our brother, sanctifying us in our flesh; and the wayes of his converse amongst men were such, that in all cases of dutie, wherein wee are to come to God, or to behave our selves dutifully one towards another in respect of God, he hath left us either an example which wee are bound to imitate, or a precept which wee ought to observe, and which hee him∣selfe did practise. For in this, hee is the Captaine of our sal∣vation, because hee went before us in all things, and wee are bound to follow not onely him before all others, but al∣so none further then they are found to bee his followers, 1 Cor. 11. 1. and for this cause wee see that the Apostles as in all other things, so chiefly in these duties of love, unitie, forbearance, and condescension towards the weake, doe al∣ledge his practise as the strongest argument that can bee used to oblige us thereunto. Thus, 1 John 3. 16. Hee laid downe his life for us, and wee ought to lay downe our lives for the Brethren. Ephes. 5. 1, 2. Bee yee followers of God as deer children, and walke in love as Christ also hath loved us. Coloss. 3. 13. Even as Christ forgave you, so also doe yee. Gal. 6. 2. Beare yee one anothers burthens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.
1 Pet. 4. 1. Forasmuch as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arme your selves likewise with the same mind. And the Apo∣stle, Phil. 2. Having used many strong inducements to perswade us to love and unitie, Vers. 1, 2. and to disswade us from strife and division, vers. 3. then vers. 4 hee exhorts us to mu∣tuall care of one another; whereunto as an argument is brought in Christs example, as the chiefest of all other mo∣tives, Vers. 5, 6, 7, 8. Let this mind bee in you which was in Christ Jesus, &c. and Christ saith to his Father, John 17. 22. The glory which thu gavest me, I have given them, that they may be one even as we are one. By glory I understand here grace, as 1 Pet. 5. 1. partaker of the glory that shall bee revealed. As concerning Christs practise in his Ministery to avoid breaches and contentions between him and others, it is set forth by the holy Ghost in Isa. 42. 2, 3. and Matth. 12. 19, 20. thus: Hee shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man beare his voyce in the streets, a bruised reed shall hee not breake, and the smoa∣king flx shall hee not quench, till hee send forth judgement unto vi∣ctory. And concerning his way to bring us to unitie with him∣selfe and with God; the Apostle doth set it forth as an ex∣ample to bee imitated, Rom. 15. Vers. 2, 3. Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification, for even Christ pleased not himselfe, &c. which is further applied to our practise, vers. 5, 6, 7. The God of patience and consolation grant you that ye be like min∣ded one towards another, according to Christ Jesus, that you may with one mind and one mouth glorifie God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherefore receive yee one another as Christ also received us to the glory of God. And then explained in shewing what the work of Christs Ministery was, Vers. 8, 9. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God, to confirme the promises made unto the Fathers, and that the Gentiles might glo∣rifie God for his mercy, &c. Where wee may cleerly understand that by Christs Ministeriall behaviour, which was without strife, free from all clamours and disputes, and which did tend to the uniting of all, both Jewes and Gentiles, both cir∣cumcised and uncircumcised unto God, wee are taught to bee
without partialitie, to endeavour the communication of Gods glory unto all, and obliged in our Ministery not to stand and walke by our selves to satisfie our owne desires and enjoy our rights and priviledges which wee pretend unto for private content, but rather to please others to their edification, al∣though wee should suffer reproaches for their sake. For thus Christ was reproached by the Pharisees (who were much in love with their owne holinesse) for conversing and eating with Pub∣licans and sinners, Matth. 9. Vers. 10, 11, 12. & Chap. 11. 19. and upon this ground of pleasing others and receiving all that came in his way to the glory of God, Christ conversed, did eat and drinke with the Samaritanes with whom other Jewes had no dealings, John 4. 9. till vers. 43. Nor was it without a myste∣ry, that at his death hee was crucified between two Male∣factors, that the Scripture might bee fulfilled which saith, and hee was numbred with the transgressors, Marke 15. 27, 28. For by God, and by himselfe justly in respect of the imputati∣on of our sinnes to him, and by sinners unjustly hee was num∣bred in his life, and in his death one of them, for their good to save them. This example of Christ in his Ministery made the Apostle Paul become all things unto all men that hee might gaine some and partake of the Gospel with every one, as hee him∣selfe doth set forth his owne practise, to exhort us to follow it, 1 Cor. 9. vers. 19. till 24. Now if Christ and the Apostles did thus behave themselves with indifferencie, and apply them∣selves without respect of persons by their Ministery unto all, that were any way capable of the outward meanes of edificati∣on (though great sinners otherwise) how can the practise of a Separation, or of a Semiseparation be warranted, and that even from those, who in respect of their profession cannot bee de∣nied to bee our brethren? Should wee dare to put upon mat∣ters that are meerly circumstantiall, and upon things no where expresly enjoyned, but rather taken up by our selves, more weight then upon all these fundamentall duties of Christia∣nitie, and upon the undeniable practise of Christ and his Apo∣stles in the worke of their Ministery? If wee doe make our selves, and our owne wayes the measure of all perfection, sure∣ly wee become perfect Idols to, and Idolaters of our selves in
Gods worship. For if in the outward meanes of worshipping and drawing neer to God in publick, though his owne or∣dinances bee observed as hee hath appointed them, as to the outward man, (for to the inward fellowship hee himselfe a∣lone doth admit whomsoever hee pleaseth) yet if then wee love to set our selves at a distance from others; or reject others from being partakers with us of the ordinances, either because wee count them in holinesse inferiour to us, or because wee are not satisfied concerning their sinceritie, or because they come not up to joyne in opinion with us, concerning all the circumstantials of our way. If I say for these, or such like cau∣ses, wee stand aloof in the common profession; and think that God is no where to be found but in our way and societie; doe wee not Idolize our selves? doe wee not make our selves the onely rule of all perfection, and say in our hearts, Stand thou by thy selfe, come not neer, for I am holyer then thou. And whatIsa. 65. 5. can bee imagined more opposit to the love, humilitie and con∣descension of Christ and his Apostles in the way of their Mi∣nistery? Let us therefore take heed to this snare, let us count nothing perfect, but that which upon the grounds of the com∣mon profession is conformable to the example of Christ and his Apostles, who came into the world to save and draw sin∣ners unto God, not by a distance, but by a condescension unto them in their weaknesse. As for the communion and correspondencie which the pri∣mitive Ministers maintained one with another in the Mi∣nisteriall workes; wee shall find that it did tend to these foure ends. First, to advance the conversion of the Gentiles to the faith and profession of Christianitie. Secondly, to build up and confirme those that had received the truth of the Gospel, that they might be setled therein. Thirdly, to preserve those that were setled from the danger of se∣ducers. Fourthly and lastly, to strengthen themselves in the workes of their employment towards the Churches. All which aimes are still necessary to bee followed, and therefore the meanes which are serviceable thereunto, and which they then used must
not now bee neglected, if they can bee set afoote. First, wee find then that for the propagation of the Gos∣pel amongst the Gentiles some went forth to preach unto them the name of Christ, and tooke nothing of them. To re∣ceive such and bring them forward on their journey after a Godly sort, was a worke of holy Communion commended in Gajus by the Apostle John, as being a dutie, which all ought to in∣tend, and the ground why all ought to intend it is, that all may be fellow-helpers to the truth. This practise then is still to3 John 6. 7, 8. bee followed by all that are called to the Ministery, so long as the propagation of the truth shall be necessary. Secondly, for the confirmation and edification of converts in the faith by the care of neighbour Ministers correspon∣ding with those that did convert them, wee have an example in Acts 8. 14. where the Ministers of the Church at Jerusa∣lem sent to Samaria two of their number to confirme the be∣leevers and build them up in the faith; in like manner when they heard that some were turned unto the Lord in Antioch, they sent Barnabas, and he went to the same end and purpose, Acts 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. Thirdly, for the preservation of the truth from the dan∣ger of Seducers, and the decision of doubts in doctrine and practise cast in amongst the professours to trouble them, wee have an example of Brotherly Communion and Corre∣spondency in Acts 15. vers. 1. till 30. where one Church doth crave and another doth contribute assistance, counsell and au∣thoritie in a Synodicall way towards the decision and settlement of the difference which broke forth amongst them. Fourthly, the example wherein Ministers amongst them∣selves did strengthen one another in the worke of their em∣ployment towards the Churches, is that of the Apostles of the Jewes and Gentiles, who having communicated together con∣cerning the doctrine which they preached, Gal. 2. vers. 2. and made known to one another their practise, Ʋerse 3, 4, 5, 6. to gaine mutuall approbation and confirmation therein, Verse 6. 7, 8. they did enter into a contract of followship, Vers. 9. and an obligation of Communion and communication of good things
between their Churches, Vers. 9, 10. Nor was it found law∣full or answerable to the truth of the Gospel, that upon hu∣mane considerations or partiall respects that Communion should be broken, Vers. 11. till the end. From all which againe doth follow that which former∣ly hath beene concluded; that nothing is more consciona∣ble, nothing more commendable, nothing more profitable, and nothing more sutable to the glory of God and the perfecting of the Saints in the worke of the Ministery, then that the Ministers of the Gospel should maintaine a Brotherly Com∣munion and correspondency one with another, and that such as neglect this dutie walke not worthy of the calling where∣with they are called in imitation of Christ and his Apo∣stles. Sect. V. Concerning that which concernes the Office of the Ministery in it self. IF wee reflect upon the Ministeriall office in it selfe, and con∣sider that whereunto it hath a speciall reference, wee shall find, that all Ministers that are faithfull to their charge are bound at all times to have respect unto foure things. The first is their relation unto Christ as they are under him who is the head of the Church. The second is their relation to the Church, as therein they are Officers. The third is their relation to the workes of their charge in the Office. The fourth is their relation to their fellow-labourers in these workes. None of these respects must be wanting, because without their subordination unto Christ, they are no Ministers, nor are they otherwise in Christ, but as they are members of his Church, nor can they bee counted members without a work to performe, because the use of every member is to be an Organ of the soul in the body: now the soul of this body is the spirit of Christ, and every true beleever is a member Organicall in his own place, that is, appointed to some usefull worke. Nor is any
member alone, but it is put together with the rest, to make up the whole by mutuall conjunction and cooperation, there∣fore none doth worke as it is alone, but as it standeth united with its fellow-labourers in every worke. And as none of these respects can bee wanting in the office of the Ministery; so none besides these are needfull; for if a member doth duely depend upon his head, and standeth in its right place in the body; and hath a lively facultie to doe its owne worke, and is no wayes disjoynted but fitly compacted and linked to the other mem∣bers in doing its work, nothing can bee further desired or wished for in it. These are then the essentiall and proper relations, under which a Minister as an Officer of the Church is to bee considered. Now if it bee found that in the profession of truth and holinesse, nothing doth make him so fit for his office in all these relations, as to maintaine the du∣ties of brotherly love, unitie, communion and corresponden∣cie, and that without the studie of these, hee cannot stand a∣right in any of those relations; then I suppose that these du∣ties will without contradiction bee acknowledged to bee the most commendable and usefull that hee can apply himselfe unto, and that without the observance of the same, hee cannot bee said to walke worthy of the vocation wherewith hee is called. Let us therefore take these relations into a more distinct con∣sideration, and see how therein by these duties a Minister is fitted for his office. First, then a Minister by his Office is subordinate unto Christ, as a Servant, as a Disciple, and as a friend of his; and to make these relations evident to the world and sure to himself, is to make his calling and election sure; which is effected when both others are made to see, and hee himself doth assuredly of himselfe know, that what hee doth in his charge, is done to serve Christ as it becommeth his Disciple and friend. But except his behaviour in all the workes of his charge bee suta∣ble to that love whereby Christ his master did love us, and thereby did unite himself unto us, these relations will not bee evidenced. For to be a faithfull servant of Christ he must make two things
appeare. First, that hee serves none but him alone, as the A∣postle doth, Gal. 1. 10. and as Christ requires of all to bee done, when hee tells us that none can serve two masters, Matth. 6. 24. And secondly, that hee applies himselfe to the same worke which Christ did. For hee commands all his servants to follow him, Iohn 12. 26. namely, in that service which hee performed, which was to doe the will and manifest the love of his Father unto us; therefore the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 5. in order to this, doth professe not to preach himselfe, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and himselfe a servant to the Corinthians for Iesus sake. This was to be a servant of the love of Jesus to us, to invite all to bee reconciled to God for his sake, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. 21. and 6. 1. As the imployment is nothing else but a service of love, Gal. 5. 13. that is, to expresse the love and fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2. so the infallible character of a disciple by1 Cor. 16. 14. which hee is to bee distinguished in the world from all others, is mutuall love and unitie, as is cleer by Iohn 13. 35. and here∣in as well as in holding forth the word, they are to approve themselves to bee the light of the world, Matth. 5. 14. which will appeare by comparing these two places, Phil. 2. 14, 15, 16. with 1 John 2. 9, 10, 11. The whole relation then of being a true servant and Disciple, is evidenced by nothing more then by this worke of love and mutuall unitie. Lastly also it is evi∣dent, that none can claime the title of being Christs friend, but by the performance of this dutie: For Christ hath intai∣led the right to this dignitie wholly upon this condition; which is cleerly expressed Iohn 15. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. This is my commandement, that yee love one another as I have loved you; greater love hath no man then this, that a man lay downe his life for his friends: Yee are my friends if yee doe whatsoever I command you, &c. And when in vers. 15. and 16. hee hath shewed, how much by his friendship to them hee hath obliged them alrea∣dy; and what further obligations they should receive from his Father, hee concludes, vers. 17. thus. These things I com∣mand you, that you love one another. So that hee puts all the rela∣tions which wee have to him of servants, of disciples and of friends, upon the expression of our love to each other; from whence wee must forcibly conclude, that if there bee no such
expression of love, but rather of disaffection, and of hatred to one another in our Ministery, that wee make it apparent unto the world; and to our owne consciences, when they awake, it will bee evident, that wee are none of his servants, nor his disciples, nor his friends; but rather the servant, disciples, and friends of his enemy, the Prince of wickednesse in heavenlyEphes. 6. 12. matters. Therefore let no man bee deceived with faire preten∣ces of holinesse, and with large pleas and discourses about spe∣ciall rights; the Apostle tells us, that if wee have bitter envy and strife in our hearts one against another, and if wee glory therein, weeIam. 3. 14, 15, 16. lie against the truth: For the wisedome by which men are led in such cases, descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensuall, and devillish. Secondly, in relation to the Church, as it is a house of God, the Ministers therein are builders, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12. as it is the houshold of faith, they are stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 14. 1, 2. and as it is a flock they are shepheards thereof, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Now if in building the same house there bee no con∣currence and correspondency between the builders thereof, how will it bee fitly framed together as it ought to bee? Ephes. 20. 21. Can builders that have no spirituall communion, but are rather disunited in their wayes, frame fitly one and the same house for Gods spirit to dwell in? And if in a great houshold, where one steward cannot oversee all, severall stewards being appointed to do all by one and the same rule of administration; yet they agree not amongst themselves, but walke different wayes and crosse each other: will not this distraction disorder the affaires of the houshold? will not this reflect upon their Lord and Master, as if he could not govern his family in peace? And if severall shepheards belonging to a great flock to feed it joint∣ly, doe every one take a part thereof for himself, and feed it separately each from other, without any care to maintaine good neighbourhood and acquaintance, but rather to crosse one another in their walkes, and draw sheep one from another, how will they bee able to answer it to him that hath intrusted them with the joynt care of his flock? I find that when the soulCant. 1. 7, 8▪ which is in love with Christ doth seeke to find him out, it is afraid to turne aside unto the flockes of his companions; and
when it is directed how to come to him, it is bid goe forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed besides the shepheards tents: whence wee may observe, that the multitude of flocks under many pretending to bee Christs companions, doe perplex the soule, and turne it aside from him, but the unitie of the flock under shepheards that are united, is the way wherein Christ is to bee found. Thirdly, their relation to the workes of their employment doth wholly necessitate them to maintaine mutuall love and unitie; because not onely these duties in themselves are a prin∣cipall part of their worke; but what ever else doth belong to their charge, whether it concerne the Church or the Gospel; it can neither bee acceptable unto God, nor profitable unto men, except it bee done in the spirit of love and u∣nitie. First then, that these duties are recommended unto them, as a maine part of the very worke, which is chiefly to be a∣med at in their profession, I suppose hath been abundantly made out by that which formerly hath been alleadged. Secondly, that nothing can bee acceptable unto God with∣out this frame of spirit, is evident, because God is love, and hee that loveth not, knoweth not God, 1 John 4. 8. and on the contrary hee that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God and God in him, ibid. Vers. 16. Moreover he that doth not all his workes in love, as he is commanded, 1 Cor. 16. 14. transgresseth the whole Law, by the unlovely frame of his spirit, because as love is the fulfil∣ling of the whole Law, Rom. 13. 8, 9, 10. So the want of it, must needs bee the transgression of the whole Law; and hee that is not subject to the Law of God cannot please him, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. 7, 8. And as nothing can bee acceptable unto God, which is not done in love, so it cannot bee profitable unto men; For if God blesse it not, how can it prosper towards them, and how can hee blesse that which is displeasing to him? And then the Apostle tells us, that knowledge is apt to puffe men up, but it is Charitie which edifieth, 1 Cor. 8. 1. And what I say of love may bee verified of unitie; as it is the fruit of love inseparable from it in Christs aime: John 37. 23. and equally recommended to
us by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 10. and 2 Cor. 13. 11. Ephes. 4. 1. Ephes. 4. 1. till 7. Phil. 2. 2. whence wee see, that all things which are to bee done by any must thus bee qualified to find acceptance; but if wee looke more distinctly upon the pro∣per workes of their employment towards the Church and for the Gospel; wee shall perceive more cleerly the intrinsecall coherence which is found between these duties and the Mini∣steriall administrations. For the workes of their administration towards the Church are all the Ordinances of God belonging to the publick wor∣ship in the word and prayer, whereunto the Sacraments, theActs 6. 4▪ Government and the Discipline are subordinate, that therein by the Word and Prayer the Saints may have communion with God through the Spirit. The whole substance and summe of all that they have to doe, is expressed by the Apostle, Ephes. 4.Ephes. 4. from Vers. 11. till 17. where I observe that all the gifts andVers. 11. Offices which Christ hath given to his Church, both the ex∣traordinary, of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, and the ordinary of Pastors and teachers, their worke is the same towards the Church unto the worlds end; namely this. 1. To bee service∣ableVers. 12. in perfecting the Saints, and in building up the body of Christ, in Faith and knowledge, till they all come to the unitie thereof, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ.Vers. 13. Where wee see that the end of their worke is nothing else but the perfection of unitie, and consequently if any should not aime at this, it is evident that they come short of the true end of their administration of the ordinances, and shoot not at the marke which God hath set before them. Secondly, their service is to preserve by this meanes theVers. 14. Professors of Christianitie from that unsettlement which is brought upon those that are children in understanding by the different doctrines of men and their sleights and cunning craftinesse whereby they lay in wait to deceive the simple and draw disciples after them: whence wee may gather that if the true Ministers had done their worke as they should have done in love and unitie from the beginning of the Reformation, the deceivers of these times would never have prevailed so as they have done hitherto. But because this hath not been intended, therefore
they have gotten all the advantages that they can desire and wish for, both against us and all other Protestants. Thirdly, their worke is not onely to unite them in faith andVers. 15. knowledge, and to preserve them from seducers, but to endea∣vour their growth in all things into him, who is their head Christ, by the sinceritie and truth of love. Fourthly, and to this effect their worke is to compact themVers. 16. and joyne them together as one body to build up themselves in love by that which every joynt is able to supply unto another. Whence wee may most evidently perceive that the whole substance of their worke towards the Church and Saints to per∣fect them and build them up, is in effect nothing but this, to unite them in the faith and knowledge of Christ, to preserve them from unsettlement, and to cause them grow up within themselves by the loving communication of their graces to each other. As concerning the work which they are to intend for the Gospel to maintain the profession of it in the world; it is in a word to uphold the truth which is after godlinesse; that itTit. 1. 1. may be acknowledged to bee the grace of God which bringeth sal∣vation: and that it may appeare unto all men; to teach them toTit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. deny ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and the Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himselfe for us that hee might redeeme us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himselfe a peculiar people jealous of good workes. Now to hold forth this word of life, the Apostle requireth in all Professours, and therefore most of all in the Ministers of the profession, that they should doe all things without murmurings andPhil. 2. 14. disputings, and that they should bee (in their conversation) blame∣lesse and harmelesse, as the Sonnes of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, and that they should stand fast inPhil. 1. 27. in one Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel. Where wee may observe that in that worke which is proper to the advancement of the Gospel of truth in the world, the holinesse of life, the peaceablenesse and the unitie of the professors, are the necessary requisites without which nothing in this kind can bee effected: For this worke hath two parts. The one is towards the children of truth, the other is against
the adversaries of truth. Towards the children of truth, the worke is in respect of the common profession, to concurre in the wayes of righteousnesse, of faith, of charitie and of peace with all those that call upon God out of a pure heart, 2 Tim. 2. 22. and in re∣spect of the aime of mutuall edification for practise, it is to ex∣hort one another daily whiles it is called to day, Hebr. 3. 13. and to pro∣voke one another to love and to good workes, Heb. 10. 24. and for knowledge, it is to endeavour that their hearts may bee comforted, being knit together in love, and to all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God and of the Father, and of Christ in whom are hid all the treasures of wise∣dome and knowledge, Col. 2. 2, 3. Where we ought to observe that the studie of love and unitie have not onely an influence upon the common profession, and that part of the peculiar worke of edification, which is practicall to maintain it, but also that it is a meanes to confirme and comfort the hearts of the belee∣vers in all the riches of the full assurance of the knowledge of the highest and most secret Mysteries. And consequently that where this studie is not entertained, there both the profession and all the comforts which arise unto the soules of beleevers practically and intellectually from their peculiar interests in each others edification, doe wholly decay, and the great myste∣ries of our salvation concerning God and the Father and Christ are darkned, made doubtfull, and by some utterly contradicted, all which is brought to passe now adayes as much, if not more then in any age heretofore by our dis∣sensions. As for the adversaries and gainesayers who are to bee oppo∣sed, if wee take them to bee the principalities and powers of dark∣nesse and spiritualities of malice in high places, a chief part of the armour by which we are to fight against them and preserve our selves from their assaults is, to have our Loines, (that is, our af∣fections) girt about with truth (that is, with sincere love, which is the bond of perfectnesse) Ephes. 6. 14. and to have our feetCol. 3. 14. with Ephes. 4. 15. shod (that is, our wayes of conversion fitted) with the prepara∣tion of the Gospel of peace, that is, with meanes of peace, to pre∣pare men to entertain without offence and peaceably the Gospel of the peace of God, which is revealed in his word to us, Ephes.
6. 15. But if wee take the opposers to bee men, although sometimes their mouthes must be stopped, and they sharply rebuked,Tit. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. Tit. 3. 9. 2 Tim. 2. 23. namely, when it is evident that they are vain talkers, unruly de∣ceivers and liars: yet alwayes matters of strife and jangling both with them and all others, are to bee avoided (which we now have not heeded) and the behaviour of the servant of God even in his greatest zeale, and in the worst of times must never bee precipitate and hasty, that is, without long suffering, 2 Tim. 4. 2, 3. But chiefly towards such of whom there may be hope of reco∣very, all gentlenesse, patience, forbearance and meeknesse of instruction is with great care to bee used, as the Apostle doth teach Timothy, 2 Epist. 2. 24, 25. which is a lesson almost utterly forgotten in these our dayes amongst some that esteeme themselves the chief of Professors. Thus then wee see that there is no parti∣cular part of all the Ministeriall worke wherein the spirit of love and unitie must not appeare, as the principall agent to make it successefull. Fourthly and lastly, their relation to each other as fellow∣labourers in these workes, is properly that of joynts, which are between the Members of the body to unite them to each other, and to make them dependent upon the head. For in Ephes. 4. vers. 16. the Apostle doth cleerly speak of the visible body of the Church, as it hath a spirituall communion with Christ, and within it self by the meanes of that which every joynt supplyeth; if then every part by his joynt (that is, by his Minister, to whom is joyned a societie of Saints as a part of the whole) is bound to supply to another part, that wch is his effectu∣all working towards the building up of the body in Love, then it is absolutely necessary for him to correspond and concur with his neighbour and fellow-joynts: for how can any part supply any thing to another part of the body without the joynt there∣of? So then wee must observe that the Associations of the Saints (which are undeniable true parts of the whole) should edifie one another, by that which every joynt sup∣plyeth. For to that effect joynts are in the body, and the Apostle saith in the whole body: to let us understand that all the particular Associations of Beleevers in respect of the common profession are to bee counted as one Association, and that by
the joynts which God hath set in the whole, the parts therefore are fitly to bee joyned together; whence wee must gather, that Ministers are not onely joynts to unite individuall Professors into a societie, but to u∣nite one Congregation unto another; for hee saith, that the whole is compacted by joynts, it followeth then that the Congregations, though distinct by them∣selves, and one within themselves, as to their severall joynts, yet ought to bee further joynted with other Con∣gregations, and not to bee at a distance and stand by themselves as parts of the whole disjoynted from each o∣ther; which is the posture whereat many desire to stand, and is the practise of too many upon severall pretences, to the great dishonour of the Gospel in the common profession of Christianitie. But how contrary this is unto the true end of the publick worship of God, to the calling of the Ministery, to the aime of Christ in giving gifts unto men, to the perfecting of the Saints, and to the edifying of the body of Christ, I hope such as are conscionable will bee able to see by that which hath beene hitherto said. And al∣though I thinke it needlesse, to speake much more of this relation which Ministers ought to maintaine one to another, seeing it hath already beene proved, that all the Commandements of brotherly love, of unitie, of mu∣tuall care, of communion and correspondency which are given to all Christians in the common profession, are more particularly binding unto Ministers towards each other, in respect of their Ministeriall charges: Yet I shall briefly mention three or foure speciall duties which seeme to be enjoyned more distinctly unto them, rather as they are Ministers, then as they are Christians, because they have a respect rather unto their publick charge and employment, wherein they relate one another, then unto the common profession by it selfe. First, they are not onely bound to serve all men Mini∣sterially as Christ served us, but they are by his example and precept more distinctly commanded to serve one another,
Matth. Chap. 20. Vers. 27, 28. Whosoever will bee chiefe among you let him bee your servant, even as the Sonne of man came not to bee ministred unto but to minister, and give his life a ran∣some for many. Secondly, they are bound to looke first unto them∣selves, and then to the flock, Acts 20. Vers. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, &c. For Vers. 29. & 30. they are foretold that amongst them grievous Wlves will enter in, and of their selves (that is, some of their owne vocation) men shall arise speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. It then all must looke diligently lest a root of bitternesse spring up in the Church and many bee defiled thereby, Hebr. 12. 15. farre more is it the dutie of Ministers, to looke to each other herein. Thirdly, they are bound to looke upon themselves and their gifts, as not for themselves but for all, and chief∣ly for each other to profit withall, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. Vers. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withall; to the Mini∣sters ordinarily the greatest and most usefull manife∣stations are given; and they can profit most thereby one towards another, because in being profitable thereby unto each other; they are inabled so much the more to be profitable unto all. Fourthly and lastly, in the use of their spirituall gifts wherein they intend to bee profitable unto all, they are to subject themselves one to another; as it is written, 1 Cor. 14. Vers. 29. 32. Let the Prophets speake and let the others judge. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Pro∣phets. From all which as the duties of mutuall love and unitie are necessarily to bee inferred, so the meanes to maintaine and exercise the same, which are the wayes of spirituall communion and correspondency, must needs also bee ac∣knowledged to bee their dutie; for where the end is com∣manded, there the meanes also, without which that end
cannot be attained, is also commanded: so that we must cleerly conclude that this is an undeniable Scriptural Truth. That the Ministers of the Gospel are bound to maintain bro∣therly unity, communion and correspondency one with another; because in the duties of their Ministerial charge, nothing is found more conscionable, nothing more commendable, nothing more profitable, and nothing more sutable to the glory of God, and the calling by which they are called to the perfecting of the Saints, and to the edifying of the body of Christ, then this duty is; and therefore whosoever doth not walk by this rule, doth not walk worthy of the vocation wherewith he is called in the Gos∣pel; and whosoever doth walk thereby, peace and mercy be up∣on him, and upon all the Israel of God. Amen. FINIS. The CONTENTS of the Preface. Section. I. HOw the means of Christian peace, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, ought to be followed, and may be found. Pag. 1. Sect. II. What the lets of reconciliation are, and the causes of Divisions, and how to be remedied. p. 16 The Contents of the Discourse. Chap. 1. THe Introduction showing the scope and matter of the discourse. Pag. 26 Chap. 2. Concerning the Law of Christian Brotherhood, what it is, and whereunto it binds us. p. 28 Chap. 3. Concerning the termes of unity and forbearance in general. p. 32 Chap. 4. Concerning the termes of unity by themselves what they are, why not regarded, and wherefore they ought to be regarded. p. 33 Chap. 5. Concerning the particular termes of unity, whereunto the
Ministers of this Nation have attained in the doctrine of faith, and in their relation to Christ and his Church. p. 39 Chap. 6. Concerning the termes of unity in the chief Acts of our re∣ligious profession. p. 41 Sect. 1. Of single professors. p. 42 2. Of Professors united to a Congregation. p. 45 3. Of several Congregations, as they are, or ought to be as∣sociated. p. 46 4. Of Officers and Rulers of several Congregations and their association. p. 49 Chap. 7. Concerning the termes of forbearance, that there is, and may be found an agreement therein. p. 55 Chap. 8. Concerning the principles of mutual toleration, wherein there is a full agreement. p. 56 Chap. 9. Concerning the way how to settle and prosecute a mutuall toleration, by rules wherein there is an agreement. p. 58 Chap. 10. Of the rules of condescension, how they may be found out. p. 60 Chap. 11. Concerning the causes of disaffection, and of breaches, how they should be removed by common consent. p. 67 Chap. 12. Concerning the motions which should induce us to make pro∣fession of this unity and forbearance, why these are requisite, and what they are. p. 70 Chap. 13. Concerning the necessity of brotherly unity in the Ministe∣ry. p. 71. Chap. 14 Concerning the usefulnesse and commendablenesse of bro∣therly unity in the work of the Ministery. p. 84 Sect. 1. What the communion and correspondency is, wherein our unity is to be setled. p. 84 2. Of the excellency of unity, and of the fountain thereof, Charity. p. 89 3. Of the common rules of Christianity, as they are more espe∣cially obligatory unto Ministers in the duties of their cal∣ling. p. 9 4. Of the practise of those that are set before us as infallible examples in the Ministery. p. 99 5 Concerning that which belongs to the Office of the Mini∣stery in it self. p. 104
