d2014 e571_28 99865307 165361
Strange and VVonderfull PROPHESIES BY The Lady ELEANOR AUDELEY; who is yet alive, and lodgeth in WHITE-HALL. Which Shee Prophesied sixteen yeeres agoe, and had them Printed in Holland, and there presented the said Prophesies to the Prince Elector; For which she was imprisoned seven yeers here in England, by the late King and his Majesties Councell: First, she was put into the Gate-house then into Bedlam, and afterwards into the Tower of LONDON. With Notes upon the said Prophesies, how farre they are fulfilled, and what part remains yet unfulfilled, concerning the late King; and Kingly Government, and the Armies and people of ENGLAND. And particu∣larly White-Hall, and other wonderfull Predictions. Imprimatur Theodore Jennings August 27. 1649. London Printed for Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern, 1649.
Strange and VVonderfull PROPHESIES BY The Lady Eleanor Audeley, who is yet alive, and lodgeth in White-Hall. TOThose that beleeve this pro∣phecy. Sion most belov'd I sing So the frequently called the Bishops and Courtiers of En∣gland.of Babilon a Song, Concerns you more full well I wot then ye do thinke upon. The late King Charles whom in al her books she cald Belshaz∣zer; because the wal of the Ban∣quetting house at White-Hal, where he feasted, should be terrible to him, as a writing on the wall was to Belshazzer, which proved true, for there he was beheaded.Belshazzer, lo, behold the King feasting his thousand Lords; Phebus and Mars prais'd on each string, every day records. The Temple Vessels of Gods House, boldly in drunk about: HisHere she prophecied of his pawning and selling of his plate. own (tis like) were made away, bids holy things bring out; The pulling down of pictures and Organs in Churches.Praising of Gold and Brasse, the gods, of Iron, Wood and Stone, All did rise against him but the Court faction.See, hear, nor know, but now alas, praised in Court alone. AHere shee prophecied of the Kings death, which fell out true For the heads-man took the hatchet in his hand wher∣with he was be-headed, on the wal of the Banquetting-house, after the King had drank a glasse of wine, at one blow or line of blood, in presence of his then Equalls, for he dyed as Charles Stuart. After he had been scarce an houre upon the Scaffold, he fell downe on his knees, and so laid his neck on the block, with a pale gastly countenance, without any opposition. hand appears, lo in his sight, as he did drinke the wine, Upon the wall against the light it wrote about a line In presence of his numerous Peers, not set an hour full, In loyns nor knees had he no might, chang'd as a gastly skull.
Who might it read, alas, the thing, BelshazzerHere she speaks of the High Court of Justice, where the King pleaded hard, and so did the 3 Lords, but they were sentenced for their Treasons, &c. and put to death, according to judgement denounced by the Lord President in Scar∣let. loud did shout; Calls for Magicians all with speed. came in, as wise went out. Caldeans and Southsayers sage, the meaning whoso can Of Mene Mene third Realmes Peer in Scarlet Robe the man. HisThe King did eate no Sup∣per the night before he dyed. majesty forgets to Sup, Nobles astonish'd all; Musitians may their pipes put up, stood gazing on the Wall. TheHe dranke a glasse of wine a little before he came to ex∣ecution. pleasant Wine at length as sharpe, too late till thought upon DivisionHis head was divided from his body. of another strain unfolds the fingers long. WhenHere shee names the Ban∣quetting-house, the very place where hee should be execu∣ted, and that before the host or Army. And this did befall him, for being led by his Queen. to the Banqueting house so wide, Where host of Lords did ring, So wisely came the gratefull Queen, said, Ever live, O King. NeedsThis she write to perswade the King to beleeve her prophe∣cy. trouble, O King, thy thoughts no more, forthwith shall it be read; Daniel there is who heretofore like doubts did open spread. Could al interpretating Shew which profound man scon brought, On whom confer the King needs would hisThe King delivered His George to the Bishop of London for P. Charles, but the Parlia∣ment considering his raising forces against them would not let him have it. orders high unsought. Needlesse preferments yours reserve, Sir, keep your gifts in store, High offices let others gaine, there's given too much afore. Yet unto thee shall here make known, resolve this Oracle true,
Sure as inHere shee set down the very place and manner of his exe∣cution, which was true, for at the Banquetting-House the King had his head cut off at one fatall blow. thy Banquetting house, where all that come may view: The Vessells of my God are brought, the palm salutes thee know Herewith; for these profan'd by thee threatneth the fatall blow. O King, even thou, the most high God unto thyHis Grand-father was put to death in Scotland, which she did usually call Caldean Land. Grandsire bold, Caldean land, a Nation fell gave them to have and hold. The Royal Scepter and the Crown advanc'd whom he would have, And whom he would he pulled down, could put to death and save: Till walking at the twelve moneths end, subject full Tides do fall; ExcellentHere shee prophecyed that Monarchy should cease in Eng∣land, and White hal which was the Kings Court be turned in∣to an hold for Souldiers. Majesty how gon, Court exchang'd for the Stall. ThyShee here prophecyed that hee should as surely be put to death, as his Grand-father was, though not in the same man∣ner. Grandsire on, as came to passe; at all yet minded not, As if a feigned Story, but his miserable Lot. Expell'd was for the words escap'd, memory can speak well, Hardened in pride, unheard of such, the wilde Asse with did dwel: Sent to the Ox, its owner knows, Here shee prophecied of the fouls which flew over the King when hee was at execution, to shew his folly, that hee would not know his time, but bring himself to that miserable end.undreamt of this his doom: Fowls their appointed time observe, wots not the night from noon. WhoseHere shee prophecied that his Entrals should bee taken out, and his body be imbalmed, which was true. heart made equal with the Beast, driven out with those that Bray; The Diadem as well fits thee, Ass, go, as much to say.
She speakes this of his spiri∣tual estate, that God in mer∣cy hath saved his soul.Until return'd came to himself, knew him that rules on high, Over the sons of men appoints what office they supply. During the time of the Kings imprisonment, there were Guards upon him night and day.During which space, this Assyrian, what watch kept night and day, Thus metamorphys'd, over him, lest make himselfe away. This fel out true, for he was much lamented, by those of his own party especially.Fields, woods as wel ring out, as men for wo, and Ecchoes call Mercy this savage King upon, in holy Temples all. Bewailed, dejected soul, thus faln, fed now grazing full low, whilst they bedew the ground with tears It was grown to a common Proverbe that the King knew not his friends from his foes, al being abas'd, and none dar∣ing to stir or move for him.discerns not friend from foe. Earth that of late made seem to dawn with songs of Triumph high, Fleeth each wight abas'd as much, among the Herd doth lye. BySpeaking of her own family. Star-light for device who gave, as graven on his Shield, An Eagle mounted on the Crest, a Hart in silver field. Extold again his God as high, blessed him all his days: Shee here blames those that would not beleeve her.Others reputes them as nothing, alone proclaimes his praise. Whose sevenHere she prophecied of the very time seaven times seaven that is 49th year of his age, the King was be-headed. times it served forth, in vain for rest to crave; Whom Devills Legions do possesse, a Monarch turn'd a Slave. Deposed thus, thou knewest wel, Belshazzer,Prince Charles. O his Son,
And renew'd so,This fell out true for present∣ly after the Kings death, the House of Commons Voted England a deliverance from Monarchy. deliverance is voyced by every one. A day aAn Act was pub∣lished in al parts against king∣ly Government, notwithstand∣ing the many favourites there∣of, And Lords that the King used to call Cosens. Trumpet made to sound for Generations all; And with a Feast solemnized, that no time might recal: The memory of such an act, yet as it had not been, Thy Favorites who are more this day, or matched to thy Kin. Then theyThis is not yet fulfilled, but it seems to point out that the Kings Statues, and Armes shal be broken & pulled down from all publick places, as he in his Reign had promoted Idolatry liberty on the Lords day, and other notorious sins against God, adoring. Wood and Stone, Statues forsake Divine; Meditate carved Statutes on in Faction do combine, With Enemies of God most high, to thrust him from his Thron, And thus hast lifted up thy self. so facile and so prone. Against the Lord of Heaven thy King, not humbling of thy heart, But stiffened hast with pride thy neck unto thy future smart. Behold, polluting holy things with Sabbath so Divine, Idolartry and Revells in that day and night made thine, But he in whose hand rests thy life, even breath, thy ways, and al, Thou hast not glorified him sent this wrote on the wal. God numbered thy Kingdome hath ended; the Hand points here, In Ballance he hath weighed thee too, the set hour drawing neer.
How light soever by thee set, thou as thy weightlesse Gold, His Image wanting, found much more lighter then can be told. This is in part fulfilled by the Kings lands and goods new upon sale.Parted, divided thine Estate, given to the Medes is, At Hand, the Hand bids it adieu, She pophecies here that ther shal be no more Kings in Eng∣land.finish'd thy Majesties. Anagr. Reveale O Daniel. Eleanor Audeley FINIS.
