d556 e445_10 99864238 161743
THE DECLARATION AND RESOLƲTJON OF THE Knights, Gentry, and Free-holders of the COUNTY of KENT, Now in Armes for the defence and pre∣servation of the Kings Majesties Royall Person, he Priviledges of the Subjects, and the Laws and Liberties of the Free-born People of this NATION. With their Resolution touching the Army; and al others that shall oppose them. And their randevouzing at Black-Heath, and their Skirmish with a Party of the Gnerals horse, with the manner thereof, and their taking of divers Pieces of Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition. May 29. London, Printed for R. W. Anno Dom. 1648.
A DECLARATJON OF THE Knights, Gentlemen, and Free-holders of the County of KENT THat the innocency of our intentions, and Justice of undertakings, may more clearly appear to all men of uncorrupt understand∣ings, and hearts not made too servil by the long and odious custome of oppression: We the Knights, Gentlemen, and Franchlins of the County of Kent, the most free people of this late Flourishing Na∣tion; by the wisdome and valour of our Ancestors, deli∣vered from the Laws of a Conquerer, and to these late daies unhappy confusion and distraction enjoying the same, through all the Reignes of the most glorious victo∣rious
Kings and Princes of this Nation: Doe hereby de∣clare and manifest to all the world, That our assembling and meeting together at this time, is no other then for a vindication of our selves and purposes, from the scandal, and aspersions of the Committee of this County; who upon occasion of a Petition in behalf of the County of Kent, assented and subserbed to by the Grand Jurie at the Sessions of the Judges upon an espetiall Commission of Oyer and Terminer executed at the Castle of Canterbury the 11. of May last, for the said County; not onely made Or∣ders agoinst the same, and commanded them publickly to be read in all Churches sentencing & condemning the said Petition and all the Abetors thereof: and have sum∣moned the Troops of Horse, and Forces of Foot of this County for suppresion of the said Petition: which tends not only to the suppression of the Liberty, even of the most enslaved persons of the world; but also as much as in them lies, endeavour upon any causes whatsoever, which suits not with their humours, to over we the senses of other men, and upon opposition therein think they have ground enough to take away the lives and For∣tunes, or both, of their said opposers. In consideration of which, and that now the said Com∣mittee finding themselves unable to involve this County in bloud; have made their addresse to the Parliament, and Army; and make strange and malitious representations, of our purposes, thereby discovering nothing so much as their own pride and malice. We the said Knights, Gen∣tlemen, and Frree-Yeomen of the County of Kent do here∣in appeal to al the world to judge, If it were not high time for us to put our selves ino a posture of Defence; & doe further declare, that we will prosecute our said petiti∣on
with our lives and fortunes, not doubting of a fair re∣ception from the two houses of Parliament; whom we know to have been instigated against us by the said Committee: And therefore saving to our selves the en∣larging of the said Committee with encreasing the Taxes of this County above the du proportions, and only for maintining their owne private luxury and pride; with usurping a power over the Estte and Fortunes of this County not grafted in them, and expressed by words and actions, all along the exercise os ths power, (which mkes them unfit for rule) to the exasperating of the peo∣ples hearts into all annimomosity, and overthrowing of all love and peace in this County: which also hath been followed to that hight of prosecution, That had not two Houses given a stop to their exorbitant proceedings, we had suffered much more uder the torment of these mens projected designes: wherein we acknowledge our selves to have ben secured in the temper and moderation of the Houses. we have no more to say or do, but to defend our selves, till we can have a right understanding of our pur∣poses and action before the Houses. In the mean time, we shall look upon all opposition, as the provocation of a conscious and enraged Committee, and in respect of the invasion lately made upon the persons of our Neighbours we think fit not to lie at the mercy of Souldiers, but to have refuge to our Armes, from which no threats or face of Souldiery shall drive us, knowin wel the justice of our cause, and the temper of our ow hearts.
An exact and full Relation of the procee∣dings of the Kentish-men, and the man∣ner of their Fight at Dedford, with the Parliaments Forces. SIR, ON Fryday last being the 26 of this instant the Kentish-men boarded a Pinnace that lay on the River, and seiz'd on all the Arms and Ammunition, and took all her Ord∣nance, which they landed near Dedford, and planted them in two or three passages, placing their Guards both of horse and foot; then they marcht to New-Cross, & with Carts, harrows, and such like materials blockt up the passages to stop the Parliaments horse in their march, and placed two Drakes at a Court of Guard there; from thence they went to Dedford bridge, and did the like: the colours which their Ensignes bore were white and red. Their body of horse
and foot (which at this time consisted of about 800.) randezvouzed at Black-heath, where di∣vers other of the country forces made their ap∣pearance. Also this evening divers Gentlemen and Esquires went from this town over into Es∣sex, to know their resolutions; but what an∣swer they received, as yet J cannot hear; but they are assured from Surrey, that before Sunday morning, they will bring to their as∣sistance 5000, men compleatly armed. On Satterday about five of the clock in the af∣ternoon came in five Companies more to Black-health with yellow Cullers, at whose approach the Body gave such a shout, that they made the place to ring. Jt is confidently reported, that they expected to be about 16000 before Sunday at noon, and this Evening they took four Drakes out of another Ship which lay vpon the River over against Det∣ford. This day likewise they put themselves
into a posture of defence, and made choice of their Officers both Horse and Foot, and it it is reported, that they intend to chuse the Earl of Thanet Generall. On Satterday in the morning about three of the clocke, a par∣ty of Horse belonging to Col. Rich his Re∣giment, fac'd the Guard at New Crosse, where both parties fired at each other, but the Kentish horse pursuing them, and retur∣ning, met some of their own foot (who went over the fields, and thought to have engaged Col. Riches horse) and had like to have falu upon them, but that they presently gave them the word, God grant a happy uniting be∣twixt both parties, and stop the further effusion of bloud, which shall be the con∣stant prayers of him, who remaines Greenwich 27. May, 1648. Your obliged Friend, G. MALLOTT. FINIS.
