D801 E447_18 99864376 161809
THE DECLARATION, Together vvith the PETITION AND REMONSTRANCE OF THE Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and Free-holders of the COUNTY of HAMPESHIRE. June 14th LONDON, Printed for H. W. MDCXLVIII.
The Declaration, &c. MOre than this our humble Ad∣dresse at present wee intended not, but having received cer∣taine information, of late how the Essex Petition was though seemingly accepted, yet indeed really sleighted: And how barbarous an Answer was re∣turn'd to the Petitioners of Surrey, out of the mouthes of Muskets, and from the bloudy hands of Sectaries; a president so full of horror, injustice, and more than Turkish tyranny, that all the free Sub∣iects of England ought to look upon with with extreame detestation. And lastly considering that our brethren of Kent were referr'd to receive satisfaction to their humble addresse to the two Houses,
only from the Lord Fairefax, and his in∣sulting Army, we are forc'd to annex this briefe Declaration, to our humble Petiti∣on. That if our Messengers by us entrusted receive not a full and satisfactory Answer to these our modest Requests, that wee will speedily arme our selves, and associ∣ate with other Counties, and endeavour by Gods blessing to free our selves from that slavery which this present Army, getting no small advantage by the cun∣ning & fraudulent delayes of the Houses, threaten to bring upon us and our Poste∣rities.
TO The Honourable Houses of Parliament assembled at WESTMINSTER. The humble PETITION of the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Ministers, and Freeholds of the County of HAMPESHIRE. Humbly Sheweth; THat your Petitioners having taken into their sad and serious thoughts, the pres∣sing, and almost unsupportable miseries under which this whole Kingdom groanes: Religion in stead of being reformed, is metamorphis'd into so many shapes, that the Synagogue of Rome does exult; and for the Divisions a∣mongst us, the truely Orthodox have great thoughts of heart; our heavy Taxes, and other illegall wayes of raising vast Summes, though none of the Royall party have for many months appeared, unlesse in Prison, or under
Sequestration, and so far from being taken off, which was faithfully promised, that they are rather encreased, which we fear was really in∣tended: Our most Gracious Soveraigne, not∣withstanding your frequent Protestations of bringing Him with Safety and Honour to His great Counsell, is under most barbarous Re∣straint; our Lawes are fallen into a Lethurgy, Arbitrary power, and the stronger Sword carry all before them; but above all, the most formi∣dable apprehension of this Kingdomes being once more made an Aceldema, to the high provocation of Gods severest wrath, if not ut∣terly to ruine, yet at least to enslave us and our Posterities to the prevayling party. Doe therefore in all humility hold forth to your grave wisdoms what by Gods blessing, and your timely concurrence, may prove effectuall for the speedy cure of those maladies under which this bleeding Common-wealth is ready to expire. And first, wee doe with submission to better
judgements conjecture, that together with the many sins of this Nation, that which hath had an especiall influence in the ripening of these Judgements hath been that little regard given to, and the oversleight laying aside of his Ma∣jesties many and most gracious Messages, and most pious overtures for Peaee, and an happy understanding between him and his people, and this occasioned as wee do more than probably o∣pine by three sorts. First by thse that thinke they have monopoliz'd all truth, and would therefore square our Religion according to their own confused modules. Secondly by those that ought to make audit for the many thou∣sands received for the publique, as was preten∣ded, but converted or transported for their own private benefit. But thirdly, and principally by those that had a designe by taking away Mo∣narchicall Government, of making themselves high and mighty States, and engrosing all Do∣minion over their yet fellow Subjects into their own hands. Having thus hinted upon the causes of our Having
miserie, we do with all submission present to the Honourable Houses what to our best appre∣hension may prove soveraign for the Kingdoms recovery. And first, that the true reformed Prote∣stant Religion profest in the reigns of Q. Elizabeth, and K. James of blessed memo∣ry be re-establisht. Secondly, that his Majesty bee speedily restor'd to a condition of Safety and Ho¦nour, and enjoy according to the com∣mand of our blessed Saviour, all his indu∣bitable Rights, who saith, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars. Thirdly, that the Arrears of the Army under the command of the Lord Fairefax be speedily audited, and they disbanded. And lastly that an account being given to the king∣dom how that masse of Treasure that hath bin rais'd is employed, that His Majesty be desired to passe an Act of Oblivion, and that his most Princely proffer of ease to tender Consciences be thankfully embraced, all which your Petitioners desire may be speedily ap∣plyed for the cure of this bleeding Common-wealth. And we shall for ever pray, &c. FINIS.
