e1999 e73_3 e73_3* 99860208 155474
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, For the more speedy raising of the Monies formerly Imposed, and yet unpaid, within the City of London and Liberties thereof. Die Lunae, 23 Octobris. 1643. ORdered that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published. Jo. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. H Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1643.
Die Lunae, 23. Octob. 1643. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. THE Lords and Commons taking into their consideration the great burthen and charge hitherto for the most part under∣gone by the willing part of the City of London and Liberties thereof, by their ready payments and contributions, in pur∣suance of severall Acts and Ordinances of Parliament,
heretofore made for that purpose, whilest others, through want of the due execution thereof, have either paid and contributed nothing, or not considerably thereunto: For remedy thereof, doe Ordaine, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the severall persons here∣after named, shall within the severall Wards of the said City and Liberties, be imployed as agents to put in exe∣cution the severall Acts and Ordinances hereafter men∣tioned, in manner as is hereby Declared, viz, In the Ward of Cheape & Cornehill Edward Lynsey. John Payne Algate Matthew Bugge Samuel Poole Bassingshaw Colemanstreet James Wight Samuel Wight Bishopsgate within and without Francis Laurence Jeremy Arnold Bridgeward Candlewicke Richard Cole Thomas Baker
Billingsgate Tower Ward Humphrey Burey Lynam Robins Breadstreete Cordweyners Arthur Coleman John Anckle Vintrey Thomas Lindsey John Eames. Cripplegate within George Comes Thomas Hamersley Cripplegate without Thomas Layton Jervis Goffe Dowgate Walbrooke William Rudgdale Thomas Williamson Queenehithe William Bridges Edward Cole Aldersgate Henry Whittingham John Morton
Broadstreet Henry Wilson Thomas Thorneton Portsoken John Ford Thomas Downall Farringdon within Joseph Hunscot Maximilian Buck Farringdon without the East division Clement Carter Henry Hastings Farringdon without Fleetstreet division John Digby Laurence Forden Castle Baynard Thomas Jervis Adam Houghton Langborn Limestreet Francis Burrist Edward Edmonds VVHich said severall persons, or any other that the Committee for the Militia of London shall adde, who are hereby inabled thereunto, upon notice
given them by the Collectors or any of them, of the last Subsidies, for foure hundred thousand pounds, and of the weekely Assesments or any Fif∣teenes heretofore granted by the Common-Coun∣cell of the Citie of London, who are hereby requi∣red upon the request of the persons above named to give notice thereof accordingly, what persons with∣in their severall Wards, or Precincts have refused, or neglected to pay their said Subsidies, Weekely Assessements, and Fifteenes; And what the said Arrerages are, and upon notice also given to the Persons above named, by the Treasurors appoin∣ted to receive the monies brought in upon the late Ordinance of the 18. of August last; or by any of the Common-Councell men of any Ward, what Arrerages are due thereupon, and from whom, (who are also required hereby upon the request of the Per∣sons above named to give notice thereof according∣ly) shall together with the said Collectors of each severall Ward, or any of them, forthwith repaire to the severall Persons so in Arreare, or to the usu∣all places of their abode. And if upon demand thereof made, such persons shall neglect or refuse to pay the said weekely Assessements, Subsidies or the said Fifteenes, to the said Collectors or any of them; And shall neglect or refuse forthwith to pay the Ar∣rerages due upon the said late Ordinance of the eighteenth of August, to the Treasurors appointed for that purpose; That then it shall and may bee lawfull to and for the persons above named, in the presence of the said Collectors, or any of them, or
of the Constables of the said severall Wards, and Precincts, who are hereby required to be ayding and assisting herein, within their severall Precincts, and Wards, to destreyne, seize, take, and carry away from the severall persons so in Arreares, so much of the Goods and Estate of every such person, so refusing or neglecting to pay the same as aforesaid, as may fully satisfie the said Arrerages, with all charges of seisures, and removall thereof; And it is also ordained, that all the goods so seized, and di∣streined as aforesaid, shal be forthwith Inventoried by the said persons above named in the presence of the said Constables, and Collectors, or some of them; And also appraised by such Persons as shal be for that purpose appointed, by William Rowell, Richard Wil∣let, Henry Cole, Richard Everet, Robert Doleman,  Stocke, Thomas Vincent, and John Bret, or any two of them, who are hereby appointed a Committee to sit at Gresham Colledge, to receive the said Inventories, and Goods so appraised; Which said Inventories are to be subscribed by the persons hereby appointed to distreine, together with the Constables or Collectors that shall be present at the distresse. And in case neither the persons whose goods shall bee seized, or distreyned, nor any in his behalfe doe within three dayes after seisure, redeeme the same, as they shall be appraised, Then the said Committee or any two of them, to sell the same for the best advantage; And from time to time to deliver the Monies so received for the same, to the Treasurers sitting at Guild-Hall London appoin∣ted
by the said Ordinance of the eighteenth of Au∣gust last; and to restore the overplus, if any bee, to the persons so seized and distreined as aforesaid. And it is hereby further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the persons above named, shall hereby have power and Authority in the pre∣sence of the said Collectors, and Constables, or any of them, as well within any priviledged places, as without, to break open all Lockes, Doores, or other strength whatsoever, where the Estates, Money, or Goods belonging to any such person so in arreare, are, or shall be; And the Trained Bands, Voluntires and other Forces, their Commanders and Officers, and also the severall Constables and other Officers, within their Limits, are hereby required and enjoy∣ned to be ayding and assisting to the persons above nominated and imployed, for the service aforesaid; And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said Committee, or any two of them, shall allow to the persons above named and appointed, to make seisures as aforesaid three pence for every pound, which the goods so distreined by them and sold shall amount unto, and also such other allowance to such other person or persons necessarily imployed for the service aforesaid, as the said Committee shall thinke requisite, to bee paid out of the money taken for the sale of the said goods. It is also ordained by the said Lords and Commons to the end both this, and the Ordi∣nance for Sequestration formerly made, may be effe∣ctually
put in execution, and that as well the severall Committees for Sequestrations, both within the said Citie of London and Liberties, and elsewhere, ap∣pointed in pursuance of the Ordinances for Seque∣strations formerly made, as also the said Commit∣tee hereby appointed to sit at Gresham Colledge, shall have power at such times as the said Committees, or any of them thinke fit, to cause the said Collectors, or any other their Under-officers, to give an account upon oath, to the said Committee, or any of them, concerning any the dealings and proceedings of the said Collectors, and Under-officers in their severall imployments under the said Committees. And to the end this present Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, may not hinder the due and orderly ex∣ecution of the said Ordinances formerly made for the sequestrations of the estates of Papists and De∣linquents within the said Citie of London and liber∣ties thereof; Be it therefore ordained, that all such as shall frau∣dulently imbezele, conceale, or convey away all, or any part of their goods, money, or estate, with∣out valuable consideration, Bona fide, thereby pre∣venting or avoyding the payment of any Taxes or Assessements, laid upon them by any Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, or any distresse or sei∣sure in case of non payment thereof, or that after any such Tax or Assessements convey themselves away, or refuse to be spoken with, whereby any such Tax or Assessement layd on them by any Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament cannot be executed up∣on them, or their estates, according to the true meaning and purport thereof, shall be still taken to bee delinquents, onely within the said Ordinance of Sequestration, and their Estates sequestred by the said sequestrators (the Common-Councell men and Collectors of each Ward and Precinct within the said Citie and Liberties, being hereby required upon request made to them, or any of them, by the said Committee for sequestrations, or the Collectors ap∣apointed by the said Committee, to give a Cata∣logue or other notice of such persons now or hereto∣fore inhabiting within their severall Wards, This present Ordinance or any thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; And it is also ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that if the said Collectors, Constables or any other persons hereby appointed or to bee appointed for the purposes mentioned in this Ordinance, and in pursuance thereof shall refuse or neglect to execute and doe what hereby is required from them or any of them, that then upon proofe made thereof to the Committee of the House of Commons for exami∣nations, sitting at Westminster, or to the Militia for the Citie of London, every person so refusing, or neglecting as aforesaid, shall bee by the said Com∣mittees, or either of them committed to safe custo∣dy without Baile or Maineprise, or Assessed to pay such summes of money by way of fine, as the said Committee, or Militia shall thinke fit, so the same
exceed not the summe of ten pounds for any one offence, and every person and persons doing and performing any thing in pursuance of this present Ordinance shall bee therefore from time to time kept harmelesse by the authoritie of both Houses of Parliament. Jo. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
