E3910 E278_11 99860819 130523
AN EXTRACT Of Severall LETTERS From SCOTLAND: Concerning the Defeat given to the Rebels Forces un∣der the Command of James Ghrame, Earl of Mont∣rosse, at Dundy, by the Army of the Parliament of Scotland, under the Conduct of Lieutenant-Generall Baylie, and Generall-Major Urry. Together with their pursuit of the Rebels after the Vi∣ctory: Dated at Killimure the 7. of April. 1645. 15. April. 1645. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Par∣liament, that publike Thanksgiving be made on Sunday next in all Churches and Chappels within the Lines of Communication for the great blessing God hath given to our Brethren of Scotland, in the late Victory obtained against the Forces under the Command of the Earle of Montrosse: And it is further Ordered, That this Relation and Order be forthwith Printed and Published. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands. 1645.
An Extract of severall Letters from Scot∣land, concerning the defeat given to the Rebels Forces at Dundy. VPon Thursday the third of this in∣stant, the one half of our Army be∣ing quartered on the South-side of Tay, the other half on the North-side; the Re∣bels apprehending that all our Army was marched over, at ten at night begun their march toward Dundy, with intention to surprise it; which being discovered, we sent presently advertisement to the town, to be in a readinesse to enterain them, promising them assistance very speedily: VVhereupon the Citizens and Jnhabi∣tants (for there were but few Souldiers there) put themselves in a posture of De∣fence, and within very few hours after,
the Enemy approached about twelve of the clock the next day, with the greatest part of his strength (The late Earl of Montross their chief Commander slain upon a hill, with about Five hundred, at a reasona∣ble distance within view of the Town:) They assaulted the VVorks very furiously at four several places, but were gallantly re∣pulsed; yet after a hot dispute, the Enemy gained one of their Forts, and turned the Canon upon the Town, but they were quickly beaten from it, especially by the valour of Leiutenant Coleburn, who was lying sick of the Gout when the Enemy assaulted the VVorks; but having notice in what danger the town was, and know∣ing how few Souldiers were in it, desired to be carryed out in a chair, not being able to walk, But upon the first sight of the Re∣bels he forgot his pain, and with an hundred Musquetiers which he called to him, he made
the Enemy to quit the Fort; The Enemy notwithstanding continued fighting, till their Forces on the Hills perceived the ad∣vance of our Forces, which was about five of the clock at night, whereupon they sounded a Retreat; Wherein, though they made great haste, yet General Major Urry did overtake their Reare, and did good execu∣tion upon them; Jt were hard to determine, whether the flight or pursuit were more eager; Our Foot went on so cheerfully, that they cast away all that might hinder their march (Arms excepted) and marched, or rather run with the Horse, and the Irish and Highlanders cast away their Plaides and Arms, to the number of six or seven hundred, and left all their Baggage and Ammunition behinde them, so that if the night had not come on very dark, few had escaped. At the Town, and in then flight, there were killed between four and five
hundred, amongst whom, two were much la∣mented by the Jrish, for when they fell, there was a terrible howling among them, and they fought desperately to recover their bodies, one of their Faces was so disfigured and mangled by the Irish, themselves not being able to carry away his Corps, that it was not possible to di∣scern who he was; Some say it was Col: Kit∣togh, others say it was O Cain, a man of great esteem amongst them; the Town left not in all above seventeen or eighteen per∣sons: we continued all night in the fields both Horse and Foot, and the next morn∣ing before day-light wee marched after their greatest body, which, as we under∣stood afterward, had marched that night as farre as Melgum, twelve miles from Dundy, and crossed Carreston before day-light; vvhereupon our Horse followed with all the haste they might, and did overtake them marching toward the hills,
they were in such confusion, that notwith∣standing we had no Foot there, they did never so much as turn Faces about, but marched from one plain to another; many of them are fallen off from the rest, and many vvere killed by our Horse, and some by the country people; vvee have pursued so quickly, that they got neither leave to harm the country, nor to take rest or meat to refresh them. Upon Sunday at night Gen: Major Vrry met vvith a party of them neer Edyell, vvhereof he killed four∣score, and put the rest to flight. Our Ar∣my is now divided, one part lyeth between the Rebels and the hills, the other hall is marched to Atholl, the ordinary place of their Retreat. So that, by Gods blessing upon our Forces, vve trust vvithin a short time there shall bee no Enemy here to op∣pose us. Killimure, 7. April, 1645. FINIS.
