E85 E150_26 99871648 156760
THE Earle of Warwickes GLORIOVS VICTORY Over fifty Ships of the King of Denmarkes in the Narrow Seas. Report thereof being made to the House of Com∣mons by a Merchant of London, that came lately from Norway. With an Order from the House of Commons to the Earle of Warwicke, that one and fifty Ships should be strongly prepared with 500 pieces of Ordnance. Also how many hundred thousand pounds the Charge of the Navy hath amounted unto, raised out of the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, and what the King hath received out of the same Bill. And how the Earle of Stamford, the Lord Rutham and Sir Arthur Hasterigg executed the Militia in Leicestershire. Lastly the totall summe of the money sent by the Parlia∣ment to Munster and Dublin in Ireland. I. B. Cler. P. London, Printed for J. Horton. June 15. 1642.
The Earle of War∣wicks great Victory over 50. Ships of the King of Denmarkes in the Narrow-Seas. THe King of Den∣marke under∣standing by the manifold infor∣mation of ma∣ny, that his Bro∣ther the King of great Brit∣taine was disu∣nited from the Parliament, and his in∣dignation being highly incensed, that he was resolved to make Warre against his great Councell, and Supream Court,
began to assemble his Subjects, desiring their assistance to ayd his Brother in the intended Warre. And after great debate, and consultation thereabout, hee concluded immediatly to prepare certain Ships for England. The number of those ships which the King of Den∣marke had in preparation, were 100, and 50. of them already fitted on Sea, conducting with them in the said ships many Horses and Hay, as the informa∣tion thereof was reported to the house of Commons by a Merchant, that was lately come from Norway. Whereupon the House of Commons without any further procrastination or detraction of any longer time Ordered incontinent∣ly, that information should be sent withall expedition to the Earle of War∣wicke, Lord Generall for the Sea, desi∣ring him to be very vigilant and care∣full at Sea, least any suddaine and un∣expected invasion might rush in upon the Kingdome.
Wherefore as soone as the Earle of Warwicke had received this particular intention from the Parliament, he pre∣sently set all the ships in readinesse, and began to be very cautious, setting streight watch every night, least unawares the Denmarks by some policy or Stratagem might invade the Land by night. The ninth day of this present moneth the Denmarkes appeared in the Nar∣row Seas superbiously, comming to England with fifty ships loaden with great store of Ammunition, Horse and Hay, but as soone as the Earle of War∣wicke perceived his sinester intents, he went against him with one and twen∣ty ships, and most valiantly with an undanted courage let off thirty pieces of Ordnance against the Denmarke, fol∣lowing very couragiously, insomuch that he made them almost recant, and turne Sayle The Demarks on the other side be∣haved themselves bravely at the first encounter, and gave the English above
threescore and ten shootes, which had beene sufficient to have sunke some of our ships, but that they were placed so wisely, and craftily, that wee had a great advantage of them, because we had the Wind withall on our side. And the Lord Generall had regulated the ships in such an equall way, that at the second discharge they were compelled to turne Sayle and fly, but two of these Ships were taken; wherein there was found great store of Ammunition, and the rest escaped by flight. If we consider how Arminianisme was diffused in the Church, and since the Parliament how many obstructions and pernicious obstacles have beene layd to interrupt their assiduous pro∣ceedings: all which if they be with mature deliberation seriously conside∣red, we shall with facility and appa∣rent and perspicuous demonstrations perceive the wonderfull mercies of Al∣mighty God towards us. For which
we are bound in duty towards God to magnifie his holy and omnipotent Name, fortheir is nothing more odious and detestable to God then ungrati∣tude, for it is a wicked instrument, that oftentimes causeth God to divert and turne away his blessings to a Na∣tion. Therefore above all things let us be sure to embrace gratitude, and offer it as an Oblation and auspitious Sacri∣fice to God, glorifying him for all these mercies, and withall so beseeching in our supplications, that he would preserve and defend the Parliament from the malignity of all ill-disposed people. The Parliament have since most dis∣creetly, and judiciously Ordered, That a great charge of the State of the Kings Ships should be forthwith taken. And withall by their appointment, the Na∣vy at Sea is made wonderfull strong. For there is one and fifty ships under the Earle of Warwicks Command, with
five hundred pieces of Ordnance, and set out with such Ammunition, and provisions of Armes, as hath not been seen, and knowne the like for number, and strength sent out by any Prince in this Kingdome by force. The Charge whereof hath amounted to 300000 pounds which hath beene raised out of the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage. And also the King hath re∣ceived 100000 pound out of the bene∣fit of the same Bill since May was twelve Moneths. The Earle of Stamford, the Lord Ru∣tham, and Sir Arthur Haslerigg were ap∣pointed by the Parliament to see the Militia put in execution in Leicester∣shire. The House of Commons Ordered also that there should be 10000 pound presently sent to Munster in Ireland, and 6000 pound to Dublin to pay the Souldiers. FINIS.
