F2358A E112_40 99865417 117657
A FULL RELATION Of all the late proceedings of His Majesties Army in the County of Yorke: with the present state and condition of things there. Declaring His Majesties intention to advance His Standard at Nottingham the 20 of August, and by proclamation to command all mens attendance on his Person: with the number of His Army, Horse and Foot. Also the Propositions of the Malignant-party, by them now daily treated on for effecting of their mischievous designes; contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the liberty of the Subject. Likewise how divers Gentlemens houses in that County have beene lately pillaged by the Troopers belonging to His Majestie. And lastly, certaine Considerations towards the re∣dresse of these groaning evils, securing the County, and preservation of the peaceable Subjects therein. As it was sent in a Letter to Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, and by him presented to both Houses of Parliament. August 19. 1642. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith printed and published. J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Wright. 1642.
A true Relation from Yorke, of sundry Occurrences concerning His MAJESTY, and His Army. SIR, THe Constitution of affaires in this County are of so high importance to the generall good of the whole Land, as we conceive it requisite to have them represented to the House of Parliament, and to receive directions from thence, to guide the well-affected Subjects in such waies as conduce to the establish∣ment of peace, here and elsewhere; and to that end the Committee when they returned to the Parliament promi∣sed frequent intercourse, and that those who should be em∣ployed from hence upon such occasions should finde their charge and travell well rewarded, whereupon divers Gen∣tlemen of the County, having met here at Yorke, this day and yesterday, did resolve it necessary to dispatch the bea∣rer, with a view of the present condition of the Country which they desire you to make known to the House as you shall finde it necessary. His Majesty hath now withdrawne all his Forces from Hull and Beverley, and sent most part of his Horse towards Newarke and Nottingham, and intends to advance his Stan∣dard at Nottingham, the 20 of August, and by Proclamation
to command all mens attendance on his person, as the Pro∣clamation which the bearer will deliver will more fully in∣forme. His Army at this present consists especially of Horse which are intended to be about 4000. in severall Regiments, in which number we conceive is not included the 500. Horse which certaine of the Gentry of Yorkeshire promise to raise; nor the Traine of the Court, estimated at 500. Horse. For Foot forces, here are very few visible, and those of the scum of the Countrey, being raised by beating Drums for Volunteers, yet it is said that the pro∣portion is 13000. foot, though in discourse they declare as if 5000. foot will be sufficient for the designe, which what it is, or against whom we know not, otherwise then is expressed in the Proclamation, for raising the Standard: for if it were for defence of the Protestant Religion, the Lawes of the Land, and priviledges of Parliament so often repeated, we conceive the Papists, who hate them all would not so much rejoyce, nor shew themselves so for∣ward to assist the service, nor make so frequent resort as now they doe into these parts, from Ireland, Lancashire, and all parts of Yorkeshires; and besides we observe the King hath sent out warrant to call to the service all Recusants Horse and Armes, and many Recusants, to make themselves capable of commands do resort to Church. It is given out that the King goes Southward on Tewsday next though of that we can write no certainty; But when∣soever he goes from hence, he leaves the Earle of Cumber∣land to governe these Northerne Counties, with authority to raise forces for defence of them, and a Councell of War to assist him; And to terrifie the Subjects and constraine obedience to the government, it is to be accompanied with a Commission of Oier and Terminer, and this government and Councell, are to reside at Yorke. You have already heard how the Gentry of this County
were summoned to appeare before his Majesty at Yorke the fourth of this Moneth, where His Majesty made certaine Propositions to them, which you have since seen in print, whereupon the Earle of Cumberland, Lord Savill, Lord Faulconbridge, all or most of the Commissioners of Array, and divers other Gentlemen of the Country, met in the Deanry at Yorke, and there framed the Petition sent up by M. Jackson and M. Maud to the Parliament; which though it was carried then with much secrecy, yet now it is divul∣ged, and disliked by a great number of the other Gentry of this County, who will protest against it in writing as soon as they can meet with conveniency; yet they which framed it resolve to maintaine it, and hold meetings and consul∣tations at the Deanry in Yorke, where they treate of mat∣ters of dangerous and high consequence, and contrary to the Lawes of the Land, and the liberty of the Subject; that is to say, To joyne in association with other neighbouring Coun∣ties, to maintaine the petition aforesaid. To raise an Army of horse and foote for defence of the County under the command of the Earle of Cumberland, to be laid about Yorke, and paid by the Country. To obteine of the King an able Souldier to command in this Army under the Earle, to whom they intend the Country shall allow entertainment. To constreine all persons to contribute to the charge of this Army, and to distreine upon such as refuse it. And to disable the Subjects to oppose, or defend them∣selves against this oppression, they intend to disarme, and imprison all such Gentlemen, as shall not consent with them, and they have especially designed, for imprisoning a great number of Gentlemen, who they suppose will give opposition to their courses, and they have already dis∣armed part of the trained band, in every regiment, and in∣tend
to disarme more of them, where they finde danger of opposition. And Sir Iohn Mallory in his regiment hath already cau∣sed, both money to be furnished to his Souldiers by the Constables, and Armes to be taken from the Souldiers. These Propositions and consultations which are gener∣ally spoken of, doe not a little perplex the wel affected sub∣jects; and their feares encrease, by divers particular affronts and attempts upon the Gentry of the Country, by the Troopers and others of the Kings Army: as the pillaging of divers Gentlemens Houses about Hull, and pillaging Sir Henry Cholmelies House neere Selby, on Sunday last, and Master George Marwoods House at Nunmunckton, five miles from Yorke, on Wensday last. In this of Master Marwoods, we will relate some particulars, for your better infor∣mation. It was done in the day time, and by 24 Horse or there a∣bout, part stayed beyond the River, running close by the House, part entred the house, and others kept watch, that none should come to hinder their attempt; They threat∣ned Mistris Marwood and her servants with death, to dis∣cover where her husband was: and swore they would cut him in peeces before her face, and called her protestant whore, and Puritan whore: They searched all the house, and brake open 17 locks, they tooke away all his money, being about 120. l. and all his plate they could finde; And they pretended, that they had the Kings warrant for their doings; which the King disavowes, and is very much of∣fended to have his Name so abused, and threatens to have them all hanged if they be discovered; And though it be Master Marwoods lot to suffer first, yet the loose people threaten to pillage and destroy all Round-heads, and name some particular persons; under which foolish name Round-head they comprehend all such as doe not goe their wayes.
These beginnings and preparations of misery, are ne∣cessary to be made knowne to all the Kingdome, that the good Subjects may stand upon their guard; for though we may assure our selves that the King will endeavour to preserve us, yet we finde it is impossible to restraine the malice and rage, of bloody Papists, and faithlesse Atheists; and in time these mischiefes will approach other parts, though for the present, we lye in the mouth of danger. Now towards the redresse of these growing evils, and securing the peace of this County, and preservation of those peaceable subjects, intended to be disarmed and left naked to the furie of every malicious adversary; we offer to your Considerations, the Propositions following viz, That an Order be conceived in Parliament, and decla∣red, that all the Kingdome may take notice of it; to this effect, That all well affected and good Subjects (that shall be plundered, pillaged, or suffer in their e∣states, by any one of the Cavalleeres or other forces raised without consent of Parliament) shall have full reparation of their dammages, out of the estates of such Persons of wealth and quality, whose fortunes lying in the South, doe now reside in Yorkeshire, and with their presence and assi∣stance, doe countenance, and further these distempers of the Kingdome, and the mischiefes, that doe happen, and are like to increase. That there may be speedily sent to Hull a sufficient pro∣portion of powder, bullets, Armes, ordnance and other mu∣nition, with an Order to furnish the Country with them, as there shall be occasion, especially to such as shall be disar∣med upon the consultations held in the Deanery. That Commissions bee speedily sent downe from the Earle of Essex, Lord Leivtenant of this County, to the Gen∣tlemen named in this inclosed paper, or such of them as the House shall elect, for the present, to raise and command the
forces of this Country, for suppressing of any insurrections or unlawfull Tumults that may happen to arise. That the Sheriffe bee commanded by speciall Order of Parliament, to conduct and assist them, as the House con∣ceives fitting. This list of Gentlemen for Commanding the Country forces, is not intended to disappoint any, of trust or com∣mand, who are already nominated, and intrusted by the Parliament: nor are they intended to be continued longer then untill some other provision by act be concluded on, by the King and Parliament, for setling and ordering the Militia. And lastly it is the desire of the well affected in this Country, to receive weekely advertisements from thence, by some especially employed for that purpose, untill af∣faires be so setled, as we may safely confide in the ordinary post; for now we neither rightly understand the proceed∣ings of the House, nor can we represent to them such mat∣ters as concerne the peace of the Country. All which we hope you will bee pleased to represent to the House, as the unanimous considerations of a great num∣ber of the Gentry of the Country. 13. August. 1642. And we remaine your most affectionate friends and servants. FINIS.
