F242 E475_9 99862448 114607
THREE PROCLAMATIONS BY HIS Excellency the Lord General Fairfax; THE FIRST Commanding the Civil Deport∣ment of the Souldiery. THE SECOND That no Souldier shall depart from his Quarters without Leave. THE THIRD That all ill-affected Persons, that have engaged for the King, in the first or latter War, and are now residing in or about London, shall depart the said City, and Suburbs, and all places Ten Miles distant from thence, within twenty four hours next after Publica∣cation hereof. LONDON, Printed for John Partridge, and George Whittington. 1648.
By His EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax. THese are to require all Officers and Souldiers of Horse and Foot who shall Quarter in and about the City of LONDON, and Suburbs thereof, That they behave and demne themselves civily and peaceably towards all sorts of people, not gi∣ving any just cause of offence, or provocation by language, or otherwise, upon pain of such severe punishment as to a Court Martial shall be thought meet, and not do any unlaw∣ful violence to the person or goods of any, ei∣ther in their Quarters, or elsewhere, upon pain of death: And for the more due execution
hereof all Commanders and Officers are hereby required not to be absent from their several and distinct charges without leave first had in writing from their Superiors, up∣on pain of such punishment as the party inju∣red shall sustain, and such further censure as to Justice shall be thought fit. Given under my hand and seal, Decemb. the first, 1648. T. Fairfax. To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum, at the head of the Re∣giments.
By His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax. WHereas it is informed, That ma∣ny Souldiers and others of the Army going without leave of their Officers from the places where they are Quartered, do straggle about the City of Lon∣don and Suburbs, contrary to Orders in that behalf given; I do hereby require and com∣mand all such Souldiers and others of the Ar∣my, forthwith upon publication hereof to re∣pair to their several Quarters upon pain of be∣ing strictly proceeded against according to the said Orders and the General Articles of War. And whereas it is informed, That divers loose persons going about the City under the name, and in the Garb of Souldiers, have been very abusive in language, and otherwise, to the in∣jury of some Inhabitants, and just offence of o∣thers; I do hereby desire, That if any such shall be hereafter found going about without
order, or Officers to govern them, whether they be indeed soldiers or no, and committing any such abuses, they may be apprehended by the next Constables, and sent to White-Hall, there to be delivered as prisoners to the Marshal General, together with what Information and evidence there is against them for such mis∣carriage, & there shall be a present proceeding against them by a Councel of War, to the due punishment of those that shall be found to have offended, and to the just satisfaction of the persons injured: And if any Soldiers go∣ing about with their officers shall be so abu∣sive, in case their officers shall not restrain them, such officer, being complained of, shall himself be punished, and give satisfaction to the party injured. Given under my hand and seal, Decemb. 4. 1648. T. FAIRFAX. To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet.
BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax. FOrasmuch as divers ill-affected Persons have of late made their Resort to the City of LONDON, the Suburbs, and places ad∣joyning, with Design (as there is cause to believe upon Grounds more then probable) to imbroil this Kingdom in further Troubles: And whereas by Or∣dinance, or Order of Parliament, such Resort hath been prohibited, and the departure of such Persons enjoyned; These are therefore to require all Persons, who have engaged for the King in the first or later War, or have adhered unto, or assisted him or his Party therein, and are now, residing in LONDON, or within Ten Miles distance there from. That within twenty four hours, after Publication here∣of, They depart from the said City and Suburbs,
and all places within Ten Miles distance thereof, and not to return for the space of one Moneth next ensuing the publication hereof, if the Head Quar∣ter shall continue here so long: And who ever shall be found and taken, contrary hereunto, they shall be dealt withall as Prisoners of War; Except such of them as have perfected their Compositions, and not engaged again in the latter War. Given under Hand and Seal the fourth of Decemb. 1648. T. FAIRFAX. To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet. FINIS.
