J600 E463_17 50805842 162223
A PREPARATIVE TO THE TREATY: OR, A short, sure, and conscientious Expedient for Agreement, and Peace; tendred to the two Houses of Parliament. WITH An Appeale to the Assembly of Divines. ALSO, An Admonition to the People, concerning the present Ingagements. By Da. J. P. N. NUMB. 30.2. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or sweare an Oath to bind his Soule with a Bond; he shall not breake his word, he shall doe according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth. JOSH. 9.20. Lest wrath be upon him, because of the Oath which he sware. Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
A short, sure, and conscientious Expedient for Agreement and Peace. THe KING and the two Houses of Parlia∣ment declaring mutually, that they took up Armes for the same reasons, intents, and purposes, 'tis a wonder how at first they fell out, and a greater wonder that hitherto they are not reconciled. The Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament. They have the precedency, The Declara∣tions of the two Houses of Parliament. because they were first in Armes. In the conclusion of their Declaration of 26 May, 1642. apprehending very justly, that their expressions there would beget at least a great suspition of their Loyalty, they say, They doubt not but it shall in the end appear to all the world, that their endeavours have been most hearty and sincere for the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the KING's just Prerogatives, the Lawes and Liberties of the Land, and the Priviledges of Parliament, in which en∣deavours by the grace of God, they would still persist, though they should perish in the worke.
In like manner, June 2. when they published their Propositions for bringing in Money or Plate to raise an Army, they declared, That whatsoever is brought in shall not at all be imployed upon any other occasion, then to main∣tain the Protestant Religion, the KING's Authority, and His Person in His Royall dignity, the free course of Justice, the Lawes of the Land, the Peace of the Kingdome, and the Priviledges of Parliament. Infinite are their Declarati∣ons and professions in this kind. The KING's Declarations. June 16. The King's Declarations. His Majesty published a Declaration to all His loving Subjects, exciting them to bring in ready Mo∣ney and Plate, and to furnish Him with Horse, Horse-men, and Armes, for defence of the Protestant Religion, the pre∣servation of His royall Person, the Lawes, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdome, and the vindication of the Privi∣ledge and Freedome of Parliament. In His Declaration to all His loving Subjects con∣cerning the proceedings of this present Parliament, Aug. 12. His Majesty saies, That nothing, but the preser∣vation of the true Protestant Religion, invaded by Brow∣nisme, Anabaptisme, and Libertinisme, the safety of His Person, threatned and conspired against by Rebellion, and Treason, the Law of the Land, and Liberty of the Subject, oppressed, and almost destroyed by an usurped, unlimited, ar∣bitrary Power, and the Freedome, Priviledge, and Dignity of Parliament awed and insulted upon by force, and Tu∣mults, could make Him put off His long Robe of Peace, and take up defensive Armes. And in pursuance of these ends did His Majesty offer Propositions accordingly, The King's Propositions conform to his Declarations. at all Treaties, where He might propose any thing.
But concerning the Propositions of the two Houses of Parliament, at the Treaty at Uxbridge, The Propositi∣ons of the two Houses diffe∣ring from their Declarations. His Majesties. Commissioners truly observed, That after a War of neer 4 Yeares for which the defence of the Protestant Religion, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and the Priviledges of the Parliament, were made the cause and grounds, in a Treaty of 20 Daies, nor indeed in the whole Propositions upon which the Treaty should be, They alter the state of the warre. there hath been nothing of∣fered to be Treated concerning the Breach of any Law, or of the Liberty and Property of the Subject, or Priviledge of Parliament, but onely Propositions for the altering a Go∣vernment established by Law, and the making new Lawes, by which almost all the old are, or may be cancelled. I will not here dispute the Power of the two Houses of Parliament separate from the KING, but That they cannot assent to any thing in Parliament, What the two Houses cannot doe in respect of the King and Crown. that tends to the disherison of the KING, and His Crowne, whereunto they are sworne, is acknowledged by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, 42 Edw. 3. And, that they neither meant, nor had power, The Oathes of Allegiance and Supremacy. to hurt the KING's Prerogative, is declared by the House of Com∣mons at the passing of the Petition of Right, 3 Caroli. Besides, What they are bound to doe for the King and the Crown. by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy they are bound positively, to defend and maintaine His Majesties royall Person, with all the Prerogatives, Privi∣ledges, and Preheminencies belonging or annexed to the imperiall Crown. And they have bound themselves by the Protestation, The Prote∣station. with their Lives, power, and Estates, to defend and main∣taine His Majesties royall Person, Honour, and Estate; to∣gether with the power of the Priviledge of Parliament, and the lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Subject: And to their power to oppose all such as shall by force, counsell, con∣spiracy,
or otherwise, doe any thing to the contrary of any thing in the Protestation contained: And that they will not for hope, feare, or other respects, relinquish this Pro∣mise, Vow and Protestation. And by the Solemne League and Covenant, The League & Covenant. In the preservation of Religion and Liberties, to maintain and de∣fend the KING's Person and Authority, without diminish∣ing His just Power and Greatnesse: And that they will all the daies of their lives continue in this Covenant against all opposition whatsoever. The Expedient for Peace. Now let the Lords and Commons at the Treaty pro∣ceed, The expedient for Peace. not according to their strengths and successes, but according to their Declarations, and their legall and vo∣luntary Oaths (i.) with Religion, Priviledges, and Li∣berties; Let them maintaine and defend the KING, the Crown, His Majesties Honour and Estate, His Au∣thority, Power, and Greatnesse; And an Agreement and Peace will follow thereupon. An Oath being the end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. An Appeale to the Assembly of Divines. And I appeale to the Assembly of Divines (for their Assent, An Appeale to the Assembly of Divines. or Answer) whether in point of Religion and Con∣science they may proceed otherwise then according to their Declarations, Protestation, and Covenant? And whether they are not guilty of disloyalty and perjury pro∣ceeding otherwise? The Parl. and the Army have altered the state of the warre. as the two Houses have done hither∣to by their Propositions devesting the KING, and the Crown of the chief Power and Government, and establish∣ing it in themselves: And as the Army did by their last Declaration, Resolving to settle the Government without
the KING, and against Him, and against all that take part with Him. And hence our late Petitions for His Majesties Re∣turne to His Parliament and Government (being con∣trary to their sense) were so unwelcome to them, Why our late Petitions were so unwelcome to them. that the Petitioners from Surrey and Kent were chastised by them. An Admonition to the People concerning the Engagements. And to involve the People in this damnable Apostacy from their faith and allegiance to GOD, and the KING; The present Engagements. and the better to carry on their designs against the King and the Crown, have they framed an Ingagement for us, to adhere to the authority of the two Houses of Parliament, (i.) to Renounce the KING, His Protestation, and Go∣vernment, and to submit to the usurpation and domina∣tion of the two Houses of Parliament, and to serve them: And this Ingagement is carried on at this day in the se∣verall Counties, Cities, and Corporations (silently, and covertly) for encreasing and strengthning their Confe∣deracy, and for enlarging and establishing their Domi∣nion privily and insensibly. There is also another Engagement on foot (of the same nature with the Negative Oath) Not to assist the KING in this War (for Recovering His Rights and Pre∣rogatives) and not to doe any thing to the prejudice of the affaires of the two Houses of Parliament (in prosecution of their designes against the KING and the Crowne.) And when any become liable to them, they are forced to take this Ingagement before they can get off from their Delinquency.
The People in their severall Parishes to consult their respective Ministers about the Ingagements. But I would have the people of the Kingdome to re∣member when they took the Oath of Supremacy, The People in every Parisa to consult their respective Mi∣nisters. That they promised from thenceforth to bear faith and true Alle∣giance to the KING's Highnesse, His Heires, and lawfull Successours; and to their power to assist and defend all Ju∣risdictions, Priviledges, Preheminences, and Authority granted, or belonging to the KING's Highnesse, His Heirs and Successours, or linked and annexed to the Imperiall Crown of the Realme. And when they took the Oath of Allegiance, That they swore to beare faith and true Allegiance to His Majesty, His Heires and Successours; and Him, and them to defend to the utmost of their power, against all conspiracies and at∣tempts whatsoever, which shall be made against His, or their Persons, their Crowne and Dignity. And I would have the people in the severall Parishes (in the City and County) to consult their respective Ministers, whether considering the Oaths aforesaid they can engage or comply with the two Houses and the Army in manner aforesaid without high disloyalty & manifest perjury? or whether considering their Obligations by those Oaths and by the Protestation & Covenant, they ought not rather to oppose, and fight against them for the defence and main∣tenance of the KING and Crown, and the established Go∣vernment of the Kingdome? I Counsell thee to keep the King's Commandement, and that in regard of the Oath of God, Eccl. 8.2. [It is a pernicious Doctrine to teach Subjects they may be dischar∣ged from the Oath of Allegiance.] Mr. Pym, p. 17. of his Speech or Declaration delivered after the recapitulation or summoning up of the Charge of High Treason against the E. of Strafford; and published by the Order of the House of Commons. FINIS.
