K475B R43669 42475077 151205
A New Book Containing sundry SET-FORMS OF PRAYERS, THANKSGIVINGS, and GRACES. omposed chiefly for the Benefit of CHILDREN and YOUTH: t may be useful to all such as are destitute of better Helps, to further them in their Godly Practices. The First Edition. LONDON, Printed for William Thackaray, in Duck-Lane near Smithfield. 1673.
A Prayer for the Morning. ALmighty God, who of thine infinite goodne hast brought me into this world, and hast pre¦served me ever since I was born from those  dangers into which I should daily have fallen, had  thou not upheld me with thy strong Hand. I desir from the bottom of my heart to return thee innume¦rable thanks for all thy great favours bestowed upo me, and more particularly, for that thou hast adde to all those benefits hitherto poured upon my Sou and Body, this further blessing in preserving m this night past from all evils Spiritual and Corporal I beseech thee, as thou hast let me see the light of th day, so lift up the light of thy countenance upon me▪ and be merciful unto me in the pardon and forgive∣ness of all my Sins, which I have this night or at any time heretofore committed against thee, giving m grace to repent and amend my sinful life, that I ma this following day and for ever after live, not as  will but as thou wilt. Let me daily more and more lament my former sinful life, trusting faithfully in thy rich mercies, through the merits of Jesus Christ, for the pardon of all my sins; and let all my thoughts words and deeds henceforward be such as may tend to the praise of thy holy Name, and good example of
thers: Grant this, O Lord, for his sake who hath rchased my Redemption with no less price than s dearest Blood, even for the sake of Jesus Christ;  whose Name and Words I further call upon thee, ying as he himself hath taught me, O holy Fa∣er, &c. A Prayer for the Evening. BLessed be thy Name, O Lord God, for all thy fa∣vours, benefits, and blessings which thou hast ouchsafed out of thy rich mercy and free goodness o bestow upon me, and more especially the blessings f this day past. Thou, O Lord, hast cloathed and fed e with thy good Creatures, and afforded me abun∣ance of comfort by thy liberal contribution of all hings necessary both for my soul and body. What hall I render unto thee for all thy mercies? Lord,  have nothing but what is thine, thou hast freely given me whatsoever I enjoy, I desire therefore to ive up my self wholly unto thee, desiring thee to ccept o me, in Jesus Christ, for thy Child, restoring into me that Image of God which I lost in the fall f my first Parents, and make me like unto the Lord. esus Christ, enabling so me to walk, even as he walk∣d; fill my heart with an utter loathing and detesting of all sin, and with a fervent longing after thy grace, hat I may hunger and thirst after righteousness, and ever be satisfid till thou hast filled my mouth with hy good things. And, O Lord, I beseech thee keep ne this night following, let me lie down in peace, nd rest in peace; guard me with thy holy Angels,
and let not the Devil, that roaring Lyon who go about day and night seeking whom he may devou have any advantage over me, but when I sha through thy goodness be refreshed with sleep, gra that in the morning I may again praise thee, and e¦deavour to walk in thy waies, and keep thy Com¦mandments all the daies of my life. These thing O Lord, and what else thou knowest best for me,  beg at thy hands for Jesus Christ his sake, in whos Name and Words I further call, &c. Another Prayer for the Morning. I Desire to return unto thee, O most gratious Lor God, all possible praise and thanksgiving, for tha thou hast continued thine accustomed goodness un¦to me, in keeping me this night past from all thos hurts and dangers both of Soul and Body, unt which by reason of my heinous sins and provocation I am liable every moment; Blessed be thy Nam for the quiet rest and sweet sleep which thou hs afforded me: Grant, O Lord, that I begin this new day to lead a new life; as thou hast cloathed my Body with Garments, so put upon me the robes o Christs Righteousness, that my Soul may not ap∣pear naked in thy sight, but having on the Wedding Garment, I may sit down at the great Marriage Supper of the Lamb whensoever thou shalt be plea∣sed to call me; and forasmuch as thou knowest, O Lord, what deadly enemies I have to encounter whilst I continue in this life; I therefore beseech thee to Arm me with the whole Armour of God,
hat in the strength of Jesus Christ, and through the assistance of thy holy Spirit, I may vanquish and overcome them all: so shall thy Name be Glorified, he Lord Jesus Christ exalted, and my poor soul saved in the day of Jesus Christ; for whose sake my soul desires eternally to bless thee, and in whose most holy Name and blessed Words, I desire to con∣clude these my weak and imperfect prayers, saying as he hath taught me, O boly Father, &c. Another Prayer for the Evening. O Most gratious God and loving Father in Jesus Christ, I poor miserable Creature desire to humble my Soul before thee this Evening, to im∣plore thy Divine Majesty, to be merciful unto me, for I have most grievously offended thee by my ma∣nifold sins and transgressions; so that if thou shouldst enter into judgement with me, I cannot be able to stand up before thee, for mine iniquities are gone over my head, and my sins reach up to Heaven, where they daily cry unto thee for vengeance against me. But thou, O God, art full of Pity and Compassion, flow to Anger, and of much Mercy, who desirest not the death of a sinner, but wouldst have all to come to the knowledge of the Truth and be saved; unto thee, O Lord, I come, beseeching thee for thy Names sake, for thy Mercies sake, for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, to remove my sins as far out of thy sight, as the East is from the West; let them never any more come into thy remembrance, but assure me by thy Spirit, that thou hast freely Pardoned the same,
and in token thereof give me, I beseech thee, a new heart, that I may henceforth truly love, honour, and obey thee, in the whole course of my life: and let my mouth be filled with thy praises; for great is thy loving kindness to the children of men. Thou, O Lord, hast poured forth thy blessings upon me, and I have tasted of thy goodness in an abundant measure; For ever blessed be t Name for all thy favours and benefits: and in particular for such comforts as thou hast this day vouchsafed unto me, in giving health, strength, food, rayment, and all things richly to enjoy. Oh! let me never be un∣mindful to return thee thanks for the same, and I beseech thee, O Lord, continue thy goodness still unto me, and as thou hast preserved me this day, so keep me this night following from all those evils, which by my sins I have justly deserved to under∣go, and grant that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may be found of thee, not in my own Righte∣of Jesus Christ; for whom my soul desires eternally to bless thee, to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, be rendred as is most due, all Honour, Praise, Thanksgiving, and Adoration now and for ever∣more. Amen. A Prayer to be said at all times. O Lord and heavenly Father, whose power is infinite, whose wisdom is unsearchable, and of whose goodness and mercy there is no end. Look down I beseech thee from heaven, the place of thy holy Habitation, and with an eye full of pity and
compassion, behold me thy poor Creature, who do most humbly prostrate my self before thee, acknow∣ledging and confessing my manifold sins and trans∣gressions, whereby I have grievously offended thy justice, and am worthy of eternal condemnation; if thou beest not exceeding gracious unto me in the free pardon and forgiveness of all my sins. Therefore, O Lord, hearken to the voice of my supplication. Let not my sins cry louder in thine ears for venge∣ance against me, than the Blood of Jesus Christ for mercy and forgiveness. O remember not, Lord, what I have done but what the Lord Christ hath Suffered; though I by my sins have deserved death, yet he by his death hath purchased life for all that unfeignedly believe in him. Give me, O gratious God, a lively faith in his Blood; enable me to lay hold upon eternal life, which thou hast promised by him to the worst of sinners; in the number where∣of I stand: and I beseech thee, manifest thy unspeak∣able goodness, not only in the pardoning my sins, but in cleansing me from all my filthiness and wick∣edness. O let not sin any longer have dominion over me; suffer me not to yield my members as servants of unrighteousness unto uncleanness: but do thou so change my heart and renew my will, that I may ever hereafter pursue the things that are good, en∣deavouring by my future diligence, to redeem the Time which I have wasted in vanity and unprofita∣bleness. Let thy holy Spirit work mightily in me, beating down all my strong lusts and corruptions,
and whatsoever would withdraw my heart from hee. Let thy Word be a light unto my feet, and a anthorn to my paths, and guide me in that way wherein thou wouldest have me walk, that so I may with chearfulness run the race that thou hast set be∣ore me, and having fought a good fight, finished y Course, and kept the Faith, I may receive a Crown of Glory, which thou hast laid up for them hat love the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ: or whose sake I beg all these things at thy hands, nd in whose Name and Words I further call upon thee, saying as he himself hath taught me, O holy Father, &c. A Prayer to be said at all times. O Most holy Lord God, I desire to return thee all possible praise and thanksgiving, for those un∣peakable benefits which thou vouchsafest to bestow pon me from day to day. Lord, what am I that hou shouldst be mindful of me, that thou shouldst so much as look upon me, unless it were in Anger, for I ave done nothing but sinned against thee all my life ong; what thou hast commanded me to do, that ave I left undone; and what thou hast forbidden e to do, that have I done. My mind hath been in a ontinual Rebellion against thee, and though I have abundantly tasted of thy goodness, yet have I re∣warded thee evil for good; those members which hou hast given me to honour and serve thee withal,  have made instruments of wickedness and unclean∣ess, thereby to provoke thee to wrath and indig∣nation
against me; yet since thou art pleased out o thy great pity and compassion, to spare me, and giv me time of Repentance; I humbly beseech thee to work in my soul a godly sorrow for all those heinous sins which I have committed against thee: And do thou, O Lord, for thine infinite mercies sake, pardon all mine offences past, and enable me for the time to come, to lead a new life; send down thy Spirit in∣to my heart, even the Spirit of Adoption, whereby I may be enabled to cry, Abba Father; and let the same Spirit work in me a sincere love unto thee, a perfect hatred of sin, and an universal Obedience to all thy holy Commandments; keeping me from all evil waies, and teaching me to choose the way of truth, purifying my heart from all filthiness of sin and evil concopisence, so that I may become a new creature, and be made in every respect conformabl to the Image of Jesus Christ; for whose sake I be these things, and what ever else thou in thy wisdom knowest to be most expedient for me: To him, with thy self, and blessed Spirit, enable me, O Lord, to render as is most due all Honour, Praise, Thanksgiv∣ing, and Adoration, now and for evermore. Amen. A Confssion of Sins, and Prayer for pardon. O Gracious God, when I consider the infinite ho∣liness and purity which is in thee; I am eve ashamed and almost afraid to lift up mine eyes unto Heaven, the place of thy glorious habitation, for my sins are ascended up into thy sight. Against thee O Lord, against thee have I sinned, and done evi
ore thee. My Iniquity is great, I have been an nder against thee, even from my Mothers Womb;  that I have great cause to admire thy wonderful ience, and long suffering towards me; that thou t not long ere this cast me into Hell: surely 'tis ause thy compassions fail not. O for ever blessed  thy Name, that thou still sparest me, and givest  time of Repentance. Lord, I beseech thee work  my heart a true sight, and sence of my sins, that ing the ugliness thereof, and considering how ghly I have displeased thee by them, I may ever reafter hate and detest them. Let my heart be d with sorrow, that I have offended so good and atious a God, and work in me a settled resolution,  forsake every evil way, to shun all occasions of sin, d earnestly to endeavour to walk before thee in w obedience all the daies of my life. Thou, O Lord, at hast promised to give thy holy Spirit to them at ask thee; I humbly beseech thee send down y holy Spirit into my heart, to enlighten my mind  the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and guide me into e paths of thy Commandments, that so I may ob∣in pardon of all my sins, and be made partaker of erlasting felicity, through the merits and mediati∣ of Jesus Christ; To whom with thee, O holy Fa∣er, and thy blessed Spirit, enable me to ascribe as most due all Honour, Praise, Thanksgiving, and doration, now and for evermore. Amen.
A Prayer for pardon of Sins, ad grace to Ame O Gratious God who art the maker and Crea of all creatures, who governest and rulest th all by thy Power and Wisdom, who preservest th by thy Providence and goodness, and hearest  cries of all those people that call upon thee in th Necessities; thou hast been graciously pleased  manifest thy abundant mercy towards poor wo¦less creatures, in promising that whosoever come unto thee, thou wilt in no wise cast out: By  consideration of which thy unspeakable goodne I thy poor servant am encouraged in all Humili to come before thee, not in my own name, or in  own righteousness, but in the Name and Righteo¦ness of Jesus Christ, beseeching thee for his sake ¦lend a gratious ear to the voice of my supplicati Vouchsafe, O Lord, to pardon and forgive all  sins, as well Original as Actual; sins against t Law, and sins against thy Gospel, wherewith  Soul and Body are stained and polluted against the O Lord, I have sinned and done evil in thy sight, a if thou shouldst be extream in marking and punis¦ing what I have done amiss, I should not be able  stand before thee; but with thee there is mercy th thou maist be feared. O manifest thy goodness un my poor Soul, and let me thereby be led unto Repe¦tance; Take away this rocky stony heart, and gi me such a heart as thou wouldst have me to have enlighten my understanding, renew my will, refor my judgement, sanctifie me throughout both in So
Body, and let thy blessing be upon all my law∣ endeavours; let it be my intention and drift to  thy will, to walk in thy waies, and to keep thy mandments; let thy blessed Spirit dwell in my l; let the power of sin be weakned in me, and gthen and confirm me in thy grace, granting  to persevere therein unto the end, that being ded by thy counsel to obey thee in this life, I may  made a partaker of thy glory in the world to e: which I beseech thee grant for Jesus Christ sake, for whom I bless thee: In whom I desire ever to be found of thee; to whom with thee  thy holy Spirit, be ascribed as is most due, all our, Praise, thanksgiving, and Adoration, both  and for evermore. Amen. Another of the same. O Lord, who art the Father of Jesus Christ, and in him the Father of all Mercies, and God of Consolation; I thy poor unworthy servant, do up∣he bended knees of my soul, in all humility, pre∣ my petitions before thee, beseeching thee to t me an Assurance of thine especial grace to∣ds my soul, in the pardon and forgivness of all  sins, wherewith I have so highly displeased thy jesty, by breaking all thy holy Laws and Com∣dments in thought word and deed; I confess, ord, that shouldst thou deal with me according y deserts, I could expect nothing but thy se∣st wrath and curse, which is due unto me for my : but thou, O Lord, hast no pleasure in the death
of the wicked, Mercy best pleaseth thee; O the¦fore shew unto me the light of thy Countena and say▪ unto my soul, Thou art my Salvati Write thy Laws in my heart, put thy fear into  inward parts, elighten my mind in the knowle of thy Truth: and so establish me in thy Grace, t I may never again depart from thee; wash me a make me clean from all my filthiness; Mortifie me whatsoever is carnal; enable me through  assistance of thy Spirit to crucifie the flesh, with  lusts and affections thereof: let not sin get the u¦per hand of me, neither let Satan approach too n to hurt me, but do thou continually guide, dire and assist me in the waies of Righteousness, so t whatsoever I shall do, my special care and purp may be to serve and honour thee, that I may t nothing in hand which shall not be agreeable to  most blessed Will. O let it please thee to prese and defend me from all the Temptations of Sata deliver me from all Perils and Dangers whatsoev so that I may henceforth pass the time of my  journing here in Rest and Qietness, and finally l with thee for ever in thy Kingdom: All whic beg of thee for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen. A Prayer for Sanctifying Grace. ALmighty God, who art the Alpha and Omeg the beginning and the end; in whom all cre¦tures live, move and have their Being; upon the tr knowledge of whom dependeth my eternal salva¦on: I do most humbly beseech thee to enligh
my mind in the knowledge of thy truth; let the light of thy glorious Gospel shine into my heart, that I may see the evil of sin, the vanity and emptiness of ll worldly enjoyments, the fullness and unsearch∣ble Riches of Jesus Christ. O let me no longer live n my self, but fill thou my soul with a Hungering nd Thirsting desire after Jesus Christ: And as the Hart pants after the water Brooks, so let my soul ant after thee, O God: and forasmuch as thou hast aid, without holiness no man shall see thy face; Purge, cleanse, and purifie me, O Lord, I beseech hee from all the Pollutions, Spots and Defilements of sin, and make me holy as thou art holy, give un∣to me such a portion of thy blessed Spirit, as may make me in all things conformable to thy blessed Will, and let my conversation be such as becometh the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For whose sake I beseech thee grant me such things as thou in thy abundant Wisdom, knowest to be most expedient for me, for whom my soul desires to bless thy great and glorious Name; to whom with thee holy Father, and thy sweet Spirit of Love, be rendred and ascribed as is most due all Honour, Praise, Thansgiving and Ado∣ration now and for evermore. Amen. A Prayer for Pardoning and Sanctifying Grace. ALmighty Lord God, who hast the Heaven for thy Throne, and the Earth for thy Footstool, before whom all the World is as nothing; what am I poor sinful dusd Ashes, that I should pre∣sume to take thy sacred Name into into my mouth,
or so much as cast up my Eyes towards Heaven; for thou art a holy God, thou canst not behold iniqui∣ty, and I am a sinful polluted creature, having stain'd and defil'd both Soul and Body, with filthy and un∣clean Actions, so that thou maist justly loath me and cast me out of thy presence into the bottomless pit of Hell, but deal not thou with me, O Lord, accord∣ing to my deserts, neither reward me according to mine iniquities, which have been multiplied before thee; but out of thy free grace and rich mercy, pardon and forgive all my sins, and accept of me in Jesus Christ, who is worthy though I am unwor∣thy; I have sinned, O Lord, but he hath suffered for sin, giving his Life a Ransom for many, and is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by him: O therefore I beseech thee let that heavy burden of sin, which is ready to weigh me down to Hell, be laid upon him who is able to bear it, and let his righteousness be imputed unto me, cloath me therewith, that I may thereby become righteous in thy sight. And gratious God, I beseech thee, give me a new heart, a heart to fear, love and obey thee; let thy blessed Spirit be poured plenti∣fully upon me, and purifie my heart by Faith, purge my conscience from dead works to serve thee the living God; let nothing be so odious unto me as sin, nothing so desirable as grace and holiness of living, whereby thou maist be glorified, and in all my thoughts words and actions, let my care be to imitate the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great
pattern of perfection, and example for all thy people to follow. In whose Name and for whose sake,  beg at thy hands all things needful both for Soul and Body, to whom with thee, O Father, and the ver blessed Spirit, three persons and one God be as∣cribed as is most due all Honour, Praise, Thanks∣giving, and Adoration now and for evermore. Amen. A general Confession of Sins, and Prayer for forgiveness. O Gratious Lord God and loving Father in Jesus Christ, look down I beseech thee in much mercy upon me the most unworthy of all thy Crea∣tures, and give ear to the Prayers and supplications which I make before thee. I confess, O Lord, that I was conceiv'd in sin and brought forth in Iniqui∣ty, I was by nature a filthy loathsom Creature. Thou mightst justly have thrown me into Hell the same hour I was born, and have done me no wrong, but thou hast in much mercy spared me hitherto, and been very gratious unto me, notwithstanding I have added to that Original sin which I brought in∣to the world with me, many actual sins and trans∣gressions, whereby I have daily provoked thee to wrath and indignation against me; yet seeing, O Lord, that thou delightest in mercy, and dost wait to be gratious, because thou art unwilling that any should perish, but that all shud come to the know∣ledge of the Truth and be saved: I am thereby en∣couraged to come unto thee, in the Name of Jesus Christ, beseeching thee for his sake to pardon all my
sins, and blot out of the Book of thy remembrance all my transgressions; Forgive, O Lord, whatsoever Iniquities and offences I have committed against thee, in thought, in word, or deed; let not my un∣worthiness hinder thy mercy from descending upon me, for I come not unto thee in my own Name, but in the Name of Jesus Christ who is worthy, and though I be poor yet he is Rich; though I am a sin∣ner, yet he is Righteous; though I be filthy and impure, yet he is pure and Holy: For his sake therefore be merciful unto me unto me, wash me from all the pollutions and defilements of sin. Cleanse me from my filthiness forgive mine offences forget my iniquities, pour out thy Holy Spirit upon me, write thy Law in my heart, let thy word be a light unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths, and grant that I may so live in thy fear, that I may die in thy favour and be made a partaker of that everlasting happiness which was purchased by the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, for whom my soul desires eternal∣ly to bless thee, in whose Name and Words, I con∣clude these my weak and imperfect Prayers, saying as he himself hath taught me. O holy Father, &c. A Prayer for a Family. O Most gratious God and merciful Father, who hast commanded us by Prayer to crave of thee all things necessary for soul and body, and hast pro∣mised gratiously to hear, and merciful to grant the needful requests and petitions of those which call upon thee. We thy poor servants do in the Name
of Jesus Christ, and for his sake humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, to grant us all things for this bo∣dy and transitory Life, as shall be most agreeable to thy good will and pleasure; and give us we beseech thee true repentance, that we may unfeignedly turn from all our sins, and so indue us with thy heaven∣ly grace, and assist us with thy holy Spirit, that we may be enabled to mortifie all our carnal Lusts and filthy Affections. Pardon, O Lord, all our offences past, and grant that for the time to come we may lead a holy conversation, in all godliness, to the glory of thy holy name, the good of others, and the salvation of our precious souls in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with thee, O holy Father, and thy blessed Spirit be ascribed all Honour, and Praise for evermore. Amen. O Most merciful Lord God, who art great and great and glorious in thy self, and good and gratious in thy Son; we thy poor unworthy crea∣tures, desire from the bottom of our hearts to ren∣der thee praise and thanksgiving for all those unde∣served favours and benefits, which thou hast from time to time bestowed upon us in giving us health, strength, liberty, food, rayment, and abundance of all things that are needful for our comfortable subsistence in this miserable world; O continue, we beseech thee, the same still unto us, and grant that we may make such a holy use of thy blessings, and so improve them to thy glory, that thou maist never repent thee of the good which thou hast shewed
unto us. We bless thee, O Lord, that thou hast preserved us all our life time hitherto from all death, danger, and other mischief; vouchsafe we beseech thee this day and ever hereafter to have a merciful eye over us, support and sustain us, bear us up and save us that we fall not into danger, nor run into Temptation; suffer us not to break thy Command∣ments, but give us grace to walk worthily amongst the snares of our mortal enemies, the Dvil, the World, and the Flesh; let all our thoughts, words, and works be such as may tend to the glory of thy great Name, to the edifying of our souls in Vertue and Piety, and to the profit of our Brethren. These things, O Lord, and what ever else thou knowest to be needful for us, we beg at thy hands for Jsus Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words we fur∣ther call upon thee saying, Our Father, &c. O Most holy Lord God, who art infinite in great∣ness, and infinite in goodness, whose Throne is in the highest Heavens, and yet art pleased so far to condescend as to look down with pity and com∣passion upon us poor miserable creatures here below, and hast promised that if we call upon thee thou wilt hear, if we ask we shall have, if we seek we shall find, and if we knock it shall be opened unto us; We beseech thee, O Lord, fullfil thy gratious promise unto us the unworthiest of thy Servants, who do here in all Humility put up our petitions unto thee, craving thy holy Spirit, desiring to see
thy face and knocking at the gates of thy mercy. O let thy blessed Spirit seal unto us the pardon and orgiveness of all our sins; shew unto us the light of hy countenance, and with the everlasting Arms f thy Love embrace us; sanctifie us, O Lord, both n soul and Body, cleanse us from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; teach, direct, and enable us to walk humbly before thee; confirm and establish us in thy truth, let us daily grow in grace and therein persevere unto the end, that so when this frail life is ended, we may Live with thee for ever in that Kingdom which was purchased for us by thy dear Son and our blessed Saviour Jesus Christ. For whom we bless thee, and in whose Name and Words we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, &c.
Grace before Meat. GOod Lord bless us and these thy good Creatures which thou hast provided for us, give them, O Lord, strength to nourish us, and give us grace faithfully to serve thee through Jesus Christ our Lord. A Thansgiving after Meat. HƲmble and hearty thanks be rendred unto thee most gratious God for all thy mercies, for these comfortable refreshings which thou hast now vouch∣safed unto us; Lord we pray thee feed our Souls with thy Heavenly Manna the food of eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grace before Meat. GOod Lord Pardon and forgive us all our sins which make us unworthy of the least of thy mercies, bless these thy Creatures to the use of our Bodies, and bless our Bodies to the use of our Souls; and bless both Body and Soul to thy service through Jesus Christ our Lord. A Thanksgiving after Meat. BLessed and Praised be thy Name, O Lord, for those good Creatures wherewith thou hast plentifully fed us, we beseech thee give us thankful hearts for these and all other thy benefits bestowed upon us through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Grace before Meat. LET thy blessing, O Lord, be upon these thy good Creatures, which through thine abundant goodness, we are at this time about to receive at thy hands, make them healthful to our Bodies, and nourish thou our Souls with the Bread of Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. A Thansgiving after Meat. WE desire to render thanks unto thee, O gratious God, for thy great mercies daily continued unto us; and in particular for these blessings whereof we have now been partakers; we beseech thee as thou fillest our Bellies with thy good Creatures, so fill our hearts and mouths with Praises unto thy Name▪ through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grace before Meat. BE pleased, O gratious God, to sanctifie unto our uses these thy blessings which thou hast here set before us, and give us Grace to make such a sober use thereof that we may not be hin∣dred from performing our Duties, but strengthened to do thee service, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
A Thanksgiving after Meat. WE return unto thy Majesty, O blessed God, in∣numerable thanks for thy undeserved benefits which thou daily purest upon us; blessed be thy Name for feeding us at this time with thy good Creatures. O Lord, we pray thee give us grace faithfully and thankfully to serve thee through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grace before Meat. GRacious God, who of thine bountiful goodness hast prepared Meat and Drink for our necessity, and daily feedest us therewith, whereby our frail Bodies are nourished, strengthened, and refreshed; we beseech thee replenish our hearts with Joy and Gladness, and make as fruitful in good works, to the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. A Thanksgiving after Meat. HOnour and Praise be given unto thee, O holy God, who out of thy tender care over us, hast provided all things for us richly to enjoy; grant, O Lord, that both our Eating and Drinking, Speaking, and living may redound to the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. FINIS.
