l1778 e575_7 99862919 115099
LETTERS FROM IRELAND, Relating the several great Successes it hath pleased God to give unto the Parliaments Forces there, in the Taking of Drogheda, Trym, Dundalk, Carling∣ford, and the Nury. Together with a LIST of the Chief Commanders, and the Number of the Officers and Soldiers slain in Drogheda. Die Martis, 2 Octobr. 1649. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the several Letters from the Lord Lieutenant of Ire∣land, together with so much of Colonel Venables Letter as concerns the Successes in Ireland, be forthwith printed and published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1649.
For the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England. SIR, YOur Army being safely arrived at Dub∣lin, and the Enemy endeavoring to draw all his Forces together about Trym and Tecroghan (as my Intelligence gave me;) from whence endeavors were used by the Marquis of Ormond, to draw Owen Roe O Neal with his Forces to his Assistance, but with what success I cannot yet learn. I resolved after some refresh∣ment taken for our weather beaten Men and Horses, and accommodations for a march, to take the Field; and accordingly upon Friday the Thirtieth of August last, Rendezvouzed with Eight Regiments of Foot, and Six of Horse, and some Troops of Dragoons, three miles on the Northside of Dublin; the Design was, To endeavor the Regaining of Drogheda, or tempting the Enemy, upon his hazard of the loss of that place, to fight. Your Army came before the Town upon Munday following, where having pitch∣ed, as speedy course as could be was taken to frame our Batteries, which took up the more time, because divers of the Battering Guns were on Ship board: Upon Munday the Ninth of this instant, the Bat∣teries began to play; whereupon I sent Sir Arthur Ashton the then Governor a Summons, To deliver
the Town to the use of the Parliament of England; to the which I received no satisfactory Answer, but proceeded that day to beat down the Steeple of the Church on the Southside of the Town, and to beat down a Tower not far from the same place, which you will discern by the Card enclosed: Our Guns not being able to do much that day, It was resolved to endeavor to do our utmost the next day to make Breaches assaultable, and by the help of God to Storm them: The places pitched upon, were that part of the Town wall next a Church, called St. Maries; which was the rather chosen, because we did hope that if we did enter and possess that Church, we should be the better able to keep it against their Horse and Foot, until we could make way for the entrance of our Horse, which we did not conceive that any part of the Town would afford the like ad∣vantage for that purpose with this. The Batteries planted were two, one was for that part of the Wall against the East end of the said Church, the other against the Wall on the Southside; being somewhat long in Battering, the Enemy made six Retrench∣ments, three of them from the said Church to Du∣leek Gate, and three from the East end of the Church to the Town wall, and so backward. The Guns after some two or three hundred shot, beat down the Corner Tower, and opened two reasonable good Breaches in the East and South wall. Upon Tuesday the Tenth of this instant, about five of the clock in the evening, we begun the Storm, and after some hot Dispute, we entred about Seven or Eight hun∣dred men, the Enemy disputing it very stifly with
us; and indeed through the advantages of the place, and the courage God was pleased to give the Defen∣ders, our men were forced to retreat quite our of the Breach, not without some considerable loss; Colonel Cassel being there shot in the Head, whereof he presently dyed, and divers Soldiers and Officers doing their duty, killed and wound∣ed: There was a Tenalia to flanker the South-wall of the Town, between Duleek Gate, and the Corner Tower before mentioned, which our men entred, wherein they found some forty or fifty of the Enemy, which they put to the sword, and this they held; but it being without the Wall, and the Sally part through the Wall into that Tenalia being choaked up, with some of the Enemy which were killed in it, it proved of no use for our entrance in∣to the Town that way. Although our men that stormed the Breaches were forced to recoil, as be∣fore is expressed, yet being encouraged to recover their loss, they made a second attempt, wherein God was pleased to animate them, that they got ground of the Enemy, and by the goodness of God, forced him to quit his Entrenchments; and after a very hot dispute, the Enemy having both Horse and Foot, and we onely Foot withn the Wall, the Ene∣my gave ground, and our men became masters; but of their Retrenchments and the Church, which in∣deed although they made our entrance the more dif∣ficult, yet they proved of excellent use to us, so that the Enemy could not annoy us with their Horse, but thereby we had advantage to make good the ground, that so we might let in our own Horse, which ac∣cordingly,
was done, though with much difficulty; the Enemy retreated divers of them into the Mill-Mount, a place very strong and of difficult access, being exceeding high, having a good graft and strongly Pallisadoed; the Governor Sir Arthur Ash∣ton, and divers considerable Officers being there, our men getting up to them, were ordered by me to put them all to the Sword; and indeed being in the heat of action, I forbade them to spare any that were in Arms in the Town, and I think that night they put to the sword about two thousand men, divers of the Of∣ficers and Soldiers being fled over the Bridge into the other part of the Town, where about One hundred of them possessed St. Peters Church Steeple, some the West Gate, and others, a round strong Tower next the Gate, called St. Sundays: These being summon∣ed to yield to mercy, refused; whereupon I ordered the Steeple of St. Peters Church to be fired, where one of them was heard to say in the midst of the flames, God damn me, God confound me, I burn, I burn; the next day the other two Towers were summoned, in one of which was about six or seven score, but they refused to yield themselves; and we knowing that hunger must compel them, set onely good Guards to secure them from running away, until their sto∣macks were come down: from one of the said Towers, notwithstanding their condition, they killed and wounded some of our men; when they submitted, their Officers were knockt on the head, and every tenth man of the Soldiers killed, and the rest Shipped for the Barbadoes; the Soldiers in the other Town were all spared, as to their
lives onely, and Shipped likewise for the Barbadoes. I am perswaded that this is a righteous Judgement of God upon these Barbarous wretches, who have imbrued their hands in so much innocent blood, and that it will tend to p the effusion of blood for the future, which are the satisfactory grounds to such Actions, which oise cannot but work re∣morse and regret. The Oes and Soldiers of this Garison, were the flower of all their Army; and their great expectation was, That our attempting this place, would put fair  us; they being confi∣dent of the Resolution of their men and the advan∣tage of the place; if we had divided our Force into two ters, to have Besieged the North Town and the South Town, we could not have had such a cor∣respondency between the two parts of our Army, but that they might have chosen to have brought their Army, and have fought with which part they pleased, and at the same time have made a Salley with two thousand men upon us, and have left their walls manned, they having in the Town the numbers spe∣cified in this inclosed, but some say near Four thou∣sand. Since this great Mercv vouchsafed to us, I sent a Party of Horse and Dragoons to Dundk, which the Enemy quitted, and we are possessed of; as also another Castle they deserted between Trym and Drogheda, upon the Boynes. I sent a Party of horse and Dragoons to a House within five miles of Trym, there being then in Trym some Scots Companies which the Lord of Ardes brought to assist the Lord of Ormond; but upon the News of Drogheda they ran away, leaving their great Guns behinde
them, which we also have possessed. And now give me leave to say how it comes to pass that this work is wrought; It was set upon some of our hearts, that a great thing should be done, not by power, or might, but by the Spirit of God; and is it not so clear? That which caused your men to Storm so couragi∣ously, it was the Spirit of God, who gave your men Courage, and took it away again, and gave the Ene∣my Courage, and took it away again, and gave your men Courage again, and therewith this happy Suc∣cess; and therefore it is good that God alone have all the Glory. It is is remarkable, that these people at the first set up the Mass in some places of the town that had been Monasteries; but afterwards grew so insolent, that the last Lords day before the Storm, the Protestants were thrust out of the great Church, called St. Peters, and they had publique Mass there; and in this very place near One thousand of them were put to the Sword, flying thither for safety: I believe all their Fryers were knockt on the head pro∣miscuously, but two, the one of which was Father Peter Taaff (Brother to the Lord Taaff) whom the Soldiers took the next day, and made an end of; the other was taken in the Round Tower, under the re∣pute of Lieutenant, and when he understood that the Officers in that Tower had no quarter, he confessed he was a Fryer, but that did not save him. A great deal of loss in this business, fell upon Col: Hewson, Col: Cassel, and Colonel Ewers Regiments; Colonel Ewers having two Field-Officers in his Regiment shot, Colonel Cassel and a Captain of his Regiment slain, Colonel Hewsons Captain-Lieutenant slain; I
do not think we lost One hundred men upon the place, though many be wounded. I most humbly pray, the Parliament will be pleased this Army may be maintained, and that a consideration may be had of them, and of the carrying on of the Affairs here, as may give a speedy issue to this work, to which there seems to be a marvellous fair opportuni∣ty offered by God. And although it may seem very chargeable to the State of England to maintain so great a Force, yet surely to stretch a little for the pre∣sent, in following Gods Providence, in hope the charge will not be long, I trust it will not be thought by any (that have not irreconcileable or malicious Principles) unfit for me to move for a constant sup∣ply, which in humane probability, as to outward means, is most likely to hasten and perfect this work; and indeed, if God please to finish it here, as he hath done in England, the War is like to pay it self. We keep the Field much, our Tents sheltring us from the wet and cold, but yet the Country sickness overtakes many, and therefore we desire recruits, and some fresh Regiments of Foot may be sent us; for it is easily conceived by what the Garisons already drink up, what our field Army will come to, if God shall give more Garisons into our hands. Craving pardon for this great trouble, I rest, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMVVEL. Dublin, Sept. 17. 1649.
Since the writing of my Letter, a Major who brought off Forty three Horse from the Enemy, told me, that it is reported in their Camp, that Owen Roe and they are agreed. A List of the Defendants in Drogheda. THe Lord of Ormonds Regiment, Sir Edmund Verney, Lieut: Colonel, 400. Col: Bourn, 400. Col: Warren, 900. Col: Wall, 800. The Lord of Westmeath, 200. Sir Iames Dillon, 200. Horse, 200.
For the Honorable Willaiam Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Parliament of England. Mr. Speaker, I Had not received any accompt from C (whom I sent from Drogheda, to endeavor the reducing of Carling∣ford, and so to march Northward, towards a conjunction with Sir Charls Coot) until the last night. After he came to Car∣lingford, having summoned the place, both the three Cs and the Fort commanding the Harbor, were ened to him; where∣in were about Forty Barrels of Powder, seven piece of Canon, about One thousand Muskets, and five hundred Ps wanting twenty. In the entrance into the Harbor, Captain Fern aboard your Man of War had some danger, being much shot at from the Sea Fort, a ballet shooting through his main Mast: The Ca∣ptains entrance into that Harbor, was a considerable adventure, and a good service; as also was Captain Brandleys, who with forty Seamen stormed a very strong Tenalia at Drogheda, and helped to take it, for which he deserves an owning by you. Venables marched from Carlingford, with a Party of Horse and Dragoons to the Nury, leaving the Foot to come up after him: He summoned the place, and it was yielded before his Foot came up to him. Some other Informations I have received from him, which promise well towards your Northern Interest; which if well prosecuted, will (I trust through God) render you a good accompt of those parts. I have sent those things to be presented to the Councel of State for their consideration. I pray God as these Mercies flow in upon you, he will give you an heart to im∣prove them to his Glory alone, because he alone is the Author of them, and of all the goodness, patience and long-suffering extended towards you. Your Army is marched, and I believe this night lieth at Arctlo, in the County of Wicklo, by the Sea side, between thirty and forty miles from this place: I am this day by Gods blessing going towards it. I crave your pardon for this trouble, and rest, Your most humble Servant, O. Cromwel. Dublin, Sep. 27. 1649.
I desire the Supplies moved for, may be hastned: I am verily perswaded, though the burthen be great, yet it is for your Ser∣vice. If the Garisons we take, swallow up your men, how shall we be able to keep the Field? who knows but the Lord may pity Englands sufferings, and make a short work of this? it is in his hand to do it, and therein onely your Servants rejoyce. I humbly present the condition of Captain George Jenkins his widow: He dyed presently after Tredagh storm; his widow is in great want. A List of the Officers and Soldiers slain at the storming of Drogheda. SIr Arthur Ashton Governor. Sir Edmond Verney Lieutenant Col: to Ormonds Regiment. Col: Fleming, of Horse. Lieutenant Col: Finglass, of Horse. Major Fitzgerald, of Horse. Eight Captains of Horse. Eight Lieutenants of Horse. Eight Cornets of Horse. Col: Warren, of Foot, with their Lieutenants, Majors, &c. Col: Walls, of Foot, with their Lieutenants, Majors, &c. Col: Byrne, of Foot, with their Lieutenants, Majors, &c. The Lord Taaffs brother, an Augustine Fryer. Forty four Captains, and all their Lieutenants, Ensigns, &c. Two hundred and twenty Reformado's and Troopers. Two thousand Five hundred-Foot Soldiers, besides Staff-Officers, Chyrurgeons, &c. and many Inhabitants.
For His Excellency, The Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. My Lord, IN observance of your Excellencies Orders, I advanced to Carlingford upon Tuesday last, and at the same instant, Captain Ferns came into the Har∣bors mouth with his Frigot; and upon the Signal agreed upon betwixt us, came in with much gallantry and resolution, indured many shots, whereof one split his main Mast, and in the Haven took a small Wexford Vessel; And in the three Castles and the Sea-Fort, we found seven piece of Ordinance, near forty Bar∣rels of Powder, and as many of small shot, above a thousand Muskets, and four hundred and eighty Pikes (the greatest store in Ulster) but little Provision; the next day I marched with some Horse and Dra∣goons to the Nury and summoned the place, which also yielded immediately before the Foot could come. Many difficulties encounter us, yet by Gods assistance, I resolve to break through all, to follow the leading Providence of that Divine Hand, which now seems to guide us forward; for except we march on, the Scots resolve to put Irish into Carrickfergus, Belfast, and Lisnegarvy, because their own Nation refuses them both assistance and Provisions; and if we prevent not the Irish, it will kindle a new War in those Parts, more bloody then what we have yet tasted of; which to prevent, shall be my utmost and chief endeavor. Monro hath already put some Irish into Colrain: I have sent several Messengers to Sir Charls Coot, to
know his pleasure, to acquaint him with my resolutions for this work: we are all full of (not improbable) hopes of Divine assistance in this work; which if your Ex∣cellency please, but to cherish us in, may through Gods assistance, prove a most happy undertaking, which is the Prayer of, My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant, R. VENABLES. Nury Sept. 22. 1649. We had in the Castle of this place, sixty Muskets, and five Bar∣rels of Powder. FINIS.
