L3494 E1331_1 99868004 169782
The Two Main QVESTIONS RESOLVED: How 1 The Ministers 2 The Impropriators shal be Maintained Satisfied If TYTHES be put down. Often PETITIONED for, by several Counties, and Propounded and De∣bated at a Meeting not far from London, by divers Eminent Personages of this Common-Wealth, and sundry Freeholders, and Others, attending on them. By D. Lupton, Servant of Jesus Christ in the work of the GOSPEL. Mat. 23.23. Luk. 11.42. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye Tithe Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law; Judgement, Mercy, and Faith. London, Printed by R. W. for R. Harford, at the Bible and States-Arms in Little-Brittain, MDCLII.
How the Ministers shall be pro∣vided for; if Tythes be put down? THe Ministers of England for their Annual gains, and Titular prefer∣ments, (the two chief spurs and pullies to force forward, and draw on their Covetous and Ambitious Spirits) have for hundreds of yeers by plausible perswasions held out to, and made the people of England believe without the least scruple, the Di∣vine Right of payment of Tythes; there were few or none who in those times for fear of Ec∣clesiastical censures (the onely Bugbears to keep truth concealed,) durst appear to vindicate or manifest it.
But of late (God pleasing to so order times, and the piety of our Parliament upholding truth) it hath some favor and liberty to shew its face; so that all the people of this Land may be, and (we hope) are fully satisfied, yes, and the Clergy too, fully convinced, though hardly brought unto it; That Tythes are not now, by the people of this Land, by any Divine Right to be paid unto the Ministers of the same: The sundry Petitions of several Counties already exhibited, and others who are ready to come up; with the several books and treatises of some Mens pens, though in num∣ber not many, nor varnished over with smooth and flattering language; (for Truth desires a plain habit) and whose persons, though not great in worldly preferments (for, such who seek the discovery of truth, catch at no such shaddows) and did they, they would miss of their Aym, for the world will love her own; both these send forth strong Arguments and loud cries, for the putting of Tythes down in this Common-Wealth. And seeing that God hath pleased to enable and to choose such pens (though weak in esteem) to manifest this truth against payment of Tythes any longer; Who, of any sound Judgement, or sincere Conscience can dislike his choice? Let the Clergy (and the Impropriators, properly so cal∣led, who side with them for gains) take heed how they strive against the truth, or endeavor to
withhold the truth, now appearing in this particu∣lar against Tyth-taking, under the Gospel; Truth is, and will be opposed, but it cannot be op∣pressed. Tis true, manifold are the Writers for the de∣fence of Tythes, but their works, how flaccid and void of substantial truth? themselves are weary if not abashed at their own works: and there∣fore in the next place being startled with guilt and fear, they have left their pens, and use their tongues, in accusing such for unjust, unmerci∣full, unrighteous, factious, and cruell men, who either petition, or write any thing against Tythes; and that they and their families will by this means be utterly undone; they cry out as that unjust steward did, Digg I cannot, and to beg I am ashamed. That 8. or 10000. families, who have been hitherto tenderly brought up, must now starve, and that learning must live upon Almes, and peoples charity; That such who petition a∣gainst Tythes, or write to put them down, intend to extirpate the Gospel and Preaching too: these and many such are the Clamors they raise, and these things they infuse into mens fancies (and those no small Ones neither) of our unjust in∣tendments. And therefore to satisfie the world, it shall appear to all Conscionable men, that we have more care of them, than they of themselves; we
hope to Reform them, is not to ruine them; to steer them, is not to starve them; to reduce them from an old error is Charity and Mercy, not Malice: to Inform them whats best, we conceive is best for them; and though there be an Alteration of their maintenance, there is not a privation. If they say, 'twill be little, or nothing to what they had by Tythes; for peoples charity they fear will be small, and quickly cold: if it should be little; they may learn content; and a little well got, is better then a great deal with the wages of unrighteous∣ness. And if many of them should have little, or nothing allowed them by the State, 'twas but their due wages, for Hundreds of them do not any thing for, but rather against the Magistrate, scarce vouchsafing the Parliament, Councill of State, or our Armies either by Sea, or Land, a good word; not mentioning them in their publike Prayers, nor craving Gods blessing upon their Persons or Actions. This is true O presbyterian Ministers! And yet you do expect to have Tythes upheld by these men. If the peoples Charity be Cold, 'tis your selves are in fault; And know this, that better, more able, and holier men than you are, have lived by Charitable Collections, and thankfull too; what if you be put to it? are you better than Christ, his Apostles, and the primitive Christians?
To come therefore to our Intendment. How our Ministers shall be provided for, if Tythes be put down? We say, whilest we are providing for them, we hope they have no just cause to be angry with us for our Care, and good-will towards them; if they be, we know at whose dore the sin will lye; and therefore, First, may not our Ministers, nay ought they not to conform themselves and Actions; their pra∣ctise and behaviour to Christ himself, his Apostles, and to the Primitive Christians? Can they have a fairer, or surer pattern then these? or a safer Rule to walk by, than Gods word? Or, shall the Popish Dispensatory Indulgences be accounted of more worth, or necessity (and so be upheld by our Tythe-takers) than the Precepts, or Practice of Christ or his Apostles? because, by the Popes, in former times, our Tythe-takers were favoured and indulged, that so all Collations to Benefices, and first fruits of all Bishopricks and other Ecclesiasti∣cal places, might flow into their Coffers at Rome: for they gave Tythes to the Clergy, that they might have the profits aforesaid to themselves. Shall we imagine therefore, that they who wore the Triple Mitre, had more wit, wildom, truth, or equity in their decrees; Than he who wore a Crown of Thornes, hath in his heavenly word? Oh no!
—Impar Congressus And therefote, we will describe unto all men, And specially to the Ministers of England some∣thing of our Saviour Christ As first, his journeying. Secondly, His Apparel. Thirdly, His diet, with his manner of Maintenance while he was upon Earth Fourthly, of his Apostles and their practice. Fifthly, Of the primitive Christians and their manner of Maintenance; and we will, in the next place see whether tythe-taking by our Ministers or Impropriators will hold with their doings or not; if they speak not according to this, tis because there is no truth in them. Isaiah 8. And so we will sum up what the whole will yield for our Infor∣mation in this particular. To begin therefore with his travailes, when he or his Disciples journeyed (as they did dayly, going about and doing good, even unto weariness, as we may see Joh. 4.) it was alwayes on foot, except once, and that was, when he rid into Jerusalem, rather to fulfill that prophesie of Zachary, behold thy King cometh meekly sitting upon an Ass, Zach. 9. though he did at that time ride, yet it was in meekness and lowliness of minde, and it was not two miles; and usually without shoes, onely used sandals, meetly to defend the feet from stones or pricks, or other Incumbrances, or else, when he passed some lake; not so much for ease, as to shew his diligence to be about his spiritual work, or to
work Miracles on the water as he did, Mat. 9 to awaken and confirm his Disciples faith; this is enough to shew his pains and labour, patience, and humility with his followers. Behold the man; Oh Ministers! Secondly, We proceed to speak of His apparel, his predecessor came clothed in Camels hair, and a leathern girdle about his loines, Mat. 3. and our blessed Saviour said, that they who were clothed in soft Raiment, were in Kings palaces, which he came not into, onely when he was forced thither, Mat. 26, and sent from Pilate to Herod in mockery; His apparrel was only for use, and necessity: we read not of any chests of fine linnen, or Wardrobes of rich Attire: when the Soldiers stript his clothes from his back, they took all that he at present had, and they were no costly ones neither; and when his disciples took care for temporal provi∣sion, amongst other things he counsells them, after this manner, Mat. 6. Why take ye thought for rayment; Consider the Lillies of the field; but we hasten. Thirdly, Let us observe his diet, 'twas his meat and drink to do his fathers will. Not that he did not eat any thing, or not drink at all, but he did it by the by, as we say: his chief intent and drift, or his onely meat and drink, was the accomplish∣ment of his fathers will. But we may gather from the word, what manner of food he used. For when
he fed 5000. people, he asked his Disciples, how many Loaves have ye? and one Answerd, five Barly Loaves and a few small fishes; Bread they had, but not of Wheat, but Barly, nor much neither, onely five Loaves, and they were not much for 13. or 14. travelling men to feed on; and when he told them, he had compassion on the Multitude, they reply, 200. peny-worth of bread will not suffice; here's only bread for the Caterer to buy, if he had gone, and doubtless it should have been of Barley, if he had bought any. He begun his Gospel with fasting and prayer, Mat. 4. often at prayer, seldom eating, Take no care what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink Mat. 6. that rich Glutton of whom he spoke, fared deliciously every day, but he went into hell, where he wanted one drop of water. Luk. 16. when he had fed the Multitude, gave Order, to gather up the fragments, not onely because they should not be lost, but that they might be given either to the poor, or else that they might serve his Disciples to eat. And for mony, as 'tis certain he had some (for Judas kept it) yet not much; for He paid tribute-mony by a Miracle: he had for needfull supply, but not for superfluity; and we conceive too, that what he had was given to him by such as loved him, and followed him, and Mi∣nistred to him of their substance, as Chusa, Herods stewards wife, and others, Luk. 8. 'tis not to be imagined that he, who wished others not to lay
up treasures for themselves on Earth, would him∣self practice that which he disswaded others from. We know his speech concerning that rich yong man, how hard is it for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? But that we may finish in brief what we intend: We have seen how He, (vi.) Christ Jesus the Lord of life, and King of Kings, was pleased to content himself while he was a∣mongst sinfull men on Earth; Not but that he could have had better provision; (for he deserved the best, and all had been too little, and far short of his deserts) yet as we have described his man∣ner of diet, journeying and apparel, so it was; we come now to his Apostles. And they (Good Souls) were (after our Savi∣ours Resurrection) so put to it, to Communicate their goods; for their Master, though he left them some spiritual Legacies, did not bequeath to any of them (no not to John that beloved Disciple) any temporal estate, or any Bishoprick, Deanary, Prebendary, nor Cardinalship, nor any mony to him or them, so that they were forc'd to break their bread from house to house, Acts 2.3. (pro∣vidently done) as to see none should (while the common store lasted) want; So also that there should be no mispending or profuse lavishing; means were short, for no question if their master, when he was taken, had had any store of Monies, or themselvs either, Judas would have discovered
that; for he who did not spare to betray him, would not have made any scruple to have rob'd him, or them; with which, if he, or they had been furnished, it would have fallen to have been censured for lawfull pillage for the company who took him; and therefore we say it for truth, that Peter and John did speak truth, when they said, Silver and Gold have I none; they were not to carry a Scrip, because they should not put any thing into it. A cup of cold water and thanks. They plucked the Ears of corn for hunger, Act. 9. And Paul not only not coveted any mans Silver or Gold or Apparel, but justifies it, that these hands did administer to his necessities and to them that were with him; that he and the other Saints lived upon Collection, and peoples Charity, is plain if we please to see. 2 Cor. 11. And he himself sayes of himself, as having no∣thing; 2 Cor. 6.10. Perswades the Corinthians to be liberall. And so the Galatians also; but perswades one∣ly, does not constrain or force them; and yet he was content; and we see how he describes the Saints of God, Heb. 11. though famous men for Piety and Holiness, yet they wandered about in sheepskins, and Goatskins, being destitute, &c. They were put so to it even for Lodging, Food and Ray∣ment, and other Necessaries; these were so far from being provided for, that the Text saith, they
were Destitute: And to shut up all, lets come, Fifthly, To speak briefly of the primitive Chri∣stians, who lived in the first 300. years after Christ; how were they provided for? had they tythes paid them, or did they demand any such burthen to be laid upon the people of those times? Oh no! there were Cruces & Patibula, Crosses and Gibbets, but little or no maintenance, and yet by them was the Gospel preached purely and powerfully; Aureos habebat tunc temporis Ec∣clesia pastores: They were golden Pastors for life and Doctrine, and yet lived upon the Charitable Collection of Believers; Yes, and that too was fain to be gathered and distributed privately a∣mongst them; they had no Parsonage houses, or Glebe lands, nor scarce any good Countenance shewed to them, till Constantines time, and that lasted but a while neither; yet all this while as op∣portunity and liberty was afforded to them, they did not cease to preach the Gospel of Christ, and to write rare and admirable pieces of Divinity: Much more here may and might be added, one∣ly thus much for a ground work to what fol∣lows. And now O Presbyterian Ministers of England! do not take it ill, if we do what we can to you, as Andrew did to Peter his brother, Joh. 1.42. (viz.) of whom 'tis said, And he brought him to Jesus; dis∣dain
not, if the younger brother be in Christ be∣fore you, and you be brought to Jesus Christ by your inferiors; to be short, slight not good councel, , John 19.5. Behold the man! Do not do as the Prophet Isaiah saith, Esai. 53 Hide as it were your faces from him: and what! you shall find him on foot, who was the Master; will you his servants ride on pampered horses, as fatt as your selves; he had as much and more work to do, and but a short time to finish it in, and yet he did it perfectly, better than all you, and yet he travailed on foot; Leave off your superfluity in this kind, and what is vainly spent this way, may help for your provision. And secondly, for his Apparel. Behold the man! and blush at your pride & variety in fashions, your costly clothes of Silks and Satins, and fine linnen from the crown of the Head to the sole of your Feet; Are you like him who came from Bosrah with garments all in blood? have ye yet as the Apostle sayes resisted to blood striving against sin? Heb. 12. get his Robes of Righteousness to cover your sins, or else all your wardrobes will prove but Rotten raggs; What say you to this conformity? We onely hint you. Thirdly, For his diet, twas sparing, charitable, frugal, seldom, homely and poor; Behold the man! Herein also, what shall be thought of your first and second courses? Eating, not Barley, but the
purest wheat; Not to satiety, but too often to sur∣fet; who haunt feasts & publike banquetings, desire to be called Rabbi, Doctor, good your worship, Reverend Sir, and taking the chief Seats, &c. Your Master went but twice or thrice to feasts, to a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, and to Matthew the Publicans house; at the first and second he wrought a Miracle, to promote his fathers glory, and was admired for his heavenly discourse; but for your frequent feasts, we may say as Paul to the Corin∣thians, Ye come together for the worse and not the better, shall I praise you for this, I praise you not. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And for Monies he had little or none, onely for necessity; if we should speak home, and why not? what becomes of the 300. and 400. l. per annum? Do you put it into bags that have seven holes? do you not grieve there are no more fat morsels for your large stomachs? You would well be content with pluralities, and those no little ones, nay totquots would down with you too, (if allowed by the State) is this, to be joyned to the Lord, and to be one Spirit? 2 Cor. 2. to take and command tythes, is that to live as Christ did? or to be conformable to him? And now to come to try you by the Apostles and primitive Christians, was not, what is writ∣ten of them, written for our instruction? 2 Cor. 10. Could we but find any of you who pretend
such holiness, and seem to be such Reformed Pres∣byters, to be true followers of them, as they were of Christ: Follow me (says the Apostle Paul) even as I follow Christ. And Christ says, follow me; but how slowly and indirectly, if at all do you follow, nay, do not you go clean contrary to him and them also? if we should Anatomize your Actions, we should find you others than you seem for, but if you be false, you know your re∣ward; We will not stain our paper, with opening your diseases, your own sin will find you out. We press this to you, that it is not fitting you should live unjustly by Tythes, and of other mens Goods, and Command them, with rigor too; but indeavor to have your Mainte∣nance by the peoples Good will, and blessing, and Charitable Collections, for they will bring you peace at the last: To sum up all therefore, First, That though this point of Reduction and Apostolical and Primitive Reformation, be to Carnal Ministers and others, Hard and Odious, perhaps though without just cause, yet in it self, being essentially and simply true, 'tis not to be slighted but followed and imbraced. Secondly, Though it be hard, especially to flesh and blood, yet Ministers above all others, ought not to consult with them; but, as it is true, so it hath been practised by the best with Approbation and content, even by Christ, his Apostles, and the
Primitive Christians, and therefore not onely possible, but fitting to be renewed and established. Thirdly, As 'tis true, and hath been practised by the best, so 'tis the Ancientest, Freest, most Equal, Safest, Comfortablest, and most Satisfactory way for Ministers Maintenance; therefore having Truth, Practice, Antiquity, Freedom, Equity, Safety, Comfort and Satisfaction in it, ought to be a Pattern, President, Rule and Example for Maintenance for Ministers now, as well as then; for our Ministers as well as those who have been before them, whose Labor and Learning was no less, and whose Piety did exceed ours, and yet they were thankfull and content for such Collecti∣ons, and why not ours too? This way of Main∣tenance will try their Spirits, whether they got into this Function or Imployment, more for Love, or the Loaves they get by it; for our parts, they, who will not be content with it, should be content without it; from hence will issue two Querees to be resolved, to help forward this Action. 1. Who shall Collect it, when and where to be done? 2. How to be distributed? Answer. IN every Hundred, according to the number of Parishes therein, Greater or Lesser; Let two
or three Godly, able, well affected, well Reputed, and Conscionable men in each Parish be chosen, and let them Collect carefully, quietly, and meekly the Charity of each Inhabitant, and others, upon the first Lords day of the month, or upon any within the moneth (as they shall find fittest,) and if any Inhabitant be absent, to repair to their houses, or to note him or them with a blank, that so he or they may double next Collection, or add some∣thing to it; let each Inhabitants gift be set upon his name, with the Moneth wherein Collected; and let the benefit of all the Gleab-Lands in each Hundred be equally liable to the advancing this Collection in general, and to the helping the lesser and poorer Parishes; for Impropriators being satisfied, the Gleab-Lands will much aug∣ment and ease the Collection. 2. How to be distributed? Answer. EQually, to all the Ministers alike, according as our Saviour speaks in that parable Mat. 20.2. The Master gave to every labourer a penny; not a pound to one, and but a penny to another; but the Text saith, and every one received a penny; some did (as perhaps some of our Ministers will do now at this equality of Distribution) grudge and murmure; but the Act of Equality was ap∣proved
proved then by our Saviour Christ, and therefore not to be thought amiss of now; Since he equal∣led it, why should any go about, or desire to have more than his fellow Labourer? So that the Mi∣nister of one place shall partake equally of the Collection so made, as another; if any Believer or Charitable minded man please to do any thing in private, thats left to his own free choice, as God shall move his heart, or as he finds that he reaps benefit by the hearing of Gods word; a mans private Charity is free: Yet we would not that any should make that an excuse for not giving to the publike Collection. This due and equal Distribution to all the Mi∣nisters alike, we conceive, will encourage all alike, and cause every respective Minister in his Calling to be painfull and Industrious, to live quiet and loving with and amongst his Parishioners, and to keep all of them from Envy and Hatred. The labour in gathering, and proportionating it for each Minister, is easie, and may be performed with loss of little time, and may be the willinger born, because this doth free them from Tythe pay∣ing; Let the respective portions, when summ'd up and divided, be brought to the several Mini∣sters to their houses, with a certificate under six, or more of the Collectors hands, in Testimony of the truth; and 'tis fitting that one of them, in each Parish, so chosen for Collectors, should be able to
write what is Collected; the poor and Impotent are to be had regard unto, and though they do not give, yet if Pious, and fit to be members of the Church of Christ; Not to be debarred any of the Ordinances of the Gospel. And this Collection being practised, let all man∣ner of Church-dues (so called) and all Tythes, great and small, and offerings whatsoever, be forthwith abolished. —Addatur, si quid novistis rectius, istis. And with this Collection, and the Gleab-Lands added to it, the Ministers we hope may rest con∣tented; there are other wayes proposeable, if this seems too mean for their high Spirits. Example. IF all the Freehold, and Copy-hold Lands in England will make up 200000. times a 100. l. per annum, and let every 100. l. be proportioned to pay 5. l. the yeer to the Minister, every 50. l. pay yeerly 50. s. 20. l. 20. s. 10. l. 10. s. and so propor∣tionably for the least as well as the greatest, which is but after 12. d. in the pound. We say then that this number will maintain 10000. Ministers, and every Minister shall have an 100. l. per annum, and yet there will be 200000. l. more than needs, if there be not 8000. Ministers in the Land, as 'tis thought there are not; and out of this we would have the Widdows of Ministers to be allowed
50. l. for to keep them in their old age, when their husbands are dead, or else to be for, and in stead of the first fruits office, if that be yet kept up; and to help to pay off the Impropriators, it will (we conceive) perform all these; and yet, what Freeholder and Copy-holder, doth not pay treble, nay more than so, as they pay Tythes; and (we believe) neither of them will grudge to pay after this allowance of 12. d. in the pound, which yet will be a good allowance for each Mini∣ster; and this may be done with ease. Or let the Ministers themselves (if they can) find out a bet∣ter, surer or equaller way; without doubt twill be imbraced; for we are not so far wedded to our own judgements, but we will and can easily forgo ours, and subscribe to better, so the work be done; This obstacle of Tyth-taking being once removd, the people will in love embrace their Teach∣ers, Ʋnity and Amity will be on all sides, and ease and comfort to the Ministers in their Imployments. We hope to see it effected to Gods Glory, and every mans ease, contentment and satisfaction.
2. How Impropriators may be satisfied? Resolved. THere are but these two things that hinder the removing of Tythes, (viz.) a Main∣tenance for the Ministers, and the satis∣fying the Impropriators; we have indeavoured, and have (we hope) found out and laid down a way of livelyhood and Maintenance for the first of these; the Ministers of England (viz.) either by way of publike Collection, or else by a propor∣tion out of all Free-hold, and Copy hold Lands, by which provision 'tis concluded, that as there shall be no preferring one Minister before another, or allowing more to one than to another, so tis pru∣dently fore-cast, that none shall want a good and sufficient maintenance; There remains the second of these questions to be resolved, (viz.) How the Impropriators may be satisfied? These men we know, or hope, will blush to say, as the Ministers, that if Tythes be put down they are undone, and know not how to live, for 'tis known sufficiently that these, the Impropriators, have had a sweet time of gathering, and may say, as 'tis in the Gospel, We have goods laid up for many years, Soul take thine ease: and though there
be already sufficient Arguments to convince them, set forth in Print concerning their tenure and practice; Yet to drive the Nail home (as we use to say) and to make sure work of the business, that the mouths of the Gainsayers may be stopped for time to come, we say to this point further; And first. Ab Injusto. Their very Tenure and Purchase, much more their Practice and Execution of it, to extremity, is simply unjust and unfitting; the more Ancient it is, and the longer they have lived by that course, so much the worse; Nay more, should we say that the very Act of Henry the eighth, who did pull down the Abbies, and destroy divers, if not all the then called and reputed houses of Religion, though nothing so, not out of any zeal he had to the pure Preaching of Gods Word, or for the suppression of Popery or Popish Superstition, no nor yet for the gross misdemeanors and abuses that were in the Abbots, Monks, or Friars of those times, though they did abound, as he knew well enough; but he did it, either to enrich his own Coffers by others ruine, or else to please, supply, or satisfie some of his old Courtiers, or to help towards the charges of his Wars in France, or for that the Cler∣gy were then in the Premunire; but Chiefly to be revenged upon them and their father the Pope, for not yeilding to the satisfying of his desires, concerning his Marriage with the Lady Catha∣rine,
his Brother Arthurs Widdow: who, as a Maiden, and as his brothers wife, and as a Widdow was virtuous, onely as she became his wife was faulty; yet should we say that this Act of his (as his) (though God did use him as his Instrument in it to abolish Popery and Idolatry yet it was not the Kings intent, thought or desire to do so,) was unjust having no surer Warrant for the upholding its legality, but his Power and will, his covetous mind, and Tyrannical Oppression, his cruelty a∣gainst his own Subjects, and desire of Revenge, we should but (as we conceive) speak truth; and if so, consider this, you who are made Rich and Fat, and great by this means, how the Petitioning for these means by your Ancestors, or yet how the undervalued purchase of them, from such an un∣lawfull ground, can all these years be held and yet continued for good and conscionable, and just before God or good men by you their heirs, professing the purity of Religion: and for certain, any one that hath eyes and judgement may see, and say, that if the Act of that King was in any kind (though Accidentally equal in the suppressing the houses, and taking their means) 'twas because they did abuse them, and misapply them to Idolatry and superstition, to gluttony, if not to whoredom, and such other sins. May we not definitively say, (or why we in after times bound to his Act, when as 'tis found to be ill grounded, and full of Incon∣veniencies)
That it is but a conscionable and just Act, if now, the same means (though in other hands) be as grosly abused to Pride and Ambition, to Extortion, Covetousness, Ʋsury, to Glut∣tony, drunkenness, and to extream uncharitable∣ness, it is for certain but so, if our Parliament by way of Reformation cause the means te return, and for ever to remain to the right owners, (we mean the husbandmen of England) out of whose labours, and stocks these Creatures, called Impropriators, do live so wantonly and Lordly; and if they be so setled upon their Lees, that they will be unwil∣ling to be stirred; Why, So we know the Abbots and Friars, and Nunnes were much agrieved to be turned out of doors, and stript of their means; to which yet they had a surer title than our Impro∣priators have, yet 'twas done, and done to the pur∣pose, and why not now? Secondly, Let our Impropriators set before their eyes the practical justice and discretion, and Consci∣ableness of the Parliament, and let them imitate their Actions; who knows not but that at the beginning of these Wars many Patrons and Par∣sons left their places and revenews, and took them∣selves to Arms Actually against the Parliament, and the reupon the Parliament wisely did (and justly they might) sequester such Lordships & Par∣sonages into their hands for the good of the Com∣mon-wealth; yet they did not hold them for ever,
nor cut off the Heirs of such Lordships, (if not against them) no nor yet their fathers from re∣possessing them, upon their due submission, and laying down of Arms; no nor yet did they (though they neither wanted power, nor sufficient cause) keep the Parsonages sequestred in their own hands, but as fast, and assoon as Ministers could be provided for them, did freely place them in, and bestowed them, that so Gods word might be preached in such parishes again. Behold (we pray) Oh Impropriators, and shut not your eyes hereat! What a Mass of Wealth would have come in to the Publike by this means, and how justly might it have been performed, and yet the Parliament used it not, but hath disposed them to good uses, and to the right Owners a∣gain; go ye and do so likewise; and 'tis time, you having gotten great Estates to your selves already by this way, and you will have praise and love of all men, and will enjoy the quiet and peace of a good Conscience. Thirdly, To satisfie you, we say: 'tis not what you will demand, or what you would have to sur∣render, but what you ought to have; men are not to look so much upon their own covetous desires, as upon what's equal and just. Hereupon we say, and do for the most part, in most places find, that the very Glebe-Lands belonging to the Par∣sonages so impropriated, if made sure to you and
yours, as Free soccage, those Lands being in some places very large, (as of 200. l. 150. l. 100. l. 80. l. or 60 l. per annum,) will satisfie and equal, if not surpass your Monies disbursed, for your Purchase; especially having not onely had them, but Tythes besides payd to you along time together, and your Ancestors and your selves having had (as tis in the proverb) Robin hoods penny worth in the first Purchase. Fourthly, You cannot receive any comfort in the holding up Tythes; for, Non fuit sic ab initio, 'twas not so from the beginning, but 'tis continued as our Saviour says (in another case) through the hardness of your hearts; as Moses permitted them, so now Tythes are permissively, not Authoritatively yours: 'tis with you as tis with Usurers, permitted not allowed: yet, they have a propriety to, and in their Monies, you not so unto Tythes: the very Brand and Name of your Parsonages shew, that you are not they that should hold them; Impropria∣tions, improperly yours; here's no Propriety: thus in the name is engraven the shame of such as hold them; Improper, in all respects; Improper, in a well ordered Comōn-wealth; Improper, for their Own∣ers to receive; and as Improper for others to pay. Fifthly, It is a fearfull case to live in such a way, as is obstructive to a godly Reformation; to have a mans wealth by such an Indirect course, as to be a stumbling block to hinder a general good, is
lamentable; You cannot but hear and know, that every man is against you, and you against every man. Covet not that which is not yours; since you do not labour, how come you to reap? 'tis true in∣deed, he that sows should reap, but not he that sows not. Lastly, All this being true, and said to awaken our Impropriators, let them beware how they longer go on against the light of Conscience and know∣ledge; We intend not to force them, but to perswade them; we hope they will not be unperswasible in this particular. Let them exhibite and shew their lawfulness, we say their lawfulness to take Tythes, and we have done: if they have a Right, produce it to the world; or if they have not, let them be willing to take a fair satisfaction at their bre∣threns hands, to avoid further trouble, and inevi∣table scandal to the people of God. Rules for the helping forward the satisfaction of Impropriators. 1. Let their Number be computed through England. 2. Their just value, how let or sett. 3. How long purchased, and from whom. 4. What given justly, when purchased. 5. They may be allowed four yeers purchase for their Tythes, and have their Gleabe-lands for
ever to themselves and heirs; which admit an Im∣propriation be worth 500. l. per annum, having a 100. l. per annum of Glebe-Lands; there will be to be paid for four yeers for tythes 1600. l. which summ, with the Glebe, will pay most, if not all the Impropriators off proportionably. And if there be in all England 2000. Impropriate Livings, and one with another valued at 200. per annum, to buy off these at four veers Purchase, will amount unto the summ of 1600000. l. which is one million and six hundred thousand pound Sterling; and yet the Impropriators shall have their Gleabe Lands, but they are to joyn with the other Free-holders, and Copy-holders, towards the payment of the severall Ministers afterwards. This may be Collected by way of Taxe, and no Free-holders, or Copy-holders, specially when as their uncertain fines and Harriots are taken off, will except against the payment of their shares, nor (we hope) any of the Impropriators rest unsatisfied; they bearing no share in this said Taxe of 1600000. l. and this will in one year and four Months be paid off to the Impropriators, after a Rate of 100000. l. per Mensem through England; and Tythes immediately to Cease. Finis esto Decimarum.
