R1645 E545_10 99865231 117468
REASONS TO Resolve the unresolved PEOPLE Of the Legality of the KINGS Tryal and Iudgment. By Rob. Robins. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbot. LONDON. Printed for Robert White. Feb. 26.
REASONS To resolve the unresolved People of the Legality of the KINGS Tryal and Judgment. LECTORI. True Englands Truths I would declare to thee, If Englands Iayls my Guerdon might not be. Imprimis. HE saith, that he is King succes∣sive, which if he be, he should have declared, That his Interest to the succession, was an here∣ditary, or an elective succession: If an hereditary succession, then hereditary from the Conquest; if so, then by the sword have we freed our selves from slavery, as we we were by the sword inslaved; if electory, then the Electors may reclaim their own power, and call the elected to an account, his authority arising from the Electors. At the death of Kings, all the Officers of
his Court lay their offices at the dead Kings feet. This ceremony doth declare, That all offices and trusts dye with him, and then (if not in a Parliament time) the Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Chief Justices, and Judges, pro∣claim the next Heir to the dead King, King; which ceremony doth manifest, that they are electory, and not hereditary: For the Bishops, Dukes, &c. are the Body of the Kingdom, and Councel of the people, and their Repre∣sentative out of Parliament, trusted by the King for the peoples weal; and if electory, why shall not the people elect whom they please? and when the trust is abused, which the elected is trusted with, why shall not the people call the elected to an account of his trust, and punish him according to the Com∣mon Law (which is Reason) for breach of trust, if he refuse to yield an account of his trust? It hath been Englands, and other Kingdoms Custom, to call to highest Offices, such as were of greatest fame, repute, quality, and estates, thereby imagining, that they who are conceived most honorable, and most rich; are best bred in knowledg, and would duly dis∣charge
their trusts, for conscience and honors sake, and to preserve their estates, being lyable to restitution for wrong doing. The trust that Kings of England are trusted with, is, to govern well, and therefore hath the name of Rex, being a derivative name or word, from Rego, to Govern; which word, if observed well, will tell you what Rex, a King, is; for it is an old Proverb, Regum est parcere subjectis, & debulare superbos; Regum est▪ id est, officium Regum, the office and duty of Kings. The King enjoyes the Crown, not as his, but the Kingdoms, nor can grant any office before he is sworn; and when he is sworn, it is by the peoples Representative, trusted for that office, by the dead King, in his life time; and the Crown Lands, after he is sworn, and crowned, allotted him for maintenance, as a reward to maintain him, to execute his office. After he is sworn to execute such trusts as the people have trusted him with, he is by the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury, (the chief Ecclesiastical Minister in England, clothed in white) crowned with a Golden Crown, beset with Diamonds, and other rich
Jewels, which carry a lustre round about the Crown and Head; which is a Celestial Type, fit for such a man, as a glorious renown, that will discharge that great trust he is trusted with, and hath sworn to execute it. By vertue of his oath, he is Chief Justice of England, to administer true Justice, as well to poor as to rich, without respect of persons; and hath thereby power to call to his assist∣ance, Wisemen, and Lawyers, and to depute them, swear them, and locate them at his plea∣sure; and if they do not well demean them∣selves, to displace them, and call others. He is also Lord Chancellor, and maketh a Seal (which is Treason to counterfeit, for fear of wrong to be done by it to his trust, which he is trusted with) and is to hear and determine in equity, what Reason, which is Common Law, may impose upon any man contrary to equity. He is Receiver of the Revenue of the King∣dom, being trusted in his hands for mainte∣nance of Officers deputed by him in Courts of Justice for his assistance, in executing true Justice. He is Admiral of the Sea, and the Ton∣nage
and Poundage the Kingdoms, trusted in his hands for maintenance of a Navy, to protect the Merchants from Pirates and Sea Rovers. He is Constable of all the Towers, Castles, Forts, and Arms in the Kingdom, being the Militia, which is moenia Angliae, trusted in his hands by the people, and by them bought to preserve the Kingdom against forraign Inva∣sions, and domestick Rebellions. He is Gaurdian of many Infants, until they come to the age of twenty one yeers, left by their Parents hereditary estates; and to pre∣serve the Orphant and estate, and to breed them in the fear of God, and learning, and to account when they come to age. He is Keeper and Preserver of the Peace of the Kingdom, and to see the Statute Laws put in execution; and to have a care, that if any shall offend against it, to fine and punish him at his pleasure, or at the pleasure of such Judges or Justices as he shall depute. Many more Trusts have the people reposed in him, which for brevity, I omit, and he hath broken them; he hath turned the Militia into the peoples bowels, and killed them
with it; he hath taken the Merchants, with the Tonnage and Poundage, and spoyled their Ships, and Goods at Sea. Equity hath he turned into cruel iniquity, contrary to a good Conscience; he hath sold Justice, and placed Ignorance in her Seat; he hath sold the peoples Interest to monopolizing Crea∣tures; he hath thrown wisdom and honesty into prison, protected the wicked, and punished the innocent; he claimeth the Mi∣litia, the Revenue, the Tonnage and Pound∣age, the Crown, and Crown Lands, to be his, and not the peoples; and refuseth to account to the people, being demanded several times, and saith he will account to none but God, and will not by fair means, nor legal tryal, give any answer; and therefore, according to Englands Laws hath his sentence, as consessing all that is charged upon him, in respect he denyeth it not. Now let all the world judg, whether the people have justly recalled their own Interest, and adjudged him to death for such abuses, and refusing to account.
