T1706E 669.f.20[54] 99870600 163470
TO THE Right-honourable the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND. The Humble Petition of the Real Lenders, vpon the Publick Faith, the Clothiers, and all others in the Counties of Essex, and Suffolk, in the behalf of themselves, and all others the like, that are unpaid. Sheweth, THat whereas the Noble Representatives of our body Politick, have in former ages, acted so for Honour, as that they promoted the publick above themselves, Estates, or Liber∣ties, insomuch that their names, and successours were truely honoured; who being in exigencies, Anno 1642. the real Members at their motion were willing to extend their assistance, by lending Moneys, Plate, Horses, raising, and maintaining Forces, as volunteers at their proper Charges, &c. The which free offering of the people was so honoured by the God of heaven, that the effect thereof was, and now is the enjoy∣ment of all Proprieties, of Powers, Honours, Estates real and personal, to all persons whatsoever in the Common-wealth. And thereby all Lands enjoyed by Inheritance, or Purchase, are lyable to be taxed (as your Petitioners humbly concieve) untill the just, and real publick debts are paid, and are at the com∣mand of your Honours (as Administrators to your Predecessors) insomuch as your Honours stand en∣gaged to perform them by Assesments vpon the Revenues, or waste Lands, Discoveries, and forfeitures of Buildings, &c. As any intire body Corporate are to pay their Debts borrowed under their Seals. And where as your Petitioners in their zeal for the Honour of God, and the publick good, did extend them∣selves with the very first, and beyond their abilities, being Trades-men (and having no moneys by reason of bad trading) did joyn whole Towns, and divers persons together, & borrowed money upon interest: And for example, to excite other Counties, Cities, and places, did lend in proportion 10. times more, than the generality of the people did: But by the continued distractions by Wars at Sea, Trading hath been so obstructed, and your Petitioners so disabled, by the Non-payment of the Debts, due upon the publick faith (which they depended upon, as the best security in the Common-wealth, being so generally e∣steemed) that it hath occasioned the undoing of thousands of persons, and whole families of your Petitioners; some are in prison, some of Traders turned to work men, & others relieved by Alms; & all impoverished greatly by dammage by Interest, and losse of credit: Wherefore also, for that, as your Petitioners were Leaders to incite others to lend, so they have not been wanting by their importunity for them, to the several Representatives for 13 years past, (besides 15. weeks attending during this present Sessions,) and yet are wholly unpayed, (except by promises, and provisions made by the little Parliament.) Your Petitioners have expected, that these Conceptions would have come to a Birth of performance before this time, having tendered their free service to state the Accompts at Worcester-house: But there they found Honour abroad, and self-denial not at home, and love to the publick thereby (for want of Lodging) so cold and feeble, that it could not act, nor open the door to Actors. Let your Honours therefore permit your Petitioners to plead in the name of Christ, and langu∣age of Canaan, that you will take all the premisses into your pious and grave consideration; And also these Motives, First, because the Richer persons that lent sparingly; by purchase, and doubling are paid with advantage. 2. How unreasonable it is that the faithfullest servants should be paid least, much more not paid at all; because they were not able to double, or purchase. 3. How dishonourable it is being told in Gath▪ and Askelon, to the reproach of the Na∣tion and Religion, and Faith thereof, and is a derision among all opposites at home. 4. How Procrastination is Sathans Engine to give defeat to the Holy ones command, Prov. 3. 27, 28. say not so, and come again, &c. 5. That if importunity prevailed with the unjust Judge, much more it should with the righteous, to doe right to the faithfull, that are grieved. 6. That the Lord will blesse thee, O habitation of Justice, Jer. 31. 23. also one example, the 2. of the Chron. 32. chap. vers. 25. But Hezekiah &c. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that no further delay may be used. But if all cannot be paid at once, that the first lent in 1642 may be first paid, by Tax∣es, or otherwaies, As your Honours shall think best, Agents imployed for all the Petitioners in Essex. Will. Tanner. John Coveney. Agents for Suff. George Sparling. Steven Hawe. And your Petitioners shall pray, &c.
