T3574 669.f.14[47] 99869917 163035
TYRANTS Tryumphant: OR, The High Court of State. Loe here in Rank and File the Rebels stand, VVho have unchristened half a Christian Land, Lo here the Libertines, those Lawlesse things, VVho hate the Scepter, yet would all be Kings, Loe here the Regindos, who at one stroak, Have coller'd us in an Egyptian yoak, Behold them well, take notice which is best, Find out one good, Ile swear for all the rest. Earles. Sarum Denbigh Mulgrave Pembroke. Lords. Fairfax Gray of Wark Gray of Groby Lisle. Cromwell Skippon Rolls St. Iohn Wilde Bradshaw. Knights. Arthur Haslerigg VVilliam Massam Gilbert Pickering Iames Harrington Vane junior Iohn Danvers VVilliam Armyn Henry Mildmay VVilliam Constable. Citizens. Isaack Pennington Rowland VVilson. Esquires. VVhitlock Stapeley Heningham Ludlow VVallop Hutchinson Bond Popham VVatten Scot Purfoy Iones. FOure Trayterous Earles, as many stinking Lords, The veriest fooles and knaves the Land affords, Two Saints, one a Prodigious flame of light, The other a most smooth Hermophradite; Two Justices in chiefe, (for grand deserts) The Laundring Baron, that doth wash his Shirts, Besides Lord President unto the State, Who had the Law once pusht into his pate. Nine skittish Knights, the first a jewell Thiefe, The next a Broker of the Saints beliefe, The third, a Pandor to his zealous Sister, Whilst Major (he knowes who) devoutly kist her, The fourth, a Coward, posted up of yore, Because he would not stand unto his Whore; The fift so valiant▪ that he run away At Newburn Heath, yet swore he won the day; The sixt, a cursed Cheat; the seventh a Sot Not civiliz'd, till by a barbarous Scot; The eighth, a man of chaste and holy life, Ask but his Hand-maid, or his zealous Wife, Perhaps the Gravell-pit may it remember, For here indeed he shew'd himself a Member; The Ninth, New-England vamped in the Foot, Or else he had withered both branch and root. Two reverend Cits, a creeping knave the first, Skin'd ore with Sacriledge, yet belly-burst; The latter worldly wise, but weak within, His guts is furr'd with dregs, his heart with sinne. Twelve more there are, and they be called Squires, Bred up by Beggars, at good peoples fires, Most of whose names were never known before, Except in some Church-wardens list of the Poore, Or at the Sessions-house, (for there indeed) Inditements have been fatall to their breed, Yet these be they who must have all the sway, These are the Kings the English must obey, Here are the Pillars of the Common-weale, The Power Supream, from whence is no appeale. England, shake of these fetters, fight and dye, Rather then live slave to their Tyranny, Admit thy lawfull King, revenge the blood Of Him these murdred, for being too good; Purge out thy peccant humours that abound, Let blood, 'twill cleanse, and make thy body sound; This Physick is safe, if used but in season, No Dote so proper for dispelling Treason, Take it sick England, if thou wilt be well, For there's no health till these men fry in Hell.
