v498a 99896040 153715
A Vindication of the Armie, from some calumnious Quaeres, being not so much a particular answer to those nine se∣verall Quaeres, as to the scope of the Author in them. By Jo: Harr: Esq. THe honest use of making queres was heretofore, to be instructed and attaine satisfaction in those things whereof our reason doubted; not to justifie our owne wilfull errors, and un∣der colour of asking questions to vent opprobrious calumnies, and raile posi∣tively against the sense of other men. The nature therefore of queres is much mistaken by the Author of those nine against the Army; for I cannot discern in what point he desires to be instructed
himselfe, or teach others; but instead of that, in a positive way, and with much bitternesse, he inveighs against the pro∣ceedings of those gallant gentlemen, to whose successefull valour, and indefa∣tigable industry (next under God, with∣out whose blessing all endeavours are fruitlesse) the Kingdome of England is indebted to for the rescue of her sink∣ing (and almost lost) Lawes and Li∣berties. If this Army have well deserved of the Common-wealth, why should any man that loveth the Common-wealth flie so high against them, as by way of prejudice to censure their intentions worse then their actions shew. For no action of theirs hath yet produced any hurt. Can any candid or honest man harbour a suspicion, that the noble Fair∣fax and Cromwell, names honoured by
the very enemies, whom no successe could ever puffe up, those miracles of modesty, in whom no selfe-seeking, no pride or ambition has in the least measure discovered it selfe; should now be guilty of such a monstrous ambition as to affect an arbitrary power, to tram∣ple upon the State, to subject the Parlia∣ment, and enslave the nation to their owne will? But it appeares by the queres (saith he) that they have broken the privi∣ledges of Parliament, and are therefore suspected to aime at wicked ends. I, for mine own part, do so much honour the Parliament, that I thinke every Privi∣ledge belonging to it of so tender a na∣ture, as is unfit to be trod upon, or rude∣ly dealt with: But I confesse I doe more honour the essence and being of the Parliament then I doe every small pun∣ctuality
of Priviledge, and could be content rather to see the finger of it wounded (for these contesting times have taught us such distinctions) then the whole body perish. Some parts of a body may be a little afflicted some∣times, that the whole may live in the more health: Neither can I thinke that this Army which hath given so noble a testimony of their affections to the Parliament, as to preserve the very be∣ing of it; would now violate any part or priviledge thereof, unlesse the safety of the whole did require such a seeming violation. Let honest English-men therefore suspect no hurt unlesse they see probable inducements to such a suspicion; but hope still, that this Par∣liament whom the swords of so many Lords and others of the English-Gentry could not cut downe, whom the Votes
of that Oxford Assembly (which the King called his mungrill Parliament) could not at all blast, nor many secret practices undermine, shall be still pro∣tected by Almighty God, and not rui∣ned, but rescued from some inconveni∣ences, which might have wrought a ru∣ine, if not prevented. The particular queres are scarce wor∣thy of severall answers: but to the first, wherein he makes it so great a breach of Priviledge that the Army printed their Declarations, and Charge against the Members without leave of the House, I think it a sufficient answer, that there was no other way to make the cleere∣nesse of their intentions appear, and vin∣dicate themselves from farther jealou∣sies, as their enemies might raise, who have beene too apt to throwgh causlesse aspersions on them. I could rather wish
that the London Presses were not too open in these dayes, to reproachfull pamphlets of our greatest enemies, which are daily ven∣ted against the honour and essence of the Parliament it selfe. The second quere wherein this Religious and deserving Army is in many things com∣pared to Cade and his fellow Rebells, being so injurious as that it cannot be answered with patience enough, may with discretion be scorned and passed over. As likewise the third, wherein he compareth this demand of the Members to another, which was made heretofore, and judged by both Houses to be a great breach of Priviledges, of which because the case is so notoriously different, J think it not fit to speak at all; nor to say any thing at all to that cavill of his, because the Members are not particularly charged, because time must produce that, only to which it is referred.
As for another comparison which he makes in a following quere betwixt the Ar∣mies proceedings, and those which Sleiden relates of the bloody & mad actions of those Anabaptists in Munster, J hope all judici∣ous men will easily make a difference, with∣out any vindication of mine, betwixt per∣sons and actions so extreamly discre∣pant. As for another imputation of hindering the reliefe of Ireland, it may easily appear, and J make no question but it will in time, that the cause of that may with more reason be imputed to the enemies of this Army, who by unjust provocations have diverted that important service. To spare therefore farther expressions in this kinde, J shall onely stay with patience, and expect what it will please God to pro∣duce of these jarrs, hoping that it may be such a blessing to this afflicted Kingdome,
as may rather justifie the charity of them, who beleeved well of the Army, then their suspitions, who are jealous in the other kinde. THE END.
