w1623a 42475277 151441
WHereas it is Certified under the Hands of very many Mercers of the chief Towns in North and South-Wales (who are the only Traders in Books there) That there are very few Di∣vinity-Books in the Welsh-Language to be sold there; And to the best of their knowledg, not one Welsh-Bible to be bought at any rate, although greatly desired by Persons of all Ranks and Conditions: It would be a singular work of Charity tending to the good of Thousands, who otherwise may be destitute of the means of Knowledg, to contribute, as towards the Printing of some Pi∣ous Treatises in the Welsh-Language, to be freely given away to poor Persons and Families there; so espe∣cially towards the Printing of the Welsh-Bible in Octavo, which will shortly be put to the Press. And in regard that few poor Children are there brought up to Reading, it is another good work of Charity, to raise and maintain several Schools, for teaching the poorest of the Welsh-Children to read English, and the Boys to learn to Write and cast Accounts; whereby they will be enabled to read our English Bibles and Treatises, to be more serviceable to their Country, and to live more comfortably in the World. We therefore whose Names are under-written, do promise to contribute, during our plea∣sure, towards the Printing the Welsh-Bible, and other Licensed Treatises, to be freely given away to such poor people as can read them, and are not able to buy Books; as also towards the Teaching of poor Welsh-Children to read English, Write, and cast Accounts, in such Towns where Schools for that purpose are not already erected and setled by the Charity of others. Provided that this charitable and pious work be ordered and managed by Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, and the rest whose Names are after-written. We whose Names are under-written, do promise our greatest care in managing the Money given to the above-mentioned charitable and pious works. John Tillotson. Benjamin Whichcott. Simon Ford. William Bates. William Outram. Simon Patrick. William Durham. Edward Stillingfleet. John Meriton. Hezekiah Burton. Richard Baxter. Thomas Gouge. Mathew Pool. Edward Fowler. William Turner. Richard Newman. James Reading. Thomas Firmin. Henry Norton. John du Bois. An Account of what hath been done this last year from Michaelmas 1674, to Michaelmas 1675, in pursuance of the aforesaid Trust, upon the encouragement given by divers Ho∣nourable and worthy Persons to this Pious and Charitable design. I. THere have been bought, and distributed in several Families Thirty-two Welsh-Bibles, as also Four hundred seventy-nine New Testaments in Welsh, which were all that could be had in Wales or London. II. Five hundred Whole Duties of Man, in Welsh; bought and disposed of in like manner. III. Two thousand and five hundred of a Treatise called, The Practice of Piety; with some hundreds of other Licensed Treatises, translated into Welsh, are now Printing, and almost finished; which are to be freely given to poor People in Wales. IV. In Eighty-six of the chief Towns and Parishes in Wales, Eleven hundred sixty-two poor Children are put to School to learn to read English, and the Boys to learn to Write and cast Accounts, over and above the Two hundred put to School the last year by the Charity of others, before this Trust began. Which Pious and charitable undertaking hath already provoked divers of the Landlords and Inhabitants of several Towns and Parishes in Wales, to put Eight hundred sixty-three of the poorest Welsh Children to School upon their own account. So that Two thousand two hundred and twenty-five in all, are already put to School. As more particularly appeareth by the following Account.
The Names of the Towns and Parishes in North and South-Wales, in which the Poorest of the Welsh-Children are put to School to learn to read English, and the Boys to learn to Write; upon the Charity of divers worthy Persons in England and Wales. As also the Number of poor Scholars in each Town and Parish, with the Names of the Minister and Church-Warden, or chief Magistrate, in each Parish, who have certified the truth thereof under their hands. In Car∣marthen∣shire Number of Scholars.   Laughborne 40 Mich. Owen, Vicar. John Lewis, Church-warden. Penboyne 20 Edmond Myrrick, Rector. John Philips, Church-Ward. Lanboydy 30 Walter Philips, Vicar. Walter Rees, Church-Warden. St. Cleeres 20 Will. Evans, Vicar. Wheeler Jones, Church-War. Marrows 20 Mick. Owen, Vicar. David Price, Church-Ward. Llanelthy 20 Roger Prosser, Vicar. Henr. Dunell, Church-Ward. Llandovery 20 John Griffith, Vicar. Rees Bevan, Church-Ward. Kidwelly 40 David Evanson, Vicar. Will. Dyer, Church-Warden. Lanctny 12 Edmond Meyrick, Vicar. John Hopkin, Church-Ward. Llandiowrer 20 Walter Philips, Rector. John Eaton, Church-Warden. Carmarthen Town 24 John Williams, Mayor. John Scurlock, Alderman. In Pem∣broke∣shire   Carew Town 20 Lewis Boddor, Vicar. John Phelps, Warden. Lampeder Welfry 10 George Owen, Rector. Will. Willy, Warden. Ʋsmoston 20 Phineas Whitesoot, Rector. John Viltot, Church-Ward. Pembroke Town 60 Nic. Stokes, Vicar. John Hughs, Warden. Haverford-west 60 John Bateman, Mayor. John Williams, Alderman. Nolton 30 John Llewhellin, Minister. James Higgin, Church-Ward Tresgarn 30 John Llewhellin, Minister. James Higgin, Church-Ward rawdy 10 George Williams, Curate. Owen David, Church-Ward. Frestrop 10 Maurice Williams, Rector. John Lloyd, Church-Warden. Langham 10 Maurice Williams, Rector. John Lloyd, Church-Warden.   N. of S.   Martheltwy 20 Iohn Criffith, Vicar. Tho. Philips, Warden. Slehbish 15 Maurice Williams, Curate.   Roch-Parish. 20 Iohn Saice, Church-Wardens. Iohn Roblin, Church-Wardens. Cosheston 24 Morgan Davies, Rector. Tho. Hancock, Warden. Tenby 25 Ioseph Critchley, Mayor. Iames Lloyd, Alderman. Narbarth 12 George Owen, Rector. Iohn Thornbrough, Ward. In Gla∣morgan∣shire   Cardiff 50 Guil. Evans, Clerk. Lewis Cox, Church-War. Margam 20 Iohn Lougher, Curate.   Cunfigg 20 William Edwards, Ward.   St. Nicolas 12 William Button, Esquire.   Lancarvan 20 Iohn Iones, Esquire. Oliver Iones, Gentlem. Lantrithed 20 Edm. Waters, Rector. Iohn Courtney, Ch. Ward. St. Mary Hill 20 Edm. Waters, Rector. Iohn Courtney, Ch. Ward. Penmark 20 Iohn Iones,Esq   St. Hilary 10 Oliver Iones   Wenvoe 14 Ien. Christophers, Rector. Will. David, Ch. Warden. Cowbridge 40 Iohn Wyndham,Esq   Swansey 20 Man Mathews, Vicar. Anth: Iones, Ch. Warden. Neath 40 Godwin Lewis, Rector. Thomas Hopkin, Warden. Llandilotabout 20 Pe. Meyrick, Vicar. Will Iohns, Chu. Warden. Bridg-End 20 Nath. Gamage, Clerk. W. Christopher, Warden. Bettus 15 Iohn Hutton, Curate. Evan Lewis, Ch. Ward. Breck∣nockshire   Brecknock-Town 20 Meredith Penry, Vicar. Dan. Herberth, Warden. Hay-Town 20 Henry Prosser, Vicar. Ja. Watkins, Warden.
In Mon∣mouth∣shire. N. of S.   Chepstow 20 Henry Allen, Vicar. Tho. Goslin, Church-Warden. Lantrissent 20 Henry Evans, Clerk. Moses Daniel, Church-warden. Newport 40 Tho. Powell, Clerk. Tho. Basset, Warden. Caerlion 40 Char. Hurchins, Vicar. Philip Gwyn, Chur-Warden. Langiby 20 Trever Williams, Knight and Baronet.   Macn 20 William Morgan;Esq   Basslogg 20 William Morgan;Esq   Ʋsk. 32 Phineas Roger, Vicar. Thomas Iones, Ch.-Warden. Monmouth 50 Rick. Ballard, Mayor. Will. Bellamy, Baliff, Abergavenny 40 Iohn Grenhaugh, Vicar. Ioseph Haits, Chur.-Warden. Bont be Pool 16 Caple Hanbury,Esq Tho. Iones, Gent. Michelstone de Vedo 32 Rich. Praunch, Curate. Tho. Evans, Church-Warden. Cardi∣ganshire   Cardigan-Town 40 Iohn Morrice, Mayor. B. Young; Alderman. Lambeder 24 Rees Powell, Vicar. David Thoas, Ch.-warden. In Mon∣gomery∣shire   Myvad 32 Randle Davies, Vicar. John Jones, Church-Warden. Welsh-Pool 40 Sam. Davies, Vicar. Humphrey Draper, Warden. Kinnerly 20 Hugh Gethin, Vicar. Evan Davies, Church-Ward. Llanchfrochwell 12 Tho. Peeres, Vicar. Step. Thomas, Church-Warden. Oswestry 25 Rich. Edwards, Vicar. Edw. Rogers, Church-Warden. In Rad∣norshire   New Radnor 20 Hugh Watkins, Chur. Warden. Iames Bedward, Chur. Warden. Knighton 40 Rob. Milward, Vicar. Iohn Mason, Church-Warden. Prestain 0 Phil. Lewis, Rector. Hugh Howel, Church Warden. In Car∣narvan: shire N. of S.   Carnarvan-Town 20 Row. Williams, Vicar.   Conweigh 36 Roberts Roberts, Vicar. Will. Pryther, Ch.-Ward. Llandegay 12 Robert Williams, Knight and Baronet.   Llanllechid. 12   In Den∣highshire   Ruthe 40 Robert Evans, Curate. John Shurlock, Ch. Ward. Denhigh-Town 50 John Roberts, Vicar. David Davies, Warden. Markeweell 16 Will. Hanmer. Vicar.   Wrexham 40 Will. Smith, Vicar. John Hughs, Ch. Warden. Gresford 12 Maurice Evans, Curate. John David, Ch. Warden. Llanrwst 20 Henric. Sodorensis.   Abergelly 40 Will. Williams, Vicar. John Whaley, Ch. Warden. Holt 12 Daniel Brown, Vicar. Nath. Pasnage, Warden. In Flint∣shire   Bangor 50 Rich. Williams, Vicar. Tho. Pitson, Ch. Warden Flint-Town 24 Henry Thomas, Curate. Griffith Jones, Warden. Northop 20 David Lloyd, Vicar. John Jones, Ch. Warden. Caerwys 15 Tho. Gryffith, Vicar. Tho. Roberts, Warden. Mould 30 Walter Williams, Vicar. Robert Jones, Warden. Ourton 50 Mich. Jones, Curate. Tho. Jones, Church-Wa. Worthenbury 20 Guil. Whittle, Curate. John Roberts, Ch. Ward. Anglesy   Bewmarri 48 Will. Williams, Rector. Rich. Shaw, Ch. Warden.
Here followeth a Testimonial under the hands of divers Honourable and Worthy Persons, Deputy-Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, in several places of WALES, where the Schools are set up. WHereas there is a late Pious and Charitable Design set on foot, for the Teaching poor Children in Wales to Read and Write; and for the buying, printing, and giving away of Bibles, and other good Books in the Welsh-Language, for the use of poor Families there; which is managed by Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Whichcott, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Ford, Dr. Bates, Dr. Outram, Dr. Patrick, Dr. Meriton, Dr. Burton, Mr. Durham, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Pool, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Firmin, and some others. Which is also put in execution by the Charity of divers Honourable and Worthy Persons, and by the care and diligence of Mr. Thomas Gouge. We whose Names are underwritten, having Personal knowledg of some places where it is executed, and certain information of others, do willingly testifie, that it is carried on with all impartiality and fidelity, and we hope, through Gods blessing, for many good and happy effects from it. Edward Mansell. Edw. Harley. Jo. Awbrey. Erasmus Philipps. Tho. Moston. Trever Williams. John Trevor. H. Owen. John Wyndham. Ev. Seys. Henric. Sodoret Monae. Robert Williams. Will. Morgan. Robert Hookes. VVill. Thomas. We having examined the Accompts, and perused the Originals of the foregoing Cer∣ do hereby certifie the truth of them. John Tillotson. Benj. VVichcott. Simon Ford. VVill. Durham. Edw. Stillingfleet. John Meriton. Hezekiah Burton. Mat. Pool. Edward Fowler. Tho. Firmin. Henry Norton. John du Bois.
