W57 E116_39 99872595 156056
Happy Newes from SHERBORN, AND Sherborne Castle: RELATING, THE death of Colonel Lunsford, the Lord Paulet, and divers other persons of qua∣lity, the taking of divers prisoners, and great store of Armes from the CAVALIERS. Written in a Letter from DORCHESTER to Master Nicholas Skinner a Merchant of LONDON, declaring the happy successe of the Parliaments Forces, against the Cavaliers betwixt Sherborne and Yeavell. ALSO, A true Copy of the last Petition, sent by both Houses of PARLIAMENT to His MAJESTIE. London Printed for F. Cowles. Septemb. 13. 1642.
A Letter written from a Merchant in DORGHESTER to M. Nicholas Skinner a Merchant of LONDON, declaring the happy successe of the Parliaments Forces, in defeating divers of the Cave∣liers near SHERBORNE. SIR HEre in the Countrey we dare not send seven miles abroad, for feare of the Cavaliers, who lye at Sherborne, pillaging, robbing and killing like so many Sonnes of Hell; but they were met withall this weeke to the purpose, by some London Troupers, and our Dorchester Troopers. My L. of Bedford finding the Castle to be a piece
of greater strength than he imagined, and seeing his trained Bands to forsake him; so that of sixe or seven thousand he had not above fifteene hundred in three dyes, not that they deserted the Cause, but being men who had Wives and Estates, were loth to ha∣zard their lives in an offensive war. My Lord re∣solved to raise the siege, and on Tuesday marched to Yeavell, foure miles distant from Sherborne. There were lost seven or eight men of a side at the siege, as we heare, I am sure no more on our side. On Wed∣nesday toward Evening, while my LORD of Bedford and the souldiers were at a Sermon in Yeavell, at the Funerall of some souldiers lately killed; The Sher∣borne Lords and Cavaliers, having that day received to their number a hundred horse and two hundred foot, from M. Rogers, one of our Shire Knights, inso∣lently triumphing at the departure of my Lord of Bedfords Forces, and contemning the Parliament, came in a bravado, and pitched themselves in battell∣array with 400 horse, and two hundred Muskettiers in ambush on the top of the Hill, betwixt Yeavell and Sherborne mid-way: Which the London Troo∣pers hearing of, two Troops of theirs, and our Dor∣chester Troop made ready to assault the Enemy, the other Troops abiding at the ends of the Towne of Yeavell, fearing the Cavaliers would surprise the Towne. Our men had about a hundred Muskettiers, and a hundred and forty horse, and marched up the Hill while Bullets flew as thicke as haile about their eares, assaulted the Cavaliers, and came in to swords point, slashing and cutting without any pitty or
mercy, the great Rebels, respecting no person, but the night came on, else they had killed and taken eve∣ry man. God cast upon the Cavaliers a spirit of fear∣fulnesse, that they ran like Mice into every hole. The Muskettiers threw downe their Armes and fled, so that our men brought above a hundred of their Mus∣kets into Yeavell, tooke about twenty men, amongst which were some chiefe Commanders, killed many, amongst whom Colonell Lunsford and the Lord Pau∣let are certainly slaine. The next morning there was found twenty eight dead bodies of the enemies lying upon the ground, besides those which were carried away in the night, there were Lanthornes and Candles searching for dead bodies all the night, most of the Cavaliers run∣ning away (for so they did) they cryed out to our men, hold your hands, you have shed already much noble blood. Of our side were slaine five men, &c. two or three taken prisoners, and divers lightly wounded, The Cavaliers were heard to say at their comming home, (as some of our neighbours which were present heard them say) they had lost halfe their men, of two hundred Musquetiers there retur∣ned but eighteene to the Castle that night; thus in briefe I have related to you the truth, praised be to God for the Victory, So farewell. Your loving friend, I. W. Dorchester Septemb. 9. 1642.
To the Kings most Ex∣cellent MAIESTY. The humble Answer and Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, unto the Kings last Message, bearing date the fifth of September. May it please your Majesty, IF We the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, should repeat all the wayes we have taken, the en∣deavours we have used, and the Ex∣pressions we have made unto your Majesty, to prevent those distractions and dangers your Majesty speaks of, likely to fall upon this Kingdome, we should too much enlarge this reply; therefore as we humbly, so shall we onely let your Majesty know, that we cannot receade from our former answer for the reasons there expressed, for that you have not taken downe your Standard, recalled your Proclamations and Declarations, whereby you have declared the actions of both Hou∣ses of Parliament to be treasonable, and their Per∣sons traytors, and you have published this same since
the 25. of August, by your late instructions sent to your Commissioners of Array, which Standard be∣ing taken downe, and the Declarations, Proclamati∣ons, and instructions recalled, if your Majesty shall then upon this our humble Petition leaving your Forces, returne unto your Parliament, and receive their faithfull advice, your Majesty will finde such expressions of our fidelity and duties, as shall assure you that your safety, honour, and greatnesse can onely be found in the affections of your people, and the sincere Counsell of your Parliament, whose constant and discouraged endeavours and consultations have passed through difficulties unheard of, only to secure your Kingdomes from the violent mischiefs and dan∣gers now ready to fall upon them, and every part of them who deserve better of your Majesty, and can ne∣ver allow themselves (representing likewise your whole Kingdome) to be ballanced with those persons whose desperate conditions and counsels prevaile still so to interrupt all our endeavours for the relie∣ving of bleeding Ireland, as we may feare our labours and vaste expences will be fruitlesse to that distressed Kingdome, as your presence is thus desired by us, so it is our hopes your Majesty will in your reason be∣leeve there is no other way then this, to make your selfe happy, and your Kingdome safe. Iohn Browne Cleric. Parliament.
