A3369 R170321 52211886 175403
An ANSWER To Mr. Lenthall's Pretended CASE. I. THAT instead of 12000 l. due from Mr. Lenthall at Sir John Cutler's Death, (as the Case suggests) there was above 14500 l. then due, as has since been own'd, under Mr. Lenthall's Hand and Seal. II. That the Accompt stated in May 1697, is the Third pass'd by Mr. Lenthall under Hand and Seal, since Sir John Cutler's Death; and all of them were pass'd deliberately and fairly, as has appear'd by the Originals produc'd to the Com∣mittee, where the same (with what is since incurred) have been Examined in Mr. Lenthall's presence, and he could make no Objection, because of Vouchers to eve∣ry Article that required them, and he could not pretend Surprize, as owning to have had Coppys of Accompts deliver'd to him. III. That the Pretence about Mr. Boulter's making an Abatement, is altogether frivolous, many Persons can witness upon occasion: And as to Mr. Folkes's being to have 1000 l. on that account, 'tis already disprov'd upon Oath. IV. That the Deeds executed by Mr. Lenthall, about the Estate and Office, were done voluntarily and deliberately, has fully appear'd to a Committee of Parliament two years ago; where the said Deeds (with Mr. Card, and others con∣cern'd therein) were examin'd in Mr. Lenthall's presence, and he declar'd the Deeds to be with his Approbation, and that he directed them to be drawn. V. That tho' Mr. Lenthall says he only knew since May last, that the Mort∣gages were Assign'd to the Earl of Radnor, yet there's very ample Proof that he was acquainted with the Transferr as soon as 'twas agreed upon, and he declar'd his Satisfaction with it: Besides, for two years last past, he has receiv'd, from time to time of the Earl of Radnor, several large Summs of Money, and under his Hand and Seal has charg'd and annex'd the same to the Securities so Assign'd as aforesaid; for the proof whereof, and of this fair and regular passing the Ac∣compts and Deeds, the Committees and the Journals are referr'd to. That there was any certain Rent to be paid for the Marshal's Office, is deny'd, the present Marshal holding it on Tryal; and by his Accompt it does appear, that nothing has been made on't, nor indeed is like to be, while the Warden of the Fleet makes so bold with Acts of Parliament, and bids Defiance to the Laws. As to Mr. Lenthall's value of the Oxfordshire Estate, and the Prison, 'tis only answer'd, That the Earl of Radnor is willing that the same be Sold to the best advantage, for his Lordship desires but what is justly due to him, and he wishes the Estate and Prison would amount to it; however it is hoped that Mr. Lenthall's trifling and false Suggestions will not prejudice or lessen his Lordships Right, nor hinder so great an Advantage to the Publick, as the Bill to pay the Incumbrance, and dissolve the Prison would effect.
To Mr. Lenthall's Case.
