C2448D 53298988 179765
HIS MAJESTIES MESSAGE Sent to the PARLIAMENT, Aprill, 8. 1642. Concerning His Resolution to go into Ireland for suppressing the Rebels there. LONDON: Printed for JOSEPH SMITH, 1642.
C R royal insignia HIS MAJESTIES Message sent to the Parliament the Eighth of Aprill, 1642. Concerning his Resolution to go into Ireland, for suppressing the Rebels there. HIs Majesty being grieved at the very soul, for the calami∣ties of His good Subjects of Ireland, and being most ten∣derly sensible of the false and seandalous Reports dispersed amongst the people, concerning the rebellion there, which not onlywounds His Majesty in Honour, but likwise
greatly Retards the reducing of that un∣happy Kingdom, and multiplies the Di∣stractions at home, by weakning the mutuall confidence betwixt Him and his People: Out of his pious Zeal to the Honour of Almighty God, in esta∣blishing the true protestant profession in that Kingdom, and his princely care for the good of all His Dominions, hath firmly resolved with all convenient speed to go into Ireland, to chastise those wicked and detestable Rebels (odious to God aad all good men) therby so to settle the Peace of that Kingdom, and the se∣curity of this, that the very name of Fears and Jealousies may be no more heard of amongst us. As his Majesty doubts not, but that His Parliament will cheerfully give all possible assistance to this good work; so He requires them and all His loving Sobjects to beleeve, That he shall upon those Considerations as earnestly pur∣sue this Design (not declining any ha∣zard of his person, in performing that
Duty which he oweth to the defence of Gods true Religion, and his distressed Subjects) as for these, and only these Ends he undertakes it: to the sincerity of which profession he cals God to wit∣nesse, with this further assurance, That His Majesty will never consent (upon whatsoever pretence) to a Toleration of the Popish profession there, or the Abo∣lition of the Laws now in force against popish Recusants in that Kingdome. His Majesty hath further thought fit to advertise his Parliament, That to∣ward this Work He intends to raise forthwith by his Commissions, in the Counties neer Westchester, a Guard for His own person (when He shall come into Ireland) consisting of 2000. Foot, and 200. horse, which shall be Armed at Westchester from his Magazine at Hull: At which time all the Officers and Soul∣diers shall take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: The charge of raising and paving wherof His Majesty desires His Parliament to adde to their former
Undertakings for that war which His Maiestie will not only well accept; But if their Pay be found too great a Burthen to His good Subjects, His Ma∣jesty will be willing (by the advice of His Parliament) to sell, or pawn any of His Parks, Lands, or House towards the supplies of the Service of Jreland: with the addition of these Leavies to the for∣mer of English and Scots agreed upon in Parliament, He hopes so to appear in this Action, that (by the assistance of Al∣mighty God) in a short time that King∣dome may be wholly reduced and re∣stored to peace, and some measure of happinesse. whereby he may cheereful∣ly seturne, to be welcomed home with the Affections and blessings of all his good English people. Toward this good work, as his Majestie hath lately made dispatches into Scotland, to quicken the Leavies there for Vlster, So he heartily wish∣es that his Parliament here would give all possi∣ expedition to those which they have resolved for Munster and Conaught: and hopes the encourage∣ment which the Adventurers (of whose interest His Maiestie will be alwayes very carefull (will
hereby receive (as likewise by the lately signing of  Commission for the Affairs of Ireland, to such persons for were recommended to him by both houses of Parliament) will raise full sums of Money for the doing there of. His Majestie hath been likewise pleased (out of of His earnest desire to remove all occasi∣ons, which do unhappily multiply Ms-under∣standings between Him and His Parliament) to prepare a Bill ro be offered to them by His Attourney, concerning the Militia, whereby He hopes the Peace and Safety of this Kingdom may be fully secured, to the generall satisfaction of all men, without violation of His Maiesties iust Rights or preiudice to the Liberty of the Subiect. If this shall be thankfully received; He is glad of it. If retused; He calls God, and all the world to judge, on whose part the default is: one thing his Majestie requires, (if this Bill be appro∣ved of) That if any Corporation shall make their lawfull Rights appeare, they may be reserved to them. Before his Majestie shall part from England, he will take all due care to entrust such persons with such authority in his absence, as he shall find to be requisite for the Peace and Safety of this Kingdom, and the happy Progresse of this Par∣liament. FINIS.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
