c4051aa 53981627 180171
ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY CONCERNING MATTERS ECCLESIASTICAL Within the DIOCESS of LANDAFFE IN THE EPISCOPAL VISITATION Of the Right Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS, Lord Bishop of LANDAFFE. Anno. Dom. 1671. LONDON: Printed for James Collins in Westminster-Hall. M.DC.LXXI.
The Tenor of the Oath to be Tendered to the Church-wardens and Side-men. YOu shall Swear diligently to En∣quire, and true Presentment make of all Defaults and Offences, as are Inquirable by the Laws Ecclesiastical of this Realm. So God you help.
ARTICLES OF ENQUIRY within the DIOCESS OF LANDAFFE. TIT. I. Concerning Churches or Chappels, with the Ornaments, Furniture and Possessions belonging to them. 1. IS the Fabrick of your Church (or Chappel) with all things apper∣taining to it, kept in good repair within and without, in such order and decency, as becometh the House dedicated to the Publick Worship of God? 2. IS there any Chappel of Ease within your Parish? What Con∣secration hath it had, or what Instruments of its Allowance to be so: Can you produce? 3. IS there in the Church (or Chappel) a Font of Stone standing in the usual, ancient place, with a Cover to it, for the Administration of Baptism? Is there also a convenient Communion Table covered with a fair Carpet of Silk, or other decent Stuff, in time of Divine Service; and with a fair Linnen Cloth at the time of Administring the Sacrament? What Cup, Chaiice, Paten, or Flagons, have you belonging to that Service? 4. HAVE you in your Church (or Chappel) a convenient Seat for the Minister to read Divine Service in? And a Pulpit, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the same? Have any Pews or Seats been erected by any private person of his own authority without leave from the Ordinary? 5. HAVE you a large Folio Bible of the last Translation, with two Books of Common-Prayer well bound, one for the Minister, the other for the Clerk? Have you the Book of Homiles set forth by Authority, the Book of Canons, and the Table of Degrees allowed and prohibited in Marriage? 6. HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment for all who are Christned, married, and buried in the Parish, in which are set down the names of the parties, with the day, month, and year of each Christning, marriage and burial? Is the Transcrit thereof every year, within one month after the Twenty fifth of March, carried into the Bishops Registry? 7. HAVE you a Paper book, in which the names of Strangers, who Preach or Officiate in the Church (or Chappel) are set down; and another Book for the Church-wardens accompts?
8. HAVE you a fair Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his publick Ministration, provided at the charge of the Parish? 9. HAVE you a Chest for Alms, with three Locks and Keys, and another Chest to keep the Books and Ornaments of the Church? Have you a Bier with a black Herse-cloth for the burial of the Dead? 10. IS the Church-yard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Pales, or Rails, and decently kept from all annoyance or incroachments? Are the Trees therein preserved? 11. IS the Mansion-house of your Minister, with all other houses thereto belonging, kept in good Repair? Have any of them been pulled down, or defaced? Have any incroached upon the Land thereto belonging, or felled the Trees thereon growing? 12. HAVE you a perfect Terrier of all Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchards and Tenements, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage; also a particular List of such Pensions, Tythes, or other yearly profits (either within, or with∣out the Parish) as belong thereunto? Are any of them withheld from your Minister, as you know, or have heard, and by whom? 13. HAVE any of the antient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, been taken away or alienated by Safe or Exchange, without Licence from the Ordinary, and free consent of the Incumbent? TIT. II. Concerning Ministers. 1. IS your Minister Episcopally Ordained Deacon or Priest, according to the Laws of the Realm of England? Is he defamed, or suspected to have obtained his Orders or Benefice by any Simoniacal Compact? hath he been Legally Instituted and Inducted unto his Benefice? and did he within two months after his Induction, publickly read in the Church, in the time of Di∣vine Service, the thirty nine Articles of Religion, established in the Church of England? And did he then and there declare his assent thereunto? 2. HATH your Minister been Licenced to Preach by the Archbishop, Bishop of this Diocess, or either of the two Vniversities? Doth he diligently read Di∣vine Service, and Preach every Lords day in the Church, unless hindered by sickness, or reasonable absence? And in such cases, doth he procure some lawful Minister to read Prayers to Preach and perform other Ministerial Duties? 3. HATH your Minister (or any other who Preached in your Church) pub∣lished in his Sermons any Doctrine which is new:, strang, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and the Articles of the Christian Faith, or any thing against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the Govern∣ment of it, as it is now established? Doth he use before his Sermon, the Form of Prayer prescribed by the Fifty fifth Canon? 4. DOTH your Minister in the morning and evening Service, in the Ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, and in performing other Religious offices appointed by the Church of England, use the respective Forms in the Book of Common-Prayer, together with all those Rites and Ceremonies which are en∣joyned in this Church? And doth he make use of the Surplice and the Hood
proper for him, if a Graduate, when he reads Divine Service; or administers the Sacraments? 5. DOTH your Minister diligently Catechize the Youth of his Parish every Sunday and Holyday before Evening Service? Doth he prepare and procure them (as occasion is offered) to come and be confirmed by the Bishop? And doth he endeavour to reclaim all Popish Recusants, and all Sectaries in your Parish, to the true Religion? 6. IS your Minister a man of a sober, unblameable, and exemplary life? Is he grave, modest, and regular in his outward demeanor and apparel, according to the Constitutions of the Church? Or is his carriage, conversation, or com∣pany in any kind whatsoever, disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming his Calling and Charge? 7. IS your Minister ready to visit the Sick, and to baptize Infants in danger of death, being so desired? Is any Infant or more aged person in the Parish yet unbaptized by his default? Have those Children which have been baptized in-private Houses by the Minister of the Parish, afterward been brought into the Church; and did the Minister there certifie the Congregation, That the true Form of Baptism was by him privately before used? Or if any children in the Parish have been baptized privately by any other lawful Minister, have those Children been brought to your Church? and hath the Minister of the Parish there examined, whether such children were lawfully baptized or not? Doth your Minister refuse to give the Sacrament to any in the Parish, and for what cause? Or doth he give it to such as are scandalous, or notorious sinners, or to any Excommunicated persons? Doth he duly administer the blessed Sa∣crament three times every year at the least, whereof Easter to be one? 8. DOTH your Minister, or any other Minister, Marry any persons within your Parish, in private Houses, or such as are under age, not having the con∣sent of their Parents and Guardians? Doth he, or any other Minister, marry any within your Parish without Banes first published three Sundays or Holy∣days in the Church? or Banes being not so published, without Licence? or at prohibited times or hours, without Licence so to do? 9. DOTH your Minister duly bid and observe Holydays and Fasting days as is appointed? and doth he then use the Form of Prayer prescribed by the Church? Hath he taken upon him to appoint any private Fasts, or Religious Exercises, without lawful Authority? Doth he, or any other (Minister, or Lay person) in your Parish, hold any Conventicles, or Religious Meetings for people of se∣veral Families to resort unto, contrary to the Laws in that case provided? 10. IS your Minister constantly resident among you, and how many weeks in the year hath he been absent from his Benefice? Hath he a Curate to assist him in his absence or presence? Is that Curate in holy Orders and hath he a Li∣cence from the Bishop to serve the said Cure? Doth he carry himself in all things, as an able and discreet Minister, and Conformable to the Church of England? Doth he serve any more Cures besides that of your Parish, and at what distance? and doth any Laymen, not being in Holy Orders, presume to read Publick Prayers in the Church? 11. IS there in your Parish any Lecturer? Is he in Orders, and du∣ly
Licensed? Doth he read Divine Service before his Lecture? and is he con∣formable to the Discipline of the Church of England? 2. DOTH your Minister every six Months publickly denounce all such as per∣severe in the Sentence of Excommunication, not seeking to be absolved? Have any excommunicate person been received into the Church, without a Certifi∣cate from the Ordinary of their Absolution? Or any so dying, buried with Christian Burial? TIT. III. Concerning Parishioners. 1. ARE there any in your Parish who are reputed Hereticks, or Schisma∣ticks refusing Communion with the Church of England? Any Impug∣ners of the Religion established; of his Majesties Supremacy, or of any of the Laws, Rites and Ceremonies Ecclesiastical? Have any spoken or declared any thing in derogation, or to the depraving of the Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, and administration of the Sacraments, Rites and Cere∣monies prescribed in the Book of Common-prayer, as it is now established by Law? are there any Convicted Papists, known Anabaptists, or Quakers in the Parish? 2. ARE there any in your Parish, who lye under a common Fame, or vehe∣ment suspition of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? are there any common Drunkards, Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods holy Name and Word? are there any Excommunicate persons, or any who countenance or keep com∣pany with them? 3. DO any of your Parish prophane the Lords day by neglecting of publick holy duties, or by doing the works of their ordinary Calling, or using unlaw∣ful Recreations, or permitting their Children and Servants so to do? Do they duly observe other Holy dayes, Festivals and Fasts appointed by Authority? 4. DO all those who inhabit in your Parish, duly resort to your Church (or Chappel) and continue there during Divine Service, Sermon, and other holy Duties, with that Reverence, Order and Decency, as befits devout Christi∣ans? Or have any occasioned Ryot, Clamor, or fighting in the Church at any time? Is there any Recusant, Papists, or Sectaries in your Parish? Do they, or any of them keep any School-master in their house, which cometh not to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive the Holy Communion? 5. ARE there any in your Parish, who refuse to have their Infant children baptized by your Minister? Or do they keep them unbaptized longer than the Church allows? And what Infants, or more aged persons are there in your Parish unbaptized? 6. DO all your Housholders duly send their Children, Apprentices and Ser∣vants to be Catechized? And do they take care (when occasion is offered) they should be Confirmed by the Bishop? 7. IS there any person in your Parish so confirmed and instructed, and being Sixteen years of age, who refused to receive the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at least three times every year, whereof Easter to be one? And
do all receive this Sacred Mystery with that outward gesture of humility and reverence, as becomes them, meekly kneeling upon their knees, according to the order and custom of the Church? 8. ARE there any in your Parish, who are known or suspected to be unlaw∣fully married, contrary to the Laws of God and this Church? Are there any who being lawfully married (and never Divorced) do yet live asunder? Or any, who being lawfully Divorced, do live together again? Or being sepa∣rated for Adultery, have afterwards Entermarried with any other, during the life of their first Consort? 9. ARE there any married Women in your Parish, who after their safe De∣livery from Childbirth, refuse to make their humble and publick Thanksgi∣vings to God, according to the appointment of the Church? 10. ARE there any of your Church, who refuse to pay their Easter-Offerings, and other Duties to your Minister? Or to pay the rates assessed on them, for the repair and provisions of the Church? 11. DO you know, or have you heard of any Patron, or other person in your Parish, who having the gift of an Ecclesiastical Benefice, hath made gain thereby upon any bargain, either for Money, Pension, Lease, Reserve of Tythes, or Glebe, or other Simoniacal Compact whatsoever? 12. DO any among you refuse to Bury their Dead, according to the Rites of the Church of England? Are there any Wills of deceased persons unproved, or Goods not administred? Do you know of any Legacies given to your Church, or the Cathedral Church of Landaffe, or to the Poor, or to other cha∣ritable Vses, not yet received by you, or detained from you, or not applied to the charitable Vses appointed: TIT. IV. Concerning the Officers belonging to the Church. 1. ARE the Church-wardens of your Parish, yearly chosen according to Law? and are there Side-men appointed to assist them, for the due ordering of the Church? 2. HAVE the former and last Church-wardens given up their accompts to those that succeed them, together with all monies, and other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? 3. HAVE you a Parish Clerk aged Twenty years at least, who is of sober life and good Report? Is he chosen by your Minister, and approved by the Parish? and is he able for Reading, Writing, and Singing, as a Clerk? are his wages duly paid him? 4. DOTH he or your Sexton take care of your Church, to keep it lockt and clean: to open the doors, and Ring the Bells in due time, to call the Living to the Worship of God; also to admonish them by Tolling of a Passing-bell for any that are dying, thereby to meditate of their own death and to com∣mend the others weak condition to the mercy of God?
TIT. V. Concerning Alms-houses, Schools and School-Masters, Physitians, Chirurgeons and Midwives. 1. IS there any Hospital, Alms-house, or Free-School, founded in your Pa∣rish? are they so governed and ordered in the use and Revenue as the Founders appointed, according to the Ordinances and Statutes which have been made concerning the same? 2. DOTH any man keep a publick or private School in your Parish? Is he or they licenced and allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Doth he-instruct his Scholars in the Catechism and Religion of the Church of England? Is there any Woman that taketh upon her to instruct and educate any young Maidens? doth she resort duly, and bring with her to Divine Service, upon the Lords day and Holy dayes, all such young Maidens as are committed to her care? 3. DO any in your Parish practise Physick, Chirurgery, or Midwifery, without Licence? TIT. VI. Touching Ecclesiastical Officers. 1. ARE there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical Iuris∣diction within this Diocess, that take and receive any extraordinary Fees for any Cause? have abuses or offences been presented by Church-war∣dens and Quest-men? And are such offences being presented, suppressed, or left unpunished? 2. HAVE any Apparitors taken any Reward for the concealing of any Offence, or the avoiding of the punishment of the Offendors? And do they summon any without a Citation first had? IF you know of any other Default, or Crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, you are to present the same. THE Minister of every Parish may joyn in presentments with the Church-wardens and Side-men; and if they will not Present, then the Ministers themselves (being the persons that have the chief care of the suppressing of sin and Impiety in their Parishes) may present the Crimes aforesaid, and such things as shall want due Reformation, Can. 113. FRANCIS C. LANDAVEN.
