D1877A 51784490 174905
To the Right Honorable, the LORD CHAN∣CELLOR, the humble Petition of COVENT-GARDEN. Sheweth, THat having for many years past lived under great Oppressions, by the pretence of raising great sums of money for the paying of a Minister, and the People being divided in Opinion, commonly called Religion, where the Godly have alwayes persecuted the Loyal, Upon the coming of His Sacred Majesty (who seemed rather to be descended from above, then returned from the Low Countreys) they were in great hope to be relieved; yet so it is, that the same Persons that did formerly torment them, being continued still in Authority, they are stil trou∣bled by vexatious Suits at the Common Law, by which means they are much hindered from following their lawful Callings. Wherefore we do humbly desire, that one Dr. Babre, who hath been a chief In∣strument in troubling the Parish ever since he came into it, and hath often threatned that we should have no QUIET as long as he continued in Commission of PEACE, may be removed out for these following Reasons. 1. He was a Physician to Cromwel in Scotland against the King. 2. He was employed by Cromwel for the taking away the Life of Panta∣leon Sa, and had been hanged himself if he had not got Cromwell's Pardon, to whom he was a Pentionary Spye. 3. He indicted a very goodly Captain of the Parliament for treasonable words against Cromwell, and endangered his Life without giving him any Physick. 4. He was indicted himself by the Parish for Forgery, the Indictment found, and his Ears like to have been lost. 5. He is a general Solicitor practicing to set Man and Wife together by the Ears, as in Mris. Juyes Case it was plainly seen, when her Council told him, that if he had studied the Law he would have been an excellent Physici∣an, because studying Physick he was become so excellent a Lawyer. 6. Being Physician to his Sacred Majesty, if he were an honest man, he would study his Profession, and leave his Law-Suits, and broking in other mens affairs. 7. 'Tis a great discouragement to the Bench of Justices, that when they should send a Vagabond to be whipped, His Majesty should send His Physi∣cian to cure them. 8. He is a Knight of the P. a common Affidavit. Man. &c. 9. He is a Physician at the Court, a Doctor at the Colledge, a Commit∣tee-man, a Militia-man, John Babre, and Jack of all Trades, Spye to all sides, a Plague to all his Neighbours, and a Pestilence to the whole Town; and there∣fore we come unto your Honor in the words of Robert Wisdom: Help Lord, for good and godly men Malicious are as Devils; You Our good Angel, onely can Seal up these pious Evils. And as in duty bound, we shall pray, &c. Bedford Berry, St. An. Shandois, Piazza King, Henrietta Bedford, James Russel, Charles York, Bridges Bowstreet, Amen Manto, Todos Autros. Jun. 1661
