F1561 N557A 99887980 183654
The forlorn Lovers La∣ment. To the Tune of the bony Broom. SIr, do not think these Lines have flow'd from youthful hearts or hands But from a friend, who's thrice conjoin'd in Hymens holy bands: Nor Charidora did not prove, by half so much unkind To Diaphantes, since his love, could never match my mind. Nor Coradon, who turn'd his song, and sorrows to the Broom, Could never match with me in wrong, which shores me to consume: Poor lovers in this lovelesse age, are left to mourn alone, And wondred at by such as rage, my love to look upon. Even as the Lillie in the Hedge, is prick'd on either side, So I'm tormented by the rage, of those who swell with pride: The surgies of the swslling tide, and the walls broad that be, As yet they never could divide, my heart from loving thee. I live in anguish grief and smart, for thou enjoyest mine, And I must live without an heart, until thou send me thine: Which if thou could incline to do, it should such comfort send To me, who comfortlesse am now, and iike my life to end. For I should take it as a pledge, since thou hast mine from me, Least I should die without an heart, let me have thine from thee: Then might we both together live, as one by hearts exchang'd, But keeping both, if thou survive, just heavens will be aveng'd. But I will rest, in hope that thou, will send me answer kind, To me who lives in torment now, until I know thy mind. I do expect no frowns from thee, because I did presume, To send these lines, when minding me to sing them as the Broom. FINIS: A New BALLAD, Composed by a Lover, in praise of his Mistriss. To a new Tune, I'le fix my Fancy on thee. WHen first thy Feature and thy face, I seriously espyed, I thought to thee there was no Grace, which Nature had denyed: The more I look'd, the more I lov'd, contemplating upon thee, At length the force of love me mov'd to fix my fancy on thee. Thy Head is as the highest sphere, adorn'd with all the Graces, Thy Soul sits as Commander there, o'r spread with dangling Traces; Which through the Casements of thine Eyes sends forth such flames upon me, That I am forc'd to sympathize, and fix my fancy on thee. Thy Nose helow mount-fore-head lies, proportion'd well by Nature, Which doth divide thy cristal Eyes, and makes a comelie Creature; Thy odoriferous Breath atracts my soul to cease upon thee, And since thou art without compare, I fix my fancy on thee, Thy Thighs as Ivory columns are, by Natures kind well framed, Betwixt there is a place Ile spare, which shall not here be named; But surely it attractive is, which makes me think upon thee, But since thou'rt, mine I will design, to fix my fancy on thee. FINIS.
