h3289 99884971 182770
A HUE AND CRIE AFTER The Earl of CLARENDON. FRom Dunkirk-House there lately ran away A Traytor, whom you are defir'd to stay. You by these marks and signs may th'Traytor know, He's troubled with the Gout in feet below: Pity it is, it vex'd no other part; 'Tis pity but long since 't had pain'd his Heart: Had it, I'm sure 't had sav'd some thousand Lives, And thousands that are Widows, had been Wives: Thousands that Orphans are, so had not been, But their dear Parents still alive had seen: Dunkirk by England still had been possest, Instead of being turn'd into a Nest Of Gallick Pirates: Those Ships that by Flames Did lately perish, still had kept their Names. Scotch-Cittadels had stood; and th' stones that came From Pauls, might have conduc'd t' have stopt that Flame That not long since that ancient Pile did burn, And turn'd it into its own Fun'ral Vrn. Ships that were captive led by hostile hand, Had still remain'd the Bulwarks of our Land; And we whom Conquered Foes did late invade, Might unto us still them have subject made: And might have kept, without much cost or pain, Plantations, that will cost dear to regain: This hopeful Blade being conscious of his Crimes, And smelling how the current of the times Ran cross, forsakes his Palace and the Town, Like some presaging Rat th'house ere't falls down; Or like Sea-Monster, when the Waves 'gin t'roar, Retires, and waits until the Storm be o'er: So he, presaging Storm, away is fled; Knowing 't would cost him loss of Hide and Head, Shou'd he remain. 'Tis pity that the Womb That bare him, did not also prove his Tomb. 'Tis pity that this Cock'trice had not been Crusht in the Egg, ere he the Light had seen: Or that long since he had of Vital Breath Bereaved been by some untimely Death; It had been well for us: No Days that are Mark'd with Red Letters in our Calendar, Had more deserv'd Remembrance; hardly those That Popish Plots against us did disclose. But since he's fled, who ere can find him out, And bring him back; an Action without doubt, Grateful to England will perform; and he Shall with three Nations thanks rewarded be: If possible alive let him be brought, That for those hellish mischiefs he hath wrought, He may be published in publick view, And Hangman with the Devil receive his due. If not, 'twould be a meritorious Deed, For any man to make his Heart to Bleed, With Stab of Dagger; any way; soth' World Be rid of him; so he to Hell be hurld: Whither almost we may conclude he'll goe, and stir up Feuds amongst the Fiends below, Till a new hell for him they find: No times Can instance in the like flagitious Crimes, By any Person done: A thousand Lives, And ruine of ten thousand that survives, Lie on his Charge. Therefore when ever he Shall perish, let a general Jubilee Be kept throughout the Land, that all may know Treason still works the Traytors Overthrow. FINIS. Printed in the Year of CLARENDON'S Confusion, 1667.
