j753 99887181 181889
JOANS Victory Over her Fellow-Servants. A Young-man that with many Maids does dwell, Thought Joan the rest in beauty did excell; Mall Was too coy, Jenny was too bold, Kate was too stale, and Nanny was a scold: That he dislikes them all, and would with none Be pleas'd, but with his fair and dearest Joan, Tune of, My own sweet Nichol a Cod. I'Ve liv'o in this Town these 5 Years, but never the Lass could find That would prove so true a Lover, as constant and as kind: Now fortune has me befriended, at last to give me one; Whose true love I discover, then here's a good heal Health to Joan. I once loved Kate and Jenny, and once I loved Mall; And then my love turned to Nancy, but now I dislike them all: For I have gotten a true love, whom I affect alone; 'Tis she best pleaseth my fancy, then here's a good health to Joan, With Cate I'de a short encounter, because she was plaguy old, Her Letchery was so hasty, that my love soon grew cold: She proffered me Figgs of the best sort, but I told her I'de have none, Cause the strenyth of her breath was so nasty but here's a good health to Joan, At length a wonderful kindness, as possible may be thought, Did pass betwixt me and Jenny, bur this was her only fault; She stradled so wide, and came on so fast. that she made me cry out, be gone, For I think the Devil is in you, then, &c. But then there was a secret Court there, betwixt our Mall and I; And she of her love was so tender, that I hated her Modesty: She was so much given to frowning, and killing glances prone; That on no terms she'd surrender, then here's a good health to Joan. At last I had a warm passion for Nanny my dear heart; But when ever her I courted, she was too brisk and smart: She'd gotten a Tongue with a tang in't, and a trick to her self alone; That she kick'd like a Colt when we sported then, &c. Then since i've gotten a sweet-heart, that is both loving and true; All old Fish i'le defie, and learn to deal with new: For I hate to imbrace a Carcass that's nothing but skin and bone; And has never a whit of beauty, then, &c. Since Jenny then was so forward, and impudent withal; I thought it fit to leave her, and my kindness to recall: For I hate such buxome Lasses, they'l Cuckold me ten to one; 'Twas policy then to deceive her, then, &c. Nor will I fix my heart on those Maids that are too coy; For Moll she was so squemish, that she my love did cloy: Then give me the Lass that is loving, and not so scrupulous grown; For that is the Lass without blemish, then, &c. Nor i'le have no more of this scolding, which will but end my days; She is worse then a smoaky Kitchin, which always plagues your eyes. Her tongues the worst part about her, for it is always prone To chatting, and damming, and itching, then, &c. Now 'twould be a thing that's needless; to tell how I dearly love She that my heart has wounded, and does my passion move: She has none of those damnable errors to which most Maids are prone: On her vertues my love is grounded, then, &c. She's neither old nor mouldy, she's neither coy nor bold, Nor has she faults of Nancy, she's neither Shrow nor Scold: Then she is the Maid that i'le marry, she has none of these faults of her own, Therefore she best pleaseth my fancy, then here's a good health to Joan. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Gol∣den-Ball, near the Hospital-gate, in West-smithfield.
