L256B 47012500 174467
A lamentable Balled of the Ladies Fall, Declaring how a Gentlwoman through her too much trust came to her en and how her Lover slew himselfe. The tune of, In Pescod time. MArk well my heavy dolefull Tale. you loyall Lovers al, And héedfully bear in your breast, a gallant Ladies fall. 'Long was she woo'd, e're she was won to lead a wedded life; But folly wrought her overthrow, before she was a Wife, Too soon alas she gave consnt, to yeeld unto his will, Though hee protested so be true and faithfull to her still, She felt her body altered quite, her bright hue waxed pale, Her fair red cheeks chang'd colour while, her strength began to fail. So that with many a sorrowfull sigh, this beauteous maiden mild, With grieved heart perceivd her self to be conceiv'd with child, She kept it from her Fathers sight, so close as close might be, And so put on her silken Gown, none might her swelling see. Vnto her Lover secretly shee did her selfe bewray▪ And walking with him hand in hand, these words to him did say. Behold said she a Maids distress, my Love brought to thy Bow, Behold I  with child by thee, though none thereof do know. The little babe srings in my womb, to hear the Fathers voice, Let it not be a bastard cd, sith I make thee my choice. Come come my love perform ty vow, and wed me out of hand: O leave me not i thse extreams, in grief ayes to . Think on thy former promise made, thy vows and Oath each one, Remember with what bitter tears to me thou mad'st thy mean; Convey me to some secret place, and marry me with spéed, Or with thy Rapier end my life, e're further shame proceed. Alas my dearest Love quoth he my greatest joy on earth. Which way can I convey thée hence without a sudden death. Thy friends they be of high degree, and I of mean estate; Full hard it is to get thee forth out of thy fathers gate. Dread not thy self to save my same, and if thou taken be, My self will step betweeen the s and take the harm on me. So shall I scape dishonour quite, if so I should be slain, What could they say but that tru did work a Ladies bane. ANd fear not any further harm, my self will so devise, That I will go along with thee, unseen of mortal eyes. Disguised like some pretty Page, I'le meet thee in the dark, And all alone I'le come to thee had by my Fathers Park. And there quoth he I'le meet my love, if God lend me life, And this day month without all fail, I will make thee my wife, Then with a swee an loving kisse, they parted presently; And at their parting brinish tears, stood in each others eye. At length the wished day was come, whereas this lovely maid, With lovely eyes and strange attire, for her true lover staid. When anie person she espi'd come riding over the plain, She thought it was her own true love, but all her joyes were vain. Then did she wéep and sore bewail her most unhappy state, Then did she speak these wofull words when succourlesse she sate. O false forsworn and faithlesse wretch, disloyall to thy Love: Hast thou forgot thy promise made, and wilt thou perjur'd prove. And hast thou now forsaken me, in this my sad distress; To end my daies in open shame, which thou mightst well redresse Wo worth the the time I did believe that flattering tongue of thine, Would God that I had never seen the tears of thy false eyne. And thus with manie a sorrowfull sigh homeward she went amain, No rest came in her watrie eies, she felt such bitter pain. In travell strong they fell that night, with many a bitter throw. What woful pangs shee felt that night, doth each good women know. She called for her waiting Maid, that lay at her beds feet; Who musing at her mistresse wo, did fast begin to weep. Weep not quoth she but shut the door, and windows round about; Let noe bewail my wretched case, but keep all persons out. O Mistriss call your mother dear, of women you have need; And of some skillfull midwives help, the better may you speed: Call not my Mother for thy life, nor call no women here, The Midwives help comes now too late, my death I do not fear. With that the babe sprung in her womb, no creatour being nigh, And with a sigh that broke her heart, this gallant Dame did die, This living little infant young, the Mother being dead, Resign'd it's new received breath, to him that had him made. Next morning came her Lover true, affrighted at this news, And he for sorrow slew himself, whom each one did accuse. The Mother with the new born babe, was both laid in one grave; Their parents overcome with wo, no joy of them could have. Take heed you dainty Damsells all, of flattering words beware, And of the honour of your name have you a speciall care; Too true this a storie is, as manie one can tell, By others harms learn to be wise, and thou shalt do ful well. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and William Gilbertson.
