N1036AA 47012553 174519
News out of the Strand, OR, The Brewers Misfortune. Being a true relation of a London Brewer, who was taken by his own Wife and the constable, in bed with two strapping Lasses both at once, he lying in the middle, and they on each side. This was done near Co∣vent-Garden on monday the seventh day of this present July, 1662. about one of the clock in the morn∣ing; the manner how, is more fully exprest in this following Ditty. To the Tune of, Come my own Dear let us dally a while. COme listen a while and I'le tell you a jest, with a fa, la, la, la, la lero, There's nothing but truth in my Ditty exprest, with a fa, la, la, la, la lero. 'Tis of a Ranting Brewer which, Was troubled with a leacherous Itch And wanted a Whore to coole his bréech, with a fa, la, la, la, la, lero. To be a Whore-monger he was known, with a fa, la, &c. And yet he had a swéet Wife of his own, with a fa, la, &c. He had good-Ale enough in his own Fat, And Flesh in his house, yet what of that The Brewer must have a fresh bit for his Cat, with a fa, la, &c. Sure he in lust did excéedingly burn, with a fa, &c. That no lesse than two could serve his turn, with a fa, &c. If that be true that one Whore can foyle, Ten men in an hour and make them recoyle, I fear these two wenches the Brewer did spoyle, with a fa, &c. But that which to many doth séeme very strange, with a fa, &c. These Doxies belonged unto the Exchange, with a fa, &c. The Brewer being in great care. How for his money, to get good ware. The new Exchange sifted him to a hair, with a fa, &c. This Brewer was none of your Idle Drones, with fa, &c. For he could please two wenches at once, with a fa &c. He'd need be wary that deals with such, For they will be very apt to grutch, If one hath too little and to'ther too much, with a fa la, &c. These Lasses were none of the ordinary sort with a fa, la, &c. But stately young Girls who were us'd to the sport, with a fa, la, &c. They knew the Brewer to be a brave Lad, Who fréely would give to make them glad A draught of the sweetest wort that he had, with a fa la, &c. The second part to the same Tune. O Was not this a wonderful Riddle, with a fa, la, &c. Two whores in the Bed, and a knave in the middle, with a fa la, &c. But though 'twas odds yet he did not fail, To please both the wenches (tooth and nail) His courage was rais'd with a Cup of good Ae with a fa, &c. Yet mark how at last this Brewer did fare, with a fa la, &c. His Wife catch'd him napping, as Mosse catch'd his Mare, with a fa la, &c. She did suspect him long before Because he us'd to Rant and Roar, But now she resolv'd shée would finde out his Whore, with a fa la, &c. And having notice of the place, with a fa la, &c. Where he his Lasses did imbrace, with a fa, la, &c. To follow him thither she was not afraid Because she had the Constable's aid And thus the poor Brewer was betraid, with a fa la, &c. On monday morning by one of the clock, with a fa la, &c. At the first crowing of the Cock, with a fa la, &c. She stept into the Room with a light, Which to the whores was a terrible sight And did the Brewer most sorely affright, With a fa la, &c. There she beheld unto her greif with a fa la, &c. That these two Lasses had plaid the théef, with a fa la, &c. For being in her Husbands lay, They went so often to the best Tap, That she at home could get never a drop, with a fa la, &c. But now she good wife will make them both sure, with a fa, la, &c From being henceforth so bold with the Brewer, with a fa la, &c. They did consume her husbands gains, And drank up the Ale whilst she fed on the grains, 'Tis fit that they should be well paid for their pains with a fa la, &c. Into the round-house these Lasses were put, with a fa la, &c. A fitting place for each impudent slut, with a fa la, &c. Hereafter let them have a care, How to a Brewer they sell their ware, For fear that Bridewell fall to their share, with a fa la, &c. I cannot tell how they'l spéed all at last, with a fa la, la, la, la lero, But sure I am, the worst is not past, with a fa la, la, la, la, lero. The Brewer should have been more wse, And ept further off his wenches thighes For now hee'l be made to pay double Excise, with a fa la, la, la, la, lero. FINIS. London, Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-hill.
