r89b 47012603 174571
The Royall Subjects Warning piece to all Traytors You traytors all both great and small, I wish you to beware. In time rpen, and be content, for you must, all to Hide-Park- Fair. There is Hemp'n toyes for you brave boys, which murdered Charles the first, The Hangman he your guide must be, for thither go you must. To a pleasant new Tune, Come back my own sweet Duck. OLd England now rejoyce, thy sorrows all are past; Tryuph with heart and voice. good news is come at last, Thse that long time did mourn, come and rejoyce with me I scorn my Ct to turn, but faithful I will be. Heavens blesse our Generall. hath our sorrows drownd, Pray for him great and small, King Charles must now be Crownd. This is good news indeed for every honst man; The Law will now procéed Trator do what you can, Your' glsse is almost run your time is almost spent, You will to Squire Dun except you soon repent. for King Charles right, Lords of high renown fight Charles must wear his Crown You that did once bare sway and kept us all at under, Now is your reckoning day; good Subjects you are plunder, Those that did firmly stand for Charles of high renown You banished the Land, and chast them up and down,; Then Traitors all repent, in City and in town, Your time is almost spent, King Charles must wear, &c. What answer can you make either to God or man, What course now can you take do all the best you can: For murdering of your King, the Law will now proceed, Beware a hempen string, no better can you speed. Then traytors all repent in City and in Town, Your time is almost spent. King Charles, &c. The second Part, to the same tune. YOur Anabaptists head no comfort can you bring, Alack he is almost dead, for treason against the King Himself must answer make, for what is done and past He can no way forsake Squire Dun & fear at last, then traitors all repent in City and in town, Your tune is almost spent. King Charles, &c, Come Harrison thou art the man. I and John Oakey thy brother, For treason against the King, there scarce is two such other; the one a Butchers son, the other a poor Dray-man, You must to Squire Dun do all the best you can You traitors all repent in City and in town, Your time is almost spent, King Charles, &c. Alack blind Hewson now, where is thy Laste and Awl, It had been better for thee to have kept in thy stall; For Judging of the King a rebellions horrid déed, Beware of a Hempen string no better thou can spéed, And for killing poor prentice boys for playing at the foot ball, Squire Dun has be hempen toyes for sure will serve you all. Bold Arthur Haslerigge Newcastle doth thée curse For raising of their Coals four shillings a Chauldron just; Nay this is the worst of all, for Judging of the King As thou sate in White-hall, beware of an Hempen string. Repent you traitors all in City and in town, Justice doth on you call, King Charles will pull you down. Your  curse the day that ever you did know Bold Oliver, I say, that traitor, Englands foe; He being a Brewers Son you liquored well your throat, the Commenty you have undone Yet now beware a Rope for climbing up so high You are sure to have a fall. the innocent blood doth cry Down with those Rebells all. When you had murdered the King you banished his Wife, And all he Royall Off-spring you fought to take their life; All that true Subjects were you bid them traitors call. You must to Hide-Park-Fair, Squire Dun invites you all. then traitors all look too't. the Rump cannot you save, the Gallows will claim her due use all the skill you have. Concluding thus I cry God save our gracious King From bloody tyranny, and all the royall Off-spring, Lord blesse the Duke of York, brave Generall Monck also, He is a Noble Spark against King Charles his soe. then traitors all repent, mark we well what here is said, Your time is almost spent alack you are all betraid, T. R. FINIS.
