S1683 52612442 179610
C R royal blazon or coat of arms PROCLAMATION Anent the Rendezvouz of the Militia, for the Year, 1684. CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and soverally, specially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch, as We find it necessary for Our Royal Service, that the General Rendezvouz of Our Militia be punctually kept and observed for this Year, and in all time coming, Have therefore thought fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council, to appoint the saids Rendezvouz for this Year, to be at the Dyets and places after-specified, viz. the of wo Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shires of Fife and Kinross, to be at Vs-Moor, the eighth day of July next: The two Regiments of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Perth; at Perth, the ninth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Forfar, at Forfar, the tenth day of the said Moneth of J The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Kincardine, and Marischals  of Aberdent, at Aberdene, the fifteenth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, an wo Troops of Horse of the Shires of Bamff and Errols part of Aberdene, at Turreff, the seven∣ day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shires of  eighteenth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop  Earl of Seaforth, an  Lovits part of Innerness, at Innerness, the twenty two day of the said Moneth of July: The ment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shires of Ross, Sutherland and Caithness, at Dornoch, the twenty fourth day of the  Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot of the Stewartry of Orkney and Zetland, the twenty ninth of the said Moneth of July:The Regiment of Food, and Troop of Horse of the Shires of Linlithgow and Peebles, at Selm-Moor, the twenty two day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot of the Town of Edinburgh, at the Links of Leith, the twenty third day of the id Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Edinburgh, at Musselburgh, the twenty fourth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Haddingtoun, at Beinstoon-Moor, the twenty fifth day of the said Moneth of July: the Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Berwick, at Foggo-Moor, the twenty ninth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Shires of Rox∣burgh and Selkirk, at Ancrum-Moor, the thirtieth day of the said Moneth of July: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shire of Dumfreis, at Dumfreis, the twenty third day of October next: The two Troops of Horse of the Shire of Wig∣toun at Mio of e the twenty fourth day of the said Moneth of October: The three Troops of Horse of the Shire of Air, and part of the Shire of Renfrew, at Air, the fifth day of August next: The Troop of Horse of the rest of the Shire of Renfrew, at Renfrew, the sixth day of the said Moneth of August: The three Troops of Horse of the Shire of Lanerk, at Hamiltoun, the eighth day of the said Moneth of August: The Regiment of Foot, and Troop of Horse of the Shires Stirling and Clackmannan, at Sie-Foord the twelfth day of the said Moneth of August: The Regiment of Foot of the Shires of Argyle, Boot, and Dumbar∣ton, the thirteenth day of the said Moneth of August, for the Shires of Dumbarton and Boot, and upon the seventeenth day of that Moneth at Innerrara for the Shire of Argyle. And We Ordain the whole Officers of Foot and Horse to attend their Charges at the saids Dyets of Rendezvouzes, and the Heretors and others Out-reikers of the Souldiers, to have their men present (habile) according to Law; with certification to the saids Officers and Heretors, if they neglect their duty herein, they shall be proceeded against conform to the Laws and Instructions made thereanent; And do appoint the Muster-Master-General by himself, or his De∣putes, to be present at the several Rendezvouzes, and to return an account to Our-Council of the Absents and Deficients, that they may be proceeded against according to Law. Our will is herefore, and We charge you strictly, and command, that incon∣tinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and several Mercat Crosses of the Head Burghs of this King∣dom, and Burghs of Regality, and several Paroch Kirks within the same, upon a Sunday after Divine Service, and other places needful, and there in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premisses, that none pretend ignorance: And We Ordain the Sheriffs of the respective Shires to cause duely publish these presents. The which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full power, by these Our Letters, delivering them by you duely Execute and Indorsat again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet, At Edinburgh, the Twenty two day of April, 1684. and of Our Reign the Thirtieth and sixth Year. Per actum Dominoram Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON. Gls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the H  to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1684.
