10182 [ocn]180867040 191714
ARTICLES TO BEE ENQVIRED of, throughout the Whole Diocesse of Chichester, mi∣nistred and giuen in charge to the Church-wardens and Sidemen with∣in the same Diocesse, by the Reuerend Father in God Richard by Gods prouidence Bishop of Chichester, In his first generall Visitation. Holden Anno Dom. 1628. Anno Consecrationis suae primo. LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Tho: Bourne.
The forme of the Oath which accor∣ding to the 119. Canon, is to be administred vnto the Church-wardens and Sidemen. YOu shall sweare, that you, and euery of you shall duely consider, and dili∣gently enquire of all & euery of these Ar∣ticles giuen you in charge, and that all af∣fection, fauour, hope of reward, and gaine, all feare of displeasure, or offending any, all malice, enuie, & like sinister affections set apart, you shall present all and euery such person, of, or within your Parish, as haue committed any offence, or made any default mentioned in these or any of these Articles, wherein you shall deale vpright∣ly, sincerely, plainely, and fully: neither presenting, nor sparing to present any con∣trarie to truth: hauing God before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to maintaine truth & vertue, & to suppresse error and vice: So helpe you God, and the holy con∣tents of this Booke.
Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine. WHETHER be there any one, or more residing, lodging or abi∣ding in your Parish, that holde, de∣fend, set forth, or propose any He∣resie, errors, or false opinions, contrarie to holy Scripture, the Thrée Créedes, the booke of Thirtie nine Articles, the booke of Common Prayer, the booke of Consecrating and ordayning Bishopps, Priests, and Deacons? 2 Whether there be any in your Parish, that oppose, de∣nie, or otherwise traduce the Kings Maiesties lawfull, and established supremacie ouer all persons, in all causes as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall within his Highnesse Realmēs and Dominions? 3 Whether there be any that affirme, or maintayne that the Church of England is not a true Church, but Hereticall, or Schismaticall, and there Refuse to come into the publike Seruice, to receiue the Sacraments, to participate in other Diuine Rites and ceremonies with the Church of England, eyther as Popish Recusants, or Puritanicall separatistes and Schismatiks.
4 Whether there be any in your Parish that doe or hath frequented, celebrated, or vsed any vnlawfull Assemblies, priuate méetings, or conventicles, vnder color, or pretext of Religion, repeating of Sermons, expounding of Scripture in priuate houses, or that holdeth such méetings to be law∣full, or such as may challenge the name of a Church. 5 Whether any in your Parish do publish, sell, disperse, or communicate to others, any superstitious or Popish books, or writings, any Schismaticall, and Puritanicall, Libelles, treatises, or papers Derogatorie from, or contrary to the Religion, State, Church Gouernement of this Kingdome of England, the Lawes and Canons of the same, the Mini∣stery and Priesthood therein? Present their names, qualities, and conditions. Articles concerning diuine Seruice and administration of the Sacraments. 1 HAth any of, or in your Parish spoken, or declared any thing to disgrace, depraue, contemne or Derogate from the forme of Diuine Seruice, in the Booke of common Prayer. 2 Bée there any in your Parish that either absolutely re∣fuse to come into Church and bee present at Prayer, or ordi∣narily walke abroad, come not from home, or not into the Church till Sermon begin. 3 Doth your Minister read diuine seruice according to the Iniunctions in the booke of common Prayer; doth he dimi∣nish, alter, exchange the forme prescribed, in part, or in all, vsing Prayers in stéede thereof of his owne deuising, and conceiuing. 4 Whether doth he reade the Confession, and absolution thereupon to be pronounced, or doth he change the words ther∣of to make it a Prayer, doth he in reading the first, and se∣cond
lessons, expound the Chapters, as he readeth: doth hée stand at the Gospell and Créed, and obserue the forme prescri∣bed in the Booke, or not. 5 Whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme rightly and dilly administred according to the prescript forme expressed in the Booke of common Prayer, without adding, altering, or Detracting from any part, or poynt therein: Doth he rufuse to vse the Interrogatories prescribed, the signe of the Crosse commaunded: Doth he vse the words, and not doe the Act, hath he admitted the Fathers, or Mothers in publike, or in priuate Baptisme to be Godfathers, and Godmothers, whe∣ther doth he vse to baptise the childe at the Font, or in some Bason at his seate where he readeth Prayer, or is the Font translated and placed there, or néere thereto from the Church-doore, where it should stand, signifying that Baptisme is our entry into the Church of God. 6 Whether hath he refused in case of necessity to baptise Children at home; have any so dyed vnbaptised, or will he not Baptise the children of Papists being offered to baptisme: such as be borne out of wedlocke, Bastards, or vnlesse the Father will affirme it is his owne childe. 7 Whether is the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per so administred as is prescribed, viz. once euery Moneth, or thrice at the least in the yeare. 8 Item in time of administration are any suffered to bee present, that doe not communicate: Doth your Minister in administring it vse the garments, and vestments prescribed, Doth hee consecrate the Bread and Wine, with those wordes that are set downe, if not, how and in what manner.
9 Doth he first reuerently vpon his knées receiue himselfe, and then seuerally, and distinctly giue it to the communicants, they méekely knéeling, and not standing or sitting either at the Table, or vpon some bench: Whether is the Bread hol∣some and swéet? is the wine as it should bee, representing blood, not Sacke, White-wine, Water, or some other Li∣quor., And if more bread and wine be afterwards brought, the first not sufficing which was consecrated, doth hee first vse the words of consecration vpon it before he giue it to the Communicants, as is prescribed Can. xxj. 10 Whether in solemnizing of Marriage, visitation of the sicke, Buriall of the dead, churching of women, Doth your Minister vse such manner & forme, such words, rights, and ceremonies, as are prescribed: and if not, then in what manner doth hee performe them. Articles concerning the Church, the Orna∣ments, sacred vtensills, and possessions of the same. 1 VVHether haue you in your Church, the whole Bible of the largest volumne, and last Translation, the Booke of common Prayer: the two Bookes of Homilies? 2 Haue you a Font of Stone, for the administration of Baptisme, set vp in the vsuall place néere the Church doore, with a couer to kéepe it from dust and soyle? 3 Haue you a conuenient, and decent Communion Table placed conueniently as it ought, with a Carpet of silke, or some other comely stuffe to bee layd vpon it in time of diuine Seruice, and a cleane lynnen cloath for the time of Communion? 4 Is it prophaned at any time, by sitting on it, casting hattes, or cloakes vpon it, writing, or casting vp accompts, or any other indecent vsage?
5 Haue you in your Church a conuenient seate for your Minister to reade Diuine Seruice, and to preach in, a come∣ly large, and fine Surplice, a Communion Cup and flagon of siluer or pewter; a Chest for Almes with thrée lockes and keyes, another chest for kéeping the bookes, ornaments, and vtensils of the Church: Haue you a Register booke in parch∣ment for Christnings, Burialls, Mariages, and are these duely and faithfully written and recorded therein or not, and is the same safely kept in a chest with thrée lockes and keyes according to the Canon? 6 Whether is your Church, Chappell, Chancell, sufficient∣ly repayred, decently and comly kept, as well within as with∣out, be the seats maintayned, the Stéeple and bels preserued, the windowes glased, the floore paued, and all things in such sort as may well beséeme the house of God? 7 Whether is your Churchyard well mounded, and fen∣ced, kept cleane without Nusance, or soyle cast into it: is it incroached vpon, and by whome? doe any offensiuely kéepe doores, outletts, or passages into your Churchyard: doe any vse to quarrell, fight, play, or make méetings, banquets, Church-ales there, doe any kéepe Courts, Léetes, Lawdaies, Musters there, or otherwise vse it being a consecrated place, prophanely contrarie to the 88. Canon? Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers of Gods word. 1 VVHether is your Minister a Preacher or not: of what degrée is he in the Vniuersitie, is he a licen∣sed Preacher, doth he personally reside vpon his benefice: if not, how long doth he vse to absent himselfe, how doth he take order for seruing of his Cure: whether by a sufficient and ho∣nest man: what allowance doth hee make him according to the proportion of his Benefice?
2 Whether is your Minister or Curate a man of honest life, fame and reputation; a quarreller, makebate, sower of strife, sedition, dissention, or doth he commonly vse Ale∣houses, or vnlawfull games, is hee defamed or detected for drunkennesse, swearing, swaggering, or any indecent mis∣behauiour, to the disgrace of his holy function and calling? 3 Doth your Minister catechise the youth of the Parish vpon Sundayes in the aftermone, halfe an hower before e∣uening prayer, in that Catechisme authorised in the common booke, and no other, and if any Parishioners refuse to send their Children, or Seruants to be Catechised, let them bee presented? 4 Whether doth your Minister admitt to preach in his Cure any stranger without requiring his Licence, or any in∣conformeable man, or suspended from Preaching, and if yea, how often, and whom hath he so admitted? 5 Hath your Minister preached against, or confuted any Doctrine deliuered by any other minister, in the same, or any other Church within the Diocesse, before he hath acquainted the Bishop therewith, and bin directed by him what to doe: to the disturbance of the Churches peace, or the scandall, or offence of others? 6 Hath your Minister preached or taught any new, and strange Doctrine, contrary vnto, or disagréeing from the booke of Articles, and the literall sense thereof? 7 Doth your Minister vse in his prayer, to pray for the King, the Quéene, Clergie, Counsell, &c. and conclude with the Lords prayer according to the 55. Canon.
8 Haue you any superinducted Preacher, or Lecturer in your Parish: doth he twice in the yeare at least, reade Di∣uine Seruice, both morning and euening two seuerall Sun∣dayes, dayes, publikely in his surplice: doth hee twice a yeare ad∣minister the Sacraments with such Rites and Ceremonies as be prescribed in the Communion booke, according to the 56. Canon? 9 Doth your Minister solemly bid holidayes, and fasting dayes in the weeke following, doth he marry any without as∣king the banes thrice, doth he of his owne head and volunta∣tarie motion, appoynt or kéepe any solemne fastes, publikely or in priuate howses, other then such as by law are, or by authoritie shall be appoynted, or is he present at any such, in, or out of his Parish: Doth he hold, or frequent any méetings for Sermons, commonly called Prophesyings, or Exercises in market townes or other places: Doth hee vpon any pre∣tence whatsoeuer by Fasting and Prayer take vpon him to cast out any Deuill, or Deuills in any obsessed, or possessed person: 10 Doth your Minister vpon euery Sunday when there is no sermon, read an Homily, or some part therof, doth he once in the yeare reade ouer the booke of Canons, vpon some Sun∣dayes, or Holidayes, before euening prayer, according to the Iniunction from his Maiestie? 11 Doth your Minister vpon euery Wenseday and Fri∣day, reade the Letanie in your Parish Church, or Chappell, according to the 15. Canon? 12 Doth your Minister alwaies, and at euery time both morning and euening, reading diuine seruice, and admini∣string the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, ware the Surplice according to the Canons, and doth he ne∣uer omitt wearing of the same at such times? 13 Doth your Minister vse in his common course of life, that decent apparrell, answerable to his calling and degrée, both abroad and at home, in iournyes and otherwise, as is
ordayned by the 74. Canon. 14 Hath any man resyding in your Parish being a Dea∣con, or Priest, relinquished his Function, and betaken him∣selfe, to a lay mans life, or vocation? 15 Doth any Person of what degrée or calling soeuer, kéepe or retayne in his house any Chaplyn, or Minister, to reade Prayers, Preach, instruct his Family, who are they; how many, of what condition or degrée? 16 Doth your Minister reside, and dwell vpon his Par∣sonage, and Vicarage house, or elsewhere, doth he kéep it in good and sufficient reparations or not? 17 Doth your Minister yearely in Rogation wéeke, for the knowing and distinguishing of the boundes of Parishes, & for obtayning Gods blessing vpon the fruites of the ground, walke the Perambulation, and say, or sing in English, the Gospells, Epistles, Letanie, and other deuout prayers, to∣gether with the Letanie, the hundred and third, and hundred and fourth Psalmes? 18 Whether your Minister be knowne to be, or is vehe∣mently suspected to bee, an Vsurer, regrator, or to vse any other scandalous and difamed trade, and course of life? 19 Doth your Minister before the seuerall times of ad∣ministring the holy Communion, especially before Easter, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if they haue their con∣sciences troubled, to resort vnto him, or some other learned and discréete Minister, to reueale, and open his greefe, and disquietmentes, that so he may receiue such Ghostly counsell and comfort, that his conscience may bee quieted, and him∣selfe receiue the benefit of Absolution?
20 If any man confesse his secret and hidden sinnes to the Minister, for the disburthening of his conscience and re∣ceiuing consolation, doth, or hath the Minister at any time reuealed that thing committed to his trust and secrisie, con∣trarie to the 113. Canon? Articles concerning Matrimonie. 1 HAue any bin married within your Parish, that were within the degrées of affinitie, or consanguinity by the law of God forbidden; if any, present their names? 2 Haue any within your Parish, béene married secretly in priuate houses, or without their parents, or gouernors con∣sent signified, being vnder the age of One and Twenty yeares? 3 Doe any person lawfully married, liue asunder, vn∣lawfully, and in whom is the defaulte? 4 Haue any persons (there banes being not thrice publi∣shed in the Church) béene married without Licence, who were present at such Marriages, and what Minister marri∣ed them? 5 What Popish Recusants, or their children haue béene married in your Parish, in what sort was that Matrimonie solemnized, when, and by whom? Articles concerning the Church-wardens. 1 BEE the Church-wardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners, according to the 89. Canon, and whe∣ther hath any taken vpon him to be Church-warden, being not chosen, or hath any continued one yéere in his office with∣out a new choyse?
2 Haue any Church-wardens retained any of the Church goods, and not made a iust accompt of what they haue recei∣ued, and expended? 3 Haue your Churchwardens, and Sidemen béen, and are they diligent in their office, to sée decencie kept in the Church; and order in the tyme of Common prayer, and ad∣ministration of the Sacraments, and that there be noe dis∣turbance, but sobernesse and quietnesse in the Church. And doe the Churchwardens kéepe a booke in your parish, wherein the Names of euery strange Preacher in your parish is set downe, and haue the Churchwardens suffered any to preach not shewing or hauing no Licence? Articles concerning the Parishioners. DOe any in your Parish prophane the Sunday by vnlaw∣full games, drinking, or tipling in the tyme of common prayer or Sermon; and by working and doing the ordinarie workes of their vocation and trades? 2 Are there any in your parish that doe impugne or speake against the Rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawfull vse of them; And the gouernement of this Church vnder his Maiestie by Archbishops, Bishops and o∣ther ecclesiasticall officers?
3 Who in your Parish doe come to Sermon onely, and not to diuine Seruice, And who doe not reuerently behaue themselues during the time of diuine seruice, deuoutly knée∣ling, when the generall confessinn of Sins, the Letany, the Ten Commandements, and all Prayers and Collects are read, and vsing all duly, and lowly reuerence, when the bles∣sed Name of the Lord Iesus is mentiened, and standing vp when the Articles of the Beleife, The Magnificat, Nunc di∣mittis, Te Deum, Benedictus, & Gloria Patri, &c. are read, who doe couer their heads heads in the Church during the whole time of Diuine seruice vnlesse it be in ease of necessi∣ty, in which case they may weare a night-cap, or who do giue themselues to babling, talking, or walking, and are not at∣entiue to heare the word read and Preached? 4 Is there any of your parish hauing a Preacher to their Minister, that doe absent themselues from his sermons, and resort to other places, to heare other preachers: Or doe any in your parish communicate or baptize their children in any other parish? 5 Are there any in your parish that refuse to haue their children baptized, or themselues to receiue the Communion of your Minister, taking exception against him: or haue a∣ny wiues that refuse to come to Church according to the booke of common Prayer, to giue thanks to God for their safe deliuerance, in a decent habite, as hath béene anciently ac∣customed? 6 Hath any in your Parish spoken slaunderous and re∣proachfull words against your Minister, to the scandall of his vocation, or against his Neighbour, defaming them touching any crime of Ecclesiasticall cognizance? 7 Whether doe any in your parish exercise any trade, or labour; buy, or sell or kéepe open shops, or set out any wares to be sold vpon Sundayes, or Holidayes by themselues, their Seruants, or Apprentices, or haue otherwise prophaned the sayd dayes? 8 Is the Fift of Nouember kept holy, and thanks giuing made to God, according to the order set forth in that behalfe.
9 Is there any in your Parish that bee, or are commonly knowne, or reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy name, Drunkards, Adulterers, Fornicators, incestuous persons, concealors, or harbourers, of Fornicators, or Adulterers: Haue any béene defected or vehemently suspected of such no∣torious crimes, & what penance haue they done for the same? 10 What person, or persons haue dyed, and departed this mortall life since the Second day of February last past, and whether did they make any last wils, or Testaments, and who were their Executors, or whether dyed they intestate, and who hath the administration of their Goods; and what be the names of such deceased, and Executors, and admini∣strators. 11 Whether haue any in your parish administred the goods of any person deceased without lawfull authority; and before he or they haue proued the will or Testament of the party de∣ceased, or haue obtayned commission from the Ordinary to dispose the sayd mooueable goods; or are there any Willes vnproued, or goods not administred. 12 What persons be Excommunicate within your parish and for what cause to your knowledge, and doe any of them repayre to the Church, in time of prayer vnabsolued? 13 Whether haue any in your parish giuen to the Church∣wardens or Side-men, or to any of them, any euill wordes for doing their duties according to their Oathes and consci∣ence, in making presentment for any fault? 14 Whether haue any within your Parish harboured any woman vnlawfully begotten with childe, and haue suffered her to depart away vnpunished. Articles concerning Schoolemasters, Physiti∣ans, and Chirurgions and Parish Clarkes. 1 Is there any Schoolemaister in your Parish that teacheth publikely or priuately, not licensed by the Ordinary, the Bishop of the Diocesse. Doth he teach any Papists, or sectu∣aries children that come not to Church. And doth he instruct all his Schollers to learne the short Catechisme, by Law e∣stablished, contayned in the booke of common Prayer. Is he a graduate, and sufficient to teach.
2 What Physitian or Chirurgion is in your parish-vnli∣censed, and being not a Doctor of Physicke, in eyther of the Uniuersities, doth practise physicke. And what ignorant per∣sons haue left their trade, and taken vpon them to professe physicke, or Chirurgery; and who be they that so abuse the people? 3 Haue you a fitt parish clarke aged Twenty yeares at least, of honest life, able to reade and write. Are his and the Sextons wages payd without fraude; if not, then whose de∣fault is it. By whome is hee chosen: is he diligent in his Office, and seruiceable to the Minister; Doth hee meddle with any thing aboue his Office, doth hee kéepe the Church cleane, the Doores locked. Is any thing lost or spoyled by his default, and doth he execute his Office duly? Articles concerning Ecclesiasticall officers. 1 HAth any Chancellor Deputy, or Surrogate or any o∣ther exercising Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction within his Diocesse, or any Register, Apparitor or other Officer belong∣ing to the Ecclesiasticall Court, exacted any extraordiuary or greater Fées, then heretofore of late hath bin accustomed, or then are expressed in the table of fées set vp in the Consistory? declaring what fees are due? 2 Lastly do you know any other matter worthy of present∣ment, or any other person or persons, which haue committed any fault, or offence contrary to his Maiesties Eccleasticall Lawes, or hereof vehemently suspected, not set downe or ex∣pressed in these Articles, by vertue of your Oathes present the sayd faults, and the names of the persons which haue com∣mitted, or are vehemently suspected for committing the same offences? THere must be a full, and seuerall presentment, or answer made, to euery seuerall Article. FJNJS.
MEmorandum, it is lawfull for every Minister (be he Parson, Vicar, or Curate) to present any enormity, or common fame of any enor∣mous crime that shall arise within his Parish. And whereas it seemeth by the Canon, that the Officers are not to present oftner than twice a yeare: it is to be understood, as in that Canon appeareth, of presentments in generall. But it is lawfull and meete for every Minister, Church-wardens, and Sidemen to make noto∣rious offenders knowne to their Ordinaries, as often as occasion is offered, to the end that such offences may in due time bee punished and re∣formed.
