11314.6 S92578 [ocn]166384436 191555
THE RVLE OF THE RELIGIOVS, OF THE THIRDE ORDER OF SAINT FRANCIS,  both sexes, making the three vovves, and liuing together in Communitie and Cloyster. VVith certaine other things vvhich the leaf follovving doth shevve. IHS. AT BRVXELLES, By Ihon Pepermans, at the golden Bible, 1624.
THE Bulle of Pope Leo the tenth, in vvhich is declared that the professed Sisters of the third order of S. Frā∣cis, living together in Communitie and Cloy∣ster having made the three vovves, are truly Religious and may en∣ioye the privileges gran∣ted to the Freers Minors.
THe perfectiōs of the rule The prayse of the rule. Three privileges which S. Francis obteined of God. Three other privileges grā∣ted him. Seavē other priuileges gran∣ted him. Certaine Indulgences gran∣ted to S. Francis Order. An examin of conscience for à Religious person. Twelue evilles which come by venial sinne. Nine wayes by which we par∣ticipate of others sinnes.
Twelue fruictes of the bles∣sed Sacrament. Twelue Evangelical coun∣sels. The malediction of S. Fran∣cis. The Litanies of our holie Father S. Francis.
QVicumque hanc Regu∣lam secuti fuerint, pax super illos & misericor∣dia. Gal. 6.16. Whosoever shall fol∣lowe this rule, peace v∣pon them, and mercie. Galat. 6.16. Regula est, qua rectum probari solet: quam si fle∣ctes, quicquid ex illa muta∣ueris, iniuria est recti. Se∣neca Epistola 72. A rule is, that vvher∣by the right vseth to be proved: which if thovv
decline, whatsoever thow change of it, is iniurie to the right. Seneca Epist. 72. Nisi ad Regulam, praua non corriges. Vnless by rule thou canst not correct the vvrong. Epist. 11. Regulam tuam gestabis per omne tempus vitae tuae. S. Athanasius lib. de Vir∣ginitate, tom. 3. Thou shalt beare thy rule for al the time of thy life.
Hard, great, difficult, but great are the revvar∣des. S. Hierom. Epist. to Rustic. the monck.
THE PROLOGVE. SAint Francis having a most feruent desire to drawe al men to God of what state or cōdition soeuer. Rested not, but hauing or∣deined for the men his first rule, called the Rule of the Freers Minors, and his se∣cund Rule for women, called of S. Clare, hath also written the thirde Rule, called of Poenance, for retyred persons remayning in the worlde,
Ecclesiastic, and saecular; ma∣ried, and vnmaried; of both sexes: confirmed by Pope Nicolas the fowerth. In this Order verie manie holie persons haue liued, of which a great number are beatified, and some also Canonized in the holie church, as Saint Elizabeth, S. Ludovic, king of France. S. Iuo Priest, S. Elzearius, Count: through whose merites the order is verie much multiplied in al partes of the worlde. VVheras therfore great mul∣titudes
of persons, of both sexes, are gathered toge∣ther into seueral communi∣ties, holding the foresayd third rule, and after the maner of spiritual and Reli∣gious people binding them selues with the three vowes, to witte, of obedience, Pouer∣tie, and Chastitie, the same notwithstanding hath been done by permissiō of the sea Apostolic: which hath holden it for good, and all such per∣sons lawfully professed for true religious. Afterward
Leo the tenth Pope of that name, out of the first rule of Nicolas, aboue related, drewe the rule following and wrote it and cōfirmed it, for all the religious of the third order, of both sexes, liuing in com∣munities and Cloysters; in the forme ensuing, vvhich he wil of al to be observed. And wheras some people ha∣ue been and as yet are found, who wil not acknowlege for religious the professed of this third rule: it was necessarie at the end of the same rule,
heer set downe, to adde the Bul of the sayde Leo the tenth, Pope, out of which it is manifest that euen before his time they haue been hol∣den for true Religious, and that he wil also that all mē do acknowledge and hold them for such, and that no man do cōtradict it, and other things he forbiddeth therein vnder paine of excommunication. He hath endued the fore sai∣de Religious with al priui∣leges giuen and granted to the Freers Minors.
Omnia autem honeste & secundum ordinem fiant in vobis. 1. Cor. 14.40. But let al things be done ho∣nestly and according to or∣der among you.
IN THE NAME OF OVR LOR∣de beginneth the rule of the thirde Order of S. Francis called the Order of Poenance. To our beloued children the Bre∣theren and Sisters of the third Order of S. Francis liuing in Congregation vnder the three essential vovves. LEo the tenth Pope. Belo∣ued sonnes, and daugh∣ters,
health, and Apostolical benediction. Among other thinges committed to our charge and gouernment, those chiefly do make vs so∣licitous, by vvhich, the con∣cupiscenses of the vvorld and flesh being brideled, the quiet state of innocencie, and first peace giuē vs from heauen is knovven to be re∣duced to his original state and perfection. Long since truly for this cause and respecte, Pope Nicolas the fovverth, our predecessor, confirmed and approued the third rule of S. Francis, vvhich he tear∣med
of poenance, by vvhich the holie cōfessor of Christ, ful of the spirite of God, la∣bored to further the salua∣tion of al faithful Christia∣nes. But forasmuch as by cour∣se of time, through the in∣spiration of the holie ghost, not only maried persons, & such as dvvel in the vvorl∣de, (for vvhom the foresay∣de third rule vvas made by S. Francis) but also quires of innumerable virgins ta∣king vpon them the three essential vovves, and some also that of inclosure, by our authoritie, and hauing
builded verie manie mo∣nasteries, not vvithout ma∣nifold fruict and edification of the militant church, sub∣devved their necks vnder the yoake of the foresayde third Order. And because in the saide thirde rule, some things to maried persons accomodated, are inserted vvhich to single, ād virginal estate, vnder this third Rule seruing our lorde, are no vvayes conuenient, for vvhich the pure affectes of chast mindes, are novv & then auerted from entring into the sayde order; vvee according to the vvil of our
lorde, separating the pre∣tious from the vile, doe con¦firme anevv, & approue, the same third rule distinguis∣hed in maner, as follovveth and deliuer the same to you, and your successores to be kept, the tenor vvherof fol∣lovveth, and is such. Of the entrance of Nouices. CHAP. I. THe Brothers, The con∣diti∣on of those that are to be recei¦ued. or sisters to this thirde Order to be receiued ought to be faithful Catholikes, not tyed in ma∣riage, free of debtes, sound
in bodie, prompt in minde, not taxed vvith anie vulgar infamie, reconciled vvith theyr neighbores. And of al¦thees things, before they be receiued, of him vvho hath facultie to receiue them, they are diligently to be ex∣amined. Of the things which the Bro∣thers and Sisters are to pro∣miss in the profession of this third rule. CHAP. II. THe Brothers, and Si¦sters, after thay haue
for a vvhole yeare borne the habit of probation (vvhich ought to be of course cloath according to the iudgement of the visitor) if their con∣uersation shal be thought laudable in the Conuent vvherin thei haue borne the habit of probation, Of the habit of the Bro∣thers and Si∣sters. by the counsail of the discree∣tes of the sayde Convent, let them be receiued to the profession of the sayde or∣der. Of the for∣me of their profe¦ssion. In vvhich profession let them promiss to keep the commandementes of God, and to make satisfaction for the transgressions, vvhich they shall commit against
this third Rule, vvhen of theyr prelates they shal be required, liuing in obedien∣ce, vvithout proprietie, and in chastitie. Of the Faste. CHAP. III. THe Brothers, and Si∣sters, perpetually, on the secōd, fourth, sixt feries, and the sabbath must eate no flesh except on the feast of the natiuitie of our lorde. And from the feast of al saintes vnto the resurrectiō of our lorde euerie fourth
and sixth ferie, they must be tyed to fast. and likevvse euerie sixth ferie of the vvhole yeare. Also from the feast of S. Martin vnto the natiuitie of our lorde let them fast euerie day, adioy∣ning the lent of the vniuer∣sal church, till the resurrec∣tion of our lorde, vvhich neuertheless from quinqua∣gesima they must begin. But on those dayes in vvhich they fast not, let them eat only tvvice a-day. Except that from the feast of Easter vnto the moneth of Octo∣ber, those that labour in pai∣neful, or hard vvork may
eate thrice aday, Of the labo∣rers. the dayes of fast alvvaies excepted. Not vvithstanding trauelers, in∣firme, and vveake persons in time, of necessitie may breake their fast. Of the diuine office, and Prayer. CHAP. IV. THe Brothers and Sis∣ters must in the church keepe silence, Of silen∣ce. specially vvhen mass is celebrated, or the vvord of God propo∣sed. But in other places, let them keepe vvhat by their
superiores concerning si∣lēce shal be ordeined them, they ought also euerie day in the euening, betvven them∣selues, and God, to thinck vvhat they haue done, say∣de, Of mass to be he∣ard for cler∣ckes. for laie. or thought: And everie day (if they can comodious∣ly) they ought to heare mass. And they must procure, that they haue a religious man, vvho on certe in dayes may propose to them the vvorde of God, and induce them to poenance and virtues. And he or she or they vvho by themselues do knovve to say the Canonical hovvres, ought to fulfil the Canoni∣cal
hovvres according to the vse of the holie Roma∣ne church. But those that do not knovve hovve to say the Canonical hovvres, let them say tvvelue Pater nosters for matines, and for everie one of the other hovvres seauē, adding Gloria Patri in the end of euerie Pater noster, adding also Credo, and Mi∣serere mei Deus, in the begin∣ning of Prime ād of Complet. and vvho knovve not thees fore sayde things, must say three times, the Pater noster, for poenance. And as often as they take dinner, or mea∣te, they ought to giuet han∣kes
to God. but of Sacra∣mental confession, Of Con∣fessiō and Cō∣mu∣nion. and re∣ceiuing the sacred Commu∣nion; they shal keep the or∣dination of Pope Nicolas the fovverth, that thrice in the yeare they confess, and Cō∣municate, or else the statu∣tes of theyr superiores heer vpon ordeined. Of the ordeyning of Prelates and Officers. CHAP. V. EVerie house, if it shal be a Monasterie of men, shal haue a Superior of this
fraternitie, vvho shal be called the Local minister. But if of vvomen, she shal be called the Mother: and they shal be chosen by their conuents, or instituted by theyr Prouincial superiors, or General visitor so ne∣uertheless, Of their sub∣iectiō to the or∣der of Fre∣ers Mi∣nores that none be perpetual, but for a certein time. Which Ministers, and Mothers shal obey in al things, vvich belong to this present rule, to the Pro∣uincial ministers of the or∣der of Minores of B. S. Fran∣cis and to the visitors depu∣ted by the same ministers, as long as they shal be in
the sayde offices. But as con∣cerning other offices vvi∣thin the hovvse, they shal keepe theyr ovvne statutes. Of the maner of Conversing within and without. CHAP. VI. WHeras the Brothers and sisters of this fra∣ternitie are called of poenā∣ce, Of the qua∣litie of their vestu¦re. it behoueth them to ab∣staine from al curiositie, as∣vvel in vesture, as other things vvhat soeuer. And according to the vvholso∣me counsel of the prince of
the Aposteles Saint Peter, o∣ther vaine ornamēts of this vvorlde layde asyde, they ought to carie no corporal ornament, but only an hum∣ble, and necessarie tegumēt of theyr bodie. They ought also to auoyd by all meanes access to the courtes of Princes, lordes, or ladies vvhere the delicacies of this vvorlde are had; as our sa∣uior doth vvitnes; Of the spa∣ring of spe∣ach. Nor euer at onie time to be present at dances, playes, sportes, and other vanities of players. They must also be sparing in vvordes, and speaches vvhich seeldom vvithout
sinne are multiplyed. And aboue al things they must abstaine from euerie lye, ād vvhatso euer oath, accor∣ding to the commande¦mēt of our lorde, vnless it be for peace, fidelitie, calumnie, and giuing testimonie. And euerie day at evening a∣mong other things they ought examine themselues, if either lye, or anie oath they haue made, and for euerie one they must say three times Pater noster.
Of the visitation, and care of the sicke. CHAP VII. IF anie Brother or sister of this fraternitie shal fal into infirmitie, the Minister of the hovvse, or Mother, once euerie day by them∣selues, or by another person shal be bound to visite thē. And of the commun goo∣des, they shall diligently cause al thinges necessarie, to be ministred vnto them. let them be bound also to moue the sicke person to
accept poenance, and to ma∣ke a true cōversion to God, by proposing the neerness of death, and the distriction of the diuine iustice, and vvithal the diuine mercie. Of the visitation vvhich the Prelates ought to make of the Brothers and Sisters. CHAP. VIII. THe Prouincial minister of the Freers Minores, or the visitor of the same order, to vvhom he shal
commit it, shal visite euerie yeare, once only in euerie hovvse, vvith presēce of the elders, and the visitation made, he ought not to en∣ter into the offices, or other invvard places of the Sis∣ters. Of en∣tran∣ce of the enclo¦sure. And let neuer the visi∣tor himselfe remaine alone and separate vvith anie Sis∣ter. And the Ministers, and Mothers, ought to tel the vi∣sitor, the defects vvhich vvant correction, like vvise also the other Brothers, Of the incor¦rigi∣ble. and Sisters. And if anie shal be incorrigible, by the iudge∣ment of the discreetes of the hovvse, as infectious cattel
let them be cast out of the congregation. Of the Offices for the dead. CHAP. IX. AFter that anie Brother or Sister shalbe depar∣ted out of this vvorlde, Of ma∣king exe∣quies the Minister, or Mother, shal take care that their exequies be solemnly celebrated: at vvhich, al the Brothers, or Sisters of anie hovvse, vvhe∣re they shal happen to dye, ought personally to be pre∣sent, nor to departe vntil the bodie be put into the graue.
And for the soule of everie one dead, vvithin eight day∣es, let euerie Priest be bound to say one mass, And they that can the psalter, fifty psalmes, but they that can not the psalter, fiftie Pater nosters, and at the end of euerie one, Requiem aeternam. And at the end of euerie yeare, or vvithin euerie yea∣re, euerie Priest ought to say three masses for the de∣ad, those that can the psal∣ter, one psalter, but those that can not the psalter, a hundred Pater nosters vvith Requiem aeternam, at the end of euerie one. And concer∣ning
thees offices of the de∣ad, and other diuine offices, in this present revve anne∣xed, the care is imposed on the Ministers, and Mothers, that they be faithfully dis∣charged. Of the obligation of the things conteined in the rule. CHAP. X. AL and euerie thing in this present rule con∣teined, are counsels, to sau more easilie the soules o the vvayfaring. and none o
them are obligatorie to sin∣ne mortal, or venial, vn∣less, by humane or diuine lavve anie one should be out of some other respect obliged. The Brothers and Si∣sters are neuertheless obli∣ged to do the poenances im∣posed vpon them by theyr superiors, vvhen heer vpon they are required. they are obliged also, to the three essential vovves, pouertie, by hauing nothing in spe∣cial: chastitie, because af∣ter the vovve they cannot contract matrimonie, nor vvithout transgression, mix them selues in vices of the
flesh: and obedience, in as much as toucheth those things, vvithout vvhich this fraternitie can not commo∣diously be manteined. They are also bound to keep in∣closure those Sisters vvhich haue expresly vovved to keep it, vvhich to al and euerie Conuent vve grant, so that the hospitalitie, and charitie, vvhich they are vvont to exercise vvith the infirme, do vvith reputation suffer no detriment. Giuen at Rome at Saint Peters vnder the ring of the fisher, the 20. day of Ianuarie 1521. in the 8. yeare of our Papacy.
THE BVL OF PO∣PE LEO THE TENTH, wherin is declared that the professed Sisters of the third order of saint Francis liuing together in cōmunitie and cloy∣ster, hauing made the three vovves are true Religious, and endued vvith the priuileges giuen to the Freers Minors. To our vvelbeloued sonn Chri∣stopher, of the title of S. Marie of Aracoeli, Priest Cardinal.
LEO THE TENTH, POPE. TO our beloued Sonn, health and Apostolical benediction. Those things vvhich by the sea Apostolic are knovvē to be provident∣ly constituted, or deined, and declared, sometimes the Roman Bishop, according as in our lorde he seeth pro∣fitably to be expedient, hath accustomed, (vvhen it is de∣manded of him) to approue, and of nevve to ordeine, and dispose, least the same in suc∣cess of time be subiect to
impugnatiō. It is true indeed that hertofore Sixtus IV. of happie memorie, our prede∣cessor hath established, and ordeined the Sisters of the third Order of S. Francis li∣ving collegially by making the three essential vovves to be true Religious, and the vovve of obedience, pouer∣tie, and chastitie, by the Si∣sters of the third Order of S. Francis, liuing collegially, then made in the handes of theyr Superiors, or by them for the time hereafter to be made, to haue the force, and validitie of a solemne vovve, and to induce euerie effect,
vvhich a solēne vovve doth induce, made in vvhatsouer of the Religions approued by the Apostolick sea, and to hinder matrimonie to be cōtracted, and to take avvay that vvhich is already con∣tracted. And although vve in the sacred Councel of La∣teran last celebrated for cō∣seruing of peace and vnitie betvven Prelates and Reli∣gious personnes, the same sacred Councel approuing it, haue profitably ordeined, vvilled, and decreed, that the Brothers and Sisters of the foresaid third Order, bearing the habit therof,
and leading collegially vir∣ginal, and vidual, or conti¦nent life by express vovve, ought to enioy al the priui∣leges of the Freers Minores, as in our and our foresaid predecessores letters respec∣tiuely is more fully contei∣ned. Nevertheless, as your vigilancy hath lately related vnto vs, manie Praelates and Rectors of parish, churches chiefly in France, and Ger∣manie affirme the sayde sis∣ters not to be religious, and that therfore they can not enioy the fore sayde priuile∣ges, and do not permit them to haue oratories, and places
for burial, and in their ora∣tories the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and holie oyles, and to sing masses, and make holie vvater, but as mere se∣culars do endeuor to com∣pel them to hear masses, and receiue the Sacraments of the church, in their pa∣rish churches, to the great troble of the sisters, and scā∣dal of verie manie: vvher∣fore you vvho execute the office of General minister of the sayde order of Freers Minors by Apostolical grāt, haue made humble suppli∣cation to vs that vve vvould out of our Apostolikall Cle∣mencie
vouchsafe to appro∣ue, renevv and furthermore intirely to establish the de∣claration of Sixtus 4. and the brief therupon geuen; hence it is that vvee yeelding our consent to such your desires, do by our Apostolick outhori¦tie, by the tenor of thees pre∣sents approue, and renevve, and decree that the sayde declaration of the forena∣med Sixtus our praedecessor vvith al, and everie clause therin conteyned ought to obteine the force of perpe∣tual stabilitie. And moreo∣ver to al and everie Praelate asvvel regular, as saecular and
Rectores of parish churches and al other Ecclesiastical persons, vnder paine of ex∣communication lata senten∣tia, vve forbidd that the say∣de Sisters (vvhom according to the ordinance of our fo∣resaid predecessor, vve de∣clare for true Religious) they do not heare after pre∣sume to hinder in vvhat sort so euer, but that they accor∣ding to the priuileges of the saide Brothers, may haue freely, and lavvefully, ora∣tories vvith a lovve steeple and bel, and in th same o∣ratorie the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in a comely, and
decent place, and also holie oyles for theyr ovvne vse only, and halovved burial in vvhich the bodies of the Sisters decessed by theyr cō∣fessor may be buried, and in the same oratories holie vva¦ter to be solemnly made, ād masses according to theyr deuotiō solemnly to be song and celebrated. And that to hear masses and other diui∣ne offices in anie other pla∣ce then in the sayde orato∣ries, or to receiue the Eccle∣siastical Sacraments of an other, then the confessor secular, or regular by their superiors to them assigned,
by no meanes, by the sayde Prelates and Rectors or anie others to be compelled or any vvay for such respect to be molested: and the con∣fessor him selfe, if he be se∣cular, as long as he shal con∣tinevve in the office of con∣fessor imposed vpon him by his superiors, cannot at al be hindred in the premisses by the ordinaries of the pla∣ces. And notvvithstanding to al and euerie the Arch∣bishops, Bishops, and per∣sons constitute in Ecclesia∣stical dignitie, Metropolita∣nes also, or Canons of Ca∣thedral churches, vvho heer∣vpon
on the behalfe of the saide Sisters shal be requi∣red, by thees presents vve do commande, that they, or tvvo, or one of them by himself, or another, or ot∣hers assisting the sayde sisters, or theyr hovvses in the pre∣misses, vvith safeguard of efficacious defense, do make them to enioy thees like pri∣vileges in peacible possessiō, not permitting them heer∣vpon by the ordinaries and Prelates and foresaide Rec∣tors, or vvhosoeuer els vvrongfully to be molested, repressing the gayne-sayers, & disobedient ād rebellious,
(al Appellation layd asyde;) calling herunto also, if need shal be, the ayde of secular povver: vvhatsoeuer consti∣tutions, Apostolical ordinan∣ces or other of any sort, to these contrarie notvvithstan∣ding. And because it vvold be hard for thees present let¦ters to be sent originally to al prouinces, vve vvil, that to the copies of them sub∣scribed by the hand of a pu∣blic Notarie, and firmed vvith the seale of anie person constitute in Ecclesiastical dignitie, the same credit be fully giuen in iudgement, and out of it, as if the origi∣nals
present vvere shevved or exhibited. Giuen at Ro∣me at Saint Peters vnder the fishers ring, the last day of August 1517. in the fifth year of our Papacie.
THE PERFECTIONS OF THE RVLE CON∣sist in six Seraphicall VVin¦ges, to vvit, in totall O∣bedience, in Euangeli∣call Pouerty, in imma∣culate Chastity, in pro∣found Humility, in Pa∣cificall Simplicity, in Se∣raphicall Charity. OBedience is a Vertue vvhich hath three degrees: the first is Obedience by profession,
vvhich is vvhen one doth accomplish the command∣ment of God, or the Prelate, touching the exteriour. The second is Obedience by con∣formity, vvchich is vvhen the commandment is per∣formed not alone in the ex∣terior, but also vvithout mur∣muration, according to the intention and vvil of him that commandeth. The third is Obedience by vnion, by vvhich he that is truly Obe∣dient, hath no other respect but the pleasure and vvill of God. 2. Euangelicall Pouerty is a vertue that hath three de∣grees:
the first is Pouerty by Profession, that is, to haue no right nor propriety in any thing vvhat soeuer: the se∣cond, to retaine only the simple vse of things necessa∣ry, & rest contented vvith the most vile: the third, not to haue any affection, euen in thinges necessary, but by vvay of constraint to take the bare vse of them. 3. Chastity is a vertue that hath three degrees: the first, Chastity of body, by vvhich all the exteriour members are restrained from any im∣pure or suspicious act: the second, chastity of hart, by
vvhich the hart is preserued from any dishonest or vn∣cleane thought: the third, Chastity of the spirit by vvhich vve not ōly refraine from any dishonest loue, but also from al excessiue delec∣tation or spirituall consola∣tion. 4. Humility is a vertue that hath three degrees: the first is, Humility of knovv∣lege, by the vvhich man doth acknovvledge to be vile and abiect in himselfe: the second is Humility of ex¦hibition, by vvhich the inte∣riour humility is expressed in the exteriour, as by the
attire, by vvordes, and by vvil, and abiect vvorkes: the third is Humility of affectiō, through vvhich a soule doth not only humble herselfe in the sight of God, but also in the sight of men, desiring to be esteemed poore & abiect. 5. Simplicity is a vertue vvhich hath three degrees: the first is simplicity of thoughts, that is, not to enter into higher cogitation then the vnderstanding is capable of, neyther of honours and vvordly dignities, but to es∣teeme himselfe the most vn∣vvorthy to serue God of all others: the second is, Sim∣plicity
in vvords, auoiding all affected curiosity in spe∣ach, speking plainly vvith∣out superfluity, vvhich stil comes of an ill roote, to vvit vanity: the third is Simpli∣city of vvorks, imploying our selues in no other but such as are simple and profi∣table. And a generall rule of this Vertue is to haue a pure; right, and simple intention: but Simplicity vvithout Pru∣dence is not of value: for God loueth those that vval∣ke in Prudence. 6. Charity is a vertue of three degrees: the first is to lone God not only for his
benefits, but also for that he is most vvorthy of it: the se∣cond, is to loue our neigh∣bour, not only for the loue of our neighbour but simply for the loue of God: the third to loue our selues in labou∣ring for vertue, our happi∣nes, and glory; not for our ovvne respect but for the loue of God, and to be plea∣sing vnto him. Prayse of the Rule. THe holy Father S. Fran∣cis, encouraging his Re∣ligious to the obseruance of the Rule, said It vvas the
booke of life: the fruit of vvisdom: the marrovv of the Ghospell: the hope of he∣alth: the path of saluation, the ladder by vvhich one as∣cendeth to heauen: the key of Paradise: and the pledge of Eternall Peace. Three Priuiledges, vvhich our holy Father Saint Frā∣cis obtayned of Almighty God. POpe Gregorie the Ninth said he had vnderstood of the holy Father S. Fran∣cis, that Almighty God had
graunted him three Priui∣ledges: the first that the mo∣re the Religious of his order did increase, the more he vvould prouide for them: the second that none should euer vnhappily dye in the habit; the third that vvho∣soeuer should persecute his Order should be grieuou∣sly punished by Almighty God.
Three other Priuiledges w∣hich he sayd to haue recea¦ued by the Seraphim, when as he appeared vnto him, in the mountayne of Al∣uerne. THe first, that his order should last to the day of Iudgment: the second that vvhosoeuer vvould liue vvic¦kedly in the Order should not indure long: the third that vvhosoeuer did loue his Order although a great sin∣ner, he should receaue and obtaine mercy of Almighty God.
Seauen other Priuiledges vvhich by an Angel vve∣re reuealed vnto the holy F. S. Francis in the Couēt of S. Vrbane, to all that obserued his Rule and dy∣ed in the Order. THe first, that if their in∣tention be good, they shal euer be gouerned by the holy Ghost: the second, that in this their perigrina∣tion they shall stil be par∣ticularly defended, & in all their temptations also, from mortall sinne: the third, that
the fire of Purgatory shall not detaine them after their death from the immediate inioying of euerlasting glo∣ry: the fourth, that they shall receaue in themselues that promise of our Sauiour ma∣de vnto his Apostles, of sit∣ting on the tvvelue seates to iudge the tribes of Israel: the fifth that such as loue the Order Almighty God vvill increase his graces, and blessinges tovvardes them in this vvorld and the next: the sixth, that those vvho are enemies to his order, & do persecute it vvithout repen∣ting, either their life shal be
shortned, or if it be long it shalbe replenished vvith mi¦sery, and after their death be eternally lost: the seauēth that there shall euer be Re∣ligious of good and holy li∣fe, louers of the honor of God, & their Religion, in this Order. Certayne Indulgēces graun∣ted amongst many others, by the souerayne Bishops of Rome, vnto all the Reli∣gious of the Order of Saint Francis.
THe Religious both men and vvomen shal gaine a plenary both à paena & culpa, from paine & fault, on the daies of their Cloathing, Pro∣fession, and article of death: also at the article of death, the Fathers & Mothers of the said Brothers & Sisters may haue the same giuen them, by any lavvful Confessor. 2. All the Religious that shall receaue the most holy Sacrament vpon all Sundayes throughout the yeare, all the feastes of our Blessed Saui∣our, & of our Blessed Lady, of the Saints of the Order, shall gaine a plenary Indul∣gence,
And if it happen that any could not confesse & communicate these dayes, their hindrance being lavv∣full, they may gaine the same Indulgence if after being freed of that impediment, they confesse and communi∣cate for that intention, not∣vvithstanding the day of the feast be past. 3. The Religious vvho shall recite the Corone of our Lord, that is 33. Pater nosters, and Aue Maria, in honour of the 33 years he liued in the vvorld, or the Coronne or Rosary of the Glorious Virgin Mary, con∣tayning
72. Aues vvith 7. Pa∣ter nosters and one Pater no∣ster and Aue for the Souerai∣gne Bishop, do gaine plenary Indulgence, Like vvise the same is graunted as often as they say the seauen Psalms and Letanies, the Gradual Psalms, the office of the dead, or assist at the Letanies of euery second Sunday in the moneth. 4. As often as the Religi∣ous eyther by day or night, in vvhat place soeuer they be, shall recite six Pater no∣sters and Aues, and Gloria Pa∣tri, fiue for the necessities of the Church, and the sixt for
the Popes Holines, shall gai∣ne the Indulgences of the Stations of Hierusalem, of Rome, of S. Iames, and of Portiuncula. 5. Item reciting the Psal∣me Exaudiat te Dominus in die tribulationis &c. three Pater nosters and Aues, for the Po∣pes intention, they shallgaine all the Indulgences graunted by the Soueraigne Bishops, to the Confraternity of the Rosary, to the Churches of our Blessed Lady of Loreto, of Mont-serat, and of saint Ia∣mes de Compostella. 6. Euery time they say the Angelus Domini at the accu∣stomed
time vvhē it ringeth, a plenary Indulgence; and the like euery time they cō∣municate. As often as they heare the Masse of the Con∣ception of our Blessed Lady, praying for his Holinesād the vniuersall Church, is graun∣ted a Plenary indulgēce, Say∣ing the diuine office, or the office of our Blessed Lady, besides all other Indulgence, they gaine 100. yeares of pardon. 7. Saying once euery day one Pater noster and Aue Ma∣ria, calling deuoutly three ti∣mes vpon the Holy Name of Iesus, they gaine 3000. yea∣res
of pardon. 8. It is graunted vnto the Sisters that foure times a yea∣re they may haue a generall absolution in ful remission of their sinnes vvhatsoeuer, and be restored to the estate of innocency, as fully as they could receaue it from his Ho∣lines: & the like is graunted them on euery feast of our Blessed Sauiour, our Blessed Lady, on the feast of S. Peter and S. Paul, S. Francis, Saint Clare, S. Catharine Queene and Martyr, the feast of All Saints, and euery day of the holy vveeke; yet notvvith∣stāding these graces vvil pro∣fit
nothing, vnto those vvho should vpon presumption to gaine them, sin more freely. They may apply all priuiled∣ges and Indulgences graun∣ted to themselues, vnto the faithfull departed. Note that for the gayning of these or any indulgences is requisite the applying of the intention for the same. An examen of Conscience for a Religious Person. WHat are his euill incli∣nations and bad custo∣mes, vvhence they proceed, & vvhat vvarre & exercise
he vseth against them. 2. What Passions most rai∣gne in him, ād by vvhat mea∣nes he hath hitherto indea∣uoured to mortify them. 3. What are his principall, most frequent, and most trou∣blesome temptations, and hovv he hath hitherto beha∣ued himself in them. 4. If he be indifferent in accepting any imployment of the holy Religion, vvillin∣gly accepting vvhatsoeuer is appointed him. 5. Whether God be the only intētion of all his actiōs, or if he seeke proper commo∣dity or praise in his vvorkes.
6. Whether he doe not prefer exteriour matters, as good qualities and naturall gifts and graces, before the study of vertue and perfe∣ction. 7. If he desire, and be most contēted his Superiours should haue knovvledge of all his faultes. 8. If he be confident and open harted to his Superiours & confer vvith them in any necessary occasion of things touching the good of his sou∣le. 9. Whether he be truly vnited by affection vnto his Superiours, or if he haue any
auersion, & from vvhence it proceedes. 10. Whether he be not too familiar vvith some, and if that familiarity be not hurt∣full to him self and the other party, and if by that occasion he loose not time, & disedify others. 11. If he loue and imbrace the interiour and exteriour mortifications, and rather those matters that be humble & abiect, then of esteeme and credit. 12. If he obserue al his Rules & Constitutions, of vvhich he maketh lesse estee∣me, & for vvhat reason.
13. If he desire truly to be penitent for all his faultes, truly confessing them vvith strong purpose of amende∣ment. 14. If he make a particular examen euery day vpon one imperfectiō and vvith vvhat preparation he receaueth the holy Sacrament: and hovv he frequenteth the holy exercise of prayer. 15 If his vvordes & dis∣courses in Recreatiō or other vvise, as also vvith secular be of edification: hovv he obser∣ueth silence, and spendeth his time.
Tvvelue great Euills vvhich come by Veniall sinnes. FIrst, they doe so darken and obscure the eyes of our vnderstanding, that they cannot see almighty God. 2. They kill the feruour of di∣lection and diuine Charity. 3. They hinder our prayers and petitions from being he∣ard by God. 4. They defile and spotte the soule. 5. They contristate the holy Ghost, and reioice the enemy. 6. They depriue vs of the svveet and amiable familiarity of our Blessed Sauiour. 7. They
are a great cause and meanes of our fall into more grie∣uous sinnes. 8. They cause a soule to fall into great slouth and tepidity in all goodnes. 9. They vveaken exceedingly the forces of the soule, from resisting her bad inclinatiōs. 10. They incline our affectiōs and desires to temporall mat∣ters. 11. They prolong and augment the paines in pur∣gatory. 12. They exceedingly hinder vs from seeing & en∣ioying the presence of God.
Nyne wayes by which we par∣ticipate of the sinnes of others. BY Counsell. 2. By com∣mandment. 3. By consent. 4. By procuration or persua∣sion. 5. By flattery 6. By hol∣ding our peace of his fault of vvhome vve ought to haue care. 7. To dissemble or not to reprehend, and hinder if vve be thereunto obliged. 8. In participating of the mat∣ter, vvhereof such a sinne doth proceed. 9. In defending the fault of another.
Twelue fruits of the B. Sa∣crament. IT not only maketh possi∣ble but also most easy the forsaking and leauing of all earthly & fading thinges. 2. It causeth great profit & aduancement in heauenly thinges. 3. It rayseth the soule a¦boue all things created. 4. It inforceth the spirit vnto al good. 5. It illuminateth and gi∣ueth light to the vnderstan∣ding, in the knovvledge of God.
6. It causeth an inflamed feruerous possession of the pure loue of God alone. 7. It is the consummation of al vertue & perfection. 8. It giueth the soule pos∣session of the treasury of all goods & riches. 9. It causeth a continuall interiour ioy. 10. It indevveth her vvith a happy security & assurāce, in seeing him in vvhom she belieueth. 11. A perfect peace begin∣ning in this life & cōtinuing for eternity. 12. A parfaict vnion vvith Almighty God, vvherby the
soule is made participant of all diuine perfection. Twelue Euangelicall Coun∣sayles. POuerty, vvherby a Religi∣ous person is estranged from all terrestriall things. 2. Obedience vvithout vvhich no vertue is perfect. 3. Chastity vvhich beanti∣fieth and adorneth all other vertues. 4. Charity tovvardes our enemies, vvherby all spiri∣tuall infection of any sinne is expelled. 5. Mansuetude, vvhich (as
sayth S. Ambrose) is the me∣dicine of the hart, vvherby the soule is illuminated by God Almighty, to knovv his secrets. 6. Mercy, vvhich exten∣deth it selfe to the help of e∣uery one vvithout limite, en∣treth svveetly into the hart vvith pitty, & cleanseth it from all sinne. 7. The simple vvord al∣vvaies fructifying in God, in purity of intention, in chari∣ty &c. 8. Shunning occasiō of sin∣ne, cōducting the soule vvith prudency, and security to the purchase of vertue.
9. Right intention, vvhich maketh all vvorkes to pro∣ceed of humility, to the edifi∣cation of our neighbour. 10. Cōformity of the vvor∣ke vnto the vvord, vvherby all special instruction is seri∣ously, & vvith all profit ac∣cepted. 11. Auoiding of vn profita∣ble solicitude, therby better to attend vnto spiritual illu∣minations, vvhich are obscu∣red by earthly cares. 12. Fraternal Correction, vvhich is a light that illumi∣nateth the vnderstanding, ac∣cording to that of the Apost∣le, saying, That vvhich is cor∣rected
is made apparent by the light that follovveth. The Malediction of S. Francis. BY thee O Eternall, and Heauenly Father, and all the celestial Court, and by me most Vnvvorthy, be ac∣cursed all those Brethren, vvho by their euill example doe ruine and destroy the thinges vvhich thou hast bu∣ilt, and ceasest not build, by so many holy Brethren of this Order.
Cum votum voueris, &c.Deut. 23.21. WHen thovv hast vo∣vved a vovve to our lorde thy God, thovv shalt not slacke to pay it: because our lorde thy God vvill re∣quire it. And if thovv delay, it shal be reputed to thee for sinne. If thovv vvilt not pro∣miss, thovv shalt be vvithout sinne. But that vvhich is once gone out of thy lippes, thovv shalt obserue, and shalt do as thovv hast promised to our lorde thy God, and hast spo∣ken vvith thy proper vvil, and thyne ovvne mouth.
Vovve ye, and render to our lorde your God. Psalm. 75. They shal vovve vovves to our lorde, and pay them. Isa∣as. 19.21. Psalm. 21.26. I vvil render my vovves in the sight of them that feare him. S. Bernarde in his treatie of precept and dispensation. PErfect obediēce knovveth no lavve, it is not streitned vvithin boundes: nor content vvith the breadth of our pro∣fession, vvith larger vvil it is caried to al the latitude of charitie: and to al that is en∣ioyned
free, by the vigor of a liberal and cheerful minde considering no mean: vnto infinite libertie is extended. Out of a treatie of S. Bernar∣dine, to which the title is. Qui habendi Proprietarij. They violate their vovve and are proprietaries. I. WHO vvhatsomever thing, or of vvhom∣soeuer giuen, do hide in frau∣de from their Prelate, or do not forthvvith restore it, vvhen he cōmandeth, either that it be restored, or lent, or
giuen to another. 2. Who change the vse of things of the communitie in∣to their proper vse, or giue them to others, vvithout li∣cence of the Prelate. 3. Who hide the key least the Prelate take onie thing avvay, or othervvise dispose: and if onie thing be taken avvay, are trobled, and do murmur. 4. Who deliberately are of that minde, that if onie thing vvere taken avvay, or called back, they vvold not forthvvith yelde. 5. Who vvill not spend Almes deposed or giuen for
their necessitie, but by a kind of prouidence for the time to come, or treasuring, do re∣serue it: seeking in the mean time more. LITANIAE B. P. N. S. FRANCISCI. KYrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christe audi nos. Christe exaudi nos. Pater de cis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus Miserere nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, Misere∣re nobis. Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancte Francisce, Pater ama∣bilis, ora pro nobis. Pater admirabilis. ora. Pater benigne, ora. Pater venerabilis, ora. Vexillifer Iesu Christi, ora. Eques Crucifixi, ora. Imitator filij Dei, ora. Seraphim ardens, ora. Fornax Charitatis, ora. Arca Sanctitatis ora. Cultor pacis, ora. Vas Puritatis, ora. Norma Iustitiae, ora. Speculum prudentiae, ora.
Regula Poenitentiae, ora. Magister Obedientiae, ora. Exemplar Virtutum, ora. Patriarcha Pauperum, ora. Profligator Criminum, ora. Lumen tuae Patriae, ora. Decus Morum, ora. Viuificator Mortuorum, ora. Saluator Famelicorum, ora. Obsequium Leprosorum, or. praeco magni Regis, ora. Forma Humilitatis, ora. Consors Sublimitatis. ora. Victor Vitiorum, ora. Dux Minorum, ora. Praedicator Siluestrium, ora. Portans dona Gloriae, ora. Auriga militiae nostrae, ora. Nouis vtens Prodigijs, ora.
Caelum caecis aperiens, ora. Gratum gerens obsequium, ora pro nobis. Templum Christo consecrās, ora pro nobis. Hostes malignos proterens, ora pro nobis. Tenens vitae brauium, ora. Spargens virtutum munera, ora pro nobis. Amplians iter ad gloriā, ora. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Do∣mine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Exaudi nos Do∣mine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.
Vers. Ora pro nobis Beate Pater Francisce. Resp. Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi. Oremus. DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam Beati Francisci meritis foetu nouae prolis amplificas: tribue nobis ex eius imitatio∣ne terrena despicere, & cae∣lestium donorum semper par¦ticipatione gaudere. Per Do∣minum nostrum, &c. Amen. FINIS.
APPROBATIO IVssu R. P. N. F. Andreae à Soto Sereniss. Infanti His∣paniarum à Confessionibus, Commissarij Generalis, re∣gulam hanc Tertij Ordinis S. Francisci ex Latino in idio∣ma nostrum Anglicanū ver∣sam, cum adicta Bulla, ad exemplaria latina diligenter contuli, & peromnia ijsdem conformem inueni. 30. Octo∣bris, 1624. Ita Testor F. Bonauentura Frat. Minorum Anglorum, Duac. Guardianus.
