D2632ab R176027 [ocm]80922569 191863
PROPOSALS For Printing by Subscription, the Second, Third and Fourth Volumes OF THE French Book of Martyrs, Or HISTORY of the Famous Edict of Nantes. Which Three Volumes with the First already Publish'd, CONTAIN An Account of all the Persecutions that have been in France, from the beginning of the Reformation (there) down to this present Time, comprehending the Reigns of Henry III. Henry IV. Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. The whole Work Faithfully Extracted from all the Publick and Secret Memoirs that cou'd possibly be procured, by that Learned and Judicious Divine Mounsieur Bennoit. Printed first in French by the Authority of the States of Holland and West-Friezland, and now Translated into English. With Her Majesties Royal Priviledge. THE First Volume of this French Martyrology already Publish'd, having fully answered the Expectations of the Curious, it has occasion'd several Gentlemen to desire a spee∣dy Publication of the whole Work; but seeing that cannot be done with the Expedition ex∣pected without Great Expence, I shall therefore to gratifie those who are impatient for the remaining Volumes, make Proposals for Printing the Second, Third and Fourth by way of Subscription, not doubting but that such a Seasonable Work as this is, (which has been Patronized by the States of Holland, and born a Second Impression there in a few Weeks) will meet with answerable Encouragement here, seeing her Majesties Royal License for the Printing of it, and the Expectations of so many Great Persons as have desir'd it in our own Language, will not a little recommend it to the English Nation. As for the Author, his Preface to the First Volume does yet promise fairer things, as his Corres∣pondence for the carrying on so Great a Work extending to such distant places, his access to so many Publick and Private Libraries, as well as to the Cabinets and Studies of the Exacter sort, where Eugitive Pieces secure themselves. His Assistances by Manuscripts and Collecti∣ons, especially those of the Learned and Ingenious Monsieur Tesserean, and the Memoirs he left at his Death, with other helps, which will best appear in the Work it self. If History be properly Consecrated to preserve to Posterity the Remembrance of things the most remarkable that fall out in the World, it cannot be deny'd, but that the deplorable End of the Liberty which the Protestants enjoy'd so long a Time in France, is one of the most Memo∣rable Accidents that merits to be taken in hand for the Information of succeeding Ages. There is not any thing in that Revolution which does not deserve particular Reflctions; up∣on whatever Circumstance a Man fixes his Mind, he shall find enough to exercise his Thoughts either at wondering at the Malice and Fury of those that were the Authors of it, or in admiring at the Patience of those that were envelop'd in it. It is not to be imagin'd what has pass'd in that Kingdom upon this Occasion, especially within these last Thirty Years. It was very necessary therefore to establish things in their true Light, and to Collect in a
History all the sorrowful Accidents of this Revolution, (we having as yet no Faithful Colle∣ction of them any where extant) to the intent that thereby a durable and perpetual Monument might be erected, of a Catastrophe worthy to be Eterniz'd in all its Circumstances, and therein an Account given of all the Martyrdoms and Persecutions which in France have befallen those who for these Fourscore and ten Years have lived in that Kingdom under the Faith of the most Solemn Edict that ever was Publish'd. The PROPOSALS are, I. THAT these Second, Third, and Fourth Volumes will contain about Three Hun∣dred Sheets, which shall be Printed on the same Paper, Character and Size with the First Volume already Published, that Paper and Character being the very same with these Pro∣posals. II. That the Price of these Three Volumes to Subscribers shall be Twenty four Shillings in Sheets, to be paid at four equal payments, viz. Six Shillings in hand (for the speedy carrying on the Work) Six Shillings upon the Delivery of the Second Volume, Six Shil∣lings more at the Delivery of the Third, and 6 s. at Delivery of the Fourth. III. And for the further Encouragement of those who promote it, any Gentleman who will subscribe for six Books, shall have a seventh Gratis, which will reduce the Price of the Three Volumes to about One pound six pence three Farthings. IV. The Price of these Three Volumes to those that do not Subscribe, shall not be less than Twenty seven Shillings in Sheets. V. All who intend to Assist in the Advancement of this Useful Work, are desir'd to send in their Subscriptions with all speed unto the Ʋndertaker here undernamed, where Printed Receipts shall be given them; and if they arise to a competent Number, the Second Volume shall be publish'd by Christmss next, and the Third and Fourth by Lady-Day following. VI. That to render the Work Compleat, there shall be a large Alphabetical Table to each Volume. VII. Those who expect the Benefit of these Proposals, are to send in their First Payment before the 24th. of December next, for after that Day no Subscription shall be taken in. PPOPOSALS are to be had of the UNDERTAKER Iohn Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey, And of most Booksellers in London and the Countrey. There is Newly Published, ☞ THe Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate Dr. Thomas Barlow, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln, containing divers Discourses Theological, Philosophical, Histo∣rical, &c. in Letters to several Persons of Honour and Quality. To which is added, the Resolution of many abstruse Points; as also Directions to a Young Divine for his Stu∣dy of Divinity, and Choice of his Library, with great Variety of other Subjects. Published from his Lordships Original Papers. Price Bound 6 s. Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.
