14787.4 S106765 99842475 177937
A TREVVE DESCRIPTION OF the nobill race of the Stevvards: succedinge Lineallie to the Croun of Scotland vnto this day: And novv this yeir 1603. vnto the Croun of England: vvith thair lyvvelie portraturs, declaring exactlie vvhat tyme thay begane to reigne, hovv lange thay reigned, and of vvhat qualities thay vvere. Steward family coat of arms IN DEFENCE
portrait of Robert II ROBERTVS II REX SCOTORVM RObert the secund sur-named Blear-eic, the first of the Stevvar∣des, son to VValter Stevvard, & Mariorie Bruyse K. Robert Bruyse his daughter, succeedit to his mothers brother, in the yeir of the vvarld 5341. in the yeir of Christ 1371. A gud and a peaceable Prince. He maried first Eufeme daughter to Hug Earl of Rosse, vvho bare vnto him David Earl of Strathern. VValter Earl of Athol, and Alexander Earl of Buchan, Lord Badzenoth: After her death for th' affection he bare to his childern, begotten before his first mariage, he maried Elizabeth Mure, daughter to Sir Adam. Mure Knight, VVho had borne vnto him Iohn, thereafter called Robert 3. Earle of Carrict Robert Earle of Fife and Menteith, and Eufeme vvife to Iames Earle of Dovvglas. He died at Dun donald the 19. yeir of his reign, & vvas buried at Scone.
portrait of Robert III ROBERTVS III REX SCOTORVM, RObert the thred sur-named Iohn Farne-yeir, succeded to his fa∣ther, in the yeire of the vvarld 5360. in the yeire of Christ 1390. A quiet and peaceable prince: He maried Anabel Drummond, daugh∣ter to the Laird of Stobhall, vvho bare vnto him David, the Prince, Duke of Rothesay, that died in prisone of verie extreame famine, at Falkland, and Iames the first taken in his voyage to France, and detei¦ned a captive, almost the space of 18. yeires in England. He died of displeasure at Rothesay, vvhen he heard of the death of th'one sonne, and captivitie of the other, and vvas buried at Paisley, in the 16. yeir of his reigne.
portrait of James I IACOBVS, I, REX, SCOTORVM, IAmes the first began to reigne in the yeire of the vvarld 5394. in the yeire of Christ 1424. He vvas a gude, learned, vertuous and just prince. He maried Ieane daughter to Iohn Duke of Summerset and Marques Dorcet, sonne to Iohn of Ghent, 3. sonne to Edvvard 3. the victorious King of England, vvho bare vnto him Iames the 2. and sex daughters Margaret vvife to Levves II. the Daulphin, thereafter King of France, Elizabeth the Duches of Britaine, Ieane countes of Hunt∣ley, Eleonor Duches of Austria, Marie vvife to the Lord of Camp-ve∣re, & Anabella. He vvas slaine at Perth traiterouslie be VValter Erle of Athole, and Robert Grahame and their confederates, in the 31. yeire of his reigne, gif vve count from the death of his father: and in the 13. yei∣re, gif vve count from his deliverance out of England, and vvas buried at the Charter-house of Perth quhilk he builded.
portrait of James II IACOBVS, II REX SCOTORVM, IAmes the secund succeeded to his father, in the yeire of the vvarld 5407 in the yeire of Christ 1437. a prince subject to great troubles in his youth. He maried Marie daughter to Arnold Duke of Geldre, Sistres daughter to Charles, surnamed Audax, the last Duke of Bur∣gundy &c. VVho bare vnto him three sonnes, Iames the 3. Iohn Erle of Mar. Alexander Duke of Albanie, and Marie vvife first to Thomas Boyde, Erle of Arrane, and after his decourting to Iames Hammilton of Cadzou. He vvas slaine at the sege of Roxburgh in the 24. yeir of his reigne.
portrait of James III IACOBVS, III, REX, SCOTORVM IAmes the thred, succeeded to his father in the yeire of the vvarld 5430. in the yeire of Christ 1460. A prince corrupted by vvicked Courtiers. He maried Margaret daughter to Christianus 1. surnamed Dives, King of Denmarke, Norvvay and Svveden. He vvas slaine at the fielde of Bannock-burne, in de 29. yeire of his reigne, and vvas bu∣ried at Cambus-kenneth.
portrait of James IV IACOBVS, IIII, REX, SCOTORVM, IAmes the feird, succeeded to his father, in the yeire of the vvarld 5459. In the yeire of Christ 1489. A noble and courageous Prince. He maried Margaret, Eldest daughter to Henry the 7. Erle of Riche∣mond, King of Englnnd and Elizabeth dauchter to Edvvard the 4. In vvhose tvva persones the tvva houses of Lancaster and Yorke vvere vnited, and the bludie civill vvarres of England pacified. He vvas slai∣ne at Flovvdon, in the tvventie five yeire of his reigne.
portrait of James V IACOBVS, V, REX, SCOTORVM, IAmes the fyfte succeeded to his father in the yeire of the vvarld 5484. In the yeire of Christ 1514. A just prince and severe. He ma∣ried first Magdalene, daughter to Frances 1. King of France, vvho died shortlie thereafter vvithout succession. After her he maried Marie of Lorayne, Duches of Longe-ville, daughter to Claude Du∣ke of Guise. He died at Falkland in the 29. yeire of his reigne. He vvas buried at Halirude-house.
portrait of Mary Queen of Scots MARIA, REG: SCOTORVM, MArie succeeded to her father Iames the fyfte, in the yeire of the vvarld 5513. In the yeire of Christ 1543. a princesse verteouslie inclined. She maried first Frances 2. Daulphine, thereafter King of France, then after his death, returning hame to Scotland, she maried Henrie Stevvarde Duke of Albanie, & Lord Darley, sonne to Ma∣thevv Erle of Lennox (a comelie Prince, Pronepnoy to Henrie the 7. King of England) to vvhome she bare Iames the 6. She vvas put to death in England 8. Feb. 1586. after 18. yeires captivitie,
portrait of James VI IACOBVS VI REX SCOTORVM. IAmes the first of England, and sext of Scotland, a gude, godlie, and learned Prince, succeeded to his Mother in the yeire of the vvarld 5537. In the yeire of Christ 1567. And nove to his cousinge of Blessed memorie Elisabeth, lait Queine of England in the yeir of the vvarlde 5563. in the yeir of Christ 1603. He maried Anna Daughter to Fre∣derik the 2. King of Denmark, &c. And Sophia, Vlricus the Ducke of Mekelburgh his only Daughter, quha hes borne vnto him alreadie Henrie Frederik, the Prince, the 19. Febr. 1593. Elizabeth 19. August. 1596. Margret 24. Decemb. 1598. Charles Ducke of Rosay 19. No∣vemb. 1600. And  He is novv pre∣sen the King of England, Scotland, France and Irland, and this yeir 1603. is the first of his reigne in England &c. and the 37. yeir of his reigne in Scotland.
portrait of Anne ANNA REGINA SCOTORVM ANna daughter to that nobil Prince of vvorthie memorie Frede∣rik the 2. King of Denmark, &c. marijt vnto Iames the sext, in the yeir of Christ 1590. vvho hath borne vnto him alreadie fyve chil∣drene befoir mentioned. The Lord in mercie indevve thame and hair posterities vvith sick measure of his grace, that not onlie the Kirk of Christ in thair dominions, bot also in vvhole Europe, may ind a blessinge in thair happie Governement, Amen. Printed in Amsterdam, Ad the expensis of ANDRO HART Buikseller in Edinbrugh. Anno 1603. Cum privilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
