B1848a c.112.f.9[42] c.112.f.9[48] R231339 99888628 195846
In Bridges-Street, just over against the King's Play-House, near Covent-Garden, at Mr. EDWARD STEVENSON, Liveth ANTHONY BELLON, Doctor of Phisick in the University of Montpellier, newly come over. WHO that the Publick may make use of his Rare and often experimented Remedies, doth let them know that He can Cure the FRENCH POX, and all other Venerial Diseases, without obliging his Patients to keep their Chambers, nor leaving their daily Occupations. He can Cure the Kings Evil, old or new, and that by easy inward Remedies without any Operation, nor Supuration or scares in any part of the Body. He can Cure and hath Cured several Persons of the Falling-Sickness, of the Convul∣sions, of the Vapours, by safe and easy Remedies. He can Cure the Scab and Tettars in a very short time, and the Itch by a kind of Girdle. He hath found out an Excellent Plaster and a kind of a Truss, not yet seen of the casiest and most neccessaries to Cure the Ruptures or Broken-Bellyes for Men, Women or Chil∣dren. He hath some Remedies, most certain and quick, to Cure Maids and Women of the Stopage, Obstruction and Retention. If any Woman is not hindered by any Distemper (not curable) to make Children, He can help them to Conception, prevent Miscarriages in those that are used to Miscary, and prevent the Grippes in those that are Lying in. He can Cure the Piles by the taking of sweet Lozanges, He hath a most excellent Remedy to Cure the Weakness of the Sinews, and to Strengthen them. He can Cure all sorts of Scorbuts and all sorts of Rheumatisms. He hath got some excellent Remedies against the Consumption and the Short-Breath. He maketh a Syrop Vitae (now much in use in the French Court) which is so extra∣ordinary, that it doth make one live longer, it doth preserve Health in taking of it, it doth give a Healthful Looseness, takes away all the causes tending to Putrefaction; Distroys all sorts of Worms, and giveth a good Stomach in taking only a Spoonful every Morning. He Sels also that Geneva Cordial Water of Lemon, so excellent and so pleasant to Drink, that there is no other Liquor to be compared to it. He Sels the Imperial and Digestive Water, fit to take after every meal, especially for those that have a weak and a delicat Stomack. He Sels also some Coffee Powder to be taken as is ordinary Coffee, with the same taste and smell, and doth Purge very gently. He hath for the Ladies all sorts of Waters, perfumed prepared Spunges, for to clear and smoothen or color the Face, take away Pimples and Spots, and all Wrinckles. Also several sorts of Pomatum's for the above said use, and a kind of a Paste to whitten the Breast and the Hands. He Sels a Lozange to cure and smoothen Sore Lips. He Sels also the Canada Maidenhair Syrop, made with Flowers, and the Cedar Syrop. He may be Spoken at his Dwelling-House from 9 a Clock in the Morning till one a Clock in the Afternoon.
