B2493 R35758 99835184 103721
THE WHOLE BOOK OF PSALMS: Collected into English Metre, BY Thomas Sternhold, John Hop∣kins, and others. Set forth and allowed to be sung in all Chur∣ches, of all the people together, before and after Morning and Evening Prayer; and also before and after Sermons; and moreover in private houses for their godly solace and comfort: laying apart all ungodly Songs and Ballads; which tend only to the nourishing of Vice, and corrupting of Youth. JAMES v. ¶ If any be afflicted, let him pray, and if any be merry, let him sing Psalms. COLOSS. III. ¶ Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all wisdom, teaching and exhorting one another in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing un∣to the Lord with grace in your hearts. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for the Company of Stationers. 1668.
A Table for the whole number of the Psalms, and also in what Page you may finde every of them. A Psalm. 3 ALl laud and praise Folio 13 Psalm. 49 All people hearken Folio 23 Psalm. 78 Attend my people Folio 42 Psalm. 82 Amid the press Folio 46 Psalm. 100 All people that Folio 55 Psalm. 81 BE light and Folio 45 Psalm. 119 Blessed are they Folio 67 Psalm. 128 Blessed art thou Folio 77 Psalm. 134 Behold and Folio 75 Psalm. 142 Before the Folio 81 Psalm. 144 Blest be the Folio 81 Psalm. 83 DO not O God Folio 46 Psalm. 127 EXcept the Folio 75 Psalm. 27 GIve to the Folio 13 Psalm. 37 Grudge not Folio 18 Psalm. 48 Great is the Folio 24 Psalm. 54 God save me Folio 29 Psalm. 105 Give praise Folio 58 Psalm. 107 Give thanks Folio 61 Psalm. 148 Give laud Folio 83 Psalm. 12 HElp Lord Folio 5 Psalm. 13 How long Folio 5 Psalm. 58 Have mercy Folio 27 Psalm. 56 Have mercy Lord Folio 30 Psalm. 67 Have mercy on us Folio 34 Psalm. 73 How ever it be Folio 39 Psalm. 84 How pleasant is Folio 46 Psalm. 91 He that within Folio 5 Psalm. 5 INcline thine Folio 2 Psalm. 11 I trust in God Folio 5 Psalm. 20 In trouble Folio 9 Psalm. 25 I lift mine Folio 11 Psalm. 34 I will give Folio 16 Psalm. 39 I said I will Folio 20 Psalm. 40 I waited long Folio 20 Psalm. 43 Judge and revenge Folio 22 Psalm. 77 I with my Folio 41 Psalm. 92 It is a thing Folio 52 Psalm. 100 In God the Folio 55 Psalm. 101 I mercy will Folio 55 Psalm. 109 In speechless Folio 63 Psalm. 116 I love the Folio 66 Psalm. 120 In trouble Folio 73 Psalm. 121 I lift mine eyes Folio 73 Psalm. 122 I did in heart Folio 74 Psalm. 6 LOrd in thy Folio 2 Psalm. 16 Lord keep Folio 6 Psalm. 26 Lord be my Folio 12 Psalm. 35 Lord plead Folio 16 Psalm. 42 Like as the Folio 21 Psalm. 68 Let God arise Folio 34 Psalm. 72 Lord give thy Folio 38 Psalm. 16 Lord bow thine Folio 47 Psalm. 88 Lord God of Folio 40 Psalm. 139 Lord to thee Folio 76 Psalm. 140 Lord save me Folio 80 Psalm. 143 Lord hear my Folio 81 Psalm. 23 MY shepherd Folio 11 Psalm. 45 My heart doth Folio 23 Psalm. 62 My soul to Folio 32 Psalm. 71 My Lord my Folio 37 Psalm. 103 My soul give Folio 56 Psalm. 104 My soul praise Folio 57 Psalm. 146 My soul praise Folio 82 Psalm. 115 NOt unto us Folio 65 Psalm. 124 Now Israel Folio 74 Psalm. 3 O Lord how are Folio 1 Psalm. 4 O God that Folio 2 Psalm. 7 O Lord my God Folio 3 Psalm. 8 O God our Lord Folio 3 Psalm. 15 O Lord within Folio 6 Psalm. 17 O Lord give ear Folio 6 Psalm. 19 O God my Folio 7 Psalm. 21 O Lord how joyful Folio 9 Psalm. 22 O God my God Folio 9 Psalm. 31 O Lord I put Folio 14 Psalm. 44 Our ears have Folio 23 Psalm. 51 O Lord consider Folio 27 Psalm. 55 O God give ear Folio 29 Psalm. 60 O Lord thou Folio 31 Psalm. 63 O God my God Folio 32 Psalm. 64 O Lord unto my Folio 33 Psalm. 70 O God to me Folio 37 Psalm. 79 O God the Gentiles Folio 44 Psalm. 94 O Lord thou Folio 52 Psalm. 95 O come let us Folio 52 Psalm. 98 O sing ye now Folio 54 Psalm. 102 O hear my Folio 55 Psalm. 108 O God my heart Folio 63 Psalm. 117 O all ye Nations Folio 66 Psalm. 118 O give ye Folio 66 Psalm. 123 O Lord that heaven Folio 74 Psalm. 129 Oft they now Folio 75 Psalm. 131 O Lord I am Folio 76 Psalm. 133 O how happy Folio 77 Psalm. 135 O praise the Folio 67 Psalm. 136 O laud the Lord Folio 78 Psalm. 139 O Lord thou Folio 79 Psalm. 141 O Lord upon Folio 80 Psalm. 28 PUt me not to Folio 19 Psalm. 106 Praise ye the Folio 60 Psalm. 136 Praise ye the Folio 77 Psalm. 147 Praise ye the Folio 83 Psalm. 61 REgard O Folio 32 Psalm. 132 Remember Dav. Folio 76 Psalm. 59 SEnd aid and Folio 31 Psalm. 69 Save me O Folio 36 Psalm. 96 Sing ye with Folio 53 Psalm. 125 Such as in God Folio 74 Psalm. 119 Sing ye unto Folio 84 Psalm. 1 THe man is Folio 1 Psalm. 14 There is Folio 5 Psalm. 19 The heavens Folio 8 Psalm. 13 The Lord is Folio 11 Psalm. 24 The earth is Folio 11 Psalm. 27 The Lord is both Folio 12 Psalm. 28 Thou art Folio 13 Psalm. 12 The man is blest Folio 15 Psalm. 36 The wicked with Folio 16 Psalm. 41 The man is blest Folio 21 Psalm. 46 The Lord is our Folio 23 Psalm. 50 The mighty God Folio 25 Psalm. 50 The God of gods Folio 26 Psalm. 53 The foolish man Folio 28 Psalm. 57 Take pity for Folio 30 Psalm. 65 Thy praise Folio 33 Psalm. 76 To all that now Folio 41 Psalm. 80 Thou herd Folio 44 Psalm. 85 Thou hast been Folio 47 Psalm. 87 That city shall Folio 48 Psalm. 89 To sing the Folio 49 Psalm. 90 Thou (Lord) Folio 50 Psalm. 93 The Lord as Folio 52 Psalm. 97 The Lord doth Folio 54 Psalm. 99 The Lord doth Folio 55 Psalm. 110 The Lord did Folio 64 Psalm. 112 The man is Folio 65 Psalm. 125 Those that Folio 75 Psalm. 138 Thee will I praise Folio 79 Psalm. 145 Thee will I laud Folio 82 Psalm. 75 UNto thee Folio 40 Psalm. 2 WHy did the Folio 1 Psalm. 9 With heart Folio 3 Psalm. 10 What is the Folio 4 Psalm. 52 Why dost thou Folio 28 Psalm. 74 Why art thou Folio 39 Psalm. 111 With heart I do Folio 64 Psalm. 114 When Israel Folio 65 Psalm. 126 When that the Folio 75 Psalm. 137 When as we sate Folio 79 Psalm. 33 YE righteous Folio 15 Psalm. 47 Ye people all Folio 24 Psalm. 58 Ye rulers that Folio 30 Psalm. 66 Ye men on earth Folio 34 Psalm. 113 Ye children Folio 65 Psalm. 150 Yield unto God Folio 84 These ye shall have after the Psalms. Veni Creator Spiritus. The humble suit of a sinner. Venite exultemus. Te Deum laudamus. Magnificat anima mea. Nunc dimittis. The lamentation of a sinner Pater noster. The Lords Prayer. The en Commandements. Attend my people and The complaint of a sinner, Praise ye the Lord. The Creed. A prayer to the Holy Ghost Da pacem. O Lord in thee is all my Behold now give heed. Preserve us Lord.
THE PSALMS OF DAVID In Metre. PSALM, i. T. S. THe man is blest that hath not bent to wicked read his ear: Nor led his life as sinners do, nor sate in scorners chair. But in the law of God the Lord doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise himself both day and night. He shall be like the tree that grows fast by the river side: Which bringeth forth most pleasant fruit in his due time and tide: Whose leaf shall never fade or fall, but flourish still and stand: Even so all things shall prosper well that this man takes in hand. So shall not the ungodly men, they shall be nothing so: But as the dust which from the earth the wind drives to and fro. Therefore shall not the wicked men in judgement stand upright: Nor yet the sinners with the just, shall come in place or sight. For why? the way of godly men unto the Lord is known, And eke the way of wicked men shall quite be overthrown. PSALM ii. T. S. WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their brain? Why did the Jewish people muse, seeing all is but in vain? The Kings and Rulers of the earth conspire and are all bent, Against the Lord and Christ his Son, which he among us sent. Shall we be bound to them, say they? let all their bonds be broke: And of their doctrine and their law, let us reject the yoke. But he that in the heaven dwells, their doings will deride: And make them all as mocking stocks, throughout the world so wide, For in his wrath the Lord will say, to them upon a day, And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say: I have anointed him my King upon my holy hill: I will therefore Lord preach thy law, and eke declare thy will. For in this wise the Lord himself did say to me I wot, Thou art my dear and only Son, to day I thee begot. All people I will give to thee, as heirs at thy request, The ends and coasts of all the earth by thee shall be possest. Thou shalt them bruise even with a mace, as men under foot trod, And as the potters sherds shall break them with an iron rod. Now ye O Kings and rulers all, be wise therefore and learn'd: By whom the matters of the world be iudged and discern'd. See that ye serve the Lord above in trembling and in fear. See that with reverence ye rejoyce to him in like manner. See that ye kiss, and eke embrace his blessed Son I say, Lest in his wrath ye suddenly perish in the mid way. If once his wrath never so small, shall kindle in his brest: Oh then all they that trust in Christ shall happy be and blest: PSALM iii. T. S. O Lord how are my foes increast, which vex me more and more? They kill mine heart when as they say God can him not restore. But thou (O Lord) art my defence. when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honor both, and thou holdst up my head. Then with my voice upon the Lord, I did both call and cry, And he our of his holy hill did hear me by and by, I laid me down and quietly I slept and rose again, For why I know assuredly, the Lord will me sustain,
If ten thousand had hem'd me in, I could not be afraid: For thou art still my Lord and God, my Saviour and mine aid. Rise up therefore, save me my God, For now to thee I call: For thou hast broke the cheeks & teeth Of those wicked men all. Salvation only doth belong to thee O Lord above: Thou dost bestow upon thy folk thy blessing and thy love. PSALM iiij. T. S. O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call, Thou hast set me at liberty when I was bound and thrall. Have mercy Lord therefore on me, And grant me my request: For unto thee uncessantly, to cry I will not rest. O mortal men how long will ye my glory thus despise! Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lyes? Know ye that good and godly men the Lord doth take and cuse: And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse. Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly, see you your selves convert. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness, I say: And look that in the living Lord you put your trust alway. The greater sort crave worldly goods, and riches do embrace: But Lord grant us thy countenance, thy favour and thy grace. For thou thereby shalt make my heart more joyful and more glad. Than they that of their corn and wine full great increase have had. In peace therefore lie down will I, taking my rest and sleep: For thou only wilt me, O Lord, alone in safety keep. PSALM. v. T. S. INcline thine ears unto my words. O Lord my plaint consider: And hear my voice, my King, my God, to thee I make my prayer. Hear me betime, Lord try not, for I wil have respect, My prayer early in the morn to thee for to direct. And I vvil trust through patience in thee my God alone: Thou art not pleas'd with wickedness, and ill with thee dwell none, And in thy sight shall never stand these furious fools, O Lord: Vain workers of iniquity, thou hast always abhor'd. The lyars and the flatterers Thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the blood thirsty, and the deceitful man. Therefore will I come to thine house trusting upon thy grace: And reverently wil worship thee, toward thine holy place. Lord lead me in thy righteousness, for to confound my foes: And eke the way that I shal walk, before my face disclose. For in their mouths there is no truth, their heart is soul and vain: Their throat an open fepulchre, their tongues do glose and fain. Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to nought: Subvert them in their heaps of sin, which have rebellion wrought. But those that put their trust in thee let them be glad always: And render thanks for thy defence, and give thy Name the praise. For thou with favour wilt encrease the just and righteous still: And with thy grace as with a shield, defend him from all ill. PSALM vi. T. S. LOrd in thy wrath reprove me not, though I deserve thine ire: Ne yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord I thee desire, For I am weak therefore O Lord, of mercy me forbear: And heal me Lord, for why thou know'st my bones do quake for fear. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently, But Lord how long wilt thou delay, to cure my misery? Lord turn thee to thy wonted grace, my slly soul up take: O save me, nor for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake. For why no man among the dead remembreth thee one whit: Or who shal worship thee (O Lord) in the infernal pit? So grievous is my plaint and mone, that I wax wondrous faint: All the night long I wash my bed with tears of my complaint. My fight is dim, and waxeth old with anguish of my heart: For fear of those that be my foes, and would my soul subvert. But now away from me all ye that work iniquity: For why? the Lord hath heard the voice of my complaint and cry. He heard not only the request and prayer of my heart:
But it received at my hands, and took it in good part. And now my foes that vexed me, the Lord wil soon defame: And suddenly confound them all to their rebuke and shame. PSALM vij. T. S. O Lord my God, I put my trust and confidence in thee: Save me from them that me pursue: and eke deliver me, Lest like a Lion he me tear, and rend in pieces small: While there is none to succour me and rid me out of thrall. O Lord my God if I have done the thing that is not right: Or else if I be found in fault, or guilty in thy sight. Or to my friend rewarded ill, or lest him in distress, Which me pursu'd most cruelly, and hated me causless. Then let my foes pursue my soul, and eke my life down thrust Into the earth, and also lay mine honour in the dust. Start up O Lord now in thy wrath, and put my foes to pain: erform the Kingdom promised to me which wrong sustain. Then shall great nations come to thee, and know thee by this thing, f thou declare for love of them, thy self as Lord and King. And as thou art of all men judge, O Lord now judge thou me, ccording to my righteousness, and mine integrity. The second Part. Lord cease the hate of wicked men, and be the just mans guide: y whom the secrets of all hearts are searched and descri'd. I take my help to come of God in all my pain or smart: That doth preserve all those that be of pure and perfect heart. The just man and the wicked both God judgeth by his power: that he feels his mighty hand even every day and hour. Except he change his mind, I die, for even as he should smite, e whets his sword, his bow he bends, aiming where he may hit. And doth prepare his mortal darts, his arrows keen and sharp, or them that do me persecute, whilst he doth mischief warp. But lo, though he in travel be of his devilish forecast: nd of his mischief once conceiv'd, yet brings forth nought at last, He digs a ditch and delves it ep, in hope to hurt his brother: But he shall fall into the pit that he dig'd up for other. Thus wrong returneth to the hurt of him in whom it bred: And all he mischief that he wrought shall fall upon his head. I will give thanks to God therefor that judgeth righteously: And with my song will praise the name of him that is most high, PSALM viij. T. S. O God our Lord how wonderful are thy works every where: Whose fame surmounts in dignity, above the heavens clear! Even by the mouth of sucking babes, thou wilt confound thy foes: For in those babes thy might is seen, thy graces they disclose. And when I see the heavens high, the works of thine own hand: The Sun, the M on, and all the Stars in order as they stand: What thing is man (Lord) think I then that thou dost him remember? Or wha is mans posterity, that thou dost it consider? For thou hast made him little le than Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also with glory and dignity. Thou hast prefer'd him to be Lord of all thy works of wonder: And at his feet hast set all things, that he should keep them under. As sheep and neat, and all beasts else that in the fields do feed: Fowls of the air, fish in the sea, and all that therein breed. Therefore must I say once again, O God that art our Lord: How famous and how wonderful are thy works through the world? PSALM ix. T. S. WIth heart and mouth unto the Lord will I sing laud and praise: And speak of all thy wondrous wor, and them declare always. I will be glad, and much rejoice, in thee O God most high: And make my songs extol thy Name, above the starry skie. For that my foes are driven back, and turned unto flight: They fall down star, and are destroy'd by thy great power and might. Thou hast revenged all my wrong, my grief and all my grudge: Thou dost with justice hear my cause most like a righteous Judge. Thou dost rebuke the heathen folk and wicked so confound:
That afterward the memory of them cannot be found. My fos thou hast made good dispatch, and all their towns destroy'd: Thou hast their fame with them defac'd, through all the world is above. Know now that he which is above for evermore shall reign, And in the seat of equity true judgement will maintain. With justice he will keep and guide the world and every wight: And so will yield with equity to every man his right. He is protector of the poor, what time they be opprest; He is in all adversity their refuge and their rest. And they that know thy holy Name therefore shall trust in thee: For thou forsakest not their suit in their necessity. The second Part. Sing Psalms therefore unto the Lord, that dwells in Sion hill: Publish among all nations his noble acts and will. For he is mindful of the blood of those that be opprest: Forgetting not th' afflicted heart that seeks to him for rest. Have mercy Lord on me poor wretch, whose enemies still remain: Which from the gates of death are wont to raise me up again. In Sion that I might set forth thy praise with heart and voice: And that in thy salvation Lord, my soul might still rejoyce. The heathen stick fast in the pit that they themselves prepar'd: And in the net tha they did set, their own feet fast are snar'd. God shews his judgments wc were good for every man to mark: When as ye see the wicked man is trap'd in his own wark. The wicked and deceitful men go down to hell for ever: And all the people of the world, that will not God remember. But sure the Lord will not forget the poor mans grief and pain: The patient people never look for help of God in vain. O Lord arise lest men prevail, that be of worldly might: And let the heathen folk receive, their judgment in thy sight. Lord strike such terror, fear, and dread into the hearts of them: That they may know assuredly, they be but mortal men. PSALM x. T. S. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so far from thine? And keepest close thy countenance from us this troublous time? The poor do perish by the proud and wicked mens desire: Let them be taken in the craft that they themselves conspire. For in the lust of his own heart th' ungodly doth delight, So doth the wicked praise himself, and doth the Lord despight. He is so proud that right and wrong he seteth all apart: Nay, nay, there is no God, saith he, for thus he thinks in heart. Because his wayes do prosper still, he doth thy laws neglect: And wish a blast doth puff against such as would him correct. Tush, tush, saith he, I have no dread, lest mine estate should change: And why? for all adversity to him is very strange. His mouth is full of cursedness, of fraud, deceit, and guile: Under his tongue doth mischief fit, and travel all the while. He lieth hid in wayes and holes, to slay the innocent: Against the poor that pass him by, his cruel eyes are bent. And like a Lion privily lies lurking in his den: If he may snare them in his net, to spoil poor simple men. And for the nonce full craftily he croucheth down, I say: So are great heaps of poor men made by his strong power his prey. The second Part. Tush God forgetteth this, saith he, therefore I may be bold: His countenance is cast aside, he doth i not behold. Arise, O Lord, O God in whom the poor man hope doth rest: Lift up thy hand, forget not Lord the poor that be opprest. What blasphemy is this to thee, Lord dost thou nor abhor it? To hear the wicked in their heart, say, tush thou car'st not for it? Bt thou seest all their wickedness and well dost understand, That friendless and poor fatherless are left into thy hand. Of wicked and malicious men, then break the power for ever: That they with their iniquity may perish altogether.
The Lord shall reign for evermore, as King and God alone: And he will chase the heathen folk, out of the land each one. Thou heard'st (O Lord) the poor mans their prayer and request: Their hearts thou wilt confirm until plaint, thine ears to hear be prest. To judge the poor and fatherless, and help them to their right: That they may be no more opprest by men of worldly might. PSALM xi. T. S. I Trust in God, how dare ye then say thus my soul until? Fly hence as fast as any fowl, and hide you in your hill. Behold the wicked bend their bows, and make their arrows prest, To shoot in secret, and to hurt the sound and harmless brest. Of worldly hope all stays were shrunk, and clearly brought to nought: Alas the just and righteous man, what evil hath he wrought! But he that in his Temple is, most holy and most high: And in the heavens hath his seat of royal Majesty. The poor and simple mans estate considereth in his minde: And searcheth out full narrowly the manners of mankinde: And with a chearful countenance the righteous man will use: But in his heart he doth abhor all such as mischief muse. And on the sinners casteth snares, as thick as any rain: Fire and brimstone & whirlwinds thick, appointed for their pain. Ye see then how a righteous God doth righteousness embrace: And to the just and upright mn shews forth his pleasant face. PSALM xii. T. S. HElp Lord, for good and godly men do perish and decay: For faith and truh from worldly men is pared clean away. Who so doth with his neighbor talk, his talk is all but vain; For every man bethinketh how to flatter, lye, and fain. But flattering and deceitful lips, and tongues that be so stout, To speak proud words, and make great brags the Lord soon cuts them out. For they say still, we will prevail, our tongues shall us extol: Our tongues are ours, we ought to speak, what Lord shall us control? But for the great complaint and cry of poor and men opprest: Arise will I, now saith the Lord, and them restore to rest. Gods word is like to silver pure, that from the earth is tri'd: And ha h no less then seven times in fire been purifi'd. Now sith thy promise is to help, Lord keep thy promise then: And save us now and evermore, from this ill kinde of men. For now this wicked world is full of michiefs manifold: When unity with worldly men so highly is extol'd. PSALM xiii, T. S. HOw long wilt thou forget me Lord shall I nere be remembred? How long wilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou wert offended? In heart and minde how long shall I with care tormented be? How long eke shall my deadly foe thus triumph over me? Behold me now, my Lord my God, and hear me sore opprest: Lighten mine eyes, lest that I sleep, as one by death possest. Lest that mine enemies say to me, behold I do prevail: Lest thy also that hate my soul, rejoyce to see me quail. But from thy mercy and goodness, my hope shall never start: In thy relief and saving health, right glad shall be my heart. I will give thanks unto the Lord, and praises to him sing, Because he hath heard my request, and granted my wishing. PSALM xiv. T. S. THere is no God, as foolish men affirm in their mad mood: Their drifts are all corrupt and vain, not one of them doth good. The Lord beheld from heaven high the whole race of mankind: And saw not one that sought indeed the living God to finde. They went all wide and were corrupt and truly there was none, That in the world did any good, I say, there was not one. Is all their judgment so far lost, that all work mischief still? Eating my people even as bread, not one to seek Gods will? When they thus rage, then suddenly great fear on them shall fall: For God doth love the righteous men, and will maintain them all, Ye mock the doings of the poor, to their reproach and shame:
Because they put their trust in God, and call upon his Name. But who shall give thy people health, and when wilt thou fulfil Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion hill? Even when thou shalt restore again such as were captive led: Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. PSALM xv. T. S. O Lord within thy Tabernacle, who shall inhabit still! Or whom wilt thou receive to dwell in thy most holy hill? The man whose life is uncorrupt, whose works are just and straight: Whose heart doth think the very truth, whose tongue speaks no deceit. Nor to his neighbour doth none ill, in body, goods, or name: Nor willingly doth move false tales, which might impair the same. That in his heart regardeth not malicious wicked men: But those that love and fear the Lord, he maketh much of them. His oath and all his promises that keepeth faithfully: Although he make his covenant so, that he doth lose thereby. That putteth not to usury his money and his coin: Nor for to hurt the innocent, doth bribe or else purloi. Who so doth all things as you see that here is to be done: Shall never perish in this world, nor in the world to come. PSALM xvi. T. S. LOrd keep me, for I trust in thee, and do confess indeed Thou art my God, and of my goods O Lord thou hast no need. I give my goods unto the Saints that in the world do dwell: And namely to the faithful flock in vertue that excel. They shall heap sorrows on their heads which run as they were mad To offer to the idol gods, alas it is too bad. As for their bloody sacrifice, and offerings of that sort, I will not touch, nor yet thereof my lips shall make report. For why? the Lord the portion is of mine inheritance: And thou art he that dost maintain my rent, my lot, my chance. The place wherein my lot did fall, in beauty did excel. Mine heritage assign'd to me, doth please me wondrous well. I thank the Lord that caused me to understand the right: For by his means my secret thoughts do teach me every night. I set the Lord still in my sight, and trust him over all: For he doth stand on my right hand, therefore I shall not fall. Wherefore my heart and tongue also do both rejoyce together: My flesh and body rest in hope, when I this thing consider. Thou wilt not leave my soul in grave, for Lord thou lovest me: Nor yet wilt give thy Holy One, corruption for to see. ut wilt me reach the way to life, for all treasure and store Of perfect joy are in thy face, and power for evermore. PSALM xvii. T. S. O Lord give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain: And hear the prayer that I put forth, with lips that do not fain. And let the judgement of my cause, proceed alwayes from thee: And let thine eyes behold and clear this my simplicity. Thou hast well tri'd me in the night, and yet could'st nothing finde That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my minde. As for the works of wicked men. and paths perverse and ill, For love of thy most holy Name, I have refrained still. Then in thy paths that be most pure stay me Lord and preserve: That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerve. For I do call to thee O Lord, surely thou wilt me aid: Then hear my prayer & weigh right well the words that I have said. O thou the Saviour of all them that put their trust in thee: Declare thy strength on them that spurn against thy Majesty. O keep me as thou wouldest keep the apple of thine eye: And under covert of thy wings defend me secretly. The second Part. From wicked men that trouble me, and daily me annoy: And from my foes that go about my soul for o destroy. Which wallow in their worldly wealth so full are they and fat,
That in their pride they do not spare to speak they care not vvhat. They lie in vvait vvhere I should pass, vvith craft me to confound: And musing mischief in their mind to cast me to the ground. Much like a Lion greedily that vvould his prey embrace: Or lurking like a Lions vvhelp, vvithin some secret place. Up Lord, in haste prevent my foe, and cast him at thy feet: Save thou my soul from the ill man, and vvith the svvord him smite. Deliver me Lord by thy povver, out of these tyrants hands: Which novv so long time reigned hae, and kept us in their bands. I mean from vvorldly men, to vvhom all vvorldly goods are rise: That have no hope nor part of joy, but in this present life. Thou of thy store their bellies fill'st vvith pleasure to their mind: Their children have enough and leave to theirs the rest behind. But I shall vvith pure conscience behold thy gracious face: o vvhen I vvake I shall be full of thine image and grace. PSALM xviii. T. S. O God my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: hou art my castle and defence in my necessity. My God, my Rock in vvhom I trust, the vvorker of my vvealth: y refuge, buckler, and my shield, the horn of all my health: When I sing land unto the Lord, most vvorthy to be serv'd; en from my foes I am right sure that I shall be preserv'd. The pangs of death did compass me, and bound me every vvhere: he flovving vvaves of vvickedness did put me in great fear. The slie and subtil snares of hell vvere round about me set: d for my death there vvas prepar'd a deadly trapping ne. I thus beset vvith pain and grief, did pray to God for grace: d he forthvvith did hear my plaint out of his holy place. Such is his povver, that in his vvrath he made the earth to quake: ea the foundation of the mount of basan for to shake. And from his nostrils came a smoke, vvhen kindled vvas his ire: d from his mouth came kindled cols f hot consuming fie, The Lord descended from above, and bovved the heavens high: And underneath his feet he cast the darkness of the sky. On Cherubs and on Cherubims full royally he rode: And on the vvings of all the vvinds came flyig all abroad. The second Part And like a den most dark he made his hid and secret place: With vvaters black and airy clouds environed he vvas. but vvhen the presene of his face in brightness shall appear: Then clouds consume, and in their stead come hail and coles of fire. The fiery darts and thunder bolts disperse them here and there: And vvith his often lightenings he puts them in grea fear. Lord, at thy vvrath and threatning and at thy chiding chear, The springs and the foundations of all the vvorld appear. And from above the Lord sent down to fetch me from belovv: And pluck'd me out of vvaters great, that vvould me overflovv. And me delivered from my foes that vvould have made me thrall: Yea from such foes as vvere too strong for me to deal vvithal. They did prevent me to oppress in time of my great grief: but yet the Lord vvas my desence. my succor and relief. He brought me forth in open place, vvhereas I might be free: And kept me sale because he had a favour unto me. And as I vvas an innocent, so did he me regard, And to the cleanness of my hands he gave me my revvard. For that I vvalked in his vvayes, and in his paths have trod: And have not nned vvickedly against my Lord and God. The third Part. but evermore I have respect to his lavv and decree: His statutes and commndement I cast not out from me. but pure, and clean, and uncorrupt appear'd before his face: And did restrain from vvickedness and sin in any case. The Lord therefore vvill me revvard, as I have done aright: And to the cleanness of my hands appearing in his sght. For Lord vvith him that holy is, vvilt thou be ho ly too,
And with the good and vertuous men right vertuously wilt do. And to the loving and elect thy love thou wilt reserve: And thou wilt use the wicked men, as wicked men deserve. For thou dost save the simple folk in trouble when they lie: And dost bring down the countenance of them that look full high. The Lord will light my candle so, that it shall shine full bright: The Lord my God will make also my darkness to be light. For by thy help an host of men discomfit Lord I shall: By thee I scale and over-leap the strength of any wall. Unspotted are the ways of God, his word is purely try'd He is a sure defence to such as in his faith abide. For who is God except the Lord? for other there is none: Or else, who is omnipotent saving our God alone? The fourth Part. The God that girdeth me with strength is he that I do mean: That all the wayes wherein I walk, did evermore keep clean. That made my feet like to the Harts, in swiftness of my pace: And for my surety brought me forth into an open place. He did in order put my hands to battle and to fight: To break in sunder bars of brass, he gave mine arms the might. Thou teachest me thy saving health, thy right hand is my tower: Thy love and familiarity doh still increase my power. And under me thou makest plain the way where I should walk: So that my feet shall never slip, nor stumble at a balk. And fiercely I pursue and take my foes that me annoid: And from the field do not return till they be all destroy'd. So I suppress and wound my foes that they can rise no more. For at my feet they fall down flat, I strike them all so sore. For thou dost gird me wt thy strength to war in such a wise: That they be all scattered abroad, that up against me rise. Lord thou hast put into my hands my mortal enemies yoke And all my foes thou dost divide in fder with thy stroke, They cal'd for help, but none gave ear nor holp them with relief: Yea to the Lord they call'd for help, yet heard he not their grief. The fifth Part. And still like dust before the wind, I drive them under feet: And sweep them out like filthy clay, that sticketh in the street. Thou keep'st me from seditious folk that still in strife are led. And thou dost of the heathen folk appoint me to be head. A people strange to me unknown, and yet they shall me serve: And at the first obey my word; whereas mine own will swerve. I shall be irksome to mine own. they will not see my light: But wander wide out of the way, and hide them out of sight. But blessed be the living Lord, most worthy of all praise: That is my rock and saving health, praised be he alwayes. For God it is that gave me power revenged for to be: And with his holy word subdu'd the people unto me. And from my foe delivered me, and set me above those That cruel and ungodly were, and up against me rose. And for this cause, O Lord my God, to thee give thanks I shall: And sing out praises to thy Name, among the Gentiles all: That gavest great prosperity unto the King I say: To David thine anointed King and to his seed for ay. PSALM xix. T. S. THe heavens and the firmament do wondrously declare The glory of God omnipotent, his works and what they are. The wondrous works of God appear by every dayes success: The nights likewise which their race run the self-same thing express. There is no language, tongue, or speech where their sound is not heard: In all the earth and coasts thereof their knowledge is conferr'd. In them the Lord made for the Sun a place of great renown: Who like a bridegroom ready trim'd, doth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, vvho for to get a prize, With joy doth haste to take in hand, some noble enterprize.
And all the skie from end to end he cmpasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will finde it out. How perfect is the law of God, how is his Covenant sure: Converting souls, and making wise the simple and obscure? Just are the Lords commandements. and glad both heart and minde: His precepts pure, and giveth light to eyes that be full blinde. The fear of God is excellent, and doth endure for ever: The judgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether: And more to be embrac'd alway then fined gold I say: The honey and the honey-comb are not so sweet as they. By them thy servant is forewarn'd to have God in regard: And in performance of the same, there shall be great reward. But Lord what earthly man doth know the errors of his life? Then cleanse me from my secret sins, which are in me most rife. And keep me that presumptuous sins prevail not over me: And so shall I be innocent, and great offences flee. Accept my mouth, and eke my heart my words and thoughts each one: For my Redeemer and my strength, O Lord thou art alone. PSALM xx. T. S. IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still: The Majesty of Jacobs God defend thee from all ill. And send thee from his holy place his help at every need: And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong indeed. Remembring well the sacrifice, that now to him is done: And so receive right thankfully, thy burnt-offerings each one. According to thy hearts desire, the Lord grant unto thee: And all thy counsel and device, full well perform may he. We shall reioyce when thou us savest, and ur banners display Unto he Lord, which thy requests fulfilled hath a way. The Lord will his anointed save, I know well by his grace: And send him help by his right hand out of his holy place. In chariots some put confidence, and some in horses trust: But we remember God our Lord, that keepeth promise just. They fall down flat, but we do rise and stand up stedfastly: Now save and help us Lord and King on thee when we do cry. PSALM xxi. T. S. O Lord how joyful is the King, in thy strength and thy power? How vehemently doth he rejoyce in thee his Saviour? For thou hast given unto him his godly hearts desire: To him nothing thou hast deni'd, of that he did require Thou didst prevent him with thy gifts and blessings manifold: And thou hast set upon his head a crown of perfect gold. And when he asked life of thee, thereof thou mad'st him sure: To have long life, yea such a life as ever shall endure. Great is his glory by thy help, thy benefit and aid: Great worship and great honour both thou hast upon him laid. Thou wilt give him felicity, that never shall decay: And with thy chearful countenance will comfort him alway. For why, the King doth strongly trust in God for to previl: Wherefore his goodness and his grace will not that he shall quail. But let thine enemies feel thy force, and those that thee withstand, Finde out thy foes, and let them feel the power of thy right hand. And like an oven burn them Lord, in fiery flame and fume: Thine anger shall destroy them all, and fire shall them consume. And thou shalt root out of the earth their fruit that should increase: And from the number of thy folk their seed shall end and cease. For why, much mischief did they muse against thy holy Name: Yet did they fail and had no power for to perform the same. But as a mark thou shalt them set in a most open place: And charge thy bow strings readily against thine enemies face. Be thou exalted Lord therefore, in thy strength every hour: So shall we sing right solemnly, praising thy might and power.] PSALM xxii. T. S. O God my God, wherefore dost thou forsake me utterly,
And helpest not when I do make my great complaint and cry? To thee my God even all day long I do both cry and call: I cease not all the night, and yet thou hearest not at all. Even thou that in thy Sanctuary, and holy place dost dwell: Thou art the comfort and the joy, and glory of Israel. And he in whom our fathers old had all their hope for ever: And when they put their trust in thee, thou didst them aye deliver. They were delivered ever when they called on thy Name: And for the faith they had in thee, they were not put to shame but I am now become a worm, more like than any man: An out-cast whom the people scorn, with all the spite they can. All men despise as they behold me walking on the way: They grin, they mow, they nod their heads, and on this wise they say: This man did glory in the Lord, his favour and his love: Let him redeem and help him now, his power if he will prove. but Lord out of my mothers womb, I came by thy behest: Thou didst preserve me still in hope, while I did suck her brest. I was committed from my birth, with thee to have abode: Since I was in my mothers womb, thou hast been ere my God. The second Part. Then Lord depart not now from me, in this my present grief: Since I have none to be my help, my succour and relief. So many bulls do compass me, that be full strong of head: Yea bulls so far, as though they had in Bashan field been fed. They gape upon me greedily, as though they would me slay: Much like a Lion roaring out, and ramping for his prey. but I drop down like water shed, my joynts in sunder break: My heart doth in my body melt, like wax against the heat. And like a potsherd dri'th my strength my tongue it cleaveth fast Unto my jaws and I am brought to dust of death at last. And many dogs do compass me, and wicked counsel eke Conspire gainst me , they  my hands and fee I was tormented, so that I might all my bones have told; Yet still upon me they do look, and still they me behold. My garments they divided eke in parts among them all: And for my coat they did cast lots, to whom it might befal. Therefore I pray thee be not far from me at my great need: But rather sith thou art my strength, to help me Lord make speed. And from the sword Lord save my soul by thy might and thy power: And keep my soul thy darling deer. from dogs thar would devour. And from the Lions mouth that would me all in sunder shiver; And from the horns of Unicorns Lord safely me deliver. Then shall I to my brethren all thy Majesty record: And in thy Church shall praise the Name of thee the living Lord. The third Part. All ye that fear him praise the Lord, thou Jacob honour him: And all ye seed of Israel with reverence worship him. For he despiseth not the poor, he turneth not awry His countenance when they do call, but granteth to their cry. Among the folk that fear the Lord, I will therefore proclaim Thy praise, and keep my promise made for setting forth thy Name. The poor shall eat and be suffic'd and those that do endeavour To know the Lord, shall praise his Name, their hearts shall live for ever. All coasts of th' earth shall praise the Lord, and turn to him for grace: The heathen folk shall worship him before his blessed face. The Kingdom of the Heathen folk the Lord shall have therefore: And he shall be their governour, and King for evermore. The rich man of his goodly gifts, shall feed and taste also: And in his presence worship him, and bow their knees full low. And all that shall go down to dust of life by him shall aste: My d shal serve and praise the Lord, while any world shall last. My seed shall plainly shew to them that shall be born hereafter, His iustice and his ighteousness, and all hi  of wonder.
Psalm. xxiij. W. W. THe Lord is only my support, and he that doth me feed: How can I then lack any thing, whereof I stand in need? He doth me fold in cotes most safe, the tender grass fast by: And after drives me to the streams which run most pleasantly. And when I feel my self near lost, then doth he me home take: Conducting me in his right paths, even for his own Names sake. And though I were even at deaths door yet would I fear none ill: For with thy rod and shepherds crook, I am comforted still. Thou hast my table richly deck'd, in despight of my foe: Thou hast my head with balm refresh'd my cup doth overflow. And finally while breath doth last, thy grace shall me defend: And in the house of God will I my life for ever spend. Another of the same by T. S. MY shepherd is the living Lord, nothing therefore I need: In pastures fair with waters calm, he sets me for to feed. He did convert and glad my soul, and brought my mind in frame To walk in paths of righteousness, for his most holy Name. Yea though I walk in vale of death, yet will I fear none ill: Thy rod, thy staff doth comfort me, and thou art with me still. And in the presence of my foes, my table thou shalt spread: Thou shalt (O Lord) fill full my cup, and eke anoint my head. Through all my life thy favor is so frankly shewed to me: That in thy house for evermore my dwelling place shall be. PSALM xxiv. J. H. THe earth is all the Lords, with all her store and furniture: Yea his is all the world, and all that therein dth endure. For he hath fastly founded it, above the seas to stand: And laid alow the liquid floods, to flow beneath the land. For who is he O Lord that shall ascend into thy hill? Or pass into thy holy place, there to continue still. Whose hand are harmless, and whose beare no spot there doth defile. His sul not set on vanity, who hath not sworn to guile, Him that is such an one, the Lord shall place in blisful plight: And God his God and Saviour shall yield to him his right. This is the brood of travellers, in seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the Israelites, in that time of his race. Ye Princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the King of glorious state. Who is the King of glorious state, the strong and mighty Lord: The mighty Lord in battel stout, and trial of the sword. Ye Princes ope your gates, stand ope the everlasting gate: For there shall enter in thereby the King of glorious state. Who is the King of glorious state? the Lord of hosts it is: The Kingdom and the royalty of glorious state is his PSALM xxv. T. S. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorn of me: And let them not be overthrown, that put their trust in thee. but shame shall them befal, which harm them wrongfully; Therefore thy paths and thy right ways unto me Lord descry. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray: Thou art my God and Saviour, on thee I wait alway. Thy mercies manifold, I pray thee Lord, remember, And eke thy pity plentiful for they have been for ever. Remember not the faults and frailty of my youth: Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth. Nor after my deserts let me thy mercy find: but of thine own benignity, Lord have me in thy minde. His mercy is full sweet, his tth a perfect guide: Therefore the Lord will sinners teach, and such as go aside. The humble he will teach his precepts for to keep: He will direct in all his ways, the lowly and the meek, For all the ways of God, are truth and mercy both
To them that keep his Testament, the witness of his troth. The second Part. Now for thy holy Name, O Lord, I thee intreat, To grant me pardon for my sin, for it is wondrous great. Who s doth fear the Lord, the Lord will him direct: To lead his lite in such a way as he doth best accept. His soul  all evermore in goodness dwell and stand: His see! and his posterity inherit shall the Land. All those that fear the Lord, know his secret intent: And unto them he doth declare his Will and Testament. Mine eyes and eke my heart to him I will advance: That pluck'd my feet out of the snare of sin and ignorance. With mercy me behold, to thee I make my moan: For I am poor and desolate, and comfortless alone, The troubles of my heart, are multipi'd indeed: Bring me out of this misery, necessity and need. Behold my poverty, mine anguish and my pain: Remit my sin and mine offence, and make me clean again. O Lord, behold my foes how they do still increase: Pursuing me with deadly hae, that fain would live in peace. Preserve and keep my soul, and eke deliver me: And let me not be overthrown, because I trust in thee. Let my simple pureness me from my enemies shend: Because I look as one of thine, that thou should'st me defend. Deliver, Lord, thy folk, and send them some relief, I mean thy chosen Israel, from all their pain and grief. PSALM xxvi. T. S. LOrd be my judge and thou shalt see, my paths be right and plain: I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain. Prove me my God, I thee desire, my wayes to search and try: As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins and heart espy. Thy goodness laid before my f, I durst behold alwayes: For of thy truth I tread the trace, and will do all my dayes. I do not lust to haunt or use, with men whose deeds are vain: To come in house I do refuse, with the deceitful train. I much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise: I do not once to them resort, that hurtful things devise. My hands I wash, and do proceed in works to walk upright: Then to thine Altar I make speed to offer there in fight. That I may speak and preach the praise that doth belong to thee: And so declare how wondrous wayes thou hast been good to me. O God thy house I love most dear, to me it doth excell: I have delight, and would be near whereas thy grace doth dwell. O shut not up my soul with them, in sin that take their fill: Nor yet my life among those men, that seek much blood to spill. Whose hands are heapt with craft and guile their lives thereof are full: And their right hand wt wrench and wile for bribes doth pluck and pull. But I in righteousness intend my time and dayes to serve: Have mercy Lord, and me defend, so that I do not swerve: My foot is staid for all assayes, it standeth well and right: Wherefore to God will I give Praise in all the peoples sigt. PSAL. xxvii. J. H. THe Lord is both my health and light shall man make me dismaid? Sith God doth give me strength & might why should I be afraid? While that my foes with all their strength begin with me to brwl, And think to eat me up at length, themselves have caught the fall. Though they in camp against me lie, my heart is not afraid: In battle pight if they will try, I trust in God for aid. One thing of God I do require, that h wuld not deny: For which I pray and will desire, till he to me apply. That I within hi holy place my life throughout may dwell To see the beauty of his face, and view his temple well, In time of dread he shall me hide, within his place most pure: And keep me secret by his side, as on a rock most sure.
At length I know the Lords good grace shall make me strong and stout, My foes to foil and clean deface, that compass me about. Therefore witin his house will I give sacrifice of praise: With Psalms and Songs I will apply to laud the Lord alwayes. The second Part. Lord hea th voice of my request, for which to thee I call; Have mercy Lord on me opprest, and send me help withal. My heart doth knowledge unto thee, I sue to have thy grace: Then seek my face saist thou to me, Lord I will seek thy face. In wrath tun not thy face away, nor suffer me to slide: Thou art my help still to this day, be still my God and guide. My parents both their son forsook, and cast me off at large: And then the Lord himself yet took of me the care and charge. Teach me, O Lord, the way to thee, and lead me on forth right: For fear of such as watch for me, to trap me if they might, Do not betake me to the will of them that he my foes; For they surmise against me still, false witnes to depose. My heart would faint, but that in me this hope is fixed fast: The Lord Gods good grace shall I see in life that aye shall last. Trust still in God whose whole thou art, his will abide thou must: And he shall ease and strength thy heart, if thou in him do trust. PSALM xxviii. T. S. THou art (O Lord) my strength and stay the succor which I crave: Neglect me no, lest I be like to thm that go to grave. The voice of thy suppliant hear that unto thee doth cry: When I lift up my hands unto thy holy Ark most High. Repute me not among the sort of wicked and pervert: That speak right fair unto their friends, but think full ill in heart. According to their handy work, as they deserve indeed: And after their inventions let them receive their meed. For they regard nothing Gods work, his law ne yet his lore: Therefore will he them and their seed, destroy for evermore. To render thanks unto the Lord, hovv great a cause have I, My voice, my prayer, and my complaint, that heard so willingly? He is my shield and fortitude, my buckler in distress: My hope, my help, my hearts relief, my song shall him confess. He is our strength and our defence, our enemies to resist: The health and the salvation of his elect b Christ. Thy people and thine heritage Lord bless, guide, and preserve: Increase them Lord and rule their heart that they may never swerve. PSALM xxix. T. S. GIve to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world: Give ye all praise, honour, and strength unto the living Lord. Give glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worship him in Maiesty within his holy throne. His voice doth rule the waters all even as himself doth please: He doth prepare the thunder-claps, and governs all the seas. The voice of God is of great force, and wondrous excellent: It is most mighty in effect, and most magnificent. The voice of God doth rend and break the Cedar-trees so long: The Cedar-trees of Lebanon, which are most high and strong. And makes them leap like as a Calf, or else the Unicorn: Not only trees, but mountains great whereon the trees are born. His voice divides the flames of fire, and shakes the wilderness: It makes the desart quake for fear, that called is Cadeh. It makes the Hinds for fear to calve, and makes the coverts plain: Then in his Temple every man his glory doth proclaim. The Lord was set above the floods, ruling the raging sea: So shall he reign as Lord and King, for ever and for aye. The Lord will give his people power in virtue to increase: The Lord will bless his chosen flock with everlasting peace. PSALM xxx. J. H. ALL laud and praise with heart and voice, O Lord I give to thee: Which didst not make my foes rejoyce, but hast exalted me. O Lord my God to thee I cry'd in all my pain and grief:
Thou gav'st an ear and didst provide to ease me with relief. Of thy good will thou hast call'd back my soul from hell to save: Thou didst revive when strength did lack and keptst me from the grave. Sing praise ye Saints that prove and see the goodness of the Lord: In memory of his Majesty rejoyce with one accord. For why? his anger but a space doth last and slack again: but in his favour and his grace alwayes doth life remain. Though gripes of grief and pangs full sore shall lodge with us all night: The Lord to joy shall us restore before the day be light. When I enjoy'd the world at will, thus would I boast and say: Tun, I am sure to feel none ill, this wealth shall not decay. For thou O Lord of thy good grace hadst sent me strength and aid: but when thou turn'dst away thy face, my mind was sore dismaid. Wherefore again yet did I cry to thee O Lord of might: My God with plaints! did apply, and pray'd both day and night. What gain is in my blood (said I) if death destroy my dayes? Doth dust declare thy Majesty, or yet thy truth doth praise? Wherefore my God some pity take, O Lord I thee desire: Do not this simple soul forsake, of help I thee require. Then didst thou turn my grief & woe into a chearful voice: The mourning weed thou took'st me fro and mad'st me to rejoyce. Whereefore my soul uncessantly shall sing unto thy praise: My Lord my God to thee will I give laud and thanks alwayes. PSALM xxxi. J. H. O Lord I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame, As thou art it deliver me, and set me quit from blame. Hear me O God ad that anon, to help me make good speed: be thou my rock and house of stone, my fece in tie o need. For why? as stones thy srength is tri'd tho art my sort and rowe For thy Names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy power. Pluck thou my feet out of the snare, which they for me have laid: Thou art my strength, and all my care is for thy might and aid. Into thy hands Lord I commit my spirit which is thy due: For why thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. I hate such folk as will not part from things to be abhorr'd: When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord. For I will in thy mercy joy, I see it doth excel: Thou seest when ought would me annoy and know'st my soul full well. Thou hast not left me in their hand, that would me overcharge: but thou hast set me out of band, to walk abroad at large. The Second Part. Great grief O Lord doth me assail, some pity on me take: Mine eyes wax dim, my fight doth said my womb for woe doth ake. My life is worn with grief and pain my years in vvoe are past: My strength is gone, and through disdain my bones corrupt and vvaste. Among my foes I am a scorn, my friends are all dismaid: My neighbors and my kinsmen born, to see me are afraid. As men once dead are out of mind, so am I novv forgot: As small effect in me they find, as in a broken pot. I heard the brags of all the rout, their threats my mind did fray: Hovv they conspir'd and vvent about to take my life avvay. but Lord I trust in thee for aid, not to be over-trod: For I confess and still have said, thou art my Lord and God. The length of all my life and age O Lord is in thy hand: Defend me from the vvrath and rage of them that me vvithstand. To me thy servant (Lord) express, and shevv thy joyful face: And save me Lord for thy goodness, thy mercy and thy grace. The third Part. Lord le me not be put to blame, for tha on thee I call: bu let the vvicked bear the shame, and in their grave to fall. O Lord make dumb their lips outright vvhich are addict to lies; And cruelly vvith pride and spight against the just devise. O hovv great good hast thou in store aid up full safe for them
That fear and trust in thee therefore, before the sons of men! Thy presence shall them fence and guide from all proud brags and wrong: Within thy place thou shalt them hide from all the strife of tongues. Thanks to the Lord that hath declar'd on me his grace so far: Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war. Thus did I say both day and night, when I was sore opprest: Lo I was clean cast out of sight, yet heardst thou my request. Ye Saints love ye the Lord, I say, the faithful he doth guide: And to the proud he doth repay according to their pride. Be strong and God will stay your heart be bold n have a lust: For sure the Lord will take your part, sith ye in him do trust. PSALM xxxii. T. S. THe man is blest whose wickedness the Lord hath clean remitted: And he whose sin and wickedness is hid and also covered. And blest is he to whom the Lord imputeth not his sin: Which in his heart hath hid no guile, nor fraud is found therein. For whilst that I kept close my sin in silence and constraint: My bones did wear and waste away with daily moan and plaint. For night and day thy hand on me so grievous was and smart, That all my blood and humours moist to driness did convert. I did therefore confess my faults, and all my sins discover, Then thou, O Lord, didst me forgive, and all my sins pass over. The humble man shall pray therefore, and seek thee in due time: So that the floods of waters great shall have no power on him. When trouble and adversity do compass me about: Thou art my refuge and my joy, and thou dost rid me out. Come hither and I will thee teach how thou shalt walk aright: I will thee guide, as I my self have learn'd by proof and sight. Be not so rude and ignorant as is the hore and mule: Whose mouth with  a rein or bit from hrm thou canst nor rule. The wicked man shall, manifold sorrows and griefs sustain: ut unto him that trusts in God, his goodness shall remain. Be merry therefore in the Lord, ye just lift up your voice: And ye of pure and perfect heart, be glad and eke rejoyce. PSALM xxxiii. J. H. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce, it is a seemly sight, That upright men with thankful voice should praise the Lord of might. Praise ye the Lord with harp and song, in Psalms and pleasant things: With Lute and Instrument among, that soundeth with ten strings. Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him praise: For why his word is ever true, his works and all his wayes To judgement equity and rght, he hath a great good will: And with his gifts he doth delight the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone the heavens all were wrought: Their hosts and powers every one his breath to pass hath brought. The waters great gthered hath he on heaps within the shore: And hid them in the depth to be, as in a house of store. All men on earth both least and most fear God and keep his Law: Ye that inhabit in each coast, dread him and stand in awe. What he commanded wrought it was at once with present speed: What he doth will is brought to pass with full effect indeed. The counsels of the nations rude the Lord doth bring to nought: He doth defeat the multitude, of their device and thought. But his decrees continue still, they neve slack nor swage: The motions of his mind and will take place in every age. The second Part. And blest are they to whom the Lord as God and guide is known: Whom he doth choose of meer accord, to take them as his own. The Lord from heaven cast his sight, on men mortal by birth: Considering from his seat of might the dwellers on the earth. The Lord I say whose hand hath wroughs mans heart, and doth it frame: For he alone doth know the thought and working of the same. A King that trusteth in his host shall nought prevail at length: The man that of his might doth boast, shall fall for all his strength.
The troops of horsemen eke shall fall, their sturdy steeds shall sterve: The strength of horse shall not prevail, the rider to preserve. But lo the eyes of God intend and watch to aid the just: With such as fear him to offend, and on his goodness trust. That he of death and great distress may set their souls from dread; And if that dearth their land oppress, in hunger them to seed. Wherefore our soul doth whole depend on God our strength and stay, He is our shield us to defend, and drive all darts away. Our soul in God hath joy and game, rejoycing in his might: For why, in his most holy Name we hope and much delight. Therefore let thy goodness, O Lord still present with us be: And we awayes with one accord, do only trust in thee. PSALM xxxiv. T.S. I Will give laud and honor both unto the Lord alwayes: And eke my mouth for evermore shall speak unto his praise. I do delight to laud the Lord in soul, and eke in voice: That humble men and mortifi'd may hear and so rejoyce. Therefore see that ye magnifie with me the living Lord: And let us now exalt his Name together with one accord. For I my self besought the Lord, he answered me again: And me deliver'd incontinent, from all my fear and pain. Who so they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear, Their countenance shall not be dasht, they need it not to fear. This silly wretch for some relief, unto the Lord did call: Who did him hear without delay, and rid him ou of thrall. The Angel of the Lord doth pitch his tes in every place: To save all suh as fear the Lord, that nothing them deface. Taste and consider well therefore, that God is good and ju O happy man that maketh him his only stay and trust. Fear ye the Lord ye holy ones, above all earthly thing: For they that fear the living Lord, are sure to lack nothing. The Lions shall be hunger-bit, and pin'd with famine much: But as for them that fear the Lord, no lack shall be to such. The second Part. Come near therefore my children dear and to my words give ear: I shall ye teach the perfect way, how ye the Lord should fear. Who is the man that would live long and lead a blessed life? See thou refrain thy tongue and lips from all deceit and strife. Turn back thy face from doing ill, and do the godly deed: Inquire for peace and righteousness, and follow it with speed. For why? the eyes of God above, upon the just are bent: His ears likewise do hear the plaint of the poor innocent. But he doth frown and bend his brow upon the wicked train: And cuts away the memory, that should of them remain. But when the just do call and cry, the Lord doth hear them so, That out of pain and misery forthwith he lets them go. The Lord is kind and straight at hand to such as be contrite: He saves also the sorrowful, the poor and meek in sprite. Full many be the miseries that righteous men do suffer: But out of all adversities the Lord doth them deliver. The Lord doth so preserve and keep their very bones alway: That not so much as one of them doth perish or decay. The sin shall stay the wicked man which he himself hath wrought: And such as hate the righteous man, shall soon be brought to nought. But they that fear the living Lord, the Lord doth save them sound, And who that put their trust in him, nothing shall them confound. PSALM xxxv. T. S. LOrd plead my cause against my foes, confound their force and might: Fight on my part against all those that eek with me to fight. Lay hand upon the spear and shield. thy self in armor dress: Stand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress. Gird on thy swod, and stop the way mire eemies to withstand, That hou unto my soul maist say Lo, I thy help at hand. Confound them with rebuke & blame, that seek my soul to spill;
Let them turn back and flee with shame that think to work me ill. Let them disperse and flee abroad, as wind doth drive the dust: And that the Angel of our God, their might away may thrust. Let all their wayes; be void of light, and slippery like to fall: And send thine angel with thy might to persecute them all. For why? without my fault they have in secret set their gin: And for no cause have dig'd a cave, to take my soul therein. When they think least and have no care O Lord destroy them all: Let them be trapt in their own snare, and in their mischief fall. And let my soul in heart and voice in God have joy and wealth; That in the Lord I may rejoyce, and in his saving health. And then my bones shall speak and say, my parts shall all agree: O Lord though they do seem full gay, what one is like to thee? The second Part. Thou dost defend the weak from them that are both stout and strong: And rid the poor from wicked men that spoil and do them wrong. My cruel foes against me rise, to witness things untrue And to accuse me they devise of things I never knew. Where I to them did owe good will they quit me with disdain: That they should pay my good with ill, my soul doth sore complain. When they were sick I mourn'd therefore and clad my self in sack: With fasting I did faint full fore, to pray I was not stack. As they had been my brethren dear I did my self behave: As one that maketh woful chear about his mothers grave. But they at my disease did joy, and gather on a rout: Yea, abiect slaves at me did toy, with mocks and checks full stout. The belly-gods and flattering train, that all good things deride: At me do grin with great disdain, and pluck their mouths asde. Lord why wilt thou so long forbear, why dost thou stay and pause? O rid my soul, mine only dear, out of these Lions claws. And then will I give thanks to thee, before the Church alwayes: And where most of the people be, there will I shew thy praise, Let not my foes prevail on me, which hate me for no fault: Nor let them wink or turn their eyes, that causless me assault. The third Part. Of peace no word they think or say, their talk is all untrue: They still consult, and would betray all those that peace ensue. With open mouth they run at me, they gape, they laugh, they fleer: Well, well, say they, our eye doth see the thing that we desire. But Lord thou seest what wayes they take, cease not my grief to mend: Be not far off, nor me forsake, as men that fail their friend. Awake, arise, and stir abroad, defend me in my right: Revenge my cause, my Lord, my God. and aid me with thy might. According to thy righteousness, my Lord God set me free: And let them not their pride express, nor triumph over me, Let not their hearts rejoyce and cry, There, there, all goeh trim: Nor give them cause to say on high we have our will on him. Confound them with rebuke & shame that joy when I do mourn: And pay them home with spite & blame that brag at me with scorn. Let them be glad and eke rejoyce, which love mine upright way, And they all times with heart and voie shall praise the Lord, and say, Great is the Lord, and doth excel, for why, he doth delight To see his servants prosper well, that is his pleasant sght. Wherefore my tongue I will apply thy righteousness to praise: Unto my Lord my God will I sing laud and praise alwayes. PSALM xxxvj. J. H. THe wicked with his works unjust doth hus perswade his heart: That of the Lord he doth not trust his fear is set apart. Yet doth he joy in his estate, to walk as he began: So long till he deserve the hate of God and eke of man. His words are wicked, vile, and naught, his tongue no truth doth tell, Yet at no hand will he be tught which way he may do well. When he should sleep, then doth he muse his mischiefs to fulfil: No wicked wayes doth he refuse, nor nothing that is i'll.
But Lord thy goodness doth ascend above the heavens high, So doth thy truth it self extend unto the clody skie. Much more than hills so high and sleep thy justice is exprest: Thy judgment like to seas most deep, thou sav'st both man and beast. Thy mercy is above all things, O God it doth excel: In trust whereof as in thy wings, the sons of man shal dwell. Within thy house they shall be fed, with plenty at their will: Of all delights they shall be sped, and take thereof their fill. For why? the well of life so pure doth ever flow from thee: And in thy light we are full sure the lasting light to see. From such as thee desire to know, let not thy grace depart: Thy righteousness declare and shew to men of upright heart. Let not the proud on me prevail, O Lord of thy good grace: Nor let the wicked me assail, to throw me out of place. but the in their device shall fall that wicked works maintain: They shall be overthrown withal, and never rise again. PSALM xxxvij. W. W. CRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to flourish still: Nor yet envy such as to ill have bent and set their will. For as green grass and flourishing herbs are cut and wither away: So shal their great prosperity soon pass, fade, and decay. Trust thou therefore in God alone, to do well give thy mind: So shalt thou have the land as thine, and there sure food shalt find. In God set all thy hearts delight, and look what thou wouldst have, Or else can wish in all the world, thou needst it not to crave. Cast both thy self and thine affairs, on God with perfect trust: And thou shalt see with patience, the effect both sure and just. Thy perfect life and godly name, he will clear as the light: So that the Sun even at noon days, shall not shine half so bright. Be still therefore and stedfastly on God see thou walt then: Not shrinking for the prosperous state of lewd and wicked men. Shake off despight, envy and hate, at least in any wise: Their wicked steps avoid and flee and follow not their guise. For every wicked man will God destroy both more and less: But such as trust in him are sure the land for to possess: Watch but a while and thou shalt fee no more the wicked train: No not so much as house or place where once he did remain. The second Part. But merciful and humble men enioy shal sea and land: In rest and peace they shal rejoice. for nought shal them withstand. The lewd men and malicious, against the just conspie: They gnash their teeth at him as men, which do his bane desire. But while the lewd men thus do thin the Lord laughs them to scorn: For why he sees the term approach, when they shall sgh and mourn. The wicked have their swords outdraw their bow eke have they bent: To overthrow and kill the poor, as they the right way went. But the same sword shal pierce their heart, which was to kill the just: Likewise the bow shall break to shivers wherein they put their trust. Doubtless the just mans poor estate is better a great deal more: Then all these lewd and wicked mens rich pomp and heaped store. For be their power never so strong, God will it overthrow: Where contrary he doth preserve the humble men and low. He sees by his great providence, the good mens trade and way: And will give them inheritance, which never shal decay. They shall not be discouraged, when some are hard bestead: When other shal be hunger bit, they shal be clad and fed. For whosoever wicked is, and enemy to the Lord: Shall quail, yea melt even as lambs grease or smoke that flies abroad. The third Part. Behold the wicked borrows much, and never pays again: Whereas the just by liberal gifts, makes many glad and fain. For they whom God doth bless shall have the land for herritage. And they whom he doth curse likewise shall perish in his rage.
The Lord the just mans ways doth guide, and gives him good success: To every thing he takes in hand, he sendeth good address. Though that he fall, yet is he sure not utterly to quail, Because the Lord puts out his hand at need and doth not fail. I have been young and now am old, yet did I never see The just man left, nor yet his seed to beg for misery. But gives alway most liberally, and lends whereas is need: His children and psterity receive of God their meed. Flee vice therefore and wickedness, and vertue do embrace: So shal God grant thee long to have on earth a dwelling place. For God so loveth equity, and shews to his such grace: That he preserveth them alway, but stroyes the wicked race. Whereas the good and godly men inherit shall the land: Having as Lords all things therein in their own power and hand. The just mans mouth shall ever speak of matters wise and hie: His tongue doth talk to edifie, with truth and equity. For in his heart the Law of God his Lord doth still abide: o that where ever he goes or walks, his foot can never slide. The wicked like a raving wolf, the just man doth beset: y all means seeking him to kill, if he fall in his net. The fourth Part. Though he should fall into his hands yet God would succour send: hough men against him sentence give, God would him yet defend. Wait thou on God and keep his way, he shall preserve thee then: he earth to rule, and thou shalt see destroy'd these wicked men. The wicked have I seen most strong, and plac'd in high degree: ourishing in all wealth and store, as doth the Lawrel-tree. But suddenly be past away, and lo he was quite gone: hen I him sought, but could not find the place where dwelt such one. Mark and behold the perfect man, how God doth him encrease: r the just man shal have at length great joy with rest and peace. As for transgressours, wo to them, destroy'd they shal all be: God will cut off their budding race, and rich posterity. But the salvation of the just doth come from God above: Who in their trouble sends them aid of his meer grace and love. God doth them help, save, and deliver from lewd men and unjust: And still wil save them whilst that they in him do put their trust. PSALM xxxviij. J.H. PUt me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thy provoked ire: Ne in thy heavy wrath, O Lord, correct me I desire. Thine arrows do stick fast in me thy hand doth press me sore: And in my flesh no health at all appeareth any more. And all this is by reason of the wrath that I am in: Nor any rest is in my bones, by reason of my sin. For lo my wicked doings (Lord) above my head are gone: A greater load than I can bear, they lie me sore upon. My wounds stink and are festered so, as loathsome is to see: Which all through mine own foolishness betideth unto me. And I in careful wise am brought in trouble and distress: That I go wailing all the day in doleful heaviness. My loins are fill'd with sore disease, my flesh hath no whole part: I feeble am and broken sore, I roar for grief of heart. Thou know'st (Lord) my desire, my groans are open in thy sight, My heart doth pant, my strength doth fail, mine eyes have lost their light. My lovers and my wonted friends stand looking on my wo: And eke my kinsmen far away are me departed fro. They that did seek my life laid snares and they that sought the way To do me hurt, spake lies and thought on mischief all the day. The second Part. But as a deaf man I became, that cannot hear at all: And as one dumb, that opens not his mouth to speak withal. For all my confidence O Lord is wholly set on thee: O Lord, thou Lord that art my God, thou shalt give ear to me. This did I crave, that they my foes triumph not over me:
For when my soul did slip, then they did joy my fall to see. And truly I poor wretch am set, in place, a woful wight: And eke my grievous heaviness is ever in my sight. For while that I my wickedness in humble wise confess: And while I for my sinful deeds, my sorrows do express: My foes do still remain alive, and mighty are also, And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow. They stand against me, that my good with evil do repay: Because that good and honest things I do ensue alway. Forsake me not, O Lord my God, be thou not far away: Haste me to help, my Lord, my God, my safety and my stay. PSALM xxxix. J. H. I Said I will look to my wayes, for fear I should go wrong: I will take heed all times that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keep fast my mouth with force and might: Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sght. I held my tongue and spake no word, but kept me close and still: Yea from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will. My heart wat hot within my brest, with musing thought and doubt: Which did increase and stir the fire, at last these words burst out, Lord number out my life and dayes which yet I have not past, So that I may be certifi'd, how long my life shall last. Lord thou hast pointed out my life, in length much like a span: Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is every man. Man walketh like a shade, and doth in vain himself annoy In getting goods, and cannot tell, who shall the same enjoy. Now Lord since things this wise do frame, what help do I desire? Of truth my help doth hang on thee, I nothing else require. The second Part. From all the sins that I have done, Lord quit me out of hand: And make me not a scorn to fools that nothing understand. I was as dumb, and to complain no trouble might me move: Because I knew it was thy work, my patience for to prove. Lord take from me thy scourge and plague, I can them not withstand: I faint and pine away for fear of thy most heavy hand, When thou for sin dost man rebuke, he waxeth woe and wan: As doth a cloth that moths have fret, so vain a thing is man. Lord hear my suit, and give good heed regard my tears that fall: I sojourn like a stranger here, as did my fathers all. O spare a little, give me space my strength for to restore: Before I go away from hence, and shall be seen no more. PSALM xl. J. H. I Waited long and sought the Lord; and patiently did bear: At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear. He pluck'd me from the lake so deep. out of the mire and clay: And on a rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way. To me he taught a Psalm of praise, which I must shew abroad: And sing new songs of thanks alwayes unto the Lord our God. When all the folk these things shall see as people much afraid: Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid. O blest is he whose hope and heart doth in the Lord remain: That with the proud do take no part nor such as lye and fain. For Lord my God thy wondrous deeds in greatness far do pass: Thy favor towards us exceeds all things that ever was. When I intend and do devise thy works abroad to show: To such a reckoning they do rise, thereof no end I know. Burnt offerings thou delightst not in, I know thy whole desire, With sacrifice to purge his sin, thou dost no man require. Mea-oerings and sacrifice thou wouldst not have at all: But thou (O Lord) hast open made mine ears to hear withal. But then said I, Behold and look, I come a mean to be: For in the volume of thy book thus it is said of me, That I (O Lord) should do thy min which thing doth like me well:
For in my heart thy law I finde fast placed there to dwell. Thy justice and thy righteousness in great resorts I tell: Behold my tongue no time doth cease, O Lord thou knowst full well. The second Part. I have not hid within my brest, thy goodness as by stealth, But I declare and have exprest thy truth and saving health. I kept not close thy loving mind, that no man should it know: The trust that in thy truth I find, to all the Church I show. Thy tender mercy (Lord) from me, withdraw thou not away, But let thy love and verity preserve me still for ay. For I with mischiefs many a one am sore beset about: My sins increase, and so come on. I cannot spy them out. For why? in number they exceed the hairs upon my head: My heart doth faint for very dread, that I am almost dead. With speed send help and set me free, O Lord I thee require: Make haste with aid to succor me, O Lord at my desire. Let them sustain rebuke and shame, that seek my soul to spill: Drive back my foes, and them defame, that wish and would me ill. For their ill feats do them descry, that would deface my name: Alwayes at me they rail and cry, fie on him, fie for shame. Let them in thee have joy and wealth that seek to thee alwayes: That those that love thy saving health may say, To God be praise. But as for me, I am but poor, opprest and brought full low: Yet thou O Lord, wilt me restore to health, full well I know. For why, thou art my hope and trust, my refuge, help, and stay, Wherefore my God as thou art just, with me no time delay. PSALM xli. T. S. THe man is blest that careful is the needy to conder: or in the season perillous the Lord will hm deliver. The Lord will make him safe and found and happy in the land: nd he will not deliver him into his enemies hand. And on his bed when he lies sick, the Lord will him restore: nd thou, O Lord, wilt turn to healh his sickness and his sore. Then in my sickness thus said I, have mercy Lord on me, And heal my soul, which is full woe, that I offended thee. Mine enemies wish'd me ill in heart and thus of me did say, When shall he die, that all his name may vanish quite away? And when they come to visit me, they ask if I do well: But in their heart mischief they hatch, and to their mates it tell. They bite their lips and whisper so, as though they would me charm, And cast their fetches how to trap me with some deadly harm. Some grievous sin hath brought him to this sickness, say they plain: He is so low, that without doubt rise can he not again. The man also that I did trust, with me did use deceit: Who at my table are my bread, the same for me laid wait. Have mercy, Lord, on me therefore, and let me be preserv'd, That I may render unto them the things they have deserv'd. By this I know assuredly to be belov'd of thee, When that mine enemies have no cause to triumph over me. But in my right thou hst me kept, and maintained lway: And in thy preence place assign'd where I shall dwl for ay. The Lord the Gd of Israel be praised evermore, Even so be it (Lord) will I say, even so be it therefore. PSALM xlii. J. H. LIke as the hart doth breath and bray, the well springs to obtain, So doth my soul desire alway, with thee Lord to remain. My soul doth thirst, & would draw near the living God of might: O when shall I come and appear in presence of his sight! The tears all times are my repast, which from mine eyes do slide, When wicked men cry out so fast, Where now is God thy guide? Alas what grief is this to think what freedom once I had? Therefore my soul as at pits brink, most heavy is and sad. When I did march in good aray, furnished with my train, Unto the temple was our way, with songs and hearts most sai
My soul why art thou sad alwayes, and frest thus in my brest? Trust still in God, for him to praise I hold it ever best. By him I have succor at need, against all pain and grief: He is my God which with all speed will haste to send relief. And thus my soul within me Lord, doth faint to think upon The land of Jordan, and record the little hill Hermon. The second Part. One grief another in doth call as clouds burst out their voice: The floods of evil that do fall, run over me with noise. Yet I by day felt his goodness, and help at all assayes: Likewise by night I did not cease the living God to praise. I am perswaded thus to say to him with pure pretence: O Lord thou art my guide and stay my rock and sure defence, Why do I then in pensiveness, hanging the head thus walk? While that mine enemies me oppress, and vex me with their talk. For why? they pierce my inward parts with pangs to be abhor'd: When they cry out with stubborn hearts where is thy God thy Lord? So soon why dost thou faint & quail, my soul with pain opprest: With thoughts why dost thy self assail, so sore within my brest? Trust in the Lord thy God alwayes, and thou the time shalt see To give him thanks with laud and praise for health restor'd to thee. PSALM xliii. T. S. JUdge and revenge my cause O Lord, from them that evil be: From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me. For of my strength thou art the God, why putst thou me thee fro? And why walk I so heavily oppressed with my foe? Send out thy light and eke thy truth, and lead me with thy grace: Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place. Then shall I to the altar go, of God my joy and cheer: And on my harp give thanks to thee, O God my God most deer. Why art thou then so sad my soul, and fretst ths in my brest? Still trust in God, for him to praise I hold it alwayes best. By him I have deliverance against all pain and grief: He is my God which doth alwayes at need send me relief. PSALM xliv. T. S. OUr ears have heard our fathers tell. and reverently record, The wondrous works that thou hast done in older time O Lord. How thou didst cast the Gentiles ut, and stroidst them with strong hand: Planting our fathers in their place, and gav'st to them their land. They conquered not by sword nor strength the land of thy behest: But by thy hand, thy arm, and grace, because thou lov'dst them best. Thou art my King, O God, that holp Jacob in sundry wise: Led with thy power, we threw down such as did against us rise. I trusted not in bow nor sword, they could not save me sound: Thou keptst us from our enemies rage, thou didst our foes confound. And still we boast of thee our God, and praise thy holy Name: Yet now thou go'st not with our host but leavest us to shame. Thou mad'st us flee before our foes and so were over-trod: Our enemies rob'd and spoil'd our good when we were sperst abroad. Thou hast us given to our foes, as sheep for to be slain: Amongst the heathen every where scattered we do remain. Thy people thou hast sold like slaves, and as a thing of nought: For profit none thou hadst thereby, no gain at all was sought. And to our neighbors thou hast made of us a laughing stock: And those that round about us dwell, at us do grin and mock. The second Part. Thus we serve for none other use, but for a common talk: They mock, they scorn, they nod their head where ere they go or walk, I am asham'd continually to hear these wicked men: Yea so I blush that all my face with red is covered then. For why? we hear such slanderou words such false reports and lies: That death it is to see their wrongs, their threatnings and their cries. For all this we forgot not thee, nor yet thy covenant brake: We turn not back our hearts from thee nor yet thy paths forsake,
19 Yet thou hast trod us down to dust, where dens of dragons be: and covered us with shade of death, and great adversity. If we had our Gods Name forgot, and help of Idols sought, Would not God then have tried this out? for he doth know our thought. Nay, nay, for thy Names sake, O Lord, always are we slain thus: s sheep unto the shambles sent, right so they deal with us. Up Lord, why sleepest thou? awake, and leave us not for all: Why hidest thou thy countenance, and dost forget our thrall? For down to dust our soul is brougt, and we now at last cast: Our belly, like as it were glued unto the ground cleaves fast. Rise up therefore for our defence, and help us (Lord) at need We thee beseech for thy goodness, to rescue us with speed. PSALM xlv. I. H. MY heart doth take in hand, some godly song to sing: he praise that I shall shew therein, pertaineth to the King. My tongue shall be as quick, his honour to indite, s is the pen of any scribe, that useth fast to write. O fairest of all men, thy speech is pleasant pure: or God hath blessed thee with gifts, for ever to endure. About thee gird thy sword, O Prince of might elect: With honour, glory, and renown thy person pure is deckt. Go forth with godly speed, wih meekness, truth, and right: nd thy right hand shall thee instruct in works of dreadful might. Thine arrows sharp and keen, their hearts o sore shall sting: hat folk shall fall and kneel to thee, yea all thy foes, O King. Thy royal seat, O Lord, for ever shall remain: ecause the Scepter of thy Realm doth righteousness maintain. Because thou lov'st the right, and dost the ill detest: od even thy God hath 'nointed thee with joy above the rest. With myrrhe and savours sweet, thy clahes are all bespread: hen thou dost from thy palace past, therein to make thee glad. Kings daughters do attend in fine and rich aray: At thy right hand the Queen doth stand in gold and garments gay. The second Part. O daughter take good heed, incline and give good ear: Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dear. Then shall the King desire thy beauty fair and trim: For why? he is the Lord thy God, and thou must worship him. The daughters then of Tyre, with gifts full rich to see: And all the wealthy of the land shall make their suit to thee. The daughter of the King is glorious to behold: Within her closet the doth sit all deckt with beaten gold. In robes well wrought with needle and many a pleasant thing: With Virgins fair on her to wait, she cometh to the King. Thus are they brought with joy, and mirth on every side, Into the palace of the King, and there they do abide. Instead of parents left, (O Qeen the case so stands) Thou shalt have sons whom thou maist set, as Princes in all lands. Wherefore thy holy Name all ages shall record: The people shall give thanks to thee, for evermore, O Lord. PSALM xlvi. I. H. THe Lord is our defence and aid, the strength whereby we stand: When we with war are much dismaid, he is our help at hand. Though th'earth remove we will not fear, though hills so high and steep Be thrust and hurled here and there, within the sea so deep. No though the waves do rage so sore, that all the banks it spills: And though it overflow the shore, and beat down mghty hills. For one fair floud doth send abroad his pleasant streams: pace: To 'fresh the city of our God, and wash his holy place. In midst of her the Lord doth dwell, she can no whit decay: All things against her that rebel, the Lord will truely stay. The heathen folk the kingdoms fear, the people make a noise. The earth doth melt and not appear, when God puts forh his voice. The Lord of hosts doth take our part, to us he hath an eye:
Our hope of health with all our heart, on Jacobs God doth lie. Come hear & see with mind & thought, the working of our God: What wonders he himself hath wrought, in all the world abroad. By him all wars are husht and gone, which countries did conspire: Their bows he brake, and spears each one, their chariots burnt with fire. Leave off therefore (saith he) and know I am a God most stout: Amongst the heathen high and low, and all the earth throughout. The Lord of hosts doth us desend, he is our strength and power: On Jacobs God we do depend, and on his might and power. PSALM xlvii. J.H. YE people all with one accord, clap hands and eke rejoyce: Be glad and sing unto the Lord, with sweet and pleasant voice. For high the Lord and dreadful is with wonders manifold: A mighty king he is truly, in all the earth extol'd. The people shall he make to be, unto our bondage thrall: And underneath our feet he shall, the nations make to fall. For us the heritage he chose, which we possess alone: The flourishing worship of Jacob, his wellbeloved one. Our God ascended up on high, with joy and pleasant noise: The Lord goes up above the kie, with trumpets royal voice. Sing praises to our God, sing praise, sing praises to our King: For God is King of all the earth, all skilful praises sing. God on the heathen reigns and fits upon his holy throne: The princes of the people have them joyned every one, To Abrahams people, for our God which is exa ted high, As with a buckler doth defend the earth continually. PSALM xlviii. J.H. GReat is the Lord, & with great praise, to be advanced still: Within the city of our God, upon his holy hill. Mount Sion is a pleasant place, it gladdeth all the land: The City of the mighty king on her north-side doth stand. Within the palaces thereof, God is a refuge known: For lo the Kings are gathered, and together they are gone. But when they did behold it so, they wondered, and they were Astonied much, and suddenly were driven back with fear. Great terror there on them did fall, for very woe they cry: As doth a woman when she shall go travel by and by. As thou with Eastern wind the ships upon the sea dost break: So they were 'stroid; and even as we heard our fathers speak; So in the city of the Lord, we saw as it was told: Yea in the city which our God for ever will uphold. O Lord, we wait and do attend on thy good help and grace, For which we do all times attend within thy holy place. O Lord, according to thy Name, for ever is thy praise: And thy right hand, O Lord, is ful of righteousness always. Let, for thy judgments, Sion Mount fulfilled be with joys: And eke of Juda grant, O Lord, the daughters to rejoyce. Go walk about all Sion hill, yea round about her go: And tell the towers that thereupon are builded on a row. And mark ye well her bulwarks all behold her toers there: That ye may tell thereof to them that after shall be here. For this God is our God, our God for evermore is he: Yea and unto the death also our guider shall he be. PSALM xlix. J.H. ALL people hearken and give ear to that, that I sha tel: Both high and low, both rich and poor that in the world do dwel. For why? my mouth shal make discou of many things right wise: In understanding shal my heart his study exercise. I wil incline mine ears to know the parable so dark: And upon all my doubtful speech, in meeter on my harp. Why should I fear affliction, or any careful toil: Or else my fes which at my hees are prest my life to spoil? For as for such as riches have, wherein, their trust is most:
And they which of their treasures great, themselves do brag and boast. There is not one of them that can his brothers death redeem; Or that can give a price to God, sufficient for him. It is too great a price to pay, none can thereto attain: Or that he might his ife prolong, or not in grave remain. They see wise men as wel as fools subject unto deaths bans: And being dea, strangers possess their goods, their rents, their lands. Their care is to build houses fair, and so determine sure, To make their name right great on earth, for ever to endure. Yet shall no man always enjoy high honor, wealth, and rest: But shall at length taste of deaths cup as well as the brute beast. The second Part. And though they try their foolish thoughts, to be most lewd and vain: Their children yet approve their talk, and in like sin remain. As sheep into the fold are brought, so shall they into grave: Death shall them eat, and in that day the just shall Lordship have. Their image and their royal port shall sade and quite decay: When as from house to pit they pass, with wo and weal away. But God will surely preserve me from death and endless pain: Because he will of his good grace, my soul receive again. If any man wax wondrous rich, fear not, I say, therefore: Although the glory of his house increaseth more and moe. For when he dies, of all these things nothing shall he receive: His glory will not follow him, his pomp will take her leave. Yet in this life he takes himself the happiest under Sun: And others likewise flatter him, saying all is well done. And pesuppose he live as long as did his fathers old: Yet must he needs at length give plae, and be brought to deaths fold. Thus man to honor God hath brought yet doth he not consider: But like brute beasts so doth he live, which turn to dust and powde. PSALM L. W. W. THe mighty God, th' Eternal hath thus spoke, And all the world he will call and provoke: Even from the East, and so forth to the West, From towards Sion, which place he liketh best. od will appear in beauty most excellent▪ Our God will come before that long time be spent. Devouring fire shall go before his face, A great tempest shall round about him trace, Then shall he call the earth and heavens bright, To judge his folk with equity and right, Saying, Go to, and now my Saint assemble: My past they keep, their gift do not dissemlbe. The heavens shall declare his righteousness, For God is judge of all things more and less. Hear my people, for I will now reveal: List Israel, I will thee nought conceal, Thy God thy God am I, and will not blame thee, For giving nor all manner offerings to me. I have no need to tae o thee at all. Cots o thy fold, or Cal out of thy stall. For all the east, are mine within the woods: On thousand hills, cattel are mine own goods, I know for mine all birds that are on mountins: All ests are mine, which haunt the fields and founains. Hungry if I were I would not thee it tell: For all i mine that n the world doht dwell. Fa the flesh of get Bulls or Bullocks? O drink the blood o Goat, or of the focks? Offer to od praise and hearty thanksgiving, And pay thy vows unto God ever-living. Call upon me, when troubled thou shalt be. Then will I help, and thou shalt honor e. To the wicked, thus faith h' Etern God,
Why dost thou preach my laws and hests abroad? Seeing thou hast them with thy mouth abused, And hat'st to be by discipline reformed. My words, I say, thou dost reject and hate, If that thou see a thief, as with thy mate, Thou run'st with him and so your prey do seek: And art all one with bands and ruffins eke. Thou giv'st thy self to backbite and to slander: And how thy tongue deceives, it is a wonder. Thou sittest musing, thy brother for to blame: And how to put thy mothers son to shame. These things thou didst, and whilst I held my tongue; Thou didst me judge, because I staid so long, Like to thy self: Yet though I keep long silence. Once shalt thou feel of thy wrongs just recompence, Consider this, ye that forget the Lord; And fear not when he threatneth with his word: Lest without help I spoil you as a prey. But he that thanks off'reth, praiseth me aye, Saith the Lord God, and he that walketh this trace, I will him teach Gods saving health to imbrace. Another of the same by J. H. THe God of gods the Lord, hath call'd the earth by name: From whence the Sun doth rise, unto the setting of the same. From Sion his fair place, his glory bright and clear: The perfect beauty of his grace, from thence it did appear. Our God shall come in haste, to speak he shall not doubt: Before him shall the fire waste, and tempest round about, The heavens from on high, the earth below likewise, He will call forth, to judge and try his folk he doth devise. Bring forth my Saints, saith he, my faithful flock so dear: Which are in band and league with me, my law to love and fear. And when these things are tride, the heavens shall record, That God is just, and all must bide the judgement of the Lord. My people, O give heed, Israel to thee I cry: I am thy God, thy help at need, thou canst it not deny. I do not say to thee, thy sacrifice is slack: Thou offerest daily unto me much more then I do lack. Think'st thou that I do need thy cattel young or old? Or else so much desire to feed, on Goats out of thy fold? Nay, all the beasts are mine, in woods that eat their fils: And thousands more of neat and kine, that run wild on the hils: The second Part. The birds that build on high, in hils and out of sight, And beasts that in the fields do lie, are subject to my might. Then though I hungred sore, what need I ought of thine? Sith that the earth with her great store, and all therein is mine? To Buls flesh have I mind, to eat it dost thou think? Or such a sweetness do I find, the bloud of Goats to drink? Give to the Lord his praise, with thanks to him apply: And see thou pay thy vows always unto the God most high. Then seek and call to me, when ought would work thee blame: And I will sure deliver thee, that thou mayst praise my Name. But to the wicked train, which talk of God each day: And yet their works are foul and vain, to them the Lord wil say, With what a face dar'st thou my word once speak or name? Why doth thy talk my law allow, thy deeds deny the same? Whereas for to amend thy life thou art so slack: My word the which thou dost pretend, is cast behind thy back. The third Part. When thou a thief dost see, by theft to live in wealth: With him thou runst and dost agree likewise to thrive by stealth. When thou dost them behold that wives and maids defile, Thou lik'st it wel, and waxest bold to use that life most vile,
Thy lips thou dost apply, to slander and defame: Thy tongue is taught to craft and lie, and still doth use the same. Thou studiest to revile thy friends to thee so near With slander thou wouldst needs defile thy mothers son most dear. Hereat while I did wink, as though I did not see: Thou goest on stil, and so dost think that I am like to thee. But sure I wil not let to strike when I begin; Thy faults in order I wil set, and open all thy sin. Mark this I you require, that have not God in minde: Lest when I plague you in mine ire, your help be far to finde. He that doth give to me the sacrifice of praise, Doth please me wel: and he shall see to walk in godly ways. PSALM li. W. W. O Lord consider my distress, and now with speed some pity take, My sins deface, my faults redress good Lord for thy great mercies sake. Wash me, O, Lord, and make me clean from this unjust and sinful act: And purifie yet once again my hainous crime and bloody fact. Remorse and sorrow do constrain me to acknowledge mine excess: My sin alas doth stil remain before my face without release. For thee alone I have offended, committing evil in thy sight: And if I were therefore codemned, yet were thy judgments just and right. It is too manifest alas that fist I was conceiv'd in sin: Yea of my mother so born was and yet vile wretch remain therein, Also behold, Lord, thou dost love the inward truth of a pure heart: Therefore thy wisdom from above thou hast reveald me to convert. If thou with hysop purge this blot, I shall be cleaner then the glass: And if thou wash away my spot, the Snow in whiteness shall I pass. Therefore, O Lord, such joy me send, that inwardly I may finde grace: And that my strength may now amend, which thou hast swag'd for my trespass. Turn back thy face and frowning ire, for I have felt enough thy hand: And purge my fins I thee desire which do in number pass the sand. Make new my heart wthin my brest, and frame it to thy holy wil, Thy constant spirit in me let rest, which may these raging enemies k The second Part. Cast me not, Lord, out from thy face, but speedily my torments end: Take not from me thy spirit of grace, which may from dangers me defend. Restore me to those joys again, which I was wont in thee to find: And let me thy free spirit retain, which unto thee may stir my mind. Thus when I shall thy mercies know, I shall instruct others therein: And men that are likewise brought low by mine example shall flee sin. O God that of my health art Lord, forgive me this my bloody vice: My heart and tongue shall then accord to sing thy mercies and justice. Touch thou my lips, my tongue unt O Lord, which art the only key: And then my mouth shall testifie thy wondrous works and praise alway. And as for-outward sacrifice, I would have offered many a one: But thou esteem'st them of no price, and therein pleasure tak'st thou none. The heavy heart the minde opprest, O Lord, thou never dost reject; And to speak truth it is the best, and of all sacrifice the effect. Lord, unto Sion turn thy face, pour out thy mercies on thy hil: And on Jerusalem thy grace, buid up the wals and love it stil. Thou shalt accept then our offrings, of peace and righteousness. I say: Yea calves and many other things, upon thine altar wil we lay. Another of the same, by J. H. HAve mercy on me Lord, after thy great abounding grace; After thy mercies multitude, do thou my sins deface, Yea wash me more from mine offence, and cleanse me from my sin: For I do know my faults, and stil my sin is in mine eyne. Against thee, thee alone, I have offended in this case: And evil have I done before the presence of thy face. That in the things that thou hast done upright thou mayst be tryed: And eke in judgment that the doom may pass upon thy side. Behold in wickedness, my kinde and shape I did receive; And lo my sinful mother eke, in sin did me conceive.
But lo the truth in inward parts is pleasant unto thee: And secrets of thy wisdom thou revealed hast to me. With hysop, Lord, besprinkle me I shall be cleansed so: Yea wash thou me, and so I shall be whiter than the snow. Of ioy and gladness make thou me to her the pleasant voice: That so the bruised bones which thou h st broken may rejoyce. From the beholding of my sin, Lo d turn away thy face: And all my deeds of wickedness do utterly deface: od create in me a heart, unspotted in thy sight: And eke within my bowels, Lord, renue a stable sprite, Ne cast me from thy fight nor take thy holy Spirit away: Th comforts of thy saving health give me again, I pray. With thy sweet spirit establish me, and I will teach therefore Sinners thy ways, and wicked shall be turned to thy lore. The second Part. O God that art God of my health, om blood deliver me: That pries of thy righteousness my tonge may sing to thee. My lips tht yet fst cloed be, d thou, O Lord, unclose: The praises of thy Majesty, my mouth shall so disclose. I woud have offered sacrifice, if that had plea ed thee: But plesed wth burnt offerings, I know thou wilt not be. A tro bled spirit is sacrifice delghtf l n Gods eyes: A broken and an humble heart, God, thou wilt not despise. In thy good will deal gently, Lord, to Sion, and withall Grant, that of thy Jerusalem uper'd may be the wall. Burnt-offerings, gifts, and sacrifice of justie in that dy Thou shalt accept, and calves they shall upon thine altar lay. PSALM lii. J. H. WHy dost thou tyrant boast abroad, thy wicked works to praise? Dost thou not know there is a God, who e mecies last alway? Why doth thy mind yet still devise, such wicked wiles to warp? Thy tonge ntre in forging lie, is the  rsor sharp. On mischief why serst thou thy mind, and wilt not walk upright? Thou hast more lust false tales to find, than bring the truth to light. Thou dost delight in fraud and guile, in mischief, blood, and wong: Thy lips have learn'd the flattering stile, O false deceitful tongue. Therefore shall God for aye confound, and pluck thee from thy place: Thy seed root out from off the ground, and so shall thee deface. The just when they behold thy fall, with fear will praise thee, Lord, And in reproach of thee withall cry out with one accord. Behold the man that would not take the Lord for his defence: But of his goods his god dd make, and trust his corrupt sense. But I as Olive fresh and green, shall spring and spread abroad, For why? my trust all times hath been upon the living God. For this therefore will I give praise to thee with heart and voice: I will set forth thy name always, wherein thy Saints rejoyce. PSALM liii. T S. THe foolish man in that which he within His heart hath said: That there is any God at all, hath utterly denai'd. They are corrupt, and they alo a hamous work have wought: Among them all there is not one of good that worketh ought. The Lord look'd down on som of men from heaven all abroad; To see if any wee that would be wise and seek for God. They are all gone ot of the way, they are corrupted all: There is not one doth any good, thee is not one at all. Do not all wicked workers know, that they do seed uon My people, as they feed on bread? the Lod they call not on. Even there they wee afraid and stood with trembling all dismaid: Wheres there wa no cause at all, why they should be afraid. For God his bones that thee besieg'd, hath scattered all abroad: Thou hast confounded them, for they rejeted are of God. O Lord give thou thy people health, and thou O Lord fulfil Thy promise made to Israel, from out of Sion-hill.
When God his people shall restore, that erst were captive led: Then Jacob shall therein rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad. PSALM liv. J. H. GOd save me for thy holy Name, and for thy goodness sake: Unto the strength (Lord) of the same, I do my cause betake. Regard, O Lord, and give an ear to me when I do pray: Bow down thy self to me, and hear the words that I do say. For strangers up against me rise, and tyrants vex me still: Which have not God before their eyes, they seek my soul to spill. But lo, my God doth give me aid, the Lord is strait at hand With them by whom my soul is staid, the Lord doth ever stand. With plagues repay again all those for me that lie in wait: And in thy truth destroy my foes with their own snare and bait. An offering of free heart and will, then I to thee shall make: And praise thy Name, for therein still great comfort I do take. O Lod, at length do me set free from them that craft conspie. And now mine eye with joy doth see on them my hearts desire. PSALM lv. J. H. O God give ear and do apply to hear me when I pray: And when to thee I call and cry, hide not thy self away. Take heed to me, grant my request, and answer me again: With plaints I pray full sore opprest, great grief doth me constrain. Because my foes with threats & cries, oppress me through despight: And so the wicked sort likewise to vex me have delight. For they in counsel do conspire, to charge me with some ill: So in their hasty wrath and ire they do pursue me still. My heart doth faint for want of breath it panteth in my brest: The terrors and the dread of death, do work me much unrest. Such dreadful fear on me doth fall, that I therewith do quake: Such horror whemeth me withall, that I no shift can make. But I did say, Who will give me the swift and pleasant wings Of some fair Dove, that I may flee, ad rest me from these things? Lo then, I would go far away, to flee I would not cease: And I would hide my self and stay in some great wilderness. I would be goe in all the haste, and not abide behind: That I were quit and overpast these blasts of boisterous wind. Divide them Lord, and from them pull their devilish double tongue: For I have spied their City full of apine, strife, and wrong. Which things both nght and day throughou do close her as a wall: In midst of her is mischief flout, and sorrow eke withall. Her inward parts are wicked plain, her deed: are much too vile: And in hr streets there doth remain all crafty fraud, and guile. The second Part. If that my foe dd seek my shame, I might it well abide From open enemies check and blame, somewhere I could me hide. But thou it wast, my fellow der, whih friendship didst prete d; And didt my secret counsel hear, as my familiar friend. With whom I had delight to talk, in secret and abroad: And e together oft did walk within the house of God. Let death in haste upon them fall, and send them quick to hell: For mischief raigneth in the hall, and parlour where they dwell. But I unto my God will cry, to him for help I ee: The Lord ill help me by and by; and he will succour me. At morning, noon, and even tyde; unto the Lord I pray: When I so instantly have cride, he doth not say me nay. To peace he shall restore me yet, though war be now at hand: Although the number be ful great, that would against me stand. The Lord that first & last doth raign both now and evermore, Will hear when I to him complain, and punish them full sore. For sure, there is no hope that they to turn will once accord: For why? they will not od obey? nor yet do fear the Lord. Upon their friends they laid their hands which were in covenant knit: Of friendship to neglect the bands, they pass or care no whit.
While they have war within their hearts as butter ate their words: Although their words were smooth a oyl, they cut as sharp as swords. Cast thou thy care upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: For in no wise will he accord the just in thrall to see. But God shall cast them deep in pit, that thirst for blood always: He will no guileful man permit to live out half his days. Though such be quite destroy'd and gone in thee, O God, I trust; I shall depend thy Grace upon, with all my heart and lust. PSALM lvi. J. H. HAve mercy Lord on me I pray, for man would me devour: He figheth with me day by day, and troubleth me each hour. Mine enemies daily enterprise to swallow me out right: To fight against me many rise, O thou most high of might. When they would make me most afraid with boasts and brags of pride: Trust i thee alone for aid, by thee I will abide. Gods promise I do minde and praise, O Lord, I stick to thee: I do not care at all assays, what flesh can do to me. What things I either did or spake, they wrest them at their will: And all the counsel that they take, is hw to work me ill. They all consent themselves to hide lose watch for me to lay: They spie my paths, and snares have tide to take my life away. Shall they thus scape on mischief set? thou God on them wilt frown: For in his wrath he doth not let to throw whole kingdoms down. Thou secst how oft they made me flee, and on my tears dost look: Reserve them in a glass by thee, and write them in thy book. When I do call upon thy Name, my foes away do start: I well perceive it by the same, that God doth take my part. I glory in the Word of God, to praise it I accord: With joy I will declare abroad the promise of the Lord. I trust in God, and yet I say, as I before began: The Lord he is my help and stay, I do not care for man. I will perform with heart so free, o God my vows always And I, O Lord, all times to thee, will offer thanks and praise. My soul from death thou dost defend, and keepst my feet upright That I before thee may ascend with such as live in light. PSALM lvii. J. H. TAke pity for thy promise sake, have mercy Lord on me: For why? my soul doth her betake unto the help of thee. Within the shadow of thy wings I set my self full fast: Till mischief, malice, and like things be gone and overpast. I call upon the God most high, to whom I stick and stand: I mean the God that will stand by the cause I have in hand. From heaven he hath sent his aid. to save me from their spight, That to devour me have assaid, his mercy, truth and might. I lead my life with Lions fell, all set on wrath and ire: And with such wicked men I dwell, that fret like flames of fire. Their teeth are spears and arrows long, as sharp as I have seen: They wound and cut with their quick tongue like swords and weapons keen. Set up and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright: Exalt thy praise on earth abroad, thy Majesty and might. They lay their net and do prepare a privy cave and pit: Wherein they think my soul to snare, but they are fan in it. My heart is set to laud the Lord, in him to joy always: My heart I say doth well accord to sing his laud and praise. Awake my joy, awake I say, my lute, my harp, and string: For I my self before the day, will rise, rejoyce, and sing. Among the people I will tell the goodness of my God: And shew his praise that doth excel in heathen lands abroad. His mercy doth extend as far as heavens all are high; His truth as high as any star, that shineth in the skie. Set forth and shew thy self, O God, above the heavens bright; Extol thy praise on earth abroad, thy majesty and might. PSALM lviii. J. H. Ye Rulers that are put in trust, to judge of wrong and right:
Be all your judgements true and iust, not knowing meed or might? Nay, in your hearts ye mark and muse in mischief to consent: And where ye should true justice use, your hands to bribes are bent. The wicked sort from their birth-day have erred on this wise: And from their mothers womb alway have used craft and lies. In them the poyson and the breath of Serpents do appear: Yea like the Adder that is deaf, and fast doth stop her ear. Because she will not hear the voice o one that harmeth well: No though he were the chief of choice, and did therein excel. O God break thou their teeth at once within their mouths throughout: The tusks that in their great jaw-bones like lions whelps hang out. Let them consume away and waste, as waters run forth right: The shafts that they do shoot in haste, let them be broke in flight. As snails do waste within the shell, and unto slime do run: As one before his time that fell, and never saw the Sun. Before the thorns that now are yong, to bushes big shall grow: The storms of anger waxing strong, shall take them ere they know. The just shall joy, it doth them good that God doth vengeance take: And they sha l wash their feet in blood of them that him forsake. Then shall the world shew forth & tell that good men hae reward: And that a God on earth doth dwell, that justice doth regard. PSALM lix. I. H. SEnd aid and save me from my foes, O Lord, I pray to thee: Deend and keep me from all those that rise and strive with me. O Lord, preserve me from those men, whose doings are not good: And set me sure and safe from them that thirst still after blood. For lo they wait my soul to take, they rage againt me still: Yea for no fault that I did make, I never did them ill. They run and do themselves prepare, when I no whit offend: Arise and save me from their snare, and see what they intend. O Lord of hosts of Israel, arise and strike all lands: And pity none that do rebel, and in their mischief stands▪ At night they stir and seek about, as hounds they houl and grin: And all the City clean throughout, from place to place they run. They speak of me with mouth alway, but in their lips are swords. They greed my death, and then would say, what? none doth hear our words id, But Lord, thou hast their ways espide, and laught thereat apace: The heathen folk thou dost deride, and mock them to their face. The strength that doth our foes withstand O Lord, doth come from thee: My God he is my help at hand, a fort of sence to me. The Lord to me doth shew his grace, in great abundance still: That I may see my oes in case, such as my heart doth will. The second Part. Destroy them not at once, O Lord, left it from minde do fall: But with thy strength drive them abroad, and so consume them all. For their ill words & truthless tongue, confound them in their prie: Their wicked oaths with lies and wrong let all the world deride. Consume them in thy wrath, O Lord, that nought of them remain: That men may know throughout ye world that Jacobs God doth raign. At evening they return apace, as ogs they gin and cry Throughout the streets in eery place, they run-about and spie. They seek about for meat I say, but let them not be fed: Nor finde a house wherein they may be bold to put their head. But I will shew thy strength abroad, thy goodness I will praise For thou art y defence and God, at need in all assaies. Thou art my strength, thou hast me staid O Lord, I ing to thee: Thou art my sort, my fence, and id, a loving God to me. PSALM lx. I. H. O Lord, thou didst us clean forsake, and scatteredst us abroad: Such great displeasure thou dist take; return to us, O God. Thy might did mre the earth so sore that it in sunder brake The hurt thereof, O Lord, restore, for it doth bow and quake. With heay chane thou plaguest us the people that are thine: And thou hast given unto us a drink of deadly wine. But yet to such as fear thy Name, a token thou didst shew
That they may triumph in the same, because thy word is true. So that thy might may keep and save thy olk that favour thee: That they thy hel at hand may have, O Lord grant thi to me. he Lord did speak from his own place, this was his joyful tale: I will divide Sichem by pace and mte out Succoth vle. Gilead is given to mine hand, Manases mine beside: Ephraim the strength of all my land, my law doth Juda guide. In Moab I will wash my feet, over Edom throw my shoo: And thou Palestine ought'st to seek for savour me unto. But who will bring me at this tyde unto the city strong? Or who to Edom will me guide, so that I go not wrong? Wilt thou not God, which didst forsake: thy folk, their land, and coasts? Our wars in hand thou wouldst not take, nor walk among out hosts. Give aid, O Lord, and us relieve from them that us disdain: The help that hosts of men can give, it is but all in vain, But through our God we shall have might to take great things in hand: He will tread down and put to flight, all hose tha us withstand. PSALM lxi. J. H. REgard, O Lord, for I complain, and make my suit to th e: Let not my words return in vain, t give an ear to me. From out the coasts and utmost parts of all the arth abroad: In grief and anguish of my heart, I cry to thee, O God. Upon the ock of thy great power my woful mind reoe: Thou art my hope, my sort and tower, my fene agint my foes. With n thy tet I lst o dwell, for ever to endu e: Under thy wings I now right well I shall be safe and sure. The Lod doth my desire regard, and doth fulfil the same: With goo y gifs will be reward all those tht fear his Name. The King shall he in halth maintain, and so polong his days. hat he from age to age shall ragn, for evermore always. Tht he may have a dwelling place, ore the Lord for ay: O let thy mercy, truth; and grace defend him from decay. Then shall I sing for ever still, wi h praise unto thy Name: That all my vows I may fulfil, and daily pay the same. PSALM lxii. J. H. MY soul to God shall give good heed and him alone attend: For why? my health and hope to speed, doth whole on him depend. For he alone is my defence, my rock, my help, and aid, He is my stay that no pretence shall make me much dismaid. O wicked folk, how long will ye use craft? sure ye must fall: For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottering wall. Whom God doth love, ye seek always to put him to the worse: Ye love to lie, with mouth ye praise, and yet your heart doth curse. Yet still my soul doth whole depend on God my chief desire: From all ill feats me to defend, none but him I require. He is my rock, my fort, and tower, my healh is of his grace: He doth support me that no power can move me out of place. God is my glory and my health, my souls desire and lust: My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth; God is my onely trust. O have your trust in him alway, ye folk with one a cord: Pour out your hearts to him, and say, Our trust is in the Lord. The sons of men deceitful are, on balance but a sleight: With things most vain do them compare, for they can keep no weight. Trust not in wrong, robry, nor stealth, wealth r vain delights be gne: Though goods well got flow in with let not your hearts thereon. The Lord long since one thing did tell which here to mind I call: He spake it oft, I heard it well, that God alone doth all. And that thou Lord art good & kind thy mercy doth exced: So that all sorts with thee shall finde, according to their deed. PSALM lxiii. J. H. O God my God, I watch betime o come to thee in haste: For why my soul and body both do thirst of thee to taste. And in this barren wilderness, where waters there are none: My flsh is prcht for thought of thee, r thee I with alone.
That I might see yet once again thy glory, strength and might, As I was wont it to behold within thy Temple bright: For why? thy mercies far surmount this life and wretched days: My lips there foreshall give to thee due honour, laud, and praise. An whist I lve I will not fail to worship thee alway: And in thy name I shall lift up my hands when I do pray. My soul is fill'd as with marrow, which is hoth fat and sweet: My mouh therefore shall sing such songs as are for thee most meer. When as in bed I think on thee, an eke all the night tyde: For uner covert of thy wings, thou art my joyful guide. My soul doth surely stick to thee; thy right hand is my power: And those that seek my soul to stroy, them death shall soon devour. The sword shall them devour each one, their carcases shall feed The hungry Foxes, which do run their prey to seek at need. The King and all men shall rejoice, that do profess Gods Word: For lyars mouths shall then be stopt, which have the truth disturb'd. PSALM lxiv. J. H. O Lod, unto my voice give ear, with plaint when I do pray: And rid my life and soul from fear of foes that threat to slay. Defend me from that sort of men which in deceit do lurk: And from the frowning face of them that all ill feats do work. Who whe their togues as we have seen men wher and sharp their swords: They shoot abroad their arrows keen, I mean most bitter words. With privy sleihts shoot they their shaft, the upright men to hir. The just unwares o strike by craft, they care or fear no whir. A wicke work they have decreed; in councel thus they cry: To use deceit let us not dread; what? Who can it espie? What way to hurt they talk and muse all times within their heart: They all consut what seats to use, eah doth invent his part. But yet all this shall not prevail; when they think least upon, o with his art shall sure assail, and wound them every one. Their crafts and their ll tongues withal shall work themselves such blame, That they which then behold their fall, shall wonder at the some. Then all that see shall know right well that God the thing hath wrought: And praise his witty works, and tell what he to pass hath brought. Yet shall the just in God rejoyce, still trusting in his might; So shall they joy with mind and voice, whose hearts are pure and right. PSALM lxv. J. H. THy praise alone, O Lord, doth raign in Sion thine own hill: Their vows to thee they do maintain, and their behests fulfil. For that thou doest their prayers hear, and dost thereto agree: The people all both far and near with trust shall come to thee. Our wicked life so far exceeds, that we shall fall therein: But, Lord, forgive our great misdeeds, and purge us from our sin. The man is blest whom thou dost chuse within thy courts to dwell Thy house and Temple he shall use with pleasures that excel. Of thy great Justice hear us, God; our health of thee doth rise: The hope of all the earth abroad, and the sea-coasts likewise. With strength thou art beset about, and compast with thy power: Thou mak'st the mountains strong and stout to stand in every shower. The swelling ses thou dost asswage and make their streams full ll Thou dost restrain the peoples rage, and rule them at thy wll. The folk that dwell full far on earth, shall dread thy signs to see. Which morn and evening in great mirth do pass with praise to thee. When that the earth is chapt and drie, and thirsteth more and more: Then with thy drops thou dost supply, and much increase her store. The flood of God doth overflow, and so doth cause to sprin The seed and corn which men do sow, for he doth guide the thing, With wet thou dost her furrows fill, whereby her clods do fall: Thy drops on her thou dost distil, and bless her fruit withal. Thou deck'st the earth of thy good grace with fair and pleasant crop: Thy clouds distil their dew apace, great plenty they do drop. Whereby the deserts shall begin, full great increase to bring;
The little hills shall joy therein. much fruit in them shall spring. In places plain the flocks shall feed, and cover all the earth: The vales with corn shall so exceed, that men shall sing for mirth. PSALM lxvi. T. S. YE men on earth in God rejoyce, with praise set forth his Name: Extol his might with heart and voice, give glory to the same. How wonderful, O Lord, say ye, in all thy works thou art? Thy foes for fear shall seek to thee, full sore against their heart. All men that dwell the earth throughout shall praise the Name of God: The laud thereof the world about is shewd and set abroad. Al folk come forth, behold and see what things the Lord hath wrought: Mark well the wondrous works that he for man to pass hath brought. He laid the sea like heaps on high, therein a way they had On foot to pass both fair and drie, whereof their hearts were glad. His might doth rule the world alway, his eyes all things behold: All such as would him disobey, by him shall be controld. Ye people give unto our God, due laud and thanks always: With joyful voice declare abroad, and sing unto his praise. Which doth endue our soul with life. and it preserve withal: He stayes our feet, so that no strife can make us slip or fall. The Lord doth prove our deeds with fire, if that they will abide: As workmen do when they desire to have their metals tride. Although thou suffer us so long in prison to be cast: Ad there with chains and fetters strong to he in bondage fast. The second Part. Although (I say) thou suffer men on us to ride and raign: Though we through fire and water run of very gief and pain. Yet sure thou dost of thy good grace dispose it to the best: And bring us out into a place, to live in wealth and rest. Unto thy house resort will? offer and to pray: And there I will my self apply my vows to then to pay. The vows that with my mouth I spake in all my grief and smart; The vows I say which I did make in dolou of my heart. Burnt-offerings I will give to thee, of Oxen fat and Rams: Yea this my sacrifice shall be of Bullocks, Goats, and Lambs. Come forth and hearken here full soon all ye that fear the Lord: What he for my poor soul hath done, to you I will record. Full oft I call to minde his grace, this mouth to him doth cry: And thou my tongue make speed apace: to praise him by and by. But if I feel my heart within. in wicked works rejoyce: Or if I have delight to sin, God will not hear my voice. But surely God my voice hath heard, and what I do require: My prayer he doth well regard, and granteth my desire. All praise to him that hath not put, nor cast me out of minde: Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I do ever finde. PSALM lxvij. J. H. HAve mercy on us Lord, and grant to us thy grace, To shew to us do thou accord, the brightness of thy face. That all the earth may know the way to godly wealth: And all the nations on a row, may see thy saving health. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy Name; O let the people all abroad, extol and laud the same. Throughout the world so wide, let all rejoyce with mirth: For thou with truth and right dost guide the rations of the earth. Let all the world, O God, give praise unto thy name: O let the people all abroad, extol and lud the same. Then shall the earth encrease, great store of fruit shall fall: And then our God, the God of peace, shall bless us eke withal. God shall us bless, I say, and then both far and near, The folk throughout t e earth alway, of him shall stand in fear. PSALM lxviii. T. S. LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: His enemies then will run abroad, and scatter out of fight. And as the fire doth melt the wax, and winde blow smoke away;
So in the presence of the Lord the wicked shall decay. But righteous-men before the Lord, shall heartily rejoyce: They shall be glad and merry all, and chearful in their voice. Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord, who rideth on the skie: Extol the Name of Jah our God, and him do magnifie. The same is he that is above, within his holy place: That father is of fatherless, and judge of widows case. Houses he gives, and issue both, unto the comfortless: He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distress. When thou didst march before thy folk th' Egyptians from among: And broughtst them through the wilderness which was both wide and long; The earth did quake, the rain powr'd down heard were great claps of thunder: The mount Sinai shook in such sort, as it would break in sunder. Thine heritage with drops of rain abundantly was washt. And if so be it barren waxt, by thee it was refresht. Thy chosen flock doth there remain, thou hast prepar'd that place: And for the poor thou didst provide of thine especial grace. The second Part. God will give women causes just, to magnifie his Name: When as his people triumphs make, and purchase bruit and fame. For puissant kings for all their power shall flee and take the foil: And women which remain at home shall help to part the spoil. And though you were as black as pots, your hue shall pass the Dove: Whose wings and feathers seem to have silver and gold above. When in this land God shall triumph on Kings both high and low: Then shall it be like Salmon hill, as white as any snow. Though Basan be a fruitful hill, and in height others pass: Yet Sion, Gods most holy hill, doth far excel in grace. Why brag ye thus, ye hills most high, and leap for pride together? The hill of Sion God doth love, and there will dwell for ever. Gods army is two millions of warriors good and strong; The Lord also in Sinai is present them among. Thou didst, O Lord, ascend on high, and captives ledst them all: Which in times past thy chosen flock in bondage kept and thrall. Thou mad'st them tribute for to pay, and such as did repine, Thou didst subdue that they might dwell in thy Temple divine. Now praised be the Lord for that he pours on us such grace: From day to day he is the God of our health and solace. The third Part. He is the God from whom alone salvation cometh plain: He is the God by whom we scape all dangers, death, and pain. Thus God will wound his enemies head and break the hairy scalp Of those that in their wickedness continually do walk. From Basan will I bring, said he, my people and my sheep: And all mine own as I have done, from dangers of the deep. And make them dip their feet in blood of those that hate my Name: And dogs shall have their tongues imbru'd with licking of the same. All men may see how thou, O God, thine enemies dost deface. And how thou goest as God and King into thine holy place. The fingers go before with joy, the minstrels follow after: And in the midst the damsels play, with timbrel and with taber. Now in the Congregation, O Israel, praise the Lord; And Jacobs whole posterity, give thanks with one accord. Their chief was little Benjamin, but Juda made their host: With Zebulon and Nephalim, which dwelt about their coast. As God hath given power to thee, so Lord make firm and sure The thing that thou hast wrought in us, for ever to endure. And in thy Temple gifts will we. give unto thee, O Lord: For thine unto Jerusalem, sure promise made by word. The fourth Part. Yea, and strange Kings to us subdu'd, shall do like in those days: I mean to thee they shall present their gifts of laud and praise. He shall destroy the spearmens ranks the calves and bulls of might; And cause them tribute pay, and daunt all such as love to fight:
Then shall the Lords of Egypt come, and presents with them bring▪ The Moors most black shall stretch their hands unto their Lord and King. Therefore the Kingdoms of the earth give praise unto the Lord: Sing Psalms to God with one consent, thereto let all accord. Who though he ride and ever hath above the heavens bright: Yet by the fearful thunder-claps men may well know his might. Therefore the strength of Israel ascribe to God on he, Whose might an power doth far extend above the cloudy skie. O God, thy holiness and power is dread for evermore: The God of Israel gives us strength, praised be God therefore. PSALM lxix. J. H. SAve me, O God, and that with speed, the water flow full fast: So nigh my soul do they proceed, that I am sore agast. I stick full deep in mire and clay, whereas I feel no ground: I fall into such floos, I say, that I am like be drownd. With crying oft I faint and quail, my throat is hoarse and drie- With looking up my sight doth sail, for help to God on high. My foes that guiltless do oppress my soul, with hate are led In number sure they are no less than hairs are on my head. Though for no cause they vex me sore, they prosper and are glad: They do compel me to restore the thing I never had. What I have done for want of wit, thou, Lord, all times canst tell; And all the faults that I commit, to thee are known full well. O God of Hosts defend and stay all those that trust in thee: Let no man doubt or shrink away, for ought that chanceth me. It is for thee and for thy sake that I do bear this blame: In spight of thee they would me mke to hide my face for shame. My mother sons, my brethren all, forsake me on a row: And as a stranger they me call, my face they will not know. Unto thy house such zeal I bear, that it doth pie me much: Their checks and taunts at thee to hear, my very heart doth grutch. The second Part. Though I do fast my flesh to chaste, if I do weep and mone: Yet in my teeth this thing is cast, they pass not thereupon. If I for pain and grief of heart in sackcloth use to walk: Then they anon will it pervert, thereof they jest and talk. Both high and low and all the throng that fit within the gate, They have me ever in their tongue, of me they talk and prate. The drunkards which in wine delight it is their chief pastime To seek which way to work me spight, of me they sing and rime. But thee the while. O Lord, I pray, that when it pleaseth thee, For thy great truth thou wilt alway send down thine aid to me. Pluck thou my feet out of the mire, from drowning do me keep; From such as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters deep. Lest with the waves I should be drown'd and depth my soul devou, And that the pit should me consoud, and shut me in her power. O Lord of hosts to me give ear, as thou art good and kind; And as thy mercy is most dear, Lord have me in thy mind. And do not from thy servant hide, nor turn thy face away: I am opprest on every side, in haste ive ear, I say. O Lord unto my soul draw nigh, the same with aid repose: Because of their great tyranny acquit me from my foes. The third Part. That I abide rebuke and shame, thou knowst an thou canst tell: For those that seek and work the same, thou seest them all full well. When they with brags do break my hear I seek for help anon: But find no friends to ease my smart, to comfort me not one. But in my meat they gave me gall, too crel for to think: And gave me in my thirst withal strong vinegar to drink. Lord turn their table to a snare, to take themselves therein: And when they think full well to fare, then trap them in the gin. And let their eyes be dark and blind, that they may nothing see; Bow down their backs and do them bind in thraldom for to be. Pour out thy wrath as ot as fire, that it on them may fall:
Let thy displeasure in thine ire. take hold upon them all. As defarts dry their house disgrace, their off-spring eke expel: That none thereof possess their place, nor in their tents do dwell. If thou dost strike the man to tame, on him they lay fell sore: And if that thou dost wound the same, they seek to hurt him moe. Then let them heap up mischief still, (sith they are all pervert) That of thy favour and good will they never have a part. And raze them clean out of thy book of life, of hope, of trust: That for their name they never look in number of the just. The fourth Part. Though I, O Lord, with wo and grief have been fell sore opprest: Thy help shall give me such relief, that all shall be redrest. That I may give thy name the praise and shew it with a song; I will extol the same always, with hearty thanks among. Which is more pleasant unto thee, (such minde thy grace hath born) Then ether oxe or calf can be, that hath both hoof and horn. When simple folk do this behold, it shall rejoyce them sure: All ye that seek the Lord, behold your life for aye shall dure. For why? the Lord of hosts doth hear the poor when they complain: His prisoners are to him full dear, he doth them not disdain. Wherefore the skie and earth below, the sea with flood and stream: His praise they shall declare and shew, with all that live in them. For sure our God will Sion save, and Juds cities build: Much folk possession there shall have her streets shall all be fll'd. His servant seed shall keep the same, all age out of minde: And there all they that love his Name, a dwelling place shall finde. PSALM lxx. J. H. O God to me ake heed, of help I thee require: O Lord of hosts with haste and speed, help, help I thee desire. With shame confound them all, that seek my soul to sill: Rebuke them back with blame to fall, that think and with me ill. Confound them that apply, and seek to work me shame: And at my harm do laugh and cry, so so, there goes the game. But let them joyful be in thee with joy and wealth: Which only trust and seek to thee, and to thy saving health. That they may say always, in mirth and one accord: All glory, honour, land and praise be given to thee, O Lord. But I am weak and poor, come Lord thine aid I lack: Thou art my stay and help, therefore make speed and be not slack. PSALM lxxi. J. H. MY Lord my God in all distress, my hope is whole in thee: Then let no shame my soul oppress, nor once take hold on me, As thou art just defend me, Lord, and rid me out of dread: Give ear and to my suit accord, and send me help at need. Be thou my rock, to whom I may for aid all times resort: Thy promise is to help alway, thou art my fence and fort. Save me, my God, from wicked men, and from their strength and power, From folk unjust, and eke from them that cruelly devour. Thou art the stay wherein I trust, thou Lord of Hosts art he: Yea from my youth I had a lust, still to depend on thee. Thou hast me kept even from my birth, and I through thee was born: Wherefore I will thee praise with mirth both evening and at morn. As to a monster seldom seen, much folk about me throng: But thou art now and still hast been my fence and aid so strong. Wherefore my mouth no time shall lack thy glory and thy praise: And eke my tongue shall not be slack to honour thee always. Refuse me not, O Lord, I say, when age my limbs doth take: And when my strength doth waste away, do not my soul forsake. Among themselves my foes enquire, to take me through deceit: And they against me do conpire, that for my soul laid wait. The second Part. Lay hand and take him now, they said; for God from him is gone: Dispatch him quite, for to his aid (I wis) there cometh none. Do not absent thy self away, O Lord when nee shall be
But that in time of grief thou may in haste give help to me. With shame confound and overthrow all those that seek my life: Oppress them with rebuke also, that fain would work me strife. But I will patiently abide thy help at all assaies Still more and more, each time and tyde, I will set forth thy praise. My mouth thy justice shall record, that daily help doth send: But of thy benefits, O Lord, I know no count nor end. Yet will I go and se k forth one with ty good help, O God: The saving health of thee alone, to shew and set abroad. For of my youth thou tookst the care, and dost instruct me still: Therefore thy wonders to declare, I have great minde and will. And as in youth from wanton rage, thou didst me keep and stay: Forsake me not unto mine age, and till my head be gray. The third Part. That I thy strength & might mayshow to them that now be here: And that our seed thy power may know, hereaf er many a year. O Lord thy justice oth exceed, thy doings all may see: Thy works are wonderful indeed, O! who is like to thee? Thou madst me feel affliction sore, and yet thou didst me save: Yea thou didst help and me restore. and tookst me from the grave. And thou mine honour dost increase, my dignity maintain: Yea thou dost make all strife to cease, and comfortst me again. Therefore thy faithfulness to praise, I will with viol sing. My harp shall sound thy praise always, O Israels holy King. My mouth will joy with pleasant voice when I shall sing to thee. And eke my soul will much rejoyce, for thou hast made me free. My tongue thy uprightness shall sound, and speak it daily til: For grief and shame do them confound, that seen to work mill. PSALM lxxii. J. H. LOrd, give thy judgements to the King, therein instruct him well And with his son that princely thing, Lord let thy justice dwell. That he may govern uprighty, and rule thy olk aright: And so defend through equity, the poor that have no might. And let te mountains that are high unto thy folk give peace: And eke let lttle hills apply, in justice to encrease. That he may help the weak and poor with aid, and make them strong: And eke destroy for ever more, all those that do them wrong. And then from age to age shall they regard and fear thy might: So long as Sun doth shine by day, or else the Moon by night. Lord make the King unto the just, like rain to fields nw mown: And like to drops that lay the dust, and fresh the and new sown. The just shall flourish in his time, and all shall be at peace: Until the Moon shall leave to prime, waste, change, and to increase. He shall be Lord of sea and and, from shore to shore throughout: And from the floods wihin the and, through all the earth about. The people that in desarts dwell, shall kneel to him fll thck: And all his enemies that rebel, the earth and dst shall lick. The Lords of all the iles thereby, great gitts to him shall bring: The Kings of Sabe and Arabie, give many a costly thing. The second Part. All Kings shall s ek with one accord in his good grace t stand: And all the people of the world shall serve him at his hand. For he the needy sort doth sae; that unto him do call: An eke the simple folk that have no help of man at all. He taketh pity on the por, that are with need opprest: He doth preserve them evermore, and bring their souls to rest. He shall redeem their lives from dread, from fraud, from wrong, from might; And eke the bood that they shll bleed is pretious in his sight. But he shall live, and they shall bring to him of Sabaes gld: He shal be honored as a King, and daily be exto. The mighty mountains of his land of corn shall beat such throg: That it like Cedar-trees shall stand, in Libaus ful long. Their Cities eke full well shall speed, the fruits thereof shall pass:
In plenty it shall far exceed, and spring as green as grass. For ever they shall praise his Name, while that the Sun is light: And think them happy through the same, all folk shall bless his might. Praise ye the Lord of hosts, and sing to Israels God each one: For he doth every wondrous thing, yea he himself alone. And blessed be his holy Name, all times eternally: That all the earth may praise the same, Amen, Amen, say I. PSALM lxxiii. T. S. HOw ever it be, yet God is good and kind to Israel: And to all such as safely keep their constience pure and well. Yet like a fool I almost slipt, my feet began to slide: And ere I wist, even at a pinch, my steps awry gan glide. For when I saw such foolish men, I grudg'd and did disdain, That wicked men all things should have without turmoil or pain. They never suffer pangs nor grief, as if death should them smite: Their bodies are both stout and strong, and ever in good plight. And free from all adversity, when other men be shent: And with the rest they take no part of plague or punishment. Therefore presumption doth imbrace their necks, as doth a chain; And are even wrapt as in a robe, with rapine and disdain. They are so fed, that even for fat their eyes oft times out-start: And as for worldly goods they have more then can wish their heart. Their life is most licentious, boasting much of their wrong: Which they have done to simple men, and ever pry'd among. The heavens and the living Lord they spare not to blaspheme: And prate they do of worldly things, no wight they do esteem. The people of God oft times turn back to see their prosperous state: And almost drink the self same cup, and follow the same rate. The second Part. How can it be that God (say they) should know or understand, These worldly thing, sith wicked men be lords of sea and land? For we may see how wicked men in riches still increase: Rewarded well with worldly goods, and live in rest and peace. Then why do I from wickedness, my fantasie refrain? And wash my hands with innocents, and cleanse my heart in vain? And suffer scourges every day, as subject to all blame: And every morning from my youth sustain rebuke and shame? And I had almost said as they, misliking mine estate: But that I should thy children judge, as folk unfortunate. Then I bethought me how I might this matter understand: But yet the labour was too great for me to take in hand. Until the time I went into thy holy place, and then I understood right perfectly the end of all these men. And namely how thou settest them upon a slippery place: And at thy pleasure and thy will thou dost them all deface. Then all men muse at that strange sight to see how suddenly They are destroid, dispatcht, consum'd, and dead so horribly. Much like a dream when one awakes, so shall their wealth decay. Their famous names in all mens sight, shall ebbe and pass away. The third Part, Yet thus my heart was grieved then, my mind was much opprest; So fond was I, and ignorant, and in this point a beast. Yet nevertheless by thy right hand, thou holdst me always fast: And with thy counsel dost me guide to glory at the last. What thing is there that I can wish, but thee in heaven above? And in the earth there is nothing. like thee that I can love. My flesh and eke my heart doth fail, but God doth fail me never: For of my health God is the strength, my portion eke for ever. And lo, all such as thee forsake, thou shalt destroy each one: And those that trust in any thing, saving in thee alone. Therefore I will draw near to God, and ever with him dwell: In God alone I put my trust, thy wonders I will tell. PSALM lxxiv. I. H. WHy art thou (Lord) so long from us, in all this danger deep? Why doth thine anger kindle thus, at thine own pasture sheep? Lord call thy people to thy thought, which have been thine so long:
The which thou hast redeem'd & brought from bondage sore and strong. Have mind therefore and think upon, reember it full well: Thy pleasant place, thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell. Lift up thy feet and come in haste, and all thy foes deface: Which now at pleasure rob and waste within thy holy place. Amid thy congregations all, thine enemies roar, O God: They set as signs on every wall, their banners splaid abroad. As men with axes hew down trees, that on the hills do grow: So shine the bills and words of these within thy Temple now. The seeling sawd, the carved boards, the goodly graven stones: With axes, hammers, bills and swords, they bear them down at once. Thy place they consume with flame, and eke in all this toil, The house appointed to thy Name, they raze down to the soil. And thus they say within their heart, dispatch them out of hnd: Then burnt they up in every prt Gods house through the land. Yet thou no sign of help dost send, our Prophets all are gone: To tell when this our plague shall end, among us there is none. When wilt thou (Lord) once end this shame and cease thine enemies strong? Shall they always blaspheme thy Name, and rail on thee so long? Why dost thou draw thy hand aback, and hide it in thy lap? O pluck it out and be not flack to give thy foes a rap. The second Part. O God thou art our King and Lord, and evermore hast been: Yea thy good grace throughout the world for our good help hath seen. The seas that are o deep and dead, thy might dd make them drie: And thou ddst brek the Serpents heed, that he theein dd die. Yea thou didst brek the head so great of Whales that are so fell▪ And gav'st them to the folk to eat, that in the deserts dwel. Thou mad'st a spring wth streams to rise from rock both hard and high: And eke thy hand hath made likewise deep rivers to be dry. Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they are begun: Thou sets to serve us with their shine, the light and eke the Sun: Thou didst appoint the ends and coasts of all the earth about: Both summer-heats, and winter-frosts, thy hard hath found them out. Think on (O Lord) no time forget thy foes that thee defame: And how the foolish folk are set to rail upon thy ame. O let no cruel easts devour the Turtle that is true: Forget not alwaies in thy power the poor that much do re. Regard thy covenant and behold thy foes possess the land. All sad and dark, forlorn and old, our Realm as now doth stand: Let ot the simple go away, nor yet return with shame: But let the poor and needy aye give praise unto thy Name. Rise (Lord) let be by thee maintain'd the cause that is thine own: Remember how that thou blasphem'd art by the foolish one. The voice forget nt of thy foes; for the presumption he, Is more and more increast of those that hate thee spitefully. PSALM lxxv. J. H. UNto thee, God, will we give thanks, we will give thanks to thee: Sith thy name is so near, delare thy wondrous works will we. I will prightly iudge, when get convenient time I may: The earth is weak, and all therein, but I her pillars stay. I dd to the mad people say, Deal not so furiously: And unto the ungodly ones, set not your horns on hie. I said unto them, Set not up your raised horns on he: And see that you do with stiff neck, not speak presumptuously. For neither from the eastern parts, nor from the western side: Nor from forsaken wilderness, promotion doth proceed. For why? the Lord our God he is the righteous judge alone: He putteth down the one, and sets another in the Throe. For why? a cup of mighty wine is in the hand of God: And all the mighty wine therein, himself doth pour abroad: As for the lees and filthy dregs, that do remain of it:
The wicked of the earth shall drink, and suck them every whit. But I will talk of God, I say, of Jacobs God therefore: And will not cease to celebrate his praise for evermore. In sunder break the horns of all ungodly men will I: But then the horns of righteous men shall be exalted high. Gloria Patri. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all gloy be therefore: As in beginning was is now, and shall be evermore. PSALM lxxvi. J. H. TO all that now in Jury dwell, the Lord is clearly known: His name is great in Israel, a people of his own. At Salem he his tents hath pight, to tarry there a space: In Sion eke he hath delight to make his dwelling place. And there he brake both shaft and bow, the sword, the spear, and shield: And brake the ray to overthrow in battel on the field. Thou art more worthy honor, Lord, more might in thee doth lie, Than in the strongest of the world, that rob on mountains high. But now the proud are spoild through thee, and they are faln on sleep: Through men of war no help can be, themselves they could not keep. At thy rebuke, O Jacobs God, when thou didst them reprove, s half on sleep their chariots stood. no horsemen once did move. For thou art dreadful, Lord, indeed, what man the courage hath o bide thy sight; and doth not dread when thou art in thy wrah? When thou dost make thy jdgements heard from heaven tho gh the ground, hen all the earth full soe afraid, in silence shall be found. And that when thou, O God, dost stand: in judgement for to speak, o save the afflicted of the land, on earth that are full weak. The fury that in man doth raign hll turn unto thy praise: refter (Lord) do thou restrain their wrath and threats always. Take vows, and pay them to our God, e folk that nigh him be: ng gifts all ye that dwell abroad, o dedul sure is he. For he doth take both life and might om Prnes great of birth, full of terrour is his sight o all the Kings on earth. PSALM lxxvii. J. H. I With my voice to God do cry, with heart, and hearty cheer: My voice to God I lift on hie, and he my suit doth hear. In time of grief I sought to God, by night no rest I took: But stretcht my hands to him abroad, my soul comfort forsook. When I to think on God intend, my trouble then is more: I spake, but could not make an end, my breath was stopt so sore. Thou holdst mine eyes always from rest that I always awake: With fear I am so sore opprest, my speech doth me forsake. The days of old in minde I cast, and oft did think upon: The times and ages that are past full many years agone. By night my songs I call to minde, once made thy praise to show: And with my heart much talk I finde, my spirits do search to know. Will God, said I, at once for all cast off his people thus: So that henceforth no time he shall be friendly unto us? Wht, is his goodness clean decaid for ever and a day? Or is his promise now delaid, and doth his truth decay? And will the Lord our God forget his mercies manifold? Or shall his wrath increase so hot, his mercies to withhold? At last I said, My weakness is the cause of this mistrust: Gods mighty hand can help all this, and change it when he lust. The second Part. I will regard and think upon the working of the Lord, Of all his wonders past and gone, I gladly will record. Yea all his works I will declare, and what he did devise: To tell his facts I will not spare, and eke his counsel wise. Thy works (O Lord) are all upright, and holy all abroad: What one hath strength to match ye might of thee, O Lord our God? Thou art a God that dost forth show thy wonders every hour: And so dost make the people know thy vertue and thy power. And thine own folk thou dost defend with strength and stretched arm: The sons of Jacob that descend, and Josephs seed, from harm. The waters Lord perceived thee,
the waters saw thee well: And they for fear away did flee, the depths on trembling fell. The clouds that were both thick and black did rain full plenteously: The thunder in the air did crack, thy shafts abroad did flie. Thy thunder in the air was heard, thy lightning from above, With flashes great made men afraid, the earth did quake and move. Thy ways within the sea do lie, thy paths in waters deep; Yet none can there thy steps espie, nor know hy paths to keep: Thou ledst thy folk upon the land, as sheep on every side: Through Moses and through Aarons hand thou didst them safely guide. PSALM lxxviii. I. H. ATtend my people to my law, and to my words incline: My mouth shall speak strange parables, and senteces divine. Which we our selves have heard and learn'd even of our fathers old: And which for our instruction our fathers have us told. Because we should not keep it close from hem that should come after: Who should Gods power to their race praise and all his works of wonder. To Jacob he commandment gave, how Israel should live: Willing our fathers should the same unto their children give. That they and their posterity, that were not sprung up ho, Should have the knowledge of the law and teach their seed also. That they might have the better hope in God that is above: And not forget to keep his laws, and his precepts in love. Not being, as their fathers were, rebelling in Gods sight: And would not frame their wicked hearts to know their God aright. How went the people of Ephraim their neighbors for to spoil: Shooting their darts in day of war, and yet they took the soil? For why? they did not keep with God the covenant that was made: Nor yet would walk or lead their lives according to his trade. But put into oblivion, his counsel and his wil: And all his works most magnifique which he declared stil. The second Part. What wonders to our fore-fathers did he himself disclose: In Egypt land within the field, that call'd is Thaneos? He did divide and cut the sea, that they might pass at once: And made the waters stand as stil as doth an heap of stones. He led them secret in a cloud by day when it was bright: And in the night when dark it was, with fire he gave them light. He brake the rocks in wilderness, and gave the people drink: As plentiful as when the deep do flow up to the brink. He drew out rivers out of Rocks that were both dry and hard: Of such abundance, that no floods to them might be compar'd. Yet for all this against the Lord their sin they did encrease: And stirred him that is most high, to wrath in wilderness. They tempted God within their hearts, like people of mistrust, Requiring such a kind of meat, as served to their lust. Saying with murmuration, in their unfaithfulness: What? can this God prepare for us a feast in wilderness? Behold he strake the stony rocks, and floods forthwith did flow: But can he now give to his folk both bread and flesh also? When God heard this he waxed wroth with Jacob and his seed: So did his indignation. on Israel proceed. The third Part. Because they did not faithfully believe, and hope that he Could always help and succor them in their necessity. Wherefore he did command the clouds, forthwith they brake in sunder: And rain'd down Manna for them to eat, a food of mickle wonder. When earrhly men with Angels food were fed at their request: He bd the East winde blow away, and brought in the South-West. He rain'd down flesh as thick as dust, and fow I as thick as sand: Which he did cast amid the place, where all their tents did stand, Then did they eat exceedingly, and all men had their fils: Yet, more and more they did desire to serve their lusts and wils. But as the meat was in their mouths, his wrath upon them fel: And slew the flower of all their youth and choice of Israel.
Yet fell they to their wonted sin, and still they did him grieve: For all the wonders that he wrought, they would him not believe. Their days therefore be shortened, and made their honour vain: Their years did waste and pass away, with terrour and with pain. But ever when he plagued them, they sought him by and by: Remembring that he was their strength their help and God most high. Though in their mouths they did but glose and flatter with the Lord: And with their tongues, & in their hearts dissembled every word. The fourth Part. For why? their hearts were nothing bent to him, nor to his trade: Nor yet to keep or to perform the covenant that was made. Yet was he stil so merciful, when they deserv'd to die: That he forgave them their misdeeds, and would not them destroy. Yea many a time he turn'd his wrath, and did himself advise; And would not suffer all his whole displeasure to arise. Considering they were but flesh, and even as a winde, Passiing away, and cannot wel return by his own kind. How oftentimes in wilderness did they the Lord provoke? How did they move and stir the Lord to plague them with his stroke? Yet did they turn again to sin, and tempted God eft-soon: Prescribing to the holy Lord, what things they would have done. Not thinking of his hand and power, nor of the day when he Delivered them out of the hands of their fierce enemy. Nor how he wrought his miracles, (as they themselves beheld) In Egypt, and the wonders that he did in Zoan field. Nor how he turned by his power, their waters into blood: That no man might receive his drink at river nor at flood. Nor how he sent them swarms of flies, which did them sore annoy: And fill'd their countrey ful of frogs, which did their land destroy. The fift Part. Nor how he did commit their fruits unto the caterpillar: And all the labour of their hands he gave to the grashopper. With hail-stones he destroid their vines, so that they were all lost: And not so much as wild fig-trees, but he consum'd with frost. And yet with hail-stones once again the Lord their cattel smote: And all their flocks and herds likewise with thunderbolts ful hot. He cast upon them in his ire, and in his fury strong, Displeasure, wrath, and evil spirits to trouble them aong. Then to his wrath he made a way, and spared not the least: But gave unto the pestilence, the man and eke the beast. He struck also the first-born all, that up in Egypt came: And all the chief of men and beasts within the rents of Ham. But as for all his own dear folk, he did preserve and keep: And carried them through wilderness, even like a flock of sheep. Without all fear both safe and sound, he brought them out of thrall: Whereas their foes with rage of sea were overwhelmed all. And brought them out unto the coast, of his own holy land, Even to the mount which he had got by his strong arm and hand. And there cast out the heathen folk, and did their land divide: And in their tents he set the tribes of Israel to abide. Yet for all this, their God most high they stir'd and tempted stil: And would not keep his Testament, nor yet obey his Wil. But as their fathers turned back, even so they went astray: Much like a bow that would not bend, but slip and start away. The sixt Part. And griev'd him with their hil-altars, with offerings and with fire: And with their idols vehemently provoked him to ire. Therewith his wrath began again to kindle in his brest: The naughtiness of Israel he did so much detest. Then he forsook the Tabernacle of Shilo, where he was Right conversant with earthly men, even as his dwelling place. Then suffered he his might and power in bondage for to stand: And gave the honour of his Ark into his enemies hand. And did commit them to the sword, wroth with his heritage:
Their young men were devour'd with fire, maids had no marriage. And with the sword the priests also did perish every one: And not a widow left alive, their death for to bemone. And then the Lord began to wake, like one that slept a time: And like a valiant man of war, refreshed after wine. With Emrods in their hinder parts, he strake his enemies all: And put them then unto a shame that was perpetual. Then he the tent and tabernacle of Joseph did refuse: As for the tribe of Ephraim, he would in no wise chuse. But chose the tribe of Jehuda, whereas he thought to dwel. Even the noble mount Sion, which he did love so wel. Whereas he did his Temple build, both sumptuously and sure: Like as the earth which he had made fr ever to endure. Then chose he David, him to serve, his people for to keep: Whom he took up and brought away, even from the folds of sheep. As he did follow th'Ews with young, the Lord did him avance: To feel his people Israel, and his inheritance. Thus David with a faithfu heart his flock and charge did seed: And prudently with all his power, did govern them indeed. PSALM lxxix I. H. O God, the Gentiles do invade thine heritage to spoil: Jerusalem an heap is made, thy Temple they defile. The bodies of thy Saints most dear, abroad to birds they cast: The flesh of them that do thee fear, the beasts devour and waste. Their blood throughout Jerusaem, as waters spilt they have: So that there is not one of them to lay their dea in grave. Thus are we made a laughing-stock, amost the world throughout: The enemies at us jest and mock, whi h dwel our coasts about. Wilt th u, O Lord, thus in thine ire; against us ever sume: And shew thy wrath as hot as fire, thy folk for to c nsume? Up n those people pour the same, which did thee never knw: All Realms which call not on thy Name, consume and overthrow. Fr they have got the upper hand, and Jacobs seed destroid: His habitation and his land, they have left waste and void. Bear not in mind our former faults, with speed some pity show: And a us Lord in all assaults, for we are weak and low. The second Part. O God that giv'st all health and grace, on us declare the same: Weigh not our works, our sins deface, for honor of thy Name. Why shall the wicked-stil alway, to us a people dumb, In thy reproach rejoyce and say, where is their God become? Require (O Lord) as thou seest good, before our eyes in sight, Of all these folk thy servants blood, which they spilt in depight. Receive into thy sight in haste, the clamours, grief, an wrong Of such as are in prison cast, sustaining irons strong. Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lord set them out of ban. Which unto death are destinate, and in their enemies hand. The nations which have been so bold, as to blaspheme thy Name: Into their lap with seven fold, repay again the same. So we thy folk and pasture sheep, will praise thee evermore: And teach all ages for to keep, for thee like praise in store. PSALM lxxx. I. H. THou Herd that Israel dost keep, ive ear and take good heed: Which leadest Joseph like a sheep, and dost him watch and feed. Thou Lord, I say whose seat is set on Cherubims most bright: Shew forth thy self and do not let, send down thy beams of light. Before Ephraim and Benjamin, Manasses eke likewise. To shew thy power do thou begin, come help us, Lord arise. Direct our hearts unto thy grace, convert us Lord to thee: Shew us the brightness of thy face, and then ful safe are we. Lord God of hots, f Israel, ow long wilt thou, I say, Against thy flk in anger wel, and wilt not hear them pray? Thou dost them feed with sorrows deep their breed with tears they ea: And drink the tears that they do weep, in measure ful and great.
Thou hast us made a very strife to those that dwel about? And that our foes do love a-life, they laugh and jest it out. O take us (Lord) unto thy grace, convert our hearts to thee: Shew forth to us thy joyful face, and we ful safe shall be. From Egypt where it grew not wel, thou broughtst a vine ful dear: The heathen folk thou didst expel, and thou didst plant it there. Thou didst prepare for it a place, and set her roots ful fast: That it did spring and grow apace, and fill'd the land at last. The second Part. The hils were covered about with shade that from it came: And eke the Cedars strong and stour, with branches of the same. Why then didst thou her wals destroy? her hedge pluckt up thou hast: That all the folk that pass thereby, thy vine may spoil and wast. The Boar out of the wood so wild, doth dig and root it out: The furious beasts out of the field devour it all about. O Lord of hosts, return again, from heaven look betime: Behold, and with thy help sustain this poor vineyard of thine. Thy plant, I say, thine Israel, whom thy right hand hath set, The same which thou didst love so wel, O Lord, do not forget. They lop and cut it down apace, they burn it eke with fire: And through the frowning of thy face, we perish in thine ire. Let thy right hand be with them now whom thou hast kept so long: And with the son of man whom thou to thee hast made so strong. And so when thou hast set us free, and saved us from shame: Then wil we never fall from thee, but call upon thy Name. O Lord of hosts through thy good grace convert us unto thee: Behold us with a pleasant face, and then ful safe are we. PSALM lxxxi. J. H. BE light and glad, in God rejoyce, which is our strength and stay: Be joyful and lift p your voice, to Jacobs God, I say. Prepare your instruments most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with Harp and Lute so sweet, on every pleasant string. Blow as it were in the new Moon, with trumpets of the best: As it is used to be done at any solemn feast. For this is unto Israel, a stature and a trade: A law that must be kept ful wel, which Jacobs God hath made. This clause with Joseph was decreed, when he from Egypt came: That as a witness all his seed should stil observe the same. When God I say, had so pepar'd to bring him from that land: Whereas the speech which he had heard, he did not understand. I from his shoulders took (saith he) the burthen clean away: And from the furnace quit him free from burning brick of clay. When thou in grief didst cry and call, I holpt thee by and by: And I did answer thee withal in thunder secretly. Yea at the waters of discord I did thee tempt and prove: Whereas the goodness of the Lord, with muttering thou didst move. Hear, O my folk, O Israel, and I assure it thee: Regard and mark my words ful wel, if thou wilt cleave to me. The second Part. Thou shalt no God in thee reserve, of any land abroad: Nor in no wise to bow or serve a strange or forreign god. I am the Lord thy God, and I from Egypt set thee free: Then ask of me abundantly, and I will give it thee. And yet my people would nor hear my voice when that I spake: Nor Israel would not obey, but did me quite forsake. Then did I leave them to their will, in hardness of their heart, To walk in their own counsel stil, themseves they might pervert. O that my people would have heard the words that I did say: And eke that Israel woul regard, to wak within my way! How soon would I confound their foe▪ and bring them down ful low: And turn my hand upon all those, that would them overthrow! And they that at the Lord do rage, as slaves should seek him stil, But of his folk the time and age should flourish ever stil. I would have fed them with the crop, and finest of the wheat:
And made the rock with honey drop, that they their fills should eat. PSALM lxxxii. I. H. AMid the press with men of might the Lord himself doth stand, To plead the cause of truth and right, with judges of the land. How long (saith he) will you proceed false judgement to award. And have respect for love of meed, the wicked to regard? Whereas of due you should defend the fatherless and weak: And when the poor man doth contend, in judgement justly speak. If ye be wise, defend the cause of poor men in their right: And rid the needy from the claws of tyrants force and might. But nothing will they know or learn, in vain to them I talk: They will not see, or ought discern, but still in darkness walk. For lo, even now the time is come, that al things fall to nought: And likewise laws both all and some, for gain are sold and bought. I had decreed it in my sight, as gods to take you all: And children to the most of might, for love I did you call. But notwithstanding ye shall die as men, and so decay: O tyrants, I shall you destroy, and pluck you quite away. Up, Lord, and let thy strength be known, and judge the world with might: For why? all nations are thine own to take them as thy right. PSALM lxxxiii. I. H. DO not (O God) refrain thy tongue, in silence do not stay: Withhold not, Lord, thy self so long, and make no more delay. For why, behold thy foes, and see how they do rage and cry: And those that bear an hate to thee, hold up their heads on high. Against thy folk they use deceit, and craft'ly they enquire: For thine elect to e in wait, their counsel doth conspire. Come on, say they, let us expel, and pluck these folk away: So that the name of Israel may utterly decay. They all conspire within their heart, how they may thee withstand: Against the Lord to take a part, they are in league and ad. The tents of all the Edomites, the Ishmaelites also: The Hagarens and Moabites, with divers others mo. ebal with Ammon, and likewise doth Amalek conspire: The Philistims against thee rise, with them that dwell at Tyre And Ashur eke is well apaid, with them in league to be: And doth become a fence and aid to Lot's posterity. As thou didst to the Midianites, so serve them Lord each one: As to Siser and to Jabin, beside the brook Kison. Whom thou in Endor didst destroy; and waste them through thy might: That they like dung on earth did lie, and that in open sight. The second Part, Make them now and their Lords appear like Zeb and Oreb than: As Zeba and Zalmunna were the Kings of Midian. Which said, Let us throughout the land in all the coasts abroad, Possess and take into our hand the fair houses of God. Turn them, O God, with storms as fast, as wheels that have no stay: Or like the chaff which men do cast, with windes to flie away. Like as the fire with rage and fume, the mighty forrests spils: And as the flame doth quite consume the mountains and the hills. So let the tempest of thy wrath upon their necks be laid: And of thy stormy winde and showre, Lord make them all afraid. Lord bring them all I thee desire, to such rebuke and shame, That it may cause them to enquire and learn to seek thy Name. And let them evermore daily to shame and slander fall: And in rebuke and obloquie, to perish eke withall. That they may know and feel ful well. that thou art called Lord: And that alone thou dost excel, and raign throughout the world. PSALM lxxxiv. I. H. HOw pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts to me! The Tabernacles of thy grace how pleasant Lord they be! My Soul doth long ful sore to go into thy courts abroad, My heart doth lust, my flesh also, in thee the living God. The sparrows finde a room to rest, and save themselves from wrong: And eke the swallow hath a nest wherein to keep her young,
These birds full nigh thine Altar may have place to fit and sing: O Lord of hosts, thou art I say, my God and eke my King. O they be blessed that may dwell within thy house always: For they all times thy facts do tell, and ever give thee praise. Yea happy sure likewise are they whose stay and strength thou art: Which to thy house do minde the way, and seek it in their heart. As they go through the vale of tears, they dig up fountains still: That as a spring it all appears, and thou their pits dost fill. From strength to strength they walk full fast no faintness there shall be: And so the God of gods at last in Sion they do see. O Lord of hosts to me give heed, and hear when I do pray: And let it through thine ears proceed, O Jacobs God, I say. O Lord our shield, of thy good grace regard and so draw near: Regard, I say, behold the face of thine anointed dear. For why? within thy Courts one day is better to abide, Then other where to keep or stay, a thousand days beside. Much rather would I keep a door within the house of God, Than in the tents of wickednesse to settle mine abode. For God the Lord, light and defence, will grace and worship give: And no good thing shall he with-hold from them that purely live. O Lord of hosts, that man is blest, and happy sure is he, That is perswaded in his breft, to trust all times in thee. PSALM lxxxv. J. H. THou hast been merciful indeed, O Lord unto thy land: For thou restoredst Jacobs seed, from thraldome out of hand. The wicked ways that they were in thou didst them clean remit: And thou didst hide thy peoples sin, full close thou coveredst it. Thine anger eke thou didst asswage, that all thy wrath was gone: And so didst turn thee from thy rage, with them to be at one. O God our health do now convert thy people unto thee: Put all thy wrath from us apart, and angry cease to be. Why? shall thine anger never end, but still proceed on us? And shall thy wrath it self extend upon all ages thus? Wilt thou not rather turn therefore, and quicken us, that we, And all thy folk may evermore be glad and joy in thee? O Lord on us do thou declare thy goodnesse to our wealth: Shew forth to us, and do not spare thine aid and saving health. I will heark what God saith, for e speaks to his people peace, And to his Saints, that never they return to foolishness. For why? his help is still at hand to such as do him fear: Whereby great glory in our land shall dwell and flourish there. For truth and mercy there shal m in one to take their place: And peace shall justice with kisse gree, and there they shall embrace. As truth from earth shall, spring apa and flourish pleasantly: So righteousnesse shall shew her face, and look from heaven high. Yea God himself doth take in hand to give us each good thing: And through the coasts of all the land the earth her fruit shall bring. Before his face shall justice go, much like a guide or stay: He shall direct his steps also, and keep them in the way. PSALM lxxxvi. J. H. LOrd bow thine ear to my request, and hear me by and by: With grievous pain and grief opprest. full poor and weak am I. Preserve my soul, because my way and doings holy be: And save thy servant, O my Lord, that puts his trust in thee. Thy mercy (Lord) on me expresse, defend me eke withall: For through the day I do not cease on thee to cry and call. Comfort (O Lord) thy servants soul, that now with pain is pin'd: For unto thee (Lord) I extoll and lift my soul and mind. For thou art good and bountiful, thy gifts of grace are free: And eke thy mercy plentiful to all that call on thee. O Lord likewise when I do pray, regard and give an ear: Mark well the words that I do say, and all my prayers hear. In time when trouble doth me more, to thee I do complain. For why? I know and well do prove, thou answerest me again. Among the gods (O Lord) is none with thee to be compar'd,
And none can do as thou alone, the like hath not been heard. The second Part. The Gentiles and the people all, which thou didst make and frame, before thy face on knees shall fall, and glorifie thy Name. For why? thou art so much of might, all power is thine own: Thou workest wonders still in fight, for thou art God alone. O teach me, Lord, the way, and I shall in thy truth proceed: O oyn my heart to thee so nigh, that I thy Name may dread. To thee my God will I give praise, with all my heart O Lord: And glorifie thy Name always, for ever through the world. For why? thy mercy shew'd to me is great, and doth excell: Thou setst my soul at liberty, out from the lower hell. O Lord, the proud against me rise, and heaps of men of might: They seek my soul, and in no wise will have thee in their fight. Thou Lord art mercifull and meek, full slack and slow to wrath: Thy goodness is full great, and eke thy truth no measure hath. O turn to me, and mercy grant, thy strength to me apply: O help and save thine own servant, thy handmaids son am I. On me some signe of favour show: that all my foes may see, And be asham'd, because (Lord) thou dost help and comfort me. PSALM Lxxxvii. J. H: THat City shall full well indure, her ground-work still doth stay Upon the holy hils full sure, it can no time decay. God loves the gates of Sion best, his grace doth there abide: He loves them more then all the rest of Jacobs tents beside. Full glorious things reported e in Sion and abroad: Great things, I say, are said of thee, thou City of our God. On Rahab I will cast an eye, and bear in mind the same: And Babylon shall eke apply, and learn to know thy Name. Lo, Palestie and Tyre also, with Ethiope likewise: A peope old, full long ago were born, and there did rise. Of Sion they shall say abroad, that divers men of fame Have thee sprung up, and the high God hath ounded fast the same. In their records to them it shall through Gods device appear Of Sion, that the chief of all had his beginning there. The trumpetters, with such as sing, there in great plenty be: My fountains and my pleasant springs are compast all in thee. PSALM Lxxxviii. J. H. LOrd God of health, the hope and stay thou art alone to me: I call and cry throughout the day, and all the night to thee. O let my prayer soon ascend unto thy fight on hie: Incline thine ear, O Lord, attend, and hearken to my cry. For why? with wo my heart i fill'd. and doth in trouble dwell: My life and breath almost doth yield, and draweth nigh to hell. I am esteem'd as one of them that in the pit do fall, And made as one among those men that have no strength at all. As one among the dead, and free from things that here remain: It were more ease for me to be with them the which are slain. As those that lie in grave, I say, whom thou hast clean forgot: The which thy hand hath cut away, and thou regard'st them not. Yea like to one shut up full sure within the lower pit, In places dark and all obscure, and in the depth of it. Thine anger and thy wrath likewise full sore on me do lie: And all thy storms against me rise. my soul to vex and trie. Thou putst my friends far off from me and mak'st them hate me sore: I am shut up in prison fast, and can come forth no more. My fight doth fail through grief and wo, I call to thee O God: Throughout the day my hands also to thee I stretch abroad. The second Part, Dost thou unto the dead declare thy wondrous works of fame? Shall dead to life again repair, and praise thee for the same? Or shall thy loving kindness, Lord, be preached in the grave? Or shall with them that are destroid, thy truth her honour have? Shall they that lie in dark full low, of all thy wonders wot? Or there shall they thy justice know, where all things are forgot? But I, O Lord, to thee always do cry d call apace:
My prayer eke ere it be day, shall come before thy face. Why dost thou, Lord, abhor my soul in grief that seeketh thee? And now, O Lord, why dost thou hide thy face away from me? I am afflicted, dying still, from youth, this many a year: Thy terrors which do vex me ill, with troubled mind I bear. The furies of thy wrathful rage full sore upon me fall: Thy terrours eke do not asswage, but me oppress withall. All day they compass me about, as waters at the tide: And all at once with streams full stout beset me on each side. Thou settest far from me my friends, and lovers every one: Yea and mine old acquaintance all out of my sight are gone. PSALM lxxxix. J. H. TO sing the mercies of the Lord, my tongue shall never spare: And with my mouth from age to age, thy truth I will declare. For I have said, that mercy shall for evermore remain: In that thou dost the heavens stay, thy truth appeareth plain. To mine elect, saith God, I made a covenant and behest: My servant David to perswade, I swore and did protest. Thy seed for ever I will stay, and stablish it full fact: And still uphold thy Throne alway, from age to age to last. The heavens shew with joy and mirth thy wondrous works, O Lord: Thy saints within thy Church on earth, thy faith and truth record. Who with the Lord is equal then, in all the clouds abroad? Among the sons of all the gods, what one is like our God? God in assembly of his Saint is greatly to be dread: And over all that dwell about, in terror to be had. Lord God of hosts, in all the word. what one is like to thee? On every side, most mighty Lord, thy truth is seen to be. The raging sea by thine advice, thou rulest at thy will: And when the waves thereof arise, thou mak'st them calm and still. And Egypt (Lord) thou hast subdu'd, and thou hast it destroyd: Yea, thou thy foes with mighty arm hast scater'd all abroad. The second Part. The heavens are thine, & still have been likewise the earth and land: The world, and all that is therein, thou soundedst with thy hand: Both North & South, with East & West thy self didst make and frame: Both Tabor mount, and eke Hermon, rejoyce and praise thy Name. Thine arm is strong and full of power all might therein doth lie: The strength of thy right hand each hour thou liftest up on hie: In righteousness and equity thou hast thy seat and place: Mercy and truth are still with the, and go before thy face. That folk is blest that knows arig thy present power O God: For in the favour of thy sight they walk full safe abroad. For in thy Name throughout the day they joy and much rejoyce: And through thy righteousness have they a pleasant fame and noise. For why? their glory, strength and aid▪ in thee alone doth lie: Thy goodness eke that hath us staid, shall lift our horn on hie. Our strength that doth defend us well the Lord to us doth bring: The holy One of Israel, he is our guide and King. Sometimes thy will unto thy Saints in visions thou didst show: And thus then didst thou say to them thy mind to make them know A man of might I have erect your King and guide to be And set him up whom I elect. among the folk to me. The third Part, My servant David I appoint, whom I have searched out: And with my holy oyl anoint him King of all the rout. For why? my hand is ready still with him for to remain: And with my arm also I will him strengthen and sustain. The enemies shall not him oppress they shall him not devour: Ne yet the sons of wickedness on him have any power. His foes likewise I will destroy before his face in fight: And those that hate him I will plague, and strike them with my might. My truth and mercy eke withall, shall still upon him lie: And in my name his horn eke shall be lifted up on high,
His Kingdom I will set to be upon the sea and land: And eke the running floods shall he embrace with his right hand. He shall depend with all his heart on me, and thus shall say: My Father and my God thou art, my rock of health and stay. As my first-born I will him take, of all on earth that springs: His might and honour I will make above all earthly Kings. My mercy shall be with him still, as I my self have told: My faithful covenant to fulfill, my mercy I will hold. And eke his seed I will sustain for ever strong and sure: So that h seed shall still remain while heaven doth endure. The fourth Part. If that his sons forsake my Law, and so begin to swerve: And of my judgements have none awe, nor will not them observe. Or if they will not use aright my stues to them made: And set all my commandments light, and will not keep my trade: Then with the rod will I begin, their doings to amend: And so will scourge them for their sin, f that they do offend. My mercy yet and my goodnesse, I will not take him fro: Nor handle him with craftinesse, and so my truth forego. But sure my covenant I will hold, with all that I have spoke: No word the which my lips have told, shall alter or be broke. Oce sware I by my holinesse, and that perform will I: With David I shall keep promise, to him I will not lie. His seed for evermore shall raign, and eke his throne of might, As doth the Sun, it shall remain for ever in my sight. And as the Moon within the skie for ever standeth fast: fathful witnesse from on hie, so shall his kingdome last. But now, O Lord, thou dost reiect, and now thou changest chear: Yea thou art wroth with thine elect, hine own anointed dear. The covenant with thy servant made, Lord thou hast quite undone: And down upon the ground also st cast his royal crown. The fift Part. Th pluck'st his hedges up with might, his wals thou dost confound: Thou beareft eke his bulwarks down, and break'st them to the ground: That he is sore destroy'd and torn, of comers by throughout: And so is made a mock and scorn to all that dwell about. Thou their right hand hast lifted up, that him so sore annoy: And all his foes that him devour, Io thou hast made to joy. His swords edge thou dost take away that should his foes withstand: To him in war no victory thou giv'st, nor upper hand. His glory thou dost also waste; his throne, his joy, his mirth, By thee are overthrown, and cast full low upon the earh. Thou hast cut off and made full shr his youth and lusty days, And rais'd of him an ill report, with shame and great dispraise. How long away from me, O Lord, for ever wilt thou turn? And shall thine anger still alway, as fire consume and burn? O call to minde, remember then, my time consumeth fast: Why hast thou made the sonnes of men as things in vain to waste? What man is he that liveth here, and death shall never see? Or from the hand of Hell his foul shall he deliver free? Where is (O Lord) thine old goodnes e so oft declar'd before, Which by thy truth and uprightnesse to David thou hast swore? The great rebukes to minde I call, that on thy servant lie: The railings of the people all borne in my brest have I: Wherewith (O Lord) thine enemies blasphemed have thy Name: The steps of thine anointed One they cease not to defame. All praise to thee, O Lord of hosts, both now and eke for aye: Through skie and earth, and all the coasts Amen, Amen, I say. PSALM xc. I. H. THou Lord hast been our sore defence, our place of ease and rest: In all times past, yea so long since, as cannot be exprest. Ere there was made mountain or hill, the earth and world abroad: From age to age, and always still, for ever thou art God. Thou grindest man through grief and pain to dust, or clay, and then, And then thou saift, again, Return again ye sonnes of men.
The lasting of a thousand years, what is it in thy sight? A yesterday it doth appear, or as a watch by night. So soon as thou dost scatter them, then is their life and trade All as a sleep, and like the grass, whose beauty soon doth fade. Which in the morning shines full bright but fadeth by and by: And is cut down ere it be night, all withered, dead and drie. For through thine anger we consume, our might is much dcaid: And of thy servent wrath and sume we are full sore afraid. The wicked works that we have wrought thou setst before thine eyes: Our privy faults, yea eke our thoughts thy countenance doth spie. For through thy wrath our days do waste, thereof doth nought remain: Our years consume as words or blasts, and are not cal'd again. Our time is threescore years and ten, that we do live on old: If one see fourscore, surely then, we count him wondrous old. The second Part. Yet of this time the strength & chief the which we cou pon, I nohng else but p till grief, and we as as re o e. Who once doth  what strength is there what  thin aer hth: Or in his heart who dth e r, according to  wrat Instrut us, L, t k ad y, ho g o  main Tha tho we ay  ply ue wdom Lord, fw g wit thou orth  in wa reed? hew  to t rvans w, p them t their need. w thy mercy soon, and  our joy ll be, ll ti so long as ife doth last, rioyce will we. hast plaged us before, so make us glad: And for he years wherein full sore a  we have ha. O let thy work ad power appear and on thy sernts light▪ And shew unto thy children dear, thy glory and thy might. Lord let thy grace and glory stand on us thy servants thus: Confirm the works we take in hand, Lord prosper them to us. PSALM xci. J. H. HE that within the secret place of God most high doth dwell. In shadow of the mightiest grace, at rest shall keep him well. Thou art my hope and my strong hold I to the Lord will say: My God is he, in him will I my whole assiance stay. He shall defend thee from the sart, the which the hunter laid: And from the deadly ple ad are, whereof thou art a. And with his wings s cover the. ad keep thee safely there: His aith and truh th as sure as shield an So that thou shalt not  I s, to fear or be affright Of all the shaf that e  y, nor terrours of the nig. Nor of the plague th  y doth walk in dar Nor yet of that which dh desry, ad a noon day doth wa. Yea at thy de as a thousand ded Ten thousand eke at thy  and, and yet shalt thou be But thou shalt  prt, thine eyes shall , That even like to the wicked have re. Fr wh  lust o stay my hpe on thee: And in he  I put my trust, y re ce is e. one ill to ear. w e  well: No  the plage shall once come ne the house where thou dost dwell. Fr why?  h Ange all, with chge ommanded he: Th shl  hy ways they shall presve and prosper thee. d i their nds shall bear thee up ll waiing ee upon: So that th  all never chance to sp  none. Upon  thou shalt go, te  and long And ead pon the Lions young, gn stout and strong. he  uno me, ill quit hi quite: And him desnd bese that he doth know y Name aright. When he for help o me doth cry, an answer I will  ve: And from his grief take him will I in glory for to live. With length of yeares and dayes of weath I will fulfill his time: The goodnesse o my saving health I will declare to him. PSALM xcii. J. H. IT is a thing both good and meet, to praise the highest Lord:
And to thy Name O thou most High, to sing with one accord. To shew the kindnesse of the Lord, betime ere day be light: And eke declare his truth abroad, when it doth drew to night. Upon ten-stringed instruments, on Lute and Harp so sweet: With all the mirth you can invent, of instruments most meet. For thou hast made me to rejoyce in things so wrought by thee: And I have joy in heart and voice, thy handy-works to see. O Lord, how glorious and how great, are all thy works so stout? S deeply are thy counsels set, that none can try them out. The man unwise hath not the wit, these things to pass to bring: And all sch fools are nothing to understand this thing. When so the wicked at their will, as grass do spring full fast: They when they flourish in their ill, for ever shall be waste. But thou art mighty, Lord, most High, yea thou dost raign therefore: n every time eternally, both now and evermore. For why? O Lord behold and see, behold thy foes I say: How all that work iniquity, shall perish and decay. But thou like as an Unicorn shalt list mine horn on hie: With fresh and new prepared oyle, thine oynted King am I. And of my foes before mine eyes shall see the fall and shame: Of all that up against me rise, mine ears shall hear the same. The just shall flourish up on high, Date-trees bud and blow: And as the Cedars multiply, in Libanus that grow. For they are planted in the place, and dwelling of our God: Within his courts they spring apace, and flourish all abroad. And in their age much fruit shal bring both fat and well beseen: And pleasantly both bud and spring, with boughs and branches green. To shew that God is good and just, and upright in his will: H is my rock, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill. PSALM xciii. J. H. THe Lord as King aloft doth raign, with glory goodly dight: And he to shew his strength most main, hath girt himself with might. The Lord likewise the earth hath made and shaped it so sure; No might can make it move or fade, at tay it doth endure. Ere that the world was made or wrought thy seat was set before: Beyond all time that can be thought thou hast been evermore. The floods, O Lord, the floods do rise, they roar and make a noise: The floods (I say) did enterprise, and lifted up their voice. Yea, though the storms arise in fight, though seas do rage and swell: The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on high doth dwell. And look what promise he doth make his houshold to defend: For just and true they shall it take, all times without an end. PSALM xciv. J. H. O Lord thou dost revenge all wrong that office 'longs to thee: Sith vengeance doth to thee belong, declare that all may see, Set forth thy self, for thou of right the earth dost judge and guide: Reward the proud and men of might according to their pride, How long shall wicked men bear sway, with lifting up their voice? How long shall wicked men, I say, thus triumph and reioyce? How long shall they with brags burst out and proudly prate their fill? Shall they rejoyce that be so stout, whose works are ever ill? Thy ock, O Lord, thine heritage, they spoil and vex full sore: Against thy people they do rage still daily more and more. The widows which are comfortless, and strangers they destroy: They slay the children fatherlesse, and none doth put them by. And when they take those things in hand this talk they have of thee: Can Jacobs God this understand? tuh, no, he cannot see. O folk unwise, and people rude, some knowedge now discern: Ye fools among the multitude, at ngth begin to learn. The Lord which made the ear of man he needs of right must hear: He made the eye, all things must then before his sight appear. The Lord doth all the world correct and make them understand: Shall he not then your deeds detect? how can you scape his hand? The second Part The Lord doth know the thoughts of man hi heart he see full plin:
The Lord (I say) mans thoughts doth scan and findeth them but vain. But Lord that man is happy sure, whom thou dost keep in awe: And through correction dost procure to teach him in thy Law. Whereby he shall in quiet rest in time of trouble sit: When wicked men shall be supprest, and fall into the pit. For sure the Lord will not refuse his people for to take: His heritage whom he did chuse, be will no time forsake. Until that judgment be decreed to justice to convent: That all may follow her with speed, that are of upright heart. But who upon my part shall stand against the cursed train? Or who shall rid me from their hand that wicked works maintain? Except the Lord had been mine aid, mine enemies to repell: My soul and life had now been laid almost a low as hell. When I did say my foot did slide I now am like to fall: Thy goodness, Lord, did so provide to stay me up withall. When with my self I mused much, and could no comfort find: Then Lord thy goodness did me touch, and that did ease my mind. Wilt thou inhaunt thy self and draw with wicked men to sit? Which with pretence instead of law, much mischief do commit. For they consult against the life of righteous men and good: And in their counsels they are rise, to shed the guiltless blood. But yet the Lord he is o me a strong defence or lock: He is my God, to whom I flee, he is my strength and rock. And he shall, cause their mischiefs all themselves for to anoy: And in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroy. PSALM xcv. J. H. O Come let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: In him our rock of health rejoice let us with one accord. Yea let us come before his face, to give him thank and praise: In singing Psalms unto his grace, let us be glad always. For why? the Lord he is no doubt a great and mighty God: A King above all gods, throughout in all he world abroad. The secrets of the earth so de and corners of the land: The tops of hil that are so steep, he hath them in his hand. The sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein it, his hand hath made of nought. Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fall: And kneel to him with one accord, the which hath made us all. For why? he is the Lord our God, for us he doth provide: We are his flock, he doth us seed. his sheep, and he our guide. To day if ye his voice will hear, then harden not your heart: As ye with grudging many a year provok'd me in desert. Whereas your fathers tempted me, my power for to prove: My wondrous works when h did e yet still they would me mo. Twice twenty years they did me grie and I to them did say, They erre in heart, and not lieve, they have not known my way. Wherfore I sware, when that my wrh was kindled in my brest, That they should never tread the to enter in my rest. PSALM xcvi. J. H. SIng ye with praise unto the Lord, new songs with joy and mirth Sing unto him with one accord, all people on the earth. Yea sing unto the Lord, I say, praise ye his holy Name: Declare and shew from day to day salvation by the same. Among the heathen eke declare his honour round about: To shew his wonders do not spare, in all the world throughout. For why, the Lord is much of might and worthy praise alway: And he is to be dread of right, above all gods, I say. For all the gods of heathen folk are idols that will fade: But yet our God, he is the Lord that hath the heavens made. All praise and honour eke do dwell for aye before his face: Both power and might likewise excell within his holy place. Ascribe unto the Lord alway, ye people of the world: All might and worship eke I say, ascribe vnto the Lord.
Ascribe unto the Lord also, the glory of his Name: And eke unto his courts do go, with gifts unto the same. The second Part. Fall down and worship ye the Lord, within his Temple bright: Let all the people of the world be fearfull at his sight. Tell all the world, be not agast, the Lord doth raign above: Yea he hath set the earth so fast, that it can never move. And that it is the Lord alone that rules with princely might: To judge the nations every one with equity and right. The heavens shall great joy begin, the earth eke shall reioyce: The sea and all that is therein, shall shout and make a noise. The field shall joy, and every thing that springeth on the earth: The wood and every tree shall sing with gladness and with mirth. Before the presence of the Lord, and coming of his might: When he shall justly judge the world, and rule his folk with right. PSALM xcvii. J. H. THe Lord doth raign, whereat  earth may joy with pleasant voice: And eke the Isles with joyfull mirth may triumph and rejoice. Both clods and darkness eke do swell and round about him beat: Yea right and justice ever dwell, and bide about his seat. Yea fire and heat at once do run, and go before his face: Which shall his foes and enemies burn abroad in every place. His lightnings eke full bright did blaze and to the world appear: Whereat the earth did look and gaze, with dread and deadly fear. The hills like wax did melt in sight and presence of the Lord: They fled before that Rulers might, which guideth all the world. The heavens eke declare and shew his justice forth abroad: That all the world may see and know the glory of our God. Confusion sure will come to such as worship idols vain: And eke to those that glory much, dumb pictures to maintain. For all the idols of the world which they as gods do call, Shall feel the power of the Lord, and down to him shall fall: With joy shall Sion hear this thing, and Juda shall reioice. For at thy judgments they shall sing, and make a pleasant noise: That thou, O Lord, art set on high, in all the earth abroad: And art exalted wondrously above each other god. All ye that ear the Lord, do this, hare all things that are ill: For he doth keep the souls of his from such as would them spill. And light doth spring up to the just, with pleasure for his part: Great joy with gladness, mirth, and lust, to them of upright heart. Ye righteous in the Lord rejoyce, his holiness proclaim: Be thankfull eke with heart and voice, and mindfull of the same. PSALM xcviii. J. H. O Sing ye now unto the Lord, a new and pleasant song, For he hath wrought throughout the world his wonders great and strong. With his right hand full worthily, he doth his foes devour: And get himself the victory, with his own arm and power. The Lord doth make his people know his saving health and might: The Lord doth eke his justice show, in all the heathens sight. His grace and truth to Israel, in mind he doth record: That all the earth hath seen right well the goodness of the Lord. Be glad in him with ioyfull voice, all people of the earth: Give thanks to God, sing and rejoyce, to him with joy and mirth. Upon the harp unto him sing, give thanks to him with Psalme: Rejoyce before the Lord our King, with Trumpets and with Shalm. Yea let the sea with all therein for joy both roar and swell: The earth likewise let it begin, with all that there dwell. And let the floods rejoyce their fil, and clap their hands apce. And eke the mountains and the h before the Lord his face. For he shall come to iudge and trie the world and every wight: And rule the peope mightily with iustice and with right. PSALM xcix. J. H. THe Lord doth raign, although at is the people rage full sore: Yea he on Cherubims doth ft, though all the world doth roar. The Lord that doth in Sion dwell. is hgh and wondrous great: Above all folk he doth excell, and he aloft is set,
Let all men praise thy mighty Name, for it is fearfull sure: And let them magnifie the same, that holy  and pure. The princely power of our King doth love judgment and right: Thou rightly rules every thing in Jacob through thy might. To praise the Lord our God devise, all honour to him doe: Before his sotstool worship him, for he is holy too. Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, as Priests on him did call: When they did pray he heard them wel, and gave them answer all. Within the cloud to them he spake, then did they labour still, To keep such laws as he did make, and pointed them untill. O Lord our God thou didst them hear, and answeredst them again: Thy mercy did on them appear, their deeds didst not maintain. O laud and praise our God and Lord within his holy hill: For why? our God throughout the world is holy ever still. PSALM C. J.H. ALl people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with chearful voice: Him serve with fear, his praise forth tel, come ye before him and rejoyce. The Lord ye know is God indeed, without our aid he did us make: We are his fock he doth us seed, and for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, approach with joy his courts unto: Paise, laud, and bless his Name alwaies, for it is seemly so to do. For why the Lord our God is good, his mecy is for ever sure: s truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. Another of the same by J. H. IN God the Lord e glad and light, praise him throughout the earth: Serve him and come before his s ght with singing and with mirth. Know that the Lord our God he is, he did us make and keep: Not we our selves, for we are his own flock and pasture sheep. O  into his gates alwaies, give thanks within the same: Wthn his courts set forth his praise, and d his holy Name. For  the godness of the Lord for  doth raign: From  o age throughout the world, his truth  still remain. PSALM ci. N. I Mercy will and judgment sig, O Lord God unto thee: And wisely do in pefect way, ntill thou come o me. And in the midst of my house wa k, in pureness of my sprit: And I no kind of wicked thing, will set befre my ght. I hate their works that fall away, it shall not cleave to me: From me shall part the froward heart none evil will I see. Him will I stroy that standereth his neighbour privily: The lofty heart I cannot bear, nor him that looketh hie. Mine eyes shall be on them within the land that faithfull be: In perfect way who walketh shall be servant unto me. I will no guilfull person have within my house to dwell: And in my presence he shall not remain that lies doth tell. Betimes I will destroy even all the wicked of the land: That I may from Gods City out, the wicked workers hand. PSALM cii. N. O Hear my prayer, Lord, and let my cry come unto thee: In time of trouble do not hide thy face away from me. Inclne thine ear to me, make hate to hear me when I call: For as the smoke doth sade, so do my days consume and fall. And as an hearth my bone are rnt, my heart is smitten dead: And withers like the grass, that I forget to eat my bread. By reason of my groaning voice, my bones cleave to my kin: As Pelan  wilderness, such case now am I . And as an Owle in desrt is, lo I am such an one: I watch, and as a Sparrow on the house  am a . Lo daily in rprochfu , mine eemies do m : And  at do g  ge, agnst me the with my hunger I ve And mingd hve m think  tea tt from mine e, have std. cause of th  Lord. thy wrath and : For thou , and cast ,
The daies wherein I pase my life, are like the fleeting shade: And I am withered like the grass, which soon away doth fade. But thou O Lord for ever dost remain in steady place: And thy remembrance ever doth abide from race to race. The second Part. Thou wilt arise, and mercy thou to Sion wilt extend: The time of mercy, now the time foreset is come to end For even in the stones thereof thy servants do deight: And on the dust thereof they have compassion in their sprite. Then shall the heathen people fear the Lords most hoy name: And all the Kings on earth shall dread, thy glory and thy fame. Then when the Lord the mighty God again shall Sion rear: And then when he most nobly in his glory shall appear. To prayer of the desolate, when he himself doth bend: When he hall not disdain unto their prayers to attend. This all be written for the age that after shall succeed: The people yet uncreated the Lords renown shall spread. For he from his high Sanctuary hath looked down below: nd out of heaven hath the Lord behod the earth aso. That of the mourning captive he might hear the woful cry: And that he might deliver those that damned are to dy. That they in Sion may declare the Lords most holy Name: And in Jerusalem set forth the praises of the same. Then when the people of the lands and kingdoms with accord, shall be assembled for to do their service to the Lord. The third Part. My former force of strength he hath bated in the way: And shorter he hath out my daies; thus I therefore did say: My God in midst of all my daies now take me not away: Thy years endure eternally, from age to age I say. Thou the foundations of the earth before all times hast laid: And Lord, the heavens are the work which thine own hands have made Yea they shall perish and decay; but thou shalt tarry still: And they shall all in time wax old, even as a garment will. Thou as a garment shalt them change and changed they shall be: But thou dost still abide the same, thy years do never flee. The children of thy servants shall continually endure: And in thy sight their happy seed for ever shall stand sur PSALM ciii. T. S. MY soul give land unto the Lord, my spirit shall do the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy Name. Give thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy self unkind: And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind. That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restor'd again, For all thy weak and frail disease, and heal'd thee of thy pain. That did redeem thy life from death, from which thou couldst not nee: His mercy and compassion both he did extend to thee. That fill'd with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth: Like at the Eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renew'th. The Lord with justice doth repay all such as be opprest: So that their suffering and their wrongs are turned to the best. His ways and his commandements to Moses he did show: His counsels and his valiant acts the Israelites did know, The Lord is kind and mercifull when sinners do him grieve: The slowest to conceive a wrath, and readiest to forgive. He chides us not continually, though we be full of strife: Nor keeps our faults in memory, for all our sinfull life. Nor yet according to our sin the Lord doth us regard: Nor after our iniquities he doth not us reward. But as the space is wondrous great 'twixt earth and heaven above; So is his goodness much more large to hem that do him love. God doth remove our sins from us, And our offences all, As far as if the Sun-rising full distant from his full.
The second Part. And look what pity parents dear unto their children bear: Like pity beareth God to such as worship him in fear. The Lord that made us knows our shape, our mold and fahion just: How weak and frail our nature is, and how we are but dust. And how the time of mortal men is like the withering hay: Or like the flower right sair in field, that fades full soon away. Whose gloss & beauty stormy winds do utterly disgrace: And make that after their assault such blossoms have no place. But yet the goodness of the Lord with his shall ever stand: Their childrens children shall receive his righteousness at hand. I mean, which keep his covenant with all their whole deire: And not forget to do the thing that he doth them require. The heavens high are made the seat and foot-stool of the Lord: And by his power imperiall he governs all the world. Ye Angels which are great in power, praise ye and bless the Lord: Which to obey and do his will, immediately accord. Ye noble host and ministers, cease not to land him still: Which ready are to execute his pleasure and his will. Yea all his works in every place praise ye his holy Name: My heart, my mind, and eke my soul praise ye aso the same. PSALM civ. W. K. MY soul praise the Lord, speak good of his Name O Lord our great God, how dost thou appear? So passing in glory, that great is thy fame! Honour and Majesty in thee thine most clear. With light as a robe thou hast thee becld: Whereby all the earth thy greatnesse may see: The heaven in such sort thou also hast spread, That it to a curtain compared may be. His chamber-beams lie in the clouds full sure Which as his chariot are made him to bear, And there with much swiftness his course doth endure, Upon the wings riding of winds in the air. He maketh his spirits as Heralds to go: And lightnings to serve, we see also prest: His will to accomplish. they run to and fro, To save or consume things, as seemeth him best. He groundeth the earth so firmly and fast, That it once to move none shall have such power: The deep a fair covering for it made thou hast: Which by his own nature the hills would devour. But at thy rebuke the waters do flie: And so give due place thy word to obey: At thy voice of thunder so fearfull they be: That in their great raging, they haste soon away, The mountains full high they then up ascend: If thou dost but speak, thy word they fulfill: So likewise the vallies most quickly descend, Where thou them appointed remain they do still. Their bounds thou hast set, how far they shall run: So that in their rage not that pass they can. For God hath appointed they shall not return The earth to destroy more, which made was for man. The second Part. He sendeth the springs to strong stream or aes Which run do ull swift among the huge his. Where both the wd ses their hirst oft ti , And beasts of the mountas thereof drink their ls. By thse peant springs of fountains full , The fowls of the Air abide shall and dwell: Who moved by nature to hop here and there, Among the green branches their songs shall exce.
The mountains to moist the clouds he doth use: The earth with his works is wholly repleat. So as the bruit cattell he doth not refuse: But grass doth provide them, and herb for mans meat. Yea bread, wine, and oyle he made for mans sake: His face to refreh, and heart to make strong. The Cedars of Liban this great Lord did make: Which trees he doth nourish that grow up so long. In these may birds build, and make there their nests: In rre-trees the Storks remain and abide. The high hills are succour for wild goats to rest: And eke the rocks stony for Conies to hide. The Moon then is set her season to run: The daies from the nights thereby to discern: And by the descending also of the Sun, The cold from heat alway thereby we do learn. When darkness doth come by Gods will and power: Then creep forth do all the beasts of the wood. The Lions range roaring, their prey to devour: But yet it is thou Lord which givest them food. As soon a the Sun is up, they retire: To couch in their den then are they full fain: That man to his work may as right doth require: Till night come and call him, to take rest again. The third Part. How sundy O Lord, are all thy worke found? With wisdom full great they are indeed wrought: So that the whole world of thy praise doth sound: And as for thy riches, they pass all mens thought. So is the great sea, which large is and broad: Where things that creep swarm, and beasts of each sort. There oth mighty ships sail, and some lie at road: The Whale huge and monstrous there also doth sport. All things on thee wait, thou dost them relieve: And thou in due time full well dost them seed. Now when it doth please thee the same for to give; They gather full gladly those things which they need. Thou openest thy hand, and they find such grace, That they with good things are filled we see. But sore are they troubled, if thou turn thy face, For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they be. Again when thy Spirit from thee doth proceed All things to appoint, and what shall ensue: Then are they created, as thou hast decreed: And dost by thy goodness the drie earth renew. The praise of the Lord for ever shall last: Who may in his works by right well rejoyce. His looks can the earth make to tremble full fast: And likewise the mountains to smoak at his voice. To this Lord and God, sing will I always: So long as I live, my God praise will I: Then am I most certain my words shall him please: I will reioyce in him, to him will I cry. The sinners, O Lord, consume in thine ire: And eke the perverse, them root out with shame▪ But as for my soul now, let it still desire, And say with the faithful, praise ye the Lords Name. PSALM cv. N. GIve praise unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name: Among the people eke declare his works to spread his fame. Sing ye unto the Lord I say, and sng unto his praise: And talk of all his wondrous works that he hath wrought alwaies. In honour of his holy Name rejoyce with one accord: And let the heart also rejoyce of them that seek the Lord.
Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might: And seek his face continually, and presence of his  ght. The wondrous works that he hath done keep still in mindfull heart: Ne let the judgments of his mouth out of your mind depart. Ye that of faithfull Abraham his servant are the seed: Ye his ee, the children that of Jacob do proceed. For he, he onely is I say, the mighty Lord ur God: And his most rightfull judgmets are through all the earth abroad. His promise ad h s covenant which he hath made to his, He hath remembred evermore, to thousands of degrees. The second Part. The covenant which he hath made with Abraham long ago: And faithfull oath which he hath sworn to Isaac also. And did confirm the same for law, that Jacob should obey: And for eternal covenant to Israel for aye. When thus he said, Lo, I to you all Canaan land will give: The lot of yur inheritance, wherein your eed shall live. Although the number at that time did very small appear: Yea very mall, and in the land they then but strangers were. Whie yet they walk'd from land to land without a sure abode: And while from sundry kigdoms they did wander all abrd. And rog at no oppressors hand he suffered them to take: But even the great and mighty Kings reproved for their sake. And thu he said, Touch ye not those that mine anointed be: He do the Prophets any harm that do pertain to me. He cal'd a dearth upon the land, of bread he stroid the store: But he against the time of need had sent a man before. The third Part. Even Joseph which had once been sold to live a slave in wo: Whose feet they hurt in stocks, whose soul the irons peirc'd also. Until the time came when his cause was kown apparently: The mighty word of God the Lord his faultless truth did trie. The King sent and delivered him from prison where he was: The rule f the people then di reely let him pass. And over all his house he made him Lord to bear the sway: And of hs substance made him have the rule and all the stay. That he might to his will instruct the Princes of the land: And wisdom ore his ancient men might cause to understand. Then into the Egyptian land came Israel also: And Jacob in the land of Ham did live a stranger tho. His people he exceedingly in number made to flow, And over all their enemies in strength he made them grow. Whose heart he turn'd that they with hate his people did entreat: And did his servants wrongfully abuse with false deceit. The fourth Part. His faithfull servant Moses then, and Aaron whom he chose, He did command to go to them, his message to disclose. The wondrous message of his signs among them he did show: And wonders in the land of Ham then did they work also. Darkness he sent, and made it dark instead of brighter day: And unto his comm ssion they did no diobey. He turn'd their wate into blood, he did their fishes slay: Their land brought frogs even in the Place where their King Pharaoh lay. He spake, and at his voice there came great swarms of noisom es, And all the aers of the land were fil'd wth crawling lice. He gave them cold and stony hail in stead of milder rain: And fiery flames within their land he sent unto their pain. He smote their vines and all their tre whereon their figs did grow: And all their trees within their coasts down did he overthrow. He spake, then Caterpillars did and Grashoppers abound: Which are the grass in all their land, and fruit of all their ground. The fift Part. The first-begotten in their land eke deadly he did smite: Yea the beginning and first fruit of all their force and might: With gold & silver he them brought from Egypt land to pass:
And in the number of their Tribes no feeble one there was. Egypt was glad and joyfull then when they did thence depart: For terrour and the fear of them was faln upon their heart. To shroud them from the parching heat a cloud he did display: And fire he sent to give them light, when night had hid the day. They asked, and he caused Quailes to ain at their request: And fully with the bread of heaven then hunger he represt: He opened the stony rock, and waters gushed out: And in the dry and parched ground like rivers ran about. For of his holy covenant aye mindfull was he tho: Which to his servant Abraham he plighted long ago. He brought his people forth with mirth and his elect with joy, Out of the cruel land, where they had liv'd in great annoy. And of the heathen men he gave to them the fruitfull lands: The labours of the people eke they took into their hands. That they his holy statutes might observe for evermore: And faithfully obey his laws: praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM cvi. N. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good his mercy dures for aye: Who can express his noble acts, or all his praise display? They blessed are that judgment keep, and justly do alway: With favour of thy people (Lord) remember me I pray. And with thy saving health (O Lord) vouchsafe to visit me: That I the great felicity of thine elect may see, And with thy peoples joy I may a joyfull mind possesse: And may with thine inheritance a glorying heart expresse. Both we, and eke our fathers all. have sinned every one: We have committed wickednesse, and lewdly we have done. The wonders great which thou (O Lord) hast done in Egypt land: Our fathers though they saw them all yet did not understand. Nor yet thy mercies multitude did keep in thankful mind; But at the sea, yea the red sea, rebelled most unkind. Neverthelesse he saved them for honour of his Name: That he might make his power known and spread abroad his fame. The red sea he did then rebuke, and forthwith it was dry'd: And as in wildernesse, so through the deep he did them guide. He sav'd them from the cruel hand of their despitefull foe: And from the enemies hand he did deliver them also. The second Part. The waters their oppressours whelm'd not one was left alive: Then they beleev'd his word, & praise in song they did him give. But by and by unthankfully his works they clean forgat: And for his counsel and his will they did neglect to wait. But lusted in the wildernesse, with sond and greedy lust: And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all their trust. And then their wanton mindes desire he suffered them to have: But wasting leannesse therewithall unto their souls he gave. Then when they lodged in their tents, at Moses they did grutch: Aaron the holy of the Lord so did they envy much. Therefore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did devour: And all Abirams company did cover in that hour. In their assembly kindled was, the hot consuming fire: And wasting flame did then burn up the wicked in his ire. Upon the hill of Horeb they an idol-calf did frame: And there the molten image they did worhip of the same. Into the likenesse of a Calf, which feedeth on the grasse, Thus they their glory turn'd, and all their honour did deface. And God their only Saviour unkindly thy forgot: Which many great and mighty things in Egypt land had wrought. The third Part. And in the land of Ham for them most wondrous works had done: And by the red sea dreadfull things performed long agone. Therefore for their so shewing them forgetfull and unkind: To bring destrution on them all he purpos'd in his mind;
Had not his chosen Moses stood before him in the break To turn his wrath, lest he on them with slaughter should him wreak. They did despise the pleasant land, that he behight to give: Yea and the words that he had spoke they did no whit believe. But in their tents with grudging heart they wickedly repin'd: Nor to the voice of God the Lord they gave an hearkning mind. Therefore against them lifted he his strong revenging hand: Them to destroy in wilderness, ere they should see the land. And to destroy their seed among the nations with his rod: And through the countrie of the world to scatter them abroad. To Baal-Peor then they did adioyn themselves also: And are the offerings of the dead, so they forsook him tho. Thus with their own inventions his wrath they did provoke: And in his sore inkindled wrath the plague upon them broke. But Phineas stood up with zeal, the sinners vile to slay: And judgement he did execute, and then the plague did stay. The fourth Part. It was imputed unto him for righteousnesse that day And from thenceforth so counted i, from race to race, I say. At waters eke of Meribah they did him angry make: Yea, so far forth, that Moses was then punish'd for their sake. Because they vex'd his spirit so sore, that in impatient heat His lips spake unadvisedly, his servour was so great. Nor as the Lord commanded them they slew the people tho. But were among the heathen mix'd and learn'd their works also. And did their idols serve, which were their ruine and decay: To fiends their sons and daughters they did offer up and slay: Yea with unkindly murdering knife the guiltless blood they spilt: Yea their own sons and daughters blood, without all cause of guilt. Whom they to Canaan idols then offred with wicked hand: And so with blood of innocent defiled was the land. Thus were they stained with the works of their own filthy way: And with their own inventions a whoring they did stray. Therefore against his people was the Lords wrath kindled sore: And even his own inheritance he did abhor therefore. Into the hands of heathen men he gave them for a prey: And made their foes their Lords, whom they were forced to obey. The fift Part. Yea and their hateful enemies opprest them in the land: And they were humbly made to stoop as subject to their hand. Full oftentimes from thrall had he delivered them before: But with their counsels they to wrath provok'd him evermore. Therefore they by their wickednesse were brought full low to lie: Yet when he saw them in distresse he hearkned to their cry. He call'd to minde his covenant, which he to them had swore: And by his mercies multitude repented him therefore. And favour he them made to find before the fight of those That led them captive from their land when erst they were their foes. Save us O Lord that art our God, save us (O Lord) we pray: And from among the heathen folk Lord gather us away. That we may spread the noble praise of thy most holy Name: That we may glory in thy praise, and sounding of thy fame. The Lord the God of Israel be blest for evermore: Let all the people say, Amen, praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM. cvii. W. K. GIve thanks unto the Lord our God, for gracious is he: And that his mercy hath no end all mortal men may see. Such as the Lord redeemed hath, with thanks shall praise his Name: And shew how they from foes were freed and how he wrought the same. He gathered them forth of the lands that lay so far about: From East to West, from North to South his hand did finde them out. They wandred in the wildernesse, and strayed from the way. And found no city where to dwell, that serve might for their stay. Whose thirst and hunger was so great in these desert so void:
That faintness did them sore assault, ad ae eir  'd. The  the  teir distress unto the Lord Who d move hei oous state acording as they praid. A  that ay whi h was most right, he  a g de: That they might to a ty go, ad there as abide. Let e therefore before the Lord cotes his godness then: And ew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he the empty soul sustain'd whom thirst had made to faint: The hungry soul with goodness fed, and did them eke acquaint. Such as do dwell in darkness deep, where they on death do wait, Fast bound to taste such troublous storms as iron chains do threat. The second part. For that against the Lords own words they sought for to rebel: Esteeming light his counsels high, which do so far excell. But when he humbled them full low, they then fell down with grief: And none was found so much to help, whereby to get relief. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous state according as they praid. For he from darknes out them brought and from deaths dreadful sade: Bursting with force the iron hands which them before did lade: Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. For he threw down the gates of brass and rake them with strong hand: The iron bars he smote in two, nothing could him withstand. The foolish folk great plagues do feel and cannot from them wend: But heap on more to those they have, because they do offend. Their souls so much did loath al meat that none they could abide: Whereby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tri'd. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for aid: Who did remove their troublous stare, according as they praid. For then he sent to them his word, which health did soon restore: And brought them from those danger deep wherein they were before. The third Part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess his kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. And let them offer sacrifice with thanks and also fear: And speak of all his wondrous works with glad and joyfull chear. Such as in ships and brittle bark into the seas descend: Their merchandise through fearful floods to compass and to end. Those men are forced to behold the Lords works what they be: And in the dangerous deep the same, most marvellous they see. For at his word the stormy wind ariseth in a rage: And stirreth up the surges so, that nought can them asswage. Then are they lifted up so high, the clouds they seem to gain: And plunging down the depth untill their souls consume with pain. And like a drunkard to and fro, now here, now there they reel: As men with fear of wit bereft, or had of sense no feel. Then did they cry in their distress unto the Lord for ad: Who did remove their troublous state according as they praid. Fr with his word the Lord doth make the sturdy storms to cease: So that the great wae from their rage are brought to rest and peace. Then are men glad when rest is come which they so much did crave: And are by him in haven brought, which they so fain would have. The fourth Part. Let men therefore before the Lord confess is kindness then: And shew the wonders that he doth before the sons of men. Let them in presence of the folk with praise extoll his Name: And where the Elders do convent, there let them do the same. For running floods to drie desern he doth oft change and turn: And drieth up as it were dust the springing well and bourn. A frtfull land with pleasures deck'd ll barren he doth make, Wh on their sins that dwell therein he doth just vengeance take. Again the wilderness full rude he maketh fru to bear: With pleasant springs of water clear, though none before were there.
Wherein such hungry souls are set, as he doth freely chuse: That they a City might them build, to dwell in for their use. That they may sow their pleasant land and vineyards also plant, To yeild them fruit of such increase, as none may seem to want. They multiply exceedingly, the Lord doth bless them so: Who doth also the bruit beasts make by numbers great to grow. But when ye faithfull are low brought by the oppressors stout: And minish do through many plagues that compass them about▪ Then doth he Princes bring to shame which did them sore oppress: And likewise caused them to erre within the wilderness. But yet the poor he raiseth up out of their troubles deep: And oft times doth his train augment much like a flock of sheep. The righteous shall behold this sight, and also much rejoyce: Whereas the wicked and perverse with grief shall stop their voice. But who is wise, that now full well he may these things record? For certainly such shall perceive the kindness of the Lord. PSALM cviii. J. H. O God my heart prepared is, and eke my tongue is so: I will advance my voice in song, and giving thanks also: Awake my violl and my harp, sweet melody to make: And in the morning I my self right early will awake. By me among the people, Lord, still praised shalt thou be: And I among the heathen folk will sing, O Lord, to thee. Because thy mercy, Lord, is great, above the heavens hie: And eke thy truth doth reach the clouds within the lofty skie. Above the starry heavens high exalt thy self O God: And Lord display upon the earth thy glory all abroad. That thy dearly beloved may be set at liberty: Help O my God with thy right hand, and hearken unto me. God in his holiness hath spoke, wherefore my joys abound: them I will divide, and mete the vale of Succoth ground. And Gilead shall be mine own. Manasses mine shall be: My head-strength Ephraim, and law shall Juda give for me. Moab my wash-pot, and my shoe on Edom will I throw: Upon the land of Palestine in triumph will I go. Who shall into the City strong be guide to conduct me? Or how by whom to Edom land conveyed shall I be? Is it not thou O Lord which late hadst us forsaken quite? And thou O Lord which with our host didst not go forth to fight. Give us O Lord thy saving aid. when troubles do assail: For all the help of man is vain, and can no whit avail. Through God we shall do valiant act, and worthy of renown: He shall subdue our enemies, yea he shall tread them down. PSALM cix. N. IN speechless silence do not hold O God thy tongue always: O God even thou I say that art the God of all my praise. The wicked and the guilfull mouth on me disclosed be: And they with false and lying tongues have spoken unto me. They did beset me round about with words of hatefull spight: Without all cause of my desert against me they did fight. For my good will they are my foe, but then 'gan I to pray: My good with ill, my friendliness with hate they did repay. Set thou  cked over him, to have he upper hnd: At h righ hnd ke suffer thou h  oe to stand. When he is ided, let  the be here And let the prayer that e makes, be tned to Few be hi days, his charge also let thou another take: His children let be fherless, his wife  widow make. Let his off-spring be vagabond to beg and seek their bread: Wandring out of the wasted place where erst they have been fed. Let covetous extortioners catch all his goods and store: And let the strangers spoil the fruit of all his toyl before. Let there be none to pity him, let there be none at all:
That on his children fatherless will let their mercy fall. The second Part. And so let his posterity for ever be destroid: Their name out-blotted in the age that after shall succeed. Let not his fathers wickedness from Gods remembrance fall: And let not thou his mothers sin be done away at all. But in the presence of the Lord let them remain for aye: That from the earth their memory he may cut clean away. Sith mercy he forgot to shew, but did pursue with spight The troubled man, and fought to slay the wofull-hearted wight. As he did cursing love, it shall beside unto him so: And as he did not blessing love, it shall be far him fro. As he with cursing clad himself, so it like water shall Into his bowels, and like oyl into his bones befall. As garment let it be to him to cover him for aye: And as a girdle wherewith he may girded be alway. Lo let the same be from the Lord the guerdon of my foe: Yea, and of those that evil speak against my soul also. But thou O Lord, which art my God, deal thou (I say) with me After thy Name, deliver me, for great thy mercies be- Because in depth of great distress I needy am and poor: And eke within my pained brest my heart is wounded sore. The third Part. Even so do I depart away, as doth declining shade: And as the Grashopper, so I am shaken off and fade. With fasting long from needfull food onfee  are my knees: And all her arness hath my flesh enforced been to lese. And I also a vile proach to them am made to be: Ad they that did upon me look, did hake their heads at me. But thou O Lord, that art my God, mine aid and succour be: According to thy mercy Lord, save and deliver me. And they shall know thereby, that this (Lord) is thy mighty hand: And that thou, thou hast done it, Lord, so, shall they understand. Although they curse wt spite, yet thou shalt bless with loving voice: They shall arise and come to shame, thy servant shall rejoyce, Let them be clothed all with sham that enemies are to me: And with confusion as a cloke eke covered let them be. But greatly I will with my mouth give thanks unto the Lord: And I among the multitude his praises will record. For he with help at his right hand will stand the poor man by: To save him from the man that would condemn his soul to die. PSALM cx. N. THe Lord did say unto my Lord. fit thou at my right hand: Till I have made thy foes a stool whereon thy feet shall stand. The Lord shall out of Sion send the Scepter of thy might: Amid thy mortal foes be thou the ruler in their right. And in the day on which thy might and power they shall see: Then hereby free-will-offerings shall the people offer thee, Yea with an holy worshipping then shall they offer all: Thy births-dew is the dew that doth from womb of morning fall. The Lord hath sworn, and never will repent what he doth say: By th' order of Melchisedech, thou art a Priest for aye. The Lord thy God on thy right hand that standeth for thy stay, Shall wound for thee the stately Kings upon his wrathfull day. The heathen he shall judge, and fill the place with bodies dead: And over divers countries shall in sunder smite the head. And he shall drink out of the brook that runneth in the way: Wherefore he shall lift up on high his royall head that day. PSALM cxi. N. WIth heart I do accord, To praise and land the Lord In presence of the just. For great his works are found, To search them such are bound, As him do love and trust. His works are glorious Also his righteousness It doth endure for ever. His wondrous works he would We still remember should: His mercy faileth never.
Such as to him love bear, A portion full fair He hath up for them laid, For this they shall well finde, He will them have in minde, And keep them as he said. For he did not disdain His works to shew them plain, By lightnings and, by thunder: When he the heathens land Did give into their hand, Where they beheld his wonders. Of all his works ensu'th Both judgment, right and truth, Whereto his statutes tend: They are decreed sure For ever to endure Which equity doth end: Redemption he gave His people for to save: And hath also required, His promise not to faile, But always to prevail, His holy Name be feared. Who so with heart full fain True wisdom would attain, The Lord fear and obey: Such as his laws do keep Shall knowledge have full deep, His praise shall last for aye. PSALM cxii. W. K. THe man is blest that God doth fear, And that his law doth love indeed: His seed on earth God will uprear, And bless such as from him proceed, His house with good he will fulfill, His righteousness endure shall still, Unto the righteous doth arise In trouble joy, in darkness light: Compassion is in his eyes, And mercy always in his sight: Yea pity moveth such to lend He doth by judgment things expend. And surely such shall never fail: For in remembrance had is he: No tidings ill can make him quail, Who in the Lord sure hope doth see. His heart is firm, his fear is past, For he shall see his foes down cast. He did well for the poor provide, His righteousness shall still remain. And his estate with praise abide, Though that the wicked man disdain, Yea gnash his teeth thereat shall he And so consume his state to see, PSALM cxiii. W. K. YE children which do serve the Lord, Praise ye his Name with one accord: Yea blessed be always his Name, Who from the rising of the Sun, Till it return where it begun, I to be praised with great fame, The Lord all people doth surmount, As for his glory we may count, Above the heavens high to be, With God the Lord who may compare Whose dwellings in the heavens are Of such great power and force is he. He doth abase himself we knovv, Things to behold both here below, and also in heaven above. The needy out of dust to draw, And eke the poor which help none savv, His only mercy did him move. And so him set in high degree, With Princes of great dignity. That rule his people with great fame, The barren he doth make to bear, And with great joy her fruit to rear, Therefore praise ye his holy Name. PSALM cxiv. W. W. WHen Israel by Gods address, from Pharaohs land was bent And Jacobs house the strangers lef, and in the same train went. In Juda God his glory shewd, his holiness most bright: So did the Israelites declare his kingdom, power, and might. The sea it saw, and suddenly at all amaz'd did flie: The roaring streams of Jordans flood recoiled backwardly. As Rams afraid the mountains ipt, their strength did them forsake: And as the silly trembling Lamb their tops did beat and shake. What aild the sea as all amaz'd so suddenly to flie? Ye rolling waves of Jordans flood, why ran ye backwardly? Why hook ye hills as Ram afraid? why did your strength so shake? Why did your tops as trembling Lambs for fear quiver and quake? O earth confess thy Soveraign Lord. and dread his mighty hand: Before the face of Jacobs God, fear ye, both sea and land. I mean the God which from hard rocks doth cause main floods appear: And from the stony flint doth cause, gush out the fountains clear. PSALM cxv. N. NOt unto us, Lord, not to us, but to thy Name give praise Both for thy mercy and thy truth, that are in thee always. Why shall the heathen scorners say where is their God become? Our God in heaven is, and what he will, that hath he done. Their idols silver are, and gold, works of mens hands they be: They have a mouth, and do not speak, and eyes, and do not see. And they have ears joynd to their head, and do not hear at all: And noses eke they formed have, and do not smell withall,
And hands they have, and handle not, and feet, and do not go: A throat they have, yet through the same they make no sound to blow. Those that make them are like to them and those whose trust they be: O Israel trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he. O Aarons house trust in the Lord, their help and shield is he: Trust ye the Lord that fear the Lord, their help and shield is he. The Lord hath mindfull been of us, and will us bless also: On Israel and on Aarons house, his blessings he will show. Them that be fearers of the Lord, the Lord will bless them all. Even he will bless them every one, the great and eke the small. To you (I say) the living Lord will multiply his grace: To you and to the children that shall follow of your race. Ye are the blessed of the Lord, even of the Lord, I say: Which both the heaven and the earth, hath made and set in stay. The heavens, yea the heavens high, belong unto the Lord: The earth unto the sons of men, he gave of free aord: They t he lead do not with praise set fo  the Lords enown: Nor any  nto th ace, f  do down. t  raise the Lord our God om  and for aye: ound ye e pris of the Lord, praise ye the Ld  say. PSALM cxvi. N. I Love the Ld because my voice, and prayer heard hath he: When  I cal'd on him, he  his ear to me. Even  sas of cruel death abt beset  rond When  as  ell me ght and when I w nd  ud. Upon te  of God my Lord then did  and sy, Delive tho y , O Lord, I do thee humbly pray. The Lrd is very mercifull, and iust he is also: And in our God compassion doth plentifully flow. The Lord in afety doth preserve all those that simple be: I was in woful misery, and he delivered me. And now my soul, sith thou art safe, return unto thy rest: For largely, lo, the Lord to thee his bounty hath exprest. Because thou hast delivered my soul from deadly thrall: My moistned eyes from mournfull tears, my sliding feet from fall. Before the Lord I in the land of life will walk therefore: I did believe, therefore I spake, for I was troubled sore. The second Part. I said in my distress and fear that all men lyars be: What shall I pay the Lord for all his benefits to me? The wholesome cup of saving health I thankfully will take: And on the Lords Name I will call. when I my prayers make. I to the Lord will pay the vows that I to him be hight: Yea, even at this present time in all his peoples sight. Right dear and pretious in his fght, the Lord doth aye esteem The death of all his holy ones, what ever men do deem. Thy servant Lord, thy servant, lo, I do my self confess, Son of thy handmaid: thou hast broke the bonds of my distress. And I will offer up to thee a sacrifice of praise: And I will call upon the Name of God the Lord always. I to the Lord will pay the vows that I have him behight: Yea even at this present time, in all his peoples sight. Yea in the courts of Gods own house, and in the midst of thee, O thou erusalem, I say, wherefore the Lord prase ye. PSALM cxvii. N. O All ye nations of the world, praise ye the Lord alwaies: And all ye people every where set forth his noble praise. For grea his kindness is to us his truth endures for aye: Wherefore paise ye the Lord our God, Praise ye he Lord, I say. PSALM cxviii. N. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because his mercy doth endure for ever towards thee. Let Israel confess and say, his mercy dues for aye: Now let the house of Aaron say, his mercy dures for aye. Let all that fear the Lord our God even now confess and say:
The mercy of the Lord our God endureth still for aye. In trouble and in heavinesse unto the Lord I cri'd: Which lovingly heard me at large, my suit was not deny'd. The Lord himself is on my side, I will not stand in doubt: Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about. The Lord doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemy. Better it is to trust in God, than in mans mortal seed: Or to put confidence in Kings, or Princes in our need. All nations have inclosed me, and compassed me round: But in the name of God shall I mine enemies confound. They kept me in on every side, they kept me in I say: But in the Lords most mighty Name I shall work their decay. They came about me all like Bee but yet in the Lords Name I quenchd their thorns that were on fre and will destroy the same. The second Part. Thou hast with force thrust sore at me that I indeed might fall: But through the Lord I sound such help that they were vanquisht all. The Lord is my defence and strength my joy, my mirh, my song: He is become for me indeed, a Saviour most strong. The right hand of the Lord our God doth bring to pass great things: He causeth voice of joy and health in righteous mens dwellings. The right hand of the Lord doth bring most mighty things to pass: His hand hath the preheminence, his force is as it was. I shall not die, but ever live to utter and declare The Lord his might & wondrous power, his works and what they are. The Lord himself hath chastened, and hath corrected me: But hath not given me over yet to death, as ye may see. Set open unto me the gates of truth and righteousness: That I may enter into them, the Lords praise to express. This is the gate even of the Lord, which shall not so be shut: But good and righteous men alway shall enter into it. The third Part. I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, because thou hast heard me; And art become most lovingly a Saviour unto me. The stone which ere this time among the builders was refused: Is now become the corner stone, and chiefly to be used. This was the mighty work of God, this was the Lords own fact: And it is marvellous to behold with eyes that noble act. This is the joyful day indeed which God himself hath wrought Let us be glad and joy therein, in heart, in minde, and thought. Now help us, Lord, and prosper us, we wish with one accord: blesed i he that coms to us in the name of the Lord. Go is the Lord that shews us light, binde ye therefore with cord Your sacrifice to the tar, and give thanks to the Lord. Thou art my God, I will confess and render hanks to thee. Thou art my Go, and I will praise thy mercy towards me. O give ye hanks unto the Lord, for graous is he: Because hs mercy doth endure for ever towards me. PSALM Cxix. W. W. ALEPH. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in minde and heart: Whose lives ad conversations from Gds laws never start. Blessed are thy that give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking he Lord with all their hearts. and never from him swerve. Doubtlesse such men go not astray. nor do no wicked thing: Which stedfastly walk in his way without any wandring. It is thy will and commandment that with attentive heed Thy noble and divie precepts, we learn and keep indeed. O would to God it might thee pleas my ways so to address: That I might both in h art and voice thy laws keep and confess. So should no shame my life attaint, whilst I thus set mine eyes: And bend my minde always to muse on thy sacred decrees. Then will I praise with upright heart and magnifie thy Name; When I shall learn thy judgments just, and likewise prove the same.
And wholly will I give my self to keep thy lawes most right. Forsake me not for ever Lord, but shew thy grace and might. BETH. The second Part. By what means may a young man best his life learn to amend? that he mark and keep thy word, and therein his time spend. Uneignedly I have thee sought, and thus seeking abide: O never suffer me, O Lord, from thy precepts to slide. Within my heart and secret thoughts thy words I have hid still: That I might not at any time offend thy godly will. We magnifie thy Name O Lord, and praise thee evermore: Thy statutes of most worthy same, O Lord teach me therefore. My lips have never ceas'd, to preach, and publish day and night, The judgments all, which did proceed from thy mouth full of might. Thy testimonies and thy waies, please me no less indeed, Then all the treasures of the earth, which worldlings make their meed. Of thy precepts I will still muse, and thereto frame my talk: As at a mark so will I aim, thy waies how I may walk. My only joy shall be so rix'd, and on thy lawes so set: That nothing can me so far blind, that I thy words forget. GIMEL. The third Part. Grant to thy servant now such grace as may my life prolong: Thy holy Word then will I keep, both in my heart and tongue. Mine eyes which were dim and shut up so open and make bright, That of thy law and marvellous works I may have the clear s ght. I am a stranger in this earth, wandring now here, now there: Thy word therefore to me d sclose, my foot-steps for to clear. My soul is ravish'd with desire, and never is at rest: But seeks to know thy judgments high, and what may please thee be. The proud men, ad malicious, thou hast destrod each one: And cursed are such as do not thy hosts attend upon. Lord turn from me rebuke and shame, which wicked men conspire: or I have kept thy covenant with zeal as hot as fire. The Princes great in counsel sate, and did against me speak: But then thy servant thought how he thy statutes might not break. For why? thy covenants are my joy, and my hearts great solace: They serve instead of counsellers, my matters for to pase. DALETH. The fourth Part. I am alas as brought to grave, and almost turn'd to dust: Restore therefore my life again, as thy promise is just. My waies when I acknowledged, with mercy thou didst hear: Hear now eft-soon, and me instruct thy lawes to love and fear. Teach me once throughly for to know thy precepts and thy sore: Thy works then will I meditate, and lay them up in store. My soul I feel so sore opprest, that it melteth for grief: According to thy word therefore, haste Lord to send relief. From lying and deceitful lips let thy grace me defend: And that I may learn thee to love, thy holy law me send. The way of truth both straight & sure I have chosen and found. I set thy judgments me before, which keep me safe and sound. Since then (O Lord) I forc'd my self thy covenants to embrace: Let me therefore have no rebuke, nor check in any case. Then will I run with joyfull chear where thy word doth me call, When thou hast set my heart at large, and rid me out of thrall. HE The fifth Part. Instruct me Lord in the right trade of thy statutes divine: And it to keep even to the end, my heart will I incline. Grant me the knowledge of thy lavv, and I shall it obey: With he t, and mind, and all my might, I will it keep I say. In the right paths of thy precepts guide me Lord I require: None other pleasure do I wish, nor greater thing desire. Incline my heart thy laws to keep, and covenants to embrace: And from all filthy avarice, Lord shield me with thy grace. From vain desires and worldly lusts turn back mine eyes and sight: Give me the spirit of life and power, to walk thy ways aright. Confirm thy gracious promise Lord.
which thou hast made to me, Which am thy servant, and do love and fear nothing but thee. Reproach and shame which I so fear from me O Lord expell: For thou dost judge with equity, and therein dost excell. Behold my hearts desire is bent thy lawes to keep for aye: Lord strengthen me so with thy grace that it perform I may. VAU The sixt Part. Thy mercies great and manifold let me obtain O Lord: Thy saving health let me enjoy according to thy word. So shall I stop the slandrous mouths of lewd men and unjust: For in thy faithfull promises stands my comfort and trust. The word of truth within my mouth let ever still be prest: For in thy judgments wonderfull my hope doth stand and rest. And whilst that breath within my brest doth natural life preserve: Yea till this world shall be dissolv'd, thy law will I observe. So walk will I, as set at large, and made free from all dread: Because I sought how for to keep thy precepts and thy read. Thy noble acts I will describe as things of most great fame: Even before Kings I will them blaze, and shrink no whit for shame. I will rejoyce then to obey thy worthy hests and will: Which evermore I have lov'd best, and so will love them still: My hands I will lift to thy lawes, which I have dearly sought: And practise thy commandements in will, in deed, in thought. ZAIN. The seventh Part. Thy promise which thou mad'st to me thy servant, Lord, remember. For therein do I put my trust, and confidence for ever. It is my comfort and my joy, when troubles me assail: For were my life not by thy word, my life would soon me fail. The proud and such as God contemn, still made of me a scorn: Yet would I not thy law forsake, as he that were forlorn: But cal'd to mind, Lord, thy great work shew'd to our fathers old: Whereby I elt the joy surmount my grief an hundred fold. But yet alas for fear I quae. seeing how wicked men Thy law forsook, and did procure thy judgments upon them. And as for me, I fram'd my son thy statutes to exalt: When I among the strangers dwelt, and thoughts gan me assault, I thought upon thy Name, O Lord, by night, when others sep: As for thy law, also I kept, and ever will it keep. This grace I did obtain, because thy covenants sweet and dear I did embrace, and also keep with reverence and with fear. HETH. The eight Part. O God which are my part and lot, my fort and my stay: I have decreed and promised, thy law to keep alway, Mine earnest heart did humbly sue in presence of thy face: As thou therefore hast promised Lord, grant me of thy grace. My life I have examined, and try'd my secret heart, Which to thy statutes caused me my feet strait to convert. I did not stay nor linger long, as they that slothfull are: But hastily thy lawes to keep, I did my self prepare. The cruel bd of wicked men have made of me their prey: Yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray. Thy righteous judgments towards me so great are and so hie: That even at midnight will I rise, thy Name to magnifie. Companion am I to all them which fear thee in their heart: And never will for love nor dread from thy commandments starr. Thy mercies Lord most plenteously do all the world fulfill: O teach me how I may obey, thy statutes and thy will. TETH. The ninth Part. According to thy promise Lord, so hast thou with me dealt: For of thy grace in sundry sorts have I thy servant felt. Teach me to judge alwaies aright, and give me knowledge sure: For certainly believe I do that thy precepts are pure. Ere thou didst touch me with thy od I err'd and went astray: But now I keep thy holy Word. and make it all my stay. Thou art both good and graciou.
and giv'st most liberally Thine ordinances how to keep, therefore O Lord teach me. The proud & wicked men have forg'd against me many a lie: Yet thy commandments still observe with all my heart will I. Their hearts are swoln with worldly wealth as grease so are they fat. But in thy law do I delight, and nothing seek but that. O happy time may I well say, when thou didst me correct: For as a guide to learn thy laws thy rod did me direct. So that to me thy word and law is dearer manifold: Then thousands great of silver and gold, or ought that can be told. IOD. The tenth Part. Seeing thy hands hve made me, Lord. to be thy creature: Grant knowdge likwise hw to to put thy lawes in re. So they that fear thee shall re , when ever they me see: Because I have learn'd by thy Were, to put my trust in thee. When with thy rods the world is plagu'd I know the cause is just: So when thou dost correct me Lord, the cause just needs be must. Now of thy goodnesse I thee pray, some comfort to me send: As thou to me hast promised, so from all ill me shend. Thy tender mercie pour on me, and I shall surely live: For ioy and consolation both thy law to me doth give. Confound the proud whose false pretence is me for to destroy: But as for me thy hests to know I will my self imploy. Whoso with reverence do thee fear, to me let them retire: And such as do thy covenants know, and them alone desire. My heart without all wavering let on thy lawes be bent: That no confusion come to me, whereby I should be shent. CAPH. The eleventh Part. My soul doth faint and ceaseth not, thy saving health to crave: And for thy words sake still I trust, my hearts desire to have. Mine eyes do fail with looking for thy word, and th I say: O when wilt thou me comfort, Lord, why dost thou thus delay? As a skin-botle in the smoke so am I parcht and dri'd, Yet will I not out of my heart let thy commandments slide. Alas how long shall I yet live, before I see the hour, That on my foes which me torment, thy vengeance thou wilt pour? Presumptuous men have digged pits thinking to make me sure. Thus contrary against thy law my hurt they do procure. But thy commandments are all true, and causlesse they me grieve: To thee therefore I do complain, that thou mightst me relieve. Almost hey had me clean destroid, and brought me quite to ground: Yet by thy utes I abode, and therin uccour o d. Reove me Lord again to life, thy mercies exce: And so shall I thy covenants keep, till dath my life expell. LAMED. The twelfth Part. In heaven Lord where thou dost dwel thy ord is stablisht sure: And shall for all eternity sad graven there endure. From age to age thy truth abides, as doth the earth witnesse: Whose ground-wk thou hast laid so sur as no tongue  expresse. Even to this day we may well see how all things persevere According to thine Ordinance, for all things thee do fear. Had it not been that in thy law my soul had comfort sought: Long time ere now in my distresse I had been brought to nought. Therefore I will thy precepts aye in memory keep fast: By them thou hast my life restor'd when I was at last cast. No wight to me can title make, for I am onely thine: Save me therefore, for to thy lawes mine ears and heart incline. The wicked men do seek my ba, and thereto lie in wait, But I the while considered thy noble works and great. I see nothing in this wide world, at length which hath no end: But thy commandments and thy word beyond all bounds extend. MEM. The thirteenth Part. What great desire and fervent love, do I bear to thy law? All the day long I meditate on it with reverent awe. Thy word hath taught me far to p
my foo in policie: For still I hold it as a thing of most excellencie. My teachers which did me instruct, in knowledge I excel: Because I do thy covenants keep, and them to others tell. In wisdom I do pass also the ancient men indeed: And all because to keep thy laws, I held it aye best reed. My feet I have refrained eke from every evil way: Because that I continually thy word might keep, I say. I have not swerv'd from thy judgements, nor yet shrunk any dell: For why? thou hast me taught thereby, to live godly and well. O Lord how sweet unto my taste find I thy words alway! Doubtless no hony in my mouth feel ought so sweet I may. Thy laws have me such wisdom learn'd that utterly I hate All wicked and ungodly wayes, in every kind or rate. NUN. The fourteenth part. Even as a lantern to my feet, so doth thy Word shine bright: And to my paths where ever I go, it is a flaming light. I have both sworn and will perform my promises duubtless, That I will keep thy judgements just, and them in life expess. Affliction hath me sore opprest, and brought me to deaths door: O Lord, as thou hast promised, so me to life restore. The offrings which with heart and voice most frankly I thee give, Accept, and teach me how I may after thy judgements live. My soul is aye so in my hand, that dangers me assail: Yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to keep will fail. Although the wicked laid their nets, to catch me at a bay: Yet did I not from thy precepts once swerve or go astray. Thy law I have so claim'd alway, as mine own heritage: And why? for therein I delight, and set my whole courage. For evermore I have been bent thy statutes to fulfil: Even so likewise unto the end I will continue still. SAMICH. The fifteenth part. The crafty thoughts & double heart. I do alwaies detest: But as for thy law and precepts, I love them ever best. Thou art my hid and secret place. my shield of strong desence: Therefore have I thy promises look'd for with patience. Go to therefore ye wicked men, depart from me anon: For the Commandments will I keep Of God my Lord alone. As thou hast promis'd, so perform, that death me not assail: Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quail. Uphold me and I shall be safe, for ought they do or say: And in thy statutes pleasure take will I both night and day. Thou hast trod such under thy feet, as do thy statutes break: For nought avails their subtilty, their counsel is but weak. Like dross thou cast'st the wicked out where ere they go or dwel: Therefore can I as thy statutes love nothing half so well. My flesh alas is taken with fear, as though it were benumb'd: For when I see thy judgements, straighs I am as one aston'd. AIN. The sixteenth Part. I do the thing that lawful is, and give to all men right: Resign me not to them that would, oppress me with their might. But for thy servant Surety be, in that thing that is good: That proud men give me not the foil, which rage as they were wood. Mine eye with waiting are now blind thy health so much I crave: And eke thy righteous promise, Lord. whereby thou wilt me save. Intreat thy servant lovingly, and favour to him show: Thy statutes of most excellency teach me also to know. Thy humble servant (Lord) I am, grant me to understand, How by thy statutes I may know best what to take in hand. It is now time (Lord) to begin, for truth is quite decaid: Thy law likewise they have transgrest, and none against them said. This is the cause wherefore I love thy laws better than gold, Or jewels fine which are esteem'd most costly to be sold. I thought thy precepts all most just, and to them laid in store: All crafty and malicious waies I do abhor therefore,
PE. The seventeenth Part. Thy covenants are most wonderful and full of things profound: My soul therefore doth keep them sure, when they are try'd and found. When men first enter into thy word, they find a light most clear: And very idiots understand, when they it read or hear. For joy I have both gap'd & breath'd to know thy commandment: That I might guide my self thereby, I sought what thing it meant. With mercy and compassion, Lord, behold me from above: As thou art wont to behold such, as thy name fear and love. Direct my foot-steps by thy Word, that I thy will may know: And never let iniquity thy servant overthrow. From landerous tongues & deadly harm preserve and keep me sure: Thy precepts then wil I observe, and put them eke in ure. Thy countenance which doth surmount, the Sun in his bright hue, Let shine on me, and by thy law teach me what to eschew. Out of mine eyes great flouds gush out of dreary tears that fall: When I behold how wicked men thy laws keep not at all. TZADI. The eighteenth Part. In every point, Lord, thou art just, the wicked though they grudge: And when thou dost sentence pronounce thou art a righteous judge. To render right and flee from guile, are two chief points most high: And such as thou hast in thy law commanded us straightly. With zeal and wrath I am consum'd and even pin'd away: To see my foes thy word forget, for ought that I do may. So pure and perfect is thy Word, as any heart can deem: And I thy servant nothing more do love or yet esteem. And though I be nothing set by, as one of base degree: Yet do I not thy laws forget, nor shrink away from thee. Thy righteousness (Lord) is most just, for ever to endure: Also thy Law is truth it self, most constant and most pure. Trouble and grief have seiz'd on me and brought me wondrous low: Yes do I still of thy precepts delight to hear and know. The righteousnes of thy Judgeme doth last for evermore: Then teach them me, for even in them my life lies up in store. KOPH. The nineteenth Part. With fervent heart I call'd & cri'd now answer me, O Lord: That thy commandments to observe, I may fully accord. To thee my God I make my suit with most humble requests: Save me therefore, and I will keep thy precepts and thy hests. To thee I cry even in the morn, before the day wax light: Because that I have in thy word my confidence whole pight. Mine eyes prevent the watch by nig and ere they call I wake: That by devising on thy Word, I might some comfort take. Incline thine ears to hear my voi and pitie on me take: As thou wast wont, so judge me Lor lest life should me forsake. My foes draw near, and do proc my death maliciously, Which from thy law are far gone ba and straid from it lewdly. Therefore, O Lord, approach th ne for need doth so require, For all thy precepts true they are, then help I thee desire. But thy commandments have I lear not now, but long ago: That they remain for evermore, thou hast them grounded so. RESH. The twentieth part. My trouble and affliction, consider and behold: Deliver me, for of thy law, I ever take fast hold. Defend my good and righteous cau with speed some succour send: From death (as thou hast promised) Lord keep me and defend. As for the wicked, far they are from having health and grace: Whereby they might thy statutes kno they enter not the trace. Great are thy mercies Lord I gran what tongue can them attain! And as thou hast me judg'd ere now. so let me life obtain. Though many men did trouble and persecute me sore: Yet from thy laws I never shrunk, nor went awry therefore. And truth it is, for grief I die, when I these traitors see: Because they keep no whit thy word, nor yet seek to know thee. Behold, for I do love thy laws,
with heart most glad and fain: As thou art good and gracious Lord, restore my life again. What thy word doth decree, must be and so it hath been ever: Thy righteous judgements are also most true and decay never. SCHIN. The xxi. part. Princes have sought by cruelty, causless to make me crouch: But all in vain, for of thy word the fear did my heart touch. And certainly even of thy word I was more merry and glad. Than he that of rich spoils and prey, great store and plenty had. As for all lies and falfities, I hate most and detest: For why thy holy law do I above all things love best. Seven times a day I praise the Lord singing with heart and voice: Thy righteous acts and wonderful, so cause me to rejoyce. Great peace & rest shall all such hav as do thy statutes love. No danger shall their quiet state impair or once remove. My only health and comfort Lord, I look for at thy hand: And therefore have I done those things, which thou didst me command. Thy laws have been mine exercise which my soul most desir'd: SO much to them my love was bent, that nought else I requir'd: Thy statutes and commandements, I kept (thou know'st) aright: For all the things that I have done, are present in thy sight. TAU, The xxii. part. O Lord, let my complaint and cry before thy face appear: And as thou hast me promise made, so teach me thee to fear. Mine humble supplication, tow'rd thee let find access: And grant me Lord deliverance, for so is thy promise. Then shal my lips thy praises speak, after most ample sort: When thou thy statutes hast me taught, wherein stands my comfort. My tongue shall sing and preach thy word, and on this wise say shall: Gods famous acts and noble laws are just and perfect all. Stretch out thy hand I thee beseech, and speedily me save: For thy commandments to observe chosen O Lord I have. of thee alone Lord I crave health. for other I know none. And in thy law and nothing else I do delight alone. Grant me therefore long daies to live thy name to magnifie: And of thy judgments merciful let me the favour try. For I was lost and went astray▪ much like a wandring sheep O seek me, for I have not fail'd thy commandments to keep. PSALM Cxx. T. S. IN trouble and in thral Unto the Lord I call, And he doth me comfort. Deliver me, I say, From lyars lips alway, And tongues of false report. What vantage or what thing Get'st thou thus for to sting, Thou false and flattering lyar? Thy tongue doth hurt I ween. No less then arrows keen, Or hot consuming fire. Alas too long I slack Within these tents so black, Which Kedar's are by name By whom the flock elect, And all of Isaac's sect Are put to open shame. With them that peace did hate I came a peace to make And set a quiet life. But when my tale was told, Causless I was controld By them that would have strife, PSALM Cxxi. W. W. I Lift mine eyes to Sion hill, From whence I do attend That succour God me send. The mighty God me succour wil, Which heaven and earth framed. And all things therein named. Thy foot from slip he will preserve And will thee safely keep, For he will never sleep: Lo he that doth Israel conserve, No sleep at all can him catch. But his eyes shall ever watch. The Lord is thy warrant alway, The Lord eke doth thee cover, As at thy right hand ever. The Sun shall not thee parch by day. Nor the Moon not half so bright, Shal with cold thee hurt by night. The Lord wil keep thee from distress. And will thy life sure save, And thou shalt also have In all thy business good success Where ever thou goest in or out God will thy things bring about.
PSALM Cxxii. W. K. I Did in heart rejoyce, To hear the people's voice, In offering so willinglie: For let us up, say they, And in the Lords house pray, Thus spake the folk full lovinglie. Our feet that wandred wide, Shal in thy gates abide, O thou Jerusalem ful fair: Which art so seemlie set Much like a City neat, The like whereof is not elsewhere. The Tribes with one accord, The Tribes of God the Lord Are thither bent their way to take, So God before did tell That there his Israel Their prayers should together make. For there are thrones erect, And that for this respect, To set forth justice orderlie: Which thrones right to maintain To Davids house pertain, his folk to judge accordinglie. To pray let us not cease For Jerusalem's peace, Thy friends God prosper mightilie: Peace be thy walls about, And prosper thee throughout Thy palaces continuallie. I wish thy prosperous state, For my poor brethrens sake, That comfort have by means of thee: Gods house doth me allure, Thy wealth for to procure, So much alwaies as lies in me. PSALM Cxxiii. T. S. O Lord that heaven dost possess, I lift mine eyes to thee: Even as the servant lifteth his, his master's hands to see. As handmaids watch their mistris hands some grace for to atchieve: So we behold the Lord our God, till he do us forgive. Lord grant us thy compassion, and mercie in thy sight: For we are fill'd and overcome with hatred and despight. Our minds be stuft with great rebuke, the rich and worldly-wise Do make of us their mocking stocks, the proud do us despise. PSAL. Cxxiv. W. W. NOw Israel may say, and that truly: If that the Lord had not our cause maintain'd: If that the Lord had not our right sustain'd: When all the world against us furiously Made their uprores, and said we should all die. Now long ago they had devour'd us all: And swallowed quick, for ought that we could dee Such was their rage, as we might well esteem. And as the flouds with mighty force do fall: So had they now our lives even brought to thrall. The raging streams most proud and roaring noise, Had long ago o're-whelm'd us in the deep. But lov'd be God, which doth us safelie keep From bloudie teeth, and their most cruel voice. Which as a prey, to eat us would rejoyce. Even as a bird out of the Fowler's i Escapes away, right so it fares with u: Broke are their nets, and we have scaped thus. God that made heaven and earth is our help then: His name hath sav'd us from these wicked men. PSALM Cxxv. W. K. SUch as in God the Lord do trust. As mount Sion shall firmly stand. And be removed at no hand, The Lord will count them right & just So that they shal be sure, For ever to endure. As mightie mountains, huge and great Jerusalem about do close: So will the Lord do unto those, Who on his godly will do wait: Such are to him so dear, They never need to fear. For though the righteous cry doth be By making wicked men his rod: Lest they through grief forsake their God, It shall not as their lot still be. Give, Lord, to us thy light, Whose hearts are true and right. But as for such as turn aside, By crooked waies which they out-sought The Lord will surely bring to nought; With workers vile they shall abide: But peace with Israel For evermore shall dwel. Another of the same by R. W. THose that do put their confidence Upon the Lord our God onely, And flie to him for their defence. In all their need and misery:
Their faith is sure still to endure, Grounded on Christ the corner-stone, Mov'd with none ill, but standeth stil, tedfast like to the mount Sion: And as about Jerusalem, The mighty hills do it compass, o that no enemies come to them, To hurt that town in any case: So God indeed in every need His faithfull people doth defend, tanding them by assuredly, From this time forth world without end. Right wise and good is our Lord God, And wil not suffer certainlie, The sinners and ungodlies rod, To tarrie upon his familie. Lest they also from God should go, Falling to sin and wickedness: O Lord defend world without end Thy Christian flock through thy goodnes. O Lord do good to Christians all, That stedfast in thy Word abide: uch as willinglie from God fall, And to false doctrine dailie slide, Such wil the Lord scatter abroad, With hypocrites thrown down to hell, God will them send pains without end: But Lord grant peace to Israel. Glorie to God the Father of might, And to the Son our Saviour, And to the Holy Ghost, whose light hine in our hearts and us succour, That the right way from day to day We may walk, and him glorifie: With hearts desire all that are here Worship the Lord, and say Amen. PSALM Cxxvi. W. W. WHen that the Lord again his Sion had forth brought From bondage great and also servitude extreme; His work was such as did surmount mans heart and thought, So that we were much like to them that use to dream, Our mouths they were with laughter filled then, And eke our tongues did shew us joyful men. The heathen folk were forced then this to confess: ow that the Lord for them also great things had done. But much more we, and therefore can confess no less: Wherfore to joy we have good cause as we begun. O Lord go forth, thou canst our bondage end: to desarts the flowing rivers send. Full true it is, that they which sow in tears indeed, A time will come, when they shal reap in mirth and joy, They went and wept in bearing of their precious seed: For that their foes ful oftentimes did them annoy: But their return with joy they shall sure see: Their sheaves home bring, and not impaired be. PSALM Cxxvii. W. W. Except the Lord the house doth make, And thereunto doth set his hand, What men do build it cannot stand. Likewise in vain men undertake, Cities and holds to watch and ward, Except the Lord be their safeguard. Though ye rise earlie in the morn, And so at night go late to bed, Feeding ful hardly with brown bread, Yet were your labour lost and wor But they whom God doth love and keep Receive all things with quiet sleep. Therefore mark wel when ever ye see, That men have heirs to enioy their land It is the gift of Gods own hand. For God himself doth multiplie. Of his great liberality, The blessing of posterity. And when the children come to ag They grow in strength and activeness, In person and in comeliness: So that a shaft shot with courage, Of one that hath a most strong arm, Flies not so swift, nor doth like harm O wel is he that hath his quive Furnish'd with such artillerie; For when in peril he shal be, Such one shal never shake nor shiver, When that he pleads before the Judge, Against his foes that bear him grudge. PSALM Cxxviii. T.S. BLessed art thou that fearest God. and walkest in his way: For of thy labour thou shalt eat happie art thou I say. Like fruitful vines on thy house fide, so doth thy wife spring out: Thy children stand like olive plants thy table round about. Thus art thou blest that fearest God and he shal let thee see The promised Jerusalem, and her felicity. Thou shalt thy childrens children s to thy great jie's increase: And likewise grace on Israel, prosperitie and peace. PSAL. Cxxix. N. OFt they (now Israel may say) me from my youth assail'd: Oft they assaild me from my yout,
yet never they prevail'd. Upon my back the plowen plow'd. and furrowes long did cast: The righteous Lord hath cut the cords of wicked foes at last. They that hate me shall be asham'd, and turned back also: And made as grass upon the house, which with'reth ere it grow. Whereof the mower cannot find enough to fill his hand: Nor can he fill his lap that go'th, to glean upon the land. Nor passers by pray God on them to let his blessing fall: Nor ay, We bless you in the Name of God the Lord at all. PSALM Cxxx. W.W. LOrd to thee I make my mone, when dangers me oppress: I call, I sigh, plain and groan, trusting to find release. Hear now O Lord my request, for it is full due time: And let thine ears ay be prest, unto this prayer mine. O Lord our God if thou weigh our sins and them peruse: Who shal I then escape and say, I can my self excuse? But, Lord thou art merciful, and turn'st to us thy grace: That we with hearts most careful should fear before thy face. In God I put my whole trust, my soul waits on his will: For his promise is most just, and I hope therein still. My soul to God hath regard. wishing for him alway, More then they that watch and ward to see the dawning day. Let Israel then boldly, in the Lord put his trust: He is that God of mercy, that his deliver must. For he it is that must save Israel from his sin: And all such as surely have their confidence in him. PSALM Cxxxi. M. O Lord I am not puft in mind, I have no scornful eye: I do not exercise my self in things that be too high. But as the child that wained is, even from his mothers brest: So have I Lord behav'd my self in silence and in rest. O Israel, trust in the Lord, him be all thy stay: From this time forth for evermore, from age to age, I say. PSALM Cxxxii. M. REmember Davids troubles Lord, how to the Lord he swore: And vow'd a vow to Jacobs God, to keep for evermore. I will not come within my house, nor climb up to my bed, Nor let my temples take their rest, nor the eyes in my head, Till I have found out for the Lord, a place to fit thereon: An house for Jacobs God to be an habitation. We heard of it at Ephrata, there did we hear this sound: And in the fields and forrests there, these voices first were found. We will assay, and go in now. his Tabernacle there: Before his foot-stool to fall down, and worship him in fear, Arise, O Lord, arise I say, into thy resting place: Both thou and the Ark of thy strength, the presence of thy grace. Let all thy priests be clothed, Lord, with truth and righteousness: Let all thy Saints and holy men sing all with joyfulness. And for thy servant Davids sae. refuse not, Lord, I say, The face of thine anointed, Lord, nor turn thy face away. The second part. The Lord to David swore in truth and will not shrink from it: Saying, the fruit of thy body upon thy seat shall fit. And if thy sons my covenant keep, that I shall learn each one: Then shal their sons for ever fit upon thy princely throne. The Lord himself hath chose Sion, and loves therein to dwel: Saying, this is my resting place, I love and like it well. And I will bless with great increase her victuals every where: And I will satisfie with bread the needy that be there. Yea I will deck and cloth her Priests with my salvation: And all her Saints shal sing for joy of my protection. There will I surely make the horn of David for to bud: For there I have ordain'd for mine a lantern bright and good. As for his enemies, I will clothe
with shame for evermore: e I will cause his crown to shine more fresh than heretofore. PSALM Cxxxiii. W. W. O How happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see rethren together fast to hold the band of amity! It calls to mind that sweet perfume, and that costly ointment, Which on the Sacrificer's head by Gods precept was spent. It wer not Aarons head alone but drencht his beard throughout: And finally it did run down his rich attire about. And as the lower ground doth drink the dew of Hermon hill: And Sion with his silver drops the fields with fruit doth fill. Even so the Lord doth powre on them his blessings manifold: Whose hearts and minds without al guile this knot do keep and hold. PSALM Cxxxiv. W. W. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: Which in his house by night do watch, praise him with one accord. Lift up your hands on high, unto his holy place: And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace. For why? the Lord who did both earth and heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will conserve for evermore the same. PSALM Cxxxv. N. O Praise the Lord, praise him, praise him, praise him with one accord: O praise him stil all ye that be the servants of the Lord. O praise him ye that stand and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court and of his house, praise him with one accord. Praise ye the Lord for he is good, sing praises to his Name: It is a comely and good thing, alwaies to do the same. For why? the Lord hath chose Jacob, his very own ye see: So hath he chosen Israel, his treasure for to be. For this I know and am right sure, the Lord is very great: He is indeed above all gods, most easie to intreat. For whatsoever pleased him, all that full well he wrought In heaven, in earth, and in the sea. which he hath made of nought. He lifts up clouds ev'n from the earth he makes lightnings and rain: He bringeth forth the winds also. he made nothing in vain. He smote the first-born of each thing, in Egypt that took rest: He spared there no living thing, the man nor yet the beast. He hath in thee shew'd wonders great O Egypt void of vaunts: On Pharaoh thy cursed King, and his severe servants. He smote then many nations, and did great acts and things: He slew the great, and mighties, and chiefest of their Kings. Sehon King of the Amorites and Og King of Bashan: He slew also the Kingdoms all that were of Canaan. And gave their land to Israel, an heritage we see, To Israel his own people an heritage to be. The second part. Thy Name (O Lord) shal stil endu and thy memorial, Throughout all generations that are or ever shall. The Lord will surely now avenge his people all indeed: And to his servants he will shew favour in time of need. The idols of th' heath'n are made in all the coasts and lands, Of silver and of gold they be, the work even of mens hands. They have their mouths and cannot speak, and eyes that have no sight: They have eke ears and hear nothing, their mouths be breathless quite. Wherefore all they are like to the that so do set them forth: And likewise those that trust in them, or think they ought be worth. O all ye house of Israel, see that ye praise the Lord: And ye that be of Aarons house, praise him with one accord. And ye that be of Levi's house, praise ye likewise the Lord: And ye that stand in awe of him, praise him with one accord. And out of Sion sound his praise, the great praise of the Lord, Which dwelleth in Jerusalem, praise him with one accord. PSALM Cxxxvi. N. PRaise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Give praise unto the God of gods. for his mercy endureth for ever. Give praise unto the Lord of lords,
for his mercie endureth for ever. Which onlie doth great wondrous works, for his mercie, &c. Which by his wisdom made the heavens, for his mercie, &c. Which on the waters stretch'd the earth, for his mercy, &c. Which made great lights to shine abroad, for is mercie, &c. As Sun to rule the lightsome day, for his mercie, &c. The Moon and Stars to guide the night for his mercy, &c. Which smote Egypt with their first-born, for his mercie, &c. And Israel brought our from thence, for his mercie, &c. With mightie hand and stretched arm, for his mercie, &c. Which cut the red sea in two parts, for his mercie, &c. And Israel made pass there-through, for his mercie, &c. And drowned Pharaoh and his host, for his mercie, &c. Through wilderness his people led, for his mercie, &c. He which did smite great noble kings, for his mercie, &c. And which hath slain the mightie kings, for his mercie, &c. As Sehon King of Amorites, for his mercie, &c. And Og the King of Basan land, for his mercie, &c. And gave their land for heritage, for his mercie, &c. Even to his servant Israel, for his mercie, &c. Remembring us in base estate, for his mercie, &c. And from oppressors rescued us, for his mercie, &c. Which giveth food unto all flesh, for his mercie, &c. Praise ye the Lord of heaven above, for his mercie, &c. Give thanks unto the Lord of lords, for his mercie, &c. Another of the same by T. C. O Land the Lord benigne, Whose mercies last for aye, Give thanks and praises sing To God of gods I say. For certainly, His mercies dure Both firm and sure, Eternallie. The Lord of lords praise ye, Whose mercies aye do dure: Great wonders onelle he Doth work by his great power, For certainlie, &c. Which God omnipotent, By his great wisdom hie The heavenlie firmament Did frame as we may see. For certainlie, &c. Yea, he the heavie charge Of all the earth did stretch And on the waters large The same he did out-reach, For certainlie, &c. Great lights he made to be, For why? his love is aye: Such as the Sun we see, To rule the lightsome day. For certainlie, &c. And eke the Moon so clear, Which shineth in our sight, And Stars that do appear, To guide the darksome night. For certainlie, &c. With grievous plagues and sor, All Egypt smote he than: The first-born less and more, He slew of beast and man. For certainlie, &c. And from amidst their land His Israel forth brought: Which he with mighty hand, And stretched arm hath wrought, For certainlie, &c, The sea he cut in two, Which stood up like a wall: And made through it to go His chosen children all, For certainlie, &c. But there he whelmed then The proud King Pharaoh, With his huge host of men, And Chariots eke also. For certainlie, &c. Who led through wilderness, His people safe and sound: And for his love endless, Great Kings he brought to ground. For certainlie, &c. And slew with puissant hand. Kings mightie and of fame, As of Amorites land, Sehon the King by name. For certainlie, &c, And Og (the Giant large) Of Bashan King also: Whose land fo heritage, He gave his people tho. For certainlie, &c. Even unto Israel, His servant dear, I say, He gave the same to dwel, And there abide for ay, For certainlie, &c.
Yo mind he did us call In our most base degree, And from oppressors all In safetie set us free. For certainlie, &c. All flesh in earth abroad With food he doth ful fil: Wherefore of heaven the God To laud be it your wil. For certainlie, His mercies dure Both firm and sure; Eternally, PSAL. Cxxxvii. W.W. WHen as we sate in Babylon, the rivers round about: And in remembrance of Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We hang'd our harps and instruments the willow trees upon: For in that place men for their use had planted many a one. Then they to whom we prisoners were said to us tauntingly: Now let us hear your Hebrew songs and pleasant melody. Alas, said we, who can once frame his sorrowful heart to sing The praises of our loving God thus under a strange King? But yet if I Jerusalem out of my heart let slide: Then let my fingers quite forge the warbling harp to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth, be ti'd for ever fast: If that I joy before I see thy full deliverance past. Therefore (O Lord) remember now the cursed noise and crie That doms sons against us made, when they raz'd our citie. Remember Lord their cruel words, when as with one accord They cri'd, On, sack and raze their walls, in despight of the Lord. Even so shalt thou O Babylon, at length to dust be brought: And happie shal that man be cal'd, that our revenge hath wrought, Yea blessed shal that man be cal'd, that takes thy children young: To dash their bones against hard stones, that lie the streets among. PSALM Cxxxviii. N. THee wil I praise with my whole heart my Lord my God alwaies: Even in the presence of the gods I wil advance thy praise. Toward thy holie Temple, I will look and worship thee: And praised in my thankful mouth thy holie Name shal be. Even for thy loving kindness sake, and for thy truth withal: For thou thy Name hast by thy Word advanced over all. When I did cal, thou heardest me, and thou hast made also The power of increased strength within my soul to grow. Yea all the Kings on earth, they shal give praise to thee O Lord: For they of thy most holie mouth have heard the mightie word. They of the waies of God the Lord in singing shal intreat: Because the glorie of the Lord it is exceeding great. The Lord is high and yet he doth behold the lowlie sprite: But he (contemning) knows a sar the proud and lofty wight. Although in midst of trouble I do walk, yet shal I stand Renewed by thee, O my Lord, thou wilt stretch out thy hand Upon the wrath of all my foes, and saved shall I be By thy right hand: the Lord God will perform his work to me. Thy mercy Lord indures for aye, Lord do me not forsake: Forsake me not that am the work which thine own hand did make. PSALM Cxxxix. N. O Lord thou hast me try'd and known, my sitting thou dost know, And rising eke, my thoughts afar thou understand'st also. My paths, yea and my lying down thou compassest alwaies: And by familiar custom art acquainted with my waies. No word is in my tongue, O Lord, but known it is to thee: Thou me behind hold'st and before, thou lar'st thine hand on me. Too wonderful above my reach, Lord is thy cunning skill: It is so high, that I the same cannot attain until. From sight of thy all-seeing Spirit, Lord, whither shall I go? Or whither shal I flee away, thy presence to scape fro? To heaven if I mount alost, lo thou art present there: In hell if I lie down below, even there thou dost appear. Yea let me take the morning win and let me go and hide Even there where are the farthest parts. where flowing sea doth slide. Yea even thither also shall thy reaching hand me guide
And thy right hand shall hold me fast, and make me to abide. Yea, if I say, the darkness shall yet shroud me from thy sight: Lo ev'n also the darkest night about me shall be light. Yea darkness hideth not from thee, but night doth shine as day: To thee the darkness and the light, are both alike alway. The second part. For thou possessed hast my rein, and thou hast covered me, When I within my mothers womb inclosed was by thee. Thee will I praise, made fearfully, and wondrously I am: Thy works are marvellous, right well my soul doth know the same. My bones they are not hid from thee, although in secret place I have been made, and in the earth beneath I shaped was. When I was form lesse, then thine eye saw me, for in thy book Were written all, nought was before, that after fashion took. The thoughts therefore of thee O God, how dear are they to me? And of them all how passing great the endless number be! If I should count them, lo their sum more than the sand I see: And whensoever I awake, yet am I still with thee. The wicked and the bloudy men, O that thou wouldest slay: Even those, O God, to whom depart, depart from me I say. Even those of thee (O Lord my God) that speak full wickedly: Those that are lifted up in vain, being enemies to thee. Hate I not them that hate thee Lord, and that in earnest wise? Contend I not against them all, against thee that arise? I hate them with unfained hate, even as my utter foes: Trie me, (O God) and know my heart, my thoughts prove and disclose, Consider Lord if wickedness in me there any be: And in thy way (O God my guide) for ever lead thou me. PSALM Cxl. N. LOrd save me from the evil man, and from the cruel wight and from all those which evil do imagine in their sprite. Which make on me continual war, their tongues lo they have whe Like Serpents, underneath their lips is Adders poyson set. Keep me (O Lord) from wicked hands, preserve me to abide Free from the cruel man that mean to cause my steps to slide. The proud have laid a snare for me, and they have spread a net With cords in my path-way, and gri for me eke have they set. Therefore I said unto the Lord, thou art my God alone: Hear me, O Lord, O hear the voice wherewith I pray and mone. O Lord my God, thou onely art the strength that saveth me: My head in day of battle hath been covered still by thee. Let not (O Lord) the wicked have the end of his desire: Perform not his ill thoughts, left he with pride be set on fire. Of them that compass me about, the chiefest of them all, Lord let the mischief of their lip upon themselves befal: Let coal fall on them, let him ca them in consuming flame: And in deep pits, so as they may not rise out of the same. For no backbiter shall on ear be set in stable plight: And evil to destruction still shall haunt the cruel wight. I know the Lord th'afflicted will revenge, and judge the poor: The just shal praise thy name, just shal dwell with thee evermore. PSALM Cxli. N. O Lord upon thee do I call, Lord haste thee unto me: And hearken Lord unto my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my prayers be directed in thine eyes: And the up-lifting of my hands as evening sacrifice. My Lord, for guiding of my mouth, set thou a watch before: And also of my moving lips, O Lord keep thou the door. That I should wicked works commi, incline thou not my heart: With ill men of their delicates, Lord let me eat no part. But let the righteous smite me Lord, for that is good for me: Let him reprove me, and the same a precious oyl shall be. Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall, When I shall in their misery make prayers for them all.
Then when in stony places down their judges shall be cast: Then shall they hear my words, for then they have a pleasant taste. Our bones about the graves's mouth, lo scattered are they found: As he that heweth wood, or he that diggeth up the ground. But O my Lord my God, mine eyes do look up unto thee: In thee is all my trust, let not my soul forsaken be. Which they have laid to catch me in, Lord keep me from the snare: And from the subtil gins of them that wicked workers are. The wicked into their own nets together let them fall: While I do by thy help escape the danger of them all. PSALM Cxlii. N. BEfore the Lord God with my voice I did send out my cry: And with my strained voice unto the Lord God prayed I. My meditation in his sight to powre I did not spare: And in the presence of the Lord my trouble did declare. Although perplexed was my spirit, my path was known to thee: In way where I did walk, a snare they slily laid for me. I look'd & view'd on my right hand, but none there would me know: All refuge failed me, and for my soul none cared tho. Then cry'd I Lord to thee, and said, my hope thou onely art: Thou in the land of living art my portion and my part. Heark to my cry, for I am brought full low: deliver me From them that do me persecute, for me too strong they be. That I may praise thy Name, my soul from prison, Lord, bring out: When thou art good to me, the just shall press me round about. PSALM Cxliii. N. LOrd hear my prayer, heark the plaint that I do make to thee: Lord, in thy native truth and in thy justice answer me. In judgement with thy servant Lord, O enter not at all: For justifi'd be in thy sight, not one that liveth shall. The enemy hath pursu'd my soul, my life to ground hath thrown: And laid me in the dark, like them that dead are long agone. Within me in perplexity was mine accumbred sprite: And in me was my troubled hea amazed and affright. Yet I record time past, in all thy works I meditate: Yea in thy works I meditate, that thy hands have create. To thee, O Lord, my God, lo I do stretch my craving hands: My soul desireth after thee, as do the thirsty lands. Hear me with speed, my spirit doth fall hide not thy face me fro: Els shall I be like them that down into the pit do go. Let me thy loving kindness in the morning hear and know, For in thee is my trust, shew me the way where I shall go. For I lift up my soul to thee, O Lord deliver me From all mine enemies, for I have hidden me with thee. Teach me to do thy will, for thou, thou art my God, I say: Let thy good Spirit into the land of mercy me convay. For thy names sake with quickening grace alive do thou me make: And out of trouble bring my soul, even for thy justice sake. And for thy mercy slay my foes, O Lord, destroy them all That do oppress my soul: for I thy servant am and shall. PSALM Cxliv. N. BLest be ye Lord my strength, that doth instruct my hands to fight: The Lord that doth my fingers frame to battle by his might. He is my goodness, fort and tower, deliverer and shield: In him I trust, my people he subdues to me to yeeld. O Lord, what thing is man, that him thou holdest so in prise: Or son of man, that upon him thou thinkest in such wise? Man is but like to vanity, so pass his dayes to end, As fleeting shade, bow down O Lord the heavens and descend. The mountains touch, and they shall smoke, cast forth thy lightning flame, And scatter them: thine arrows shoot, consume them with the same Send down thine hand even from above O Lord deliver me: Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free. Whose subtil mouth of vanity;
and fondness doth intreat: And their right hand is a right hand of falshood and deceit. A new song will I sing, O God, and singing will I be On Vioi, and on Instrument ten-stringed unto thee. Even he it is that only gives deliverance to Kings: Unto his servant David help from hurtful sword he brings. From strangers hand me save & shield, whose mouth talks vanitie: And their right hand is a right hand of guile and subtiltie. That our sons may be as the plants, whom growing youth doth rear: Our daughters as carv'd corner stones, like to a palace fair. Our garners full, and plentie may with sundrie sorts be found, Our sheep bring thousands, in our streets ten thousands may abound. Our oxen be to labour strong, that none do us invade: There be no goings out, nor cries within our streets be made. The people blessed are that with such blessings are so stor'd: Yea, blessed all the people are, whose God is God the Lord. PSALM Cxlv. N. THee wil I laud my God and King, and bless thy Name for aye: For ever wil I praise thy Name, and bless thee day by day. Great is the Lord, most worthie praise, his greatness none can reach: From race to race they shal thy works praise, and thy power preach. I of thy glorious Majestie, the beautie wil record: And meditate upon thy works most wonderful O Lord. And they shal of thy power and of thy fearful acts declare: And I to publish all abroad, thy greatness will not spare. And they into the mention shal break of thy goodness great: And I aloud thy righteousness singing shal repeat. The Lord our God is gracious, and merciful also: Of great abounding mercie, and to anger he is slow. Yea good to all, and all his works his mercie doth exceed: Lo all thy works do praise thee, Lord, and do thy honour spread. Thy Saints do bless thee, and they do thy kingdom's glorie show: And blaze thy power, to cause the sons of men thy power to know, The second part. And of his mighty kingdom eke to spread the glorious praise: Thy kingdom Lord a kingdom is that doth endure alwaies: And thy dominion through each age endures without decay: The Lord upholdeth them that fal their sliding he doth stay. The eyes of all do wait on thee. thou dost them all relieve: And thou to each sufficing food in season due dost give. Thou openest thy plenteous hand, and bounteously dost fill All things whatsoever do live, with gifts of thy good will. The Lord is just in all his waies. his works are holie all: Near all he is that call on him, in truth that on him call. He the desires which they require, that fear him will fulfil: And he will hear them when they cry, and save them all he will. The Lord preserves all those to him that bear a loving heart: But he them all that wicked are, will utterly subvert. My thankful mouth shal gladlie speak the praises of the Lord: All flesh to praise his holy Name, for ever shall accord. PSALM Cxlvi. J.H. MY soul praise thou the Lord alwaies, my God I will confess: While breath & life prolong my daies, my tongue no time shall cease. Trust not in worldlie Princes then, though they abound in wealth: Nor in the sons of mortal men, in whom there is no health. For why? their breath doth soon depart, to earth anon they fall: And then the counsels of their heart decay and perish all. O happy is that man I say, whom Jacobs God doth aid: And he whose hope doth not decay, but on the Lord is staid. Which made the earth and waters deep, the heavens high withal: Which doth his word and promise keep in truth and ever shal. With right alwaies doth he proceed, for such as suffer wrong: The poor and hungry he doth feed, and loose the fetters strong. The Lord doth send the blind their sight, the lame to limbe restore: The Lord (I say) doth love, the right and iust man evermore.
He doth defend the fatherless, and stranger sad in heart: And quit the widow from distress, and ill mens waies subvert. Thy Lord and God eternally O Sion still shall reign: In time of all posterity, for ever to remain. PSALM Cxlvii. N. PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good unto our God to sing: For it is pleasant, and to praise, it is a comely thing. The Lord his own Jerusalem, he buildeth up alone: And the disperst of Israel doth gather into one. He heals the broken in their heart, their sores up doth he bind: He counts the number of the stars, and names them in their kind. Great is the Lord, great is his power, his wisdom infinite: The Lord relieves the meek, and throws to ground the wicked wight. Sing unto God the Lord with praise, unto the Lord rejoyce: And to our God upon the Harp, advance your singing voice. He covers heaven with clouds, and for the earth prepareth rain: And on the mountains he doth make the grass to grow again. He gives to beasts their food, and to young Ravens when they cry: His pleasure not in strength of horse, nor in mans legs doth lie. But in all those that fear the Lord, the Lord hath his delight: And such as do attend upon his mercies shining light. The second part. O praise the Lord Jerusalem, thy God O Sion praise: For he the bars hath forged strong, wherewith thy gates he staies. Thy children he hath blest in thee, and in thy borders he Doth settle peace, and with the flour of wheat he filleth thee. And his commandement upon the earth he sendeth out: And eke his word with speedy course doth swiftlie run about. He giveth snow like wool, hoar-frost like ashes he doth spread: Like morsls carts his ice, thereof, the cold who can abide? He sendeth forth his mighty word, and melteth them again: winds he make to blow, and then the wters flow main. The doctrine of his holy word to Jacob he doth show: His statutes and his judgements he gives Israel to know. With every Nation hath he not so dealt, nor have they known His secret judgements, ye therefore praise ye the Lord alone. PSALM Cxlviii. J. H. GIve laud unto the Lord, From Heaven that is so high▪ Praise him in deed and word, Above the starrie skie, And also ye, His Angels all Armies royal, Praise him with glee. Praise him both Moon and Sun, Which are so clear and bright; The same of you be done, Ye glistering stars of light: And eke no less, Ye Heavens fair, And clouds of the air. His laud express. For at his word they were, All formed as we see: At his voice did appear All things in their degree, Which he set fast, To them he made A law and trade. for aye to last. Extol and praise Gods Name, On earth ye Dragons fell▪ All deeps do ye the same, For it becomes you well. Him magnifie, Fire, hail, ice, snow, And storms that blow At his decree. The hills and mountains all And trees that fruitful are: The Cedars great and tall. His worthy praise declare. Beasts and cattel, Yea birds flying. And worms creeping, that on earth dwell. All Kings both more and le With all their pompous train: Princes and all Judges That in the world remain, Exalt his Name. Young men and maids, Old men and babes, Do ye the same. For his Name shall we prove To be most excellent, Whose praise is far above The earth and firmamnt. For sure he shall Elt with bliss
The horn of his, And help them all. His saints all shall forth tell His praise and worthiness: The children of Israel, Each one both more and less, And also they That with good will His words fulfill, And him obey. PSALM Cxlix. N. SIng ye unto the Lord our God, a new rejoycing song: And let the praise of him be heard his holy Saints among. Let Israel rejoyce in him, that made him of nothing: And let the seed of Sion eke be joyful in their King. Let them sound praise with voice of flute, unto his holy Name: And with the timbrel and the harp sing praises of the same. For why? the Lord his pleasure all hath in his people set: And by deliverance he will raise the meek to glory great. With glory and with honour now let all his Saints rejoyce: And now aloud upon their beds advance their singing voice. And in their mouths let be the acts of God the mighty Lord: And, in their hand eke let them bea a double edged sword. To plague the heathen, and correct the people with their hands: To bind their stately Kings in chains. their Lords in iron bands. To execute on them the doom that written is before: This honour all his Saints shal have; praise ye the Lord therefore. PSALM Cl. N. YIeld unto God the mighty Lord praise in his Sanctuary: And praise him in the firmament that shews his power on hie. Advance his Name, and praise him in his mighty acts alwayes: According to his excellency of greatness give him praise. His praises with the princely noise of sounding Trumpets blow: Praise him upon the Viol, and upon the Harp also Praise him with Timbrel and with Flute Organs and Virginals: With sounding Cymbals praise ye him, praise him with loud Cymbals. What ever hath the benefit of breathing, praise the Lord: To praise the name of God the Lord agree with one accord. The end of the Psalms of DAVID in Meeter. VENI CREATOR. COme Holy Ghost eternal God proceeding from above: Both from the Father and the Son, the God of peace and love. Visit our minds, and into us thy heavenly grace inspire: That in all truth and godliness we may have true desire. Thou art the very Comforter in all wo and distress: The heavenly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express. The fountain and the living spring of joy celestiall. The fire so bright, the love so clear, and unction spiritual. Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christs Church doth stand, In faithful hearts writing thy law, the finger of Gods hand. According to thy promise made, thou givest speech of grace: That through thy help the praise of God may stand in every place. O Holy Ghost into our wits send down thy heavenly light: Kindle our hearts with servent love, to serve God day and night. Strengthen and stablish all our weakness, so feeble and so frail: That neither flesh, the world nor devil against us do prevail. Put back our enemies far from us, and grant us to obtain Peace in our hearts with God and man, without grudge or disdain. And grant (O Lord) that thou being our leader and our guide: We may eschew the snare of sin, and from thee never slide. To us such plenty of thy grace good Lord grant, we thee pray: That thou maist be our Comforter, at the last dreadful day Of all strife and dissention, O Lord, dissolve the bands: And make the knots of peace and love throughout all Christian lands.
Grant us, O Lord, through thee the Father most of might: That of his dear beloved Son we may attain the fight. And that with perfect faith also we may acknowledge thee The Spirit of them both alway, one God in persons three. Laud and praise be to the Father, and to the Son equal: And to the Holy Spirit also, one God coeternal. And pray we that the only Son vouchsafe his Spirit to send To all that do profess his Name, unto the Worlds last end. The humble sute of a sinner. M. O Lord on whom I do depend, behold my careful heart: And when thy will and pleasure is, release me of my smart. Thou seest my sorrows what they are, my grief is known to thee: And there is none that can remove, or take the same from me. But onely thou whose aid I crave whose mercy still is prest, To ease all those that come to thee, for succour and for rest. And sith thou seest my restless eyes, my tears and grievous grone: Attend unto my suit O Lord, mark well my plaint and mont. For sin hath so enclosed me, and compast me about: That I am now remediless, if mercy help not out. For mortal man cannot release, or mitigate this pain: But even thy Christ, my Lord and God, who for my fi was slain. Whose bloudy wounds are yet to see, though not with mortal eye, Yet do thy Saints behold them all, and so I trust shall I. Though sin doth hinder me a while, when thou shalt see it good, I shall enjoy the sight of him, and see his wounds and bloud. And as thine Angels and thy Saints do now behold the same, So trust I to possess that place, with them to praise thy Name. But whilst I live here in this vale, where sinners do frequent: A saist me ever with thy grace, my fins still to lament. Lest that I tread the finners trace, and give them my consent, To dwel with them in wickedness, whereto nature is bent. Only thy grace must be my stay, lest that I fall down flat: And being down, then of my self cannot recover that. Wherefore this is yet once again my suit and my request, To grant me pardon for my sin, that I in thee may rest. Then shal my heart and tongue also be instruments of praise: And in thy Church and house of Saints sing Psalms to thee alwaies. Venite exultemus. O Come and let us now rejoyce, And sing unto the Lord: And to our onely Saviour, Also with one accord. O let us come before his face, With inward reverence, Confessing all our former sins, And that with diligence. To thank him for his benefi, Alwayes distributing: Wherefore to him right joyfully In Psalms now let us sing. And that because that God alone Is Lord magnificent, And eke above all other gods, A King omnipotent. His people doth not he forsake At any time or tide: And in his hands are all the coasts Of all the world so wide. And with his loving countenan He looketh every where: And doth behold the tops of all The mountains far and near. The sea and all that is therei, Are his, for he them made: And eke his hand hath fashioned The earth which doth not fade. O come therefore and worship him, And down before him fall: And let us kneel before the Lord, The which hath made us all. He is our God, our Lord and King And we his people are: His flock, and sheep of his pasture, Of whom he taketh care. This day if ye will hear his voice, Then harden not your heart: As in the bitter murmuring, When ye were in desart. Which thing was of their negligence Committed in the time Of trouble in the wilderness, A great and grievous crime, Whereas your fathers tempted me, And tri'd me every way: They proved me, and saw my works, What I could do or say. These fourty years I have been grive'd With this gen'ration: And evermore I said they er'd
In their imagination, Where with their hearts were sore cumbred Long time and many daies: Wherefore I said assuredly, They have not known my waies. To whom I in mine anger swore, That they should not be blest, Nor see my joy celestial; Nor enter in my rest. Gloria Patri. All laud and praise be to the Lord, O that of might art most: To God the Father and the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it in the beginning was, for ever heretofore: And is now at this present time, and shall be evermore. The Song of Saint Ambrose called Te Deum. WE praise thee God, we knowledge thee the only Lord to be: And as eternal Father all the earth doth worship thee. To thee all Angels cry, the heavens, and all the powers therein: To thee Cherub and Seraphin, to cry they do not lin. O holy, holy, holy Lord, of Sabboth Lord the God: Through heaven and earth thy praise is spread, and glory all abroad. Th' Apostles glorious company yeeld praises unto thee: The Prophets goodly fellowship praise thee continually. The noble and victorious host of Martyrs sound thy praise: The holy Church throughout the world doth knowledge thee alwaies. Father of endless Majesty they do acknowledge thee, Thy Christ thine honourable, true, and onely Son to be. The Holy Ghost the Comforter, of glorie thou art King, O Christ, and of the Father art the Son everlasting. When sinful mans decay in hand thou tookest to restore: To be inclos'd in Virgins womb, thou diddest not abhor. When thou hadst overcome of death the sharp and cruel might: Thou heavens kingdom didst set ope to each believing wight. In glory of the Father thou dost sit on Gods right hand: We trust that thou shalt come our Judge our cause to understand. Lord help thy servant whom thou hast. bought with thy precious bloud▪ And in eternal glory set them with thy Saints so good. O Lord do thou thy people save, bless thine inheritance: Lord govern them, and Lord do thou for ever them advance. We magnifie thee day by day, and world without an end Adore thy holy Name: O Lord vouchsafe us to defend From sin this day: have mercy Lord. have mercy on us all: And on us as we trust in thee, Lord let thy mercy fall. O Lord I have reposed all my confidence in thee: Put to confounding shame therefore, Lord let me never be. The Song of Zacharias called Benedictus. THe only Lord of Israel be praised evermore: For through his visitation, And mercy kept in store, His people now he hath redeem'd, That long have been in thral: And spread abroad his saving health Upon his servants all. In Davids house his servant true, According to his mind: And also his anointed King, As we in Scripture find. As by his holy Prophets all Oft times he did declare: The which were since the world began▪ His waies for to prepare. That we might be delivered From those that make debate: Our enemies, and from the hands Of all that do us hate. The mercy which he promised Our Fathers to fulfil: And think upon his covenant made, According to his will. And also to perform the oath Which he before had sworn, To Abraham our Father dear, For us that were forlorn. That he would give himself for us, And us from bondage bring Out of the hands of all our foes, To serve our heavenly King. And that without all manner fear, And eke in righteousness: And also for to lead our lives In stedfast holiness: And thou (O Child) which now art bo, And of the Lord elect: Shalt be the Prophet of the Highest, His waies for to direct. For thou shalt go before his face
For to prepare his waies: And also for to reach his will, And pleasure all thy daies. To give them knowledg how that their Salvation is near: And that remission of their sins Is through his mercy meer. Whereby the day-spring from on high Is come us for to visit: And those for to illuminate, Which do in darkness fit. To lighten those that shadowed be With death and eke opprest: And also for to guide our feet The way to peace and rest. The Song of the blessed Mary, called Magnificat. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord. My spirit eke evermore Rejoyceth in the Lord my God, Which is my Saviour. And why? because he did regard, And gave respect unto So base estate of his hand-maid, And let the mighty go. For now behold all nations, And generations all, From this time forth for evermore Shal me right blessed call: Because he hath me magnified, Which is the Lord of might: Whose name be ever sanctified, And praised day and night. For with his mercy and his grace All men he doth enflame: Throughout all generations, To such as fear his Name. He shewed strength with his great arm, And made the proud to stare, With all imaginations That they have in their heart. He hath put down the mighty ones From their supernal seat: And did exalt the meek in heart, As he hath thought it meet, The hungry he replenished With all things that were good: And through his power he made the rich Oft times to want their food. And calling to remembrance His mercy every deal: Hath holpen up assistantly is servant Israel. According to his promise made o Abraham before: nd to his seed successively, o stand for evermore. The Song of Simeon, called Nunc dimittis. O Lord because my hearts desire Hath wished long to see: My only Lord and Saviour, Thy Son before I die. The joy and health of all mankind, Desired long before: Which now is come into the world, Of mercy bringing store. Thou sufferest thy servant now In peace for to depart, According to thy holy Word, Which lighteneth my heart. Because mine eyes which thou hast d To give my body light, Have now beheld thy saving health, Which is the Lord of might, Whom thou mercifully hast set (Of thine abundant grace) In open sight and visible, Before all peoples face, The Gentiles to illuminate. And Satan over-quel: And eke to be the glorie of Thy people Israel. The Lamentation of a sinner. O Lord turn not away thy face From him that lies prostrate: Lamenting sore his sinful life, Before thy mercy gate: Which gate thou openest wide to those That do lament their sin: Shut not that gate against me Lord, But let me enter in. And cal me not to mine account How I have lived here: For then I know right well O Lord. How vile I shall appear. I need not to confess my life, I am sure thou canst tell, What I have been and what I am, I know thou know'st it well. O Lord thou know'st what things be pa And eke the things that be: Thou know'st also what is to come, Nothing is hid from thee. Before the heavens & earth were made Thou knowst what things were then: As all things else that have been since, Among the sons of men. And can the things that I have done, Be hidden from thee then? Nay nay, thou know'st them all O Lord, Where they were done and when, Wherefore with tears I come to thee, To beg and to intreat: Even as the child that hath done ill. And feareth to be beat. So come I to thy mercy gate, Where mercy doth abound: Requiring mercy for my sin, To heal my deadly wound. O Lord I need not to repeat, What I do beg and crave: Thou know'st (O Lord) before I ask.
The thing that I would have. Mercy good Lord, mercy I ask, This is the total summe, For mercy Lord is all my suit, Lord let thy mercy come. The Lords Prayer, or Pater Noster. OUr Father which in Heaven art, Lord hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, even as the same In Heaven is. Give us O Lord, our daily bread this day. As we forgive our debters, so forgive our debts we pray. Into temptation lead us not, from evil make us free: or kingdom, power and glory thine both now and ever be. The Lords Praier, D. Cox. OUr Father which in heaven art, And mak'st us al one brother-hood, To call upon thee with one heart, Our heavenly Father and our God. Grant we pray not with lips alone, But with our hearts deep sigh & grone, Thy blessed Name be sanctified, Thy holy Word might us inflame, In holy life for to abide, To magnifie thy holy Name. From all errors defend and keep The little flock of thy poor sheep. Thy kingdom come even at this hour And henceforth everlastingly: Thine Holy Ghost into us poure, With all his gifts most plenteously. From Satans rage and filthy band, Defend us with thy mighty hand. Thy will be done with diligence, Like as in heaven, in earth also: In trouble grant us patience, Thee to obey in wealth and wo. Let not flesh, bloud, or any ill Prevail against thy holy will. Give us this day our daily bread, And all other good gifts of thine: Keep us from war and from bloud-shed, Also from sickness, dearth and pine. That we may live in quietness. Without all greedy carefulness. Forgive us our offences all, elieve our careful conscience: As we forgive both great and smal, Which unto us have done offence. Prepare us Lord for to serve thee In perfect love and unity. O Lord into temptation, Lead us not when the fiend doth rage, To withstand his invasion, Give power and strength to every age. Arm and make strong thy feeble host, With faith and with the Holy Ghost. O Lord from evil deliver us, The daies and times are dangerous From everlasting death save us, And in our last need comfort us. A blessed end to us bequeath, Into thy hands our souls receive. For thou, O Lord, art King of king, And thou hast power ever all: Thy glory shineth in all things, In the wide world universal. Amen, let it be done, O Lord, That we have praid with one accord. The ten Commandments of God, Exod. 20. W. W. HEark Israel, and what I say give heed to understand: I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of Egypt land, Even from the house wherein thou did in thraledome live a slave: None other Gods at all before my presence shalt thou have. No manner graven image shalt thou make at all to thee: Nor any figure like by thee shall counterfeited be, Of any thing in Heaven above nor in the earth below: Nor in the waters beneath the earth. to them thou shalt not bow, Nor shalt them serve, the Lord thy God: a jealous God am I: That punish parents faults, unto the third and fourth degree, Upon their children that me hate, and mercy do display To thousands of such as me love, and my precepts obey. The Name thou of the Lord thy God in vain shalt never use: For him that takes his Name in vain the Lord will not excuse. Remember that thou holy keep the sacred sabbath day: Six dayes thou labour shalt, and do thy needful works alway. The seventh day the Lord thy God hath set to rest upon: No work then shalt thou do in it, ne thou nor yet thy son, Thy daughter, servant, nor thy maid, thine oxe, nor yet thine asse, Nor stranger that within thy gates hath his abiding place. For in six dayes, God heaven and earth, and all therein did make: And after those, his rest he did upon the seventh day take. Wherefore he blest the day that he for resting did ordain: And sacred to himself alone appointed to remain.
Yield honour to thy parents, that prolong'd thy dayes may be Upon the land, the which the Lord thy God hath given thee. Thou shalt not murther. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Nor witness false against thy neighbour be. Thou shalt not cover house that to thy neighbour doth belong: Ne cover shalt in having of his wife to do him wrong. Nor his man-servant not his maid. nor ox nor asse of his: Nor any other thing that to thy neighbour proper is. Another of the same by W. W. ATtend my people and give ear, Of ferly things I will thee tell: See that my words in mind thou bear, And to my precepts listen well. I am thy soveraign Lord and God, Which have thee brought frō careful thral And eke reclaim'd from Pharaohs rod, Make thee no gods on them to call. Nor fashioned form of any thing In heaven or earth to worship it: For I thy God by revenging With grievous plagues this fin wil smite. Take not in vain his holy name, Abuse it not after thy will, For so thou might'st soō purchase blame And in his wrath he would thee spill. The Lord from work the seventh day ceast, And brought all things to perfect end: So thou and thine that day take rest, That to Gods hests ye may attend. Unto thy parents honour give, As Gods commandments do intend: That thou long days &c good maist live In earth, where God a place doth lend. Beware of murther and cruel hate. All filthy fornication fear. See thou steal not in any rate. False witness against no man bear. Thy neighbours house wish not to have His wife, or ought that he calls mine: His field, his oxe, his asse, his slave, Or any thing which is not thine. A Prayer. The spirit of grace grant us O Lord To keep these laws our hearts restore, And cause us all with one accord, To magnifie thy Name therefore. For of our selves no strength we have To keep these laws after thy will: Thy might therefore O Christ we crave, That we in thee may them fulfil. Lord for thy Names sake grant us this Thou art our strength, O Saviour Christ Of thee to speed how should we miss, In whom our treasure doth consist? To thee for evermore be praise. With the Father in each respect, And with the holy Spirit alwayes, The comforter of thine elect. The Complaint of a sinner. WHere righteousness doth say, Lord for my sinful part. In wrath thou shouldst me pay Vengeance for my desert. I can it not deny, But needs I must confess, How that continually Thy laws I do transgress. But if it be thy will With sinners to contend: Then all thy flock shall spil, And be lost without end. For who lives here so rights. That rightly he can say, He sins not in thy fight, Full oft and every day? The Scripture plain tells me, The righteous man offendeth Seven times a day 'gainst thee Whereon thy wrath dependeth: So that the righteous man Doth walk in no such path, But he falls now and than In danger of thy wrath. Then fith the case so stand, That even the man right wise Falls oft in sinful hands, Whereby thy wrath may rise, Lord, I that am unjust, And righteousness none hav Whereto then shall I trust, My sinful soul to save? But truly to that post, Whereto I cleave and shall? Which is thy mercy most, Lord let thy mercy fall, And mitigate thy mood. Or else we perish all: The price of this thy bloud. Wherein mercy I call. The Scripture doth declare, No drop of bloud in thee: But that thou didst not spare To shed each drop for me. Now let those drops most sweet, So moist my heart so drie, That I with sin repleat, May live, and sin may die. That being mortified, This sin of mine in me, I may be sanctified, By grace of thine in thee: So that I never fall Into such mortal sin, That my foes inferl
Reioyce my death therein. But vouchsafe me to keep From those infernal foes: And from that lake so deep Whereas no mercy grows. And I shall sing the songs, Confirmed with the just: That unto thee belongs, Which art my onely trust. A Song to be sung before Morning Prayer. T. B. PRaise ye the Lord ye Gentiles all, which hath brought you into his light: O praise him all people mortal, as it is most worthy and right. For he is full determined on us to poure out his mercy: And the Lords truth be ye assur'd, abideth perpetually. Glory be to God the Father, and unto Jesus Christ his Son: With the Holy Ghost in like manner, now and at every season. A Song to be sung before Evening prayer. BEhold now give heed such as be the Lords Servants faithful and true, Come praise the Lord every degree, with such songs as to him are due. O ye that stand in the Lords house, even in our own God's mansion: Praise ye the Lord so bounteous, which worketh our salvation. Lift up your hands in his holy place, yea and that in the time of night: Praise ye the Lord which gives all grace, for he is a Lord of great might. Then shall the Lord out of Sion, which made heaven and earth by his power, Give to you and your nation, his blessing mercy, and favour. Glory be to the Father, &c. The twelve Articles of the Christian Faith. ALl my belief and confidence is in the Lord of might: The Father which all things hath made the day and eke the night. The heavens and the firmament, and also many a star, The earth and all that is therein, which pass mans reason far. And in like manner I believe in Christ our Lord his son: Coequal with the Deitie, and man in flesh and bone. Conceived by the Holy Ghost, his word doth me assure: And of his mother Mary born, yet she a Virgin pure. Because mankind to Satan was for sin in bond and thral: He came and offer'd up himsel to death to save us all. And suffering most grievous pain, then Pilate being judge: Was crucified on the Cross, and thereat did not grudge. And so he died in the flesh, but quickned in the sprite▪ His body then was buried, as is our use and rite. His soul did after this descend into the lower parts: A dread unto the wicked spirits, but joy to faithful hearts. And in the third day of his death he rose to life again: To th' end he might be glorifi'd, out of all grief and pain, Ascending to the heavens high, to sit in glory still: On Gods right hand his Father der, according to his will. Until the day of judgement come, when he shal come again With Angels power (yet of that day we all be uncertain) To judge all people righteously, whom he hath dearly bought: The living and the dead also, which he hath made of nought. And in the holy Spirit of God, (my faith to satisfie) The third person in Trinity, believe I stedfastly. The holy and Catholick Church, that Gods Word doth maintain: And holy Scripture doth allow, which Satan doth disdain. And also I do trust to have by Jesus Christ his death: Release and pardon of my fins, and that onely by faith. What time all flesh shall rise again, before the Lord of might: And see him with their bodily ey, which now do give them light. And then shal Christ our Saviour the sheep and goats divide: And give life everlastingly, to those whom he hath tri'd, Within his Realm celestial, in glory for to rest: With all his holy companie of Saints and Angels blest. Which serve the Lord omnipotent obediently each hour: To whom be all dominion, and praise for evermore.
A Prayer to the holy Ghost, to be sung before the Sermon. COme holy Spirit the God of might comforter of us all: Teach us to know thy Word aright, that we may never fall. O Holy Ghost visit our coast, defend us with thy shield: Against all sin and wickedness, Lord help us win the field. Lord keep our King and his Councel, and give them will and might To persevere in thy Gospel, which can put sin to flight. O Lord that giv'st thy holy Word, send Preachers plenteously: That in the same we may accord, and therein live and die. O holy Spirit direct aright the Preachers of thy Word: That thou by them maist cut down fin, as it were with a sword. Depart not from thy Pastors pure, but aid them at their need. Which break to us the bread of life, whereon our souls do feed. O blessed Spirit of truth keep us in peace and unity: Keep us from sects and errours all, and from all Papistry. Convert all those that are our foes, and bring them to thy light, That they and we may well agree, and praise thee day and night. O Lord increase our faith in us, and love so to abound: That man and wife be void of strife, and neighbours about us round. In our time give thy peace O Lord, to nations far and nigh: And teach them all thy holy Word, that we may sing to thee. All glory to the Trinity, that is of mighties most: The living Father and the Son, and eke the Holy Ghost. As it hath been in all the time that hath been heretofore: As it is now, and so shall be henceforth for evermore, Da Pacem, Domine. GIve peace in these our daies O Lord, Great dangers are now at hand: Thine enemies with one accord, Christs name in every land. Seek to deface, Root out and rase Thy true right worship in deed: Be thou the stay, Lord we thee pray, Thou helpst alone in all need. ive us that peace, that we, do lack Through misbelief and ill life: Thy Word to offer thou dost not lach Which we unkindly gain-strive. With fire and sword, This healthful word, Some persecute and oppress: Some with the mouth, Confess the truth Without sincere godliness. Give peace, and us thy Spirit down send With grief and repentance true, To pierce our hearts, our lives to mend, And by faith in Christ renew. That fear and dread War and bloud-shed, Through thy sweet mercy and grace, May from us slide, Thy truth may bide, And shine in every place. The Lamentation. O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woful cry, Refuse me not that am unjust, But bowing down thy heavenly eye, Behold how I do still lament, my fins wherein I do offend: O Lord for them shall I be shent? fith thee to please I do intend. No, no, not so thy will is bent, to deal with sinners in thine ire: But when in heart they shall repent, thou grantst with speed their just desire, To thee therefore still shall I crie, to wash away my sinful crime: Thy blood O Lord is not yet drie, but that it may help me in time. aste thee O Lord, haste thee I say, to poure on me thy gifts of grace: That when this life shall flit away, in heaven with thee I may have place, Where thou dost raign eternally, with God which once did down thee send Where Angels sing continually, to thee be praise world without end. R. W. PReserve us Lord by thy dear word, From Turk and Pope defend us Lord Which both wold thrust out of his throne Our Lord Jesus Christ thy dear Son. Lord Jesus Christ shew forth thy might That thou art Lord of lords by right: Thy poor afflicted flock defend, That we may praise thee without end. God Holy Ghost our Comforter, Be our patron, help, and succour: Give us one mind and perfect peace, All gifts of grace in us increase. Thou living God in persons three, Thy name be prais'd in unity: In all our need so us defend, That we may praise thee witout end FINIS.
A FORME OF PRAYER TO be used in private houses every Morning and Evening. Morning Prayer. ALmightie God, and most merciful Father, we do not present our selves here before thy Majestie, trusting in our own merits or worthiness, but in thy manifold mercies, which hast promised to hear our prayers, & grant our requests which we shal make to thee in the name of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord: who hath also com∣manded us to assemble our selvs together in his name, with full assurance that he will not onely be amongst us, but also be our Mediator and Advocate towards thy Majesty, that we may obtain all things which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will, for our necessities. Therefore we be∣seech thee (most merciful Father) to turn thy loving countenance towards us, and impute not unto us our manifold sinnes and offences, whereby we justly deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment: but ra∣ther receive us to thy mercy, for Jesus Christs sake, accepting his death and passi∣on as a just recompence for all our offen∣ces, in whom onely thou art pleased, and through whom thou canst not be offended with us. And seeing that of thy great mercies we have quietly passed this night, grant (O heavenly Father) that we may bestow this day wholly in thy service, so that all our thoughts, words, and deeds, may redound to the glory of thy Name, & good ensample to all men, who seeing our good works, may glorifie thee our heavenly Father. And forasmuch as of thy meer favour and love, thou hast not one∣ly created us to thy own similitude and likeness, but also hast chosen us to be heirs with thy dear Son Jesus Christ, of that immortal kingdom, which thou preparedst for us before the beginning of the world  we beseech thee to increase our faith and knowledge, and to lighten our hearts with thy holy Spirit, that we may in the mean time live in godly con∣versation and integritie of life, knowing that doliters, adulterers, covetou men, contentious persons, drunkards, gluttons, and such like, shall not inherit the king∣dom of God. And because thou hast commanded us to pray one for another, we do not onely make request (O Lord) for our selves, and them that thou hast already called to the true understanding of thine heavenly wil, but for all people and nations of the world, who as they know by thy wonder∣ful works, that thou art God over all, so they may be instructed by thine holy Spi∣rit to believe in thee their onely Saviour & Redeemer. But forasmuch as they can∣not believe except they hear, nor cannot hear but by preaching, and none can preach except they be sent: therefore (O Lord) raise up faithful distributers of thy mysteries, who setting apart all worldly respects, may both in their life and do∣ctrine onely seek thy glory. Contrarily confound Satan, Antichrist, with all hire∣lings and Papists, whom thou hast already cast off into a reprobate sense, that they may not by sects, schisms, heresies, and errors, disquiet thy little flock. And be∣cause (O Lord) we be fallen into the latter dayes and dangerous times, wherein ig∣norance hath gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his ministers seeks by all mean to quench the light of thy Gospel, we beseech thee to maintain thy cause again those ravening wolves, and strengthe all thy servants whom they keep in pri∣son and bondage. Let not thy long suffer∣ing be an occasion either to increase thei tyranny, or to discourage thy children neither yet let our sins and wickene be an hinderance to thy mercies; bo with speed (O Lord) consider their grea misery. For thy people Israel many time by their sins provoked thine anger, an thou punishedst them by thy just judge¦ments; yet though their sins were neve so grievous, if they once returned fro their iniquity, thou receavedst them mercy. We therefore most wretched si¦ners
bewaile our manifold sins, and ear∣nestly repent us for our former wicked∣ness & ungodly behaviour towards thee: and whereas we cannot of our selves pur∣chase thy pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christs sake, to shew thy mercies upon us, and receave us again to thy favour. Grant us (dear Father) these our requests, and all other things ne∣cessary for us and thy whole Church, ac∣cording to thy promise in Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose name we beseech thee, as he hath taught us, saying, Our Father which art, &c. Evening Prayer. O Lord God, Father everlasting and full of pity, we acknowledge and confess that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to present our selves before thy Majesty, with confi∣dence that thou wilt hear our prayers, & grant our requests, if we consider our own deservings. For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins do witness against us, and we know that thou art an upright Judge, which doest not justifie the sinners and wicked men, but punishest the faults of all such as transgress thy command∣ments. Yet most merciful Father, since it hath pleased thee to command us to call on thee in all our troubles and adversi∣ties, promising even then to help us when we feel our selves (as it were) swallowed up of death and desperation, we utterly renounce all worldly confidence, and flee to thy soveraign bounty as our onely stay and refuge: beseeching thee not to call to remembrance our manifold sins and wickedness, whereby we continually provoke thy wrath and indignation a∣gainst us: neither our negligence and un∣kindness, which have neither worthily esteemed, nor in our lives sufficiently ex∣pressed the sweet comfort of thy Gospel revealed unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Sonne Jesus Christ, who by offering up his body in sa∣crifice, once for all, hath made a sufficient recompence for all our sins. Have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and forgive us our offences. Teach us by thine holy Spirit, that we may rightly weigh them, and earnestly repent for the same: and so much the rather, O Lord, because that the reprobate, and such as thou hast forsaken cannot praise thee, nor call upon thy name; but the repenting heart, the sor∣rowful mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our Creator, and we be the work of thine hands: yea thou art our Father, and we thy children: thou art our Shepheard, and we thy flock: thou art our Redeemer, and we the people whom thou hast bought: thou art our God, and we thine inheritance. Correct us not therefore in thine anger, (O Lord) nei∣ther according to our deserts punish us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly affection, that all the world may know that at what time soever a sinner doth re∣pent him of him sins from the bottom of his heart, thou wilt put away his wicked∣ness out of thy remembrance, as thou hast promised by thine holy Prophets. Finally, forasmuch as it hath pleased thee to make ye night for man to rest in, as thou hast ordained him the day to tra∣vel in, grant (dear Father) that we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this mortal life: and in the mean season that we, not overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or other temp∣tations, may fully set our minds upon thee, love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee: furthermore, that our sleep be not exces∣sive or overmuch, after the insatiable de∣sires of our flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak nature, that we may be the better disposed to live in all godly conversation, to the glory of thine holy name & profit of our brethren. So be it. A godly Prayer to be said at all times. HOnour and praise be given to thee, O Lord God Almighty, most dear Fa∣ther of heaven, for all thy mercies & lo∣ving kindnesses shewed unto us, in that it hath pleased thy gracious goodness, freely and of thine own accord to elect and chuse us to salvation before the beginning of the world. And even like continual thanks be given to thee, for creating us after thine own image, for redeeming us with the precious bloud of thy dear Son, when we were utterly lost; for sanctifying us with thy holy Spirit, in the revelation & knowledge of thy holy word: for help∣ing and succouring us in all our needs & necessities: for saving us from all dangers of body & soul: for comforting us so fa∣therly in all our tribulations & persecu∣tions: for sparing us so long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. These bene∣fits, O most merciful Father, like as we acknowledg to have receaved them of thy only goodnes, even so we beseech thee for thy dear Son Jesus Christs sake, to grant us alwayes thy holy Spirit, whereby we may continually grow in thankfulness to∣wards thee, to  led into all truth, and
comforted in all adversities. O Lord strengthen our faith, kindle it more in ferventness & love towards thee, and our neighbours for thy sake. Suffer us not, most dear Father, to receive thy word any more in vain: but grant us alwaies the assistance of thy grace and holy Spirit, that in heart, word and deed, we may san∣ctifie and do worship to thy Name; help to amplifie & increase thy kingdom, and whatsoever thou sendest, we may be hear∣tily well content with thy good pleasure and will. Let us not lack the thing (O Fa∣ther) without the which we cannot serve thee: but bless thou so all the works of our hands, that we may have sufficient, and not be chargeable, but rather helpful unto others. Be merciful, O Lord to our offences: and seeing our debt is great, which thou hast forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee and our neighbours so much the more. Be thou our Father, captain and defender in all temp∣tations: hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may be delivered from all inconveniencies, and end our lives in the sanctifying and honouring of thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord and onely Saviour. Let thy mightie hand and our-stretched arm (O Lord) be still our defence: thy mercie and loving kindnes in Jesus Christ thy dear Son our salvation, thy true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort and consolation, unto the end, and in the end. So be it. Lord increase our faith. A Prayer to be said before a man begin his work. O Lord God, most merciful Father and Saviour, seeing it hath pleased thee to command us to travel that we may relieve our need, we beseech thee of thy grace so to bless our labour, that thy bles∣sing may extend unto us, without the which we are not able to continue; and that this great favour may be a witness unto us of thy bountifulness & assistance, so that thereby we may know the father∣ly care that thou hast over us. Moreover O Lord, we beseech thee that thou wouldst strengthen us with thy holy Spirit, that we may faithfully travel in our state and vocation without fraud or deceit, & that we may endevour our selvs to follow thine holy ordinance, rather then seek to satisfie our greedy affections, or desire to gain. And if it please thee (O Lord) to prosper our labour, give us a mind also to help them that have need, according to that ability that thou of thy mercy shal give us: and knowing that a good things come of thee, grant that we may humble our selvs to our neighbours & not by any means lift our selves above them which have not received so large a portion of thy mercies as thou hast given us. And if it please thee (O Lord) to trie & exercise us by greater poverty and neces∣sity then our flesh would desire, that thou wouldst yet (O Lord) grant us grace to know that thou wilt nourish us continu∣ally through thy bountiful liberality, that we be not so tempted, that we fall into distrust, but that we may patiently wait till thou fill us, not onely with corporal graces and benefits, but chiefly with thine heavenly and spiritual treasures; o the intent that we may alwayes have more ample occasion▪ to give thee thanks, and wholly to rest upon thy mercies. Hear us (O Lord) of mercy, through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, Amen. A Confession for all estates and times. O Eternal God and most mercifull Father, we confess and acknowledge here before thy divine Majestie, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and born in sin and iniquitie, so that in us there i no goodness: For the flesh evermore re∣belleth against  Spirit, whereby we con∣tinually transgress thy holy precepts and commandements, and so purchase to our selves through thy just judgment, death and damnation. Notwithstanding (O hea∣venly Father) forasmuch as we are displea∣sed with our selves, for the sins we have committed against thee, and do unfained∣ly repent us of the same, we most humly beseech thee for Jesus Christs sake, to shew thy mercie upon us, to forgive al our sin and increase thy holy Spirit in us, that w acknowledging from the bottom of ou hearts our own unrighteousness, may from henceforth not onely morcifie our sinful lusts and affections, but also brin forth such fruits as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will: not for the worthi∣ness thereof, but for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our only Saviour, whom thou hast already given an oblation and offering for our sins, and for whose sake we are certainly perswa∣ded, that thou wilt denie us nothing that we shall ask in his name, according to thy wil. For thy spirit doth assure ou consciences, that thou art our mercif Father, and so lovest us thy children through him, that nothing is able to re¦move thy heavenly grace and favour fro us. To thee therefore (O Father) with th Son and the holy Ghost, be all hono and glory, world without end. Amen. FINIS.
