C7154 [ocm]18451768 206443
❧ By the Protector. A PROCLAMATION Giving Encouragement to such as shall transplant themselves to Jamaica. WHereas the Island of Jamaica in America, is by the Providence of God, in the hands and possession of this State, the Enemy which was found upon it, being fled into the Mountains with an intention to es∣cape into other places, save such of them as do daily render themselves to our Commander in chief there, to be disposed of by him; and We being satisfied of the Goodness, Fertility, and Commodiousness for Trade and Commerce of that Island, Have resolved, by the blessing of God, to use Our best endeavours to secure, and plant the same. For which end and purpose, We have thought it necessary to publish, and make known unto the People of this Commonwealth, and especially to those of the English Islands, Plantations and Colonies in America, our Resolutions and Intentions on that behalf, as also to declare unto them the Encouragements which We have thought fit to give unto such as shall remove themselves, and their habitations into the aforesaid Island of Jamaica, within the time mentioned and expressed in these Presents. And first, concerning the securing thereof a∣gainst the Enemy, We have already upon the Island, which landed there in May last, above six thousand Soul∣diers, and the beginning of July after, we sent from hence a Regiment of eight hundred more, drawn out of Our old Regiments in England, with eight Ships of War, besides Victualers, to be added to twelve others, that were left there by General Pen, under the command of Captain Will. Goodson, all which are appointed to remain in those Seas for the Defence of the said Island; and We shall from time to time take care to send thither other, both Land and Sea Forces, that We may have alwaies in those parts, such a strength as may be able, through the blessing of God, to defend and secure it against any Attempt of the Enemy; that whereas the Planters in other Places have been at Great and vast expences at their first sitting down, and in the very beginning of their Plantati∣ons for their necessary defence, aswell against the Natives of the Countrey as other Enemies, those who shall re∣move thither, will be under the immediate Protection of this State, and so eased both of the danger and charge which other Plantations are subject to, and shall have, for their further encouragement, the terms and conditions following. 1. Those who shall transport themselves as aforesaid shall have land set forth unto them, according to the propor∣tion of twenty Acres, besides Lakes and Rivers, for every Male of twelve years old and upwards, and ten Acres for every other Male or Female, in some convenient place of the said Island; and in case any whole Plantation, That is to say, the Governours and greatest part of the people shall remove themselves, they shall be preferred in respect of the place of their sitting down, that it may be near some good Harbour commodious for Commerce and Navigation. 2. That the said Proportion of Land shall be set forth unto them, within six Weeks after notice given by them under their hands, or the hands of some of them on the behalf of the rest, unto his Highness Commander in chief, or Commissioners there, appointed for that purpose of their resolutions to remove, and of the time they in∣tend to be upon the place.
3. That they shall have Liberty for the space of ven years to hunt, take and dispose of to their own use such Horses, and other cattle as are, or shall be upon the said Island, the same not being marked by, or belonging to other Planters, subject nevertheless to such Rules and Directions as to their hunting, and taking of Horses, Cattle, and other Beasts out of their own bounds and limits, as shall from time to time be made by the Persons authorized by his Highnesse, for mannaging the affairs of the said Island. 4. That they shall hold the said Land with all Houses, Edifices, Woods, Trees, Profits and Advantages thereupon, to them and their Heirs for ever, to be held in free, and common Soccage, without any Rent for the first seven years, and then one penny an Acre, and by no other rent, tenure, or service whatsoever. 5. That after the said Proportions of Land are set forth as aforesaid, His Highness, or his Successors, upon the desire of the Owners thereof, shall by Letters Pattents, under the Great Seal of England, or by such other sure ways as shall be devised by their Counsel learned in the Law, give, grant, and confirm unto him or them, their heirs and assigns the said Proportions of Land, together with all and singular the Privileges, Iurisdictions, Profits and advantages which are intended hereby to be enjoied by them, with power to erect and create any Man∣nour or Mannors, with tenures in free and common Soccage within such Plantation, or Plantations, as shall be capable thereof. 6. That they shall hold and enjoy all, and singular Mines of Copper, Iron, Tin, or other Minerals what∣soever (excepting Gold, and Silver Mines) and all Mines of Quarries, Coal, Stone, Allum, or other Mines, whatsoever (except as aforesaid) within the circuit, Meets or bounds of the said several and respective proportions of Land; and also all Fishings, and Piscaries whatsoever upon or within any of the Lakes, Streams or Rivers within their Meets, and bounds; and also full power, and authority to man, and send forth to Sea, and unto any the Coasts, and Shores, Roads, Harbours or Creeks within or near the said Island, any Ships, Boats or other Vessels to fish for, find out, or take any Pearls, precious Stones, or Iewels therein being, and to enjoy the same to his and their own use or uses, rendering and paying to the Governour of the said Island for the time being, or to such other person or persons, for the time being, as His Highnesse shall authorize to receive the same, to his High∣ness use, the full fifth part only, and no more of all such Pearls, precious Stones and Iewels as shall be got, found, and taken, as aforesaid; and also one tenth part of all such Mettal as shall be had, found, and gained in the Mines, granted hereby to the aforesaid Planters. 7. That no Custom, Excise, Impost, or other duty shall be set or imposed for the space of three years to be accounted from the 29. day of September, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1656. upon any of their Goods and Merchandizes of the growth, production or Manufacture of the said Island, which they shall transport into this Commonwealth: Nor shall they or their Servants, without their own consent, be drawn out into the Wars, unlesse it be in case of Invasion, or Rebellion, and for the defence of the Island. 8. That they shall have power to build Walls, and raise Bulwarks and Castles upon their own Land for the defence, and security of their own plantations, and also to arme themselves, and servants, and to lead, and con∣duct them against any Enemies, or Rebels within the said Island; Subject nevertheless to such Orders, and directions as they shall on this behalf receive from the Governour or Commander in chief of the said Island for the time being. 9. That all and every person and persons, that shall hereafter happen to be born within the said Island, shall be, and shall be deemed, and accounted to be free Denizons of England, and shall have and enjoy all and every such benefits, privileges, advantages and immunities whatsoever, as any the Natives or People of England born in England now have and enjoy in England. That all such professing the Protestant Religion, who shall transport themselves into the aforesaid Island with∣in two years to be accounted from the said 29. day of September 1656. and shall make a beginning therein by trans∣porting to the said Island one third part of their number before the 29. day of September next, shall have, and enjoy the aforesaid Privileges, and Advantages. And for the more certain carrying on of this businesse, and answering Our intentions herein. We do hereby authorize and require Our Commander in chief of the said Island, for the time being, and also the aforesaid Commissioners that they take notice of the Premisses, and cause and due and effec∣tual execution of the same from time to time as there shall be occasion, according to the purport, & true meaning here∣of, for which these presents shall be their sufficient warrant. Given at White-Hall the 10. of October 1655. London Printed by Henry Hills and Iohn Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCV
