E995D 21.b.16[1] R211052 99883682 190672
AN ACT FOR AN ASSESSMENT At the Rate of Five and thirty thousand Pounds by the Moneth upon England, Six thousand Pounds by the Moneth upon Scotland, And Nine thousand Pounds by the Moneth upon Ireland, FOR THREE YEARS; FROM The twenty fourth of June 1657. For a Temporary Supply towards the Maintenance of the Armies and Navies of this COMMONVVEALTH. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom. 1656. coat of arms of the Commonwealth of England, circa 1657 LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and Iohn Field, Printers to His Highness. 1657.
Rates and Proportions, and in such maner as is hereafter expressed, that is to say; For eve∣ry Moneth of the said three years: UPon the County of Bedford, the Sum of Four hundred threescore and six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The County of Berks, the sum of Five hun∣dred forty four pounds eight shillings and eleven pence. The County of Bucks, the sum of six hun∣dred forty one pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The County of Cambridge, the sum of five hundred fifty one pounds and five shillings. The Isle of Ely, the sum of one hundred four∣score and three pounds and fifteen shillings. The County of Chester, the sum of three hundred fourscore and five pounds. The City and County of the City of Chester, the sum of forty two pounds fifteen shillings and seven pence. The County of Cornwal, the sum of eight hundred and sixteen pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The County of Cumberland, the sum of fifty four pounds. The County of Derby, the sum of four hun∣dred threescore and six pounds thirteen shil∣lings and four pence. The County of Devon, the sum of one thou∣sand five hundred and one pounds seventeen shillings and nine pence. The City and County of the City of Exon, the sum of fifty three pounds thirteen shillings and four pence.
The county of Dorset, the sum of six hun∣dred fifty five pounds fifteen shillings and three pence. The town and county of Pool, the sum of Five pounds and seven shillings. The county of Durham, the sum of Three∣score and sixteen pounds seventeen shillings and two pence. The county of York, with the city and coun∣ty of the city of York, the sum of One thousand five hundred twenty one pounds fourteen shil∣lings and five pence. The town and county of Kingston upon Hull, the sum of Thirty three pounds sixteen shil∣lings and eight pence. The county of Essex, the sum of One thou∣sand seven hundred and fifty pounds. The county of Glocester, the sum of Eight hundred and thirteen pounds three shillings and four pence. The city and county of the city of Glocester, the sum of Fourscore and one pounds five shil∣lings and seven pence. The county of Hereford, the sum of Five hun∣dred fourscore and three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Hertford, the sum of Seven hundred pounds. The county of Huntington, the sum of Three hundred and eleven pounds two shillings and three pence. The county of Kent, with the city and coun∣ty of the city of Canterbury, the sum of One thousand eight hundred twenty seven pounds fifteen shillings and seven pence. The county of Lancaster, the sum of Four
hundred threescore and six pounds thirteen shil∣lings and four pence. The county of Leicester, the sum of Five hundred forty four pounds eight shillings and ten pence. The county of Lincoln, with the city and county of the city of Lincoln, the sum of One thousand three hundred threescore and one pounds two shillings and five pence. The city of London, the sum of Two thou∣sand three hundred thirty three pounds six shil∣lings and eight pence. The county of Middlesex, with the city and liberty of Westminster, the sum of Eight hun∣dred fourscore and fourteen pounds eight shil∣lings and eleven pence. The county of Monmouth, the sum of Two hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence. The county of Northampton, the sum of Se∣ven hundred pounds. The county of Notingham, the sum of Four hundred fifty one pounds twelve shillings and two pence. The town and county of the town of No∣tingham, the sum of Fifteen pounds one shilling and two pence. The county of Norfolk, the sum of One thousand eight hundred and twelve pounds four shillings and five pence. The city and county of the city of Norwich, the sum of Fourscore and thirteen pounds, six shillings and eight pence. The county of Northumberland, the sum of Fourscore and nine pounds nineteen shillings and eleven pence.
The town of Newcastle, the sum of seventeen pounds fifteen shillings and ten pence. The county of Oxon, the sum of five hun∣dred threescore and three pounds seventeen shil∣lings and nine pence. The county of Rutland, the sum of one hun∣dred thirty six pounds two shillings and three pence. The county of Salop, the sum of six hundred threescore and one pounds two shillings and two pence. The county of Stafford, the sum of four hun∣dred fifty nine pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The city and county of the city of Litchfield, the sum of seven pounds. The county of Somerset, the sum of one thou∣sand three hundred threescore and one pounds two shillings and three pence. The city and county of the city of Bristol, the sum of fourscore and five pounds eleven shillings and one peny. The county of Southampton, with the town and county of Southampton, the sum of one thousand and eleven pounds two shillings and two pence. The county of Suffolk, the sum of one thou∣sand eight hundred twenty seven pounds fif∣teen shillings and seven pence. The county of Surrey, the sum of seven hun∣dred fourscore and two pounds twelve shil∣lings and nine pence. The Borough of Southwark, the sum of four∣score and twelve pounds seven shillings and three pence. The county of Suffex, the sum of nine hun∣dred
fifty two pounds fifteen shillings and se∣ven pence. The county of Warwick, with the city and county of the city of Coventry, the sum of six hundred twenty two pounds four shillings and five pence. The county of Worcester, the sum of five hun∣dred fourscore and eleven pounds two shillings and two pence. The city and county of the city of Worcester, the sum of Thirty one pounds two shillings and three pence. The county of Wilts, the sum of Nine hun∣dred threescore and twelve pounds four shil∣lings and five pence. The county of Westmerland, the sum of thirty six pounds nineteen shillings and eight pence. The Isle of Anglesey, the sum of threescore and seven pounds seventeen shillings and two pence. The county of Brecknock, the sum of One hundred and fourscore pounds sixteen shillings and eight pence. The county of Cardigan, the sum of One hundred and six pounds and fifteen shillings. The county of Carmarthen, the sum of One hundred threescore and sixteen pounds three shillings and four pence. The county of Carnarvan, the sum of One hundred and one pounds two shillings and two pence. The county of Denbigh, the sum of One hun∣dred thirty six pounds two shillings and three pence. The county of Flint, the sum of threescore
and sevon pounds seventeen shillings and three pence. The County of Glamorgan, the sum of two hundred twenty nine pounds eight shillings and ten pence. The County of Merioneth, the sum of three∣score and two pounds four shillings and five pence. The County of Montgomery, the sum of one hundred forty seven pounds fifteen shillings and six pence. The County of Pembrook, the sum of two hundred and three pounds. The County of Radnor, the sum of one hun∣dred twenty seven pounds three shillings and four pence. The Town of Haverford-VVest, the sum of se∣ven pounds five shillings and ten pence. The Town of Berwick, the sum of two pounds eighteen shillings and four pence. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Commissioners and other persons nominated and mentioned in an Act of this present Parliament (Entituled, An Act for an Assessment upon England, at the rate of Threescore thousand pounds by the Moneth, for Three Moneths, from the 25th day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven, to the Four and twentieth day of June then next ensuing) and such others as are hereby, or shall hereafter be added and Au∣thorized, Shall be, and are hereby Authorized, appointed and continued respectively; And shall have, use, exercise, and put in Execution all and every the Powers and Authorities for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying, and Pay∣ing
the said Three Years Assessments hereby appointed to be Assessed and paid, which they had and were Impowered and Appointed to use and exercise by the said recited Act, for the Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Payment of the aforesaid Three Moneths Assessment; And that the several Rules, Directions, Clauses and Proviso's mentioned and con∣tained in the said recited Act, and the Powers and Authorities thereby given to all and every the persons therein named or mentioned, shall endure, and have continuance until the said Three years Assessment shall be fully and due∣ly Collected, Levied, and paid in, according to the true intent and meaning of this Act. For the better effecting whereof, It is here∣by further Enacted, That the said several and respective Commissioners hereby appointed and continued for the said several and respe∣ctive counties, cities and towns, shall meet to∣gether at the most common and usual place of meeting in each of the said counties, cities and towns respectively, for their first general meet∣ings, on or before every second day of July, and every second day of January; And for their se∣cond general meetings, on or before every sixteenth day of July, and every sixteenth day of January in every of the said Years: And the said Commissioners, or so many of them as shall then and there respectively at∣tend and be present, shall cause this present Act to be put in execution, for the ordering, direct∣ing, managing, levying, and bringing in the Assessment by this Act required; so as the full sum charged upon each Division, Hundred, Parish, and Place for the first three Moneths
Assessments of each year, may be fully Asses∣sed, Levied, Collected and paid in to the respe∣ctive Receivers, on or befare the First day of September: The second Three Moneths Assess∣ments, on or before the First day of December: The third Three Moneths Assessments, on or before the First day of March: And the last Three Moneths Assessments, on or before the First day of June, in every year, during the said three years respectively. Provided always, and it is hereby further Enacted, That the Duplicates of Assessments by the fore-recited Act required to be delivered to the respective Receivers of each County, City, Town or Place, to be by him the said Receiver transmitted to the Lords Commis∣sioners of the Treasury, shall by him the said Receiver be transmitted into His Highness Court of Exchequer at Westminster, together with the Names, Surnames, and places of abode of the respective Receivers, Collectors, and Sub-collectors of such Assesments, there to remain upon Record. Provided nevertheless, and t Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Tha case during the continuance of this present Parliament, any other more equal way of raising the said Monethly Assessment of Thirty five thousand pounds by the Moneth hereby appointed shall be found, and the Parliament shall make a Declaration to that purpose, That then such part of the said Assessment as shall be then uncollected, shall be Taxed, Assessed, Col∣lected, Levied and Paid, according to such pro∣portions upon the respective Counties and Places, or in such way, and for such time of the
said three years, as the Parliament shall by such Declaration direct and set down, and not according to the proportions in this Act ex∣pressed, This Act or any thing therein con∣tained to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing. Provided always, That neither this Act nor the said Act for the said Assessment of Six∣ty thousand pounds by the Moneth, or any thing therein contained, shall extend or be con∣strued to authorize or impower the said Com∣missioners▪ or any person or persons whatso∣ever, to Raise or Levy the said Tax hereby Assessed or Taxed, or any part thereof, by Free Quarter, or by Quartering of Soldiers, Any thing in this Act, or in the said Act for the said Monethly Assessment to the contrary not∣withstanding. And be it further Enacted, That the one Moyety of the Assessment charged upon the County of Cardigan, in an Act of this present Parliament, Entituled, An Act for an Assessment upon England at the Rate of Sixty thousand pounds by the Moneth, hree moneths, from the 25th day of March, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, to the Twenty fourth day of Iune then next ensuing, shall be onely Levied, Collected and Paid▪ and the other Moyety of the said Three Moneths Assessment, toge∣ther with the Moyety of all former Assessments char∣ged upon the said County of Cardigan, since the 25ht of December, One thousand six hundred forty nine, and remaining in arrear, shall be wholly remitted. And the said County of Cardigan shall be, and is hereby Declared to be fully acquitted and dis∣charged therefrom, Any thing in the said Act, or former Acts or Ordinances, or Orders and
Declarations to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And it is hereby Enacted, That the Sum of Six thousand pounds Sterling by the month, shall be Taxed, Levied, Collected and Paid in Scotland for the space of Three years, commen∣cing the 24th day of June, in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and se∣ven, out of the several counties, cities, towns and places in Scotland. according to the several and respective proportions after mentioned, That is to say; For the county of Aberdeen, for every Moneth of the said Three Years, the Sum of three hundred thirty and nine pounds sixteen shil∣lings and seven pence. For the Borough of Aberdeen, threescore and six pounds twelve shillings. For the county of Aire, three hundred twenty and two pounds ten shillings and five pence. For the Borough of Aire, thirteen pounds nineteen shillings nine pence three farthings. For the town of Irwing, nine pounds nineteen shillings and eight pence. For the county of Argile, one hundred three∣score and two pounds five shillings and ten pence three farthings. The county of Bamf, fourscore and fifteen pounds seventeen shillings. The town of Bamf, three pounds. The town of Collen, one pound and ten shil∣lings. The county of Berwick, two hundred thirty four pounds eight shillings and five pence. The town of Lander, three pounds nine shil∣lings
and seven pence farthing. The county of Bute, five and twenty pounds fourteen shillings and two farthings. The borough of Rothsay, three pounds. The county of Cathnes, nine and forty pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence. The county of Cleckmannen, nine and twen∣ty pounds seven shillings and three pence far∣thing. The county of Cromart, five pounds thirteen shillings and nine pence. The county of Dumbarton, threescore and three pounds fourteen shillings and two pence. The borough of Dumbarton, six pounds. The county of Dumfrees, two hundred twen∣ty and six pounds one shilling and five pence. The borough of Dumfrees, sixteen pounds and thirteen shillings. The borough of Sanchar, one pound. The borough of Lockmaben, one pound. The borough of Annen, one pound. The county of Edenburgh, two hundred sixty five pounds six shillings and six pence. The city of Edenburgh, three hundred thirty four pounds and twelve shillings. The county of Elgin, fourscore and eight pounds five shillings and five pence. The borough of Elgin, six pounds thirteen shillings and two pence. The borough of Forras, three pounds. The county of Fife, four hundred and nine∣teen pounds seventeen shillings and ten pence. The county Kinross, eleven pounds three shillings and two pence.
The Borough of St. Andrews, thirty three pounds and six shillings. The Borough of Dyssert, thirteen pounds nineteen shillings and ten pence. The Borough of Kirkaldie, four and twen∣ty pounds eight shillings and five pence. The Borough of Cowper, ten pounds nine∣teen shillings and seven pence farthing. The Borough or Anstruther Easter, seven pounds nineteen shillings and seven pence half peny. The Borough of Pitteinwein, six pounds thirteen shillings and two pence two far∣things. The Borough of Dumfernling, eight pounds fifteen shillings and three pence. The Borough of Creil, ten pounds and nineteen shillings. The Borough of Kinghorn, four pounds and ten shillings. The Borough of Anstruther Wester, three pounds and nine shillings. The Borough of Innerkething, four pounds nineteen shillings and nine pence. The Borough of Kilrein, one pound ten shillings. The Borough of Burnt-Island, ten pounds nineteen shillings and nine pence. The County of Forfar, two hundred seven∣ty and two pounds sixteen shillings and three pence. The Borough of Forfar, two pounds one shilling and a peny. The Borough of Dundee, threescore and nine pounds eighteen shillings and six pence farthing.
The Borough of Arbroth, Four pounds and ten shillings. The Borough of Montross, Nineteen pounds nineteen shillings and seven pence two far∣things. The Borough of Birchin, Six pounds four∣teen shillings and six pence. The County of Hadington, Two hundred thirty and one pounds seventeen shillings and two pence. The Borough of Hadington, Eighteen pounds and three pence farthing. The Borough of Dumbar, Ten pounds nine∣teen shillings and seven pence farthing. The Borough of North-Berwick, Two pounds six shillings and ten pence. The county of Innernes, Two hundred and fifteen pounds eighteen shillings and three pence. The Borough of Innernes, Four and twenty pounds nineteen shillings and five pence. The Borough of Train, four pounds nine∣teen shillings and seven pence two far∣things. The Borough of Dingwal, Nineteen shil∣lings and two pence two farthings. The County of Kincardine, Fourscore and two pounds and one peny. The County of Lanrick, Two hundred and sixty three pounds seventeen shillings and ten pence. The Borough of Lanrick, Six pounds. The City of Glasgow, Threescore and four pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence.
The Burrough of Rugline, Two pounds. The County of Linlithgow, One hundred five pounds sixteen shillings six pence. The Burrough of Queensferry, Four pounds one shilling. The County of Narn, Twenty three pounds and three pence. The Burrough of Narn, Two pound one shilling and two pence. The County of Ortney and Zetland, Four∣score and ten pounds fourteen shillings and two pence. The County of Pebles, Fourscore and six pounds seventeen shillings and six pence. The Burrough of Pebles, Four pounds nine∣teen shillings and ten pence two farthings. The County of Perth, Four hundred and nineteen pounds seventeen shillings and ten pence. The Burrough of Coleross, Four pounds ten shillings. The County of Ranthrow, One hundred and twelve pounds fifteen shillings and seven pence. The Burrough of Ranthrow, Three pounds eighteen shillings and eleven pence. The County of Roxburrough, Three hundred and seven pounds four shillings and nine pence two farthings. The Burrough of Jedburgh, Eight pounds eighteen shillings and five pence. The County of Sterling, One hundred fourty six pounds three shillings eight pence two far∣things. The Burrough of Sterling, Ten pounds nine∣teen shillings and nine pence.
The County of Salkraig, Threescore and fif∣teen pounds seven shillings and five pence. The Burrough of Salkraig, Six pounds thir∣teen shillings and two pence. The County of Sotherland, Eight and twenty pounds. The Burrough of Dornock, One pound nine shillings. The County of Wigton and Kirkudbright, Two hundred twenty and three pounds five shillings and six pence. The Burrough of Wigton, Six pounds nine∣teen shillings and eleven pence. The Burrough of Kirkudbright, Eight pounds and four pence. The Borrough of White-horn, Two pounds. The Burrough of New Galloway, Ten shil∣lings. The Burrough of Linlithgow, Seventeen pounds sixteen shillings and ten pence. The Burrough of Perth, Nine and thirty pounds nineteen shillings and three pence. And that the several and respective Commis∣sioners and other persons mentioned, named, or Authorized in one Act of this present Parlia∣ment, Entituled, An Act for the raising of Fifteen thousand pounds Sterling in Scotland, and such others as are herein, or shall hereafter be named by this present Parliament shall be, and are here∣by Authorized and Impowred in like manner, with the like Authorities and Powers for the putting in execution this present Act, to the in∣tents and purposes aforesaid. And that all the respective Authorities, Powers, Clauses, Mat∣ters and Provisions mentioned in the said Act for Taxing, Levying and paying the afore∣said
Sum of fifteen thousand pounds, shall be, and are hereby revived and made of full force, Authority and virtue, for the bringing in the Assessment by this Act appointed and di∣rected. And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the time of the meetings of the respective Commissioners in their respective Counties, Cities, Towns, and Places, and the respective times and daies of Collecting, Le∣vying, and paying in the respective Sums, by this Act appointed to be Collected and Paid, shall be, and are hereby declared to be, the same that are appointed in this present Act in relati∣on to the Assessment of England. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the sum of Nine thousand pounds by the Moneth, shall be Assessed, Tax∣ed, Collected, Levyed, and Paid in and out of Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belong∣ing, for and during the Term of three years, commencing the Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and seven, and ending the Four and twentieth of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty, according to the Rules and Proportions hereafter mentioned; That is to say, for every three Moneths, (ac∣counting twelve Moneths to the Year,) Vpon the County of Dublin, the sum of One thousand and eighty pounds. Vpon the City and County of the City of Dublin, the sum of seven hundred and twenty pounds. Vpon the County of Kildare, the sum of Five hundred and ninety pounds.
Vpon the County of Catherlogh, the sum of Two hundred pounds. Vpon the Kings County, the sum of Two hun∣dred and fourty pounds. Vpon the Queens County, the sum of Three hundred and sixty pounds. Vpon the County of Longford, the sum of One hundred and five pounds. Vpon the County of East Meath, the sum of One thousand nine hundred and three pounds eighteen shillings. Vpon the County of West Meath, the sum of Five hundred seventy three pounds. Vpon the County of Kilkenny, the sum of One thousand four hundred eighty two pounds ten shillings. Vpon the County of Wexford, the sum of six hundred pounds. Vpon the County of Wicklo, the sum of One hundred and twenty pounds. Vpon the County of Louth, with the Town of Tredagh, the sum of Five hundred and ninety pounds twelve shillings. Vpon the County of Limrick, with the City and County thereof, the sum of nine hundred fifty six pounds sixteen shillings. Vpon the County of Cork, with the City and County thereof, the summe of three thousand three hundred sixty pounds eighteen shillings. Vpon the County of Waterford, with the City and County thereof, the sum of One thousand one hundred and twenty pounds. Vpon the County of Clare, the sum of seven hundred forty five pounds four shillings. Vpon the County of Kerry, the sum of One hundred and eighty pounds.
Vpon the County of Tipperary, including Holicross, the sum of One thousand six hundred and ten pounds. Vpon the County of Dovegol, the sum of One thousand one hundred forty three pounds. Vpon the County of Tirone, the sum of Five hundred and fifty pounds. Vpon the County of Fermahagh, the sum of Three hundred pounds. Vpon the County of Cavan, the sum of One hundred seventy three pounds. Vpon the County of Monham, the sum of One hundred fifty five pounds two shillings. Vpon the County of Antrim and the Town of Carricfergus, the sum of One thousand seven hundred sixty three pounds. Vpon the County of Down, the sum of One thousand four hundred sixty six pounds. Vpon the County of Ardmah, the sum of three hundred and fourty pounds. Vpon the County of London Derry, and the City and County thereof, and the Town and Barony of Colerane, the sum of One thousand and twelve pounds. Vpon the County of Galloway, the sum of Two thousand and sixty pounds. Vpon the County of Roscomon, the sum of Five hundred thirty three pounds. Vpon the County of Sligo, the sum of Three hundred and sixty pounds. Vpon the County of Mayo, the sum of Four hundred seventy seven pounds. Vpon the County of Leitrim, the sum of One hundred and thirty pounds.
And to the end the said three years Assess∣ment, may be more speedily, effectually, equally, and indifferently made and perfected; Be it further Enacted by the Authority a∣foresaid; That the Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland, or any three or more of them, shall be, and are hereby Authorized, and required forth∣with, to nominate, constitute, and appoint, such Commissioners of Assessments, Collectors, and Receivers, for the Assessing, Taxing, Collect∣ing, Levying, Receiving and Paying in the said three years Assessments, with the most equality, and indifferency that may be, both in relation to real and personal Estates, and such other thing and things therein, to do, execute, and perform, or order, direct, or cause to be done, executed, and performed, as they the said Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland, or so many of them, as shall act in the premisses, upon, and according to the Authority aforesaid, shall think meet, necessary and convenient. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said three years Assessments be paid into the hands of the Receiver General of Ire∣land, according to the Rule following, that is to say, at the end of every three Moneths, during the said three years, the sum of Twenty seven thousand pounds, being three Moneths Assess∣ments. Provided alwaies, and be it Enacted, That the Taxes or Assessments now raised, or to be raised, by vertue of an Ordinance of His High∣ness the Lord Protector, with the Advice of His Council, bearing date the three and twen∣tieth day of June, One thousand six hundred
fifty four, Entituled, An Ordinance for the further encouragement of the Adventurers for lands in Ireland, and of the Souldiers and other Planters there, shall not be Assessed, Taxed, Collected, Levied, or Paid for any longer time, then untill the four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty seven, Any thing in the said Or∣dinance to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing.
Commissioners added to the former Com∣missioners for the Monethly Assessment; For the County of Bedford. Major General Bridge, John Walker, Gent. Berks. General Desbrow. Bucks. Edmund Stafford Esq; Cambridge. Hezekia Haines Esquire, William Underwood Esquire, Alderman of London, Devereux Martin Esq; William Audley Gent. Isle of Ely. Laurence Oxborough, Samuel Fortrey, Hamond Ward, Robert Hampson Esquires, John Childe the younger, Gent. Anthony Balam, James Edwards the elder,  Edwards eldest Son of William Edwards deceased. Cornwall. Thomas Burrell Esq; Derby. Henry Sacheverel Esq; George Harpur Esq; Devon. Thomas Pyne Esq; James Pearse Esq; Capt. Francis Roll, John Were Esq; Robert Land Gent. For the City and County of Exeter. The Mayor and Sheriff of the City and County for the time being.
Dorset. General Desberow, Edward Hooper, Robert Co∣ker, Dennis Bond, William Laurence, Robert Tyd∣derleight, John Newburgh, Giles Stoodly, Richard Newman, Edmund Butler, Esquires. Durham. Colonel Ralph Cobbet, Thomas Mitford, Richard Beke Esquires. Essex. Thomas Peek, John Shaw, Esqs: Sir Robert Kemp, William Kemp Esq; Richard Hurlakenden Esq; Walter Luckin Gent. Edward Hadsley Gent. John Vicars Gent. John Fenning Gent. Gloucester. William Dutton, Martin Noel, Edmund Dunch, Thomas Chamberlain, Don Hodges, Esqs: Nicholas Web Gent. Hereford. William Botterel, Higgings James, Esquires. For the City of Hereford. Richard Lyd. Hertford. Colonel Philip Twisleton, Samuel Desburrow Esq; Edward Brisco, Thomas, Arris, Esqs Huntington. Henry Pickering Esq; Robert Hampson Esq;
Kent. Philip Parker, Edward Honiwood, William Both∣by, Esqs: Robert Seyliard Gent. John Seyliard of Pen∣shurst Esq; Thomas Monnins, Thomas Wilton of Do∣ver, Robert Maskal, Richard Rabson, Thomas Harri∣son, Ralph Suckley of Cheveney, John Brown of Or∣pington, Peter Peak of Ash, Martin Pike, Frere of Renham, Richard Lancaster, Peter Hayman, John Wroth, Alexander Roberts, Jacob Turner, Tho∣mas Young of Darente. For the City of Canterbury. Vincent Den, Captain Jones, Robert Maskal. Lancaster. Colonel Edward Salmon. Leicester. John Sherman, Thomas Goddard, Anthony Major, Gent. For the County of Lincoln. Colonel Philip Twisleton, Daniel Rhodes, Major Heaton, Francis Empson, John Askham. For the City of London. Griffith Bodurda Esq; Jeremiah Rouston, John Blackwell the elder Esq; Midlesex. Richard Newman Esq; Elia Palmer, John Falkner, Esqs: Morris Gothin, Edmund Gage, Sir Thomas Vi∣ner, Deputy William Hobson, William Kiffin, John Miller, Sir John Dethick Knight.
Westminster. John Stone Esq; Jarvace Bennet, Col. Stephen Vinthorp, Christopher Lyster, Kellway Guider, Gent. Nottingham. Col. Philip Twisleton. For the County of Norfolk. John Reynes, Simond Smith, Gabriel Barber, Sa∣muel Prentice, John Pike, Owen Palmer, Bernard Ut∣ber, jun. Thomas Manfield, Robert Waters, Thomas Dixon, John Smith, Thomas Dun, Laurence Oxbo∣rough, Clement Spilman, Samuel Smith, Robert Lane, Edward Barber, and John Spilman, James Long, Matthew Long, Thomas Green of Lyn Merchant. For the City of Norwich. Samuel Pulke, Richard Brown, Giles Wood. For the County of Northampton. Henry Pickering Esq; Williams Rainsborow Esq; William Say Esq; Robert Henley Esq; Baldwin Arthur Esq; Richard Robins Gent. Miles Fleet∣wood Esq; Arthur Samuel Esq; William Garret Gent. Northumberland. John Hearon, Thomas Boultflower. Salop. William Jones Esq; Recorder of Shrewsbury.
For the City and County of the City of Bristol. William Can, Richard Baldman, Robert Purnel, Thomas Ellis, Esqs: Southampton. George Whither of Hall, Esq; Somerset. Sir John Coppleston Knight, Thomas Allen Gent. John Web Esq; Staffordshire. John Birch of Cannock. Suffolk. Sir Edmund Bacon Baronet, Robert Lane, Ro∣bert Stewart, William Underwood Alderman of Lon∣don, Arthur Samuel, John Trenchard, Esqs: George Gascoign, John Hurst, Gent. John Brandling Esq Essington, John Howis, Gent. George Reve Esq; Ro∣bert Gurdon, John Shepheard, Esqs: Roger Kerrington Gent. Robert Knowls. Sussex. The Mayor of Chichester for the time being, Alexander Wilson, John Clerk, Esqs: Edmund Blake, Thomas Bernard of Petworth, Christopher Coles, William Baldwin, Gent. William Yalden the young∣er Esq; Nicholas Dullender Gent. Francis Selwin Esq; George Taileur, George Hide, Thomas Southton. Surrey. William Daniel, Samuel Rous, Esq; Charls Craiker Gent. Richard Downs Esq;
Warwick. Thomas Rawlins Esq; Samuel Eboral, William Fetherston. Wilts. Edward Bainton, John Bulkley, Esq; Henry Hun∣gerford, George Cooper, John Ernley, Richard Grub∣bam How, George Grubbam How, Isaac Burges, Ed∣ward Duke, William Stone, Robert Good, Henry Eyre, Thomas Bayley, Peter Legay, Edward St. Barbe, James Abbot, Humphrey Ditton the Elder, John Randal, Richard Phelps, Thomas Wyat, John Ste∣phens of the Devizes, Robert Eyre, Francis Bennet, John Frowd of Sedg-hill, Michael Beach, Ephraim Westley, Francis Craddock, John Ridonte, Thomas Ray, Thomas Escours of Pinkney, Esqs: Westmerland. Thomas Sands Esq; Captain Sedgwick. Hull. Lieutenant Colonel Richard Elton, Captain George Westby, John Northend, Robert Berrier, Wil∣liam Masters. Breccon. Hoo Games, William Morgan, William Jones of Buckland, Esqs John Games of Canvigan, Hugh Williams, Gent.
Carmarthen. John Vaughan of Llanelly, Henry Middleton, Humphrey Brown, William Lloid, Morgan Jones, John Vaughan of Derllysk, Richard Prothero, Jenkin Daukins, Esqs Carnarvan. Sir William Williams Baronet, William Vaugh∣an, William Griffith Esqs: William Glyne of Llyer Esq; Griffith Vaughan Gent. Denbigh. John Jeffreys, John Lloyd, Edward Puleston, Ed∣ward Morris, Peter Moyle, Esqs: John Price. Glamorgan. Sir Edward Mansel Baronet, David Evans Gent. Edmund Gamage, Robert Thomas, Esqs: Pembroke. Reeve Williams Esq; Mervin Cannon, Rowland Gething, John Wingfield, Esqs: LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.
