E2095 [ocm]11998118 196583
AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; To inable the Right Honourable, EDVVARD, Earle of MANCHESTER, To put in execution all former Ordinances for Sequestring Delinquents Estates: Weekly Assessements: The fift and twentieth parts: Contribution for IRELAND: And other Ordinances for Raising of Monies with∣in the Associated counties of Lincoln, North∣folk, Suffolk, Essex, Hertford, Cam∣bridge, Huntingdon, Ile of Ely, and City of Norwich. 17. Nov. 1643. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordi∣nance be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. MARCH 7. 1643. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the Middle-Temple. 1643.
17. Nov. 1643. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons Assembled in Parliament, To enable the Right Honorable, Edward Earl of Manchester, to put in execution all former Ordi∣nances for sequestring Delinquents estates: Weekly Assessments: the Fift and Twentieth parts: Con∣tribution for Ireland: And other Ordinances for raising of monies within the Associated counties of Northfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hertford, Cam∣bridge, Huntington, Isle of Ely, and City of Norwich. WHereas the associated counties of Lin∣coln, Northfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Hert∣ford, Cambridge, Huntington, the Isle of Ely, and citie of Norwich, have been at great and excessive charges, in maintaining severall
forces both of Horse and Foot, in preserving the said Counties, and in withstanding, resist∣ing and repelling, the severall attempts, hosti∣lities and outrages done and committed by the Popish Army, now under the command of the Earle of New-castle. And whereas severall Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament, for the seising & sequestring of the estates of De∣linquents, the weekly assessement; the assessing raising, and levying, the fifth and twentieth parts: contributions for Ireland, and other Ordinances for raising of monies within the said associated Counties, have not been put in that due and speedy execution as the necessity and urgencie of the present affaires do require. It is ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled; That Edward Earle of Manchester, Major Generall of the said asso∣ciated Counties, do forthwith take some effe∣ctuall and speedy course for the better & pre∣sent execution of the said Ordinances. And in case where the Deputy Lievtenants and Com∣mittees, or any of them, in any of the said Counties are, or have been negligent and re∣misse in the due execution of the said Ordinan∣ces; that in such Counties, Cities, Townes,
and Divisions, within the said associated counties: the said Earle of Manchester shall and may nominate and appoint such person and persons within the said counties, respe∣ctively, as his Lordship shall hold fitting, who shall and may assesse, collect, and levie, the severall summes of money to be raised within the said severall counties, by vertue of the said Ordinances, as in the said Ordinances is mentioned and declared: and such person and persons so to be nominated, by the said Earle of Manchester, to have the same power to all intent and purposes as the Committees mentioned in the said Ordinances now have. And it is further ordered, that two parts of the summe or summes of money to be levied, had and received of any person, by vertue of the said Ordinance, for the sequestring of De∣linquents estates, raised, or to be raised, by any Warrant or Order, or Direction from the said Earle of Manchester, shall be forthwith after the levying and payment thereof, sent up and paid to the Treasurers at Guildhall London, for such use and uses as by the said Ordinances is appointed. And the third part of every such
summe or summes, to be paid to such Trea∣surer and Treasurers within the said severall and respective Counties, as his Lordship shall nominate and appoint; and to be imployed for the maintaining of such Forces as are rai∣sed, or to be raised in the said Associated coun∣ties, and are in actuall service in such Garri∣son and places, as by his Lordship the said Earl of Manchester, within the said Associated counties, or elsewhere is or shall be appointed. And all other sums of money to bee raised by vertue of the said other Ordinances, to be imployed as in the Ordinance is limited and declared. And it is further ordered, that in case where any distresse of any goods is had, levyed, and made, for the raising of any summe by vertue of the said Ordinances, that the Collector, Of∣ficer, and other Persons for taking such di∣stresse, shall and may from time to time receive such summe and summes of money, not ex∣ceeding twelve pence in the pound, as the said Earl of Manchester shall appoint, for and towards charges, in levying the sum, to be paid and levyed by the said person and per∣sons, by way of distresse and sale of goods, up∣on
whom such distresse is had and taken over and above the summe assessed upon them, and to be paid by them. And further, that the said Earl of Manchester, or such as his Lordship shall appoint, shall and may take account of all Treasurers, Collectors, chief Constables, and others, in whose hands any money now is raised by vertue of the said Ordinances, of the Bill of 400000 pounds: And that all such summe and summes of money be forthwith paid unto such Treasurers at London or else∣where, as by the said severall Ordinances and Act of Parliament is limited and declared. And lastly, it is ordered that the Treasurers to be appointed by the said Earl of Manche∣ster, do from time to time, upon notice to them given, give account of all monies by them re∣ceived and disbursed, to such person and per∣sons as from time to time shall be nominated and appointed by the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations. FINIS.
