E1943 [ocm]12288826 197552
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament assembled; For the better observation of the Monethly FAST. Die Mercurii 24. August. 1642. It is this day Ordered that this Ordinance for the better observing of the Fast, bee forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Laurence Blaiklock.  August .26. 1642.
An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT assembled. WHereas the Kings most excellent Ma∣jesty, upon the request of the Lords and Commons in this present Parlia∣ment assembled, and by and with their advice and consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of his good subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland; (that there might be a generall humiliation of all the estates of this Kingdom before Almighty
God in Fasting and Prayer) was graciously pleased to command the keeping of a Monethly Fast; and to the end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to leave such without excuse, as should not duly keep and observe the same) did afterward by his Proclamation of the 8th of Ianuary 1641. appoint that the same should bee generally, publikely, and so∣lemnly holden, and kept, as well by abstinence from food, as by publike prayers, preaching, and hearing of the Word of God, and other Religious and ho∣ly duties, in all Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches, and Chappels▪ within the Kingdom of Eng∣land and Dominion of Wales (without any exception) on the last Wensday of every Moneth, to continue during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which his Majesty did straitly charge and com∣mand, should be reverently and devoutly performed by all his Subjects, as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and would avoyd his heavie indignation against this land and people; and upon paine of such punish∣ments as may justly bee inflicted upon all such as shall contemne or neglect so religious a work and dutie. And whereas the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, have received divers informati∣ons from severall parts of this Kingdome and Domi∣nion of Wales, of the great neglect of the due obser∣vation and keeping of the said Fast upon the dayes ap∣pointed,
and of the profanations of the same, by many irreligious, ill-affected, loose, and scandalous persons, as well of the Clergie as others, who are so farre from afflicting their soules and loosing the bands of wickednesse, as that they provoke the wrath of Al∣mighty God, and make so pious a meanes to procure his blessings, the occasion of greater Judgements. For the prevention whereof for the time to come, the Lords and Commons doe order, declare, ordaine, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate and Parish Churches, and Chappels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, (without any exception) upon every Lords day, next and immediately before any the dayes appointed for the said publike Fast, the Parson, Vicat, Curate, or Minister, that upon that day shall Officiate, or exercise in any of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches or Chap∣pels, shall give publike notice in every of the said Cathedralls, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or Chap∣pels respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing, imme∣diately after Sermon, or prayer ended in the forenoone, before the Congregation bee dismissed, earnestly ex∣horting and perswading all the people to the solemne due keeping and religious observation of the whole day appointed for the said Fast, and that they would repaire to some Church or Chappell, there diligently and reverently to attend all such holy duties as shall be used in the observance of the same; that they fore∣beare
to use all manner of sports and pastimes whatsoe∣ver, & their ordinary Trades and Callings upon the said day, as well Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Waynmen, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters▪ Shop-keepers, Labou∣rers; or any others using any Art, Trade, Mystery or mannuall Occupation whatsoever, and that all Vintners, Taverners, Ale-house-keepers, and Keepers of Victu∣alling-houses, doe forbeare to keep open their doores, Bulks, or Shops, or to sell or utter (except in cases of extreame necessitie) any Wine, Beare, Ale, or Victuall, till the publike exercises and religious duties of that day in the respective Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches and Chappels be past and over. And lastly, all and every the Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, Constables, Church-Wardens, and other Officers inhabiting or residing within the limits or precincts of any such Cathedrall, Collegiate Parish Church, or Chappell, are hereby required to take speciall notice as well of such Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to officiate in any of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chappels, upon any such day appointed for the said Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do the same, or not do or cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast day at the time and in manner as aforesaid, and forthwith to return their names and the names of all such (from time to time) as
shall wilfully offend herein, in contempt of the Lawes, his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, unto some one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the County where such offence is, or shall be committed, that some speedy course may be taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein according to the Lawes. FINIS. Die Mercurii 24 August. 1642. IT is this day Ordered, that this Ordinance for the better observing of the Fast be forth∣with printed and published. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
