E3562 99827505 206861
AN EXACT ACCOUNT Of His Majesties Progress From his First Landing in IRELAND, To his Arrival at Hilsbrough near the Newry. Together with the Protestants Address. Lisburne, June 12. 1690. WE expect the King with Impatience, the Castle of Belfast, and the Castle of Hils∣brough, are prepared in the best manner to receive his Majesty; the streets of Belfast are daily swept, and not a Horse permitted to go into any Stable there, but all kept clean for the King and his Retinue. One Captain Smith, formerly of Dundalke, hath, by order of the General, been with a party of Horse from the Newry, to review the Roads thence to Dun∣dalke, and says all the Bridges and Causways are broke to prevent our march; all the Roads betwixt this place and the Newry are mending, and vast quanti∣ties of Provisions are daily sent towards Ardmagh. Belfast, June 16. The General expecting the King's Landing, came hither on Friday in the Afternoon, and sent out Men to all the adjacent Coasts to watch; and at 9 that Night the Post-Boy of Donnoghodee coming with the Pacquet, brought advice the King had passed by that place towards this. On Saturday, about Three in the Afternoon, the General received advice his Majesty was come into the Lough; and thereupon, in his Coach and Sett of small black Barbary Horses, posted away to meet the King at Carrigfergus, and immediately mounted and rode on Horseback through the main street of the Town, where the almost numberless crowds of People bid his Majesty welcom with continued Shouts and Acclamations, at the White House, three miles hence, half way betwixt this and Carrigfergus. The General met the King at Four of the Clock, who was pleased for to a light, and go into his Coach, attended only with one Troop of Horse, and a few Gentlemen, and immediately drove over the Strand hither. The uncertainty of the time and place of his Ma∣jesties Landing, and the suddenness of the News was such, that few of the multitude that flocked hither to see it had their ends, the General's motion was so quick; yet before they got into the Town there were abundance who met them▪ and coming to the North Gate, He was received by the Sovereign and Bur∣gesses of this place in their Formalities, a Guard of the Foot Guards, and a general continued Shout and Shouts of, God save the King, God bless our Protestant King, God bless King William. Being come to the Castle, his Majesty alighted, and with the General walked into and round a very fine Garden at the back side thereof. Then his Majesty went into an Apartment appoint∣ed for him, and immediately issued out Orders for bringing ashore 200000 l. which came with him into the Lough, and 15 Tuns of Half-pence and Farthings in Tin, and that an Account be forthwith sent to the Agents of all Regiments to bring in their Accounts within 3 Days, in order to receive their Mens Pay, &c. In order to which, his Majesty presently fell upon Measures how to clear all Quarters, and dis∣charge the Country, and Ordered the Train to be ready to March in a Week. As the King was coming over the Strand another Coach of the Generals met him, which his Grace called to out of the former, and Ordered streight forward to the White-House, to re∣ceive into it such persons of Quality as they should find first Landing. Not far from the said North-gate his Majesty was met by Dr. George Walker, late Go∣vernor of London-Derry, and about Twelve of the Episcopal Clergy, who followed the Coach to the Castle, and when his Majesty alighted Addressed him in a Congratulatory Speech on his Arrival. At Night the Streets were filled with Bonfires, and Fire-Works, which were no sooner lighted, but the Alarm Signal was given by discharge of Guns, so planted, that from one place unto another, thro' out the whole Country in our hands, in a few Mi∣nutes, all places had notice of the King's Arrival, and in 3 Hours made Bonsires so thick, that the whole Country seemed in a Flame, So that the Enemy could not but see and conjecture the Cause to their Eternal Grief. At Lisburne, one George Gregson, the most eminent Preaching Quaker in the Province of Ʋlster, not making a Bonfire, the Soldiers broke all his Win∣dows, pull'd down the Pales round his House, forc'd his Wheel-barrows, Shovels, Pick-Ax's, Tubs, Pitch and Tar-Barrels, out of his backside and Piled them up before his own Door in a state∣ly Bonfire, and had not his House been Lieutenant General Douglass his Quarters, it had been impossi∣ble to save it from pulling down, though a Guard was upon it, so Angry were the People. Lieutenant General Douglass is expected here this Day; and this Morning are a great number of Pres∣byterian Ministers come in to wait on his Majesty with an Address. And one Captain William Cor∣mock, (Brother in Law to Mr. Ezekiel Webb, the Reverend Minister of Inniskilling,) who was the first that took up Arms and Proclaimed their Majesties at Inniskilling, and under God the chief Instrument of saving that place, is come hither likewise with a Pe∣tition, (and very Ample Certificates in his favour,) to the King, setting forth, That notwithstanding his past good Services, and extraordinary Sufferings, by raising and long maintaining there 2 Companies at his own Charge, heading the first until his only Son was cut off, and himself taken Prisoner by the Enemy, he was broke and bereaved of his Command, for (as he knows,) no other Cause, than timely forewarning some General Officers, that Major Ge∣neral Maccarty intended to escape (as he afterwards did from Inniskilling,) and prayed his Majesty to be restored to the Company he raised, or to have the benefit of a Tryal at a General Court Martial, to convince the World he hath not been guilty of
Crime, but is ruined only for his Innocency and Ju∣stice, and Espousing his Majesties Interest. As there was but few Men met his Majesty just at his Landing, so there was but one Woman, viz. Capt. Weston's Widow, who last year raised a Company of Foot in London, and with the same lost her Husband at Dundalke last Winter. The Lough betwixt this and Carrigfergus, two Leagues long, seems like a Wood, there being in it no less than 6 or 700 Sail of Ships most loaden with Provision and Ammunition, so that now we fear no more Dundalke wants; the plenty and order of all things here, is most wonderful, and not credible to any but those that see it, I cannot think the German War ever had the like, and yet all Goods hold a good Rate, Beer 13 or 14 l. the Tun, Claret and Whitewine 15 l. the Hogshead, Canary and Sher∣ries 10 s. a Gallon, Malaga, and right good Brandy 8 s. a Gallon, Wheat 25 s. the Bristol Barrel, Mault 17 s. a Barrel, Flower 15 s. the Stone, Cheese 35 s. the Hundred, Salt 12 d. the Gallon, and so propor∣tionable for all other Goods for Back and Belly. The Inhabitants are preparing (at Lisburne) an Address to present the King. Lisburne, June 19. His Majesty hath continued at Belfast until this day at Noon, when he came thence hither, and dines with the General, and this Night goes for Hls∣brough, where he resolves to continue until he goes to the Camp, which is now forming near Tanderagee, about 20 Miles South from hence, on the very Fron∣tiers between Ardmagh and the Newry, and all the Army have Orders forthwith to repair thither. Some part of the Train at Belfast is shipt to go about by Sea, as 'tis thought, to meet the rest at Dundalke; the other part of it hath Orders, as this day, and to morrow, to march this way towards the Camp, and that part that's at Hilsbrough, is also to march forth∣with. The Regiments of the Earl of Meath, and Lieu∣tenant Colonel Douglass, are this Night to march hence to the Camp. Lieutenant General Dou∣glass is here, as also Prince George, Earl of Oxford, and abundance of other Nobility and Gentry. This Day are Landed at the White-House 2500 Horse from Scotland, and this Day Marched through this place for the Camp Three White Dutch Regi∣ments of Horse; all our Army are in a wonderful good order, and furnished with new Tents, and new Arms, as well as new Cloaths. The great number of Coaches, Waggons, Baggage-Horses, and the like, is almost Incredible, to be supplyed from England, or any one the biggest Nation in Europe, I cannot think any Army in Christendom hath the like. None but they that see it can belive it, or that it could be possible for all the Men besides, (if joined in one Body▪) should stand before them. Last Week a Sculking Party of the Irish of about 20, betwixt Monaghan and Clownish, surprized Six of our Men Travelling with Swords only, whom they a while kept Prisoners, but at last offered them Li∣berty for Monie; whereupon our Men desir'd leave to Advise together about procuring their Demands; which while they were doing, the Irish laid down and quitted their Arms at a small distance to smoak To∣bacco, and take Sneezing, which our Men perceiving, got to their Arms, killed two on the spot, wounded and took several of them Prisoners, and returned to their Quarters. POSTSCRIPT. JUST now is Advice, that the late King is at the Castle of Mograh, within Five Miles of the N∣ry, and with him 15000 Men. The following Address was humbly pre∣sented to his Majesty upon his Arrival. Greatest of Kings, Conquer what is your own, And add poor Ireland to sweet England's Crown, Pull the stiff Neck of every Papist down, Set Captives free, who on the Willow Trees Hang useless Harps that tun'd such Songs as these. Ah! Mighty Prince, How do our Sorrows swell, What Tongues, or Pens, can our great Miseries tell, Who in the midst of Satan's Subjects dwell? Disarm'd, and Plunderd, Captiv'd here we lie, Gladly we would, alas, but cannot fly. Irish and French Insult, Tryumph, and Kill, And who dare say the Ruffians have done ill, Since all their Law is Couched in their Will? The Papist Locusts do the Church devour, Ravish our Wives, and our Young Maids deflower. Arise, Great Sir, and like a Rampant Lion, Revenge the Assronts of poor distressed Sion. Blest be the Angel, brings the best of Kings With Expedition on the Cherub's Wings. Blest be the Wind and Tide that Wafts you o're To your sad Subjects on the Irish Shoar: And ever Bless'd be they that Fight your Cause, And with their Swords maintain Great Britain's Laws. Thus Wish your Majesties Obedient SUBJECTS. Advertisements. These are to give Notice, That if any person hath ☞ occasion to sell any Library, or parcel of Books, either in large or small Quantities, they may receive ready Money for them, upon View thereof, by Langley Cur∣tiss at Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Head near Fleet-bridge. These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the ☞ Benefit of the Publick, That Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physick, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25. Years practice, Liveth at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the Lower End of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expe∣ditiously Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable) and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testifie. He hath likewise a most excellent Gargarism or Mouth-Water, which will make black or yellow Teeth as white as Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly cure the Scurvy, and all other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums, which in many persons causeth a stink∣ing Breath, which (by the Blessing of God, and the use of this Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies beforementioned, with Directions. His Pills only prepared for the French Disease, and the Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several prices, with other Venereal Arcana's, as occasion serves. London, Printed for Langley Curtiss at the Sign of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Head near Fleet-Bridge. 1690.
