F1438C Harl.7608[380-381] R226571 99886766 189397
For the selling of Herrings in and neere the Towne of Yarmouth during the Faire there yerely kept, and for the setting at certainty of the liberties of the said Faire, and Iurisdiction of the said Towne during the same. The Preamble. 1. THat there is and tyme out of mynde hath beene a free Faire yearely kept at Yarmouth, begining at Mi∣chaelmas 31. Ed. 3. and continuing 40. daies, which is the principall tyme of Herring fishing vpon the Sea∣coasts of Norffolke, and Suffolke. 2. That the gouernement of the said Faire, 'doth of right, and aunciently did belong, to the Barons or Bailiffs of 31. Ed. 3. the Cinque-ports. 3. That dureing the said Faire, no Herrings ought to be bought or sould by way of forestalling, by Yarmouth men 31. Ed. 3. and Charter of Yarmouth 46. Ed. 3. reuiued 10. R. 2. or others, on the Sea, or else where, within 7 miles distance of the said Faire, but onely in the sayd open Fayre, and that after the Fishers ships or boats be come into the Hauen of Yarmouth with their Herrings, and haue the cables drawne to the land, nor any Herrings till then to be discharged out of the said ships or boats. As by diuers Statutes and Charters appeareth. 4. That it is doubtfull vppon the words of the said Statutes and Charters, how farre from the said Faire the pro∣hibition of buying or selling of Herrings, out of the said Faire, doth extend. 5. That Yarmouth men by colour of the said Statutes and Charters, and of certaine liberties authoritie and ad∣mirall Grieuance. Iurisdiction to them lately graunted, doe vse (during the time of the Faire) to buy Herrings in great num∣bers, of the said fishers, before their ships be come into the Hauen with their Herrings, and yet restraine fishers dwelling in remote parts, from selling to any other saue to themselues, (either within the said 7. miles, or in the roades of Lowestofe which are 8. or 9. miles distance. 6. That when the said Fishermen doe come with their ships or boates into the Hauen of Yarmouth, the men of Yarmouth, haue such deuises and practises &c. that by meanes thereof, the masters of Fishers ships of remote partes Grieuance. are inforced to be hosted with some freeman of the said towne, and not permitted to sell to any other but to their said hoasts, whereby they make a Monopoly of Merchandizing of Herrings, contrary to the meaning of the said Statutes and Charters, to the great hurt of the Common wealth, and to the discouragement and vndoing of the said Fishers, for that they being restrained, and disturbed for selling their Herrings in roading places aforesaid, they haue lost the one halfe of the profitt of their Fishing (which otherwise they might haue had) and oftentimes more. For Remedie whereof and neuerthelesse for the preseruation of the true and ancient liberties of the said Faire according to the true meaning of ancient Statutes & Charters now in force concerning the same be it inacted, &c. The Act. 1. THat noe Herrings during the said Faire, be bought or sold (by way of Merchandize) within 7 miles of the 31. Ed. 3. 10. R. 2. said Faire, by Yarmouth men nor others, but in the said open Faire. The penaltie is, that the buyer shall forfeit the value of the Herrings so bought, out of the said Faire, (and within the said 7 miles) halfe to the King, and halfe to him that will sue for the same. Prouided that ships or boates, that haue not in them aboue a last and a halfe, may sell, within the said 7 miles, 32. Ed. 3. and out of the said Faire (after they be anchored) and shall not be inforced, to enter the Hauen, and bring them to the said Faire. 2. That the 7 miles shall be measured, from the Crane Key in Yarmouth, where the said Faire is kept, euery mile 16 May 1596. The Remedy sought for. to containe 8 furlongs, euery furlong 40 pole, and euery pole 16 foote and a halfe. 3. That it shall be lawfull for the Fishers to sell their Herrings in the said Faire, to any that will buy the same, and as lawfull for euery man there to buy, as for the Hostlers and Townesmen of Yarmouth, and to carry away the same by land or by water, as they shall thinke good. 4. That all Fishers at all times shall haue free libertie to sell their Herrings in any roade or other place, (out of the said 7 miles) to any person or persons there, to buy without restraint. 5. That the Corporation of Yarmouth shall haue no power to restraine the buying and selling of Herrings, (in any place without the said 7 miles) nor to take anchorage for ships or boates (out of the said 7 miles.) Or to intermed∣dle with any bargaine or contract, (out of the said 7 miles) made or to be made for Herrings. 31. Ed. 3. 32. Ed. 3. 33. Ed. 3. 6. That the Barons or Bayliffes of the Cinque-ports, shall haue the gouernement of the said Faire, and of doeing Iustice there in such manner, as heretofore they haue vsed to doe. 7. That no by Lawe, or ordinance heretofore made or hereafter to be made, by the said Corporation of Yar∣mouth (touching the gouernement of the said faire) shall be put in execution, till the same be seene and approued off, by the Iudges of the Assizes for Suffolke and Norffolke. The penalty is 40 Lib. for him that shall doe any thinge contrary to this Act.
