F1916 [ocm]15353294 204165
SOMETHING IN ANSVVER To the Old Common-Prayer-Book, AND FOR THE INFORMATION Of those who are for it; which is much of it taken out of the Old Mass-Book. Both which are got up since the Apostles dayes: for them in Meekness and Patience to read over, consider and try by the Scrip∣tures of Truth, whether or no they are not degenerated from the Apostles. The Scriptures in all your Books are owned in themselves, in the condition to which they were spoken, and Him in whom they end, the Life; But the Imaginations of them no man can own that fears God; for the Spirit of Truth which gave them forth must lead into all Truth; which is our Leader and Comforter, and the Worlds Re∣prover, which they and you must come into, before you come into the Truth of the Scriptures, John 14.16. Ch. 16. from the 6th. to the 15th. So this is an Answer to something of the Common-Prayer, which things we find not agreeable to the Scriptures, nor the Apostles, nor the true Church. And that the Apostles did not set forth a Common-Prayer, that such a Prayer they should say on Sunday, and Monday, and Wednesday, and Tursday, and Saturday, and Morning-Prayers, and Evening-Prayers. But that they should Pray in the Spirit. London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and Wind-Mill, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.
SOMETHING IN ANSVVER To the Old COMMON-PRAYER-BOOK, And for the Information of those who are for it. THE Apostles bid them pray in the Spirit, who was a true Minister, and it helpt their Infirmities, for they knew not what to pray for, but the Spirit made inter∣cession with sighs and groans. For he saw many get∣ting the Form of Godliness before his decease, which were out of the Spirit and Power, and such would be forward enough to set up Forms of their own. And the Apostle bid, Pray with the Spi∣rit and with understanding, and Pray without ceasing: but does not set a long Form of Prayer; but told them the Spirit did help them, and in that they might Pray; And it made intercession, Rom. 8. 1 Thes. 5. And Cnrist said, Pray not as the Pharisees do, who think to be heard for their much babling, who stand praying in the Synagogues and Corners of the Streets, that use vain repetitious, as the Heathen do. But when thou Prayest en∣ter into thy Closet, and shut the door, and Pray to thy Father in secret, who sees in secret, that he may reward thee openly: For the Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him; Therefore be not like the Pharisees and Heathen: And when ye pray, pray after this manner: Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Now can you say, The Will of God is done in Earth as it is in Heaven, Thy Kingdom come; That be so cross one against another, and out of the peace that the Kingdom is in? And give us this day our dayly bread; Can you
say, your dayly bread, who are persecuting about Religion? who are like to devour one another, biting one another about your forms, and so are like to be consumed one of another. And for∣give us our debts, as we forgive our debters; Where is there ever a man of you all in England, or in Christendom, that has forgiven his debts, that speaks it in the Spirit of Truth? Do ye not say these words like Pharisees, drawing nigh with your Lips, but your Hearts afar off? If ye would forgive men their debts as ye would be forgiven, then ye would never persecute men for Religion. But are you not gone into Temptation, and so from the Kingdom and the Glory, and the dayly bread, into the evil? And if ye do not forgive men their Trespasses, that Trespass against you; neither will the Father forgive your Trespasses, Matth. 6. But if you forgive men their Trespasses that Trespass against you, your Hea∣venly Father will forgive you; then you must give over your perse∣cution. And you should not teach the People to call Sunday; Munday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, but first and second, &c. according to the Apostles Doctrine, and Moses and the Prophets; for there is no Scripture for calling them Sunday and Munday, which came from the Heathen. And how can you give forth Prayers to be said at all times, and for every day, to be said at morning and evening; who say you have not the same Spirit and Power that the Apostles had, that gave forth the Scriptures? And yet you set forth long forms of Common-Prayers for People, which the Apostles did not, but bid them Pray in the Spirit; And so there is the common way of Prayer, which Christ and the Apostles let you see, which is not like the Heathen, the Jews, nor the Pharisees, who had the Tem∣ple to pray in, called the House of Prayer; And the Apostle brought them off the outward Temple, the House of Prayer, and told them their Bodyes were the Temple of God, and bad them pray in the Spirit, and likewise sing in the Spirit; this was spoken to them that came off the Jews Temple and their sing∣ing. And where did the Apostles say to the True Churches, they should read such a Scripture, such a Chapter, and such a Psalm, and so much for Morning-Prayer, and so much for Evening-Prayer? Are not these Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit? Such Psalms you must sing for such a day, and such for
such a day: Is this singing with the Spirit, by them that say they have not the same Spirit and Power as they had that gave forth Scripture? How can you then set forth Forms, Collects, and Prayers, and Psalms, to be read at several seasons and times? Is not this a form of Godliness and out of the Power, that have not the same Spirit as they had that gave forth the Scrip∣tures? Rent your hearts, and keep out of costly and gorgeous apparrel, and turn to the Lord, and he will shew you mercy; And do not say over these words in a form without the practice, Pharisee∣like, Ezek. 18.10. and 20. Come to that which will make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, that you may live a new Life, and where Repentance is, and wickedness is put out of the remem∣brance of the Lord; for Repentance is a change of the mind from that sin it hath been in; and then to say, if we have no sin we de∣ceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us; but mark and read on, If we do confess our sin, he is faithful and just to forgive us all our sin; and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all unrighteousness: Mark here is a time to see that people have sin∣ned, and have sin, and to confess it, and to forsake it; and then the Blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse from all sin; and then the birth; he that is born of God doth not commit sin, neither can he, because he is born of God, and the Seed of God remaineth in him. And here the Children of God are manifest, and the Chil∣dren of the Devil, who sinned from the beginning, and so doth his birth, which the birth of God doth not; for he that doth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous; And let no man deceive you, Joh. 1.3. And all your form of Prayer will not cover a people, for that which must cover, must be the Spirit of the Lord, in which they must pray to God, and worship him; neither can they set forth true Prayers that be not in the same Spirit the Apostles were in, neither do they pray in the Spirit, that say over those words. And the Scriptures do not command a kneeling always at prayer, for sometimes they stood, and sometimes they laid down on their faces; And when ye come to pray in the Spirit, you will not fol∣low the devices of your hearts, and it will lead you to do the things you ought to do, and lead you from those things you should not do: for they are the Sons of God that are led by
the Spirit of God, for to do the things they should do. And you who have gone astray, come to the Light which Jesus Christ hath enlightened you withal, that you may come to the Shepherd, the Bishop of your Souls. And you say — There is no health in us, — And doth not the Scripture say, Christ is in you, except you be reprobates; And the word is in your Hearts, Rom. 10. Col. 2. And God will put his Laws in their Hearts, and they shall be his People, and he will be their God; And the Grace is in the Heart, seasoning and establishing it; And the mystery of Faith is held in a pure conscience, which saves; And they that have love, have this in them, and have health in them; And they that have not this in them, wants the health in them. And I say, all the confession in made Prayers, is nothing but like Pharisees, till you do forsake it, it is but lip labour; and to make forms of Prayers and Praises, (and not be in the same Spi∣rit, as they were in that gave forth the Scriptures,) and set them up, is to worship the works of their own hands; and they cannot remit sins, that are not in the same Spirit and Power that they were in which gave forth the Scriptures: When a sinner doth re∣pent from the bottom of his heart, the Lord will blot out his wickedness out of his remembrance. And yet, if ye say you have not sin, ye deceive your selves, and the Truth is not in you; This is contradiction, that after Repentance the Lord hath blotted out your wickedness; and then to say, there is sin in you, and to say, if you have none in you, you deceive your selves. And a general confession to be said by the whole Congregation, after the Mini∣ster kneeling, — that you follow the devices of your own hearts, and you have offended the Holy Laws, and done those things you ought not, and there is no health in you. — This shews you are out of Christian life, far off them that sits in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and to be Children of Light, that can say, the darkness is past, and the true Light now shines. And for a whole Congregation to say — they have offended the Laws, and done those things they ought not, and there's no health in them; — (This is sad, but when comes the amend∣ment.) which is as much as to say, Christ is not in them, and the Word of God is not in their hearts, Rom. 10. Col. 2. And to say, God hath not put his Laws in their minds and hearts; and
the anointing is not in them to teach them, 1 Joh. 2. And that Grace is not in their hearts to stablish them, by which they are saved; And that Faith is not in their Hearts, with which they are saved, which is held in a pure Conscience, which purifies the Heart; And where these things is within there is health, Is there not? And where drunkenness, and prophaness, and cursing, and swearing, and all manner of pleasures and wickedness is, they may say they are gone from the ways of God, and there is no health in them, who are gone from the Spirit of Faith in them, which purifies the Heart, by which they are saved; they may say, there is no health in them. And after the Priest and the Congregation hath confessed, that they are miserable Offenders, and of their Errors, and if they forsake, it differs them from Pharaoh and Herod. But not in a form of Confession all their life time; For the repentance is in the forsaking; and no man hath power to remit sins. except they be in the Power and Spirit the Apostles and Christ were in. And you that say in your confessing and kneeling. — There is no health in you, — yet ye will give forth Prayers; — And that you are erred and strayed from his ways and Laws, — cannot say you have the same Spirit and Power that the Apostles had, for if that be in you, there is health in you, and that takes away sin. And where did the Apostles say, that they should say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice, and different from which they said other Prayers? And where did the Apostles set forth a form of Prayer, and the People should say one part, and the Priest another, in all the Churches? Where was that written? And where did the Apostles and true Church set forth Lessons and Gospels out of the Scriptures; but said, the Gospel was the Power of God. Where was this practised in the true Church, in the primitive which is the first? A greater than Solomon with burnt-offerings, who was anointed King, is come, CHRIST JESUS, who sits upon his Throne, who is King among the Christians, as Solomon was among the Jews, and ends burnt-offerings, and mortal Crowns, and makes Kings, and puts upon them an immortal Crown. And the Apostle which said, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Power, and the Powers that be are ordained of God; And Custome to whom Custome, and Honour to whom Honour, and
Fear to whom Fear: He denyed the Jews, Customes and Hea∣thens, and he was in the higher Power, by which he saw the end of the Jews Customes and Laws; and so he was not to fear him that could kill the Body; But Fear God, that's the Fear; And who resisteth the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. Now all power in Heaven and Earth is given to the Son. For if the Apo∣stle had been subject to every Power, and every Custome, in every Nation, then he had rendered his sear, and had worshipped Gods, worshipped the Devil, and followed the Customes of the Heathens and the Jews, and had had no persecution. Therefore there is a distinction in these words, what was the Custome, and what was the Fear, and what was the Honour; For there is an Honour that God will lay in the dust, which we do not desire to be cloathed with; that which gives the Fear to whom it be∣longeth, and Honour to whom it belongeth, and Custome to whom it belongeth; where the man is that crossed people in their Cu∣stomes, and broke the Customes both of Jews and Gentiles; who comes into the Power of Christ, and Spirit that gave forth Scriptures, sees the distinction of all these things, and the customs that is vain, and fear that is to be cast out, and the honour that must be stained. And who comes to owe to no man nothing but love, which is the end of the Law, hath put on Christ; so love is the fulfilling of the Law, which was to kill, which was among the Jewes, which the Royal Seed, the Royal Command of it, is to love enemies. And where did Christ bid the Apostles, or the Apostles bid o∣ther Ministers, stand on the North side of the Table, when they said the Lords Prayer? And have you said the Lords Prayer more than with lips? So the Pharisees said Moses and the Pro∣phets in their Synagogues and Temple, as you have said your prayer, in your Synagogues and Temples; as to say—For∣give us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us;— you not practisig to forgive them that trespass against you, but persecuting them; How shall God forgive you that tres∣pass against him? So you go into the temptation and evil, from the day and daily bread, and the Kingdom, in which is peace, and cannot call God Father in truth, as the perfect Children of the Most High do, who love enemies, which differs them from Pharisees, and the Apostate Christians.
And where did the Apostle say, that any King or Magistrate upon earth was, A DEFENDER OF THE FAITH? but said, they themselves had not power over mens Faith, 2 Cor. 1. but said, Christ was the Authour of Faith, and Faith is in the heart, which is a shield, which gives the Victory over that which separates from the Lord, which brings again, to have access to God; and this is every particulars defence; which Faith is the end of the Law, Christs and the Apostles words; It's much that people cannot take their words, and believe what they spoke; And, if they do believe that they were grounded upon the Rock, to take their words; but they must be setting forth, CHURCH-FAITH, and DIRECTORY, and MASSE and COMMON-PRAYER, and persecuting one another, that will not observe what each others sets up; and every one will cry, they do it by the Higher Power, and have the Higher Power to do it, enough to distract people, and make them mad, that be out of the Faith that works by love, which Christ is the Authour of; And that's Church-Faith amongst whom he is KING and DEFENDER OF IT, who is the Head of the Church, and the Body of whom we are Members; who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him; The Chief Magistrate, and King, Authour and Defender of the Faith, and Strengthener; who is our KING, our PROPHET, and our PRIEST, who teacheth us how to say, and what will lead us into all Truth (the Spirit of Truth) and teacheth how to worship God, and in what. Now to say over the truest form of Godliness as ever was, and not to be in the Power that gave it forth and the Spirit, they are to be turned away from. Now to invent forms, and not to be in the same Power and Spirit that the Apostles had that gave forth the Scriptures, Are not those to be turned away from? And did ever the Apostles set forth a form of Prayer for every day in the week, and those to be said all their life time? Are not peo∣ple to come into the thing they pray? And so they are not to be kept in the form of Prayer, but in the Spirit? And what good does the absolution and remission of sin pronounced by a Priest, after that people have confessed it, and do not forsake it, and do not come out of it? This is not right in the sight of God; And where did the Apostles or Christ set the Saints to read so
many Prayers, and such a place of Scripture upon the Saints days; as to read such a place of Scripture upon the day of the birth of Christ, and the day of the Feast of Circumcision, and purifica∣tion of Mary, and for the 12 Apostles, for the Saints and All-Saints? Where did Christ and the Apostles set forth these things, and give Scripture for it for the Primitive? (the true foundation of God was laid there in the Primitive Church) Where did they lay any of this foundation among them, and set forth Whitsuntide, Easter, and Christ-mass, and Michel-mass, and Can∣dle-mass, and Childer-mass? Where did ever the Apostles set forth any of these things? And hath not the Mass-book been the Authour of it? Which came from the Apostates from the Apostles, who have apostatized from Christ and the Apo∣stles, and the true foundation that was among the Apostles, of the true Church that was in the day before the Apostacy, and the Papacy got up? for these things are not found among them; for the Apostles work was to bring people to the Spirit and the Power of God in themselves, and to pray and worship in that; for people would fast enough run into the form of prayers, without Life, without Spirit; so the true Ministers work was to bring people to the Spirit; but the false got them into a form of Godliness, before the Apostles deceased; and so they that run into the form without the power, run to the observation of Dayes, and Times and Years, which they that were in the Power of God, and built upon the Rock and the Foundation, brought off the observing of Dayes and Times and Years, as Gal. 4. and Coloss. 2. and Rom. 14. Tim. 2.3. They were not to judge one another about dayes, much less to present one another into Courts about Holy-dayes, or any dayes; but he that did observe a day, did observe it to the Lord, and some ac∣counted every day alike; Now they were all to be perswaded in their own minds, that judged one another about such things, and not hale one another into Courts; for Christ is the Lord of the Sabbath and of other dayes; who makes all things holy, who is to be received, who is the Prince of Peace and Life; and people are to come to him; not persecuting one another about Dayes and Times, and Months, and Years, and obser∣ving Christs day, and Saints dayes, and the Apostles dayes, and Sabbath dayes; but come to CHRIST the REST, the
LORD of the Sabbath, and come to the Apostles life, and Saints life, that the Apostles and Saints were in, the Life, the Spirit that they were in, and there you will have all Unity. Where did the Apostles say, that they should read such a Psalm, or sing such a Psalm? for have they not been turned into Meetre since the Apostles days? and do not all sing them? and is it not their principle that all have not the Spirit? and do they not all sing together? do not ye say — That all have not the Grace? And do they not sing Davids Prayers and Prophesies, and his Victories in Wars in the time of the Law, and his reproachings, and his fastings? are not all these put together in Meetre and given to People to sing? Now there is a time to distinguish Prayer from Singing, and Fasting, and Reproaching, and Wars, and the Spirit distinguisheth the time of Prophesy and Prayer, from the time of Praises: Now there is a time of Singing in the Temple, Praising in the Temple, and Praying in the Temple, and Worshipping in the Temple; and Christ puts an end to the Temple, and bids them Worship in the Spirit, and Sing in the Spirit, and Pray in the Spi∣rit, and this was Christs and the Apostles Doctrine; so none was to be persecuted for not going to the Temple then, which was called a House of Prayer, nor for not going thither to Wor∣ship. Now there was but one Temple in the whole World, com∣manded of God, which was Solomons Temple set up at Jerusa∣lem, which was not set up in Rome or England, nor Holland, nor Spain, nor any of those places; But all other Temples were in∣vented Diana's, and all other which have their compelling wor∣ship set up, and Men will fight about them, as the Heathen do about their Gods: Whereas Christ came to end the true Temple, and the Apostles came to bring them off the true Temple which Solomon built, and told them their Bodyes were the Temple of God, and they that were gathered together, were gathered in the Name of Christ. And Christ did not tell the Apostles they should read such a Chapter such a day, and such a Psalm such a day, and say such a Prayer such a day; but he told them the Spirit of Truth he would send to them, which should lead them into all Truth, and that should be their Comforter; and did not set them Collects, and that
they should read so much out of the Epistles, and so much out of the Evangelists, at several times, but he told them the Spirit should be their Leader into all Truth, and that should be their Comfor∣ter; and so this is it that will teach every one to pray; for he saith, It shall reprove the World of Sin. So the World coming to that which doth reprove them, it will teach them to pray in the Spirit, which knows the mind of the Lord, which they know not what to pray for out of that; And so set Forms of Prayers to keep up Peoples minds from that which does reprove, and so does peo∣ple hurt; For there is a Nature that would be calling upon God with the Lips, and have a Form of Godliness, and so have a Sa∣crifice, and a Praying, and a Preaching, but not in the Spirit; so that covering God will take off, which is not in the Spirit; and that Form without the Spirit and Power which fleshly people would live in, and saying Forms over all their life time, calling upon God with their Lips, out of those Prayers they have made for several dayes, and for several times, and for others to say over, and when they have said them over, they think they have done, it is sufficient; this is a worshipping the work of their own hands, and is not a praying in the Spirit, but in the Letter; For who among you will say, that you have the same Spirit that gave first the Scriptures? As for Praying for all them that be in Authority, that we may live a Godly and peaceable life under them, that by them we may not be brought into ungodliness, which is out of peace. And whereas you fay, — Fear God, Honour all Men, Love brotherly Fellowshiop, Honour the King. — Honour all Men, Honour the King; That is to have him and all men in esteem; And we can do no otherwise, if we would have all men to be saved. And the Brother-hood is in the Salvation, wherein is the Fellowship; And the Fear of God that brings to receive Wis∣dom. And where did the Apostles set forth some Lessons to be read with a loud voice, and some with a low voice; And some Lessons to be song? And did Christ say, they should pray with a loud voice? Did not he say, Thou shalt enter into thy Closet? Did he say, that the Priest should stand on the North side of the Table, and say the Lords Prayer? We never read this Doctrine among the Apostles or Christ, but out of the Mass. And did
Christ and the Apostles set forth a Creed that they should say, certain times People standing up? And they with a loud voice, (People and Priest) say Prayers together kneeling? Some may be made to stand, and some to kneel. And were did the Apostles and Christ set up an ALTAR to take the Communion at? and bow before it? and say certain Prayers there? Is not this from the Mass? not from the Scriptures: And where did Christ and the Apostles set forth COLLECTS; such things to be read in the Evening, and such things in the Morning? And where doth the Scripture speak of Three Persons and Trinity, but of the FA∣THER, SON and HOLY GHOST? have not those things come out of the Mass-book? and not out of the Scriptures? And where did the Apostles set forth Morning prayers, Even∣ing prayers, Collects, and what they should read, and what they should sing, for every Evening and Morning for every day through the whole year? Where did the Apostles do such things? And they must say over so many Prayers, Is not this from the Mass-book, and not from the Scriptures, which say, they must pray with the Spirit, which must lead them into all Truth? And sing in that, and Teach them to read Scriptures, and let them see the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and enjoy him in whom they end? And are ye in a doubt and Question after ye have set forth so many Prayers, Psalms, Collects, Even Songs, Lauds, Praises? is there not after a doubting and a questioning in your selves, that these things are not right? Therefore these things must not be for a standing Form. And no one can set forth a Form of Godliness, unless they be in the Power and Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, that may answer the witness of God in People. Therefore it is dangerous to set forth Forms to People, not being in the same Power and Spirit that the Apostles were in; that must be turned away from. For people grow in the Spirit in which they must pray. And the Apostles and Christ have set forth enough, how they must pray and preach, and worship God. And did ever the Apostle and Christ set forth a Form of Words that people should say at all times and seasons? And did not he teach them how to pray, and ask in his Name? and not think to be heard by much balling? and pray in the Spirit? Is not this the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles?
And did not Christ say that the Spirit should lead the Disciples into all Truth? In that they were to pray; and that should re∣prove the World? And should not the World pray in the Spirit that reproves them? Can they pray in the Spirit, if they quench that, and grieve it, and vex it? Will the saying over then a Form of Prayer made ready to their hands do them any good, a pray∣ing by Letter and by Line, and singing by Letter and by Line, and not by the Spirit pray nor sing? which Spirit distinguishes, which Spirit the Lord knows the mind of, which it helps the in∣firmities of, and it gives the utterance both to preach, to pray, to sing, to give thanks; for it must be in the Spirit, the preaching, the praying, the singing, that keeps the condition in the Lord, out of the flesh. And why do they call them Collects, rather than that which hath been gathered out of the Books of other men? And the Four Sundayes in Advent, and not rather a coming before the time called Christmass and Christs birth? And why call ye Epi∣phany, and not the Appearance? And Septuagesima and Sexa∣gesima, and Quinquagesima, rather than the 70th. and 60th. and 50th. day before such a time? And why call ye that time Easter, and not the Passover? And the other time Whitsuntide, and not Pentecost; as the Jews did? And where did the Apostles ob∣serve that time afterward, or give a command that that time should be observed after? And where did the Apostles or Christ set forth a time of Lent, that they must eat fish on, and not flesh? and call it a time of fasting? And is there not a flesh of fish? Cor. 15. And where did the Apostles set forth Collects and Epi∣stles, and Gospels to be said on Munday, and Tuesday, and Wed∣resday, and Thursday, and Good Friday next before Easter, or the Scripture speak such things? but the Old Mass-book, got up since the Apostles dayes? And where did the Apostles appoint a day for the Trinity? Whereas the Scripture makes mention of the FATHER, and the SON, and that the HOLY GHOST fell upon them, but no mention of the Trinity, nor that a day should be observed, which they should call Trinity-Sunday; but these have come from the degenerated Papists, from the Mass. Did Paul set forth that any Prayer or Collect should be said on the day of his conversion, or Mary, or Steven, or any of
the Apostles or Saints? Are ye not to come to the Apostles life, the Spirit and Power, and so to the general assembly and to Spirits of just men made perfect? Where did the Apostle or Christ set forth a Collect and Prayer for St. Michael the Archangel? hath not this come from the Mass, not from the Scripture of Truth? Where do you read that the Apostles commanded to spread a fair white Linnen cloath in the Temple, and the Priest standing on the North side of the Altar, to say Collects and Prayers, and one for the King, and the Creed and Homily, if there want a Sermon? And why do ye call that a Homily, and not a familiar Speech, and the other a Speech? And the Congregation must receive the Bread and Wine, kneeling on their knees; Now the Apostles and Christ did not say so, that they should kneel when they took it, there is no such Scripture for that; but sayes as they sate at Sup∣per, and you take it at Morning or at Noon, and they took it at Night, a figure of his death, when he was betrayed in the night, and you take it at Morning or Midday; so this taking of it kneeling hath come up since the Apostles dayes, for there was no such foundation laid in the True Church. And the Apostles did not set forth that it should be taken at Christmass, or at set times, not Christ; but said as oft as ye take it. Did not the Apostle speak these words to the Cor. to whom he gave the Cup and the Bread, and brought to know and search whether Christ was in them or no, and brought people to Christ the substance, to know him in them, or else they were reprobates, though they had all the Scrip∣tures; and off observing of dayes and inventions; and if they had him in them, they had him in whom the Scriptures ended, who is the Prince of Peace and Life. Now that Church that is full of strife and persecution, and confusion, we cannot say that Christ is the Head of, nor it his Body: For the true Ministers of Christ wrestled not with flesh and blood, so they that have wrestled with flesh and blood since the Apostles dayes, we cannot say they are the True Ministers of Jesus Christ; for they wrestled with the Powers of darkness, and Spiritual wickedness that led Men from God. So their Weapons, War, and Ministery, and Worship were Spiritual, and their Pray∣ing and Singing was in it, in the Spirit, and their fellowship was in the Spirit, which Spirit was before enmity was, in this War which
we see Independents, and Baptists and Presbiters in; Spiritual men should not wrangle one with another about Religion, but they should obey Christs Command, love one another, love ene∣mies, and love doth edifie; which hath been wanting among both Papists and Protestants since the Apostles dayes, having the Form of Godliness, but denying the Power. This is the Word of the Lord God to you all; To repent, and come to the Spirit that doth reprove you, that in it you may have Unity, in it you may Pray, in it you may worship God who is a Spirit, with it ye may have Unity with the Scriptures, and God, and one another. And so this is a visitation to you in the ending of this night of Apostacy. Whereas ye say — they are to sing a Psalm after the taking of it: — Those Psalms ye sing were not turned into Meetre then, they were turned since; And so all these times, Christmas, Easter, Whitesuntide, they ye find not in the Scriptures, nor have them from the Apostles, but from the Papists; And so ye call it a Sacrament, which is from the Papists likewise, not from the Scriptures. Whereas ye say, — that Baptism with Water was mini∣stred but twice a year, EASTER and WHITSUNTIDE, but now ye have thought it fit to be ministred on Sundayes, or other Holy-dayes; — So ye have broken your own order; where∣as ye cannot say, that either of these Orders ye have had from the Apostles. And where did ever John or any of the Apostles give names when they baptized them, or their Parents give names to them? Let see some Scripture for this. And where did John or the Apostles set up a Font or Water-pot; doth not that signifie a Fountain? Did the Apostles set up a Fountain in the Temple, or Synagogue? Where did the Apostles set up God-Fathers and God-Mothers, to be ready there at the Font? Are these savoury words? Who is God's Father? Is it not presumption to speak such a word? And the Priest is to pray for the remission of the sins of the Infant; and yet these Infants born of believing Parents called Christians, and yet not Holy; Are the Children of such un∣clean? have ye judged the Apostles Doctrine? or have ye thrust in this Scripture among the Christians, which sayes. We are all by nature the Children of wrath aswel as others? This was in the state of unbelief. Do ye not baptize all, them that are right births,
and they that are not right births, do ye not baptize all, and then when they are baptized, they are regenerated and born again, and do sign the Child with the sign of the Cross? Did ever the Apo∣stles sign any, or John Baptist? for they baptized many: Did they ever sign them with the sign of the Cross when they baptized them? Had ye this from the Apostles? If so, where was it written in the Scriptures? or came it from the Papists? And were not they to preach and bid them repent, and be baptized? and do not ye baptize, and then bid them repent 30. or 40. years after, more or less? And the Priest asks the God-Fathers and God-Mothers, — Whether they forsake the Devil and ALL his works, and the vain pomps and glory of this World, with all covetous desires of the same, the lusts of the flesh, and not be led by them. — How many thousands of God-Fathers and God-Mothers have made this confession in the open Congregation; and yet after they have made this confession, ask them whether they be perfect or no, they say — They sin in thought word and deed, all their best actions are sin, — and so there is open contradiction. And so when the Child is baptized, ye say, — It is ingrafted into Christ; regenerated, — and then when the Child comes to be Catechized, say, — That his God-Fathers and God-Mo∣thers, promised that he should forsake the Devil and all his works, and the pomps and vanities of the wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh, and to keep Gods Holy VVill and Commandments all the dayes of his life, and to walk in the same. Now if the God-Fathers and God Mothers had been so as they say, and had trained up the Child, as they say, to forsake the Di∣vel and all his works, and have kept Gods Holy Will and Com∣mandments all the dayes of their lives; then had you been a sweet people and a sweet savour both to God and Man; But do not ye say, after ye have said these words, that you do not keep the Commandments of God, and that none can keep them? and so shews that you be out of the love of God; for who loves him keeps his Commandments: And after that they be baptized, and fay they are regenerated, and born again, and Members of Christ, and Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom; do not ye
say then after, if these come which are born again and regenerated, if they dissent from you — they are Hereticks? It is a prin∣ciple in Christendom, it is blasphemy to say, that any can fall from Grace. And yet when he comes to years, and questions you about Religion, you call him — a Heretick — then he is fallen from heirship, and membership, and from being a Child of God, the regeneration; and is not this to fall from Grace, and to turn the Grace of God into wantonness? And was Baptism with water held up by a Law among the Apostles, or by an out∣ward power? and some said they should dip, and some said they should sprinkle. And doth not that in Matth. 28. say, Baptize into the Name? and is not that more than in the Name? And are all Children born in Original sin? are the Children of believing Parents born in original sin? are not they then born in the Devil? is not he the Original of sin? doth it not signifie the beginning? and did not Christ destroy the Devil the Original? are not they made Holy that believes in him, and so their Children? and though unbe∣lieving Wife, and unbelieving Husband, they were not to depart. And have not God-Fathers and God-Mothers promised to see the Children trained up, and have not the Priests taught them to vow it? And did not Christ and the Apostle teach people to keep to yea and nay? and doth not that end vows? And so hath not this teaching of vows and not performing them, been since the Apostles, from the Papists? And ye say, — That no man shall think that any detriment shall come to Children by deferring of the confirmation, he shall know for Truth, that it is certain by Gods VVord, that Children being Baptized, have all things necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. And will ye not say, that if they turn from you, afterward to other Sects, that they are damned? is not this contradiction? And Christ saying, suffer Children to come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; that was not to sprinkle them. And where had you a command from the Apostles for con∣firming of Children, Bishopping of Children? or have they all re∣ceived the Holy Ghost, that they have laid their hands upon? or have you the same Spirit and Power to do such a thing as the
Apostles had? did they do it by a Form and Custome, or Tradi∣tion, or did they do it by the gift of the Holy Ghost? And had the Apostles a God-Father or God-Mother, when they did lay their hands upon any? have ye this from the Papists? or from the Scriptures? If ye say from the Scriptures, bring it out, let us see where it is. And can any lay on the hands without the Gift of Prophesie? Tim. 4. And can you hold the Gift of Pro∣phesie by tradition, or the Words? The Form of Godliness that ye may keep by tradition, but not the Gift of Prophesie, which doth fore-see who the hands must be laid on. And must not these Bishops be blameless, that do lay on their hands? not given to wine, not given to filthy lucre, not brawlers, nor covetous, no Strikers, no Persecutors; For the Apostle said be∣fore, he had been a Persecutor. Have not all the Bishops been covetous, and Persecutors, Brawlers, and out of patience, haling before Courts, and up and down, even as mad as Saul with his packet of Letters; The Fruits of the Bishops and Deacons have not declared themselves like Timothy and Titus, and the Apo∣stles; All these which have got up since the Apostles dayes: for what striking and fighting, and persecuting hath here been, and covetous practices, persecuting for the observing of dayes, which was not the Work of the Apostles, which shews they have been out of the Gift of Prophesie, and the Power and Spirit that the Apostles were in, who had Spiritual Weapons to wrastle withal, and not Prisons and Gaoles to put people into that had offended them. And where did the Apostles set forth these names of Batchellors of Art, and Masters of Art, and Batchellors of Divinity, and Doctors of Divinity, Deans and Chapters, and Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and set up Schools to train up these, and none must preach, but who are bred up there, and such who are Or∣thodox, have the tongues, which ends at Babel: are not these the Wise of the World and Rabbies, for which we have no Example from the Apostles? Are not these they that will stand against Christ in his Vineyard? that if the Father send forth into his Vine∣yard, they will keep them out, and say, they come not from the Schools; if he call them from the Boats, from the Nets, from the Plough, and send them as he pleases, which hath his word, which
was before Babel was; where ends your Languages, by which ye make Ministers at the Schools. For they that go into the Vineyard of God, they must have the Word of God, which was in the beginning, before tongues were; and must not have tongues as the Original to open Truth, for Truth was before Tongues were; The Apostle saith we must be redeemed out of Tongues, and Tongues are waters, and Tongues shall cease; so when they are ceased the word remains, and the Ministry of the Word; and this may be in a Plough-man, or a Fisherman, or a Carpenter; the Ministry of the Word stands, when the Tongues cease which makes Ministers at Colledges; And do not the Ministers cease when the Tongues cease? Is not there a ceasing of the Original? And where did the Church among the Apostles set forth, that you should wear Surplices, Tippets, Hoods, and Gowns with long sleeves, or with short sleeves, and so by their habit to distinguish them, their places and orders? Where is this in the Scriptures among the Apostles, but only among the Papists, in their Histo∣ries? Now there were white Fryers, gray Fryers, black Coats, and Jesuits; and when the KING turned from the POPE, The Jesuit turned from him to the COMMON-PRAYER-Men, and then the COLLEDGES came in to him to make Ministers for the Common-prayer; and so though the Jesuit did turn from the Papist to the Common-prayer, he kept his black Coat, to di∣stinguish his order, to shew what order he was off; and he may say, he was but subject to the Higher power, in turning from the Papist to the Common-prayer, for the Higher power set it up; and then when the Common-prayer was thrown down, and the Presbytery set up, he turned to them, and kept the black Coat, though he turned from Presbiter to Independent, from Indepen∣dent to Baptist, he kept the black Coat; distinguished his Order and Tribe; and so though they bring POPERY up again, he keeps his Livery to shew that he hath been but subject to the Higher power, and is ready for it. The BISHOP to bless people, cannot bless in Righteousness and Truth, for they that be so in Righteousness and Truth, they must be in the Word that was in the Righteousness, for that san∣ctifies them, and makes their hands Holy; but this we say, that
no Persecutor upon the Earth, (about Church Worship and Reli∣gion) hath clean hands, neither is his sacrifice accepted, no more than Cains was; for he is out of the Faith that works by love, he is out of the Spiritual War and wrastling, and out of the love to Enemies and Brethren; and does not shew the Fruits that he hath passed from Death to Life, & bears not the mark of a perfect Child, no Persecutor upon Earth, and differs not his love from Pharisees, and is out of the command of Christ and the Apostles; and persecution was ever blind, and blind is out of the Light; and therefore they are those that stand so much against the Light that doth enlighten every man, and therefore these are unfit men to be Ministers of Christ; only they are Ministers made by the na∣tural Tougues, at Schools, and so state Ministers, and National Ministers in the Form, out of the Power and Spirit that the Apostles were in. And after they have baptized Children, whether they be the right birth or not, and say they are Children of God, Heirs of the Kingdom, and say they are regenerated, and born again; is it not said again, that every one that cometh into the World is not lightened, those that they have baptized, and every one hath not the Spirit; and yet they have taught to pray and sing, and to have set worships; then mark what singing, what praying, what wor∣ship they are in, and yet they were regenerated, and born again, when they were baptized; is not here contradiction? And as concerning MARRIAGE, Where was it among the Apostles and the dayes of Christ practised, when a Man and Woman was married, that they put a Ring upon the Finger, or that the Man should take the Woman by the hand, and plight their Troth? Where was this ever practised among the Apostles, that the Priest should speak to the people, that they have given each other their Troth, and by receiving of a Ring, and by joyning Hands, pronounce Man and Wife? Now have not all these things come up since the Apostles dayes among the Papists? and is not here putting together by Men, and Men that put asunder again? And is this as was in the beginning before the fall? or Man was drove from God into the Earth? For have not the Heathen gone together like beasts, and gone asunder again? and the Apostate Christians done the same? And did not the Jews
after they came out of Aegypt, and knew the Power of the Lord, go together? & did not they afterward for their hardness of heart, give a Bill of divorcement, and go asunder again? but in the beginning it was not so, before man was drove from God into the Earth; but since hath been all the hardness of heart among people; And is not all the dishonorable marriages and the defiled Beds been since the fall? Does any come out of the defiled Beds, out of the dishonorable marriage, but who are come out of the Earth, and sees over Jews, Gentiles, Apostate Christians marriages, the Lord joyning together, where no man may put asunder; and men joyning together, men put asunder. For now we do not read that the Apostles did marry people for money nor Christian Children for money, nor the Clark have money for saying Amen; for when the Church met, as ye may read in Cor. 1. That he doth not say, He to say Amen, in the Church, but They to say Amen. So have not all these Clarks, and these things come from the Papists, and were not among the Apo∣stles, among whom the foundation was laid. And now see what abundance of stuff ye build withal, which ye fall out about, which is not in the Scriptures. And we never read that the Apostle in all his Epistles who spoke of Marriages, did ever teach, that Man and Woman should say one to another, I pledge thee my Troth, or I plight thee my Troth; This is be∣yond yea and nay, out of the Doctrine of Christ, saying; Ye shall not Swear, and so not as it was in the beginning. And so is that an honourable marriage, which is out of the Doctrine of Christ? Is not all the observing of dayes, and bring∣ing people to observe dayes, a bringing them into bondage, and there keeping of them? and hath not these been the intruders into those things they have not seen, and neglecting the body in the whole Christendom, by which they should be made one: whose Ministry hath been for the bringing into the observing of dayes and times; whereas the true Ministers and the Apostles have been for the bringing off of observing dayes and times. So bringing people to observe dayes after Saints Names for which ye have no command from the Apostles, this is to worship the works of their own hands; for the Apostle brought people to the Spirits of just men made perfect; and to the Church of the living
God, yea, and to the knowing of no man after the flesh. And so for visiting of the Sick. If there were more visiting of the Sick, and relieving the Widdows and fatherless among you, that there need not be a Beggar in your streets, nor stranger to wander, nor none to want, that there might be a better savour in the Creation; but the Power of the Lord God, and his Life and Love ye must live in, who comes to love friends and enemies, and to wrastle with that which makes men enemies of God, and not with Creatures; in that the blessing is felt. And where did the Apostles set forth Funeral Sermons, and that they should go in black; whence came this, from the Apo∣stles or the Scriptures of Truth? Did not it come from the Hea∣then, a Heatheanish custome? And the Priest to meet singing, or else his Clark, and they must say such words, when they are casting into the Grave, and they must say such a Lesson, and such Collects; Now where did the Apostles set forth these things, or where were they practised among the Apostles? Did not Christ say to him that would go bury the dead. Let the dead bury their dead? Was that the work of the Apostles? and for a set wage? was it not the work of the Apostles to bring them out of the Grave? Did ever the Apostles set forth and hallow a piece of ground, and say that it was holier than other ground? Did not Christ that destroyed the Devil, make all things Holy? yea, and reconciles to God all things in Heaven, and things in Earth and destroyes him that made the separation between God and man? And ye say — Keep Holy the Sabbath-day. — This was the Jews Sabbath which ye keep Markets and Fairs on; which Sabbath was a sign of rest given to the Jews, after the fall, yea a sign to the Creation, which Christ the Substance, the Lord of the Sabbath, ends the sign, and destroyes the Devil, the Author of the burdening of the Creation, and gives Liberty both to the Fami∣ly, the Ox, and all the Creation; yea to Jews and Gentiles. Now the Christians meeting together on the first day of the Week, one of the 6, dayes, Christ and the Apostles do not set forth that as a LAW and COMMAND, that they should keep that as a Sabbath; but they were not to observe Dayes, and Times, and Years, and they were not to judge one another about such things, but the Apostle said he was afraid of them that ob∣served
dayes, lest he had bestowed labour in vain. And are all the Apostles Labours and Epistles bestowed on them in vain, that be run into dayes, which was the work of the Apostles to bring them to Christ the Lord of the Sabbath? And Christ said, Come to me, ye would not come to me that ye might have life, and who comes to him, makes all things holy, and all dayes holy to them, and the ground holy. And where was it among the Apostles, that they had mony for Churching Women, and a piece of Cloth, saying some Prayers over her or some Psalms? But this we say, that all that come to MARRY, or BURY, or give thanks, it should be freely, not for money, but a free people. Where did the Apostles or Timothy a Bishop, or Titus look among the people for Tythes or Glebelands, or Easter reckonings, or Midsummer dues, where were these things set up among the Apostles by a Law? Were not they that were redeemed out of the Earth, their doings were as they were moved by the Spirit of God? for is it not Christ that doth redeem men out of the Earth? were not Tythes in the time of the Law, and the first Priest-hood? Is it not Christ that ends the Law, and the first Priest-hood? and there do not people come out of the nineths, (for Tythes were offered up in the time of the Law) and so they are come to reign with Christ on the Earth. And did ever Christ and the Apostles say, that there should be a set maintenance for a Ministry, else they should be imprisoned; so as it is done now in Christendom since the Apostles dayes? we would fain see those Scriptures. Did ever the Apostles set forth what a Bishops Fee should be (for among them was the foundation laid,) and to have Courts to fummon people about such things, and to hale any before a Ma∣gistrate about such things? And is not this called disturbing now among you, that if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the first hold his peace; for ye may all prophesie one by one, that all may learn and be comforted, and this was order in the Churches of God, which since the Apostles dayes hath been accounted dis∣order and disturbance, for which a great deal of persecution hath been stirred up, which hath shewed, that ye have been naked of the Spiritual weapons, by which ye should have convinced gain∣sayers and stopped their mouths.
And where did the Apostles set forth a Clerk among them, and describe his wages, as you do? and set up BELLS in the Steeple-houses to call them together, did ever the Apostles this? And where did the Apostles bid them provide a Pulpit in every Church as they call it, and a piece of Cloth and a Cushion on it, and an Hour-glass at the end of it? I would fain see some Scripture for this from the Apostles and Christ. Now if you say — Ezra had a Pulpit of Wood, Nehem. 8. — We say, yes, but it was set up in the street in the Water-gate, not in the Temple, where a matter of 14 men might stand upon it, who read the Law; Christ is the end of the Law, and so his Ministers are the Preachers of the Gospel that ends the Law; so that ends Ezra and his Pul∣pit. And where did the Apostles say, that there must be a Font of Stone set up in every Church, and a Communion Table set up at the East-end of it, & that the People should read the Sentences written upon the Wall? Where did the Apostles set forth these things? but they were to live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, and to Pray and Worship in that, and they were to be baptized into one body with one Spirit, which plunges down the corruption got up in the transgression since the fall from God, that people are gone into many Bodies and Heads from Christ the Head. Ye say, — In the primitive Church, there was a Godly Disci∣pline, that in the beginning of Lent, such people as were notorious were put to do penance, — which you instead of have given forth many CURSES for people to say Amen to, till the same be restored again▪ The primitive Church does not set forth a time of LENT to do penance; Look where in all the Epistles is it read; and that the people should read over a company of CURSES. The Apostles and Christ do not teach this Doctrine, but that they should Bless and not Curse, and that Christ became a Curse, to re∣deem from the Curse; who ends the Curse in the time of the Law, and destroyes the Devil, and brings the Blessing, and takes away the Curse, and wrath and Law, and reconciles again to God; and so they were not to read the Curses, for while Moses was read, the Vail was over their hearts; so bringing to reading of Moses, brings people to be under the Vail; who brings them to Christ, brings them from under the Vail and the Curse, and ends it, and in him there is none.
They that received the Bread and Wine in remembrance of Christ, shewing his death till he come, which the Apostle had re∣ceived of the Lord; and delivered to the Corinthians, which they were to (Examine and) eat and drink in the remembrance of Christ's death till he come, This was in 1 Cor. Then he writes again to the Corinthians, and bids them Examine themselves, and prove their own selves, knew they not that Christ was in them, except they were reprobates: So they may see that this was not a standing Form, but as often as they did it, they did it in remem∣brance of Christ, till he came; & then examin your selves, prove your own selves, if Christ be not in you, except you be reprobates. So if you have him within, what need you to have that which puts in the remembrance of him? And so if ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above; for now Bread and Wine is below, which is in the remembrance of his death; so that part dyes with him, which must have a sign to put in remembrance of him; for the Apostles forgat, who said, that they thought that that man should deliver Israel. And ye say — The Priest must kneel at Gods board when he receives Bread and Wine, and give it to the people kneeling, — and say, — Receive ye the Body and Blood of Christ. — Now was the Body of Bread, the Body of Christ that was put to death, and the Blood of the Grape, the Blood of Christ that was shed upon the Cross? had not he eaten the Bread before, and drunk of the Cup? And the Apostle doth not set forth such an order and command, to take it kneeling; And did not the Apostles sit when they took it? Whereas ye say, — That no Minister must hold any pri∣vate meetings contrary to your Church; — VVere not they Christians which met together in several places, contrary to the Jews and Heathens meetings? And was not the place which ye call the Church the Papists Old Mass House? And did ye not put them out of that which ye call your Church? And did not the Presbyters put you out of that which ye call the Church, the Old Mass House? and then they call it the Church; And the Inde∣pendents and Baptists do not they pluck one another out of that which ye call the Church, and pluck out the Presbyters? what a plucking is here of one another out of that which ye call the Church? whereas the Church is in God, which the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against! what prevailing hath here been against that which ye call the Church? — And none shall Preach or Prophesie in Towns or Markets without licence. — Ans. Who are you that will limit God the Holy one, or quench his Spirit? from whom had the Prophets or the Apostles licence? from any Authority or Earthly Power? for they were neither set up by them, nor they could seperate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus. And Strangers not to Preach without li∣cence. VVhat would you have said to Peter and John that could not read Letters, and Amos the Herdsman, and Matthew the Publican, for we do not read these were brought up at Schools of Learning? So how can we say, ye are agreeable to the Scrip∣tures, or the VVord of God, that limits and sets forth so many things that are not in the Scripture? VVhere did ever Christ or the Apostles command to bid solemnly Holy-dayes, and that confirmation should be performed once in 3. years? where is the Scripture for these, or is it found but among the Papists, and Old Histories? As for all these Holy-dayes, Christ-mass-day, and Whit-sunday, & giving names to dayes as Sun-day, and Mun-day, and Satur-day, and Sabbath-day, and Sacrament, and Trinity, they have got up among the Papists and the Heathen since the Apostles dayes, for which there is no Scripture; and your CROSS likewise you hold from your ancient Fathers, but not from Christ and the Apostles, who said, the Cross of Christ was the Power of God, and the Cross of Christ was a Mystery; and a Cross of Wood or Stone is not a Mystery. Where did the Apostles procure monthly Sermons; and the Sacraments to be three times a year? have notall these things been done out of, & contrary to the Power and Spirit that the Apostles were in? Did ever Timo∣thy or Titus which were Bishops, or the Apostles set forth OATHS to be taken, or take OATHS themselves? or did they make any Ministers by Oaths? And did not Christ and the Apo∣stles deny swering? who said they that swear fal into condemnation, and sayes, in all your communication, let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; and before all things my Brethren swear not; and tells them the danger, lest they fall into condemnation. And had they Courts of swearing, called Ecclesiastical? And does not Christ say, that they of old time said, Thou shalt perform thy Oaths to
the Lord, sayes now, Swear not at all by Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath; and that Oath in old time was the true Oath of God, which they were to perform to the Lord, (it was not fri∣volous Oaths) which Christ the Oath of God ended, and said Swear not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil, Now if ye say, — The Angel swore, — I bring forth my first be∣gotten, the Son, into the World, which the Angels must worship. Now if they say, that the Prophets, MOSES, Abraham, Jacob and SOLOMON swore, and the Oath was to end the controversie of strife among men; — Christ (who ends the Prophets and the Law before Abraham was, reigns over the House of Jacob and Joseph, a greater than Solomon, that David calls Lord) he saith, Swear not at all; This is the voice of the King that destroys the Devil, the author of strise among men, who brings peace on earth, and good will towards men; his teaching is, In all your Commu∣nication, let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay, for whatso∣ever is more than this cometh from evil; Mark these. There∣fore if men swear, they commit evil. Therefore all the swearing hath been since the Apostles dayes, when the true Church went into the wilderness, who taught their Brethren, above all things not to swear, but to keep to Yea and Nay in all your communi∣cation. Have not all these things been done out of the Spirit and Power that the Apostles were in, that ye have not had the spiritual wea∣pons to wrastle with, that there hath been so much persecution, and men have not loved enemies, and given their backs to the smiter, and have not been in the Faith that works by love, and have not differed from the Pharisees, nor have been like the Children of the Most High, the City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid, that was the Light of the world, which could keep all wickedness out of the City without carnal weapons, and Magistrates sword? VVill not the Papists say, that is a Tyran∣rannical power that holds up the Common-prayer? And will they not say, that it is a Tyrannical power, that holds up the Pa∣pists? And did not the Presbyterians say, that is a Tyrannical power, that held up the Common-prayer-men and Papists? And did not the Independents cry, that the power that held up the
Presbyterians was Tyrannical? Is not this a shame how to all Christendom, who say they are Christians, and that it is a mark of a Disciple to love one another? So mark the power of Christ, who hath all power given them in Heaven and Earth, which teacheth you, to love enemies, and came to save mens lives, and not to destroy them; and told them that would have destroyed mens lives, that they did not know what Spirit they were of. So now all in the whole Christendom that do persecute about Religion, that do not know what spirit they are of, there is no one that is wise that will trust either Body, Soul or Spirit into their hands, that do not know themselves what spirit they are of All the sacrifices of the world that be in the transgression from the Spirit of God, are but as the lowing of the beasts in the Lords ears; and all the sacrifices in Christendom are but as Cain's, and in his way, that will kill about their Worship Church and Religion; and this is not in the Spirit that the Apostles and the true Church was in, the spirit which offered spiritual sacrifices with the Spirit of God to the Father of Spirits; and all that be in the birth born of the flesh, which doth persecute them that have been born of the Spirit, though they have a profession of Prayer, Preaching, Church, Singing, all this is but in the flesh, and not in the Spirit, while they persecute them that are born of the Spirit. The Law of God was not made for the Righteous, but for evil-doers, sinners and transgressors; which is a praise to them that do well. And they that be in the higher Power of God (which doth never change) can put a difference between the pretious and the vile, and bear not the sword in vain, and they have the humility before the honour. This is not to worship God in the Spirit, to get a Form of Godliness, and deny the Life and Power of God, and then to invent Forms contrary to the Scriptures, and compel others to worship by a Law; this is to bring people from the worship of God in Spirit, and to make a wilderness for them; which doth not say, ye must invent Forms, and set them up, which is contrary to the true Form of Godliness in the Scriptures, which saith, you must pray in the Spirit, and nor invent a Form and say over that, and then say, ye have not the same Spirit and Power that the A∣postles had; The Apostle saith, you must pray in the Spirit, and
that brings every one to the Spirit in themselves; and you must worship God in the Spirit and the Truth, which errour is out of; and you must sing, in the Spirit, and rejoyce in the Spirit, and that keeps down the birth that would boast, glory and persecute him that is born of the Spirit. We need not your Common-Prayer to teach us; for the Spirit that gave forth the Scripture teacheth us how to pray, sing, fast, and give thanks, and praise, and worship God, and in what and how to honour and glorifie God, and how to walk to him, and all Men and Creatures upon the Earth; And leadeth and guideth into all Truth, which was given forth from it, which is our Comforter, Leader, and Guider, which reproveth the World, by which we know Son-ship, in which we have Unity; And this doth never change; But that which men do invent, Prayers and Forms, which do say that they have not the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, that will change VVorship and Religion; which that in the Spirit doth not. All Christendom being on heaps about Church-worship, Mini∣stry, and Scriptures, is, because they are out of the Spirit, which the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ was in, in which Spirit is the Unity. Therefore come to the Spirit of God every one in your selves, that in that you may worship God in it, and in the Truth, and come to the Spirit that reproves you for sin, that you may pray in the Spirit, and sing in the Spirit, and have the Spiritual weapons to wrastle with all about your Religion, that you may be Spiritual VVarriours, and Spiritual VVeaponed men, in this you will come out of blind zeal, for blind zeal runs with his carnal weapon, when Christ bids, give there Ear and Cheeks to the Smiter. It is said in Phil. 2. Every Knee shall bow at the Name of Jesus, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and all things you do not see when you Name the VVord Jesus bow their knees, of things in Heaven and things in Earth: But you must bow at the Name of Jesus Christ, which is Immanuel, God with us, whose Name is the VVord of God, which is, Power, and he that doth destroy the Devil, which is the cause of the Oppression of the Creation, and the same doth reconcile to God all things in Heaven, and all things in the Earth in one, him by whom all things were
made; Mingle not your Sacrifices with blood, least the Lord vaga∣bond you out from him, as he did Cain which killed his Brother about Sacrifices; whose blood cryed to the Lord: Let your hands be clean which you lift up to God, and your weapons Spiritual which you wrastle withal, about Religion Church and worship, and not with flesh and blood wrastle, that differs you from Cain Jews and Heathen, and Apostatized Christians, and makes you like the true Christians. You may say, we have not the same Power and Spirit as the Apostles, so we are not the Spiritual Men, we have not Spiritual weapons to fight with all; if you do not help us higher Powers, we fall; for we hold our traditious, and that which we have is by tradition, is by the earthly Powers: for we are not made Ministers as the Apostles were, by the inmediate Spirit, and Power, and Gifts as the Apostles were; therefore the higher Power must help us; and to them we go with our Packet of Letters as Saul did, for we are not Spiritual weaponed-menas Paul was. It is not in the power of the Bishops to make Presbyterians, nor are they true Bishops, that have not the gift of Prophesie, nei∣ther can they make with out that, for they cannot make Presby∣terians nor Bishops, with the Law and by natural tongues at Colledges, nor by Oaths; for this wayes the Apostles did not make them in their dayes; but this way of making have been since their dayes, among them that have degenerated from their life. All Religions will fight about Religion and Worships, like the Heathen about their Gods, as Nebuchadnezzar about his image, Jews, Gentiles, Papists, Protestants of all Sects, which be out of the Power of the Lord, and the Spirit the Apostles were in; and so they be all out of the Royal Spirit, and the Royal VVeapon∣men, that hath the Spiritual weapons, and out of the Royal Seed, which saith, love Enemies, which is the Royal command to the Royal Priest-hood. The Apostles were Ministers of the Spirit, and their VVeapons were Spiritual, and their Guard that they maintained their wor∣ship withal, and their Church; and they Ministred to the Spirit, and they brought People to the Spirit into it to worship God and in Truth; and they brought to Pray in the Spirit, and to Sing in
the Spirit, and in the Spirit they were justified, and they told them in the Spirit they were to walk; so their War was Spiritual, and their Way was Spiritual, and the Life, and this was that which brought them to walk not as men; and the Spirit brought them to have Unity with God, the Father of Spirits, and to have Unity with the Scriptures that were given forth from the Spirit, and to have Unity one with another in the Spirit. And where did ever Christ or his Apostles make a Picture of God, and put it in Books, like the Image of a creature? Did ever Christ or his Apostles give you a command to make a Pic∣ture of God, as you may see in your Bibles, and to bow before an Altar, or to bow to an Altar, is not this to worship the works of mens hands? Do not all take Gods Name in vain, that be not in the same Power and Spirit that gave forth Scripture? Did not the Lord say, you shall not make to your selves any Picture or graven Image, or the likeness of men and women, nor the likeness of any beast of the earth, nor the likeness of any feathe∣red fowls, nor the likeness of any fish in the Sea? For when God spoke to you in Horeb, in the midst of fire, you saw no manner of Image; And do you set the Image of God in your Bibles, and liken God to corruptible man? (Rom. 1. and Deut. 4. and Deut. 16. and Exodus the 19th) Look there you Pictured up God like an old man, in your old Bibles; And do you not say, God is a Spirit? You cannot make a Picture of that. And you that take Tythes, who profess your selves Christians, which was the practice of the Jews, by the command of God, amongst whom there was not to be a beggar, though they were as the sand of the Sea-shore; God said, there should not be a beggar amongst them, Deut. 15. So you that profess the Gos∣pel, who take Tithes, which was not the way of the Gospel, amongst whom there is so many beggars, which shews you are not come to the Jews Law yet, which was the Law of God which was among the Jews, amongst whom there was to be no beggar, which Law Christ came to end, and who follows him are the true Christians, and are redeemed from the earth, and comes to reign upon it. G. F.
A TESTIMONY Concerning the BOOK OF Common-Prayer, (SO CALLED.) Being an Answer to an Objection, Whether it be not in it self, and as practised in this Nation, heretofore, and at this present, the True Wor∣ship of the True and Living God? Answ. 1. THE Book of COMMON-PRAY∣ER (so called) in its first Institu∣tion and practise in this Nation, did but differ little from POPERY, & the men that were the Authours of it, and that constituted it, into that Form and Method as now it is, were of much zeal for their Form, and some sincerity, and of more tenderness and good Conscience towards God, in what they knew, then were they of the Church of ROME; who cryed out a∣gainst them as Hereticks, and the like; and they had so much Light from God by his Spirit, as that they saw the Idolatry and Corruption of the Church of Rome, and did
dissent from her, and denyed her Worships and Practises in part, though they were because thereof persecuted; and the Lord stirred up their Hearts to bear Testimony against the Abomination of that time, as it was in both Church and State, (so called) and they sought after Re∣formation, and did in some part Reform this Nation, and did deny the Popist-Mass, and the Popes Supremacy, and many Idolatries, both in Doctrine and Discipline; and instead of the way and manner of Worship, as held forth by the Church of Rome, these Reformers set up the COMMON-PRAYER, to be performed as the Wor∣ship of their Church, supposing that to be more accept∣able then the other, and no doubt but the first Institution and Practise thereof, was in much sincerity and zeal by many, and they were held under persecution, and suffer∣ed some of them even death for denying the Church of Rome, and her wayes and worships; even them who did first ordain and compose the COMMON-PRAYER, (so called) though yet there was much error in their Judgments, and darkness in their Understandings, and a vail of great Ignorance in many things upon them, even while it was brought forth and these things effected, in the very beginning and proceedings of them. 2. And when it was formed, it being imposed on this Nation, by force and penalty; and set up by compelling all people into the practise of it, by violent Laws upon the Bodyes and Consciences of men, this was great Abo∣mination in the sight of God, and made the practise of it detestable unto him; For it is contrary to God, in the dispensation of the Gospel, the way of forcing by com∣pelling and constraint through outward Laws, any kind or Form of Worship, though in it self never so Holy, and like unto the true Worship; yea, if the very things that
the Apostles practised for Worship, were imposed on any people by force, when as the Consciences of Men were not first perswaded thereunto by the Spirit of God, even this were Abomination unto God, and not the true Worship of him, which is not of force, but of a willing mind; nor in the Ignorance of Mens minds, but in the Light risen in their Hearts; So that because of Imposing the practise of the COMMON-PRAYER by force, it was hateful to God as so practised, and the performance of it, while it was so held forth in this Nation, was on bet∣ter then the Idolatrous MASS, nor no more acceptable to God. 3. And as for the Matter in it self, partly, and divers practises thereunto pertaining, it is not the true Worship of the True and Living God, though never so zealously practised; because it cannot be believed that the Au∣thors and Composers of it, were moved, led, and guided, by the Holy Spirit of God, in their very Institution and forming of it; and whatsoever is brought forth, whether in Faith, or any practise in any kind of Profession, and practises in any way of Religion, and not onely by the Spirit of God, is not the True Worship of God, which is onely in Spirit and Truth, and consists onely of such practises moved unto, and guided in by the Spirit; and the True Worship of God is not otherwise, neither for matter nor manner, but in what things, and after what manner, as the Spirit of God leadeth unto & guideth in, for the Father seeketh such to Worship him, as Worship in Spirit and Truth. 4. As for the Method and Form of the matter, it is not according to the example of the Holy Scriptures, nor agreeing to the practise of Worship, held forth by the Apostles, but different from, and partly contrary to the
Spirit that was in the Saints, and their example of Wor∣ship, as in many circumstances, (pertaining to the Or∣ders of COMMON-PRAYER-BOOK,) might be In∣stanced; but even some of the Practises themselves, and the manner of performing them, are for the most part Invention and Tradition, traduced into the World long since the Apostles dayes, and they are not according to the Scriptures, nor example of the Saints Worship in the Church of Christ in their dayes; and therefore the Mat∣ter in it self partly, and the Method of it, are not the True Worship of the Living God, which is not after the tradi∣tions of men, as the manner of performance of COM∣MON-PRAYER-BOOK is; when as the Worship of God is in, and by the Spirit of God, as before witnessed. 5. And as for the PRACTICE of it in this Nation, as by Imposition and force, upon pains and penalties, as it was practised for many years together; as so held forth, it was not the Worship of God, but Abomination to him as I have shewed; and that Worship which is practised by any people being forced upon them, is but Hipocrisie and deceit: And outward conformity in such Worship∣pers; and God requires it not of them, and such was the Worship in the Common-Prayer, (so called) for there were many who did bow, and conform thereunto, even be∣cause of the terror of men, even many in the Ignorance of their Consciences, and some against their Con∣sciences, and contrary to the Light thereof; and some were persecuted because they could not conform, all which were Abomination in the sight of the Lord; even the consequence of the thing, was as evil as any part of either matter or manner also; even while many conceit∣ed themselves in their Ignorance, that they had Wor∣shipped God and done well, while they had onely per∣formed,
such Worship forced upon them, and which the Lord never required at their hands; and that cannot be the true Worship of the True and Living God, which can be performed by a People without the Spirit of God (by which alone and without it God cannot be Worshipped, & the practise of Worship after the order of Common-Prayer, did many thousands, (if not most) perform without the Spirit of God; whereby it fully appears that in the pra∣ctise of the Book of Common-Prayer, the Worshippers did not Worship the true & Living God; but walked only in a part of the Form of Godliness, but had not the Power. 6. But as for the PRACTISE of it, as now in England, without Imposition upon all by force & penalty, but by some, out of supposition that it is the best way of Wor∣ship, and that willingly, and neither forced upon them, nor they forcing it upon others; as thus practised is not so great Idolatry, nor of so bad effects, as if it were vio∣lently forced upon all; but if any suppose it to be the best way of Worship, and be so perswaded, such may more equally have their Liberty in the exercise thereof; while they allow Liberty to others to follow what Worship as they are perswaded; and as it is unjust to impose by vio∣lence that, or any other Form of Worship upon People; so it is unjust to impose force of penalty or punishments, upon the Bodyes or Estates of any for their conformity to the Book of Common-Prayer, or any other kind of Worship; for as it is contrary to God to compel by force to that practise of Worship; So it is unjust to stop by force from that way of Worship, or to inflict penalties upon the Persons or Estates of any because thereof; for though many exceptions may be justly made by sound Argu∣ments against that way of Worship, in Matter, Manner, and Effects, as I have said, yet none ought to be afflicted
in Person or Estate, for the error of their minds, while their error extends not to destroy the Person and Estate of another; for all force by violence that hath been put on the Bodyes and Estates of Men, about Church-Wor∣ship, Ministry and Religion of any kind, hath been Anti∣christian and not of God, even for many generations. 7. And therefore them that read the Book of Com∣mon-Prayer, and all other sorts of Worshippers, that are either perswaded by the Spirit of God, or supposes in their Hearts of the Verity and Truth of their way; Let them all have their Liberty in their way of Worship without force, or restraint by outward Laws, while they impose not one upon another violently; for the true Worshippers ought not to be persecuted for their Worship, but if they are, it will confirm them in the Truth of their way; and the false Worshippers ought not to suffer affliction of Person, nor loss of Estate, though they do erre in their minds and Judgments about Worship in Spiritual things, but if they are affli∣cted because thereof, it will harden them in their evil wayes, and not Convert them, nor turn them from the evil of their wayes; for men are converted to the right way, and out of that which is evil by the Spirit of God, and through perswading of the Conscience in∣wardly, and not by force or violence put upon their Bodyes or Estates outwardly; never any were Converted to God by such means. And this is my Answer to the Objection, and my Judgment of the case inquired into: The Book of COMMON-PRAYER (so called) partly the Matter it self, and the Method of it, and the Manner of its performance, is not the true Worship of the True and Living God, no not the free Practise thereof with∣out Imposition; much less the Practise of it by Imposi∣tion
and force; for that is altogether Abomination, and hath with it woful effects, upon whatsoever People it hath been, or shall hereafter be forced and violently Imposed. This is given forth for the Satisfaction of all that desires in this Matter. The 5th. Month, 1660. E. B. POST-SCRIPT. AND some set up the Institution of Calvin, or Form of Prayer, as these have now the Common-Prayer; and both the one and the other have cast off the POPES Form, and brought in their own. Got into a Form of words, a Form of wor∣ship without either Life or Power. The PAPISTS in some things what they begin to do, will say, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; And the Protestants, or them who call themselves of the Reformed Church, that are come off from the Papists; some of them when they go about to do a thing will say, Our help is in the Name of the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth. Here both the one and the other have a Form of words, but out of the Name, the one as well as the other, out of the Life, out of the Power and Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore what they do, how can it be done in his Name, which themselves are out of? Though they may be in the words, and do a thing in the words. But that is not a doing it in the Name; for to do things in so many words in their own Time and Will, that which themselves have brought in, is one thing; But to do it in the Name, Power and Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ is another; for words is not the Name nor the Power; and the Kingdom stands in the Power, not in words. Therefore all people see what you do, that it be done in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the true Light of the world, who lighteth every man that cometh into the world; in his Light, in his Power, then that will bring you to cease from your own words, and following your own wayes, doing it in his
Power, in his Strength, out of your own words, your own wayes, and your own wills, in his Name. For what hath form or words either one or the other hitherto produced or brought forth without Life or Power? Hath your long Profession and Forms of the words, brought any of you yet into the possession of the things? Or will it ever do? If not; What serves it to? Who hath required it, to have it done? And is it not his right alone who is to be worshipped, to direct himself how he will be worshipped? Or is not all other service and worship in the will? And so Will∣worship, that is not of his own direction or appointment. And the Scripture saith, John the 4th chap. as you may read, God is a Spirit, and he will be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth. (Mark that) He who is a Spirit, will be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth, that which the Devil abode not in; for into a Form of words, Drunkards, Swearers, Lyars, Prophane-Persons, un∣righteous, which are shut out of the Kingdom, may get into words, in such a worship, out of the Spirit; but that is not the worship which God requires; And is it not equal that he alone direct how he will be worshipped, that is to be worshipped? And thou art so to perform thy service towards him, that of him it may be accepted; and so it is rightly done, when done as he hath ap∣pointed it, as he hath directed, And Obedience is more than Sacrifice, whom thou art to obey, if thou wilt do him service who is worshipped or served in the Spirit and in the Truth; whose Will then comes to be done, and not thine, who will be so worship∣ped, and so served: But otherwise is it not thine own will, and not his that is done? Therefore whosoever will come to worship the KING, the LORD of HOSTS, must come to worship him in his own way; not in their wayes, to bow down to his Light, to bow down to the measure of his Spirit in them; for the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal; Otherwise will not People, Teachers and Professors, be alwayes in the prosit∣less condition; Ever learning, and never come to the know∣ledge of the Truth. THE END.
